Authenticity and Personal Creativity : How EarSketch Affects Student Persistence Tom McKlin The Findings Group 2646 Woodridge Drive Decatur , Georgia USA tom @ thefindingsgroup . org Brian Magerko Digital Media Program Georgia Institute of Technology 85 Fifth Street NW Atlanta , Georgia USA magerko @ gatech . edu Taneisha Lee The Findings Group 2646 Woodridge Drive Decatur , Georgia USA taneisha @ thefindingsgroup . org Dana Wanzer The Findings Group 2646 Woodridge Drive Decatur , Georgia USA dana @ thefindingsgroup . org Doug Edwards Center for Education Integrating Science Mathematics and Computing Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta , Georgia USA doug . edwards @ ceismc . gatech . edu Jason Freeman Center for Music Technology Georgia Institute of Technology 840 McMillan Street Atlanta , Georgia USA jason . freeman @ gatech . edu ABSTRACT STEAM education is an approach to engage students in STEM topics by prioritizing personal expression , creativity , and aesthetics . EarSketch , a collaborative and authentic learning tool , introduces students to programming through music remixing , has previously been shown to increase student engagement , and increases learner’s intentions to persist in computing . The goal of EarSketch is to broaden participation in computing through a thickly authentic learning environment that has personal and real world relevance in both computational and music domains . This article reports a quasi - experimental study suggesting that an authentic learning environment predicts increased intentions to persist via identity / belongingness and creativity . We ran a path analysis that exposed the creativity subscales , and this analysis reveals that “sharing” is the one creativity sub - construct that predicts increased intention to persist . This work makes a significant contribution to computer science education by revealing how an authentic STEAM curriculum affects student attitudes and knowledge , by presenting scales to measure authenticity and personal creativity , and by discussing how identity / belongingness may affect student success . KEYWORDS Computer science education , creativity , STEAM , music , broadening participation ACM Reference format : T . McKlin , B . Magerko , T . Lee , D . Wanzer , D . Edwards , and J . Freeman . 2018 . Authenticity and Personal Creativity : How EarSketch Affects Student Persistence . In SIGCSE ’18 : 49th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education , Feb . 21 – 24 , 2018 , Baltimore , MD , USA . ACM , NY , NY , USA , 6 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3159450 . 3159523 1 INTRODUCTION EarSketch is an integrated STEAM ( STEM + the Arts ) learning environment and curriculum that teaches elements of computing and sample - based music composition ( i . e . composition using musical beats , samples , and effects ) to engage a diverse population of students in computer science . EarSketch seeks to increase and broaden participation in computing , primarily at the high school level , through a thickly authentic [ 17 ] [ 23 ] and personally creative approach . EarSketch consists of a web - based programming environment , digital audio workstation , curriculum , and audio loop library that enables students to write Python or JavaScript code to algorithmically create music in popular genres . EarSketch students write code to creatively manipulate musical samples while learning computing fundamentals such as loops , lists , and functions . The EarSketch curriculum is closely aligned with Computer Science Principles ( CSP ) . This paper builds on previous preliminary studies and contends that EarSketch’s unique approach to STEAM in computing education — with a strong focus on authenticity in both the musical and computing domains — enhances students’ attitudes towards computing , their personal creativity through computing , and ultimately their intentions to persist in computing . Specifically , we contend that EarSketch enables students to a ) create music that is personally - and culturally - relevant ; b ) learn to code and produce music that is industry - relevant ; c ) use music and computing paradigms that are specific Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . SIGCSE ' 18 , February 21 – 24 , 2018 , Baltimore , MD , USA © 2018 Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5103 - 4 / 18 / 02 … $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3159450 . 3159523 Paper Session : Interdisciplinary Perspectives SIGCSE’18 , February 21 - 24 , 2018 , Baltimore , MD , USA 987 to music and coding disciplines ; and d ) engage in graded projects in which they write code to creatively remix music . 2 PERSONAL CREATIVITY AND AUTHENTICITY IN STEAM EDUCATION STEAM learning environments are often effective because they create opportunities for creative expression within STEM contexts [ 14 ] . Traditional STEM learning allows few opportunities for creative expression . However , EarSketch combines programming with music creation through learning activities that teach coding concepts and simultaneously encourage personal expression . STEAM education has a growing body of literature indicating that it leads to more engaged and motivated learning [ 14 ] while employing creativity to engage students [ 12 ] . Previous publications on EarSketch findings have outlined prior research on creativity from four perspectives : Creativity as process , person , press or place , and product [ 9 ] [ 1 ] [ 22 ] [ 18 ] . This paper focuses on two of these aspects of creativity : personal creativity and place ( or learning environment ) . Personal creativity is comprised of the traits , tendencies , and characteristics of the high school EarSketch student who engages in the creative work of writing code to make music . Place is the set of environmental factors that encourage creativity . EarSketch is designed to be a thickly authentic learning environment [ 23 ] , and for this reason we label place as authenticity . Table 1 . Personal Creativity Scale Sub - Construct Item Expressiveness : conveying one’s personal view through computing  I am expressive and creative while doing computing .  I can express my unique view of the world through computing . Exploration : investigating ideas in computing  I am capable of exploring many different ideas , options , or outcomes in computing . Immersion / Flow : feeling absorbed by the computing activity  When I do computing , my attention is fully captured by the activity . Originality : generating unique and ( personally ) novel ideas in computing  I can come up with new ways to do things in computing .  I produced something in computing that I never thought was possible . Sharing : inviting friends / family to see and participate in computing work  I want to share what I do in computing with my friends .  I want to share what I do in computing with my family .  Computing is something I want to do with my friends . Creative Thinking Skills : approaching computing problems from new perspectives ; unorthodox solutions  I look for different solutions to a computing problem . 2 . 1 Personal Creativity We measure personal creativity in learners using nine survey items that encompass the six sub - constructs in Table 1 with five Likert scale response options ranging from 1 ( Strongly Disagree ) to 5 ( Strongly Agree ) . This scale builds on three sub - constructs used in the Creativity Support Index ( CSI ) [ 6 ] : exploration , expressiveness , and immersion . The personal creativity scale departs from the CSI in that it is specifically designed to measure creative expression in STEAM learning environments and to do so through pre - post self - reports by students . 2 . 2 Authenticity We measure , along with personal creativity , the extent to which the learning environment or place promotes creativity . This construct ultimately measures student perception of the learning environment as thickly authentic . Shaffer and Resnick [ 23 ] contend that a learning environment that is personally - relevant , infused with real - world tools and tasks , unquestionably focused on the intended discipline , and that allows students to metacognitively assess their learning is thickly authentic and more likely to meaningfully engage students . Given the focus of this construct on authentic learning environments , we feel that this construct is more appropriately labeled authenticity rather than place . [ 23 ] . Based on the creativity research literature [ 1 ] [ 22 ] [ 18 ] and on Shaffer and Resnick’s description of thick authenticity [ 23 ] , we developed an eight - item scale to measure authenticity using four sub - constructs ( see Table 2 ) . Table 2 . Authenticity Scale Sub - Construct Item ( Prompt : To what extent did Unit 2… ) Personal : activities that are meaningful to the student  Allow me to work on projects that are meaningful to me .  Allow me to create things that I am proud of . Real World : activities reflect aspects of the milieu outside of school  Allow me to work on projects that are based in the real world .  Help me explore and think about real world issues . (cid:31)  Allow me to talk with others about what I learned . Disciplinary : activities that are authentic to computing  Encourage me to think like a computing professional . Assessment : activities that require students to demonstrate learning  Provide me with feedback that helps me solve computing problems .  Tell me what I know and what I don’t know about computing . 2 . 3 Theory of Change The EarSketch team generated a theory of change that connects the EarSketch intervention to student success . A theory of change is a practical tool that illustrates how and why a desired change is expected to happen in a particular context . It Paper Session : Interdisciplinary Perspectives SIGCSE’18 , February 21 - 24 , 2018 , Baltimore , MD , USA 988 provides a picture of the conditions , or early and intermediate outcomes , that are needed to achieve an ultimate goal [ 3 ] . The EarSketch theory of change ( see Figure 1 ) first posits that an authentically creative learning environment will bring about positive attitudinal changes in students ( confidence to do computing , computing enjoyment , importance and perceived usefulness of computing , motivation to succeed in computing , identity / belongingness , and personal creativity ) [ 9 ] [ 11 ] . These attitudinal changes will then increase students’ CS content knowledge and their intentions to persist in further computing education and computing - centered careers . The theory of change thereby shows that , through an attitude - behavior theory framework , the processes by which students achieve the outcomes are by a thickly authentic learning environment , which enhances students’ attitudes towards computing . Figure 1 . Theory of Change Model for EarSketch 3 METHODS 3 . 1 Procedures Participating teachers attended a summer professional development workshop and received on - going support during the academic semester when implementing the EarSketch curriculum . The workshop , which included a three - day ( 20 - hour ) face - to - face training combined with a month - long online session , was designed to prepare teachers to teach the CSP course using EarSketch . The five teachers taught a total of 486 students during the school year . A total of 205 ( 43 . 80 % ) of those students consented to participate in the study . 3 . 2 Assessment Instruments Each element in the theory of change has a corresponding survey scale or knowledge assessment . We developed an attitude survey ( Student Engagement Survey ) to measure confidence , enjoyment , importance , motivation , identity , intent to persist , personal creativity , and authenticity . The Student Engagement Survey contains the two scales mentioned in the Personal Creativity and Authenticity sections . It also includes subscales from the Computer Science Attitude Survey ( CSAS ) [ 25 ] and adapts items from Knezek & Christensen [ 16 ] to measure identity / belongingness . Previous research [ 25 ] indicates that these psychosocial constructs contribute to increasing the number of under - represented students who persist in STEM fields . All scales on the student engagement survey were administered as a retrospective pre - post survey except for the authenticity scale , which was administered as a post - only scale . ( Students cannot rank authenticity at pre because they are not yet familiar with the learning environment . ) Additionally , the EarSketch team , with the support of an Advanced Placement Computer Science teacher , developed a 20 - item language agnostic computing content knowledge assessment to assess gains in programming content knowledge . We administered the assessment as a traditional pre - and post - test to students . This assessment is aligned to the College Board’s AP Computer Science Principles Curriculum Framework ( 2016 - 2017 ) [ 8 ] and measures learning objectives 5 . 1 . 1 - 5 . 4 . 1 ( Big Idea 5 : Programming ) . Further , the assessment addresses the essential knowledge areas appropriate for a multiple - choice format . The assessment was developed through multiple iterations in conjunction with a team of subject matter experts . The team also conducted think - aloud interviews with high school computer science students to help ensure that students accurately interpret assessment items . To help triangulate findings , we also conducted six focus groups with a representative sample of students . 3 . 3 Survey Quality One measure of survey quality is reliability , a numerical value that indicates whether the same set of items for each construct would elicit the same responses if re - administered to the same respondents . To assess reliability , Cronbach’s alphas were calculated for each of the 8 constructs in the Student Engagement Survey . Alpha coefficients range in value from 0 to 1 ; the higher the score , the more reliable the scale . Nunnally [ 21 ] recommends . 70 and higher as acceptable reliability . The Cronbach’s alphas for each of the 8 psychosocial constructs are displayed in Table . Overall , all scale reliabilities fell within the acceptable range [ 21 ] . Table 3 . Reliabilities of Student Engagement Survey and Creativity Survey constructs Constructs Cronbach’s alpha Pre Post Confidence . 87 . 82 Enjoyment . 74 . 69 Importance . 80 . 80 Motivation . 76 . 81 Identity . 76 . 80 Intent to Persist . 95 . 95 Personal Creativity . 90 . 92 Authenticity - - . 91 We further conducted two confirmatory factor analyses ( CFAs ) , one for the pre - test items and one for the post - test items , to determine how well the items cluster or group together into their respective constructs . Overall , the theoretical model that Paper Session : Interdisciplinary Perspectives SIGCSE’18 , February 21 - 24 , 2018 , Baltimore , MD , USA 989 was tested fit the data well . Table 4 shows the model fit indices for the CFA models for pre - test and post - test conditions and shows that all fit indices ( see next section for further information about fit indices ) are within their recommended cut - off values . Table 4 . Confirmatory Factor Analysis Model Fit for Pre - Test and Post - Test CFI RMSEA SRMR Pre - test . 911 . 063 . 055 Post - test . 925 . 052 . 051 Note : Goal values for fit indices : CFI > . 90 ; RMSEA < . 08 ; SRMR < . 06 3 . 4 Path Analysis Path analysis is an extension of multiple regression that determines the relationships among a multitude of variables . While in multiple regression there can only be a single outcome variable , a path analysis can handle multiple outcomes variables as well as relationships among the predictor and / or outcome variables such as mediation . Thus , rather than building eight multiple regression models , the path analysis can analyze the theory of change with a single model . Path analyses are evaluated by multiple criteria called fit indices that establish whether the model is acceptable . While there are dozens of different fit indices , this study focuses on three of them : the Comparative Fit Index ( CFI ) , the Root Mean Square Error of Approximation ( RMSEA ) , and the Standardized Root Mean Square Residual ( SRMR ) . Recommended cut - off values for the fit indices are CFI above . 90 , RMSEA below . 08 , and SRMR below . 06 [ 15 ] . 4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 4 . 1 Attitudinal and Creativity Gains We measured gains in computing attitudes and content knowledge to determine whether the changes from pre to post were significant . We used paired - samples t - tests on attitudinal constructs following a set of guidelines from survey researchers [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] . Table 5 shows statistically significant increases across all constructs on the student engagement survey . Following recommendations from the American Psychological Association 0 , we report effect sizes using Cohen’s d across all constructs . Effect sizes reveal the magnitude of the differences between pre and post measures . Cohen [ 7 ] classifies small effect sizes at . 20 , medium at . 50 , and large at . 80 . Hattie’s [ 13 ] analysis of 195 educational interventions reveals . 40 as the “hinge point” and recommends that educators employ interventions with an effect size greater than . 40 . The effect sizes displayed in Table 5 suggest that all attitudinal constructs yielded medium or large effect sizes and met Hattie’s criteria . EarSketch was most robust in increasing students’ confidence in computing ( d = 1 . 20 ) and personal creativity ( d = 1 . 23 ) . Qualitative data from student focus groups reveal what some students may be pondering when reporting changes in personal creativity . For example , one student said : I used to just think that coding was just so one - sided like type in the code . But I realize that even that takes creativity to a degree . I feel like all computer coding involves creativity because there are so many different ways to do stuff . I could write a function and set some parameters . But then my function parameters could do the same thing that [ student name ] is doing and [ another student name ] is doing . But then all three of our codes are written totally different ways . Hers could be short… . There are so many options and different ways of doing it , that you can’t help but be creative and have some type of creativity slip out while you’re doing that . This student recognizes that no single answer exists to coding assignments and that solving a computing problem involves creative expression . Seeing computing as a form of creative expression requires that many students fundamentally alter their prior conceptions of computing . One student said : “But when I got into this class , I was like , ‘Really ? So , this is what they do ? ’” Similarly , another student said : Like I thought coding was going to be boring and kind of just make me super - mad . It was going to be like tragic . But now that I’ve taken this class and I’ve seen all the things I can do with EarSketch and how that can be applied , like the same general concepts can be applied and expanded on to all these other aspects and different fields , it kind of opened up and made me kind of rethink my career choices like , “Oh , maybe I actually want to pursue something in like IT or computer science . ” Table 5 . Attitudinal and Creativity Statistics Pre / Post p - value Effect size ( d ) Confidence 2 . 82 / 3 . 81 p < . 001 1 . 20 Enjoyment 3 . 19 / 3 . 75 p < . 001 0 . 78 Importance 4 . 13 / 4 . 38 p < . 001 0 . 57 Motivation 3 . 39 / 3 . 92 p < . 001 0 . 89 Identity 3 . 38 / 3 . 86 p < . 001 0 . 79 Intent to Persist 3 . 56 / 3 . 88 p < . 001 0 . 62 Personal Creativity 3 . 22 / 3 . 90 p < . 001 1 . 23 Authenticity - - / 3 . 85 - - - - Note : Scale : 1 , strongly disagree to 5 , strongly agree . 4 . 2 Content Knowledge Gains While the primary focus of EarSketch is to increase students’ intentions to persist in computing , we tested computing content knowledge gains to learn whether EarSketch student knowledge growth is consistent with expected gains for this dosage of instruction . Paired samples t - tests suggested statistically significant gains in students’ programming knowledge ( see Table 6 ) . The computed effect size further indicates that students gains in content knowledge are medium at d = 0 . 29 , and this falls within Hattie’s [ 13 ] zone of typical instructional effects ( ranging from d = . 15 to d = . 30 ) . Paper Session : Interdisciplinary Perspectives SIGCSE’18 , February 21 - 24 , 2018 , Baltimore , MD , USA 990 Table 6 . Content Knowledge Statistics Pre / Post p - value Effect size ( d ) Content Knowledge - Overall 58 % / 62 % p < . 001 0 . 29 Note : Scale : 0 % to 100 % correct . 4 . 3 Testing the Theory of Change Model The theory of change model describes the hypothesized conditions or pathways that might predict students’ persistence in computing . For example , as the learning environment is perceived as being more authentic , students’ psychosocial attitudes should increase ; in turn , intent to persist in computing should increase . We tested the theory of change by conducting a path analysis . The path analysis analyzed how authenticity predicted post - test scores on the attitudinal constructs ; it further tested how the post - test scores for authenticity and the attitudinal constructs predicted post - test scores for intent to persist and content knowledge . While not shown in the model for sake of brevity , the model also included pre - test scores predicting post - test scores , all of which were statistically significant . Overall , the theory of change model was a decent fit for the data ; CFI was greater than . 90 but RMSEA was above the threshold of . 08 and SRMR was above the threshold of . 06 . RMSEA and SRMR may be inflated due to the fairly small sample size , so increasing the sample size may improve model fit . Table 7 . Model Fit for the Path Analysis ( n = 205 ) CFI RMSEA SRMR Theory of Change Model . 945 . 097 . 088 Note : Goal values for fit indices : CFI > . 90 ; RMSEA < . 08 ; SRMR < . 06 Figure 2 . Path Analysis Testing the Theory of Change Note . Solid lines signify singificance at p < . 05 . Figure 2 shows the relationships among the elements of the theory of change . Authenticity significantly predicted all six attitudinal constructs but neither intent to persist or content knowledge directly . Two of the six attitudinal constructs ( identity / belonging and personal creativity ) significantly predicted intention to persist while none significantly predicted content knowledge . This finding matches our expectations : the primary focus of EarSketch is to influence students’ intentions to persist in computing . Since personal creativity significantly predicted intent to persist , we conducted a second path analysis to determine which sub - constructs within personal creativity ( expressiveness , exploration , immersion / flow , originality / creativity , sharing , and creative thinking skills ) were responsible for the significant relationship . The theory of change model specifying each personal creativity subconstruct fit the data decently ; CFI was greater than . 90 and RMSEA was below the threshold of . 08 , but SRMR was above the threshold of . 06 . Table 8 . Model Fit for the Extended Path Analysis ( n = 205 ) C FI RMSEA SRM R Theory of Change Model . 9 51 . 066 . 080 Note : Goal values for fit indices : CFI > . 90 ; RMSEA < . 08 ; SRMR < . 06 Figure 3 shows the relationships among the elements of the extended theory of change . Again , authenticity significantly predicted all attitudinal constructs including all creativity subconstructs , and identity / belonging significantly predicted intention to persist . Interestingly , one personal creativity subconstruct ( sharing ) significantly predicted intention to persist . Sharing is defined as inviting friends / family to see and participate in computing work . Figure 3 . Path Analysis Testing the Extended Theory of Change Note . Solid lines signify singificance at p < . 05 . Identity / belongingness is the other significant psychosocial construct predicting intent to persist . The team considered multiple explanations , and one potential theory posits that identifying as someone who does computing coincides with students perceptions that computing is creative . That is , seeing examples that computing is creative ( like using computing to make music ) interacts with and feeds computing identity . This is important because many students do not perceive they belong Paper Session : Interdisciplinary Perspectives SIGCSE’18 , February 21 - 24 , 2018 , Baltimore , MD , USA 991 in computing . Consider the following student who explains his transformation from someone who does not belong in computing to someone who does : I feel like it’s changed me a lot , too , personality - wise . Last year , when I was introduced to it , I wasn’t the same as now . I wasn’t as friendly . I was kind of mean to people . Like where I’m from , people like me don’t make it very far . They stay down there where they are . When I moved up here , I got introduced to all that other stuff . When I got introduced to EarSketch , I actually worked with people and was being nicer and doing better things than people that I used to be around . This student expresses a shift in his perception from “people like me don’t make it very far” to someone who “actually worked with people , ” from someone who does not identify with computing to someone who shares computing work . 5 CONCLUSION This paper proposes a framework — espoused by the EarSketch theory of change — for understanding the relationships between thick authenticity , student engagement ( including personal creativity ) , and outcomes ( intention to persist and content knowledge ) in STEAM computing environments . A path analysis of data collected from 205 students across 5 high school CSP classes suggests that perceived authenticity significantly predicts all attitudinal constructs , and that two of those attitudinal constructs ( personal creativity : sharing and identity / belonging ) significantly predict intention to persist . These findings suggest that the success of STEAM approaches to computing education hinges on the degree to which students perceive their learning environment to be thickly authentic . In fact , the important role that “sharing” plays in predicting student intent to persist may further reinforce this : qualitative data suggests that students share the work they create with EarSketch because they see it as relevant beyond the classroom and specifically to the music and computing industries . Perhaps students’ desire to share what they have created with computing outside the classroom also reflects their increased sense of identity and belongingness in computing , and these two factors together affect intention to persist . We are currently scaling up our research efforts to include 23 high school CSP teachers and their students ( as compared to the 5 teachers who participated in this study ) . This larger population will enable us to further understand the theory of change presented in this paper and the role that authenticity and personal creativity play in STEAM interventions and in students’ intention to persist in computing . 6 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The EarSketch project receives funding from the National Science Foundation ( CNS # 1138469 , DRL # 1417835 , and DUE # 1504293 ) , the Scott Hudgens Family Foundation , the Arthur M . Blank Family Foundation , and the Google Inc . Fund of Tides Foundation . EarSketch is available online at earsketch . gatech . edu . 7 REFERENCES [ 1 ] Amabile , T . M . 1990 . Within you , without you : The social psychology of creativity and beyond . In Theories of Creativity , M . A . Runco and R . S . Albert . Sage Publications , Newbury Park , CA , 61 - 90 . [ 2 ] American Psychological Association . ( 2010 ) . Publication manual of the American Psychological Association ( 6th ed ) . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . [ 3 ] Annie E . Casey Foundation and Organizational Research Services . 2004 . Theory of Change : A practical tool for action , results and learning . Retrieved March 3 , 2016 from : http : / / www . aecf . org / m / resourcedoc / aecf - theoryofchange - 2004 . pdf [ 4 ] Carifio , J . , and Perla , R . 2007 . Ten common misunderstandings , misconceptions , persistent myths and urban legends about Likert scales and Likert response format and their antidotes . Journal of Social Sciences , 2 , 106 - 11 . [ 5 ] Carifio , J . , and Perla , R . 2008 . Resolving the 5 - year debate around using and misusing Likert scales . Medical Education , 42 , 1150 - 1152 . [ 6 ] Carroll , E . A . , Latulipe , C . Fung , R . , and Terry , M . 2009 . Creativity factor evaluation : Towards a standardized survey metric for creativity support . In Proceedings of the seventh ACM conference on Creativity and Cognition ( Berkeley , Cailifornia , October 27 – 30 , 2009 ) . C & C ’09 . ACM , New York , NY , 127 - 136 . DOI = http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 1640233 . 1640255 [ 7 ] Cohen , J . 1988 . ) . Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences ( 2 nd ed ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Earlbaum Associates [ 8 ] College Board . 2016 . AP Computer Science Principles Curriculum Framework Accessed March 3 , 2016 from https : / / secure - media . collegeboard . org / digitalServices / pdf / ap / ap - computer - science - principles - course - and - exam - description . pdf [ 9 ] Engelman , S . , Magerko , B . , McKlin , T . , Miller , M . , Edwards , D . , & Freeman , J . ( 2017 ) . Creativity in Authentic STEAM Education with EarSketch ( pp . 183 – 188 ) . ACM Press . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3017680 . 3017763 [ 10 ] Field , A . P . 2009 . Discovering Statistics using SPSS . SAGE Publications , Thousand Oaks , CA . [ 11 ] Freeman , J . , Magerko , B . , McKlin , T . , Reily , M . , Permar , J . Summers , C . , and Fruchter , E . 2014 . Engaging underrepresented groups in high school introductory computing through computational remixing with EarSketch . In Proceedings of the 45 th ACM technical symposium on computer science education ( Atlanta , Georgia , March 05 – 08 , 2014 ) . SIGCSE’14 . ACM , New York , NY , 85 - 90 . DOI = http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / 2538862 . 2538906 [ 12 ] Harel , I . and Papert , S . 1991 . Constructionism . Ablex Publishing Corporation , New York , NY . [ 13 ] Hattie , J . ( 2012 ) . Visible learning for teachers : maximizing impact on learning . London ; New York : Routledge . [ 14 ] Henriksen , D . 2014 . Full STEAM ahead : Creativity in excellent STEM teaching practices . The STEAM Journal . 1 , 2 ( Feb . 2014 ) , Article 15 . DOI = 10 . 5642 / steam . 20140102 . 15 [ 15 ] Ho , R ( 2006 ) . Handbook of Univariate and Multivariate Data Analysis and Interpretation with SPSS . Chapman & Hall / CRC , Boca Raton , Florida , USA . [ 16 ] Knezek , G . and Christensen , R . 1996 . Validating the Computer Attitude Questionnaire ( CAQ ) . Presented at Annual Meeting of the Southwest Education Research Association ( New Orleans , Louisiana , January 26 , 1996 ) . AMSERA’96 . [ 17 ] Lee , H . S . , and Butler , N . 2003 . Making authentic science accessible to students . International Journal of Science Education . 25 , 8 ( 2003 ) , 923 - 948 . DOI = 10 . 1080 / 09500690305023 [ 18 ] Mayer , R . E . 1999 . Fifty years of Creativity Research . In Handbook of Creativity , R . J . Sternberg . Cambridge University Press , New York , NY , 449 - 460 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / CBO9780511807916 . 024 [ 19 ] Murray , J . 2014 . Likert data : what to use , parametric or non - parametric . International Journal of Business and Social Science , 4 , 258 - 264 . [ 20 ] Norman , G . 2010 . Likert scales , level of measurement and the “laws” of statistics . Advances in Health Science Education , 15 , 625 - 632 . [ 21 ] Nunnally , J . C . 1978 . Psychometric Theory . McGraw - Hill , New York , NY . [ 22 ] Rogers , C . 1976 . Toward a Theory of Creativity . In The Creativity Question , Rothenberg , A . and Hausman . C . R . Duke University Press , Durham , NC . [ 23 ] Shaffer , D . W . , and Resnick , M . 1999 . Thick Authenticity : New media and authentic learning . Journal of Interact . Learn . Res . 10 , 2 , 195 - 215 . [ 24 ] Webb , N . L . 2002 . An analysis of the alignment between mathematics standards and assessments for three states . Presented at Annual Meeting of the American Education Research Association ( New Orleans , Louisiana , April 01 – 05 , 2002 ) . [ 25 ] Wiebe , E . , Williams , L . , Yang , K . , and Miller , C . 2003 . Computer science attitude survey . Comput . Scie . 14 . Paper Session : Interdisciplinary Perspectives SIGCSE’18 , February 21 - 24 , 2018 , Baltimore , MD , USA 992