Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein – mediated actin dynamics control type - I interferon production in plasmacytoid dendritic cells The Harvard community has made this article openly available . Please share how this access benefits you . Your story matters Citation Prete , F . , M . Catucci , M . Labrada , S . Gobessi , M . C . Castiello , E . Bonomi , A . Aiuti , et al . 2013 . “Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein – mediated actin dynamics control type - I interferon production in plasmacytoid dendritic cells . ” The Journal of Experimental Medicine 210 ( 2 ) : 355 - 374 . doi : 10 . 1084 / jem . 20120363 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1084 / jem . 20120363 . Published Version doi : 10 . 1084 / jem . 20120363 Citable link http : / / nrs . harvard . edu / urn - 3 : HUL . InstRepos : 11855801 Terms of Use This article was downloaded from Harvard University’s DASH repository , and is made available under the terms and conditions applicable to Other Posted Material , as set forth at http : / / nrs . harvard . edu / urn - 3 : HUL . InstRepos : dash . current . terms - of - use # LAA Article The Rockefeller University Press $ 30 . 00 J . Exp . Med . 2013 Vol . 210 No . 2 355 - 374 www . jem . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1084 / jem . 20120363 355 Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome ( WAS ) is an X - linked immunodeficiency characterized by thrombo - cytopenia , eczema , recurrent infections , and auto - immune phenomena . The disease is caused by mutations of the WAS gene that encodes the CORRESPONDENCE Federica Benvenuti : benvenut @ icgeb . org Abbreviations used : BAFF , B cell activating factor ; cDC , conventional DC ; EE , early endosomes ; HD , healthy donor ; HPF , high power field ; IRF - 7 , IFN regulatory factor 7 ; JIA , juvenile idiopathic arthritis ; MxA , myxovirus resistance protein A ; pDC , plasmacytoid DC ; SLE , systemic lupus erythe - matosus ; WAS , Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome ; WASp , WAS protein . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein – mediated actin dynamics control type - I interferon production in plasmacytoid dendritic cells Francesca Prete , 1 Marco Catucci , 2 Mayrel Labrada , 1 , 3 Stefania Gobessi , 4 Maria Carmina Castiello , 2 , 5 Elisa Bonomi , 6 Alessandro Aiuti , 2 , 7 William Vermi , 6 , 8 Caterina Cancrini , 9 Ayse Metin , 10 Sophie Hambleton , 11 Robbert Bredius , 12 Luigi Daniele Notarangelo , 13 Mirjam van der Burg , 14 Ulrich Kalinke , 15 Anna Villa , 2 , 16 and Federica Benvenuti 1 1 International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology , Padriciano 99 , 34149 Trieste , Italy 2 San Raffaele Scientific Institute , Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy , 20132 Milan , Italy 3 Immunobiology Division , Center of Molecular Immunology , Atabey , Playa , Havana , Cuba 4 International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology ( ICGEB ) Molecular Hematology Group , Campus “A . Buzzati - Traverso , ” 00016 Rome , Italy 5 Vita - Salute San Raffaele University , 20132 Milan , Italy 6 Department of Pathology , University of Brescia / Spedali Civilli di Brescia , 25123 Brescia , Italy 7 Department of Public Health and Cell Biology , Tor Vergata University , 00133 Rome , Italy 8 Department of Pathology and Immunology , Washington University School of Medicine , St . Louis , MO 63110 9 Department of Pediatrics , Children’s Hospital Bambino Gesù and Tor Vergata University , 00133 Rome , Italy 10 Pediatric Immunology and Allergy Department , Ankara Children’s Diseases Hematology Oncology Training Hospital Pediatric Hematology , Bone Marrow , Transplantation Unit , Ankara Children’s Hematology Oncology Training Hospital , 06050 Ankara , Turkey 11 Institute of Cellular Medicine , Newcastle University , Newcastle NE2 4HH , England , UK 12 Department of Hematology and Immunology of Leiden University Medical Center , 2300 Leiden , Netherlands 13 Division of Immunology , Children’s Hospital , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA 02115 14 Department of Immunology , Erasmus MC , University Medical Center Rotterdam , 3015 GE Rotterdam , Netherlands 15 Institute for Experimental Infection Research , TWINCORE , Centre for Experimental and Clinical Infection Research , a joint venture between the Helmholtz - Centre for Infection Research ( HZI ) , Braunschweig , and the Hannover Medical School ( MHH ) , 30625 Hannover , Germany 16 Milan Unit , Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica , Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche , 20138 Milan , Italy Mutations in Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome ( WAS ) protein ( WASp ) , a regulator of actin dynamics in hematopoietic cells , cause WAS , an X - linked primary immunodeficiency characterized by recurrent infections and a marked predisposition to develop autoimmune disorders . The mech - anisms that link actin alterations to the autoimmune phenotype are still poorly understood . We show that chronic activation of plasmacytoid dendritic cells ( pDCs ) and elevated type - I interferon ( IFN ) levels play a role in WAS autoimmunity . WAS patients display increased expression of type - I IFN genes and their inducible targets , alteration in pDCs numbers , and hyperresponsiveness to TLR9 . Importantly , ablating IFN - I signaling in WASp null mice rescued chronic activation of conventional DCs , splenomegaly , and colitis . Using WASp - deficient mice , we demonstrated that WASp null pDCs are intrinsically more responsive to multimeric agonist of TLR9 and constitutively secrete type - I IFN but become progressively tolerant to further stimulation . By acute silencing of WASp and actin inhibitors , we show that WASp - mediated actin polymerization controls intracellular trafficking and compartmentalization of TLR9 ligands in pDCs restraining exaggerated activation of the TLR9 – IFN -  pathway . Together , these data highlight the role of actin dynamics in pDC innate functions and imply the pDC – IFN -  axis as a player in the onset of autoimmune phenomena in WAS disease . © 2013 Prete et al . This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike – No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date ( see http : / / www . rupress . org / terms ) . After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported license , as described at http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 / ) . T h e J ou r n a l o f E x p e r i m e n t a l M e d i c i n e 356 Role of WASp in pDCs | Prete et al . and it is involved in polarization and secretion of cytokine / cytotoxic granules in T cells / NK cells ( Orange et al . , 2002 ; Gismondi et al . , 2004 ; Morales - Tirado et al . , 2004 ; Trifari et al . , 2006 ) . Together , the cellular defects identified in WASp - deficient immune cells provide clues to understand the im - munodeficiency of WAS patients . However , the mechanisms by which perturbation of actin dynamics promote autoim - mune phenomena are less clear . Impairment of T and B cell tolerance have been reported in WAS patients and in Was - deficient mice , but the exact cellular mechanisms that link loss of WASp function to autoimmunity have not been fully elu - cidated yet ( Humblet - Baron et al . , 2007 ; Maillard et al . , 2007 ; Marangoni et al . , 2007 ; Becker - Herman et al . , 2011 ; Recher et al . , 2012 ) . Plasmacytoid DCs ( pDCs ) are the major class of type - I IFN – producing cells that react rapidly upon pathogen en - counter to secrete large amount of this cytokine . Recognition of foreign nucleic acid by TLR7 and TLR9 occurs in endo - somes and leads to production of type - I IFN and proinflam - matory cytokines . Several studies have unveiled that activation of IFN regulatory factor 7 ( IRF - 7 ) and IFN -  production in pDCs relies upon strict spatiotemporal compartmentalization of TLR9 and its ligands within the endocytic pathway ( Honda et al . , 2005 ; Guiducci et al . , 2006 ; Sasai et al . , 2010 ) . Besides their beneficial antiviral properties , type - I IFNs pro - duced by pDCs contribute to breakage of tolerance in several WAS protein ( WASp ) involved in controlling actin dynamics . Members of the WASp family regulate a variety of actin - dependent processes that range from cell migration to phago - cytosis , endocytosis , and membrane trafficking ( Thrasher and Burns , 2010 ) . Efforts to understand the cellular basis of the disease have identified diverse and cell - specific actin - related defects in cells of the adaptive and innate immune system . In T cells , TCR engagement induces cytoskeletal rearrange - ment , driving assembly of signaling platforms at the synaptic region . WASp plays a crucial role in this process by control - ling ex novo actin polymerization required to stabilize synapse formation and signaling ( Dupré et al . , 2002 ; Sasahara et al . , 2002 ; Badour et al . , 2003 ; Snapper et al . , 2005 ; Sims et al . , 2007 ) . WASp is also required on the APC side of the immune synapse for proper transmission of activating signals ( Pulecio et al . , 2008 ; Bouma et al . , 2011 ) . Defective signaling through antigen receptors affects the function of invariant natural killer T cells ( Astrakhan et al . , 2009 ; Locci et al . , 2009 ) and B cells ( Meyer - Bahlburg et al . , 2008 ; Westerberg et al . , 2008 ; Becker - Herman et al . , 2011 ) . Furthermore , altered actin polymeriza - tion and integrin signaling in WASp - deficient immune cells cause defective homing and directional migration of T , B , and DCs ( de Noronha et al . , 2005 ; Westerberg et al . , 2005 ; Gallego et al . , 2006 ) . Moreover , WASp - mediated actin poly - merization controls phagocytic cup formation in monocytes , macrophages , and DCs ( Leverrier et al . , 2001 ; Tsuboi , 2007 ) Table 1 . PDC numbers and MxA expression in WAS spleen Case MxA score MxA pDCs Clinical score / autoimmunity % WAS # 1 4 18 . 52 6 . 21 5 / + WAS # 2 2 13 . 23 203 . 92 5 /  WAS # 3 3 7 . 99 154 . 98 5 /  WAS # 4 1 2 . 89 228 . 76 5 / + WAS # 5 4 19 . 02 50 . 40 3 /  WAS # 6 2 1 . 03 93 . 71 3 /  WAS # 7 4 13 . 95 323 . 48 5 / + WAS # 8 4 13 . 61 8 . 68 5 / + Mean ( ±SD ) 3 11 . 28 ( ±6 . 7 ) 133 . 8 ( ±113 . 9 ) CTR # 1 3 14 . 44 131 . 15 CTR # 2 1 0 . 47 578 . 25 CTR # 3 2 1 . 6 202 . 63 CTR # 4 2 0 . 15 223 . 00 CTR # 5 2 4 . 21 NV CTR # 6 4 25 . 29 202 . 63 CTR # 7 2 10 . 24 156 . 26 CTR # 8 2 0 . 61 62 . 95 CTR # 9 ne ne 83 . 21 CTR # 10 3 20 . 48 43 . 80 Mean ( ±SD ) 2 . 3 7 . 12 ( ±9 . 5 ) 187 . 10 ( ±160 . 30 ) ne = not evaluable . MxA is expressed as the percentage of reactivity of the spleen area . pDCs are expressed as BDCA - 2 + cells / mm 2 spleen area . Absolute pDC count and MxA expression were quantified on spleen sections of WAS patients . The MxA score was evaluated by counting the percentage of MxA + cells and expressed as a four - tier scale . MxA percentage of reactivity of the spleen area and BDCA - 2 + cells / mm 2 spleen area were evaluated automatically on digital slides as described in Materials and methods . Disease score is given according to the classification reported previously ( Imai et al . , 2004 ) JEM Vol . 210 , No . 2 Article 357 ( Fig . 1 , E and F ) . Significantly , in three of these cases , elevated MxA expression correlates to the occurrence of autoimmu - nity ( Table 1 ) . Several studies have shown that sera from SLE patients trigger pDCs activation and IFN -  release ( Vallin et al . , 1999 ; Lövgren et al . , 2004 ; Barrat et al . , 2005 ) . To test this hypothesis in WAS , we incubated pDCs isolated from healthy donors ( HDs ) with sera derived from WAS patients or HDs . As a control , we included sera from patients with SLE and juvenile idiopathic arthritis ( JIA ) . We observed induc - tion of low to moderate production of IFN -  by WAS sera that was statistically significant as compared with HD sera and simi - lar to the induction by SLE and JIA sera ( Fig . 2 A ) . A second hallmark of type - I IFN – driven disease is the up - regulation of IFN -  gene transcripts in peripheral blood ( Baechler et al . , 2003 , 2007 ; van der Pouw Kraan et al . , 2007 ; Emamian et al . , 2009 ; van Baarsen et al . , 2009 ; Pascual et al . , 2010 ) . We analyzed human autoimmune diseases , including systemic lupus eryth - ematosus ( SLE ) , Sjogren syndrome , and psoriasis ( Blanco et al . , 2001 ; Båve et al . , 2005 ; Nestle et al . , 2005 ; Gottenberg et al . , 2006 ; Becker - Herman et al . , 2011 ) . In these diseases , uncontrolled pDC activation depends on triggering of TLR7 / 9 by self – nucleic acid – containing immune complexes ( Barrat et al . , 2005 ) , binding of self - DNA to antimicrobial peptides ( Lande et al . , 2007 ) , and clustering of self - DNA within neu - trophil extracellular traps ( Garcia - Romo et al . , 2011 ) . The most common autoimmune features that develop in a high proportion of WAS patients include hemolytic ane - mia , vasculitis , renal disease , and arthritis ( Humblet - Baron et al . , 2007 ; Bosticardo et al . , 2009 ) . These symptoms par - tially overlap with those commonly observed in type - I IFN – driven diseases . Based on this , we hypothesized an involvement of the pDC – IFN -  axis in promoting autoimmunity in WAS . We provide evidences in patients and the demonstra - tion in a mouse model that WASp deficiency in pDCs con - trols activation of IFN - I genes contributing to autoimmune phenomena in WAS . RESULTS Frequency of pDCs and expression of type - I IFN – inducible genes in WAS patients Dysregulated production of type - I IFN by pDCs repre - sents a crucial step in the pathogenesis of autoimmune dis - eases such as SLE , Sjogren syndrome , and psoriasis . Some typical features of these diseases , such as skin lesions , arthritis , renal diseases , and cutaneous vasculitis , are also present in a proportion of WAS patients . Moreover , autoantibodies that are known to convert self – nucleic acid into potent triggers of pDCs are abundant in a murine model of WAS deficiency and are also detected in a proportion of WAS patients ( Dupuis - Girod et al . , 2003 ; Meyer - Bahlburg et al . , 2008 ; Trifari et al . , 2010 ; Becker - Herman et al . , 2011 ; Bosticardo et al . , 2011 ) . To investigate a possible contribution of altered pDC ho - meostasis to the pathophysiology of WAS , we first analyzed spleen sections and peripheral blood of WAS patients . We previously reported a general depletion of the splenic white pulp in WAS spleen . However , this analysis was limited to lymphoid cell populations with no data on the occurrence and distribution of pDCs ( Vermi et al . , 1999 ) . The avail - ability of an anti – BDCA - 2 capable to specifically identify human pDC on fixed tissues ( Vermi et al . , 2011 ) allowed us to analyze this cellular population of archival samples . Histolog - ical analysis of WAS spleen sections detected variable num - bers of BDCA - 2 + cells showing a typical pDCs morphology and a regular distribution in the T cell area ( Table 1 and Fig . 1 , A – D ) . The mean number of pDCs in WAS spleen was comparable to control cases ( 133 . 7 vs . 183 . 6 ; P = 0 . 35 ) with two cases in which pDCs were almost absent ( Fig . 1 G and Table 1 ) . As a surrogate marker of type - I IFN produc - tion , we directly assessed the protein level of myxovirus resistance protein A ( MxA ) on human spleen by immuno - histochemistry . Interestingly , we detected an elevated ex - pression of MxA ( score ≥ 3 ) in five out of eight WAS patients Figure 1 . Characterization of pDCs cells in spleen and peripheral blood of WAS patients . Spleen sections are obtained from WAS patients ( A – E ) and HDs ( F ) and stained for BDCA - 2 + ( A – D , brown ) , CD3 ( D , blue ) , and MxA ( E and F ) . Similarly to control cases , the spleen content of BDCA - 2 + cells in WAS patients is extremely variable ( WAS # 2 in A , WAS # 1 in B ; G ) . BDCA - 2 + cells show a typical PDC morphology ( WAS # 2 in C ) and are regularly distributed mainly in T cell area ( WAS # 2 in D ) . E and F illus - trate two cases of MxA score 4 ( WAS # 1 ) and score 2 ( HD # 2 ) . Bars : ( A , B , and D – F ) 200 µm ; ( C ) 33 µm . ( G ) The number of pDCs ( CD303 + cells ) in spleen sections was quantified automatically as described in Materials and methods . Horizontal bars indicate the mean value . 358 Role of WASp in pDCs | Prete et al . evaluated by ELISA by the percentage of pDCs in each sam - ple ( Fig . 2 E ) . We found that the relative IFN -  production by WAS patients was significantly higher compared with HDs ( Fig . 2 E ) . Overall these data strongly suggest that the pDC – IFN -  axis can be altered in WAS patients , thus con - tributing to pathogenesis of autoimmune manifestations . Constitutive activation and spontaneous IFN -  release by WASp - deficient pDCs To better understand the role of WASp in pDC , we moved to study a mouse model of WAS . Mice knocked out for WASp protein expression ( WKO mice ) present circulating autoan - tibodies and develop spontaneous colitis and proliferative glo - merulonephritis with immune complex deposition ( Snapper et al . , 1998 ; Humblet - Baron et al . , 2007 ; Nikolov et al . , 2010 ; Shimizu et al . , 2012 ) . Mutant mice also show infiltrates of B , T , and DCs in salivary glands , a feature commonly observed in mice models of Lupus and Sjogren Syndrome , and a moderate proteinuria index indicative of renal damage ( not depicted ; Humphreys - Beher , 1996 ; Fleck et al . , 1998 ) . the expression of type - I IFN genes and IFN -  – inducible targets ( chosen among those found overexpressed in SLE patients ) in a cohort of seven WAS patients with a clinical score of 4 – 5 . Notably , we observed increased expression of IFN -  genes in six of seven patients analyzed ( Fig . 2 B ) . Moreover , the mean expression levels of five type - I IFN – induced genes were significantly higher in this cohort of patients compared with age - matched HDs ( Fig . 2 C ) . Next , we examined the frequency and responsiveness of the pDC compartment in PBMCs . In keeping with previous observa - tions in SLE ( Blomberg et al . , 2003 ; Migita et al . , 2005 ; Kwok et al . , 2008b ) , we found a reduction in the frequency of pDCs in the PBMC of 15 pediatric WAS patients with a severe clinical score ( 3 – 5 , described by Zhu et al . , 1997 ) as compared with HDs ( Fig . 2 D ) . Next we evaluated the capacity of WAS pDCs to produce IFN -  in response to an agonist of TLR9 . We stimulated total PBMCs using a pDC - specific TLR9 ligand , CpG ODN2216 . Since pDC frequency was different among WAS patients and HDs , we calculated the relative IFN -  production dividing the absolute IFN -  production Figure 2 . Characterization of pDCs in peripheral blood of WAS patients . ( A ) IFN -  induction in pDCs by serum from WAS patients . pDCs isolated from HDs were incubated with 50 % serum from WAS , SLE , JIA patients , or HDs for 24 h . IFN -  in supernatant was measured by ELISA . Values of IFN -  super - natants were subtracted from the values of IFN -  in corresponding sera assayed in parallel without cells . Horizontal bars indicate the mean value . Data were analyzed with Mann - Whitney test . * , P < 0 . 05 ; * * , P < 0 . 01 . ( B and C ) mRNA was extracted from PBMCs of seven WAS patients and five HDs . Data show expression of three IFN -  transcripts ( B ) and five type - I IFN – inducible genes ( C ) . Horizontal bars indicate the mean value . Horizontal dashed line indicates the normalized HD mean value . ( D ) The percentage of pDCs in PBMCs of 15 pediatric WAS patients and 10 age - matched HDs was calculated by dividing the number of lineage - negative / BDCA - 2 + / CD4 + cells by the number of total live cells . Hori - zontal bars indicate mean values . ( E ) Relative IFN -  production by PBMCs from five WAS patients and eight HDs 24 h after stimulation with CpG ODN2216 . Relative IFN -  produc - tion was calculated by dividing CpG ODN2216 - induced IFN -  production by the percentage of pDCs . Adult patient is indicated by # . ELISA and real - time PCR data were ana - lyzed with Mann - Whitney test . * , P < 0 . 05 ; * * , P < 0 . 01 . JEM Vol . 210 , No . 2 Article 359 Figure 3 . Analysis of the pDC compartment in WASp - deficient mice . ( A ) Frequency and absolute numbers of pDCs in adult WKO mice . FACS dot plots show pDCs gating strategies , and numbers in quadrants refer to percentage of PDCA - 1 + / Siglec - H + / B220 + cells . Graphs show frequency and absolute number of pDCs in the spleen and LN of WT and WKO animals . n = 8 – 11 mice per group from three independent experiments . ( B ) Proliferation of pDCs in vivo . WT and WKO adult mice were fed BrdU in the drinking water for 7 d . Representative FACS plots showing the percentages of BrdU + pDCs in spleen , 360 Role of WASp in pDCs | Prete et al . LN , and BM . Results are from two experiments with four mice per group . ( C ) The expression of maturation markers ( CD86 , CD40 , and MHC - II ) was mea - sured by FACS on pDCs in different organs . The mean fluorescence intensity ( MFI ) in individual mice is indicated . Data are representative of two experi - ments ( n = 4 – 8 mice per group ) of four performed . ( D ) The levels of IFN -  and IL - 6 in the sera of untreated mice were evaluated by ELISA . n = 13 – 14 WT mice and 13 – 19 WKO mice . ( E ) Data show the relative expression of Ifna4 mRNA in pDCs isolated from the spleen and LN of WT and WKO mice .  CTs were obtained by normalizing target gene to the housekeeping  - actin . Values are shown as the 2  CT × 10 3 . n = 4 mice per group in at least four inde - pendent experiments . ( F ) WT and WKO splenic pDCs were plated at 3 × 10 5 / well and the spontaneous release of IFN -  was measured by ELISA 24 h later . Data are from three independent experiments , each with six mice per group . A – C , Mann - Whitney test ; D – F , Student’s t test ; error bars indicate SEM . * , P < 0 . 05 ; * * , P < 0 . 01 ; * * * , P < 0 . 001 . We first analyzed the pDC compartment in WKO mice . Conversely to patients , we found that the frequency and ab - solute numbers of PDCA - 1 + / Siglec - H + / B220 + cells were higher both in spleen and LNs of WKO mice ( Fig . 3 A ) . To understand the origin of increased cell numbers , we per - formed an in vivo BrdU labeling experiment by feeding WT and WKO mice for 7 d with BrdU in the drinking water . The number of labeled pDCs in the spleen , LNs , and BM was twice as much in WKO than in WT animals , indicating an enhanced turnover rate ( Fig . 3 B ) . WKO pDCs express significantly higher levels of MHC class - II and costimulatory molecules ( CD40 and CD86 ) in spleen , LNs , and blood , fur - ther indicating a state of constitutive activation ( Fig . 3 C ) . To examine whether chronically activated pDCs may be a source of elevated IFN -  , we analyzed the sera of WT and WKO mice . As shown in Fig . 3 D , in the absence of any in vivo stimulation , significantly higher levels of IFN -  were de - tected in the serum of WKO than of WT mice ; in contrast , levels of the inflammatory cytokine IL - 6 were similar in both groups of mice . Circulating IFN -  at steady state is not simply a consequence of increased pDC numbers , as mRNA extracted from equal numbers of splenic and LN pDCs con - firmed the presence of IFN -  transcripts only in WKO pDCs ( Fig . 3 E ) . Moderate levels of IFN -  protein were also de - tected in the supernatant of WKO splenic pDCs incubated ex vivo in medium without stimuli ( Fig . 3 F ) . Thus , pDCs in WASp - deficient animals are spontaneously activated and con - stitutively secrete detectable amounts of type - I IFN . WKO pDCs develop a selective exhaustion of the TLR9 – IFN -  pathway To further examine functional abnormalities in WASp - deficient pDCs , we evaluated their response to exogenous TLR ago - nists . WT and WKO mice were challenged intravenously with CpG - A - DOTAP , which induces secretion of high levels of type - I IFN by pDCs in the spleen . In WT mice , the levels of IFN -  peaked at 6 h after injection , whereas we detected a significantly lower IFN -  production in WKO mice at all time points tested ( Fig . 4 A ) . The levels of IL - 6 and IL - 12p40 were comparable in the two genotypes ( Fig . 4 A ) . Similarly , intra - cellular staining of splenic pDCs showed increasing numbers of IFN -  – producing pDCs at 2 . 5 and 6 h after injection in WT mice , whereas lower percentages of positive cells were detected in WKO mice at all time points ( Fig . 4 B ) . We next evaluated the production of type - I IFN and inflammatory cyto - kines in cells stimulated ex vivo with agonists of TLR9 and TLR7 . We used two agonists of TLR9 : multimeric CpG - A , which induces robust IRF - 7 – mediated transcription of IFN -  genes and little proinflammatory cytokines , and CpG - B , which induces preferentially inflammatory cytokines . As an agonist of TLR7 , we used Imiquimod ( R837 ; Honda et al . , 2005 ) . As expected , multimeric CpG - A , R837 , and , to a lower extent , CpG - B induced IFN -  gene transcription and protein secre - tion in WT pDCs ( Fig . 4 C ) . In contrast , IFN -  production was strongly impaired in WKO pDCs in response to agonist of TLR7 and TLR9 , both at the transcriptional and protein level . Release of inflammatory cytokines varied depending on the agonist used but was overall similar in WT and WKO pDCs ( Fig . 4 , C and D ) . In sum , these data show that pDCs in adult WKO mice are hyporesponsive in terms of IFN -  while maintaining intact the capacity to produce inflammatory cyto - kines upon TLR7 / 9 triggering . This is consistent with the fact that chronically activated pDCs become refractory to fur - ther TLR challenge ( Pau et al . , 2012 ) . WKO pDCs are intrinsically more responsive to TLR9 triggering We next investigated the mechanism of altered pDC func - tions . First , we tested whether spontaneous pDC activation may depend on the presence of endogenous pDC activators in sera , as seen in WAS patients . We confirmed that serum from adult WKO contains autoantibodies ( Humblet - Baron et al . , 2007 ; Becker - Herman et al . , 2011 ; Recher et al . , 2012 ) . As shown in Fig . 5 ( A and B ) , we found anti - nuclear and anti – double - stranded ( ds ) DNA antibodies in adult WKO mice that are absent in younger animals ( 3 wk ; Fig . 5 , A and B ) . Stimulation of pDCs with sera from adult WKO mice ( 6 – 12 wk ) , but not with sera from adult WT mice , induced IFN -  gene transcription and release of little but detectable amounts of IFN -  in the cell culture supernatant . Sera from young WKO mice failed to induce IFN -  secretion . Moreover , the IFN -  – inducing capacity of WKO sera was reduced upon pre - treatment with DNase ( Fig . 5 D ) . Thus , immune complexes of autoantibodies and self – nucleic acid may constitute an endogenous trigger of pDC activation in vivo in WAS mice . Activation by endogenous factors would explain , at least in part , chronic pDC activation and exhaustion of the IFN -  pathway , similarly to what has been described in SLE ( Ito et al . , 2006 ; Kwok et al . , 2008a ) . However , a second not mutually exclusive hypothesis is that cell intrinsic factors lower the threshold for pDC acti - vation . Consistent with this , WKO B cells were recently shown to be intrinsically hyperresponsive to TLR9 triggering JEM Vol . 210 , No . 2 Article 361 CpG - A was also reflected in slightly enhanced IL - 6 produc - tion that , despite being only weakly induced by this agonist , was augmented in WKO cells . TNF production in the cell culture supernatant was comparable between WT and WKO ; however , intracellular staining at early time points revealed a higher fraction of cells positive for both IFN - I and TNF in ( Becker - Herman et al . , 2011 ; Recher et al . , 2012 ) . To address this possibility , we first examined the responsiveness of naive pDCs isolated from young ( 3 wk old ) mice with undetectable anti - nuclear antibodies . We found that CpG - A , but not R837 , induced a significantly enhanced production of IFN -  by WKO young pDCs ( Fig . 6 A ) . Hyperresponsiveness to Figure 4 . Progressive exhaustion of the TLR9 / IFN -  in WKO mice . ( A ) WT and WKO adult ( > 6 wk ) mice were injected intravenously with 10 µg CpG - A in complex with the cationic lipid DOTAP . Serum levels of IFN -  , IL - 6 , and IL - 12p40 were measured by ELISA at 2 , 6 , 10 , and 24 h after injection . n = 4 – 9 mice per group in three independent experiments . ( B ) Dot plots showing IFN -  intracellular staining in the spleen of WT and WKO mice isolated at dif - ferent time points after injection . Numbers represents the percentage of cells in the respective quadrant . Data are representative of one of three experi - ments performed each with three mice per group . ( C ) Gene transcription and protein release in splenic pDCs sorted from WT and WKO adult mice . Cells were stimulated ex vivo with CpG - A , CpG - B , and R837 ( 15 µg / ml ) . The relative expression of Ifna4 transcripts was evaluated by qRT – PCR at 4 and 24 h . The target mRNA was normalized to  - actin mRNA . Values are shown as the 2  CT × 10 3 . The levels of IFN -  ( C , right ) , IL - 6 , and IL - 12p40 ( D ) were measured in cell culture supernatants after 16 h . Results are representative of four ( CpG - A and CpG - B in C ) and three ( R837 in C and D ) independent experiments . A , Mann - Whitney test ; C and D , Student’s t test ; error bars indicate SEM . * , P < 0 . 05 ; * * , P < 0 . 01 ; * * * , P < 0 . 001 . 362 Role of WASp in pDCs | Prete et al . WKO pDCs stimulated by CpG - A ( Fig . 6 B ) . CpG - B and R837 induced equal levels of IFN -  and cytokines in the two groups . Notably , young WKO pDCs responded more vigorously than young WT pDCs to stimulation with sera derived from adult WKO animals ( Fig . 6 C ) . Collectively , these data strongly suggest that naive WKO pDCs are hyper - responsive , especially in terms of IFN -  production , to mul - timeric TLR9 agonists ( CpG - A and DNA immune complexes in sera ) . To fully establish that WASp controls activation of the TLR9 – IFN -  pathway and to demonstrate that pDC dysregulation is cell autonomous , we treated pDCs with siRNA oligos that target WASp . WT pDCs treated with a Was - specific siRNA showed a 70 % reduction in protein expression compared with cells treated with a control siRNA ( Fig . 6 D ) . CpG - A stimulation of WASp - depleted cells induced significantly higher IFN -  and slightly increased IL - 6 , as compared with cells treated with the control siRNA , whereas inflammatory cytokines induced by CpG - B were comparable ( Fig . 6 D ) . In a parallel experiment of gene de - pletion in conventional BM - derived DCs , we observed no differences in the levels of IL - 6 and IL12p40 produced after stimulation with CpG - B ( Fig . 6 E ) . Thus , in a setting that completely excludes environmental factors , full expression of WASp is required to control activation of the TLR9 pathway intrinsically in pDCs . Interestingly , interfering with actin po - lymerization by means of two different actin inhibitors , cyto - chalasin - d and latrunculin - A , significantly enhanced IFN -  and slightly enhanced IL - 6 release upon CpG - A triggering . The release of proinflammatory cytokines upon CpG - B treat - ment was not affected ( Fig . 6 , F and G ) . Cytokine production by conventional DCs ( cDCs ) was also not modified by cyto - chalasin - d treatment ( Fig . 6 H ) . Therefore , we conclude that in a cell - intrinsic fashion , WASp - mediated actin dynamics controls activation of TLR9 signaling upon internalization of multimeric TLR9 ligands . Altered endocytic pathway and CpG - A accumulation in WASp null pDCs We next examined the cell biological basis of increased IFN -  production in WASp null pDCs . The unique ability of pDCs to produce large amounts of type - I IFN depends on spatiotemporal regulation of ligand / receptor trafficking within the endocytic pathway . It has been widely documented that retention of large DNA aggregates into early endosomes ( EE ) and trafficking to lysosome - related organelles are two steps that control robust activation of IFN -  genes ( Honda et al . , 2005 ; Guiducci et al . , 2006 ; Sasai and Iwasaki , 2011 ) . As recent reports showed that nucleating promoting factors like the Arp2 / 3 complex ( a downstream WASp effector ) , Figure 5 . WKO serum induces IFN -  secretion by pDCs . ( A ) The presence of IgG anti - dsDNA autoantibodies in sera was analyzed by immunostaining of NIH3T3 cells . Diluted sera from control ( WT ) , WKO ( > 6 mo ) , and young WKO ( 3 wk ) mice were incubated with NIH3T3 cells , and the anti - nuclear reactivity was detected using FITC - conjugated anti - IgG antibody ( right ) . Nuclei were visualized by DAPI staining ( left ) . Represen - tative images from one out of four sera tested / group are shown . Bar , 36 µM . ( B ) Levels of IgG anti - dsDNA autoantibodies were evaluated by ELISA in sera ( 1 : 800 dilution ) from 3 - wk - old , 3 – 4 - mo - old , and 6 – 7 - mo - old WKO mice . As positive and negative controls , SLE - prone NZW / NZB F1 mice ( 6 mo old ) and WT mice ( 4 – 7 mo old ) were used , respectively . Each dot represents an individual animal . Horizontal bars indicate medians . ( C ) 3 . 5 × 10 5 WT BM – derived pDCs ( BM - pDCs ) were stimulated with sera from WT or WKO mice for 7 h . Relative expression of Ifna4 transcripts were evaluated by qRT - PCR . Data are representative of sera from n = 4 mice per group in two independent experiments . ( D ) 3 . 5 × 10 5 WT BM - pDCs were stimulated with sera from the indicated groups of animals ( pooled sera of four animals per group ) treated or not with DNase I . Secretion of IFN -  was measured by ELISA at 24 h . Data are expressed as the values in experimental wells subtracted of the values in control wells ( dilutions of sera without cells ) . B and D , Mann - Whitney test ; error bars indicate SEM . * , P < 0 . 05 . JEM Vol . 210 , No . 2 Article 363 Figure 6 . Cell - intrinsic role of WASp - mediated actin dynamics in limiting IFN -  production in pDCs . ( A ) Responses to TLR9 and TLR7 agonists in naive pDCs from young WKO mice . 3 × 10 5 pDCs isolated from the spleen of young ( 3 wk ) WT or WKO mice were stimulated ex vivo with 10 µg / ml CpG - A or CpG - B and 5 µg / ml R837 . Bars show IFN -  , IL - 6 , and TNF protein levels determined by ELISA in cell culture supernatant . Results are from two ( R837 ) to five ( CpG - A and CpG - B ) independent experiments each with six mice per group . ( B ) pDCs were stimulated with 20 µg / ml CpG - A for 5 h in the presence of brefeldin A . Intracellular staining was performed with antibodies against IFN -  and TNF . The plots are from one representative experiment of three per - formed . ( C ) Splenic pDCs from young WT or WKO mice were incubated with sera from WT ( n = 4 ) or WKO ( n = 4 ) adult mice . Data show the levels of IFN -  in cell culture supernatants subtracted of the values in control wells without cells . Data are representative of two experiments with six mice per group . ( D and E ) BM - pDCs or BM - cDCs were nucleofected with siRNA control ( si - irr ) or WASp - specific ( si - WASp ) RNA oligos . ( D ) 3 × 10 5 control or WASp - silenced 364 Role of WASp in pDCs | Prete et al . BM - pDCs were stimulated with 15 µg / ml CpG - A or CpG - B . IFN -  and IL - 6 protein levels were determined by ELISA . Results are from four experiments . ( E ) 3 × 10 5 control or WASp - silenced BM - cDCs were stimulated with 15 µg / ml CpG - B . IL - 12p40 and IL - 6 protein levels were determined by ELISA . Results are representative of three experiments . ( F ) 3 × 10 5 BM - pDCs were preincubated with 1 µg / ml cytochalasin - d ( Cyto - d ) , 0 . 1 µg / ml latrunculin - A or control medium , washed and stimulated with 5 µg / ml CpG - A for 5 h . Bars show concentrations of IFN -  and IL - 6 protein in cell culture supernatants . Data are representative of two ( latrunculin - A ) to six ( cytochalasin - d ) independent experiments . Levels of IL - 6 ( G ) and IL - 12p40 ( H ) induced by CpG - B in Cyto - D – treated pDCs and Cyto - D – treated cDCs upon stimulation with 15 µg / ml CpG - A and CpG - B , respectively . One representative experiment out of three with similar results is shown . A , D , and E , Student’s t test ; F , Mann - Whitney test ; error bars indicate SEM . * , P < 0 . 05 ; * * , P < 0 . 01 ; * * * , P < 0 . 001 . WASH , and cortactin are involved in EE fission and matura - tion into lysosomes ( Derivery et al . , 2009 ; Ohashi et al . , 2011 ) , we postulated that WASp might be involved in regu - lation of pDC activation by controlling delivery of TLR9 ligands within the endocytic pathway . To address this ques - tion , we first examined actin reorganization and WASp acti - vation in WT pDCs . In agreement with previous observations in macrophages and myeloid DCs ( Sanjuan et al . , 2006 ) , we found that CpG - A induces phosphorylation of Src kinases and actin regulatory proteins such as paxillin and pyk2 ( Fig . 7 A ) . Notably , stimulation with CpG - A induced a rapid increase in WASp phosphorylation , a mechanism which was shown to be essential for WASp functions in several model systems but which has not been previously reported to be associated to TLR9 signaling ( Fig . 7 B ) . Immunolabeling of WASp in pDCs was weak but specific and revealed a shifting from a diffuse cytoplasmic distribution in resting pDCs to accumu - lation of WASp in patches overlapping with EE upon CpG - A stimulation , suggesting that WASp is involved in remodeling of endosomal actin during pDCs activation by TLR9 ago - nists ( Fig . 7 C ) . Next , we analyzed by confocal microscopy the fate of in - ternalized CpG - A labeled with FITC in splenic pDCs isolated from young WT or WKO animals . EE in nonstimulated WT pDCs appeared as well defined rounded vesicles ( mean EE volume = 3 . 3 µm 3 ± 3 . 3 SD ) distributed uniformly ( Fig . 8 A ) . In contrast , EE were often clustered in larger vesicles at one pole of the cells in resting WKO pDCs ( mean EE volume = 5 . 24 µm 3 ± 6 SD ) . Stimulation with CpG - A FITC induced clustering of EE vesicles in areas of CpG - A uptake in both WT and WKO cells , resulting in an increase of EE volumes that was slightly higher in WKO cells . Remarkably , CpG - A vesi - cles inside WKO cells were larger and often displayed a tubular shape ( Fig . 8 , A and C ) . Quantitative analysis on 3D recon - structed images showed that intracellular CpG - A vesicles have significantly larger volumes in WKO than in WT pDCs ( Fig . 8 A ) . To establish that actin remodeling driven by WASp controls the compartmentalization of TLR9 ligands in pDCs , we analyzed CpG - A vesicles in cells depleted of WASp expres - sion by siRNA or treated with Cyto - D . The mean volume of the CpG - A – containing compartments was increased in both conditions , indicating that enhanced accumulation of TLR9 ligands is linked to stronger activation of IFN -  genes ( Fig . 8 B ) . To better understand the nature of the CpG - A containing compartment , we quantified the colocalization of CpG - A FITC with markers of EE ( EEA - 1 ) and lysosomes ( LAMP - 1 ) . At 1 h Figure 7 . CpG - A induces tyrosine phos - phorylation of WASp and its localization in EE . ( A ) WT BM - pDCs were stimulated with 20 µg / ml CpG - A and whole cell lysates were Western blotted with anti - phospho paxillin , anti - phospho Pyk2 , and anti - phospho Src antibodies . ( B ) WT BM - pDCs were lysed after the indicated times of stimulation with CpG - A . WASp was immunoprecipitated from the cell lysates and the anti - WASp immunoprecipi - tates were Western blotted with anti total phospho - tyrosine and anti - WASp antibodies . ( C ) WT or WKO splenic pDC were labeled with antibodies against WASp to assess staining specificity ( bars , far left panels , 33 µm ) . WT splenic pDCs from adult mice were left untreated or stimulated with CpG - A for 30 min , fixed , and labeled with antibodies against WASp and the EE marker EEA - 1 . Representa - tive single confocal z - planes ( middle ) are shown . Bars , 3 µm . ( D ) The index of colocal - ization ( Pearson’s coefficient ) between WASp and EEA - 1 staining was measured on 9 and 10 resting and stimulated cells , respectively . Red horizontal bars indicate the median . Mann - Whitney test . JEM Vol . 210 , No . 2 Article 365 Figure 8 . WASp controls CpG - A accumulation and EE size in pDCs . ( A ) Splenic pDCs from young WT and WKO mice were stimulated with 20 µg / ml CpG - A FITC for 30 min or left untreated ( NS ) . Shown are representative confocal images of CpG - A and EEA - 1 merged with DIC images . The quantification of EE volumes and CpG - A volumes on 3D reconstructed z - sections is shown on the right . For EE volumes , n = 85 , 19 , 63 , and 25 for WT ( NS ) , WT ( CpG - A ) , WKO ( NS ) , and WKO ( CpG - A ) , respectively . Mean and SEM are indicated , Mann - Whitney test . For CpG - A volumes , n = 74 and n = 77 cells were analyzed in WT and WKO , respectively . Horizontal bars show mean values . * * * , P = 0 . 0008 , Mann - Whitney . ( B ) Splenic WT pDCs were pretreated with cytochalasin - d ( or control medium ) for 30 min , washed , and exposed to CpG - A FITC for 30 min . Confocal images show representative example of CpG - A and EEA - 1 staining merged with DIC images . The volume of intracellular CpG - A vesicles was quantified on > 30 cells per condition . Bars show mean values , P = 0 . 034 , Mann - Whitney . ( C ) BM - PDCs treated with control or WASp - specific siRNA ( si - IRR and si - WASp ) were incubated with CpG - A - cy5 and immunostained with anti – EEA - 1 antibodies . Representative single confocal planes are shown . The plot shows the quantification of CpG - A containing vesicles measured on 3D reconstructed images . Data were collected from 50 si - irr – and 50 si - WASp – treated cells . Horizontal bars show mean values . * * , P = 0 . 0021 , Mann - Whitney test . ( D ) Splenic pDCs isolated from young mice were incubated with 20 µg / ml CpG - A FITC for 1 h . Confocal images of CpG - A and EEA - 1 ( left ) and LAMP - 1 ( right ) staining merged with DIC images are shown . The graph represents Pearson’s correlation coefficients that were calculated for CpG - A and EEA - 1 or CpG - A and LAMP - 1 on 3D reconstituted z - sections . Data are from n = 74 WT and n = 41 WKO cells for EEA - 1 ( * * , P = 0 . 0037 ) , and from 366 Role of WASp in pDCs | Prete et al . any stimulation , splenic WKO cDCs expressed significantly higher levels of maturation markers ( CD40 and CD86 ) than WT cDCs , indicating a state of chronic activation . Expression in DKO cDCs was intermediate between WT and WKO , showing an almost complete rescue of spontaneous matura - tion . Moreover MHC - I expression was high in WKO cDCs but returned to WT level in cDCs isolated from DKO mice . Next , we stimulated cDCs with CpG - B or LPS to measure the production of proinflammatory cytokines . WKO cDCs produced increased levels of TNF , IL - 12p40 , and IL - 6 as compared with WT cells . In contrast , secretion by DKO cells was significantly lower than in WKO cells and , for IL - 6 , even lower than in WT cells ( Fig . 9 D ) . Thus , excessive maturation and responsiveness toTLR4 and TLR9 in WKO cDCs depend on engagement of IFNAR . Secretion of B cell activating factor ( BAFF ) by IFN -  – activated cDCs is a major mecha - nism by which DCs may amplify production of autoantibod - ies ( Litinskiy et al . , 2002 ; Cancro et al . , 2009 ) . The levels of BAFF in sera of WKO animals were indeed significantly higher than in WT mice , whereas they were completely rescued in DKO mice ( Fig . 9 E ) . However , despite rescued BAFF levels , DKO mice still contained elevated anti - dsDNA antibodies , suggesting that cell - intrinsic B cell defects ( Becker - Herman et al . , 2011 ; Recher et al . , 2012 ) are dominant over the con - tribution of the type - I IFN – BAFF axis ( Fig . 9 F ) . Based on these data , we conclude that type - I IFN signaling in WAS pro - motes excessive activation of DCs and contributes to the de - velopment of autoimmune manifestations . DISCUSSION The mechanisms that limit unrestrained activation of innate immune cells upon ligation of pattern recognition receptors are of great interest , as it is increasingly recognized that failure to prevent excessive activation leads to chronic inflammation and autoimmunity . This work provides the first description of the role of WASp in pDCs , a crucial subset of innate im - mune cells specialized in secretion of type - I IFN . We show that type - I IFN production is negatively regulated by WASp - dependent actin dynamics , both indirectly through cell ex - trinsic mechanisms and in a cell autonomous fashion . The combination of extrinsic and intrinsic cellular mechanisms leads to chronic pDC activation and spontaneous release of IFN -  that is involved in autoimmune disease . These find - ings provide a new important clue to understand the devel - opment of autoimmune phenomena in WAS and suggest the inclusion of the syndrome in the list of type - I IFN diseases . pDCs are specialized in producing high levels of type - I IFNs upon recognition of foreign nucleic acid derived from endo - cytosed pathogens . In several type - I IFN diseases ( SLE , Sjorgen , and psoriasis ) , unwanted pDC activation by self - nucleic acid after uptake , CpG - A showed higher association with EE than with lysosome markers in both WT and WKO cells . However the index of CpG - A / EE colocalization was higher in WKO cells . Merging with lysosome markers was limited in WT pDCs ( mean Pearson’s coefficient = 0 . 18 ± 0 . 018 ) , whereas it was significantly higher in WKO pDCs ( mean Pearson’s co - efficient = 0 . 315 ± 0 . 02 ; Fig . 8 C ) . These data indicate that WKO pDCs accumulate larger amounts of intracellular CpG - A that are rapidly translocated to TLR9 signaling compartments . We next quantified the nuclear translocation of IRF - 7 in cells stimulated with CpG - A . IRF - 7 staining was confined in the cytoplasm of nonstimulated cells and begun to accumulate in the nucleus at 2 h after activation . Quantitative analysis of nuclear / cytoplasmic IRF - 7 fluorescence intensity revealed a higher ratio in stimulated WKO pDCs , indicating stronger nuclear recruitment . Thus , increased IFN -  production in WKO pDC is a result of enhanced signaling through the TLR9 – IRF - 7 axis . Collectively , we conclude that lack of WASp in pDCs causes accumulation of large aggregates of multimeric TLR - 9 ligands that rapidly traffic within the endocytic path - way leading to increased IRF - 7 activation . Rescue of autoimmune manifestations in WASp null mice on an IFNAR - deficient background Finally , we directly examined whether dysregulated type - I IFN production plays a role in the pathogenesis of WAS auto - immune phenomena . To this purpose , we backcrossed WKO mice to mice lacking a functional IFN -  /  receptor ( Prinz et al . , 2008 ) , referred to as DKO mice , hereafter . Ablation of type - I IFN signaling in WKO mice caused a significant reduction of splenomegaly and amelioration of colitis . As shown in Fig . 9 A , the total cellularity and spleen weight were increased in adult WKO mice with respect to WT mice , whereas they were comparable between WT and DKO mice . Consistent with previous reports ( Snapper et al . , 1998 ) , 4 - mo - old WKO mice develop colitis characterized by a dense mucosal T cell infiltration as measured on CD3 - stained sec - tions ( 18 . 25 CD3 + cells / high power field [ HPF ] for WT vs . 58 . 25 CD3 + cells / HPF for WKO , P < 0 . 0001 ) . In DKO , the density of infiltrating T cells was intermediate between WT and WKO ( 31 . 5 CD3 + cells / HPF ) but still significantly dif - ferent from the WT group ( P < 001 ) . Similarly , infiltrates of B and T cells in salivary glands were increased in WKO but almost absent in DKO animals ( unpublished data ) . Constitutive pDC activation and production of type - I IFN contribute to breach of peripheral tolerance through activation of cDC , boosting their antigen - presenting capacity and secretion of proinflammatory cytokines ( Blanco et al . , 2001 ; Ding et al . , 2006 ; Agrawal et al . , 2009 ) . We examined maturation and cytokine secretion in cDCs . In the absence of n = 116 WT and n = 72 WKO cells for LAMP - 1 ( * * * , P = 0 . 0005 , Mann - Whitney t test ) . Horizontal bars represent median . ( E ) Splenic pDCs from young mice were incubated with 10 µg / ml CpG - A for 2 h , fixed , and labeled with antibodies against IRF - 7 . Representative images are of resting and stimulated WT and WKO cells . The quantification shows the ratio between the mean fluorescence intensity in cytoplasm versus nucleus calculated on 4 and 25 resting and stimulated cells , respectively , in each group . Horizontal bars show mean values . * * , P = 0 . 0017 , Mann - Whitney test . Bars , 3 µm . JEM Vol . 210 , No . 2 Article 367 Figure 9 . Partial rescue of autoimmune disease in IFNAR / WASp double KO mice . ( A ) Representative spleens from 3 - mo - old WT , WKO , and DKO mice . Graphs represent spleen wet weight ( in grams ) and total splenocytes counts ( n = 7 – 10 animals per group ) . ( B ) Formalin - fixed sections of large bowel are from 4 - mo - old WT ( left ) , WKO ( middle ) , and DKO ( right ) mice and stained for anti - CD3 . Compared with WT , WKO , and , to a lesser extent , DKO , show increased mucosal infiltration of CD3 + T cells . Sections are counterstained with Mayer’s hematoxylin . Bar , 200 µm . ( C ) Mean fluorescence intensity ( MFI ) of CD86 , CD40 , and MHC - I expressed by cDC ( CD11c hi ) at steady state were measured by FACS in spleens of WT , WKO , and DKO mice . Data are from three independent experiments , each with two to four mice per group . ( D ) 3 × 10 5 WT , WKO , and DKO BM - cDCs were incubated with increasing doses of 368 Role of WASp in pDCs | Prete et al . proliferation of autoreactive B cells and T cells ( Jego et al . , 2003 ; Le Bon et al . , 2006a , b ) . This is well illustrated in lupus - prone mice models in which IFNAR deficiency invariably reduces the levels of autoantibodies ( Santiago - Raber et al . , 2003 ; Agrawal et al . , 2009 ) . Intriguingly , WASp mice defi - cient for IFNAR receptor , despite amelioration of others major autoimmune signs , still have elevated anti - dsDNA antibodies , indicating that both IFN - I – dependent and – independent path - ways contribute to autoimmunity . Although further analyses are needed to characterize subclasses and specificity of auto - antibodies in these mice , the data are consistent with a domi - nant cell intrinsic break in the B cell compartment in WAS ( Becker - Herman et al . , 2011 ; Recher et al . , 2012 ) . We have identified two mechanisms that contribute to unabated pDCs activation in WASp - deficient animals . First , sera of WKO adult mice can induce IFN -  secretion , strongly sug - gesting that self – nucleic acids , in complex with autoantibodies ( Humblet - Baron et al . , 2007 ; Nikolov et al . , 2010 ) , are con - verted into pDCs inducers , similarly to what has been described in SLE ( Barrat et al . , 2005 ; Means et al . , 2005 ) . It is likely that other factors participate in pDC activation in WKO , given that inefficient clearance of dying cells by macrophages ( Lorenzi et al . , 2000 ) is a source of endogenous TLR9 agonist ( Båve et al . , 2000 ) . Chronic pDC activation in WASp mice caused a selective exhaustion of the IFN -  pathway . This selective effect may depend on consumption of specific factors in the Myd88 – IRF - 7 pathway or on the induction of negative reg - ulators ( Escoll et al . , 2003 ) . A similar inability of pDCs to make type - I IFN in response to a secondary challenge has already been described in the context of viral infections ( Björck , 2004 ; Ito et al . , 2006 ) , in lupus - prone mice ( Pau et al . , 2012 ) , and in SLE patients ( Kwok et al . , 2008a ) . Whether exhaustion of the IFN -  pathway is playing a role in inefficient viral clearance in WKO mice ( Strom et al . , 2003 ; Andreansky et al . , 2005 ) will be a subject of future studies and it is certainly an impor - tant implication of our findings . Second and most compelling , we demonstrated with different approaches that WASp - deficient pDCs are inherently hyperresponsive to TLR9 triggering . Importantly , drug - induced inhibition of actin polymerization enhanced cytokine production , thus strengthening the no - tion that WASp restrains excessive activation via its actin regulatory properties . TLR9 signals through the adaptor pro - tein MyD88 to activate two distinct pathways , one leading to the transcription of proinflammatory cytokines via NF -  B and the second leading to type - I IFN through IRF - 7 . Acti - vation of these two different pathways depends on signaling from distinct endocytic organelles , with activation of IFN -  requiring access of TLR9 to lysosome - like organelles ( Honda et al . , 2005 ; Sasai et al . , 2010 ) . Our functional studies show complexes has been recognized as a major pathogenetic mech - anism ( Vallin et al . , 1999 ; Barrat et al . , 2005 ; Gilliet and Lande , 2008 ; Gilliet et al . , 2008 ) . In the mouse model of WASp deficiency , we observed multiple signs of pDC activation , in - cluding an increased proliferation rate , higher expression of surface maturation markers , constitutive transcription of IFN -  genes , and elevated levels of systemic IFN -  . Many evidences in WAS patients support the conclusion that ele - vated type - I IFN may contribute to disease pathogenesis . Analysis of gene expression on RNA isolated from PBMC of pediatric patients with a high clinical score showed up - regulated expression of IFN -  genes and of several type - I in - ducible genes , as compared with normal donors , demonstrating exposure to elevated levels of this cytokine . Second , the sera from WAS patients , similarly to sera from SLE and JIA , in - duced release of IFN -  by normal pDCs . This indicates that the well documented pathogenic mechanism of chronic pDC triggering by endogenous factors is likely to operate also in WAS patients . In spite of this , we failed to detect consistent levels of IFN -  in sera , except from one patient with overt autoimmunity ( unpublished data ) . Analysis of expression of MxA by immunohistochemistry on spleen sections of affected young boys confirmed elevated expression of this major target of type - I IFN in secondary lymphoid organs . We also report a reduced frequency of pDCs in the peripheral blood of our cohort of pediatric WAS patients . In this respect , the discrep - ancy with increased pDCs number observed in WKO mice may be explained by the exposure of WAS patients to re - peated infections and corticosteroid treatment , two factors which can contribute to pDCs depletion ( Duan et al . , 2004 ; Kanto et al . , 2004 ; Altfeld et al . , 2011 ) . Of note , total PBMC from WAS patients showed an increased IFN -  secretion when challenged with TLR9 agonist . This finding is consis - tent with our observations in WASp null mouse pDCs ( young prediseased mice and WASp silenced pDCs ) , strongly sup - porting that pDCs are basically hyperresponsive . It may be that blood - derived pDCs in PBMC , as opposed to splenic pDCs in mice , are just generated and have not yet been exposed to endogenous triggers , maintaining their naive responsiveness . Indeed , we demonstrated a role for type - I IFN in the initiation of autoimmunity . WASp null mice made resistant to type - I IFN have milder disease in terms of splenomegaly , coli - tis , and salivary gland infiltrates . Our data suggest that IFN -  signaling diverts DCs toward a proinflammatory phenotype , which may directly contribute to development of colitis by inhibiting T reg cell proliferation ( Murai et al . , 2009 ) . Con - sistent with this , a recent report showed a role for innate im - mune cells in inducing colitis in WASp null mice ( Nguyen et al . , 2012 ) . Type - I IFN may also have direct effects in promoting CpG - B ( top ) or LPS ( bottom ) . The levels of TNF , IL - 12p40 , and IL - 6 were measured by ELISA in 4 - h cell culture supernatants . Data are from two indepen - dent experiments , each with two to four mice per group . ( E ) The levels of BAFF were compared in the sera of WT ( n = 10 ) , WKO ( n = 9 ) , and DKO ( n = 11 ) animals in absence of any prior stimulation . Error bars indicate SEM . Statistics were calculated by one - way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s post hoc test . ( F ) Levels of IgG anti - dsDNA autoantibodies were evaluated by ELISA in sera from WT , WKO , and DKO mice at 2 and 4 mo of age ( n = 4 mice per group ) . Horizontal bars show median . * , P < 0 . 05 ; * * , P < 0 . 01 ; * * * , P < 0 . 001 . JEM Vol . 210 , No . 2 Article 369 that WKO pDCs isolated from young animals have a lower activation threshold for both pathways , but the effect on IFN -  production is more pronounced . Moreover , hyperre - sponsiveness is restricted to multimeric TLR9 agonists that were shown to be retained into endosomes during activation of the MyD88 – IRF - 7 pathway ( Honda et al . , 2005 ) . Our imaging studies revealed that perturbing actin dynamics in pDCs ( by different approaches ) invariably causes an increase in the size of the CpG - A – containing vesicles and that CpG - A in WKO pDCs becomes associated to lysosomes more than in WT cells . Although we could not gain a dynamic picture of CpG - A trafficking in WKO pDCs , we propose that al - tered actin dynamics cause a slower or diverted progression along the endocytic pathway that favors assembly of the signal - ing cascade ( especially the MyD88 – IRF - 7 branch , responsi - ble for IFN -  activation ) . Alternatively , WASp may be required for the docking of negative regulators of TLR9 sig - naling . Indeed , recent studies illustrated the role of actin dur - ing clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( the pathway used by CpG - A to enter cells ; Latz et al . , 2004 ) . WASp plays a central role in coordinating the action of several proteins , such as dynamin , myosins , membrane curvature proteins , cortactin , and intersectin , during the endocytic process ( Cao et al . , 2003 ; Itoh et al . , 2005 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ; Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Takenawa and Suetsugu , 2007 ) . Therefore , lack of WASp in pDCs may inhibit correct vesicle scission / fission / sorting , or indirectly perturb the coordinated action of the remaining proteins that compete with WASp for upstream activators or downstream effectors . Interestingly , depletion of cortactin and actin depolymerizing drugs were shown to induce endosome enlargement and tubulation similarly to what we observed in WKO cells ( Itoh et al . , 2005 ; Ohashi et al . , 2011 ) . It would be interesting to evaluate whether the in - creased responses to TLR9 triggering recently reported in WASp null B cells ( Becker - Herman et al . , 2011 ) are linked to similar alterations of the endocytic pathway . In conclusion , this study adds a new layer of complexity to our understanding of the pathophysiology of this disease and raises important consider - ations about the treatment of patients with autoimmune phe - nomena . Finally , the implications of this study go beyond the pathophysiology of WAS , introducing actin as a new player in the complex scenario of the negative regulation of IFN -  production in pDCs . MATERIALS AND METHODS Patients and tissues . The occurrence , frequency , and distribution of PDC were studied on formalin - fixed paraffin - embedded spleen sections from patients affected by WAS or XLT ( 11 cases ) and obtained from the archive of the Department of Pathology , Spedali Civili di Brescia . Clini - cal and molecular data were provided for each case ( Department of Pedi - atrics , Institute of Molecular Medicine “A . Nocivelli , ” University of Brescia , Brescia , Italy ) and previously described in Wengler et al . ( 1995 ) , Vermi et al . ( 1999 ) , and Jin et al . ( 2004 ) . Normal spleen from age - matched control patients ( 10 cases ) who underwent splenectomy for trauma or spherocytosis were used for comparison . Peripheral blood samples were collected according to the protocol for research studies on biologi - cal material from patients with primary immunodeficiency ( TIGET 02 ) , including WAS , approved by the HSR Institutional Ethical Committee . Biological specimen from HDs ( children ) were collected and used upon informed consent for research purpose in agreement with the rules de - fined by approved protocols TIGET PERIBLOOD . For pDC isolation , CD3 + , CD14 + , CD15 + , CD19 + , and CD56 + cells were depleted from PBMCs using magnetic beads ( Miltenyi Biotec ) . CD3  / CD14  / CD15  / CD19  / CD56  cells were stained with PE - conjugated anti – BDCA - 2 ( Miltenyi Biotec ) , and BDCA - 2 + cells were isolated using anti - PE mag - netic beads ( Miltenyi Biotec ) . Immunohistochemistry . 4 - µm formalin - fixed paraffin - embedded tissue sections were stained with anti - BDCA2 ( mouse IgG1 , clone 124B3 . 13 , di - lution 1 : 50 ; Dendritics ) , and anti - MxA ( mouse IgG2a , dilution 1 : 500 , pro - vided by O . Haller , University of Freiburg , Freiburg , Germany ) . Epitope retrieval was obtained by microwave heating in EDTA buffer , pH 8 . 0 , for 3 × 5 min , at 750 W for anti - MxA and for 2 × 5 min at JET and 3 × 5 min at 750 W for anti - CD303 . Reactivity was revealed using the EnVision anti – mouse HRP - linked detection kit ( Dako ) for anti - MXA or Bond Polymer Refine Detection ( Leica ) for anti - BDCA2 followed by DAB . Distribution of PDC was analyzed by double immunohistochemistry using primary anti - body to BDCA2 and CD3 ( rabbit , clone SP7 , dilution 1 : 100 ; Thermo Fisher Scientific ) . After completing the first immune reaction against BDCA2 , the second immune reaction was visualized using Mach 4 MR - AP ( Biocare Medical ) , followed by Ferangi Blue ( Biocare Medical ) as chromogen . Absolute PDC count was quantified automatically applying a custom - programmed script in Cognition Network Language based on the Definiens Cognition Network Technology platform ( Definiens AG ) . In brief , digital slides of entire spleen sections immunostained for CD303 were obtained by Aperio ScanScope CS Slide Scanner ( Aperio Technologies ) at 40× magnification and analyzed using Tissue Studio 2 . 0 ( Definiens AG ) . The quantitative scor - ing algorithm for BDCA2 was customized by using commercially available templates . The algorithm was created to match the requirements of the CD303 staining parameter in human spleen and includes Manual ROI Selection ( Draw Polygon ) . PDCs are expressed as number of CD303 - positive cells / mm 2 of spleen area . Spleen MxA expression was scored as percentage of positive cells : positivity score 1 = < 25 % of positive cells ; score 2 = 25 – 50 % of positive cells ; score 3 = > 50 % of positive cells ; score 4 = > 75 % of positive cells . As an additional strategy , we also measured total MxA signal by Tissue Studio 2 . 0 ( Definiens AG ) on spleen digital slides immunostained for MxA . The algorithm was created to match the requirements of the MxA staining parameter in spleen sections and includes Manual ROI Selection ( Draw Polygon ) . Data are expressed as percentage of spleen area immunostained for MxA . For figure panel preparation , immunostained sections were photo - graphed using a digital camera ( DP - 70 ; Olympus ) mounted on a micro - scope ( BX60 ; Olympus ) and processed using Analysis Image Processing software ( Olympus ) . Scoring of the T cell infiltration was performed on formalin - fixed paraffin - embedded sections of mice large bowel . 4 - µm sections were stained with anti - CD3 ( rabbit monoclonal , clone SP7 , dilution 1 : 100 ; Thermo Fisher Scientific ) . Antigen retrieval was ob - tained by microwave heating in EDTA buffer , pH 8 . 0 , for 3 × 5 min at 750 W , and reactivity was revealed using EnVision HRP - linked detec - tion system ( Dako ) followed by diaminobenzidine ( DAB ) . Nuclei were counterstained with hematoxylin . T cells were quantified on at least 10 HPF / mouse . Analysis of pDC frequency in human peripheral blood . Immunophe - notyping of human pDCs was performed using the following anti – human antibodies : APC - conjugated anti - CD3 / anti - CD14 / anti - CD15 / anti - CD16 / anti - CD19 / anti - CD20 / anti - CD56 ( lineage cocktail ; BD ) ; PE - conjugated anti - BDCA - 2 ( Miltenyi Biotec ) ; and PE - Cy7 – conjugated anti - CD4 ( BD ; Presicce et al . , 2008 ) . The pDC subset was identified as lineage cocktail – negative / BDCA - 2 + / CD4 + cells gated on live cells . Stained cells were ac - quired with a FACS CANTO flow cytometer and analyzed with FCS Express software ( version 2 . 3 ; De Novo Software ) . Isotype controls were performed with corresponding mouse Ig . 370 Role of WASp in pDCs | Prete et al . water for 7 d and then sacrificed . BrdU incorporation in spleen , lymph node , and BM cells was determined using the FITC BrdU flow kit ( BD ) . For cell death analysis , splenocytes stained with antibodies to CD11c , B220 , and PDCA - 1 were labeled with FITC - conjugated annexin V and 7 - amino - actinomycin D ( 7 - AAD ; BD ) . Dead cells were defined as 7 - AAD + cells and apoptotic cells as 7 - AAD  annexin V + . FACS analysis . The following Abs for FACS analysis were purchased from BioLegend : PE - conjugated Sca - 1 ; PE - Cy7 – , FITC - , and PE - conjugated anti - CD11c ; FITC - and PE - Cy5 – conjugated anti I - A b ; PE - and PE - Cy5 – conjugated anti - CD86 ; PE - Cy5 – conjugated anti - CD40 ; PE - and FITC - conjugated anti - B220 ; FITC - and APC - conjugated anti – PDCA - 1 ; PE - Cy5 – conjugated anti - CD19 ; FITC - and APC - conjugated anti - CD3 ; and PE - Cy7 – conjugated anti - TNF . Anti – IFN -  RMMA - 1 was from PBL Bio - medical Laboratories , Inc . FITC - conjugated anti - WASp was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . For analysis of number and activation of pDCs , total cells freshly isolated from spleen , lymph nodes , and blood were stained for 30 min at 4°C with antibodies to extracellular markers CD11c , B220 , and PDCA - 1 for the detection of pDC subset and with anti - bodies to CD86 , CD40 , or I - A b for the analysis of the maturation state . Stained cells were acquired with a FACSAria III flow cytometer and ana - lyzed with FLOWJO software ( version 4 . 5 . 4 ; Tree Star ) . Isotype controls were performed with corresponding rat Ig . For detection of intracellular IFN -  in splenic pDCs , 10 µg / ml Brefeldin A ( Sigma - Aldrich ) was added during all the phases of DC enrichment procedure and staining . Cells were enriched from total spleen cells by depletion of B and T cells and stained for extracellular markers using antibodies to CD11c , B220 , and PDCA - 1 . Cells were then processed with the Fix & Perm kit ( BD ) according to the manu - facturer’s instructions and then stained overnight at 4°C with an anti – IFN -  antibody . For detection of intracellular IFN -  and TNF by BM - pDC , cells were stimulated with 20 µg / ml CpG - A for 5 h at 37°C in the presence of 10 µg / ml Brefeldin A . Cells were processed with the Fix & Perm kit and then stained over night at 4°C with anti – IFN -  and anti - TNF antibodies . RNA extraction and real - time polymerase chain reaction . Total RNA from isolated endogenous pDCs of pooled mice ( n = 4 ) was prepared with TRIzol ( Invitrogen ) and treated with DNase I ( Fermentas ) according to the manufacturer’s protocol . cDNA was synthesized with random hexamers and M - MLV reverse transcription ( Invitrogen ) . Quantitative real - time PCR analysis was performed with the CFX96 Touch Real - Time PCR Detection System and iQ SYBR green Supermix ( Bio - Rad Laboratories ) .  - actin mRNA was used for normalization of Ifn  4 and Il6 mRNA expression . Primer se - quences were as follows : IFN -  4 forward , 5  - CCTGTGTGATGCAGG - AACC - 3  , and reverse , 5  - TCACCTCCCAGGCACAGA - 3  ; IL - 6 forward , 5  - GAGGATACCACTCCCAACAGA - 3  , and reverse , 5  - AAGTGCAT - CATCGTTGTTCAT - 3  ;  - actin forward , 5  - CAGAAGGAGATTACT - GCTCTGGCT - 3  and reverse , 5  - GGAGCCACCGATCCACACA - 3  . Thermal cycle conditions were the following : 95°C for 3 min , 43 cycles of 95°C for 10 s , and 60°C for 30 s . Each sample was analyzed in duplicates , and the relative expression of target genes were defined by calculating the  cycle threshold , with respect to the housekeeping gene . Silencing of WASp . ONE - TARGET plus siRNA targeting WASp and ONE - TARGETING plus nontargeting siRNA ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ; Dharmacon RNAi Technology ) and used as specific WASp siRNA and as control siRNA , respectively . 8 × 10 6 BM - pDCs or - cDCs were transfected with 10 µM siRNA using the Nucleofector ( Amaxa ) according to the man - ufacturer’s instructions . Cells were collected 48 h after transfection . To assess depletion of WASp , 3 × 10 5 cells were lysed and analyzed by SDS page using anti - WASp antibody ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . ) . Protein reduction was assessed by ImageJ ( National Institutes of Health ) . Cytochalasin - d and latrunculin - A treatment . BM - pDCs and - cDCs were plated in 96 - well culture plates in complete medium including 1 µg / ml cytochalasin d ( Sigma - Aldrich ) or 0 . 1 µM latrunculin - A ( AdipoGen ) for IFN -  induction . 5 × 10 5 PBMCs were stimulated using 5 µM CpG ODN 2216 ( Enzo Life Sciences ) in 96 - well plates at a final volume of 200 µl / well . Afterward , 24 supernatants were collected and stored at  80°C . For IFN -  induction in pDCs by serum , 2 × 10 5 BDCA - 2 + cells were incubated with 50 % serum at a final volume of 200 µl / well . Afterward , 24 supernatants were collected and stored at  80°C . The amount of IFN -  was measured in the supernatant by ELISA ( Verikine Human IFN Alpha Serum Sample ELISA kit ; PBL InterferonSource ) . Analysis of gene expression profile in PBMCs . mRNA was extracted from PBMCs of WAS patients and HDs using RNeasy Mini kit ( QIAGEN ) . Ret - rotranscription was performed using the RT 2 First Strand kit ( SABiosciences ) . Real - time PCR on cDNA samples was performed according to the protocol provided with the kit ( Human IFN -  , -  Response PCR Array ; SABiosciences ) on a ViiA 7 Real - Time PCR System ( Life Technologies ) .  Ct values were calcu - lated for each target gene by normalizing the Ct value of the target gene to the Ct value of the housekeeping gene .  Ct values were calculated for each target gene by normalizing the WAS patient  Ct value to the mean  Ct value of the same gene expressed by healthy controls . Fold increase values were calculated for each target gene using the following formula : 2 (  Ct ) . Mice . WASp  /  ( WKO ) mice on a C57BL / 6 ( CD45 . 2 ) genetic back - ground were a gift from S . Snapper ( Massachusetts General Hospital , Boston , MA ) . Mice were bred and maintained in sterile isolators . In vivo experiments were performed using WASP  /  homozygous female or WASp  male as WKO and WT littermate as control . Mice lacking the  - chain of the IFN -  /  receptor on a B6 background were provided by U . Kalinke and bred with the WASp  /  mice to generate IFNAR  /  / WASp  /  double KO ( DKO ) mice . Animal care and treatment were conducted in conformity with institutional guidelines in compliance with national and in - ternational laws and policies ( European Economic Community Council Di - rective 86 / 609 ; OJL 358 ; December 12 , 1987 ) . Protocols were approved by the Italian Ministry of Health . Cells . BM - derived pDCs and cDCs were differentiated in vitro from the BM of WT or WASp KO mice using FLT - 3 ligand . DCs were used for ex - periments between days 6 and 8 . BM - pDC and BM - cDC were obtained by positive and negative selection , respectively , using B220 + microbeads ( Miltenyi Biotec ) . For isolation of pDCs from organs , cell suspension were obtained by digestion with 1 . 6 mg / ml collagenase d ( Roche ) and 0 . 1 mg / ml DNase I ( Roche ) for 30 min at 37°C . Splenic pDCs were enriched from total spleen cells using the Plasmacytoid Dendritic Cell Isolation kit II , mouse ( Miltenyi Biotec ) . In some experiments , CD11c + / PDCA - 1 + / B220 + cells were isolated from B and T cell – depleted spleen cells or total lymph node cell suspensions using a FACSAria III cell sorter ( BD ) . Purity was higher that 95 % . TLR agonists . The CpG - A ( 1585 ) and CpG - B ( 1826 ) oligonucleotides and R837 were from InvivoGen . The Cy5 - labeled CpG - A was obtained from Sigma - Aldrich . FITC - CpG - A was from InvivoGen . The lipopolysac - charide ( Escherichia coli O55 : B5 ) was from Enzo Life Sciences . In vivo treatment . Mice were injected in the tail vein with CpG - A com - plexed with the cationic lipid 1 , 2 - dioleoyloxy - 3 - trimethylammonium - propane ( DOTAP ) . For preparation of CpG - A / DOTAP mixture , 10 µg CpG - A re - solved in 50 µl PBS was incubated with 30 µl ( 30 µg ) DOTAP Liposomal Transfection Reagent ( Roche ) in a polystyrene tube containing 70 µl PBS for 15 min at room temperature . 150 µl of the CpG - A / DOTAP mixture was then in - jected . Sera were collected 2 , 6 , 10 , and 24 h after the CpG - A / DOTAP injec - tion and analyzed for the content of IFN -  , IL - 6 , and IL - 12p40 . For the detection of intracellular IFN -  , spleens are collected 45 min , 2 h , and 30 min or 6 h after the injection . Cytokine ELISA kits were purchased from PBL Bio - medical Laboratories ( IFN -  ) and Thermo Fisher Scientific ( IL - 12p40 and IL - 6 ) . BrdU incorporation . For continuous in vivo BrdU labeling , mice were fed 1 mg / ml BrdU ( Sigma - Aldrich ) in 10 % sucrose - supplemented drinking JEM Vol . 210 , No . 2 Article 371 Immunoprecipitation of WASp . 8 × 10 6 WT BM - DCs were resuspended in complete IMDM supplemented with Flt3 ligand and incubated with CpG - A at 20 µg / ml for 3 , 7 , or 10 min at 37°C . Cells were washed and lysed with NP - 40 plus phosphatase inhibitors . Total lysates were subjected to overnight incubation at 4°C with protein A – Sepharose beads ( GE Healthcare ) previously treated for 2 h with 2 µg of polyclonal anti - WASp ( H - 250 ; Santa Cruz Bio - technology , Inc . ) . Bead – antibody – protein complexes were washed four times with lysis buffer and eluted with SDS - PAGE sample buffer . Immunoprecipi - tated proteins were separated by SDS - PAGE using 7 . 5 % polyacrylamide gel . Anti - phosphotyrosine and anti - WASp immunoblotting was performed using an anti – P - tyrosine ( P - Tyr - 100 ; Cell Signaling ) and an anti - WASp monoclo - nal antibody ( B - 9 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . ) , respectively . Immunofluorescence analysis . For the analysis of intracellular trafficking of CpG - A , splenic pDCs were isolated form the spleen of young animals ( 3 wk ) . Cells were pulsed with 10 – 20 µg / ml FITC - labeled CpG - A for 30 min to 2 h as indicated in the text . In experiments with drug inhibitors , cells were incubated with cytochalasin - d for 30 min before incubation with CpG - A . For siRNA experiment control and WASp - specific siRNA , treated BM - pDCs or WT BM - pDCs were incubated with 3 µM CpG - cy5 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . For IRF - 7 , nuclear translocation cells were incubated with unla - beled CpG - A for 2 h . Fixed cells were labeled with goat anti – EEA - 1 ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc ) , LAMP - 1 ( 553792 ; BD ; directly coupled to Alexa Fluor 555 to avoid cross reactivity with antibodies used for isolation ) , or anti IRF - 7 ( Invitrogen ) . Confocal images were acquired in a reverse microscope ( LSM 510 META Axiovert 200M ; Carl Zeiss ) with a 63× objective . EE volumes and CpG - A volumes were quantified on projections of 0 . 2 z slices using Volocity software ( Perkin Elmer , Inc ) . Colocalization between CpG - A and endosomes markers was measured manually on 3D recon - structed images , using Volocity software . To quantify nuclear translocation of IRF - 7 , we manually depicted two regions , one including the nucleus ( based on DAPI signal ) and the second covering the cytosol . The ratio be - tween the intensities in the two regions was calculated and expressed as index of nuclear translocation . Statistical analysis . Results were analyzed with Prism 5 . 0 ( GraphPad Soft - ware ) . The tests used for statistical analysis are mentioned in the figure leg - ends . A p - value < 0 . 05 was taken as statistically significant . All graphs , unless otherwise specified , show mean ± SEM . The authors are grateful to Raffaella Vescovi ( Department of Pathology , University of Brescia ) for the excellent contribution to quantitative histological analysis . We thank Elisabetta Traggiai ( Laboratory of Immunology and Rheumatic Disease , IGG Genoa ) for providing control serum from SLE and JIA patients . This work is funded by Italian Telethon GGP 10231 . F . Prete is supported by an International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biology predoctoral fellowship . W . Vermi is supported by PRIN ( Ministero dell’Istruzione dell’Università e della Ricerca , 2009 ) . M . Carmina Castiello conducted this study as partial fulfillment of her PhD in Molecular Medicine , Program in Basic and Applied Immunology , San Raffaele University , Milan , Italy . L . D . Notarangelo was partially supported by NIH - NHLBI grant 5P01HL059561 - 14 . The authors have no conflicting financial interests . Submitted : 15 February 2012 Accepted : 17 December 2012 REFERENCES Agrawal , H . , N . Jacob , E . Carreras , S . Bajana , C . Putterman , S . Turner , B . Neas , A . Mathian , M . N . Koss , W . Stohl , et al . 2009 . Deficiency of type I IFN receptor in lupus - prone New Zealand mixed 2328 mice decreases dendritic cell numbers and activation and protects from disease . J . Immunol . 183 : 6021 – 6029 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 0803872 Altfeld , M . , L . Fadda , D . Frleta , and N . Bhardwaj . 2011 . DCs and NK cells : critical effectors in the immune response to HIV - 1 . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 11 : 176 – 186 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nri2935 Andreansky , S . , H . Liu , S . Turner , J . A . McCullers , R . Lang , R . Rutschman , P . C . Doherty , P . J . Murray , A . W . Nienhuis , and T . S . Strom . 2005 . 20 min at 37°C . Cells were washed two times and incubated in complete medium containing the TLR ligands for 5 h at 37°C . Culture supernatants were collected for ELISA analysis . Functional in vitro assays . Splenic pDCs isolated by sorting or by mag - netic beads were washed , resuspended in complete IMDM supplemented with Flt3 ligand , and cultured in 96 - well culture plates for different time points at 37°C in the presence of CpG - A , CpG - B ( 10 – 15 µg / ml ) , or R837 ( 5 µg / ml ) . Culture supernatants were collected for ELISA analysis . Cell pel - lets were lysed to extract RNA for qRT - PCR . BM - cDCs from WT , WKO , and DKO animals were resuspended in complete IMDM and cultured in 96 - well culture plates for 4 h at 37°C in the presence of different doses of CpG - B or LPS . Culture supernatants were collected for ELISA analysis . Silenced BM - pDCs and - cDCs were washed , resuspended in complete IMDM supplemented with Flt3 ligand , and cultured in the presence of CpG - A or CpG - B at 15 µg / ml for different time points . Culture supernatants were col - lected for ELISA analysis after 8 h . To test IFN - I production by mice sera , BM - pDCs were resuspended in complete IMDM supplemented with Flt3 ligand and cultured in the presence of 1 : 5 dilution of sera . Cell pellets were lysed to extract RNA after 5 h . Culture supernatants were collected for ELISA analysis overnight . Values obtained in control wells ( diluted sera without cells ) were subtracted from experimental wells to quantify de novo production by pDCs . Treatment with DNase was performed as follows : DNase I ( Fermentas ) was dissolved in IMDM at 200 µg / ml and 50 µl of serum was incubated with an equal volume of PBS containing 10 µg DNase and 0 , 3 µmol MgCl 2 for 1 h at 37°C . 5 µl of 50 mM EDTA was added to stop the enzyme reaction . Control sera were incubated with IMDM containing no DNase . Antinuclear antibody and BAFF detection . NIH 3T3 cells were grown on glass coverslips in 35 - mm dishes . After 1 d in culture at 60 % confluence , the cells were washed with PBS and then fixed for 20 min at room tempera - ture with 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS . The fixed cells were permeabilized by exposure to 1 % Triton X - 100 in PBS for 5 min , washed , and incubated with blocking buffer ( PBS - 2 % BSA ) for 1 h at room temperature . Cells were then stained with sera collected from indicated mice ( diluted 1 : 40 in PBS ) for 1 . 5 h , followed by incubation with FITC - conjugated goat anti – mouse IgG antibody for 1 h ( Sigma Aldrich ) . Cells were subsequently washed , stained with DAPI , and the coverslips were mounted on the slides . For de - tection of anti - dsDNA autoantibodies by ELISA , 96 - well Immuno - Plates ( Nunc ) were coated with 0 . 01 % poly - l - lysine solution in PBS ( Sigma - Aldrich ) for 1 h at room temperature , and then incubated overnight with 10 mg / ml plasmid DNA in borate buffer saline , pH 8 . 4 . After blocking with 0 . 5 % BSA / PBS for 3 h at room temperature , serially diluted serum samples in 0 . 05 % Tween 20 / 0 . 5 % BSA / PBS were added to the plates in duplicate and incubated for 2 h at room temperature . Plates were then washed with 0 . 05 % Tween 20 / PBS and goat anti – mouse IgG HRP ( Cell Signaling Tech - nology ) diluted at 1 : 2 , 000 into 0 . 05 % Tween 20 / 0 . 5 % BSA / PBS was added to each well . Peroxidase reactions were developed using TMB Peroxidase EIA Substrate ( Bio - Rad Laboratories ) and stopped with 0 . 2 N H 2 SO 4 . OD450 was read using MRX Microplate Reader ( DYNEX technologies ) . Serum levels of BAFF were determined using Quantikine ELISA kit mouse BAFF / BLys / TNFSF13B ( R & D Systems ) . Serum anti - dsDNA IgG were assessed by ELISA . In vitro phosphorylation of Pyk2 , paxillin , and Src kinases . 5 × 10 5 WT BM - pDCs were resuspended in complete IMDM supplemented with Flt3 ligand and incubated with CpG - A at 10 µg / ml for 10 or 30 min at 37°C . Cells were washed and lysed with NP - 40 plus phosphatase inhibi - tors ( 20 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 4 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 mM EDTA , 1 mM DTT , 1 % Nonidet P - 40 , 1 mM sodium orthovanadate , 10 mM NaF , and Protease Inhibitor Cocktail ) . Total lysates were analyzed by SDS - PAGE ( Nu - PAGE 4 – 12 % Bis - Tris gradient gels ; Invitrogen ) and immunoblotted with the antibodies specific for phospho - Pyk2 ( Tyr - 402 ) , phospho - paxillin ( Tyr - 118 ) , and phospho - Src family ( Tyr - 416 ) , all provided by Cell Signal - ing Technology . 372 Role of WASp in pDCs | Prete et al . receptor - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Cell . Biol . 23 : 2162 – 2170 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / MCB . 23 . 6 . 2162 - 2170 . 2003 de Noronha , S . , S . Hardy , J . Sinclair , M . P . Blundell , J . Strid , O . Schulz , J . Zwirner , G . E . Jones , D . R . Katz , C . Kinnon , and A . J . Thrasher . 2005 . Impaired dendritic - cell homing in vivo in the absence of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein . Blood . 105 : 1590 – 1597 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1182 / blood - 2004 - 06 - 2332 Derivery , E . , C . Sousa , J . J . Gautier , B . Lombard , D . Loew , and A . Gautreau . 2009 . The Arp2 / 3 activator WASH controls the fission of endosomes through a large multiprotein complex . Dev . Cell . 17 : 712 – 723 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2009 . 09 . 010 Ding , D . , H . Mehta , W . J . McCune , and M . J . Kaplan . 2006 . Aberrant phe - notype and function of myeloid dendritic cells in systemic lupus ery - thematosus . J . Immunol . 177 : 5878 – 5889 . Duan , X . Z . , M . Wang , H . W . Li , H . Zhuang , D . Xu , and F . S . Wang . 2004 . Decreased frequency and function of circulating plasmocytoid den - dritic cells ( pDC ) in hepatitis B virus infected humans . J . Clin . Immunol . 24 : 637 – 646 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10875 - 004 - 6249 - y Dupré , L . , A . Aiuti , S . Trifari , S . Martino , P . Saracco , C . Bordignon , and M . G . Roncarolo . 2002 . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein regulates lipid raft dynamics during immunological synapse formation . Immunity . 17 : 157 – 166 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1074 - 7613 ( 02 ) 00360 - 6 Dupuis - Girod , S . , J . Medioni , E . Haddad , P . Quartier , M . Cavazzana - Calvo , F . Le Deist , G . de Saint Basile , J . Delaunay , K . Schwarz , J . L . Casanova , et al . 2003 . Autoimmunity in Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome : risk factors , clinical features , and outcome in a single - center cohort of 55 patients . Pediatrics . 111 : e622 – e627 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1542 / peds . 111 . 5 . e622 Emamian , E . S . , J . M . Leon , C . J . Lessard , M . Grandits , E . C . Baechler , P . M . Gaffney , B . Segal , N . L . Rhodus , and K . L . Moser . 2009 . Peripheral blood gene expression profiling in Sjögren’s syndrome . Genes Immun . 10 : 285 – 296 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / gene . 2009 . 20 Escoll , P . , C . del Fresno , L . García , G . Vallés , M . J . Lendínez , F . Arnalich , and E . López - Collazo . 2003 . Rapid up - regulation of IRAK - M ex - pression following a second endotoxin challenge in human monocytes and in monocytes isolated from septic patients . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 311 : 465 – 472 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbrc . 2003 . 10 . 019 Fleck , M . , E . R . Kern , T . Zhou , B . Lang , and J . D . Mountz . 1998 . Murine cyto - megalovirus induces a Sjögren’s syndrome - like disease in C57Bl / 6 - lpr / lpr mice . Arthritis Rheum . 41 : 2175 – 2184 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / 1529 - 0131 ( 199812 ) 41 : 12 < 2175 : : AID - ART12 > 3 . 0 . CO ; 2 - I Gallego , M . D . , M . A . de la Fuente , I . M . Anton , S . Snapper , R . Fuhlbrigge , and R . S . Geha . 2006 . WIP and WASP play complementary roles in T cell homing and chemotaxis to SDF - 1alpha . Int . Immunol . 18 : 221 – 232 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / intimm / dxh310 Garcia - Romo , G . S . , S . Caielli , B . Vega , J . Connolly , F . Allantaz , Z . Xu , M . Punaro , J . Baisch , C . Guiducci , R . L . Coffman , et al . 2011 . Netting neutrophils are major inducers of type I IFN production in pediatric systemic lupus erythematosus . Sci . Transl . Med . 3 : 73ra20 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / scitranslmed . 3001201 Gilliet , M . , and R . Lande . 2008 . Antimicrobial peptides and self - DNA in autoimmune skin inflammation . Curr . Opin . Immunol . 20 : 401 – 407 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . coi . 2008 . 06 . 008 Gilliet , M . , W . Cao , and Y . J . Liu . 2008 . Plasmacytoid dendritic cells : sens - ing nucleic acids in viral infection and autoimmune diseases . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 8 : 594 – 606 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nri2358 Gismondi , A . , L . Cifaldi , C . Mazza , S . Giliani , S . Parolini , S . Morrone , J . Jacobelli , E . Bandiera , L . Notarangelo , and A . Santoni . 2004 . Impaired natural and CD16 - mediated NK cell cytotoxicity in patients with WAS and XLT : ability of IL - 2 to correct NK cell functional defect . Blood . 104 : 436 – 443 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1182 / blood - 2003 - 07 - 2621 Gottenberg , J . E . , N . Cagnard , C . Lucchesi , F . Letourneur , S . Mistou , T . Lazure , S . Jacques , N . Ba , M . Ittah , C . Lepajolec , et al . 2006 . Activation of IFN pathways and plasmacytoid dendritic cell recruitment in tar - get organs of primary Sjögren’s syndrome . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 103 : 2770 – 2775 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0510837103 Guiducci , C . , G . Ott , J . H . Chan , E . Damon , C . Calacsan , T . Matray , K . D . Lee , R . L . Coffman , and F . J . Barrat . 2006 . Properties regulating the nature of the plasmacytoid dendritic cell response to Toll - like receptor 9 activation . J . Exp . Med . 203 : 1999 – 2008 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1084 / jem . 20060401 WASP - mice exhibit defective immune responses to influenza A virus , Streptococcus pneumoniae , and Mycobacterium bovis BCG . Exp . Hematol . 33 : 443 – 451 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . exphem . 2004 . 12 . 006 Astrakhan , A . , H . D . Ochs , and D . J . Rawlings . 2009 . Wiskott - Aldrich syn - drome protein is required for homeostasis and function of invariant NKT cells . J . Immunol . 182 : 7370 – 7380 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 0804256 Badour , K . , J . Zhang , F . Shi , M . K . McGavin , V . Rampersad , L . A . Hardy , D . Field , and K . A . Siminovitch . 2003 . The Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein acts downstream of CD2 and the CD2AP and PSTPIP1 adap - tors to promote formation of the immunological synapse . Immunity . 18 : 141 – 154 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1074 - 7613 ( 02 ) 00516 - 2 Baechler , E . C . , F . M . Batliwalla , G . Karypis , P . M . Gaffney , W . A . Ortmann , K . J . Espe , K . B . Shark , W . J . Grande , K . M . Hughes , V . Kapur , et al . 2003 . Interferon - inducible gene expression signature in peripheral blood cells of patients with severe lupus . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 100 : 2610 – 2615 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0337679100 Baechler , E . C . , J . W . Bauer , C . A . Slattery , W . A . Ortmann , K . J . Espe , J . Novitzke , S . R . Ytterberg , P . K . Gregersen , T . W . Behrens , and A . M . Reed . 2007 . An interferon signature in the peripheral blood of derma - tomyositis patients is associated with disease activity . Mol . Med . 13 : 59 – 68 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2119 / 2006 - 00085 . Baechler Barrat , F . J . , T . Meeker , J . Gregorio , J . H . Chan , S . Uematsu , S . Akira , B . Chang , O . Duramad , and R . L . Coffman . 2005 . Nucleic acids of mamma - lian origin can act as endogenous ligands for Toll - like receptors and may promote systemic lupus erythematosus . J . Exp . Med . 202 : 1131 – 1139 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1084 / jem . 20050914 Båve , U . , G . V . Alm , and L . Rönnblom . 2000 . The combination of apoptotic U937 cells and lupus IgG is a potent IFN - alpha inducer . J . Immunol . 165 : 3519 – 3526 . Båve , U . , G . Nordmark , T . Lövgren , J . Rönnelid , S . Cajander , M . L . Eloranta , G . V . Alm , and L . Rönnblom . 2005 . Activation of the type I interferon sys - tem in primary Sjögren’s syndrome : a possible etiopathogenic mechanism . Arthritis Rheum . 52 : 1185 – 1195 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / art . 20998 Becker - Herman , S . , A . Meyer - Bahlburg , M . A . Schwartz , S . W . Jackson , K . L . Hudkins , C . Liu , B . D . Sather , S . Khim , D . Liggitt , W . Song , et al . 2011 . WASp - deficient B cells play a critical , cell - intrinsic role in triggering autoimmunity . J . Exp . Med . 208 : 2033 – 2042 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1084 / jem . 20110200 Björck , P . 2004 . Dendritic cells exposed to herpes simplex virus in vivo do not produce IFN - alpha after rechallenge with virus in vitro and exhibit decreased T cell alloreactivity . J . Immunol . 172 : 5396 – 5404 . Blanco , P . , A . K . Palucka , M . Gill , V . Pascual , and J . Banchereau . 2001 . Induction of dendritic cell differentiation by IFN - alpha in systemic lupus erythema - tosus . Science . 294 : 1540 – 1543 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1064890 Blomberg , S . , M . L . Eloranta , M . Magnusson , G . V . Alm , and L . Rönnblom . 2003 . Expression of the markers BDCA - 2 and BDCA - 4 and produc - tion of interferon - alpha by plasmacytoid dendritic cells in systemic lupus erythematosus . Arthritis Rheum . 48 : 2524 – 2532 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / art . 11225 Bosticardo , M . , F . Marangoni , A . Aiuti , A . Villa , and M . Grazia Roncarolo . 2009 . Recent advances in understanding the pathophysiology of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome . Blood . 113 : 6288 – 6295 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1182 / blood - 2008 - 12 - 115253 Bosticardo , M . , E . Draghici , F . Schena , A . V . Sauer , E . Fontana , M . C . Castiello , M . Catucci , M . Locci , L . Naldini , A . Aiuti , et al . 2011 . Lentiviral - mediated gene therapy leads to improvement of B - cell functionality in a murine model of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome . J . Allergy Clin . Immunol . 127 : 1376 – 1384 : e5 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jaci . 2011 . 03 . 030 Bouma , G . , A . Mendoza - Naranjo , M . P . Blundell , E . de Falco , K . L . Parsley , S . O . Burns , and A . J . Thrasher . 2011 . Cytoskeletal remodeling mediated by WASp in dendritic cells is necessary for normal immune synapse for - mation and T - cell priming . Blood . 118 : 2492 – 2501 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1182 / blood - 2011 - 03 - 340265 Cancro , M . P . , D . P . D’Cruz , and M . A . Khamashta . 2009 . The role of B lymphocyte stimulator ( BLyS ) in systemic lupus erythematosus . J . Clin . Invest . 119 : 1066 – 1073 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1172 / JCI38010 Cao , H . , J . D . Orth , J . Chen , S . G . Weller , J . E . Heuser , and M . A . McNiven . 2003 . Cortactin is a component of clathrin - coated pits and participates in JEM Vol . 210 , No . 2 Article 373 syndrome protein is required for efficient phagocytosis of apoptotic cells . J . Immunol . 166 : 4831 – 4834 . Litinskiy , M . B . , B . Nardelli , D . M . Hilbert , B . He , A . Schaffer , P . Casali , and A . Cerutti . 2002 . DCs induce CD40 - independent immunoglobulin class switching through BLyS and APRIL . Nat . Immunol . 3 : 822 – 829 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ni829 Locci , M . , E . Draghici , F . Marangoni , M . Bosticardo , M . Catucci , A . Aiuti , C . Cancrini , L . Marodi , T . Espanol , R . G . Bredius , et al . 2009 . The Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein is required for iNKT cell matu - ration and function . J . Exp . Med . 206 : 735 – 742 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1084 / jem . 20081773 Lorenzi , R . , P . M . Brickell , D . R . Katz , C . Kinnon , and A . J . Thrasher . 2000 . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein is necessary for efficient IgG - medi - ated phagocytosis . Blood . 95 : 2943 – 2946 . Lövgren , T . , M . L . Eloranta , U . Båve , G . V . Alm , and L . Rönnblom . 2004 . Induction of interferon - alpha production in plasmacytoid dendritic cells by immune complexes containing nucleic acid released by necrotic or late apoptotic cells and lupus IgG . Arthritis Rheum . 50 : 1861 – 1872 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / art . 20254 Maillard , M . H . , V . Cotta - de - Almeida , F . Takeshima , D . D . Nguyen , P . Michetti , C . Nagler , A . K . Bhan , and S . B . Snapper . 2007 . The Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein is required for the function of CD4 + CD25 + Foxp3 + regulatory T cells . J . Exp . Med . 204 : 381 – 391 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1084 / jem . 20061338 Marangoni , F . , S . Trifari , S . Scaramuzza , C . Panaroni , S . Martino , L . D . Notarangelo , Z . Baz , A . Metin , F . Cattaneo , A . Villa , et al . 2007 . WASP regulates suppressor activity of human and murine CD4 + CD25 + FOXP3 + natural regulatory T cells . J . Exp . Med . 204 : 369 – 380 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1084 / jem . 20061334 Means , T . K . , E . Latz , F . Hayashi , M . R . Murali , D . T . Golenbock , and A . D . Luster . 2005 . Human lupus autoantibody - DNA complexes activate DCs through cooperation of CD32 and TLR9 . J . Clin . Invest . 115 : 407 – 417 . Merrifield , C . J . , D . Perrais , and D . Zenisek . 2005 . Coupling between clathrin - coated - pit invagination , cortactin recruitment , and membrane scission observed in live cells . Cell . 121 : 593 – 606 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2005 . 03 . 015 Meyer - Bahlburg , A . , S . Becker - Herman , S . Humblet - Baron , S . Khim , M . Weber , G . Bouma , A . J . Thrasher , F . D . Batista , and D . J . Rawlings . 2008 . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein deficiency in B cells results in impaired peripheral homeostasis . Blood . 112 : 4158 – 4169 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1182 / blood - 2008 - 02 - 140814 Migita , K . , T . Miyashita , Y . Maeda , H . Kimura , M . Nakamura , H . Yatsuhashi , H . Ishibashi , and K . Eguchi . 2005 . Reduced blood BDCA - 2 + ( lymphoid ) and CD11c + ( myeloid ) dendritic cells in systemic lupus erythematosus . Clin . Exp . Immunol . 142 : 84 – 91 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2249 . 2005 . 02897 . x Morales - Tirado , V . , S . Johannson , E . Hanson , A . Howell , J . Zhang , K . A . Siminovitch , and D . J . Fowell . 2004 . Cutting edge : selective require - ment for the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein in cytokine , but not chemokine , secretion by CD4 + T cells . J . Immunol . 173 : 726 – 730 . Murai , M . , O . Turovskaya , G . Kim , R . Madan , C . L . Karp , H . Cheroutre , and M . Kronenberg . 2009 . Interleukin 10 acts on regulatory T cells to maintain expression of the transcription factor Foxp3 and suppres - sive function in mice with colitis . Nat . Immunol . 10 : 1178 – 1184 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ni . 1791 Nestle , F . O . , C . Conrad , A . Tun - Kyi , B . Homey , M . Gombert , O . Boyman , G . Burg , Y . J . Liu , and M . Gilliet . 2005 . Plasmacytoid pre - dendritic cells initiate psoriasis through interferon -  production . J . Exp . Med . 202 : 135 – 143 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1084 / jem . 20050500 Nguyen , D . D . , M . A . Wurbel , J . A . Goettel , M . A . Eston , O . S . Ahmed , R . Marin , E . K . Boden , E . J . Villablanca , H . Paidassi , V . Ahuja , et al . 2012 . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein deficiency in innate immune cells leads to mucosal immune dysregulation and colitis in mice . Gastroenterology . 143 : 719 – 729 : e1 – e2 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1053 / j . gastro . 2012 . 06 . 008 Nikolov , N . P . , M . Shimizu , S . Cleland , D . Bailey , J . Aoki , T . Strom , P . L . Schwartzberg , F . Candotti , and R . M . Siegel . 2010 . Systemic au - toimmunity and defective Fas ligand secretion in the absence of the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein . Blood . 116 : 740 – 747 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1182 / blood - 2009 - 08 - 237560 Honda , K . , Y . Ohba , H . Yanai , H . Negishi , T . Mizutani , A . Takaoka , C . Taya , and T . Taniguchi . 2005 . Spatiotemporal regulation of MyD88 - IRF - 7 signalling for robust type - I interferon induction . Nature . 434 : 1035 – 1040 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature03547 Humblet - Baron , S . , B . Sather , S . Anover , S . Becker - Herman , D . J . Kasprowicz , S . Khim , T . Nguyen , K . Hudkins - Loya , C . E . Alpers , S . F . Ziegler , et al . 2007 . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein is required for regulatory T cell homeostasis . J . Clin . Invest . 117 : 407 – 418 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1172 / JCI29539 Humphreys - Beher , M . G . 1996 . Animal models for autoimmune disease - associated xerostomia and xerophthalmia . Adv . Dent . Res . 10 : 73 – 75 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 08959374960100011501 Imai , K . , T . Morio , Y . Zhu , Y . Jin , S . Itoh , M . Kajiwara , J . Yata , S . Mizutani , H . D . Ochs , and S . Nonoyama . 2004 . Clinical course of pa - tients with WASP gene mutations . Blood . 103 : 456 – 464 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1182 / blood - 2003 - 05 - 1480 Ito , T . , H . Kanzler , O . Duramad , W . Cao , and Y . J . Liu . 2006 . Specialization , kinetics , and repertoire of type 1 interferon responses by human plas - macytoid predendritic cells . Blood . 107 : 2423 – 2431 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1182 / blood - 2005 - 07 - 2709 Itoh , T . , K . S . Erdmann , A . Roux , B . Habermann , H . Werner , and P . De Camilli . 2005 . Dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton cooperatively regu - late plasma membrane invagination by BAR and F - BAR proteins . Dev . Cell . 9 : 791 – 804 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2005 . 11 . 005 Jego , G . , A . K . Palucka , J . P . Blanck , C . Chalouni , V . Pascual , and J . Banchereau . 2003 . Plasmacytoid dendritic cells induce plasma cell differentiation through type I interferon and interleukin 6 . Immunity . 19 : 225 – 234 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1074 - 7613 ( 03 ) 00208 - 5 Jin , Y . , C . Mazza , J . R . Christie , S . Giliani , M . Fiorini , P . Mella , F . Gandellini , D . M . Stewart , Q . Zhu , D . L . Nelson , et al . 2004 . Mutations of the Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( WASP ) : hotspots , effect on tran - scription , and translation and phenotype / genotype correlation . Blood . 104 : 4010 – 4019 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1182 / blood - 2003 - 05 - 1592 Kaksonen , M . , C . P . Toret , and D . G . Drubin . 2005 . A modular design for the clathrin - and actin - mediated endocytosis machinery . Cell . 123 : 305 – 320 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2005 . 09 . 024 Kanto , T . , M . Inoue , H . Miyatake , A . Sato , M . Sakakibara , T . Yakushijin , C . Oki , I . Itose , N . Hiramatsu , T . Takehara , et al . 2004 . Reduced num - bers and impaired ability of myeloid and plasmacytoid dendritic cells to polarize T helper cells in chronic hepatitis C virus infection . J . Infect . Dis . 190 : 1919 – 1926 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 425425 Kwok , S . K . , J . Y . Lee , S . H . Park , M . L . Cho , S . Y . Min , S . H . Park , H . Y . Kim , and Y . G . Cho . 2008a . Dysfunctional interferon - alpha production by peripheral plasmacytoid dendritic cells upon Toll - like receptor - 9 stimulation in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus . Arthritis Res . Ther . 10 : R29 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1186 / ar2382 Kwok , S . K . , S . H . Seo , J . H . Ju , C . H . Yoon , S . C . Park , B . S . Kim , H . Y . Kim , and S . H . Park . 2008b . Cryptococcal meningitis presenting with isolated sixth cranial nerve palsy in a patient with systemic lupus erythe - matosus . J . Korean Med . Sci . 23 : 153 – 155 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3346 / jkms . 2008 . 23 . 1 . 153 Lande , R . , J . Gregorio , V . Facchinetti , B . Chatterjee , Y . H . Wang , B . Homey , W . Cao , Y . H . Wang , B . Su , F . O . Nestle , et al . 2007 . Plasmacytoid den - dritic cells sense self - DNA coupled with antimicrobial peptide . Nature . 449 : 564 – 569 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature06116 Latz , E . , A . Schoenemeyer , A . Visintin , K . A . Fitzgerald , B . G . Monks , C . F . Knetter , E . Lien , N . J . Nilsen , T . Espevik , and D . T . Golenbock . 2004 . TLR9 signals after translocating from the ER to CpG DNA in the lyso - some . Nat . Immunol . 5 : 190 – 198 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ni1028 Le Bon , A . , V . Durand , E . Kamphuis , C . Thompson , S . Bulfone - Paus , C . Rossmann , U . Kalinke , and D . F . Tough . 2006a . Direct stimulation of T cells by type I IFN enhances the CD8 + T cell response during cross - priming . J . Immunol . 176 : 4682 – 4689 . Le Bon , A . , C . Thompson , E . Kamphuis , V . Durand , C . Rossmann , U . Kalinke , and D . F . Tough . 2006b . Cutting edge : enhancement of an - tibody responses through direct stimulation of B and T cells by type I IFN . J . Immunol . 176 : 2074 – 2078 . Leverrier , Y . , R . Lorenzi , M . P . Blundell , P . Brickell , C . Kinnon , A . J . Ridley , and A . J . Thrasher . 2001 . Cutting edge : the Wiskott - Aldrich 374 Role of WASp in pDCs | Prete et al . Snapper , S . B . , P . Meelu , D . Nguyen , B . M . Stockton , P . Bozza , F . W . Alt , F . S . Rosen , U . H . von Andrian , and C . Klein . 2005 . WASP deficiency leads to global defects of directed leukocyte migration in vitro and in vivo . J . Leukoc . Biol . 77 : 993 – 998 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1189 / jlb . 0804444 Strom , T . S . , S . J . Turner , S . Andreansky , H . Liu , P . C . Doherty , D . K . Srivastava , J . M . Cunningham , and A . W . Nienhuis . 2003 . Defects in T - cell - mediated immunity to influenza virus in murine Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome are corrected by oncoretroviral vector - mediated gene transfer into repopulating hematopoietic cells . Blood . 102 : 3108 – 3116 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1182 / blood - 2002 - 11 - 3489 Takenawa , T . , and S . Suetsugu . 2007 . The WASP - WAVE protein network : connecting the membrane to the cytoskeleton . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 : 37 – 48 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm2069 Thrasher , A . J . , and S . O . Burns . 2010 . WASP : a key immunological mul - titasker . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 10 : 182 – 192 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nri2724 Trifari , S . , G . Sitia , A . Aiuti , S . Scaramuzza , F . Marangoni , L . G . Guidotti , S . Martino , P . Saracco , L . D . Notarangelo , M . G . Roncarolo , and L . Dupré . 2006 . Defective Th1 cytokine gene transcription in CD4 + and CD8 + T cells from Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome patients . J . Immunol . 177 : 7451 – 7461 . Trifari , S . , S . Scaramuzza , M . Catucci , M . Ponzoni , L . Mollica , R . Chiesa , F . Cattaneo , F . Lafouresse , R . Calvez , W . Vermi , et al . 2010 . Revertant T lymphocytes in a patient with Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome : analysis of function and distribution in lymphoid organs . J . Allergy Clin . Immunol . 125 : 439 – 448 : e8 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jaci . 2009 . 11 . 034 Tsuboi , S . 2007 . Requirement for a complex of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) with WASP interacting protein in podosome forma - tion in macrophages . J . Immunol . 178 : 2987 – 2995 . Vallin , H . , A . Perers , G . V . Alm , and L . Rönnblom . 1999 . Anti - double - stranded DNA antibodies and immunostimulatory plasmid DNA in combination mimic the endogenous IFN - alpha inducer in systemic lupus erythematosus . J . Immunol . 163 : 6306 – 6313 . van Baarsen , L . G . , C . L . Bos , T . C . van der Pouw Kraan , and C . L . Verweij . 2009 . Transcription profiling of rheumatic diseases . Arthritis Res . Ther . 11 : 207 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1186 / ar2557 van der Pouw Kraan , T . C . , C . A . Wijbrandts , L . G . van Baarsen , A . E . Voskuyl , F . Rustenburg , J . M . Baggen , S . M . Ibrahim , M . Fero , B . A . Dijkmans , P . P . Tak , and C . L . Verweij . 2007 . Rheumatoid arthritis subtypes iden - tified by genomic profiling of peripheral blood cells : assignment of a type I interferon signature in a subpopulation of patients . Ann . Rheum . Dis . 66 : 1008 – 1014 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1136 / ard . 2006 . 063412 Vermi , W . , L . Blanzuoli , M . D . Kraus , P . Grigolato , F . Donato , G . Loffredo , C . E . Marino , D . Alberti , L . D . Notarangelo , and F . Facchetti . 1999 . The spleen in the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome : histopathologic ab - normalities of the white pulp correlate with the clinical phenotype of the disease . Am . J . Surg . Pathol . 23 : 182 – 191 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1097 / 00000478 - 199902000 - 00007 Vermi , W . , M . Soncini , L . Melocchi , S . Sozzani , and F . Facchetti . 2011 . Plasmacytoid dendritic cells and cancer . J . Leukoc . Biol . 90 : 681 – 690 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1189 / jlb . 0411190 Wengler , G . S . , L . D . Notarangelo , S . Giliani , M . G . Pirastru , A . G . Ugazio , and O . Parolini . 1995 . Mutation analysis in Wiskott Aldrich syn - drome on chorionic villus DNA . Lancet . 346 : 641 – 642 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0140 - 6736 ( 95 ) 91477 - 3 Westerberg , L . , M . Larsson , S . J . Hardy , C . Fernández , A . J . Thrasher , and E . Severinson . 2005 . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein deficiency leads to reduced B - cell adhesion , migration , and homing , and a de - layed humoral immune response . Blood . 105 : 1144 – 1152 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1182 / blood - 2004 - 03 - 1003 Westerberg , L . S . , M . A . de la Fuente , F . Wermeling , H . D . Ochs , M . C . Karlsson , S . B . Snapper , and L . D . Notarangelo . 2008 . WASP confers se - lective advantage for specific hematopoietic cell populations and serves a unique role in marginal zone B - cell homeostasis and function . Blood . 112 : 4139 – 4147 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1182 / blood - 2008 - 02 - 140715 Zhu , Q . , C . Watanabe , T . Liu , D . Hollenbaugh , R . M . Blaese , S . B . Kanner , A . Aruffo , and H . D . Ochs . 1997 . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome / X - linked thrombocytopenia : WASP gene mutations , protein expression , and phenotype . Blood . 90 : 2680 – 2689 . Ohashi , E . , K . Tanabe , Y . Henmi , K . Mesaki , Y . Kobayashi , and K . Takei . 2011 . Receptor sorting within endosomal trafficking pathway is facilitated by dynamic actin filaments . PLoS ONE . 6 : e19942 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0019942 Orange , J . S . , N . Ramesh , E . Remold - O’Donnell , Y . Sasahara , L . Koopman , M . Byrne , F . A . Bonilla , F . S . Rosen , R . S . Geha , and J . L . Strominger . 2002 . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein is required for NK cell cyto - toxicity and colocalizes with actin to NK cell - activating immunologic synapses . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 99 : 11351 – 11356 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 162376099 Pascual , V . , D . Chaussabel , and J . Banchereau . 2010 . A genomic approach to human autoimmune diseases . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 28 : 535 – 571 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev - immunol - 030409 - 101221 Pau , E . , Y . H . Cheung , C . Loh , G . Lajoie , and J . E . Wither . 2012 . TLR tol - erance reduces IFN - alpha production despite plasmacytoid dendritic cell expansion and anti - nuclear antibodies in NZB bicongenic mice . PLoS ONE . 7 : e36761 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0036761 Presicce , P . , A . Taddeo , A . Conti , M . L . Villa , and S . Della Bella . 2008 . Keyhole limpet hemocyanin induces the activation and maturation of human dendritic cells through the involvement of mannose re - ceptor . Mol . Immunol . 45 : 1136 – 1145 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molimm . 2007 . 07 . 020 Prinz , M . , H . Schmidt , A . Mildner , K . P . Knobeloch , U . K . Hanisch , J . Raasch , D . Merkler , C . Detje , I . Gutcher , J . Mages , et al . 2008 . Distinct and nonredundant in vivo functions of IFNAR on myeloid cells limit autoimmunity in the central nervous system . Immunity . 28 : 675 – 686 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2008 . 03 . 011 Pulecio , J . , E . Tagliani , A . Scholer , F . Prete , L . Fetler , O . R . Burrone , and F . Benvenuti . 2008 . Expression of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein in dendritic cells regulates synapse formation and activation of naive CD8 + T cells . J . Immunol . 181 : 1135 – 1142 . Recher , M . , S . O . Burns , M . A . de la Fuente , S . Volpi , C . Dahlberg , J . E . Walter , K . Moffitt , D . Mathew , N . Honke , P . A . Lang , et al . 2012 . B cell - intrinsic deficiency of the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASp ) causes severe abnormalities of the peripheral B - cell compartment in mice . Blood . 119 : 2819 – 2828 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1182 / blood - 2011 - 09 - 379412 Sanjuan , M . A . , N . Rao , K . T . Lai , Y . Gu , S . Sun , A . Fuchs , W . P . Fung - Leung , M . Colonna , and L . Karlsson . 2006 . CpG - induced tyrosine phosphory - lation occurs via a TLR9 - independent mechanism and is required for cytokine secretion . J . Cell Biol . 172 : 1057 – 1068 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200508058 Santiago - Raber , M . L . , R . Baccala , K . M . Haraldsson , D . Choubey , T . A . Stewart , D . H . Kono , and A . N . Theofilopoulos . 2003 . Type - I inter - feron receptor deficiency reduces lupus - like disease in NZB mice . J . Exp . Med . 197 : 777 – 788 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1084 / jem . 20021996 Sasahara , Y . , R . Rachid , M . J . Byrne , M . A . de la Fuente , R . T . Abraham , N . Ramesh , and R . S . Geha . 2002 . Mechanism of recruitment of WASP to the immunological synapse and of its activation following TCR ligation . Mol . Cell . 10 : 1269 – 1281 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1097 - 2765 ( 02 ) 00728 - 1 Sasai , M . , and A . Iwasaki . 2011 . Love triangle between Unc93B1 , TLR7 , and TLR9 prevents fatal attraction . Immunity . 35 : 3 – 5 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2011 . 07 . 006 Sasai , M . , M . M . Linehan , and A . Iwasaki . 2010 . Bifurcation of Toll - like receptor 9 signaling by adaptor protein 3 . Science . 329 : 1530 – 1534 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1187029 Shimizu , M . , N . P . Nikolov , K . Ueno , K . Ohta , R . M . Siegel , A . Yachie , and F . Candotti . 2012 . Development of IgA nephropathy - like glomerulonephri - tis associated with Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein deficiency . Clin . Immunol . 142 : 160 – 166 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . clim . 2011 . 10 . 001 Sims , T . N . , T . J . Soos , H . S . Xenias , B . Dubin - Thaler , J . M . Hofman , J . C . Waite , T . O . Cameron , V . K . Thomas , R . Varma , C . H . Wiggins , et al . 2007 . Opposing effects of PKCtheta and WASp on symmetry break - ing and relocation of the immunological synapse . Cell . 129 : 773 – 785 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2007 . 03 . 037 Snapper , S . B . , F . S . Rosen , E . Mizoguchi , P . Cohen , W . Khan , C . H . Liu , T . L . Hagemann , S . P . Kwan , R . Ferrini , L . Davidson , et al . 1998 . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein - deficient mice reveal a role for WASP in T but not B cell activation . Immunity . 9 : 81 – 91 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1074 - 7613 ( 00 ) 80590 - 7