Structure , cell wall elasticity and polysaccharide properties of living yeast cells , as probed by AFM This article has been downloaded from IOPscience . Please scroll down to see the full text article . 2008 Nanotechnology 19 384005 ( http : / / iopscience . iop . org / 0957 - 4484 / 19 / 38 / 384005 ) Download details : IP Address : 131 . 104 . 62 . 10 The article was downloaded on 03 / 05 / 2012 at 04 : 50 Please note that terms and conditions apply . View the table of contents for this issue , or go to the journal homepage for more Home Search Collections Journals About Contact us My IOPscience IOP P UBLISHING N ANOTECHNOLOGY Nanotechnology 19 ( 2008 ) 384005 ( 9pp ) doi : 10 . 1088 / 0957 - 4484 / 19 / 38 / 384005 Structure , cell wall elasticity and polysaccharide properties of living yeast cells , as probed by AFM David Alsteens 1 , Vincent Dupres 1 , Kevin Mc Evoy 1 , Linda Wildling 2 , Hermann J Gruber 2 and Yves F Dufrˆene 1 , 3 1 Unit´e de Chimie des Interfaces , Universit´e Catholique de Louvain , Croix du Sud 2 / 18 , B - 1348 Louvain - la - Neuve , Belgium 2 Institute for Biophysics , Johannes Kepler University of Linz , Altenbergerstrasse 69 , A - 4040 Linz , Austria E - mail : Yves . Dufrene @ uclouvain . be Received 4 February 2008 , in ﬁnal form 18 March 2008 Published 12 August 2008 Online at stacks . iop . org / Nano / 19 / 384005 Abstract Although the chemical composition of yeast cell walls is known , the organization , assembly , and interactions of the various macromolecules remain poorly understood . Here , we used in situ atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) in three different modes to probe the ultrastructure , cell wall elasticity and polymer properties of two brewing yeast strains , i . e . Saccharomyces carlsbergensis and S . cerevisiae . Topographic images of the two strains revealed smooth and homogeneous cell surfaces , and the presence of circular bud scars on dividing cells . Nanomechanical measurements demonstrated that the cell wall elasticity of S . carlsbergensis is homogeneous . By contrast , the bud scar of S . cerevisiae was found to be stiffer than the cell wall , presumably due to the accumulation of chitin . Notably , single molecule force spectroscopy with lectin - modiﬁed tips revealed major differences in polysaccharide properties of the two strains . Polysaccharides were clearly more extended on S . cerevisiae , suggesting that not only oligosaccharides , but also polypeptide chains of the mannoproteins were stretched . Consistent with earlier cell surface analyses , these ﬁndings may explain the very different aggregation properties of the two organisms . This study demonstrates the power of using multiple complementary AFM modalities for probing the organization and interactions of the various macromolecules of microbial cell walls . ( Some ﬁgures in this article are in colour only in the electronic version ) 1 . Introduction Currently , the probing of microbial cell surfaces down to the nanometer scale is attracting much interest . Microbial cells are surrounded by thick , mechanically strong cell walls which play several key functions , including supporting the internal turgor pressure of the cell , protecting the cytoplasm from the outer environment , imparting shape to the organism , acting as a molecular sieve , controlling molecular recognition and cell adhesion , and being the target of antibiotics [ 1 , 2 ] . The wall mechanical strength in eubacteria is provided by a layer of peptidoglycan consisting of glycan chains of 3 Author to whom any correspondence should be addressed . alternating N - acetylglucosamine and N - acetylmuramic acid residues , which are cross - linked by short peptide chains . In Gram - positive bacteria , the peptidoglycan is bound to anionic polymers ( e . g . teichoic acid ) while in Gram - negative bacteria it is overlaid by an outer membrane , i . e . an asymmetrical bilayer of phospholipids and lipopolysaccharides containing membrane proteins ( e . g . porins ) . In yeast , cell walls are made of a microﬁbrillar array of β 1 - 3 glucan , overlaid by β 1 - 6 glucan and mannoproteins [ 3 – 5 ] . Yeast wall mannoproteins are highly glycosylated polypeptides , often 50 – 95 % carbohydrate by weight , and thus may be thought of as yeast proteoglycans [ 4 ] . An important minor component is chitin , a linear polysaccharide of β 1 - 4 linked N - acetylglucosamine , which contributes to the insolubility of the 0957 - 4484 / 08 / 384005 + 09 $ 30 . 00 © 2008 IOP Publishing Ltd Printed in the UK 1 Nanotechnology 19 ( 2008 ) 384005 D Alsteens et al ﬁbers . Although the chemical composition of the yeast cell walls is known , the organization , assembly and interactions of the various macromolecules are poorly understood . Understanding the functions of microbial cell walls requires determination of their structural , physical and biochemical properties . Various characterization methods have been developed towards this goal [ 1 , 2 , 6 , 7 ] : separation and chemical analysis of wall constituents , serological procedures , binding studies ( dyes , antibodies and lectins ) , selective degradation by enzymes , cell wall mutants , modiﬁcations by antibiotics , electron microscopy techniques combined with freeze - fracture and surface replica or negative staining , x - ray photoelectron spectroscopy , infrared spectroscopy , contact angle and electrophoretic mobility measurements . These methods often require cell manipulation prior to examination ( extraction , drying , staining ) and in many cases provide averaged information obtained on a large ensemble of cells without spatial resolution . In this context , atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) has recently opened up new possibilities for exploring microbial cells , enabling researchers to observe the nanoscale structure of live cells as they grow or interact with drugs [ 8 – 12 ] , and to measure their local surface properties such as elasticity [ 13 – 15 ] and hydrophobicity [ 16 , 17 ] . Of particular interest is the rapid development of single molecule force spectroscopy ( SMFS ) methods , which provide valuable insight into the nanomechanical properties of cell surface polymers [ 18 , 19 ] . The general idea is to pick up and stretch single macromolecules with the AFM tip and then to analyze the retraction force curves with models from statistical mechanics to describe the elasticity of the stretched molecules . Moreover , SMFS with functionalized tips offers a means to detect and localize speciﬁc receptors on microbial surfaces [ 20 – 24 ] . The approach involves recording multiple force curves between a modiﬁed tip and a cell , and assessing the unbinding force between complementary receptor and ligand molecules from the adhesion ‘pull - off’ force observed upon retraction [ 25 ] . Accordingly , the continuously rising number of publications in the area indicates that a new ﬁeld has been born , for which we propose the term ‘nanomicrobiology’ . Here , we used AFM to probe the ultrastructure , cell wall elasticity and polysaccharide properties ( distribution , adhesion , elasticity and extension ) of two yeast strains , with two questions in mind : ( i ) how do these properties vary across the surface of a single yeast cell , ( ii ) do they differ from one strain to another ? We selected a top - fermenting brewing strain ( S . cerevisiae ) and a bottom - fermenting brewing strain ( S . carlsbergensis ) because they are known to have different surface biochemical composition , surface hydrophobicity and aggregation properties [ 26 ] , i . e . the top - fermenting strain is richer in proteins and more hydrophobic , explaining why these cells tend to associate with CO 2 bubbles and rise to the top of the fermented suspensions . 2 . Materials and methods 2 . 1 . Microorganisms and culture conditions Brewing yeast strains Saccharomyces carlsbergensis MUCL 28285 and Saccharomyces cerevisiae MUCL 38475 were grown as described by Dengis et al [ 26 ] . S . carlsbergensis is an obsolete species which is now a synonym of S . cerevisiae . Yeast cells were stored in 25 % ( vol / vol ) glycerol at − 20 ◦ C . They were plated in a petri dish on solid medium ( 1 % [ wt / vol ] yeast extract , 3 % [ wt / vol ] glucose , 2 . 5 % [ wt / vol ] agar ) and incubated at 30 ◦ C for three days . The plates were stored at 4 ◦ C and repitched every three weeks . The culture broth contained 2 % ( wt / vol ) yeast extract and 5 % ( wt / vol ) glucose . Two or three colonies from the solid medium plate were used as inoculum for a 10 ml preculture which was grown by shaking overnight at 30 ◦ C . Cells of the preculture were used to inoculate 200 ml of culture medium to a concentration of about 2 × 10 6 cells ml − 1 . The two strains were incubated on a shaker at 100 rpm either at 10 ◦ C ( S . carlsbergensis ) or at 30 ◦ C ( S . cerevisiae ) and harvested in the early stationary growth phase , i . e . after three days for S . carlsbergensis , and after 14 h for S . cerevisiae . 2 . 2 . AFM measurements AFM contact mode images and force – distance curves were recorded at room temperature ( 20 ◦ C ) in buffered solutions ( sodium acetate ; pH 4 . 75 ) containing 1 mM CaCl 2 + 1 mM MnCl 2 using a Nanoscope IV Multimode AFM ( Veeco Metrology Group , Santa Barbara , CA ) and oxide - sharpened microfabricated Si 3 N 4 cantilevers ( Microlevers , Veeco Metrology Group , Santa Barbara , CA ) . Acetate buffer is well suited for yeast experiments and , unlike PBS , does not precipitate in the presence of CaCl 2 . Cells were immobilized by mechanical trapping into porous polycarbonate membranes ( Millipore ) , with a pore size similar to the cell size [ 27 , 28 ] . After ﬁltering a concentrated cell suspension , the ﬁlter was gently rinsed with acetate , carefully cut ( 1 cm × 1 cm ) , attached to a steel sample puck ( Veeco Metrology Group ) using a small piece of double faced adhesive tape , and the mounted sample was transferred into the AFM liquid cell while avoiding dewetting . The spring constants of the cantilevers measured using the thermal noise method ( Picoforce , Veeco Metrology Group ) were found to be 0 . 011 N m − 1 . Blocking experiments were performed by adding 100 mM D - ( + ) - mannose to the solutions . Experiments on model carbohydrate surfaces were performed on agarose beads functionalized with D - mannose ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . Single molecule force spectroscopy measurements were performed using a constant approach and retraction speed of 1000 nm s − 1 , and a maximum applied force of 250 pN , corresponding to a maximum indentation in the 1 – 10 nm range . All adhesion peaks lacking a nonlinear delay were considered as unspeciﬁc and therefore not considered to generate adhesion force maps and histograms . For the histograms , all speciﬁc peaks from all curves were considered , while for the maps only the largest peaks were considered . Mechanical properties were mapped by recording force – volume images consisting of arrays of 32 × 32 force curves using a maximum applied force of 1 . 2 nN . Elasticity maps and histograms were generated by analyzing the force curves according to the Hertz theory for elastic media [ 29 ] , using a conical tip geometry : F = 2 E tan α π ( 1 − ν 2 ) δ 2 ( 1 ) 2 Nanotechnology 19 ( 2008 ) 384005 D Alsteens et al where F is the force , δ is the indentation depth , E is the Young’s modulus , ν is the Poisson coefﬁcient and α the semi top angle of the tip . A program developed for soft materials in Fortran C + + ( Compaq Visual Fortran V . 6 . 6 , Compaq Computer Corp . , Houston , TX , USA ) was adapted and used to ﬁt the experimental force curves with the model ( for details , see [ 30 , 31 ] ) . For probing cell surface polysaccharides , AFM tips were functionalized with the lectin concanavalin A ( Con A ; Sigma - Aldrich ) via a 6 nm - long polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) chain . Cantilevers were washed with chloroform and ethanol , placed in an UV - ozone - cleaner for 30 min , and immersed overnight in a solution of ethanolamine hydrochloride in DMSO ( 3 . 3 g in 6 ml ) to generate amino groups on the tip surface [ 32 ] . These amino groups were further reacted with PEG linkers carrying benzaldehyde functions on their free - tangling end , essentially as described in [ 33 ] . For coupling of proteins , the cantilever was covered with a 200 μ l droplet of a PBS solution containing Con A ( 0 . 2 mg ml − 1 ) to which 2 μ l of a 1 M NaCNBH 3 solution was added [ 33 ] . After 50 min of incubation , 5 μ l of a 1 M ethanolamine hydrochloride solution ( pre - adjusted to pH 9 . 5 with NaOH , see supporting information to [ 33 ] ) was added in order to deactivate unreacted aldehyde groups during another 10 min incubation period , after which the cantilever was washed with and stored in PBS . To gain insight into the elasticity of the stretched polymers , elongation forces were ﬁtted using the wormlike chain ( WLC ) and the freely jointed chain ( FJC ) models [ 34 ] . The WLC model has already been successfully applied to describe the stretching of DNA [ 35 ] and proteins [ 36 ] . It describes the polymer as an irregular curved ﬁlament , which is linear on the scale of the persistence length l p , a parameter which represents the stiffness of the molecule . The extension of the molecule is limited by the contour length L c , that is , the length of the linearly extended molecule without stretching the molecular backbone . In this model , the force F versus extension x is given by F ( x ) = k b T / l p [ 0 . 25 ( 1 − x / L c ) − 2 + x / L c − 0 . 25 ] ( 2 ) where , k b is the Boltzmann constant and T the absolute temperature . The FJC model has been successfully applied to describe the elastic behavior of polysaccharides [ 37 , 38 ] . Here , the polymer has a purely entropic elastic response and is considered as consisting of a series of n rigid , orientationally independent statistical ( Kuhn ) segments , connected through ﬂexible joints . The segment length , referred to as the Kuhn length l k , is a direct measure of the chain stiffness and is related to the contour length by L c = nl k . An extended FJC ( FJC + ) model has been developed in which Kuhn segments can stretch and align under force . Here , the polymer consists of a series of n elastic springs characterized by a segment elasticity k s . The extension x versus the pulling force F is then given by x ( F ) = L c [ coth ( Fl k / k b T ) − k b T / Fl k ] [ 1 + nF / k s L c ] ( 3 ) Figure 1 . Imaging living yeast cells . AFM height images ( ( a ) , 6 μ m × 6 μ m , z - range : 400 nm ; ( b ) , 6 μ m × 6 μ m , z - range : 1500 nm ; ( c ) , 7 μ m × 7 μ m , z - range : 400 nm ; ( d ) , 7 μ m × 7 μ m , z - range : 1500 nm ) of Saccharomyces carlsbergensis ( ( a ) , ( b ) ) and S . cerevisiae ( ( c ) , ( d ) ) recorded in buffered solution ( sodium acetate ; pH 4 . 75 ; 1 mM CaCl 2 + 1 mM MnCl 2 ) . While some cells showed homogeneous surfaces ( ( a ) , ( c ) ) , others clearly showed the presence of a bud scar ( ( b ) , ( d ) ) . Cells were trapped into a porous polymer membrane for non - invasive , in situ imaging . 3 . Results and discussion 3 . 1 . Imaging yeast cells in real time and at high resolution Currently , AFM is the only technique that can image the surface of live microbial cells at high resolution and in real time , thereby providing information that is complementary to that obtained from electron microscopy . An important requirement for successful live cell imaging is that the specimens must be well attached to a support while avoiding denaturation , as can be achieved by immobilizing the cells mechanically in porous membranes [ 27 , 39 ] . Figure 1 shows height images of single S . carlsbergensis and S . cerevisiae cells prepared using this approach . Due to the large curvature of the cells , height images had fairly poor resolution , while deﬂection images ( ﬁgure 2 ) were much more sensitive to the surface relief . The cell surface was very smooth , the root mean square ( rms ) roughness on height images being 1 . 1 nm ( on 500 nm × 500 nm areas ) , consistent with the presence of an outer layer of mannoproteins . In addition , dividing cells showed ∼ 1 μ m circular protrusions ( ﬁgures 1 ( b ) , ( d ) ; ﬁgures 2 ( a ) and ( b ) ) attributed to bud scars [ 40 , 41 ] . Notably , high - resolution deﬂection images of this region ( ﬁgure 2 ( a ) ) revealed concentric striations that may reﬂect a newly formed cell wall , possibly enriched in chitin . Overall , these structural features are consistent with earlier electron microscopy [ 41 ] and AFM [ 42 ] observations . 3 . 2 . Nanoscale mapping of cell wall elasticity Besides being used as a microscope , AFM can also mea - sure local elastic properties via nanoindentation measure - ments [ 13 , 15 , 44 , 45 ] . Here , force curves are recorded across 3 Nanotechnology 19 ( 2008 ) 384005 D Alsteens et al Figure 2 . Mapping the nanomechanical properties of yeast cells . ( a ) , ( b ) Deﬂection images , ( c ) , ( d ) corresponding elasticity maps ( z - range = 3 MPa ) , and ( e ) , ( f ) typical force – indentation curves ( open symbols are raw data while the solid line shows the theoretical ﬁt using the Hertz model ) recorded on the cell wall ( label 1 ) and bud scar ( label 2 ) of S . carlsbergensis ( ( a ) , ( c ) , ( e ) ) and S . cerevisiae ( ( b ) , ( d ) , ( f ) ) . Deﬂection images were recorded just after the force maps . the surface , converted into force versus indentation curves us - ing appropriate treatments [ 13 , 30 , 31 ] , and then analyzed with theoretical models to provide quantitative information on sam - ple elasticity ( Young’s modulus ) . This method has enabled the measurement of the mechanical properties of a variety of cells , including yeast cells [ 13 , 14 ] . We used spatially resolved nanoindentation measurements to map the nanomechanical properties of S . carlsbergensis and S . cerevisiae . Force – volume images consisting of arrays of 32 by 32 force curves and topographic images were recorded on dividing cells showing a bud scar . Force – indentation curves were analyzed using the Hertz theory ( ﬁgures 2 ( e ) and ( f ) ) to generate elasticity maps ( ﬁgures 2 ( c ) and ( d ) ) . S . carlsbergensis showed homogeneous elasticity maps , the Young’s modulus on the mother cell and bud scar regions being 0 . 8 ± 0 . 2 MPa and 0 . 7 ± 0 . 2 MPa , respectively . By Figure 3 . Single molecule force spectroscopy of the concanavalin A – mannose interaction . ( a ) Surface chemistry used to functionalize AFM tips with the concanavalin A ( Con A ) lectin . ( b ) Representative force curves and adhesion force histogram ( n = 500 ) recorded in buffer solution ( sodium acetate ; pH 4 . 75 ; 1 mM CaCl 2 + 1 mM MnCl 2 ) between a Con A tip and a mannose - terminated agarose bead . The curves were taken on single locations , selected on the top region of the bead . Similar data were obtained using different tips and beads ( 10 tips , 5 beads ) . ( c ) Control experiment showing a dramatic reduction of adhesion frequency when the force measurements are performed in the presence of free mannose ( 100 mM ) . contrast , S . cerevisiae showed heterogeneous elasticity , the average Young’s modulus being 0 . 7 ± 0 . 2 MPa and 2 . 3 ± 0 . 8 MPa for the mother cell and the bud scar . Consistent with earlier studies [ 13 , 14 ] , this difference demonstrates that in S . cerevisiae , the bud scar is stiffer than the cell wall , presumably due to chitin enrichment [ 46 ] . We note , however , that the bud scar value ( 2 . 3 MPa ) is smaller than that reported earlier ( 6 . 1 MPa [ 13 ] ) . This difference is likely to reﬂect a more accurate determination of the contact point between the AFM tip and the cell surface in the present work [ 30 , 31 ] . Strikingly , the localized increase in stiffness was not observed on S . carlsbergensis , suggesting that the macromolecular composition or organization of the bud scar may be different from that of S . cerevisiae . 4 Nanotechnology 19 ( 2008 ) 384005 D Alsteens et al Figure 4 . Mapping individual mannan polysaccharides on the yeast bud scars . ( a ) , ( d ) AFM deﬂection images , ( b ) , ( e ) adhesion force map ( gray scale : 350 pN ) , and ( c ) , ( f ) adhesion force histogram ( n = 1024 ) together with representative force curves recorded with a Con A tip on the bud scar region of S . carlsbergensis ( ( a ) – ( c ) ) and S . cerevisiae ( ( d ) – ( f ) ) . Deﬂection images were recorded just after the force maps . For the two strains , histograms yielding very similar mean adhesion forces were obtained using different tips and yeast cells ( S . carlsbergensis : 10 tips , 5 cells ; S . cerevisiae : 6 tips , 3 cells ) . 3 . 3 . Probing cell surface polysaccharides Mannoproteins are highly glycosylated polypeptides which represent the main constituent of the yeast surface . To speciﬁcally pick up individual mannan oligosaccharides , AFM tips were functionalized with the concanavalin A ( Con A ) lectin ( ﬁgure 3 ( a ) ) [ 33 ] . As a proof of concept , we ﬁrst recorded force curves between the modiﬁed tips and agarose beads functionalized with mannose residues . As shown in ﬁgure 3 ( b ) , a signiﬁcant fraction of a total of 1024 curves displayed single adhesion forces at short rupture distances ( 0 – 50 nm ) , the remaining measurements exhibiting no adhesion . The corresponding adhesion force histogram displayed two maxima with mean magnitudes of 60 ± 23 and 126 ± 28 pN . In view of the surface chemistry used and of the observed force histograms , we believe that the measured 60 pN forces reﬂect the rupture of single lectin – mannose complexes . To assess the speciﬁcity of the measured interaction forces , force curves were also recorded in 100 mM solutions of mannose ( ﬁgure 3 ( c ) ) . As can be seen , a dramatic reduction of adhesion frequency was observed ( from 61 % to 6 % ) , demonstrating that the measured adhesion forces indeed originate from speciﬁc lectin – carbohydrate interactions . We then investigated the distribution , adhesion , ﬂexibility and extension of mannans on the surface of the two yeast strains . Figures 4 and 5 show adhesion force maps and histograms , as well as representative force curves , recorded with a lectin - terminated tip on S . carlsbergensis and S . cerevisiae . For S . carlsbergensis , force curves showed essentially single adhesion events . As opposed to the agarose situation ( ﬁgure 3 ) , the cells showed pronounced elongation forces with rupture distances typically in the 0 – 100 nm range , reﬂecting the stretching of the ﬂexible polysaccharide chains . The adhesion force histograms revealed a maximum at 62 ± 18 pN ( ﬁgure 4 ( c ) ) . These forces are rather similar to the agarose values , suggesting they reﬂect the detection of single mannose residues . Presumably , binding forces in the 100 – 200 pN range corresponded to the detection of two or three residues . When force curves were recorded in a 100 mM mannose solution ( ﬁgure 5 ) , a substantial reduction of adhesion frequency was observed , supporting the notion that the measured adhesion forces originate from speciﬁc interactions . Lastly , adhesion maps revealed homogeneous distribution of mannose residues across the yeast surface , no difference being observed between the bud scar and the cell wall . This ﬁnding , which correlates with the homogeneous elasticity maps , suggests that the bud scar and cell wall of S . carlsbergensis show similar mannan properties with respect to distribution and adhesion . To some extent , S . cerevisiae showed similar polysaccha - ride properties . Binding events with a maximum of 66 ± 25 pN ( ﬁgure 4 ( f ) ) were detected and partially blocked with free man - nose ( ﬁgure 5 ) , suggesting that they also reﬂect the detection of mannans . As for S . carlsbergensis , binding events were ran - domly distributed across the yeast surface , with similar densi - ties on the bud scar and cell wall . At ﬁrst sight , this ﬁnding is in apparent contradiction with the heterogeneous elasticity maps which suggest that the polysaccharide composition of the bud scar differs from that of the cell wall . However , this may be ex - plained considering the different principles and probing depths of nanomechanical measurements and SMFS . On close examination , major differences between S . carlsbergensis and S . cerevisiae were found . First , larger adhesion forces and rupture distances ( 0 – 400 nm ) were 5 Nanotechnology 19 ( 2008 ) 384005 D Alsteens et al Figure 5 . Mapping individual mannan polysaccharides on the yeast cell walls . ( a ) , ( d ) AFM deﬂection images , and ( b ) , ( e ) adhesion force histogram ( n = 1024 ) together with adhesion force maps ( gray scale : 200 pN ) recorded with a Con A tip on the cell wall of S . carlsbergensis ( ( a ) – ( c ) ) and S . cerevisiae ( ( d ) – ( f ) ) . ( c ) , ( f ) Control experiments showing a reduction of adhesion frequency when the force measurements were performed in the presence of free mannose ( 100 mM ) . Adhesion maps in ( c ) , ( f ) were taken on the same cells as in ( b ) , ( e ) and essentially on the same areas , although some lateral drift cannot be excluded . observed on S . cerevisiae . Figure 6 shows that these parameters increased in the order mannose – agarose < S . carlsbergensis < S . cerevisiae . To further visualize these differences , we reconstructed three - dimensional maps of polymer properties for the two strains , by combining adhesion forces ( expressed as false colors ) and rupture distances ( expressed as z level ) measured at every x , y location . Figures 6 ( g ) and ( h ) show that while polysaccharides were homogeneously distributed on both strains , they were clearly more extended and more adhesive on S . cerevisiae . While the greater adhesion on S . cerevisiae indicates that simultaneous , multiple lectin – carbohydrate interactions were more frequently detected , the much longer rupture distances suggest that the stretched macromolecules were of different nature . Oligosaccharide chains present on mannoproteins typically consist of 50 – 200 α - linked mannose units [ 4 ] . Assuming that the length of a mannose monomer is about 5 ˚A , elongation of these chains should give rise to rupture distances in the 0 – 100 nm range . This agrees well with the values observed for S . carlsbergensis , and thus supports the notion that only the oligosaccharide portion of mannoproteins were stretched . Presumably , the much longer rupture distances ( up to 400 nm ) on S . cerevisiae reﬂect the stretching of both the oligosaccharide and polypeptide chains of mannoproteins . Another remarkable ﬁnding is that the S . carlsbergensis and S . cerevisiae polysaccharides showed different mechanical properties ( ﬁgure 7 ) . In ﬁgure 7 ( a ) , it can be seen that while the S . carlsbergensis elongation force peaks could not be ﬁtted with a wormlike chain ( WLC ) model , they were well described by an extended freely jointed chain ( FJC ) model , with a Kuhn length l k of 5 ˚A and a segment elasticity of k s = 7 N m − 1 , which are typical values for polysaccharides [ 37 , 38 ] . Notably , for S . cerevisiae only a few force peaks could be described with an extended FJC model ( not shown ) , the majority of them being well ﬁtted with a WLC model ( ﬁgure 7 ( b ) ) with persistence lengths ranging from 0 . 03 to 0 . 56 nm ( here 0 . 06 and 0 . 26 nm for the ﬁrst and second peaks , respectively ) . We also note that a simple FJC model failed to adequately describe the data . Taken together , the above observations ( ﬁgures 6 and 7 ) lead us to believe that while mannan oligosaccharides were mechanically pulled on S . carlsbergensis , mannoproteins were stretched on S . cerevisiae . Our ﬁnding that polypeptides are more exposed , or available for interaction , on the S . cerevisiae surface is fully consistent with earlier physicochemical studies showing that the surface of S . cerevisiae is richer in proteins and much more hydrophobic than S . carlsbergensis [ 26 ] , and may explain why these cells tend to associate with CO 2 6 Nanotechnology 19 ( 2008 ) 384005 D Alsteens et al Figure 6 . Comparing the adhesion forces and rupture distances on mannose – agarose , S . carlsbergensis and S . cerevisiae . ( a ) – ( c ) Superimpositions of 10 typical force curves and ( d ) – ( f ) plots of adhesion force versus rupture distance obtained on mannose – agarose ( ( a ) , ( d ) ) , S . carlsbergensis ( ( b ) , ( e ) ) and S . cerevisiae ( ( c ) , ( f ) ) . ( g ) , ( h ) Three - dimensional reconstructed maps of polymer properties obtained for S . carlsbergensis ( g ) and S . cerevisiae ( h ) by combining adhesion force values ( expressed as false colors ) and rupture distance ( expressed as z level ) measured at different x , y locations . bubbles . To summarize , our data indicate that although the chemical composition of the cell walls of S . cerevisiae and S . carlsbergensis are likely to be similar , the interactions and three - dimensional assembly of the various macromolecules may be different . 4 . Conclusion At the cross - roads of nanoscience , biophysics and microbi - ology , the nanoscale characterization of microbial cells is an exciting , rapidly evolving research ﬁeld . Here , we have shown the potential of combining three AFM modalities— topographic imaging , nanomechanical measurements and SMFS—for probing the nanoscale surface properties of living yeast cells . Our main ﬁnding is that the two strains investi - gated here have similar surface ultrastructure , but different cell wall elasticity and polysaccharide properties . Unlike S . carls - bergensis , S . cerevisiae shows bud scars that are several times stiffer than the surrounding cell wall , presumably due to the presence of chitin . Mannans are homogeneously distributed on both strains . However , they are much more extended on S . cerevisiae , leading us to believe that only mannan chains are 7 Nanotechnology 19 ( 2008 ) 384005 D Alsteens et al Figure 7 . Fitting the elongation forces obtained on the yeast cell walls . The thick lines reveal that the experimental data were well ﬁtted with an extended FJC ( FJC + ) model for S . carlsbergensis ( a ) and with a WLC model for S . cerevisiae ( b ) . By contrast , WLC and FJC + models failed to adequately describe the S . carlsbergensis and S . cerevisiae data ( see insets , interrupted lines ) . On the right , schematic representations of the molecular interactions between the yeast surfaces and the lectin - tips are shown . On S . carlsbergensis , only mannan oligosaccharides ( in red ) are stretched , while on S . cerevisiae both the oligosaccharide and polypeptide ( in blue ) chains of mannoproteins are stretched . stretched on S . carlsbergensis , while the entire mannoproteins are stretched on S . cerevisiae . Acknowledgments This work was supported by the National Foundation for Scientiﬁc Research ( FNRS ) , the Universit´e catholique de Louvain ( Fonds Sp´eciaux de Recherche ) , the R´egion wallonne , the Federal Ofﬁce for Scientiﬁc , Technical and Cultural Affairs ( Interuniversity Poles of Attraction Programme ) , and the Research Department of the Communaut´e franc¸aise de Belgique ( Concerted Research Action ) . YFD and DA are Research Associate and Research Fellow of the FRS - FNRS , respectively . LW was supported by EU project Tips4Cells . We thank G Francius for helping us with the elasticity data treatment . References [ 1 ] Beveridge T J and Graham L L 1991 Surface - layers of bacteria Microbiol . Rev . 55 684 [ 2 ] Mozes N , Handley P S , Busscher H J and Rouxhet P G 1991 Microbial Cell Surface Analysis ( New York : VCH ) [ 3 ] Fleet G 1991 Cell Walls ed A Rose and J Harrison ( London : Academic ) p 199 [ 4 ] Lipke P N and Ovalle R 1998 Cell wall architecture in yeast : new structure and new challenges J . Bacteriol . 180 3735 [ 5 ] Lesage G and Bussey H 2006 Cell wall assembly in Saccharomyces cerevisiae Microbiol . Mol . Biol . Rev . 70 317 [ 6 ] Ubbink J and Schar - Zammaretti P 2005 Probing bacterial interactions : integrated approaches combining atomic force microscopy , electron microscopy and biophysical techniques Micron 36 293 [ 7 ] Ubbink J and Schar - Zammaretti P 2007 Colloidal properties and speciﬁc interactions of bacterial surfaces Curr . Opin . Colloid Interface Sci . 12 263 [ 8 ] Touhami A , Jericho M H and Beveridge T J 2004 Atomic force microscopy of cell growth and division in Staphylococcus aureus J . Bacteriol . 186 3286 [ 9 ] Verbelen C , Dupres V , Menozzi F D , Raze D , Baulard A R , Hols P and Dufrˆene Y F 2006 Ethambutol - induced alterations in Mycobacterium bovis BCG imaged by atomic force microscopy FEMS Microbiol . Lett . 264 192 [ 10 ] Plomp M , Leighton T J , Wheeler K E , Hill H D and Malkin A J 2007 In vitro high - resolution structural dynamics of single germinating bacterial spores Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 9644 [ 11 ] Dague E , Alsteens D , Latg´e J P and Dufrˆene Y F 2008 High - resolution cell surface dynamics of germinating Aspergillus fumigatus conidia Biophys . J . 94 656 [ 12 ] Alsteens D , Verbelen C , Dague E , Raze D , Baulard A R and Dufrˆene Y F 2008 Organization of the mycobacterial cell wall : a nanoscale view Eur . J . Physiol . 456 117 [ 13 ] Touhami A , Nysten B and Dufrˆene Y F 2003 Nanoscale mapping of the elasticity of microbial cells by atomic force microscopy Langmuir 19 4539 [ 14 ] Pelling A E , Sehati S , Gralla E B , Valentine J S and Gimzewski J K 2004 Local nanomechanical motion of the cell wall of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Science 305 1147 [ 15 ] Francius G , Tesson B , Dague E , Martin - J´ez´equel V and Dufrˆene Y 2008 Nanostructure and nanomechnaics of live Phaeodactylum tricornutum morphotypes Environ . Microbiol . 10 1344 [ 16 ] Dague E , Alsteens D , Latge J P , Verbelen C , Raze D , Baulard A R and Dufrˆene Y F 2007 Chemical force microscopy of single live cells Nano Lett . 7 3026 [ 17 ] Alsteens D , Dague E , Rouxhet P G , Baulard A R and Dufrˆene Y F 2007 Direct measurement of hydrophobic forces on cell surfaces using AFM Langmuir 23 11977 [ 18 ] van der Aa B C , Michel R M , Asther M , Zamora M T , Rouxhet P G and Dufrene Y F 2001 Stretching cell surface macromolecules by atomic force microscopy Langmuir 17 3116 [ 19 ] Abu - Lail N I and Camesano T A 2002 Elasticity of Pseudomonas putida KT2442 surface polymers with single - molecule force microscopy Langmuir 18 4071 [ 20 ] Gad M , Itoh A and Ikai A 1997 Mapping cell wall polysaccharides of living microbial cells using atomic force microscopy Cell Biol . Int . 21 697 [ 21 ] Touhami A , Hoffmann B , Vasella A , Denis F A and Dufrene Y F 2003 Aggregation of yeast cells : direct measurement of discrete lectin – carbohydrate interactions Microbiology 149 2873 [ 22 ] Dupres V , Menozzi F D , Locht C , Clare B H , Abbott N L , Cuenot S , Bompard C , Raze D and Dufrˆene Y F 2005 Nanoscale mapping and functional analysis of individual adhesins on living bacteria Nat . Methods 2 515 [ 23 ] Hinterdorfer P and Dufrˆene Y F 2006 Detection and localization of single molecular recognition events using atomic force microscopy Nat . Methods 3 347 [ 24 ] Gilbert Y et al 2007 Single - molecule force spectroscopy and imaging of the vancomycin / D - Ala – D - Ala interaction Nano Lett . 7 796 [ 25 ] Ludwig M , Dettmann W and Gaub H E 1997 Atomic force microscope imaging contrast based on molecular recognition Biophys . J . 72 445 8 Nanotechnology 19 ( 2008 ) 384005 D Alsteens et al [ 26 ] Dengis P B , Nelissen L R and Rouxhet P G 1995 Mechanisms of yeast ﬂocculation : comparison of top - and bottom - fermenting strains Appl . Environ . Microbiol . 61 718 [ 27 ] Kasas S and Ikai A 1995 A method for anchoring round shaped cells for atomic - force microscope imaging Biophys . J . 68 1678 [ 28 ] Dufrˆene Y F 2004 Using nanotechniques to explore microbial surfaces Nat . Rev . Microbiol . 2 451 [ 29 ] Hertz H 1881 Uber die ber¨uhrung fester elastischer k¨orper J . Reine Angew . Math . 92 156 [ 30 ] Francius G , Hemmerl´e J , Ohayon J , Schaaf P , Voegel J C , Picart C and Senger B 2006 Effect of crosslinking on the elasticity of polyelectrolyte multilayer ﬁlms measured by colloidal probe AFM Microsc . Res . Tech . 69 84 [ 31 ] Francius G , Hemmerl´e J , Ball V , Lavalle P , Picart C , Voegel J - C , Schaaf P and Senger B 2007 Stiffening of soft polyelectrolyte architectures by multilayer capping evidenced by viscoelastic analysis of AFM indentation measurements J . Phys . Chem . 111 8299 [ 32 ] Riener C K et al 2003 Heterobifunctional crosslinkers for tethering single ligand molecules to scanning probes Anal . Chim . Acta 497 101 [ 33 ] Ebner A et al 2007 A new , simple method for linking of antibodies to atomic force microscopy tips Bioconjug . Chem . 18 1176 [ 34 ] Janshoff A , Neitzert M , Oberdorfer Y and Fuchs H 2000 Force spectroscopy of molecular systems—single molecule spectroscopy of polymers and biomolecules Angew . Chem . Int . Edn 39 3213 [ 35 ] Rief M , Clausen - Schaumann H and Gaub H E 1999 Sequence - dependent mechanics of single DNA molecules Nat . Struct . Biol . 6 346 [ 36 ] Oesterhelt F , Oesterhelt D , Pfeiffer M , Engel A , Gaub H E and Muller D J 2000 Unfolding pathways of individual bacteriorhodopsins Science 288 143 [ 37 ] Rief M , Oesterhelt F , Heymann B and Gaub H E 1997 Single molecule force spectroscopy on polysaccharides by atomic force microscopy Science 275 1295 [ 38 ] Marszalek P E , Oberhauser A F , Pang Y P and Fernandez J M 1998 Polysaccharide elasticity governed by chair – boat transitions of the glucopyranose ring Nature 396 661 [ 39 ] Dufrˆene Y F , Boonaert C J P , Gerin P A , Asther M and Rouxhet P G 1999 Direct probing of the surface ultrastructure and molecular interactions of dormant and germinating spores of Phanerochaete chrysosporium J . Bacteriol . 181 5350 [ 40 ] Pringle A , Forsdyke J and Rose A 1979 Scanning electron microscope study of Saccharomyces cerevisiae spheroblast formation J . Bacteriol . 140 289 [ 41 ] Koch Y and Rademacher K 1980 Chemical and enzymatic changes in the cell walls of Candida albicans and Saccharomyces cerevisiae by scanning microscopy Can . J . Microbiol . 26 965 [ 42 ] Ahimou F O , Touhami A and Dufrˆene Y F 2003 Real - time imaging of the surface topography of living yeast cells by atomic force microscopy Yeast 20 25 [ 43 ] Burnham N A and Colton R J 1989 Measuring the nanomechanical properties and surfaces forces of materials using an atomic force microscope J . Vac . Sci . Technol . A 7 2906 [ 44 ] Weisenhorn A , Khorsandi M , Kasas S , Gotzos V and Butt H J 1993 Deformation and height anomaly of soft surfaces studied with an AFM Nanotechnology 4 106 [ 45 ] Matzke R , Jacobson K and Radmacher M 2001 Direct , high - resolution measurement of furrow stiffening during division of adherent cells Nat . Cell Biol . 3 607 [ 46 ] DeMarini D J , Adams A E M , Fares H , DeVirgilio C , Valle G , Chuang J S and Pringle J R 1997 A septin - based hierarchy of proteins required for localized deposition of chitin in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell wall J . Cell Biol . 139 75 9