The Fuzzy Front End of Experience Design Abstract The basic idea behind Experience Design approach is that before ideating the solution , you define what experience to design for . This is a critical point in a design process , because the experience goal needs to be appropriate for the target context of use , in line with the brand experience , and meaningful to truly engage users . In the early phases of the experience design process , in the fuzzy front end , there are several sources that can guide experience goal setting . One important way is empathic understanding of the users’ world and stepping into the users’ shoes , but there are also other sources of insight and inspiration for setting the experiential goals such as brand promise , technology and societal trends as well as mere vision of renewal . In this workshop , we aim to collect examples of the fuzzy front end of the experience design process and analyze how the different sources of insight and inspiration influence experience goal setting . Author Keywords Experience design , User experience , UX goals . ACM Classification Keywords H . 1 . 2 User / Machine Systems : Human factors . Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the Owner / Author . Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . NordiCHI ' 14 , Oct 26 - 30 2014 , Helsinki , Finland ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 2542 - 4 / 14 / 10 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2639189 . 2654829 Eija Kaasinen VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland P . O . Box 1300 FI - 33101 Tampere , Finland eija . kaasinen @ vtt . fi Heli Väätäjä Tampere University of Technology P . O . Box 553 FI - 33101 Tampere , Finland heli . vaataja @ tut . fi Hannu Karvonen VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland P . O . Box 1000 FI - 02150 VTT ( Espoo ) , Finland hannu . karvonen @ vtt . fi Yichen Lu Aalto University , School of Arts , Design and Architecture P . O . Box 31000 , 00045 Aalto , Finland yichen . lu @ aalto . fi 797 Topic , Motivation , and Outcome Today experience design is often understood as only the cover - graphics , visual appearance and user interface . These can create delightful aesthetic experiences and remove usability problems . To create great experiences that engage users in the long run requires experience design that is not add - on but built - in . Experience design is about defining the right functionality , the right concept [ 1 ] . Experience design takes the intended experience as the starting point , and defines the product only after defining the experience to design for [ 3 ] . As Desmet and Schifferstein [ 2 ] state , the two important challenges in experience design are 1 . to determine what experience to aim for , and 2 . to design something that is expected to evoke that experience . In this workshop , we focus on the first challenge . In the fuzzy front end of experience design process , we have several alternative sources for gaining insight into determining what experience to aim for . We may also have different , even conflicting viewpoints . With a long tradition of user - centred design , we tend to think that we can find out the wanted experiences by studying users and gaining empathic understanding of the users’ world . However , there are also other sources for gaining insight into defining goals for user experience . Hassenzahl et al . [ 4 ] have chosen six psychological needs as the starting point for experience design . Roto and Rautava [ 8 ] describe how brand promise can guide defining experience goals for all of the company’s products . Hekkert et al . [ 5 ] introduced the Vision in product design approach ( ViP ) , in which first presuppositions of the product are abandoned and then a vision for desirable possibilities is sought , often taking inspiration from other fields . Also advances in technologies and new interaction concepts can provide possibilities for novel kinds of user experiences but they may also introduce threats for user experience . Thinking about these possibilities and threats can trigger new types of experiences [ 6 ] . Finally , Norman and Verganti [ 7 ] recommend socio - cultural studies to identify a breakthrough experience that may lead to radical innovation . The different sources of insight provide several alternatives for experience goals . In the fuzzy front end of the experience design process we should manage to define what experience to aim for and to indicate this as concrete , focused experience goals . The experience goals should manage to indicate how we wish the user to feel in usage situations and beyond . The goals should communicate the targeted feelings to the whole design team so that they can commit to the goals . This workshop is continuation to the NordiCHI ' 12 workshop on ' How to Utilize User Experience Goals in Design ' . We have moved the focus towards the early phases of design , the fuzzy front end . We have learned that finding the right kind of experience goals is not easy , so in this workshop , we will discuss the process of defining the goals and hope to ease this important and challenging task . Based on short papers by participants , we aim to collect examples and experiences of the fuzzy front end of various kinds of experience design processes . We would like to discuss what kinds of approaches have been 798 used to determine the starting point for the experience design process , i . e . , what experience to aim for . We will analyze the cases and learn together what kinds of approaches there are to get from the fuzzy front end to concrete , focused experience goals . By discussing the contributions of the participants , we aim to answer the following questions : 1 . Where can you get insight and inspiration to define what experience to aim for ? 2 . How the information from various sources can be utilized to define the targeted experience ? 3 . In which form should the targeted experience be presented so that it can guide the design process ? Workshop Activities The workshop comprises of three phases . 1 . Position paper : people interested in the workshop are asked to submit a 2 - 6 page position paper that describes their contribution . The papers are blind reviewed by the workshop organizers and external reviewers . The aim is to achieve a balance of different types of design cases with varying types of goal setting . The position papers can describe a specific design case with a description of how the user experience goals emerged , or they can focus on the methodological aspects in identifying and determining the goals . Best papers are chosen to be presented in the workshop . 2 . A pre - workshop task : The participants selected based on their position papers are instructed to complete an advance task as an online questionnaire . The task is related to the question of how the design goals emerged . The organizers of the workshop will analyze the results prior to the workshop , and create a summary to be presented in the workshop . 3 . Activity at the full - day workshop : In the workshop , the results from the pre - workshop task are first presented by the organizers . Selected contributions by the participants are introduced in 10 min presentations . Topics of the presentations and specific questions from the pre - workshop tasks will be discussed and developed further with group work and analysis methods , such as creation of affinity diagrams . The goal of the group work is to identify and discuss the commonalities and differences in the experience goal setting . Outcomes The outcome of the workshop is mutual learning of how to get from the fuzzy front end of experience design to concrete , focused experience goals . If agreed with the participants , we may set up a special interest group to continue discussions after the workshop . At the workshop web site www . vtt . fi / uxgoals w e will share position papers and other information before and after the workshop . Workshop proceedings will be available online with an ISBN . The proceedings will contain ( 1 ) selected position papers , and ( 2 ) the conclusions from the pre - workshop task and workshop 799 activity . For the proceedings , the participants can extend their position papers after the workshop . Acknowledgements The workshop is organized by the User Experience and Usability of Complex Systems ( FIMECC UXUS ) programme by Finnish Metals and Engineering Competence Cluster ( FIMECC ) . The programme is partly funded by Tekes – the Finnish Funding Agency for Technology and Innovation . We wish to thank FIMECC and Tekes as well as the participating companies for their good cooperation . Organizers Dr . Tech Eija Kaasinen is a Principal Scientist at VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland . She has a long experience in human - centred design , user acceptance studies as well as mobile and ubiquitous interaction . Her main research interests are increasing the impact of human viewpoint in the design of future technology and future - orientation in human - driven design . Dr . Sc . Tech . Heli Väätäjä is a researcher at Tampere University of Technology ( Human - Centered Technology ) . Her research interests cover user experience in mobile and ubiquitous HCI , specifically in relation to complex systems and media within work and utilitarian domains . MSc . Hannu Karvonen is a Research Scientist at VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland . His research interests include human factors of complex industrial systems , experience design in industrial settings , trust in technology as well as human factors of transportation systems . MSc . Yichen Lu is a doctoral candidate at Aalto University ( Department of Design ) . Currently , she is doing research on experience design in Finnish metal and engineering industry with a focus on design methods for concept generation . References [ 1 ] Buxton , B . Sketching User Experiences . Getting the Design Right and the Right Design . Morgan Kaufmann , 2010 . [ 2 ] Desmet , P . M . A . , and Schifferstein , H . N . J . ( eds ) From Floating Wheelchairs to Mobile Car Parks : a Collection of 35 Experience - Driven Design Projects . Eleven Publishers , Den Haag , NL , 2011 . [ 3 ] Hassenzahl , M . Experience Design – Technology for All the Right Reasons . Morgan & Claypool , 2010 . [ 4 ] Hassenzahl , M . , Eckoldt , K . , Diefenbach , S . , Laschke , M . , Lenz , E . , and Kim , J . Designing moments of meaning and pleasure . Experience design and happiness . International Journal of Design 7 , 3 ( 2013 ) , 21 - 31 . [ 5 ] Hekkert , P . , and van Dijk , M . Vision in Product Design : Handbook for innovators . BIS Publishers , 2011 . [ 6 ] Karvonen , H . , Koskinen , H . , and Haggrén , J . Defining User Experience Goals for Future Concepts . A Case Study . In : Väätäjä , H . , Olsson , T . , Roto , V . , and Savioja , P . ( Eds . ) , NordiCHI2012 UX Goals 2012 Workshop proceedings , TUT Publication series ( 2012 ) , 14 - 19 . http : / / URN . fi / URN : ISBN : 978 - 952 - 15 - 2955 - 9 [ 7 ] Norman , D . A . , and Verganti , R . Incremental and Radical Innovation : Design Research vs . Technology and Meaning Change . Design Issues 30 , 1 ( 2014 ) , 78 - 96 . [ 8 ] Roto , V . , and Rautava , M . User experience elements and brand promise . Proc . International Engagability & Design Conference , in conjunction with NordiCHI ( 2008 ) . 800