Tangible ‘Design Non - Proposals’ for Relationship Building in Community - Based Co - Design Projects Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor School of Computing , Australian National University , Canberra , ACT , Australia jennyfer . taylor @ anu . edu . au Wujal Wujal Aboriginal Shire Council Wujal Wujal Aboriginal Shire Council , Wujal Wujal , QLD , Australia info @ wujal . qld . gov . au Alessandro Soro School of Computer Science , Queensland University of Technology , Brisbane QLD , Australia , alessandro . soro @ qut . edu . au Margot Brereton School of Computer Science , Queensland University of Technology , Brisbane QLD , Australia m . brereton @ qut . edu . au ABSTRACT We present tangible design non - proposals as a technique for estab - lishing and growing relationships in community - based co - design projects , particularly with Australian Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities . Prior tangible design products from our re - search group were used to introduce our capabilities and interests and as tangible provocations to understand potential community interests for co - design . We describe how the non - proposals sup - ported initial conversations and imagination , forming relationships , formalising an official relationship , understanding the scope and scale of community aspirations , artful appropriation , and how they morphed into a research prototype aligned to the community’s needs and vision . We describe the ways that tangibles supported a mutual sensitisation process and realising project limits , bounds and misalignments . We contribute a framework for design non - proposals with both general characteristics and dimensions salient to our collaborative work with Aboriginal communities . We evalu - ate our own design non - proposals using the framework to present implications for seeding co - design processes . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Participatory design . KEYWORDS Relationship building , rapport , engagement , Aboriginal , community - based participatory design ACM Reference Format : Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor , Wujal Wujal Aboriginal Shire Council , Alessan - dro Soro , and Margot Brereton . 2022 . Tangible ‘Design Non - Proposals’ for RelationshipBuildinginCommunity - BasedCo - DesignProjects . In Participa - toryDesignConference2022 : Volume1 ( PDC2022Vol . 1 ) , August19 – September 01 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 12 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3536169 . 3537780 Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . PDC 2022 Vol . 1 , August 19 – September 01 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom © 2022 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9388 - 1 / 22 / 08 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3536169 . 3537780 1 INTRODUCTION We acknowledge the Kuku Yalanji , Kuku Nyungul and Jalunji peoples who are the Traditional Owners and Custodians of the Wujal Wujal area [ 1 ] . The success of participatory design ( PD ) projects depends on designers establishing and maintaining strong relationships at per - sonal and organisational levels with the project partners to enable ‘genuine participation’ and engagement in design [ 2 , 3 ] . Relation - ships can be necessary precursors to design , develop through co - design practice , be the end goal of co - design [ 4 , 5 ] , and represent the longer - term legacy of a co - design project [ 6 ] . For community - based participatory - design projects ( CBPD ) , there is a need to build relationships with individuals and groups within the community , negotiate protocols for working together , and identify possible design outcomes and other associated benefits for communities before formal design activities can begin . Respectful relationships are key to ethical research [ 7 , 8 ] in CBPD projects with Australian Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities to ensure that de - sign practices and products respect Lore and community protocols , and promote cultural continuity in light of ongoing colonisation . However , initial relationship building is often under - reported in human - computer interaction ( HCI ) and ( PD ) literature [ 9 ] , includ - ing declaring the designers’ intent [ 10 ] , and there are few explicit methods in the PD toolbox for relationship building . Design artefacts have played an important role in facilitating relationship building activities for CBPD projects and mutual sen - sitisation to the design endeavour . Existing designs have been used to communicate possible interactions with technology [ 11 , 12 ] , fa - cilitate community introductions for projects involving emerging technologies [ 13 ] , and practice reciprocity through gift giving [ 14 ] . Methods in HCI and PD such as technology probes [ 15 ] , cross - dialogical probes [ 16 ] , prototypes [ 17 ] , and provotypes [ 18 ] have engaged fully - functioning existing designs in contextual research and collaborative design exploration . Soro et al . [ 16 ] and Madden and colleagues’ work [ 19 ] in particular has sought to reposition probe methods for dialogical work in - situ with Aboriginal commu - nities . However , these approaches have not addressed the role of fully functioning designs in the initial relationship building phase of CBPD before project aims are established and formal design activities begin . We present design non - proposals , a novel technique to support relationship building in CBPD , developed through a project to grow 63 PDC 2022 Vol . 1 , August 19 – September 01 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor et al . everyday use of the Kuku Yalanji Aboriginal language with Wujal Wujal Aboriginal Shire Council ( WWASC ) and community . Design non - proposals are neither intended to be proposed outcomes of the project , nor interimsteps towards them , imposed by thedesign team . They are examples of prior projects from other contexts that serve as slightly misaligned provocations to help begin a dialogue about ‘matters of concern’ [ 20 ] in the current context . They also introduce the design researchers to the community in a tangible way through their prior work . We introduced three existing designs developed by our research group to the community as ‘design non - proposals’ which offered a light touch approach to facilitating dialogue and engagement , and helped to identify project limits , bounds and mis - alignments . The design non - proposals sparked initial conversations and imagination , catalysed organisational partnerships by making explicit the scope and scale of community aspirations , and both conceptually and materially seeded an iterative co - design process . We contribute : a ) an empirical account and reflections on the use of design non - proposals in our relationship building activities with the community ; b ) a framework that characterises design non - proposals as a technique for CPBD with Aboriginal communities and across contexts ; and c ) an evaluation of our design non - proposals against the framework dimensions to identify resonances and dissonances with community practices and settings . 2 RELATED WORK 2 . 1 Relationship building in participatory design literature Relationships are integral to co - design projects at all stages , from their initial conception to the evaluation and sustainability of co - designed technologies . Relationships can shape the nature and qual - ity of design research [ 21 ] , including influencing researcher access to participants and topics [ 22 ] . Relationship building can inform the design process through the sensitisation of designers to partici - pants’ lives and contexts , and of participants to design practice and what “being a designer” entails [ 4 ] . This can take place through planned meetings and formal processes , as well as “non - planned community driven activities” that might be undervalued by a de - sign team and research community if they not directly advance the design work [ 23 , p . 5 - 6 ] . Relationship building and maintenance can present challenges for everyone involved , particularly for long - term situated design work with communities , with tensions in maintain - ing boundaries between researchers and participants [ 24 ] . Given the centrality of relationships to co - design , PD scholarship has argued that skills such as “relational expertise” [ 5 ] and “relational auton - omy” [ 25 ] are necessary for designers to establish relationships and enter into the “network of working relations” [ 26 ] within commu - nities . Yet , there are few explicit relationship building methods or techniques within the co - design toolbox . Additionally , Dearden and Rizvi argue that initial “project establishment” activities such as developing project objectives and structures are under - addressed in PD literature , and relationship - building “examined in depth only in special cases” [ 9 , p . 84 ] . Accounts of past HCI and PD projects offer best practice ap - proaches to relationship building for CBPD . CBPD differs from other PD projects as it involves relationship building at both personal and organisational levels , establishing longer - term partnerships , and negotiating benefits for community members beyond technological outputs , such as employment and scholarships [ 27 , p . 1353 ] . Brere - ton and colleagues advocate for design approaches that privilege “reciprocity and engagement” in contrast to extractive rapid ethno - graphic approaches in CBPD with Aboriginal communities [ 28 ] , where acts such as fixing computers and iPads established rapport and sensitised the researchers to the setting [ 28 ] . Schwartzman and Parikh’s co - design with a coffee - cooperative in Guatemala [ 29 ] details strategies such as having a local researcher who speaks the community’s language , negotiating roles and expectations upfront , and the need for designers to “show they are committed and capa - ble” [ 29 , p . 1847 ] . This resonates with insights for building CBPD projects in Africa such as the ability for local researchers to fa - cilitate relationship building , development of trust through social activities , and value of acts of reciprocity , among others [ 30 ] . While relationship building and maintenance is an ongoing and dynamic process , measures of success include sustained use of co - designed artefacts beyond the project period [ 2 ] , the research team “being participated” into the community’s practices and values [ 23 ] , and a lack of surprise when the researchers return yet again for fieldwork in the community [ 31 ] . This work foregrounds the need for rela - tionship building techniques to account for interpersonal , material , activity , and contextual factors , as well as the sensibilities of the design team . Relationship building requires particular approaches when work - ing with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities in a post - colonial context [ 32 ] . Researchers must adhere to ethical guidelines [ 7 , 8 ] and values such as “respect” , “equity” , “reciprocity” , “spirit and integrity” , “cultural continuity” , and “responsibility” [ 8 ] across all activities including relationship building . Past design projects with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities [ 33 – 37 ] and more general guidelines from government ( e . g . , [ 7 , 8 , 38 ] ) , re - search bodies ( e . g . , [ 39 ] ) , and industry [ 40 , 41 ] can inform relation - ship building for CBPD . In making initial introductions , Aboriginal Councils can be an appropriate first point of contact [ 40 ] as they work within both Western and Aboriginal governance systems [ 38 , 40 ] . PD researchers have made connections with community sites through their own personal contacts [ 33 , p . 2 - 3 ] , or through their work with the same community on other projects [ 42 ] . PD work has highlighted the need to spend time with people in com - munity and on Country for sensitization and growing relation - ships [ 33 , 42 , 43 ] , with activities including tours of the area [ 33 ] , meetings with participants at the university and on Country [ 43 ] , yarning over cups of tea [ 42 ] , presenting to the Council [ 42 ] , and undertaking cultural courses [ 44 ] . Design researchers have also acknowledged the challenges of spending a sufficient amount of time in community to establish and maintain strong relationships within design project timeframes [ 33 ] . There is also limited discus - sion in PD work with Aboriginal communities on the use of design artefacts in these initial conversations prior to project partnerships and aims being established . In the next section , we consider how design artefacts have facili - tated relationship building and oriented design enquiry in empirical and methodological work . 64 Tangible ‘Design Non - Proposals’ for Relationship Building in Community - Based Co - Design Projects PDC 2022 Vol . 1 , August 19 – September 01 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom 2 . 2 Role of design artefacts in establishing rapport and building relationships for CBPD Design artefacts have explicitly been used in HCI and PD projects for relationship building and initiating design activities in numer - ous ways , though they have not been articulated as design methods or techniques in themselves . Existing prototypes have been in - troduced to communicate a key interaction concept or idea . For example , the Messaging Kettle prototype [ 45 ] was used to show the idea of connecting through everyday things in co - design fiction workshops with older adults in Australia [ 46 ] , and in co - design for ecological work with Indigenous communities in Bhutan [ 12 ] . Johnson and colleagues also used existing designs to illustrate the idea of “civic technologies” to communities in the UK [ 11 , p . 4 ] . Wearing VR gear during the “community introductions” helped familiarise people with the technology and recruit participants in Rodil and colleagues’ virtual reality work with the San people in Namibia [ 13 ] . For Jacobs and Zoran’s co - design with Ju / ’Hoansi artisans , showing both research and personal artefacts that they had made themselves at the beginning built rapport , as did gifting design artefacts , crafting tools , and materials [ 14 ] . Unlike electronic kits [ 47 ] , crafting materials in Bags of Stuff [ 48 ] , and cultural probe activities [ 49 ] , these examples involve the use of ‘finished’ designs rather than base materials and components . In this way , existing designs were able to concretely express interaction and experience design possibilities , illustrate the research team’s previous work and relationship with other groups , and show possible participant experiences in , and outcomes of , CBPD projects . Fully functioning designs are implicated in a range of material design methods . Technology probes extend the cultural probe [ 49 ] method to actively involve households in co - creating new tech - nologies for family communication , and observe situated uses of the probes in the home [ 15 ] . Technology probes go beyond simply communicating a design idea to eliciting interactions with it , to both field test from an engineering perspective and elicit new uses and technology ideas from users . These were deployed with indi - vidual families to test ideas rather than for relationship building in CBPD . Provotypes [ 18 ] use “provocative prototypes” as breach - ing experiments [ 50 , 51 ] to support organisational change by pro - ductively surfacing tensions to promote dialogue [ 18 ] . While the multi - stakeholder lens is relevant to CBPD , the provotypes in that project were designed and deployed following field research , rather than for relationship building towards it . In the Australian Abo - riginal context , the cross - dialogical probes method seeks to close geographical distance and cultural divide between researchers and participants through the use of a fully - functioning prototype for dialogical in - situ design practices [ 16 ] . A digital community no - ticeboard prototype facilitated relationship building by introducing the researchers to settings and practices in which the noticeboard could be used , and featured in hands - on design activities [ 16 ] . This took place after initial agreements had been established with the Council , and the noticeboard was a high - fidelity prototype of the end system that followed earlier design work [ 16 ] . While these methods , some of which have been developed through projects with Aboriginal communities , use existing de - sign products early in the design process to differing ends , they are not necessarily applicable to initial relationship building for CBPD . Some probe methods have focused on building rapport [ 49 ] and forming connections e . g . , using “Getting - to - know - you - probes” [ 52 ] . Such examples focus on relationship building with individuals from within a community , rather than taking a whole - of - community approach through partnerships with local government agencies , who may have established protocols for partnering with them on research projects . Probe methods that are primarily used for data collection [ 53 ] may not be appropriate for work with Aboriginal communities prior to relationships being built and institutional agreements being put in place establishing an ethical framework for the research , including protection for Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property ( ICIP ) . Similarly , the introduction of provo - types that are contentious at early stages has the potential to curtail relationship building and potentially harm community relations if not respectful of Lore and protocols . Existing designs , if imposed by the design team on communities as intended project outcomes , can perpetuate power imbalances and contribute to processes of colonisation [ 32 ] . Prior CBPD with Aboriginal communities has typically initiated design through open - ended discussions [ 33 , 36 , 37 , 42 ] , or by ‘growing’ the community’s own existing print and digital materials [ 44 ] , rather than from func - tional designs . Yet , the broader literature suggests other possible uses for existing designs in relationship building activities to com - municate design ideas and reveal values , preoccupations , resources , and constraints . We respond to the following research question : What technique ( s ) involving design prototypes can enable initial relationship building for CBPD projects with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities ? 3 OVERVIEW OF THE RESEARCH SETTING AND PROJECT The design non - proposals technique was developed through doc - toral research as part of an ongoing CBPD project between design researchers from Queensland University of Technology , and the Wujal Wujal community in Far North Queensland , Australia . The Traditional Owners of this area are the Kuku Yalanji , Kuku Nyun - gul and Jalunji peoples who speak the Kuku Yalanji language , and some speak the Kuku Nyungul dialect [ 54 ] . The township of approx - imately 650 people [ 55 ] is located in the rainforest near beaches and coral reefs . WWASC is the local government body and administers a range of services including the Aged Care Centre , Arts Centre , Indigenous Knowledge Centre ( IKC ) , Kindergarten , and local com - munity radio [ 1 ] . On the research team , Taylor is a white , female Australian with a background in anthropology and information technology , who completed this work through their doctoral re - search in HCI from 2017 - 2020 . Soro is an immigrant to Australia from Italy and is a HCI researcher . They have a background in computer science and an interest in supporting culture and lan - guage that stems from their own passion for their original regional language and heritage . Brereton is a non - Indigenous professor in electrical engineering and HCI , who has led co - design projects with diverse communities . The community invited the research team to partner with them on a project to co - design tangible and social technologies to sup - port the intergenerational transmission and everyday use of Kuku 65 PDC 2022 Vol . 1 , August 19 – September 01 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor et al . Figure 1 : The Ambient Birdhouse prototype [ 58 ] , Digital Community Noticeboard [ 35 ] , and MyWord [ 59 ] designs Yalanji by young children and their families [ 54 ] . While Elders in the community proudly know and speak Kuku Yalanji fluently , colonisation and missionisation has impacted language vitality , and the Elders are concerned about language shift from Kuku Yalanji to English among younger generations . The Elders were interested in using technologies to augment their language revitalisation efforts . The design research involved immersive fieldwork over several years using the following methods : 1 ) interviews with adult lan - guage speakers [ 56 ] to understand current language practices and use of technology in language activities ; 2 ) Language Reference Group ( LRG ) meetings and co - design workshops with Elders from the three dialect groups to facilitate iterative co - design ; and 3 ) pro - totype demonstrations and trials with families and in community settings . The resulting design is a talking soft toy that young chil - dren and their families can use to create and experience their own language recordings through playful and embodied interactions [ 57 ] . The relationship building process began in October 2017 , when we first contacted WWASC based on a personal recommendation from a previous project . The research team arranged a two - day visit to the community in conjunction with a nearby conference to meet with Council staff and community members to gauge their interest in working together . We brought three existing designs to show examples of the kinds of projects that we had worked on : 1 ) the tangible Ambient Birdhouse for teaching bird names and calls to urban citizens [ 58 ] ; 2 ) the MyWord personalised bilingual dictionary application [ 59 ] ; and 3 ) a generic version of the Digital Community Noticeboard system [ 35 ] ( Figure 1 ) . From this visit , WWASC invited us to submit a Letter of Intent to partner with them on CBPD , and we received WWASC approval to continue with the relationship building process . Relationship building towards the formal establishment of the project subsequently took place through three additional visits from November 2017 – July 2018 , ranging from 1 - 4 weeks in duration , consisting of strategic / administrative , cultural , and design project activities . This research project was conducted with Queensland University of Technology Human Research Ethics committee approval ( Pro - tocol 1800000050 ) . While some of the early relationship building activities and meetings in the initial trips were not formal ‘research’ activities , the content is based on work published in Taylor’s PhD thesis that was reviewed by WWASC and Elders from the LRG for approval prior to publication , and the Council are co - authors of this publication . We use the terminology “Aboriginal” and Indigenous in similar ways to [ 60 ] . 4 FINDINGS 4 . 1 The concept of design non - proposals We propose design non - proposals as a technique with a tool [ 61 , p . 117 ] for building relationships for CBPD , with particular rele - vance to work with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communi - ties . The technique involves demonstrating existing designs ( e . g . , high - fidelity prototypes or final products ) created by the research team to build rapport , get to know each other , and promote dia - logue at both a strategic and interaction design level during the initial stages of a project . Design non - proposals illustrate possible avenues for technology design and provide a light - touch approach to identifying design considerations by discussing with aspects of the existing designs are interesting and applicable ( or not ) to com - munity members and design settings . They are a tangible portfolio representing the values , expertise , and politics of the design team , and as such , should be designs that the team has created themselves . We named the technique design non - proposals to draw attention to a central concern that distinguishes it from other methods : the design non - proposals are not intended to be representations of the final products or interim steps towards them , nor are they intended to impose a framing of the design space on the community . Rather , the technique is intended to support initial relationship building and engagement across the community before funding applications and formal agreements are put in place , and facilitate the pragmat - ics of getting started in a design process . There are many things that can be ‘designed’ in a co - design project including technologies , practices , theories , relationships , and spaces . The non does not in - dicate an absence of a proposal , but a commitment to shaping the project around the community’s own agenda and not prescribing a particular design from the outset . This is important given the socio - political context , where Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander interests and voices have been systematically excluded from policy decisions [ 62 ] . The name is also intended to resonate with anti - solutionist approaches [ 63 ] , where language revitalisation is not approached as a ‘problem to be solved’ , and where digital tech - nologies do not necessarily represent the ‘response’ . The technique 66 Tangible ‘Design Non - Proposals’ for Relationship Building in Community - Based Co - Design Projects PDC 2022 Vol . 1 , August 19 – September 01 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom also entails a commitment to exploring interactions within a de - sign space without limiting the enquiry to a particular kind of technology too early . The Ambient Birdhouse [ 58 ] was the key design non - proposal for our work with Wujal Wujal . The Ambient Birdhouse is a tangible user interface developed by Queensland University of Technology to encourage people living in urban areas to engage with nature by learning the names and calls of birds in their local area . The Ambient Birdhouse plays videos of birds calling subtitled with its name every 15 minutes in an ambient mode akin to a cuckoo clock . Users can also directly interact with the Ambient Birdhouse by tapping coloured RFID cards decorated with bird photographs and information to play the corresponding bird video . The Ambient Birdhouse runs on a Raspberry Pi®attached to a speaker , screen , and RFID reader , housed in a laser - cut wooden frame . The hardware and software components were later used as a kit to prototype new design ideas in the early stages of design work ; this reflected a desire to make use of materials on hand in field rather than deliberate design evolution from the non - proposal . In the following sections , we reflect on the positioning of the Am - bient Birdhouse design non - proposals in key relationship - building activities and milestones , presented roughly in chronological order . 4 . 2 Initial conversations with the Council 4 . 2 . 1 Activity . During the first few visits to Wujal Wujal , we demonstrated the Ambient Birdhouse , Digital Noticeboard , and MyWord as design non - proposals in discussions with Council staff to negotiate a shared vision of the project outcomes . During the first visits , we met with Council staff and other community mem - bers in the IKC that houses the library , historical materials such as photographs and language documentation , and hosts robot - ics and IT classes . We did not arrive in community with a pre - determined project , but instead expressed a broad research interest in co - designing technologies to support Indigenous languages and cultural practices . We explained the functionality of the three pro - totypes and shared the stories of their design , asking for feedback on whether technology explorations of this kind could work well for Kuku Yalanji . The Council staff expressed a desire to undertake projects with long - term “generational impact” that would provide workforce development opportunities in Science , Technology , En - gineering , and Maths ( STEM ) by engaging as “capacity partners” rather than passive recipients of technology , and for designs to integrate with their existing physical infrastructure such as the community Wi - Fi mesh . An early vision of the project outcomes articulated through these discussions was to incorporate speech recognition and synthesis into the design to safeguard against language shift and loss through a conversational user interface . Developing a mobile app could leverage the community’s existing ownership and use of mobile phones , with ownership of computers being less widespread . Our design team’s view was that it was not feasible to design a tech - nology with speech and language processing with the resources and expertise available for the project . We also perceived an op - portunity for ongoing community production and maintenance of a tangible technology with the low - cost electronics such as those used in the Ambient Birdhouse , and for local people to be involved in designing both the form and functionality . Through an iterative participatory re - design process with the LRG using the Ambient Birdhouse components in different ways and forms , a tangible soft toy design emerged which integrated with mobile phones through its local web application . 4 . 2 . 2 Reflection . All three design non - proposals assisted with ne - gotiating early visions for the project by sharing our interests and values , articulating the expertise and resources that each party could contribute to the project , and identifying mismatching ex - pectations . The early conversations were framed by the language of local government in managing physical and cultural assets , se - curity , economic development , and community service provision , and illustrated how such a project could connect with the Council’s strategic priorities . The design non - proposals enabled nuanced dis - cussions about ways of bringing Kuku Yalanji together with digital and tangible technology designs . The tangibility of the Ambient Birdhouse and its connection to Country held greater appeal than either of the other existing designs , despite them being more os - tensibly about language . A limitation of this approach was that the Ambient Birdhouse may have constrained people’s understanding of what tangible designs can offer in terms of integrating physical and digital interfaces together and promoting ongoing design and community ownership , issues that we discussed further with the LRG . 4 . 3 Developing official agreements 4 . 3 . 1 Activity . The next phase of our community visits and conver - sations with WWASC involved putting in place official agreements such as the Memorandum of Understanding ( MoU ) and Human Research Ethics Protocol . The focus of the MoU was on outlining mutually acceptable protocols for working together , and covered aspects of the project such as confidentiality , intellectual property , project resourcing , cultural guidance , the need to respect social protocols and Lore , and procedures for media release and publi - cation about the project . Logistical aspects were also addressed such as staff time , physical assets , funding , accommodation , vehi - cles , workspaces , and mentoring . The design non - proposals demon - strated technology outcomes from prior projects but did not repre - sent the full project scope , or other outcomes that can be achieved in CBPD beyond the technology itself . The vision captured in the final MoU document was “to preserve and increase use of the com - munity’s traditional language among youth through technologies , enhance connection to culture and country through technologies , and increase engagement in Science Technology Engineering Maths ( STEM ) ” [ 54 ] . The design non - proposal aided the development of the human research ethics protocol in working with WWASC to identifying possible community settings in which to conduct the research . Council - operated facilities such as the IKC , Home and Community Care Centre and the Kindergarten were mentioned as possibilities , and we visited these organisations to introduce ourselves with the design non - proposal . After the earliest meetings , only the Ambient Birdhouse design non - proposal was used as it had garnered the most interest from the community and could easily be demonstrated in various settings . In the IKC , we set up the Ambient Birdhouse for several weeks between visits in response to community interest , 67 PDC 2022 Vol . 1 , August 19 – September 01 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor et al . and we were able to observe people’s experiences with and use of the prototype while we were present , as well as on returning after a period . Yet , for designs to function well in such settings , they need local champions to maintain and update their content , in ways that add value to peoples’ work . It was difficult to find a good fit with the practices of the IKC that would enable the Birdhouse to continue to be updated through the existing practices of its staff . We subsequently worked with the LRG to identify the most appropriate research settings for a design created specifically for young children and their families . The design non - proposal also sensitized the community to the work of HCI designers , which was important in terms of seeking informed consent from participants . The community had previously worked with researchers from other disciplines such as anthropol - ogy and linguistics , whose work involved generating audio and video recordings of language and stories . These previous experi - ences gave rise to expectations about how ‘researchers’ of any aca - demic discipline carry out their work , and what language projects involve . Since there are few design researchers or practitioners engaging in CBPD with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander com - munities , there is understandably little public awareness of what design research entails in terms of methods , knowledge contri - butions , and outputs . While the design non - proposal itself was a tangible expression of design practices such as prototyping and iterative design , we also showed community members examples of HCI theses and academic publications to illustrate how participant voices are portrayed , and where the public can access these research papers online . 4 . 3 . 2 Reflection . The design non - proposal communicated the work of HCI researchers and intended outcomes of this work as a CBPD project , with the primary focus being on designing new ways for people to experience their own language recordings , rather than the research team creating the language recordings of community members . While the design non - proposals assisted us in articulat - ing which aspects of the project each party considered fixed and open to negotiation , the Memorandum of Understanding principles focussed on the partnership and collaboration rather than specifics of the design outcomes . The design non - proposals also held ex - pressive power in conveying information to the community about the design team . For example , the Ambient Birdhouse showed our technical strengths and our interests and values with respect to CBPD , accompanying our verbal discussions . 4 . 4 Demonstrating the design non - proposal in community 4 . 4 . 1 Activity . Alongside these strategic discussions , we informally demonstrated the Ambient Birdhouse at the different community sites . The Elders were particularly enthusiastic about the Ambient Birdhouse as a potential design to teach children the names of local birds in Kuku Yalanji and explain the cultural significance of bird calls . We put some additional local bird videos on Wujal Wujal subtitled with their names from the Kuku Yalanji dictionary to pro - vide discussion points by connecting to place . Children found the wooden Birdhouse frame and card tapping interaction particularly exciting . The kinds of questions that we asked to build rapport dur - ing these early interactions included : What local birds would we put on here for Wujal Wujal ? In which settings in community could this design be used ? What kinds of content could be played on the Birdhouse to reflect the local environment ? In which community activities could this design be used ? . The design non - proposal assisted with convening the LRG . The LRG comprised of 15 Elders with representatives from the three dialect groups , though not every Elder attended each meeting . The Elders gave advice , feedback , and input into the iterative co - design process during 6 LRG focus group sessions that were recorded and transcribed for inclusion in the analysis . The Elders were initially invited to an information session prior to the first formal LRG meeting to introduce the preliminary project aims and the role of the group . Taylor delivered the invitations to the LRG members at their home or in the community . In some cases , the research team set up the Ambient Birdhouse on people’s verandas so that they could experience the design , as a way of communicating about the project and inviting them to be involved . At the information session that was co - chaired by Taylor and the Council CEO , where we also gave an Ambient Birdhouse demonstration to those attending who had not already seen it . Once the LRG was established following the development of the official agreements , the Elders identified at an early meeting a list of local birds and their corresponding names in Kuku Yalanji , to pop - ulate the prototype with content reflecting the local environment . Through this process we were able to quickly identify issues relat - ing to the use of the Ambient Birdhouse in Wujal Wujal including : the complexities in some cases of finding the correct translations of bird names between English and Kuku Yalanji ; difficulties in locating and filming high quality videos of birds that are high up and far away on mobile phone cameras ; and a mismatch between learning about birds indoors on the Ambient Birdhouse when this intergenerational language transmission best takes place outside on Country in the birds’ natural habitats . 4 . 4 . 2 Reflection . Bringing the design non - proposal from an urban setting to a remote community and observing situated interactions with the prototype offered up opportunities to discuss what it would mean to recontextualize the design to the local context . The Am - bient Birdhouse was initially designed to foster engagement with nature among city residents who may not spend much time out - side engaging with birdlife , while in Wujal Wujal , many language activities and cultural practices take place in nature ‘on Country’ . Talking through the form and functionality of the Ambient Bird - house brought to the fore certain questions of community capacity - strengthening and sustainability : How could a design such as the Ambient Birdhouse integrate with the community Wi - Fi mesh , and existing device ecologies such as people’s mobile phones ? How could community members produce and maintain such a device themselves in community , and at what cost ? What kind of ongoing involvement would be needed from the university ? The design non - proposal reified possible interaction designs and design practices without prescribing them . 4 . 5 Seeding the iterative co - design process 4 . 5 . 1 Activity . The Ambient Birdhouse hardware and software components also became a prototyping kit in the field that facil - itated the creation of new tangible prototypes in - situ with the 68 Tangible ‘Design Non - Proposals’ for Relationship Building in Community - Based Co - Design Projects PDC 2022 Vol . 1 , August 19 – September 01 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom resources on hand . While the Ambient Birdhouse design resonated with the community , its form also gave the appearance of being ‘fin - ished’ and ready for deployment , rather than a preliminary design idea that was open to being changed or replaced entirely . Through discussions with the Language Reference Group , we also identified that games and play might pique young people’s interests in using a technology for Kuku Yalanji . Using the Birdhouse components , Taylor reassembled the parts into the first iteration of the design , a ‘talking language box’ , with the elements rehoused in an ‘unfin - ished’ cardboard box frame . The research team adapted the python scripts running on the Birdhouse to trial new interactions with the RFID cards , such as programming quiz questions about animals and kinship that people could ‘respond’ to by tapping the corresponding cards . The design non - proposal materials subsequently morphed into several other interim designs before eventually becoming the final talking soft toy design [ 54 ] . 4 . 5 . 2 Reflection . The design non - proposal served as a primer and a seed for an iterative co - design process . Since the LRG members did not have prior experience with designing technologies , the de - sign non - proposal offered a way of productively constraining the design conversation to find a place ‘to start’ . The fact that the design non - proposal form and content were both flexible made it easy to mock - up other design ideas or variations , and collaboratively ex - plore different ways of bringing language and technology together . The Language Reference Group specified their vision for how the iterative design process would unfold - that the designers would bring ideas to the Elders for their advice and input and work further with the community before bringing back the next version to show . This afforded the designers a high degree of influence over ideation and prototyping and working from the design non - proposal as a co - design kit may have oriented the design practice in ways that represented the strengths of the design team and precluded other possible alternatives . 5 DISCUSSION 5 . 1 A conceptual framework for design non - proposals 5 . 1 . 1 Overview of the framework . We advance design non - proposals as a novel technique with a tool [ 61 ] for relationship building in CBPD , particularly at the initial stages of networking and establishing agreements before the formal design research can begin . We present non - proposals as a technique rather than a method , as it addresses a specific phase of the design process rather than “a coherent set of organising principles and general guide - lines for how to carry out a design process from start to finish” [ 61 , p . 118 ] . We offer a framework for design non - proposals ( Figure 2 ) identifying key aspects of the existing designs that either garnered interest from the community or failed to gain traction . We identify general dimensions of design non - proposals that are applicable across contexts : illustrative , adaptable , expressive , relevant , and open . We also propose dimensions that have been particularly rele - vant to our own CBPD with Aboriginal Peoples : communal , fitting , available , situated , and robust . Given the diversity of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples and languages in Australia , the technique itself and framework dimensions may be more relevant to working with some communities than others . The intent and sensibilities of designers in enacting the design non - proposals technique also influences its effectiveness for rela - tionship building and distinguishes it from other approaches such as probes and prototypes . These aspects depend on the specific design context and are too multi - dimensional and nuanced to be ad - equately distilled into the framework . Two cross - cutting concerns are that : 1 ) design non - proposals are not intended to be finished products or a design ‘solution’ for that community ; and 2 ) design non - proposals are not intended to facilitate in - depth data collec - tion before relationships are built and protocols put in place . The National Health and Medical Research Council ( NHMRC ) values [ 8 ] mentioned earlier provide a useful guidance for how to op - erationalise the technique for work with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities . For example , design non - proposals that can be situated within local language practices and Country in collaboration with Elders may demonstrate respect and promote cultural continuity . Reciprocity might entail leaving the design non - proposals for communities to use and keep , rather than intro - ducing them only to take them away again . These human elements direct relationship - building activities but are also interrogated and assessed through them . In the following sections , we elaborate further on the framework dimensions and connect them to theoretical perspectives in design research and the “fundamental aspects of participatory design” in [ 64 , p . 89 ] . 5 . 1 . 2 General dimensions . Design non - proposals are prototypes and products with enough resolution to be illustrative of a particu - lar set of interactions or ideas , to serve as a conversational starting point for dialogically exploring the relationship between this idea and community practices and concerns within local settings . Illus - trative design non - proposals can strengthen participant influence in the design process [ 64 ] by showing what is possible with tech - nology , and facilitate mutual learning [ 3 ] about which aspects of the idea or interactions work ( or not ) in community . Design non - proposals are adaptable and can be moved around between community settings , with flexible form content that can be extended to situate it within the local context . They can support a range of different activities , which creates opportunities to connect with various individuals and groups , and develop situated design practices with the community [ 23 ] . Design non - proposals can serve as boundary objects [ 65 ] that afford “interpretive flexibility” while maintaining the qualities that make it an exemplar of the original design concept . Design non - proposals are expressive in that they communicate the values , interests , skills , and ideas of the design team , as well as telling the story of the co - design projects that came before . Design non - proposals therefore need to be designs that the research team has developed themselves to express the designers’ “personal poli - tics” [ 10 ] . There is an interesting tension between what the design non - proposal embodies as a standalone artefact [ 66 ] , and how much of this story is conveyed in conversation using non - proposals as props . Design non - proposals are relevant to different groups within the community , particularly in designing for language and cultural 69 PDC 2022 Vol . 1 , August 19 – September 01 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor et al . Figure 2 : A framework for design non - proposals transmission , where intergenerational relationships and social in - teractions are vital . Community members as “experts in their own lives” [ 64 ] are best placed to identify the relevance of design non - proposals to their lives and situations . Design non - proposals are open questions , seeds , and provoca - tions rather than a finished product for the community . However , the community might decide that the design non - proposal suits them well and they wish to continue with using it , even if it does not fit within the proposed aims of the new project . Tangible technolo - gies present interesting opportunities for engagement as people can be involved in the design and implementation of the hardware , software , and tangible form , unlike primarily digital technologies such as mobile apps . 5 . 1 . 3 Dimensions for co - design with Aboriginal communities . Community - based co - design involves balancing the interests of individual participants with community goals and strategic priori - ties of the organisational partners . Communal designs can be set up and demonstrated in community settings , as researchers may not have access to private homes before relationships are built , and seek to strengthen community relations and connectedness [ 56 ] . Design non - proposals demonstrate how new technologies can fit with local languages , Indigenous Knowledges , social practices and protocols , and device ecologies . Design non - proposals should be introduced in settings where there is a natural fit , and not forced into settings or practices ( e . g . , the ‘Welcome to Country’ ) where they would not be welcome . Design non - proposals may also find fit when they promote cultural continuity [ 8 ] and can be used by the community in their own activities to care for culture and Country . Design non - proposals are available for the community to keep and use straight away ( if they wish to ) and stable enough to be reliably deployed . If design non - proposals are set up for community use between field visits , this can also give people space and time to experiment and build confidence in using the design non - proposal , enhancing their influence over the subsequent design direction [ 64 ] through “productive participation” [ 67 ] in co - design activities . Design non - proposals are more likely to be relevant if they can be situated in the local environment and connect to place . The Ambient Birdhouse was populated with seed content of common [ City ] birds , some of which inhabit the Wujal Wujal area ( e . g . , magpies ) , and some of which do not . The Birdhouse prototype elicited ideas about what local birds could be incorporated though situated design activities with the Language Reference Group . The design non - proposals are robust enough to withstand condi - tions in remote communities , handle numerous deployments and interactions , and be repaired with the knowledge and resources on hand . Design non - proposals with technical difficulties can present frustrating user experiences that undermine “quality of life” [ 64 ] and relationship building . This relates to Dourish et al . ’s call to reflect on what an unstable design non - proposal “demands” of participants in an iterative design process [ 60 ] , where in some com - munities there are accumulations of promising technologies that have subsequently failed them . 5 . 2 Evaluating three design non - proposals against the framework dimensions We evaluate our three design non - proposals against the framework dimensions ( Table 1 ) to understand why some were more effective than others in relationship building and gaining traction with vari - ous groups in the community . The Ambient Birdhouse was the most successful design non - proposal across the framework dimensions . Yet , the Noticeboard and MyWord were still valuable as design non - proposals in what their dissonances revealed about their fit with local practices and device ecologies , and what aspects were of interest , even if their features were incorporated to a lesser extent in the final soft toy design . We reflect on the resonances and dissonances of the framework dimensions with our designs . The ratings reflect the characteristics 70 Tangible ‘Design Non - Proposals’ for Relationship Building in Community - Based Co - Design Projects PDC 2022 Vol . 1 , August 19 – September 01 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom Table 1 : Evaluation of three design non - proposals Ambient Birdhouse Digital Community Noticeboard MyWord IllustrativeAdaptableExpressiveRelevantOpenCommunalFittingAvailableSituatedRobust a ( dark = strong resonance , light = strong dissonance , middle = some elements of resonance and dissonance ) of the designs themselves , and ( our understanding of ) the commu - nity’s perceptions of the designs . The ratings are not an evaluation of these systems , but the effectiveness of those specific versions of the prototypes as design non - proposals with that specific commu - nity , at that moment in the time . 5 . 2 . 1 Ambient Birdhouse . The Ambient Birdhouse was the most effective design non - proposal across the framework dimensions as its relevance to Elders’ interests and its appeal to children were key dimensions that helped to build rapport and spark dialogue . The intergenerational interest in the design meant that it was adapt - able to a range of activities and community settings frequented by adults and children of all ages to start building rapport with people of all ages . The Ambient Birdhouse was expressive of the context in which it was designed through its bird videos and design motivation , but we were also able to situate the design by adding local birds following the suggestions of the Elders to stimulate fur - ther discussion . The communal design could be used by groups of adults and children together , and it fit in with existing technologies by offering something different in its tangible form rather than competing . The use of the Ambient Birdhouse components for further pro - totyping potentially made the design conversation less open by directing discussions to tangible user interfaces and the Birdhouse materials . Yet , it was also a productive way of narrowing the design space and scoping initial design directions using an accepted tech - nology as a starting point . The Ambient Birdhouse in its original form was not easily adaptable to incorporate the community’s dig - ital and physical materials as the prototype only accepted videos in a certain file format , but the Elders gave suggestions ( that were not followed through as the design subsequently morphed into other forms ) to modify and situate the wooden frame by affixing a name for the Birdhouse in [ Language ] and decorating it with bird photos . In later iterations of the design , the community members were more actively involved in designing and sewing the soft toy form for the final design [ 57 ] . 5 . 2 . 2 Digital Community Noticeboard . The Digital Community Noticeboard design was adaptable to local settings as it enabled people to create single or multipage stories with mixed media , and could be attached to existing screens or accessed through its own local WiFi network using mobile devices [ 35 ] . The Noticeboard was illustrative as it was readily populated with seed stories of different lengths that showed different combinations of features , and could be situated within the local context such as the IKC which housed old photos and print materials that could be digitised and displayed as in [ 44 ] . The design was communal since the Raspberry Pi ®running the software could be attached to the IKC television screen , where people could view and discuss the content together . The design was available as the software could be deployed at low cost on the Pi and connected to existing screens , though we could not bring the bulky touchscreens that we had used in the previous project , and the Pi prototype may have given the impression of the design being more open and malleable than the ‘finished’ MyWord app . The Noticeboard interface was not particularly expressive of its design story , as we did not display any content from the previous project partner . Without examples of the original content or a compelling relationship between the form and the content as in the Birdhouse , it was unable to find the same relevance . The Noticeboard was attached to the screen in the IKC for the community to use during several weeks between the field visits . However , it did not fit there as it competed with other uses of the screen rather than being a dedicated ambient display , and other spaces such as the local café and the health clinic already had display systems for their own content . While the Noticeboard was also readily accessible through its own Wi - Fi network , it was not very available as the community did not have general awareness of this functionality and how to use it . We also encountered some technical difficulties with the new Pi prototype that were complex to troubleshoot with the developers in [ City ] due to the remoteness and limited internet connectivity . 5 . 2 . 3 MyWord . The MyWord app [ 59 ] was the least effective de - sign non - proposal across the framework dimensions and was not deployed in any particular setting or used in design activities . My - Word was already available for free on the Apple App Store® , robust as it was a fully implemented application , and illustrative as it showed the idea of curating a personal dictionary , with a bilingual mode already built in for demonstration . The design was adaptable as we could bring our demonstration iPads to different places , and 71 PDC 2022 Vol . 1 , August 19 – September 01 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor et al . the dictionary software could be populated with user generated content rather than having a fixed word list . It was open in the sense that the research lab could easily change or modify the software , but the fact that the app was already available online could have given the impression of it being a ‘final’ product . MyWord was communal in terms of being deployable on IKC iPads , but the individual user accounts and personal dictionaries linked to one person made it less conducive to community demon - strations and did not fit with household or clan language activities . The community had already invested their resources in a dictionary project involving different software , and the MyWord app could not easily integrate with either this work or content from the print dictionaries . While the bilingual mode was relevant to Elders’ de - sires for children to be strong in English and [ Language ] , it was less clear how the design could integrate an additional dialect . MyWord was also locked to the iPad platform which did not fit with the devices that community members commonly owned and used . Like the Noticeboard , MyWord did not come preloaded with existing content , so accompanying flyers and paper were more expressive of its design story than the app itself . 5 . 3 Applicability of the technique across contexts The design non - proposals technique was helpful in our CBPD with an Aboriginal community , where the Ambient Birdhouse connected with the community’s aspirations for their language . Since the community were not familiar with the HCI discipline , the design non - proposal demonstrations conveyed the kinds of questions and issues of interest to designers , the nature of design research meth - ods and practices , and possible outcomes from CBPD projects . The design non - proposal facilitated relationship building at different levels – personal , project and organisational – concurrently . Tak - ing along several different designs prevented us from converging too quickly on an interface or design , and it was not apparent in advance which ones the community would find most appealing . The technique might not be suitable when the design team cannot physically access the community site ( e . g . , due to COVID travel restrictions ) to observe and discuss its fit with local practices in - situ , and future work could explore the digital replication of this technique over a distance . If the design non - proposal demonstrates functionality that is not technically feasible for the project at hand , this might give rise to false expectations about what the project will deliver . While our articulation of the technique is new , our approach is further validated by similar work in other contexts . For example , Ambe and colleagues’ co - design fiction writing workshops with older adults [ 46 ] involved showing a video of the Messaging Kettle [ 45 ] to convey “a feeling of everyday togetherness” through tech - nology [ 46 , p . 5 ] and helped to build rapport and prime imaginations to produce written fictions . Dema et al . also used the Messaging Kettle as a “prompt” for relationship building in CBPD for environ - mental engagement and species conservation with communities in Bhutan [ 12 ] . The Messaging Kettle was shown to communicate “how a tangible technology can embody key design principles of connectedness , everyday routines , reciprocity , and care” [ 12 , p . 6 ] . The design non - proposal along with other locally relevant artefacts helped to create common ground by sparking associative thinking , contextual references , questions , and discussions . They began a process of relationship building focussed on discussing specifics more so than generalities , and without imposing the technological forms . 6 CONCLUSIONS Relationships are the key enablers for CBPD , and initial exchanges with the potential community partners determine whether the design conversation evolves or becomes silent , suggesting a need for relationship building methods and techniques in the co - design toolbox . Relationship building often involves an entanglement of people , places , practices , and artefacts , and existing designs do not facilitate relationship building in and of themselves . As Light and Akama contend , “it is not meaningful to separate the designer from method since we cannot know participative methods without the person or people enacting them” [ 68 , p . 61 ] . It is the ensemble of people and artefacts in settings together that aids the expression of intent and values , and seeds situated design explorations . Design non - proposals can provide a starting point to work from and help to identify aspects of the prospective project that are fixed from the perspective of each party , and those that are open to negotiation , to find a path forward together . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank and acknowledge the Wujal Wujal community and Ref - erence Group , and the Wujal Wujal Aboriginal Shire Council . The practice of using design non - proposals was originally developed through doctoral research at Queensland University of Technol - ogy , with funding from QUT Computer - Human Interaction ( CHI ) Discipline . This study received QUT Ethics Approval ( Protocol 1800000050 ) . Parts of this paper are included verbatim from [ 54 ] , without quotation marks and in - text citation to improve readability . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Wujal Wujal Aboriginal Shire Council . 2020 . Wujal Wujal Aboriginal Shire Coun - cil Website . https : / / www . wujalwujalcouncil . qld . gov . au / . Access Date : 26 / 03 / 2021 . [ 2 ] Susan Hansen . 2019 . Culturally Tailored ICT4D : Designing with Communities , Culture and Context . PhD Thesis . University of Technology Sydney , Sydney . [ 3 ] Jesper Simonsen and Toni Robertson . 2013 . Routledge International Handbook of Participatory Design . Routledge , New York . [ 4 ] Jessica Korte . 2020 . Patterns and Themes in Designing with Children . Foun - dations and Trends®in Human – Computer Interaction , 13 , 2 , 70 - 164 . DOI : 10 . 1561 / 1100000079 . [ 5 ] Christian Dindler and Ole Sejer Iversen . 2014 . Relational expertise in partic - ipatory design . In Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference on Research Papers - PDC ’14 . Assocation for Computing Machinery , New York , 41 - 50 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2661435 . 2661452 . [ 6 ] Valeria Righi , Sergio Sayago , Andrea Rosales , Susan M . Ferreira and Josep Blat . 2018 . Co - designing with a community of older learners for over 10 years by moving user - driven participation from the margin to the centre . CoDesign , 14 , 1 , 32 - 44 . DOI : 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2018 . 1424206 . [ 7 ] AIATSIS . 2020 . AIATSIS Code of Ethics for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Research . Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies ( AIATSIS ) , Canberra . [ 8 ] NHMRC . 2018 . Ethical conduct in research with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples and communities : Guidelines for researchers and stakeholders . National Health and Medical Research Council ( NHMRC ) , Canberra . [ 9 ] Andy Dearden and Haider Rizvi . 2008 . Participatory IT design and participatory development : a comparative review . In Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008 . Indiana University , 81 – 91 . [ 10 ] Linus Kendall and Andy Dearden . 2018 . Disentangling participatory ICT design in socioeconomic development . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design 72 Tangible ‘Design Non - Proposals’ for Relationship Building in Community - Based Co - Design Projects PDC 2022 Vol . 1 , August 19 – September 01 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom Conference : Full Papers - Volume 1 . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , 1 - 12 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3210586 . 3210596 . [ 11 ] Ian G . Johnson , Dalya Al - Shahrabi and John Vines . 2020 . From Creating Spaces for Civic Discourse to Creating Resources for Action . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 - 14 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376464 . [ 12 ] Tshering Dema . 2021 . Engaging Remote Communities in Technology Design for Connecting People To and Through Nature . PhD Thesis . Queensland University of Technology , Brisbane . [ 13 ] Kasper Rodil , Donovan Maasz and Heike Winschiers - Theophilus . 2020 . Moving Virtual Reality out of its Comfort Zone and Into the African Kalahari Desert Field : Experiences From Technological Co - Exploration With an Indigenous San Community in Namibia . In 26th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology . 1 - 10 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3385956 . 3418955 . [ 14 ] JenniferJacobsandAmitZoran . 2015 . HybridPracticeintheKalahari : DesignCol - laboration through Digital Tools and Hunter - Gatherer Craft . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Associa - tion for Computing Machinery , New York , 619 - 628 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702362 . [ 15 ] Hilary Hutchinson , Wendy Mackay , Bo Westerlund , Benjamin B . Bederson , Al - lison Druin , Catherine Plaisant , Michel Beaudouin - Lafon , Stéphane Conversy , Helen Evans , Heiko Hansen , Nicolas Roussel and Björn Eiderbäck . 2003 . Tech - nology probes : inspiring design for and with families . In Proceedings of the 2003 SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , 17 – 24 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 642611 . 642616 . [ 16 ] Alessandro Soro , Margot Brereton , Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor , Anita Lee Hong and Paul Roe . 2016 . Cross - Cultural Dialogical Probes . In Proceedings of the First African Conference on Human Computer Interaction . Association for Computing Machinery , 114 - 125 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2998581 . 2998591 . [ 17 ] HelenSharp , JenniferPreeceandYvonneRogers . 2019 . InteractionDesign : Beyond Human - Computer Interaction . John Wiley & Sons Inc , Hoboken , New Jersey . [ 18 ] Laurens Boer and Jared Donovan . 2012 . Provotypes for participatory innovation . In Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , 388 – 397 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2317956 . 2318014 . [ 19 ] DiannaMadden , YvonneCadet - James , IanAtkinsonandFeleciaWatkinLui . 2014 . Probes and prototypes : a participatory action research approach to codesign . CoDesign , 10 , 1 , 31 - 45 . DOI : 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2014 . 881884 . [ 20 ] Pelle Ehn . 2008 . Participation in design things . In Proceedings of the Tenth An - niversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008 . Indiana University , 92 – 101 . doi : https : / / dl . acm . org / doi / 10 . 5555 / 1795234 . 1795248 . [ 21 ] Tad Hirsch . 2020 . Practicing Without a License : Design Research as Psy - chotherapy . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , 1 - 11 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376750 . [ 22 ] Jennifer A . Rode . 2011 . Reflexivity in digital anthropology . In Proceedings of the SIGCHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems ( CHI’11 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , 123 – 132 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1978961 . [ 23 ] Heike Winschiers - Theophilus , Shilumbe Chivuno - Kuria , Gereon Koch Kapuire , Nicola J . Bidwell and Edwin Blake . 2010 . Being participated : a community ap - proach . In Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference . Asso - ciation for Computing Machinery , New York , 1 – 10 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 1900441 . 1900443 . [ 24 ] Jenny Waycott , Cosmin Munteanu , Hilary Davis , Anja Thieme , Wendy Moncur , Roisin McNaney , John Vines and Stacy Branham . 2016 . Ethical Encounters in Human - ComputerInteraction . In Proceedingsofthe2016CHIConferenceExtended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , 3387 - 3394 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2851581 . 2856498 . [ 25 ] Filip Bircanin , Margot Brereton , Laurianne Sitbon , Bernd Ploderer , Andrew Azaa - banye Bayor and Stewart Koplick . 2021 . Including Adults with Severe Intellectual Disabilities in Co - Design through Active Support . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , 1 - 12 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445057 . [ 26 ] Lucy Suchman . 2002 . Located accountabilities in technology production . Scandi - navian Journal of Information Systems , 14 , 2 , 91 – 105 . DOI : 10 . 5555 / 782686 . 782694 . [ 27 ] Christopher A . Le Dantec and Sarah Fox . 2015 . Strangers at the Gate . In Pro - ceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , 1348 - 1358 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675147 . [ 28 ] Margot Brereton , Paul Roe , Ronald Schroeter and Anita Lee Hong . 2014 . Beyond ethnography : engagement and reciprocity as foundations for design research out here . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , 1183 – 1186 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557374 . [ 29 ] Yael Schwartzman and Tapan S . Parikh . 2007 . Establishing relationships for designing rural information systems . In CHI ’07 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , 1845 – 1850 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 1240866 . 1240909 . [ 30 ] AniciaN . Peters , HeikeWinschiers - Theophilus , KagonyaAwori , NicolaJ . Bidwell , Edwin Blake , Arun Kumar and Shilumbe Chivuno - Kuria . 2014 . Collaborating with communities in Africa . In CHI ’14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , 1969 - 1974 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2559206 . 2581313 . [ 31 ] Daisy Yoo , Odeth Kantengwa , Nick Logler , Reverien Interayamahanga , Joseph Nkurunziza and Batya Friedman . 2018 . Collaborative Reflection . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , 1 - 11 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173853 . [ 32 ] Lilly Irani , Janet Vertesi , Paul Dourish , Kavita Philip and Rebecca E . Grinter . 2010 . Postcolonial computing : a lens on design and development . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , 1311 – 1320 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753522 . [ 33 ] Tuck Wah Leong , Christopher Lawrence and Greg Wadley . 2019 . Designing for diversity in Aboriginal Australia . In Proceedings of the 31st Australian Conference on Human - Computer - Interaction . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , 418 - 422 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3369457 . 3369505 . [ 34 ] Dianna Hardy , Elizabeth Forest , Zoe McIntosh , Janine Gertz and Trina Myers . 2016 . Co - creation of a Digital Game to Support Language Revitalisation . Springer International Publishing , City . [ 35 ] Alessandro Soro , Margot Brereton , Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor , Anita Lee Hong and Paul Roe . 2017 . A cross - cultural noticeboard for a remote community : design , deployment , andevaluation . In Human - ComputerInteraction - INTERACT2017 . IN - TERACT 2017 . Lecture Notes in Computer Science . Springer Cham , doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 67744 - 6 _ 26 . [ 36 ] Dorian Peters , Susan Hansen , Jenny McMullan , Theresa Ardler , Janet Mooney and Rafael A . Calvo . 2018 . " Participation is not enough " . In Proceedings of the 30th Australian Conference on Computer - Human Interaction . Association for Comput - ing Machinery , New York , 97 - 101 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3292147 . 3292204 . [ 37 ] Yoko Akama , Seth Keen and Peter West . 2016 . Speculative Design and Hetero - geneityinIndigenousNationBuilding . In Proceedingsofthe2016ACMConference on Designing Interactive Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , 895 - 899 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2901790 . 2901852 . [ 38 ] Janet Hunt . 2013 . Engaging with Indigenous Australia— exploring the conditions foreffectiverelationshipswithAboriginalandTorresStraitIslandercommunities . Australian Institute of Health and Welfare , Canberra . [ 39 ] Annabel Jones and Bryony Barnett . 2006 . Guidelines for ethical and effective communication for researchers working in Torres Strait . CRC Reef Research Centre Ltd , Townsville . [ 40 ] National Association of Community Legal Centres . 2017 . Connecting and Work - ing with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Communities , Organisations and Clients : A Guide for Community Legal Centres . National Association of Commu - nity Legal Centres , Sydney South . [ 41 ] Rob Ranzijn , Keith R McConnochie and Wendy Nolan . 2010 . Psychology and indigenous Australians : foundations of cultural competence . Palgrave Macmillan , South Yarra , Vic . [ 42 ] Margot Brereton , Paul Roe and Anita Lee Hong . 2012 . Evolving a Relationship for Cross - Cultural Innovation . In 2012 Participatory Innovation Conference . Swin - burne University , Australia , 1 - 5 . [ 43 ] Dianna Hardy , Elizabeth Forest , Zoe McIntosh , Trina Myers and Janine Gertz . 2016 . Moving beyond " just tell me what to code " . In Proceedings of the 28th Australian Conference on Computer - Human Interaction - OzCHI ’16 . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , 557 - 561 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3010915 . 3010991 . [ 44 ] Margot Brereton , Paul Roe , Thomas Amagula , Serena Bara , Judy Lalara and Anita Lee Hong . 2013 . Growing Existing Aboriginal Designs to Guide a Cross - Cultural Design Project . In Human - Computer Interaction – INTERACT 2013 . IN - TERACT 2013 . Lecture Notes in Computer Science . Springer , Berlin , Heidelberg , doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 40483 - 2 _ 22 . [ 45 ] Margot Brereton , Alessandro Soro , Kate Vaisutis and Paul Roe . 2015 . The Messag - ing Kettle . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 713 - 716 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702462 . [ 46 ] Aloha Hufana Ambe , Margot Brereton , Alessandro Soro , Laurie Buys and Paul Roe . 2019 . TheAdventuresofOlderAuthors . In Proceedingsofthe2019CHIConfer - ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 - 16 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300588 . [ 47 ] Yvonne Rogers , Jeni Paay , Margot Brereton , Kate L . Vaisutis , Gary Marsden and Frank Vetere . 2014 . Never too old : engaging retired people inventing the future with MaKey MaKey . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in ComputingSystems . AssociationforComputingMachinery , NewYork , 3913 – 3922 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557184 . [ 48 ] Mona Leigh Guha , Allison Druin and Jerry Alan Fails . 2013 . Cooperative Inquiry revisited : Reflectionsofthepastandguidelinesforthefutureofintergenerational co - design . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction , 1 , 1 , 14 - 23 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2012 . 08 . 003 . [ 49 ] Bill Gaver , Tony Dunne and Elena Pacenti . 1999 . Design : Cultural probes . inter - actions , 6 , 1 , 21 – 29 . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 291224 . 291235 . [ 50 ] Andy Crabtree . 2004 . Design in the absence of practice : breaching experiments . In Proceedings of the 5th conference on Designing interactive systems : processes , practices , methods , and techniques . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , 59 – 68 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 1013115 . 1013125 . 73 PDC 2022 Vol . 1 , August 19 – September 01 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor et al . [ 51 ] Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor , Alessandro Soro , Paul Roe , Anita Lee Hong and Margot Brereton . 2017 . Situational When : Designing for Time Across Cul - tures . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com - puting Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , 6461 – 6474 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025936 . [ 52 ] Rosanne Van Klaveren . 2014 . Participation within the Niva to Nenets Project : Three Methods to Communicate , Share and Transfer Knowledge . In Art Of Re - search . [ 53 ] Kirsten Boehner , Janet Vertesi , Phoebe Sengers and Paul Dourish . 2007 . How HCI interprets the probes . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , 1077 – 1086 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 1240624 . 1240789 . [ 54 ] Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor . 2020 . Ngana Wubulku Junkurr - Jiku Balkaway - Ka : The International Co - Design of a Tangible Technology to keep Active Use of the Kuku Yalanji Aboriginal Language Strong . PhD Thesis . Queensland University of Technology , Brisbane . [ 55 ] Wujal Wujal Aboriginal Shire Council . 2017 . 2016 / 17 Annual Report : Wujal Wujal Aboriginal Shire Council . Wujal Wujal Aboriginal Shire Council , Wujal Wujal . [ 56 ] Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor , Wujal Wujal Aboriginal Shire Council , Alessandro Soro , Paul Roe and Margot Brereton . 2019 . A Relational Approach to Designing Social Technologies that Foster Use of the Kuku Yalanji Language . In Proceedings of the 31st Australian Conference on Human - Computer - Interaction . Association for Computing Machinery , 161 – 172 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3369457 . 3369471 . [ 57 ] Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor , Wujal Wujal Aboriginal Shire Council , Alessan - dro Soro , Michael Esteban , Andrew Vallino , Paul Roe and Margot Brereton . 2020 . Crocodile Language Friend : Tangibles to Foster Children’s Language Use . In Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , 1 – 14 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3334480 . 3383031 . [ 58 ] Alessandro Soro , Margot Brereton , Tshering Dema , Jessica L . Oliver , Min Zhen Chai and Aloha May Hufana Ambe . 2018 . The Ambient Birdhouse : An IoT De - vice to Discover Birds and Engage with Nature . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , Paper 397 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173971 . [ 59 ] Cara Wilson , Margot Brereton and Bernd Ploderer . 2017 . MyWord : Supporting the Interest - based Learning of Words through a Personal Visual Dictionary . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference Companion Publication on Designing Interactive Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , 132 – 137 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3064857 . 3079133 . [ 60 ] Paul Dourish , Christopher Lawrence , Tuck Wah Leong and Greg Wadley . 2020 . On BeingIterated : TheAffective Demandsof DesignParticipation . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , 1 - 11 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376545 . [ 61 ] Tone Bratteteig , Keld Bodker , Yvonne Dittrich , Preben Mogensen and Jesper Simonsen . 2013 . Methods : Organising Principles and General Guidelines for Par - ticipatory Design Projects . Routledge International Handbook of Participatory Design . Routledge , New York . [ 62 ] N . D . Westbury and M . C . Dillon . 2019 . Overcoming Indigenous Exclusions : Very Hard , Plenty Humbug . Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research , Aus - tralian National University , Canberra . [ 63 ] Mark Blythe , Kristina Andersen , Rachel Clarke and Peter Wright . 2016 . Anti - Solutionist Strategies . In Proceedings of the First African Conference on Human Computer Interaction ( AfriCHI’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , 4968 - 4978 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858482 . [ 64 ] Kim Halskov and Nicolai Brodersen Hansen . 2015 . The diversity of participatory design research practice at PDC 2002 – 2012 . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , 74 , 81 - 92 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2014 . 09 . 003 . [ 65 ] Susan Leigh Star . 2010 . This is Not a Boundary Object : Reflections on the Ori - gin of a Concept . Science , Technology , & Human Values , 35 , 5 , 601 - 617 . DOI : 10 . 1177 / 0162243910377624 . [ 66 ] William Gaver . 2012 . What should we expect from research through design ? In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , 937 – 946 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208538 . [ 67 ] Maletsabisa Molapo , Melissa Densmore and Limpho Morie . 2016 . Designing with community health workers : enabling productive participation through exploration . In Proceedings of the First African Conference on Human Computer Interaction ( AfriCHI’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , 58 - 68 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2998581 . 2998589 . [ 68 ] Ann Light and Yoko Akama . 2012 . The human touch : participatory practice and the role of facilitation in designing with communities . In Proceedings of the 12th Participatory Design Conference : Research Papers - Volume 1 . Association for Computing Machinery , 61 – 70 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2347635 . 2347645 . 74