Exploring Linguistic Style Matching in Online Communities : The Role of Social Context and Conversation Dynamics Aparna Ananthasubramaniam ∗ , Hong Chen ∗ , Jason Yan ∗ , Kenan Alkiek ∗ , Jiaxin Pei ∗ , Agrima Seth ∗ , Lavinia Dunagan ∗ , Minje Choi ∗ , Benjamin Litterer ∗ and David Jurgens School of Information , University of Michigan { akananth , hongcc , jasonyan , kalkiek , pedropei , agrima , laviniad , minje , blitt , jurgens } @ umich . edu Abstract Linguistic style matching ( LSM ) in conversa - tions can be reflective of several aspects of social influence such as power or persuasion . However , how LSM relates to the outcomes of online communication on platforms such as Reddit is an unknown question . In this study , we analyze a large corpus of two - party conver - sation threads in Reddit where we identify all occurrences of LSM using two types of style : the use of function words and formality . Using this framework , we examine how levels of LSM differ in conversations depending on several so - cial factors within Reddit : post and subreddit features , conversation depth , user tenure , and the controversiality of a comment . Finally , we measure the change of LSM following loss of status after community banning . Our findings reveal the interplay of LSM in Reddit conversa - tions with several community metrics , suggest - ing the importance of understanding conversa - tion engagement when understanding commu - nity dynamics . 1 Introduction Social influence can be subtle . When two per - sons converse , their interpersonal dynamics can lead to one person adopting the language of the other . For example , in settings where one person has higher status or power , the lower - status person may unconsciously begin mirroring the language of the other ( Danescu - Niculescu - Mizil et al . , 2012 ) . This process has been described as accommodation ( Giles and Ogay , 2007 ) or linguistic style matching ( LSM ) ( Niederhoffer and Pennebaker , 2002 ) and can reflect the underlying influence that individuals have on each other ( Chartrand and Bargh , 1999 ) . Past work has primarily focused on how linguis - tic influence changes relative to the identities of the speakers . However , the larger social context in which a conversation happens also plays a role ∗ denotes equal contribution in determining whether an individual may be in - fluential . Here , we perform a large - scale study of linguistic influence to test how specific types of so - cial context influence the level of accommodation . Past work in the social sciences has studied ac - commodation to understand the influence and so - cial power dynamics in specific settings , like job in - terviews ( applicants and interviewers ) ( Willemyns et al . , 1997 ) and academic context ( students and faculty ) ( Jones et al . , 1999 ) . Also , LSM has been studied to understand group dynamics ( Gonzales et al . , 2010 ) and negotiations ( Ireland and Hender - son , 2014 ) . Work in NLP has operationalized these theories to test accommodation theory in new do - mains . Typically , these works adopt some tests for measuring influence in language and have shown these measures correlate with known social dif - ferences . However , it is yet unknown how LSM occurs in conversations in online community plat - forms and differs by community dynamics . Our work examines the larger context in which linguistic influence occurs . Using a large sample of 2 . 3 million conversations from Reddit and two measures of linguistic influence , we test how the level of linguistic influence correlates with con - versational outcomes , such as conversation length and even the continued presence of a person in a community . Further , we examine how specific so - cial and contextual factors influence the rates of linguistic influence . For instance , we discover that the controversy level of the parent comment can lead to different dynamics of style matching in the conversation threads . This paper offers the following three contribu - tions . First , we systematically compare comple - mentary measures of accommodation , showing clear evidence of style accommodation in Reddit conversations . Second , we draw the relationships of several social factors that affect LSM , including levels of engagement , the popularity of the content , and tenure within a subreddit . Third , we demon - a r X i v : 2307 . 02758v2 [ c s . C L ] 26 A ug 2023 strate the use of LSM to measure the loss of status through the banning of subreddits . We have re - leased all code and data for full reproducibility . 1 2 Accommodation and its Measurement In this section , we discuss communication accom - modation theory and associated sociolinguistic re - search to outline the accommodation of commu - nicative behavior based on perceived social power dynamics . Subsequently , we explore the concept of linguistic style matching and methods adopted by researchers to quantify this phenomenon . We also investigate various factors that contribute to LSM variations and their strategic uses . 2 . 1 Accommodation Theory as Social Influence When two individuals engage in social interaction , they may either converge or diverge in their com - municative behavior . The Communication Accom - modation Theory ( CAT ) suggests that the degree of convergence or divergence is affected by the rel - ative social power between the interlocutors ( Xu et al . , 2018 ) . Asymmetric convergence is more likely to occur in situations where there is a power imbalance between the interlocutors . Individuals with lower social power or status are more likely to adapt their communication style to align with those in higher or dominant positions ( Muir et al . , 2016 ) . For instance , Puerto Ricans in New York City during the 1970s , who were perceived to hold less power than African Americans , adopted the dialect of African Americans to converge with their more powerful counterparts ( Wolfram , 1974 ) . Social power has been often found to be an im - portant determinant of degrees of accommodation ( Giles et al . , 1991 ; Ng and Bradac , 1993 ) and inter - actants of differential social power or social status can act in a complementary fashion ( Street , 1991 ) . 2 . 2 Linguistic Style Matching Linguistic alignment is a pervasive phenomenon that occurs in human communication where inter - actants unconsciously coordinate their language us - age . This coordination , described as convergence in the psycholinguistic theory of communication accommodation , involves aspects such as word choice , syntax , utterance length , pitch , and ges - tures ( Giles et al . , 1991 ) . Linguistic style match - 1 https : / / github . com / davidjurgens / style - influence ing ( LSM ) is a specific manifestation of linguis - tic alignment , wherein individuals unconsciously match their speaking or writing styles during con - versations ( Ireland et al . , 2011 ) . Unlike content ac - commodation , LSM focuses on stylistic accommo - dation , examining how things are communicated rather than what they communicate . Individuals strategically negotiate their language style to decrease social distance , seek approval , and accommodate each other . LSM can also reflect the level of common understanding and conceptualiza - tion of the conversation topic between speakers . The degree of LSM can indicate social power dy - namics as indicated by ( Giles and Ogay , 2007 ) . Empirical evidence from recent studies ( Danescu - Niculescu - Mizil et al . , 2012 ) showed that partic - ipants with less power ( such as lawyers or non - administrative roles in Wikipedia ) exhibit greater coordination in conversational behavior than partic - ipants with high power ( such as justices or adminis - trators ) . Additionally , Noble and Fernández ( 2015 ) identified a positive correlation between linguis - tic accommodation and social network centrality , which effect can be greater than the effect of power status distinction . Studies by Muir et al . ( 2016 , 2017 ) further show that individuals in a lower posi - tion of power tend to accommodate their linguistic style to match that of their higher - power counter - parts during face - to - face communication as well as computer - mediated communication . The variance in LSM can be attributed to var - ious social and psychological factors and can be triggered for different purposes . Linguistic align - ment may signal likability and agreement , relate to seeking approval or arise from social desirabil - ity . Higher levels of accommodation in social be - haviors are found to be associated with increased feelings of affiliation , liking , and successful in - terpersonal relationships ( Bayram and Ta , 2019 ) . Thus , linguistic alignment can be strategically em - ployed to establish relationship initiation and stabil - ity ( Ireland et al . , 2011 ) , increase group cohesion , and task performance ( Gonzales et al . , 2010 ) , and assist in negotiations ( Taylor and Thomas , 2008 ) . Furthermore , alignment has been found to enhance persuasiveness , motivating listeners to adopt health - ier practices ( Cialdini , 2001 ) while in some cases like presidential debates , it has been perceived as more aggressive ( Romero et al . , 2015 ) . The de - gree of matching may differ based on context and individual factors . 0 1 2 3 0 2 4 6 i n C o mm en t # F un c t i on W o r d s # Function Words in Parent Comment ( a ) Accommodation , # Function Words 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 00 0 . 25 0 . 50 0 . 75 1 . 00 Formality in Parent Comment F o r m a li t y i n C o mm en t ( b ) Accommodation , For - mality Figure 1 : Commenters on Reddit accommodate to the ( a ) # function words and b ) formality of the comment they are replying to . Typically , the level of accommo - dation is higher when responding to posts with below - average ( red ) than above - average ( blue ) style . 3 Data Reddit is a popular social media platform with a forum - based interface . It allows users to interact with dispersed individuals who share similar expe - riences or topics of interest . Our dataset to study LSM spans from July 2019 to December 2022 and includes 35M users and 500K subreddits . Using the Pushshift Reddit Dataset which con - tains the full history of comments aggregated on a monthly basis ( Baumgartner et al . , 2020 ) , we con - struct conversation threads from the comments and filter those that satisfy the following conditions : ( 1 ) the conversation chain consists of exactly two users ; ( 2 ) the beginning of the conversation chain must be a root comment which does not have a par - ent comment ; and ( 3 ) the lengths of a conversation chain must between 3 and 100 . These conditions allow us to capture conversation dynamics between exactly two users without any interference . Our resulting dataset contains 16 , 893 , 013 conversation turns ( or comments ) across 2 , 305 , 775 conversation chains from 68 , 788 subreddits . 4 How should we measure linguistic influence ? Computational work has proposed multiple ap - proaches for both what to measure and how to measure linguistic influence . In this section , we aim to build intuition for what the two measures of accommodation—using function words and formality—are operationalizing . 4 . 1 Linguistic Style Markers Our study measures linguistic influence with two complementary style markers . We use the notation m to refer to a marker throughout . Marker 1 : Function Words Function words ( e . g . pronouns , prepositions , articles , and auxil - iary words ) are primarily employed unconsciously and frequently and incorporate social knowledge for comprehension and usage ( Meyer and Bock , 1999 ; Ireland and Pennebaker , 2010 ) . Prior compu - tational studies of linguistic accommodation have measured linguistic influence by tracking the rela - tive frequencies of function words across conversa - tion turns ( Danescu - Niculescu - Mizil et al . , 2011 ; Babcock et al . , 2014 ; Gonzales et al . , 2010 ) . Func - tion words reflect how content is expressed , rather than what specific content is expressed ( e . g . , con - tent words ) and are thought to be a better proxy for unconscious language processing ( Tausczik and Pennebaker , 2010 ) . Here , we use the function words defined by the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count ( LIWC ) lexicon ( Pennebaker et al . , 2001 ; Pennebaker and Chung , 2007 ) . Marker 2 : Formality Individuals adopt a spe - cific register that is appropriate to their position in the social context , real or desired ( Niederhoffer and Pennebaker , 2002 ) . A commonly varied register is the level of formality used when speaking to an - other . The level of formality shown by a speaker is known to reflect the speaker’s opinion towards a topic or their closeness to the listener ( Hovy , 1987 ) . Unlike function words , variation in formality often requires conscious processing to select the appro - priate phrasing in a given circumstance . As a result , it offers a complementary view into how a speaker influences another through shifting the conversa - tion towards a more formal or informal register . Here , we measure formality using a supervised classification model . The model is a fine - tuned RoBERTa - based classifier ( Liu et al . , 2019 ) trained on the GYAFC ( Rao and Tetreault , 2018 ) and On - line Formality Corpus ( Pavlick and Tetreault , 2016 ) datasets ; we use the model available from the Hug - ging Face API 2 . Both datasets contain social media text and the reported model performance is high for both blogs and Q & A text ( Spearman’s ρ > 0 . 7 ) . Using this classifier , each comment’s formality is measured on a continuous scale in [ 0 , 1 ] . Importantly , these style variables are related ; function word frequency also changes in more for - mal contexts , where articles and prepositions typi - cally become more common while pronouns and interjections become less common ( Heylighen and 2 https : / / huggingface . co / s - nlp / roberta - base - formality - ranker Dewaele , 1999 ) . Content word - based measures of style and function word counts are thought to capture the same latent style variables , i . e . , they are interchangeable at a stylometric level ( Grieve , 2023 ) . 4 . 2 Measuring Linguistic Influence At a high - level , linguistic influence ( also referred to as LSM or accommodation in this paper ) is mea - sured by testing whether the value for some mea - sure m of a comment made by user a is predictive of the value of m in the reply to that comment by user b . Therefore , one straightforward way to measure accommodation is with linear regression : m b ∼ β 0 + β 1 m a where β 0 reflects the baseline level of the measure ( e . g . , the average formality ) and β 1 measures the level of accommodation ( e . g . , the average increase in formality associated with a 1 - unit increase in the formality of the parent com - ment ) . However , as Xu et al . ( 2018 ) note , the char - acteristics of a comment are likely influenced by other unrelated factors such as the length of the comment or the number of turns in the conversa - tion . Indeed , they show that unless one controls for such factors , linguistic influence may be over - estimated . Therefore , we used a mixed - effects re - gression to control for comment a and b ’s length in tokens ( fixed effects L a , L b ) , the number of replies r b → a that b has made to a so far in the conversa - tion . To capture individual and community - level variation , we include random effects to control for the effect of the subreddit s ; these random effects let us control for differences in the norms of com - munities ( e . g . , some communities are more / less formal ) to test for relative changes in m . Linguistic accommodation is modeled as m b ∼ β 0 + β 1 m a + β 2 L a + β 3 L b + β 4 r b → a + ( 1 | s ) where β 1 measures the level of accommodation . 4 . 3 Results We first observe clear evidence of accommodation in both style markers : parent comments with more function words receive replies with more function words ( Figure 1a ) , and more formal parent com - ments receive more formal replies ( Figure 1b ) . For comments where we have the text of the origi - nal post , we observe accommodation even after controlling for the author and original post’s style markers , suggesting that users may accommodate 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 1 1 . 0 10 . 0 Time to Comment ( days ) A cc o mm oda t i on ( # f un c t i on w o r d s ) ( a ) Time to Comment , # Func - tion Words 0 . 08 0 . 10 0 . 12 0 . 14 0 . 1 1 . 0 10 . 0 Time to Comment ( days ) A cc o mm oda t i on ( f o r m a li t y ) ( b ) Time to Comment , For - mality Figure 2 : Commenters on Reddit are more likely to accommodate ( a ) # function words when they reply quickly ( suggesting subconscious accommodation ) and b ) formality of the comment when they reply slowly ( suggesting strategic accommodation ) . to the style of the person they are interacting with in the comment thread . However , this effect plateaus when the parent comment has above - average levels of a style marker , suggesting a potential threshold for the impact of parent comment style on reply style . This attenuation of effect may be the result of several mechanisms , including regression to the mean or an author modulating their replies accord - ing to their own personal style ( i . e . , a more extreme parent comment may trigger greater modulation ) . Second , the two style markers are almost per - fectly uncorrelated , suggesting that they measure distinct constructs . In order to calculate the corre - lation between these two measures , we randomly sample 1 , 000 subsets of the conversation turns and calculate the extent of accommodation in function words and formality in that subset . The correlation between the function - word - and formality - based accommodation scores is - 0 . 00171 . Third , accommodation in the two style mark - ers seems to occur via fundamentally distinct psy - chological processes . Accommodation can occur either 1 ) through a subconscious priming mecha - nism , where the speaker instinctively repeats what they hear ; or 2 ) through a more conscious , strate - gic act with communicative intent ( Doyle and Frank , 2016 ) . Figure 2 suggests that function - word - accommodation seems to be an unconscious form of relating to the audience , while formality - accommodation seems to be more intentional and strategic . Commenters exhibit greater accommoda - tion in function words when they take less time to reply to the prior comment ( 2a ) and greater accom - modation in formality when they reply more slowly ( 2b ) . These results are consistent with prior work , suggesting that accommodation of function words occurs subconsciously ( reflexively , takes less time ) and builds on this work to show that accommoda - animals discussion education entertainmentgeneralhobbies humor lifestyle other technology 0 . 10 0 . 15 0 . 20 0 . 155 0 . 160 0 . 165 0 . 170 0 . 175 0 . 180 Accommodation ( # function words ) A cc o mm oda t i on ( f o r m a li t y ) Figure 3 : Level of accommodation in the number of function words ( x - axis ) and in formality ( y - axis ) . 1e + 05 1e + 06 1e + 07 1 2 3 4 5 Mean Style Entropy ( Biber Linguistic Features ) S ub r edd i t S i z e Figure 4 : The mean Shannon Entropy of Biber’s linguis - tic features ( x - axis ) is uncorrelated to the subreddit’s number of subscribers ( y - axis ) ( p = 0 . 41 ) . Entropy is calculated using a random sample of comments in each subreddit . tion in other style markers , like formality , occurs strategically ( intentionally , takes more time ) . Fourth , there is little variation in accommodation across subreddit characteristics . Figure 3 shows the levels of accommodation across ten different types of subreddits , using an existing taxonomy of popu - lar subreddits . 3 While certain types of subreddits ( e . g . , lifestyle ) tend to have higher levels of accom - modation than others ( e . g . , technology , entertain - ment ) , most differences are only weakly significant ( p > 0 . 01 ) with a small effect size . Moreover , Fig - ure 4 shows the relationship between subreddit size and variation in linguistic style , for 300 subreddits sampled based on their number of subscribers . To calculate variation in linguistic style , we use Biber ( 1988 ) ’s comprehensive set of linguistic features . Linguistic variation within each subreddit is esti - mated as the mean Shannon Entropy of each Biber tag frequency at the subreddit level . Despite expec - tations that larger communities may exhibit greater diversity in language use ( Kocab et al . , 2019 ) , we find no relationship between community size and linguistic variation . 3 https : / / www . reddit . com / r / ListOfSubreddits / wiki / listofsubreddits / 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 1 3 10 30 Comment Depth ( # turns ) A cc o mm oda t i on ( # f un c t i on w o r d s ) ( a ) Comment Depth , Function Words 0 . 10 0 . 15 0 . 20 0 . 25 0 . 30 −10 −5 0 5 10 Comment Karma A cc o mm oda t i on ( # f un c t i on w o r d s ) ( b ) Comment Karma , Func - tion Words 0 . 12 0 . 14 0 . 16 0 . 18 1 3 10 30 Comment Depth ( # turns ) A cc o mm oda t i on ( f o r m a li t y ) ( c ) Comment Depth , Formal - ity 0 . 09 0 . 10 0 . 11 0 . 12 0 . 13 0 . 14 −10 −5 0 5 10 Comment Karma A cc o mm oda t i on ( f o r m a li t y ) ( d ) Comment Karma , Formal - ity Figure 5 : Characteristics of the comment are non - linearly associated with accommodation , including com - ment depth ( a , c ) and comment karma ( b , d ) . Overall , these findings point to the nuanced dy - namics of LSM in online interactions , indicating that factors such as function word usage and for - mality in the parent comment are associated with the linguistic style and tone of replies . 5 What factors about a comment influence the degree of accommodation ? LSM can be affected by many factors and exist - ing studies have pointed out the roles of not only linguistic characteristics but also the contextual fac - tors affecting LSM ( Niederhoffer and Pennebaker , 2002 ) . In this section , we study the connection be - tween LSM and a series of contextual factors where the comment is posted ( i . e . , comment depth ) and the “success” of a comment ( i . e . , comment Karma and parent comment Karma ) . 5 . 1 Experimental Setup To test for heterogeneity in the level of accommoda - tion with respect to several covariates ( e . g . , depth , Karma ) , we run a mixed effects regression similar to Section 4 . 2 , but include an interaction term to test whether accommodation changes significantly with respect to some covariate ( say , Karma K ) : m b ∼ β 0 + β 1 m a + β 2 K + β 3 m a ∗ K + β 4 L a + β 5 L b + β 6 r b → a + ( 1 | b ) + ( 1 | s ) Here , β 1 measures the level of accommodation when K = 0 and β 3 measures the increase in ac - commodation when K increases by one point ; if β 3 is significantly different from 0 , then we have evi - dence that accommodation is heterogeneous with respect to Karma . In order to visualize these effects , we fit the model in the above equation to estimate accom - modation at different values of Karma . In order to appropriately represent uncertainty in this model , we sample 100 , 000 conversation turns at each value of Karma 10 times and use this to obtain 10 differ - ent estimates of accommodation for each value of the covariate . To visualize the association between Karma and accommodation , we plot Karma on the x - axis and the LSM estimates on the y - axis . 5 . 2 Results As shown in Figure 5 , various factors of comments are related to LSM . Comment depth Comment depth reflects the position of a comment in the conversation tree . Deeper comments are usually posted in longer con - versations and when the users are more engaged in the dialogue . As shown in Figure 5a and Fig - ure 5c , comment depth is positively correlated with LSM . However , accommodation in formality drops off for very deep comments . LSM happen more when the comment is deeper in the conversation tree , suggesting that users tend to match not only the content but also the structural aspects of their language in response to their interlocutor . Such a trend could be due to greater investment in the con - versation . When two users are involved in longer and deeper conversations , they are more likely to be engaged in the conversation , which may lead to higher subconscious but lower conscious LSM . Comment Karma A key feature of Reddit is the ability for users to upvote or downvote comments , which determines the comment’s karma - a measure of its popularity within the community . In figure 5 , we observe several non - linear associations be - tween karma , comment characteristics , and LSM . In terms of comment karma , users’ LSM tends to remain relatively constant , except for cases where the comment has very high karma , which is associ - ated with an increase in LSM . This finding implies that highly popular comments may foster greater linguistic alignment between users . We also see that comments with low karma have lower levels of LSM than comments with high karma ( Figure 5d ) , which makes sense since we’d expect users to respond better to comments whether the author is mirroring their interlocutor . Notably , this upward trend reverses in comments with very high karma – which have lower levels of LSM than comments with lower levels of karma . The reversal of the LSM trend in comments with high karma warrants further exploration . One possible expla - nation for this phenomenon is that highly upvoted comments may exhibit unconventional linguistic styles that deviate from the norm , which could be seen as novel by the Reddit community . Another explanation may be that comments with high karma are more likely to be popular in larger , diverse com - munities where users may have a wider range of linguistic styles . Additionally , it is possible that comments with high karma receive a higher volume of comments and interactions , which may dilute the overall LSM score due to the presence of diverse linguistic styles from multiple interlocutors . 6 What effect does accommodation have on the conversation itself ? Linguistic accommodation is usually associated with positive social benefits ( Taylor and Thomas , 2008 ; Gonzales et al . , 2010 ) . Here , we test whether linguistic accommodation is associated with two positive behaviors in social media : sustained con - versation and length of participation in a subreddit . 6 . 1 Experimental Setup We fit a linear regression on conversational dyads following the LSM measure in Section 4 . 2 . Fol - lowing the procedure from the prior section , we estimate the level of accommodation for comments around a particular covariate by sampling 100 , 000 conversation turns at or near the respective value of the covariate . Once again , we verify that dif - ferences between covariates are significant , by in - troducing interaction terms in the regression and testing for a statistically significance effect . 6 . 2 Results Figures 6a and 6b compare the effect of alignment when conditioned on the total length of the con - versation thread . For both functions words and formality , we observe from the fitted lines that ac - commodation is more likely to happen from longer conversations , but only up to a certain length of approximately 30 - 40 . This suggests the possibility of LSM being an earlier indicator of how engaged the users will be in a conversation . On the other hand , the likelihood of accommodation in formality decreases when the conversation becomes longer 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 3 10 30 100 Conversation Length ( # turns ) A cc o mm oda t i on ( # f un c t i on w o r d s ) ( a ) Length , # Function Words 0 . 06 0 . 08 0 . 10 0 . 12 0 . 14 0 . 16 3 10 30 100 Conversation Length ( # turns ) A cc o mm oda t i on ( f o r m a li t y ) ( b ) Length , Formality −0 . 002 0 . 000 0 . 002 0 10 20 30 Depth of Turn A ss o c i a t i on be t . L S M ( f un c . w o r d ) & C on v . Leng t h ( c ) Depth x Length , # Func - tion Words 0 . 00 0 . 01 0 . 02 0 10 20 30 Depth of Turn A ss o c i a t i on be t . L S M ( f o r m a li t y ) & C on v . Leng t h ( d ) Depth x Length , Formal - ity Figure 6 : The number of turns in a conversation is associated with the level of accommodation in each turn : ( a - b ) Longer conversations ( i . e . , threads consisting of more conversation turns ) are associated with higher accommodation , up to a threshold ; for sufficiently long conversations , the association is negative for formality . ( c - d ) The effect of alignment on conversation length is stronger earlier in the conversation and weaker as more conversational turns occur . than a certain threshold , which suggests that speak - ers may stop consciously trying to accommodate once the conversation becomes sufficiently long . Figures 6c and 6d compare accommodation like - lihoods at a given turn within a conversation . Inter - estingly , we can observe that LSM starts off highest at the beginning of a conversation and decreases as the number of turns increases . Combining the two results , we can conjecture that while the degree of LSM generally decreases within a conversation thread , the initial levels of LSM observed at the early stages of a conversation can indicate how en - gaged the speakers will be , which one can use to estimate the overall conversation length . How does LSM differ by tenure and number of subsequent posts in a subreddit ? Figure 7 shows that , for both style markers , users who have a longer tenure in the subreddit or who post more in the subreddit in the next month tend to display higher subconscious and lower conscious LSM . We consider these results as evidence of the “lifespan” of a user’s engagement toward conversations held within that subreddit , and ultimately engagement toward the subreddit itself , which has been noted in prior work ( Danescu - Niculescu - Mizil et al . , 2013 ) . 0 . 10 0 . 15 0 . 20 0 . 25 0 . 30 0 500 1000 1500 Tenure in Subreddit ( days ) A cc o mm oda t i on ( # f un c t i on w o r d s ) ( a ) Tenure , # Function Words 0 . 10 0 . 12 0 . 14 0 . 16 0 500 1000 1500 Tenure in Subreddit ( days ) A cc o mm oda t i on ( f o r m a li t y ) ( b ) Tenure , Formality Figure 7 : Alignment is associated with engagement : ( a ) stronger function - word LSM and ( b ) weaker formality LSM for higher tenure in subreddit . 7 What effect does the social context have on accommodation : Controversiality ? In this section , we examine whether LSM dif - fers by social contexts that arise during conver - sations . Specifically , we focus on the controversy level of the parent comment . In contrast to non - controversial issues , controversial issues lead to competitive disagreement , where the goal of the groups involved in argumentation is to convince the opponent group ( s ) of the validity of one’s point of view ( Ilie , 2021 ) . The arguments on controversial issues tend to invite strong emotions with negative affect ( Mejova et al . , 2014 ) and deteriorate the de - liberation in the public sphere because interactions often turn uncivil ( Doxtader , 1991 ) . 7 . 1 Experimental Setup Following the procedure from the prior section , we estimate the level of accommodation for comments at each covariate , separately for controversial and non - controversial comments . When a comment or post receives a substantial number of upvotes and downvotes , Reddit automatically designates it as controversial . The exact method used by Reddit to determine controversy remains private . How - ever , the Reddit API offers a binary label indicat - ing whether a comment is controversial or non - controversial ( Koncar et al . , 2021 ) . Approximately 1 . 30 % ( n = 218 , 899 ) of the comments in our sample are labeled as controversial . We test that differences between conditions are significant with a three - way interaction term in the regression between the parent - comment style , the comment’s Karma ( or other covariates ) and the comment’s controversiality : m a × K × C . 7 . 2 Results Figure 8 reveals that LSM occurs differently in controversial and non - controversial comments . For both function words and formality , LSM is less 0 . 100 0 . 125 0 . 150 0 . 175 0 . 200 −10 −5 0 5 10 Comment Karma A cc o mm oda t i on ( # f un c t i on w o r d s ) Controversial Yes No ( a ) Karma , Function Words 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 3 10 30 Conversation Length ( # turns ) A cc o mm oda t i on ( # f un c t i on w o r d s ) Controversial Yes No ( b ) Length , Function Words 0 . 00 0 . 05 0 . 10 0 . 15 −10 −5 0 5 10 Comment Karma A cc o mm oda t i on ( f o r m a li t y ) Controversial Yes No ( c ) Karma , Formality −0 . 1 0 . 0 0 . 1 3 10 30 Conversation Length ( # turns ) A cc o mm oda t i on ( f o r m a li t y ) Controversial Yes No ( d ) Length , Formality Figure 8 : The associations between LSM and “suc - cess” are very different for controversial ( red line ) and non - controversial ( blue line ) comments : ( a ) Very - high - karma controversial comments tend to have lower , rather than higher , function - word alignment ; and ( c ) overall lower formality - alignment . ( b ) Compared to shorter threads , longer controversial threads tend to have lower , rather than higher , function - word alignment and ( d ) for - mality alignment . likely to occur in controversial rather than non - controversial comments when the conversation length is below a certain threshold ( 12 - 14 ) . In - terestingly , we see that this trend is strengthened as the conversation length increases . One possible ex - planation is that controversial comments generate more initial interest that promotes users to engage more in conversations . However , this initial effect is washed away as the conversation takes further turns , and the conversation is less likely to continue due to reasons such as incivility . Non - controversial comments , on the other hand , enjoy less of this initial boost and is more likely to carry on if the users have accommodated each other’s language during their conversation . With the addition of Karma , we can observe a more complex trend that plays out differently for each style marker . For function words , conversa - tions in controversial comments have a nonlinear relationship that drops as the parent comment’s Karma increases , whereas a weak positive corre - lation can be observed for non - controversial com - ments and levels of Karma . In contrast , for formal - ity , LSM occurs most at comments with about 0 - 5 Karma and decreases for higher Karma for both controversial and non - controversial comments . Overall , we observe that social contexts that are defined by the community platform such as Karma or controversy have complex , nonlinear effects on how LSM occurs in conversations . 8 Loss of Status via Community Banning Reddit bans specific subreddit communities as a result of policy violations , such as repeated posting of highly offensive content or lack of moderator oversight ( Chandrasekharan et al . , 2017 ) . When users are highly active in such communities , the ban potentially results in a loss of status , as they are forced to find new communities to participate in . Here , we test the extent to which users change how they are linguistically influenced by others af - ter such a ban . While prior work has studied how users change after gaining status ( e . g . , Danescu - Niculescu - Mizil et al . , 2012 ) , our unique setting allows us to perform a novel study of the poten - tially humbling effects of status loss . In addition , a study of the subreddit r / changemyview sug - gests that formality is ( weakly ) associated with more effective persuasion on Reddit ( Dayter and Messerli , 2022 ) ; we hypothesize that users who recently experienced a ban may have multiple prag - matic reasons to accommodate more . 8 . 1 Experimental Setup We test for changes to linguistic influence using a pseudo - causal difference - in - difference analysis ( Lechner et al . , 2011 ) . Subreddit ban dates were de - termined by identifying all banned subreddits and then using the last date of a post in that subreddit . Our sample includes 1 , 024 subreddits banned be - tween July 2019 and December 2022 . We identify 16 , 686 users in our sample who made at least one comment in these subreddits in the 30 days before their ban . Each user from a banned subreddit is considered as treated and matched with a control user who did not participate in that subreddit . Three analyses of the effect of the ban are per - formed , controlling for user - level and temporal fac - tors . First , we estimate the effect of commenting in a banned subreddit , by comparing posts made in banned subreddits t months before the ban to posts made by the same users at the same time , in other subreddits . Second , using a difference - in - differences approach , we estimate the effect of banning a subreddit on authors’ use of accommo - dation in ( unbanned ) subreddits they were active in for t months before and after the ban . This sec - ond analysis measures the spill - over effects of the ban on users’ behaviors in other subreddits ; the ( a ) # Function Words ( b ) Formality ( c ) # Function Words ( d ) Formality Figure 9 : When a subreddit is banned , ( a , c ) users who commented there tend to have higher LSM in other sub - reddits , ( b ) users tend to have higher LSM in function words in subreddits they migrate to , ( d ) LSM in for - mality tends to temporarily increases just before the subreddit is banned then returns to near - baseline levels in subreddits they migrate to . difference - in - differences estimator uses users ac - tive in these subreddits at the same time , but not in a banned subreddit , as a control for temporal and subreddit - level effects . Third , we calculate the effect of the ban on commenting behavior in sub - reddits users migrated to ( i . e . , newly joined ) after the ban was enacted . The difference - in - differences estimator compares accommodation in comments in the banned subreddits to comments in the subred - dits these users migrated to ; to isolate the effect of migration , the difference between the comments in the migrated and banned subreddits are compared against the spill - over effects in other subreddits that users were a part of during this time . 8 . 2 Results Our results suggest that policy actions on Reddit , such as banning , have an effect on the level of accommodation by users . First , the level of subcon - scious accommodation tends to be lower in banned subreddits than other subreddits the users comment in during the 30 days before the ban ( the effects are all below 0 in Figure 9c ( p < 2 e − 16 ) . Second , following the banning of a subreddit , users tend to change their LSM levels in other subreddits : Figure 9 shows that function - word - mirroring ( Figure 9a ) and formality - mirroring ( Fig - ure 9b ) increase after a subreddit is banned . Our results suggest that users who had previously been active in banned subreddits may have been making an effort to index agreeableness by accommodating ( e . g . , to avoid losing status in another community ) . Third , changes in accommodation are initially amplified in subreddits that these users migrate to after their original community was banned . The comments left by these users in banned subred - dits exhibit higher levels of accommodation than would be expected immediately before the ban and maintain higher subconscious accommoda - tion in subreddits they migrated ( Figures 9c and 9d p < 2 e − 16 ) . Since function - word mirroring is likely subconscious and formality - mirroring strate - gic ( Section 4 ) , our results suggest that users who had previously been active in banned subreddits may have , intrinsically , indexed agreeableness by accommodating ( e . g . , to gain status in their new community ) but without making a conscious ef - fort ( e . g . , because they were upset about the loss of a status ) . These users also increased LSM in the subreddit immediately before it was banned ( e . g . , perhaps to index agreeableness when warn - ings about the ban were issued ) . 9 Discussion and Conclusion In this study , we performed a large - scale compu - tational analysis on Reddit conversations to un - derstand when LSM occurs and its effect on plat - form engagement . Overall , do our findings indicate that LSM frequently occurs in online conversations within Reddit , and that it exhibits complex nonlin - ear relationships with conversation metrics such as Karma , conversation lengths , or controversy scores , which suggests linguistic influence can affect con - versation dynamics . Furthermore , we show that the degree of accommodation in conversations is re - lated to greater levels of engagement both at conver - sation and platform levels . Our findings highlight the possibility of identifying LSM as an indicator of engagement and civil conversations and suggest ideas for building and maintaining online commu - nities that promote constructive discourse . In our experiments , we have assumed LSM as a unidirectional concept by measuring the exhibition of a particular style conditioned on the previous turn . However , LSM can occur in several different directions , such as the two speakers converging into a single style or even diverging to separate styles . While not in the scope of this study , the existence of such types of LSM in Reddit conversation threads can be studies in future research . 10 Ethical Considerations This study was conducted only on observational data and did not require any human intervention . We did not use any information that could identify individuals or specific demographic groups , and all of our presented results were obtained through aggregation from millions of users and comments . Acknowledgments This material is based in part upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No IIS - 2143529 . References Meghan J Babcock , Vivian P Ta , and William Ickes . 2014 . Latent semantic similarity and language style matching in initial dyadic interactions . Journal of Language and Social Psychology , 33 ( 1 ) : 78 – 88 . Jason Baumgartner , Savvas Zannettou , Brian Keegan , Megan Squire , and Jeremy Blackburn . 2020 . The pushshift reddit dataset . A Burcu Bayram and Vivian P Ta . 2019 . Diplomatic chameleons : Language style matching and agreement in international diplomatic negotiations . Negotiation and Conflict Management Research , 12 ( 1 ) : 23 – 40 . Douglas Biber . 1988 . Variation across Speech and Writ - ing . Cambridge University Press . Eshwar Chandrasekharan , Umashanthi Pavalanathan , Anirudh Srinivasan , Adam Glynn , Jacob Eisenstein , and Eric Gilbert . 2017 . You can’t stay here : The efficacy of reddit’s 2015 ban examined through hate speech . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , 1 ( CSCW ) : 1 – 22 . Tanya L Chartrand and John A Bargh . 1999 . The chameleon effect : The perception – behavior link and social interaction . Journal of personality and social psychology , 76 ( 6 ) : 893 . Robert B Cialdini . 2001 . The science of persuasion . Scientific American , 284 ( 2 ) : 76 – 81 . Cristian Danescu - Niculescu - Mizil , Michael Gamon , and Susan Dumais . 2011 . Mark my words ! linguistic style accommodation in social media . In Proceed - ings of the 20th international conference on World wide web , pages 745 – 754 . Cristian Danescu - Niculescu - Mizil , Lillian Lee , Bo Pang , and Jon Kleinberg . 2012 . Echoes of power : Language effects and power differences in social interaction . In Proceedings of the 21st international conference on World Wide Web , pages 699 – 708 . Cristian Danescu - Niculescu - Mizil , Robert West , Dan Jurafsky , Jure Leskovec , and Christopher Potts . 2013 . No country for old members : User lifecycle and lin - guistic change in online communities . In Proceed - ings of the 22nd International Conference on World Wide Web , WWW ’13 , page 307 – 318 , New York , NY , USA . Association for Computing Machinery . Daria Dayter and Thomas C . Messerli . 2022 . Per - suasive language and features of formality on the r / changemyview subreddit . Internet Pragmatics , 5 ( 1 ) : 165 – 195 . Erik W Doxtader . 1991 . The entwinement of argument and rhetoric : A dialectical reading of habermas’ the - ory of communicative action . Argumentation and Advocacy , 28 ( 2 ) : 51 – 63 . Gabriel Doyle and Michael C Frank . 2016 . Investigat - ing the sources of linguistic alignment in conversa - tion . In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics ( Vol - ume 1 : Long Papers ) , pages 526 – 536 . Howard Giles , Nikolas Coupland , and IUSTINE Cou - pland . 1991 . 1 . accommodation theory : Communi - cation , context , and . Contexts of accommodation : Developments in applied sociolinguistics , 1 . Howard Giles and Tania Ogay . 2007 . Communication accommodation theory . In Explaining Communica - tion : Contemporary Theories and Exemplars , chap - ter 16 . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . Amy L Gonzales , Jeffrey T Hancock , and James W Pennebaker . 2010 . Language style matching as a predictor of social dynamics in small groups . Com - munication Research , 37 ( 1 ) : 3 – 19 . Jack Grieve . 2023 . Register variation explains stylo - metric authorship analysis . Corpus Linguistics and Linguistic Theory , 19 ( 1 ) : 47 – 77 . Francis Heylighen and Jean - Marc Dewaele . 1999 . For - mality of language : definition , measurement and be - havioral determinants . Technical report , Center “Leo Apostel” , Free University of Brussels . Eduard Hovy . 1987 . Generating natural language un - der pragmatic constraints . Journal of Pragmatics , 11 ( 6 ) : 689 – 719 . Cornelia Ilie . 2021 . Discussion , dispute or contro - versy ? paradigms of conflict - driven parliamentary practices . Journal of Language Aggression and Con - flict , 9 ( 2 ) : 237 – 270 . Molly E . Ireland and Marlone D . Henderson . 2014 . Lan - guage style matching , engagement , and impasse in negotiations . Negotiation and Conflict Management Research , 7 ( 1 ) : 1 – 16 . Molly E Ireland and James W Pennebaker . 2010 . Lan - guage style matching in writing : synchrony in essays , correspondence , and poetry . Journal of personality and social psychology , 99 ( 3 ) : 549 . Molly E Ireland , Richard B Slatcher , Paul W Eastwick , Lauren E Scissors , Eli J Finkel , and James W Pen - nebaker . 2011 . Language style matching predicts relationship initiation and stability . Psychological science , 22 ( 1 ) : 39 – 44 . Elizabeth Jones , Cynthia Gallois , Victor Callan , and Michelle Barker . 1999 . Strategies of accommoda - tion : Development of a coding system for conversa - tional interaction . Journal of Language and Social Psychology , 18 ( 2 ) : 123 – 151 . Annemarie Kocab , Jayden Ziegler , and Jesse Snedeker . 2019 . It takes a village : The role of community size in linguistic regularization . Cognitive Psychology , 114 : 101227 . Philipp Koncar , Simon Walk , and Denis Helic . 2021 . Analysis and prediction of multilingual controversy on reddit . In 13th ACM Web Science Conference 2021 , pages 215 – 224 . Michael Lechner et al . 2011 . The estimation of causal effects by difference - in - difference methods . Founda - tions and Trends® in Econometrics , 4 ( 3 ) : 165 – 224 . Yinhan Liu , Myle Ott , Naman Goyal , Jingfei Du , Man - dar Joshi , Danqi Chen , Omer Levy , Mike Lewis , Luke Zettlemoyer , and Veselin Stoyanov . 2019 . Roberta : A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap - proach . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1907 . 11692 . Yelena Mejova , Amy X Zhang , Nicholas Diakopou - los , and Carlos Castillo . 2014 . Controversy and sentiment in online news . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1409 . 8152 . Antje S Meyer and Kathryn Bock . 1999 . Representa - tions and processes in the production of pronouns : Some perspectives from dutch . Journal of Memory and Language , 41 ( 2 ) : 281 – 301 . Kate Muir , Adam Joinson , Rachel Cotterill , and Nigel Dewdney . 2016 . Characterizing the linguistic chameleon : Personal and social correlates of linguis - tic style accommodation . Human Communication Research , 42 ( 3 ) : 462 – 484 . Kate Muir , Adam Joinson , Rachel Cotterill , and Nigel Dewdney . 2017 . Linguistic style accommodation shapes impression formation and rapport in computer - mediated communication . Journal of Language and Social Psychology , 36 ( 5 ) : 525 – 548 . Sik Hung Ng and James J Bradac . 1993 . Power in lan - guage : Verbal communication and social influence . Sage Publications , Inc . Kate G Niederhoffer and James W Pennebaker . 2002 . Linguistic style matching in social interaction . Jour - nal of Language and Social Psychology , 21 ( 4 ) : 337 – 360 . Bill Noble and Raquel Fernández . 2015 . Centre stage : How social network position shapes linguistic co - ordination . In Proceedings of the 6th workshop on cognitive modeling and computational linguistics , pages 29 – 38 . Ellie Pavlick and Joel Tetreault . 2016 . An empiri - cal analysis of formality in online communication . Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 4 : 61 – 74 . James W Pennebaker and Cindy K Chung . 2007 . Ex - pressive writing , emotional upheavals , and health . In Foundations of health psychology . Oxford University Press . James W Pennebaker , Martha E Francis , and Roger J Booth . 2001 . Linguistic inquiry and word count : Liwc 2001 . Mahway : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , 71 ( 2001 ) : 2001 . Sudha Rao and Joel Tetreault . 2018 . Dear sir or madam , may I introduce the GYAFC dataset : Corpus , bench - marks and metrics for formality style transfer . In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computa - tional Linguistics : Human Language Technologies , Volume 1 ( Long Papers ) , pages 129 – 140 , New Or - leans , Louisiana . Association for Computational Lin - guistics . Daniel M Romero , Roderick I Swaab , Brian Uzzi , and Adam D Galinsky . 2015 . Mimicry is presidential : Linguistic style matching in presidential debates and improved polling numbers . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 41 ( 10 ) : 1311 – 1319 . RL Street . 1991 . Accommodation in medical consulta - tions . Contexts of accommodation : Developments in applied sociolinguistics , pages 131 – 156 . Yla R Tausczik and James W Pennebaker . 2010 . The psychological meaning of words : Liwc and comput - erized text analysis methods . Journal of language and social psychology , 29 ( 1 ) : 24 – 54 . Paul J Taylor and Sally Thomas . 2008 . Linguistic style matching and negotiation outcome . Negotiation and conflict management research , 1 ( 3 ) : 263 – 281 . Michael Willemyns , Cynthia Gallois , Victor J Callan , and Jeffery Pittam . 1997 . Accent accommodation in the job interview : Impact of interviewer accent and gender . Journal of Language and Social Psychology , 16 ( 1 ) : 3 – 22 . Walt Wolfram . 1974 . Sociolinguistic Aspects of As - similation : Puerto Rican English in New York City . Center for Applied Linguistics . Yang Xu , Jeremy Cole , and David Reitter . 2018 . Not that much power : Linguistic alignment is influenced more by low - level linguistic features rather than so - cial power . In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meet - ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics ( Volume 1 : Long Papers ) , pages 601 – 610 .