present density functional calculations with gradient corrections give energy barriers of chemical reactions that are too low . A qualitative step forward is called for , similar to the step from the LDA to current gradi - ent - corrected density functionals ( 5 ) . For these reasons , the design and optimi - zation of high - performance electronic , opti - cal , and magnetic materials benefits perhaps the most from the capabilities of first - prin - ciples quantum mechanical methods , be - cause in these systems the key aspect is typi - cally the relation between a static geometric structure and the corresponding electronic structure . A good example is related to the design of high - performance optical fibers , in which any impurity or defect is a poten - tial source of scattering that can degrade performance . One such defect is caused by oxygen vacancies within the SiO2 network . Starting from a crystal of a - quartz ( see fig - ure ) , the removal of an oxygen atom leaves two silicon atoms in the lattice with unsatur - ated bonds . It is not obvious how these at - oms relax to minimize the total energy of the system . One possibility is that an internal Si - Si dimer forms , thus closing the micro - void created by the oxygen vacancy . Local density functional calculations ( 6 ) reveal that on removal of one oxygen atom the ad - jacent Si atoms spontaneously dimerize . However , a puckered conformation is found as another possible metastable conformation ( see figure ) . For this structure , the calcula - tions give a highly localized electronic state ( see figure ) . The energy of this state falls into the optical gap of the perfect silica and thus may be a cause for light absorption . A key finding , which is being further investigated , is the fact that the puckered structure is sta - bilized by the trapping of a positive charge . In fact , with this detailed knowledge of the nature of the oxygen impurity and its sensi - tivity to the charge state , it is possible to de - sign improved materials and processes that avoid this type of defect , thus leading to better high - performance silica materials for applications such as optical fibers . These two examples demonstrate that current quantum mechanical methods al - low the prediction of subtle structural fea - tures that can have significant effects on the properties of a material , such as its opti - cal characteristics . Equipped with this type of predictive structural tool , materials sci - entists are now in a position to explore the " materials design space " in a much more creative and productive way than with a purely experimental approach . A large part of all possible combinations of atoms is still unknown , as can be seen from an analysis of the documented materials and phases . Whereas 83 % of all possible binary systems have been experimentally characterized , less than 10 % of all ternaries and less than 1 % of quaternary systems are known ( 7 ) . The majority of materials have yet to be synthesized and characterized . An impor - tant tool to this end is the reliable predic - tion of atomic structures , now possible with first - principles quantum mechanical ap - proaches even when very subtle effects and dynamical aspects are involved . References and Notes 1 . J . FurthmOller , J . G . Kresse , J . Hafner , R . Stumpf , M . Scheffler , Phys . Rev . Lett . 74 , 5084 ( 1995 ) . 2 . Local density functional theory does not contain any arbitrary or adjustable parameters ; hence , it can be called " first - principles " theory . In contrast , current gradient - corrected density functionals in - clude some parametric aspects . 3 . An overview of current atomistic computational methods is given , for example , by E . Wimmer , J . Comput . - Aided Mater . Des . 1 , 215 ( 1993 ) . 4 . R . Car and M . Parrinello , Phys . Rev . Lett . 55 , 247 ( 1985 ) . 5 . J . P . Perdew , Specialist Workshop on Density Functional Methods in Chemistry , Centre Euro - peen des Calculs Atomiques et Moldculaires ( CECAM ) , Lyon , France , 28 to 30 June 1995 . 6 . D . C . Allan and M . P . Teter , J . Am . Ceram . Soc . 73 , 3247 ( 1990 ) . 7 . P . Villars , A . Prince , H . Okamoto , Handbook of Ternary Alloy Phase Diagrams ( ASM Interna - tional , Materials Park , OH , 1995 ) , vols . 1 - 10 . 8 . The author gratefully acknowledges the many stimulating and helpful discussions , especially with D . C . Allan , D . A . Dixon , A . J . Freeman , J . Harris , R . D . King - Smith , D . H . Klipstein , and M . P . Teter . Eukaryotic cells use stringent sorting mechanisms to maintain the lipid and pro - tein composition of their intracellular or - ganelles . This sorting process is best under - stood for the recruitment of certain trans - membrane proteins into pits in the plasma membrane ( defined by their coats of the pro - tein clathrin ) . Concentration of these pro - teins generates heterogeneity within the plane of the membrane . The cell uses a dif - ferent strategy to maintain other distinctive plasma membrane structures , the caveolae , a strategy that makes use of the biophysical properties of lipids rather than protein - pro - tein interactions . A new purification tech - nique for caveolae , reported in this issue of Science , demonstrates this in a striking way ( 1 ) . Caveolae ( " small caves " ) , flask - shaped invaginations of the plasma membrane , are a prominent feature of many mammalian cells ( 2 , 3 ) . They were originally defined by electron microscopy and are particularly abundant in adipocytes , smooth muscle , and endothelia . In the past 5 years , progress on the biochemistry of caveolae has been greatly facilitated by the characterization of VIP21 - caveolin , a 21 - kilodalton integral membrane protein proposed to be part of the " caveolar coat " ( 4 , 5 ) . This unusual pro - tein forms a hairpin structure in the mem - brane , with both the amino and carboxyl termini facing the cytoplasm ( 6 ) . VIP21 - caveolin is also present in the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) and in both apical and basolateral exocytic vesicles of epithelial cells . It was isolated from such epithelial cells on the basis of its presence in low - density , detergent - insoluble complexes ( 7 ) , which also contain glycosyl phosphati - dylinositol ( GPI ) - linked proteins and other proteins implicated in signal transduction , including Src - family kinases and heterotri - meric guanosine triphosphate - binding pro - teins ( G proteins ) ( 8 ) . The complexes are enriched in glycosphingolipids ( GSLs ) , sphingomyelin , and cholesterol , but are de - SCIENCE * VOL . 269 * 8 SEPTEMBER 1995 pleted of phospholipids ( 9 ) . These results suggested a link to earlier observations in lymphocytes showing that cross - linking of GPI - anchored proteins caused activation of Src - family kinase - mediated signaling path - ways dependent both on the GPI - anchor and on the lipid modification ( palmitoylation ) of the Src kinase ( 10 - 12 ) . Moreover , detergent treatment of lymphocytes extracted com - plexes enriched in GPI - anchored proteins and Src kinases ( 13 ) . These findings led to the idea of microdomains of distinct lipid com - position that mediate signal transduction . However , the equivalence of detergent - insoluble complexes and caveolae has now been questioned ( 14 ) , and it appears that at least in lymphocytes and neuroblastoma cells detergent - insoluble complexes can ex - ist in the absence of caveolae , as shown by morphological criteria and by the absence of VIP21 - caveolin ( 15 , 16 ) . Clearly , signal transduction in these cells does not require VIP21 - caveolin or caveolar invaginations . In addition , GPI - anchored proteins may not be greatly enriched in caveolae under steady - state conditions ( 17 , 18 ) and hence their detergent insolubility would not corre - late with their presence in caveolae . Never - theless , these points remain controversial . We therefore propose that the term " caveolae " be used for the classical morpho - logical entity as originally defined and that these structures be differentiated from the de - Digging into Caveolae Robert G . Parton and Kai Simons The authors are at the European Molecular Biology Laboratory , Meyerhofstrasse 1 , D69012 Heidelberg , Germany . 1398 . M on M a r c h 28 , 2016 D o w n l oaded f r o m on M a r c h 28 , 2016 D o w n l oaded f r o m S lsrc - family kinase / , Specific phospho DIGs and caveolae on the cell surface . tergent - insoluble glycosphingolipid - enriched complexes ( DIGs ) , which appear to be present in all mammalian cells ( see figure ) . What is the nature of these DIGs , how do they form , and what is their relation to caveolae ? Sphingomyelin or brain cerebro - sides incorporated into pure liposomes have detergent - insolubility characteristics similar to those of the DIGs of intact cells ( 19 ) . Cholesterol in the liposomes also becomes detergent - insoluble but is not essential for the insolubility of the lipids . GPI - anchored alkaline phosphatase incorporated into the same liposomes was also detergent - insoluble but , unlike sphingolipids , which were deter - gent - insoluble at all temperatures , alkaline phosphatase was soluble at higher tempera - tures . Thus , the insolubility of these mol - ecules is not a fundamental feature of caveolae but is due to the physical proper - ties of the lipid components . The basic in - soluble core of the DIGs may in fact be due to the sphingolipids . Other components , such as cholesterol , would then interact with this basic core . GPI - anchored proteins may have lower affinity for these domains under normal conditions , but this affinity might be increased by experimental manipulations ( such as cross - linking with antibodies , or detergent treatment ) or regulated by physi - ological protein - protein interactions . Similarly , the core of the caveolae may also be based on sphingolipids . The ganglio - side GM1 can be seen within caveolae by electron microscopy , even without cross - linking ( 20 ) . This point is now supported by biochemical evidence from a purification technique in which the endothelial cell sur - face is coated with colloidal silica in vivo ( 1 ) . Remarkably , GM1 - and VIP21 - caveolin - enriched domains were completely separated from fractions containing GPI - anchored proteins . The authors suggest that GPI - an - chored proteins exist in a domain or annulus surrounding , but not within , the caveolae , a surprising suggestion in view of the postu - lated role of GPI - anchored proteins within caveolae ( 3 ) ( although it is still possible that the cationic silica could cause some redistri - bution of the negatively charged GPI - an - chored proteins from the caveolae interior ) . Is the insolubility of VIP21 - caveolin also due to an interaction with GSLs in caveolae ? Possibly , because VIP21 - caveolin interacts specifically with cholesterol in a detergent - resistant manner ( 21 ) , and cho - lesterol is essential for the maintenance of caveolar morphology and function ( 22 ) . VIP21 - caveolin may therefore associate with the cholesterol surrounding the sphingo - lipids to form the caveolae . Few other com - ponents seem required to form the basic caveolar unit : Expression of VIP21 - caveolin in lymphocytes causes de novo formation of plasma membrane invaginations indistin - guishable from caveolae of other cells ( 23 ) , perhaps requiring the self - association of VIP21 - caveolin monomers ( 24 ) . We envisage the DIGs as rafts in which the constituent logs ( lipids ) are constantly moving back and forth , as do detergent monomers in a micelle . The DIGs would differ from caveolae in that the latter are in - vaginated and ready to be internalized from the surface like coated pits . Caveolae may also form around the DIGs , but we believe that even in cells with numerous caveolae , DIGs are not restricted to the caveolar do - main . Characterization of the nature of the lipids on the cytoplasmic leaflet of the SCIENCE * VOL . 269 * 8 SEPTEMBER 1995 membrane will be revealing , as will recon - stitution of the process in liposomes . Finally , these results have implications for sorting of apically destined proteins in the TGN of epithelial cells . Buds of the TGN may be enriched in GSLs , VIP21 - caveolin , and GPI - anchored proteins and function analogously to caveolae ( 6 ) . Caveolae at the cell surface may act as traps for proteins with affinity for these mem - brane domains . This affinity might be mod - ulated , for example , by processes that mimic cross - linking of GPI - anchored or trans - membrane proteins ( 25 ) . Palmitoylation , a reversible and regulatable modification , may influence the interaction of proteins with the DIGs ( within or outside caveolae ) on the cytosolic surface of the plasma mem - brane . Indeed , VIP21 - caveolin ( 26 ) , Src ki - nases ( 27 ) , and heterotrimeric G proteins ( 28 ) are all palmitoylated . In this way the cell could build up a complex domain with - in the plasma membrane around an aggre - gate of lipids . The challenge in the future will be to understand how these interactions of lipids and proteins contribute to specific - ity in cellular function . Maybe the cell re - ally does need the hundreds of lipid species that make up our cellular membranes . References 1 . J . E . Schnitzer , D . P . Mcintosh , A . M . Dvorak , J . Liu , P . Oh , Science 269 , 1435 ( 1995 ) . 2 . N . J . Severs , J . Cell Sci . 90 , 341 ( 1988 ) . 3 . R . G . W . Anderson , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 5 , 647 ( 1993 ) . 4 . K . Rothberg etal . , Cell 68 , 673 ( 1992 ) . 5 . T . V . Kurzchalia , P . Dupree , S . Monier , FEBS Lett . 346 , 88 ( 1994 ) . 6 . P . Dupree , R . G . Parton , G . Raposo , T . V . Kurzchalia , K . Simons , EMBO J . 12 , 1597 ( 1993 ) . 7 . T . V . Kurzchalia et al . , J . Cell Biol . 118 , 1003 ( 1992 ) . 8 . M . Sargiacomo , M . Sudol , Z . Tang , M . P . Lisanti , ibid . 122 , 789 ( 1993 ) . 9 . D . A . Brown and J . K . Rose , Cell68 , 533 ( 1992 ) . 10 . D . Brown , Curr . Opin . Immunol . 5 , 349 ( 1993 ) . 11 . S . A . Shenoy et al . , J . Immunol . 149 , 3535 ( 1992 ) . 12 . S . A . Shenoy , L . K . Gauen , J . Kwong , A . S . Shaw , D . M . Lublin , Mol . Cell . Biol . 13 , 6385 ( 1993 ) . 13 . T . Cinek and V . Horesji , J . Immunol . 149 , 2262 ( 1992 ) . 14 . T . V . Kurzchalia , E . Hartmann , P . Dupree , Trends Cell Biol . 5 , 187 ( 1995 ) . 15 . A . Fra , E . Williamson , K . Simons , R . G . Parton , J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 30745 ( 1994 ) . 16 . A . Gorodinsky and D . A . Harris , J . Cell Biol . 129 , 619 ( 1995 ) . 17 . S . Mayor , K . Rothberg , F . Maxfield , Science 264 , 1948 ( 1994 ) . 18 . R . G . Parton , B . Joggerst , K . Simons , J . Cell Biol . 127 , 1199 ( 1994 ) . 19 . R . Schroeder , E . London , D . Brown , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 91 , 12130 ( 1994 ) . 20 . R . G . Parton , J . Histochem . Cytochem . 42 , 155 ( 1994 ) . 21 . M . Murata et al . , Proc . Nati . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . , in press . 22 . K . Rothberg , Y . Ying , B . A . Kamen , R . G . W . Anderson , J . Cell Biol . 111 , 2931 ( 1990 ) . 23 . A . M . Fra , E . Williamson , K . Simons , R . G . Parton , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . , in press . 24 . S . Monier , R . G . Parton , F . Vogel , A . Henske , T . V . Kurzchalia , Mol . Biol . Cell 6 , 911 ( 1995 ) . 25 . K . Fiedler , R . G . Parton , R . Kellner , T . Etzold , K . Simons , EMBO J . 13 , 1729 ( 1994 ) . 26 . D . J . Dietzen , W . R . Hastings , D . M . Lublin , J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 6838 ( 1995 ) . 27 . S . A . Shenoy , D . J . Dietzen , J . Kwong , D . C . Link , D . M . Lublin , J . Cell Biol . 126 , 353 ( 1994 ) . 28 . S . M . Mumby , C . Kleuss , A . G . Gilman , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 91 , 2800 ( 1994 ) . 1399