Amoeboid leukocyte crawling through extracellular matrix : lessons from the Dictyostelium paradigm of cell movement Peter Friedl , Stefan Borgmann , and Eva - B . Bro¨cker Cell Migration Laboratory , Department of Dermatology , University of Wu¨rzburg , Wu¨rzburg , Germany Abstract : Cell movement within three - dimen - sional tissues is a cycling multistep process that requires the integration of complex biochemical and biophysical cell functions . Different cells solve this challenge differently , which leads to differ - ences in migration strategies . Migration principles established for leukocytes share many characteris - tics with those described for ameba of the lower eukaryote Dictyostelium discoideum . The hall - marks of amoeboid movement include a simple polarized shape , dynamic pseudopod protrusion and retraction , ﬂexible oscillatory shape changes , and rapid low - afﬁnity crawling . Amoeboid crawling includes haptokinetic adhesion - dependent as well as biophysical migration mechanisms on or within many structurally and functionally different sub - strates . We describe central aspects of amoeboid movement in leukocytes and the implications for leukocyte crawling and positioning strategies within interstitial tissues . J . Leukoc . Biol . 70 : 491 – 509 ; 2001 . Key Words : T lymphocytes z collagen matrix z cytoskeletal dy - namics z migration strategies INTRODUCTION Leukocytes are highly migratory cells that can develop a spec - trum of versatile migration strategies to enter and transmigrate through various tissues and organs [ reviewed in ref . 1 – 3 ] . In the body , migrating leukocytes adapt their cell bodies to pre - existing structures , yet appear simultaneously able to structur - ally modify matrix barriers . Putatively nondestructive T cell migration occurs within the loose connective tissue of lym - phatic organs and interstitial compartments [ 2 ] . These com - partments comprise the lymph node cortex , the mesentery , perivascular ﬁbrillar trails along blood vessels , or the dermal papillae [ 2 , 4 ] . T lymphocytes are further capable of crawling along the surface of other cells , such as vessel endothelium before transmigration , ﬁbroblastic reticulum cells in lymph nodes [ 5 ] , and antigen - presenting cells [ 6 ] . The penetration of basement membranes requires attachment coupled to proteo - lytic mechanisms [ 7 ] and profound shape changes . In chronic inﬂammation , the interaction of T cells with resident tissue cells can result in severe proteolytic remodeling of tissue architecture , integrity , and function [ 8 ] . For all of these con - ditions , migratory traction occurs in conjunction with recogni - tion of additional activation signals from the counterpart cell or matrix interphase , implicating overlapping pathways of cy - toskeletal dynamics and signal transduction [ 9 ] . Such a broad spectrum of migratory capabilities through or across biophysically and biochemically very different sub - strates implies a great degree of ﬂexibility and adaptability of leukocyte migration and positioning strategies . Such diversity may set leukocytes apart from other more specialized migratory cell types . As examples , ﬁbroblasts , keratinocytes , and neurons migrate only under circumstances highly restricted in location and time , i . e . , on morphogenesis or wound healing within a speciﬁc tissue context . Cell migration within the tissues is a complex mechano - chemical process that requires the integration of key events in signaling , cytoskeletal , membrane , and adhesion systems [ re - viewed in ref . 10 – 12 ] . Based on cell type - speciﬁc morpholog - ical and functional criteria of migration within an extracellular matrix ( ECM ) environment , i . e . , polarization and shape change , migration velocity , cytoskeletal organization , and integrin and protease expression and function , at least three migratory pro - totypes can be classiﬁed : ( 1 ) amoeboid crawling can be distin - guished from ( 2 ) ﬁbroblast - like , mesenchymal migration and ( 3 ) collective cell movement , as seen in multicellular strands , sheets , or clusters [ 12 14 ] . The concept of amoeboid motion is most clearly established by studies using the single - cell stage of the lower eukaryotic ameba Dictyostelium discoideum [ 15 ] . Amoeboid movement results from alternating cycles of morphological expansion and contraction driven by cytoskeletal dynamics , shape change , and low adhesivity . These migration characteristics allow ameba to rapidly adapt to a given environment , develop high migration velocities , and contact other cells in a dynamic yet reversible manner . The Dictyostelium paradigm of movement has important implications for the understanding of cell mi - gration strategies in higher eukaryotes , most notably for neu - trophils , lymphocytes , and some tumor cells [ 15 , 16 ] . Fibroblast - like mesenchymal migration , as detected in ﬁ - broblasts , myoblasts , neural crest cells , and many cells from solid tumors , depends on relatively slow , adhesion receptor - and integrin - dependent cell - substrate interactions that fulﬁll the criteria of adhesion - mediated ( “haptokinetic” ) migration [ 11 , 17 , 18 ] . These cells express high levels of integrins and Correspondence : Peter Friedl , Cell Migration Laboratory , Department of Dermatology , University of Wu¨rzburg , Josef - Schneider - Str . 2 , 97080 Wu¨rz - burg , Germany . E - mail : peter . fr @ mail . uni - wuerzburg . de Received February 15 , 2001 ; revised July 9 , 2001 ; accepted July 30 , 2001 . Journal of Leukocyte Biology Volume 70 , October 2001 491 matrix - degrading proteases and , while migrating , can create substantial remodeling of the ECM [ 19 – 21 ; reviewed in ref . 12 ] . Collective cell movement , in extension of haptokinetic mi - gration of single cells , is dependent on highly adhesive sub - strate interactions and remodeling of the extracellular matrix . Multicellular migration requires the maintenance of stringent cell - cell adhesion and communication mechanisms [ 13 , 22 23 ; Y . Hegerfeldt , M . Tusch , E . B . Brocker , P . Friedl , unpublished results ] , as detected in migrating cell clusters from epidermal keratinocyte sheets , angiogenic sprouts , and tumors . Because form follows function and vice versa , the shapes adopted by single cells or cells within tissue frequently corre - spond to functional speciﬁcities of those cells . We here sum - marize cellular and molecular strategies involved in amoeboid cell movement and use the paradigm of amoeboid crawling for understanding the locomotor mechanisms of leukocytes , par - ticularly by T lymphocytes and neutrophils migrating on 2 - D and within 3 - D tissue substrates . THE LIFE CYCLE OF D . DISCOIDEUM The amoeboid cells of the slime mold D . discoideum live as separate , independent cells in soil , leaf mold , or litter stratum , phagocytozing bacteria and yeasts . Under favorable nutrient conditions , amebas grow as individual cells that divide every few hours by individual cell division ( cytokinesis ) . Under these conditions , Dictyostelium amebae develop chemotaxis towards the source of their food , i . e . , bacterial products , such as folic acid . The single cell phenotype is commonly referred to as preaggregation stage . On challenge by adverse events , such as starvation by exhaustion of food and nutrients , amebae stop dividing and initiate a developmental program that leads to the two - step formation of a multicellular organism , the spore . First , about 10 4 - 10 5 cells chemotactically gather together and aggre - gate to form a tipped mound . The mound is surrounded by extracellular matrix and develops a spore head . The spore head elongates and falls onto the substrate to generate a multicel - lular slug or pseudoplasmodium , i . e . , a worm - like migratory cell cluster that behaves chemotactically and phototactically . Proper slug development is dependent on differentiation and sorting into two different cell types , prestalk and prespore , that migrate and position themselves differently . Prestalk cells form the faster moving front of the slug whereas prespore cells are located in slower rear parts [ 25 ] . The slug is surrounded by a sheet composed of extracellular matrix ( ECM ) proteins and cellulose . Attracted by light and heat , multicellular migration of slugs can persist for up to 20 days . Culmination is initiated if growth conditions such as light , humidity , and external ion strength are appropriate . The slug then maturates into a dif - ferentiated fruiting body consisting of a vacuolated stalk sup - porting a mass of spores ( spore head ) , stalk tube , and a basal disk . Finally , the spore germinates to form a new generation of ameba and thereby completes the life cycle [ 26 ] ( highly in - structive Dictyostelium information is available on the World Wide Web at http : / / dicty . cmb . nwu . edu / dicty / dicty . html ) . PARADIGM OF AMOEBOID MOTION , INCLUDING SHAPE CHANGE AND MIGRATION DYNAMICS One of the earliest responses to starvation by amebae is that they start to secrete cAMP . cAMP leads to convergent chemo - tactic migration of the cells for aggregation and differentiation towards the mound and slug stage [ 15 ] . This phase of early single - cell movement has been used for extensive quantitative studies on the cell biology and molecular mechanisms of amoeboid crawling . Based on ﬁndings from the preaggregation stage of Dictyostelium , a ﬁve - step model of cell crawling was established and has been extended over the years [ 15 , 27 ] . These ﬁve phases form a cycling process that is initiated by pseudopod extension as a starting point [ 28 ] : ( 1 ) In initial actin nucleation , extrinsic or intrinsic signals are integrated by G - proteins and phosphoinosites ( PIPs ) leading to local actin polymerization at the leading edge ; ( 2 ) during ﬁlament growth and pseudopod protrusion , as a result of actin polymerization , a pseudopod is formed and protruded ; the development of a pseudopod results from elongation and cross - linking of poly - merized actin to a viscous gel and unilateral swelling , prompt - ing the outward pushing of the plasma membrane , extension of one or several leading pseudopods , and acquisition of a polar - ized cell shape ; ( 3 ) during attachment , the pseudopod estab - lishes an interaction towards the underlying substrate by low - adhesion mechanisms that , in the case of Dictyostelium , re - mains to be deﬁned on a molecular level ; ( 4 ) contraction by ﬁlament sliding occurs after attachment of the leading edge to the substrate and anterior elongation of the cell body ; this contraction provides the force for translocation , and contractile force is putatively provided by myosin motors and additional mechanisms ; ( 5 ) ﬁnally retraction and detachment of the cell rear occurs , during which localized release of adhesive bonds at the trailing edge allows the detachment and retraction of the rear end into the advancing cell body . An important aspect of cell movement is how biochemical signals are integrated into characteristic and cell type - speciﬁc morphological dynamics . In resting Dictyostelium , the size of the cell body is 8 – 12 m m and the shape is spherical . After polarization and on crawling , the length axis averages 12 – 16 m m and can extend to 30 m m and more . In principle , the amoeboid morphology consists of an elliptoid core body with a broader leading edge and a narrowing trailing edge , termed the uropod . The overall morphology is highly reactive to external stimuli and can fundamentally change within seconds . Shortly before and on crawling , multiple pseudopods form around the leading edge and lateral portions of the cell body , while the uropod appears to remain a largely passive contractile zone . While the cell body advances , the bottom surface has been shown to maintain knobby foot - like actin - rich interaction zones ( “eupodia” ) of 1 m m in diameter towards the underlying sub - strate [ 29 ] , which , together with lateral adhesion sites , are thought to act as anchoring points . The average velocity varies from 4 to 12 m m / min , whereas accelerations in pseudopod extension result in peak velocities up to 25 m m / min [ 30 ] . If external chemotactic triggers are lacking , autochthonous pseu - dopodal oscillations and shape changes lead to short - lived forward movement alternating with rapid turns . Consequently , 492 Journal of Leukocyte Biology Volume 70 , October 2001 http : / / www . jleukbio . org the directional persistence of nonchemotactically crawling ameba on nonaligned substrates is low , in agreement with the concept of persistent random walk [ 31 , 32 ] . In the natural environment , Dictyostelium cells migrate on or within three - dimensional ( 3D ) complex substrates such as soil particles , fragmented leaves , and debris of very different phys - icochemical properties . The cells are able to move on humid as well as on dry substrates . Consequently , amoeboid migration must be a very robust process that is resistant to many adverse events . On the other hand , conventional laboratory substrates represent relatively smooth surfaces , such as agar , nitrocellu - lose ﬁlters , or cover slips , lacking biophysical constraints . As discussed below , these substrates might not mimic the natural environment closely enough , recently prompting investigations on reconstructed soil substrate [ 33 , 34 ] . CYTOSKELETAL ORGANIZATION The structure and dynamics of the cytoskeleton in Dictyoste - lium have been the subjects of intense investigations using both functional and genetic strategies [ see reviews in ref 10 , 15 , 35 – 37 ] . It is likely that several molecular events converge in cytoskeletal dynamics and force generation . Mechanisms of cell motility Three different yet putatively synergistic mechanisms have been proposed and further studied that might contribute to cell motility : actin polymerization to ﬁlaments , myosin - mediated stiffening and contraction , and osmotic or hydrostatic force . Actin polymerization Actin polymerization occurs closely juxtaposed to the inner leaﬂet of the plasma membrane , possibly favored by random membrane ﬂuctuations to be ﬁlled by expanding actin ﬁla - ments . Actin , the main component of the microﬁlamentous cytoskeleton , exists as soluble , monomeric globular actin ( G - actin ) which homoaggregates to form ﬁlamentous actin poly - mers ( F - actin ) . Actin polymerization is a directional process . Rapid aggregation of monomers occurs at one side of the ﬁlament ( barbed end ) , while depolymerization is present at the other end ( pointed end ) . Growing actin ﬁlaments elongate , branch , and form a viscous actin - rich gel ( “gel” phase ) . This actin gel is characterized by a certain degree of stiffness and rigidity , allowing rapid membrane protrusion and pseudopod growth . From scanning electron microscopy studies detecting labeled actin monomers newly incorporated into the ﬁlaments , it appears that most of these barbed ends are directed towards the plasma membrane and , while growing , might generate an outward movement of the membrane [ 27 ] . Myosin sliding The myosin sliding concept predicts that , also in nonmuscle cells , actin ﬁlaments can be cross - linked and contracted through myosin , generating both cortical actin stabilization and cell contraction . Myosin II ( conventional myosin ) forms bipolar ﬁlaments that cross - link actin ﬁlaments and stiffen cell pro - trusions [ 38 ] . Myosin II was further shown to mediate posterior contraction enabling the rear of the cell to detach from the substrate and move in concert with the leading edge [ 39 ] . Although myosin II - deﬁcient cells are principally able to gen - erate pseudopods and undergo locomotion on surfaces , the migration velocity as well as mechanical force generated at the leading edge of myosin II - deﬁcient cells is reduced as a consequence of reduced cortical stiffness , delayed posterior release of adhesive bonds , and uropod retraction [ 40 , 41 ] . Cortical expansion The cortical expansion model predicts that local osmotic pres - sure favors focal cytoplasmic swelling and pseudopod exten - sion [ 35 ] . Osmotic pressure might be generated by ion inﬂux at the leading edge mediated by ion channels [ 42 ] or the cyto - plasmic release of osmotically active molecules . In addition , some hydrostatic pressure might be generated by cell contrac - tion or uropod retraction that pumps cytoplasmic ﬂuid into regions of increased elasticity . Net pressure of the aqueous phase could then lead to localized swelling and passive out - ward extension of a nascent pseudopod . Role of cytoplasmic proteins in actin function It is quite likely , that the above concepts synergize and can be integrated into one common scheme . In Dictyostelium , the molecular control of actin ﬁlament assembly and disassembly is provided by an ever increasing number of known cytoplas - mic proteins , which bind to actin and control actin function . The following paragraphs highlight selected proteins , most of which share structural and functional homology to mammalian cells . Capping proteins Capping proteins bind to , protect , and sequester actin ﬁla - ments . At the onset of ﬁlament growth , capping proteins dis - sociate from preexisting ﬁlaments and increase the number of barbed ends [ 43 ] . Capping proteins appear to deliver actin monomers to privileged actin nucleation centers , e . g . , at the leading edge [ 44 ] , thereby putatively conﬁning the addition of actin monomers to growing ﬁlaments at special sites in time and space [ 45 ] . On the other hand , while reversibly capping older ﬁlaments , capping proteins also terminate polymeriza - tion . Capping proteins include gelsolin , protovillin , proﬁlin , and Cap32 / 34 . Actin uncapping and initial polymerization are rapid processes . After chemotactic stimulation , increased barbed ends are observed in Dicytostelium with 1 - s delay [ 46 ] , indicating that uncapping is a rapid process that initiates ﬁlament growth and remodeling . The importance of capping proteins in actin dynamics and remodeling is underlined by deletion mutants that develop exaggerated levels of polymer - ized actin while motility is impaired , putatively as a conse - quence of decreased actin turnover [ 47 ] . Severing proteins Severing proteins bind to and intercalate between actin ﬁla - ments causing ﬁlament breakage or actin monomer dissociation at the contact point . It is thought that repetitive ﬁlament severing keeps growing actin ﬁlaments at a certain length for network formation and also increases the number of freely accessible barbed ends for ﬁlament growth [ summarized in ref . 48 ] . However , if G - actin levels are rate - limiting , severing will Friedl et al . Amoeboid crawling movement of leukocytes 493 lead to depolymerization , whereas at high G - actin concentra - tions , nucleation and ﬁlament growth are supported [ 48 ] . Im - portant severing proteins are members of the coﬁlin family ( previously called actin - depolymerizing factors ) . In vitro and in vivo analyses have shown that coﬁlin severs ﬁlamentous actin thereby generating free barbed ends for G - actin binding and nucleation . Coﬁlin increases actin turnover rates [ 49 ] , and , consequently , overexpression of coﬁlin leads to enhanced ruf - ﬂing , pseudopod formation , and cell movement [ 50 , 51 ] . It was proposed that coﬁlin could recycle actin monomers to regions of nucleation by depolymerizing old ﬁlaments , thereby contrib - uting to the remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton [ 44 , 52 ] . Other proteins exerting severing function are gelsolin , severin , and villin [ 53 ] . Branching and cross - linking proteins Branching and cross - linking proteins bind to and intercalate between individual actin ﬁlaments and contribute to the for - mation of actin meshwork [ 54 ] . Cross - linking is important for the generation of a 3 - D actin ﬁlament structure of increased mechanical strength and stiffness . Branching proteins include Arp2 , Arp3 , members of the ﬁlamin family [ e . g . , the 120 - kDa gelation factor actin - binding protein ( ABP ) - 120 ] , and coronins . The actin - related proteins Arp2 and Arp3 are part of a seven - protein cross - linking and signaling complex localized in actin - rich spots within pseudopodia . The Arp2 / 3 complex was shown to be essential in actin network formation [ 55 ] . ABP - 120 and coronin become localized in pseudopods of the leading edge and are thought to contribute to cross - linking and remodeling of cortical ﬁlaments in pseudopod extensions [ 56 – 59 ] . Other branching proteins are ABP - 180 and spectrin . Cross - linking proteins , such as a - actinin , fascin , cortexillins , and calpactin cross - link actin ﬁlaments to form thicker bundles or meshwork of higher mechanical strength . Myosin II also cross - links actin ﬁlaments and contributes to cortical stiffness and pushing force in extending pseudopods [ 40 , 41 ] . Anchoring proteins Anchoring proteins are candidate proteins connecting growing ﬁlaments to the inner leaﬂet of the plasma membrane . Anchor - ing proteins include Scar1 , myosin I , and talin homologues . Scar1 is an important multifunctional adapter protein related to the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) family in mam - mals ( see below ) . Scar1 / WASP binds to membrane - inserted phosphoinositides and membrane - anchored activated G - pro - teins , then recruiting actin binding and branching proteins ( e . g . , Arp2 / 3 ) to the membrane [ 60 ] . Overexpression of a non - functional , dominant - negative Scar1 / WASP fragment uncou - ples the actin cytoskeleton from the membrane and leads to complete loss of actin nucleation and lamellipodial extension . Myosin I ( “unconventional myosin” ) is a candidate protein to anchor actin ﬁlaments to the plasma membrane predominantly at the leading edge . Myosin - I - deﬁcient cells extend an in - creased number of pseudopods , indicating a role for myosin I in focusing and polarizing pseudopodal action [ 61 ] . Talin - like proteins are homologous to mammalian talin ( see below ) , a protein that cross - links actin to transmembrane adhesion re - ceptors [ 62 , 63 ] . Talin homologues localize to the tips of the ﬁlopodia , cross - link actin ﬁlaments , and are also involved in actin nucleation and assembly [ 62 , 63 ] . Other anchoring pro - teins are ponticulin , hisactophilin , synexins , and intercaptin [ 64 66 ] . There is a consensus that actin polymerization involves simultaneous and synergistic mechanisms including severing of preexisting actin ﬁlaments ( coﬁlin ) , uncapping of preexisting nuclei by dissociation of capping proteins , and de novo nucle - ation ( Arp2 / 3 , Scar1 / WASP ) [ 28 , 48 , 55 , 67 , 68 ] . From a viewpoint of physical chemistry , the formation and turnover of actin - rich gels are sufﬁcient to explain membrane protrusion and the generation of a certain degree of mechanical stiffness . In vivo evidence for this concept comes from observations on the intracellular propulsion of Listeria monocytogenes in in - fected eukaryotic cells . Listeria rods are pushed forward by a ﬁlamentous “tail” of endogenous host actin that forms at one end of the bacterium [ reviewed in ref . 69 , 70 ] . A minimum of four components required for this actin - driven force generation were recently identiﬁed using puriﬁed proteins in cell - free extracts : actin , activated Arp2 / 3 complex , coﬁlin , and capping protein [ 71 , 72 ] . Several models have been proposed illustrating how these components might act together . Activated Arp2 / 3 induces branched nucleation and ﬁlament growth . Two actin sites have been discussed as targets of Arp2 / 3 , the sides of older ﬁla - ments ( dendritic nucleation model ) [ 68 , 73 ] and the barbed ends of actin ﬁlaments after uncapping ( barbed - end nucleation model ) [ 74 , 75 ] . Coﬁlin has been proposed to depolymerize pointed ends and to further accelerate actin incorporation into barbed ends , increasing the speed of ﬁlament growth [ 51 , 76 ] . The function of capping protein in this context is less clear . Capping protein could contribute to spatially limit and focus the polymerization process ( funneling concept ) , e . g . , by mask - ing older ﬁlaments while sparing adjacent rapidly growing ﬁlaments [ 67 ] . Based on these concepts together with other in vitro as well as in vivo ﬁndings , actin polymerization alone might generate mechanical pushing force for pseudopod growth and protrusion . It remains to be determined how the mechanical strength generated by such restricted actin assembly in vitro can be translated to the biomechanical requirements of entire cells . In vivo generation of actin ﬁlaments must be robust enough for higher - order shape change and mechanical resistance towards extracellular constraints . It is therefore likely that the biome - chanics in complete cells require additional action of ABPs with overlapping function . In Dictyostelium , a single cell crawl - ing across 2 - D surfaces is a robust process that can be quite resistant to genetic ablation of structural and signaling pro - teins . A number of Dictyostelium deletion mutants for single ABPs ( e . g . , coronin , proﬁlin , myosin IB , 120 - kDa gelation factor , cortexillin , severin , cap32 / 34 , a - actinin , or talin ) have produced strikingly minor alterations in single - cell locomotion , whereas other processes such as phagocytosis , cytokinesis , and morphogenesis have been more frequently impaired [ 77 ] . One obvious explanation is that deleting a single or a limited number of proteins might not sufﬁciently impair the overall stability of the cytoskeleton , because functional compensation of the deleted proteins might be provided by remaining ABPs 494 Journal of Leukocyte Biology Volume 70 , October 2001 http : / / www . jleukbio . org as a part of a redundant network . More frequently , loss of function in mutants with deletion of cytoskeletal proteins is obtained at the slug or spore stage , indicating that cell - cell and cell - substrate interactions involved in sorting and positioning at 3 - D multicellular stages demand more stringent cytoskeletal action and control than biomechanically less demanding sin - gle - cell crawling [ 25 ] . A further critical parameter determining the molecular bio - mechanics of amoeboid crawling and positioning could come from the physical 3 - D architecture and composition of the extracellular environment . Ponte et al . [ 34 ] have reported experiments on Dictyostelium gene deletion mutants ( deletions of genes encoding , e . g . , a - actinin , synexin , ABP - 34 and ABP - 120 ) using an artiﬁcial soil substrate that reconstructs an arguably more complex and natural in vitro environment . On reconstructed soil , these mutants display more profound loco - motor and morphogenetic defects than were initially described for the same mutants using conventional laboratory substrates [ 34 ] . Therefore , it might be useful to investigate complex cell functions such as migration also in the context of biomechani - cally demanding “nature - like” 3 - D environments . SIGNALING CONTROL OF ACTIN POLYMERIZATION The best - deﬁned mechanism leading to the initiation of cell polarization and induction of migration is outside - in signaling via chemoattractant receptors . Chemotaxis is deﬁned as the directional cell movement towards an increasing concentration of a soluble factor , the chemoattractant or chemotaxin . Dictyo - stelium shows chemotaxis towards a number of compounds , and the best - characterized response is that to cAMP [ 78 ; reviewed in ref 26 , 79 ] . The cAMP receptors ( cARs ) belong to the family of serpentine / G - protein - coupled receptors with homology to serpentine chemoattractant receptors in higher eukaryotes . Cloning and deletion of four cARs in Dictyostelium ( cAR1 – 4 ) shows that high - afﬁnity cAR1 and cAR3 are essential for chemotaxis and aggregation at the single - cell stage [ 80 ] . Cells lacking cAR1 and cAR3 fail to develop cAMP - induced che - motaxis and aggregation [ 81 ] . cAMP is secreted by the cells in a paracrine fashion to neighboring cells at nanomolar oscilla - tory pulses with a periodicity of several minutes [ 36 ] . After receptor binding , an activation peak within the ﬁrst minute is followed by a few minutes of unresponsiveness . cAMP then becomes rapidly degraded by a membrane - bound phosphodi - esterase allowing resensitization and ensuing chemotactic cy - cles . For the integration of an external chemotactic stimulus towards cell polarization and directional crawling , triggering should occur in a polarized manner , e . g . , by preferential sig - naling and cytoskeletal activation in the cell compartment proximal to the highest chemoattractant concentration [ 79 ] . Preferential chemoattractant - induced signaling at the leading edge would require the polar redistribution and / or clustering of chemoattractant receptors or , alternatively , G - proteins or downstream effectors . Whereas in polarized Dictyostelium cells , cARs remain uniformly distributed , the signal transduc - ing G - protein G bg shows preferential accumulation at the leading edge [ 82 ] . Polarized G - protein activation is thought to generate downstream signaling towards different effectors , most notably to phosphatidyl - inositol - kinases ( PIKs ) and small GTPases [ 79 ] . In principle , PIKs and small GTPases synergize for downstream signaling by recruiting multiple other signaling and cytoskeletal proteins to the inner leaﬂet of the plasma membrane , leading to actin nucleation , polymerization , and turnover . Accumulating evidence suggests that PIPs form a major structural link between the plasma membrane and the actin cytoskeleton . PIPs are generated by PIKs from membrane phospholipids inserted in the inner leaﬂet of the plasma mem - brane . Important PIKs include phosphatidyl - inositol - 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) and type I phosphatidyl - inositol - 5 - kinase ( PI5KI ) . PI3K has been shown to be directly activated by G bg [ 83 ] . Activated PI3K , in turn , phosphorylates membrane PIPs at the 3 - OH position as well as other effectors at serine / threonine residues [ 84 , 85 ] . The predominant PIP phosphorylation prod - ucts phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 4 - bisphosphate ( PIP 2 ) and phos - phoinosite - 3 , 4 , 5 - monophosphate ( PIP 3 ) are thought to form multimeric aggregates inserted in the inner leaﬂet of the mem - brane bilayer [ 86 – 88 ] . Clustered PIP 2 and PIP 3 can be di - rectly bound by proteins that contain either a pleckstrin ho - mology ( PH ) domain , Src homology ( SH ) domains ( e . g . , SH2 , SH3 ) , or other PIP - binding domains [ 89 ] . Several ABPs , in - cluding Scar / WASP , gelsolin , phdA ( PH domain containing protein I ) , and akt / PKB ( also known as Rac protein kinase or protein kinase B ) , as well as the signaling molecules guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( GEFs ) [ 90 ] and phospholipase C g [ 45 ] , have been shown either to contain such PIP - binding domains or to directly bind PIPs [ 89 ] . By interacting with PIPs , these proteins link the plasma membrane to the cortical cy - toskeleton and cytoplasmic - signaling apparatus . Within sec - onds after stimulation by cAMP , akt / PKB [ 87 ] , phdA [ 85 ] , Scar1 , and other proteins accumulate at the leading edge , and it has been predicted that this recruitment is PIP dependent [ 79 , 85 , 86 , 89 , 91 ] . The amount of cortical actin polymeriza - tion is proportional to the generation of PIPs , suggesting that PIPs favor actin polymerization [ 92 , 93 ] . In reverse , as PIP levels fall , the reaction of ﬁlament growth is reversibly termi - nated [ 92 ] , which is consistent with ﬁndings on Dictyostelium mutants that lack PI3K or cells treated with PI3K inhibitor . These cells , presumably because of insufﬁcient PIP generation , fail to recruit pkB , phdA , and other adapters to the leading edge [ 85 ] . As a consequence , PI3K - deﬁcient cells fail to rap - idly assemble F - actin at the leading edge and to polarize , produce fewer pseudopods , and do not undergo chemotaxis normally [ 85 ] . Taken together , local generation of PIPs and consecutive recruitment of actin binding and regulatory factors initiate and maintain uncapping , actin anchoring , and branch - ing for spatially regulated ﬁlament growth . PIP generation is further controlled by other signaling path - ways that include low - molecular - weight GTPases of the Ras and Rac family , src - related tyrosine kinases , and other kinases . Besides initiating actin polymerization , PIPs have been shown to induce downstream signaling towards mitogen - Friedl et al . Amoeboid crawling movement of leukocytes 495 activated protein kinase / extracellular regulated kinase path - ways , Ras and Rac pathways , and protein kinase A - and cGMP - dependent effectors [ 26 , 94 ] . This suggests that the generation of PIPs and membrane - proximal actin polymeriza - tion accompany quite different stimuli and signal transduction pathways . Another important PI3K substrate in Dictyostelium is Akt , the homologue to mammalian protein kinase B ( akt / PKB ) . After phosphorylation , Akt / PKB becomes localized to the leading edge [ 95 , 96 ] . In turn , Akt / PKB can phosphorylate multiple effector proteins , regulating not only chemotactic response but also endocytosis , gene expression , and apoptosis [ 84 ] . Akt / PKB - deﬁcient Dictyostelium cells , similar to cells lacking PI3K function , exhibit a polarization defect , aberrant chemo - taxis , and reduced aggregation capacity [ 87 ] . The Ras and Rac family of small GTPases is involved in various pathways controlling the actin cytoskeleton . Dictyoste - lium cells express . 40 different members of the Ras and Rac subfamily of GTPases [ for complete list , see ref . 97 ] and the related GEFs . Ras and Rac GTPases interact with multiple cytoskeletal and adapter proteins that control cytoskeletal re - modeling and cell motility , including rufﬂing , polarization , cortical stiffness , and cytokinesis [ 97 ] . Rac GTPases contain a PH domain for membrane localization and putative PIP bind - ing on chemotactic response [ 98 , 99 ] , although this feature remains to be conﬁrmed for Dictyostelium . More than 20 down - stream targets of Rac GTPases have been reported so far , among them Rho - dependent serine / threonine kinase ( ROCK ) , myosin light - chain phosphatase , and gelsolin [ 100 , 101 ] . Many of the GTPases have been genetically ablated in Dictyostelium resulting in deﬁned loss - of - function phenotypes . As examples , deletion of the small GTPase RasG , Rac1A , or Rac1b leads to severe impairment of cell polarity and single - cell movement [ 97 , 102 ] . On the other hand , deletion of RasS or its related exchange factor , RasGEFB results in a threefold increase in migration velocity compared with that of wild - type cells [ 103 ] . How downstream effectors mediate these different effects re - mains to be determined . Many mutations of GTPases show no apparent defects in single - cell crawling ; however , they severely affect the sorting and differentiation process at the multicellu - lar stages [ 97 ] . It is therefore likely that each Ras and Rac GTPase controls quite speciﬁc cytoskeletal events at a given developmental stage . Besides its occurrence on chemotaxis , pseudopod extension has been suggested to occur as a spontaneous process involving constitutive oscillation of signaling molecules and cyclic base - line actin polymerization and depolymerization . High - resolu - tion morphometric analysis of shape changes demonstrates that Dictyostelium cells are intrinsically vibrating bodies , transited by “self - organized , superpositioned , harmonic modes of rotat - ing oscillatory waves” [ 104 ] . These morphological oscillations appear to be associated with intrinsic physicochemical oscil - lations of actin polarization leading to pseudopodal extensions and retractions [ 104 ] . In other words , the contractile apparatus of Dictyostelium exhibits a certain degree of autochthonous rhythmicity . In the absence of external triggers , this inherent oscillatory apparatus can lead to constitutive , nondirectional crawling that , as mentioned above , follows a model of persis - tent random walking [ 31 ] . ADHESION AND DETACHMENT MECHANISMS IN METAZOAN CELLS AND COMPARISON TO DICTYOSTELIUM An important issue in exploring cell movement is the control of cycling adhesion and de - adhesion events that couple the cell body to the extracellular environment . Although an array of adhesion mechanisms and intracellular effectors have been identiﬁed in metazoan cells over the past decade [ 105 , 106 ] , the molecular basis of adhesion to extracellular structures is largely elusive in Dictyostelium . Because the integration of molecular adhesion and de - adhesion events required for mi - gration has been predominantly established for ﬁbroblasts and keratinocytes [ 11 , 101 , 107 , 108 ] , we here summarize these metazoan migration models ﬁrst and then discuss their impli - cations for crawling Dictyostelium ameba . Haptokinetic migration In the model of haptokinetic ( i . e . , adhesion - dependent ) migra - tion of ﬁbroblasts across ligand - coated surfaces [ 11 , 17 , 109 ] , migration efﬁciency follows an inverse - U function relative to the adhesive force between the cell and the underlying sub - strate ( Fig . 1A ) . Maximum migration rates are achieved at intermediate strength of adhesion to the substrate [ 17 ] , allow - ing the formation of new interactions at the leading edge , while preexisting bonds are sufﬁciently released at the trailing edge ( Fig . 1A , ‹ ) . Increasing adhesion , e . g . , by increasing ligand density or by up - regulating adhesion receptor density , leads to locomotor reduction ( Fig . 1A , › ) , as a consequence of impeded or delayed detachment form the rear [ 18 , 110 , 111 ] . On the other hand , reducing substrate adhesion to a minimum , e . g . , by decreasing ligand density or by adhesion - perturbing antibod - ies , causes a loss of contact to the substrate [ Fig . 1A , ﬁ ) . As net interaction and traction forces are further lowered , partial detachment and rounding up of the cells are accompanied by nonproductive oscillatory membrane dynamics and impaired migration ( Fig . 1A , ﬁ ) [ 101 , 112 ] . Besides ﬁbroblasts and keratinocytes , the haptokinetic migration model on 2 - D sub - strate has been conﬁrmed for myoblasts migrating across a ligand - coated surface [ 113 ] , as well as for ﬁbroblast - like cells ( e . g . , melanoma cells ) penetrating 3 - D collagen matrices [ 21 ] . In mammalian cells , adhesion and de - adhesion events are represented by the assembly and disassembly of transmembra - nous junctions containing adhesion receptors , extracellular ligands , and cytoskeletal elements , termed either focal adhe - sions or focal contacts . These junctions control cytoskeletal assembly and turnover , adhesion and migration , and related signaling . Focal adhesion Focal adhesions contain adhesion receptors ( in mammals , in - tegrins ) and cytoskeletal and signaling molecules in multimo - lecular complexes of 0 . 5 – . 2 m m in diameter [ 114 ] . Integrins bound to extracellular ligands become linked to the actin cytoskeleton via several adapter and signaling proteins , such as talin , a - actinin , ﬁlamin , focal adhesion kinase , and others [ 114 , 115 ] . Fully matured focal adhesions represent relatively stable cell - substrate interactions that persist for longer periods . 496 Journal of Leukocyte Biology Volume 70 , October 2001 http : / / www . jleukbio . org Long - lasting contact leads to integrin - ligand strengthening and bundling of preexisting actin ﬁlaments in parallel to longitu - dinal thick actin bundles , termed stress ﬁbers , inserting into these attachment zones . The formation of fully matured focal adhesions and stress ﬁbers can be induced by activated low - molecular - weight GTPase Rho via downstream effector ROCK [ 101 , 116 ] . Stress ﬁber formation is counteracted by actin - severing proteins such as coﬁlin or gelsolin [ 117 ] , as shown by inhibitory targeting of severing activity . In ﬁbroblasts , Rac has been shown to mediate cortical actin turnover and ﬁlopodal rufﬂing via activation of gelsolin , thereby preventing stress ﬁber formation [ 100 ] . Focal adhesions and stress ﬁbers appear to maintain a critical basal adhesion strength and traction . In slowly spread - ing and / or migrating cells , focal adhesions develop within 10 to 20 min , which is a time - consuming process [ 114 ] resulting in relatively stable and long - lived interactions towards the sub - strate that are inversely proportional to pseudopodal dynamics [ 117 ] and migration speed [ 11 , 18 , 101 ] . This does not exclude that slow turnover of focal adhesions and stress ﬁbers can contribute to slow motion by gradual translocation . On promi - gratory stimulation , however , ﬁbroblasts and keratinocytes dis - assemble preformed stress ﬁbers and focal adhesions , decrease adhesiveness , and , consequently , increase the turnover of ad - hesion receptors for migration [ 118 ] . In mammals , the control of focal adhesion and stress ﬁber disassembly has been shown for the Rho family member Rnd1 [ 112 ] , counteracting stress ﬁber assembly by the Rho and ROCK pathways [ 101 ] . Rnd1 appears to favor cell detachment from the rear , increasing migration speed ; however , if Rnd1 is constitutively active , substrate adhesion becomes disrupted , and the cells round up , detach , and stop migration [ 112 ] . Focal contact The focal contact is a smaller , less developed , and more transient relative to focal adhesions [ 114 ] . Focal contacts con - tain smaller clusters of adhesion receptors and a reduced array of cytoskeletal and signaling elements , which are not linked to stress ﬁbers but rather to a more diffuse cortical F - actin [ 114 ] . Focal contacts are considered to represent more dy - namic junctions predominantly under the control of Rac and Cdc42 [ 101 , 119 ] . Highly dynamic surface structures , such as microvilli , ﬁlop - odia , and pseudopodia , frequently display no apparent struc - tural - compartment formation of proteins in the plasma mem - brane . Here , F - actin , adhesion receptors , and signaling mole - cules show a rather diffuse distribution , indicating high molecular dynamics , lateral mobility , and turnover of protein - protein interactions . Detachment mechanisms Membrane ﬂow models for locomotion predict that membrane extension at the leading edge requires the insertion of new membrane from intracellular sites , such as intracellular vesi - cles [ 120 ] . Endosomes containing internalized adhesion recep - tor and plasma membrane are formed at the trailing edge and trafﬁc towards the leading edge for receptor and membrane recycling at pseudopod protrusions [ 120 ] . For crawling Dictyo - stelium cells , endocytosis and turnover rates of ﬂuorescently tagged surface membranes have been established in the range of one cell surface equivalent every 4 to 8 min [ 121 ] , indicating high membrane turnover rates . If high substrate adhesivity counteracts receptor release from the substrate , as seen in migrating ﬁbroblasts and tumor cells , detachment can be further achieved by the deposition ( “shedding” ) of adhesion receptors , such as integrins and CD44 [ 19 , 110 , 122 ] . One mechanism of receptor shedding is proteolytic cleavage of cytoskeletal anchorage points by the protease calpain as well as the cytoplasmic portion of integrin adhesion receptors . Calpain cleaves the adapter proteins talin and paxillin [ 125 , 126 ] . By degrading cytoskeleton - membrane junctions , calpain is considered an important regulator of focal adhesion disassembly and cell detachment in ﬁbroblasts [ 18 ] . Other cells , however , such as crawling leukocytes , appear to Fig . 1 . Migration of ﬁbroblasts ( A ) and leukocytes ( B ) on 2 - D and within 3 - D environments as a function of adhesive strength to the substrate ( C ) . ( A ) Haptokinetic migration model as established from ﬁbroblasts [ see ref . 11 , 17 ] . In migrating ﬁbroblasts and cells utilizing ﬁbroblast - like migration strate - gies , migration efﬁciency in both 2 - D and 3 - D environments is similarly dependent on adhesive interaction to the substrate . Three prototypic migratory states are indicated by numbers . ( B ) Four different migratory states observed for leukocyte migra - tion on 2 - D and within 3 - D substrates . As a major difference , leukocyte crawling might persist in 3 - D environments after adhesion blocking ( B , ) , whereas ﬁbroblast - like migration is dependent on adhesion in both 2 - D and 3 - D migration models ( A , ) . ( C ) Leukocyte adhesion conditions and resulting mor - phology , as deduced for each functional state . References correspond to migrating leukocytes only . Friedl et al . Amoeboid crawling movement of leukocytes 497 detach independently of calpain - mediated cleavage , suggest - ing that rapidly moving amoeboid leukocytes could use differ - ent mechanisms to regulate adhesive release at the cell rear than more adhesive , slowly moving cells [ 18 ] . Adhesion receptors in Dictyostelium Although the generation of pseudopodal extension is well un - derstood in Dictyostelium , candidate adhesion receptors in regions that contact the underlying substrate remain to be identiﬁed [ 127 ] . So far , neither tyrosine kinase receptors nor integrin homologues have been identiﬁed in Dictyostelium . Known transmembranous adhesion receptors include gp80 / contact site A ( csA ) [ 33 , 128 ] , gp24 / DdCAD - 1 [ 129 ] , gp150 [ 130 ] , and DTFA ( defective in tip formation ) [ 131 ] . gp80 / csA mediates EDTA - resistant homotypic end - to - end adhesion in aggregating cells , which can be blocked by antibody [ 128 ] . In addition , gp80 / csA - defective cells develop increased substrate adhesiveness and delayed migration ( compare state › , Fig . 1A ) , suggesting a function of gp80 / csA in the regulation of de - adhesion [ 33 ] . gp24 / DdCAD - 1 is a secreted nontransmem - brane protein with sequence similarities to mammalian cad - herins which binds to the extracellular surface and mediates calcium - dependent cell - cell adhesion in early morphogenesis [ 132 ] . gp150 is a candidate receptor involved in the sorting of prestalk and prespore cells at the mound stage [ 130 ] . DTFA is involved in cell - cell interaction at early aggregation as well as a later sorting stage [ 131 ] . So far , none of these receptors have been implicated in binding to the underlying substrate and in single - cell crawling or chemotaxis . Because speciﬁc adhesion receptors remain to be identiﬁed in Dictyostelium , it is difﬁcult to relate the mechanism of amoeboid substrate interactions with principles of haptokinetic migration to mammalian cells . In nature , Dictyostelium is confronted with substrates of very diverse , nonuniform physicochemical properties , such as leaves and soil . It therefore remains subject to speculation whether engagement of speciﬁc adhesion receptors would be a useful strategy for interaction with such diverse environmental substrates after all . Lack of focal adhesions / contacts in Dicytostelium The focal - adhesion model has been mainly established using cells from higher eukaryotes , whereas in Dictyostelium amebae , adhesion receptors that mediate contact to substrates other than cells are unknown . In migrating Dictyostelium cells , on - off rates of cell substrate interactions are high ( in the range of seconds to minutes ) , whereas long - lasting stable attachment to the underlying substrate is lacking . Cell propulsion and trac - tion appear to result from highly volatile , low - afﬁnity interac - tions rather than stable substrate binding . Consequently , focal adhesion - or focal contact - like structures are not formed , which is consistent with the concept that migration dynamics prevent focal adhesion formation and vice versa . Genetically modiﬁed ponticulin - deﬁcient Dictyostelium cells lack approximately 90 % of the normal number of high - afﬁnity interactions between actin ﬁlaments and the plasma membrane , but migration and phagocytosis exhibit no functional alterations [ 65 ] . Together , these morphological and functional characteristics indicate a low degree of cytoskeletal - compartment formation coupled to low - afﬁnity interactions between cytoskeleton , plasma mem - brane , and extracellular substrate . Besides in Dictyostelium , such diffuse membrane and cytoskeletal organization appears as a general feature present in fast moving leukocytes and other cells in the absence of focal contacts and stress ﬁbers [ 4 , 14 , 104 , 133 ] . One conclusion of the above ﬁndings is that the cellular and molecular migration mechanisms diverge between amoeboid crawling and more adhesive haptokinetic migration strategies in ﬁbroblasts and other cells [ 14 ] . GENERAL LOCOMOTOR CHARACTERISTICS IN CRAWLING LEUKOCYTES Many aspects of morphodynamics , such as cell movement , pseudopodal extension and retraction , cytoskeletal organiza - tion , phagocytosis , cell sorting , pattern formation , and the response to external stimuli , are common among Dictyostelium and higher eukaryotic cells . Leukocytes , similarly to Dictyo - stelium at preaggregation stage , spend most of their life cycle as amoeboid cells . Leukocytes chemotactically respond to ex - ternal stimuli , perform phagocytosis , and contact other cells present within peripheral tissues . After passively circulating in the blood , leukocytes become rapidly recruited into the tissues by activated endothelium of microvessels . Leukocyte - endothe - lial interactions involve multiple speciﬁc adhesion molecules , chemokine signals , and biophysical events that lead to leuko - cyte spreading on the surface of the endothelium [ reviewed in ref . 1 , 134 ] . The ensuing transmigration requires the widening of endothelial cell - cell junctions , profound morphological dy - namics ( squeezing ) , and penetration of the basement mem - brane followed by a long - lasting migratory response within the adjacent tissue [ 135 ] . Although this initial transendothelial step is a special feature of circulating bone marrow - derived cells in higher eukaryotes and lacks a clear equivalent in ameba , the crawling of leukocytes within tissues or across cells shares many characteristics of migrating Dictyostelium cells . T cell and neutrophil polarization and migration follow a stereotypic intrinsic program in response to different external stimuli . These include chemokines , chemical or mechanical triggers , increase in temperature , contact with ECM ligands , or physical contact with other cells ( e . g . , endothelium and anti - gen - presenting cells ) [ 2 , 6 , 136 , 137 ] . Similar to Dictyostelium , migrating leukocytes adopt a polarized morphology ( Fig . 2A ) consisting of a leading edge ( Fig . 2A and B , asterisk ) that generates one or several anterior lamellipodia , an elliptoid cell body containing the nucleus , and a tail - like uropod ( Fig . 2A , black arrowhead ) . Both in vitro and in vivo , this prototypic morphology is conserved among different leukocytes , including T cells [ 4 ] , neutrophils [ 138 ] , and dendritic cells [ 139 , 140 ] . Leukocytes display an extraordinary deformability suitable for ﬂexible adaptation to biophysical constraints of the substrate , such as pores and spaces [ 141 ] . While the cytoplasm in loco - moting leukocytes is ﬂowing forward , lateral protrusions ( “foot - holds” ) move backwards relative to the advancing cell body ( Fig . 2B ) . As in Dictyostelium , stress ﬁbers and focal contacts are lacking in crawling neutrophils [ 142 ] and T cells [ 4 ] , indicating high turnover of individual ﬁlaments . To measure physical forces generated by migrating cells , spherical micropipette 498 Journal of Leukocyte Biology Volume 70 , October 2001 http : / / www . jleukbio . org systems have been used to apply pressure to different cell compartments , as an estimate for stiffness generated by the cell [ 143 ] . The rigidity of the cell body in migrating leukocytes is relatively high , albeit the traction forces are 10 - to 30 - fold smaller than those detected in ﬁbroblasts . The deformability or stiffness of the plasma membrane in nonmotile B cells is in the range of 0 . 1 – 0 . 2 m dyn , which is increased after cross - linking of surface receptors by lectin to 0 . 4 – 0 . 6 m dyn [ 144 ] . In comparison , forces generated by individual ﬁbroblast rufﬂes are in the range of 15 – 30 m dyn [ 143 ] . The deformability of polarized neutrophils is in the range of 1 m dyn , as measured from the retention force of membrane - bound magnetic beads at single locations [ 145 ] , whereas the total force generated by a complete migrating neutrophil has been estimated in the range of 3 mdyn [ 146 ] . High elasticity at the leading edge coupled to cortical stiffness and low - traction forces allows migration ve - locities in leukocytes similar to those in Dictyostelium , which are 10 - to 30 - fold higher than in ﬁbroblasts and other cells . Average migration velocities are 6 – 8 m m ( peak velocity , 22 m m / min ) for T cells [ 147 ] , 2 – 6 m m ( peak velocity , 10 m m / min ) for dendritic cells [ 148 ] and 8 – 16 m m ( peak velocity , 28 m m / min ) for neutrophils [ 149 ] . The velocities as deduced from low - adhesion surfaces or 3 - D in vitro matrices are quite similar to the values obtained from in vivo observations , e . g . , an average of 8 – 12 m m / min for neutrophils crawling through the loose connective tissue of the rat mesentery [ 149 ] or the rabbit ear [ 140 ] . In summary , simple shape , polarized morphology , rapid oscillatory pseudopod dynamics , and high migration ve - locities are common features among leukocytes and Dictyoste - lium ameba . STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF THE CYTOSKELETON IN LEUKOCYTES The organization of the actin cytoskeleton in crawling leuko - cytes shares many similarities with the cytoskeleton in Dictyo - stelium . Most extensive information is available for intact neu - trophils or neutrophil cell extracts , and some results have been conﬁrmed for T lymphocytes . In principle , the ﬁve - step process of pseudopod extension and attachment to substrate , cell po - larization , contraction of the cell body , the posterior release of attachment sites , and uropod retraction have been demon - strated in neutrophils [ 16 ] and to some extent in T cells [ 150 ] . Different sets of structural and regulatory actin binding pro - teins have been identiﬁed to provide ﬁlament growth , severing , branching , and cross - linking in mammalian cells , most of which are homologous to actin - binding proteins in Dictyoste - lium . Capping protein homologues controlling initial ﬁlament un - masking include gelsolin , villin , radixin , capZ , adseverin , and a - actinin . Filament severing is achieved by coﬁlin , depactin , and actophorin [ 151 ] . Similar to Dictyostelium , Arp2 / 3 acts as a key nucleator of branched actin polymerization in neutrophils [ 68 , 152 ] . Other homologous branching proteins , such as ﬁl - amins ( homologues to ABP - 120 and ABP - 280 in Dictyostelium ) and spectrin also contribute to branching and formation of a ﬁlament meshwork [ 151 ] . Filament cross - linking to parallel bundles is provided by ﬁmbrin , a - actinin , and calpactin . An - choring to membrane receptors occurs through ﬁlamin , talin , and a - actinin . Filamin , talin , and a - actinin have been shown to directly interact with the cytoplasmic portion of b 1 and b 3 Fig . 2 . Amoeboid motion of a T lymphocyte within a 3 - D collagen matrix . Polarized morphology , squeezing , shape change , and directional alterations of a CD4 1 T cell in spon - taneous locomotion after staining with calcein - AM , as assessed by confocal time - lapse reﬂection and ﬂuorescence microscopy ( movie can be viewed at http : / / www . xxx . html ) . Frames were taken at 20 - s time intervals and reconstructed . Numbers rep - resent individual time points ( seconds ) . The collagen lattice was reconstructed from confocal reﬂection contrast ( 6 individ - ual sections of 1 . 5 m m in depth ) [ 230 ] . The central section of the cell body was integrated into the reconstructed ﬁber net - work at the actual cell position in z direction and displayed by false color imaging . Symbols in frame A indicate leading edge ( * ) and uropod ( black arrowhead ) . In frames C and D ; cell trapping within a region of narrow ﬁbers leads to temporary stopping by obstruction ( C – E , white arrowheads ) , whereas os - cillating shape change is continued for ; 200 s . From frames E to F , pseudopod extension ( white arrow ) at a lateral portion of the cell body initiates the process of circum - migration across a horizontal ﬁber in the absence of structural remodeling of the matrix structure . Variations of overall ﬁber architecture from frame to frame result from manual focussing of the microscopic stage in depth while the cell is crawling . Scale bar , 10 m m . Friedl et al . Amoeboid crawling movement of leukocytes 499 integrins and , to some extent , b 2 integrins , representing major structural links between the actin cytoskeleton and integrins [ 115 , 153 – 155 ] . The kinetics and spatial distribution of actin assembly and disassembly are very similar in leukocytes and Dictyostelium . In nonmigrating spherical neutrophils , F - actin comprises ap - proximately 30 % of total actin and is diffusely distributed throughout the cytoplasm [ 156 ] . On chemokine triggering , ini - tial actin polymerization occurs within , 15 s [ 156 ] . After 30 s , the content of F - actin has doubled , and most newly assembled actin is detected in the proximity to the emerging leading lamella [ 156 , 157 ] , whereas the cell body and uropod contain a relatively stable cortical rim of F - actin for polarity and stability [ 158 , 159 ] . In electron microscopic studies from neu - trophil cytoplasmic lysates , individual actin ﬁlaments elongate rapidly to reach a maximum length after 15 – 30 s of 0 . 5 – 2 m m [ 158 , 160 ] . Actin ﬁlaments at the leading lamella are rapidly remodeled based on polymerization and depolymerization [ 158 ] . After removal of chemoattractant , actin depolymeriza - tion to basal levels is reached within 3 – 10 s , preferentially at the leading edge [ 158 ] . This time scale is consistent with in vitro estimation of actin turnover in the range of 10 – 30 s [ 161 ] . Similar to neutrophils , in T cells , chemoattractant - induced onset of migration is complete after 1 – 2 min [ 136 ] ; however , more detailed information on actin ﬁlament structure and reg - ulators of polymerization in T cells is sparse . In nonmigrating T cells residing within a 3 - D collagen matrix , some focal nucleation of actin appears at contacts to collagen ﬁbers [ 162 ] . With the onset of T cell locomotion , cortical F - actin is present along the rim of the cell body and is enriched in the uropod [ 162 ] , whereas F - actin distribution is highly variable at the leading edge [ 4 , 159 , 162 ] . Taken together , in crawling leuko - cytes polymerized actin forms a highly dynamic and ﬂexible leading edge in conjunction with a relatively stiff polarized core body and uropod . SIGNALING CONTROL OF CYTOSKELETAL DYNAMICS IN LEUKOCYTES The molecular components controlling the actin cytoskeleton in leukocytes are largely homologous to those of Dictyostelium [ 15 , 163 ] . Although cAMP as a compound is not a common chemoattractant in higher eukaryotes , the molecular mecha - nisms of cAMP - induced signaling and induction of migration are prototypic for most other chemoattractants in mammalian cells . In neutrophils , numerous factors can initiate actin ﬁla - ment nucleation and growth . Examples include chemoattrac - tants , growth factors , extracellular matrix , and multimeric or patterned molecule complexes , such as lectins , phagocytic particles , the surfaces of other cells , and other hydrophilic solid - phase substrates ( e . g . , nitrocellulose ﬁlters ) . Similar to mechanisms in Dictyostelium , the signals generated by chemo - kine receptors and associated heterotrimeric G - proteins lead to the activation of PI3K and / or PI5KI . Besides chemokine re - ceptors , PIKs can be activated by Fc receptors , complement receptors , integrins , or , in T cells , triggering of the T cell receptor ( TCR ) [ 164 ] . PIKs generate PIP 2 and PIP 3 inserted in the inner leaﬂet of the membrane , thereby recruiting cytoplas - mic actin - binding and - signaling molecules to the plasma membrane [ 165 , 166 ] . In neutrophils , an ever - increasing num - ber of ABPs have been described that are recruited to the membrane by PIPs . These include gelsolin , proﬁlin , ezrin , moesin , phospholipase C - g or - d 3 , akt / PKB , Vav , and WASP [ reviewed in ref . 167 ] . The importance of PIKs in actin poly - merization and leukocyte motility has been shown using PI3K inhibitors . The PI3K inhibitor wortmanin leads to severe im - pairment of polarization and chemotaxis in neutrophils [ 168 , 169 ] and T lymphocytes [ 170 ] , indicating that , similar to that in Dictyostelium , PI3K is a key regulator of actin dynamics and motility in leukocytes . Conversely , exaggerated PIP formation might overstate action polymerization and delay turnover . PI5KI overexpression in migrating ﬁbroblasts greatly delays detachment and migration rates , suggesting that balanced amounts of PIPs are important for cytoskeletal assembly , force generation , and ﬁlament turnover [ 117 ] . WASP and N - WASP , homologues to Scar1 in Dictyostelium , are important for the induction of actin dynamics and migration in leukocytes and other cells [ 171 ] . ( Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome is an inherited disorder in humans , caused by a deﬁciency of WASP protein function . The lack of WASP leads to severe defects in leukocyte and platelet function such as recurrent pyogenic and opportunistic infections , eczema , and thrombo - cytopenia . The life span of affected individuals is reduced . ) WASP directly interacts with Cdc42 , as shown by yeast two - hybrid screening , and it further has a PH domain for PIP binding [ 172 ] . After binding Cdc42 / PIP 2 complex at the inner leaﬂet of the membrane , WASP becomes activated [ 173 ] and recruits and activates Arp2 / 3 to form an actin nucleation complex for branched nucleation and ﬁlament growth [ 174 ] . Besides Cdc42 and PIP 2 , other factors have been proposed as candidate regulators of WASP activity , including proﬁlin , phospholipase C - g , and proteins containing SH2 and SH3 motifs ( e . g . , Grp2 and src kinases ) [ 175 ] . Similar to those in Dictyostelium , small GTPases are central regulators of actin polymerization and motility in higher eu - karyotes . Mammalian Rho GTPases share structural and func - tional homology to Rac homologues in Dictyostelium [ 97 ] ; however , only three family members , Rac , Cdc42 , and Rho , have been identiﬁed [ 98 , 116 ] . Rho GTPases are activated by chemoattractant receptors , integrins , or growth factor receptors [ 176 , 177 ] as well as by intracellular signaling via src - related tyrosine kinases ( Syc ) , the nuclear exchange factor Vav , or other small GTPases ( Rho and Ras pathways ) [ 119 , 178 ] . Rac and Cdc42 synergize for the induction of dynamic cytoskeletal events , i . e . , the formation of rufﬂes and pseudopodia [ 116 ] . Rac forms a complex with PI5KI that is considered to increase PIP 2 levels in the membrane [ 166 , 179 ] . Downstream effects of Rac to cytoskeletal dynamics and remodeling could be mediated by Rac - induced dissociation of capping proteins ( e . g . , gelsolin ) from actin ﬁlaments to initiate ﬁlament growth [ 180 ] . Cdc42 binds PIP 2 and WASP , as outlined above for the initiation of actin polymerization [ 181 ] . This is consistent with the ﬁnding , that , in T cell lines , dominant - negative Cdc42 abrogates che - mokine - induced directional polarization and chemotaxis [ 182 ] . Because both contribute to actin ﬁlament growth , Rac and Cdc42 are considered candidate initiators and regulators of migration - driving membrane - cytoskeleton junctions of high 500 Journal of Leukocyte Biology Volume 70 , October 2001 http : / / www . jleukbio . org turnover , such as rufﬂes , ﬁlopodia , and lamellipodia [ 98 , 116 ] ( In contrast to Rac and Cdc42 , Rho is involved in focal adhesion assembly and the maturation of actin ﬁlaments into stress ﬁbers , putatively via downstream activation of the serine / threonine kinase ROCK [ 116 , 119 ] . Constitutively , active Rho exaggerates stress ﬁber and focal adhesion formation , thereby retarding migration in motile ﬁbroblasts [ 101 ] . This phenotype is similar to the effect of PI5KI overexpression leading to exaggerated PIP production and actin polymerization [ 117 ] . Conversely , reduction of Rho or ROCK activity leads to the loss of stress ﬁbers while polarized rufﬂing remains fully intact , thereby increasing migration rates [ 101 , 117 ] . This is consistent with the effects of Rho inhibition in immobilized monocytic cells , leading to greater spreading dynamics and membrane oscillations [ 183 ] and suggesting that reducing Rho activity favors dynamic cell - substrate interactions . Last , however , some degree of Rho activity may be essential in maintaining minimum contact strength to the substrate , because maximum inhibition of Rho can commit de - adhesion and loss of locomotion as a secondary event [ 101 ] ( corresponding to Fig . 1 A , ﬁ ) . In summary , similar to Dictyostelium , PIKs , WASP , and Rho GTPases represent important effectors controlling actin poly - merization and motility . As one difference , however , mamma - lian cells simultaneously integrate outside - in signaling from chemoattractant receptors , ECM - binding integrins , and other receptors , whereas in Dictyostelium at single - cell stage , che - moattractant receptor - mediated signals appear predominant . FUNCTION OF ADHESION RECEPTORS IN LEUKOCYTE MIGRATION In metazoan cells , the major ECM - binding cell surface recep - tors that mediate adhesion and migration are members of the superfamily of integrin receptors . Integrins are heterodimeric receptors consisting of a set of a chains noncovalently associ - ated with a limited number of b chains . The extracellular integrin domain binds to ECM components or to ligands on other cells , whereas the cytoplasmic portion reversibly con - nects to cytoskeletal and signaling proteins [ reviewed in ref . 105 , 184 ] . On cell activation , integrins can become “activated” by intracellular signals as well as up - regulated or de novo expressed . In the absence of expression regulation , integrins may undergo conformational change leading to increased bind - ing strength towards monomeric ligands ( “afﬁnity regulation” ) [ 185 ] . In addition , binding to multimeric ligands such as ECM macromolecules or an adjacent cell surface triggers lateral integrin aggregation and clustering in the plasma membrane , which locally increases substrate - binding avidity in the ab - sence of afﬁnity change ( “avidity regulation” ) [ 186 ] . Integrin occupancy and clustering initiate recruitment of ABPs ( e . g . , talin , ﬁlamin , a - actinin , and paxillin ) , as well as signaling molecules ( e . g . , Rho GTPases , PI3K , focal adhesion kinase , and src - kinases ) , to the plasma membrane to form focal con - tacts or adhesions [ 105 ] . Integrin - mediated signals regulate further integrin apposition , actin assembly , cell polarity , and migration [ 119 ] . Nonactivated naive T cells and neutrophils express low levels of b 1 , b 3 , b 4 , and b 7 integrins on the surface , whereas b 2 integrins are constitutively expressed at high levels [ 187 , 188 ] . Integrins that bind interstitial collagen , i . e . , a 1 b 1 , a 2 b 1 , a 3 b 1 , and a v b 3 , are either not detectable or expressed at very low levels in naive T cells and neutrophils [ 187 ] . Integrin a v b 3 additionally binds to vitronectin and ﬁbronectin [ 189 ] . Other ECM components , such as ﬁbrinogen and ﬁbrin , are bound by a L b 2 or a M b 2 integrins [ 190 ] . Within minutes after activa - tion , neutrophils up - regulate the surface expression of b 1 integrins as well as a L b 2 , a M b 2 , and a v b 3 integrins from cytoplasmic stores [ 191 – 194 ] . In contrast to neutrophils , T cells require long - term activation ( . 2 days ) to up - regulate most adhesion receptors ( e . g . , b 1 , b 2 , b 3 , and b 7 integrins ) , whereas others are newly expressed , such as the collagen receptors a 1 b 1 and a 2 b 1 [ 187 ] . Both subsets , constitutively expressed as well as up - regu - lated integrins , cooperate to mediate adhesion and migration in the tissue . If compared with 2 - D haptokinetic migration of ﬁbroblasts ( Fig . 1A ) , the interdependence of adhesion recep - tor - mediated attachment force shows a similar nonlinear rela - tionship to locomotor rates in leukocytes on ECM - coated sur - faces ( Fig . 1B and C ) . Haptokinetic migration in leukocytes Accumulating evidence suggests that the model of haptokinetic migration is valid for crawling leukocytes , most notably asso - ciated with b 1 and b 3 integrins . In different types of 2 - D haptokinetic migration assays , the migration of preactivated T cells on or towards ﬁbronectin is supported by a 4 b 1 and a 5 b 1 integrins [ 3 , 195 ] , corresponding to an optimal balance of adhesion and de - adhesion rates ( Fig . 1B , ‹ ) . Activation of b 1 integrins in otherwise low - adhesion T cell lines increases adhesion to immobilized ﬁbronectin and thereby favors traction and migration [ 196 ] . Maximum migration on 2 - D ﬁbronectin substrate is nearly completely blocked by adhesion - perturbing antibodies against a 4 , a 5 , or b 1 chains [ 195 ] or soluble monomeric ﬁbronectin [ 196 ] , suggesting that loss of adhesion impairs migration as a secondary effect ( Fig . 1B , ﬁ ) . Similar to peripheral T cells , thymocytes utilize a 4 b 1 and a 5 b 1 inte - grins for migration across ﬁbronectin [ 197 ] . Likewise , hapto - kinetic motility of T cells across model basement membrane ( matrigel ) as well as across individual basement membrane components , such as laminin or type IV collagen , is reduced by anti - laminin or anti - a 6 integrin antibody [ 198 , 199 ] . In neutrophils , chemotaxin - induced activation and extrava - sation lead to the de novo expression of a 2 b 1 integrin both in vivo and in vitro . For neutrophils recruited into the rat mes - entery in vivo , the migration velocity is reduced by blocking anti - a 2 or - b 1 integrin antibody or antagonistic a 2 b 1 - binding peptide DGEA ( Asp - Gly - Gln - Ala ) , as assessed by intravital microscopy and tracking of cell paths [ 149 ] . Because b 2 integrins appear not to be required for in vivo crawling , it is likely that activated neutrophils utilize newly expressed a 2 b 1 integrin as a principal receptor for migration within collage - nous tissue [ 149 ] . Similarly , a v b 3 integrins support neutrophil migration across ﬁbronectin ( Fig . 1 B , ‹ ) and reduction in substrate binding by blocking anti - a v b 3 antibody , which im - pairs neutrophil crawling as a secondary effect ( Fig . 1 B , ﬁ ) [ 200 ] . Friedl et al . Amoeboid crawling movement of leukocytes 501 In addition to b 1 integrins , haptokinetic leukocyte migration can be supported by an intriguing number of structurally and functionally different receptors and ligands . Lymphocytes are capable of locomotion over the surface of different cell types , such as macrophages , dendritic cells , ﬁbroblasts , glioma cells , and endothelial cells [ 201 , 202 ] . After contact with an antigen - presenting dendritic cell , T cells can establish a 2 - D crawling migration type across the antigen - presenting cell and readily receive migration - driving as well as activation signals from the same counterpart surface [ 6 ] . T cell crawling across intercel - lular adhesion molecule ( ICAM ) - 1 - coated surface [ 203 ] , across endothelium , or within glioma spheroids [ 202 ] is mediated by b 2 integrins , most importantly lymphocyte function - associated antigen ( LFA ) - 1 / a L b 2 , interacting with ICAM - 1 on the coun - terpart substrate . LFA - 1 is an important and versatile integrin linking the actin cytoskeleton to promote adhesive as well as migratory cell - cell interactions [ 203 , 204 ] . Fc receptor - positive lymphocytes are able to move across surfaces coated with antibody complexes [ 205 ] . The capacity to utilize a wide range of different substrates for haptokinetic migration indicates that multiple sets of surface receptors are simultaneously available to leukocytes for dynamic connection to the actin cytoskeleton . Hence , although the receptor usage might be diverse on dif - ferent 2 - D substrates , the importance of maintaining minimum adhesiveness for migratory traction remains preserved among leukocytes and other cell types . Adhesive locomotor arrest On the highly adhesive side of leukocyte substrate interaction , integrin activation and increased substrate binding can out - grow the capacity to detach , forcing the cell to slow down and , ultimately , arrest locomotion ( Fig . 1B , › ) . Increasing the gen - eral level of integrin - mediated attachment leads to the trapping of rufﬂes to the substrate followed by cell ﬂattening and non - polar - spreading behavior . Induction of constitutive high - afﬁn - ity b 1 integrin binding in resting T cells by activating antibody leads to T - cell immobilization that can be reversed by coun - teracting blocking anti - b 1 antibody [ 4 ] , suggesting that the ratio of high - to low - afﬁnity binding determines net transloca - tion . Similar effects of activating b 1 integrin antibody are mediated via a 4 and a 5 integrins trapping crawling eosino - phils on ﬁbronectin by adhesive sticking [ 206 ] . Along these lines , paradoxical effects of otherwise migration - driving cyto - kines [ e . g . , tumor necrosis factor ( TNF - a ) ] and chemoattrac - tants have been described . In T cells activated by SDF - 1 or regulated on activation , normal T expressed and secreted ( RANTES ) , immobilized TNF - a can impede migration [ 207 ] , putatively by anchoring the cell to the substrate [ 208 ] . In - creased attachment forces can also be achieved by retarding detachment of the uropod . Intracellular calcium ﬂuxes are required for uropod retraction and detachment in crawling neutrophils . Buffering calcium delays retraction and anchors the uropod to the substrate , rendering rufﬂing and pseudopodal activity at the leading edge ineffective [ 209 ] . Chemoattractant - induced neutrophil migration through 3 - D ﬁbrin lattices or matrigel is dependent on integrin a M b 2 yet independent of b 1 integrins [ 210 ] . However , after stimulation by N - formyl - methionyl - leucyl - phenytalanine , a M b 2 appears to collaborate with integrin a 5 b 1 and shift ﬁbrin binding towards a high - afﬁnity state , increasing adhesion yet reducing migration rates [ 210 ] . A similar adhesive mechanism is likely to mediate the stopping of T blasts crawling across ICAM - 1 - containing lipid bilayers via LFA - 1 - mediated adhesion . After TCR triggering , adhesive engagement of LFA - 1 mediates T cell ﬂattening and spreading on the substrate followed by sticking and migratory arrest , despite ongoing vigorous cytoskeletal dynamics [ 211 ] . Together , these observations support the con - cept that environment - induced increases in ligand binding above the capacity to generate traction at the leading edge favor immobilization ( “sticking” ) of otherwise highly motile leukocytes . From a mechanistic point of view , this process has been compared with the “accumulation of ﬂies on a ﬂy paper” [ 210 ] . Biophysical migration strategies In most of the above described migration - blocking experi - ments , maximum reductions of crawling velocity rates are from 50 to 70 % , leaving a level of residual migration at velocities ranging from 2 to 10 m m / min [ 136 ] . In particular , if leukocytes are incorporated into 3 - D substrates , considerable residual migration is present after adhesion blocking [ 4 , 149 ] . The cellular and molecular mechanisms of residual migration after receptor blocking are poorly understood . Residual substrate binding and haptokinetic migration are likely to be provided by compensatory receptors not affected in a particular assay . Furthermore , residual migration may result from nonadhesive “biophysical” mechanisms . It has been noted that a nonadhesive 2 - D substrate can support T lymphocyte attachment and migration if structural discontinuities support pseudopod anchoring and the genera - tion of some retention force [ 212 ] . In 3 - D substrates consisting of interstitial space , ﬁber strands , and cell interphases , the body of a migrating cell is bordered and three - dimensionally restricted by extracellular structures . The importance of bio - physical constraints for cell crawling has been explored for neutrophils in locomotion within a ﬂat glass capillary space . If the spacing height of two adjacent glass interphases is ; 5 m m relative to an average neutrophil diameter of 6 . 5 to 8 m m , a slight squeezing of the cell body occurs , and neutrophil crawl - ing and chemotaxis might not be reduced by adhesion - blocking antibodies against b 1 , b 2 , or b 3 integrins [ 213 , 214 ] . Such “adhesion - independent” locomotion , however , requires bilat - eral interaction to both chamber walls [ 213 ] . If the capillary height is increased above 14 m m ( hence removing the upper contact phase ) , the cells are forced to unilaterally attach to the substrate via b 2 integrins . In this case , neutrophil crawling is blocked by anti - b 2 integrin antibody [ 213 ] . The most obvious explanation for such different adhesion and migration require - ments towards an identical substrate is that , on spatial restriction and passive contact with a biophysical substrate , neutrophils can use an attachment - independent mode of locomotion ( Fig . 1B , ﬂ ) , whereas migration on a 2 - D surface is secondary to unilateral binding provided by adhesion receptors ( Fig . 1B , ﬁ ) . One important motility mechanism in biophysically complex environments is shape change [ 150 , 215 ] . In 3 - D tissues , similar to the narrow glass chamber model [ 213 ] , leukocytes are passively surrounded and trapped by collagen ﬁbers and other ECM components [ 2 , 212 ] , potentially bypassing active 502 Journal of Leukocyte Biology Volume 70 , October 2001 http : / / www . jleukbio . org attachment for substrate contact . Early studies on T cell mi - gration showed that nonactivated peripheral - blood T cells could not attach to a 2 - D surface coated with collagen or ﬁbronectin [ 150 , 212 ] . This low binding strength is best ex - plained by low integrin expression and the maintenance of integrins in a nonadhesive state in resting T cells [ 216 , 217 ] . However , because such nonadhesive T cells are still capable of crawling into and within 3 - D collagen or ﬁbronectin matrices , migration - driving forces in 3 - D ECM might range below the forces required for 2 - D attachment , prompting concepts of adhesion - independent crawling [ 150 , 212 ] . If the matrix gaps , pores , and clefts are large enough relative to cell size and deformability [ 218 ] , a 3 - D environment appears to favor bio - physical migration strategies of low adhesive strength ( Fig . 1B , ﬂ ) . The simplest mechanism leading to biophysical migra - tion is based on cytoskeletal ﬂow , cortical stiffening , and coordinated shape change , as derived from Dictyostelium pseu - dopod stiffening and protrusion . T cells can use stiff lateral outward pseudopod protrusions ( “footholds” ) that remain sta - tionary and locked between ﬁbers for some seconds while the cell mass ﬂows forward [ 212 ] . As T cells squeeze through regions of narrow spaces , constriction points or rings can act as anchors for anterograde ﬂow of the cytoplasm and propulsion of the cell mass [ 212 ] . Footholds , constriction rings , and slight yet fully reversible matrix distortion on detachment have also been reported for neutrophils [ 219 ] and dendritic cells [ 139 ] on migration through 3 - D ECM . The concept of migration strate - gies of very low adhesivity is consistent with negative results on T cells that move through 3 - D collagen matrices . Here , migra - tion occurs independently of b 1 , b 2 , b 3 , and a v integrin - mediated adhesion , as shown by a combination of blocking anti - integrin antibodies [ 4 ] . In conclusion , footholds and con - striction rings could represent cellular strategies to generate physical anchors that function despite low attachment forces ( Fig . 1 B , ﬂ ) as long as external constraints support a squeez - ing , pushing , and gliding mode of migration . DIRECTIONAL GUIDANCE OF LEUKOCYTE LOCOMOTION Chemotaxis is an important mechanism by which leukocytes accumulate in the tissues both in vitro and in vivo , as com - prehensively summarized elsewhere [ 220 – 223 ] . In addition to chemotactic cues , leukocytes are very responsive to the phys - ical and chemical patterns of the substrate . Most tissues in the body are nonrandomly organized . Migratory cells exhibit a tendency to follow the 3 - D geometry of the tissues as a conse - quence of physical and immobilized chemical guidance mech - anisms . Two major concepts have been developed in the past on how cell migration and positioning are inﬂuenced by a solid - phase environment , namely contact guidance and hapto - taxis . Contact guidance Guidance by physical structures preserved in tissues and other solid - phase substrates is termed contact guidance [ 224 ] . The concept of contact guidance was initially established for the extension of outgrowing neurites along the ﬁbers of an oriented ﬁbrin clot [ 225 ] and conﬁrmed for guidance of many other cells , such as ﬁbroblasts , leukocytes , and macrophages inter - acting with different substrates of nonrandom texture [ reviewed in ref . 226 ] . In principle , contact guidance represents the alignment of the length axis of the cell body or parts of it in parallel to a preformed physical structure such as structural discontinuities in the form of matrix ﬁbers ( Fig . 2A ) , a groove , or an elevated border . A special case of 3 - D contact guidance in vitro may be represented by “chimneying , ” i . e . , cell crawling through a narrow capillary tube [ 213 ] . Contact guidance results from a stereotypic guidance reaction , which can be elicited by an array of natural and synthetic substrates , e . g . , matrix ﬁbers , a groove in the cover slip , or textile or plastic ﬁbers . This versatility and apparent substrate independence could argu - ably implicate mechanisms of cell - substrate interactions be - yond speciﬁc receptor - ligand interaction and molecular recog - nition . The cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in contact guidance remain to be determined . Physicochemically , contact guidance might be a consequence of the oriented strengthening of integrin - substrate linkages after borders of maximum rigidity [ 106 ] . The concept of integrin - ligand strengthening is sup - ported by aligned focal contact - like structures preferentially developing in ﬁbroblasts along the interface of a grooved surface but not in interactions with ﬂat substrate regions [ 227 ] . The outcome is a polarized stabilization of the structural cy - toskeleton along environmental discontinuities , leading to the adaptation of the cell body along these extracellular guidance cues . In 3 - D tissue environments , contact guidance along edges of increased rigidity is probably combined with the ﬂowing and gliding of the cell body along paths of least resistance , as detected for T cells crawling through a 3 - D collagen ﬁber network ( Fig . 2 ; for a video clip , see http / / : www . xxx ) . T cells slide through open gaps along preformed pathways oriented in parallel to and guided by adjacent colla - gen ﬁbers ( Fig . 2A – C ) . Instead of structurally remodeling collagen ﬁbers , regions of increased ﬁber density and narrow texture [ Fig . 2D and E ( white arrowhead ) ] are readily circum - migrated leaving the preformed matrix structure fully intact [ Fig . 2 E – G ( white arrow ) ] . Because T cells tend to orient along the random order of collagen ﬁbers , the path structures ob - tained from T cell populations migrating within nonaligned 3 - D collagen lattices follow the model of persistent random walk [ 2 , 212 ] . Within aligned collagen matrices , T lymphocytes show a bias for movement in parallel to the length axis of the ﬁbers , implicating contact guidance mechanisms [ 212 , 228 ] . The minimum extension of a physical cue to initiate morphological cell patterning has been established in the range of 30 nm in macrophage - like cells [ 229 ] . The diameter of individual colla - gen ﬁbers ranges from 70 to 280 nm , although bundles can reach extensions of micrometers [ 230 ] . Unlike chemotaxis , contact guidance in the absence of further stimuli is a bidi - rectional locomotion cue that , on its own , would not lead to directed cell accumulation ; however , it would predeﬁne a limited number of pathways that can be used by cells within a given structural environment . Friedl et al . Amoeboid crawling movement of leukocytes 503 Haptotaxis Cell movement towards an increasing concentration of immo - bilized , i . e . , surface - or matrix - bound adhesive or biochemi - cally active molecules is termed “haptotaxis” [ 231 ] . In vitro , stable gradients of soluble chemoattractants can be generated by various diffusion techniques imposing directional cell mi - gration . In vivo , however , it is difﬁcult to conceive how soluble gradients might be upheld . Under in vivo conditions , physical - perturbing events such as muscular contraction , convection of extravascular ﬂuid , and lymph ﬂow might interfere with the graded diffusion of soluble substances , forming stable gradi - ents . One mechanism of maintaining a concentration gradient over time is the immobilization of soluble factors to ECM via ECM - binding domains , such as TNF - a binding to laminin [ 208 , 232 ] . Some chemokines such as RANTES can bind to glycosaminoglycans ( e . g . , heparan sulfate ) on cell surfaces and ﬁbrillar structures , whereas the cell - binding domain is acces - sible by passenger cells [ 233 , 234 ] , thereby potentially gener - ating an immobilized chemokine scaffold . It is important that cell orientation to topographical or chem - ical cues has a fairly large random component ( “noise” ) for 2 - D substrates [ 235 ] as well as 3 - D ﬁbrillar matrices [ 148 ] . In vivo , it is likely that nondirectional random walking , chemotaxis , haptotaxis , contact guidance , and adhesive arrest are simulta - neously present to various degrees . Accumulation at a given site could then result from several converging mechanisms : ( 1 ) positive attraction , i . e . , by chemotactic or haptotactic gradients of cytokines and ( 2 ) random or nonrandom walk along physical matrix structures ; these promigratory events are likely com - bined with ( 3 ) migratory arrest provided by local stopping cues , such as trapping of migrating T cells by integrin activation [ 4 ] and immobilized cytokines [ 207 ] . As an endpoint of cell entry into tissue , adhesion - driven cell immobilization could result in efﬁcient cell accumulation in regions of interest . Last , it is noteworthy that the leukocyte crawling efﬁciency may be de - termined by the physical width of preformed matrix gaps and trails . On vasodilatation or inﬂammation , the degree of tissue hydration and swelling might signiﬁcantly contribute to loca - tion and speed of leukocyte inﬁltration by reversible widening of preexisting matrix pores and gaps for passenger cells , rep - resenting an adaptive navigation mechanism beyond single - cell function . CONCLUSIONS Leukocyte migration is now understood as a plastic and adap - tive process rather than a uniform stereotypic event . In the course of evolution , essential basic migration mechanisms ap - pear to have arisen in primitive cells , as represented by Dic - tyostelium ameba . These migration strategies might have been conserved in some if not most cell types throughout further development of metazoan organisms . With the development of complex tissue structures as well as the rise of the speciﬁc immune system , ancient basic migration strategies appear to have become more sophisticated and diverse , i . e . , including diverse sets of adhesion receptors , signaling cascades , and matrix - remodeling strategies . These additional migration strat - egies might have speciﬁcally evolved on the basis of more intimate cell - tissue interactions , whereas basic migration in - struments such as cytoskeletal turnover or pseudopod dynam - ics were retained . Consequently , for the understanding of dif - ferences in leukocyte migration and positioning strategies , it might be helpful to operationally distinguish basic , i . e . , phy - logenetically old , crawling mechanisms present after constitu - tive trafﬁcking through tissues and across resident tissue cells , from more specialized adhesion and migration events occurring in the context of speciﬁc environmental conditions . For leuko - cytes , such more speciﬁc events might include transendothelial migration , T cell crawling across antigen - presenting cells , or cytotoxic conjugation and killing , which then are further de - termined by highly speciﬁc sets of receptors and signaling cascades . On the other hand , highly speciﬁc recognition strat - egies , e . g . , on triggering TCR by major histocompatibility complex - peptide complexes , are likely to retain basic events in cytoskeletal dynamics and turnover [ 9 ] . The paradigm of amoeboid movement will continue as a source of insights and probes into the study of cell motility in mammalian cells . Amoeboid single - cell movement appears to represent an efﬁcient migration strategy optimized for speed and ﬂexibility for cells that appear to function in very different environments under both beneﬁcial and adverse conditions . The ﬁnding that Dictyostelium cells can apparently crawl across many different sorts of substrates , either living or non - living , might stimulate further efforts to dissect robust , versa - tile shape - driven migration strategies from speciﬁc adhesion receptor - dependent haptokinetic processes . In light of these ﬁndings in Dictyolstelium , one of the most overlooked princi - ples of migration and positioning in leukocytes might depend on morphological stiffness and shape change generated by a highly dynamic actin cytoskeleton in response to adjacent extracellular patterns . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by grants from the Deutsche For - schungsgemeinschaft ( Fr - 1155 / 2 - 1 ) and the Wilhelm - Sander Foundation ( 96 . 030 . 2 ) . We acknowledge Katarina Wolf for critical reading of the manuscript and Bong - Seok Song for confocal time - lapse microscopy . REFERENCES 1 . Springer , T . A . ( 1994 ) Trafﬁc signals for lymphocyte recirculation and leukocyte emigration : the multistep paradigm . Cell 76 , 301 – 314 . 2 . Friedl , P . , Brocker , E . B . ( 2000 ) T cell migration in 3 - D extracellular matrix : guidance by polarity and sensations . Dev . Immunol . 7 , 249 – 266 . 3 . Hauzenberger , D . , Klominek , J . , Bergstrom , S . E . , Sundqvist , K . G . ( 1995 ) T lymphocyte migration : the inﬂuence of interactions via adhesion molecules , the T cell receptor , and cytokines . Crit . Rev . Immunol . 15 , 285 – 316 . 4 . Friedl , P . , Entschladen , F . , Conrad , C . , Niggemann , B . , Zanker , K . S . ( 1998 ) CD4 1 T lymphocytes migrating in three - dimensional collagen lattices lack focal adhesions and utilize beta1 integrin - independent strategies for polarization , interaction with collagen ﬁbers and locomo - tion . Eur . J . Immunol . 28 , 2331 – 2343 . 504 Journal of Leukocyte Biology Volume 70 , October 2001 http : / / www . jleukbio . org 5 . Gretz , J . E . , Anderson , A . O . , Shaw , S . ( 1997 ) Cords , channels , corridors and conduits : critical architectural elements facilitating cell interactions in the lymph node cortex . Immunol . Rev . 15 , 11 – 24 . 6 . Gunzer , M . , Scha¨fer , A . , Borgmann , S , Grabbe , S . , Za¨nker , K . S . , Bro¨cker , E . - B . , Ka¨mpgen , E . , Friedl , P . ( 2000 ) Antigen presentation in three - dimensional extracellular matrix : interactions of T cells with den - dritic cells are dynamic , short lived , and sequential . Immunity 13 , 323 – 32 . 7 . Leppert , D . , Hauser , S . L . , Kishiyama , J . L . , An , S . , Zeng , L . , Goetzl , E . J . ( 1995 ) Stimulation of matrix - metalloproteinase - dependent migration of T cells by eicosanoids . FASEB J . 9 , 1473 – 1481 . 8 . Mach , F . , Schonbeck , U . , Fabunmi , R . P . , Murphy , C . , Atkinson , E . , Bonnefoy , J . Y . , Graber , P . , Libby , P . ( 1999 ) T lymphocytes induce endothelial cell matrix metalloproteinase expression by a CD40L - depen - dent mechanism : implications for tubule formation . Am . J . Pathol . 154 , 229 – 238 . 9 . Friedl , P . , Gunzer , M . ( 2001 ) Interaction of T cells and antigen present - ing cells : the serial encounter model . Trends . Immunol . 22 , 187 – 191 . 10 . Condeelis , J . ( 1993 ) Life at the leading edge : the formation of cell protrusions . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 9 , 411 – 444 . 11 . Lauffenburger , D . A . , Horwitz , A . F . ( 1996 ) Cell migration : a physically integrated molecular process . Cell 84 , 359 – 369 . 12 . Friedl , P . , Bro¨cker , E . - B . ( 2000 ) The biology of cell locomotion within three - dimensional extracellular matrix . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 57 , 41 – 64 . 13 . Friedl , P . , Brocker , E . B . , Zanker , K . S . ( 1998 ) Integrins , cell matrix interactions and cell migration strategies : fundamental differences in leukocytes and tumor cells . Cell Adhes . Commun . 6 , 225 – 236 . 14 . Friedl , P . , Zanker , K . S . , Bro¨cker , E . - B . ( 1998 ) Cell migration strategies in 3 - D extracellular matrix : differences in morphology , cell matrix inter - actions , and integrin function . Microsc . Res . Technol . 43 , 369 – 378 . 15 . Devreotes , P . N . , Zigmond , S . H . ( 1988 ) Chemotaxis in eukaryotic cells : a focus on leukocytes and Dictyostelium . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 4 , 649 – 686 . 16 . Stossel , T . P . ( 1994 ) The machinery of blood cell movements . Blood 84 , 367 – 379 . 17 . Palecek , S . P . , Loftus , J . C . , Ginsberg , M . H . , Lauffenburger , D . A . , Horwitz , A . F . ( 1997 ) Integrin - ligand binding properties govern cell migration speed through cell - substratum adhesiveness . Nature 385 , 537 – 540 . 18 . Cox , E . A . , Huttenlocher , A . ( 1998 ) Regulation of integrin - mediated adhesion during cell migration . Microsc . Res . Technol . 43 , 412 – 419 . 19 . Friedl , P . , Maaser , K . , Klein , C . E . , Niggemann , B . , Krohne , G . , Zanker , K . S . ( 1997 ) Migration of highly aggressive MV3 melanoma cells in 3 - dimensional collagen lattices results in local matrix reorganization and shedding of alpha2 and beta1 integrins and CD44 . Cancer Res . 57 , 2061 – 2070 . 20 . Murphy , G . , Gavrilovic , J . ( 1999 ) Proteolysis and cell migration : creating a path ? Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 11 , 614 – 621 . 21 . Maaser , K . , Wolf , K . , Klein , C . E . , Niggemann , B . , Zanker , K . S . , Brocker , E . B . , Friedl , P . ( 1999 ) Functional hierarchy of simultaneously expressed adhesion receptors : integrin alpha2beta1 but not CD44 medi - ates MV3 melanoma cell migration and matrix reorganization within three - dimensional hyaluronan - containing collagen matrices . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 3067 – 3079 . 22 . Friedl , P . , Noble , P . B . , Walton , P . A . , Laird , D . E . , Chauvin , P . J . , Tabah , R . J . , Black , M . , and Za¨nker , K . S . ( 1995 ) Migration of coordi - nated cell clusters in mesenchymal and epithelial cancer explants in vitro . Cancer Res . 55 , 4557 – 4560 . 23 . Nabeshima , K . , Inoue , T . , Shimao , Y . , Okada , Y . , Itoh , Y . , Seiki , M . , Koono , M . ( 2000 ) Front - cell - speciﬁc expression of membrane - type 1 matrix metalloproteinase and gelatinase A during cohort migration of colon carcinoma cells induced by hepatocyte growth factor / scatter factor . Cancer Res . 60 , 3364 – 3369 . 24 . Friedl , P . , Brocker , E . - B . ( 1997 ) Cancer cell interactions with the extra - cellular matrix involved in tissue invasion and cancer cell migration : Motility mechanisms beyond the single cell paradigm . In : Heine , H . and Rimpler : Extracellular matrix and aging . Gustav - Fischer Verlag , Leipzig , Heidelberg , pp . 7 – 18 . 25 . Firtel , R . A . , Meili , R . ( 2000 ) Dictyostelium : a model for regulated cell movement during morphogenesis . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 10 , 421 – 427 . 26 . Aubry , L . , Firtel , R . A . ( 1999 ) Integration of signaling networks that regulate Dictyostelium differentiation . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 15 , 469 – 517 . 27 . Bailly , M . , Condeelis , J . S . , Segall , J . E . ( 1998 ) Chemoattractant - induced lamellipod extension . Microsc . Res . Technol . 43 , 433 – 43 . 28 . Stossel , T . P . , Hartwig , J . H . , Janmey , P . A . , Kwiatkowski , D . J . ( 1999 ) Cell crawling two decades after Abercrombie . Biochem . Soc . Symp . 65 , 267 – 280 . 29 . Fukui , Y . , Inoue , S . ( 1997 ) Amoeboid movement anchored by eupodia , new actin - rich knobby feet in Dictyostelium . Cell Motil . Cytoskel . 36 , 339 – 354 . 30 . Siegert , F . , Weijer , C . J . , Nomura , A . , Miike , H . ( 1994 ) A gradient method for the quantitative analysis of cell movement and tissue ﬂow and its application to the analysis of multicellular Dictyostelium develop - ment . J . Cell Sci . 107 , 97 – 104 . 31 . Potel , M . J . , Mackay , S . A . ( 1979 ) Preaggregative cell motion in Dictyo - stelium . J . Cell Sci . 36 , 281 – 309 . 32 . Palsson , E . , Othmer , H . G . ( 2000 ) A model for individual and collective cell movement in Dictyostelium discoideum . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 10448 – 10453 . 33 . Ponte , E . , Bracco , E . , Faix , J . , Bozzaro , S . ( 1998 ) Detection of subtle phenotypes : the case of the cell adhesion molecule csA in Dictyostelium . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 9360 – 9365 . 34 . Ponte , E . , Rivero , F . , Fechheimer , M . , Noegel , A . , Bozzaro , S . ( 2000 ) Severe developmental defects in Dictyostelium null mutants for actin - binding proteins . Mech . Dev . 91 , 153 – 161 . 35 . Condeelis , J . , Bresnick , A . , Demma , M . , Dharmawardhane , S . , Eddy , R . , Hall , A . L . , Sauterer , R . , Warren , V . ( 1990 ) Mechanisms of amoeboid chemotaxis : an evaluation of the cortical expansion model . Dev . Genet . 11 , 333 – 340 . 36 . Firtel , R . A . , Chung , C . Y . ( 2000 ) The molecular genetics of chemotaxis : sensing and responding to chemoattractant gradients . Bioessays 22 , 603 – 615 . 37 . Firtel , R . A . ( 1996 ) Interacting signaling pathways controlling multicel - lular development in Dictyostelium . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 6 , 545 – 554 . 38 . Alford , D . , Baeckstrom , D . , Geyp , M . , Pitha , P . , Taylor - Papadimitriou , J . ( 1998 ) Integrin - matrix interactions affect the form of the structures developing from human mammary epithelial cells in collagen or ﬁbrin gels . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 521 – 532 . 39 . Clow , P . A . , McNally , J . G . ( 1999 ) In vivo observations of myosin II dynamics support a role in rear retraction . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 1309 – 1323 . 40 . Elson , E . L . , Felder , S . F . , Jay , P . Y . , Kolodney , M . S . , Pasternak , C . ( 1998 ) Forces and mechanical properties in cell locomotion . In Motion Analysis of Living Cells . New York , Wiley - Liss , 67 – 84 . 41 . Fukui , Y . , Uyeda , T . Q . , Kitayama , C . , Inoue , S . ( 2000 ) How well can an amoeba climb ? Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 10020 – 10025 . 42 . Schwab , A . ( 2001 ) Function and spatial distribution of ion channels and transporters in cell migration . Am . J . Physiol . 280 , F739 – F747 . 43 . Weeds , A . , Maciver , S . ( 1993 ) F - actin capping proteins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 5 , 63 – 69 . 44 . Carlier , M . F . ( 1998 ) Control of actin dynamics . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 10 , 45 – 51 . 45 . Schafer , D . A . , Jennings , P . B . , Cooper , J . A . ( 1996 ) Dynamics of capping protein and actin assembly in vitro : uncapping barbed ends by polyphos - phoinositides . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 169 – 179 . 46 . Hall , A . L . , Warren , V . , Dharmawardhane , S . , Condeelis , J . ( 1989 ) Identiﬁcation of actin nucleation activity and polymerization inhibitor in ameboid cells : their regulation by chemotactic stimulation . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 2207 – 2213 . 47 . Hug , C . , Jay , P . Y . , Reddy , I . , McNally , J . G . , Bridgman , P . C . , Elson , E . L . , Cooper , J . A . ( 1995 ) Capping protein levels inﬂuence actin assembly and cell motility in dictyostelium . Cell 81 , 591 – 600 . 48 . Condeelis , J . ( 2001 ) How is actin polymerization nucleated in vivo ? Trends Cell Biol . 11 , 288 – 293 . 49 . Lappalainen , P . , Drubin , D . G . ( 1997 ) Coﬁlin promotes rapid actin ﬁlament turnover in vivo . Nature 388 , 78 – 82 . 50 . Aizawa , H . , Sutoh , K . , Yahara , I . ( 1996 ) Overexpression of coﬁlin stim - ulates bundling of actin ﬁlaments , membrane rufﬂing , and cell movement in Dictyostelium . J . Cell Biol . 132 , 335 – 344 . 51 . Bamburg , J . R . ( 1999 ) Proteins of the ADF / coﬁlin family : essential regulators of actin dynamics . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 15 , 185 – 230 . 52 . Carlier , M . F . , Pantaloni , D . ( 1997 ) Control of actin dynamics in cell motility . J . Mol . Biol . 269 , 459 – 467 . 53 . Andre , E . , Lottspeich , F . , Schleicher , M . , Noegel , A . ( 1988 ) Severin , gelsolin , and villin share a homologous sequence in regions presumed to contain F - actin severing domains . J . Biol . Chem . 263 , 722 – 727 . 54 . Faix , J . , Steinmetz , M . , Boves , H . , Kammerer , R . A . , Lottspeich , F . , Mintert , U . , Murphy , J . , Stock , A . , Aebi , U . , Gerisch , G . ( 1996 ) Cortex - illins , major determinants of cell shape and size , are actin - bundling proteins with a parallel coiled - coil tail . Cell 86 , 631 – 642 . 55 . Mullins , R . D . , Machesky , L . M . ( 2000 ) Actin assembly mediated by arp2 / 3 complex and WASP family proteins . Methods Enzymol . 325 , 214 – 237 . Friedl et al . Amoeboid crawling movement of leukocytes 505 56 . Cox , D . , Condeelis , J . , Wessels , D . , Soll , D . , Kern , H . , Knecht , D . A . ( 1992 ) Targeted disruption of the ABP - 120 gene leads to cells with altered motility . J . Cell Biol . 116 , 943 – 955 . 57 . Cox , D . , Wessels , D . , Soll , D . R . , Hartwig , J . , Condeelis , J . ( 1996 ) Re - expression of ABP - 120 rescues cytoskeletal , motility , and phagocy - tosis defects of ABP - 120 - Dictyostelium mutants . Mol . Biol . Cell 7 , 803 – 823 . 58 . Mishima , M . , Nishida , E . ( 1999 ) Coronin localizes to leading edges and is involved in cell spreading and lamellipodium extension in vertebrate cells . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 2833 – 2842 . 59 . de Hostos , E . L . ( 1999 ) The coronin family of actin - associated proteins . Trends . Cell Biol . 9 , 345 – 350 . 60 . Bear , J . E . , Rawls , J . F . , Saxe , C . L . ( 1998 ) SCAR , a WASP - related protein , isolated as a suppressor of receptor defects in late Dictyostelium development . J . Cell Biol . 142 , 1325 – 1335 . 61 . Jung , G . , Wu , X . , Hammer , J . A . ( 1996 ) Dictyostelium mutants lacking multiple classic myosin I isoforms reveal combinations of shared and distinct functions . J . Cell Biol . 133 , 305 – 323 . 62 . Tsujioka , M . , Machesky , L . M . , Cole , S . L . , Yahata , K . , Inouye , K . ( 1999 ) A unique talin homologue with a villin headpiece - like domain is required for multicellular morphogenesis in Dictyostelium . Curr . Biol . 9 , 389 – 392 . 63 . Kreitmeier , M . , Gerisch , G . , Heizer , C . , Muller - Taubenberger , A . ( 1995 ) A talin homologue of Dictyostelium rapidly assembles at the leading edge of cells in response to chemoattractant . J . Cell Biol . 129 , 179 – 188 . 64 . Stoeckelhuber , M . , Noegel , A . A . , Eckerskorn , C . , Kohler , J . , Rieger , D . , Schleicher , M . ( 1996 ) Structure / function studies on the pH - dependent actin - binding protein hisactophilin in Dictyostelium mutants . J . Cell Sci . 109 , 1825 – 1835 . 65 . Hitt , A . L . , Hartwig , J . H . , Luna , E . J . ( 1994 ) Ponticulin is the major high afﬁnity link between the plasma membrane and the cortical actin network in Dictyostelium . J . Cell Biol . 126 , 1433 – 1444 . 66 . Rivero , F . , Kuspa , A . , Brokamp , R . , Matzner , M . , Noegel , A . A . ( 1998 ) Interaptin , an actin - binding protein of the alpha - actinin superfamily in Dictyostelium discoideum , is developmentally and cAMP - regulated and associates with intracellular membrane compartments . J . Cell Biol . 142 , 735 – 750 . 67 . Machesky , L . M . , Cooper , J . A . ( 1999 ) Cell motility : bare bones of the cytoskeleton . Nature 401 , 542 – 543 . 68 . Higgs , H . N . , Pollard , T . D . ( 2001 ) Regulation of actin ﬁlament network formation through Arp2 / 3 complex : activation by a diverse array of proteins . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 70 , 649 – 676 . 69 . Dramsi , S . , Cossart , P . ( 1998 ) Intracellular pathogens and the actin cytoskeleton . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 14 , 137 – 166 . 70 . Roberts , T . M . , Stewart , M . ( 2000 ) Acting like actin ; the dynamics of the nematode major sperm protein ( msp ) cytoskeleton indicate a push - pull mechanism for amoeboid cell motility . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 7 – 12 . 71 . Loisel , T . P . , Boujemaa , R . , Pantaloni , D . , Carlier , M . F . ( 1999 ) Recon - stitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature 401 , 613 – 616 . 72 . Borisy , G . G . , Svitkina , T . M . ( 2000 ) Actin machinery : pushing the envelope . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 104 – 112 . 73 . Blanchoin , L . , Amann , K . J . , Higgs , H . N . , Marchand , J . B . , Kaiser , D . A . , Pollard , T . D . ( 2000 ) Direct observation of dendritic actin ﬁlament networks nucleated by Arp2 / 3 complex and WASP / Scar proteins . Nature 404 , 1007 – 1011 . 74 . Pantaloni , D . , Boujemaa , R . , Didry , D . , Gounon , P . , Carlier , M . F . ( 2000 ) The Arp2 / 3 complex branches ﬁlament barbed ends : functional antago - nism with capping proteins . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 , 385 – 391 . 75 . Cooper , J . A . , Schafer , D . A . ( 2000 ) Control of actin assembly and disassembly at ﬁlament ends . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 97 – 103 . 76 . Carlier , M . F . , Laurent , V . , Santolini , J . , Melki , R . , Didry , D . , Xia , G . X . , Hong , Y . , Chua , N . H . , Pantaloni , D . ( 1997 ) Actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF / coﬁlin ) enhances the rate of ﬁlament turnover : implication in actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 1307 – 1322 . 77 . Rivero , F . , Furukawa , R . , Fechheimer , M . , Noegel , A . A . , Weber , I . , Niewohner , J . , Faix , J . ( 1999 ) Three actin cross - linking proteins , the 34 kDa actin - bundling protein , alpha - actinin and gelation factor ( ABP - 120 ) , have both unique and redundant roles in the growth and development of Dictyostelium cytoskeletal protein mutations and cell motility in Dictyo - stelium . Biochem . Soc . Symp . 65 , 245 – 265 . 78 . Brown , J . M . , Firtel , R . A . ( 2000 ) Just the right size : cell counting in Dictyostelium . Trends . Genet . 16 , 191 – 193 . 79 . Parent , C . A . , Devreotes , P . N . ( 1999 ) A cell’s sense of direction . Science 284 , 765 – 770 . 80 . Insall , R . H . , Soede , R . D . , Schaap , P . , Devreotes , P . N . ( 1994 ) Two cAMP receptors activate common signaling pathways in Dictyostelium . Mol . Biol . Cell 5 , 703 – 711 . 81 . Sun , T . J . , Devreotes , P . N . ( 1991 ) Gene targeting of the aggregation stage cAMP receptor cAR1 in Dictyostelium . Genes Dev . 5 , 572 – 582 . 82 . Jin , T . , Zhang , N . , Long , Y . , Parent , C . A . , Devreotes , P . N . ( 2000 ) Localization of the G protein betagamma complex in living cells during chemotaxis . Science 287 , 1034 – 1036 . 83 . Leopoldt , D . , Hanck , T . , Exner , T . , Maier , U . , Wetzker , R . , Nurnberg , B . ( 1998 ) Gbetagamma stimulates phosphoinositide 3 - kinase - gamma by direct interaction with two domains of the catalytic p110 subunit . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 7024 – 7029 . 84 . Chan , T . O . , Rittenhouse , S . E . , Tsichlis , P . N . ( 1999 ) AKT / PKB and other D3 phosphoinositide - regulated kinases : kinase activation by phos - phoinositide - dependent phosphorylation . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 68 , 965 – 1014 . 85 . Funamoto , S . , Milan , K . , Meili , R . , Firtel , R . A . ( 2001 ) Role of phos - phatidylinositol 3 9 kinase and a downstream pleckstrin homology do - main - containing protein in controlling chemotaxis in dictyostelium . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 795 – 810 . 86 . Nebl , T . , Oh , S . W . , Luna , E . J . ( 2000 ) Membrane cytoskeleton : PIP ( 2 ) pulls the strings . Curr . Biol . 10 , R351 – R354 . 87 . Meili , R . , Ellsworth , C . , Lee , S . , Reddy , T . B . , Ma , H . , Firtel , R . A . ( 1999 ) Chemoattractant - mediated transient activation and membrane localization of Akt / PKB is required for efﬁcient chemotaxis to cAMP in Dictyostelium . EMBO J . 18 , 2092 – 2105 . 88 . Czech , M . P . ( 2000 ) PIP2 and PIP3 : complex roles at the cell surface . Cell 100 , 603 – 606 . 89 . Sechi , A . S . , Wehland , J . ( 2000 ) The actin cytoskeleton and plasma membrane connection : PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P ( 2 ) inﬂuences cytoskeletal protein activity at the plasma membrane . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 3685 – 3695 . 90 . Lockyer , P . J . , Wennstrom , S . , Kupzig , S . , Venkateswarlu , K . , Downward , J . , Cullen , P . J . ( 1999 ) Identiﬁcation of the ras GTPase - activating protein GAP1 ( m ) as a phosphatidylinositol - 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate - binding protein in vivo . Curr . Biol . 9 , 265 – 268 . 91 . Stossel , T . P . ( 1994 ) The E . Donnall Thomas Lecture , 1993 : the machin - ery of blood cell movements . Blood 84 , 367 – 379 . 92 . Raucher , D . , Stauffer , T . , Chen , W . , Shen , K . , Guo , S . , York , J . D . , Sheetz , M . P . , Meyer , T . ( 2000 ) Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate functions as a second messenger that regulates cytoskeleton - plasma membrane adhesion . Cell 100 , 221 – 228 . 93 . Shibasaki , Y . , Ishihara , H . , Kizuki , N . , Asano , T . , Oka , Y . , Yazaki , Y . ( 1997 ) Massive actin polymerization induced by phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase in vivo . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 7578 – 7581 . 94 . Wang , Y . , Liu , J . , Segall , J . E . ( 1998 ) MAP kinase function in amoeboid chemotaxis . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 373 – 383 . 95 . Klippel , A . , Kavanaugh , W . M . , Pot , D . , Williams , L . T . ( 1997 ) A speciﬁc product of phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase directly activates the protein kinase Akt through its pleckstrin homology domain : a speciﬁc product of phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase directly activates the protein kinase Akt through its pleckstrin homology domain . Mol . Cell Biol . 17 , 338 – 344 . 96 . Servant , G . , Weiner , O . D . , Herzmark , P . , Balla , T . , Sedat , J . W . , Bourne , H . R . ( 2000 ) Polarization of chemoattractant receptor signaling during neutrophil chemotaxis . Science 287 , 1037 – 1040 . 97 . Wilkins , A . , Insall , R . H . ( 2001 ) Small GTPases in Dictyostelium : lessons from a social amoeba . Trends Genet . 17 , 41 – 48 . 98 . Hall , A . ( 1998 ) Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskeleton . Science 279 , 509 – 514 . 99 . Ren , X . D . , Bokoch , G . M . , Traynor - Kaplan , A . , Jenkins , G . H . , Ander - son , R . A . , Schwartz , M . A . ( 1996 ) Physical association of the small GTPase Rho with a 68 - kDa phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase in Swiss 3T3 cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 7 , 435 – 442 . 100 . Azuma , T . , Witke , W . , Stossel , T . P . , Hartwig , J . H . , Kwiatkowski , D . J . ( 1998 ) Gelsolin is a downstream effector of rac for ﬁbroblast motility . EMBO J . 17 , 1362 – 1370 . 101 . Nobes , C . D . , Hall , A . ( 1999 ) Rho GTPases control polarity , protrusion , and adhesion during cell movement . J . Cell Biol . 144 , 1235 – 1244 . 102 . Tuxworth , R . I . , Cheetham , J . L . , Machesky , L . M . , Spiegelmann , G . B . , Weeks , G . , Insall , R . H . ( 1997 ) Dictyostelium RasG is required for normal motility and cytokinesis , but not growth . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 605 – 614 . 103 . Wilkins , A . , Chubb , J . R . , Insall , R . H . ( 2001 ) A novel Dictyostelium RasGEF is required for normal endocytosis , cell motility and multicel - lular development . Curr . Biol . 10 , 1427 – 1437 . 104 . Killich , T . , Plath , P . J . , Wei , X . , Bultmann , H . , Rensing , L . , Vicker , M . G . ( 1993 ) The locomotion , shape and pseudopodial dynamics of unstimulated Dictyostelium cells are not random . J . Cell Sci . 106 , 1005 – 1013 . 105 . Yamada , K . M . , Geiger , B . ( 1997 ) Molecular interactions in cell adhesion complexes . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 9 , 76 – 85 . 506 Journal of Leukocyte Biology Volume 70 , October 2001 http : / / www . jleukbio . org 106 . Sheetz , M . P . , Felsenfeld , D . P . , Galbraith , C . G . ( 1998 ) Cell migration : regulation of force on extracellular - matrix - integrin complexes . Trends Cell Biol . 8 , 51 – 54 . 107 . O’Toole , E . A . , Marinkovich , M . P . , Hoefﬂer , W . K . , Furthmayr , H . , Woodley , D . T . ( 1997 ) Laminin - 5 inhibits human keratinocyte migration . Exp . Cell Res . 233 , 330 – 339 . 108 . Huang , X . , Wu , J . , Spong , S . , Sheppard , D . ( 1998 ) The integrin alphav - beta6 is critical for keratinocyte migration on both its known ligand , ﬁbronectin , and on vitronectin . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 2189 – 2195 . 109 . Schmidt , C . E . , Horwitz , A . F . , Lauffenburger , D . A . , Sheetz , M . P . ( 1993 ) Integrin - cytoskeletal interactions in migrating ﬁbroblasts are dynamic , asymmetric , and regulated . J . Cell Biol . 123 , 977 – 991 . 110 . Palecek , S . P . , Huttenlocher , A . , Horwitz , A . F . , Lauffenburger , D . A . ( 1998 ) Physical and biochemical regulation of integrin release during rear detachment of migrating cells . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 929 – 940 . 111 . Palecek , S . P . , Horwitz , A . F . , Lauffenburger , D . A . ( 1999 ) Kinetic model for integrin - mediated adhesion release during cell migration . Ann . Biomed . Eng . 27 , 219 – 235 . 112 . Nobes , C . D . , Lauritzen , I . , Mattei , M . G . , Paris , S . , Hall , A . , Chardin , P . ( 1998 ) A new member of the Rho family , Rnd1 , promotes disassembly of actin ﬁlament structures and loss of cell adhesion . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 187 – 197 . 113 . Echtermeyer , F . , Schober , S . , Poschl , E . , von der , M . ( 1996 ) Speciﬁc induction of cell motility on laminin by alpha 7 integrin . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 2071 – 2075 . 114 . Burridge , K . , and Chrzanowska - Wodicka , M . ( 1996 ) Focal adhesions , contractility , and signaling . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 12 , 463 – 519 . 115 . Critchley , D . R . ( 2000 ) Focal adhesions—the cytoskeletal connection . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 133 – 139 . 116 . Bishop , A . L . , and Hall , A . ( 2000 ) Rho GTPases and their effector proteins . Biochem . J . 348 , 241 – 255 . 117 . Yamamoto , M . , Hilgemann , D . H . , Feng , S . , Bito , H . , Ishihara , H . , Shibasaki , Y . , Yin , H . L . ( 2001 ) Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate induces actin stress - ﬁber formation and inhibits membrane rufﬂing in CV1 cells . J . Cell Biol . 152 , 867 – 876 . 118 . Oliver , T . , Lee , J . , Jacobson , K . ( 1994 ) Forces exerted by locomoting cells . Semin . Cell Biol . 5 , 139 – 147 . 119 . Schwartz , M . A . , and Shattil , S . J . ( 2000 ) Signaling networks linking integrins and rho family GTPases . Trends Biochem . Sci . 25 , 388 – 391 . 120 . Bretscher , M . S . ( 1996 ) Moving membrane up to the front of migrating cells . Cell 85 , 465 – 467 . 121 . Aguado - Velasco , C . , Bretscher , M . S . ( 1999 ) Circulation of the plasma membrane in Dictyostelium . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 4419 – 4427 . 122 . Regen , C . M . , Horwitz , A . F . ( 1992 ) Dynamics of beta 1 integrin - mediated adhesive contacts in motile ﬁbroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 119 , 1347 – 1359 . 123 . Calderwood , D . A . , Zent , R . , Grant , R . , Rees , D . J . , Hynes , R . O . , Ginsberg , M . H . ( 1999 ) The talin head domain binds to integrin beta subunit cytoplasmic tails and regulates integrin activation . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 28071 – 28074 . 124 . Huttenlocher , A . , Palecek , S . P . , Lu , Q . , Zhang , W . , Mellgren , R . L . , Lauffenburger , D . A . , Ginsberg , M . H . , Horwitz , A . F . ( 1997 ) Regulation of cell migration by the calcium - dependent protease calpain . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 32719 – 32722 . 125 . Beckerle , M . C . , Burridge , K . , DeMartino , G . N . , Croall , D . E . ( 1987 ) Colocalization of calcium - dependent protease II and one of its substrates at sites of cell adhesion . Cell 51 , 569 – 577 . 126 . Carragher , N . O . , Levkau , B . , Ross , R . , Raines , E . W . ( 1999 ) Degraded collagen fragments promote rapid disassembly of smooth muscle focal adhesions that correlates with cleavage of pp125 ( FAK ) , paxillin , and talin . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 619 – 630 . 127 . Fukui , Y . , de Hostos , E . , Yumura , S . , Kitanishi - Yumura , T . , Inoue , S . ( 1999 ) Architectural dynamics of F - actin in eupodia suggests their role in invasive locomotion in Dictyostelium . Exp . Cell Res . 249 , 33 – 45 . 128 . Muller , K . , Gerisch , G . ( 1978 ) A speciﬁc glycoprotein as the target site of adhesion blocking Fab in aggregating Dictyostelium cells . Nature 274 , 445 – 449 . 129 . Wong , E . F . S . , Brar , S . K . , Sesaki , H . , Yang , C . , Siu , C . H . ( 1996 ) Molecular cloning and characterization of DdCAD - 1 , a Ca2 1 - dependent cell - cell adhesion molecule , in Dictyostelium discoideum . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 16399 – 16408 . 130 . Siu , C . H . , Des , R . B . , Lam , T . Y . ( 1983 ) Involvement of a cell - surface glycoprotein in the cell - sorting process of Dictyostelium discoideum . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 80 , 6596 – 6600 . 131 . Ginger , R . S . , Drury , L . , Baader , C . , Zhukovskaya , N . V . , Williams , J . G . ( 1998 ) A novel Dictyostelium cell surface protein important for both cell adhesion and cell sorting . Development 125 , 3343 – 3352 . 132 . Sesaki , H . , Wong , E . F . , Siu , C . H . ( 1997 ) The cell adhesion molecule DdCAD - 1 in Dictyostelium is targeted to the cell surface by a nonclas - sical transport pathway involving contractile vacuoles . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 939 – 951 . 133 . Andre , E . , Brink , M . , Gerisch , G . , Isenberg , G . , Noegel , A . , Schleicher , M . , Segall , J . E . , Wallraff , E . ( 1989 ) A Dictyostelium mutant deﬁcient in severin , an F - actin fragmenting protein , shows normal motility and chemotaxis . J . Cell Biol . 108 , 985 – 995 . 134 . Doerschuk , C . M . , Tasaka , S . , Wang , Q . ( 2000 ) CD11 / CD18 - dependent and - independent neutrophil emigration in the lungs : how do neutrophils know which route to take ? Am . J . Respir . Cell Mol . Biol . 23 , 133 – 136 . 135 . Masuyama , J . , Berman , J . S . , Cruikshank , W . W . , Morimoto , C . , Center , D . M . ( 1992 ) Evidence for recent as well as long term activation of T cells migrating through endothelial cell monolayers in vitro . J . Immunol . 148 , 1367 – 1374 . 136 . Friedl , P . , Noble , P . B . , Za¨nker , K . S . ( 1995 ) T Lymphocyte locomotion in a three - dimensional collagen matrix : expression and function of cell adhesion molecules . J . Immunol . 154 , 4973 – 4985 . 137 . Sanchez - Madrid , F . , del Pozo , M . A . ( 1999 ) Leukocyte polarization in cell migration and immune interactions . EMBO J . 18 , 501 – 511 . 138 . Grinnell , F . ( 1982 ) Migration of human neutrophils in hydrated collagen lattices . J . Cell Sci . 58 : 95 – 108 . 139 . Gunzer , M . , Ka¨mpgen , E . , Bro¨cker , E . - B . , Za¨nker , K . S . , Friedl , P . ( 1997 ) Migration of dendritic cells in 3D - collagen lattices : visualisation of dynamic interactions with the substratum and the distribution of surface structures via a novel confocal reﬂection imaging technique . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 417 , 97 – 103 . 140 . Cliff , W . J . ( 1966 ) The acute inﬂammatory reaction in the rabbit ear chamber with particular reference to the phenomenon of leukocytic migration . J . Exp . Med . 124 , 543 – 556 . 141 . Downey , G . P . , Doherty , D . E . , Schwab , B . , Elson , E . L . , Henson , P . M . , Worthen , G . S . ( 1990 ) Retention of leukocytes in capillaries : role of cell size and deformability . J . Appl . Physiol . 69 , 1767 – 1778 . 142 . Zigmond , S . H . , Levitsky , H . I . , Kreel , B . J . ( 1981 ) Cell polarity : an examination of its behavioral expression and its consequences for poly - morphonuclear leukocyte chemotaxis . J . Cell Biol . 89 , 585 – 592 . 143 . Elson , E . L . , Felder , S . F . , Jay , P . Y . , Kolodney , M . S . , Pasternak , C . ( 1999 ) Forces in cell locomotion . Biochem . Soc . Symp . 65 , 299 – 314 . 144 . Pasternak , C . , Elson , E . L . ( 1985 ) Lymphocyte mechanical response triggered by cross - linking surface receptors . J . Cell Biol . 100 , 860 – 872 . 145 . Guilford , W . H . , Lantz , R . C . , Gore , R . W . ( 1995 ) Locomotive forces produced by single leukocytes in vivo and in vitro . Am . J . Physiol . 268 , C1308 – C1312 . 146 . Usami , S . , Wung , S . L . , Skierczynski , B . A . , Skalak , R . , Chien , S . ( 1992 ) Locomotion forces generated by a polymorphonuclear leukocyte . Bio - phys . J . 63 , 1663 – 1666 . 147 . Friedl , P . , Noble , P . B . , Shields , E . D . , Zanker , K . S . ( 1994 ) Locomotor phenotypes of unstimulated CD45RAhigh and CD45ROhigh CD4 1 and CD8 1 lymphocytes in three - dimensional collagen lattices . Immunology 82 , 617 – 624 . 148 . Gunzer , M . , Friedl , P . , Niggemann , B . , Brocker , E . B . , Kampgen , E . , Zanker , K . S . ( 2000 ) Migration of dendritic cells within 3 - D collagen lattices is dependent on tissue origin , state of maturation , and matrix structure and is maintained by proinﬂammatory cytokines . J . Leukoc . Biol . 67 , 622 – 629 . 149 . Werr , J . , Xie , X . , Hedqvist , P . , Ruoslahti , E . , Lindbom , L . ( 1998 ) Beta1 integrins are critically involved in neutrophil locomotion in extravascular tissue in vivo . J . Exp . Med . 187 , 2091 – 2096 . 150 . Wilkinson , P . C . ( 1982 ) Physical and chemical determinants of leucocyte locomotion . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 155 , 89 – 99 . 151 . Stossel , T . P . ( 1993 ) On the crawling of animal cells . Science 260 , 1086 – 1094 . 152 . Weiner , O . D . , Servant , G . , Welch , M . D . , Mitchison , T . J . , Sedat , J . W . , Bourne , H . R . ( 1999 ) Spatial control of actin polymerization during neutrophil chemotaxis . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 75 – 81 . 153 . Sharma , C . P . , Ezzell , R . M . , Arnaout , M . A . ( 1995 ) Direct interaction of ﬁlamin ( ABP - 280 ) with the beta 2 - integrin subunit CD18 . J . Immunol . 154 , 3461 – 3470 . 154 . Schoenwaelder , S . M . , Burridge , K . ( 1999 ) Bidirectional signaling be - tween the cytoskeleton and integrins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 11 , 274 – 286 . 155 . Loo , D . T . , Kanner , S . B . , Aruffo , A . ( 1998 ) Filamin binds to the cytoplasmic domain of the beta1 - integrin : identiﬁcation of amino acids responsible for this interaction . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 23304 – 23312 . 156 . Westlin , W . F . , Kiely , J . M . , Gimbrone , M . A . J . ( 1992 ) Interleukin - 8 induces changes in human neutrophil actin conformation and distribu - tion : relationship to inhibition of adhesion to cytokine - activated endo - thelium . J . Leukoc . Biol . 52 , 43 – 51 . Friedl et al . Amoeboid crawling movement of leukocytes 507 157 . Cassimeris , L . , Safer , D . , Nachmias , V . T . , Zigmond , S . H . ( 1992 ) Thymosin beta 4 sequesters the majority of G - actin in resting human polymorphonuclear leukocytes . J . Cell Biol . 119 , 1261 – 1270 . 158 . Cassimeris , L . , McNeill , H . , Zigmond , S . H . ( 1990 ) Chemoattractant - stimulated polymorphonuclear leukocytes contain two populations of actin ﬁlaments that differ in their spatial distributions and relative stabilities . J . Cell Biol . 110 , 1067 – 1075 . 159 . Coates , T . D . , Watts , R . G . , Hartman , R . , Howard , T . H . ( 1992 ) Rela - tionship of F - actin distribution to development of polar shape in human polymorphonuclear neutrophils . J . Cell Biol . 117 , 765 – 774 . 160 . Zigmond , S . H . ( 1998 ) Actin cytoskeleton : the Arp2 / 3 complex gets to the point . Curr . Biol . 8 , R654 – R657 . 161 . Zigmond , S . H . , Joyce , M . , Yang , C . , Brown , K . , Huang , M . , Pring , M . ( 1998 ) Mechanism of Cdc42 - induced actin polymerization in neutrophil extracts . J . Cell Biol . 142 , 1001 – 1012 . 162 . Entschladen , F . , Niggemann , B . , Za¨nker , K . S . , Friedl , P . ( 1997 ) Differ - ential requirement of protein tyrosine kinases and protein kinase C in the regulation of T cell locomotion in three - dimensional collagen matrices . J . Immunol . 159 , 3203 – 3210 . 163 . van Es , S . , Devreotes , P . N . ( 1999 ) Molecular basis of localized responses during chemotaxis in amoebae and leukocytes . Cell Mol . Life Sci . 55 , 1341 – 1351 . 164 . Shimizu , Y . , Mobley , J . L . , Finkelstein , L . D . , Chan , A . S . ( 1995 ) A role for phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase in the regulation of beta 1 integrin activity by the CD2 antigen . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 1867 – 1880 . 165 . Laux , T . , Fukami , K . , Thelen , M . , Golub , T . , Frey , D . , Caroni , P . ( 2000 ) GAP43 , MARCKS , and CAP23 modulate PI ( 4 , 5 ) P ( 2 ) at plasmalemmal rafts , and regulate cell cortex actin dynamics through a common mech - anism . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 1455 – 1472 . 166 . Hinchliffe , K . A . ( 2001 ) Cellular signalling : stressing the importance of PIP ( 3 ) . Curr . Biol . 11 , R371 – R372 . 167 . Wymann , M . P . , Sozzani , S . , Altruda , F . , Mantovani , A . , Hirsch , E . ( 2000 ) Lipids on the move : phosphoinositide 3 - kinases in leukocyte function . Immunol . Today 21 , 260 – 264 . 168 . Knall , C . , Worthen , G . S . , Johnson , G . L . ( 1997 ) Interleukin 8 - stimulated phosphatidylinositol - 3 - kinase activity regulates the migration of human neutrophils independent of extracellular signal - regulated kinase and p38 mitogen - activated protein kinases . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 3052 – 3057 . 169 . Niggli , V . , Keller , H . ( 1997 ) The phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase inhibitor wortmannin markedly reduces chemotactic peptide - induced locomotion and increases in cytoskeletal actin in human neutrophils . Eur . J . Phar - macol . 335 , 43 – 52 . 170 . Vicente - Manzanares , M . , Rey , M . , Jones , D . R . , Sancho , D . , Mellado , M . , Rodriguez - Frade , J . M . , del Pozo , M . A . , Yanez - Mo , M . , de Ana , A . M . , Martinez , A . , Merida , I . , Sanchez - Madrid , F . ( 1999 ) Involvement of phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase in stromal cell - derived factor - 1 alpha - induced lymphocyte polarization and chemotaxis . J . Immunol . 163 , 4001 – 4012 . 171 . Miki , H . , Miura , K . , Takenawa , T . ( 1996 ) N - WASP , a novel actin - depolymerizing protein , regulates the cortical cytoskeletal rearrangement in a PIP2 - dependent manner downstream of tyrosine kinases . EMBO J . 15 , 5326 – 5335 . 172 . Aspenstrom , P . , Lindberg , U . , Hall , A . ( 1996 ) Two GTPases , Cdc42 and Rac , bind directly to a protein implicated in the immunodeﬁciency disorder Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome . Curr . Biol . 6 , 70 – 75 . 173 . Rohatgi , R . , Ma , L . , Miki , H . , Lopez , M . , Kirchhausen , T . , Takenawa , T . , Kirschner , M . W . ( 1999 ) The interaction between N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex links Cdc42 - dependent signals to actin assembly . Cell 97 , 221 – 231 . 174 . Yang , C . , Huang , M . , DeBiasio , J . , Pring , M . , Joyce , M . , Miki , H . , Takenawa , T . , Zigmond , S . H . ( 2000 ) Proﬁlin enhances Cdc42 - induced nucleation of actin polymerization . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 1001 – 1012 . 175 . Zigmond , S . H . ( 2000 ) How WASP regulates actin polymerization . J . Cell Biol . 150 , F117 – F120 . 176 . Nobes , C . D . , Hall , A . ( 1995 ) Rho , rac , and cdc42 GTPases regulate the assembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated with actin stress ﬁbers , lamellipodia , and ﬁlopodia . Cell 81 , 53 – 62 . 177 . Riveline , D . , Zamir , E . , Balaban , N . Q . , Schwarz , U . S . , Ishizaki , T . , Narumiya , S . , Kam , Z . , Geiger , B . , Bershadsky , A . D . ( 2001 ) Focal contacts as mechanosensors : externally applied local mechanical force induces growth of focal contacts by an mDia1 - dependent and rock - independent mechanism . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 1175 – 1186 . 178 . Scita , G . , Tenca , P . , Frittoli , E . , Tocchetti , A . , Innocenti , M . , Giardina , G . , Di Fiore , P . P . ( 2000 ) Signaling from Ras to Rac and beyond : not just a matter of GEFs . EMBO J . 19 , 2393 – 2398 . 179 . Tolias , K . F . , Couvillon , A . D . , Cantley , L . C . , Carpenter , C . L . ( 1998 ) Characterization of a Rac1 - and RhoGDI - associated lipid kinase signal - ing complex . Mol . Cell . Biol . 18 , 762 – 770 . 180 . Arcaro , A . ( 1998 ) The small GTP - binding protein Rac promotes the dissociation of gelsolin from actin ﬁlaments in neutrophils . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 805 – 813 . 181 . Higgs , H . N . , Pollard , T . D . ( 2000 ) Activation by Cdc42 and PIP ( 2 ) of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASp ) stimulates actin nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 1311 – 1320 . 182 . del Pozo , M . A . , Vicente - Manzanares , M . , Tejedor , R . , Serrador , J . M . , Sanchez - Madrid , F . ( 1999 ) Rho GTPases control migration and polariza - tion of adhesion molecules and cytoskeletal ERM components in T lymphocytes . Eur . J . Immunol . 29 , 3609 – 3620 . 183 . Aepfelbacher , M . , Essler , M . , Huber , E . , Czech , A . , Weber , P . C . ( 1996 ) Rho is a negative regulator of human monocyte spreading . J . Immunol . 157 , 5070 – 5075 . 184 . Lub , M . , van Kooyk , Y . , van Vliet , S . J . , Figdor , C . G . ( 1997 ) Dual role of the actin cytoskeleton in regulating cell adhesion mediated by the integrin lymphocyte function - associated molecule - 1 . Mol . Biol . Cell 8 , 341 – 351 . 185 . Hynes , R . O . ( 1992 ) Integrins : versatility , modulation , and signaling in cell adhesion . Cell 69 , 11 – 25 . 186 . Yauch , R . L . , Felsenfeld , D . P . , Kraeft , S . K . , Chen , L . B . , Sheetz , M . P . , Hemler , M . E . ( 1997 ) Mutational evidence for control of cell adhesion through integrin diffusion / clustering , independent of ligand binding . J . Exp . Med . 186 , 1347 – 1355 . 187 . Hemler , M . E . ( 1990 ) VLA proteins in the integrin family : structures , functions , and their role on leukocytes . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 8 , 365 – 400 . 188 . Springer , T . A . ( 1990 ) Adhesion receptors of the immune system . Nature 346 , 425 – 434 . 189 . Cheresh , D . A . , Pytela , R . , Pierschbacher , M . D . , Klier , F . G . , Ruoslahti , E . , Reisfeld , R . A . ( 1987 ) An Arg - Gly - Asp - directed receptor on the surface of human melanoma cells exists in an divalent cation - dependent functional complex with the disialoganglioside GD2 . J . Cell Biol . 105 , 1163 – 1173 . 190 . Shimizu , Y . , Shaw , S . ( 1991 ) Lymphocyte interactions with extracellular matrix . FASEB J . 5 , 2292 – 2299 . 191 . Roussel , E . , Gingras , M . C . ( 1997 ) Transendothelial migration induces rapid expression on neutrophils of granule - release VLA6 used for tissue inﬁltration . J . Leukoc . Biol . 62 , 356 – 362 . 192 . Johnston , B . , Burns , A . R . , Suematsu , M . , Issekutz , T . B . , Woodman , R . C . , Kubes , P . ( 1999 ) Chronic inﬂammation upregulates chemokine receptors and induces neutrophil migration to monocyte chemoattractant protein - 1 . J . Clin . Invest . 103 , 1269 – 1276 . 193 . Youssef , P . P . , Mantzioris , B . X . , Roberts - Thomson , P . J . , Ahern , M . J . , Smith , M . D . ( 1995 ) Effects of ex vivo manipulation on the expression of cell adhesion molecules on neutrophils . J . Immunol . Methods 186 , 217 – 224 . 194 . Naccache , P . H . , Jean , N . , Liao , N . W . , Bator , J . M . , McColl , S . R . , Kubes , P . ( 1994 ) Regulation of stimulated integrin surface expression in human neutrophils by tyrosine phosphorylation . Blood 84 , 616 – 624 . 195 . Hauzenberger , D . , Klominek , J . , Sundqvist , K . G . ( 1994 ) Functional specialization of ﬁbronectin - binding beta 1 - integrins in T lymphocyte migration . J . Immunol . 153 , 960 – 971 . 196 . Woods , M . L . , Cabanas , C . , Shimizu , Y . ( 2000 ) Activation - dependent changes in soluble ﬁbronectin binding and expression of beta1 integrin activation epitopes in T cells : relationship to T cell adhesion and migration . Eur . J . Immunol . 30 , 38 – 49 . 197 . Crisa , L . , Cirulli , V . , Ellisman , M . H . , Ishii , J . K . , Elices , M . J . , Salomon , D . R . ( 1996 ) Cell adhesion and migration are regulated at distinct stages of thymic T cell development : the roles of ﬁbronectin , VLA4 , and VLA5 . J . Exp . Med . 184 , 215 – 228 . 198 . Li , Y . Y . , Cheung , H . T . ( 1992 ) Basement membrane and its components on lymphocyte adhesion , migration , and proliferation . J . Immunol . 149 , 3174 – 3181 . 199 . van de Wiel - van Kemenade , E . , van Kooyk , Y . , de Boer , A . J . , Huijbens , R . J . , Weder , P . , van de Kasteele , W . , Melief , C . J . , Figdor , C . G . ( 1992 ) Adhesion of T and B lymphocytes to extracellular matrix and endothelial cells can be regulated through the beta subunit of VLA . J . Cell Biol . 117 , 461 – 470 . 200 . Rainger , G . E . , Buckley , C . D . , Simmons , D . L . , Nash , G . B . ( 1999 ) Neutrophils sense ﬂow - generated stress and direct their migration through alphaVbeta3 - integrin . Am . J . Physiol . 276 , H858 – H864 . 201 . Chang , T . W . , Celis , E . , Eisen , H . N . , Solomon , F . ( 1979 ) Crawling movements of lymphocytes on and beneath ﬁbroblasts in culture . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 76 , 2917 – 2921 . 508 Journal of Leukocyte Biology Volume 70 , October 2001 http : / / www . jleukbio . org 202 . Jaaskelainen , J . , Maenpaa , A . , Patarroyo , M . , Gahmberg , C . G . , Somer - salo , K . , Tarkkanen , J . , Kallio , M . , Timonen , T . ( 1992 ) Migration of recombinant IL - 2 - activated T and natural killer cells in the intercellular space of human H - 2 glioma spheroids in vitro : a study on adhesion molecules involved . J . Immunol . 149 , 260 – 268 . 203 . Dustin , M . L . , Carpen , O . , Springer , T . A . ( 1992 ) Regulation of locomo - tion and cell - cell contact area by the LFA - 1 and ICAM - 1 adhesion receptors . J . Immunol . 148 , 2654 – 2663 . 204 . van Kooyk , Y . , Figdor , C . G . ( 2000 ) Avidity regulation of integrins : the driving force in leukocyte adhesion . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 542 – 547 . 205 . Alexander , E . , Henkart , P . ( 1976 ) The adherence of human Fc receptor - bearing lymphocytes to antigen - antibody complexes . II . Morphologic alterations induced by the substrate . J . Exp . Med . 143 , 329 – 347 . 206 . Kuijpers , T . W . , Mul , E . P . , Blom , M . , Kovach , N . L . , Gaeta , F . C . , Tollefson , V . , Elices , M . J . , Harlan , J . M . ( 1993 ) Freezing adhesion molecules in a state of high - avidity binding blocks eosinophil migration . J . Exp . Med . 178 , 279 – 284 . 207 . Franitza , S . , Hershkoviz , R . , Kam , N . , Lichtenstein , N . , Vaday , G . G . , Alon , R . , Lider , O . ( 2000 ) TNF - alpha associated with extracellular matrix ﬁbronectin provides a stop signal for chemotactically migrating T cells . J . Immunol . 165 , 2738 – 2747 . 208 . Hershkoviz , R . , Goldkorn , I . , Lider , O . ( 1995 ) Tumour necrosis factor - alpha interacts with laminin and functions as a pro - adhesive cytokine . Immunology 85 , 125 – 130 . 209 . Lawson , M . A . , Maxﬁeld , F . R . ( 1995 ) Ca ( 2 1 ) - and calcineurin - depen - dent recycling of an integrin to the front of migrating neutrophils . Nature 377 , 75 – 79 . 210 . Loike , J . D . , Cao , L . , Budhu , S . , Marcantonio , E . E . , El Khoury , J . , Hoffman , S . , Yednock , T . A . , Silverstein , S . C . ( 1999 ) Differential regulation of beta1 integrins by chemoattractants regulates neutrophil migration through ﬁbrin . J . Cell Biol . 144 , 1047 – 1056 . 211 . Dustin , M . L . , Bromley , S . K . , Kan , Z . , Peterson , D . A . , Unanue , E . R . ( 1997 ) Antigen receptor engagement delivers a stop signal to migrating T lymphocytes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 3909 – 3913 . 212 . Haston , W . S . , Shields , J . M . , Wilkinson , P . C . ( 1982 ) Lymphocyte locomotion and attachment on two - dimensional surfaces and in three - dimensional matrices . J . Cell Biol . 92 , 747 – 752 . 213 . Malawista , S . E . , de Boisﬂeury , C . ( 1997 ) Random locomotion and chemotaxis of human blood polymorphonuclear leukocytes ( PMN ) in the presence of EDTA : PMN in close quarters require neither leukocyte integrins nor external divalent cations . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 11577 – 11582 . 214 . Malawista , S . E . , de Boisﬂeury , C . , Boxer , L . A . ( 2000 ) Random loco - motion and chemotaxis of human blood polymorphonuclear leukocytes from a patient with leukocyte adhesion deﬁciency - 1 : normal displacement in close quarters via chimneying . Cell Motil . Cytoskel . 46 , 183 – 189 . 215 . Brown , A . F . ( 1982 ) Neutrophil granulocytes : adhesion and locomotion on collagen substrata and in collagen matrices . J . Cell Sci . 58 : 455 – 467 . 216 . Shimizu , Y . , Van Seventer , G . A . , Horgan , K . J . , Shaw , S . ( 1990 ) Regulated expression and binding of three VLA ( beta 1 ) integrin recep - tors on T cells . Nature 345 , 250 – 253 . 217 . Goldman , R . , Harvey , J . , Hogg , N . ( 1992 ) VLA - 2 is the integrin used as a collagen receptor by leukocytes . Eur . J . Immunol . 22 , 1109 – 1114 . 218 . Schor , S . L . , Allen , T . D . , Winn , B . ( 1983 ) Lymphocyte migration into three - dimensional collagen matrices : a quantitative study . J . Cell Biol . 96 , 1089 – 1096 . 219 . Mandeville , J . T . , Lawson , M . A . , Maxﬁeld , F . R . ( 1997 ) Dynamic imaging of neutrophil migration in three dimensions : mechanical inter - actions between cells and matrix . J . Leukoc . Biol . 61 , 188 – 200 . 220 . Wells , T . N . , Proudfoot , A . E . , Power , C . A . ( 1999 ) Chemokine receptors and their role in leukocyte activation . Immunol . Lett . 65 , 35 – 40 . 221 . Campbell , J . J . , Foxman , E . F . , Butcher , E . C . ( 1997 ) Chemoattractant receptor cross talk as a regulatory mechanism in leukocyte adhesion and migration . Eur . J . Immunol . 27 , 2571 – 2578 . 222 . Foxman , E . F . , Campbell , J . J . , Butcher , E . C . ( 1997 ) Multistep naviga - tion and the combinatorial control of leukocyte chemotaxis . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 1349 – 1360 . 223 . del Pozo , M . A . , Nieto , M . , Serrador , J . M . , Sancho , D . , Vicente - Man - zanares , M . , Martinez , C . , Sanchez - Madrid , F . ( 1998 ) The two poles of the lymphocyte : specialized cell compartments for migration and recruit - ment . Cell Adhes . Commun . 6 , 125 – 133 . 224 . Matthes , T . , Gruler , H . ( 1988 ) Analysis of cell locomotion : contact guidance of human polymorphonuclear leukocytes . Eur . Biophys . J . 15 , 343 – 357 . 225 . Weiss , S . ( 1961 ) Guiding principles in cell locomotion . Exp . Cell Res . 6 , 260 – 275 . 226 . Curtis , A . , Wilkinson , C . ( 1998 ) Topographical control of cell migration . In Motion Analysis of Living Cells . New York , Wiley - Liss , 141 – 156 . 227 . Meyle , J . , Gultig , K . , Nisch , W . ( 1995 ) Variation in contact guidance by human cells on a microstructured surface . J . Biomed . Mater . Res . 29 , 81 – 88 . 228 . Shields , J . M . , Haston , W . , Wilkinson , P . C . ( 1984 ) Invasion of collagen gels by mouse lymphoid cells . Immunology 51 , 259 – 268 . 229 . Wojciak - Stothard , B . , Curtis , A . , Monaghan , W . , MacDonald , K . , Wilkin - son , C . ( 1996 ) Guidance and activation of murine macrophages by nanometric scale topography . Exp . Cell Res . 223 , 426 – 435 . 230 . Friedl , P . , Brocker , E . B . ( 2001 ) Biological confocal reﬂection micros - copy : reconstruction of three - dimensional extracellular matrix , cell mi - gration , and matrix reorganization . In Methods and Applications , 2nd ed . ( D . P . Hader , ed . ) , Boca Raton , London , New York , CRC Press , 9 – 21 . 231 . Carter , S . B . ( 1965 ) Principles of cell motility : the direction of cell movement and cancer invasion . Nature 208 , 1183 – 1187 . 232 . Gilat , D . , Cahalon , L . , Hershkoviz , R . , Lider , O . ( 1996 ) Interplay of T cells and cytokines in the context of enzymatically modiﬁed extracellular matrix . Immunol . Today 17 , 16 – 20 . 233 . Proudfoot , A . E . , Buser , R . , Borlat , F . , Alouani , S . , Soler , D . , Offord , R . E . , Schroder , J . M . , Power , C . A . , Wells , T . N . ( 1999 ) Amino - terminally modiﬁed RANTES analogues demonstrate differential effects on RANTES receptors . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 32478 – 32485 . 234 . Proudfoot , A . E . , Power , C . A . , Wells , T . N . ( 2000 ) The strategy of blocking the chemokine system to combat disease . Immunol . Rev . 177 , 246 – 256 . 235 . Clark , P . , Connolly , P . , Curtis , A . S . , Dow , J . A . , Wilkinson , C . D . ( 1990 ) Topographical control of cell behaviour : II . Multiple grooved substrata . Development 108 , 635 – 644 Friedl et al . Amoeboid crawling movement of leukocytes 509