Actin Microfilaments Play a Critical Role in Endocytosis at the Apical but not the Basolateral Surface of Polarized Epithelial Cells Theodore A . Gottlieb , Ivan E . Ivanov , Milton Adesnik , and David D . Sabatini Department of Cell Biology , New York University Medical Center , New York 10016 Abstract . Treatment with cytochalasin D , a drug that acts by inducing the depolymerization of the actin cytoskeleton , selectively blocked endocytosis of mem - brane bound and fluid phase markers from the apical surface of polarized MDCK cells without affecting the uptake from the basolateral surface . Thus , in MDCK cell transformants that express the VSV G protein , cytochalasin blocked the internalization of an anti - G mAb bound to apical G molecules , but did not reduce the uptake of antibody bound to the basolateral sur - face . The selective effect of cytochalasin D on apical endocytosis was also demonstrated by the failure of the drug to reduce the uptake of ~ 25I - labeled transfer - fin , which occurs by receptor - mediated endocytosis , via clathrin - coated pits , almost exclusively from the basolateral surface . The actin cytoskeleton appears to play a critical role in adsorptive as well as fluid phase apical endocytic events , since treatment with cytochala - sin D prevented the apical uptake of cationized ferri - tin , that occurs after the marker binds to the cell sur - face , as well as uptake of Lucifer yellow , a fluorescent soluble dye . Moreover , the drug efficiently blocked in - fection of the cells with influenza virus , when the viral inoculum was applied to the apical surface . On the other hand , it did not inhibit the basolateral up - take of Lucifer yellow , nor did it prevent infection with VSV from the basolateral surface , or with influ - enza when this virus was applied to monolayers in which the formation of tight junctions had been pre - vented by depletion of calcium ions . EM demonstrated that cytochalasin D leads to an increase in the number of coated pits in the apical sur - face where it suppresses the pinching off of coated vesicles . In addition , in drug - treated cells cationized ferritin molecules that were bound to microvilli were not cleared from the microvillar surface , as is observed in untreated cells . These findings indicate that there is a fundamental difference in the process by which endo - cytic vesicles are formed at the two surfaces of polar - ized epithelial cells and that the integrity and / or the polymerization of actin filaments are required at the apical surface . Actin filaments in microvilli may be part of a mechanochemical motor that moves mem - brane components along the microvillar surface to - wards intermicrovillar spaces , or provides the force re - quired for converting a membrane invagination or pit into an endocytic vesicle within the cytoplasm . F LUID phase and receptor - mediated endocytosis are processes that enable eukaryotic cells to take up both large and small molecules from their environment ( see Anderson , 1991 ) . The internalization of surface compo - nents that occurs during endocytosis also permits cells to modulate the protein composition of their plasma mem - branes since , to varying degrees , the interiorized proteins may be rapidly returned to the cell surface , or targeted to lysosomes for degradation ( see Goldstein et al . , 1985 ; Rod - man et al . , 1990 ) . In polarized epithelial cells , which have two distinct plasma membrane domains facing different phys - iological compartments , endocytosis can take place from both surfaces . In such cells , molecules interiorized at one surface may also undergo transcytotic transfer to the oppo - site one ( see Rodman et al . , 1990 ) . In fact , in some epithelial cells the transcytotic pathway is an essential part of the route used by newly synthesized plasma membrane protein mole - cules to reach their site of function ( Bartles et al . , 1987 ; Mostov and Deitcher , 1986 ) . The nature of the mechanisms that lead to the formation of endocytic vesicles is under active investigation . Receptor - mediated endocytosis takes place in clathrin - coated vesicles and it has been proposed that assembly of the coat drives the process of vesiculation ( see Steer and Heuser , 1991 ; Ander - son , 1991 ) . Although the uptake of extracellular fluid ( pinocytosis ) can take place within clathrin - coated vesicles , several recent studies indicate that noncoated vesicles or " caveolae ; formed by an as yet obscure mechanism , may play an important role in pinocytosis , as well as in the receptor - mediated uptake of low molecular weight ligands ( Rothberg et al . , 1992 ; Anderson et al . , 1992 ) . The fact that many integral plasma membrane proteins are linked to cytoskeletal elements that may control their loca - tion and mobility ( see Luna , 1991 ) raises the possibility that (cid:14)9 The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 93 / 02 / 695 / 16 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , Number 3 , February 1993 695 - 710 695 the cytoskeleton also plays a role in the formation of endo - cytic vesicles . The participation of the actin - containing cytoskeletal network in phagocytosis and endocytosis has been extensively studied by examining the effect on these processes of the cytochalasins , drugs which lead to disas - sembly of actin filaments . Cytochalasins completely abolish phagocytosis by macrophages , a process which requires a major reorganization of the plasma membrane to engulf large particles ( Axline and Reaven , 1974 ) . On the other hand , there are conflicting reports on the extent of inhibition of endocytosis by these drugs . Using different cell types , sev - eral groups have reported that they inhibit the endocytic up - take of fluid phase markers , such as HRP and tritiated su - crose ( Wagner et al . , 1971 ; Pratten and Lloyd , 1979 ; Blok et al . , 1982 ) , but others ( Willis et al . , 1972 ; Klaus , 1973 ; Haigler et al . , 1979 ; Piasek and Thyberg , 1980 ; Kyle et al . , 1988 ) failed to observe an inhibitory effect . A recent study showed that in one cell type ( African Green Monkey Kidney cells , VERO ) , cytochalasin D selectively inhibited the endo - cytic uptake of ricin and Lucifer yellow from nonclathrin - coated areas of the plasma membrane , while having no effect on the internalization of transferrin that occurs via clathrin - coated vesicles ( Sandvig and Van Deurs , 1990 ) . On the other hand , several authors have found an inhibitory effect of cytochalasins on the uptake of various ligands by receptor - dependent processes ( Salisbury et al . , 1980 ; Kaufman et al . , 1990 ) . In polarized epithelial cells , the cytoskeleton plays an im - portant role in the generation and maintenance of the pola - rized phenotype . In the basolateral surface of such cells actin microfilaments reach the plasma membrane , through their indirect interactions with cadherins or integrins at zonulae adherens or focal adhesion sites , respectively ( see Geiger , 1989 ) . In addition , at this surface an ankyrin / fodrin - based submembraneous scaffolding ( see Nelson , 1989 ) appears to restrict the movement of specific integral membrane pro - teins , such as the Na ยง and thus determines their basolateral segregation ( Nelson and Hammerton , 1989 ) . On the apical surface of intestinal epithelial cells , the actin - containing cytoskeleton is highly developed , extending from the terminal web into the core of microvilli and towards regions of intercellular contacts ( see Louvard , 1989 ) . More - over , apical actin has been shown to play a role in maintain - ing the apical polarization of certain proteins in MDCK cells , even in the absence of cell - cell contacts ( Ojakian and Schwimmer , 1988 ) . We have previously shown that viral envelope glycopro - teins serve as useful probes for studying the biogenesis of epithelial cell polarity and plasma membrane protein trafficking in polarized epithelial cells ( Rodriguez - Boulan and Sabatini , 1978 ; Rindler et al . , 1984 , 1985 , 1987 ; Gott - lieb et al . , 1986 ) . When expressed in transfected MDCK cells grown on a permeable support , the VSV G glycoprotein accumulates almost exclusively in the basolateral plasma membrane domains of the cells ( Compton et al . , 1989 ) . On the other hand , when confluent monolayers of transfected cells are formed on a solid support , a condition which re - stricts the access of nutrients from the medium to the basolateral surface and leads to the apical relocation of a substantial portion of basolateral markers , considerable amounts of the G protein also accumulate on the apical sur - face ( Gottlieb et al . , 1986 ) . We have taken advantage of this system to study the endocytic behavior of the apically and basolaterally located G protein molecules . This led us to dis - cover a basic difference between the endocytic mechanisms that operate at the two surfaces of polarized epithelial cells . Thus , the integrity of the actin cytoskeleton was found to be required for apical but not for basolateral endocytosis of the G protein , since only the former was blocked by cytochalasin D . Using a variety of other probes we found that the intact - ness of the actin cytoskeleton is required for all apical endo - cytic events , whether they take place by the adsorptive path - way or by fluid phase pinocytosis . Materials and Methods Cell Culture and Materials Low - resistance ( strain II ) MDCK cells ( originally obtained from Dr . J . Leighton , Medical College of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA ) and the higher - resistance strain I ( provided by Dr . G . Ojaklan , SUNY Downstate Medical Center , Brooklyn , NY ) were grown in MEM containing 10 % FBS ( Hyclone Laboratories , Logan , UT ) and antibiotics , as previously de - scribed ( Gonzalez et al . , 1987 ) . The hybridoma producing mAbs to VSV G was a gift of Dr . J . Lewis ( SUNY Downstate Medical Center , Brooklyn , NY ) . A rabbit polyclonal anti - HA antibody was obtained from Dr . M . Rindler ( New York University Medical Center ) . A stock ( 25 mg / rnl ) solution of cytochaiasin D ( Sigma Chemical Co . , St . Louis , MO ) in DMSO was prepared and used by dilution to a final concentration of 25 / zg / ml in culture medium . Controls were al - ways treated with an equal concentration of DMSO . For immunofluorescence experiments , 1 . 5 x 105 MDCK cell transfor - mants expressing the VSV G protein ( MDCK - G cells ) were plated onto cov - erslips which had been placed into 24 - well dishes . The next day , the cultures were placed in medium containing 20 mM sodium butyrate to induce syn - thesis of the viral glycoprotein ( Gottlieb et al . , 1986 ) . After a 24 - h incuba - tion , the medium containing butyrate was changed and the incubation con - tinued for another 24 - h period . At this time the monolayers on coverslips were used to follow the endocytotic uptake of anti - G immunecomplexes . Viral Infection MDCK cells ( strain I ) were plated into Transwell filter chambers ( 1 . 5 (cid:141) 10 ~ cells / chamber ) containing a large pore ( 3 . 0 / ~ m ) filter , which allows VSV penetration and infection from the basolateral surface . Strain II MDCK cells are unable to form a tight monolayer on such large pore size filters . The filter chambers were maintained in 6 - well culture dishes for 4 d with daily changes of medium before infection . Only monolayers display - ing a resistance > 1 , 000 ohms cm 2 were used . When cells grown on cover - slips were infected , the cells were first grown to confluency on the coverslips and then maintained for 3 d with daily changes of media . To infect cells with influenza virus in low calcium medium that prevents the formation of tight junctions , 24 h before infection the coverslips were washed several times in HBSS and then incubated in spinner MEM ( lacking calcium ) con - taining 5 % dialyzed FCS ( CF - MEM ) . Cells grown on coverslips , 35 - ram dishes , or filter chambers were washed three times with serum - free medium before the addition of the viral inocuium , which was always in a medium containing calcium . Coverslips received influenza A / WSW virus in 0 . 2 rrd of serum - free medium at a multiplicity of infection ( moi ) l of 20 pfu / cell . Cultures on 35 - rnm dishes and filters that received virus only from the api - cai side were infected at an moi of 10 pfu / cell in 0 . 5 ml of serum - free medium . Filter - grown cells were infected with VSV from the basolateral surface at 5 pfo / cell in 0 . 2 ml of serum - free medium . To achieve this , 0 . 5 ml of MEM was added to the apical compartment and the Transwell cham - ber was placed over the 0 . 2 - ml viral inoculum placed on a piece of parafilm . A similar protocol was used for infection with influenza , but in this case the virus was present in the medium bathing the apical surface . In all cases , cultures were exposed to the viral inoculum for 45 rain , after which time the inoculum was removed and the cells cooled on ice . At this time the Transwell chambers were returned to the 6 - well dish in which they were normally maintained . The following treatments were applied to the surface 1 . Abbreviations used in this paper : CF , cationized ferritin ; moi , multiplic - ity of infection ; SFV , Semliki Forest Virus . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , 1993 696 from which infection had been carried out : the monolayers were washed three times with cold PBS - Ca over a 15 - min period and incubated with cold pronase ( 0 . 2 mg / mi ) for I0 rain to inactivate adherent virions . They were then washed twice in cold PBS - Ca and incubated in the cold for 15 min with two changes of MEM containing 30 % horse serum . Cultures were then placed in MEM containing 30 % FBS and incubated at 370C for 6 h to allow infection to proceed . Monolayers on coverslips that had been incubated in CF - MEM 24 h before infection were returned to that medium for this incu - bation . Transfection of MDCK Cells Cultures of strain II MDCK cells growing in T - 75 flasks ( Corning Glass Works , Coming , NY ) were transfected with 75 / xg of the expression plasmid using a modified calcium phosphate method and exposure to the DNA for 7 h , as previously described ( Shen et al . , 1982 ) . The next day , the cultures were trypsinized and 1 / 100th or 1 / 50th of the total cell population was seeded into 10 - cm plates containing 7 rnl of culture medium supplemented with 400 / ~ g / rnl Geneticin sulfate ( Gibco Laboratories , Grand Island , NY ) . The medium was changed every 3 - - 4 d and , after 2 - 3 wk , drug - resistant colonies were picked for expansion and screening by immunofluorescence microscopy . lmmunofluorescence Cells on coverslips were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS - Ca for at least 1 h at room temperature , or overnight at 4 ~ Coverslips were washed once with PBS - Ca at room temperature before incubation with antibodies . To visualize antigens at the apical surface of MDCK cells , coverslips were inverted on top of a 25 - t ~ 1 drop of first antibody and incubated at 37 ~ for 1 h . They were then washed for 1 h at room temperature with PBS - Ca con - taining 0 . 2 % gelatin and the second , rbodamine - conjugated , antibody ( Cappel Laboratories , Malveru , PA ) was then applied , exactly as the first . The coverslips were then washed again for 1 h and then mounted on slides using Elvatol ( Monsanto Chemical Co . , St . Louis , MO . ) . When internal - ized and basolateral molecules were to be visualized , coverslips were in - cubated with 0 . 2 % TX - 100 in PBS - Ca for 10 rain before incubation with antibody . When the distribution of viral glycoproteins was analyzed in in - fected monolayers grown on Transwell filters , after fixation , 0 . 4 ml of the appropriate antibody was added to the apical surface or , to label the basotateral surface , 0 . 1 - 0 . 2 ml of antibody was applied to a piece of parafilm , and the Transwell placed directly on it . The filters were then washed and immersed in 100 % ethanol before air drying . The excised filters were mounted on a glass side with Eukit ( Calibrated Instruments , Ardsley , NY ) , a xylene - based medium that helps to clarify the filter . Specimens were examined by epifluorescence using a Leitz fluorescent microscope ( E . Leitz , Rockleigh , NJ ) or by laser scanning microscopy using a Sarastro Sys - tem with Phoibos Software . The scanning line was 0 . 2 - # m wide and the stage was raised in 0 . 5 - ~ tm steps . Metabolic Labeling Cells on 35 - ram dishes or on filters were labeled in methionine - deficient RPMI ( Gibco Laboratories ) supplemented with 35Smethionine ( 208 / ~ Ci / ml ; sp act 1 , 000 ci / mmole ) for the times indicated in the figure legends . After labeling , the medium was removed and the cells lysed in 0 . 25 mi of 10 rt ~ d Tris - HCl , pH 8 . 0 , containing 2 % SDS . The solubilized cell extract was sonicated , boiled for 5 rain and mixed with 1 . 2 mi of solution A ( 2 . 5 % TXq00 , 50 mM Tris , pH 7 . 5 , 0 . 2 M NaCI , 1 mM EDTA ) before centrifuga - tion for 10 rain in a microfuge . The appropriate antibody ( 2 / ~ 1 ) was added to the supernatant and the mixture was incubated overnight in the cold . Pro - tein A - Sepharose beads ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) were then added and incuba - tion continued overnight in the cold with continuous gentle agitation . The beads carrying immunecomplexes were recovered by sedimentation , washed six times by resuspension in solution A containing 0 . 2 % SDS , agita - tion for 15 rain , and resedimentation . They were then processed to analyze the immunecomplexes by SDS - PAGE and fluorography . Uptake of + ~ I - labeled Transferrin For these experiments , confluent monoleyers of MDCK cells were formed by plating 1 . 5 x 106 cells into a Transwell filter unit of pore size 0 . 4 ~ m . The medium was changed daily for three consecutive days , and the cells wore used for endocytosis studies on the fourth day after plating . Human transferrin ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) was iodinated using the Iodogen reagent ( Pierce Chemical Co . , Rockford , 1L ) . Approximately 24 h before the experiment , the monolayers were rinsed three times with serum - free DMEM , and incubated overnight in DME con - taining 1 % FBS . The next morning , cells were rinsed twice with serum - free DME and further incubated in this medium for 1 h . To determine the specific uptake of t251 - 1abeled transferrin it was necessary to measure and subtract the background of nonspecifically bound radioactivity recovered with monolayers incubated with the labeled ligand in the presence of a 500 - fold excess of nonradioactive transferrin . Therefore , the filters were divided in two groups , one was incubated with t25I - labeled transferrin ( 1 t ~ g / ml , sp act 6 x 106 dpm / / ~ g ) in DME containing 500 # g / ml each of the nonspecific competitors , BSA , and ovalbumin . The other group was in - cubated with 1251 - labeled transferrin in DME containing 500 / ~ g / mi each of BSA and human transferrin . Both sets of filters were preincubated for 60 min in the respective protein solution before addition of the ~ 251qabeled transferrin . For each time point , duplicate filters from each group were re - moved and washed extensively at 40C with several changes of PBS - Ca 2 + for 1 h . The filters were then treated twice for 15 min each with an acidic stripping solution ( 0 . 2 M acetic acid and 2 M NaCI ) and then washed several times in PBS - Ca 2 + . They were then excised from the Transwell chamber with a scalpel and their radioactivity measured in an Auto Gamma Spec - trometer ( Hewlett - Packard Co . , Palo Alto , CA ) . At each time point , specific endocytosis of 125I - labeled transferrin was calculated as the differ - ence between the average radioactivities associated with the two groups . Using this protocol no detectable endocytosis of 1251 - labeled transferrin occurred in filters incubated with the probe at 4 ~ In experiments using cytochalasin D , cells were incubated with the drug for 15 rain at 37 " C before the addition of labeled transferrin . Endocytosis of lodinated mAbs The antibody was iodinated using the Iodogen reagent ( Pierce Chemical Co . ) to specific activities of , ' ~ 107 cproJ ~ g . MDCK - G cells ( 4 (cid:141) 103 ) were plated onto 14 - mm - diam Transwell filter inserts ( Costar , Cambridge , MA ) . The medium was changed three times at 24 - h intervals and 20 mM sodium butyrate was present during the last two intervals . To begin the experiments , filters were incubated with or without cytochalasin D for 15 rain at 37 ~ and then immediately chilled to 4 ~ by replacing the medium with cold PBS . They were then incubated for 2 h at 4 ~ with 0 . 5 ml of iodinated monoclonal anti - G containing 1 . 0 # g / ml of the IgG and 10 mg / ml of BSA applied either to the apical or basolateral surface . After the incubation with antibody , the filters were washed twice in cold PBS containing 10 mg / ml BSA and the uptake experiment was initiated by incubation in serum - free medium with or without cytochalnsin at 37 ~ for the times indicated . Filters removed at the different time points were transferred to PBS at 4 ~ washed at least five times with cold PBS for 30 rain , and then incubated with an acidic stripping solution ( 0 . 2 M acetic acid and 2 M NaC1 ) at 4 ~ for 10 rain . The monolayers were incubated for 15 rain with cold PBS , and then twice for 15 rain periods with proteinase K ( 0 . 4 mg / mi in PBS ; Sigma Chemical Co . ) . Finally , they were washed five times with cold PBS before measuring the radioactivity in the Gamma counter . The background of cell - associated radioactive antibody bound at " zero " time was determined in monolayers that , after receiving the labeled antibody at 4 ~ were main - tained throughout the cold , and were washed and treated for acid and pro - tease stripping as were those incubated at 37 ~ The total amount of 1 : sI - antibody bound at time zero was determined from filters that were washed , but not treated by the stripping procedure . Generally 20 - 15 times more anti - body bound to the basolateral surface ( ' ~ 10 - 20 x 103 cpm / filter ) than to the apical . Endocytosis of Cationized Ferritin MDCK cells grown in 14 - ram Transwell chambers were incubated at 37 ~ for 15 min in DME serum - free medium with or without cytochalasin D ( 25 # g / mt ) . Two different types of uptake expefiraents were then carried out in the presence or absence of the drug . In the first , a continuous - labeling pro - tocol , the cationized ferritin was present during a 55 - rain incubation at 37 ~ In the second , a cold binding - chase protocol , the cells were chilled to 4 ~ and incubated for 60 min at that temperature with 1 ml cationized ferritin ( 1 mg / m in PBS Ca2 + ; Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) added to the apical or basolateral side . The solution containing the probe was then removed and the filters were incubated at 370C for a chase period of 45 rain in serum - free DME . In all cases , after the incubations the monolayers were chilled in cold PBS Ca 2 + , and fixed in 2 % glutaraldehyde followed by 1 % OsO4 in 0 . 1 M cacodylate buffer . The filters were then excised and processed for conventional EM . Specimens were viewed and photographed using a JEM - 1200EXII electron microscope . Gottlieb et al . Critical Role of Actin Filaments in Apical Endocytosis 697 Figure 1 . Endocytosis and transcytosis of immunecomplexes con - taining apical G molecules . MDCK - G cells grown on coverslips were incubated for 30 min at 4 ~ with a hybridoma supernatant containing a monoclonal anti - G immunoglobulin . After removal of the medium , coverslips were washed with cold PBS - Ca 2 ยง and ei - ther kept on ice ( a ) , or incubated for 15 min ( b ) , or 60 min ( c and d ) at 37 ~ The specimens were fixed and incubated with rhoda - mine - labeled goat anti - mouse immunoglobulin , without ( a and c ) or with ( b and d ) prior permeabilization with Triton X - 100 to al - low access of the antibodies to the cell interior and the basolateral membrane surface . Bar , 10 # m . Results The presence of G protein on the apical surface of most cells within monolayers of permanent MDCK - G transformants grown on coverslips was easily detected by indirect im - munofluorescence using an anti - G mouse mAb followed by a rhodamine - labeled goat anti - mouse IgG ( Fig . 1 a ) . Using such monolayers , the endocytosis and transcytosis to the basolateral surface of G protein - mAb complexes formed on the apical surface was observed when , following binding of the mAb at 4 ~ the ceils were incubated at 37 ~ Thus , when after 15 min at this temperature the second antibody was applied to fixed monolayers that were permeabilized with detergent ( Fig . 1 b ) , internalized anti - G mAb im - munecomplexes were detected in many cells in what appear to be vesicular structures within the cytoplasm . After 60 min , the immunecomplexes had largely disappeared from the apical surfaces ( Fig . 1 c ) and transcytosis was extensive , since they could be visualized after detergent permeabiliza - tion as clearly marking the outline of the basolateral surfaces of many cells ( Fig . 1 d ) . It appears from these observations that the internalized , apically formed , immunecomplexes containing G protein molecules are preferentially delivered to the basolateral sur - face . This is in contrast to the behavior of immunecomplexes formed with antibody to an endogenous apical protein , leu - cine - aminopeptidase , which after interiorization preferen - tially returned to the apical surface ( Louvard , 1980 ) . When we applied to the apical surface polyclonal antibodies to the G protein , however , the immunecomplexes that formed were internalized but most failed to be delivered to the basolateral surface ( Fig . 2 ) . They were instead , retained intracellularly over long periods of time , probably for degradation in lyso - somes ( Anderson et al . , 1982 ; Mellman and Plutner , 1984 ) . The transcytosis of a large fraction of the G protein com - plexed to mAb would seem to reflect the operation of a sort - Figure 2 . Apical immunecomplexes of G protein with polyclonal antibodies are internalized but not transferred to the basolateral sur - face . Confluent MDCK - G monolayers on coverslips were cooled to 4 ~ and incubated with either monoclonal ( a ) or polyclonal anti - G antibodies ( b ) . After removal of the antibody and washing , the cov - erslips were incubated for 60 min at 37 ~ and then fixed and treated with Triton X - 100 to allow the detection of intracellular and basolateral antibodies by indirect immunofluorescence . Bar , 10 # m . ing mechanism that normally recognizes the interiorized glycoprotein and returns it to the basolateral surface , to maintain its predominantly basolateral segregation in the face of intense membrane protein recycling ( Matlin et al . , 1983 ) . On the other hand , G - protein immunecomplexes formed with polyclonal antibodies are probably extensively cross - linked , which would lead to their targeting to lyso - somes . Considerable evidence obtained with different systems in - dicates that transport of membrane vesicles through the cytoplasm involves the participation of cytoskeletal elements ( see Vale 1987 ; Kelly , 1990 ) . We , therefore , examined the effect of cytoskeletal inhibitors on the transcellular transfer of apical G molecules complexed to mAbs . In these experi - ments , the binding of the fluorescent second antibody to re - sidual non - interiorized apical G mAb immunecomplexes was blocked by first incubating the intact cells with unla - beled second antibody . Thus , only internalized and basolat - erally located complexes were detected when the fluorescent goat antibody was applied after detergent permeabilization . It was found that the transcellular transport of apically formed irnrnunecomplexes containing G protein was not af - fected by microtubule inhibitors , such as colchicine ( not shown ) , but that cytochalasin D , an agent that leads to the depolymerization of actin filaments ( see Cooper , 1987 ) , The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , 1993 698 Figure 3 . Inhibition of apical endocytosis and transcytosis of anti - G immunecomplexes by cytochalasin D . Confluent monolayers of MDCK - G cells on eoverslips were preincubated at 37 ~ for 15 rain without ( a - c ) or with cytochalasin D ( d - f ) and , after chilling to 4 ~ incubated for 60 min with monoclonal anti - G immunoglobulin . The monolayers were then washed with cold PBS - Ca + 2 and fixed , either immediately ( a , b , c , and e ) or after a 30 - rain incubation at 37 ~ ( c and f ) . Immunecomplexes on the apical surface were visualized by incubation with rhodamine - labeled goat anti - mouse IgG without prior permeabilization with Triton X - 100 ( a and d ) . To visualize endocy - tosed and transcytosed immunecomplexes ( b , c , e , and f ) , the monolayers were first incubated with an excess of non - fluorescent goat anti - mouse IgG to block the subsequent binding of rhodamine - labeled anti - mouse immunoglobulin to the cell surface . They were then permeabilized with 0 . 2 % TX - 100 and processed for indirect immunofluorescence . Bar , 10 # m . completely abolished it ( Fig . 3 ) . Thus , when the mAbs were applied to monolayers incubated with cytochalasin D , no im - munecomplexes were found either intracellularly or on the basolateral membrane of any cell , even after a 30 - rain incu - bation at 37 ~ ( Fig . 3f ) . These observations , therefore , sug - gested that cytochalasin D totally prevented endocytosis of the immunecomplexes . Since several investigators have reported that cytochala - sins have no effect on receptor - mediated endocytosis in non - polarized cells ( Sandvig and Van Deurs , 1990 ; Mellman , 1984 ) and the basolateral surface of epithelial cells may be regarded as functionally equivalent to the surface of non - polarized ceils , we considered the possibility that cytochala - sin D only blocks apical endocytosis . The effect of the drug on endocytosis from the two surfaces of MDCK - G ceils was , therefore , examined quantitatively on filter grown mono - layers which were incubated with ~ 25I - labeled monoclonal IgG applied apically or basolaterally . As shown in Fig . 4 , treatment with cytochalasin D effectively prevented the up - take of antibodies bound to the apical surface , but had no ef - fect on the uptake of immunecomplexes formed on the baso - lateral surface . The insensitivity of basolateral endocytosis to the microfilament disassembling drug was also demon - strated in monolayers incubated with ~ 25I - labeled transfer - rin . Previous studies have shown that transferrin uptake , which is mediated by the transferrin receptor and occurs by clathrin - coated vesicles ( Hopkins , 1983 ; Wileman et al . , 1988 ) , takes place almost exclusively at the basolateral sur - face of MDCK monolayers grown on a permeable support ( Fuller and Simons , 1986 ) and Fig . 5 demonstrates that cyto - chalasin D had no effect on the basolateral uptake of mI - la - beled transferrin . 4O i - J " 6 10 o o - A Ap ~ 20 ~ - CD 15 10 " " 0 - - - 0 - " - - O * eD 5 i I r 0 s 10 15 - B Basolaleral . CD - ~ l 1 I 5 10 15 Time at 37 o C ( mln ) Figure 4 . Cytochalasin D inhibits the endocytosis of 1231 - labeled monoclonal anti - G immunoglobulin molecules bound to the apical surface of confluent MDCK - G monolayers , but not of those bound to the basolateral surface . Monolayers of MDCK - G cells grown on Transwell filters ( 0 . 45 - # m pore size ) that displayed a transepithelial resistance of 200 - 300 ohms cm 2 were assayed , as described in Materials and Methods for their capacity to internalize , in the pres - ence ( o , o ) or absence ( e , i ) of cytochalasin D ( 25 # g / ml ) , anti - G immunecomplexes containing ~ 25I - labeled mAb bound to the api - cal ( A ) or basolateral ( B ) surfaces . The uptake values plotted are not corrected for the nonspecifically adsorbed radioactivity that , af - ter the stripping procedure , remained cell associated in monolayers that received the antibody at 4 " C and were maintained at this tem - perature throughout the experiment . The amounts of ] 2 ~ I - labeled mAb bound at zero time to each of the two surfaces of MDCK - G monolayers were (cid:127)1 , 500 cpm / filter and , ~ 10 , 500 cpm / filter , for the apical and basolateral surfaces , respectively . The specificity of this binding is demonstrated by the fact that the corresponding values for nontransfected MDCK monolayers that do not express the G protein were (cid:127)10 - fold lower . Gottlieb et al . Critical Role of Actin Filaments in Apical Endocytosis 699 3 . s 3 . o 2 . 5 I 2 . 0 1 . 5 1 . 0 o . s 0 0 Time lit 37 " e ( mini Figure 5 . Cytochalasin D does not inhibit the endocytosis of 12SI - labeled transferrin bound to the basolateral surface of MDCK - G monolayers . Filter - grown MDCK - G monolayers were preincubated for 30 rain at 37 " C in serum - free DME , with or without cytochalasin D . The uptake , in the presence or absence of the drug , of t25I - labeled transferrin bound at 4 " C to the basolateral sur - face was then measured as de - scribed in Materials and Meth - kods . The background level of radioactivity associated with monolayers incubated with 12SI - labeled transferrin in the presence of a 500x molar excess of nonradioactive transferrin was sub - tracted from each point . This amounted to an average of 224 cpm / filter . To determine whether cytochalasin D inhibits other coated vesicle - mediated endocytic events from the apical surface we attempted to infect MDCK monolayers with influenza virus in the presence of this drug . Normally , many enveloped vi - ruses , including influenza use the endocytic route to enter the host cell ( Helenius and Marsh , 1982 ; Matlin et al . , 1981 , 1982 ) , and MDCK monolayers are highly susceptible to in - fection with influenza from the apical surface ( Rodriguez - Boulan and Sabatini , 1978 ; Fuller et al . , 1984 ) . However , we found that influenza infection was very inefficient when MDCK cells grown on coverslips and pretreated with cyto - chalasin D for 15 min were incubated with the viral inocu - lum for 45 min in the presence of the drug . Thus , in control cultures , virally encoded newly synthesized HA molecules were abundant on the apical surfaces of almost all cells 5 h after removal of the inoculum ( Fig . 6 a ) and ( Fig . 7 A , a ) , but when infection was attempted in the presence of cyto - chalasin D , only rare single cells , or small groups of cells , displayed surface HA molecules ( Figs . 6 b ; and 7 A , b ) . This was not due to interference with the processes of viral repli - cation , protein synthesis , or HA transport to the cell surface , since cytochalasin D had no effect when it was added only after the inoculum was removed ( Fig . 6 c ) . The extent of in - hibition of viral infection was also monitored by comparing the levels of [ 35S ] methionine HA synthesized in filter or culture dish - grown monolayers which were incubated with apically added virus in the absence or presence of cytochala - sin D . As shown in Fig . 7 B ( lanes a and b ) for filter grown cultures , cytochalasin D led to an almost complete inhibition of the production of labeled HA , assessed 4 - 6 h after incuba - tion with the virus . That the effect of cytochalasin D on preventing viral infec - tion was restricted to situations in which the virus was al - lowed to enter the cell only from the apical surface , was apparent from the finding that the drug had no effect on in - fluenza virus infection ( Fig . 8 ) when the inoculum was added to cells that had been previously cultured in calcium - free medium , in which formation of tight junctions and the differ - entiation of the two cell surface domains does not occur ( Vega Salas et al . , 1987 ) . This definitively established that the drug neither interferes with binding of the virus to the Figure 6 . Cytochalasin D prevents influenza virus infection of confluent MDCK cell monolayers grown on an impermeable sup - port . MDCK cell monolayers formed on coverslips were main - tained as controls ( a and c ) or pretreated ( b ) with cytochalasin D ( 25 ~ g / ml ) for 15 min at 37 ~ before incubation for 45 min at this temperature with the influenza viral inoculum ( 20 pfu / cell ) . After removal of the inoculum , the monolayers were incubated for 6 b and then fixed and analyzed for apically , located hemagglutinin ( HA ) by indirect immunnfluorescence using a rabbit anti - HA antibody . In c cytochalasin was only applied to the monolayer for a 45 - min period , after removal of the viral inoculum . Bar , 10 ~ m . cell surface nor abolishes the infectivity of the inoculum . Furthermore , the drug did not impair infection by VSV when this virus was applied to the basolateral side of filter - grown monolayers , as monitored by either metabolic labeling ( Fig . 7 B , lanes c and d ) or immunofluorescence detection of ac - cumulated G protein molecules ( Fig . 7 A , c and d ) . The effect of eytochalasin D on apical endocytosis was also examined by electron microscopy using as a probe cat - ionized ferritin ( CF ) , which is known to bind to anionic sites on the cell surface and to be interiorized in clathrin - coated vesicles ( Farquhar , 1978 ; Skutelsky and Anon , 1976 ) . Cells that were pretreated or not with eytoehalasin D for 15 min at 37 ~ were then incubated with cationized ferri - tin for an additional 45 - min period at 370C in the presence or absence of the drug . It was found ( Fig . 9 ) that , irrespective of the presence or absence of eytoehalasin D , after this con - tinuous labeling procedure the entire apical surfaces of the cells , including microvilli and intermicrovillar spaces , were The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , 1993 700 Figure 7 . Cytochalasin D in - hibits influenza virus infection from the apical surface but not VSV infection from the baso - lateral surface of filter - grown MDCK ceils . Strain I MDCK cells grown on Transwell filter chambers and pretreated ( A , b and d ; B , lanes b and d ) or not ( , 4 , a and c ; B , lanes a and c ) with cytochalasin D were in - fected from either the apical side with influenza virus ( A , a and b ; B , lanes a and b ) or the basolateral side with VSV ( A , c and d ; B , lanes c and d ) , as described in Materials and Methods . In A , 6 h after the inoculum was removed the monolayers were fixed and pro - cessed for indirect immuno - fluorescence after applying anti - HA ( a and b ) or anti - G ( c and d ) to the apical or basolat - eral side , respectively . In B , 4 . 5 h after removal of the inoc - ulum the infected cultures were labeled with [ 35S ] methionine for 1 . 5 h . Cell lysates were pre - pared and analyzed by immu - noprecipitation with antibod - ies to HA ( a and b ) or VSV G ( c and d ) , followed by SDS electrophoresis . Bar , 20 # m . covered by ferritin , which was also frequently found within coated pits . As expected , in control cells ( Fig . 9 a ) the label was interiorized and was present within numerous cytoplas - mic structures of varying sizes and morphology , such as en - dosomes and lysosomes . In ceils treated with cytochalasin D ( Fig . 9 , b and c ) , however , almost no ferritin was found in intracellular organelles except for some structures that ap - pear to be coated vesicles , immediately below the apical sur - face . Very strikingly , the number of apical - coated pits that showed clear continuity with the apical plasma membrane was greatly increased after cytochalasin treatment . Thus , in control cells there were 23 + 5 coated pits for 100 / zm of apical contour length ( n = 5 ) , whereas in cytochalasin treated cells the number was 2 . 3 - times larger ( 54 + 10 ) . In Figure 8 . Cytochalasin D does not inhibit influenza virus in - fection of MDCK monolayers lacking tight junctions . Con - fluent MDCK cell monolayers grown on coverslips were in - cubated for 24 h in low calcium medium ( CF - MEM , see Ma - terials and Methods ) to disas - semble tight junctions ( c and d ) or maintained in normal DME medium ( a and b ) . Af - ter the viral inoculum was re - moved , incubation was con - tinued in CF - MEM ( c and d ) or DME ( a and b ) for 6 h be - fore fixation and processing for indirect immunofluores - cence with anti - HA antibod - ies . Bar , 10 # m . Gottlieb et al . Critical Role of Actin Filaments in Apical Endocytosis 701 Figure 9 . Cytochalasin D in - hibits the uptake of cationized ferritin from the apical sur - face of MDCK ceils and in - creases the frequency of coated pits on that surface . Control ( a ) and cytochalasin D pre - treated ( b and c ) MDCK cell monolayers were incubated in serum - free MEM containing cationized ferritin ( CF ) , in the continuing absence or pres - ence of the drug , for 45 min at 370C before fixation . The ar - rows point to CF either on the apical surface of the cells or in the cytoplasm within endo - somes ( En ) and lysosomes ( Ly ) . The arrowheads point to coated pits ( CP ) at the apical surface , which in cytochalasin D - treated cells ( b and c ) are frequently connected to the plasma membrane by long nar - row necks . Bar , 0 . 5 # m . the treated cells almost all the coated pits contained ferritin and many pits were connected to the apical surface by long narrow necks . It is , therefore , quite likely that what ostensi - bly were coated vesicles just beneath the plasma membrane represented profiles of obliquely sectioned coated pits . Cytochalasin D , therefore , appeared to block apical endocy - tosis by preventing the pinching off of the coated pits from the plasma membrane to form coated vesicles . In other experiments , the cationized ferritin was allowed to bind to control and cytochalasin D treated cells during a 1 - h incubation at 4 ~ which was followed by a subsequent chase incubation of 45 rain at 37 ~ in the absence of the probe . These experiments also showed ( Fig . 10 ) the com - plete inhibition of endocytosis and an increase ( 2 . 5 x ) in the number of coated pits in the apical surface ( from an average of 13 + 4 to 32 + 5 coated pits for 100 # m of apical contour length ) in cytochalasin D - treated cells . Similar experiments ( not shown ) in which ferritin was applied to the basolateral surface of monolayers grown on filters showed that , although ferritin labeling of the basolateral surface was quite sparse , cytochalasin D affected neither the internalization of the marker , nor the frequency of coated pits ( which was 6 + 2 and 9 + 1 coated pits / 100 / ~ m of contour length in control and drug treated cells , respectively ) . In these experiments , an additional effect of cytochalasin became apparent . Thus , in control cells , during the incubation at 37 ~ a lateral dis - placement of bound cationized ferritin molecules seemed to occur on the apical plasma membrane , from the microvilli , which were initially almost completely covered with ferritin particles ( Fig . 10 a ) , to the intermicrovillar spaces , where endocytosis takes place ( Fig . 10 c ) . In cells treated with cytochalasin D , in which endocytosis was inhibited , how - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , 1993 702 Figure I0 . Cytochalasin D in - hibits apical endocytosis and the clearance of cationized ferritin from microvilli . Con - trol ( a and c ) or cytochalasin D pretreated ( b , d , and e ) monolayers were incubated in the continuing absence or pres - ence of the drug with cation - ized ferritin ( CF ) for 1 h at 4 ~ in PBS - Ca 2 + and then ei - ther fixed immediately ( a and b ) or after further incubation for 45 min without CF at 37 ~ in serum - free DME without ( c ) or with ( d and e ) cytochalasin D . Note that during the chase period in the absence of cyto - chalasin D , previously bound CF is interiorized ( c , arrows ) and that many of the microviUi ( MV ) , which were initially covered by CF ( a , arrows ) , are cleared of ferritin particles ( c ) . In the presence of cyto - chalasin D ( b , d , and e ) , endo - cytosis of CF does not take place and coated pits ( CP ) ( ar - rowheads , d , e ) accumulate near the base of the microvilli , which remain coated by CF ( d , e , arrows ) . In addition , af - ter the chase incubation in the presence of cytochalasin D large areas of the apical sur - face are frequently observed which are not covered by CF ( open arrows , d ) . Bar , 0 . 5 # m . ever , the microvilli retained their ferritin coat throughout the incubation ( Fig . 10 , d and e ) . This observation raises the possibility that cytochalasin D also has a primary effect on the displacement of the surface molecules that carry ferritin from the microvillar portions of the plasma membrane to - wards the coated pits . In the pulse chase experiments , it was also striking that in cytochalasin - treated cells large areas of plasma membrane lacking microvilli and free of ferritin ap - peared in the apical plasma membrane during the course of the chase incubation ( Fig . 10 d ) . It seems likely that those regions of the plasma membrane devoid of ferritin contain membrane components that reach the cell surface by cxocy - tosis during the incubation with cytochalasin D , since this drug is known not to inhibit the arrival of new proteins to the plasma membrane ( Salas et al . , 1986 ) . The inhibitory effect of cytochalasin D on apical endocy - tosis was also demonstrated by the timing ( Fig . 11 ) that the drug almost completely blocked the apical uptake of Lucifer yellow , a soluble marker for fluid phase endocytosis whose entrance into endosomes does not require binding to the plasma membrane ( Swanson et al . , 1985 ) ( Figs . II , a and b , and 12 , a and b ) . On the other hand , the basolateral uptake of Lucifer yellow observed in monolayers grown on tilters , appeared to be unaffected by cytochalasin D treatment ( Fig . 11 , c and d ) . It is noteworthy that the apical uptake of this dye was much more intense in cells grown on coverslips ( compare Fig . 11 a with Fig . 12 a ) and that in control cells , after 2 min of uptake , Lucifer yellow was highly concen - trated in the apical cytoplasm near the tight junctions ( Fig . 12 a ) . In addition to MDCK cells , the colon derived Caco - 2 ( Fig . 12 , c and d ) cells and T - 84 cells ( Fig . 12 , e and f ) both showed reduced apical uptake of Lucifer yellow as a result of treatment with cytochalasin D . This indicates that this effect of cytochalasin D is not unique to MDCK cells . Gottlieb et al . Critical Role of Actin Filaments in Apical Endocytosis 703 Figure 11 . Cytochalasin D in - hibits apical but not basolat - eral endoeytosis of Lucifer yellow by filter - grown MDCK cells . Confluent monolayers of MDCK cells grown and maintained on Transwell fil - ters were incubated without ( a and b ) or with ( c and at ) cyto - chalasin D for 15 min at 37 ~ Medium containing Lucifer yellow ( 10 mg / ml ) was then added to either the apical ( a and c ) or basolateral ( b and d ) chambers and incubation con - tinued for 10 min at 37 " C . The chambers were than washed for 30 min with several changes of cold PBS - Ca 2 + using a Pas - teur pipette to rinse the sur - faces . The filters were removed with a scalpel , mounted on a large coverslip , and immedi - ately examined without fixa - tion . Bar , 10 # m . Figure 12 . Cytochalasin D in - hibits the fluid phase uptake of Lucifer yellow from the apical surface of several epithelial cell lines grown on coverslips . Confluent monolayers of MDCK ( a and b ) , Caco - 2 ( c and d ) , and T - 84 cells ( e and f ) were maintained for 3 d on coverslips . To initiate the ex - periment , the monolayers were incubated in the absence ( a , c , and e ) or presence ( b , d , and f ) of cytoehahsin D for 15 min . They wen ~ then incubat ~ with Lucifer yellow ( a and b , 2 mg / ml ; c - f , 10 mg / ml ) for 5 min , chilled , and examined without fixation , as in Fig . 11 . Bar , 10 / zm . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , 1993 704 Figure 13 . Cytochalasin D leads to the disorganization of actin microfilaments in apical as well as basolaterat regions of MDCK cells . Confluent monolayers of MDCK cells grown on coverslips were in - cubated without ( a - d ) or with ( e - h ) cytochalasin D ( 25 t ~ g / ml ) for 60 rain at 37 ~ The fixed and pcrmeabilized mono - layers were incubated with rho - damine - conjugated phalloidin ( 6 # g / ml ) for 30 mins at room temperature and examined by laser scanning confocal micros - copy . Micrographs correspond - ing to optical sections at the ap - ical ( a , e ) , subapical ( b , f ) , middle ( c , g ) and basal ( d , h ) regions of the cells from con - trol ( left side ) and cytochala - sin ( right side ) treated mono - layers are shown side by side . Bar , 5 / ~ m . Cytochalasin D Alters the Organization of Both Apical and Basolateral Actin Filaments in MDCK Cells The differential effect of cytochalasin D on apical and basolateral endocytosis led us to investigate whether the drug preferentially disassembled actin filaments in the apical region of the cell , We , therefore , examined by laser scanning confocal microscopy ( Fig . 13 ) the distribution of rhodamine - labeled phalloidin - a probe that binds to polymerized but not monomeric actin ( Cooper , 1987 ) - in control ( Fig . 13 , a - d ) and cytoehalasin D - treated ( Fig . 13 , e - h ) monolayers . Analysis of pairs of fluorescent micrographs representing optical sections at the apical ( Fig . 13 , a and e ) , subapical ( b and f ) , middle ( c and g ) , and basal regions ( d and h ) of the cells revealed that cytochalasin profoundly affected actin or - ganization throughout the cell . After cytochalasin treatment , stress fibers visible in the basal regions of control cells ( Fig . 13 d ) , were no longer present ( Fig . 13 h ) . Similarly , in the middle and subapical regions of the cell the circumferential bundles of actin that are associated with the lateral mem - branes in control cells ( Fig . 13 , b and c ) were largely disor - ganized after cytochalasin treatment ( Fig . 13 , f and g ) . Fi - nally , actin bundles within microvilli , which in control cells give rise to a fine punctate pattern in the apical and subapical regions ( Fig . 13 , a and b ) , after drug treatment became ag - gregated and clumped away from the cell periphery . We , therefore , conclude that the differential effect of cytochalasin D on apical endocytosis reflects a more prominent role of ac - tin filaments in this process and not a preferential sparing of basolateral microfilament integrity . Gottlieb et al . Critical Role of Actin Filaments in Apical Endocytosis 705 Discussion We have presented a series of experiments demonstrating that treatment of polarized MDCK cell monolayers with cytochalasin D , a drug that acts by interfering with the func - tion of actin - containing microfilaments ( see Cooper , 1987 ) , selectively inhibits the capacity of the cells to endocytose membrane - bound and fluid - phase markers applied to the apical surface , without affecting endocytosis from the basolateral surface . Thus , cytochalasin D prevented the api - cal uptake of a mAb bound to surface VSV G molecules and of soluble Lucifer yellow , but did not impair the uptake of the same markers or of labeled transferrin when they were applied to the basolateral surface . Moreover , the drug prevented infection with influenza virus only when the in - oculum was applied to the apical surface of intact mono - layers , while infection from the basolateral surface was un - affected . In addition , the drug completely abolished the interiorization of cationized ferritin bound to anionic sites on that surface . Since sialic acid residues , which serve as recep - tors for influenza virus ( Rogers and D ' Souza , 1989 ) , are present in many plasma membrane glycoproteins and glyco - lipids and the anionic sites that bind cationized ferritin are distributed over a wide variety of cell surface components , one can conclude that cytochalasin D blocks a critical step common to many , if not all apical endocytic events . Cytochalasin D Prevents the Pinching Off of Coated Vesicles and the Displacement of MicroviUar Surface Components to the IntermicroviUar Spaces An electron microscopic analysis of the effect of cytochalasin D on the interiorization of cationized ferritin applied to the apical surface was particularly informative with respect to the endocytic steps blocked by the drug . Cytochalasin D did not affect the binding and distribution of the cationized fen ' i - tin , which initially covered the microvilli and a large fraction of intermicrovillar spaces in the apical membrane , but com - pletely blocked the interiorization of the marker during the subsequent incubation . This seemed to result from the fail - ure of coated pits to pinch off from the apical surface , since the number of coated pits containing ferritin substantially in - creased after cytochalasin treatment , and many of the coated pits observed in the drug - treated cells were connected to the surface by long necks . When the cationized ferritin uptake was analyzed under pulse - chase conditions , it was apparent that in control cells endocytosis was accompanied by clear - ance of the microvillar surface reflecting a displacement of ferritin molecules towards the intermicrovillar spaces , where coated pits are formed . A similar displacement of a bound ligand from the microvilli to the intermicrovillar regions of the plasma membrane was observed during the endocytic up - take of Semliki Forest Virus ( SFV ) in BHK cells ( Helenius et al . , 1980 ) . Strikingly , we found that cytochalasin D not only blocked interiorizarion but also prevented the clearance of ferritin molecules from the microvillar surface . This could result from a direct block of the displacement of ferritin along the microvilli , although the same effect would also be ex - pected if the initial action of cytochalasin were to inhibit the pinching off of coated vesicles in the regions between micro - villi , which would be required to maintain the flow of pro - teins of the microvillar membrane into the intermicrovillar space . The Differential Inhibitory Effect of Cytochalasin D on Apical Endocytosis Is Probably a Consequence of the Distinct Subcortical Cytoskeletal Structures Associated with the Two Plasma Membrane Domains What molecular processes must be affected by cytochalasin D for it to interfere with apical endocytosis ? It should first be noted that molecular motors are thought to be required in endocytosis ( Anderson , 1991 ) . Such motors may either participate in the transport of proteins in the plane of the membrane ( Sheetz et al . , 1990 ) to the site of vesicle forma - tion or in the actual pinching off of the plasma membrane vesicle into the cytoplasm ( Anderson , 1991 ) . Indeed , a mechanochemical function of the latter type has been pro - posed ( Shpetner and Vallee , 1992 ) for dynamin , a GTPase that is defective in the Drosophila shibire mutant , which is incapable of endocytosis at the nonpermissive temperature ( Kosaka and Ikeda , 1983 ) . The inhibitory effects of cytochalasins on cell motility have long been recognized and it is clear that these drugs de - crease the rate of addition of monomeric actin molecules to the barbed , fast growing , ends of actin filaments ( MacLean - Fletcher and Pollard , 1980 ; Bonder and Mooseker , 1983 ) , thus reducing the final state of actin polymerization within the cell . In addition , it has been shown that cytochalasins may also sever actin filaments ( Scldiwa , 1982 ) , as well as in - hibit inteflilament interactions which contribute to the for - marion of a cytoskeletal network ( MacLean - Fletcber and Pollard , 1980 ) . The specificity of cytochalasin action on actin - containing microfilaments is well established ( see Cooper , 1987 ) and recently , rigorous proof was provided that cytochalasin acts directly on actin molecules , since it was shown that expression in cytochalasin - sensitive cells of a mutant form of actin present in cytochalasin - resistant cells confers drug resistance to the transfected cells ( Ohmori et al . , 1992 ) . Our observations can , therefore , be taken to directly demonstrate the participation of the actin - based microfilament system in apical endocytosis in MDCK cells and , hence , to reveal the existence of a relationship between actin filaments and membranous components that participate in endocytosis at the apical surface . The selective effect of the drug on apical endocytosis could either imply that actin filaments do not associate with the sites of endocytosis that occur in the basolateral membrane , where an alternative motor could operate , or that the mi - crofilaments at the basolateral surface are less sensitive to the depolymerizing action of cytochalasin D . The latter pos - sibility is unlikely , given the apparent disaggregation of actin microfilaments throughout the cell that we observed after drug treatment . With respect to the former possibility it is important to recognize that in polarized epithelial cells , the two plasma membrane domains differ substantially in their mode of association with the actin cytoskeleton . At the basolateral surface microfilaments are primarily associated with zonula adherens junctions and focal adhesion sites , probably via the complex interaction of actin with several of its associated proteins , including vinculin , talin , paxillin , and ( ~ - actinin ( see Luna , 1990 ) . Accordingly , in fully devel - oped MDCK cell monolayers there is a high concentration of actin near limited areas of the lateral membrane ( Nelson and Veshnock , 1986 ) . On the other hand , throughout the basolateral domain , it is the fodrin / spectrin cytoskeleton that is intimately associated with the membrane , playing a major The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , 1993 706 role in establishing and maintaining the basolateral segrega - tion of some integral membrane proteins , such as the NA + , K + ATPase , to which it is linked via an association with ankyrin ( Nelson et al . , 1990 ; Nelson and Veshnock , 1987 ) . In fact , the ankyrin - mediated linkage of some basolateral membrane proteins to the underlying cytoskeleton , which is triggered by the establishment of cell - cell contacts , appears to prevent the endocytosis of those proteins and thus contrib - ute to their metabolic stabilization ( Hammerton et al . , 1991 ) . A stabilizing fodrin / spectrin submembranous cytoskele - ton is not present directly under the apical membrane , except in epithelia with inverted polarity , such as the retinal pig - mentary epithelium in which the Na + , K ยง ATPase is api - cally located ( Gundersen et al . , 1991 ) . Rather , in the apical plasma membrane domain an actin - containing submem - branous cytoskeleton is well developed . In the best studied example , that of the intestinal epithelium , actin filaments constitute the core of microvilli and together with other pro - teins from the subapical filamentous network known as the terminal web ( see D . Louvard , 1989 ) . Within the microvilli , actin filaments - which have their barbed ends directed to - wards the microvillar tips ( Mooseker and Tilney , 1976 ) - are bundled by villin and fimbrin and are linked to the microvil - lar membrane by a complex of calmodulin and a ll0 - kD my - osin I molecule which is believed to be able to associate directly with membrane phospholipids ( Adams and Pollard , 1989 ; Zot et al . , 1992 ) and to mediate membrane displace - ments because of its capacity , when activated by actin , to serve as a mechanochemical energy transducer ( Mooseker and Coleman , 1989 ) . The actin - dependent movement of membrane - associated myosin I molecules that would be ex - pected to be inhibited by cytochalasin D would , however , be directed towards the barbed end of microfilaments and , hence , towards the microvillar tip . Nevertheless , because the microvillar surface may be unexpandable , the upward migra - tion of membrane embedded myosin I molecules may itself determine the countercurrent downward displacement of other membrane components of the microvillar surface . This displacement would be inhibited by cytochalasin D which , hence , would arrest endocytosis by limiting the availability of membrane components at the intermicrovillar sites where coated pits are formed . It is also possible that microfilaments play a direct role in the generation of endocytic vesicles only at the apical sur - face . Although it is thought that assembly of a protein coat on the cytoplasmic surface of a membrane patch induces the vesicle curvature , a provocative report has indicated that in coated vesicles obtained from brain tissue specific actin - binding proteins may be part of the clathrin coat itself ( Kohtz et al . , 1990 ) . In fact , evidence was presented that such pro - teins are capable of mediating the association of clathrin - coated vesicles with assembling actin filaments in vitro . It , therefore , seems possible that only in certain cell types and , perhaps only at the apical surface of epithelial cells , closure of a coated pit to form a coated vesicle depends on the as - sembly of actin monomers into microfilaments , with which cytochalasin D interferes . This raises the possibility that there are compositional differences in the coats of pits form - ing at the two surfaces of polarized epithelial cells . A previous study with human lymphoblastoma cells has also provided morphological evidence for the association of microfilaments with coated pits ( Salisbury et al . , 1980 ) . In this case , it was found that cytochalasin B blocked the inter - nalization of ferritin - conjugated anti - IgM antibody bound to the surface of the cells and the tracer accumulated in coated pits , which led to the proposal that the actin filaments serve to pull the membrane inwards during coated vesicle forma - tion . Since a cytochalasin inhibition of endocytosis has not been generally observed with other cell types ( see below ) , it would seem possible that a specialized actin filament - dependent mechanism for endocytic vesicle formation op - erates in both lymphoid cells and at the apical surface of polarized epithelial cells . The Fluid Phase Uptake at the Apical Surface of MDCK Cells That Is Inhibited by Cytochalasin D Is Likely To Occur Primarily in Non - clathrin - coated Vesicles MDCK cells are known to take up fluid phase markers , such as Lucifer yellow , at equal rates from both surfaces ( Bomsel et al . , 1989 ) . Using fluorescence microscopy , we found that the uptake of this dye from the apical surface of confluent monolayers was completely inhibited by cytochalasin D , whereas basolaterai uptake seemed unaffected . Fluid phase markers , however , can be taken up by inclusion in coated vesicles involved in receptor - mediated endocytosis , as well as within non - clathrin - coated vesicles . The mechanism for the latter form of uptake is as yet unknown , but it is not blocked ( Sandvig and Van Deurs , 1990 ) under conditions that lead to acidification of the cytosol and interfere with the formation of coated vesicles ( Sandvig et al . , 1987 ; Heuser , 1989 ) . The extent to which each of these endocytic pathways contributes to fluid phase uptake in MDCK cells has not been determined , but it is worth noting that in cells grown on coverslips we found that uptake of Lucifer yellow from the apical surface was intense and took place almost exclu - sively near the zones of intercellular contact , whereas when monolayers were grown on filters , the apical uptake of the dye was markedly reduced , even though under the same con - ditions intense apical interiorization of cationlzed ferritin in coated vesicles took place . These observations suggest that Lucifer yellow , at least in the coverslip - grown MDCK cells , is primarily interiorized by nonclathrin - coated vesicles and , therefore , that cytochalasin D also inhibits this type of endo - cytic process at the apical surface . On the other hand , the basolateral uptake of Lucifer yellow , which was observed in filter grown monolayers , was unaffected by cytochalasin D , again showing the specificity of the inhibitory effect of the drug on apical endocytosis . The Cytochalasin Inhibition of Apical Endocytosis Is Likely To be a General Feature of Polarized Epithelial Cells It seems likely that the inhibitory effect of cytochalasin D on apical endocytosis is a general one for all transporting epithelia . In a previous study ( Blok et al . , 1982 ) it was found that cytochalasin D substantially reduced the apical uptake of the fluid phase marker HRP by epithelial cells in explants of human jejunum , although the basolateral uptake was not studied in this system . In addition , we have observed that cytochalasin D blocks the apical uptake of Lucifer yellow by monolayers of polarized Caco - 2 and T - 84 cells , which are Gottlieb et al . Critical Role of Actin Filaments in Apical Endocytosis 707 both derived from human colonic carcinomas . Moreover , the uptake of cationized ferritin from the apical surface of the epithelial cells in neonatal rat ileum explants ( Gonnella and Neutra , 1984 ) , and in a polarized pig kidney epithelial cell line LLC - PK1 , was also inhibited by the drug ( our unpub - lished results ) . In light of these observations it seems some - what surprising that in short term suspension cultures of pri - mary hepatocytes the interiorization of asialoorosomucoid bound to the asialoglycoprotein receptor , which is normally present on the basolateral surface of the cells , is inhibited by cytochalasin D ( Kaufman et al . , 1990 ) . In hepatocytes , how - ever , the basolateral surface consists of several subdomains and the one facing the perisinusoidal space of Disse , where the asialoglycoprotein receptor may be expected to be con - centrated , is characterized by the presence of abundant microvilli . Therefore , in that region of the basolateral sur - face the subplasmalemmal actin cytoskeleton may very well bear a resemblance to the apical cytoskeleton of other epi - thelial cells , thus accounting for the sensitivity of the uptake of asialoorosomucoid to cytochalasin D . The selective effect of cytochalasin D on apical endocyto - sis should be taken into account in considering the conflict - ing reports in the literature on the capacity of cytochalasins to inhibit receptor - mediated and fluid phase endocytosis in different cell types . A study with African green monkey kid - ney cells ( VERO ; Sandvig and Van Deurs , 1990 ) is of partic - ular interest since it demonstrated that the endocytic uptake of transferrin , which occurs by clathrin - coated pits , was completely insensitive to cytochalasin D , whereas in the same ceils the uptake of the fluid phase markers Lucifer yel - low and tritiated sucrose , and of ricin , which binds to cell surface carbohydrates , was inhibited by , ~ 60 % . Further - more , it was shown that the bulk of the ricin uptake was in - sensitive to acidification of the cytoplasm and , therefore , did not take place in clathrin - coated vesicles . This led the au - thors to conclude that in the cells they studied only uptake by non clathrin - coated vesicles is sensitive to cytochalasin D . Given the fact that VERO cells are at least partially pola - rized ( Srinlvas et al . , 1986 ; Clayson et ai . , 1989 ) it seems quite possible that their transferrin receptors , whose inter - naiization is insensitive to cytochalasin D , are primarily localized in basolateral - like plasma membrane domains , whereas ricin - binding sites and the sites for fluid phase up - take are found in both basolateral - and apical - like regions . Cytochalasin D Inhibits Infection by Viruses That Enter Cells by Apical Endocytosis The strikingly different effects of cytochalasin D on endocy - tosis from the two cell surfaces were also manifested in its selective capacity to essentially completely prevent infection of intact monolayers with influenza virus , when the viral in - oculum was applied to the apical surface , and in its inability to inhibit infection with VSV when the inoculum was applied to the basolateral surface of monolayers established on per - meable filters . Extensive previous surveys of the effect of cytochalasins on infection of cultured cells by various viruses indicated that , in most cases , the drug enhanced the infectability of the ceils ( Koch and Koch , 1978 ) , which could possibly be attributed to the disappearance of a cortical cytoskeletal barrier to the endocytic uptake of the virions . To our knowledge , however , no previous studies have been carried out on the effect of the drug on viral infection of pola - rized epithelial cells . In our work it was apparent that cytochalasin D acted by preventing an early step in virus in - fection from the apical surface and not by inhibiting some essential step in the virus development cycle , since the drug had no effect when added immediately after the phase of viral adsorption had been completed . Moreover , cytochalasin D had no effect on influenza virus infection when the inoculum was applied to monolayers that lacked tight junctions as a consequence of their maintenance in Ca2 + - free medium . This finding not only demonstrates that the drug does not in - hibit influenza virus replication , but that it only blocks endo - cytic uptake from an intact apical surface . In this regard , it should be noted that influenza virus receptors ( which are molecules bearing exposed sialic acid residues ) ( Rogers and D ' Souza , 1989 ) under normal conditions are largely re - stricted to the apical surface of MDCK cells ( Marlin et al . , 1981 ) . It , therefore , appears that in cells lacking tight junc - tions at least some receptor molecules are displaced to basolateral domains where they can undergo endocytosis and mediate viral entrance into the cells by the cytochalasin - resistant mechanism that operates in those domains . On the other hand , it is also possible that in MDCK cells grown in low calcium medium , the virus still undergoes internaliza - tion through " apical domains " but the process is no longer sensitive to the cytochalasin . Indeed , it is well known that the polarized organization of epithelial cells is not totally abolished in the absence of tight junctions . Thus , the pola - rized budding of influenza and VSV is maintained in single cells attached to a substratum ( Rodriguez - Boulan et al . , 1983 ) and , in cells lacking intercellular contacts , some pro - teins still maintain their apical or basolateral localization ( Ojakian and Schwimer , 1988 ; Salas et al . , 1988 ) , although disruption of tight junctions by Ca 2 + depletion leads to the redistribution of some previously segregated markers ( Herz - linger and Ojakian , 1984 ; Pisam and Ripoche , 1976 ; Zio - mek et al . , 1980 ) . We acknowledge the excellent technical help of Ms . H . Plesken , I . Gum - per , the photographic work of F . Forcino and J . Culkin , and the secretarial assistance of M . Cort and B . Rosen . This work was supported by NIH grant GM43583 , and by a grant from The G . Harold and Leila Y . Mathers Charitable Foundation . Received for publication 9 July 1992 and in revised form 16 October 1992 . References Adams , R . J . , and T . D . Pollard . 1989 . Binding of myosin I to membrane lipids . Nature ( Lond . ) . 340 : 565 - 568 . Anderson , R . G . W . 1991 . Molecular motors that shape endocytic membrane . In IntraceUular Trafficking of Proteins . C . J . Steer , and J . A . Hanover , edi - tors , Cambridge University Press . 13 - - 46 . Anderson , R . G . W . , M . S . Brown , U . Beisiegel , and J . L . Goldstein . 1982 . Surface distribution and recycling of the LDL receptor as visualized by anti - receptor antibodies . J . Cell Biol . 93 : 523 - 531 . Anderson , R . G . W . , B . A . Kamen , K . G . Rothberg , andS . W . Lacey . 1992 . Potocytosis : segregation and transport of small molecules by Caveolae . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 255 : 410 - - 411 . Axline , S . G . , and E . P . Reaven . 1974 . Inhibition of phagocytosis and plasma membrane mobility of the cultivated macrophage by cytochalasin B . J . Cell Biol . 62 : 647 - 659 . Bartles , J . R . , and A . L . Hubbard . 1988 . Plasma membrane protein sorting in epithelial cells : do secretory pathways hold the key ? Trends Biochem . Sci . 131 : 181 - 184 . Barties , J . R . , H . M . Ferracci , B . Steiger , and A . L . Hubbard . 1987 . Biogenesis of the rat hepatocyte plasma membrane in vivo . Comparison of the pathways taken by apical and basolateral proteins using subcellular cell fractionation . J . Cell Biol . 105 : 1241 - 1251 . Blok , J . , A . A . Scherven , A . A . Mulder - Stapel , L . W . Ginsel , and W . T . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , 1993 708 Deams . 1982 . Endocytosis in absorptive cells of cultured human small intes - tinal tissue : effect of cytochalasin B and D . Cell Tissue Res . 222 : 113 - 126 . Bomsel , M . , K . Pyrdz , R . ( 3 . Parton , J . Gruenberg , and K . Simons . 1989 . En - docytosis in filter grown Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . J . Cell Biol . 109 : 3243 - 3258 Bonder , E . , and M . Mooseker . 1983 . Direct electron microscope visualization of barbed end capping and filament cutting by intestinal microvillar 95 - kdalton protein ( villin ) : a new actin assembly assay using the Limulus acrosomal process . J . Cell Biol . 96 : 1097 - 1107 . Clayson , E . T . , L . V . Jones Brando , and R . W . Compans . 1989 . Release of Simian Virus 40 virions from epithelial calls is polarized and occurs without cell lysis . J . Virology . 63 : 2278 - 2288 . Compton , T . , I . E . Ivanov , T . Gottlieb , M . Rindler , and D , D . Sabatini . 1989 . A sorting signal for the basolateral delivery of the VSV G protein lies in its luminal domain : analysis of the targeting of VSV G influenza HA chimeras . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 86 : 4112 - 4116 . Cooper , J . A . 1987 . Effects of cytochalasin and phalloidin . J . Cell Biol . 105 : 1473 - 1478 . Deem , R . L . , A . Niederlehner , and S . R . Targan . 1986 . Active target cell processes , possibly involving receptor - mediated endocytosis are critical for expression of cytotoxicity by natural killer cell - derived cytolytic factor . Cell . Immunol . 102 : 187 - 197 . Farquhar , M . G . 1978 . Recovery of surface membrane in anterior pituitary cells . J . Cell Biol . 77 : R35 - R42 . Fuller , S . D . , and K . Simons . 1986 . Transferrin receptor polarity and recycling accuracy in " tight " and " leak - y " strains of Madin - Darby Canine Kidney Cells . J . Cell Biol . 103 : 1767 - 1779 . Fuller , S . D . , C . H . yon Bonsdorff , and K . Simons . 1984 . Vesicular stomatitis virus infects and matures only through the basolateral surface of the polarized epithelial cell line , MDCK . Cell . 38 : 65 - 77 . Geiger , B . 1984 . Cytoskeleton - associated contacts . 1989 . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 1 : 103 - 109 . Goldstein , J . L . , M . S . Brown , R . G . W . Anderson , D . W . Russell , and W . J . Schneider . 1985 . Receptor mediated endocytosis . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 1 : 1 - 40 . Gonnella , P . A . , and M . R . Neutra . 1984 . Membrane bound and fluid phase macromolecules enter separate prelysosomai compartments in absorptive cells of suckling rat ileum . J . Cell Biol . 99 : 909 - 917 . Gonzalez , A . , L . Rizzolo , M . Rindier , M . Adesnik , D . D . Sabatini , and T . Gottlieb . 1987 . Non - polarized secretion of truncated forms of the influenza hemagglutinin and the vesicular stomarltis virus G protein from MDCK cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 84 : 3738 - 3792 . Gotrlieb , T . A . , A . Gonzaiez , L . Rizzolo , M . R . Rindier , M . Adesnik , and D . D . Sabatini . 1986 . Sorting and endocytosis of viral glycoproteins in transfected polarized epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 102 : 1242 - 1245 . Gunderson , D . , J . Orlowski , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1991 . Apical polarity of Na , K - ATPase in retinal pigment epithelium is linked to a reversal of the ankyrin - fodrin submembrane cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 112 : 863 - 872 . Haigler , H . T . , J . A . McKanna , and S . Cohen . 1979 . Rapid stimulation of pinocytosis in human carcinoma cells A - 431 by epidermal growth factor . J . Cell Biol . 83 : 80 - 90 . Hammerton , R . W . , K . A . Krzeminski , R . W . Mays , T . A . Ryan , D . A . Woll - her , and W . J . Nelson . 1991 . Mechanism for regulating cell surface distribu - tion of Na ยง K ยง in polarized epithelial cells . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 254 : 847 - 850 . Helenius , A . , and M . Marsh . 1982 . Endocytosis of enveloped animal viruses . In Ciba Foundation Symposium 92 . Membrane Recycling . 59 - 77 . Helenius , A . , J . Kartenbeck , K . S . Simons , and E . Fries . 1980 . On the entry of Semiiki Forest Virus into BHK - 21 cells . 1980 . J . Cell Biol . 84 : 404 - 420 . Herzlinger , D . A . , and G . Ojaldan . 1984 . Studies on the development and main - tenance of epithelial cell surface polarity with monoclonal antibodies . J . Cell Biol . 98 : 1777 - 1787 . Heuser , J . 1989 . Effects of cytoplasmic acidification on clathrin lattice morphol - ogy . Y . Cell Biol . 108 : 401 - 411 . Hopkins , C . R . 1983 . Intracellular routing of transferrin and transferrin recep - tors in epidermal carcinoma A431 cells . Cell . 35 : 321 - 330 . Kaufman , S . S , , P . L . Blain , J . H . Y . Park , and D . J . Tuma . 1990 . Role of microfilaments in asialoglycoprotein processing in adult and developing liver . Am . J . Physiol . 259 ( Gastrointest . Liver Physiol . 22 ) : G639 - G645 . Kelly , R . B . 1990 . Microtubules , membrane traffic , and cell organization . Cell . 61 : 5 - 7 . Klans , G . G . 1973 . Cytochalasin B dissociation of pinocytosis and phagocytosis by peritoneal macrophages . Exp . Cell Res . 79 : 73 - 78 . Koch , G . , and F . Koch . 1978 . The use of cytoehalasins in studies on the molecu - lar biology of virus - host cell interactions . In Cytochalasins : Biochemical and Cell Biological Aspects . S . W . Tannenbaum , editor . North - Holland Publish - ing , New York . 475 - 498 . Kohtz , D . S . , V . Hanson , and S . Puszkin . 1990 . Novel proteins mediate an in - teraction between clathrin - coated vesicles and polymerizing microfllaments . Eur . J . Biochem . 192 : 291 - 298 . Kosaka , T . , and I . Kazuo . 1983 . Reversible blockage of membrane retrieval and endocytosis in the garland cell of the temperature - sensitive mutant of Drosophila melanogaster , shibird ' ~ . J . Cell Biol . 97 : 499 - 507 . Kyle , M . E . , D . Nakae , I . Sakaida , S . Miccadei , andJ . L . Farber . 1988 . En - docytosis of superoxide dismutase is required in order for the enzyme to pro - tect hepatocytes from the cytotoxicity of hydrogen peroxide . J . Biol . Chem . 263 : 3784 - 3789 . Laemmli , U . K . 1970 . Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4 . Nature ( Lond . ) . 227 : 680 - 685 . Louvard , D . 1980 . Apical membrane aminopeptidase appears at site of cell - cell contact in cultured kidney epithelial cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 77 : 4132 - 4136 . Louvard , D . 1989 . The function of the major cytoskeletal components of the brush border . Curt . Opin Cell Biol . 1 : 51 - 57 . Luna , E . J . 1991 . Molecular links between the cytoskeleton and membranes . Curt . Opin . Cell Biol . 3 : 120 - 126 . Maclean - Fletcber , S . , and T . D . Pollard . 1980 . Mechanism of action of cytochalasin B on actin . Cell . 20 : 329 - 341 . Marlin , K . , H . Reggio , A . Helenius , and K . Simons . 1981 . Infectious entry pathway of influenza virus in a canine kidney cell line . J . Cell Biol . 91 : 601 - 613 . Marlin , K . , H . Reggio , A . Helenius , and K . Simons . 1982 . Pathways of vesicu - lar stomatitis virus entry leading to infection . J . Mol . Biol . 156 : 609 - 631 . Marlin , K . , D . F . Balnton , M . Pesonen , D . Louvard , N . Genty , and K . Simons . 1983 . Transepithelial transport of viral membrane glycoprotein implanted into the apical membrane of Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . I . Morpho - logical evidence . J . Cell Biol . 97 : 627 - 637 . Mellman , I . 1984 . Membrane recycling during endocytosis . In Lysosomes in Biology and Pathology . J . T . Dingle , R . T . Dean , and W . Sly , editors . El - sevier , New York . 201 - 234 . Mellman , I . , and H . Plutuer . 1984 . Internalization and degradation of macro - phage Fc receptors bound to polyvalent immunecomplexes . J . Cell Biol . 98 : 1170 - 1177 . Mooseker , M . S . , and L . Tilney . 1976 . Organization of an actin filament - membrane complex . Filament polarity and membrane attachment in the mlcrovilli of intestinal epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 67 : 724 - 743 . Mooseker , M . S . , and T . R . Coleman . 1989 . The 100 - kd protein calmodnlin complex of the intestinal microvillus ( brush - border myosin I ) is a mechano - enzyme . J . Cell Biol . 108 : 2395 - 2400 . Mostov , K . E . , and D . L . Deitcher . 1986 . Polymeric immunoglobulin receptor expressed in MDCK cells transcytoses IgA . Cell . 46 : 613 - 621 . Nelson , W . J . 1989 . Topogenesis of plasma membrane domains in polarized epithelial cells . Curt . Opin . Cell Biol . 1 : 660 - 668 . Nelson , W . J . , and P . J . Veshnock . 1986 . Dynamics of membrane skeleton ( Fedrin ) organization during development of polarity in Madin - Darby Ca - nine Kidney Cells . J . Cell Biol . 103 : 1751 - 1765 . Nelson , W . J . , and P . J . Veshnock . 1987 . Ankyrin binding to ( Na + + K + ) ATPase and implications for the organization of membrane domains in pola - rized cells . Nature ( Lond . ) . 328 : 533 - 536 . Nelson , W . J . , and R . W . Hammerton . 1989 . A membrane cytoskeletal com - plex containing Na ยง ankyrin and fodrin in Madin - Darby ca - nine kidney ( MDCK ) cells : implications for the biogenesis of epithelial cell polarity . J . Cell Biol . 108 : 893 - 903 . Nelson , W . J . , E . M . Shore , A . Z . Wang , and R . W . Hammerton . 1990 . Identification of a membrane - cytoskeletal complex containing the cell adhe - sion molecule uvomorulin ( E - cadherin ) , ankyrin , and fodrin in Madin - Darby Canine Kidney Cells . J . Cell Biol . 110 : 349 - 359 . Ohmori , H . , S . Toyama , and S . Toyama . 1992 . Direct proof that the primary site of action of cytochalasin on cell motility processes is actin . J . Cell Biol . 116 : 933 - 941 . Ojakian , G . K . , and R . Schwimmer . 1988 . The polarized distribution of an api - cal cell surface glycoprotein is maintained by interactions with the cytoskele - ton of Madin - Darby Canine Kidney Cells . J . Cell Biol . 107 : 2377 - 2387 . Piasek , A . , and J . Thyberg . 1980 . Effects of colchicine on endocytosis of horse - radish peroxidase by rat peritoneal macrophages . , L Cell Sci . 45 : 59 - 71 . Pisam , M . , and P . Ripoche . 1976 . Redistribution of surface macromolecules in dissociated epithelial cells . . L Cell Biol . 71 : 907 - 920 . Pratten , M . K . , and J . B . Lloyd . 1979 . Effects of temperature , metabolic inhibi - tors and some other factors on fluid - phase adsorptive pinocytosis by rat peri - toneal macrophages . Biochem . J . 180 : 567 - 571 . Rindier , M . J . , I . E . Ivanov , H . Plesken , E . Rodriguez - Boulan , and D . D . Sabatini . 1984 . Viral glycoproteins destined for the apical or basolaterai plasma membrane domains traverse the same Golgi apparatus during their intracellular transport in Madin - Darby Canine Kidney Cells . J . Cell Biol . 98 : 1304 - 1319 . Rindler , M . J . , I . E . Ivanov , H . Plesken , and D . D . Sabatini . 1985 . Polarized delivery of viral glycoproteins to the apical and basolateral plasma membrane of Madin - Darby canine kidney cells infected with temperature sensitive viruses . J . Cell Biol . 100 : 136 - 151 . Rindler , M . J . , I . E . Ivanov , and D . D . Sabatini . 1987 . Microtubule acting drugs lead to the non - polarized delivery of influenza hemagglutinin to the cell surface of polarized Madin - Darby canine kidney cells . J . Cell Biol . 104 : 231 - 241 . Rodman , J . S . , R . W . Mercer , and P . D . Stahl . 1990 . Endocytosis and transcy - tosis . Curt ' . Opin . Cell Biol . 2 : 664 - 672 . Rodriguez - Boulan , E . , and D . D . Sabatini . 1978 . Asymmetric budding of viruses in epithelial monolayers : a model for the study of epithelial polarity . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 75 : 5071 - 5075 . Rodriguez - Boulan , E . , K . T . Paskiet , and D . D . Sabatini . 1983 . Assembly of enveloped viruses in MDCK cells : polarized budding from single attached Gottlieb et al . Critical Role of Actin Filaments in Apical Endocytosis 709 cells and from clusters of cells in suspension . J . Cell Biol . 96 : 866 - 874 . Rogers , G . N . , and B . L . D ' Souza . 1989 . Receptor binding properties of the human and animal H1 influenza a virus isolates . Virology . 173 : 317 - 322 . Rothberg , K . G . , J . E . Heuser , W . C . Donzell , Y . - S . Ying , J . R . Glenney , and R . G . W . Anderson . Caveolin , a protein component of Caveolae mem - brane coats . Cell . 68 : 673 - 682 . Salas , P . J . I . , D . E . Misek , D . E . Vega - Salas , D . Gundersen , M . Cereijido , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1986 . Microtubules and actin microfllaments are critically involved in the biogenesis of epithelial cell surface polarity . J . Cell Biol . 102 : 1853 - 1867 . Salas , P . J . I . , D . E . Vega - Salas , J . Hochman , E . Rodriguez - Boulan , and M . Eididin . 1988 . Selective anchoring in the specific plasma membrane domain : a role in epithelial cell polarity . J . Cell Biol . 107 : 2363 - 2376 . Salisbury , J . L . , J . S . Condelis , and P . Satir . 1980 . Role of coated vesicles , microfilaments , and calmodulin in receptor - mediated endocytosis by cul - tured B lymphoblastoid cells . J . Cell Biol . 87 : 132 - 141 . Sambrook , J . , E . F . Fritsch , and T . Maniatis . 1989 . Molecular Cloning : A Lab - oratory Manual ( second edition ) . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory , Cold Spring Harbor , NY . Sandvig , K . , and B . van Deurs . 1990 . Selective modulation of the endocytic uptake of ricin and fluid phase markers without alteration in transferrin en - docytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 265 : 6382 - 6388 . Sandvig , K . , S . Olsnes , O . W . Peterson , and B . van Deurs . 1987 . Acidification of the cytosol inhibits endocytosis from coated pits . J . Cell Biol . 106 : 679 - 689 . Schliwa , M . 1982 . Action of cytochalasin on cytoskeleton networks . J . Cell Biol . 92 : 79 - 91 . Sheetz , M . P . , N . L . Baumrind , D . B . Wayne , andA . L . Pearlman . 1990 . Con - centration of membrane antigens by forward transport and trapping in neu - ronal growth cones . Cell . 61 : 231 - 241 . Shen , Y . M . , R . R . Hirschhorn , W . E . Mercer , E . Surmacz , Y . Tsutsui , K . J . Soprano , and P . Baserga . 1982 . Gene transfer : DNA microinjection compared with DNA transfection with a very high efficiency . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 : 1145 - 1154 . Shpetner , H . S . , and R . B . Vallee . 1992 . Dynamin is a GTPase stimulated to high levels of activity by microtubules . Nature ( Lond . ) . 355 : 733 . Skutelsky , E . , and D . Anon . 1976 . Redistribution of surface anionic sites on the luminal front of blood vessel endothelium after interaction with polycat - ionic ligand . J . Cell Biol . 71 : 232 - 241 . Srinivas , R . V . , N . Balachandran , F . V . Alonso - Caplan , and R . W . Compans . 1986 . Expression of Herpes Simplex Virus glycoproteins in polarized epithe - lial cells . J . Virol . 58 : 689 - 693 . Steer , C . J . , and J . Heuser . 1991 . Clathrin coated vesicles : critical determinants of intracellular trafficking . In Intracellnlar Trafficking of Proteins . Clifford J . Steer , and John A . Hanover , editors , Cambridge University Press , Cam - bridge . 47 - 102 . Swanson , J . A . , B . D . Yirinec , and S . C . Silverstein . 1985 . Phorbol esters and horseradish peroxidase stimulate pinocytosis and redirect the flow of pinocy - tosed fluid in macrophages . J . Cell Biol . 100 : 851 - 859 . Vale , R . D . 1987 . Intracellular transport using microtubule - based motors . Atmu . Bey . Cell Biol . 3 : 347 - 378 . Van Deurs , B . , T . I . Tonnescen , O . W . Petersen , K . Sandvig , and S . Olsnes . 1986 . Routing of internalized ricin and ricin conjugates to the Golgi com - plex . J . Cell Biol . 102 : 37 - 47 . Vega - Salas , D . E . , P . J . I . Salas , D . Gunderson , and E . Rodriguez - Boulan . 1987 . Formation of the apical pole of epithelial ( Madin - Darby Canine Kid - ney ) cells : Polarity of an apical protein is independent of tight junctions while segregation of a basolateral marker requires ceil - cell interactions . J . Cell Biol . 104 : 905 - 916 . Wagner , R . , M . Rosenberg , and R . Estensen . 1971 . Endocytosis in Chang liver cells . Quantitation by sucrose - 3H uptake and inhibition by cytochalasin B . J . Cell Biol . 50 : 804 - 817 . Wileman , T . , C . Harding , and P . Stahl . 1985 . Receptor - mediated endocytosis . Biochem . J . 232 : 1 - 14 . Wills , E . J . , P . Davies , A . C . Allison , and A . D . Haswell . 1972 . Cytochalasin B fails to inhibit pinocytosis by macrophages . Nat . New Biol . 240 : 58 - 60 . Ziomek , C . A . , S . Schulman , and M . Edidin . 1980 . Redistribution of mem - brane proteins in isolated mouse intestinal epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 86 : 849 - 857 . Zot , H . G . , S . K . Doberstin , and T . D . Pollard . 1992 . Myosin I moves actin filaments on a phospholipid substrate : implications for membrane targeting . J . Cell Biol . 116 : 367 - 376 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 120 , 1993 710