Accepted Manuscript Review article The Case for Applying Tissue Engineering Methodologies to Instruct Human Organoid Morphogenesis Carlos R . Marti - Figueroa , Randolph S . Ashton PII : S1742 - 7061 ( 17 ) 30186 - 1 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . actbio . 2017 . 03 . 023 Reference : ACTBIO 4791 To appear in : Acta Biomaterialia Received Date : 5 November 2016 Revised Date : 24 January 2017 Accepted Date : 14 March 2017 Please cite this article as : Marti - Figueroa , C . R . , Ashton , R . S . , The Case for Applying Tissue Engineering Methodologies to Instruct Human Organoid Morphogenesis , Acta Biomaterialia ( 2017 ) , doi : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . actbio . 2017 . 03 . 023 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication . As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript . The manuscript will undergo copyediting , typesetting , and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form . Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content , and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain . 1 The Case for Applying Tissue Engineering Methodologies to Instruct Human Organoid Morphogenesis Carlos R . Marti - Figueroa 1 , 2 and Randolph S . Ashton 1 , 2 1 Department of Biomedical Engineering , University of Wisconsin – Madison , Madison , WI 53715 2 Wisconsin Institute for Discovery , University of Wisconsin – Madison , Madison , WI 53705 Correspondence author : Randolph S . Ashton 4168 Wisconsin Institute for Discovery 330 N . Orchard Street Madison , WI 53705 ( w ) 608 - 316 - 4312 ( f ) 608 - 316 - 4606 E - mail : rashton2 @ wisc . edu Keywords : Organoid morphogenesis , tissue morphology , tissue cytoarchitecture , hydrogels , morphogen gradients , 3 - D printing , sacrificial molding , photochemistry , click chemistry , bioprinting 2 Abstract . Three - dimensional organoids derived from human pluripotent stem cell ( hPSC ) derivatives have become widely used in vitro models for studying development and disease . Their ability to recapitulate facets of normal human development during in vitro morphogenesis produces tissue structures with unprecedented biomimicry . Current organoid derivation protocols primarily rely on spontaneous morphogenesis processes to occur within 3 - D spherical cell aggregates with minimal to no exogenous control . This yields organoids containing microscale regions of biomimetic tissues , but at the macroscale ( i . e . 100’s of microns to millimeters ) , the organoids’ morphology , cytoarchitecture , and cellular composition are non - biomimetic and variable . The current lack of control over in vitro organoid morphogenesis at the microscale induces aberrations at the macroscale , which impedes realization of the technology’s potential to reproducibly form anatomically correct human tissue units that could serve as optimal human in vitro models and even transplants . Here , we review tissue engineering methodologies that could be used to develop powerful approaches for instructing multiscale , 3 - D human organoid morphogenesis . Such technological mergers are critically needed to harness organoid morphogenesis as a tool for engineering functional human tissues with biomimetic anatomy and physiology . 1 . Introduction . Human pluripotent stem cells ( hPSCs ) provide an unlimited source for generating all tissues of the human body in vitro . Over the past two decades , efforts have been focused on deriving a plethora of cell types in 2 - D culture for regenerative medicine applications such as transplantation [ 1 ] and in vitro disease modeling [ 2 , 3 ] . These cultures have been widely implemented as pre - clinical high - throughput screening platforms . Yet , its remains debatable as to how well standard 2 - D cultures recapitulate the normal physiology and disease pathologies of 3 - D tissues that contain diverse cell phenotypes within intricate micro - to - macroscale cytoarchitectures . To create improved human tissue models , researchers over the past two decades have developed varied hydrogel formulations for encapsulating and culturing cells in 3 - D [ 4 ] . Still , even with groundbreaking advances in bioprinting [ 5 ] , the ability to controllably engineer anatomically correct substitutes of human tissues in vitro remains limited . Novel approaches and methodologies are needed to reproducibly engineer such hPSC - derived tissues , which would contain in vivo levels of cell phenotype diversity spatially organized in biomimetic cytoarchitectures at both the micro and macroscale . Recent breakthroughs in organoid technology provide the basis for such ‘next - generation’ tissue - engineered organogenesis approaches [ 6 ] . To date , tissue - specific organoids are commonly created from 3 - D spherical aggregates of hPSCs , their respective germ layer or organ stem / progenitor derivatives , or primary progenitor cells of equivalent developmental immaturity . Within these aggregates , the cells spontaneously morph ( i . e . differentiate and self - organize ) recapitulating critical facets of early - stage human embryogenesis to generate millimeter - size tissues that have microscale regions mimetic of fetal tissues [ 7 , 8 ] . In this review , we are making a distinction between these organoids , which start as a microscale cell aggregate , versus engineered organotypic cultures , which use bottom - up or top - down engineering of tissues by spatially assembling their differentiated cellular components within a matrix [ 9 - 11 ] ( Fig . 1 ) . While organotypic 3 - D cultures have also been referred to as organoids and may functionally mimic some aspects of their respective organ , they generally lack the 3 remarkably biomimetic cell phenotype diversity and tissue cytoarchitecture that arises during morphogenesis processes [ 6 , 8 , 12 ] . Within the past decade , there has been significant progress in devising a variety of human organoid protocols for brain [ 13 ] , liver [ 14 ] , kidney [ 15 , 16 ] , prostate [ 17 ] , retina [ 18 ] , lung [ 7 ] and gastrointestinal tissues [ 19 ] . The protocols generally entail formation of 3 - D cell aggregates either by forced aggregation or self - organization followed by culture on or within an extracellular matrix of choice , commonly matrigel [ 20 ] or collagen [ 18 ] . For example , brain organoids of up to 4 mm in diameter were derived via neural differentiation of hPSC aggregates encapsulated within matrigel hydrogels and cultured in a stirred - tank bioreactor for 1 - 3 months . Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that brain organoids can contain a variety of brain tissues including miniature cerebral cortex formations with all six laminar neuronal layers [ 13 ] . Vascularized liver organoids , termed liver buds , were generated from self - aggregating 2 - D co - cultures of induced pluripotent stem cell ( iPSC ) - derived hepatic endodermal progenitors , human mesenchymal stem cells , and human umbilical vein endothelial cells . Upon transplantation , the liver organoids could functionally engraft and increase survival in a liver failure mouse model [ 14 ] . Kidney organoids were generated from 3 - D aggregates of hPSC - derived ureteric epithelium and metanephric mesenchyme formed using forced centrifugation . After in vitro culture at a simulated air - water interface , the aggregates morphed into organoids containing nephrons associated with a collecting duct network surrounded by renal interstitium [ 15 ] . Also , prostate organoids have been generated from 3 - D aggregates of primary luminal stem / progenitor cells cultured in 3 - D Matrigel hydrogels in the absence of stroma [ 17 ] . While such organoid protocols represent significant scientific advancements , the generated tissues generally remain developmentally immature in vitro [ 21 , 22 ] and recapitulate the early stages of in vivo organogenesis with only partial accuracy [ 23 ] . A common denominator of organoid derivation protocols is their reliance on spontaneous morphogenesis to occur freely within cell aggregates . The cells’ innate morphogenetic properties produce internal cell phenotype diversity and microscale cytoarchitectural structures that are unmatched in biomimetic accuracy compared to what can be achieved using current microfabrication or tissue engineering techniques [ 8 , 24 , 25 ] . As such , organoids have enabled the generation of unprecedented microscale human tissue structures in vitro that enhance the clinical relevance of cell culture disease models and drug discovery studies [ 8 ] . However , the uncontrolled , spontaneous morphogenesis process at the microscale inherently results in a lack of reproducibility and biomimicry in the organoids’ macroscale anatomy [ 26 ] . In the human embryo , morphogenesis is instructed at all scales by spatial and temporal perturbations in myriad biochemical and biophysical factors [ 27 ] . These factors act in a highly coupled manner through complex feed - forward and feed - back signaling loops to dynamically orchestrate the cellular composition and cytoarchitecture of developing tissues . Tissue engineering methodologies exist for exerting multiscale spatiotemporal control over these factors . Yet , they remain to be integrated into organoid derivation protocols to accurately and reproducibly recapitulate organoid morphogenesis in vitro . 4 In this review , current and potential applications of tissue engineering methodologies for instructing human organoid morphogenesis will be discussed . In particular , their use to exert spatial and temporal control over the organoid’s biochemical environment , morphology , and cellular composition will be considered . These include methods for generating composite hydrogel scaffolds with spatially compartmentalized microenvironments and internal architecture , controlling cellular cytoarchitecture during initial organoid assembly , and spatiotemporal regulation of morphogen gradients during organoid culture ( Fig . 2 ) . The use of genetic engineering to endow the organoid’s cells with artificial gene circuits capable of producing programmable morphogenesis responses is a complementary approach that has recently been reviewed elsewhere [ 26 ] . Only through integration of such engineering approaches with organoid derivation protocols will the requisite control over in vitro morphogenesis be achieved to enable standardized biomanufacture of functional human tissues with mimetic anatomy and physiology . 2 . Engineered hydrogel scaffolds . Hydrogels are water - swollen , hydrophilic , polymeric networks that remain insoluble due to the presence of chemical or physical crosslinks [ 28 ] . They can be generated using a plethora of natural [ 29 ] and synthetic [ 30 ] materials and engineered with numerous biochemical or biophysical properties to influence cell fate [ 27 ] . Hydrogels represent an ideal culture system for guiding 3 - D morphogenesis of embedded organoids . However , most organoids are currently formed by encapsulation within Matrigel hydrogels , a heterogeneous , ill - defined mixture of solubilized basement membrane proteins from mouse sarcomas [ 31 ] . A few groups have begun to demonstrate the possibility of using more chemically defined hydrogels to support organoid morphogenesis . Lindborg et al . demonstrated formation of rudimentary cerebral organoids within a hyaluronan - chitosan hydrogel blend [ 32 ] . Also , Meinhardt et al . observed spontaneous morphogenesis of neural tube organoids generated from single mouse embryonic stem cells ( mESCs ) within a pure PEG hydrogel , although at a significantly lower rate than Matrigel hydrogels [ 33 ] . These represent initial steps towards developing ‘blank - slate’ chemically defined scaffolds that support the morphogenesis of embedded human pluripotent or progenitor cell aggregates . Such defined hydrogel substrates will be necessary to experimentally deduce design principles for predictable instruction of tissue - specific organoid morphogenesis . In vivo , the morphogenesis of organ anlagen is spatially and temporally diversified , in part , through interactions with proximal tissues that provide distinct microenvironments [ 34 ] . A potential approach for mimicking these interactions in vitro is to embed organoids within composite hydrogels presenting spatially compartmentalized microenvironments ( Fig . 2A ) . Each microenvironment can be tailored with distinct biochemical factors , e . g . ECM peptides [ 35 ] , recombinant growth factors [ 36 , 37 ] and receptor ligands motifs [ 38 , 39 ] , and biophysical properties , e . g . elasticity [ 40 , 41 ] , topography [ 42 ] , or traction [ 43 ] , to instruct tissue - specific fates when populated by the growing organoid . Technologies for dynamically regulating microenvironments will also be necessary to recapitulate the temporal dependence of cues during morphogenesis [ 44 - 47 ] . Furthermore , since such cues act in a synergistic and coordinated manner to instruct cell fate [ 27 , 48 ] , systems level approaches using high - throughput hydrogel culture screening technologies [ 49 - 51 ] will be required to assess and model 5 their combinatorial effects [ 52 , 53 ] . In aggregate , these types of studies could be used to deduce guidelines for engineering hydrogel microenvironments that instruct tissue - specific morphogenesis processes . 2 . 1 . Composite hydrogels with compartmentalized microenvironments . A variety of tissue engineering techniques are capable of synthesizing composite hydrogels by either differentially modifying an existing hydrogel monolith , assembling hydrogel building blocks , or fabricating composite hydrogels de novo . For example , the Anseth group combined the use of wavelength - specific , photoactivated thiol - ene click chemistry and nitrobenzyl ether degradation to create a versatile platform for modifying both the biochemical and biophysical properties of PEG hydrogels using laser scanning microscopy [ 45 , 46 ] ( Fig . 3A ) . When combined with multiphoton microscopy , this platform can be used to ‘direct write’ discrete microenvironments within PEG hydrogels up to a millimeter thick with microscale precision . Additionally , when integrated with a live - cell imaging platform , it enables dynamic and in situ microenvironmental perturbations during organoid culture . As an alternative composite hydrogel synthesis approach , Qi et al . developed a method for programmable assembly of hydrogel building blocks using embedded , rolling circle generated DNA strands as ‘glue’ [ 54 ] ( Fig . 3B ) . The complementarity of each block’s DNA sequence can be designed to tailor the hydrogel’s macroscale geometry and composition . In principle , this approach could be used in both one - off composite hydrogel synthesis or to add new microenvironments or signaling sources to an existing organoid - hydrogel complex in real - time . The latter option being used to recapitulate spatiotemporal juxtapositions of proximal tissues that arise during organogenesis in vivo [ 34 ] . For a more simplistic method to build composite scaffolds , the Kaplan lab combined hydrogels and mechanically superior silk scaffolds to enable manual and adhesive - free assembly of concentric subunits [ 55 ] ( Fig . 3C ) . They used this method to generate 3 - D multi - layered brain - like cortical tissues with compartmentalized microenvironments . Composite hydrogels can also be synthesized de novo using photochemistry and 3 - D printing techniques . Multiphoton excitation of Rose Bengal , a singlet oxygen generator , within a solution of whole ECM proteins can be used to build 3 - D , covalently linked ECM hydrogels of defined shape using automated raster sequences [ 56 ] ( Fig . 3D ) . The use of whole ECM proteins as the hydrogel substrate versus recombinant fragments or peptides may better mimic in vivo microenvironments since myriad motifs throughout ECM proteins are involved in forming a complex signaling milieu that affects cell fate [ 57 ] . There are numerous other 3 - D printing methods that could be used to fabricate composite hydrogels . These methods could generate compartmentalized microenvironments with dimensions down to tens of microns using a spectrum of different hydrogels ( reviewed by [ 58 ] ) . Additionally , bioprinting could be integrated to precisely orient a cell aggregate within the 3 - D printed , composite hydrogel’s macroscale structure . However , bioprinting can have issues with cell viability due to suboptimal nozzle , cartridge , and bioink designs and environmental control during printing [ 5 ] . 2 . 2 . Hydrogels with internal architecture . In traditional tissue engineering , the morphology of the engineered tissue is mostly fixed and provided by the macroscale geometry of the impregnated scaffold [ 59 , 60 ] ( Fig . 1A , Top - down engineered tissue ) . However , in vivo , developing organs begin as microscale formations that grow orders of magnitude in dimension 6 and often morph through several transient geometries before achieving their final tissue morphology [ 34 ] . Similar to their in vivo counterparts , human organoids begin morphing early in their derivation process and start producing internal tissue cytoarchitecture before reaching dimensions of even 100’s of microns in diameter [ 7 , 13 , 16 , 18 , 19 ] . Hence , it will be necessary to control organoid morphology from the micro - thru macroscale to instruct anatomically correct morphogenesis . Recent publications showing that regulating the 2 - and 3 - D morphology of hPSC - derived tissues in vitro can predictably induced gastrulation [ 61 ] and self - organization of cytoarchitectural structures such as polarized epithelial rings [ 33 , 62 ] and lumens [ 63 , 64 ] further support this conclusion . Many potential tissue engineering methods for controlling microscale organoid morphology exist . However , there has been limited application to organoid systems and they lack the ability to instruct dynamic spatiotemporal changes in organoid morphology . A potential approach to controlling microscale 3 - D organoid morphology is to have the cell aggregate morph inside of a hydrogel with a defined internal architecture ( Fig . 2B ) . In this manner , the hydrogel’s internal void space would provide a physical barrier to which the growing organoid would conform . Current methods for generating versatile internal features within hydrogels include 3 - D printing , sacrificial molding , and light - induced photocleavage . For example , the Fienberg lab recently developed a novel , low - cost 3 - D printing method called freeform reversible embedding of suspended hydrogels ( FRESH ) . It uses syringe based extrusion to print suspended hydrogels into a bath of gelatin microparticles that act as a Bingham plastic— behaves as a solid at low shear rates but is fluid at higher shear rates . Using CAD design files , the system can rapid prototype hydrogels with thickness down to ~ 150 microns , and as indicated by personal communication , upgrades to the FRESH method now enable printing of hydrogels with internal architectures of dimensions down to ~ 300 microns [ 65 ] . Sacrificial molding is capable of producing hydrogels with internal cavities of micro - to - macroscale dimensions . It entails encapsulating a dissolvable or degradable material within a second orthogonal hydrogel material . Once the composite hydrogel has been formed , removal of the internal sacrificial material yields an outer hydrogel with defined internal architecture . Miller et al . developed the first tissue engineering sacrificial molding platform using 3 - D printed , water soluble carbohydrate glass templates . They demonstrated its broad utility by molding channels for vascular network formation within a variety of hydrogels materials [ 66 ] . The Huang lab also developed a platform for generating vascularized gelatin hydrogels using a calcium alginate sacrificial unit . Calcium alginate lattices were cast using PDMS molds , and dissolved from within a gelatin mold using an EDTA solution to chelate crosslinking calcium ions [ 67 ] . While both sacrificial molding techniques are highly versatile , both alginate hydrogels and the carbohydrate glass material suffer from weak and brittle mechanical properties , respectively . As an alternative , Toocio et al . has demonstrated sacrificial molding using mechanically superior poly - vinyl alcohol ( PVOH ) templates cast using PDMS molds [ 68 ] . Still , due to their rapid dissolution in water , both the carbohydrate glass and PVOH templates provide poor control over microscale cavity dimensions within slow gelling and thermoset hydrogels such as alginate monoliths and Matrigel , respectively . These sacrificial molding techniques have been primarily used in top - down tissue engineering with human endothelial cells to create vascularized tissues . However , they could also be applied to creating hydrogels with internal void spaces to which the morphology of encapsulated , growing organoids would conform . 7 While 3 - D printing and sacrificial molding are versatile techniques that can be widely disseminated , their use to generate internal architecture within a hydrogel monolith is currently a one - off proposition . It would take an entirely new printed or molded hydrogel to instruct secondary or tertiary organoid morphologies , which are common facets of organ morphogenesis in vivo . A merger of these techniques with the photocleavable PEG hydrogel material created by the Anseth group could alleviate this issue by enabling spatiotemporal changes in internal hydrogel architecture [ 46 ] . Whichever approach is pursued , the placement of organoids within the hydrogel’s internal cavity post - fabrication remains a tricky problem . This exemplifies how innovation is needed to fully integrate tissue engineering methods with organoid derivation protocols . 3 . Controlling organoid assembly . The earliest cell fate decisions in the developing embryo are based upon the spatial orientation of cells within an aggregate . The human embryo begins as a spherical aggregate of identical totipotent cells ( up to the 4 - cell stage ) [ 69 ] , but a divergence in fates occurs between cells on the exterior ( i . e . trophectoderm ) and interior ( i . e . inner cell mass ) by the 16 - cell stage [ 70 ] . This exemplifies how microscale tissue morphology and cell positioning upon tissue assembly can cause slight variations in the immediate microenvironment that induce divergent morphogenetic fates . The cellular composition of nascent tissues is also critical for morphogenesis since juxtacrine and paracrine signaling between neighboring cells is known to instruct divergent cell fates [ 38 ] . James Wells’ lab recently observed such effects when adding hPSC - derived neural crest cells ( NCCs ) to hPSC - derived mid / hindgut tube spheroids to generate human intestinal organoids ( HIO’s ) with a functional enteric nervous system ( ENS ) . Intrinsic cues within the HIO instructed developing ENS cells to acquire biomimetic positioning within the organoid’s cytoarchitecture , and signaling from the ENS cells induced differential organoid growth factor levels , absorptive and secretory cell gene expression profiles , and proliferation rates of progenitor cells within the HIO’s intestinal crypt compartments [ 71 ] . We predict that controlling cellular arrangement and composition as well as the microscale tissue morphology during initial organoid assembly will have significant affects on subsequent morphogenesis ( Fig . 2C ) . Several methods have been developed that could be used to generate organoids with custom morphologies and compositions via guided cellular assembly . The Gartner lab has developed DNA - programmed assembly of cells ( DPAC ) and demonstrated its ability to spatially program the arrangement of cells within 2 - D and 3 - D organoids of diverse shapes [ 72 ] ( Fig . 4A ) . The programmed assembly is orchestrated using 2 - D DNA - patterned substrates to guide the organized adhesion of cells presenting complimentary lipid - modified oligonucleotides . After assembly , the cell aggregate can be released from the substrate using a DNase treatment and encapsulated within a 3 - D matrix for subsequent organoid formation . Laser - based direct write bioprinting can also be used to precisely deposit cells in 2 - D and 3 - D formations [ 73 , 74 ] ( Fig . 4B ) . This technique uses a focused laser beam to rapidly volatilize a support layer underlying a cell containing matrix on the donor print ribbon . The resulting shock waves force the overlying cells to transfer onto an adjacent collector substrate [ 5 , 75 ] . The Chrisey group has used matrix - assisted pulsed laser evaporation direct writing ( MAPLE - DW ) to print small clusters of cells onto 8 and within matrigel substrates [ 73 , 76 ] , and variations of laser - based direct writing can achieve single cell resolution [ 77 ] . Combining such methods with microfabricated chambers [ 78 , 79 ] or hydrogels with internal architecture would create powerful approaches for controlling cellular arrangement and composition within an organoid of defined , microscale 3 - D morphology . Analogous to the developing embryo , the signaling that guides morphogenesis begins immediately within presumptive organoids upon assembly . While the vast majority of organoid protocols initiate as spherical cell aggregates , many human organs , including the brain and spinal cord , heart , and gut tissues , develop from epithelialized tubes instead of spherical cell assemblies [ 34 ] . Therefore , several groups are using microfabrication to investigate how instructing non - spherical organoid morphologies upon assembly can enhance the biomimicry of subsequent morphogenesis events to yield organoids with anatomical micro - to - macroscale tissue cytoarchitecture . For example , we are integrating 2 - D micropatterned substrates with neural organoid protocols to investigate how spatiotemporal control over the morphology of hPSC - derived neural stem cell ( hNSC ) aggregates affects subsequent neural tube - like morphogenesis processes . Using micropatterned , multicomponent PEG - grafted substrates and copper - free click chemistry , we have demonstrated that polarized neural tube - like tissue formation and subsequent radial tissue growth can be recapitulated in a biomimetic manner by dynamically controlling the hNSCs’ tissue morphology [ 62 , 80 ] . In an improvement to their seminal cerebral organoid protocol [ 13 ] , the Knoblich lab has used poly ( lactide - co - glycolide ) microfilaments as a scaffold to generate elongated 3 - D hNSC aggregates . They show that applying this microscale control over hNSC aggregate assembly enhanced biomimicry of neural tube formation and the radial cytoarchitecture of subsequently formed cortical tissues as compared to organoids generated from spherical cell aggregates [ 23 ] . Furthermore , use of the Takeuchi group’s double - coaxial flow method for 3 - D cellular fiber tissue engineering could perhaps provide a scalable means of generating elongated or tube - like organoids [ 81 ] . Integration of such microfabricated methods to control the morphology of organoids upon assembly is an underdeveloped research area , which will likely be critical to controlling early morphogenesis events that subsequently yield tissues with anatomically biomimetic cytoarchitectures . 4 . Spatiotemporal regulating of morphogen gradients . While microenvironmental control of cell fate is multifaceted , morphogens are arguably the most potent regulators of early tissue development in vivo . Morphogens are defined as small molecules ( e . g . retinoic acid ) , growth factors ( e . g . fibroblast growth factors , bone morphogenetic proteins ( BMP ) , WNTs , etc . ) , or hormones that form diffusion gradients within tissues to regulate cell fate in a concentration dependent manner . Transient morphogen gradients generated by secretions from ‘organizers’ are well known spatiotemporal regulators of tissue morphogenesis in vivo [ 6 , 82 , 83 ] . The presence of analogous morphogen gradients arising during organoid derivation is strongly suggested by the mere fact that cell phenotype diversity and tissue structure complexity increase drastically during organoid culture . Furthermore , Elly Tanaka’s and Hans Clevers’ groups have respectively observed the presence of Sonic Hedgehog and Wnt3 gradients within neural tube cysts [ 33 ] and the intestinal crypts of gut organoids [ 84 ] derived from mouse cells . Integrating engineering methods for spatiotemporal regulation of morphogen gradients within 9 human organoids represent a potent , but yet under explored , approach for instructing anatomically biomimetic morphogenesis ( Fig . 2D ) . Spatiotemporal regulation of morphogen gradients in tissue engineering is traditionally achieved using microfluidics [ 85 ] or micro / nanoparticles [ 86 ] . Microfluidic devices can be engineered to produce morphogen gradients of diverse geometries and have been applied to 3 - D stem cell culture . For example , the Kamm lab developed a microfluidic device in which diffusion driven , perpendicular , linear gradients of retinoic acid ( RA ) and SAG , a Sonic Hedgehog ( Shh ) signaling agonist , were generated across a 3D collagen hydrogel containing mouse embryonic stem cell - derived embryoid bodies ( EBs ) [ 87 ] ( Fig . 5A ) . This mimics ventralizing morphogen gradients that arise in the developing spinal cord [ 88 ] . After a 5 day differentiation period , they observed a correlated ‘ventral’ localization of EBs generating HB9 + motor neurons , a RA and Shh - dependent spinal cell phenotype . Demers et al . conducted a similar microfluidic study but also included the presence of an opposing dorsalizing BMP4 gradient [ 89 ] ( Fig . 5B ) . These examples demonstrate the power of using microfluidics to generate temporal morphogen gradients that spatially pattern 3 - D stem cell differentiation . However , to apply this to human organoid morphogenesis , the microfluidics must be designed in a manner that accommodates the order ( s ) of magnitude increase in organoid size over the extended culture periods required for hPSC vs . mESC differentiation . Also , the standard enclosed microfluidic design needs to be altered to permit extraction of the organoid after morphogen patterning . Micro / nanoparticles can also be used to induce gradients by either local controlled - release or sequestering of morphogens ( Fig . 2D ) . Whereas , microfluidics can only be used to induce trans - organoid morphogen gradients , micro / nanoparticles provide a means for inducing spatially discrete , internal morphogen gradients and in cases where complex organoid geometries prohibit the use of typical microfluidics . In 2001 , the Saltzman group pioneered co - aggregation of microspheres and fetal rat cells to create ‘neo - tissues’ with ‘programmable’ synthetic microenvironments . They used PLGA microspheres pre - coated with poly - D - Lysine to promote co - aggregation via electrostatic interactions with negatively charged sialic acid residues present in the cell membrane’s glycocalyx [ 90 ] . This technique could be directly translated to organoid protocols to enable localized controlled - release of morphogens as demonstrated by the McDevitt lab . They used controlled release of retinoic acid from PLGA microspheres co - aggregated within mouse EBs to induce homogeneous , synchronous and organized spheroid cyst morphogenesis that resembled E6 . 75 mouse embryos with an exterior visceral endoderm encapsulating an epiblast cell layer [ 91 ] . These results demonstrate the potency of controlled and localized delivery of a single morphogen within organoids . However , during development multiple morphogens act in concert , i . e . in varied combinations and temporal periods , to specify tissue fate . To mimic such dynamics , the Alsberg and Murphy labs developed a dual gelatin and mineral - coated hydroxyapatite microparticle system to enable delivery of two morphogens with each having a discrete controlled release profile . Using this system , they were able to effectively recapitulate the two - stage process of endochondral ossification within human bone marrow - derived mesenchymal stem cell ( hMSC ) aggregates . Gelatin microparticles that rapidly released transforming growth factor - β 1 induced chondrogenesis and alkaline phosphatase activity by week 2 of culture , and mineral - coated hydroxyapatite microparticles that provided sustained 10 release of BMP - 2 induced mineralized bone formation by week 5 [ 92 ] . The possibilities for instructing human organoid morphogenesis using microparticles is clearly wide - ranging . Furthermore , combining controlled release of growth factors with microparticles engineered for morphogen - specific sequestration [ 93 ] would make a versatile tool set for advanced gain and loss of morphogen gradient studies without the need for genetically engineered cell lines . To further advance this approach , methods to spatially concentrate microspheres within discrete regions of microscale cell aggregates , versus a typical homogenous distribution , need to be developed to provide true spatiotemporal regulation of organoid morphogenesis . 5 . Future Outlook . Human pluripotent stem cell - derived organoids are quickly becoming the biologists’ culture tool of choice for exploring physiology and disease in a human genetic background . Patient specific , iPSC - derived organoids represent a significant advancement in experimental platforms for conducting personalized medicine studies due to their biomimicry of human tissue cell phenotype diversity and cytoarchitecture . However , there is still much room for improvement in standardizing and enhancing both of these aspects at the micro thru macroscale to generate tissues in vitro that could serves as anatomically mimetic analogues to their endogenous counterparts and potentially tissue transplants [ 6 , 94 ] . Scientists’ current reliance on uncontrolled morphogenesis produces deficiencies and inconsistences in organoid anatomy and cellular composition . Future advancements in applying tissue engineering methodologies to instruct mutliscale organoid morphogenesis in a manner that mimics human development even further will be necessary to overcome this limitation . The application of tissue engineering principles to organoid derivation protocols requires several conceptual changes from traditional tissue engineering practices . First , biologists are constantly discovering that the mixture of cell phenotypes within complex organs , e . g . brain [ 95 , 96 ] and spinal cord [ 97 ] , heart [ 98 ] , intestine [ 99 ] , lung [ 100 ] , pancreas [ 101 ] , etc . , is highly diverse . Hence , it is not feasible to engineer anatomical and physiological mimetics of such organs ex vivo by deriving each cell phenotype separately and then bioprinting them with microscale precision into analogous tissue cytoarchitectures . For such organs , in vitro morphogenesis of hPSCs / progenitor cell aggregates has been the only method to date that displays the potential to generate such levels of cell phenotype diversity and tissue cytoarchitecture mimicry . Second , tissue engineers traditionally focus on starting with vascularized tissue constructs , but inception of organ development in vivo is initially an avascular process quickly followed by subsequent vascularization in a stereotyped manner [ 34 ] . For this reason , most organoid morphogenesis protocols do , and may have too , begin as avascular microscale tissues . However , bioprinting blood vessels and nerves around the developing organoid to induce subsequent vascularization and innervation would be biologically appropriate . Third , current organoid morphogenesis protocols generate microscale tissues that grow at least one order of magnitude in size , and this is compounded even further in in vivo organ development . Therefore , the ideal tissue engineering platforms for organoid morphogenesis will be versatile enough to be applied effectively over multiple length scales , e . g . micro - to - centimeter [ 26 ] . Alternatively , they should at least permit facile isolation of a growing organoid , so it can be transferred to a secondary platform for continued culture . These conceptual shifts differentiate how tissue engineering 11 methodologies would be applied to instruct organoid morphogenesis versus construct organotypic tissues . As engineers have done before , now is the time to further blend engineering and biology to develop novel approaches for harnessing the innate emergent potential of hPSC - derived organoids . This can begin by integrating existing tissue engineering methods that generate hydrogels with spatially compartmentalized microenvironments and internal architecture , methods for controlling cellular cytoarchitecture during initial organoid assembly , and approaches to spatiotemporally regulate morphogen gradients with organoid derivation protocols . This is facilitated by the proliferation of biomaterial and microfluidic tools over the past few decades and more recent advancements in 3 - D and bioprinting , sacrificial molding , and photochemistry . However , due to the expansive experimental space of organoids , engineers should become well versed in developmental biology aspects of their respective tissues to reduce the problem’s dimensionality to a manageable set of key factors . Additionally , the use of novel high - throughput screening and systems biology approaches to decipher the proper regimen of biochemical and biophysical factors necessary to instruct anatomically correct organoid morphogenesis will likely be necessary . We hypothesize that only a minimal set of instructive exogenous cues will be necessary to significantly advance the biomimicry of organoids due to their inherent and impressive morphogenetic potential . However , with all conundrums , the challenge lies in sifting through the possibilities to elucidate the simplistic solution , thereby making it a sophisticated one . Disclosures The authors indicate no potential conflict of interest . Acknowledgments This publication was developed under the Assistant Agreement No . 83573701 awarded by the U . S . Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) to R . S . A . and has not been formally reviewed by the EPA . The views expressed in this document are solely those of R . S . A . and colleagues and do not necessarily reflect those of the Agency , and the EPA does not endorse any products or commercial services mentioned in this publication . The publication was also developed with support from NIH grant 5R21NS082618 - 02 and an Innovation in Regulatory Science Award from the Burroughs Wellcome Fund ( R . S . A . ) . Figure Legends Fig . 1 . Engineered organotypic tissues vs . organoid morphogenesis . ( A ) Current methods for generating in vitro tissues involve either bottom up or top down tissue engineering approaches . In bottom - up approaches , diverse methods are used to create modular tissue units , which are assembled or grow into larger tissues with specific ctyoarchitectural features . In top - down approaches , cells and biomaterial scaffolds are combined and cultured until the cells fill the support structure to create an engineered tissue . Both approaches typically use a limited subset of progenitors or differentiated cell types . ( B ) Alternatively , organoids are generated from a microscale pluripotent or germ - layer specific stem cell aggregate and allowed to undergo spontaneous morphogenesis . This yields a biomimetic population of tissue - specific progenitors 12 that produce organotypic levels of different cell types within microscale tissue cytoarchitectures that closely resemble those found in endogenous developing organs . Adapted from [ 10 ] . Fig . 2 . Potential engineering approaches for instructing organoid morphogenesis . ( A ) Hydrogels with compartmentalized microenvironments could be used to mimic spatiotemporal interactions with proximal tissues encountered during development to instruct cell differentiation . ( B ) Hydrogel molds with predefined internal architecture could be used to impose morphological constraints on embedded / encapsulated organoids . ( C ) Direct control of cellular arrangement , composition , and aggregate morphology upon initial assembly could be used to influence subsequent organoid morphogenesis processes , e . g . spatial orientation of cell progeny / tissues . ( D ) Global or localized morphogens gradients generated by microfluidics or microparticles , respectively , could be used to spatially instruct cellular differentiation and migration during organoid morphogenesis . Fig . 3 . Engineering hydrogels with compartmentalized microenvironments . ( A ) Hydrogels containing clickable ( green ) and UV - degradable ( blue ) bis ( azide ) - functionalized polypeptides form a 3 - D substrate onto which biochemical ( click - additions , ‘Photopatterning’ ) and biophysical ( UV - degradation , ‘Photodegredation’ ) properties can be directly written using focused visible light or UV lasers , respectively . Scale bar 100 µ m . Images from [ 46 ] . ( B ) Schematic of DNA - hydrogel composite synthesis ( top ) that enables programmable assembly at the microscale ( bottom ) . Scale bar 1mm . Images from [ 54 ] . ( C ) A modular design of bioengineered brain - like cortical tissues . ( i ) Cytoarchitectural features include neocortex tissues with neuronal layers and an underlying white matter region ( top ) . Mimetic tissue constructs were engineered using adhesive - free assembly of concentric silk scaffold layers within a unit module consisting of neuron - rich grey and axon - rich white matter regions ( bottom ) . Image of assembled concentric silk scaffolds of ( ii ) original or ( iii ) dyed color . Scale bar is 1 mm . Images from [ 55 ] . ( D ) 3D reconstruction of ( i ) a Rose Bengal ( red ) and BSA / Texas Red - Laminin ( green ) hydrogel fabricated by multiphoton excited photochemistry . Scale bar is 10 µ m . ( ii ) Scanning electron micrograph of a mesenchymal stem cell ( arrow ) migrating into a BSA / Laminin hydrogel . Scale bar is 10 µ m . Images from [ 56 ] . Fig . 4 . Exemplary methodologies for controlling initial organoid assembly . ( A ) Schematic of DNA - programmed assembly of cell aggregates ( DPAC ) . ( i ) Assembly is programmed using the complementarity of lipid - modified oligonucleotides that spontaneously intercalate within cell membranes upon incubation . ( ii ) To control the morphology , arrangement , and composition of cellular aggregates , DNA - presenting micropatterned substrates with complementary sequences are used as a scaffold to spatially organize the adhesion and subsequent aggregation of multiple cell types . ( iii ) Depiction of DPAC approach to engineering aggregates of human luminal and myoepithelial cells . Scale bar is 30 µ m . Images from [ 72 ] . ( B ) Side view illustration of a MAPLE DW print ribbon where the laser pulse creates a shock - wave to bioprint cells onto an underlying substrate with precise spatial control . 3 - D tissues can be engineered by bioprinting onto an automated X - Y - Z stage . Image adapted from [ 75 ] . 13 Fig . 5 . Exemplary methodologies for inducing morphogen gradients within organotypic cultures . ( A ) Demonstration of orthogonal retinoic acid ( RA ) and sonic hedgehog agonist ( SAG ) gradients on motor neuron differentiation of mouse embryoid bodies encapsulated within 3 - D hydrogels . ( i ) Schematic comparing the morphogen concentration profiles in the developing neural tube to those created by the microfluidic device . ( ii ) Heat map demonstrating the local expression of GFP ( i . e . , red = high ; blue = low ) which corresponds to HB9 + motorneuron differentiation . Scale bar is 2 mm . Images from [ 87 ] ( B ) Graphical overview of microfluidic reconstruction of the neural tube . ( i ) Schematic of a neural tube cross - section highlighting ( ii ) the 100 µm ‘slice’ recreated by the microfluidic device . ( iii ) Spatial distribution of transcription factor expression within mouse embryoid bodies encapsulated within 3 - D hydrogels that is consistent with in vivo neural tube expression . Scale bar is 100 µ m . Images from [ 89 ] . References [ 1 ] V . Tabar , L . Studer , Pluripotent stem cells in regenerative medicine : challenges and recent progress , Nat . Rev . Genet . 15 ( 2014 ) 82 – 92 . [ 2 ] M . Grskovic , A . Javaherian , B . Strulovici , G . Q . Daley , Induced pluripotent stem cells - - opportunities for disease modelling and drug discovery , Nat . Rev . Drug . Discov . 10 ( 2011 ) 915 – 929 . [ 3 ] J . Sandoe , K . Eggan , Opportunities and challenges of pluripotent stem cell neurodegenerative disease models , Nat . Neurosci . 16 ( 2013 ) 780 – 789 . [ 4 ] H . Geckil , F . Xu , X . Zhang , S . Moon , U . Demirci , Engineering hydrogels as extracellular matrix mimics , Nanomedicine . 5 ( 2010 ) 469 – 484 . [ 5 ] A . B . Dababneh , I . T . Ozbolat , Bioprinting Technology : A Current State - of - the - Art Review , J . Manuf . Sci . Eng . 136 ( 2014 ) 061016 . [ 6 ] Y . Sasai , Next - generation regenerative medicine : organogenesis from stem cells in 3D culture , Cell Stem Cell 12 ( 2013 ) 520 – 530 . [ 7 ] B . R . Dye , D . R . Hill , M . Ferguson , Y . H . Tsai , M . S . Nagy , In vitro generation of human pluripotent stem cell derived lung organoids , eLife 4 ( 2015 ) 05098 . [ 8 ] M . A . Lancaster , J . A . Knoblich , Organogenesis in a dish : modeling development and disease using organoid technologies , Science 345 ( 2014 ) 1247125 – 1247125 . [ 9 ] B . Guillotin , F . Guillemot , Cell patterning technologies for organotypic tissue fabrication , Trends Biotechnol . 29 ( 2011 ) 183 – 190 . [ 10 ] J . W . Nichol , A . Khademhosseini , Modular Tissue Engineering : Engineering Biological Tissues from the Bottom Up , Soft Matter 5 ( 2009 ) 1312 – 1319 . [ 11 ] C . Du , K . Narayanan , M . F . Leong , A . C . A . Wan , Induced pluripotent stem cell - derived hepatocytes and endothelial cells in multi - component hydrogel fibers for liver tissue engineering , Biomaterials 35 ( 2014 ) 6006 – 6014 . [ 12 ] E . R . Shamir , A . J . Ewald , Three - dimensional organotypic culture : experimental models of mammalian biology and disease , Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 15 ( 2014 ) 647 – 664 . [ 13 ] M . A . Lancaster , M . Renner , C . A . Martin , D . Wenzel , L . S . Bicknell , M . E . Hurles , T . Homfray , J . M . Penninger , A . P . Jackson , J . A . Knoblich , Cerebral organoids model human brain development and microcephaly , Nature 501 ( 2013 ) 373 – 379 . [ 14 ] T . Takebe , K . Sekine , M . Enomura , H . Koike , M . Kimura , T . Ogaeri , R . - W . Zhang , Y . Ueno , Y . - W . Zheng , N . Koike , S . Aoyama , Y . Adachi , H , Taniguchi , Vascularized and functional human liver from an iPSC - derived organ bud transplant , Nature 499 ( 2013 ) 481 – 484 . [ 15 ] M . Takasato , P . X . Er , M . Becroft , J . M . Vanslambrouck , E . G . Stanley , A . G . Elefanty , M . H . Little , Directing human embryonic stem cell differentiation towards a renal 14 lineage generates a self - organizing kidney , Nat . Cell Biol . 16 ( 2014 ) 118 – 126 . [ 16 ] Y . Xia , E . Nivet , I . Sancho - Martinez , T . Gallegos , K . Suzuki , D . Okamura , M . - Z . Wu , I . Dubova , C . R . Esteban , N . Montserrat , J . M . Campistol , J . C . Izpisua Belmonte , Directed differentiation of human pluripotent cells to ureteric bud kidney progenitor - like cells , Nat . Cell Biol . 15 ( 2013 ) 1507 – 1515 . [ 17 ] C . W . Chua , M . Shibata , M . Lei , R . Toivanen , L . J . Barlow , S . K . Bergren , K . K . Badani , J . M . McKiernan , M . C . Benson , H . Hibshoosh , M . M . Shen , Single luminal epithelial progenitors can generate prostate organoids in culture , Nat . Cell Biol . 16 ( 2014 ) 951 – 61 – 1 – 4 . [ 18 ] M . Eiraku , N . Takata , H . Ishibashi , M . Kawada , E . Sakakura , S . Okuda , K , Sekiguchi , T , Adachi & Y . Sasai , Self - organizing optic - cup morphogenesis in three - dimensional culture , Nature 472 ( 2011 ) 51 – 56 . [ 19 ] J . R . Spence , C . N . Mayhew , S . A . Rankin , M . F . Kuhar , J . E . Vallance , K . Tolle , E . E . Hoskins , V . V . Kalinichenko , S . I . Wells , A . M . Zorn , N . F . Shroyer , J . M . Wells , Directed differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells into intestinal tissue in vitro , Nature 470 ( 2011 ) 105 – 109 . [ 20 ] M . A . Lancaster , J . A . Knoblich , Generation of cerebral organoids from human pluripotent stem cells , Nat Protoc . 9 ( 2014 ) 2329 – 2340 . [ 21 ] J . G . Camp , F . Badsha , M . Florio , S . Kanton , T . Gerber , M . Wilsch - Bräuninger , E . Lewitus , A . Sykes , W . Hevers , M . Lancaster , J . A . Knoblich , R . Lachmann , S . Pääbo , W . B . Huttner , B . Treutlein , Human cerebral organoids recapitulate gene expression programs of fetal neocortex development , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 112 ( 2015 ) 15672 – 15677 . [ 22 ] J . Jo , Y . Xiao , A . X . Sun , E . Cukuroglu , H . - D . Tran , J . Göke , Z . Y . Tan , T . Y . Saw , C . - P . Tan , H . Lokman , Y . Lee , D . Kim , H . S . Ko , S . - O . Kim , J . H . Park , N . - J . Cho , T . M . Hyde , J . E . Kleinman , J . H . Shin , D . R . Weinberger , E . K . Tan , H . S . Je , H . H . Ng , Midbrain - like Organoids from Human Pluripotent Stem Cells Contain Functional Dopaminergic and Neuromelanin - Producing Neurons , Cell Stem Cell 19 ( 2016 ) 248 – 257 . [ 23 ] M . A . Lancaster , N . S . Corsini , T . R . Burkard , J . A . Knoblich , Guided self - organization recapitulates tissue architecture in a bioengineered brain organoid model , bioRxiv . ( 2016 ) . [ 24 ] Y . Sasai , Cytosystems dynamics in self - organization of tissue architecture , Nature 493 ( 2013 ) 318 – 326 . [ 25 ] S . Guven , P . Chen , F . Inci , S . Tasoglu , B . Erkmen , U . Demirci , Multiscale assembly for tissue engineering and regenerative medicine , Trends Biotechnol . 33 ( 2015 ) 269 – 279 . [ 26 ] X . Yin , B . E . Mead , H . Safaee , R . Langer , J . M . Karp , O . Levy , Engineering Stem Cell Organoids , Cell Stem Cell 18 ( 2016 ) 25 – 38 . [ 27 ] R . S . Ashton , A . J . Keung , J . Peltier , D . V . Schaffer , Progress and Prospects for Stem Cell Engineering , Annu . Rev . Chem . Biomol . Eng . 2 ( 2011 ) 479 – 502 . [ 28 ] N . A . Peppas , P . Bures , W . Leobandung , Hydrogels in pharmaceutical formulations , Eur . J . Pharm . Biopharm . 50 ( 2000 ) 27 - 46 . [ 29 ] S . Van Vlierberghe , P . Dubruel , E . Schacht , Biopolymer - Based Hydrogels As Scaffolds for Tissue Engineering Applications : A Review , Biomacromolecules 12 ( 2011 ) 1387 – 1408 . [ 30 ] M . P . Lutolf , J . A . Hubbell , Synthetic biomaterials as instructive extracellular microenvironments for morphogenesis in tissue engineering , Nature Biotechnol . 23 ( 2005 ) 47 – 55 . [ 31 ] C . S . Hughes , L . M . Postovit , G . A . Lajoie , Matrigel : a complex protein mixture required for optimal growth of cell culture , Proteomics 10 ( 2010 ) 1886 – 1890 . [ 32 ] B . A . Lindborg , J . H . Brekke , A . L . Vegoe , C . B . Ulrich , K . T . Haider , S . Subramaniam , 15 S . L . Venhuizen , C . R . Eide , P . J . Orchard , W . Chen , Q . Wang , F . Pelaez , C . M . Scott , E . Kokkoli , S . A . Keirstead , J . R . Dutton , J . Tolar , T . D . O ' Brien , Rapid Induction of Cerebral Organoids From Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells Using a Chemically Defined Hydrogel and Defined Cell Culture Medium , Stem Cells Transl . Med . 5 ( 2016 ) 970 – 979 . [ 33 ] A . Meinhardt , D . Eberle , A . Tazaki , A . Ranga , M . Niesche , M . Wilsch - Bräuninger , A . Stec , G . Schackert , M . Lutolf , E . M . Tanaka , 3D reconstitution of the patterned neural tube from embryonic stem cells , Stem Cell Reports 3 ( 2014 ) 987 – 999 . [ 34 ] S . F . Gilbert , Developmental Biology , 10 ed . , Sinauer Associates , Inc , Sunderland , n . d . [ 35 ] E . Ruoslahti , RGD and other recognition sequences for integrins , Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 12 ( 1996 ) 697 – 715 . [ 36 ] S . T . Wall , K . Saha , R . S . Ashton , K . R . Kam , D . V . Schaffer , K . E . Healy , Multivalency of Sonic hedgehog conjugated to linear polymer chains modulates protein potency , Bioconjug . Chem . 19 ( 2008 ) 806 – 812 . [ 37 ] T . Vazin , R . S . Ashton , A . Conway , N . A . Rode , S . M . Lee , V . Bravo , K . E . Healy , R . S . Kane , D . V . Schaffer , The effect of multivalent Sonic hedgehog on differentiation of human embryonic stem cells into dopaminergic and GABAergic neurons , Biomaterials 35 ( 2014 ) 941 – 948 . [ 38 ] R . S . Ashton , A . Conway , C . Pangarkar , J . Bergen , K . - I . Lim , P . Shah , M . Bissell , D . V . Schaffer , Astrocytes regulate adult hippocampal neurogenesis through ephrin - B signaling , Nat . Neurosci . 15 ( 2012 ) 1399 – 1406 . [ 39 ] A . Conway , T . Vazin , D . P . Spelke , N . A . Rode , Multivalent ligands control stem cell behaviour in vitro and in vivo , Nat . Nanotechol . 8 ( 2013 ) 831 - 838 . [ 40 ] A . J . Engler , S . Sen , H . L . Sweeney , D . E . Discher , Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage specification , Cell 126 ( 2006 ) 677 – 689 . [ 41 ] A . Banerjee , M . Arha , S . Choudhary , R . S . Ashton , S . R . Bhatia , D . V . Schaffer , R . S . Kane , The influence of hydrogel modulus on the proliferation and differentiation of encapsulated neural stem cells , Biomaterials 30 ( 2009 ) 4695 – 4699 . [ 42 ] Y . Shao , J . Fu , Integrated micro / nanoengineered functional biomaterials for cell mechanics and mechanobiology : a materials perspective , Adv . Mater . 26 ( 2014 ) 1494 – 1533 . [ 43 ] S . Khetan , M . Guvendiren , W . R . Legant , D . M . Cohen , C . S . Chen , J . A . Burdick , Degradation - mediated cellular traction directs stem cell fate in covalently crosslinked three - dimensional hydrogels , Nat . Mater . 12 ( 2013 ) 458 – 465 . [ 44 ] S . Rammensee , M . S . Kang , K . Georgiou , S . Kumar , D . V . Schaffer , Dynamics of Mechanosensitive Neural Stem Cell Differentiation , Stem Cells ( 2016 ) . [ 45 ] C . A . DeForest , B . D . Polizzotti , K . S . Anseth , Sequential click reactions for synthesizing and patterning three - dimensional cell microenvironments , Nat . Mater . 8 ( 2009 ) 659 – 664 . [ 46 ] C . A . DeForest , K . S . Anseth , Cytocompatible click - based hydrogels with dynamically tunable properties through orthogonal photoconjugation and photocleavage reactions , Nat . Chem . 3 ( 2011 ) 925 – 931 . [ 47 ] C . M . Nelson , J . P . Gleghorn , Sculpting organs : mechanical regulation of tissue development , Annu . Rev . Biomed . Eng . 14 ( 2012 ) 129 – 154 . [ 48 ] D . E . Discher , D . J . Mooney , P . W . Zandstra , Growth Factors , Matrices , and Forces Combine and Control Stem Cells , Science 324 ( 2009 ) 1673 – 1677 . [ 49 ] T . D . Hansen , J . T . Koepsel , N . N . Le , E . H . Nguyen , S . Zorn , M . Parlato , S . G . Loveland , M . P . Schwartz , W . L . Murphy , Biomaterial arrays with defined adhesion ligand densities and matrix stiffness identify distinct phenotypes for tumorigenic and nontumorigenic human mesenchymal cell types , Biomater Sci . 2 ( 2014 ) 745 – 756 . [ 50 ] L . Jongpaiboonkit , W . J . King , G . E . Lyons , A . L . Paguirigan , J . W . Warrick , D . J . Beebe , 16 W . L . Murphy , An adaptable hydrogel array format for 3 - dimensional cell culture and analysis , Biomaterials 29 ( 2008 ) 3346 – 3356 . [ 51 ] P . Occhetta , M . Centola , B . Tonnarelli , A . Redaelli , I . Martin , M . Rasponi , High - Throughput Microfluidic Platform for 3D Cultures of Mesenchymal Stem Cells , Towards Engineering Developmental Processes , Sci Rep . 5 ( 2015 ) 10288 . [ 52 ] A . Ranga , S . Gobaa , Y . Okawa , K . Mosiewicz , A . Negro , M . P . Lutolf , 3D niche microarrays for systems - level analyses of cell fate , Nat . Commun . 5 ( 2014 ) 4324 . [ 53 ] B . D . Cosgrove , L . G . Griffith , D . A . Lauffenburger , Fusing Tissue Engineering and Systems Biology Toward Fulfilling Their Promise , Cel . Mol . Bioeng . 1 ( 2008 ) 33 – 41 . [ 54 ] H . Qi , M . Ghodousi , Y . Du , C . Grun , H . Bae , P . Yin , A . Khademhosseini , DNA - directed self - assembly of shape - controlled hydrogels , Nat . Commun . 4 ( 2013 ) 2275 . [ 55 ] M . D . Tang - Schomer , J . D . White , L . W . Tien , L . I . Schmitt , T . M . Valentin , D . J . Graziano , A . M . Hopkins , F . G . Omenetto , P . G . Haydon , and D . L . Kaplan , Bioengineered functional brain - like cortical tissue , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 111 ( 2014 ) 13811 – 13816 . [ 56 ] P . - J . Su , Q . A . Tran , J . J . Fong , K . W . Eliceiri , B . M . Ogle , P . J . Campagnola , Mesenchymal stem cell interactions with 3D ECM modules fabricated via multiphoton excited photochemistry , Biomacromolecules 13 ( 2012 ) 2917 – 2925 . [ 57 ] R . O . Hynes , The Extracellular Matrix : Not Just Pretty Fibrils , Science 326 ( 2009 ) 1216 – 1219 . [ 58 ] N . A . Sears , D . R . Seshadri , P . S . Dhavalikar , E . Cosgriff - Hernandez , A Review of Three - Dimensional Printing in Tissue Engineering , Tissue Eng . B 22 ( 2016 ) 298 – 310 . [ 59 ] Y . Cao , J . P . Vacanti , K . T . Paige , J . Upton , C . A . Vacanti , Transplantation of chondrocytes utilizing a polymer - cell construct to produce tissue - engineered cartilage in the shape of a human ear , Plast . Reconstr . Surg . 100 ( 1997 ) 297 – 302 – discussion 303 – 4 . [ 60 ] H . - W . Kang , S . J . Lee , I . K . Ko , C . Kengla , J . J . Yoo , A . Atala , A 3D bioprinting system to produce human - scale tissue constructs with structural integrity , Nature Biotechnol . 34 ( 2016 ) 312 – 319 . [ 61 ] A . Warmflash , B . Sorre , F . Etoc , E . D . Siggia , A . H . Brivanlou , A method to recapitulate early embryonic spatial patterning in human embryonic stem cells , Nat . Methods 11 ( 2014 ) 847 – 854 . [ 62 ] G . T . Knight , J . Sha , R . S . Ashton , Micropatterned , clickable culture substrates enable in situ spatiotemporal control of human PSC - derived neural tissue morphology , Chem . Commun . ( Camb . ) . 51 ( 2015 ) 5238 – 5241 . [ 63 ] Z . Ma , J . Wang , P . Loskill , N . Huebsch , S . Koo , F . L . Svedlund , N . C . Marks , E . W . Hua , C . P . Grigoropoulos , B . R . Conklin , K . E . Healy , Self - organizing human cardiac microchambers mediated by geometric confinement , Nat . Commun . 6 ( 2015 ) 7413 . [ 64 ] K . Taniguchi , Y . Shao , R . F . Townshend , Y . - H . Tsai , C . J . DeLong , S . A . Lopez , S . Gayen , A . M . Freddo , D . J . Chue , D . J . Thomas , J . R . Spence , B . Margolis , S . Kalantry , J . Fu , K . S . O’Shea , D . L . Gumucio , Lumen Formation Is an Intrinsic Property of Isolated Human Pluripotent Stem Cells , Stem Cell Reports 5 ( 2015 ) 954 – 962 . [ 65 ] T . J . Hinton , Q . Jallerat , R . N . Palchesko , J . H . Park , M . S . Grodzicki , H . - J . Shue , M . H . Ramadan , A . R . Hudson , A . W . Feinberg , Three - dimensional printing of complex biological structures by freeform reversible embedding of suspended hydrogels , Sci Adv . 1 ( 2015 ) e1500758 . [ 66 ] J . S . Miller , K . R . Stevens , M . T . Yang , B . M . Baker , D . - H . T . Nguyen , D . M . Cohen , E . Toro , A . A . Chen , P . A . Galie , X . Yu , R . Chaturvedi , S . N . Bhatia , C . S . Chen , Rapid casting of patterned vascular networks for perfusable engineered three - dimensional tissues , Nat . Mater . 11 ( 2012 ) 768 – 774 . [ 67 ] X . - Y . Wang , Z . - H . Jin , B . - W . Gan , S . - W . Lv , M . Xie , W . - H . Huang , Engineering 17 interconnected 3D vascular networks in hydrogels using molded sodium alginate lattice as the sacrificial template , Lab Chip 14 ( 2014 ) 2709 – 2716 . [ 68 ] A . Tocchio , M . Tamplenizza , F . Martello , I . Gerges , E . Rossi , S . Argentiere , S . Rodighiero , W . Zhao , P . Milani , C . Lenardi , Versatile fabrication of vascularizable scaffolds for large tissue engineering in bioreactor , Biomaterials 45 ( 2015 ) 124 – 131 . [ 69 ] H . Van de Velde , G . Cauffman , H . Tournaye , P . Devroey , I . Liebaers , The four blastomeres of a 4 - cell stage human embryo are able to develop individually into blastocysts with inner cell mass and trophectoderm , Hum . Reprod . 23 ( 2008 ) 1742 – 1747 . [ 70 ] G . Guo , M . Huss , G . Q . Tong , C . Wang , L . L . Sun , N . D . Clarke , P . Robson , Resolution of Cell Fate Decisions Revealed by Single - Cell Gene Expression Analysis from Zygote to Blastocyst , Dev . Cell 18 ( 2010 ) 675 – 685 . [ 71 ] M . J . Workman , M . M . Mahe , S . Trisno , H . M . Poling , C . L . Watson , N . Sundaram , C . - F . Chang , J . Schiesser , P . Aubert , E . G . Stanley , A . G Elefanty , Y . Miyaoka , M . A . Mandegar , B . R . Conklin , M . Neunlist , S . A . Brugmann , M . A . Helmrath , James M Wells , Engineered human pluripotent - stem - cell - derived intestinal tissues with a functional enteric nervous system , Nat . Med . 23 ( 2017 ) 49 – 59 . [ 72 ] M . E . Todhunter , N . Y . Jee , A . J . Hughes , M . C . Coyle , A . Cerchiari , J . Farlow , J . C . Garbe , M . A . LaBarge , T . A . Desai , Z . J . Gartner , Programmed synthesis of three - dimensional tissues , Nat . Methods 12 ( 2015 ) 975 – 981 . [ 73 ] T . M . Patz , A . Doraiswamy , R . J . Narayan , W . He , Y . Zhong , R . Bellamkonda , R . Modi , D . B . Chrisey , Three - dimensional direct writing of B35 neuronal cells , J . Biomed . Mater . Res . Part B 78 ( 2006 ) 124 – 130 . [ 74 ] J . A . Barron , B . J . Spargo , B . R . Ringeisen , Biological laser printing of three dimensional cellular structures , Appl . Phys . A . ( 2004 ) 1027 – 1030 . [ 75 ] N . R . Schiele , D . T . Corr , Y . Huang , N . A . Raof , Y . Xie , D . B . Chrisey , Laser - based direct - write techniques for cell printing , Biofabrication 2 ( 2010 ) 032001 . [ 76 ] N . R . Schiele , R . A . Koppes , D . T . Corr , K . S . Ellison , D . M . Thompson , L . A . Ligon , T . K . M . Lippert , D . B . Chrisey , Laser direct writing of combinatorial libraries of idealized cellular constructs : Biomedical applications , Appl . Surf . Sci . 255 ( 2009 ) 5444 – 5447 . [ 77 ] J . A . Barron , D . B . Krizman , B . R . Ringeisen , Laser printing of single cells : statistical analysis , cell viability , and stress , Ann Biomed Eng . 33 ( 2005 ) 121 – 130 . [ 78 ] A . Schepers , C . Li , A . Chhabra , B . T . Seney , S . Bhatia , Engineering a perfusable 3D human liver platform from iPS cells , Lab Chip 16 ( 2016 ) 2644 – 2653 . [ 79 ] A . Odawara , M . Gotoh , I . Suzuki , A three - dimensional neuronal culture technique that controls the direction of neurite elongation and the position of soma to mimic the layered structure of the brain , RSC Adv . 3 ( 2013 ) 23620 – 23630 . [ 80 ] J . Sha , E . S . Lippmann , J . McNulty , Y . Ma , R . S . Ashton , Sequential Nucleophilic Substitutions Permit Orthogonal Click Functionalization of Multicomponent PEG Brushes , Biomacromolecules 14 ( 2013 ) 3294 – 3303 . [ 81 ] H . Onoe , T . Okitsu , A . Itou , M . Kato - Negishi , R . Gojo , D . Kiriya , K . Sato , S . Miura , S . Iwanaga , K . Kuribayashi - Shigetomi , Y . T . Matsunaga , Y . Shimoyama , S . Takeuchi , Metre - long cell - laden microfibres exhibit tissue morphologies and functions , Nat . Mater . 12 ( 2013 ) 584 – 590 . [ 82 ] K . G . Storey , J . M . Crossely , E . M . Derobertis , W . E . Norris , C . D . Stern , Neural Induction and Regionalization in the Chick - Embryo , Development 114 ( 1992 ) 729 – 741 . [ 83 ] R . D . del Corral , K . G . Storey , Opposing FGF and retinoid pathways : a signalling switch that controls differentiation and patterning onset in the extending vertebrate body axis , Bioessays 26 ( 2004 ) 857 – 869 . [ 84 ] H . F . Farin , I . Jordens , M . H . Mosa , O . Basak , J . Korving , D . V . F . Tauriello , K . de Punder , S . Angers , P . J . Peters , M . M . Maurice , H . Clevers , Visualization of a short - 18 range Wnt gradient in the intestinal stem - cell niche , Nature 530 ( 2016 ) 340 – 343 . [ 85 ] E . K . Sackmann , A . L . Fulton , D . J . Beebe , The present and future role of microfluidics in biomedical research , Nature 507 ( 2014 ) 181 – 189 . [ 86 ] K . Lee , E . A . Silva , D . J . Mooney , Growth factor delivery - based tissue engineering : general approaches and a review of recent developments , J . Royal Soc . Interf . 8 ( 2011 ) 153 – 170 . [ 87 ] S . G . M . Uzel , O . C . Amadi , T . M . Pearl , R . T . Lee , P . T . C . So , R . D . Kamm , Simultaneous or Sequential Orthogonal Gradient Formation in a 3D Cell Culture Microfluidic Platform , Small 12 ( 2016 ) 612 – 622 . [ 88 ] J . Briscoe , J . Ericson , The specification of neuronal identity by graded Sonic Hedgehog signalling , Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 10 ( 1999 ) 353 – 362 . [ 89 ] C . J . Demers , P . Soundararajan , P . Chennampally , G . A . Cox , J . Briscoe , S . D . Collins , R . L . Smith , Development - on - chip : in vitro neural tube patterning with a microfluidic device , Development 143 ( 2016 ) 1884 – 1892 . [ 90 ] M . J . Mahoney , W . M . Saltzman , Transplantation of brain cells assembled around a programmable synthetic microenvironment , Nature Biotechnol . 19 ( 2001 ) 934 – 939 . [ 91 ] R . L . Carpenedo , A . M . Bratt - Leal , R . A . Marklein , S . A . Seaman , N . J . Bowen , J . F . McDonald , T . C . McDevitt , Homogeneous and organized differentiation within embryoid bodies induced by microsphere - mediated delivery of small molecules , Biomaterials 30 ( 2009 ) 2507 – 2515 . [ 92 ] P . N . Dang , N . Dwivedi , L . M . Phillips , X . Yu , S . Herberg , C . Bowerman , L . D . Solorio , W . L . Murphy , E . Alsberg , Controlled Dual Growth Factor Delivery From Microparticles Incorporated Within Human Bone Marrow - Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cell Aggregates for Enhanced Bone Tissue Engineering via Endochondral Ossification , Stem Cells Transl Med . 5 ( 2016 ) 206 – 217 . [ 93 ] N . A . Impellitteri , M . W . Toepke , S . K . L . Levengood , W . L . Murphy , Specific VEGF sequestering and release using peptide - functionalized hydrogel microspheres , Biomaterials 33 ( 2012 ) 3475 – 3484 . [ 94 ] C . L . Watson , M . M . Mahe , J . Múnera , J . C . Howell , N . Sundaram , H . M . Poling , J . I . Schweitzer , J . E . Vallance , C . N . Mayhew , Y . Sun , G . Grabowski , S . R . Finkbeiner , J . R . Spence , N . F . Shroyer , J . M . Wells , M . A . Helmrath , An in vivo model of human small intestine using pluripotent stem cells , Nat . Med . 20 ( 2014 ) 1310 – 1314 . [ 95 ] G . La Manno , D . Gyllborg , S . Codeluppi , K . Nishimura , C . Salto , A . Zeisel , L . E . Borm , S . R . W . Stott , E . M . Toledo , J . C . Villaescusa , P . Lönnerberg , J . Ryge , R . A . Barker , E . Arenas , S . Linnarsson , Molecular diversity of midbrain development in mouse , human , and stem cells , Cell 167 ( 2016 ) 566 – 580 . [ 96 ] M . B . Johnson , C . A . Walsh , Cerebral cortical neuron diversity and development at single - cell resolution , Current Opinion in Neurobiology 42 ( 2016 ) 9 – 16 . [ 97 ] W . A . Alaynick , T . M . Jessell , S . L . Pfaff , SnapShot : spinal cord development , Cell 146 ( 2011 ) 178 – 178 . e1 . [ 98 ] D . M . DeLaughter , A . G . Bick , H . Wakimoto , D . McKean , J . M . Gorham , I . S . Kathiriya , J . T . Hinson , J . Homsy , J . Gray , W . Pu , B . G . Bruneau , J . G . Seidman , C . E . Seidman , Single - Cell Resolution of Temporal Gene Expression during Heart Development , Dev . Cell 39 ( 2016 ) 480 – 490 . [ 99 ] D . Grün , A . Lyubimova , L . Kester , K . Wiebrands , O . Basak , N . Sasaki , H . Clevers , A . van Oudenaarden , Single - cell messenger RNA sequencing reveals rare intestinal cell types , Nature 525 ( 2015 ) 251 – 255 . [ 100 ] B . Treutlein , D . G . Brownfield , A . R . Wu , N . F . Neff , G . L . Mantalas , F . H . Espinoza , T . J . Desai , M . A . Krasnow , S . R . Quake , Reconstructing lineage hierarchies of the distal lung epithelium using single - cell RNA - seq , Nature 509 ( 2014 ) 371 – 375 . [ 101 ] M . J . Muraro , G . Dharmadhikari , D . Grün , N . Groen , T . Dielen , E . Jansen , L . van Gurp , 19 M . A . Engelse , F . Carlotti , E . J . de Koning , A . van Oudenaarden , A Single - Cell Transcriptome Atlas of the Human Pancreas , Cell Syst . 3 ( 2016 ) 385 – 394 . 20 Microfabrication Cell Stacking 3D Bioprinting Top Down Bottom Up Engineered Tissue A ) B ) hPSC sphere Early progenitors Differentiated Cells Organoids with diverse cell phenotypes Scaffold Cells of Interest OR 21 D ) Morphogen Instruction C ) Organoid Assembly B ) Engineering Internal Architecture A ) Hydrogels with compartmentalized microenvironments Complementary DNA strands Morphogengradient Microparticlecontrolled release 22 A ) B ) C ) D ) 23 A ) i . iii . ii . Luminal Cell Myoep . Cell B ) FocusedLaser Beam Quartz Print Ribbon Laser Absorbing Biopolymer and Cell Attachment Layer Laser printed cellular structure 24 A ) B ) In vivo In vitro neural tube roof plate somite floor plate notochord ii . i . ii . i . iii . 25 Statement of Significance . Human PSC - derived 3 - D organoids are revolutionizing the biomedical sciences . They enable the study of development and disease within patient - specific genetic backgrounds and unprecedented biomimetic tissue microenvironments . However , their uncontrolled , spontaneous morphogenesis at the microscale yields inconsistences in macroscale organoid morphology , cytoarchitecture , and cellular composition that limits their standardization and application . Integration of tissue engineering methods with organoid derivation protocols could allow us to harness their potential by instructing standardized in vitro morphogenesis to generate organoids with biomimicry at all scales . Such advancements would enable the use of organoids as a basis for ‘next - generation’ tissue engineering of functional , anatomically mimetic human tissues and potentially novel organ transplants . Here , we discuss critical aspects of organoid morphogenesis where application of innovative tissue engineering methodologies would yield significant advancement towards this goal . 26