University of Groningen The molecular face of lipid rafts in model membranes Risselada , H . Jelger ; Marrink , Siewert Published in : Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America DOI : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0807527105 IMPORTANT NOTE : You are advised to consult the publisher ' s version ( publisher ' s PDF ) if you wish to cite from it . Please check the document version below . Document Version Publisher ' s PDF , also known as Version of record Publication date : 2008 Link to publication in University of Groningen / UMCG research database Citation for published version ( APA ) : Risselada , H . J . , & Marrink , S . J . ( 2008 ) . The molecular face of lipid rafts in model membranes . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 105 ( 45 ) , 17367 - 17372 . DOI : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0807527105 CopyrightOther than for strictly personal use , it is not permitted to download or to forward / distribute the text or part of it without the consent of the author ( s ) and / or copyright holder ( s ) , unless the work is under an open content license ( like Creative Commons ) . Take - down policy If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details , and we will remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim . Downloaded from the University of Groningen / UMCG research database ( Pure ) : http : / / www . rug . nl / research / portal . For technical reasons the number of authors shown on this cover page is limited to 10 maximum . Download date : 29 - 12 - 2018 Supporting Information Risselada and Marrink 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0807527105 SI Methods This supplementary material contains details about the MARTINI model used in our simulations and details of the method of analysis . Fig . S1 quantifies the different lateral diffusion rates of the 2 cholesterol populations of the L d phase . Fig . S2 provides additional illustrations of the structure of the L o / L d phase coexistence in various lipid mixtures . The MARTINI Model . All systems were simulated using the MARTINI CG force field ( 1 ) , version 2 . 0 . The MARTINI model uses a 4 - to - 1 mapping , i . e . , on average 4 heavy atoms are represented by a single interaction center , with an exception for ring - like molecules such as cholesterol that are mapped with somewhat higher resolution ( (cid:1) 3 - to - 1 ) . The model considers 4 main types of interaction sites : polar ( P ) , intermediately polar ( N ) , apolar ( C ) , and charged ( Q ) . Within a main type , subtypes are distinguished either by a letter denoting the hydrogen bonding capabilities ( d , donor ; a , accep - tor ; da , both ; 0 , none ) , or by a number indicating the degree of polarity [ from 1 ( low polarity ) to 5 ( high polarity ) ] . In the CG representation , the PC head group consists of 2 hydrophilic groups : the choline ( type Q 0 ) and the phosphate ( Q a ) group . The former bears a positive charge , the latter a negative charge . Two sites of intermediate hydrophilicity ( N a ) are used to represent the glycerol ester moiety . Palmitoyl tails ( C 16 ) are modeled by 4 C 1 particles , and linoleyl tails ( C 18 : 2 ) also by 4 particles , the middle 2 by the C 4 type to reflect the more hydrophilic nature of the unsaturated bonds . The other 2 tail beads for the linoleyl tails are of type C 1 . The central location of the C 4 particles in the tail mimics those present in (cid:1) 6 fatty acids . Although the reso - lution of the CG model is necessarily limited , the closest analogue would be cis , cis - 9 , 12 - octadecadienoic acid ( also known as linoleic acid ) . Cholesterol is represented by 8 CG particles . The hydrophilic head group is modeled as SP 1 ( where the S denotes the special ring type ) , the sterol body by 4 SC 1 and 1 SC 3 particle accounting for the presence of a double bond , and 2 tail particles ( SC 1 attached to the sterol body , and C 1 for the terminal group ) . The solvent is modeled as a single , type P 4 site , each bead representing 4 water molecules . Nonbonded interactions are described by a Lennard – Jones ( LJ ) potential . The strength of the pair interaction , determined by the value of the well depth of the LJ potential , depends on the interacting particle types . The full interaction matrix can be found in the original publication ( 1 ) . In addition to the LJ interaction , the charged lipid head group sites interact via a Coulombic energy function with a relative dielectric constant e rel (cid:2) 15 for explicit screening . Standard bonded parameters were used for the lipids as well as for cholesterol ; details can be found elsewhere ( 1 ) . Parameters for polyunsaturated chains were not available , and have been optimized using all - atom simulations of Feller et al . ( 2 ) . From quantum mechanical calculations these authors concluded that polyunsaturated chains show an unusually high degree of conformational flexi - bility compared to mono - unsaturated or saturated chains . To mimic this behavior in the CG model , both the force constant K and the equilibrium angle (cid:2) of the angle potential for the CG particles representing the polyunsaturated part of the lipid tails were reduced from the standard values of K (cid:2) 45 kJ mol (cid:3) 1 to 10 kJ mol (cid:3) 1 and (cid:2) (cid:2) 120 ° to 100 ° . These parameters were further tested by comparing the effective angle distributions obtained from simulations of bulk polyunsaturated alkanes , both at the CG and all - atom level . In addition we compared the level of backfolding ( i . e . , the tendency of the lipid tail ends to reside near the interface ) in lipid bilayers at both levels of resolution . The characteristic significant increase in backfolding of polyunsatu - rated lipids is well reproduced at the CG level . The same parameters were recently used to study the interaction of cholesterol and diC 20 : 4 - PC ( diarachidonoyl - PC ) , another (cid:1) 6 fat - ty - acid - containing lipid ( 3 ) . In this study , the characteristic feature of the experimental neutron scattering profiles , namely an increased presence of the cholesterol head group in between the bilayer leaflets , could be reproduced . Analysis of Structural Properties . Local properties of the lamellar membrane system were computed by dividing the membrane into slabs of 1 nm width in the direction perpendicular to the domain boundaries . Averages were taken over the final 4 (cid:3) s of the simulation . The local membrane thickness was defined as the average distance between the phosphate groups of both mono - layer leaflets in a particular slab . The local area per lipid is calculated as the average amount of lipids ( including cholesterol ) in a slab divided by the area of that slab . The order parameter represents the segmental order parameter averaged over all 4 tail segments , and all lipid tails present in a particular slab . The local composition of a certain component was defined as the mol fraction of the total amount of components in that slab . The radial distribution function of cholesterol ( Fig . 3 B ) was obtained by considering the distribution of the cholesterol center - of - masses for each of the monolayers separately . All visual images ( Figs . 1 , 2 A , 3 A , and 4 A and Fig . S2 ) were prepared using the VMD ( Visual Molecular Dynamics ) software ( 4 ) , version 1 . 8 . 6 . Analysis of Dynamic Properties . The local lateral diffusion constant was calculated from the average lateral mean square displace - ment ( MSD ) of a representative bead in the head group region of the molecule ( the phosphate group was chosen for the PC lipids and the hydroxyl group in case of cholesterol ) in a slab . All motions were corrected for the overall center of mass motion of the monolayers . Because of the nonlocal nature of the diffusion process , only short time mobilities were taken into account ( t (cid:4) 4 ns ) to prevent dominant contributions to the diffusion rate outside the target slab . Distinction between the 2 cholesterol populations in the L d phase was based on the position of the cholesterol head group with respect to the membrane normal , assigned to 4 separate bins ( 2 for the interfaces and 2 for the membrane interior ) . The average monolayer residence time of cholesterol , or flip - flop time , was estimated by counting the number of crossings . A crossing was defined as a tilt angle changing from a value (cid:2) (cid:5) 120° to a value (cid:2) (cid:4) 60° or vice versa . The tilt angle of cholesterol was defined as the angle between the bilayer normal , and the vector connecting the head group site to the tail site that is directly attached to the sterol body . To remove fast reorientations not necessarily indicating a flip - flop , the time series were filtered by applying a running average over 10 ns before counting the number of flip - flop events . For the deter - mination of the exchange ratios of lipids between the domains , 2 small 1 nm wide slabs were defined in the middle of both the L o and L d phase , based on the plateaus in the composition profiles ( Fig . 2 B ) . An exchange event was counted when a molecule at time t (cid:2) 0 appeared in the marked region of the L d phase and at time t (cid:6) (cid:7) t ( 0 (cid:4) (cid:7) t (cid:4) 4 (cid:3) s ) in the marked region of the L o phase or visa versa . The exchange rate per unit length is then defined as the total amount of exchange events observed , divided by the time window of the analyzed trajectory and the Risselada and Marrink www . pnas . org / cgi / content / short / 0807527105 1 of 4 dimension of the simulation box in the direction along the domain interface . The values reported in the main manuscript are averaged over the exchange rates in the 2 directions . Analysis of Domain Area and Perimeter . To compute the domain area and perimeter of the L o phase , the following procedure was used to identify the L o phase . The phosphate beads of diC 16 - PC in either one of the 2 monolayers were projected on top of a 2D grid with a grid size of 0 . 5 (cid:8) 0 . 5 nm . Each grid point falling within a radius of 0 . 4 nm of the projected bead was marked as a domain element . A cluster algorithm based on the direct edge contact between 2 domain grid elements was used to subsequently identify the connectivity of the system . The L o phase is defined as being the biggest cluster of connected grid elements . A perimeter element is defined as each element of the cluster which has (cid:4) 4 neighbors belonging to the same cluster . The criteria used in this algorithm such as the grid size and the radius of the overlap circle were optimized empirically by overlapping the identified L o domain with the real structure . The area of the L o domain is defined as the total number of grid elements multiplied by the area of a grid element . The perimeter / area ratio ( Fig . 4 C ) is defined as the number of perimeter grid elements dived by the total number of grid elements in the L o domain . The overlap is determined by counting the number of corresponding grid elements of the L o domain in each mono - layer . The overlap fraction is defined as the total number of corresponding grid elements divided by the average number of grid elements of the 2 L o domains . At the start of the simulation , the overlap fraction is 0 . 75 , corresponding to the expectation value for completely uncoupled monolayer leaflets . The final overlap fraction is close to 0 . 85 . The clustering procedure was also used to identify the cholesterol cluster size distribution ( Fig . 3 B , Inset ) . The random distribution , used for comparison , was obtained from a simulation of a 2D hard sphere fluid with an overall density equivalent to that of cholesterol in the raft phase . Analysis of Line Tension . The domain line tension was estimated from the shape fluctuations of the perimeter of the L o phase ( Figs . 4 A and B ) . From the work of Esposito et al . ( 5 ) , it was shown that the line tension (cid:4) for a stable domain can be estimated as (cid:4) (cid:2) 3 kTR 0 / 4 (cid:5) (cid:1) ( (cid:7) r y ) 2 (cid:2) , with (cid:7) r y (cid:2) r y (cid:3) (cid:1) r y (cid:2) and R 0 (cid:2) 1 2 A / L x . Here r y denotes the distance between a point on the perimeter and the center of the L o domain measured along the direction perpendicular to the domain interface . The brackets represent an average over all perimeter points . A is the average area of the domain , and L x the simulation box length in the direction along the domain boundary . Because we calculated the fluctuations of the perimeter for each of the 2 monolayers independently , the line tension obtained by this method as reported in the main manuscript is the line tension for a single monolayer . An independent measure of the line tension was obtained from the pressure difference between the 2 lateral membrane directions ( 6 ) . For a percolating domain along the x direction , the line tension is given by (cid:4) (cid:2) 1 2 L x L z ( P b (cid:3) P yy ) where P b (cid:2) P xx (cid:2) P zz denotes the pressure in the bulk water and P yy is the pressure tensor component along the domain interface . Assuming independent fluctuations of the domains in both monolayers , the line tension per monolayer interface is 0 . 5 (cid:4) . Both estimates of the line tension were found to be equivalent within the statistical error . Analysis of Monolayer – Monolayer Surface Tension . The surface tension driving the L o domain – domain coupling was estimated from the probability distribution P ( (cid:7) A ) of the mismatch area (cid:7) A (cid:2) ( 1 (cid:3) (cid:6) ) A 0 between the 2 domains , with (cid:6) denoting the overlap fraction ( see Analysis of Domain Area and Perimeter , above ) and A 0 ( (cid:2) 313 nm 2 ) the equilibrium L o domain area . The histogram was constructed from the fluctuations in the area overlap fraction over the last 10 (cid:3) s of the simulation ( after macroscopic phase separation had occurred ) . The resolution for distinction of 2 nearest states was chosen to be 0 . 01 overlap fraction . Assuming that , for large mismatch areas , the dominant contribution to the free energy of the system arises from the surface tension (cid:7) between the L o and L d phases , we can write P ( (cid:7) A ) (cid:9) e (cid:3) (cid:7) (cid:7) A . Fitting ln P in the regime of a large mismatch area ( Fig . 4 D ) gives a surface tension (cid:7) (cid:2) 0 . 15 (cid:10) 0 . 05 kT nm (cid:3) 2 . Error Estimates . The statistical error in the structural and dynamic properties presented in the main manuscript was assessed by using a block averaging procedure , considering blocks of 500 ns as independent . The last 4 (cid:3) s were used for the analysis . Together with the separation of the results for both monolayers , 16 measures were obtained on which the standard error estimate was based . Statistical errors in the case of the composition , the order parameters , the area / lipid , and the thickness are small , comparable to the size of the symbols in Fig . 2 B and C . In the calculation of the local lateral lipid diffusion constants the nonlocal nature of the diffusive process introduces a systematic error . The size of this error ( displayed in Fig . 2 D ) was estimated from the spread of values obtained within a specific slab . For the flip - flop rate no accurate error bars could be derived , especially toward and inside the L o phase , because of the limited number of events observed . The flip - flop profile in Fig . 2 D is therefore of more qualitative nature . The error estimates for the line and surface tensions are also based on a division of the simulation trajectory , in this case by using somewhat larger block lengths of 1 (cid:3) s . The choice of the exact resolution with which the raft - like phase and perimeter were characterized proved insignificant compared to the spread in values obtained for the individual blocks . 1 . MarrinkSJ , RisseladaHJ , YeﬁmovS , TielemanDP , deVriesAH ( 2007 ) TheMARTINIforce ﬁeld : Coarse grained model for biomolecular simulations J Phys Chem B 111 : 7812 – 7824 . 2 . Feller SE , Gawrisch K , MacKerell AD , Jr ( 2002 ) Polyunsaturated fatty acids in lipid bilayers : Intrinsicandenvironmentalcontributionstotheiruniquephysicalproperties J Am Chem Soc 124 : 318 – 326 . 3 . Marrink SJ , de Vries AH , Harroun TA , Katsaras J , Wassall SR ( 2008 ) Cholesterol shows preference for the interior of polyunsaturated lipid . J Am Chem Soc 130 : 10 – 11 . 4 . Humphrey W , Dalke A , Schulten K ( 1996 ) VMD - Visual Molecular Dynamics . J Mol Graphics 14 : 33 – 38 . 5 . EspositoC , etal . ( 2007 ) Flickerspectroscopyofthermallipidbilayerdomainboundary ﬂuctuations . Biophys J 93 : 3169 – 3181 . 6 . Tolpekina TV , den Otter WK , Briels WJ ( 2004 ) Simulations of stable pores in mem - branes : System size dependence and line tension . J Chem Phys 121 : 8014 – 8020 . Risselada and Marrink www . pnas . org / cgi / content / short / 0807527105 2 of 4 Fig . S1 . TwocholesterolpopulationsinL d phasedifferinlateralmobility . Thelateralmeansquareddisplacement ( MSD ) ofcholesterolmoleculesintheL d phase is shown as a function of time , separated into the contribution from cholesterol molecules embedded in between the monolayer leaﬂets ( ‘‘interior’’ ) and cholesterolmoleculesorientedwiththeirheadgroupneartheinterface ( ‘‘normal’’ ) . FromtheslopeoftheMSDcurves ( solidlines ) , thelateraldiffusioncoefﬁcient is found to be D interior (cid:2) 41 (cid:10) 3 (cid:8) 10 (cid:3) 8 cm 2 (cid:1) s (cid:3) 1 for the interior population , and D normal (cid:2) 14 (cid:10) 1 (cid:8) 10 (cid:3) 8 cm 2 (cid:1) s (cid:3) 1 for the normal population . The average rate is D total (cid:2) 20 (cid:10) 1 (cid:8) 10 (cid:3) 8 cm 2 (cid:1) s (cid:3) 1 , dominated by the larger fraction of the normal population ( normal : interior (cid:1) 4 : 1 ) . The value of D normal is close to that obtained for the diC 18 : 2 - PC lipids in the L d phase ( compare Fig . 2 D ) , implying that the faster average mobility of cholesterol is because of the small interior population . The circles and diamonds indicate individual data points for the interior and normal cholesterol populations , separated into 2 sets arising from the 2 interfacial slabs ( normal ) or 2 interior slabs ( interior ) that were used for the analysis . Risselada and Marrink www . pnas . org / cgi / content / short / 0807527105 3 of 4 (cid:2)(cid:2) (cid:2)(cid:2) (cid:2)(cid:2) (cid:2)(cid:2) Fig . S2 . Cholesterol is required to induce formation of large domains . ( A ) A binary diC 16 - PC / diC 18 : 2 - PC 3 : 1 mixture shows no domain formation , although the mixing is nonrandom . The domain sizes are similar to those present in the ternary mixture 1 (cid:3) s after the quench ( see Fig . 1 B ) . Note that both domains remain in the ﬂuid phase at T (cid:2) 295 K ( H . J . R . and S . J . M . , unpublished work ) . ( B and C ) Complete phase separation is observed in the diC 16 - PC / diC 18 : 2 - PC / cholesterol 0 . 28 : 0 . 42 : 0 . 3 ( B ) and 0 . 42 : 0 . 28 : 0 . 3 ( C ) ternary mixtures at T (cid:2) 295 K . Green is used for the saturated lipids and red for the polyunsaturated lipids . Cholesterol is depicted in gray with a white ( B ) or gray ( C ) hydroxyl group . Risselada and Marrink www . pnas . org / cgi / content / short / 0807527105 4 of 4