ISSN 1302 - 9657 Contents Knowledge management in engineering design : personalization and codification Chris McMahon , Alistair Lowe , Steve Culley 000 Ontology - based systematization of functional knowledge Yoshinobu Kitamura and Riichiro Mizoguchi 000 Techniques for the integration of expert knowledge into the development of environmentally sound products Sebastian Leibrecht , Tri Ngoc Pham Van , Reiner Anderl 000 Knowledge - based support of rapid product development Dieter Roller , Oliver Eck , Stavros Dalakakis 000 Product data management system - based support for engineering project management Samir Mesihovic , Johan Malmqvist , Peter Pikosz 000 Plastics design : integrating TRIZ creativity and semantic knowledge portals Gaetano Cascini and Paolo Rissone 000 P syc h i a t r y and C li n i c a l P syc hopha r m a c o l og y Psychiatr y and Clinical Psychopharmacology Psychiatr y and Clinical Psychopharmacology SUBMIT YOUR PAPER TODAY AN OPEN ACCESS JOURNAL Submit your paper at : www . edmgr . com / bcp ISSN 1302 - 9657 Contents Knowledge management in engineering design : personalization and codification Chris McMahon , Alistair Lowe , Steve Culley 000 Ontology - based systematization of functional knowledge Yoshinobu Kitamura and Riichiro Mizoguchi 000 Techniques for the integration of expert knowledge into the development of environmentally sound products Sebastian Leibrecht , Tri Ngoc Pham Van , Reiner Anderl 000 Knowledge - based support of rapid product development Dieter Roller , Oliver Eck , Stavros Dalakakis 000 Product data management system - based support for engineering project management Samir Mesihovic , Johan Malmqvist , Peter Pikosz 000 Plastics design : integrating TRIZ creativity and semantic knowledge portals Gaetano Cascini and Paolo Rissone 000 P syc h i a t r y and C li n i c a l P syc hopha r m a c o l og y Psychiatr y and Clinical Psychopharmacology Psychiatr y and Clinical Psychopharmacology Why should you publish your research open access in Psychiatry and Clinical Psychopharmacology ? • Your research gains a recognized stamp of quality . Psychiatry and Clinical Psychopharmacology uses the robust peer review processes of all Taylor & Francis journals . This assures readers that the journal only includes valuable new work . • Greater potential to reach a wide audience . Your published article can be discovered and read for free by anyone – researchers , practitioners and policy - makers – anywhere in the world . • You will follow your funder’s requirements . By submitting to the journal , you will meet any mandates your funder has put in place . • You retain the choice of how people can reuse your article . We recommend the CC - BY publishing licence . However if you prefer – and your funder agrees – you can choose an alternative creative commons licence . • Your paper will receive the care and attention it deserves . Our professional production team will ensure your paper proceeds smoothly to publication . You can look forward to taking full advantage of final publication . AIMS & SCOPE Psychiatry and Clinical Psychopharmacology is published on behalf of the Turkish Association of Psychopharmacology . The journal publishes high quality research of interest to specialists , residents and scientists in psychiatry , psychology , neurology , pharmacology , molecular biology , genetics , physiology , neurochemistry and related sciences . Topics of current interest to clinical , experimental and basic scientists are published in critical subjects , such as psychopharmacology , psychiatry and behavioral science . Psychiatry and Clinical Psychopharmacology effectively bridges the gap between basic science and clinical application . EDITOR - IN - CHIEF : Mesut Cetin Istanbul , Turkey www . tandfonline . com / tbcp 2015 Impact Factor : 0 . 367 * * ©Thomson Reuters , Journal Citation Reports ® 2016 Psychiatry and Clinical Psychopharmacology AN OPEN ACCESS JOURNAL