r Academy of Management Perspectives 2015 , Vol . 29 , No . 2 , 218 – 236 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 5465 / amp . 2013 . 0017 A R T I C L E S RULE - BASED REASONING FOR UNDERSTANDING OPPORTUNITY EVALUATION DAVID W . WILLIAMS University of Tennessee MATTHEW S . WOOD Baylor University Much research on opportunity in entrepreneurship and related fields centers on the origin of opportunities and the actions individuals take to exploit opportunities . How - ever , our understanding of how individuals evaluate opportunities remains fragmented , with research spanning fields of study and using different terminology for similar concepts . Building on recent research suggesting that rule - based reasoning underpins how individuals evaluate opportunities , we integrate and synthesize the literature on opportunity evaluation and suggest rule - based reasoning as an overarching theoretical framework to understand opportunity evaluation across fields of study . Specifically , we illuminate how environmental factors , opportunity - related cues , and individual dif - ferences coalesce as one uses these factors as judgment rules to discern the personal attractiveness of an opportunity . Further , we explain how managers and entrepreneurs individuate opportunities , demonstrating why different individuals apply different rules and thus view similar opportunities differently . We conclude with implications of rule - based reasoning for opportunity evaluation across a broad set of management disciplines and offer directions for future research . Although the concept of opportunity is central to the field of entrepreneurship ( Short , Ketchen , Shook , & Ireland , 2010 ) , the study of opportunity spans a significant spectrum of management research . In strategic management , scholars have explored inter - preting external issues as opportunities versus threats and the link between opportunity and strategic actions ( Dutton & Jackson , 1987 ; Jackson & Dutton , 1988 ) as well as the notion of strategic opportunity ( Denrell , Fang , & Winter , 2003 ) . In international business , cross - border opportunity seeking is a common theme ( Mahnke , Venzin , & Zahra , 2007 ; Oviatt & McDougall , 1994 , 2005 ) . Within the context of technology and innovation management , new product development and innovation opportunities are often thought of as real options to be considered over time ( Adner & Kapoor , 2010 ; Bowman & Hurry , 1993 ; Kogut & Kulatilaka , 2001 ) , and research informs us that some technological environments are more conducive to opportunity than others ( Zahra , 1996 , 2008 ) . Intriguingly , across these different areas of re - search the notion of how individuals , teams , or organizations evaluate the worthiness of oppor - tunities , once identified , discovered , or created , remains fragmented , inconsistently treated , and sometimes omitted altogether . For example , strate - gic issue interpretation research shows that managers readily identify issues as opportunities , but scholars could not link such interpretations to concrete strategic action , despite the potential of the opportunities The authors would like to thank T . Russell Crook , Lane Morris , and Alex McKelvie for excellent feedback on earlier versions of this manuscript as well as Kyle Turner for his efforts . We would also like to thank AMP Editors Timothy Devinney and Donald Siegel as well as the anonymous reviewers for their insightful and de - velopmental comments . 218 Copyright of the Academy of Management , all rights reserved . Contents may not be copied , emailed , posted to a listserv , or otherwise transmitted without the copyright holder ’ s express written permission . Users may print , download , or email articles for individual use only . ( Chattopadhyay , Glick , & Huber , 2001 ; Thomas , Clark , & Gioia , 1993 ) . This line of research leaves open the question of whether the opportunity , once interpreted as such , is worthy of pursuing . Similarly , work in in - ternationalization suggests that many cross - border op - portunities become known to organizations but go unrealized despite their seemingly high potential ( Ellis , 2011 ; Liesch & Knight , 1999 ) . Finally , a major stream of research in real options theory debates how to over - come the failure of missing technological opportunities or reconsidering miscalculations in prior opportunity evaluations ( Brockner , 1992 ; Staw , 1981 ; Ziedonis , 2007 ) . The broad range of research outlined thus far suggests that opportunity evaluation , defined as assessing the attractiveness ( for me or my firm ) of introducing new goods , services , or business models to one or more markets ( Haynie , Shepherd , & McMullen , 2009 ) , is an important part of what managers and entrepreneurs do . However , it appears that opportu - nity evaluation has not received the attention it deserves given its importance in domains such as strategy formulation , internationalization , and tech - nological innovation . Even in the entrepreneurship literature , where op - portunity represents a cornerstone of research efforts ( Short et al . , 2010 ) , opportunity evaluation research lags behind other areas of opportunity - focused re - search such as opportunity exploitation ( Davidsson , 2004 ) and the ways in which opportunities come into existence ( Alvarez & Barney , 2007 ; Shane & Venkataraman , 2000 ) . However , publication trends suggest a growing interest in the role of opportunity evaluation as a critical bridge between opportunities and the actions individuals or firms take to exploit them ( e . g . , Haynie et al . , 2009 ; McMullen & Shepherd , 2006 ; Wood & McKelvie , 2015 ; Wood & Williams , 2014 ) . These developments suggest that an increased understanding of how individuals and firms evaluate opportunities provides paths forward across a range of disciplines in management . In that spirit , we integrate and synthesize research on opportunity evaluation , using the lens of rule - based reasoning — one type of cognitive structure individuals use to process information from the environment and give it form and meaning ( Hastie , 2001 ; Walsh , 1995 ) — as a means of organizing ex - tant research on opportunity evaluation . We draw heavily on the entrepreneurship literature due to the prominence of the study of opportunity in this field before cycling back to discuss what these conceptualizations and empirical findings imply for the future relevance of opportunity evaluation across the broader set of management disciplines . FROM OPPORTUNITY ORIGINATION TO OPPORTUNITY EVALUATION To address the process of opportunity evaluation , we begin with a brief primer on the origin of oppor - tunities . 1 Early thinking conceptualized opportunities as objective phenomena available for discovery by enterprising individuals ( Gaglio & Katz , 2001 ; Kirzner , 1979 ; Shane , 2003 ) . More recent formulations have advanced the idea that opportunities are subjective phenomena ( Foss , Klein , Kor , & Mahoney , 2008 ) that may be created ( Alvarez & Barney , 2007 ) , enacted ( Wood & McKinley , 2010 ) , or imagined ( Klein , 2008 ) . Important differences exist between the objective discovery and subjective creation approaches . 2 Discovery theorists typically assert that opportunities are out there to be found and exploited . Therefore , entrepreneurship unfolds as enterprising individuals move through three distinct phases : ( 1 ) recognizing , ( 2 ) evaluating , and ( 3 ) exploiting opportunity ( Ardichvili , Cardozo , & Ray , 2003 ; Shane & Venkataraman , 2000 ) . By contrast , the subjective creation approach argues that opportunities are idiosyncratic to the individual because they emerge from entrepreneurs ’ visions of possible future states and actions trying to turn these visions into reality ( Alvarez & Barney , 2007 ; Sarasvathy , 2001 ) . This iterative and socially com - plex process leads to exploiting or abandoning the opportunity depending on the degree to which un - certainty can be reduced . Despite important differences , these perspectives share significant commonality ( Dimov , 2011 ) . In both approaches , individuals objectify opportunities such that an opportunity is seen as an entity outside the mind ( Wood & McKinley , 2010 ) . When an opportu - nity is recognized , objectification happens early in 1 The opportunity construct is elusive ( Dimov , 2011 ) , leading some scholars to suggest that the field move to different constructs such as venture idea ( Samuelsson & Davidsson , 2009 ) or make the action the unit of analysis ( Foss & Klein , 2012 ) . Due to the overarching use of the term opportunity in extant literature , we maintain its use here so that we are consistent with the literatures we synthesize . 2 A deep discussion of the ontological and epistemological differences between the creation and discovery perspectives is beyond the scope of our topic . For those interested , we point to a spirited debate in the Academy of Management Review ( January 2013 , Volume 38 , Issue 1 ) . Our focus here is on areas of commonality between the perspectives as they pertain to the topic of opportunity evaluation . 2015 219 Williams and Wood the process as alert entrepreneurs identify circum - stances that represent opportunity ( De Carolis & Saparito , 2006 ) . When an entrepreneur creates an opportunity , objectification happens later as con - sensus builds around the viability of subjectively represented ideas , and they take on the quality of an external reality ( Baker & Nelson , 2005 ) . Once objectification occurs , the entrepreneur ’ s thinking shifts from cognitions about what the oppor - tunity entails to considerations of whether or not it is desirable and feasible for me ( or my firm ) to pursue the opportunity . In the discovery context , this happens by assimilating and filtering information in attempts to predict the future ( Kirzner , 1979 ; Shane , 2003 ) , whereas in the subjective creation context , entrepre - neurs focus on the elements of the environment they can control ( Alvarez & Barney , 2007 ; Sarasvathy , 2008 ) . Once individuals objectify opportunities , they eval - uate these opportunities for personal attractiveness as they decide whether or not to invest time and money in them . Shane and Venkataraman ( 2000 ) explicitly identified evaluation as a phase in the entrepreneurial discovery process , but the evaluation of opportunities is also critical in the creation approach , as Foss and Klein ( 2012 , p . 79 ) asserted that “ entrepreneurial judgments ” are key drivers of action and involve “ evaluating opportunities and deciding on which resources need to be assembled to realize an opportu - nity . ” Taken together , these lines of thinking point to the centrality of opportunity evaluation in both objec - tive and subjective approaches , and we focus our efforts on synthesizing what researchers have learned about the phenomena of opportunity evaluation . THEORETICAL UNDERPINNINGS OF OPPORTUNITY EVALUATION Opportunity evaluation is a process of ambiguity reduction whereby an individual increasingly defines the subjective elements of circumstances and events ( e . g . , opportunity ) such that they are seen ( or not ) as a desirable and feasible future reality ( Dimov , 2010 ; Shepherd , McMullen , & Jennings , 2007 ) . 3 Desirability and feasibility assessments can take a third - person form ( is this an opportunity for someone ? ) or a first - person form ( is this an opportunity for me ? ) ( McMullen & Shepherd , 2006 ) . Researchers tend to focus on opportunity evaluation as a first - person phenomena ( e . g . , Mitchell & Shepherd , 2010 ; Wood & Williams , 2014 ) , as first - person evaluations are most tightly linked to entrepreneurial action ( McMullen & Shepherd , 2006 ) . Accordingly , we adopt Haynie et al . ’ s ( 2009 ) view that evaluating whether to pursue an opportunity is “ not focused on whether the op - portunity is ‘ attractive to someone ’— but instead fo - cused on whether the opportunity is ‘ attractive to me ’ in the context of existing knowledge , skills , and abilities ” ( p . 338 ) . Thus , opportunity evaluations are future - focused judgments ( or a series of judg - ments ) where obscure events , outcomes , and con - sequences are inferred ( Hastie , 2001 ) such that one may discern the attractiveness of the currently considered opportunity . Entrepreneurs interpret opportunities as future - focused judgments by translating data into understanding by applying knowledge - based op - portunity templates to decide on a course of action ( Barreto , 2012 ) . Klein ( 2008 ) further asserted that interpretative judgments about the possibility of taking entrepreneurial action are the essence of opportunities ( i . e . , judgments are opportunities ) . Specifically , when considering circumstances ob - jectified as opportunity , individuals will reach dif - ferent conclusions , “ even if they share the same objectives and the data are presented to them in exactly the same manner , because they have access to different information , interpret the data in dif - ferent ways , and so on ( Lachmann , 1977 ; Casson & Wadeson , 2007 ) ” ( Foss & Klein , 2012 , pp . 78 – 79 ) . This suggests that opportunity evaluation is an in - terpretive process that results in entrepreneurs evaluating similar circumstances differently . While there may be many explanations for why and how this happens , a promising line of research suggests that entrepreneurs reach different con - clusions about similar circumstances because they develop different mental templates or images of opportunity ( Baron , 2006 ; Dutton & Jackson , 1987 ; Fiske & Taylor , 1991 ; Krueger , 2000 ) . Individuals use experience , education , and personal dis - positions to develop images of ideal opportunity as well as comparison images stimulated by the cir - cumstances under consideration ( Baron & Ensley , 2006 ; Mitchell & Shepherd , 2010 ) . In that way , entrepreneurs compare cognitive images of ideal and actual opportunity circumstances , and these comparisons act as perceptual screens to discern the 3 Assessments of desirability and feasibility are akin to the construction of preferences in behavioral decision theory ( e . g . , Slovic , 1995 ) and are frequently used in the consumer choice literature ( e . g . , Bettman et al . , 1998 ) . Thus , the rules we discuss below are analogous to attributes that may be weighed against each other in the construction of prefer - ences . Parallel with our arguments , construction of these preferences remains highly contingent on context . 220 May Academy of Management Perspectives personal attractiveness of an opportunity . Cognitive science research suggests a number of ways that individuals construct and compare mental images ( cf . Hastie , 2001 ) . However , individuals gravitate toward specific mental representations informed by experience and knowledge ( Hastie & Pennington , 2000 ) , and thus rule - based reasoning ( Smith & DeCoster , 1998 ) is a key mechanism by which entrepreneurs form mental representations of op - portunities ( Wood , Williams , & Gr´egoire , 2012 ) . Hence , rule - based reasoning serves as a useful framework for understanding how entrepreneurs evaluate the attractiveness of opportunities . THE RULE - BASED APPROACH TO OPPORTUNITY EVALUATION Complex decisions in uncertain and ambiguous situations , such as opportunity evaluation , neces - sitate a systematic way to think about and frame the decision ( Dimov , 2010 ; Smith & Sloman , 1994 ) . Cognitive science research finds that rule - based reasoning is a mechanism that allows individuals to organize information and frame decision problems by deliberately engaging in mental simulations of cause and effect relationships ( e . g . , reasoning rules ) . These simulations are derived from one ’ s knowl - edge base ( e . g . , lessons from education , day - to - day experiences , and past interactions with others ) and are used to conduct formal analyses and make probabilistic projections about the future ( Sloman , 1996 ; Smith & DeCoster , 1998 ; Sun , 1995 ) . Hence , we define rule - based reasoning within the context of opportunity evaluation as individuals ’ effortful engagement in cause – effect cognitive computations to form first - person beliefs about the degree to which introducing a new product or service to the market is desirable and feasible . They do so by cognitively comparing the degree to which images of current circumstances or events fit with images of ideal opportunity that they develop over time . One implication of the rule - based reasoning ap - proach is that opportunities are not “ evenly ap - pealing ” ( Dimov , 2010 , p . 1124 ) because individuals develop different mental pictures of what circum - stances mean for them in terms of future action . For example , many entrepreneurs espouse that an at - tractive entrepreneurial opportunity involves a product or service that clearly “ takes away pain ” or “ solves an urgent problem ” ( Krippendorff , 2011 ) . Thus , entrepreneurs following this reasoning logic would consciously consider the extent to which their image of a potential opportunity ( i . e . , current events and circumstances ) compares with the pain / problem image characteristic of their ideal oppor - tunity . The idea is that entrepreneurs derive their opportunity evaluation judgments , in part , by rea - soning that when an opportunity clearly solves an urgent problem or takes away [ a consumer ’ s ] pain , it matches their image of an ideal opportunity , and thus is considered more desirable and feasible for them personally . This line of thinking parallels ex - tant entrepreneurship research asserting that fo - cused analytic reasoning underpins the evaluation of market opportunities ( Kickul , Gundry , Barbosa , & Whitcanack , 2009 ) . Origin , Evolution , and Application of Rules Rule - based reasoning centers on the notion that individuals interpret the meaning of new infor - mation using symbolically represented and in - tentionally accessed knowledge in the form of normative rules ( Sloman , 1996 ; Smith & DeCoster , 2000 ) . The origins , evolution , and application of rules of reasoning have been addressed by a range of scholars in fields such as psychology , economics , and artificial intelligence . The general consensus is that rules are derived from learned and lived expe - rience and range from formal axioms ( like those of logic ) to informal considerations ( e . g . , thinking of people as unique instead of stereotypes ) ( Chaiken & Trope , 1999 ) . Rules are frequently conceptualized as analytical knowledge structures used to make logical infer - ences and take the form of “ if s 1 , then if a 1 , then c 1 , where s represents a setting condition , a represents an antecedent , and c is a consequent ” ( Frye , Zelazo , & Palfai , 1995 , p . 486 ) . Making the connections be - tween settings , antecedents , and consequences requires one to apply lessons learned from single or repeat experiences where the knowledge gained is integrated into the memory system and then re - called later to analytically guide processing of in - formation relevant to the original experience . Rules do not have to come from direct experience but can be socially learned from “ other individuals , the media , or other cultural sources ” ( Smith & DeCoster , 2000 , p . 112 ) , and this includes collaboration with experts in the domain ( Golding & Rosenbloom , 1996 ) . Because they are inferences made from past experience , or learning from the experiences of others and applied to the circumstances at hand , rules are subjective , contextual , and interpretive . With these insights in mind , we define opportu - nity evaluation rules as knowledge - driven cognitive 2015 221 Williams and Wood representations of likely cause – effect relationship outcomes that , when activated , serve as perceptual filters that individuals use to discern the personal attractiveness of pursuing an opportunity . In a weak form , an evaluation rule is a bundle of inferences about anticipated future occurrences derived from knowledge that is structurally similar to current cir - cumstances but not directly related to the specific event or situation at hand ( Abelson , 1981 ) . In a strong form , an evaluation rule involves expectancies about the hierarchical order , direction , and magni - tude of future outcomes calculated from expert domain knowledge that is directly related to oppor - tunity circumstances ( Larrick , Nisbett , & Morgan , 1993 ) . 4 A concrete example of this can be found in Autio and colleagues ’ ( 2013 ) recent study of opportunity evaluation in an online community . Specifically , they quote an entrepreneur as saying , “ I evaluated the options [ i . e . , opportunity ] to achieve financial return from doing something like selling this product . But I found it wasn ’ t worth it ; it was just too time consuming ” ( p . 1363 ) . This entrepreneur evoked a decision rule that a potential opportunity must meet a specific financial return threshold , one that the opportunity he considered did not meet , specifically because it would take too much of his time . This suggests that the entrepreneur has developed an evaluation rule around financial return in the sense that he has a cognitive image of the minimum financial return needed to make it worth it for him to pursue the opportunity given the time required . Clearly this entrepreneur ’ s minimum return threshold may differ from those of others , but the financial return rule is likely evoked by entrepreneurs broadly as they engage in rule - based reasoning to make probabilistic projections about the future . Implicit in our discussion thus far is that rules can encompass a great many possible cause – effect rela - tionships . However , rule application is stimulated by specific situational cues , and thus only a few rules would typically matter for a given opportunity ( Abelson , 1981 ; Johnson - Laird , 1983 ; Sloman , 1998 ) . This suggests that while a person may contain a breadth of knowledge that could be used to develop rules ( i . e . , imagine many cause - and - effect relationships ) , it is only those rules that are the most salient given current circumstances that will be ap - plied . In that way , it is perceptions of circumstances and events that limit the set of possible imagined configurations that serve as rules in making proba - bilistic projections about the opportunity ( Sloman , 1996 ; Sun , 1995 ) . The implication is that as entrepreneurs discern whether or not their business idea is viable , they attend to readily available sources of opportunity - related information ( Fiet , 2007 ) , and this in - formation stimulates rule application . Therefore , entrepreneurs using rule - based reasoning will re - act in predictable ways to informational cues that map onto the judgment rules they have formed ( McMullen & DeCastro , 2000 ; Wood & Williams , 2014 ) . In that spirit , our review of the literature suggests that a synthesis of rule - based cues rests on two broad categories : ( 1 ) cues associated with the environmental context surrounding the opportu - nity , and ( 2 ) cues associated with the structural aspects of the opportunity . However , in each case ( i . e . , cues related to the environment and / or the opportunity ) , individual differences influence the utility and relevance of each cue . Table 1 provides exemplars from each of these categories , and Figure 1 highlights the synthesis of these different categories using rule - based reasoning . RULE CUES AND OPPORTUNITY EVALUATION Environmental Cues Perceptions of the external environment are pow - erful determinants of individual cognition and ac - tion . Sociologists ( Giddens , 1984 ) , psychologists ( Gibson , 1960 ) , and organization theorists ( Aldrich , 1990 ) have all concluded that one ’ s interactions with the external environment ( e . g . , people , social struc - tures , and organizations ) and knowledge of others ’ interactions ( e . g . , experiences , events , and trends ) stimulate and constrain perceptions of what one might be able to achieve within the immediate en - vironment . Rule - based reasoning integrates these perspectives by asserting that past experiences co - alesce into decision rules that guide future judg - ments . As individuals interact with their environment , they form mental images of the envi - ronment ( Van Overwalle , 2009 ) , which they then 4 Rules are not heuristics used in the automatic asso - ciative reasoning system ( see limitations section ) . Heu - ristics are automatically evoked irrespective of context ( Kahneman , Slovic , & Tversky , 1982 ) . Conversely , rules are applied effortfully based on contextual relevance ( Sloman , 1996 ) . Thus , heuristic - driven judgments result in predictable outcomes irrespective of context , whereas rule - based judgments vary across contexts ( Masicampo & Baumeister , 2008 ) . 222 May Academy of Management Perspectives compare with knowledge - driven ideal images ( e . g . , rules ) to discern a path of action ( Smith & DeCoster , 2000 ) . The cognitive comparisons made between the actual and ideal images embody rule application ( see Figure 1 ) . As such , scanning the environment ( Rus - sell & Ward , 1982 ) is considered an initiating step in rule - based reasoning as individuals attend to in - formation cues and engage in top - down coherence processes ( Thagard , 2000 ) to make inferences about the meaning of those cues . Specifically , individuals use commonalities and differences between their images of the actual and ideal environments to make probabilistic predictions about what can be achieved given current circumstances . The idea of scanning the environment to identify cues about opportunities spans decades of research in strategic management . Early attempts to un - derstand drivers of firm performance , for example , often focused on the external environment ( e . g . , Porter , 1980 ) and the fit between the firm ’ s strategy and opportunities within its environment ( Penrose , 1959 ) . Building on this idea , the ubiquitous SWOT ( strengths , weaknesses , opportunities , threats ) analysis ( Andrews , 1971 , 1980 ) suggests that man - agers evaluate which external factors represent opportunities or threats to the organization . This broader external analysis conceptualization is also evident at the intersection of organization ecology and entrepreneurship ( cf . Aldrich & Wiedenmayer , 1993 ) . Organization ecologists study the conditions un - der which organizations emerge , grow , decline , and die by focusing on trends within specific industries or niches . On the macro level , many studies dem - onstrate that indicators such as prior founding rates , dissolution rates , and density levels relate to sub - sequent foundings of new ventures ( Baum & Oliver , 1996 ; Budros , 1994 ; Carroll & Hannan , 1989 ; Hannan & Freeman , 1987 , 1988 ; Lomi , 1995 ) . This has led some to speculate that hot industries ( i . e . , those with high founding rates ) entice entre - preneurs to enter the market ( Hannan & Carroll , 1992 ) , while dying industries ( i . e . , those with a large number of exits ) “ signal an environment noxious to entrepreneurs ” ( Singh & Lumsden , 1990 , p . 164 ) . Thus , if growth is part of an entrepreneur ’ s ideal TABLE 1 Recent Examples of Rule - Based Opportunity Evaluation Cues and Expectancies 5 Environmental decision cue Opportunity evaluation expectancy generated Example Window of opportunity Evaluators prefer opportunities with longer time horizons in which to act ( wide window ) . Choi & Shepherd ( 2004 ) Number of opportunities Multiple alternative opportunities result in more positive evaluations . Mitchell & Shepherd ( 2010 ) Industry rates Increases in the number of firms exiting the industry lead to more negative evaluations . Wood et al . ( 2014 ) Technological change Greater rates of technological change lead to reduced opportunity evaluations . McKelvie et al . ( 2011 ) Opportunity decision cue Opportunity evaluation expectancy generated Example Magnitude The greater the magnitude or potential value , the more attractive the opportunity . Dutton et al . ( 1989 ) Novelty Greater opportunity novelty leads to more positive evaluations . Wood & Williams ( 2014 ) Rarity Greater information rarity leads to more attractive opportunities . Haynie et al . ( 2009 ) Perception of opportunity risk The larger the perceived magnitude of loss ( i . e . , risk ) , the less attractive the opportunity . Mullins & Forlani ( 2005 ) Individual difference Opportunity evaluation expectancy generated Example Affect or emotions Greater positive ( and some negative ) emotions lead to more positive opportunity evaluations . Welpe et al . ( 2012 ) Illusion of control Greater illusions of control lead to more positive opportunity evaluations . Keh et al . ( 2002 ) Fear of failure High fear of failure leads to more negative opportunity evaluations . Mitchell & Shepherd ( 2010 ) Prior ( related ) knowledge The greater the opportunity - related knowledge , the more attractive the opportunity . Haynie et al . ( 2009 ) 5 Table 1 is not intended to be all inclusive . Rather , it illustrates recent advances in opportunity evaluation research . 2015 223 Williams and Wood industry image ( i . e . , a hot industry ) , comparing the actual industry situation to the ideal image primes the application of a rule that high founding rates must be present for the opportunity environment to be deemed attractive . Indeed , recent empirical work tests the assertion that environmental - level data influence individu - als ’ thinking about opportunities . McKelvie , Haynie , and Gustavsson ( 2011 ) found that the rate and predictability of technological change hurt en - trepreneurs ’ opportunity evaluations . Similarly , Wood , McKelvie , and Haynie ( 2014 ) demon - strated that entrepreneurs evaluate opportunities as unfavorable in the face of high dissolution rates and high density levels , but evaluate opportuni - ties as favorable when founding rates are high . Further , the level of opportunity munificence influences individuals ’ evaluations . Mitchell and Shepherd ( 2010 ) studied how executives of tech - nology firms evaluate hypothetical opportunities and demonstrated that when executives perceive more opportunities , in general , they rate all op - portunities more favorably . Together , these findings suggest that environ - mental cues trigger the application of specific rules ( e . g . , a high rate of change indicates a weaker op - portunity environment ) that individuals use to make judgments about opportunities . These results are consistent with cognitive science research showing that individuals use intentionally accessed knowledge in the form of normative rules of reasoning ( Smith & DeCoster , 2000 ) , and parallels research on decision making that establishes that choice contexts matter and that rule content differs across different action – choice contexts ( Fischhoff , 1991 ; Payne , Bettman , & Johnson , 1993 ; Slovic , 1995 ) . 6 Opportunity Cues Building on the notion that scanning the external environment allows one to identify salient issues , strategic issue interpretation research links issue identification ( opportunities versus threats ) to action outcomes ( Chattopadhyay et al . , 2001 ; Dutton & Jackson , 1987 ) . More specifically , this work empiri - cally demonstrates that “ cognitive rules ” underpin opportunities ( Jackson & Dutton , 1988 , p . 383 ) , and rules indicate situations for which “ benefits will come by acting ” or an individual “ can gain personal advantage . ” Together , this literature applies specific labels to opportunities , such as “ positive - gain ” or FIGURE 1 Rule - Based Reasoning Framework for Opportunity Evaluation 6 We thank an anonymous reviewer for highlighting this linkage . 224 May Academy of Management Perspectives “ controllable ” ( Thomas et al . , 1993 , p . 254 ) , which increases the odds of action . Thus , the implied rule involves specific labels for sensed issues that result in more or less favorable evaluations ( e . g . , opportu - nities versus threats ) . This suggests that individuals develop rules around the characteristics of the op - portunities themselves . Along this line , entrepreneurship scholars confirm that entrepreneurs may draw on knowledge - driven rules related to a range of opportunity attributes . Not surprisingly , opportunity potential positively influ - ences individuals ’ evaluations such that a higher potential opportunity is evaluated more favorably . Prior work conceptualizes this in terms of value ( the ability of the opportunity to increase efficiency and / or effectiveness ) ( Haynie et al . , 2009 ) , return on assets invested ( Bishop & Nixon , 2006 ) , and eco - nomic viability ( Perrini , Vurro , & Costanzo , 2010 ) . Beyond opportunity potential , Wood and Williams ( 2014 ) found that two specific opportunity character - istics ( novelty and resource efficiency ) positively charge entrepreneurs ’ evaluations of opportunities . Specifically , they show that , all else being equal , entrepreneurs prefer opportunities that are more novel and / or make the best use of available resources . Con - sistent with the resource - based view ( Barney , 1991 ) , Haynie and colleagues ( 2009 ) found that entrepre - neurs rated opportunities as less attractive when they were imitable and / or unable to limit competition . Perhaps the most widely studied opportunity characteristics relate to risk and uncertainty . In in - ternationalization research , Kiss , Williams , and Houghton ( 2013 ) found that managers who perceive internationalization opportunities as less risky than objective indicators ( what they call risk bias ) find these opportunities to be more favorable ( and ulti - mately exploit them in greater numbers ) . Research in entrepreneurship parallels this concern , despite prior conceptualizations of entrepreneurs as risk seeking ( e . g . , Stewart & Roth , 2001 ) . Some opportunities are riskier than others ( Bryant , 2007 ) , and perceptions of the riskiness of a specific opportunity diminish entrepreneurs ’ evaluations of the opportunity such that when the worst - case scenario ( Wood & Williams , 2014 ) or magnitude of loss ( Mullins & Forlani , 2005 ) about a particular opportunity is high , entrepreneurs evaluate these opportunities unfavorably . In addition to risk , models of opportunity evalu - ation and entrepreneurial action ( cf . McMullen & Shepherd , 2006 ) highlight the key role of un - certainty in preventing or delaying entrepreneurial action , as entrepreneurs attempt to see through the fog of uncertainty to discern whether an opportunity makes sense for them rather than someone ( or anyone ) else . Consistent with this , McKelvie et al . ( 2011 ) drew from Milliken ’ s ( 1987 ) constructs of state , effect , and response uncertainty to demonstrate that each form of uncertainty nega - tively influences opportunity evaluations of new product development decision makers in the Swedish software industry . In sum , prior research highlights that different opportunity characteristics map onto normative judgment rules entrepreneurs have formed such that the presence , magnitude , and direction of these characteristics have positive and negative effects on opportunity evaluation . Although past research did not universally draw from rule - based reasoning to develop predictions , their findings parallel the idea that entrepreneurs think in terms of rule logic such as “ if opportunity characteristic x is present , then the personal attractiveness of this opportunity is y ” that underpins rule - based reasoning ( Frye et al . , 1995 , p . 486 ; Smith & Sloman , 1994 ) . This suggests that individuals evaluating opportunities use opportunity characteristics to develop images of actual opportunity and compare those to images of ideal opportunity ( see Figure 1 ) . These cognitive comparisons embody the application of opportunity characteristic rules and drive judgments regarding what does — and does not — represent an attractive opportunity . OPPORTUNITY EVALUATION AS AN INDIVIDUATION PROCESS Images of ideal and realized opportunities occur within the minds of individuals . As such , each in - dividual brings idiosyncratic cognitive resources to bear as he or she defines subjective elements of cir - cumstances and events ( e . g . , opportunity ) and thus develops and evokes different rules depending on personal characteristics such as levels of expertise , motivations , and goals . Building on the work of Fiske and Pavelchack ( 1986 ) , this phenomenon has been described by Wood et al . ( 2014 ) as individuating — a process by which entrepreneurs make opportunities personal by linking environmental and opportunity cues with their own preferences , knowledge , emo - tions , and so on . This suggests that evaluation rules are person - centric , as individuals interpret what each cue - rule relationship means for them and for their businesses given their idiosyncratic character - istics . The implication is that individual differences influence assessments of opportunity . Hence , we use the rule - based reasoning lens to synthesize research on the effects of stable dispositions such as risk 2015 225 Williams and Wood propensity and fear of failure as well as fluid differ - ences such as knowledge , experience , and emotion on individuals ’ evaluations of opportunities . We fo - cus on these differences because each has received significant attention in the literature , suggesting that these factors play an influential role as individuals develop and apply the knowledge structures that underpin rule - based reasoning in opportunity evaluation . Stable Personal Dispositions Risk propensity has long been considered an im - portant part of an entrepreneur ’ s makeup . Tradi - tionally , research characterizes entrepreneurs as risk seekers ( Stewart & Roth , 2001 , 2004 ) , but entrepreneurs vary significantly in their propensity and tolerance for risk ( Forlani & Mullins , 2000 ; Miner & Raju , 2004 ) . This is important because just as variations in opportunity - specific risk influence evaluations of opportunity attractiveness , so do stable risk propensities . Keh and colleagues ( 2002 ) found that variations in entrepreneurs ’ risk per - ception influence opportunity evaluations . Simi - larly , Mullins and Forlani ( 2005 ) showed that entrepreneurs would rather miss than sink the boat and make relatively risk - averse choices with respect to opportunities . This line of research suggests that entrepreneurs appear to quantify risk in terms of affordable loss ( Dew , Sarasvathy , Read , & Wiltbank , 2009 ) , thereby applying a rule that environmental and opportunity - related cues must signal a level of risk that meets the affordable - loss threshold for one to see the opportunity as personally attractive . Related to the idea of affordable loss is fear of failure . Atkinson ( 1957 , p . 360 ) portrayed fear of failure as the “ propensity to experience shame upon failure , ” thus defining failure as an unacceptable event . A growing number of studies document the moderating influence that fear of failure has on op - portunity and environmental cues in the evaluation process . Mitchell and Shepherd ( 2010 ) , for example , found that fear of failure strengthened the relation - ship between potential value and likelihood of in - vestment in an opportunity , but it also weakened the relationship between number of opportunities available and likelihood of investment . More germane to rule - based reasoning , some have conceptualized fear of failure as a pre - failure bias that interferes with the trial - and - error learning that entrepreneurs use to build expertise , and this may lead to misattributions during the evaluation process ( Mitchell , Mitchell , & Smith , 2008 ) . The implication is that those with a high fear of failure will be extremely conservative in their evaluations of opportunities , presumably by developing ideal images that require very low chances of failure . The resulting hesitancy to consider certain opportuni - ties as viable constrains the learning process re - quired to develop tried and true evaluation rules for effective predictions of antecedent – consequence rela - tionships that drive rule - based opportunity evaluations . The extant literature has also considered other personal dispositions that appear to influence the development and application of opportunity eval - uation rules . Lee and Venkataraman ( 2006 ) high - lighted the role of an individual ’ s aspiration level in the likelihood that an opportunity will be pursued . Likewise , Baron , Hmieleski , and Henry ( 2012 ) pro - posed that , at very high levels , positive disposi - tional affect ( the stable tendency to experience positive moods and emotions ) interferes with spe - cific aspects of cognition , resulting in poor perfor - mance in opportunity evaluation . Finally , Gupta and colleagues ( 2014 ) found that gender differences influence opportunity evaluation such that men evaluate opportunities more favorably than women . However , this effect is contingent on gender ster - eotypes affiliated with the opportunity . Taken to - gether , the above research suggests that a range of stable individual dispositions influence knowledge - driven cognitive representations of anticipated cause – effect outcomes and thereby augment or mitigate individuals ’ development and application of rules for opportunity evaluation . Fluid Individual Differences Research also documents that fluid individual differences influence how one individuates oppor - tunity . Principal among these is knowledge , which , as previously argued , is the essential element in the rule - based reasoning framework ( Smith & DeCoster , 2000 ) . The rules evoked for opportunity evaluation discussed thus far are stable but not static ; instead , they evolve through learning and the accumulation of knowledge . Thus , the knowledge an individual has on hand when evaluating an opportunity plays a prominent role in determining which normative rules of reasoning he employs . Extant research draws attention to the key role of matching specific knowledge to a specific opportu - nity . Thus , when an opportunity is related to one ’ s current knowledge , entrepreneurs are better able to develop expectancies rather than inferences , and thus entrepreneurs with highly related knowledge 226 May Academy of Management Perspectives evaluate the opportunity more positively ( Haynie et al . , 2009 ) . Similarly , when the entrepreneur ’ s prior knowledge matches the situation at hand and her learning style matches the opportunity characteristics , she rates the opportunity more favorably ( Dimov , 2007 ) . Linking back to models of entrepreneurial ac - tion , knowledge seeking reduces demand uncertainty , thus increasing opportunity evaluations and in - creasing the likelihood of entrepreneurial action ( Autio , Dahlander , & Frederiksen , 2013 ) . Not surpris - ingly , these findings parallel those on strategic issue interpretation , demonstrating that experts ( i . e . , more knowledgeable individuals ) more easily , quickly , and effectively make sense of such information ( Day & Lord , 1992 ) . Thus , knowledge context matters such that individuals apply specific rules under conditions of knowledge fit ( Chaiken & Trope , 1999 ) . Individuals ’ stocks of knowledge also play a ma - jor role in attenuating or intensifying the application of rules based on cues from the opportunity or the environment . For example , McKelvie and colleagues ( 2011 ) found that more domain - specific expertise ( i . e . , industry and situation - specific ) weakened the negative impact of effect uncertainty on opportunity evaluations . Similarly , Wood and Williams ( 2014 ) demonstrated that both market knowledge and technical knowledge accentuated the positive effects of resource efficiency and nov - elty ; however , interestingly , both types of knowl - edge also strengthened the ( negative ) effects of considering the worst - case scenario for a particular opportunity . For their part , Haynie and colleagues ( 2009 ) found that when an entrepreneur ’ s existing knowledge , skill , and ability are high , relative to a specific opportunity , this intensifies the effects of rules regarding value yet diminishes the effects of rules regarding rarity and limits on competition . In addition , significant research centers on the role of affect and emotion in the entrepreneurial process ( Baron & Tang , 2011 ; Baron et al . , 2012 ; Cardon , Foo , Shepherd , & Wiklund , 2012 ) , notably that affect and emotion alter the way in which entrepreneurs evaluate opportunities . Grichnik , Smeja , and Welpe ( 2010 ) , for instance , showed that positive emotions positively influence op - portunity evaluations , whereas negative emotions have no influence . Relatedly , Foo ( 2011 ) found that inducing anger and happiness lowers the risk perceived in pursuing an opportunity . For their part , Welpe and colleagues ( 2012 ) demonstrated that joy and , surprisingly , anger positively in - fluence evaluation , and fear reduces opportunity attractiveness . In sum , the research above illustrates the sub - stantial effort devoted to understanding how idio - syncratic dispositions , knowledge , and emotion integrate with situational variables to affect how entrepreneurs assess the attractiveness of an op - portunity . As a result , a number of fascinating insights have emerged , and there appears to be convergence around the idea that individual dif - ferences moderate the influence of rules that flow from environmental and opportunity cues . Ulti - mately , these findings compare favorably to psy - chology research highlighting the contextual and contingent nature of rule - based reasoning ( Chaiken & Trope , 1999 ) . IMPLICATIONS FOR MANAGEMENT SCHOLARSHIP Scholars have long focused on the origin of op - portunities ( e . g . , how do entrepreneurs come up with new ideas ? ) and opportunity exploitation ( e . g . , what steps do entrepreneurs take to bring ideas to the marketplace ? ) . However , opportunity evaluation bridges these parts of the entrepreneurial process . Whether it is an executive pursuing opportunities for corporate growth or a student thinking about starting his or her first business , an opportunity must be evaluated before action can ( or should ) take place . Rule - based reasoning is a useful lens for articulating how individuals evaluate opportunities and doc - umenting the judgment criteria used . This improved understanding , derived primarily from entrepre - neurship research , has important implications for the future applicability of opportunity evaluation across the broader set of management disciplines . Below , we outline a few paths forward for researchers in management - related disciplines . Implications for Strategic Management Research The rule - based reasoning perspective provided above informs research in strategic management by bringing to the fore the strategic interpretation lit - erature that has lost momentum over the years . Past research successfully linked antecedents of strategic issue interpretation , such as managers ’ decision processes ( Kuvaas , 2002 ; Thomas et al . , 1993 ) or cultural differences ( Barr & Glynn , 2004 ) , to the characteristics of an issue ( such as the potential for gain or loss ) and the labeling of the issue as a threat or an opportunity . Further , such interpretations have been linked to action , yet this stream of research found consistent effects for actions to respond to 2015 227 Williams and Wood threats but not to opportunities ( Chattopadhyay et al . , 2001 ; Thomas et al . , 1993 ) . As noted by Barreto ( 2012 , p . 362 ) , the authors themselves recognize the potential problem : “ Perhaps our lack of results with regard to opportunities is related to our inability to discriminate between opportunities of varying mag - nitude ( Chattopadhyay et al . , 2001 , p . 951 ) . ” Thus , prior work on strategic issues neglected to account for the difference between third - person opportunities ( is this an opportunity for someone ? ) and first - person opportunities ( is this an opportu - nity for me or my firm ? ) ( McMullen & Shepherd , 2006 ) . Moreover , prior work failed to account not just for the attractiveness of the opportunity ( cf . Julian & Ofori - Dankwa , 2008 ) but also for the vari - ous rules — at the individual and firm levels — that increase or decrease the opportunity attractiveness . Extant strategic management research suggests a host of factors that could influence the attractive - ness of an issue interpreted as an opportunity . For example , the rich literature on diversification highlights the importance of the relatedness of an opportunity to the firm ’ s existing capabilities ( Markides & Williamson , 1994 ) . Further , a key strategic opportunity characteristic is when prices for a resource fail to reflect its best use ( Denrell et al . , 2003 ) . Each of these suggests a rule that managers could evoke when considering potential opportunities . At the intersection of strategic management and entrepreneurship , research examines how resource flow affects opportunity pursuit , specifically the prominent role of angel investors and venture cap - italists ( VCs ) in providing the resources required to bring an opportunity idea to market ( Bruton , Filatotchev , Chahine , & Wright , 2010 ) . However , the resources investors provide also extend to access to knowledge , experience , and social capital ( Florin , Lubatkin , & Schulze , 2003 ; Petkova , Wadhwa , Yao , & Jain , 2014 ) . This suggests that investors hold unique knowledge and experience , and therefore the opportunity images they develop may be dif - ferent from those of entrepreneurs and managers ( see Figure 1 ) . If these opportunity images rest on rule - based reasoning , the implication is that some degree of congruence likely must be achieved be - tween the rules strategic leaders and investors use to discern the attractiveness of the opportunity under consideration . Murnieks , Haynie , Wiltbank , and Harting ( 2011 ) provided evidence of this as they found that VCs evaluate opportunities more favorably when the entrepreneurs pursing the opportunity have a decision - making process similar to their own . Thus , rule - based reasoning may serve as an integrative framework for exploring how firm leaders , for example , and investors develop shared images of an opportunity , which leads to resource investment or not . Implications for Management - Related Fields Technology and innovation management . Tech - nology and innovation management research may benefit by using the rule - based reasoning framework to investigate firm - level decisions to imitate existing technology or offer unproven radical innovations ( e . g . , Semadeni & Anderson , 2010 ) . A major chal - lenge of innovation is the balance between the needs to be new and to remain credible in market offerings ( Abrahamson , 1991 ; Deephouse , 1999 ) . As such , managers must carefully consider opportunities to introduce innovative offerings by discerning the op - timal level of innovativeness . This decision process parallels the evaluation process documented above , and thus managers may use rule - based reasoning as one way to make imitate - versus - innovate decisions . In that vein , environmental cues ( e . g . , competitor offerings ; Greve , 1998 ) and opportunity cues ( e . g . , teachability or complexity ; Zander & Kogut , 1995 ) likely prime specific rules as managers discern the attractiveness of pursuing an innovation . Interestingly , technology and innovation man - agement research often uses real options theory to explain how managers deal with these uncertain decisions ( Amram & Kulatilaka , 1999 ) . Integrating the above research findings with extant work on real options theory in managerial decision making offers fruitful avenues for future research . Past research finds that managers fail to abandon poorly per - forming options , thus falling into option traps , often because there remains uncertainty regarding whether the option may still one day have value ( Adner & Levinthal , 2004 ) . Thus , the challenge is to reduce uncertainty by employing contextually de - rived rules for option attractiveness to determine when an option should be continued versus aban - doned . For example , a rule to abandon may be based on cash flows of the option in comparison with the other potential opportunities ( cf . Dixit & Pindyck , 1994 ) . International business . Another area of manage - ment research that may find value in rule - based reasoning is international business research , spe - cifically the rich research on international market selection . Early research in this area focused on psychic distance between a firm ’ s home country 228 May Academy of Management Perspectives and the potential foreign market ( Johanson & Wiedersheim - Paul , 1975 ) , but more recent work centers on the match between the firm ’ s resources and capabilities and those of the foreign market ( He & Wei , 2011 ) as well as on a need for a more opportunity - oriented approach to internationalization ( Dimitratos , Voudouris , Plakoyiannaki , & Nakos , 2012 ) . Extant research often takes an ex post approach to studying internationalization decisions , analyzing firm and market characteristics after such decisions are made . Thus , it is important for research to address what factors managers actually consider when making key internationalization decisions ( see Devinney , Midgley , & Venaik , 2003 , and Williams & Gr´egoire , 2015 ) . In one of the few studies to examine managers ’ in situ decision making , Buckley , Devinney , and Louviere ( 2007 ) found that in the choice of foreign direct investment location , “ managers appear to follow fairly rational rules ” but that such decisions appear “ less aligned to traditional models ” ( p . 1069 ) and thus “ less easy to reconcile with existing theory ” ( p . 1086 ) . These authors call for more re - search that elucidates managers ’ decision criteria along a variety of choice contexts . We echo this call and suggest that rule - based reasoning provides a useful theoretical lens to examine the rules used by managers when expanding internationally , es - pecially when evaluating internationalization opportunities . Organization theory . Finally , rule - based reason - ing may be insightful for organization theory re - search , specifically research on organizational routines — patterns for accomplishing work through generative systems that provide stability ( Feldman & Pentland , 2003 ) . Past work explored how routines are formed and evolve and how they enable and constrain value creation . Some scholars have ar - gued that an essential component of routines is trial - and - error learning ( Rerup & Feldman , 2011 ) . This parallels the concept of rule formation , as rules rest on knowledge and learning from one ’ s past experi - ence ( Golding & Rosenbloom , 1996 ) . This suggests that rules , at the level of the individual decision maker , may be analogous to routines at the level of the organization . 7 By connecting rule - based reason - ing and organization routines , researchers may be able to model the similarities between how individ - uals systematically evaluate opportunities and how the process is routinized within organizations . LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH While rule - based reasoning is a useful lens for understanding opportunity evaluation research , it has limitations . Rule - based reasoning is clearly one way entrepreneurs and managers can think about opportunity attractiveness , but alternatives exist . Evans ( 2008 ) and Kahneman ( 2011 ) , for example , argued that the mind uses two cognitive systems , and rule - based reasoning is a product of the slower , deliberative , analytical system ( i . e . , system 2 ) while associative reasoning ( e . g . , intuitive judgments ) is produced by the faster , automatic , involuntary sys - tem ( i . e . , system 1 ) . This suggests that creative and intuitive system 1 processes could be used to eval - uate opportunities , and indeed Bryant ( 2007 , p . 742 ) found evidence of an intuitive “ trusting gut ” ap - proach used by some Australian entrepreneurs . In many cases , however , these intuitions took the form of a first screen to immediately eliminate poor op - portunities . Interestingly , while entrepreneurs in Bryant ’ s ( 2007 ) study used gut instinct to reject op - portunities , they then engaged in more careful and effortful evaluation of the remaining opportunities . This suggests that while associative processes like intuition can be used to quickly evaluate opportu - nities , it appears that they serve as a broad filter and that those opportunities that survive are then eval - uated at a deeper level using more deliberate and analytical processes such as rule - based reasoning . In line with this notion , Kickul et al . ( 2009 ) found important differences in the ability of individuals to evaluate opportunities using intuitive versus ana - lytical cognitive styles . If we consider that the ade - quacy of inferences made from rule - based reasoning are contingent on the relatedness of the knowledge ( e . g . , rule - based reasoning breaks down as one moves to areas of unrelated knowledge ; Golding & Rosenbloom , 1996 ) , it becomes clear that associative reasoning may be useful for evaluating opportunities in unrelated contexts — contingent , of course , on the expertise of the entrepreneur ( Kahneman & Klein , 2009 ) . Based on our synthesis of the literature , a rule - based approach appears most consistent with prior research ; however , exploring the role of alternate reasoning models presents a much - needed area for future research to provide a more nuanced un - derstanding of the applicability of analytical versus associative reasoning ( or other relevant cognitive processes and structures ) in opportunity evaluation . Our synthesis of the opportunity evaluation liter - ature also points to limitations of extant research . First , there is a growing body of research suggesting 7 We thank an anonymous reviewer for highlighting this linkage . 2015 229 Williams and Wood that entrepreneurs may also use internal cues as stimuli for opportunity evaluation . In these instances , entrepreneurs pay less attention to cre - ating images of actual opportunity ( i . e . , the way things are ) in favor of focusing on creating images of the way things could be . Sarasvathy ’ s ( 2008 ) effectuation logic and Wood and McKinley ’ s ( 2010 ) enactment concept are examples of this type of approach . These concepts highlight that entre - preneurs develop rules about the viability of cre - ating an imagined future rather than matching existing characteristics to an image of ideal oppor - tunity . Accordingly , the judgment rules entrepre - neurs employ when using effectual or enactment logic might be different from those outlined in Table 1 because they would be about the subjective components of opportunity , such as the degree to which one can build consensus around the imag - ined future ( Wood & McKinley , 2010 ) or which resources ( i . e . , means ) currently exist ( Sarasvathy , 2001 ) . Thus , the consideration of internal stimuli that impel entrepreneurs on their journey would lead to a more comprehensive theory of opportunity evaluation . Second , research to date has focused predominantly on identifying the criteria ( rules ) entrepreneurs use as they decide which opportunities are attractive for themselves or their firms . Despite the advances made by such research , which we examine in this manu - script , scant research has paid attention to the nor - mative implications of such rule following . Future research ought to consider the implications of whether the application of different rules by different entrepreneurs leads some entrepreneurs to perform better — or worse — than others . Finally , much of the research discussed above is cross - sectional in nature , studying individuals ’ evaluations of opportunities at a single point in time . Although such studies have led to great progress in understanding how such evaluations are made , they also neglect the concept of evaluation as a process that occurs over time . The logic behind rule - based reasoning suggests that an individual ’ s evaluations of opportunities will change as the individual ’ s knowledge grows as well as when the opportunity circumstances change ( i . e . , is developed ) ( Dimov , 2007 ) . Recently , Holmes and colleagues ( 2013 ) pre - sented a behavioral model of entrepreneurs ’ judg - ments over time where such judgments took place over four stages : ideation , feasibility , desirability , and action . Such a model explicitly accounts for how such evaluations may evolve over time as the entre - preneur moves from idea to new venture . CONCLUSION A critical mass of knowledge on opportunity evaluation exists . However , because findings are fragmented across a range of literatures and use different terminology , the scope of our knowledge to date is unnecessarily obscured . Using a rule - based reasoning framework , we have synthesized these studies into a theoretically consistent ensemble . Do - ing so paints a clearer picture of the knowledge we have accumulated to date and provides insight to inform scholarship not just in entrepreneurship but in management and related disciplines . Together , this research raises interesting future research ques - tions regarding how opportunity evaluations unfold in the minds of individuals and how these evalua - tions facilitate or constrain opportunity pursuit . REFERENCES Abelson , R . P . ( 1981 ) . Psychological status of the script concept . American Psychologist , 36 ( 7 ) , 715 – 729 . Abrahamson , E . ( 1991 ) . Managerial fads and fashions : The diffusion and rejection of innovations . Academy of Management Review , 16 ( 3 ) , 586 – 612 . Adner , R . , & Kapoor , R . ( 2010 ) . Value creation in in - novation ecosystems : How the structure of techno - logical interdependence affects firm performance in new technology generations . Strategic Management Journal , 31 ( 3 ) , 306 – 333 . Adner , R . , & Levinthal , D . A . ( 2004 ) . What is not a real option : Considering boundaries for the application of real options to business strategy . Academy of Man - agement Review , 29 ( 1 ) , 74 – 85 . Aldrich , H . E . ( 1990 ) . Using an ecological perspective to study organizational founding rates . Entrepreneur - ship : Theory & Practice , 14 ( 3 ) , 7 – 24 . Aldrich , H . , & Wiedenmayer , G . ( 1993 ) . From traits to rates : An ecological perspective on organizational foundings . In J . Katz & R . Brockhaus ( Eds . ) , Advances in entrepreneurship , firm emergence , and growth ( Vol . 1 , pp . 145 – 195 ) . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . Alvarez , S . A . , & Barney , J . B . ( 2007 ) . Discovery and cre - ation : Alternative theories of entrepreneurial action . Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal , 1 ( 1 - 2 ) , 11 – 26 . Amram , M . , & Kulatilaka , N . ( 1999 ) . Real options : Man - aging strategic investment in an uncertain world . Cambridge , MA : Harvard Business School Press . Andrews , K . R . ( 1971 ) . The concept of corporate strategy . Homewood , IL : Irwin . Andrews , K . R . ( 1980 ) . The concept of corporate strategy ( 2nd ed . ) . Homewood , IL : Irwin . 230 May Academy of Management Perspectives Ardichvili , A . , Cardozo , R . , & Ray , S . ( 2003 ) . A theory of entrepreneurial opportunity identification and develop - ment . Journal of Business Venturing , 18 ( 1 ) , 105 – 123 . Atkinson , J . W . ( 1957 ) . Motivational determinants of risk - taking behavior . Psychological Review , 64 ( 6 , Pt . 1 ) , 359 – 372 . Autio , E . , Dahlander , L . , & Frederiksen , L . ( 2013 ) . In - formation exposure , opportunity evaluation , and en - trepreneurial action : An investigation of an online user community . Academy of Management Journal , 56 ( 5 ) , 1348 – 1371 . Baker , T . , & Nelson , R . E . ( 2005 ) . Creating something from nothing : Resource construction through entrepre - neurial bricolage . Administrative Science Quarterly , 50 ( 3 ) , 329 – 366 . Barney , J . ( 1991 ) . Firm resources and sustained competi - tive advantage . Journal of Management , 17 ( 1 ) , 99 – 120 . Baron , R . A . ( 2006 ) . Opportunity recognition as pattern recognition : How entrepreneurs “ connect the dots ” to identify new business opportunities . Academy of Management Perspectives , 20 ( 1 ) , 104 – 119 . Baron , R . A . , & Ensley , M . D . ( 2006 ) . Opportunity recogni - tion as the detection of meaningful patterns : Evidence from comparisons of novice and experienced entre - preneurs . Management Science , 52 ( 9 ) , 1331 – 1344 . Baron , R . A . , Hmieleski , K . M . , & Henry , R . A . ( 2012 ) . Entrepreneurs ’ dispositional positive affect : The po - tential benefits — and potential costs — of being “ up . ” Journal of Business Venturing , 27 ( 3 ) , 310 – 324 . Baron , R . A . , & Tang , J . ( 2011 ) . The role of entrepreneurs in firm - level innovation : Joint effects of positive af - fect , creativity , and environmental dynamism . Jour - nal of Business Venturing , 26 ( 1 ) , 49 – 60 . Barr , P . S . , & Glynn , M . A . ( 2004 ) . Cultural variations in strategic issue interpretation : Relating cultural un - certainty avoidance to controllability in discriminat - ing threat and opportunity . Strategic Management Journal , 25 ( 1 ) , 59 – 67 . Barreto , I . ( 2012 ) . Solving the entrepreneurial puzzle : The role of entrepreneurial interpretation in opportunity formation and related processes . Journal of Manage - ment Studies , 49 ( 2 ) , 356 – 380 . Baum , J . A . C . , & Oliver , C . ( 1996 ) . Toward an institutional ecology of organizational founding . Academy of Management Journal , 39 ( 5 ) , 1378 – 1427 . Bettman , J . R . , Luce , M . F . , & Payne , J . W . ( 1998 ) . Con - structive consumer choice processes . Journal of Consumer Research , 25 ( 3 ) , 187 – 217 . Bishop , K . , & Nixon , R . D . ( 2006 ) . Venture opportunity evaluations : Comparisons between venture capital - ists and inexperienced pre - nascent entrepreneurs . Journal of Developmental Entrepreneurship , 11 ( 1 ) , 19 – 33 . Bowman , E . H . , & Hurry , D . ( 1993 ) . Strategy through the options lens : An integrated view of resource invest - ments and the incremental - choice process . Academy of Management Review , 18 ( 4 ) , 760 – 782 . Brockner , J . ( 1992 ) . The escalation of commitment to a failing course of action : Toward theoretical prog - ress . Academy of Management Review , 17 ( 1 ) , 39 – 61 . Bruton , G . D . , Filatotchev , I . , Chahine , S . , & Wright , M . ( 2010 ) . Governance , ownership structure , and perfor - mance of IPO firms : The impact of different types of private equity investors and institutional environ - ments . Strategic Management Journal , 31 ( 5 ) , 491 – 509 . Bryant , P . ( 2007 ) . Self - regulation and decision heuristics in entrepreneurial opportunity evaluation and ex - ploitation . Management Decision , 45 ( 4 ) , 732 – 748 . Buckley , P . J . , Devinney , T . M . , & Louviere , J . J . ( 2007 ) . Do managers behave the way theory suggests ? A choice - theoretic examination of foreign direct investment location decision - making . Journal of International Business Studies , 38 ( 7 ) , 1069 – 1094 . Budros , A . ( 1994 ) . Analyzing unexpected density de - pendence effects on organizational births in New York ’ s life insurance industry , 1842 – 1904 . Organi - zation Science , 5 ( 4 ) , 541 – 553 . Cardon , M . S . , Foo , M . - D . , Shepherd , D . , & Wiklund , J . ( 2012 ) . Exploring the heart : Entrepreneurial emotion is a hot topic . Entrepreneurship : Theory & Practice , 36 ( 1 ) , 1 – 10 . Carroll , G . R . , & Hannan , M . T . ( 1989 ) . Density de - pendence in the evolution of populations of news - paper organizations . American Sociological Review , 54 ( 4 ) , 524 – 541 . Casson , M . , & Wadeson , N . ( 2007 ) . The discovery of op - portunities : Extending the economic theory of the en - trepreneur . Small Business Economics , 28 ( 4 ) , 285 – 300 . Chaiken , S . , & Trope , Y . ( 1999 ) . Dual process theories in social psychology . New York : Guilford Press . Chattopadhyay , P . , Glick , W . H . , & Huber , G . P . ( 2001 ) . Or - ganizational actions in response to threats and opportu - nities . Academy of Management Journal , 44 ( 5 ) , 937 – 955 . Choi , Y . R . , & Shepherd , D . A . ( 2004 ) . Entrepreneurs ’ decisions to exploit opportunities . Journal of Man - agement , 30 ( 3 ) , 377 – 395 . Davidsson , P . ( 2004 ) . Researching entrepreneurship . New York : Springer . Day , D . V . , & Lord , R . G . ( 1992 ) . Expertise and problem categorization : The role of expert processing in or - ganizational sense - making . Journal of Management Studies , 29 ( 1 ) , 35 – 47 . De Carolis , D . M . , & Saparito , P . ( 2006 ) . Social capital , cognition , and entrepreneurial opportunities : A 2015 231 Williams and Wood theoretical framework . Entrepreneurship : Theory & Practice , 30 ( 1 ) , 41 – 56 . Deephouse , D . L . ( 1999 ) . To be different , or to be the same ? It ’ s a question ( and theory ) of strategic balance . Strategic Management Journal , 20 ( 2 ) , 147 – 166 . Denrell , J . , Fang , C . , & Winter , S . G . ( 2003 ) . The economics of strategic opportunity . Strategic Management Jour - nal , 24 ( 10 ) , 977 – 990 . Devinney , T . , Midgley , D . , & Venaik , S . ( 2003 ) . Managerial beliefs , market contestability and dominant strategic orientation in the eclectic paradigm . In R . Narula & J . Cantwell ( Eds . ) , International business and the eclectic paradigm ( pp . 152 – 173 ) . London : Routledge . Dew , N . , Sarasvathy , S . , Read , S . , & Wiltbank , R . ( 2009 ) . Affordable loss : Behavioral economic aspects of the plunge decision . Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal , 3 ( 2 ) , 105 – 126 . Dimitratos , P . , Voudouris , I . , Plakoyiannaki , E . , & Nakos , G . ( 2012 ) . International entrepreneurial culture — Toward a comprehensive opportunity - based operationaliza - tion of international entrepreneurship . International Business Review , 21 ( 4 ) , 708 – 721 . Dimov , D . ( 2007 ) . From opportunity insight to opportu - nity intention : The importance of person - situation learning match . Entrepreneurship : Theory & Practice , 31 ( 4 ) , 561 – 583 . Dimov , D . ( 2010 ) . Nascent entrepreneurs and venture emergence : Opportunity confidence , human capital , and early planning . Journal of Management Studies , 47 ( 6 ) , 1123 – 1153 . Dimov , D . ( 2011 ) . Grappling with the unbearable elu - siveness of entrepreneurial opportunities . Entrepre - neurship : Theory & Practice , 35 ( 1 ) , 57 – 81 . Dixit , A . , & Pindyck , R . S . ( 1994 ) . Investment under un - certainty . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Dutton , J . E . , & Jackson , S . E . ( 1987 ) . Categorizing strategic issues : Links to organizational action . Academy of Management Review , 12 ( 1 ) , 76 – 90 . Dutton , J . E . , Walton , E . J . , & Abrahamson , E . ( 1989 ) . Im - portant dimensions of strategic issues : Separating the wheat from the chaff . Journal of Management Stud - ies , 26 ( 4 ) , 379 – 396 . Ellis , P . D . ( 2011 ) . Social ties and international entrepre - neurship : Opportunities and constraints affecting firm internationalization . Journal of International Business Studies , 42 ( 1 ) , 99 – 127 . Evans , J . ( 2008 ) . Dual - processing accounts of reasoning , judgment , and social cognition . Annual Review of Psychology , 59 ( 1 ) , 255 – 278 . Feldman , M . S . , & Pentland , B . T . ( 2003 ) . Reconceptualizing organizational routines as a source of flexibility and change . Administrative Science Quarterly , 48 ( 1 ) , 94 – 118 . Fiet , J . O . ( 2007 ) . A prescriptive analysis of search and dis - covery . Journal of Management Studies , 44 ( 4 ) , 592 – 611 . Fischhoff , B . ( 1991 ) . Value elicitation : Is there anything in there ? American Psychologist , 46 ( 8 ) , 835 – 847 . Fiske , S . T . , & Pavelchack , M . A . ( 1986 ) . Category - based versus piecemeal - based affective responses : Develop - ments in schema - triggered affect . In R . M . Sorrentino & E . T . Higgins ( Eds . ) , Handbook of motivation and cognition : Foundations of social behavior ( pp . 167 – 203 ) . New York : Guilford Press . Fiske , S . T . , & Taylor , S . E . ( 1991 ) . Social cognition ( 2nd ed . ) . New York : McGraw - Hill . Florin , J . , Lubatkin , M . , & Schulze , W . ( 2003 ) . A social capital model of high - growth ventures . Academy of Management Journal , 46 ( 3 ) , 374 – 384 . Foo , M . - D . ( 2011 ) . Emotions and entrepreneurial oppor - tunity evaluation . Entrepreneurship : Theory & Prac - tice , 35 ( 2 ) , 375 – 393 . Forlani , D . , & Mullins , J . W . ( 2000 ) . Perceived risks and choices in entrepreneurs ’ new venture decisions . Journal of Business Venturing , 15 ( 4 ) , 305 – 322 . Foss , N . J . , & Klein , P . G . ( 2012 ) . Organizing entrepre - neurial judgment : A new approach to the firm . New York : Cambridge University Press . Foss , N . J . , Klein , P . G . , Kor , Y . Y . , & Mahoney , J . T . ( 2008 ) . Entrepreneurship , subjectivism , and the resource - based view : Toward a new synthesis . Strategic En - trepreneurship Journal , 2 ( 1 ) , 73 – 94 . Frye , D . , Zelazo , P . D . , & Palfai , T . ( 1995 ) . Theory of mind and rule - based reasoning . Cognitive Development , 10 ( 4 ) , 483 – 527 . Gaglio , C . M . , & Katz , J . A . ( 2001 ) . The psychological basis of opportunity identification : Entrepreneurial alert - ness . Small Business Economics , 16 ( 2 ) , 95 – 111 . Gibson , J . J . ( 1960 ) . The concept of stimulus in psychol - ogy . American Psychologist , 15 ( 11 ) , 694 – 703 . Giddens , A . ( 1984 ) . The constitution of society : Outline of the theory of structuration . Cambridge , UK : Polity Press . Golding , A . R . , & Rosenbloom , P . S . ( 1996 ) . Improving accuracy by combining rule - based and case - based reasoning . Artificial Intelligence , 87 ( 1 - 2 ) , 215 – 254 . Greve , H . R . ( 1998 ) . Managerial cognition and the mimetic adoption of market positions : What you see is what you do . Strategic Management Journal , 19 ( 10 ) , 967 – 988 . Grichnik , D . , Smeja , A . , & Welpe , I . ( 2010 ) . The importance of being emotional : How do emotions affect entrepre - neurial opportunity evaluation and exploitation ? Jour - nal of Economic Behavior & Organization , 76 ( 1 ) , 15 – 29 . Gupta , V . K . , Goktan , A . B . , & Gunay , G . ( 2014 ) . Gender differences in evaluation of new business opportunity : 232 May Academy of Management Perspectives A stereotype threat perspective . Journal of Business Venturing , 29 ( 2 ) , 273 – 288 . Hannan , M . , & Carroll , G . ( 1992 ) . Dynamics of organiza - tion populations : Density , legitimation , and compe - tition . New York : Oxford University Press . Hannan , M . T . , & Freeman , J . ( 1987 ) . The ecology of organi - zational founding : American labor unions , 1836 – 1985 . American Journal of Sociology , 92 ( 4 ) , 910 – 943 . Hannan , M . T . , & Freeman , J . ( 1988 ) . The ecology of organi - zational mortality : American labor unions , 1836 – 1985 . American Journal of Sociology , 94 ( 1 ) , 25 – 52 . Hastie , R . ( 2001 ) . Problems for judgment and decision making . Annual Review of Psychology , 52 ( 1 ) , 653 – 683 . Hastie , R . , & Pennington , N . ( 2000 ) . Explanation - based decision making . In T . Connolly , H . R . Arkes , & K . R . Hammond ( Eds . ) , Judgment and decision mak - ing : An interdisciplinary reader ( pp . 212 – 228 ) . Cam - bridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Haynie , J . M . , Shepherd , D . A . , & McMullen , J . S . ( 2009 ) . An opportunity for me ? The role of resources in op - portunity evaluation decisions . Journal of Manage - ment Studies , 46 ( 3 ) , 337 – 361 . He , X . , & Wei , Y . ( 2011 ) . Linking market orientation to in - ternational market selection and international perfor - mance . International Business Review , 20 ( 5 ) , 535 – 546 . Holmes , M . , Holcomb , T . R . , Klein , P . G . , & Ireland , R . D . ( 2013 , September ) . The role of judgment and deci - sions in new - venture formation : Toward a behavioral model . Paper presented at the Strategic Management Society Conference , Atlanta . Jackson , S . E . , & Dutton , J . E . ( 1988 ) . Discerning threats and opportunities . Administrative Science Quarterly , 33 ( 3 ) , 370 – 387 . Johanson , J . , & Wiedersheim - Paul , F . ( 1975 ) . The in - ternationalization of the firm — four Swedish cases . Journal of Management Studies , 12 ( 3 ) , 305 – 322 . Johnson - Laird , P . N . ( 1983 ) . Mental models : Towards a cog - nitive science of language , inference , and conscious - ness . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Julian , S . D . , & Ofori - Dankwa , J . C . ( 2008 ) . Toward an in - tegrative cartography of two strategic issue diagnosis frameworks . Strategic Management Journal , 29 ( 1 ) , 93 – 114 . Kahneman , D . ( 2011 ) . Thinking , fast and slow . New York : Macmillan . Kahneman , D . , & Klein , G . ( 2009 ) . Conditions for intuitive expertise : A failure to disagree . American Psycholo - gist , 64 , 515 – 526 . Kahneman , D . , Slovic , P . , & Tversky , A . ( 1982 ) . Judgment under uncertainty : Heuristics and biases . New York : Cambridge University Press . Keh , H . T . , Foo , M . - D . , & Lim , B . C . ( 2002 ) . Opportunity evaluation under risky conditions : The cognitive processes of entrepreneurs . Entrepreneurship : The - ory & Practice , 27 ( 2 ) , 125 – 148 . Kickul , J . , Gundry , L . K . , Barbosa , S . D . , & Whitcanack , L . ( 2009 ) . Intuition versus analysis ? Testing differential models of cognitive style on entrepreneurial self - efficacy and the new venture creation process . En - trepreneurship : Theory & Practice , 33 ( 2 ) , 439 – 453 . Kirzner , I . M . ( 1979 ) . Perception , opportunity , and profit : Studies in the theory of entrepreneurship . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Kiss , A . N . , Williams , D . W . , & Houghton , S . M . ( 2013 ) . Risk bias and the link between motivation and new venture post - entry international growth . International Business Review , 22 ( 6 ) , 1068 – 1078 . Klein , P . G . ( 2008 ) . Opportunity discovery , entrepre - neurial action , and economic organization . Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal , 2 ( 3 ) , 175 – 190 . Kogut , B . , & Kulatilaka , N . ( 2001 ) . Capabilities as real options . Organization Science , 12 ( 6 ) , 744 – 758 . Krippendorff , K . ( 2011 , September ) . 10 rules for entre - preneurs to live by . Fast Company . Retrieved from http : / / www . fastcompany . com / 1778295 / 10 - rules - entrepreneurs - live Krueger , N . F . ( 2000 ) . The cognitive infrastructure of op - portunity emergence . Entrepreneurship : Theory & Practice , 24 ( 3 ) , 9 – 27 . Kuvaas , B . ( 2002 ) . An exploration of two competing per - spectives on informational contexts in top manage - ment strategic issue interpretation . Journal of Management Studies , 39 ( 7 ) , 977 – 1001 . Lachmann , L . M . ( 1977 ) . Capital , expectations , and the market process . Kansas City , MO : Sheed Andrews and McMeel . Larrick , R . P . , Nisbett , R . E . , & Morgan , J . N . ( 1993 ) . Who uses the cost - benefit rules of choice ? Implications for the normative status of microeconomic theory . Or - ganizational Behavior and Human Decision Pro - cesses , 56 ( 3 ) , 331 – 347 . Lee , J . H . , & Venkataraman , S . ( 2006 ) . Aspirations , market offerings , and the pursuit of entrepreneurial oppor - tunities . Journal of Business Venturing , 21 ( 1 ) , 107 – 123 . Liesch , P . W . , & Knight , G . A . ( 1999 ) . Information in - ternalization and hurdle rates in small and medium enterprise internationalization . Journal of In - ternational Business Studies , 30 ( 2 ) , 383 – 394 . Lomi , A . ( 1995 ) . The population ecology of organizational founding : Location dependence and unobserved heterogeneity . Administrative Science Quarterly , 40 ( 1 ) , 111 – 144 . 2015 233 Williams and Wood Mahnke , V . , Venzin , M . , & Zahra , S . A . ( 2007 ) . Governing entrepreneurial opportunity recognition in MNEs : Aligning interests and cognition under uncertainty . Journal of Management Studies , 44 ( 7 ) , 1278 – 1298 . Markides , C . C . , & Williamson , P . J . ( 1994 ) . Related di - versification , core competencies and corporate perfor - mance . Strategic Management Journal , 15 ( S2 ) , 149 – 165 . Masicampo , E . J . , & Baumeister , R . F . ( 2008 ) . Toward a physiology of dual - process reasoning and judgment : Lemonade , willpower , and expensive rule - based analysis . Psychological Science , 19 ( 3 ) , 255 – 260 . McKelvie , A . , Haynie , J . , & Gustavsson , G . ( 2011 ) . Unpacking the uncertainty construct : Implications for entrepreneurial action . Journal of Business Ven - turing , 26 ( 3 ) , 273 – 292 . McMullen , J . S . , & DeCastro , J . ( 2000 ) . Entrepreneurial decision making and risk assessment in the midst of environmental uncertainty : The Everest disaster . Academy of Management Proceedings , F1 – F6 . McMullen , J . S . , & Shepherd , D . A . ( 2006 ) . Entrepreneurial action and the role of uncertainty in the theory of the entrepreneur . Academy of Management Review , 31 ( 1 ) , 132 – 152 . Milliken , F . J . ( 1987 ) . Three types of perceived uncertainty about the environment : State , effect , and response uncertainty . Academy of Management Review , 12 ( 1 ) , 133 – 143 . Miner , J . B . , & Raju , N . S . ( 2004 ) . Risk propensity differ - ences between managers and entrepreneurs and be - tween low - and high - growth entrepreneurs : A reply in a more conservative vein . Journal of Applied Psy - chology , 89 ( 1 ) , 3 – 13 . Mitchell , J . R . , & Shepherd , D . A . ( 2010 ) . To thine own self be true : Images of self , images of opportunity , and entrepreneurial action . Journal of Business Ventur - ing , 25 ( 1 ) , 138 – 154 . Mitchell , R . K . , Mitchell , J . R . , & Smith , J . B . ( 2008 ) . Inside opportunity formation : Enterprise failure , cognition , and the creation of opportunities . Strategic Entre - preneurship Journal , 2 ( 3 ) , 225 – 242 . Mullins , J . W . , & Forlani , D . ( 2005 ) . Missing the boat or sinking the boat : A study of new venture decision making . Journal of Business Venturing , 20 ( 1 ) , 47 – 69 . Murnieks , C . Y . , Haynie , J . M . , Wiltbank , R . E . , & Harting , T . ( 2011 ) . “ I like how you think ” : Similarity as an interaction bias in the investor - entrepreneur dyad . Journal of Management Studies , 48 ( 7 ) , 1533 – 1561 . Oviatt , B . M . , & McDougall , P . P . ( 1994 ) . Toward a theory of international new ventures . Journal of International Business Studies , 25 ( 1 ) , 45 – 64 . Oviatt , B . M . , & McDougall , P . P . ( 2005 ) . Defining in - ternational entrepreneurship and modeling the speed of internationalization . Entrepreneurship : Theory & Practice , 29 ( 5 ) , 537 – 553 . Payne , J . W . , Bettman , J . R . , & Johnson , E . J . ( 1993 ) . The adaptive decision maker . Cambridge , UK : Cambridge University Press . Penrose , E . ( 1959 ) . The theory of the growth of the firm . Oxford , UK : Blackwell . Perrini , F . , Vurro , C . , & Costanzo , L . A . ( 2010 ) . A process - based view of social entrepreneurship : From oppor - tunity identification to scaling up social change in the case of San Patrignano . Entrepreneurship & Regional Development , 22 ( 6 ) , 515 – 534 . Petkova , A . , Wadhwa , A . , Yao , X . , & Jain , S . ( 2014 ) . Rep - utation and decision making under ambiguity : A study of US venture capital firms ’ investments in the emerging clean energy sector . Academy of Manage - ment Journal , 57 ( 2 ) , 422 – 448 . Porter , M . ( 1980 ) . Competitive strategy . New York : Free Press . Rerup , C . , & Feldman , M . S . ( 2011 ) . Routines as a source of change in organizational schemata : The role of trial - and - error learning . Academy of Management Journal , 54 ( 3 ) , 577 – 610 . Russell , J . A . , & Ward , L . M . ( 1982 ) . Environmental psy - chology . Annual Review of Psychology , 33 ( 1 ) , 651 – 689 . Samuelsson , M . , & Davidsson , P . ( 2009 ) . Does venture opportunity variation matter ? Investigating system - atic process differences between innovative and im - itative new ventures . Small Business Economics , 33 ( 2 ) , 229 – 255 . Sarasvathy , S . D . ( 2001 ) . Causation and effectuation : To - ward a theoretical shift from economic inevitability to entrepreneurial contingency . Academy of Man - agement Review , 26 ( 2 ) , 243 – 263 . Sarasvathy , S . D . ( 2008 ) . Effectuation : Elements of entre - preneurial expertise . Cheltenham , UK : Edward Elgar . Semadeni , M . , & Anderson , B . S . ( 2010 ) . The follower ’ s dilemma : Innovation and imitation in the pro - fessional services industry . Academy of Management Journal , 53 ( 5 ) , 1175 – 1193 . Shane , S . ( 2003 ) . A general theory of entrepreneurship : The individual - opportunity nexus . Cheltenham , UK : Edward Elgar . Shane , S . , & Venkataraman , S . ( 2000 ) . The promise of entrepreneurship as a field of research . Academy of Management Review , 25 ( 1 ) , 217 – 226 . Shepherd , D . A . , McMullen , J . S . , & Jennings , P . D . ( 2007 ) . The formation of opportunity beliefs : Overcoming ignorance and reducing doubt . Strategic Entrepre - neurship Journal , 1 ( 1 - 2 ) , 75 – 95 . Short , J . C . , Ketchen , J . D . , Shook , C . L . , & Ireland , R . D . ( 2010 ) . The concept of “ opportunity ” in entrepreneurship 234 May Academy of Management Perspectives research : Past accomplishments and future challenges . Journal of Management , 36 ( 1 ) , 40 – 65 . Singh , J . V . , & Lumsden , C . J . ( 1990 ) . Theory and research in organizational ecology . Annual Review of Sociol - ogy , 16 ( 1 ) , 161 – 195 . Sloman , S . A . ( 1996 ) . The empirical case for two systems of reasoning . Psychological Bulletin , 119 ( 1 ) , 3 – 22 . Sloman , S . A . ( 1998 ) . Categorical inference is not a tree : The myth of inheritance hierarchies . Cognitive Psy - chology , 35 ( 1 ) , 1 – 33 . Slovic , P . ( 1995 ) . The construction of preference . Ameri - can Psychologist , 50 ( 5 ) , 364 – 371 . Smith , E . R . , & DeCoster , J . ( 1998 ) . Knowledge acquisition , accessibility , and use in person perception and ster - eotyping : Simulation with a recurrent connectionist network . Journal of Personality and Social Psychol - ogy , 74 ( 1 ) , 21 – 35 . Smith , E . R . , & DeCoster , J . ( 2000 ) . Dual - process models in social and cognitive psychology : Conceptual integration and links to underlying memory systems . Personality and Social Psychology Review , 4 ( 2 ) , 108 – 131 . Smith , E . E . , & Sloman , S . A . ( 1994 ) . Similarity versus rule - based categorization . Memory & Cognition , 22 ( 4 ) , 377 – 386 . Staw , B . M . ( 1981 ) . The escalation of commitment to a course of action . Academy of Management Review , 6 ( 4 ) , 577 – 587 . Stewart , W . H . , Jr . , & Roth , P . L . ( 2001 ) . Risk propensity differences between entrepreneurs and managers : A meta - analytic review . Journal of Applied Psychology , 86 ( 1 ) , 145 – 153 . Stewart , W . H . , Jr . , & Roth , P . L . ( 2004 ) . Data quality affects meta - analytic conclusions : A response to Miner and Raju ( 2004 ) concerning entrepreneurial risk propensity . Journal of Applied Psychology , 89 ( 1 ) , 14 – 21 . Sun , R . ( 1995 ) . Robust reasoning : Integrating rule based and similarity based reasoning . Artificial Intelligence , 75 ( 2 ) , 241 – 295 . Thagard , P . ( 2000 ) . Coherence in thought and action . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Thomas , J . B . , Clark , S . M . , & Gioia , D . A . ( 1993 ) . Strategic sensemaking and organizational performance : Link - ages among scanning , interpretation , action , and outcomes . Academy of Management Journal , 36 ( 2 ) , 239 – 270 . Van Overwalle , F . ( 2009 ) . Social cognition and the brain : A meta - analysis . Human Brain Mapping , 30 ( 3 ) , 829 – 858 . Walsh , J . P . ( 1995 ) . Managerial and organizational cogni - tion : Notes from a trip down memory lane . Organi - zation Science , 6 ( 3 ) , 280 – 321 . Welpe , I . M . , Sp¨orrle , M . , Grichnik , D . , Michl , T . , & Audretsch , D . B . ( 2012 ) . Emotions and opportunities : The interplay of opportunity evaluation , fear , joy , and anger as antecedent of entrepreneurial exploitation . Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice , 36 ( 1 ) , 69 – 96 . Williams , D . W . , & Gr´egoire , D . A . ( 2015 ) . Seeking commonalities or avoiding differences ? Re - conceptualizing distance and its effects on internationa - lization decisions . Journal of International Business Studies , 46 , 253 – 284 . Wood , M . S . , & McKelvie , A . ( 2015 ) . Opportunity evalu - ation as future focused cognition : Identifying con - ceptual themes and empirical trends . International Journal of Management Reviews , 17 ( 2 ) , 256 – 277 . Wood , M . S . , McKelvie , A . , & Haynie , J . M . ( 2014 ) . Making it personal : Opportunity individuation and the shaping of opportunity beliefs . Journal of Business Venturing , 29 ( 2 ) , 252 – 272 . Wood , M . S . , & McKinley , W . ( 2010 ) . The production of en - trepreneurial opportunity : A constructivist perspective . Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal , 4 ( 1 ) , 66 – 84 . Wood , M . S . , & Williams , D . W . ( 2014 ) . Opportunity evaluation as rule - based decision making . Journal of Management Studies , 51 ( 4 ) , 573 – 602 . Wood , M . S . , Williams , D . W . , & Gr´egoire , D . A . ( 2012 ) . The road to riches ? An integrated model of cognitive processes underpinning entrepreneurial action . In A . C . Corbett & J . Katz ( Eds . ) , Entrepreneurial action : Advances in entrepreneurship , firm emergence , and growth ( Vol . 14 , pp . 207 – 250 ) . Bingley , UK : Emerald . Zahra , S . A . ( 1996 ) . Governance , ownership , and corpo - rate entrepreneurship : The moderating impact of in - dustry technological opportunities . Academy of Management Journal , 39 ( 6 ) , 1713 – 1735 . Zahra , S . A . ( 2008 ) . The virtuous cycle of discovery and creation of entrepreneurial opportunities . Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal , 2 ( 3 ) , 243 – 257 . Zander , U . , & Kogut , B . ( 1995 ) . Knowledge and the speed of the transfer and imitation of organizational capabilities : An empirical test . Organization Science , 6 ( 1 ) , 76 – 92 . Ziedonis , A . A . ( 2007 ) . Real options in technology li - censing . Management Science , 53 ( 10 ) , 1618 – 1633 . David W . Williams ( dww @ utk . edu ) is an assistant pro - fessor of entrepreneurship in the Haslam College of Busi - ness at the University of Tennessee . He received his PhD from Georgia State University . His research centers on cognitive processes underpinning individuals ’ decision making , specifically the identification , evaluation , and exploitation of entrepreneurial and internationalization opportunities . 2015 235 Williams and Wood Matthew S . Wood ( ms _ wood @ baylor . edu ) is an assistant professor of entrepreneurship in the Hankamer School of Business at Baylor University . He earned his PhD from Southern Illinois University after a career as an entre - preneur in the commercial printing industry . His research focuses on entrepreneurial cognition and understanding the nature of opportunities . 236 May Academy of Management Perspectives