Neuron Review Calmodulin - Kinases : Modulators of Neuronal Development and Plasticity Gary A . Wayman , 1 , 4 Yong - Seok Lee , 2 Hiroshi Tokumitsu , 3 Alcino Silva , 2 and Thomas R . Soderling 1 , * 1 Vollum Institute , Oregon Health and Sciences University , 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road , Portland , OR 97239 , USA 2 Department of Neurobiology , University of California , Los Angeles , 695 Charles E . Young Drive South , Los Angeles , CA 90095 , USA 3 Department of Signal Transduction Sciences , Kagawa University , Kagawa 761 - 0793 , Japan 4 Present address : Department of Veterinary and Comparative Anatomy , Pharmacology and Physiology , Washington State University , Pullman , WA 99163 , USA * Correspondence : soderlit @ ohsu . edu DOI 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2008 . 08 . 021 In the nervous system , many intracellular responses to elevated calcium are mediated by CaM kinases ( CaMKs ) , a family of protein kinases whose activities are initially modulated by binding Ca 2 + / calmodulin and subsequently by protein phosphorylation . One member of this family , CaMKII , is well - established for its effects on modulating synaptic plasticity and learning and memory . However , recent studies indicate that some actions on neuronal development and function attributed to CaMKII may instead or in addition be mediated by other members of the CaMK cascade , such as CaMKK , CaMKI , and CaMKIV . This review summarizes key neuronal functions of the CaMK cascade in signal transduction , gene transcription , synaptic development and plasticity , and behavior . The technical challenges of mapping cellular protein kinase signal - ing pathways are also discussed . Introduction Neuronal physiology , ranging from neurotransmitter exocytosis to dynamic regulation of dendritic spine morphology , is modiﬁed by levels of intracellular free calcium ( [ Ca 2 + ] i ) that range between 10 to 50 nM basally to stimulated levels of low micromolar . Ele - vations of [ Ca 2 + ] i are generally short lived ( milliseconds to several minutes ) due to an elaborate network of calcium buffers , pumps , channels , and exchangers in cellular membranes as well as membranes of intracellular Ca 2 + - storage organelles ( e . g . , endo - plasmic reticulum ) ( Clapham , 2007 ) . These systems , as well as the highly polarized nature of neurons , dictate subcellular com - partmentalization of [ Ca 2 + ] i and their temporal ﬂuctuations in response to a large number of extracellular cues ( Blackstone and Sheng , 1999 ) . Elevated [ Ca 2 + ] i binds to numerous proteins , from low - afﬁnity / high - capacity buffer proteins ( e . g . , calbindin , calretinin ) that limit Ca 2 + diffusion to proteins of higher afﬁnity and ion speciﬁcity ( e . g . , calmodulin , troponin ) responsible for transducing multiple biochemical changes that mediate physiological responses to elevated [ Ca 2 + ] I ( Clapham , 2007 ) . These Ca 2 + - sensor proteins decode Ca 2 + signals based on three properties : on - rates , Ca 2 + afﬁnities , and subcellular localization relative to the Ca 2 + signal ( Burgoyne et al . , 2004 ) . Among these intracellular Ca 2 + - binding proteins , calmodulin ( CaM ) is unique in several respects . CaM is a ubiquitously expressed , dumbbell - shaped 17 kD protein with each globular end containing two helix - loop - helix ‘‘EF - hand’’ Ca 2 + - binding motifs ( Kd = 0 . 5 – 5 m M ) connected by a ﬂex - ible a helix ( Chin and Means , 2000 ) . Binding of Ca 2 + produces a conformational change in CaM , exposing hydrophobic resi - dues that promote interactions of the Ca 2 + / CaM complex to nu - merous target proteins , thereby regulating their functionalities . Many of these Ca 2 + / CaM targets modulate cellular signaling pathways , but other targets include structural proteins , ion chan - nels , pumps , transcription factors , and numerous rate - limiting enzymes . Among the signaling proteins regulated by Ca 2 + / CaM is a fam - ily of Ser / Thr protein kinases known as CaM - kinases ( CaMKs ) ( Figure 1 ) . CaMKs , which are particularly abundant in brain , are activated via binding of Ca 2 + / CaM , and they phosphorylate Ser / Thr residues in their protein substrates to alter the function - ality of those proteins . Some of the CaMKs , such as myosin light chain kinase , phosphorylase kinase , and CaMKIII , are dedicated to phosphorylating a single protein substrate . CaMKIII ( also referred to as eEF2 - kinase ) phosphorylates and inactivates eukaryotic elongation factor - 2 ( eEF2 ) ( Mitsui et al . , 1993 ) , and CaMKIII is unique in that it does not contain most of the canonical motifs of classical Ser / Thr protein kinases—thus , CaMKIII belongs to a separate protein kinase family ( Ryazanov et al . , 1997 ) . Multifunctional CaMKs , such as CaMKII and members of the CaM - K cascade ( CaMKK , CaMKI , and CaMKIV ) , are pres - ent in most mammalian tissues but are highly abundant in brain , where they phosphorylate and regulate numerous protein sub - strates ( Figure 2 ) . CaMKII has been intensively investigated , is thought to regulate numerous functions in neurons , and has been extensively reviewed ( e . g . , see the ﬁve - part minireview se - ries in J . Neurosci . 24 , 8391 – 8415 , 2004 ) . More recent studies have established critical roles of the CaMK cascade in neuronal development , plasticity , and behavior ( Figure 2 ) , and this will be the major focus of this review . Structures and Regulatory Mechanisms All of the CaMKs , except CaMKIII , have similar overall domain organizations of their 50 – 60 kD subunits ( Figure 1 ) ( reviewed in Soderling and Stull , 2001 ) , and crystal structures for CaMKI ( Goldberg et al . , 1996 ) and CaMKII ( Rosenberg et al . , 2005 ) have been published . CaMKII contains a unique C - terminal 914 Neuron 59 , September 25 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . subunit association domain , and electron microscopy reveals thatitexistsasheteromericdodecamersof a , b , g , and d subunits with two hexameric rings stacked one on top of the other ( Gaert - ner et al . , 2004 ; Rosenberg et al . , 2006 ) . This complex oligomeric structure allows for unique regulatory mechanisms and protein - protein interaction domains that are essential to its functionality , especially in paradigms of learning and memory ( reviewed in Lisman et al . , 2002 ) . Activation of CaMKII by Ca 2 + / CaM allows intramolecular autophosphorylation of several sites , including Thr286 , Thr305 , and Thr306 . Autophosphorylation of Thr286 has two primary consequences : ( 1 ) the subsequent dissociation of bound Ca 2 + / CaM ( i . e . , when [ Ca 2 + ] i levels are reduced ) is de - creased by several orders of magnitude , thereby prolonging its activation , and ( 2 ) even after full dissociation of Ca 2 + / CaM , the kinase retains partial ( 30 % – 60 % ) activity ( i . e . , Ca 2 + - independent or constitutive / autonomous activity , Figure 1 ) . Thus , transient elevations of intracellular [ Ca 2 + ] i can result in prolonged CaMKII activity until protein phosphatases dephosphorylate Thr286 ( Colbran , 2004a ) . Moreover , the extent of CaMKII autonomous activity can be dictated by the frequency of Ca 2 + oscillations ( De Koninck and Schulman , 1998 ) . This mechanism is thought to be critical in several physiological situations , especially poten - tiation of synaptic transmission during learning and memory ( Lisman et al . , 2002 ) . Thus , transgenic mice in which Thr286 is mutated to Ala or Asp exhibit multiple behavioral and learning deﬁcits ( see section on Synaptic Plasticity and Behavior ) . Members of the CaMK cascade—CaMKK ( a and b ) , CaMKI ( a , b , d , and g ) , and CaMKIV ( one gene ) —are monomeric and , apart from activation by Ca 2 + / CaM , show very different modes of regulation by phosphorylation compared to CaMKII ( Figure 1 ) . These CaMKs , like most other Ser / Thr protein kinases , have an ‘‘activation loop’’ phosphorylation site that is absent in CaMKII . Binding of Ca 2 + / CaM to CaMKI and CaMKIV exposes this activa - tion loop site to allow phosphorylation by the upstream CaMKK when simultaneously activated by Ca 2 + / CaM . Phosphorylation of the activation loop in CaMKI and CaMKIV primarily increases their Ca 2 + / CaM - dependent activities . CaMKIV , but not CaMKI , can also exhibit signiﬁcant Ca 2 + - independent activity ( Chatila et al . , 1996 ; Tokumitsu et al . , 2004 ) ( Figure 1 ) . In neurons , CaMKK - mediated phosphorylation / activation of CaMKIV ap - pears to be quite transient , lasting for only a few minutes ( Kasa - hara et al . , 2001 ; Uezu et al . , 2002 ) , whereas CaMKI phosphory - lation can persist up to an hour or more ( Schmitt et al . , 2005 ) . Although CaMKI and CaMKIV have overlap in substrate speciﬁc - ity determinants ( Lee et al . , 1994 ) , they can also exhibit unique phosphorylation site preferences even in the same protein substrates ( Corcoran et al . , 2003 ) . Cellular substrate speciﬁcities of CaMKI and CaMKIV are often dictated by different subcellular localizations ( see section on Subcellular Targeting ) . The primary substrates of CaMKK are CaMKI and CaMKIV , but CaMKK can also activate PKB / Akt ( Yano et al . , 1998 ) and AMP - kinase ( reviewed in Witters et al . , 2006 ) ( Figure 2 ) . PKB and AMP - kinase are referred to as secondary substrates be - cause their phosphorylation / activation by CaMKK is very slow . For example , activation of CaMKI upon NMDA receptor stimula - tion occurs in less than 5 min , whereas PKB / Akt activation by CaMKK is maximal in about 60 min ( Schmitt et al . , 2005 ) . CaMKK - mediated activation of PKB upon prolonged elevation of [ Ca 2 + ] I results in PKB phosphorylation and inactivation of the proapoptotic factor BAD , thereby protecting neurons from apo - ptosis ( Yano et al . , 1998 ) ( Figure 2 ) . AMP - kinase is critical for regulation of cellular energy metabolism in many tissues , and its function ( s ) in brain is just beginning to be explored . Recent ev - idence implicates it in hypothalamic production of neuropeptide Y and weight regulation ( Anderson et al . , 2008 ) . Intriguingly , a brain - speciﬁc member of the AMP - kinase family , SAD - B , has recently been identiﬁed as a target for CaMKK - mediated phos - phorylation / activation ( Fujimoto et al . , 2008 ) . This may be of in - terest , as mammalian SAD - B is involved in neuronal polarization ( Barnes et al . , 2007 ; Kishi et al . , 2005 ) and presynaptic neuro - transmitter release ( Inoue et al . , 2006 ) . The potential role of CaMKK in regulating neuronal functions via SAD - B warrants further investigation . Subcellular Targeting of CaM - Kinases Many protein kinases , including CaMKs ( Lee et al . , 1994 ) , have signiﬁcant overlap in their substrate recognition motifs , leading to a lack of substrate speciﬁcity in vitro . Cellular speciﬁcity is of - ten obtained by colocalization of substrates with kinases ( Tsui et al . , 2005 ) through their participation in multiprotein signaling complexes or targeting to subcellular compartments such as the nucleus ( nuclear import or export signals ) or membranes ( lipid modiﬁcations ) . In addition to colocalization with speciﬁc substrates , subcellular compartmentalization of CaMKs can Figure 1 . Schematic of CaM - Kinase Domains and Activation Properties ( A ) CaM - kinase domains : catalytic domains , green ; autoinhibitory domains , orange ; Ca 2 + / CaM - binding domains , yellow ; association do - main ( CaMKII ) , red . ( Reproduced by permission from Soderling and Stull , 2001 ) . ( B ) Effects of Ca 2 + / CaM and autophosphorylation and / or phosphorylation on total kinase activity ( + Ca 2 + / CaM , blue ) or autonomous activity ( (cid:2) Ca 2 + / CaM , gray ) . The putative autophosphory - lation site ( S / T ? ) in CaMKIV is unknown . See text for details ( Structure and Regulatory Mecha - nisms ) . Neuron 59 , September 25 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 915 Neuron Review also dictate their activation kinetics ( Inagaki et al . , 2000 ) , as [ Ca 2 + ] I dynamics vary considerably within the neuron ( e . g . , dendritic spine versus dendritic shaft ) ( Sabatini et al . , 2001 ) . CaMKII is present throughout the neuron as a soluble protein , but it is also localized through interactions with multiple proteins . For example , an insert in the b subunit of CaMKII speciﬁcally binds to and bundles F - actin to promote isoform - speciﬁc neurite outgrowth ( Fink et al . , 2003 ) and maintain dendritic spines ( Oka - moto et al . , 2007 ) . Importantly , CaMKII constitutes the major protein of the postsynaptic density ( PSD ) in dendritic spines of excitatory neurons where it interacts with several proteins ( re - viewed in Colbran , 2004b ) . Interaction of CaMKII with the PSD is dynamic and regulated by binding of Ca 2 + / CaM and the phos - phorylation status of CaMKII—autophosphorylation of Thr286 promotes and stabilizes CaMKII binding to the PSD ( Strack et al . , 1997 ) . Interaction with the NMDAR , predominantly with the NR2B subunit , is of particular interest since this channel has Ca 2 + permeability and several substrates of CaMKII exist in the PSD . Numerous studies have documented that stimulation of the NMDAR in neurons , which triggers autophosphorylation of CaMKII , promotes translocation of CaMKII to the PSD . In hippo - campal neurons , a brief stimulus promotes a transient and re - versible interaction of CaMKII with NR2B , whereas a stronger stimulus results in persistent translocation of CaMKII ( Bayer et al . , 2006 ) . These two modes of interaction involve different do - mains in CaMKII—the persistent interaction elicits constitutive activity of CaMKII . Induction of LTP in rat hippocampal slices increases CaMKII bound in spines ( Otmakhov et al . , 2004 ) , and the association of CaMKII with the PSD correlates with synaptic strength of individual spines ( Asrican et al . , 2007 ) . Figure 2 . Cellular Signaling by CaMKs Elevated intracellular Ca 2 + / CaM bind to and activate CaMKII , CaMKK , CaMKI , and CaMKIV . CaMKII autophosphorylates to generate signiﬁcant autonomous activity ( see Figure 1 ) . Pri - mary targets of CaMKK are CaMKI ( cytosolic ) and CaMKIV ( nuclear ) —these require binding of Ca 2 + / CaM to both CaMKK and CaMKI / CaMKIV ( see Figure 1 ) . Secondary substrates of CaMKK , which are phosphorylated at much slower rates than CaMKI and CaMKIV , are PKB / Akt and members of the AMP - kinase family , including SAD - B . Crosstalk between adenylyl cyclase ( A . C . ) / PKA to inhibit CaMKK and between CaMKI toactivateMEK / Erk are illustrated . See text fordetails . To assess the role of NMDA receptor subunit NR2B interaction with PSD molecules ( e . g . , a - CaMKII ) , a transgenic mouse expressing a C - ter - minal fragment of NR2B fused to a mutant form of the ligand - binding domain of the estrogen receptor ( NR2B - LBD ) was generated ( Zhou et al . , 2007 ) . Treatment with tamoxifen to elevate NR2B - LBD disrupted the interaction between a - CaMKII and NR2B and led to deﬁcits in LTP induction and spa - tial learning ( Zhou et al . , 2007 ) , consistent with an earlier study ( Barria and Malinow , 2005 ) . Interest - ingly , activation of the transgenic protein also decreased both the activity of a - CaMKII ( i . e . , auto - phosphorylation at Thr286 ) and the phosphoryla - tion of a key CaMKII substrate , the AMPA receptor subunit glutamate receptor 1 ( Barria et al . , 1997 ) , critical for LTP induction ( Zhou et al . , 2007 ) . These results showed that interac - tion with NR2B can modulate a - CaMKII activity , AMPA receptor function , and therefore LTP and learning . Whereas autophosphorylation of Thr286 stabilizes binding of CaMKII with the PSD , autophosphorylation of Thr305 / 306 sup - presses this interaction ( Elgersma et al . , 2002 ) . Intriguingly , in a mouse model of Angelman syndrome , a neurological disorder associated with severe mental retardation , there is enhanced phosphorylation of Thr305 and a reduction in the amount of CaMKII associated with the PSD ( Weeber et al . , 2003 ) . Since this mouse model also exhibits deﬁcits in LTP ( Jiang et al . , 1998 ) , these results are consistent with the hypothesis that PSD - associated CaMKII is critical for LTP and implicates CaMKII in mental retardation . CaMKK is present in neurons throughout the brain where the a isoform is distributed throughout the cell , and the b isoform may also be nuclear ( Nakamura et al . , 2001 ; Sakagami et al . , 2000 ) . CaMKI is predominantly cytoplasmic ( Picciotto et al . , 1995 ) , but a splice variant of the b isoform is nuclear ( Ueda et al . , 1999 ) . Cytoplasmic localization of the a isoform is probably due to the presence of a nuclear export signal in its regulatory domain ( Stedman et al . , 2004 ) . The g isoform , which is lipid mod - iﬁed , can associate with the Golgi and plasma membranes ( Takemoto - Kimura et al . , 2003 ) . Plasma membrane localization of the g isoform is probably important for the ability of this iso - form to exert crosstalk with the Ras / Erk pathway ( Wayman et al . , 2006 ) , since activated Ras is also associated with the plasma membrane . Subcellular localization of CaMKK and CaMKI with lipid rafts and / or scaffold proteins is important for 916 Neuron 59 , September 25 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Review their physiological functions , as detailed in the section on Neuro - nal Development . Based on immunostaining of brain sections and analysis of cultured neurons , active CaMKIV is predomi - nantly nuclear ( Jensen et al . , 1991 ) due to facilitated transport by importin a ( Kotera et al . , 2005 ; Lemrow et al . , 2004 ) . CaMKIV can form a complex with protein phosphatase 2A , which may account for its relatively transient activation in cells by CaMKK ( Anderson et al . , 2004 ; Kasahara et al . , 2001 ; Westphal et al . , 1998 ) . CaMKIV is most likely involved in regulating gene transcription ( see Gene Transcription ) . Crosstalk between CaM - Kinases and Other Signaling Pathways Cellular signaling pathways are seldom linear—often they form complex networks with other signaling pathways . This crosstalk can occur at several levels—there can be direct phosphorylation between protein kinases or regulatory phosphorylation of either an upstream or downstream effector of another kinase . For example , three splice variants of CaMKII contain an NLS that tar - gets them to the nucleus—this NLS can be phosphorylated by CaMKI or CaMKIV , thereby preventing their nuclear localization ( Heist et al . , 1998 ) . CaMKII can directly phosphorylate another CaM - dependent kinase , myosin light chain kinase ( MLCK ) ( Ha - shimoto and Soderling , 1990 ) , thereby reducing binding of Ca 2 + / CaM to MLCK and its sensitivity to Ca 2 + ( Tansey et al . , 1992 ) . As mentioned above , CaMKII directly binds the NMDAR , but it is also colocalized in the PSD with the Ras / Rap - GAP , syn - GAP , through the PDZ scaffold protein MUPP1 ( Krapivinsky et al . , 2004 ) . Details of synGAP regulation by CaMKII and the downstream consequences are somewhat controversial ( Chen et al . , 1998 ; Krapivinsky et al . , 2004 ; Oh et al . , 2004 ; Rumbaugh et al . , 2006 ) , but it appears to modulate membrane insertion of AMPARs , dendritic spine morphology , and synaptic responses ( Krapivinsky et al . , 2004 ; Vazquez et al . , 2004 ) . Several examples of crosstalk have been identiﬁed with the CaMKK / CaMKI cascade ( Figure 2 ) . CaMKK activity can be suppressed through PKA - mediated phosphorylation of Ser74 , Thr108 , and Ser458 . Ser458 is within the CaM - binding domain , and its phosphorylation suppresses binding of Ca 2 + / CaM to CaMKK ( Wayman et al . , 1997 ) , whereas phosphorylation of Ser74 promotes binding of protein 14 - 3 - 3 and inhibition of CaMKK ( Davare et al . , 2004 ) . Therefore , potential for a negative feedback loop exists : Ca 2 + / CaM would rapidly activate CaMKK , whereas subsequent activation of CaM - dependent adenylate cyclase would elevate cAMP to activate PKA , thereby phosphor - ylating and inhibiting CaMKK . In additionto crosstalkbetween thePKA andCaMKKsignaling pathways , there is very important communication between the CaMK cascade and the Mek / Erk pathway ( Figure 2 ) ( Schmitt et al . , 2004 ) . Stimulation of the NMDAR in cultured neurons or hippocampalslicesstronglyactivatesErk , aprocesssuppressed by dnCaMKK or dnCaMKI but not by either nuclear - localized dnCaMKIV or inhibition of CaMKII ( Schmitt et al . , 2005 ) . This Erk activation appears to be mediated by g CaMKI , since its RNAi knockdown , but not suppression of the other CaMKI iso - forms , blocks activity - dependent Erk activation ( Wayman et al . , 2006 ) . This NMDAR - dependent crosstalk between CaMKK / CaMKI and Mek / Erk appears to be important for a component ofE - LTP ( Schmittetal . , 2005 ) andinactivity - dependent dendritic arborization ( Wayman et al . , 2006 ) ( see sections on Synaptic Plasticity and Neuronal Development ) . However , the detailed mechanism whereby CaMKK / CaMKI activate MEK / Erk remains to be elucidated . Criteria for Evaluating Physiological Functions of CaM - Kinases Cellular signaling pathways need to be established using multiple , independent techniques , including pharmacological reagents , expression of dominant - interfering or constitutively active constructs , RNAi approaches , and targeted and / or tem - porally restricted gene knockouts , since each approach by itself has serious limitations . Many of the physiological functions , especially in neuronal development , that had been assigned to CaMKII were based on the ability of the pharmacological re - agents KN - 62 and KN - 93 to block those functions . Although KN - 62 and KN - 93 were originally thought to be speciﬁc for CaM - KII ( Tokumitsu et al . , 1990 ) , both of these reagents also suppress Ca 2 + / CaM activation of members of the CaMK cascade ( Enslen and Soderling , 1994 ; Mochizuki et al . , 1993 ; Hidaka and Yoko - kura , 1996 ) . These KN - type drugs also have potent effects on P2X7 receptors ( Baraldi et al . , 2004 ) and K + ( Ledoux et al . , 1999 ) and Ca 2 + channels ( Anderson et al . , 1998 ) . In light of the lack of speciﬁcity of KN - 62 and KN - 93 , many of the previously reported functions of CaMKII based on studies using these inhib - itors need to be reassessed in terms of potential regulation by other CaM - kinases . Indeed , recent studies , many of which are reviewed herein , have substantiated these concerns and shown regulatory roles for members of the CaMK cascade , especially in neuronal development . These results highlight the danger of assigning cellular functionality to a signaling molecule based on any single experimental approach . It should be noted that endogenous CaMKII activity in neurons can be suppressed by RNAi ( Okamoto et al . , 2007 ) or blocked by transfection of the full - length CaMKIIN ( Wayman et al . , 2004 ) or treatment with membrane - permeable peptides ( Fink et al . , 2003 ; Sanhueza et al . , 2007 ; Yang et al . , 2004 ) derived from either CaMKIIN ( Chang et al . , 1998 ) or the autoinhibitory domain of CaMKII ( Ishida et al . , 1995 ) . CaMKIIN is an endogenous neuronal protein that speciﬁcally inhibits CaMKII with little of no effect on other CaM - kinases , PKA , PKC , or Erk ( Chang et al . , 1998 , 2001 ) . A caveat that needs to be considered when overexpressing kinases , either by transfection of cultured cells or in transgenic mice , is that overlap of substrate speciﬁcity determinants among several protein kinases can confound interpretation of results . Due to high levels of expression , the kinases may mislocalize and have access to substrates not available to their endogenous counterpart that has a discrete subcellular compartmentalization ( seesectiononSubcellularTargeting ) . Forexample , theobserva - tion that transfected caCaMKIV can activate Erk ( Enslen et al . , 1996 ) is probably accounted for by its mislocalization outside of the nucleus due to overexpression—more recent studies clearly identify CaMKI in Erk activation ( Schmitt et al . , 2004 , 2005 ; Wayman et al . , 2006 ) . This conclusion about mislocalization of expressed CaMKIV is consistent with the fact that transfected dominant - negative CaMKIV ( dnCaMKIV ) is expressed through - out the neuron ( Lemrow et al . , 2004 ) and suppresses axonal Neuron 59 , September 25 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 917 Neuron Review outgrowth ( Wayman et al . , 2004 ) . However , if a nuclear localization signal is attached to restrict its expression to the nucleus and thereby mimic endogenous CaMKIV , this NLS - dnCaMKIV no longer regulates axonal elongation or activity - dependent dendritic growth that physiologically are regulated by CaMKK / CaMKI ( Wayman et al . , 2004 , 2006 ) . There is an additional concern when overexpressing constitutively active ( ca ) kinases , since they are constantly active and can overpower opposingproteinphosphatases . Moreover , somestudiesuseex - pression of truncated CaMKs containing only the catalytic do - main that may also mislocalize . For example , full - length a CaMKI is predominantly cytoplasmic , whereas the truncated , constitu - tively active construct ( e . g . , residues 1 – 293 ) is also nuclear due to the loss of the nuclear export signal in the regulatory domain ( Stedman et al . , 2004 ) . Thus , their high levels of constant activity andmislocalizationcanpotentiallyyieldnonphysiologicalresults . RNAi approaches to suppress expression of endogenous pro - teins have become popular , but they need to be controlled by demonstrating rescue through transfection of a homolog that is resistant to the RNAi . The major concern of the traditional gene knockout approach is that developmental deﬁcits or compensa - tory expression of other isoforms may obscure physiological / be - havioral responses in mature animals . For example , any of the germ line mutations studied could have affected development or other processes that could have changed the biochemistry , neurophysiology , or neuroanatomy of the brain prior to the be - havioral tests administered , thus confounding the interpretation of the results . These concerns have been largely obviated by use of spatially and / or temporally restricted knockout paradigms , but even here sometimes considerable time is necessary for effects to materialize . Thus , mapping physiological functions of signaling pathways can be complex and requires corroborating results from several independent approaches . Of course , most neuronal readouts ( e . g . , dendritic spine formation ) require numerous individual steps , each of which may be regulated in part by several signaling pathways . Therefore , it is to be expected that multiple signaling molecules are required for such multifaceted phenomena . Regulation of Gene Transcription and Protein Synthesis Neuronal development and plasticity are dependent on tran - scription of numerous genes regulated by agonists or cues that alter [ Ca 2 + ] I ( reviewed in Flavell and Greenberg , 2008 ) . Several Ca 2 + - responsive transcription factors , such as CREB and ATF - 1 , have been identiﬁed in vitro and in situ as targets for CaMKs . The most intensively investigated of these is CREB , which requires phosphorylation on Ser133 to stimulate transcription ( Impey and Goodman , 2001 ) . One caveat is that multiple kinases ( PKA , CaMKs , MAP - kinases ) , all of which can be activated by elevated [ Ca 2 + ] I , can phosphorylate Ser133 . Therefore , sorting out which kinase mediates a particular physiological Ca 2 + - de - pendent response can be difﬁcult . Although CaMKII can phos - phorylate Ser133 ( Sheng et al . , 1991 ) , it also phosphorylates Ser142 , which blocks CREB - mediated transcription even when Ser133 is phosphorylated ( Sun et al . , 1994 ) . Transfection with constitutively active CaMKI or CaMKIV can stimulate transcription of a CREB reporter gene ( Sun et al . , 1996 ) . Of these , CaMKIV , which is nuclear localized , may be important for direct phosphorylation of CREB or its related transcription factor ATF - 1 ( Sun et al . , 1996 ) ( Figure 2 ) . However , in depolarized neurons , CaMKIV may only contribute to an early phase of CREB phosphorylation , whereas prolonged CREB phosphorylation , which is required for gene transcription , ap - pears to be mediated by the MAP - kinase pathway ( Wu et al . , 2001a ) . Indeed , induction of LTP results in a CaMKK - mediated phosphorylation and activation of nuclear CaMKIV ( Kasahara et al . , 2001 ) that is relatively transient ( (cid:3) 10 min ) , probably due to associated protein phosphatase 2A ( Anderson et al . , 2004 ; Westphal et al . , 1998 ) . However , it appears that the Ca 2 + - inde - pendent activity of CaMKIV is required for transcriptional readout ( Chow et al . , 2005 ) , and this parameter has not been measured in neurons . Once phosphorylated on Ser133 , CREB recruits its co - activators CBP and p300 . CaMKIV can also phosphorylate CBP and thereby stimulate CREB - dependent transcription ( Hardi - ngham et al . , 1999 ; Impey et al . , 2002 ) . In summary , the above studies , as well as those using transgenic animals ( see section onSynapticPlasticityandBehavior ) , ontheroleofCaMKIVinreg - ulating CREB / CBP - mediated gene transcription are suggestive but not conclusive at this time . Although a splice variant of the b isoform of CaMKI is nuclear , its role in direct stimulation of gene transcription has not been tested . However , CaMKI does contribute strongly to Ca 2 + - medi - ated transcription in neurons through crosstalk with the Ras / Erk pathway ( Schmitt et al . , 2004 ) . In cultured hippocampal neurons or acute slices , NMDA - stimulated activation of Erk is predomi - nantly mediated through CaMKK / CaMKI ( Schmitt et al . , 2005 ) . Furthermore , this pathway appears to be important for dendritic arborization where activity - dependent NMDAR activation of the g isoform of CaMKI results in MEK / Erk - mediated CREB - regulated transcription of Wnt - 2 ( Wayman et al . , 2006 ) and microRNA132 ( Wayman et al . , 2008 ) ( see section on Neuronal Development ) . Most dendritic proteins are translated in the soma and subse - quently transported into the dendrites . However , the mRNA for some synaptic proteins ( including a - CaMKII ) is itself transported to dendrites and translated near or within postsynaptic spines ( Mayford et al . , 1996b ) . Blocking the dendritic translocation of a - CaMKII mRNA by targeted deletion of its 3 0 UTR resulted in a profound ( > 75 % ) reduction in synaptic ( i . e . , PSD associated ) a - CaMKII protein , as well as deﬁcits in both the stability of L - LTP and memory . Unlike the L - LTP and long - term memory , the E - LTP and short - term memory were unaffected by this muta - tion ( Miller et al . , 2002 ) . These remarkable results suggest that the local translation and subcellular localization of a - CaMKII at synaptic sites may be important for the stability , but not induc - tion , of LTP and for memory but not learning . Protein synthesis itself is also subject to regulatory phosphor - ylation . There are several proteins that enhance cap - dependent mRNA initiation , such as mTOR , eIF4E , and its inhibitory binding protein 4E - BP1 , that are positively regulated by phosphorylation , in part via MAP - kinases ( Wang et al . , 1998 ) . Induction of LTP en - hances phosphorylation of these factors ( Kelleher et al . , 2004 ; Schmitt et al . , 2005 ) , and mice expressing dnMEK1 show an impairment in L - LTP and in phosphorylation of these translation factors ( Kelleher et al . , 2004 ) . These phosphorylations may be mediated by the CaMKK / CaMKI crosstalk with MEK / Erk , since 918 Neuron 59 , September 25 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Review treatment with STO - 609 blocks their phosphorylation in re - sponse to LTP induction ( Schmitt et al . , 2005 ) . However , corrob - oration by independent approaches is needed . In addition to general translation factors , there are several proteins that regulate translational initiation of speciﬁc mRNA species through binding to speciﬁc elements in the 3 0 UTR . One of these , cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding protein 1 or CPEB1 ( Richter , 2007 ) , is part of a multiprotein complex con - taining Maskin and eIF4E that regulates translation of proteins ( e . g . , a CaMKII , insulin receptor substrate protein 53 , tissue plas - minogen activator , AMPA receptor binding protein ) ( Bramham and Wells , 2007 ) , several of which are involved in synaptic devel - opment and / or plasticity . CPEB1 promotes the transport of selected mRNAs into dendrites where they undergo activity - dependent polyadenylation and translation ( Huang et al . , 2002 ; Wu et al . , 1998 ) . CPEB1 , upon phosphorylation of Thr171 and / or Ser177 by Aurora kinase , promotes polyadenylation of these mRNAs and releases eIF4E from its inhibitory interaction with Maskin , thereby stimulating translation ( Richter , 2007 ) . Based on activity - dependent polyadenylation in neurons , several other proteins may be regulated by CPEB ( Du and Richter , 2005 ) . CaMKII can also phosphorylate CPEB1 and stimulate synthesis of CPE - containing mRNAs ( Atkins et al . , 2004 ) . Induction of chemical LTD promoted transient dephosphorylation of CPEB1 , whereas induction of L - LTP , but not E - LTP , resulted in CaMKII - dependent phosphorylation of CPEB1 that was pro - longed due to simultaneous inhibition of protein phosphatase 1 ( PP1 ) ( Atkins et al . , 2005 ) . These results suggest that certain paradigms of Ca 2 + - mediated synaptic plasticity modulate the phosphorylation status of CPEB1 through CaMKII and PP1 to regulate protein synthesis in dendrites . In contrast to enhanced translational initiation by CaMKs as discussed above , translational elongation of most proteins is suppressed via phosphorylation of eEF2 by CaMKIII ( also known as eEF2 - kinase ) ( Mitsui et al . , 1993 ) . This CaMKIII / eEF2 pathway appears to be critically involved in LTD by group 1 metabotropic receptors ( mGluRs ) and requires the immediate - early gene Arc / Arg3 . 1 ( Park et al . , 2008 ) . CaMKIII is bound to mGluRs , in part through an interaction with the PSD scaffold protein Homer , but this interaction is reduced by mGluR activation and Ca 2 + el - evation . Paradoxically , synthesis of Arc / Arg3 . 1 , which promotes AMPAR endocytosis through interaction with endophilin 2 / 3 and dynamin ( Chowdhury et al . , 2006 ) , is rapidly ( 5 min ) enhanced by CaMKIII phosphorylation of eEF2 ( Park et al . , 2008 ) . Thus , ge - netic deletion of CaMKIII results in a selective loss of rapid mGluR - dependent Arc / Arg3 . 1 translation and in LTD induced by either mGluR stimulation or paired - pulse low - frequency stim - ulation but not in NMDAR - dependent LTD or E - LTP . This path - way appears to also have implications for synaptic plasticity in fragile X syndrome , the most common inherited cause of mental retardation and autism ( O’Donnell and Warren , 2002 ) . The fragile X mental retardation protein ( FMRP ) that is reduced in this syndrome is a translational repressor of speciﬁc synaptic mRNAs . In FMRP knockout mice , there is an increased associa - tion of Arc / Arg3 . 1 with polyribosomes , presumably resulting in enhanced basal synthesis of Arc / Arg3 / 1 to account for the fact that mGluR LTD in these mice is protein synthesis independent ( Hou et al . , 2006 ; Nosyreva and Huber , 2006 ) . Neuronal Development Several aspects of neuronal development , such as outgrowth andpathﬁndingofaxonsanddendriticarborizationandspinefor - mation , are regulated in part by localized Ca 2 + dynamics ( Konur and Ghosh , 2005 ; Zheng and Poo , 2007 ) . Many of the stimulatory effects of Ca 2 + were ascribed to CaMKII because they were largely suppressed by KN - 62 or KN - 93 ( Kuhn et al . , 1998 ; Solem et al . , 1995 ; Vaillant et al . , 2002 ; Williams et al . , 1995 ) , originally thought to be speciﬁc inhibitors of CaMKII ( Tokumitsu et al . , 1990 ) . With the realization that these pharmacological com - pounds inhibit other targets , including CaMKI and CaMKIV ( En - slenandSoderling , 1994 ; HidakaandYokokura , 1996 ; Mochizuki et al . , 1993 ) , roles of other CaMKs in neuronal development have also been examined . These recent studies show that multiple members of the CaMK family perform essential functions in the development of neurons . Activation of CaMKII in Xenopus optic tectum reduces the rate of dendritic outgrowth through stabilizing the dendritic arbor late in development ( Wu and Cline , 1998 ; Zou and Cline , 1999 ) . In depolarized hippocampal neurons , b CaMKII exerts a stimulatory effect on ﬁlopodial motility early in development ( 3 DIV ) but , as in the Xenopus optic tectum ( Wu and Cline , 1998 ) , is inhibitory at later times ( 11 DIV ) when synaptogenesis is prominent ( Fink et al . , 2003 ) . CaMKII has also been implicated in regulating Ca 2 + - dependent axonal growth cone attraction ( Wen et al . , 2004 ) . Relatively large local Ca 2 + transients activate CaMKII to give attraction , whereas smaller Ca 2 + signals mediate repulsion through the CaM - dependent phosphatase calcineurin . CaMKII also can regulate dendritic spines through at least two mechanisms . As mentioned previously , b CaMKII binds and bundles F actin , and RNAi knockdown of b , but not a , CaMKII reduces the number of mature spines in cultured hippocampal slices ( Okamoto et al . , 2007 ) . This effect of b CaMKII does not require kinase activity , as a kinase - dead mutant is able to rescue the RNAi effect . CaMKII also modulates enlargement of dendritic spines and recruitment of AMPARs through its phosphorylation and activation of the Rac1 GEF kalirin - 7 ( Xie et al . , 2007 ) ( Figure 3 ) . Depolarization ofcorticalneurons ( 2 – 4DIV ) promotesdendritic growth that requires activation of both ERK and a CaMK to stim - ulate CREB - mediated transcription ( Redmond et al . , 2002 ) . The authors concluded that this CaMK is CaMKIV because expres - sion of caCaMKIV phenocopies the effect of depolarization on dendritic outgrowth . Two very recent articles have likewise concluded involvement of CaMKIV via CREB in dendritic devel - opment and synapse formation based on transfection of either dnCaMKIVorcaCaMKIV ( Taietal . , 2008 ; Zhouetal . , 2008 ) . How - ever , as discussed above ( Criteria for Physiological Functions ) , transfected CaMKIV is not nuclear restricted ( Wayman et al . , 2004 ) , like endogenous CaMKIV ( Jensen et al . , 1991 ) , and there - fore it can mimic cytosolic CaMKI , which activates Erk ( Schmitt et al . , 2004 ) and CREB - dependent transcription ( Wayman et al . , 2006 ) . When a nuclear localization signal is attached to restrict transfected dnCaMKIV expression to the nucleus , this dnCaM - KIV does not suppress axonal outgrowth or activity - dependent dendritic arborization that are actually mediated by CaMKI ( Wayman et al . , 2004 , 2006 ) . However , since there may be some nonnuclear CaMKIV in neurons , it will be important to Neuron 59 , September 25 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 919 Neuron Review determinewhetherreductionofendogenousCaMKIVusingRNAi approaches , as has been done for CaMKI ( see below ) , inﬂuences neuronal development . CaMKIV knockout mice apparently have normal forebrain development with some impairment of Purkinje development in cerebellum ( Ribar et al . , 2000 ) . In another study , neuronal activity , mimicked by repetitive KCl depolarizations , stimulates ﬁlopodial formation on hippocampal neuron dendrites that involves both Erk and a CaMK ( Wu et al . , 2001b ) . This is pre - sumably mediated by CaMKK / CaMKI activation of Erk ( Schmitt et al . , 2004 ; Wayman et al . , 2006 ) . More recent studies have directly tested roles of CaMKK / CaMKI in neuronal development using multiple , independent ap - proaches : pharmacological inhibitors , transfection of dominant - negative constructs , and suppression of endogenous signaling molecules using RNAi . In most of these studies ( Saneyoshi et al . , 2008 ; Wayman et al . , 2004 , 2006 ) , inhibition of neuronal de - velopment by the CaMKK inhibitor STO - 609 was rescued by transfection with a mutant of CaMKK that is 100 - fold less sensi - tive to inhibition by STO - 609 ( Tokumitsu et al . , 2003 ) . Likewise , inhibitory effects of RNAi against the rat homologs were rescued by human homologs . These series of studies , performed largely with cultured neurons but with many results conﬁrmed in brain slices , have demonstrated requirements for CaMKK / CaMKI in regulationofaxonalgrowthconemorphology / motilityandaxonal outgrowth ( Wayman et al . , 2004 ) , dendritic arborization ( Take - moto - Kimuraetal . , 2007 ; Waymanetal . , 2006 , 2008 ) , andforma - tion of dendritic spines and synapses ( Saneyoshi et al . , 2008 ) ( Figures 3 and 4 ) . Initial outgrowth of dendrites ( 2 DIV , total length (cid:3) 100 m m ) in immature cortical neurons involves CaMKI g —over - expression of CaMKI g enhances dendritic length , whereas RNAi against this isoform suppresses outgrowth and branching by (cid:3) 50 % ( Takemoto - Kimura et al . , 2007 ) . Furthermore , cultured cortical neurons from a CaMKI g knockout mouse exhibit about a 25 % reduction in dendritic length and branching . Importantly , the CaMKI g is colocalized in lipid rafts with Rac and its GEF , STEF ( Figure 4 ) . Expression of a dominant - negative STEF blocks neurite enhancement by overexpressed CaMKI g . Effects ofRNAi against other CaMKI isoforms was not investigated in this study nor was the mechanism by which CaMKI g activates STEF . This same signaling pathway also mediates Ca 2 + - dependent stimula - tory effectsof BDNF onearlydendritogenesis ( Takemoto - Kimura et al . , 2007 ) . In another study using hippocampal neurons ( Way - man et al . , 2006 ) , basal dendritogenesis from 4 – 9 DIV was not affected by the CaMKK inhibitor STO - 609 under conditions where axonal outgrowth was strongly suppressed ( Wayman et al . , 2004 ) . However , activity - enhanced dendritic arborization in mature neurons ( 7 – 9 DIV , total dendritic length (cid:3) 1200 m m ) was dependent on NMDAR activation of both the a and g iso - forms of CaMKI ( Wayman et al . , 2006 ) . The CaMKI g effect was mediated via crosstalk to activate MEK / Erk ( Schmitt et al . , 2004 ) and subsequent CREB - dependent transcription of Wnt - 2 ( Wayman et al . , 2006 ) and microRNA132 ( Wayman et al . , 2008 ) ( Figure 4 ) . Previous studies have demonstrated that Wnts , via interaction with b - catenin , enhance dendritic arborization ( Yu and Malenka , 2003 ) . Conversely , microRNA132 functions by suppressing the expression of p250GAP , a Rac / Cdc42 GAP . The consequence of decreased p250GAP levels is an increase in Rac activity and stimulated dendritic growth ( Wayman et al . , 2008 ) . It is intriguing that different temporal aspects of dendritic development may be mediated by CaMKI g utilizing different sig - naling pathways—BDNF enhancement of early development is via lipid raft CaMKI g activation of STEF / Rac to modify the actin cytoskeleton ( Takemoto - Kimura et al . , 2007 ) , whereas subse - quent activity - dependent arborization is mediated in part by MEK / Erk / CREB transcription of Wnt - 2 and microRNA132 ( Way - man et al . , 2006 , 2008 ) ( Figure 4 ) . It will be important to determine whether different sources of intracellular Ca 2 + elevation ( e . g . , BDNF versus NMDAR ) activate different subcellular pools or isoforms of CaMKI . A current limitation in these studies is the lack of isoform - speciﬁc antibodies . CaMKI a also plays a role in activity - dependent dendritic arborization through an unidentiﬁed pathway ( Wayman et al . , 2006 ) . Potential candidates ( see Table 1 ) include regulation of the actin cytoskeleton via CaMKI - medi - ated phosphorylation of myosin II regulatory light chain ( Suizu et al . , 2002 ) or via Rac1 activation ( Saneyoshi et al . , 2008 ) . An - other possibility is CaMKI phosphorylation of Numb ( Tokumitsu et al . , 2005 , 2006 ) , which regulates neuronal development ( Nishimura et al . , 2003 , 2006 ) . Recent work demonstrates that CaMKK and CaMKI modulate another very important aspect of neuronal development—forma - tion of dendritic spines and synapses ( Saneyoshi et al . , 2008 ) . Figure 3 . Regulation of Spine / Synapse Formation by CaMKs Neuronal activity , via Ca 2 + inﬂux through the NMDAR , can activate both CaMKII and CaMKK / CaMKI . ( Left side ) CaMKII is complexed with PSD - 95 and the Rac GEF kalarin - 7 , which it phosphorylates and activates to promote Pak - mediated actin formation and dendritic spines . ( Right side ) Similarly , CaMKK and CaMKI a are part of a multiprotein complex with the Rac GEF b PIX and GIT1 , which localizes it in spines . CaMKI phosphorylates and acti - vates b PIX to stimulate Rac - and Pak - mediated spine and synapse formation . 920 Neuron 59 , September 25 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Review CaMKK and CaMKI a are colocalized with b PIX and GIT1 in den - dritic spines as part of a multiprotein complex . Since b PIX is a Rac / Cdc42 GEF and one of the major effectors of Rac is Pak1 , which also binds b PIX , b PIX coordinates Rac - dependent activation of Pak1 ( Mott et al . , 2005 ) . There are numerous down - stream effectors of Pak1 that regulate actin dynamics ( Bokoch , 2003 ) . Subcellular localization of b PIX to the postsynaptic den - sity of dendritic spines is mediated largely by scaffold proteins such as GIT1 ( Ko et al . , 2003 ; Zhang et al . , 2003 ) and Shank ( Park et al . , 2003 ) . Endogenous neuronal activity , via NMDAR stimulation of CaMKK and CaMKI , promotes a CaMKI phosphor - ylation of b PIX to enhance GTP loading of Rac1 and develop - mental formation of mushroom - shaped spines and synapses ( Saneyoshi et al . , 2008 ) ( Figure 3 ) . The CaMK cascade may also regulate neuronal development through modulation of microtubules . Upon activation by Ca 2 + / CaM , the catalytic domain of CaMKI interacts with and phos - phorylates multiple sites on microtubule afﬁnity regulating kinase 2 ( MARK2 ) ( Uboha et al . , 2007 ) . MARK2 , which is downstream of the PAR - 3 / PAR - 6 / PKC complex , promotes axon speciﬁcation through regulation of the microtubule cytoskeleton ( Chen et al . , 2006 ) . Enhanced axonal elongation due to overexpression of ca - CaMKI is blocked by coexpression of the MARK2 mutant where the CaMKI sites have been mutated ( Uboha et al . , 2007 ) . Micro - tubule dynamics are also regulated by stathmin phosphorylation on Ser16 induced by overexpression of caCaMKIV ( Melander Gradin et al . , 1997 ) . However , it is questionable whether endog - enous nuclear CaMKIV catalyzes this reaction , but CaMKI can phosphorylate Ser16 in stathmin in vitro ( G . A . W . and T . R . S . , unpublished data ) . Figure 4 . Regulation of Dendritic Development by CaMK g ( Top right ) Neurotropins . Initial outgrowth of neu - rites to form dendrites ( total length (cid:3) 100 m m ) is regulated in part by spontaneous and / or neurotro - pin - mediated ( e . g . , BDNF ) activation of lipid - mod - iﬁed CaMKI g that is colocalized in a lipid raft with Rac and its GEF , STEF . This signaling pathway is postulated to enhance actin polymerization and thereby promote dendrite formation . NeuronalAc - tivity . Continueddendriticarborization ( totallength > 1000 m m ) via neuronal activity requires Ca 2 + in - ﬂux through the NMDAR to activate CaMKK and both a and g CaMKI . The CaMKI g activates the MEK / Erk pathway to stimulate CREB - dependent synthesis of Wnt - 2 and microRNA132 ( miR132 ) . Wnts are known to stimulate dendritic develop - ment via b - catenins , and miR132 suppresses translation of p250GAP , thereby stimulating Rac1 and dendritic outgrowth . Downstream tar - gets of CaMKI a in this system remain to be identi - ﬁed—potential candidates are discussed in the text ( Neuronal Development and Table 1 ) . Modi - ﬁed ﬁgure used by permission ( Ciani and Salinas , 2008 ) . Synaptic Plasticity and Behavior There are multiple mechanisms that can produce synaptic potentiation or depres - sion throughout the brain , but the focus here will be the CA1 synapse in the hippo - campus where long - term potentiation ( LTP ) and depression ( LTD ) , cellular models of learning and memory , have been most intensively investigated ( reviewed in Derkach et al . , 2007 ; Lisman et al . , 2002 ; Luscher et al . , 2000 ) . LTP can be induced at the CA1 synapse in acute hippocampal slices by multiple induction para - digms , including high - frequency stimulation ( HFS ) , theta - burst stimulation ( TBS ) , and pairing of pre - and postsynaptic depolar - izations ( pairing - induced ) . The TBS protocol is probably the most physiological , as it mimics hippocampal ﬁring patterns dur - ing active exploration and learning in rodents ( Feder and Ranck , 1973 ; Otto et al . , 1991 ) . LTP is often divided into an early stage ( E - LTP ) lasting (cid:3) 1 hr that does not require gene transcription and a late - phase ( L - LTP , 1 – 4 hr ) that is dependent on gene tran - scription , particularly mediated by the transcription factor CREB ( see Gene Transcription ) . Induction of LTP by these multiple pro - tocols is dependent on transient stimulation of the NMDA recep - tor ( NMDAR ) with resultant Ca 2 + inﬂux . However , there appear to be multiple cellular mechanisms downstream of the Ca 2 + signal , even for E - LTP , that are mediated in part by CaMKs and result in potentiation of AMPAR currents . For example , these different mechanisms can be partially dissected using GluR1 knockout mice and / or infusion of Ca 2 + buffers with different chelating properties into the postsynaptic neuron ( Hoffman et al . , 2002 ) . HFS LTP in neonatal rodent hippocampus appears to require a PKA signaling pathway , whereas , in adult hippocampus , CaM - KII is essential ( Yasuda et al . , 2003 ) . Furthermore , some potenti - ated neurons show an increase in unitary conductance whereas others do not ( Benke et al . , 1998 ) , indicative of different mecha - nisms . It is likely that there are multiple Ca 2 + sensors ( e . g , CaMKI , CaMKII , adenylate cyclase , etc . ) that trigger discrete Neuron 59 , September 25 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 921 Neuron Review downstream signaling pathways that alter synaptic trafﬁcking of AMPARs , modulation of existing AMPAR properties ( e . g . , open probability , conductance ) , or synthesis of AMPAR subunits . Of course , even a single transducer could mediate different re - sponses depending on its localization . For example , CaMKII bound to the NMDAR would experience Ca 2 + dynamics and may selectively phosphorylate colocalized substrates different than soluble CaMKII in the dendritic spine head . While this review focuses on roles of CaMKs in LTP , it is clear that other Ser / Thr kinases ( e . g . , PKA , PKC , MAP - kinases ) and tyrosine kinases ( Src , Fyn ) also are important , especially in L - LTP ( Smolen et al . , 2006 ) . CaMKII has unique structural and biochemical properties ( see Structure and Regulatory Mechanisms ) that make it an ideal can - didate to be involved in LTP induction . ( 1 ) Intramolecular autophosphorylation of Thr286 allows a transient Ca 2 + inﬂux through the NMDAR during LTP induction to generate a sustained output signal via auton - omous CaMKII activity ( Figure 5 ) . ( 2 ) The extent of holoenzyme autophosphorylation , and therefore autonomous activity , can decode the fre - quency of postsynaptic Ca 2 + oscillations due to neuronal activity . ( 3 ) CaMKII is abundant in the PSD where it binds several proteins , including the NMDAR , in an activity - dependent manner ( see section on Subcellular Targeting ) . ( 4 ) CaMKII phosphorylates several proteins in the PSD dur - ing LTP , such as AMPARs , that are thought to be impor - tant in synaptic potentiation . Indeed , a large body of diverse evidence from molecular , cellular , and transgenic animal studies establishes CaMKII as a key player in mediating induction and expression of E - LTP by perhaps modulating trafﬁcking and properties of AMPARs . Some of these key observations are summarized as follows . ( 1 ) Enhancing postsynaptic CaMKII activity induces synaptic potentiation that occludes subsequent induction of LTP , indicative of common mechanisms ( Lledo et al . , 1995 ) . ( 2 ) Pharmacological or genetic inhibition of CaMKII activity or autophosphorylation block LTP induction ( Malinow et al . , 1989 ; Silva et al . , 1992b ) . ( 3 ) Blocking postsynaptic CaMKII activity after induction of LTP suppress expression of LTP ( Sanhueza et al . , 2007 ) . The roles of a CaMKII in E - LTP based on molecular and cellular studies have been extensively reviewed ( Colbran and Brown , 2004 ; Lisman et al . , 2002 ; Malenka and Nicoll , 1999 ; Soderling , 2000 ) , and results from genetic manipulations substantiate and extend these conclusions . In spite of the caveats noted previ - ously for transgenic / knockout studies ( see Criteria for Evaluating Physiological Functions ) , the striking consistency and conver - gence of the results presented with a wide variety of tools make an overwhelming case for a role for CaMKII in learning Table 1 . Substrates of CaMKI Identiﬁed In Vitro and / or In Situ Protein Phosphorylation Site Regulatory Consequence of Phosphorylation Predicted or Demonstrated Physiological Effect Reference b Pix Ser516 increased Rac GEF activity enhance actin polymerization , spinogenesis Saneyoshi et al . , 2008 MARKS2 / Par - 1b Thr294 Ser92 increased kinase activity increased axonal outgrowth Uboha et al . , 2007 nNOS ( neuronal nitric oxide synthase ) Ser741 inhibition of nNOS activity unknown Song et al . , 2004 Numb / Numbl Ser264 / Ser 304 Numb / Numbl recuitment of 14 - 3 - 3 and decreased binding to AP - 2 endocytosis ? Tokumitsu et al . , 2005 , 2006 MRLC ( Myosin II Regulatory Light Chain ) Ser19 increased Mg - ATPase activity of Myosin II Actin dynamics Suizu et al . , 2002 CREB ( cAMP response element - binding protein ) Ser133 transcriptional activation transcriptional activation Sheng et al . , 1991 ATF1 ( activating transcription factor ) Ser63 transcriptional activation transcriptional activation Sun et al . , 1996 CFTR ( cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane conductance regulator ) unknown unknown unknown Picciotto et al . , 1992 Translational initiation factor 4GII Ser1156 unknown unknown Qin et al . , 2003 HDAC - 5 ( histone deacetylase ) Ser259 , Ser498 recuitment of 14 - 3 - 3 resulting in disruption of MEF2 - HDAC complex and nuclear export of HDAC5 blocks MyoD - dependent conversion of ﬁbroblast to muscle McKinsey et al . , 2000 HSP - 25 ( 25 kDa heat shock protein ) Ser15 + Ser85 ( minor site ) unknown unknown Corcoran et al . , 2003 p300 ( transcriptional co - activator ) Ser89 suppress histone acetyltransferase activity repress transcription Corcoran et al . , 2003 ; Yuan et al . , 2002 922 Neuron 59 , September 25 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Review and memory . Furthermore , the evidence for its involvement in learning and memory goes well beyond the behavioral experi - ments described , since there is also extensive evidence for the involvement of this kinase in synaptic plasticity , and synaptic plasticity is central to learning and memory . Thus , despite the limitations of the individual experiments described herein , collectively , the data presented demonstrate that CaMKII has a key role in synaptic plasticity , learning , and memory . The a - CaMKII gene was one of the ﬁrst to be implicated in both LTP and learning and memory : deletion of a - CaMKII impaired CA1 LTP and spatial learning in mutant mice ( Silva et al . , 1992a , 1992b ) . Mice with a point mutation that prevents auto - phosphorylation at Thr286 were severely impaired in both LTP and spatial learning , indicating the importance of autonomous activity of this kinase for synaptic plasticity and learning / memory ( Giese et al . , 1998 ) . This was extended by using a tetracycline - controlled transactivator ( tTA ) system to control the onset of ex - pression of the constitutively active ( T286D ) a - CaMKII in mouse forebrain ( Mayford et al . , 1996a ) . These results indicated that even deregulation of this kinase in mature animals causes abnor - mal synaptic plasticity and learning / memory , providing evidence that the learning deﬁcits associated with a - CaMKII mutations were not caused by developmental changes ( Mayford et al . , 1996a ) . Interestingly , not all learning and / or memory tasks were equally affected by these CaMKII mutations , indicating that not all forms of memory are supported by the same molec - ular synaptic mechanisms ( Bach et al . , 1995 ; Mayford et al . , 1996a ; Mizuno and Giese , 2005 ) . Interestingly , a - CaMKII auto - phosphorylation at Thr286 is essential for NMDAR - dependent LTP ( Silva et al . , 1992b ) in CA1 but not in the dentate gyrus ( Cooke et al . , 2006 ) , suggesting that while autophosphorylation of this kinase is critical for spatial learning ( Giese et al . , 1998 ) it may not be essential for behavioral functions associated with the dentate gyrus , such as pattern separation . a CaMKII also appears to modulate memory consolidation— this was ﬁrst systematically studied with mice heterozygous for a null mutation of this kinase ( Frankland et al . , 2001 , 2004 ) . Mem - ory consolidation studies revealed that both spatial learning and contextual conditioning tested 24 hr after training were unaf - fected by this mutation but that memory tested at later time points , including 36 days after training , was dramatically disrup - ted . Perhaps because the kinase is far more abundant in the hippocampus than in the cortex , this heterozygous mutation was shown to disrupt cortical LTP without affecting hippocampal CA1 LTP ( Frankland et al . , 2001 ) . Thus , these data are in agree - ment with the idea that plasticity mechanisms are critical for permanent memory storage in cortical networks ( Frankland and Bontempi , 2005 ; Wiltgen et al . , 2004 ) . Current models propose that although spatial and contextual information storage may initially be dependent on hippocampal circuits , eventually this in - formationisstoredincorticalnetworks ( FranklandandBontempi , 2005 ; Wiltgen et al . , 2004 ) . Accordingly , although a - CaMKII het - erozygous null mutants revealed normal hippocampal activation ( i . e . , immediate - early gene expression ) immediately after training andfollowing aretrieval test24hrlater , theyfailedtoactivatecor - tical networks required for remote memory retrieval ( i . e . , 36 days after training ) ( Frankland et al . , 2004 ) . It is possible that the loss of cortical LTP in these mutants prevents cortical memory storage and therefore is responsible for their remote memory deﬁcits . These results revealed the ﬁrst molecular insights into remote memorystorageincorticalnetworks : theydemonstrateacorrela - tion between a CaMKII - dependent cortical LTP and memory consolidation . The role of CaMKII in either consolidation or retrieval of mem - ory was investigated in more detail with an elegant chemical - genetic approach ( Alaimo et al . , 2001 ) in which the enzymatic activity of a transgenic a CaMKII was controlled by a synthetic inhibitor designed to exclusively bind the altered ATP domain of the transgenic kinase ( Wang et al . , 2003 ) . With this approach , the overexpressed transgenic a CaMKII can be selectively and quickly inactivated with the synthetic inhibitor . These studies showed that elevating a CaMKII activity ( by removing the syn - thetic inhibitor from the drinking water ) resulted in dramatic Figure 5 . Schematic of CaMK Activations by Long - Term Potentiation ( Top ) Hippocampal CA1 LTP induction elicits an NMDAR - mediated spike of [ Ca 2 + ] I in dendritic spines . This elevated Ca 2 + / CaM triggers rapid CaMKII ac - tivation ( KII act ) and intramolecular autophosphorylation ( KII (cid:3) P ) to generate autonomous CaMKII activity that persists , even after slow dissociation of Ca 2 + / CaM , for at least 1 hr . This autonomous CaMKII activity can phosphory - late numerous substrates in the postsynaptic density that may contribute to synaptic potentiation . The elevated spine Ca 2 + / CaM also activates CaMKK to phosphorylate ( KI (cid:3) P ) and activate CaMKI ( KI act ) . Although CaMKI phos - phorylation persists for at least 1 hr , its activity is more transient since auton - omous activity is not generated ( see Figure 1 ) . However , even when [ Ca 2 + ] I re - turns to basal values , CaMKI will remain somewhat activated by basal Ca 2 + / CaM due to its activity via CaMKK phosphorylation . If the LTP induction pro - tocol results in CaMKI - mediated transient incorporation of Ca 2 + - permeable AMPARs , the [ Ca 2 + ] I should remain somewhat elevated for (cid:3) 20 – 25 min due to spontaneous activation of the AMPARs ( data not shown ) . This source of [ Ca 2 + ] I mayuniquelyactivatedCa 2 + - dependentproteinsnecessaryformainte - nance of the LTP . ( Bottom ) LTP induction also promotes a transient ( 3 – 10 min ) phosphorylation ( KIV (cid:3) P ) andactivation ( KIVact ) ofCaMKIVinthenucleusthat isthoughttopromoteCREB - dependentgenetranscriptionthatmaybeneces - sary for maintenance of LTP . See section on Synaptic Plasticity for details . Neuron 59 , September 25 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 923 Neuron Review changes in both LTD and LTP : LTP was generally enhanced , and stimulation parameters that normally induce LTD in the mutants induced LTP instead . Not surprisingly , the transgenic mice showed a number of deﬁcits in learning and memory tasks that could be avoided by inhibiting the transgenic kinase prior to training and testing . Interestingly , elevating a CaMKII activity in the ﬁrst week ( but not in the second , third , or fourth week ) follow - ing conditioning disrupted memory , suggesting that a CaMKII following training is required for memory consolidation . How - ever , it is also possible that overexpression of this promiscuous kinase may have resulted in unphysiological phosphorylation events that affected consolidation . Intriguingly , b CaMKII , which has different subcellular localiza - tion ( e . g . , bound to F actin ) and Ca 2 + responsiveness ( De Koninck and Schulman , 1998 ) , regulates synaptic transmission quite differently than the a isoform . First , the ratio of a / b CaMKII in neurons is modulated by prolonged neuronal activity that may be important in adaptation during synaptic homeostasis—in - creased activity favors a whereas decreased activity enhances b ( Thiagarajan et al . , 2002 ) . Furthermore , a CaMKII increases unitary synaptic transmission whereas b diminishes it . It will be intriguing to determine whether the effects of b CaMKII require its catalytic activity or are a consequence of its binding to and bundling F actin and alteration of spine structure ( see section on Neuronal Development ) . Induction of HFS LTP results in rapid activation of nuclear CaMKIV that only persists for (cid:3) 10 min ( Kasahara et al . , 2001 ) ( Figure 5 ) , probably due to its interaction with protein phospha - tase 2A ( Anderson et al . , 2004 ; Westphal et al . , 1998 ) . However , studies using transgenic and knockout mice are consistent with a role for CaMKIV in LTP . Initial studies of CaMKIV knockout mice revealed impairments in CREB phosphorylation , the induc - tion of hippocampal LTP , and in the late phase of cerebellar LTD ( Ho et al . , 2000 ; Ribar et al . , 2000 ) . A follow up study showed that long - term fear memory ( tested 1 and 7 days after training ) was impaired in this knockout mouse , while short - term memory ( tested 1 hr posttraining ) was not affected ( Wei et al . , 2002 ) . Accordingly , the mutants showed substantially lower CREB activation following fear conditioning , suggesting that deﬁcits in CREB - dependent transcription ( Bourtchuladze et al . , 1994 ) could account for their long - term memory impairments . Con - ﬁrming previous ﬁndings , however , studies in the amygdala and in multiple cortical areas revealed impairments in the induc - tion of LTP ; the behavioral results would have predicted deﬁcits in the maintenance of LTP since long - term , but not short - term , memory was affected . It is possible that the lower levels of LTP in these mice is sufﬁcient to support memory at 1 hr , but not at 1 or 7 days . Kang and colleagues overexpressed a dominant - negative form of CaMKIV ( dnCaMKIV ) in the mouse forebrain ( Kang et al . , 2001 ) . This transgenic mouse was impaired in the hidden platform version of water maze , and importantly , they showed deﬁcits in contextual fear conditioning when tested 7 days , but not 1 day , after training . These results are surprising since the mice showed deﬁcits in the L - LTP that could already be detected 3 hr after induction . It is possible that this difference in the time course of the memory and LTP deﬁcits reﬂects the fact that these authors studied LTP in hippocampal slices . It is possible that the decline in synaptic potentiation is much slower in vivo . Interest - ingly , transgenic mice overexpressing CaMKIV in the forebrain ( Wu et al . , 2008 ) showed enhancements in both trace fear mem - ory , which is known to be cortex dependent ( Han et al . , 2003 ) , and in LTP in the ACC . Although there are some incongruities concerning the effects of CaMKIV manipulations , the data presented above suggest that , while decreases in the levels of CaMKIV impair LTP and memory , overexpression of this mole - cule can enhance LTP and memory . However , one must interpret with caution results obtained from CaMKIV overexpression studies , since it may not localize properly to the nucleus . Transgenicandknockoutstudieshavealsoimplicatedrolesfor CaMKK in plasticity and learning and memory . Effects of CaMKK deletion could result from either suppressed CaMKIV - mediated phosphorylation of CREB / CBP or via crosstalk of CaMKI with the MEK / Erk pathway and subsequent regulation of CREB - dependent transcription or other downstream targets of Erk . De - letion of the gene encoding CaMKK b caused deﬁcits in CREB activation and impaired L - LTP , but not E - LTP ( Peters et al . , 2003 ) . Behavioral analysis indicated that this mutant has deﬁcits in long - term , but not short - term , memory for social transmission of food preferences . Accordingly , this mutation also affected spatial learning and memory . Surprisingly , fear conditioning was unaffected in the mutants . In contrast , deletion of CaMKK a resulted in deﬁcits in fear conditioning ( Blaeser et al . , 2006 ; Miz - uno et al . , 2006 ) . After fear conditioning , the activation of both CaMKIV and CREB were signiﬁcantly reduced in the hippocam - pus of the null mutant mice , suggesting that the CaMKK a - CaM - KIV - CREB signaling cascade is involved in fear conditioning . Unlike CaMKK b null mice , however , CaMKK a knockout mice did not show deﬁcits in spatial learning ( Mizuno et al . , 2006 ) . Sur - prisingly , the phenotype in both knockout mice appeared to have sex - speciﬁc components ( Mizuno et al . , 2006 , 2007 ) ! Male but not female CaMKK b null mutants were impaired in CA1 LTP , and transcriptional analysis revealed sex - speciﬁc transcriptional changes ( Mizuno et al . , 2007 ) . Additionally , male ( but not female ) CaMKK a mutant mice showed deﬁcits in contextual condition - ing - dependent transcription ofBDNF ( Mizunoet al . , 2006 ) . These studies demonstrate sex - speciﬁc changes in CaMKK signaling regulating plasticity and memory . Recent molecular and cellular studies indicate a role for CaMKK / CaMKI in E - LTP via crosstalk with MEK / Erk ( Schmitt et al . , 2005 ) . This effect is not transcriptional , since E - LTP does not require gene transcription . TBS induction of LTP activates Erk , and inhibitors of the Erk ( e . g . , U0126 ) pathway partially ( (cid:3) 50 % ) suppress hippocampal CA1 E - LTP induction ( Selcher et al . , 2003 ) . NMDAR activation of MEK / Erk appears to be medi - atedprimarilythroughtheCaMKK / CaMKIpathway . Forexample , treatmentofculturedhippocampal neuronswithNMDAactivates Erk—this is blocked by transfection with dominant - negative con - structs of CaMKK and CaMKI but not by dominant - negative CaMKIVnuc or a speciﬁc inhibitor of CaMKII ( CaMKIIN ) ( Schmitt et al . , 2005 ) . TBS LTP also results in a rapid ( < 5 min ) and pro - longed ( > 60 min ) activation of CaMKI ( Figure 5 ) and Erk , both of which are blocked by the CaMKK inhibitor STO - 609 ( Schmitt et al . , 2005 ) . STO - 609 inhibition of NMDAR - mediated activation of Erk is rescued by transfection with an STO - insensitive mutant of CaMKK , indicating that the STO - 609 is acting via inhibition of 924 Neuron 59 , September 25 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Review CaMKK . TBS LTP is suppressed (cid:3) 50 % by inhibition of MEK / Erk ( U0126 ) or CaMKK ( STO - 609 ) , and the two effects are occlusive , suggesting that they utilize a common pathway . However , LTP induced by HFS does not appear to involve CaMKK , as it is not suppressed by STO - 609 ( Guire et al . , 2008 ) . CaMKK / CaMKI may partially regulate LTP through synaptic trafﬁcking of a special class of AMPARs , calcium - permeable AMPARs ( CP - AMPARs ) that lack the edited - GluR2 subunit ( Isaac et al . , 2007 ) . Important roles for CP - AMPARs are estab - lished for several forms of plasticity at various brain regions . For example , replacement of basal CP - AMPARs with GluR2 - containing AMPARS can account for LTD at cerebellar stellate synapses and mossy ﬁber - CA3 pyramidal cell synapses ( Ho et al . , 2007 ; Liu and Cull - Candy , 2000 , 2005 ) . Furthermore , syn - aptic localization of CP - AMPARs in various regions of the CNS is modulated by neuronal activity ( Thiagarajan et al . , 2005 ) , neuro - nal insults ( e . g . , ischemia ) , and drugs of abuse and are impli - cated in several neuropathologies ( reviewed in Kwak and Weiss , 2006 ; Liu and Zukin , 2007 ) . However , roles of CP - AMPARs at the CA1 synapse of hippocampus are controversial . At these synap - ses , AMPARs are largely heteromeric complexes of GluR1 and edited - GluR2 subunits ( Craig et al . , 1993 ; Geiger et al . , 1995 ; Monyer et al . , 1991 ; Wenthold et al . , 1996 ) . Thus , application of CP - AMPAR inhibitors ( philanthotoxin - 433 , IEM - 1460 ) has little effect on basal CA1 synaptic transmission ( Adesnik and Nicoll , 2007 ; Guire et al . , 2008 ; Ju et al . , 2004 ; Plant et al . , 2006 ) . How - ever , upon induction of LTP there is a rapid but transient incorpo - ration of synaptic CP - AMPARs ( Guire et al . , 2008 ; Plant et al . , 2006 ) ( but see Adesnik and Nicoll , 2007 ; Gray et al . , 2007 ) . Inser - tion of only a few ( (cid:3) 5 ) homomeric GluR1 CP - AMPARs per synapse can signiﬁcantly enhance synaptic transmission ( Guire et al . , 2008 ) due to the higher conductance of these channels and their additional potentiation by CaMKII - mediated phosphor - ylation of Ser831 compared to GluR2 - containing AMPARs ( Derkach et al . , 1999 ; Oh and Derkach , 2005 ) . Insertion of synap - tic CP - AMPARs appears to be mediated by CaMKK / CaMKI since ( 1 ) the CaMKK inhibitor STO - 609 blocks their appearance during TBS LTP and ( 2 ) infusion of activated CaMKI into cultured hippocampal neurons promotes synaptic localization of CP - AMPARs ( Guire et al . , 2008 ) . This mechanism occurs with theta - burst induction ( Guire et al . , 2008 ) , which is probably the most physiologically relevant protocol for LTP ( Feder and Ranck , 1973 ; Otto et al . , 1991 ) , but not with high - frequency stimulation ( Adesnik and Nicoll , 2007 ; Gray et al . , 2007 ; Guire et al . , 2008 ) . Whether pairing - induced LTP utilizes CP - AMPARs is controver - sial ( Adesnik and Nicoll , 2007 ; Gray et al . , 2007 ; Plant et al . , 2006 ) . Future Directions Investigations over the past several years have reinforced impor - tant roles of CaMKII in synaptic plasticity and behavior . How - ever , other studies have challenged some functions of CaMKII , based on results from using KN - 62 and KN - 93 , in neuronal de - velopment and strongly implicate regulatory functions of the CaMK cascade , especially CaMKI . Thus , CaMKI has transi - tioned from an ‘‘orphan’’ kinase of unknown physiological func - tion to a signiﬁcant player in neuronal development and perhaps synaptic plasticity . This evolving view of neuronal functions of the various CaMKs implicates important areas for future investi - gation . Included in this list are the following . ( 1 ) Identiﬁcation of additional multiprotein complexes that include CaMKs and give rise to subcellular signaling speciﬁcity . These studies have contributed strongly to our understanding of CaMKII functions and will continue to expand our knowledge of isoform - speciﬁc signaling speciﬁcity for other CaMKs , especially CaMKI . ( 2 ) Relationships between CaMKs and other signaling path - ways . Protein kinases generally do not operate as inde - pendent , linear pathways but are incorporated into signal - ing networks . For example , identiﬁcation of ‘‘crosstalk’’ between CaMKK / CaMKI and the MEK / Erk pathway has challenged our understanding of CREB - dependent tran - scriptional regulation by the CaMK cascade that previ - ously was thought to be mediated solely by CaMKIV . ( 3 ) Role of CaMKIV in CREB - dependent transcription . While CaMKIV phosphorylates CREB and CBP in physiological paradigms , phosphorylation alone does not necessarily correlate with transcription . What are the relative roles of CaMIV versus other CREB - kinases , including CaMKI - mediated activation of MEK / Erk , or CBP - kinases in regulating transcription . ( 4 ) Great progress has been made in understanding roles of the various CaMKs , especially CaMKI , in neuronal devel - opment , including axonal outgrowth , dendritic matura - tion , and formation of spines and synapses . However , much remains to be investigated—for example , roles of CaMKI isoforms in axon formation and downstream signaling pathways regulating growth cone motility and the relative roles of CaMKI and CaMKII in temporal stages of dendritic arborization . One general limitation is the ability to strongly suppress CaMKII in neurons due to its extremely high levels of expression . ( 5 ) The functions of CaMKI and CaMKIV in long - term poten - tiation need to be expanded . Under what conditions and by what mechanisms does CaMKI mediate transient syn - aptic incorporation of calcium - permeable AMPARs into synapses ? What unique functions do these receptors serve ? Is CaMKIV - mediated CREB - dependent transcrip - tion important for L - LTP and memory consolidation ? ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors would like to thank Lori Vaskalis for the ﬁgure illustrations . REFERENCES Adesnik , H . , and Nicoll , R . A . ( 2007 ) . Conservation of glutamate receptor 2 - containing AMPA receptors during long - term potentiation . J . Neurosci . 27 , 4598 – 4602 . Alaimo , P . J . , Shogren - Knaak , M . A . , and Shokat , K . M . ( 2001 ) . Chemical genetic approaches for the elucidation of signaling pathways . Curr . Opin . Chem . Biol . 5 , 360 – 367 . Anderson , M . E . , Braun , A . P . , Wu , Y . , Lu , T . , Wu , Y . , Schulman , H . , and Sung , R . J . ( 1998 ) . KN - 93 , aninhibitorofmultifunctionalCa + + / calmodulin - dependent proteinkinase , decreasesearlyafterdepolarizationsinrabbitheart . J . Pharma - col . Exp . Ther . 287 , 996 – 1006 . Neuron 59 , September 25 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 925 Neuron Review Anderson , K . A . , Noeldner , P . K . , Reece , K . , Wadzinski , B . E . , and Means , A . R . ( 2004 ) . Regulation and function of the calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase IV / protein serine / threonine phosphatase 2A signaling complex . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 31708 – 31716 . Anderson , K . A . , Ribar , T . J . , Lin , F . , Noeldner , P . K . , Green , M . F . , Muehlbauer , M . J . , Witters , L . A . , Kemp , B . E . , and Means , A . R . ( 2008 ) . Hypothalamic CaMKK2 contributes to the regulation of energy balance . Cell Metab . 7 , 377 – 388 . Asrican , B . , Lisman , J . , and Otmakhov , N . ( 2007 ) . Synaptic strength of individ - ual spines correlates with bound Ca2 + - calmodulin - dependent kinase II . J . Neurosci . 27 , 14007 – 14011 . Atkins , C . M . , Nozaki , N . , Shigeri , Y . , and Soderling , T . R . ( 2004 ) . Cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding protein - dependent protein synthesis is regu - lated by calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II . J . Neurosci . 24 , 5193 – 5201 . Atkins , C . M . , Davare , M . A . , Oh , M . C . , Derkach , V . , and Soderling , T . R . ( 2005 ) . Bidirectional regulation of cytoplasmic polyadenylation element - binding pro - tein phosphorylation by Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II and protein phosphatase 1 during hippocampal long - term potentiation . J . Neuro - sci . 25 , 5604 – 5610 . Bach , M . E . , Hawkins , R . D . , Osman , M . , Kandel , E . R . , and Mayford , M . ( 1995 ) . Impairment of spatial but not contextual memory in CaMKII mutant mice with a selective loss of hippocampal LTP in the range of the theta frequency . Cell 81 , 905 – 915 . Baraldi , P . G . , Di Virgilio , F . , and Romagnoli , R . ( 2004 ) . Agonists and antago - nists acting at P2X7 receptor . Curr . Top . Med . Chem . 4 , 1707 – 1717 . Barnes , A . P . , Lilley , B . N . , Pan , Y . A . , Plummer , L . J . , Powell , A . W . , Raines , A . N . , Sanes , J . R . , and Polleux , F . ( 2007 ) . LKB1 and SAD kinases deﬁne a pathway required for the polarization of cortical neurons . Cell 129 , 549 – 563 . Barria , A . , and Malinow , R . ( 2005 ) . NMDA receptor subunit composition con - trols synaptic plasticity by regulating binding to CaMKII . Neuron 48 , 289 – 301 . Barria , A . , Muller , D . , Derkach , V . , Grifﬁth , L . C . , and Soderling , T . R . ( 1997 ) . Regulatory phosphorylation of AMPA - type glutamate receptors by CaM - KII during long - term potentiation . Science 276 , 2042 – 2045 . Bayer , K . U . , LeBel , E . , McDonald , G . L . , O’Leary , H . , Schulman , H . , and De Koninck , P . ( 2006 ) . Transition from reversible to persistent binding of CaMKII to postsynaptic sites and NR2B . J . Neurosci . 26 , 1164 – 1174 . Benke , T . A . , Luthi , A . , Isaac , J . T . , and Collingridge , G . L . ( 1998 ) . Modulation of AMPA receptor unitary conductance by synaptic activity . Nature 393 , 793 – 797 . Blackstone , C . , and Sheng , M . ( 1999 ) . Protein targeting and calcium signaling microdomains in neuronal cells . Cell Calcium 26 , 181 – 192 . Blaeser , F . , Sanders , M . J . , Truong , N . , Ko , S . , Wu , L . J . , Wozniak , D . F . , Fanse - low , M . S . , Zhuo , M . , and Chatila , T . A . ( 2006 ) . Long - term memory deﬁcits in Pavlovian fear conditioning in Ca2 + / calmodulin kinase kinase alpha - deﬁcient mice . Mol . Cell . Biol . 26 , 9105 – 9115 . Bokoch , G . M . ( 2003 ) . Biology of the p21 - activated kinases . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 72 , 743 – 781 . Bourtchuladze , R . , Frenguelli , B . , Blendy , J . , Ciofﬁ , D . , Schutz , G . , and Silva , A . J . ( 1994 ) . Deﬁcient long - term memory in mice with a targeted mutation of the cAMP - responsive element - binding protein . Cell 79 , 59 – 68 . Bramham , C . R . , andWells , D . G . ( 2007 ) . DendriticmRNA : transport , translation and function . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 8 , 776 – 789 . Burgoyne , R . D . , O’Callaghan , D . W . , Hasdemir , B . , Haynes , L . P . , and Tepikin , A . V . ( 2004 ) . NeuronalCa2 + - sensorproteins : multitalentedregulatorsofneuro - nal function . Trends Neurosci . 27 , 203 – 209 . Chang , B . H . , Mukherji , S . , and Soderling , T . R . ( 1998 ) . Characterization of a calmodulin kinase II inhibitor protein in brain . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 10890 – 10895 . Chang , B . H . , Mukherji , S . , and Soderling , T . R . ( 2001 ) . Calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II inhibitor protein : localization of isoforms in rat brain . Neuroscience 102 , 767 – 777 . Chatila , T . , Anderson , K . A . , Ho , N . , and Means , A . R . ( 1996 ) . A unique phos - phorylation - dependent mechanism for the activation of Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase type IV / GR . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 21542 – 21548 . Chen , H . J . , Rojas - Soto , M . , Oguni , A . , and Kennedy , M . B . ( 1998 ) . A synaptic Ras - GTPase activating protein ( p135 SynGAP ) inhibited by CaM kinase II . Neuron 20 , 895 – 904 . Chen , Y . M . , Wang , Q . J . , Hu , H . S . , Yu , P . C . , Zhu , J . , Drewes , G . , Piwnica - Worms , H . , and Luo , Z . G . ( 2006 ) . Microtubuleafﬁnity - regulating kinase2func - tions downstream of the PAR - 3 / PAR - 6 / atypical PKC complex in regulating hippocampal neuronal polarity . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 8534 – 8539 . Chin , D . , and Means , A . R . ( 2000 ) . Calmodulin : a prototypical calcium sensor . Trends Cell Biol . 10 , 322 – 328 . Chow , F . A . , Anderson , K . A . , Noeldner , P . K . , and Means , A . R . ( 2005 ) . The autonomous activity of calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase IV is required for its role in transcription . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 20530 – 20538 . Chowdhury , S . , Shepherd , J . D . , Okuno , H . , Lyford , G . , Petralia , R . S . , Plath , N . , Kuhl , D . , Huganir , R . L . , and Worley , P . F . ( 2006 ) . Arc / Arg3 . 1 interacts with the endocytic machinery to regulate AMPA receptor trafﬁcking . Neuron 52 , 445 – 459 . Ciani , L . , and Salinas , P . C . ( 2008 ) . Fromneuronal activity tothe actin cytoskel - eton : aroleforCaMKKsandbetaPIX inspinemorphogenesis . Neuron 57 , 3 – 4 . Clapham , D . E . ( 2007 ) . Calcium signaling . Cell 131 , 1047 – 1058 . Colbran , R . J . ( 2004a ) . Protein phosphatases and calcium / calmodulin - depen - dent protein kinase II - dependent synaptic plasticity . J . Neurosci . 24 , 8404 – 8409 . Colbran , R . J . ( 2004b ) . Targeting of calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II . Biochem . J . 378 , 1 – 16 . Colbran , R . J . , and Brown , A . M . ( 2004 ) . Calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II and synaptic plasticity . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 14 , 318 – 327 . Cooke , S . F . , Wu , J . , Plattner , F . , Errington , M . , Rowan , M . , Peters , M . , Hirano , A . , Bradshaw , K . D . , Anwyl , R . , Bliss , T . V . , and Giese , K . P . ( 2006 ) . Autophos - phorylation of alphaCaMKII is not a general requirement for NMDA receptor - dependent LTP in the adult mouse . J . Physiol . 574 , 805 – 818 . Corcoran , E . E . , Joseph , J . D . , MacDonald , J . A . , Kane , C . D . , Haystead , T . A . , andMeans , A . R . ( 2003 ) . Proteomicanalysisofcalcium / calmodulin - dependent proteinkinase IandIV invitrosubstrates reveals distinctcatalyticpreferences . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 10516 – 10522 . Craig , A . M . , Blackstone , C . D . , Huganir , R . L . , and Banker , G . ( 1993 ) . The distri - bution of glutamate receptors in cultured rat hippocampal neurons : postsyn - aptic clustering of AMPA - selective subunits . Neuron 10 , 1055 – 1068 . Davare , M . A . , Saneyoshi , T . , Guire , E . S . , Nygaard , S . C . , and Soderling , T . R . ( 2004 ) . Inhibition of calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase kinase by protein 14 – 3 - 3 . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 52191 – 52199 . De Koninck , P . , and Schulman , H . ( 1998 ) . Sensitivity of CaM kinase II to the frequency of Ca2 + oscillations . Science 279 , 227 – 230 . Derkach , V . , Barria , A . , and Soderling , T . R . ( 1999 ) . Ca2 + / calmodulin - kinase II enhances channel conductance of alpha - amino - 3 - hydroxy - 5 - methyl - 4 - iso - xazolepropionate type glutamate receptors . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 3269 – 3274 . Derkach , V . A . , Oh , M . C . , Guire , E . S . , and Soderling , T . R . ( 2007 ) . Regulatory mechanisms of AMPA receptors in synaptic plasticity . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 8 , 101 – 113 . Du , L . , and Richter , J . D . ( 2005 ) . Activity - dependent polyadenylation in neu - rons . RNA 11 , 1340 – 1347 . Elgersma , Y . , Fedorov , N . B . , Ikonen , S . , Choi , E . S . , Elgersma , M . , Carvalho , O . M . , Giese , K . P . , and Silva , A . J . ( 2002 ) . Inhibitory autophosphorylation of CaMKII controls PSD association , plasticity , and learning . Neuron 36 , 493 – 505 . Enslen , H . , and Soderling , T . R . ( 1994 ) . Roles of calmodulin - dependent protein kinases and phosphatase in calcium - dependent transcription of immediate early genes . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 20872 – 20877 . 926 Neuron 59 , September 25 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Review Enslen , H . , Tokumitsu , H . , Stork , P . J . , Davis , R . J . , and Soderling , T . R . ( 1996 ) . Regulation of mitogen - activated protein kinases by a calcium / calmodulin - de - pendentproteinkinasecascade . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 10803 – 10808 . Feder , R . , and Ranck , J . B . , Jr . ( 1973 ) . Studies on single neurons in dorsal hip - pocampal formation and septum in unrestrained rats . II . Hippocampal slow waves and theta cell ﬁring during bar pressing and other behaviors . Exp . Neurol . 41 , 532 – 555 . Fink , C . C . , Bayer , K . U . , Myers , J . W . , Ferrell , J . E . , Jr . , Schulman , H . , and Meyer , T . ( 2003 ) . Selective regulation of neurite extension and synapse forma - tion by the beta but not the alpha isoform of CaMKII . Neuron 39 , 283 – 297 . Flavell , S . W . , and Greenberg , M . E . ( 2008 ) . Signaling mechanisms linking neuronal activity to gene expression and plasticity of the nervous system . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 31 , 563 – 590 . Frankland , P . W . , and Bontempi , B . ( 2005 ) . The organization of recent and remote memories . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 6 , 119 – 130 . Frankland , P . W . , O’Brien , C . , Ohno , M . , Kirkwood , A . , and Silva , A . J . ( 2001 ) . Alpha - CaMKII - dependent plasticity in the cortex is required for permanent memory . Nature 411 , 309 – 313 . Frankland , P . W . , Bontempi , B . , Talton , L . E . , Kaczmarek , L . , and Silva , A . J . ( 2004 ) . The involvement of the anterior cingulate cortex in remote contextual fear memory . Science 304 , 881 – 883 . Fujimoto , T . , Yurimoto , S . , Hatano , N . , Nozaki , N . , Sueyoshi , N . , Kameshita , I . , Mizutani , A . , Mikoshiba , K . , Kobayashi , R . , and Tokumitsu , H . ( 2008 ) . Activa - tion ofSAD kinase by Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependentproteinkinasekinase . Bio - chemistry 47 , 4151 – 4159 . Gaertner , T . R . , Kolodziej , S . J . , Wang , D . , Kobayashi , R . , Koomen , J . M . , Stoops , J . K . , and Waxham , M . N . ( 2004 ) . Comparative analyses of the three - dimensional structures and enzymatic properties of alpha , beta , gamma and delta isoforms of Ca2 + - calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 12484 – 12494 . Geiger , J . R . , Melcher , T . , Koh , D . S . , Sakmann , B . , Seeburg , P . H . , Jonas , P . , and Monyer , H . ( 1995 ) . Relative abundance of subunit mRNAs determines gating and Ca2 + permeability of AMPA receptors in principal neurons and interneurons in rat CNS . Neuron 15 , 193 – 204 . Giese , K . , Fedorov , N . , Filipkowski , R . , and Silva , A . ( 1998 ) . Autophosphoryla - tion at Thr 286 of the a Calcium - calmodulin kinase II in LTP and Learning . Science 279 , 870 – 873 . Goldberg , J . , Nairn , A . C . , and Kuriyan , J . ( 1996 ) . Structural basis for the auto - inhibition of calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase I . Cell 84 , 875 – 887 . Gray , E . E . , Fink , A . E . , Sarinana , J . , Vissel , B . , and O’Dell , T . J . ( 2007 ) . Long - term potentiation in the hippocampal CA1 region does not require insertion and activation of GluR2 - lacking AMPA receptors . J . Neurophysiol . 98 , 2488 – 2492 . Guire , E . S . , Oh , M . C . , Soderling , T . R . , and Derkach , V . A . ( 2008 ) . Recruitment of calcium - permeable AMPA receptors during synaptic potentiation is regu - lated by CaM - kinase I . J . Neurosci . 28 , 6000 – 6009 . Han , C . J . , O’Tuathaigh , C . M . , van Trigt , L . , Quinn , J . J . , Fanselow , M . S . , Mongeau , R . , Koch , C . , and Anderson , D . J . ( 2003 ) . Trace but not delay fear conditioning requires attention and the anterior cingulate cortex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 13087 – 13092 . Hardingham , G . E . , Chawla , S . , Cruzalegui , F . H . , andBading , H . ( 1999 ) . Control of recruitment and transcription - activating function of CBP determines gene regulation by NMDA receptors and L - type calcium channels . Neuron 22 , 789 – 798 . Hashimoto , Y . , and Soderling , T . R . ( 1990 ) . Phosphorylation of smooth muscle myosin light chain kinase by Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II : comparative study of the phosphorylation sites . Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 278 , 41 – 45 . Heist , E . K . , Srinivasan , M . , and Schulman , H . ( 1998 ) . Phosphorylation at the nuclear localization signal of Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II blocks its nuclear targeting . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 19763 – 19771 . Hidaka , H . , and Yokokura , H . ( 1996 ) . Molecular and cellular pharmacology of a calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II ( CaM kinase II ) inhibitor , KN - 62 , and proposal of CaM kinase phosphorylation cascades . Adv . Pharma - col . 36 , 193 – 219 . Ho , N . , Liauw , J . A . , Blaeser , F . , Wei , F . , Hanissian , S . , Muglia , L . M . , Wozniak , D . F . , Nardi , A . , Arvin , K . L . , Holtzman , D . M . , et al . ( 2000 ) . Impaired synaptic plasticity and cAMP response element - binding protein activation in Ca2 + / cal - modulin - dependent protein kinase type IV / Gr - deﬁcient mice . J . Neurosci . 20 , 6459 – 6472 . Ho , M . T . , Pelkey , K . A . , Topolnik , L . , Petralia , R . S . , Takamiya , K . , Xia , J . , Huga - nir , R . L . , Lacaille , J . C . , and McBain , C . J . ( 2007 ) . Developmental expression of Ca2 + - permeableAMPAreceptorsunderliesdepolarization - inducedlong - term depression at mossy ﬁber CA3 pyramid synapses . J . Neurosci . 27 , 11651 – 11662 . Hoffman , D . A . , Sprengel , R . , and Sakmann , B . ( 2002 ) . Molecular dissection of hippocampal theta - burst pairing potentiation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 7740 – 7745 . Hou , L . , Antion , M . D . , Hu , D . , Spencer , C . M . , Paylor , R . , and Klann , E . ( 2006 ) . Dynamic translational and proteasomal regulation of fragile X mental retarda - tion protein controls mGluR - dependent long - term depression . Neuron 51 , 441 – 454 . Huang , Y . S . , Jung , M . Y . , Sarkissian , M . , and Richter , J . D . ( 2002 ) . N - methyl - D - aspartate receptor signaling results in Aurora kinase - catalyzed CPEB phos - phorylation and alpha CaMKII mRNA polyadenylation at synapses . EMBO J . 21 , 2139 – 2148 . Impey , S . , and Goodman , R . H . ( 2001 ) . CREB signaling – timing is everything . Sci . STKE 2001 , PE1 . Impey , S . , Fong , A . L . , Wang , Y . , Obrietan , K . , Wayman , G . A . , Storm , D . R . , So - derling , T . R . , and Goodman , R . H . ( 2002 ) . Phosphorylation of CBP mediates transcriptional activation by neural activity and CaM kinase IV . Neuron 34 , 235 – 244 . Inagaki , N . , Nishizawa , M . , Arimura , N . , Yamamoto , H . , Takeuchi , Y . , Miya - moto , E . , Kaibuchi , K . , and Inagaki , M . ( 2000 ) . Activation of Ca2 + / calmodu - lin - dependent protein kinase ii within post - synaptic dendritic spines of cultured hippocampal neurons . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 27165 – 27171 . Inoue , E . , Mochida , S . , Takagi , H . , Higa , S . , Deguchi - Tawarada , M . , Takao - Rikitsu , E . , Inoue , M . , Yao , I . , Takeuchi , K . , Kitajima , I . , etal . ( 2006 ) . SAD : apre - synaptickinaseassociatedwithsynapticvesiclesandtheactivezonecytoma - trix that regulates neurotransmitter release . Neuron 50 , 261 – 275 . Isaac , J . T . , Ashby , M . , and McBain , C . J . ( 2007 ) . The role of the GluR2 subunit in AMPA receptor function and synaptic plasticity . Neuron 54 , 859 – 871 . Ishida , A . , Kameshita , I . , Okuno , S . , Kitani , T . , and Fujisawa , H . ( 1995 ) . A novel highly speciﬁc and potent inhibitor of calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 212 , 806 – 812 . Jensen , K . F . , Ohmstede , C . A . , Fisher , R . S . , and Sahyoun , N . ( 1991 ) . Nuclear and axonal localization of Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase type Gr in rat cerebellar cortex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 88 , 2850 – 2853 . Jiang , Y . H . , Armstrong , D . , Albrecht , U . , Atkins , C . M . , Noebels , J . L . , Eichele , G . , Sweatt , J . D . , and Beaudet , A . L . ( 1998 ) . Mutation of the Angelman ubiquitin ligase in mice causes increased cytoplasmic p53 and deﬁcits of contextual learning and long - term potentiation . Neuron 21 , 799 – 811 . Ju , W . , Morishita , W . , Tsui , J . , Gaietta , G . , Deerinck , T . J . , Adams , S . R . , Garner , C . C . , Tsien , R . Y . , Ellisman , M . H . , and Malenka , R . C . ( 2004 ) . Activity - depen - dent regulation of dendritic synthesis and trafﬁcking of AMPA receptors . Nat . Neurosci . 7 , 244 – 253 . Kang , H . , Sun , L . D . , Atkins , C . M . , Soderling , T . R . , Wilson , M . A . , and Tone - gawa , S . ( 2001 ) . An important role of neural activity - dependent CaM - KIV signaling in the consolidation of long - term memory . Cell 106 , 771 – 783 . Kasahara , J . , Fukunaga , K . , and Miyamoto , E . ( 2001 ) . Activation of calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase IV in long term potentiation in the rat hippocampal CA1 region . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 24044 – 24050 . Kelleher , R . J . , 3rd , Govindarajan , A . , Jung , H . Y . , Kang , H . , and Tonegawa , S . ( 2004 ) . TranslationalcontrolbyMAPKsignalinginlong - termsynapticplasticity and memory . Cell 116 , 467 – 479 . Neuron 59 , September 25 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 927 Neuron Review Kishi , M . , Pan , Y . A . , Crump , J . G . , and Sanes , J . R . ( 2005 ) . Mammalian SAD ki - nases are required for neuronal polarization . Science 307 , 929 – 932 . Ko , J . , Kim , S . , Valtschanoff , J . G . , Shin , H . , Lee , J . R . , Sheng , M . , Premont , R . T . , Weinberg , R . J . , and Kim , E . ( 2003 ) . Interaction between liprin - alpha and GIT1is requiredfor AMPAreceptortargeting . J . Neurosci . 23 , 1667 – 1677 . Konur , S . , and Ghosh , A . ( 2005 ) . Calcium signaling and the control of dendritic development . Neuron 46 , 401 – 405 . Kotera , I . , Sekimoto , T . , Miyamoto , Y . , Saiwaki , T . , Nagoshi , E . , Sakagami , H . , Kondo , H . , and Yoneda , Y . ( 2005 ) . Importin alpha transports CaMKIV to the nucleus without utilizing importin beta . EMBO J . 24 , 942 – 951 . Krapivinsky , G . , Medina , I . , Krapivinsky , L . , Gapon , S . , and Clapham , D . E . ( 2004 ) . SynGAP - MUPP1 - CaMKII synaptic complexes regulate p38 MAP kinase activity and NMDA receptor - dependent synaptic AMPA receptor potentiation . Neuron 43 , 563 – 574 . Kuhn , T . B . , Williams , C . V . , Dou , P . , and Kater , S . B . ( 1998 ) . Laminin directs growth cone navigation via two temporally and functionally distinct calcium signals . J . Neurosci . 18 , 184 – 194 . Kwak , S . , and Weiss , J . H . ( 2006 ) . Calcium - permeable AMPA channels in neu - rodegenerative disease and ischemia . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 16 , 281 – 287 . Ledoux , J . , Chartier , D . , and Leblanc , N . ( 1999 ) . Inhibitors of calmodulin - dependent protein kinase are nonspeciﬁc blockers of voltage - dependent K + channels in vascular myocytes . J . Pharmacol . Exp . Ther . 290 , 1165 – 1174 . Lee , J . C . , Kwon , Y . G . , Lawrence , D . S . , and Edelman , A . M . ( 1994 ) . A require - ment of hydrophobic and basic amino acid residues for substrate recognition by Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase Ia . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 91 , 6413 – 6417 . Lemrow , S . M . , Anderson , K . A . , Joseph , J . D . , Ribar , T . J . , Noeldner , P . K . , and Means , A . R . ( 2004 ) . Catalytic activity is required for calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase IV to enter the nucleus . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 11664 – 11671 . Lisman , J . , Schulman , H . , and Cline , H . ( 2002 ) . The molecular basis of CaMKII function in synaptic and behavioural memory . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 3 , 175 – 190 . Liu , S . Q . , and Cull - Candy , S . G . ( 2000 ) . Synapticactivity at calcium - permeable AMPA receptors induces a switch in receptor subtype . Nature 405 , 454 – 458 . Liu , S . J . , and Cull - Candy , S . G . ( 2005 ) . Subunit interaction with PICKand GRIP controls Ca2 + permeability of AMPARs at cerebellar synapses . Nat . Neurosci . 8 , 768 – 775 . Liu , S . J . , and Zukin , R . S . ( 2007 ) . Ca2 + - permeable AMPA receptors insynaptic plasticity and neuronal death . Trends Neurosci . 30 , 126 – 134 . Lledo , P . M . , Hjelmstad , G . O . , Mukherji , S . , Soderling , T . R . , Malenka , R . C . , and Nicoll , R . A . ( 1995 ) . Calcium / calmodulin - dependent kinase II and long - term potentiation enhance synaptic transmission by the same mechanism . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 92 , 11175 – 11179 . Luscher , C . , Nicoll , R . A . , Malenka , R . C . , and Muller , D . ( 2000 ) . Synaptic plas - ticity and dynamic modulation of the postsynaptic membrane . Nat . Neurosci . 3 , 545 – 550 . Malenka , R . C . , and Nicoll , R . A . ( 1999 ) . Long - term potentiation – a decade of progress ? Science 285 , 1870 – 1874 . Malinow , R . , Schulman , H . , and Tsien , R . W . ( 1989 ) . Inhibition of postsynaptic PKC or CaMKII blocks inductionbutnotexpressionof LTP . Science 245 , 862 – 866 . Mayford , M . , Bach , M . E . , Huang , Y . Y . , Wang , L . , Hawkins , R . D . , and Kandel , E . R . ( 1996a ) . Control of memory formation through regulated expression of a CaMKII transgene . Science 274 , 1678 – 1683 . Mayford , M . , Baranes , D . , Podsypanina , K . , and Kandel , E . R . ( 1996b ) . The 3 0 - untranslatedregionofCaMKIIalphaisacis - actingsignalforthelocalization and translation of mRNA in dendrites . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 13250 – 13255 . McKinsey , T . A . , Zhang , C . L . , andOlson , E . N . ( 2000 ) . Activationofthemyocyte enhancer factor - 2 transcription factor by calcium / calmodulin - dependent pro - tein kinase - stimulated binding of 14 - 3 - 3 to histone deacetylase 5 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 14400 – 14405 . MelanderGradin , H . , Marklund , U . , Larsson , N . , Chatila , T . A . , andGullberg , M . ( 1997 ) . Regulation of microtubule dynamics by Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent kinase IV / Gr - dependent phosphorylation of oncoprotein 18 . Mol . Cell . Biol . 17 , 3459 – 3467 . Miller , S . , Yasuda , M . , Coats , J . K . , Jones , Y . , Martone , M . E . , and Mayford , M . ( 2002 ) . Disruption of dendritic translation of CaMKIIalpha impairs stabilization of synaptic plasticity and memory consolidation . Neuron 36 , 507 – 519 . Mitsui , K . , Brady , M . , Palfrey , H . C . , and Nairn , A . C . ( 1993 ) . Puriﬁcation and characterization of calmodulin - dependent protein kinase III from rabbit reticu - locytes and rat pancreas . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 13422 – 13433 . Mizuno , K . , and Giese , K . P . ( 2005 ) . Hippocampus - dependent memory forma - tion : do memory type - speciﬁc mechanisms exist ? J . Pharmacol . Sci . 98 , 191 – 197 . Mizuno , K . , Ris , L . , Sanchez - Capelo , A . , Godaux , E . , and Giese , K . P . ( 2006 ) . Ca2 + / calmodulin kinase kinase alpha is dispensable for brain development but is required for distinct memories in male , though not in female , mice . Mol . Cell . Biol . 26 , 9094 – 9104 . Mizuno , K . , Antunes - Martins , A . , Ris , L . , Peters , M . , Godaux , E . , and Giese , K . P . ( 2007 ) . Calcium / calmodulin kinase kinase beta has a male - speciﬁc role in memory formation . Neuroscience 145 , 393 – 402 . Mochizuki , H . , Ito , T . , and Hidaka , H . ( 1993 ) . Puriﬁcation and characterization of Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase V from rat cerebrum . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 9143 – 9147 . Monyer , H . , Seeburg , P . H . , andWisden , W . ( 1991 ) . Glutamate - operated chan - nels : developmentally early and mature forms arise by alternative splicing . Neuron 6 , 799 – 810 . Mott , H . R . , Nietlispach , D . , Evetts , K . A . , and Owen , D . ( 2005 ) . Structural anal - ysisoftheSH3domainofbeta - PIXanditsinteractionwithalpha - p21activated kinase ( PAK ) . Biochemistry 44 , 10977 – 10983 . Nakamura , Y . , Okuno , S . , Kitani , T . , Otake , K . , Sato , F . , and Fujisawa , H . ( 2001 ) . Immunohistochemical localization of Ca ( 2 + ) / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase kinase beta in the rat central nervous system . Neurosci . Res . 39 , 175 – 188 . Nishimura , T . , Fukata , Y . , Kato , K . , Yamaguchi , T . , Matsuura , Y . , Kamiguchi , H . , and Kaibuchi , K . ( 2003 ) . CRMP - 2 regulates polarized Numb - mediated endocytosis for axon growth . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 , 819 – 826 . Nishimura , T . , Yamaguchi , T . , Tokunaga , A . , Hara , A . , Hamaguchi , T . , Kato , K . , Iwamatsu , A . , Okano , H . , and Kaibuchi , K . ( 2006 ) . Role of Numb in dendritic spine development with a Cdc42 GEF intersectin and EphB2 . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 1273 – 1285 . Nosyreva , E . D . , and Huber , K . M . ( 2006 ) . Metabotropic receptor - dependent long - termdepressionpersistsintheabsenceofproteinsynthesisinthemouse model of fragile X syndrome . J . Neurophysiol . 95 , 3291 – 3295 . O’Donnell , W . T . , and Warren , S . T . ( 2002 ) . A decade of molecular studies of fragile X syndrome . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 25 , 315 – 338 . Oh , M . C . , and Derkach , V . A . ( 2005 ) . Dominant role of the GluR2 subunit in regulation of AMPA receptors by CaMKII . Nat . Neurosci . 8 , 853 – 854 . Oh , J . S . , Manzerra , P . , and Kennedy , M . B . ( 2004 ) . Regulation of the neuron - speciﬁc Ras GTPase activating protein , synGAP , by Ca2 + / calmodulin - depen - dent protein kinase II . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 17980 – 17988 . Okamoto , K . , Narayanan , R . , Lee , S . H . , Murata , K . , andHayashi , Y . ( 2007 ) . The role of CaMKII as an F - actin - bundling protein crucial for maintenance of dendritic spine structure . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 6418 – 6423 . Otmakhov , N . , Tao - Cheng , J . H . , Carpenter , S . , Asrican , B . , Dosemeci , A . , Reese , T . S . , and Lisman , J . ( 2004 ) . Persistent accumulation of calcium / cal - modulin - dependent protein kinase II in dendritic spines after induction of NMDA receptor - dependent chemical long - term potentiation . J . Neurosci . 24 , 9324 – 9331 . Otto , T . , Eichenbaum , H . , Wiener , S . I . , and Wible , C . G . ( 1991 ) . Learning - related patterns of CA1 spike trains parallel stimulation parameters optimal for inducing hippocampal long - term potentiation . Hippocampus 1 , 181 – 192 . 928 Neuron 59 , September 25 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Review Park , E . , Na , M . , Choi , J . , Kim , S . , Lee , J . R . , Yoon , J . , Park , D . , Sheng , M . , and Kim , E . ( 2003 ) . TheShankfamilyofpostsynapticdensityproteinsinteractswith and promotes synaptic accumulation of the beta PIX guanine nucleotide exchange factor for Rac1 and Cdc42 . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 19220 – 19229 . Park , S . , Park , J . M . , Kim , S . , Kim , J . A . , Shepherd , J . D . , Smith - Hicks , C . L . , Chowdhury , S . , Kaufmann , W . , Kuhl , D . , Ryazanov , A . G . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Elonga - tionfactor2and fragileXmental retardation protein controlthedynamic trans - lation of Arc / Arg3 . 1 essential for mGluR - LTD . Neuron 59 , 70 – 83 . Peters , M . , Mizuno , K . , Ris , L . , Angelo , M . , Godaux , E . , and Giese , K . P . ( 2003 ) . LossofCa2 + / calmodulinkinasekinasebetaaffectstheformationofsome , but not all , types of hippocampus - dependent long - term memory . J . Neurosci . 23 , 9752 – 9760 . Picciotto , M . R . , Cohn , J . A . , Bertuzzi , G . , Greengard , P . , andNairn , A . C . ( 1992 ) . Phosphorylation of the cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane conductance regulator . J . Biol . Chem . 267 , 12742 – 12752 . Picciotto , M . R . , Zoli , M . , Bertuzzi , G . , and Nairn , A . C . ( 1995 ) . Immunochemical localization of calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase I . Synapse 20 , 75 – 84 . Plant , K . , Pelkey , K . A . , Bortolotto , Z . A . , Morita , D . , Terashima , A . , McBain , C . J . , Collingridge , G . L . , and Isaac , J . T . ( 2006 ) . Transient incorporation of native GluR2 - lacking AMPA receptors during hippocampal long - term potenti - ation . Nat . Neurosci . 9 , 602 – 604 . Qin , H . , Raught , B . , Sonenberg , N . , Goldstein , E . G . , andEdelman , A . M . ( 2003 ) . Phosphorylation screening identiﬁes translational initiation factor 4GII as an intracellular target of Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase I . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 48570 – 48579 . Redmond , L . , Kashani , A . H . , and Ghosh , A . ( 2002 ) . Calcium regulation of den - dritic growth via CaM kinase IV and CREB - mediated transcription . Neuron 34 , 999 – 1010 . Ribar , T . J . , Rodriguiz , R . M . , Khiroug , L . , Wetsel , W . C . , Augustine , G . J . , and Means , A . R . ( 2000 ) . Cerebellar defects in Ca2 + / calmodulin kinase IV - deﬁcient mice . J . Neurosci . 20 , RC107 . Richter , J . D . ( 2007 ) . CPEB : a life in translation . Trends Biochem . Sci . 32 , 279 – 285 . Rosenberg , O . S . , Deindl , S . , Sung , R . J . , Nairn , A . C . , and Kuriyan , J . ( 2005 ) . Structure of the autoinhibited kinase domain of CaMKII and SAXS analysis of the holoenzyme . Cell 123 , 849 – 860 . Rosenberg , O . S . , Deindl , S . , Comolli , L . R . , Hoelz , A . , Downing , K . H . , Nairn , A . C . , and Kuriyan , J . ( 2006 ) . Oligomerization states of the association domain and the holoenyzme of Ca2 + / CaM kinase II . FEBS J . 273 , 682 – 694 . Rumbaugh , G . , Adams , J . P . , Kim , J . H . , and Huganir , R . L . ( 2006 ) . SynGAPreg - ulates synaptic strength and mitogen - activated protein kinases in cultured neurons . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 4344 – 4351 . Ryazanov , A . G . , Ward , M . D . , Mendola , C . E . , Pavur , K . S . , Dorovkov , M . V . , Wiedmann , M . , Erdjument - Bromage , H . , Tempst , P . , Parmer , T . G . , Prostko , C . R . , et al . ( 1997 ) . Identiﬁcation of a new class of protein kinases represented by eukaryotic elongation factor - 2 kinase . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 4884 – 4889 . Sabatini , B . L . , Maravall , M . , and Svoboda , K . ( 2001 ) . Ca ( 2 + ) signaling in den - dritic spines . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 11 , 349 – 356 . Sakagami , H . , Umemiya , M . , Saito , S . , andKondo , H . ( 2000 ) . Distinctimmuno - histochemical localization of two isoforms of Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase kinases in the adult rat brain . Eur . J . Neurosci . 12 , 89 – 99 . Saneyoshi , T . , Wayman , G . , Fortin , D . , Davare , M . , Hoshi , N . , Nozaki , N . , Nat - sume , T . , and Soderling , T . R . ( 2008 ) . Activity - Dependent Synaptogenesis : Regulation by a CaM - Kinase Kinase / CaM - Kinase I / betaPIX Signaling Complex . Neuron 57 , 94 – 107 . Sanhueza , M . , McIntyre , C . C . , and Lisman , J . E . ( 2007 ) . Reversal of synaptic memory by Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase ii inhibitor . J . Neuro - sci . 27 , 5190 – 5199 . Schmitt , J . M . , Wayman , G . A . , Nozaki , N . , and Soderling , T . R . ( 2004 ) . Calcium activation of ERK mediated by calmodulin kinase I . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 24064 – 24072 . Schmitt , J . M . , Guire , E . S . , Saneyoshi , T . , and Soderling , T . R . ( 2005 ) . Calmod - ulin - dependent kinase kinase / calmodulin kinase I activity gates extracellular - regulated kinase - dependent long - term potentiation . J . Neurosci . 25 , 1281 – 1290 . Selcher , J . C . , Weeber , E . J . , Christian , J . , Nekrasova , T . , Landreth , G . E . , and Sweatt , J . D . ( 2003 ) . AroleforERKMAPkinaseinphysiologictemporalintegra - tion in hippocampal area CA1 . Learn . Mem . 10 , 26 – 39 . Sheng , M . , Thompson , M . A . , and Greenberg , M . E . ( 1991 ) . CREB : a Ca ( 2 + ) - regulated transcription factor phosphorylated by calmodulin - dependent kinases . Science 252 , 1427 – 1430 . Silva , A . J . , Paylor , R . , Wehner , J . M . , and Tonegawa , S . ( 1992a ) . Impaired spatial learning in alpha - calcium - calmodulin kinase II mutant mice . Science 257 , 206 – 211 . Silva , A . J . , Stevens , C . F . , Tonegawa , S . , and Wang , Y . ( 1992b ) . Deﬁcient hippocampal long - term potentiation in alpha - calcium - calmodulin kinase II mutant mice . Science 257 , 201 – 206 . Smolen , P . , Baxter , D . A . , andByrne , J . H . ( 2006 ) . Amodeloftherolesofessen - tial kinases in the induction and expression of late long - term potentiation . Biophys . J . 90 , 2760 – 2775 . Soderling , T . R . ( 2000 ) . CaM - kinases : modulators of synaptic plasticity . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 10 , 375 – 380 . Soderling , T . R . , and Stull , J . T . ( 2001 ) . Structure and regulation of calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinases . Chem . Rev . 101 , 2341 – 2352 . Solem , M . , McMahon , T . , and Messing , R . O . ( 1995 ) . Depolarization - induced neurite outgrowth in PC12 cells requires permissive , low level NGF receptor stimulation and activation of calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase . J . Neurosci . 15 , 5966 – 5975 . Song , T . , Hatano , N . , Horii , M . , Tokumitsu , H . , Yamaguchi , F . , Tokuda , M . , and Watanabe , Y . ( 2004 ) . Calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase I inhibits neuronal nitric - oxide synthase activity through serine 741 phosphorylation . FEBS Lett . 570 , 133 – 137 . Stedman , D . R . , Uboha , N . V . , Stedman , T . T . , Nairn , A . C . , and Picciotto , M . R . ( 2004 ) . Cytoplasmic localization of calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase I - alpha depends on a nuclear export signal in its regulatory domain . FEBS Lett . 566 , 275 – 280 . Strack , S . , Choi , S . , Lovinger , D . M . , and Colbran , R . J . ( 1997 ) . Translocation of autophosphorylated calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase ii to the postsynaptic density . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 13467 – 13470 . Suizu , F . , Fukuta , Y . , Ueda , K . , Iwasaki , T . , Tokumitsu , H . , and Hosoya , H . ( 2002 ) . Characterization of Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase I as a myosin II regulatory light chain kinase in vitro and in vivo . Biochem . J . 367 , 335 – 345 . Sun , P . , Enslen , H . , Myung , P . S . , and Maurer , R . A . ( 1994 ) . Differential activa - tion of CREB by Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase type II ant type IV involves phosphorylation of a site that negatively regulates activity . Genes Dev . 8 , 2527 – 2539 . Sun , P . , Lou , L . , and Maurer , R . A . ( 1996 ) . Regulation ofactivating transcription factor - 1 and the cAMP response element - binding protein by Ca2 + / calmodu - lin - dependent protein kinases type I , II , and IV . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 3066 – 3073 . Tai , Y . , Feng , S . , Ge , R . , Du , W . , Zhang , X . , He , Z . , andWang , Y . ( 2008 ) . TRPC6 channels promote dendritic growth via the CaMKIV - CREB pathway . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 2301 – 2307 . Takemoto - Kimura , S . , Terai , H . , Takamoto , M . , Ohmae , S . , Kikumura , S . , Segi , E . , Arakawa , Y . , Furuyashiki , T . , Narumiya , S . , and Bito , H . ( 2003 ) . Molecular cloning and characterization of CLICK - III / CaMKIgamma , a novel membrane - anchored neuronal Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase ( CaMK ) . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 18597 – 18605 . Takemoto - Kimura , S . , Ageta - Ishihara , N . , Nonaka , M . , Adachi - Morishima , A . , Mano , T . , Okamura , M . , Fujii , H . , Fuse , T . , Hoshino , M . , Suzuki , S . , etal . ( 2007 ) . Regulation of dendritogenesis via a lipid - raft - associated Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase CLICK - III / CaMKIgamma . Neuron 54 , 755 – 770 . Tansey , M . G . , Word , R . A . , Hidaka , H . , Singer , H . A . , Schworer , C . M . , Kamm , K . E . , and Stull , J . T . ( 1992 ) . Phosphorylation of myosin light chain kinase by Neuron 59 , September 25 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 929 Neuron Review the multifunctional calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II in smooth muscle cells . J . Biol . Chem . 267 , 12511 – 12516 . Thiagarajan , T . C . , Piedras - Renteria , E . S . , and Tsien , R . W . ( 2002 ) . alpha - and betaCaMKII . Inverse regulation by neuronal activity and opposing effects on synaptic strength . Neuron 36 , 1103 – 1114 . Thiagarajan , T . C . , Lindskog , M . , and Tsien , R . W . ( 2005 ) . Adaptation to synap - tic inactivity in hippocampal neurons . Neuron 47 , 725 – 737 . Tokumitsu , H . , Chijiwa , T . , Hagiwara , M . , Mizutani , A . , Terasawa , M . , and Hidaka , H . ( 1990 ) . KN - 62 , 1 - [ N , O - bis ( 5 - isoquinolinesulfonyl ) - N - methyl - L - tyro - syl ] - 4 - phenylpiper azi ne , a speciﬁc inhibitor of Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II . J . Biol . Chem . 265 , 4315 – 4320 . Tokumitsu , H . , Hatano , N . , Inuzuka , H . , Sueyoshi , Y . , Yokokura , S . , Ichimura , T . , Nozaki , N . , and Kobayashi , R . ( 2005 ) . Phosphorylation of numb family proteins : Possible involvement of Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinases . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 35108 – 35118 . Tokumitsu , H . , Inuzuka , H . , Ishikawa , Y . , and Kobayashi , R . ( 2003 ) . A single amino acid difference between alpha and beta ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase kinase dictates sensitivity to the speciﬁc inhibitor , STO - 609 . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 10908 – 10913 . Tokumitsu , H . , Hatano , N . , Inuzuka , H . , Yokokura , S . , Nozaki , N . , and Kobaya - shi , R . ( 2004 ) . Mechanism of the generation of autonomous activity of Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase IV . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 40296 – 40302 . Tokumitsu , H . , Hatano , N . , Yokokura , S . , Sueyoshi , Y . , Nozaki , N . , and Kobayashi , R . ( 2006 ) . Phosphorylation of Numb regulates its interaction with the clathrin - associated adaptor AP - 2 . FEBS Lett . 580 , 5797 – 5801 . Tsui , J . , Inagaki , M . , andSchulman , H . ( 2005 ) . Calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II ( CaMKII ) localization acts in concert with substrate targeting to create spatial restriction for phosphorylation . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 9210 – 9216 . Uboha , N . V . , Flajolet , M . , Nairn , A . C . , and Picciotto , M . R . ( 2007 ) . A calcium - and calmodulin - dependent kinase Ialpha / microtubule afﬁnity regulating kinase 2 signaling cascade mediates calcium - dependent neurite outgrowth . J . Neurosci . 27 , 4413 – 4423 . Ueda , T . , Sakagami , H . , Abe , K . , Oishi , I . , Maruo , A . , Kondo , H . , Terashima , T . , Ichihashi , M . , Yamamura , H . , and Minami , Y . ( 1999 ) . Distribution and intracel - lular localization of a mouse homologue of Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase Ibeta2 in the nervous system . J . Neurochem . 73 , 2119 – 2129 . Uezu , A . , Fukunaga , K . , Kasahara , J . , and Miyamoto , E . ( 2002 ) . Activation of Ca2 + / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase I in cultured rat hippocampal neurons . J . Neurochem . 82 , 585 – 593 . Vaillant , A . R . , Zanassi , P . , Walsh , G . S . , Aumont , A . , Alonso , A . , and Miller , F . D . ( 2002 ) . Signaling mechanisms underlying reversible , activity - dependent den - drite formation . Neuron 34 , 985 – 998 . Vazquez , L . E . , Chen , H . J . , Sokolova , I . , Knuesel , I . , and Kennedy , M . B . ( 2004 ) . SynGAP regulates spine formation . J . Neurosci . 24 , 8862 – 8872 . Wang , X . , Flynn , A . , Waskiewicz , A . J . , Webb , B . L . , Vries , R . G . , Baines , I . A . , Cooper , J . A . , and Proud , C . G . ( 1998 ) . The phosphorylation of eukaryotic initi - ationfactoreIF4E inresponse tophorbolesters , cellstresses , andcytokinesis mediated by distinct MAP kinase pathways . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 9373 – 9377 . Wang , H . , Shimizu , E . , Tang , Y . P . , Cho , M . , Kyin , M . , Zuo , W . , Robinson , D . A . , Alaimo , P . J . , Zhang , C . , Morimoto , H . , et al . ( 2003 ) . Inducible protein knockout revealstemporalrequirementofCaMKIIreactivationformemoryconsolidationinthebrain . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 4287 – 4292 . Wayman , G . A . , Tokumitsu , H . , and Soderling , T . R . ( 1997 ) . Inhibitory cross - talk by cAMPkinase onthecalmodulin - dependentprotein kinase cascade . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 16073 – 16076 . Wayman , G . A . , Kaech , S . , Grant , W . F . , Davare , M . , Impey , S . , Tokumitsu , H . , Nozaki , N . , Banker , G . , and Soderling , T . R . ( 2004 ) . Regulationof axonal exten - sion and growth cone motility by calmodulin - dependent protein kinase I . J . Neurosci . 24 , 3786 – 3794 . Wayman , G . A . , Impey , S . , Marks , D . , Saneyoshi , T . , Grant , W . F . , Derkach , V . , andSoderling , T . R . ( 2006 ) . Activity - dependentdendriticarborizationmediated by CaM - kinase I activation and enhanced CREB - dependent transcription of Wnt - 2 . Neuron 50 , 897 – 909 . Wayman , G . A . , Davare , M . , Ando , H . , Fortin , D . , Varlamova , O . , Cheng , H . Y . , Marks , D . , Obrietan , K . , Soderling , T . R . , Goodman , R . H . , and Impey , S . ( 2008 ) . An activity - regulated microRNA controls dendritic plasticity by down - regulating p250GAP . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 9093 – 9098 . Weeber , E . J . , Jiang , Y . H . , Elgersma , Y . , Varga , A . W . , Carrasquillo , Y . , Brown , S . E . , Christian , J . M . , Mirnikjoo , B . , Silva , A . , Beaudet , A . L . , and Sweatt , J . D . ( 2003 ) . Derangementsofhippocampalcalcium / calmodulin - dependentprotein kinase II in a mouse model for Angelman mental retardation syndrome . J . Neurosci . 23 , 2634 – 2644 . Wei , F . , Qiu , C . S . , Liauw , J . , Robinson , D . A . , Ho , N . , Chatila , T . , and Zhuo , M . ( 2002 ) . Calcium calmodulin - dependent protein kinase IV is required for fear memory . Nat . Neurosci . 5 , 573 – 579 . Wen , Z . , Guirland , C . , Ming , G . L . , andZheng , J . Q . ( 2004 ) . ACaMKII / calcineurin switch controls the direction of Ca ( 2 + ) - dependent growth cone guidance . Neuron 43 , 835 – 846 . Wenthold , R . J . , Petralia , R . S . , Blahos , J . , II , and Niedzielski , A . S . ( 1996 ) . Evidence for multiple AMPA receptor complexes in hippocampal CA1 / CA2 neurons . J . Neurosci . 16 , 1982 – 1989 . Westphal , R . S . , Anderson , K . A . , Means , A . R . , and Wadzinksi , B . E . ( 1998 ) . A signaling complex of Ca2 + - calmodulin - dependent protein kinase IV and protein phosphatase 2A . Science 280 , 1258 – 1261 . Williams , E . J . , Mittal , B . , Walsh , F . S . , and Doherty , P . ( 1995 ) . A Ca2 + / calmod - ulinkinaseinhibitor , KN - 62 , inhibitsneuriteoutgrowthstimulatedbyCAMsand FGF . Mol . Cell . Neurosci . 6 , 69 – 79 . Wiltgen , B . J . , Brown , R . A . , Talton , L . E . , and Silva , A . J . ( 2004 ) . New circuits for old memories : the role of the neocortex in consolidation . Neuron 44 , 101 – 108 . Witters , L . A . , Kemp , B . E . , and Means , A . R . ( 2006 ) . Chutes and Ladders : the search for protein kinases that act on AMPK . Trends Biochem . Sci . 31 , 13 – 16 . Wu , G . Y . , and Cline , H . T . ( 1998 ) . Stabilization of dendritic arbor structure in vivo by CaMKII . Science 279 , 222 – 226 . Wu , L . , Wells , D . , Tay , J . , Mendis , D . , Abbott , M . A . , Barnitt , A . , Quinlan , E . , Heynen , A . , Fallon , J . R . , andRichter , J . D . ( 1998 ) . CPEB - mediatedcytoplasmic polyadenylation and the regulation of experience - dependent translation of alpha - CaMKII mRNA at synapses . Neuron 21 , 1129 – 1139 . Wu , G . Y . , Deisseroth , K . , and Tsien , R . W . ( 2001a ) . Activity - dependent CREB phosphorylation : Convergence of a fast , sensitive calmodulin kinase pathway and a slow , less sensitive mitogen - activated protein kinase pathway . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 2808 – 2813 . Wu , G . Y . , Deisseroth , K . , and Tsien , R . W . ( 2001b ) . Spaced stimuli stabilize MAPKpathwayactivationanditseffectsondendriticmorphology . Nat . Neuro - sci . 4 , 151 – 158 . Wu , L . J . , Zhang , X . H . , Fukushima , H . , Zhang , F . , Wang , H . , Toyoda , H . , Li , B . M . , Kida , S . , and Zhuo , M . ( 2008 ) . Genetic enhancement of trace fear memory and cingulate potentiation in mice overexpressing Ca2 + / calmodu - lin - dependent protein kinase IV . Eur . J . Neurosci . 27 , 1923 – 1932 . Xie , Z . , Srivastava , D . P . , Photowala , H . , Kai , L . , Cahill , M . E . , Woolfrey , K . M . , Shum , C . Y . , Surmeier , D . J . , and Penzes , P . ( 2007 ) . Kalirin - 7 controls activ - ity - dependent structural and functional plasticity of dendritic spines . Neuron 56 , 640 – 656 . Yang , H . W . , Hu , X . D . , Zhang , H . M . , Xin , W . J . , Li , M . T . , Zhang , T . , Zhou , L . J . , and Liu , X . G . ( 2004 ) . Roles of CaMKII , PKA , and PKC in the induction and maintenance of LTP of C - ﬁber - evoked ﬁeld potentials in rat spinal dorsal horn . J . Neurophysiol . 91 , 1122 – 1133 . Yano , S . , Tokumitsu , H . , and Soderling , T . R . ( 1998 ) . Calcium promotes cell survival through CaM - K kinase activation of the protein - kinase - B pathway . Nature 396 , 584 – 587 . Yasuda , H . , Barth , A . L . , Stellwagen , D . , and Malenka , R . C . ( 2003 ) . A develop - mental switch in the signaling cascades for LTP induction . Nat . Neurosci . 6 , 15 – 16 . 930 Neuron 59 , September 25 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . Neuron Review Yu , X . , and Malenka , R . C . ( 2003 ) . Beta - catenin is critical for dendritic morpho - genesis . Nat . Neurosci . 6 , 1169 – 1177 . Yuan , L . W . , Soh , J . W . , and Weinstein , I . B . ( 2002 ) . Inhibition of histone acetyltransferase function of p300 by PKCdelta . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1592 , 205 – 211 . Zhang , H . , Webb , D . J . , Asmussen , H . , and Horwitz , A . F . ( 2003 ) . Synapse for - mation is regulated by the signaling adaptor GIT1 . J . Cell Biol . 161 , 131 – 142 . Zheng , J . Q . , and Poo , M . M . ( 2007 ) . Calcium signaling in neuronal motility . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 23 , 375 – 404 . Zhou , Y . , Takahashi , E . , Li , W . , Halt , A . , Wiltgen , B . , Ehninger , D . , Li , G . D . , Hell , J . W . , Kennedy , M . B . , and Silva , A . J . ( 2007 ) . Interactions between the NR2B receptorand CaMKII modulate synapticplasticity and spatial learning . J . Neu - rosci . 27 , 13843 – 13853 . Zhou , J . , Du , W . , Zhou , K . , Tai , Y . , Yao , H . , Jia , Y . , Ding , Y . , and Wang , Y . ( 2008 ) . CriticalroleofTRPC6channelsintheformationofexcitatorysynapses . Nat . Neurosci . 11 , 741 – 743 . Zou , D . J . , andCline , H . T . ( 1999 ) . Postsynapticcalcium / calmodulin - dependent proteinkinaseIIisrequiredtolimitelaborationofpresynapticandpostsynapticneuronalarbors . J . Neurosci . 19 , 8909 – 8918 . Neuron 59 , September 25 , 2008 ª 2008 Elsevier Inc . 931 Neuron Review