# 2008 The Authors Journal compilation # 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2008 . 00764 . x Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 1354 – 1371 Blackwell Munksgaard Auxilin Depletion Causes Self - Assembly of Clathrin into Membraneless Cages In Vivo Jennifer Hirst 1 , * , $ , Daniela A . Sahlender 1 , $ Sam Li 2 , Nienke B . Lubben 1 , Georg H . H . Borner 1 , † and Margaret S . Robinson 1 , * , † 1 Cambridge Institute for Medical Research , University of Cambridge , Wellcome Trust / MRC Building , Addenbrooke’s Hospital , Hills Road , Cambridge CB2 0XY , UK 2 Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology , Cambridge CB2 2QH , UK * Corresponding authors : Jennifer Hirst , jh228 @ cam . ac . uk and Margaret S . Robinson , msr12 @ mole . bio . cam . ac . uk $ These authors contributed equally to this work . † These authors contributed equally to this work . Auxilin is a cofactor for Hsc70 - mediated uncoating of clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCVs ) . However , small interfer - ing RNA ( siRNA ) knockdown of the ubiquitous auxilin 2 in HeLa cells only moderately impairs clathrin - dependent trafficking . In this study , we show that HeLa cells also express auxilin 1 , previously thought to be neuron spe - cific , and that both auxilins need to be depleted for inhibition of clathrin - mediated endocytosis and intracel - lular sorting . Depleting both auxilins cause an (cid:1) 50 % reduction in the number of clathrin - coated pits at the plasma membrane but enhances the association of cla - thrin and adaptors with intracellular membranes . CCV fractions isolated from auxilin - depleted cells have an (cid:1) 1 . 5 - fold increase in clathrin content and more than fivefold increase in the amount of AP - 2 adaptor complex and other endocytic machinery , with no concomitant increase in cargo . In addition , the structures isolated from auxilin - depleted cells are on average smaller than CCVs from control cells and are largely devoid of membrane , indicating that they are not CCVs but membraneless clathrin cages . Similar structures are observed by elec - tron microscopy in intact auxilin - depleted HeLa cells . Together , these findings indicate that the two auxilins have overlapping functions and that they not only facil - itate the uncoating of CCVs but also prevent the forma - tion of nonproductive clathrin cages in the cytosol . Key words : AP - 1 , AP - 2 , auxilin , clathrin , coated vesicle , GGA , intracellular membranes , plasma membrane , TGN Received 29 February 2008 , revised and accepted for publication 12 May 2008 , uncorrected manuscript pub - lished online 17 May 2008 , published online 11 June 2008 Cycles of coat assembly and disassembly are essential for clathrin - dependent trafficking . Formation of clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCVs ) requires the recruitment of cytosolic coat components onto membranes , where they assemble to form the coat . These coat components include clathrin , adaptors and various accessory proteins , such as dynamin , which is required for the fission event that yields the transport vesicle . Fusion of the CCV with its target mem - brane requires the disassembly of the coat , and results in the recycling of clathrin and other coat components back into the cytosol for further rounds of vesicle formation . It has been proposed that the ATP - dependent uncoating of CCVs is mediated by the molecular chaperone Hsc70 , and its cofactors auxilin 1 and auxilin 2 ( reviewed in 1 ) . Auxilin 1 ( DNAJC6 ) was first identified as a minor , tissue - specific clathrin assembly protein purified from bovine brain ( 2 ) . A second , ubiquitously expressed isoform of auxilin , auxilin 2 ( also known as cyclin G - associated kinase ) , was subse - quently discovered . Auxilin 2 shares 50 % sequence identity with the neuronal - specific auxilin 1 ( 3 – 5 ) , but it has an additional serine / threonine kinase domain . Both auxilins bind clathrin , adaptors ( 5 – 8 ) and dynamin ( 9 ) . Their C - terminal J domain confers the specificity for binding to Hsc70 , the uncoating ATPase ( adenosine triphosphatase ) ( 10 ) . The proposed mechanism is that auxilin binds to forming clathrin - coated buds shortly before fission , where it specifically recruits ATP - bound Hsc70 . Auxilin’s J domain stimulates the ATPase activity of Hsc70 , which in turn stabilizes Hsc70’s association with clathrin . This interaction ultimately drives the dissociation of the clathrin coat into triskelia and hence the uncoating of CCVs ( 11 , 12 ) . The requirement for auxilin as well as Hsc70 in disas - sembling clathrin from CCVs has been demonstrated in a number of studies and was a crucial step in establishing a physiological role for Hsc70 in the uncoating reaction . These studies were performed in a variety of organisms , including yeast , Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila , all of which express only one isoform of auxilin . Deletion of the auxilin gene in Drosophila is lethal , while mutants with reduced auxilin function show genetic interactions with Hsc70 and clathrin ( 13 ) . When auxilin is depleted in C . elegans , endocytosis of yolk protein in oocytes is markedly reduced , most of the worms arrest during larval development and clathrin dynamics are altered ( 14 ) . Disruption of the yeast auxilin gene results in an accumu - lation of CCVs , impaired cargo delivery and slow cell growth ( 15 , 16 ) . Auxilin and its interaction with Hsc70 have Re - use of this article is permitted in accordance with the Creative Commons Deed , Attribution 2 . 5 , which does not permit commercial exploitation . 1354 www . traffic . dk also been shown to be critical for clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis in the squid giant synapse ( 17 ) . In addition to its role as a cochaperone for Hsc70 in the uncoating of CCVs , auxilin has been proposed to have functions in the recruit - ment of clathrin and adaptors to membranes ( 18 ) , in the exchange of clathrin during pit remodeling ( 19 ) , and most recently in the scission of clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) to form free vesicles through its ability to bind dynamin ( 20 ) . In spite of evidence from numerous systems that auxilin plays a key role in CCV dynamics , studies in mammalian cells have produced contradictory results . Knockdown of the ubiquitous auxilin 2 in HeLa cells causes only relatively mild phenotypes . Internalization of both EGF and transferrin is moderately impaired ( 18 , 21 ) , and trafficking of the cation - independent mannose 6 - phosphate receptor ( CIMPR ) ( 18 ) and its ligand cathepsin D ( 7 ) is also partially affected . However , no accumulation of CCVs has been observed . In addition , there is conflicting data on the effects of auxilin 2 depletion on the recruitment of clathrin and adaptors ( 7 , 18 , 21 ) and on the exchange of clathrin between cytosol and membranes ( 18 , 21 ) . Because all these data were obtained using transient RNA interference ( RNAi ) depletion of auxilin 2 in HeLa cells , it is difficult to integrate the various findings . The unexpectedly mild phenotypes also conflict with those seen in yeast , Drosophila and C . elegans ( 13 – 17 ) . A simple explanation for the discrepancy between the phenotype in mammalian cells and the phenotypes in other organisms is the existence of an alternative J - domain protein that might compensate for the absence of auxilin 2 . Indeed , we recently reported that both auxilin 1 and auxilin 2 are present in CCVs prepared from HeLa cells ( 22 ) . In this study , we resolve the conflicting literature demonstrating overlapping roles for auxilin 1 and auxilin 2 in clathrin - mediated endocytosis and intracellular traffick - ing , and in the dynamics of clathrin assembly / disassembly . These results give insights into how auxilin 1 and auxilin 2 may be functioning in the brain , where both isoforms are normally coexpressed , and also provide us with a useful tool for proteomic analysis of isolated CCVs . Results Auxilin 1 is expressed in numerous non - neuronal cell lines Auxilin 1 was originally identified as a minor component of CCVs from bovine brain ( 2 ) , and it has been reported to be a neuron - specific protein ( for a review , see 1 ) . Genechip data support the restricted expression of auxilin 1 to brain ( SymCard Expression Profile for DNAJC6 ; http : / / symat - las . gnf . org / SymAtlas / ) , as does antibody labeling of a multi - ple tissue western blot ( Figure 1A ) . However , in our recent study on the protein composition of CCVs from HeLa cells ( a cervical carcinoma cell line ) , we found both auxilin 1 and auxilin 2 in our CCV fractions ( 22 ) . Western blot analysis of a number of tissue culture cell lines reveals that several other non - neuronal cell lines also express the ‘neuron - specific’ auxilin 1 ( Figure 1B ) . In particular , we found signi - ficant expression in Daudi ( lymphoma ) and A375 ( amelanotic melanoma ) cell lines and weak expression in T98G ( glioma ) and HCT - 116 ( colon epithelial carcinoma ) cell lines . Thus , auxilin 1 expression is not restricted to brain - derived cells . Relative abundance of auxilins To estimate the relative abundance of auxilin 1 and auxilin 2 in HeLa CCVs , we used our previously published proteomics data ( 22 ) to calculate exponentially modified Protein Abun - dance Indices ( emPAIs ; Materials and Methods ) . emPAI values are proportional to molar protein concentrations and thus can be used to estimate relative levels of auxilins . emPAI was determined at 0 . 145 and 0 . 197 for auxilin 1 and auxilin 2 , respectively , equivalent to a molar ratio of auxilin 1 / auxilin 2 (cid:2) 1 : 1 . 4 . Hence , our data suggest that auxilin 1 and auxilin 2 are present in very similar amounts in HeLa cell CCVs . Figure 1 : Auxilin 1 expression pat - terns . Coomassie Blue - stained commer - cial blots of human tissues ( A ) and human cell lines ( B ) were probed with an anti - body against auxilin 1 . Sm int ¼ small intestine ; Sk mus ¼ skeletal muscle . Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 1354 – 1371 1355 Auxilin Function in HeLa Cells Auxilin depletion inhibits clathrin - mediated endocytosis The function of auxilin 2 has been studied using RNAi depletion , mainly in HeLa cells , and only moderate pheno - types have been reported ( 7 , 18 , 21 ) . We speculated that auxilin 1 might have partially compensated for auxilin 2 in these studies . To test this possibility , we used small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) to knock down the expression of both auxilin 1 and auxilin 2 in HeLa cells . For comparison , dynamin 2 was also knocked down . A 4 - day protocol using two siRNA treatments efficiently depleted all three pro - teins by > 90 % ( Figure 2A ) . To assess the effects of auxilin or dynamin depletion on clathrin - mediated endocytosis , we assayed the uptake of fluorescently labeled transferrin or EGF ( Figure 2B ) . In control cells incubated with fluores - cent ligand for 10 min at 37 8 C , both transferrin and EGF are internalized into punctate structures that resemble early endosomes . Similar uptake was observed in cells depleted of either auxilin 1 or auxilin 2 alone . However , there was an inhibition in the internalization of transferrin and EGF in cells depleted of both auxilins , similar to that seen in cells depleted of dynamin 2 . To quantify these effects , cells that had been depleted of auxilins or dynamin were incubated with radiolabeled ligand at 4 8 C to allow binding to occur and then shifted to 37 8 C for up to 10 min . There were only subtle reduc - tions in the rates of uptake of transferrin ( Figure 2C ) or EGF ( Figure 2D ) in the auxilin 1 or auxilin 2 single knockdowns . However , in agreement with the fluorescence data , deple - tion of both auxilins or of dynamin resulted in an inhibition of transferrin and EGF uptake at early time - points , similar to that seen following clathrin depletion . Recovery of transferrin uptake was seen at longer times of incubation ( results not shown ) . In addition , there was a twofold to threefold increase in the amount of transferrin bound to the plasma membrane in cells depleted of either dynamin or the two auxilins ( Figure S1 ) , suggesting an accumulation Figure 2 : Auxilin depletion blocks clathrin - mediated endocytosis . A ) HeLa cells were depleted of auxilin 1 , auxilin 2 , both auxilins or dynamin by siRNA . Cell lysates were analyzed by western blotting ; clathrin heavy chain ( CHC ) was used as a loading control . B ) HeLa cells were depleted of auxilins or dynamin by siRNA and pulsed with 10 m g / mL Alexa Fluor 594 - labeled transferrin or 400 ng / mL Alexa Fluor 488 - labeled EGF for 10 min at 37 8 C . Scale bar : 20 m m . C and D ) Cells were depleted of auxilins , dynamin or clathrin by siRNA , allowed to bind 500 nCi / mL ( equivalent to (cid:1) 2 m g / mL for transferrin and (cid:1) 2 ng / mL for EGF ) 125 I - labeled transferrin or EGF at 4 8 C and then shifted to 37 8 C for the indicated length of time . Culture supernatants were harvested , ligand remaining at the cell surface was removed with an acid wash and cells were solubilized with NaOH . Radioactivity was quantified in all three fractions and expressed as a percentage of total counts per minute ( c . p . m . ) . Only the cell - associated counts are shown here . Each point is derived from at least four separate experiments performed in triplicate , and the error bars show the standard error of the mean . 1356 Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 1354 – 1371 Hirst et al . of transferrin receptor at the cell surface . These results demonstrate that depletion of both auxilins in HeLa cells is required for an inhibition of clathrin - mediated endocytosis and thus that auxilin 1 and auxilin 2 have overlapping functions . Effects of auxilin depletion on clathrin coats at the plasma membrane We next investigated the effect of auxilin 1 / auxilin 2 knockdown on CCP formation at the plasma membrane . Depletion of both auxilins in HeLa cells resulted in a change in cell morphology with most cells appearing more rounded , which made it difficult to assess changes at the cell surface by immunofluorescence . With this caveat in mind , we did not observe any significant alteration in the localization of AP - 2 , clathrin or the AP - 2 accessory proteins epsin and clathrin assembly lymphoid myeloid leukemia protein ( CALM ) ( Figure 3A and unpublished observations ) nor were there any obvious changes in cells that had been pre - permeabilized with saponin to wash out the cytosolic pool of adaptors and enhance the visualization of mem - brane labeling ( Figure 3A ) . We therefore used quantitative electron microscopy ( EM ) to investigate clathrin coat formation at the cell surface . To distinguish plasma mem - brane - associated CCPs from free CCVs , cells were fixed in the presence of ruthenium red . This heavy metal stain is absorbed onto the plasma membrane where it forms an electron - dense layer visible by EM but is excluded from free CCVs that have already pinched off . Therefore , any clathrin - coated and ruthenium red - positive structures at or near the plasma membrane are defined as CCPs ( Figure 3 B ) . In cells depleted of auxilin 1 and auxilin 2 , the number of shallow and curved CCPs was reduced to 45 % and the number of deeply invaginated CCPs to 66 % , relative to control cells . Although reduced in number , the pits appear to have normal morphology . In cells depleted of dynamin , the number of shallow and curved CCPs was reduced to 25 % of control levels ; however , we observed a fourfold increase in the number of deeply invaginated CCPs ( Fig - ure 3B , C ) . This agrees with previous studies of a domi - nant - negative dynamin mutant and with the proposed role of dynamin in the fission of CCPs ( 23 ) . In yeast , knockout of auxilin causes the accumulation of free CCVs ( 16 ) . However , we found that in auxilin 1 / auxilin 2 - depleted HeLa cells , there was actually a decrease in the number of free plasma membrane - derived CCVs defined as ruthenium red - negative , clathrin - coated structures within 200 nm of the cell surface ( 52 % , relative to control cells ) . As expected , there was also a reduction in the number of free CCVs in dynamin - depleted cells ( 36 % of control levels ) . Auxilin depletion inhibits intracellular trafficking Depletion of auxilin 2 has been reported to affect lyso - somal sorting by altering the localization of mannose 6 - phosphate receptors ( 18 ) and delaying the maturation of cathepsin D ( 7 , 21 ) . To assess the effects of knocking down both auxilins , we performed a cathepsin D sorting assay . HeLa cells were pulse - chased with 35 S , and cathep - sin D was immunoprecipitated both from the medium and from the cells . Figure 4A shows a representative autora - diograph , and Figure 4B shows the quantification of three such experiments . Depletion of either auxilin 1 or auxilin 2 has only a small effect on cathepsin D sorting . However , depletion of both auxilins results in substantial missorting of cathepsin D , as evidenced both by the reduction in mature enzyme and by the increase in secretion of cathepsin D precursor . A similar phenotype is seen in AP - 1 depleted cells ( Figure 4B ) . Another AP - 1 - dependent pathway is the downregulation of major histocompatibility complex class I ( MHCI ) from the cell surface by Nef , a protein encoded by HIV . Knockdown of either AP - 1 or clathrin inhibits the Nef - induced rerouting of MHCI to endosomes and lysosomes ( 24 , 25 ) , whereas knockdown of AP - 2 enhances the effect of Nef on MHCI ( 25 ) . To investigate the role of auxilins in this pathway , we used a fluorescence - activated cell sorter ( FACS ) - based assay . Control ( i . e . no knockdown ) and siRNA - treated cells were transiently transfected with plasmids encoding either green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) alone or GFP and Nef as a bicistronic message , and the cells were scored for GFP expression and surface MHCI . Depletion of either auxilin 1 or auxilin 2 had only a slight effect , but the simultaneous depletion of both auxilins had a stronger inhibitory effect on Nef activity ( Figure 4C ) . Together , these results demonstrate that the two auxilins have overlapping functions not only at the plasma mem - brane but also in intracellular trafficking events and that in HeLa cells depletion of both auxilins is required to impair both the sorting of lysosomal hydrolases and Nef - induced downregulation of MHCI . Effects of auxilin depletion on the localization of clathrin and adaptors on intracellular membranes Different effects of auxilin 2 knockdown have been re - ported on the localization of clathrin and adaptor proteins associated with intracellular membranes . Lee et al . ( 18 ) reported the loss of AP - 1 and Golgi - localized g - ear contain - ing ARF - binding proteins ( GGA ) immunostaining , while Kametaka et al . ( 7 ) reported no effect on AP - 1 . We used immunofluorescence to investigate the effects of an auxilin double knockdown on the localization and label - ing intensity of clathrin , AP - 1 , GGAs and p56 ( the best characterized GGA - binding partner ) ( Figure 5 ) . We ob - served relative increases in the labeling intensities of clathrin , AP - 1 , GGA1 , GGA2 , GGA3 and p56 associated with perinuclear membranes ( Figure 5A ) . Using saponin pre - permeabilization to wash out the cytosolic pool of adaptors , we observed even more pronounced increases in the labeling intensities of GGAs and their binding partner p56 ( Figure 5B ) . We have previously reported that freeze thawing causes a rapid loss of GGA1 from the perinuclear region of the cell because of the lability of their association Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 1354 – 1371 1357 Auxilin Function in HeLa Cells with membranes ( 26 ) . Treatment with saponin prior to fixation caused a similar loss of GGA and p56 immunoflu - orescence staining ( compare Figure 5A with Figure 5B ) . In contrast , in auxilin double - depleted cells , the GGAs and p56 were retained on the membrane even after saponin pre - permeabilization . These results suggest that in the absence of auxilin 1 and auxilin 2 , the GGAs ( and conse - quently their binding partner p56 ) associate more stably with membranes . The association was still sensitive to treatment with the drug Brefeldin A and therefore depend - ent on ARF1 ( ADP ribosylation factor 1 ) ( Figure S2 ) . Using EM to investigate the morphology of the Golgi region at the ultrastructural level , we observed that the Golgi stack appears normal and that there are numerous clathrin - coated budding profiles associated with the trans Golgi network ( TGN ) and endosomes ( Figure 5C ) . The increases in labeling of clathrin , AP - 1 , GGAs and p56 on intracellular membranes in auxilin - depleted cells were quantified using an automated microscope , which enabled us to sample more than 2500 randomly chosen cells for each condition . Clathrin labeling is shown as an example of how the data were collected ( Figure 6A ) . We found increases in labeling intensity of 1 . 20 - fold for clathrin , 1 . 58 - fold for AP - 1 , 1 . 71 - fold for GGA2 and 2 . 02 - fold for p56 . Using cells pre - permeabilized with saponin , the increase became even more apparent for GGA2 ( 3 . 90 - fold ) and for p56 ( 2 . 40 - fold ) ( Figure 6B ) . Figure 3 : Auxilin depletion causes a reduction of CCPs at the plasma membrane . A ) Control cells or cells depleted of auxilin 1 and auxilin 2 were incubated with or without 0 . 05 % saponin prior to fixation and labeled for AP - 2 a . Scale bar : 20 m m . B ) Electron micrographs of cells depleted of auxilin 1 and auxilin 2 . Cells were fixed in the presence of ruthenium red to distinguish budding CCPs , which are still connected to the plasma membrane , from pinched - off free CCVs . Note the electron - dense layer formed by the ruthenium red highlighting the continuity of the plasma membrane and clathrin - coated structures at different stages during pit formation . The upper image shows a fully opened pit ( arrow ) and a ‘U’ - shaped pit ( arrowhead ) , which are scored as shallow and curved pits , respectively . The lower image shows an ‘omega’ - shaped pit with a narrow opening ( arrow ) and a cross - sectioned CCP containing ruthenium red but with no visible opening ( arrowhead ) , both of which are grouped as deeply invaginated pits . Scale bar : 200 nm . C ) Morphometric analysis of clathrin - coated profiles at the plasma membrane in control , auxilin - depleted and dynamin - depleted cells . The percentage of clathrin - coated profiles at the plasma membrane was determined , averaging the results from two independent experiments . Error bars show the standard error of the mean . 1358 Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 1354 – 1371 Hirst et al . Together , these results show that auxilin depletion increases the relative association of clathrin , AP - 1 , GGAs and p56 with intracellular membranes . As Hsc70 and auxilin are implicated in the ATP - dependent rapid exchange of free clathrin in the cytosol with clathrin in pits and buds ( 19 ) , it is likely that the stabilization is because of alterations in the cycling of coat proteins on and off membranes . Dynamics of clathrin exchange To assess the dynamics of clathrin exchange , cells were transfected with GFP - clathrin light chain and analyzed by fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) at the plasma membrane ( Figure 7A ) and in the perinuclear region ( Figure 7B ) . Cells depleted of both auxilin 1 and auxilin 2 showed a reduced fluorescence recovery after 150 sec - onds compared with control cells at both locations . In the auxilin - depleted cells , there was 80 . 2 (cid:3) 0 . 4 % recovery at the plasma membrane and 69 . 1 (cid:3) 0 . 3 % recovery in the perinuclear region , while in control cells , there was 93 . 1 (cid:3) 0 . 3 % recovery at the plasma membrane and 99 . 0 (cid:3) 0 . 3 % recovery in the perinuclear region ( Figure 7C ) , which is consistent with the presence of an immobilized pool of clathrin on the membrane in the auxilin - depleted cells . In addition , the fluorescence recovery was slower in auxilin - depleted cells , with a half - time ( t 1 / 2 ) of 29 . 1 (cid:3) 1 . 4 seconds at the plasma membrane compared with a t 1 / 2 of 24 . 4 (cid:3) 2 . 7 seconds in control cells , and a t 1 / 2 of 40 . 6 (cid:3) 2 . 4 seconds in the perinuclear region compared with a t 1 / 2 of 14 . 4 (cid:3) 1 . 1 seconds in control cells . Together , these results show that auxilin depletion causes changes in clathrin dynamics . CCV fractions from auxilin - depleted cells Knockout of auxilin in yeast causes an accumulation of free CCVs and an increase in the yield of CCVs from cell homogenates ( 16 ) . In HeLa cells , auxilin 2 knockdown causes overexpressed clathrin – GFP to aggregate in the Figure 4 : Auxilin depletion affects clathrin - mediated intracellular sorting . A ) Control cells , cells depleted of both auxilins and cells depleted of AP - 1 m 1A were pulse - chased with 35 S , and both cell - associated ( C ) and secreted ( S ) cathepsin D was immunoprecipitated . The positions of the precursor ( P ) and mature ( M ) forms of the enzyme are marked . B ) Results from three separate experiments were pooled ; error bars show the standard error of the mean . The ratio of secreted cathepsin D precursor to total cathepsin D is 0 . 17 in control , 0 . 35 in auxilin double - depleted and 0 . 51 in the AP - 1 m 1A - depleted cells . C ) HeLa cells stably expressing HLA - A2 were depleted of auxilin 1 , auxilin 2 or both by siRNA and then transfected with either a control plasmid - encoding GFP alone ( Nef STOP ) or a plasmid - encoding wild - type Nef as a bicistronic message with GFP ( Nef WT ) . Flow cytometry was used to assay for MHCI downregulation using anti - HLA - A2 bound at 4 8 C . Representative plots show dose - dependent downregulation of MHCI in control cells , which is reduced in auxilin - depleted cells . Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 1354 – 1371 1359 Auxilin Function in HeLa Cells cytosol , but no accumulation of free CCVs has been reported ( 18 ) . To test how an auxilin 1 / auxilin 2 double knockdown affects the yield of CCVs from HeLa cells , we prepared CCV - enriched fractions from control and auxilin - depleted cells , using our previously established fraction - ation protocol ( 22 , 27 ) . Samples were adjusted to equal protein concentrations and analyzed by western blotting ( Figure 8 ) . CCV fractions from auxilin 1 / auxilin 2 - depleted cells showed a significant increase in clathrin relative to control CCV fractions ( (cid:1) 1 . 5 - fold ; Figure 8A ) . While levels of adaptor proteins AP - 1 , AP - 3 and GGAs were unaffected , there was a large and selective increase in AP - 2 ( more than fivefold ; Figure 8A ) . This increase was mirrored by AP - 2 - associated proteins , including CALM , Dab2 , SNX9 , Eps15 and dynamin 2 ( Figure 8B ) . Intriguingly , there was no concomitant increase in typical endocytic cargo molecules , such as EGF and transferrin receptors ( Figure 8C ) . We even observed a small but consistent decrease in CIMPR , a cargo molecule of both endocytic and intracellular CCVs ( Figure 8C ) . In addition , auxilin double knockdown caused a strong reduction in the amount of clathrin in our high - speed supernatant ( Figure 8A ) , indicating that there is much less free clathrin in the cytosol . The selective increase in clathrin , AP - 2 and associated proteins in the CCV fraction suggests that the auxilin double knockdown causes a stabilization and subsequent accumulation of endocytic CCVs . However , the lack of increase in cargo molecules indicates that these may be CCVs that have budded without concentrating cargo . Alternatively , auxilin double knockdown may cause the formation of membraneless clathrin – adaptor cages that Figure 5 : Effects of auxilin depletion on clathrin and adaptors associated with intracellular membranes . Control cells or cells depleted of both auxilins were incubated without ( A ) or with ( B ) 0 . 05 % saponin prior to fixation and then labeled with antibodies against clathrin , AP - 1 g , GGA1 , GGA2 , GGA3 and the GGA - binding partner p56 . Scale bar : 20 m m . C ) Representative electron micrograph showing the Golgi region in a HeLa cell depleted of auxilin 1 and auxilin 2 . Cells were incubated with 0 . 05 % saponin prior to fixation . Note that the morphology of the Golgi appears normal and that there are a number of clathrin - coated budding profiles associated with the TGN ( arrows ) and with tubules emanating from endo - somes ( arrowhead ) . E , endosome ; G , Golgi ; N , nucleus . Scale bar : 500 nm . 1360 Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 1354 – 1371 Hirst et al . have similar fractionation properties as CCVs . To distin - guish between these possibilities , we analyzed our CCV fractions by EM . In preparations from control cells , CCVs were readily identified as spherical or ellipsoid structures of variable size with the bristle border that is character - istic of the clathrin coat in thin sections ( Figure 9A ) . A membrane was clearly visible inside many of the CCVs ( Figure 9A , arrows ) . In contrast , the clathrin - coated struc - tures isolated from auxilin double - depleted cells appear to be smaller , more electron dense and more uniform in size ; in addition , a membrane was rarely visible in these structures ( Figure 9B ) . Quantitative analysis showed that auxilin 1 / auxilin 2 depletion causes a shift in the size distribution of coated structures ( Figure 9C ) . The control CCV population has a mean diameter of 84 nm , with a standard deviation ( SD ) of 13 nm ( n ¼ 3369 ) . The clathrin - coated structures from auxilin - depleted cells are signifi - cantly smaller with a mean diameter of 64 nm and are also more homogeneous in size , with a SD of 9 nm ( n ¼ 2534 ) . Similar size distributions were observed when the CCV fractions were analyzed by negative staining ( unpublished data ) . The clathrin - coated structures from Figure 6 : Quantification of effects of auxilin knockdown on intracellular coat proteins . Control cells or cells depleted of auxilin 1 and auxilin 2 were incubated with or without 0 . 05 % saponin prior to fixation , double labeled with antibodies against TGN46 and either clathrin , AP1 - g , GGA2 or the GGA - binding partner p56 and imaged using an automated microscope . A ) Representative images of clathrin labeling in the absence of saponin . The top panels show the automated masking of the TGN . Scale bar : 50 m m . B ) For each condition , data from more than 2500 cells ( total ) from 10 - well repeats were pooled , the mean average intensity was determined and data were corrected for changes in TGN46 labeling . Error bars show the standard error of the mean . All the coat proteins show increased fluorescence in the TGN region after auxilin knockdown . Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 1354 – 1371 1361 Auxilin Function in HeLa Cells Figure 7 : Auxilin depletion changes clathrin dynamics . Control cells or cells depleted of both auxilins were transfected with GFP - tagged clathrin light chain . The plasma membrane ( A ) or a perinuclear region ( B ) was photobleached and fluorescence allowed to recover for 150 seconds . Scale bar : 10 m m . C ) Fluorescence recovery was adjusted for background and bleaching and then normalized to percentage recovery . Fourteen data sets were pooled and the mean results were plotted ; error bars show the standard error of the mean . 1362 Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 1354 – 1371 Hirst et al . auxilin - depleted cells also tend to be more uniformly round , whereas in the control preparations , there is a higher frequency of irregularly shaped , incompletely coated vesicles , which may represent sheared - off clathrin - coated buds ( Figure 9A and Figure S3 ) . Together , these data suggest that the auxilin double knockdown causes the accumulation of small , homogeneous , clathrin - coated structures that resemble CCVs in morphology but lack membranes . To confirm that the clathrin - coated structures from auxilin - depleted cells are indeed membraneless , we used cryo - electron tomography to obtain three - dimensional ( 3D ) reconstructions of individual frozen - hydrated particles . Images in a tilt series ( recorded as described in Materials and Methods ) were aligned with each other to calculate the electron tomograms . We found that the majority of the reconstructed clathrin - coated structures are devoid of a membrane vesicle ( Figure 10A – C ) . Comparison with tomographic slices of isolated CCVs containing a mem - brane vesicle ( Figure 10D ) also shows that most of the membraneless clathrin - coated structures are smaller than CCVs , consistent with the thin section data , and that they contain a dense core . Membraneless clathrin coats are present in intact auxilin - depleted cells The membraneless structures observed in the auxilin double knockdown are reminiscent of clathrin coats assembled in vitro ( 28 ) , suggesting that they might have formed during the fractionation procedure . To test whether these structures are also present in intact HeLa cells , we analyzed the cells by EM . Small , electron - dense and seemingly membraneless clathrin - coated structures were frequently observed in the cytoplasm of auxilin - depleted cells ( Figure 11A ) . For a quantitative analysis , con - trol and auxilin - depleted HeLa cells were pre - permeabilized withsaponin toreduce cytosolic background ( Figure 11B , C ) . Again , we observed a shift in size distribution : clathrin - coated structures from auxilin - depleted cells have a mean diameter of 74 (cid:3) 15 nm versus 88 (cid:3) 21 nm from control cells [ n ¼ 344 and 258 , respectively ( Figure 11C ) ] . Both mean diameters are larger than those that we measured when we analyzed our CCV fractions , probably because many of the structures in intact cells are clathrin - coated buds , not free CCVs . Nevertheless , the mean diameter of clathrin - coated structures is significantly smaller in the auxilin - depleted cells than in the control cells . In addition , in control cells , the majority ( 67 % ) of the clathrin - coated structures have clearly visible membranes . In contrast , in auxilin - depleted cells , only 24 % of clathrin - coated struc - tures have visible membranes . Although clathrin - coated structures without detectable membranes may represent genuine empty clathrin cages , it is also possible that they are a result of grazing sections of CCVs or clathrin - coated buds . Indeed , the latter possi - bility may explain why even in control cells a proportion of clathrin - coated structures have no visible membrane . To determine whether the seemingly membraneless Figure 8 : CCV fractions from auxilin - depleted cells have increased clathrin and AP - 2 content . Post - nuclear supernatants of whole cell lysates from control ( con ) and auxilin double - depleted ( aux KD ) HeLa cells were centrifuged at 135 000 (cid:4) g to yield a soluble fraction ( SN ) and a high - speed pellet ( P ) . A CCV - enriched fraction ( CCVs ) was prepared from the pellet by two further rounds of differential centrifugation . Samples were analyzed by western blotting . The following protein quantities were loaded per lane : Lysate , 10 m g ; SN , 10 m g ; P , 5 m g ; CCV , 2 . 5 m g . A ) Clathrin and adaptor proteins . B ) Endocytic accessory proteins . C ) Cargo proteins . Note that the amount of protein in the CCV fractions represents only a small proportion of the protein present in the SN and P fractions ( < 1 % ) ; hence , large changes of abundance in the CCV fraction are not necessarily paralleled by equally large changes in the SN and P fractions . Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 1354 – 1371 1363 Auxilin Function in HeLa Cells structures in auxilin - depleted cells actually have mem - branes outside of the plane of section , we analyzed serial sections . We found that the majority of the clathrin - coated structures in auxilin - depleted cells were contained within a single 70 - nm thick section ( Figure 11B , B 0 , see arrows and inset ) , demonstrating that they are smaller than a CCP or bud , which can usually be followed through two or more serial sections ( Figure 11B , B 0 , see arrowhead ) . This suggests that most of the membraneless structures observed in auxilin - depleted cells are indeed free clathrin cages . Discussion Previous attempts to study the role of auxilin in mam - malian cells have produced somewhat conflicting results that did not correlate with the phenotypes of auxilin inactivation in other organisms . Most of the mammalian studies were based on RNAi depletion of auxilin 2 in HeLa cells , which caused only mild defects in endocytosis and intracellular sorting , inconsistent effects on clathrin dynamics and perhaps most disappointingly no accumu - lation of CCVs ( 7 , 18 , 21 , 29 ) . One underlying problem with the majority of these studies has been the assump - tion that HeLa cells express only the ubiquitous isoform of auxilin , auxilin 2 . In this study , we show that HeLa cells express not only the ubiquitous auxilin 2 but also the ‘neuron - specific’ isoform , auxilin 1 . This has allowed us to uncover further roles for auxilin , in addition to its well - defined role in the uncoating of CCVs , by using RNAi to deplete both isoforms . Auxilin 1 and auxilin 2 functionally complement each other Knockdown of auxilin 2 alone has a weak inhibitory ef - fect on endocytosis ( 18 , 21 ) . In the present study , we demonstrate that both auxilin 1 and auxilin 2 contribute to clathrin - mediated endocytosis because only the com - bined depletion of both auxilins inhibits the uptake of transferrin and EGF . We also show that both auxilin 1 Figure 9 : EM analysis of clathrin - coated structures isolated from auxilin - depleted cells . CCV fractions were prepared from control and auxilin 1 / auxilin 2 - depleted cells . The final pel - lets were fixed and embedded , and (cid:1) 70 nm sections were cut perpendicu - lar to the pellet . Electron micrographs show clathrin - coated structures isolated from control cells ( A and A 0 ) and auxilin - depleted cells ( B and B 0 ) . Clathrin - coated structures from control cells ( A ) appear more heterogeneous in size than clathrin - coated structures from auxilin - depletedcells . Amembraneisfrequently observed in control CCVs [ arrows in ( A ) and ( A 0 ) ] , whereas clathrin - coated structures from auxilin - depleted cells mostly seem to lack membranes ( B 0 ) . Scale bars : 100 nm . C ) Size distribution of clathrin - coated structures isolated from control and auxilin - depleted cells . In total , the mean diameters of 3369 and 2534 structures were measured for control cells and auxilin - depleted cells , respectively . The size distribution is ex - pressed as a percentage of the total number measured for each condition , with 5 nm binning . The average diame - ter of control CCVs is 84 nm ( SD ¼ 13 nm ) , whereas the average diameter of clathrin - coated structures in auxilin - depleted cells is 64 nm ( SD ¼ 9 nm ) . 1364 Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 1354 – 1371 Hirst et al . Figure 10 : Tomography of vitrified clathrin - coated structures isolated from auxilin 1 / aux - ilin 2 - depleted HeLa cells . Panels A – C show tomographic slices of membraneless clathrin - coated structures . Panel D shows a tomograph of a membrane - containing CCV for comparison . The thickness of each slice is 14 . 3 A˚ ; images corre - spond to every eighth slice of the tomographic stack . Scale bar : 100 nm . Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 1354 – 1371 1365 Auxilin Function in HeLa Cells and auxilin 2 contribute to the correct sorting of cathepsin D and to Nef - mediated downregulation of MHCI . In agreement with these observations , our data suggest that auxilin 1 and auxilin 2 are present in similar quantities in HeLa CCVs . Thus , auxilin 1 and auxilin 2 have over - lapping functions and can substitute for each other in sorting events both at the plasma membrane and on intracellular membranes . Auxilin depletion has different effects on clathrin association with intracellular membranes and the plasma membrane Auxilin has been proposed to function at various stages during the CCV cycle , including clathrin recruitment ( 18 ) , clathrin remodeling ( 19 ) , vesicle scission ( 20 ) and vesicle uncoating . Despite the disruption in both endocytic and TGN / endosome clathrin - mediated trafficking in cells de - pleted of both auxilins , the knockdown appears to have opposite effects on the association of clathrin with the plasma membrane and with intracellular membranes . In auxilin - depleted cells , there was a (cid:1) 50 % drop in the number of clathrin - coated profiles at the plasma mem - brane , whereas there was a significant increase in clathrin and AP - 1 / GGA labeling on intracellular membranes . We can only speculate as to why these differences exist , but the two most likely explanations are differences in how the auxilins act on AP - 1 and AP - 2 or mechanistic differences in adaptor protein recruitment . For example , auxilin 2 has a serine / threonine kinase domain that is not found in auxilin 1 , which is homologous to the kinase domain of adaptor - associated kinase 1 ( AAK1 ) ( 30 ) . Both auxilin 2 and AAK1 can phosphorylate the m 2 subunit of AP - 2 , so it is possible that the kinase activities of AAK1 and auxilin 2 can func - tionally substitute for each other at the plasma membrane but not on intracellular membranes . Alternatively ( or in addition ) , the different mechanisms employed by AP - 2 and AP - 1 / GGAs to bind to their target membranes , in - volving different phosphoinositides and ARF guanosine triphosphatases , may influence the way they respond to auxilin depletion . What is the function of auxilin in the CCV cycle ? If the sole function of auxilin is to act as a cofactor for Hsc70 in the uncoating of CCVs , then it might be Figure 11 : EM analysis of intracellular clathrin - coated struc - tures in auxilin - depleted cells . Cells depleted of auxilin 1 and auxilin 2 were treated either without ( A ) or with ( B ) 0 . 05 % saponin , then fixed either with ( A ) or without ( B ) including 1 % tannic acid in the final step and embedded in resin . Sections of (cid:1) 70 nm were cut , and for B and B 0 , two consecutive serial sections are shown . Note the presence of small electron - dense clathrin - coated profiles in the cytoplasm that appear to be devoid of membrane . The arrowhead in ( A ) shows a 25 nm microtubule for size comparison ; the arrowhead in ( B / B 0 ) shows a CCP . Three membraneless electron - dense clathrin - coated profiles are enlarged in the insets . Unlike the CCP , they are only visible in a single section . Scale bars : 100 nm ( A ) ; 250 nm ( B ) ; M , mitochondrion . C ) Size distribution of clathrin - coated structures in the cytoplasm of control and auxilin - depleted cells . The diameter of 258 and 344 clathrin - coated structures was measured for control cells and auxilin - depleted cells , respectively . The size distribution is expressed as a percent - age of the total number measured for each condition . The average diameter of clathrin - coated structures was 74 nm ( SD ¼ 15 nm ) in auxilin - depleted cells and 88 nm ( SD ¼ 21 nm ) in control cells . 1366 Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 1354 – 1371 Hirst et al . expected that knocking down auxilin would lead to an accumulation of CCVs . Indeed , this phenotype has been reported in auxilin - depleted yeast ( 16 ) . However , by EM , we did not observe an accumulation of free endocytic CCVs , defined as ruthenium red - negative clathrin - coated structures within 200 nm of the plasma membrane . In contrast , we did find that CCV fractions from auxilin - depleted cells were significantly enriched in clathrin and components of the endocytic machinery , relative to CCV fractions from control cells . At first , these observations seemed to contradict each other , but several observations have led us to conclude that the clathrin - coated structures that accumulate in auxilin - depleted cells are assembled clathrin cages that are devoid of membrane . Firstly , while there is an increase in clathrin and AP - 2 in CCV fractions from auxilin - depleted cells , cargo proteins such as the transferrin receptor , EGF receptor or CIMPR are not in - creased . Secondly , in auxilin - depleted cells , clathrin redis - tributes from (cid:1) 50 % cytosolic to being almost completely pelletable . Thirdly , EM studies show that the mean size of purified clathrin - coated structures from auxilin - depleted cells is substantially smaller than that from control cells and similar in size to cages assembled in vitro from clathrin and AP complexes ( 28 ) . Most importantly , the majority of clathrin - coated structures isolated from auxilin - depleted cells appear to be devoid of membrane . The increase in the amount of AP - 2 in CCV fractions from auxilin - depleted cells correlates with the observed de - crease in plasma membrane - associated CCPs . In contrast , AP - 1 is not lost from intracellular membranes and does not accumulate in CCV fractions . Hence , biochemical and imaging data are consistent , all indicating that membrane - less clathrin cages form in auxilin - depleted HeLa cells . This in turn suggests that in addition to its role in uncoating , a major function of auxilin is to prevent the nonproductive assembly of clathrin , as has been suggested from in vitro studies ( 31 ) . Could the formation of cages lead to a sequestration of endocytic machinery and thus cause the observed block in transferrin and EGF uptake ? Probably not , given that we observed only a 50 % drop in the number of CCPs . Hence , it seems more likely that the endocytic and intracellular blocks are a consequence of altered clathrin dynamics . Evidence for in vivo self - assembly of clathrin into membraneless coats At concentrations above (cid:1) 50 m g / mL , clathrin has the propensity to self - assemble in vitro into structures of 70 – 125 nm , termed ‘cages’ or ‘baskets’ ( 28 ) . This assembly is greatly facilitated by the presence of adaptor proteins , which also cause the cages to become smaller and more uniform in size ( 28 ) . Although the formation of membrane - less clathrin cages in vitro is a well - documented phenom - enon , to our knowledge , free cages have never before been observed in vivo . Under certain nonphysiological conditions ( potassium depletion , growth in hypertonic medium and acidification of the cytoplasm ) , microcages have been seen to form around CCPs ( 32 , 33 ) , but the structures that we observe in auxilin - depleted cells do not accumulate at the plasma membrane but are present throughout the cytoplasm . It has been suggested that the concentration of free cytosolic clathrin is too low to allow spontaneous self - assembly in cells ( 34 ) . However , using enzyme - linked immunosorbent assays to measure clathrin concentration as a percentage of total cell protein in different cells and tissues , Goud et al . ( 35 ) have arrived at estimates of 0 . 18 (cid:3) 0 . 02 % ( of which 59 % is unassem - bled ) and 0 . 16 (cid:3) 0 . 07 % ( of which 45 % is unassembled ) in Vero cells and X63Ag8 cells , respectively ( HeLa cells were not included in the study ) . If the total protein concentration of a cell is (cid:1) 180 mg / mL ( 36 ) , the cytosolic clathrin con - centration in a typical tissue culture cell would be (cid:1) 100 – 200 m g / mL , which is certainly high enough for spontane - ous self - assembly to occur if there were no inhibitory mechanisms in place . Interestingly , Newmyer and Schmid ( 37 ) have observed that in HeLa cells overexpressing dominant - negative Hsc70 , clathrin shifts from the unassembled pool to the assembled pool , as determined by subcellular fraction - ation , without a concomitant shift of CCV cargo molecules . This led them to speculate that in the absence of Hsc70’s chaperoning activity , clathrin may form empty cages . However , the proposed cages were neither visualized nor isolated . In this study , we used EM to present the first direct evidence for in vivo assembly of clathrin into cages that are distinct from CCVs . In auxilin - depleted HeLa cells , small and membraneless clathrin - coated structures accumulate in the cytoplasm . These structures are smaller than CCVs from control cells and show a narrow size distribution similar to that observed for cages assembled in vitro . Their electron - dense appearance , in particular by EM tomography , sug - gests that they are packed with proteins . This is further supported by the biochemical fractionation data that show a greatly increased AP - 2 - to - clathrin ratio in CCV fractions from auxilin - depleted cells . Collectively , these observations suggest that the clathrin cages incorporate AP - 2 and associated proteins at higher than normal stoichiometry . Possibly , the absence of a membrane and of cargo proteins puts fewer spatial constraints on cage formation and leads to a higher packing density of clathrin - binding proteins . Intriguingly , it appears that AP - 2 and endocytic accessory factors are preferentially packaged into the membraneless cages , relative to AP - 1 and AP - 1 - binding proteins . We propose that at least two factors may be responsible for this striking difference . Firstly , there are many more known binding partners for AP - 2 than for AP - 1 ( 38 ) . Secondly , the numerous AP - 2 - associated proteins form strong protein – protein interaction networks through SH3 / proline - rich domains as well as EH domains / NPF motifs , whereas this is not the case for the known AP - 1 - associ - ated proteins ( 38 ) . Hence , although both AP - 1 and AP - 2 and their binding proteins may initially be recruited to Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 1354 – 1371 1367 Auxilin Function in HeLa Cells the membraneless clathrin cages , the stronger and more extensive interaction network of AP - 2 will outcompete the AP - 1 network , resulting in a skewed AP - 2 to AP - 1 ratio . Conclusion and outlook In this study , we have shown that HeLa cells express both isoforms of auxilin and that these are functionally comple - mentary in both endocytosis and intracellular clathrin - mediated trafficking . In view of these findings , the existing discrepancies between the mammalian and nonmamma - lian auxilin literature are likely to be resolved . Furthermore , we have demonstrated for the first time that in the ab - sence of auxilin , clathrin and adaptor proteins assemble into membraneless cages in intact HeLa cells , shedding light both on a novel role for auxilin and on clathrin assembly dynamics in vivo . Finally , auxilin depletion causes the accumulation of clathrin cages that are selectively packed with endocytic adaptors and accessory factors . Hence , auxilin knockdown provides a convenient tool for specifically increasing the yield of AP - 2 - associated proteins during biochemical fractionation and will facilitate future proteomic investigations of the endocytic clathrin machinery . Materials and Methods Antibodies and blotting Rabbit polyclonal antibodies against auxilin 1 ( which also recognizes auxilin 2 ) ( 9 ) and GGA3 ( 39 ) were kind gifts from Sanja Sever ( Harvard Medical School ) and Juan Bonifacino ( National Institutes of Health ) , respectively , and those against GGA1 , GGA2 , p56 , SNX9 , clathrin , AP - 2 a , AP - 2 b 2 , AP - 3 m 3 and CIMPR were raised in house and have already been described ( 22 , 40 – 42 ) . Mouse monoclonal antibodies against clathrin ( X22 ) and AP - 2 a ( AP - 6 ) were kind gifts from Frances Brodsky ( University of California , San Francisco ) . Commercial antibodies against Dab2 , MHCI ( BB7 . 2 ) , TGN46 , AP - 1 g ( Mab100 . 3 ) , CALM , auxilin 2 , dynamin 2 , CD8 , transferrin receptor and EGF receptor were purchased from Santa Cruz , BD Biosciences , Serotec , Sigma - Aldrich , Santa Cruz , MBL Co Ltd , Abcam , Ancell , Zymed and Santa Cruz , respectively . SDS – PAGE and western blots were per - formed using standard methods . The bands were detected using enhanced chemiluminescence and quantified using I MAGE J software ( http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / ij ) . The human tissue and cell line blots ( INSTA - Blot ) were pur - chased from Calbiochem . Immunolocalization and ligand uptake For immunofluorescence , HeLa M cells ( 43 ) were fixed with 3 % para - formaldehyde ( PFA ) , followed by permeabilization with 0 . 1 % Triton - X - 100 . For some experiments , cells were pre - permeabilized with a 30 - second wash with 0 . 05 % saponin in cytosol buffer ( 25 m M HEPES - KOH , pH 7 . 4 , 25 m M KCl , 2 . 5 m M magnesium acetate , 5 m M EGTA and 150 m M K - glutamate ) prior to fixation ( 44 , 45 ) . Primary antibodies are described above ; secondary antibodies were purchased from Molecular Probes . For ligand uptake experiments , cells were pre - incubated at 37 8 C for 30 min in serum - free medium containing 0 . 5 % BSA and 25 m M HEPES . Cells were then incubated at 4 8 C with 10 m g / mL Alexa Fluor 594 - labeled human transferrin or 400 ng / mL Alexa Fluor 488 - labeled EGF ( Molecular Probes ) for 30 min . Excess label was washed offandthecellswerewarmedto37 8 Cfor10 min to allow uptake of the ligand and then fixed . The cells were imaged with a Zeiss Axiovert 200 inverted microscope using a Zeiss Plan Achromat (cid:4) 63 oil immersion objective , 1 . 40 numerical aperture , a Hamamatsu ORCA - ER2 camera and IMPROVISION OPENLAB software . Quantification of fluorescence Quantification of fluorescence intensity of various proteins at the TGN was measured using an automated ArrayScan VTI microscope ( Cellomics / Thermo - Fisher ) and the TargetActivation . V2 assay algorithm . Cells plated onto 96 - well Nunclon Surface plates were co - stained using 4 0 - 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ( DAPI ) , a sheep polyclonal antibody against TGN46 , and rabbit polyclonal antibodies against a variety of proteins of interest , followed by Alexa Fluor 488 - labeled donkey anti - sheep immunoglobulin G ( IgG ) and Alexa Fluor 594 - labeled donkey anti - rabbit IgG . The camera was automated to identify cells using the DAPI channel , to mask a region of interest using TGN46 labeling ( object identification using the Isodata Threshold method ) , to correct for background locally within each field and then to measure the average fluorescence intensity in the Alexa 594 channel . For eachcondition , 5000 objects of interest were quantifiedspread over 10 - well repeats , which equates to at least 2500 cells ( where not all TGNsweredefinedbyasinglemask ) . Thecellswereimagedwithamodified Zeiss Axiovert 200M inverted microscope , a Zeiss (cid:4) 20 / 0 . 45 Achroplan objective , aHamamatsuORCA - ERcameraand ARRAYSCAN software . Because there wasan increase of1 . 29 inthemean size / labeling intensityofTGN46 in the auxilin - depleted cells , data collected from the other channels were corrected for the difference in TGN46 labeling by division by 1 . 29 . Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching Cells were transfected with GFP - clathrin light chain using FuGENE 6 ( Roche ) for 48 h . A defined region was photobleached , resulting in a 40 – 50 % reduction in the pre - bleach fluorescence intensity . The cells were imaged with a Zeiss LSM510 META confocal microscope using a Zeiss (cid:4) 63 / 1 . 4 Plan - Apochromat oil immersion objective and LSM software ( ver - sion 4 . 0 ) . The data were corrected for bleaching by dividing the intensity of the bleached area by that of an unbleached area and then normalized . Each curve was fitted to the equation Y ¼ Y max ( 1 (cid:5) exp ( (cid:5) KX ) using GRAPHPAD PRISM software to determine the t 1 / 2 of recovery . For each experimental condition , 14 data sets were averaged . Internalization and intracellular sorting assays Ligand uptake assays were performed as described by Motley et al . ( 46 ) . CathepsinD sorting was assayed essentially asdescribed by Davidson ( 47 ) , using 5 m L 35 S Promix ( Amersham Biosciences ) per milliliter of medium . The cells were pulse labeled for 15 min and chased for 2 . 5 h in the presenceof 5 m M mannose6 - phosphate before immunoprecipitation using rabbit anti - human cathepsin D ( DAKO ) . Quantifications were carried out using a Packard Cyclone phosphorimager . A FACS - based assay was used to assess Nef - mediated MHCI downregulation , as previously described ( 25 ) . CCV isolation and RNAi The isolation of CCVs from control and auxilin - depleted HeLa cells was performed as previously described ( 22 , 27 ) . Auxilin 1 was depleted using oligo - 2 ( UAUGUUACCUCCAGAAUUA ; D - 009885 - 02 ) from the siGENOME SMARTpool ( Dharmacon ) , which was found to be the least toxic of the four to the cells ( although the phenotype was found to be reproducible with oligo - 3 ) . Dynamin 2 and auxilin 2 were depleted using ON - TARGETplus SMARTpool ( L - 004007 - 00 ) and siGENOME SMARTpool ( M - 005005 - 01 ) , respectively . Clathrin and AP - 1 m 1A depletions have been described pre - viously ( 42 , 46 ) . HeLa cells were transfected with siRNA using Oligo - fectamine ( Invitrogen ) , as specified by the manufacturer . For efficient knockdown , two transfections were performed 2 days apart , and experi - ments were carried out 2 days after the second knockdown . Transmission electron microscopy Resin embedding of whole cells For routine EM , auxilin 1 / auxilin 2 - depleted cells , dynamin 2 - depleted cells and control cells were fixed in tissue culture dishes by adding double - strength fixative [ 5 % glutaraldehyde ( GA ) and 4 % PFA in 0 . 2 M sodium cacodylate , pH 7 . 3 ] to an equal volume of tissue culture medium for 2 min 1368 Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 1354 – 1371 Hirst et al . at 37 8 C . The fixative was then replaced by 2 . 5 % GA and 2 % PFA in 0 . 1 M sodium cacodylate buffer , pH 7 . 3 . The cells were fixed for a further hour at room temperature , washed with 0 . 1 M sodium cacodylate buffer , pH 7 . 3 , and pelleted at 10 000 (cid:4) g for 5 min . The cell pellets were post - fixed with 1 % osmium tetroxide in 0 . 1 M sodium cacodylate buffer , pH 7 . 3 , for 1 h , washed with 0 . 05 M sodium maleate buffer , pH 5 . 2 . They were then either en bloc stained with 0 . 5 % uranyl acetate in 0 . 05 M sodium maleate buffer for 1 h or impregnated with 1 % tannic acid in 0 . 1 M sodium cacodylate buffer , pH 7 . 3 , for 2 h . The cell pellets were dehydrated in ethanol , exchanged into 1 , 2 - epoxy propane and embedded in Araldite CY212 epoxy resin ( Agar Scientific ) . Ultrathin sections were collected onto formvar / carbon - coated EM grids and stained with uranyl acetate and Reynolds lead citrate . The sections were observed in a transmission electron microscope ( model CM 100 ; Philips ) at 80 kV . For quantitative analysisofclathrin - coated structuresinthecytoplasmofcon - trol and auxilin 1 / auxilin 2 - depleted HeLa cells , cells were pre - permeabilized with 0 . 05 % saponin in cytosol buffer for 30 seconds , quickly washed in cytosol buffer and immediately fixed in 2 . 5 % GA and 2 % PFA in 0 . 1 M sodium cacodylate buffer , pH 7 . 3 , and processed as described above . The cytoplasm of individual cell profiles was photographed at a magnification of (cid:4) 21 000 , and the clathrin - coated structures were counted . For each condition , at least 60 images were analyzed from two independent ex - periments . In control cells , 258 clathrin - coated profiles were counted , of which 169 had a clearly visible membrane . In auxilin 1 / auxilin 2 - depleted HeLa cells , of 344 clathrin - coated structures , only 82 had a visible membrane . The diameter of the same clathrin - coated structures was measured using VELOCITY software , and for each structure , two measure - ments were averaged . Resin embedding of CCVs For morphological analysis of isolated clathrin - coated structures , CCV pellets were immediately fixed in 2 % PFA / 2 . 5 % GA in 0 . 1 M sodium cacodylate buffer , pH 6 . 5 , for 1 h at room temperature and then processed as described above . Micrographs of random fields within the sectioned CCV pellet were taken , and the diameter of the clathrin - coated structures was measured using VELOCITY software . For the control cells , 3369 struc - tures from two separate preparations were analyzed , and for the auxilin 1 / auxilin 2 - depleted cells , 2534 structures from three separate preparations were analyzed . Ruthenium red To analyze clathrin - coated profiles at the plasma membrane , cells were fixed in 4 % PFA / 2 . 5 % GA in 0 . 1 M sodium cacodylate buffer , pH 7 . 3 , containing 0 . 5 mg / mL ruthenium red ( Fluka ) for 1 h at room temperature , washed with 0 . 15 M sodium cacodylate buffer , pH 7 . 3 , and post - fixed with 1 % osmium tetroxide in 0 . 1 M sodium cacodylate buffer containing 0 . 5 mg / mL ruthenium red for 3 h at room temperature . Cells were washed with 0 . 15 M sodium cacodylate buffer , pH 7 . 3 , scraped off the dish in 0 . 15 M cacodylate buffer and spun for 1 min at 800 (cid:4) g in a benchtop centrifuge . The cell pellets were post - fixed with osmium tetroxide , dehydrated and embedded as described above . Quantitative analysis of the percentage of plasma membrane occupied by clathrin - coated profiles was determined by applying standard stereology methods ( 48 , 49 ) . Grids were systematically scanned at a magnification of (cid:4) 39 000 , and more than 240 images for each condition were captured using a digital camera ( Megaview III TEM ; Soft Imaging System ) . A total of 784 images were analyzed with ADOBE PHOTO - SHOP software , usinga500 - nmlatticeoverlaytoscoreintersectionswiththe plasmamembraneandclathrin - coatedprofiles within200 nmoftheplasma membrane . 3448 plasma membrane intersections were scored for control cells , 4605 for auxilin 1 / auxilin 2 - depleted cells and 3330 for dynamin 2 - depleted cells . Clathrin - coated structures were grouped into three catego - ries according to their morphology . The category of shallow and curved pits includes pits ranging from flat to ‘U’ shaped in morphology . Deeply curved pits , i . e . ‘omega’ shaped , with narrow necks , or appearing completely sealed but containing ruthenium red , were grouped into the category of deeply invaginated pits . Free endocytic CCVs were defined as ruthenium red - negative clathrin - coated structures within 200 nm of the plasma membrane . EM tomography Data collection CCV pellets from auxilin - depleted cells were homogenized in Buffer A [ 0 . 1 M Mes , pH 6 . 5 , 0 . 2 m M EGTA , 0 . 5 m M MgCl 2 , 0 . 02 % NaN 3 , 0 . 2 m M AEBSF ( 4 - ( - 2 - aminoethyl ) benzenesulfonyl fluoride ) ] and mixed with 10 nm colloid gold particles before applying to holey carbon grids . The grids were briefly blotted with filter paper and plunged into liquid ethane slush . Tomographic tilt series were collected using a Tecnai F30 microscope ( FEI ) , operating at 200 kV , and UCSF T OMOGRAPHY software . A typical data set was from (cid:5) 60 to þ 60 degrees with 2 degree increments . The nominal magnification was set at (cid:4) 20 000 , resulting in a final pixel size of 7 . 15 A˚ on a 2K (cid:4) 2K Tietz CCD ( F224HD ) . The defocus was set to (cid:1) 7 m m , and the final accumulative dose on the specimen was (cid:1) 50 e (cid:5) / A˚ 2 . Image processing The program package IMOD was used to align the tomographic tilt series , and the aligned image stack was normalized using B SOFT software . The final reconstructed volume was generated using the S PIDER program . Volumes containing clathrin - coated structures were displayed using IMOD , and individual assemblies were boxed out from the 3D reconstructed tomo - grams and presented as a series of parallel slices . The slice thickness is 14 . 3 A˚ . Images have been contrasted in ADOBE PHOTOSHOP . Auxilin quantification The relative abundance of auxilin 1 and auxilin 2 in HeLa cell CCVs was estimated using emPAIs extracted from the proteomics data published in Borner et al . ( 22 ) . emPAI values were calculated based on the method described in Ishihama et al . ( 50 ) . Acknowledgments We are particularly indebted to Sanja Sever for generously providing the auxilin 1 antibody used in this study . We are grateful to Helen Kent and Ernst Ungewickell for sharing their antibodies used in preliminary inves - tigations . We thank Patrycja Kozik for her assistance in performing the FRAP analysis and Matthew Gratian for help with the VELOCITY program and its use for quantification . Supplementary Materials Figure S1 : Auxilin depletion results in increased levels of transferrin receptor at the plasma membrane . Cells were depleted of auxilins or dynamin and incubated with 125 I - labeled transferrin or EGF for 30 min at 4 8 C . Each point is derived from at least four separate experiments performed in triplicate , and the error bars show the standard error of the mean . There is no significant change in the levels of EGF binding , but there is a twofold to threefold increase in transferrin binding in auxilin - and dynamin - depleted cells . Theincreased amount oftransferrin receptor at the cell surface is most likely a consequence of a block in its internalization . Figure S2 : Brefeldin A sensitivity in auxilin - depleted cells . Cells depleted of both auxilins were treated with 20 m g / mL Brefeldin A for 5 min at 37 8 C , fixed and labeled with antibodies against AP - 1 g , GGA1 or GGA2 . The increased labeling on intracellular membranes in auxilin - depleted cells is Brefeldin A sensitive , suggesting that in auxilin - depleted cells , the association of adaptors with intracellular membranes is still dependent on the presence of ARF1 . Scale bar : 20 m m . Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 1354 – 1371 1369 Auxilin Function in HeLa Cells Figure S3 : Clathrin - coated structures isolated from auxilin - depleted cells are more uniformly round than those isolated from control cells . A ) Ratioofshort axistolong axis forclathrin - coated structures isolated from control and auxilin - depleted cells . A higher percentage of the structures from auxilin - depleted cells have ratios of 0 . 9 – 1 , whereas a higher percent - age of the structures from control cells have ratios of less than 0 . 9 . B ) Electron micrograph of a control cell treated with saponin before fixation . Three post - Golgi clathrin - coated profiles are indicated . The arrow points to a round clathrin - coated bud or vesicle ; the arrowheads point to two elliptical buds with clathrin coating on one side only . Such buds , when sheared off , likely give rise to the irregularly shaped CCVs in our preparations . Scale bar : 250 nm . Supplemental materials are available as part of the online article at http : / / www . blackwell - synergy . com References 1 . Eisenberg E , Greene LE . Multiple roles of auxilin and hsc70 in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Traffic 2007 ; 8 : 640 – 646 . 2 . Ahle S , Ungewickell E . Auxilin , a newly identified clathrin - associated protein in coated vesicles from bovine brain . J Cell Biol 1990 ; 111 : 19 – 29 . 3 . Kanaoka Y , Kimura SH , Okazaki I , Ikeda M , Nojima H . GAK : a cyclin G associated kinase contains a tensin / auxilin - like domain . FEBS Lett 1997 ; 402 : 73 – 80 . 4 . Greener T , Zhao X , Nojima H , Eisenberg E , Greene LE . Role of cyclin G - associated kinase in uncoating clathrin - coated vesicles from non - neuronal cells . J Biol Chem 2000 ; 275 : 1365 – 1370 . 5 . Umeda A , Meyerholz A , Ungewickell E . Identification of the universal cofactor ( auxilin 2 ) in clathrin coat dissociation . Eur J Cell Biol 2000 ; 79 : 336 – 342 . 6 . Scheele U , Kalthoff C , Ungewickell E . Multiple interactions of auxilin 1 with clathrin and the AP - 2 adaptor complex . J Biol Chem 2001 ; 276 : 36131 – 36138 . 7 . KametakaS , MoriyamaK , BurgosPV , Eisenberg E , Greene LE , Mattera R , Bonifacino JS . Canonical interaction of cyclin G associated kinase with adaptor protein 1 regulates lysosomal enzyme sorting . Mol Biol Cell 2007 ; 18 : 2991 – 3001 . 8 . Rapoport I , Boll W , Yu A , Bo¨cking T , Kirchhausen T . A motif in the clathrin heavy chain required for the Hsc70 / auxilin uncoating reaction . Mol Biol Cell 2008 ; 1 : 405 – 413 . 9 . Newmyer SL , Christensen A , Sever S . Auxilin - dynamin interactions link the uncoating ATPase chaperone machinery with vesicle formation . Dev Cell 2003 ; 4 : 929 – 940 . 10 . Ungewickell E , Ungewickell H , Holstein SE , Lindner R , Prasad K , Barouch W , Martin B , Greene LE , Eisenberg E . Role of auxilin in uncoating clathrin - coated vesicles . Nature 1995 ; 378 : 632 – 635 . 11 . Holstein SE , Ungewickell H , Ungewickell E . Mechanism of clathrin basket dissociation : separate functions of protein domains of the DnaJ homologue auxilin . J Cell Biol 1996 ; 135 : 925 – 937 . 12 . Sousa R , Lafer EM . Keep the traffic moving : mechanism of the Hsp70 motor . Traffic 2006 ; 7 : 1596 – 1603 . 13 . Hagedorn EJ , Bayraktar JL , Kandachar VR , Bai T , Englert DM , Chang HC . Drosophila melanogaster auxilin regulates the internalization of Delta to control activity of the Notch signaling pathway . J Cell Biol 2006 ; 173 : 443 – 452 . 14 . Greener T , Grant B , Zhang Y , Wu X , Greene LE , Hirsh D , Eisenberg E . Caenorhabditiselegansauxilin : aJ - domainproteinessentialforclathrin - mediated endocytosis in vivo . Nat Cell Biol 2001 ; 3 : 215 – 219 . 15 . Gall WE , Higginbotham MA , Chen C , Ingram MF , Cyr DM , Graham TR . The auxilin - like phosphoprotein Swa2p is required for clathrin function in yeast . Curr Biol 2000 ; 10 : 1349 – 1358 . 16 . Pishvaee B , Costaguta G , Yeung BG , Ryazantsev S , Greener T , Greene LE , Eisenberg E , McCaffery JM , Payne GS . A yeast DNA J protein required for uncoating of clathrin - coated vesicles in vivo . Nat Cell Biol 2000 ; 2 : 958 – 963 . 17 . Morgan JR , Prasad K , Jin S , Augustine GJ , Lafer EM . Uncoating of clathrin - coated vesicles in presynaptic terminals : roles for Hsc70 and auxilin . Neuron 2001 ; 32 : 289 – 300 . 18 . Lee DW , Zhao X , Zhang F , Eisenberg E , Greene LE . Depletion of GAK / auxilin 2 inhibits receptor - mediated endocytosis and recruit - ment of both clathrin and clathrin adaptors . J Cell Sci 2005 ; 118 : 4311 – 4321 . 19 . Wu X , Zhao X , Baylor L , Kaushal S , Eisenberg E , Greene LE . Clathrin exchange during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J Cell Biol 2001 ; 155 : 291 – 300 . 20 . Sever S , Skoch J , Newmyer S , Ramachandran R , Ko D , McKee M , Bouley R , Ausiello D , Hyman BT , Bacskai BJ . Physical and functional connection between auxilin and dynamin during endocytosis . EMBO J 2006 ; 25 : 4163 – 4174 . 21 . Zhang CX , Engqvist - Goldstein AE , Carreno S , Owen DJ , Smythe E , Drubin DG . Multiple roles for cyclin G - associated kinase in clathrin - mediated sorting events . Traffic 2005 ; 6 : 1103 – 1113 . 22 . Borner GH , Harbour M , Hester S , Lilley KS , Robinson MS . Compara - tive proteomics of clathrin - coated vesicles . J Cell Biol 2006 ; 175 : 571 – 578 . 23 . Damke H , Baba T , Warnock DE , Schmid SL . Induction of mutant dynamin specifically blocks endocytic coated vesicle formation . J Cell Biol 1994 ; 127 : 915 – 934 . 24 . Roeth JF , Williams M , Kasper MR , Filzen TM , Collins KL . HIV - 1 Nef disrupts MHC - I trafficking by recruiting AP - 1 to the MHC - I cytoplasmic tail . J Cell Biol 2004 ; 167 : 903 – 913 . 25 . Lubben NB , Sahlender DA , Motley AM , Lehner PJ , Benaroch P , Robinson MS . HIV - 1 Nef - induced down regulation of MHC class I requires AP - 1 and clathrin but not PACS - 1 and is impeded by AP - 2 . Mol Biol Cell 2007 ; 18 : 3351 – 3365 . 26 . Hirst J , Lindsay MR , Robinson MS . GGAs : roles of the different domains and comparison with AP - 1 and clathrin . Mol Biol Cell 2001 ; 12 : 3573 – 3588 . 27 . Hirst J , Miller SE , Taylor MJ , von Mollard GF , Robinson MS . EpsinR is an adaptor for the SNARE protein Vti1b . Mol Biol Cell 2004 ; 15 : 5593 – 5602 . 28 . Zaremba S , Keen JH . Assembly polypeptides from coated vesicles mediate reassembly of unique clathrin coats . J Cell Biol 1983 ; 97 : 1339 – 1347 . 29 . Zhao X , Greener T , Al - Hasani H , Cushman SW , Eisenberg E , Greene LE . Expression of auxilin or AP180 inhibits endocytosis by mislocalizing clathrin : evidence for formation of nascent pits containing AP1 or AP2 but not clathrin . J Cell Sci 2001 ; 114 : 353 – 365 . 30 . Conner SD , Schmid SL . Identification of an adaptor - associated kinase , AAK1 , as a regulator of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J Cell Biol 2002 ; 156 : 921 – 929 . 31 . Jiang R , Gao B , Prasad K , Greene LE , Eisenberg E . Hsc70 chaperones clathrin and primes it to interact with vesicle membranes . J Biol Chem 2000 ; 275 : 8439 – 8447 . 32 . Heuser JE , Anderson RG . Hypertonic media inhibit receptor - mediated endocytosis by blocking clathrin - coated pit formation . J Cell Biol 1989 ; 108 : 389 – 400 . 33 . Heuser J . Effects of cytoplasmic acidification on clathrin lattice morphology . J Cell Biol 1989 ; 108 : 401 – 411 . 34 . Crowther RA , Pearse BM . Assembly and packing of clathrin into coats . J Cell Biol 1981 ; 91 : 790 – 797 . 35 . Goud B , Huet C , Louvard D . Assembled and unassembled pools of clathrin : a quantitative study using an enzyme immunoassay . J Cell Biol 1985 ; 100 : 521 – 527 . 1370 Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 1354 – 1371 Hirst et al . 36 . Alberts B , Bray D , Lewis J , Raff M , Roberts K , Watson JD . Molecular Biology of the Cell . New York : Garland Publishing , Inc . ; 1994 . 37 . Newmyer SL , Schmid SL . Dominant - interfering Hsc70 mutants disrupt multiple stages of the clathrin - coated vesicle cycle in vivo . J Cell Biol 2001 ; 152 : 607 – 620 . 38 . Traub LM . Common principles in clathrin - mediated sorting at the Golgi andtheplasmamembrane . BiochimBiophysActa2005 ; 1744 : 415 – 437 . 39 . Dell’Angelica EC , Puertollano R , Mullins C , Aguilar RC , Vargas JD , Hartnell LM , Bonifacino JS . GGAs : a family of ADP ribosylation factor - binding proteins related to adaptors and associated with the Golgi complex . J Cell Biol 2000 ; 149 : 81 – 94 . 40 . Hirst J , Lui WW , Bright NA , Totty N , Seaman MN , Robinson MS . A family of proteins with gamma - adaptin and VHS domains that facilitate trafficking between thetrans - Golgi network and the vacuole / lysosome . J Cell Biol 2000 ; 149 : 67 – 80 . 41 . Lui WW , Collins BM , Hirst J , Motley A , Millar C , Schu P , Owen DM , Robinson MS . Binding partners for the COOH - terminal append - age domains of the GGAs and gamma - adaptin . Mol Biol Cell 2003 ; 14 : 2385 – 2398 . 42 . Hirst J , Motley A , Harasaki K , Peak Chew SY , Robinson MS . EpsinR : an ENTH domain - containing protein that interacts with AP - 1 . Mol Biol Cell 2003 ; 14 : 625 – 641 . 43 . Tiwari RK , Kusari J , Sen GC . Functional equivalents of interferon - mediated signals needed for induction of an mRNA can be gener - ated by double - stranded RNA and growth factors . EMBO J 1987 ; 6 : 3373 – 3378 . 44 . MorrisSM , CooperJA . Disabled - 2colocalizeswiththeLDLRinclathrin - coated pits and interacts with AP - 2 . Traffic 2001 ; 2 : 111 – 123 . 45 . Sahlender DA , Roberts RC , Arden SD , Spudich G , Taylor MJ , Luzio JP , Kendrick - Jones J , Buss F . Optineurin links myosin VI to the Golgi complex and is involved in Golgi organization and exocytosis . J Cell Biol 2005 ; 169 : 285 – 295 . 46 . Motley A , Bright NA , Seaman MNJ , Robinson MS . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis in AP - 2 - depleted cells . J Cell Biol 2003 ; 162 : 909 – 918 . 47 . Davidson HW . Wortmannin causes mistargeting of procathepsin D . evidence for the involvement of a phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase in vesicular transport to lysosomes . J Cell Biol 1995 ; 130 : 797 – 805 . 48 . Weibel EW . Stereological Methods . Volume 1 , Practical Methods for Biological Morphometry . London , United Kingdom : Academic Press ; 1979 . 49 . Griffiths G . Fine structure immunocytochemistry . Berlin : Springer - Verlag ; 1993 . 50 . Ishihama Y , Oda Y , Tabata T , Sato T , Nagasu T , Rappsilber J , Mann M . Exponentially modified protein abundance index ( emPAI ) for estimation of absolute protein amount in proteomics by the number of sequenced peptides per protein . Mol Cell Proteomics 2005 ; 4 : 1265 – 1272 . Traffic 2008 ; 9 : 1354 – 1371 1371 Auxilin Function in HeLa Cells