Reevaluation of In Vitro Differentiation Protocols for Bone Marrow Stromal Cells : Disruption of Actin Cytoskeleton Induces Rapid Morphological Changes and Mimics Neuronal Phenotype Birgit Neuhuber , 1 Gianluca Gallo , 1 Linda Howard , 2 Lisa Kostura , 2 Alastair Mackay , 2 and Itzhak Fischer 1 * 1 Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy , Drexel University College of Medicine , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania 2 Osiris Therapeutics , Inc . , Baltimore , Maryland Bone marrow stromal cells ( MSC ) , which represent a population of multipotential mesenchymal stem cells , have been reported to undergo rapid and robust trans - formation into neuron - like phenotypes in vitro following treatment with chemical induction medium including di - methyl sulfoxide ( DMSO ; Woodbury et al . [ 2002 ] J . Neu - rosci . Res . 96 : 908 ) . In this study , we conﬁrmed the ability of cultured rat MSC to undergo in vitro osteogenesis , chondrogenesis , and adipogenesis , demonstrating dif - ferentiation of these cells to three mesenchymal cell fates . We then evaluated the potential for in vitro neuro - nal differentiation of these MSC , ﬁnding that changes in morphology upon addition of the chemical induction me - dium were caused by rapid disruption of the actin cy - toskeleton . Retraction of the cytoplasm left behind long processes , which , although strikingly resembling neu - rites , showed essentially no motility and no further elab - oration during time - lapse studies . Similar neurite - like processes were induced by treating MSC with DMSO only or with actin ﬁlament - depolymerizing agents . Al - though process formation was accompanied by rapid expression of some neuronal and glial markers , the ab - sence of other essential neuronal proteins pointed to - ward aberrantly induced gene expression rather than toward a sequence of gene expression as is required for neurogenesis . Moreover , rat dermal ﬁbroblasts re - sponded to neuronal induction by forming similar pro - cesses and expressing similar markers . These studies do not rule out the possibility that MSC can differentiate into neurons ; however , we do want to caution that in vitro differentiation protocols may have unexpected , mislead - ing effects . A dissection of molecular signaling and com - mitment events may be necessary to verify the ability of MSC transdifferentiation to neuronal lineages . © 2004 Wiley - Liss , Inc . Key words : neuronal differentiation ; bone marrow ; mes - enchymal stem cell ; multipotential ; transdifferentiation Marrow stromal cells ( MSC ) represent a population of multipotential mesenchymal stem cells distinct from hematopoietic stem cells ( HSC ) in the adult bone marrow . MSC contribute to regeneration of multiple tissues , in - cluding bone , cartilage , and fat . Recent studies showed that a small percentage of transplanted MSC can differen - tiate into neurons and glia in the uninjured brain ( Kopen et al . , 1999 ) as well as in the injured brain , where MSC transplantation may improve recovery after stroke or trau - matic brain injury ( Chopp and Li , 2002 ) and spinal cord injury ( Akiyama et al . , 2002 ; Chopp and Li , 2002 ; Hof - stetter et al . , 2002 ) . The relative contributions of MSC transdifferentiation , contamination with other cells , and donor cell fusion with host cells remain the subjects of lively debate ( for review see Herzog et al . , 2003 ) . Because MSC are attractive candidates for cell ther - apies , their transdifferentiation potential in vitro has been the subject of numerous studies . Regimens for transfor - mation to neural lineages have relied on exposure of cells to retinoic acid ( RA ) and cytokine cocktails ( Sanchez - Ramos et al . , 2000 ; Kim et al . , 2002 ) , butylated hydroxy - anisole ( BHA ) , and dimethyl sulfoxide ( DMSO ; Wood - bury et al . , 2000 , 2002 ) , or agents that elevate intracellular cAMP levels ( Deng et al . , 2001 ) . The number of cells reported to convert from ﬁbroblastic to neural morphol - ogy ranged from 0 . 5 % to more than 50 % . Adoption of a neuronal or glial morphology was accompanied by expres - Contract grant sponsor : National Institutes of Health ; Contract grant num - ber : NS24707 ; Contract grant number : NS43882 ; Contract grant number : NS37515 . * Correspondence to : Itzhak Fischer , PhD , Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy , Drexel University College of Medicine , 2900 Queen Lane , Philadelphia , PA 19129 . E - mail : itzhak . ﬁscher @ drexel . edu Received 10 December 2003 ; Revised 1 March 2004 ; Accepted 9 March 2004 Published online 20 May 2004 in Wiley InterScience ( www . interscience . wiley . com ) . DOI : 10 . 1002 / jnr . 20147 Journal of Neuroscience Research 77 : 192 – 204 ( 2004 ) © 2004 Wiley - Liss , Inc . sion of neuronal or glial markers , such as neuron - speciﬁc enolase ( NSE ) , NeuN , neuroﬁlament M ( NF - M ) , tau , and glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein ( GFAP ) . Neuronal differen - tiation was reported to occur without requiring passage through the cell cycle , insofar as neuron - like cells have been reported in the absence of cell division ( Munoz - Elias et al . , 2003 ) . Kohyama and colleagues ( 2001 ) reported calcium uptake in response to a depolarizing stimulus after treating MSC with 5 - azacytidine and transfecting them with noggin . Patterns of gene expression of cultured MSC have been the subject of a number of studies . Such cells appear to express mesodermal , endodermal , ectodermal , and germline genes ( Tremain et al . , 2001 ; Woodbury et al . , 2002 ; Seshi et al . , 2003 ) , suggesting the potential to dif - ferentiate into all these cell types . Interestingly , expression of many of the neural lineage - marking proteins ( NSE , NF - M , NeuN , and GFAP ) has also been detected in undifferentiated MSC ( for review see Corti et al . , 2003 ) . There is no generally accepted method for isolating and culturing MSC or for determining the properties and the extent of heterogeneity of the expanded cell popula - tion . Reyes and Verfaillie ( 2001 ) and Jiang et al . ( 2002 ) have reported the existence of a distinct and rare subpopu - lation of MSC that they have named multipotent adult progenitor cells ( MAPC ) . Such cells seem able to assume mesodermal , neuroectodermal , or endodermal fates . MAPC - derived neuronal cells displayed spiking behavior , suggesting the presence of functional voltage - gated so - dium channels ( Jiang et al . , 2003 ) . The origin and rela - tionship of MAPC to other cells derived from marrow stroma remains indeterminate at this time . Because MSC isolation , puriﬁcation , culture expan - sion , and characterization are variable , the validity of neu - ronal transdifferentiation has been hard to assess . In par - ticular , 1 ) does in vitro neuronal differentiation of MSC yield true neurons or merely morphological artifacts ? 2 ) If transdifferentiation events are possible are they restricted to a subpopulation of MSC ? 3 ) Is this subpopulation representative of a more primitive and pluripotent stem cell than the MSC as generally envisioned ? In this study , we reevaluated an in vitro differentia - tion process , in which MSC undergo rapid transformation into neuron - like phenotypes following treatment with a chemical induction medium containing DMSO ( Wood - bury et al . , 2000 , 2002 ) . We found that , with this proto - col , formation of neurite - like processes was a result of cytoplasm retraction caused by F - actin depolymerization , not by microtubule - mediated extension . Although we conﬁrmed the display of neuron - and glia - speciﬁc antigens by induced cells , such expression was incomplete for a true neuronal phenotype and to some extent was observed in naı¨ve MSC . Furthermore , ﬁbroblasts were capable of forming similar processes through cytoplasmic retraction . These results do not rule out a possible potential of MSC to differentiate into neurons , but show that differentiation protocols may have misleading morphological effects . Critical examination of the differentiation process is nec - essary to determine the validity of the neuronal pheno - type . MATERIALS AND METHODS Isolation of Rat MSC MSC were cultured from bone marrow of 10 - week - old transgenic Fisher rats ( Mujtaba et al . , 2002 ) as previously de - scribed ( Lennon et al . , 1995 ) . After euthanasia , marrow was ﬂushed with Hank’s buffered saline solution , pooled , and counted . After centrifugation ( 600 g , 10 min ) , cells were plated at 120 (cid:1) 10 6 cells / cm 2 in 10 % fetal bovine serum ( Hyclone , Logan , UT ) , 45 % Ham’s F - 12 ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) , 45 % (cid:2) - MEM ( Invitrogen ) , supplemented with antibiotics ( 100 U / ml penicillin G and 100 (cid:3) g / ml streptomycin sulfate ; Invitrogen ) . Flasks were incubated in a humidiﬁed atmosphere with 5 % CO 2 at 37°C . After 8 days , nonadherent cells were removed , and remaining cells detached with 0 . 05 % trypsin / 0 . 53 mM EDTA ( Invitrogen ) and replated at 2 , 000 cells / cm 2 . Subsequently , cul - tures were passaged at 4 - day intervals . Differentiation of Rat MSC Into Mesenchymal Lineages Adipogenesis . MSC were seeded into six - well plates at 20 , 000 cells / cm 2 and cultured in growth medium until conﬂu - ent . Cultures were then placed in adipogenic induction medium [ DMEM with 4 . 5 mg / ml glucose ( Invitrogen ) , 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) , and antibiotics as described , with 0 . 5 mM methyl - isobutylxanthine , 1 (cid:3) M dexamethasone , 10 (cid:3) g / ml insulin , and 100 mM indomethacin ( all from Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) ] for 3 days and subsequently moved to adipogenic maintenance me - dium [ DMEM with 4 . 5 mg / ml glucose ( Invitrogen ) , 10 % FBS , antibiotics , and 10 (cid:3) g / ml insulin ( Sigma ; Pittenger et al . , 1999 ) ] for 1 day . After three cycles , cells were kept in maintenance medium for 7 days and ﬁxed with 4 % paraformaldehyde . Stain - ing with oil red O facilitated microscopic evaluation of the accumulation of neutral lipids . Osteogenesis . MSC were seeded in six - well dishes at 3 , 000 cells / cm 2 . After 2 days , growth medium was replaced by osteogenic medium ( growth medium supplemented with 100 nM dexamethasone ( Sigma ) , 50 (cid:3) M ascorbate - 2 - phosphate ( Wako Pure Chemicals , Chuo - ku , Osaka , Japan ) , and 10 mM (cid:4) - glycerol phosphate ( Sigma ) . Medium was replaced twice weekly . After 18 days , medium was aspirated , and cells were solubilized in 1 N HCl . Acid - soluble calcium was determined colorimetrically ( Sigma 587 - M ) . An additional well was stained by using the von Kossa method to visualize calcium phosphate deposition ( Pittenger et al . , 1999 ) . Chondrogenesis . Conditions promoting human MSC chondrogenesis ( Mackay et al . , 1998 ) did not promote differ - entiation of rat MSC ( data not shown ) . Instead , 500 , 000 rat MSC were pelleted ( 600 g ) in a 15 - ml polypropylene tube in high - glucose DMEM ( Invitrogen ) with 1 % FBS ( Hyclone ) , antibiotics , 50 (cid:3) g / ml ascorbate 2 - phosphate , 40 (cid:3) g / ml proline , 2 mM pyruvate ( Invitrogen ) , ITS (cid:5) ( Collaborative Research , Bedford , MA ; ﬁnal concentrations 6 . 25 (cid:3) g / ml insulin , 6 . 25 (cid:3) g / ml transferrin , 6 . 25 (cid:3) g / ml selenous acid , 5 . 33 (cid:3) g / ml linoleic acid , and 1 . 25 mg / ml bovine serum albumin ) , 100 nM dexamethasone , 10 ng / ml transforming growth factor - (cid:4) 3 ( TGF - (cid:4) 3 ; R & D Systems , Minneapolis , MN ) , and 200 ng / ml Reevaluating MSC Differentiation 193 recombinant bone morphogenic protein - 2 ( BMP - 2 ; R & D Sys - tems ) . Medium was changed three times per week . On day 21 , pellets were ﬁxed in 4 % paraformaldehyde , embedded in paraf - ﬁn , and sectioned ( 5 (cid:3) m ) . Multiple sections were stained with safranin O for detection of anionic proteoglycans and with a monoclonal anticollagen II antibody ( C4F6 ; generous gift of Dr . Chichester , University of Rhode Island ) . Primary rat dermal ﬁbroblasts failed to demonstrate osteogenic , chondrogenic , or adipogenic differentiation in these assays ( data not shown ) . Cell Culture MSC from passage 2 were plated on plastic dishes at a density of 2 , 000 / cm 2 and cultured in 45 % Ham’s F12 and 45 % (cid:2) - MEM ( both from Invitrogen ) supplemented with 10 % FBS ( Hyclone ) and 1 % penicillin and streptomycin ( Invitrogen ) . For selected experiments , MSC were plated on dishes coated with 25 (cid:3) g / ml laminin ( Invitrogen ) . Rat dermal ﬁbroblasts were isolated from neonate rats as described by Koksoy et al . ( 2001 ) . Cells from passages no higher than P8 were plated on plastic dishes at a density of 2 , 000 / cm 2 and cultured in (cid:2) - MEM supplemented with 10 % FBS and 2 mM L - glutamine ( Cellgro , Herndon , VA ) . Cells were main - tained at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 . Induction Protocols and Drug Treatments Induction for neuronal differentiation was performed as previously described by Woodbury and colleagues ( 2002 ) . Brieﬂy , MSC and ﬁbroblast cultures were grown overnight to a density of about 30 % in their respective media , followed by a 24 - hr incubation in preinduction medium consisting of 40 % Ham’s F12 and 40 % (cid:2) - MEM , 20 % FBS , and 10 ng / ml basic ﬁbroblast growth factor ( bFGF ; PreproTech Inc . , Rocky Hill , NJ ) . After being rinsed with phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) , cells were incubated at 31°C in induction medium [ 49 % Ham’s F12 and 49 % (cid:2) - MEM , 2 % DMSO , 100 (cid:3) M BHA , 10 (cid:3) M forskolin , 2 mM valproic acid , 5 U / ml heparin ( all from Sigma ) , 5 nM K252a ( Calbiochem , La Jolla , CA ) , 25 mM KCl , 1xN2 supplement ( Invitrogen ) , 10 ng / ml platelet - derived growth fac - tor ( Upstate Biotechnologies , Lake Placid , NY ) , and 10 ng / ml bFGF ] for 24 hr . For reversion studies , induction medium was replaced by MSC or ﬁbroblast medium after 24 hr . For DMSO treatment , MSC or ﬁbroblast cultures were incubated in 49 % Ham’s F12 and 49 % (cid:2) - MEM containing 2 % DMSO for 24 hr . Disruption of the actin cytoskeleton was achieved by adding 2 (cid:3) g / ml cytochalasin - D ( Cyto - D ; Sigma ) or 2 (cid:3) M / ml latrunculin - A ( Lat - A ; Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) to the medium of MSC or ﬁbroblast cultures . Depolarization of mi - crotubules was induced by adding 10 (cid:3) M / ml nocodazole ( Sigma ) . After 90 min , cells were ﬁxed and immunostained as described below . Time - lapse studies were performed with a 135 Axiovert microscope ( Carl Zeiss Inc . , Thornwood , NY ) using a (cid:1) 20 phase objective and Axiovision ( Zeiss ) software . The stage was kept at 31°C by using an air - curtain incubator . Images were taken at 2 - min intervals for the ﬁrst 90 min of exposure of MSC and ﬁbroblast cultures to induction medium . A second 90 - min sequence was taken 24 hr after induction of MSC cultures . A third sequence from an MSC culture in preinduction medium served as a control . Immunocytochemistry and Quantiﬁcation For immunostaining , cells were ﬁxed in 4 % paraformal - dehyde after 24 hr in induction medium , washed with PBS , and blocked in 10 % normal goat serum ( NGS ; Invitrogen ) for 1 hr . Primary and secondary antibodies were incubated for 1 hr at room temperature . Primary antibodies used in this study were polyclonal antineuroﬁlament M ( Chemicon , Temecula , CA ; 1 : 200 ) , polyclonal antitau ( Black et al . , 1996 ; 1 : 1 , 000 ) , mono - clonal anti - (cid:4) III - tubulin ( Babco , Richmond , CA ; 1 : 500 ) , monoclonal antisynaptophysin ( Chemicon ; 1 : 200 ) , polyclonal anti - GFAP ( Dako , Carpinteria , CA ; 1 : 500 ) , monoclonal anti - vimentin ( Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank , Iowa City , IA ; 1 : 20 ) , and monoclonal antinestin ( PharMingen , San Diego , CA ; 1 : 1 , 000 ) . Titers for each antibody were established with cells known to express its antigen . Control reactions with the primary antibody omitted were routinely performed . In addi - tion , absence of staining was conﬁrmed in controls in which primary antibodies were replaced with corresponding immuno - globins at the same concentration as the primary antibodies ( pure rabbit and mouse IgG , whole molecule ; Jackson Immu - noresearch , West Grove , PA ) . Biotinylated secondary antibodies were obtained from Jackson Immunoresearch and used at a dilution of 1 : 200 . The Elite Vectastain ABC kit ( Vector Labo - ratories , Burlingame , CA ) and Fast Diaminobenzidine ( DAB ) Tablet kit ( Sigma ) were used according to manufacturers’ sug - gestions to develop the staining . Cells were photographed under phase optics ( (cid:1) 20 objec - tive ) with an Olympus CK40 microscope connected to a Nikon Coolpix 990 digital camera . For quantiﬁcation , cells in 20 randomly selected ﬁelds were counted with a (cid:1) 10 objective . Cells with refractile cell bodies and extended processes ( neuron - like cells ) were calculated as a percentage of the total cell count . To label cytoskeletal proteins , cells were ﬁxed in 0 . 25 % glutaraldehyde in PHEM buffer ( Black et al . , 1996 ) for 15 min , thereby removing soluble tubulin . Subsequently , cells were in - cubated in 2 mg / ml sodium borohydride for 15 min , washed with PBS , and blocked in 10 % NGS . Cells were then incubated in antitubulin - FITC ( Sigma ; 1 : 100 ) for 1 hr and in phalloidin - RITC ( Molecular Probes ; 5 (cid:3) l / 100 ml ) for 30 min . A 200M Axiovert microscope ( Zeiss ) with a (cid:1) 20 objective and Axiovi - sion imaging software was used to evaluate the cells . Reverse Transcription - Polymerase Chain Reaction RNA was isolated from control MSC or ﬁbroblast cul - tures or cultures that had been treated with induction medium for 24 hr using the Purescript RNA isolation kit ( Gentra Sys - tems , Minneapolis , MN ) . Contaminating genomic DNA was removed using the DNA - free kit ( Ambion , Austin , TX ) . Quan - titative reverse transcription - polymerase chain reaction ( RT - PCR ) was performed on a Roche LightCycler ( Roche , India - napolis , IN ) by using the QuantiTect SYBR Green RT - PCR Kit ( Qiagen , Valencia , CA ) with primers at a concentration of 0 . 5 (cid:3) M ( (cid:4) III - tubulin : 5 (cid:6) - GGCCTCCTCTCACAAGTATGT - 3 (cid:6) and 5 (cid:6) - CGCCCTCTGTATAGTGC - 3 (cid:6) ; NF - M : 5 (cid:6) - AGGAGCGCCA - CAACCACGACC - 3 (cid:6) and 5 (cid:6) - ATGCGGCGATCTCGA - TGTCCA - 3 (cid:6) ; and vimentin : 5 (cid:6) - TGTCCGCCAGCAGTATGA - 3 (cid:6) and 5 (cid:6) - CCTGTCTCCGGTATTCGTTTG - 3 (cid:6) ) . In each reaction , 100 ng of total RNA were used as a template . Water was used as a 194 Neuhuber et al . negative control ; 20 ng or 1 ng poly - A rat brain RNA ( BD Bio - sciences , Palo Alto , CA ) was used as a positive control . Reaction conditions were as follows : 1 cycle 50°C , 20 min ; 1 cycle 95°C , 15 min ; 40 cycles 95°C , 0 sec ; 55°C , 10 sec ; 72°C , 10 sec with a single data acquisition . After ampliﬁcation , a melting analysis was performed with a transition from 60°C to 95°C at 0 . 1°C / sec with continuous data acquisition . Transcript levels were quantiﬁed by comparison with the signal from cDNA standards run at the same time as the samples ; the concentration of these standards ranged from 1 – 1 , 000 , 000 copies per PCR . cDNA standards were prepared from PCR product puriﬁed from agarose gel slices with the GFX Kit ( Amersham Bioscience , Arlington Heights , IL ) . The concentration of the puriﬁed PCR prod - uct was determined by using the PicoGreen dsDNA quantitation kit ( Molecular Probes ) ; PCR product was diluted in dilution buffer ( 1 mM Tris - HCl , pH 8 . 0 , 0 . 1 mM EDTA containing 10 ng / (cid:3) l yeast tRNA ) to give a concentration of 10 5 copies / (cid:3) l , and further tenfold dilutions of this stock were prepared and all cDNA standard solutions stored in siliconized tubes . Standards were run in duplicate with 2 (cid:3) l per reaction . Samples were run in triplicate with 2 (cid:3) l per reaction . RESULTS Differentiation Potential of Rat MSC To conﬁrm the multipotential mesenchymal prop - erties of rat MSC , we assayed for adipogenesis , osteogen - esis , and chondrogenesis in vitro . The assays as performed did not induce dermal ﬁbroblasts to undergo these phe - notypic alterations . Adipogenic MSC formed phase - bright vacuoles that stained red with oil red O ( Fig . 1A ) . MSC cultured under osteogenic conditions deposited an average of 30 (cid:3) g calcium per well , whereas control MSC depos - ited less than 11 (cid:3) g ( data not shown ) . Only osteogenic MSC were positive for von Kossa staining ( Fig . 1B ) . Micromass pellets of MSC responded to chondrogenic conditions by accumulating type II collagen ( Fig . 1C ) and anionic proteoglycans in the extracellular matrix ( Fig . 1D ) . Morphological Changes of MSC After Neuronal Induction Untreated and preinduced cultures of rat MSC con - sisted predominantly of spindle - shaped cells and few large , ﬂat cells ( Fig . 2A , B ) . Within 2 hr after addition of induc - tion medium , 73 % of MSC ( n (cid:7) 511 ) had changed their morphology and adopted neuronal - or glial - like pheno - types , distinguished by highly refractile cell bodies with neurite - like processes terminating in structures resembling growth cones ( Fig . 2C ) . This ﬁnding is similar to ﬁndings previously described ( Sanchez - Ramos et al . , 2000 ; Wood - bury et al . , 2000 , 2002 ; Deng et al . , 2001 ; Kim et al . , 2002 ) . No additional changes in morphology were ob - served 24 hr after induction ( Fig . 2D ) . In highly refractile cells , the region bounded by process tips was reminiscent of the cell shape of untreated MSC , and some of the less - refractile cells were intermediate in shape between untreated and neuron - like MSC ( see Fig . 2C , long arrow ) . These ﬁndings suggested that the neuron - like morphology might be caused by retraction of cytoplasm rather than active process extension . The change in morphology could be reversed by returning MSC cultures to MSC medium as previously described ( Woodbury et al . , 2002 ) . Within 1 hr , most cells had reverted to their original shape ( Fig . 2E ) , a ﬁnding inconsistent with changes expected for terminal differentiation . All experiments were repeated with human MSC and similar results obtained ( data not shown ) . DMSO is a major component of the induction me - dium . To examine its effects on MSC , we incubated MSC directly without preincubation , in serum - free medium with 2 % DMSO . Within 1 hr of application , most cells displayed a neuron - like morphology ( Fig . 2F ) . This effect was reversible by returning the cells to MSC medium . Induction of Fibroblasts Results in the Acquisition of a Neuron - Like Morphology To investigate whether the effects of induction me - dium were limited to stem cells , we subjected rat dermal ﬁbroblasts to the same protocol . We observed large , ﬂat cells in untreated and preinduced cultures ( Fig . 3A , B ) . Addition of induction medium caused cytoplasmic retrac - tion in 76 % ( n (cid:7) 884 ) of the cells ( Fig . 3C , D ) , resulting in a neuron - like phenotype with refractile cell bodies and long , extended processes with structures resembling growth cones at the tips . Thus , the induction medium affected differentiated cells and stem cells in a similar way . Fig . 1 . In vitro assays demonstrate the multipotency of rat MSC . After primary culture , cells were assayed for adipogenesis , osteogenesis , and chondrogenesis . MSC developed lipid vesicles ( red ) in dense monolayer cultures when treated with adipogenic supplements ( A ) . MSC plated sparsely in a 35 - mm well deposited calcium phosphate ( marked black with von Kossa stain ) in the extracellular matrix under osteogenic conditions ( B ) . Immunohistochemistry revealed that MSC at the con - clusion of an additional round of expansion expressed type II collagen throughout the extracellular matrix of the micromass pellet after 21 days ( C ) . Safranin O staining revealed extensive deposition of anionic pro - teoglycans ( D ) . Scale bar in A (cid:7) 50 (cid:3) m ; bar in B (cid:7) 2 mm ; bar in D (cid:7) 200 (cid:3) m for C , D . Reevaluating MSC Differentiation 195 The onset of morphological changes was as fast in ﬁbro - blasts as in MSC cultures . As with MSC , this process was reversible by returning the cells to their original growth medium ( Fig . 3E ) . Fibroblasts also adopted neuronal mor - phologies upon addition of 2 % DMSO alone ( Fig . 3F ) . Time - Lapse Analysis of Morphological Changes During Neuronal Induction We used time - lapse phase - contrast microscopy to study the dynamics of morphological changes during neu - ronal induction . Within 90 min of the initiation of induc - tion , 73 % of visualized cells ( n (cid:7) 26 ) assumed a neuron - like morphology , deﬁned as the appearance of a spherical cell body with multiple processes ( Fig . 4A – C ) . The mean time cells took to undergo this transition was 40 (cid:8) 5 min ( mean (cid:8) SD ) . Morphological changes occurred because most of the cell edge retracted toward the nucleus . Some regions of the cell edge did not retract , resulting in the formation of processes emanating from the center of the cell . Thus , processes formed through retraction of the surrounding cytoplasm , not through process extension , as is the case with process outgrowth in neurons . Similar changes in morphology were observed in induced ﬁbro - blast cultures ( Fig . 4D – F ) . Neuronal growth cones are motile and extend along processes and at their tips . To determine whether pro - cesses formed by induced MSC were capable of similar extension , we monitored the behavior of process tips during induction , and 24 hr later . We did not observe process extension at either time point . Because neurons fail to grow on untreated plastic surfaces , we wondered whether process elaboration by induced MSC might be promoted on laminin - coated dishes . Changes in MSC morphology after addition of induction medium were comparable to those seen with MSC grown on plastic , except that retraction of the cy - toplasm was not as prominent . This was , presumably , a Fig . 2 . MSC assume a neuron - like morphology upon treatment with induction medium . MSC cultures before treatment ( A ) and after pre - incubation ( B ) consist of spindle - shaped cells and ﬂat cells ( asterisks ) . Addition of induction medium results in adaptation of a neuron - like morphology , with highly refractile cell bodies and thin extended pro - cesses , which terminate in structures resembling growth cones ( short arrows ; C , D ) . Some cells have an intermediate morphology , with wide processes ( long arrow ; C ) ; other cells retain their preinduction mor - phology ( arrowheads ) . Images were taken 2 hr ( C ) and 24 hr ( D ) after addition of induction medium . Morphological changes are reversible by reintroduction of MSC medium ( E ) . Treatment of MSC cultures with 2 % DMSO causes similar changes in cell morphology ( arrows indicate growth cone - like structures ; F ) . Scale bar (cid:7) 50 (cid:3) m . Fig . 3 . Fibroblasts adopt similar neuron - like morphologies upon treat - ment with induction medium . Fibroblast cultures before treatment ( A ) and after incubation in preinduction medium ( B ) . Addition of induc - tion medium causes morphological changes similar to those in MSC , with highly refractile cell bodies and thin extended processes , which terminate in structures resembling growth cones ( arrows ; C , D ) . Some cells show an intermediate phenotype ( arrowhead ) . Images were taken 2 hr ( C ) and 24 hr ( D ) after addition of induction medium . Morpho - logical changes are reversible by reintroduction of ﬁbroblast medium ( E ) . Treatment of ﬁbroblast cultures with 2 % DMSO also induces neuron - like morphology similarly to addition of induction medium ( arrow indicates growth cone - like structure ; F ) . Scale bar (cid:7) 50 (cid:3) m . 196 Neuhuber et al . result of better adhesion of cells to the laminin substrate . However , laminin did not promote any signiﬁcant process outgrowth after the initial acquisition of the neuronal phenotype ( data not shown ) . We observed , in the time - lapse videos of MSC cultures induced for 24 hr , that 31 % of cells ( n (cid:7) 35 ) with neuronal morphology spontaneously reversed their changes to a neu - ronal morphology and returned to the spread shape that characterizes undifferentiated MSC ( Fig . 4G – I ) . Such reversal of morphology occurred when edges of the cell protruded to reﬁll the spaces between processes . The reversal from neuron - like to MSC morphology occurred over 20 – 30 min . These observations demonstrate that neuron - like MSC retain the ability to protrude the cell edge but do so rarely and always within the original cell boundaries . To investigate whether the nonuniform retraction of the cell edge was due to stronger adhesion of some areas of the cell to the plastic growth surface , we immunostained uninduced and induced MSC cultures with antibodies against paxillin , a constituent of focal adhesions . Paxillin - positive patches were present throughout the cell periph - ery in uninduced MSC ( Fig . 5A ) . In induced MSC , diffuse paxillin immunolabel was observed in the cytoplasm , in - dicating disassembly of focal adhesions ; however , some paxillin - positive patches were localized alongside the pro - cesses , suggesting that strong adhesion to the substrate allowed maintenance of these extensions even when the rest of the cell edge was retracted ( Fig . 5B ) . Disruption of F - Actin Mimics Differentiation We stained MSC and ﬁbroblasts for actin ﬁlaments and microtubules . In untreated cultures , F - actin was or - ganized as stress ﬁbers and lamellipodial protrusions ( Fig . 6A , E ) . Microtubules in control cultures originated near Fig . 4 . Time - lapse imaging reveals that acquisition of neuron - like morphology is due to retraction of the cell edge . During the ﬁrst 90 min following induction , MSC ( A – C ) and ﬁbroblasts ( D – F ) retract the majority of their cell edges while retaining some adhesions to the substrate , resulting in the formation of long , neurite - like processes terminating in growth cone - like structures ( asterisk ) . Time - lapse im - aging of MSC 24 hr after induction revealed no signiﬁcant mobility of these processes . Certain MSC were seen to revert back to preinduction morphology ( G – I ; arrows point to cells that reverted to a preinduction morphology ) . Scale bar (cid:7) 50 (cid:3) m . Reevaluating MSC Differentiation 197 the nucleus and extended throughout the cytoplasm ( Fig . 6B , F ) . By 40 min after induction , the actin network became disorganized , resulting in the loss of stress ﬁbers and lamellipodial protrusions ( Fig . 6C , G ) . Microtubules became restricted to regions where the cell edge was not fully retracted , resulting in a microtubule array with a bundled appearance ( Fig . 6D , H ) . Rather than being a cause , this microtubule organization is likely to be a con - sequence of changes in cell morphology . The observed reorganization of F - actin following induction is similar to that seen when the F - actin network is disrupted by treatment with Cyto - D or Lat - A . There - fore , we compared the morphology and organization of F - actin and microtubules in cells treated with Cyto - D or Lat - A with those of induced MSC . Pharmacological dis - ruption of F - actin triggered morphological changes and cytoskeletal reorganization similar to that observed during neuronal induction , causing MSC to adopt a neuron - like morphology ( Fig . 7A – H ) . Time - lapse phase microscopy revealed that these changes again resulted from retraction of the cell edge ( data not shown ) . Disruption of microtu - bules with nocodazole did not result in the acquisition of a neuron - like morphology by MSC ( Fig . 7I – L ) . Immunocytochemical and RT - PCR Analysis of Changes in Protein and Gene Expression Upon Induction To investigate the effects of the induction medium on protein expression , we looked at markers for neurons ( NF - M , tau , (cid:4) III - tubulin , synaptophysin ) , glia ( GFAP ) , ﬁbroblasts ( vimentin ) , and neural progenitors ( nestin ) in uninduced ( data not shown ) , preinduced , and induced MSC . Weak cytoplasmic staining for NF - M and tau was observed in 100 % of uninduced and preinduced MSC ( Fig . 8A , B ) . In neuron - like cells , immunostaining was most pronounced in the cytoplasm of the cell body and extended into the processes ( Fig . 8E , F ) . Positive staining for (cid:4) III - tubulin was not observed in uninduced or prein - duced MSC ( Fig . 8C ) . Among induced MSC , 21 % ( n (cid:7) 66 ) of neuron - like cells were (cid:4) III - tubulin positive ( Fig . 8G ) . No immunostaining for synaptophysin ( Fig . 8D , H ) was observed in uninduced , preinduced , or induced MSC . No signal for GFAP was detected in uninduced and pre - induced MSC ( Fig . 9A ) , but 50 % of induced MSC ( n (cid:7) 182 ) with a neuron - or glia - like phenotype strongly ex - pressed this glial marker ( Fig . 9D ) . Vimentin intermediate ﬁlaments were detected in all MSC ( Fig . 9B , E ) . A sub - population of MSC was positive for nestin in uninduced ( 40 % ) , preinduced ( 63 % ) , and induced ( 80 % of neuron - like , 54 % of MSC - like ; Fig . 9C , F ) MSC cultures . The presence of nestin and some neuronal and glial markers in induced MSC as well as decreased vimentin expression might suggest that MSC are driven toward a neuronal phenotype by exposure to induction medium . However , the absence of other neuronal markers and the expression of these proteins ( NF - M , tau , (cid:4) III - tubulin , GFAP ) by ﬁbroblasts in a similar pattern ( data not shown ) suggest that treatment with induction medium may promote aberrant gene expression rather than an in vitro analogue of the systematic gene expression , that is seen during differenti - ation . Quantitative RT - PCR analysis revealed a 1 . 5 - fold and 11 . 5 - fold decrease in vimentin mRNA levels upon induction of MSC and ﬁbroblasts , respectively ( Table I , Fig . 10 ) . A 51 - fold increase in NF - M mRNA expression was observed in induced vs . uninduced MSC ( Table I , Fig . 10A – D ) . (cid:4) III - tubulin message was detected in unin - duced MSC and was 14 - fold increased in induced MSC ( Table I , Fig . 10 ) . We found in ﬁbroblasts 1 . 9 - and 1 . 2 - fold increases in the expression of NF - M and (cid:4) III - tubulin , respectively . Thus , addition of neural induction medium leads to changes in the gene expression pattern in both MSC and ﬁbroblasts , though to different extents . Wood - bury et al . ( 2002 ) claim that these changes are due to a modulation of gene expression upon addition of neural induction medium in already “multidifferentiated” MSC . However , even if levels of (cid:4) III - tubulin and NF - M tran - scripts in MSC and ﬁbroblasts increase after induction , the absolute levels are very low and are of questionable phys - iological relevance . In addition , the expression of a mere subset of neuronal genes and proteins in induced cells does not serve as proof for neuronal differentiation . DISCUSSION Changes in Cytoskeleton and Gene Expression In this study , we have demonstrated that the adop - tion of a neuron - like morphology by MSC in the early stage of exposure to induction medium containing BHA and DMSO in vitro is due to a breakdown of the actin cytoskeleton and a retraction of the cell edge . The mech - anism of formation of neurite - like processes in response to induction medium is thus strikingly different from the extension - based generation of axons and dendrites of neu - rons . Additionally , the motility and active process exten - sion that characterize growing neurons are absent from induced MSC . This strongly suggests that the notion that MSC readily differentiate into neurons in vitro ( Wood - Fig . 5 . Focal adhesions are localized at the tips of processes . Staining of uninduced ( A ) and 24 - hr - induced MSC cultures ( B ) with antibodies against paxillin . Paxillin - positive patches ( arrows ) , indicating focal ad - hesions , are present throughout the cell periphery of uninduced MSC ( A ) . In addition to diffuse paxillin immunolabel , visible in the cyto - plasm of induced MSC , paxillin - positive patches ( arrows ) are localized at the tips of processes . Scale bar (cid:7) 25 (cid:3) m . 198 Neuhuber et al . bury et al . , 2000 , 2002 ) is an explanation that is incom - plete at best . More likely , the adaptation of the neuronal phenotype represents an artifact . The ﬂuctuation between neuron - like and MSC morphologies suggests that MSC have a dynamic , reversible response to induction condi - tions that is not characteristic of bona ﬁde differentiation . The rapidity with which the neuron - like morphology is both gained and lost also argues against physiological dif - ferentiation . It seems unlikely that the changes in cellular organization and gene and protein expression that largely constitute commitment to differentiation could be so ad - vanced within 45 min of exposure to inductive conditions . The presence of a subset of neuronal markers cannot be taken to prove commitment to a neuronal fate . To clearly identify a differentiated MSC as a neuron , it should display a complete set of neuronal markers . Other features of functional neurons , such as synaptic markers and ma - chinery , should also be conﬁrmed . A ﬁnal proof of func - tionality would be the identiﬁcation of action potentials accompanied by synaptic neurotransmitter release . Al - though it has been shown previously that depolymeriza - tion of the actin cytoskeleton induces process formation in MAP2 - transfected nonneuronal cells ( Edson et al . , 1993 ) , process formation requires MAP2 overexpression . In ad - dition , MAP2 - dependent process formation is an active extension process , unlike the formation of neurite - like structures in MSC that develop through retraction of the cytoplasm . Dermal ﬁbroblasts did not differentiate into osteo - cytes , chondrocytes , or adipocytes ; however , they as - sumed neuronal phenotypes just as readily as MSC when exposed to neuronal induction medium . Therefore , it seems that agents contained in the induction medium cause the breakdown of the actin cytoskeleton , creating a morphological artifact rather than inducing a physiological reprogramming event . This notion is supported by the fact that treatment of MSC and ﬁbroblasts with 2 % DMSO yielded cell phenotypes that were difﬁcult to distinguish from those promoted by complete induction medium . In this regard , the observation by Lu , Blesch , and Tuszynski ( this issue ) of “pseudoneuronal” phenotypes in various cell types upon treatment with (cid:4) - mercaptoethanol or DMSO is also consistent with the latter explanation . Cellular and Molecular Effects of Chemical Agents in Induction Media DMSO is a commonly used solvent in biological studies , even though its physiological and pharmacological effects are poorly understood . In some contexts , DMSO is a cell - differentiating agent ( for review see Santos et al . , 2003 ) . Exposure to DMSO has been reported to inhibit c - myc expression ( Darling et al . , 1989 ) , arrest the cell cycle in lymphoid cell lines ( Sawai et al . , 1990 ) , prevent dedifferentiation of normal cells ( Isom et al . , 1985 ) , and increase cAMP levels ( Terasawa et al . , 1981 ) . As with RA , DMSO accelerates differentiation and induces process for - mation in microglial cells ( Giulian and Baker , 1986 ) . Treatment of certain neuroblastoma cell lines with 2 % DMSO results in morphologically differentiated cultures with extensive process formation and electrical excitabil - Fig . 6 . Reorganization of the cytoskeleton following neuronal induc - tion . Preinduction MSC ( A , B ) and ﬁbroblasts ( E , F ) exhibit the typical cytoskeletal organization of ﬂattened cells in vitro . Actin ﬁlaments are present in the form of stress ﬁbers , long linear bundles of actin ﬁlaments , and small lamellipodia at the leading edge ( A , E ) . Microtubules in preinduced MSC and ﬁbroblasts are found throughout the cytoplasm ( B , F ) . Induction of either cell type disrupts the actin cytoskeleton , resulting in ﬁlament clumping ( C , G ) . Ninety minutes after induction , microtubules reorganize into bundles that ﬁll the processes ( D , H ) . Cells were ﬁxed and stained with TRITC - phalloidin and FITC - conjugated primary antibody to tubulin to visualize actin ﬁlaments and microtu - bules , respectively . Scale bar (cid:7) 50 (cid:3) m . Reevaluating MSC Differentiation 199 ity , although these changes are not accompanied by in - creases in the levels of acetylcholinesterase or tyrosine hydroxylase ( Kimhi et al . , 1976 ) . In contrast , embryonic carcinoma cells do not differentiate into neurons or glia but differentiate into cardiac and skeletal muscle upon treatment with DMSO ( McBurney et al . , 1982 ) . Thus , a treatment that includes exposure to 2 % DMSO is likely to promote changes to the morphology and gene expression patterns of the cells under consideration . These changes will not necessarily be diagnostic of the induction of an organized program . Furthermore , Lu , Blesch , and Tuszynski ( this issue ) show that MSC treated with Tween 20 , Triton X - 100 , or concentrated salts or bases display morphological changes reminiscent of those described here . This strongly suggests that these agents , and DMSO , induce phenotypic changes in MSC that are unrelated to a program of neuronal differentiation . cAMP is a ubiquitous intracellular second messenger that regulates such diverse cellular functions as Ca 2 (cid:5) in - ﬂux , excitability , and gene expression . In prostate tumor cells , cAMP analogues and phosphodiesterase inhibitors can induce a neuronal phenotype , including expression of NSE ( Bang et al . , 1994 ) . Forskolin , a stimulator of adenyl cyclase , can reversibly induce neuroendocrine character - istics ( Cox et al . , 1999 ) . Isobutylmethylxanthine or dibu - tyryl cAMP treatments are also commonly used to elevate intracellular cAMP in cultured cells . Deng et al . ( 2001 ) reported that treatment of human MSC with these agents induced 25 % of the cells to assume a neuron - like mor - phology and express NSE , but not markers of mature neurons . Elevation of cytoplasmic cAMP levels could be responsible for the changes in protein expression that were observed . Differentiation Potential of MSC Do MSC retain potentials that they have never ex - hibited during normal development , and can develop - mental potential be reprogrammed under speciﬁc condi - tions and result in transdifferentiation to nonmesenchymal phenotypes ? Or is such pluripotency restricted to a sub - population of early progenitor cells that is contained within the MSC population ? Transdifferentiation is de - Fig . 7 . Disruption of actin ﬁlaments results in neuron - like morphol - ogy . Treatment of MSC or ﬁbroblasts with either 2 (cid:3) g / ml cytochalasin D ( Cyto - D ) or 2 (cid:3) M latrunculin - A ( Lat - A ) causes retraction of cell edges and results in a neuron - like morphology ( A , B , E , F ) . Disruption of microtubules using 10 mM nocodazole ( Noc ) does not result in a neuron - like morphology ( I , J ) . Cyto - D and Lat - A ( C , G ) disrupt the actin cytoskeleton , resulting in ﬁlament clumping . Noc ( K ) does not disrupt the actin cytoskeleton . In Cyto - D - and Lat - A - treated cells , microtubules reorganize into bundles that ﬁll the cytoplasmic space ( D , H ) . Noc treatment causes microtubule disruption ( L ) , resulting in weak homogenous cytoplasmic staining . All images of the cytoskeleton were taken from cells ﬁxed 90 min after treatment and stained with TRITC - phalloidin and FITC - conjugated primary antibody to tubulin to visualize actin ﬁlaments and microtubules , respectively . Scale bar (cid:7) 50 (cid:3) m . 200 Neuhuber et al . Fig . 8 . Selective neuronal markers are present in MSC . Immunostain - ing of preinduced ( A – D ) and 24 - hr - induced ( E – H ) MSC cultures . NF - M immunostaining is present in the cytoplasm of preinduced and induced MSC . Staining in cells with ﬁbroblastic morphology is lighter compared with staining in neuron - like cells ( A , E ) . A similar pattern of immunostaining is visible for tau ( B , F ) . No (cid:4) III - tubulin immunolabel is present in preinduced MSC ( C ) . After addition of induction medium , a small percentage of neuron - like cells is labeled for (cid:4) III - tubulin ( G ) . No immunolabeling for synaptophysin is visible in preinduced or induced MSC ( D , H ) . Scale bar (cid:7) 50 (cid:3) m . Fig . 9 . Markers for glia , ﬁbroblasts , and early neural stem cells are present in MSC . Immunostaining of preinduced ( A – C ) and 24 - hr - induced ( D – F ) MSC cultures . Preinduced MSC are not labeled for GFAP ( A ) ; the cytoplasm of neuron - like cells in induced MSC cultures is GFAP positive ( D ) . A ﬁlamentous vimentin immunolabel is visible in the cytoplasm of preinduced and induced MSC ( B , E ) . Immunostaining for nestin is present in a subpopulation of cells in preinduced and induced MSC ( C , F ) . Scale bar (cid:7) 50 (cid:3) m . Reevaluating MSC Differentiation 201 Fig . 10 . Transcript levels change following neuronal induction . Quan - titative RT - PCR of RNA isolated from control or treated MSC shows that transcript levels for vimentin , (cid:4) III - tubulin , and NF - M change after induction . A : Real - time ampliﬁcation plot of NF - M cDNA standards from 100 , 000 to 0 copies per reaction and of RNA samples ( 100 ng ) from control MSC , and induced MSC . As a positive control , 1 ng poly - A RNA isolated from rat brain was used as a template . Each standard was run in duplicate , and each sample was run in triplicate ; for clarity only one plot of each is shown . B : Standard curve showing the correlation between log 10 NF - M standard concentration and crossing point cycle number . C : Melting peaks for PCR products from NF - M cDNA standard and induced MSC sample are coincident suggesting that the same amplicon was produced . No such melting peak is ob - served in a sample with water as the template . TABLE I . Transcript Levels Change Following Neuronal Induction * Copies per reaction 100 ng total RNA Copies per reaction 100 ng total RNA Copies per 1 ng poly - A (cid:5) brain RNA Control MSC Induced MSC - Fold change Control FB Induced FB - Fold change Vimentin 60 , 070 (cid:8) 8 , 062 40 , 440 (cid:8) 8 , 149 1 . 5 - Fold decrease 130 , 200 (cid:8) 3 , 624 11 , 320 (cid:8) 1 , 874 11 . 5 - Fold decrease 8 , 340 (cid:8) 1 , 392 (cid:4) III - Tubulin 5 (cid:8) 0 . 6 68 (cid:8) 26 14 - Fold increase 59 (cid:8) 13 70 (cid:8) 21 1 . 2 - Fold increase 8 , 880 (cid:8) 620 NF - M 3 . 3 (cid:8) 0 . 5 167 (cid:8) 17 51 - Fold increase 121 (cid:8) 6 223 (cid:8) 31 1 . 9 - Fold increase 33 , 690 (cid:8) 1 , 198 * Quantitative RT - PCR of RNA isolated from control or treated MSC or ﬁbroblasts ( FB ) shows that transcript levels for vimentin , (cid:4) III - tubulin , and NF - M change after induction . Number of transcripts detected in each RT PCR reaction ( mean of triplicate (cid:8) S . D . ) and fold change in transcript level after induction . 202 Neuhuber et al . ﬁned as a change in the gene expression pattern of a cell committed to the gene expression pattern of a different cell type ( Liu and Rao , 2003 ) . Transdifferentiation may lead in one step to a new phenotype , or , alternatively , an initial dedifferentiation event may be required . This pro - cess is not uncommon in the plant and animal kingdoms ; limb regeneration in newts is accomplished through the transdifferentiation of differentiated cells of both ectoder - mal and mesodermal origin ( Stocum , 2002 ) . An alternative explanation of the detection of neuronal and glial cells of MSC origin in cell - transplantation studies is the possibility of a fusion event , including donor mesenchymal cells and host neurons or glia ( for review see Jin and Greenberg , 2003 ; Liu and Rao , 2003 ) . Some studies have focused on the multipotency of MSC , showing that they can express genes from all three embryonic layers and the germline ( Tremain et al . , 2001 ; Woodbury et al . , 2002 ; Seshi et al . , 2003 ) . The presence in undifferentiated MSC of the intermediate ﬁlament protein nestin , a marker of neuronal precursors ( Sanchez - Ramos et al . , 2000 ) , is suggestive of the potential of MSC for neuronal differentiation . Equally , treatment of cultured MSC with RA and cytokines resulted in neuronal differentiation of a small percentage of cells ( Sanchez - Ramos et al . , 2000 ) . RA has been found to differentiate embryonic stem cells and em - bryonic carcinoma cells into neurons , probably via regu - lation of speciﬁc RA - responsive genes ( Spinella et al . , 2003 ) . Several transplantation studies have shown the dif - ferentiation of a small percentage of MSC into neurons and glia in vivo ( for review see Corti et al . , 2003 ) . This opens the possibility that a subpopulation of MSC may be able to adopt different fates . The seeming ability of culture - expanded mesenchymal MAPC to differentiate to endodermal and ectodermal as well as mesenchymal lin - eages ( Reyes and Verfaillie , 2001 ) suggests that a subpopu - lation of early progenitors may exist within certain MSC cultures . The extent to which such progenitors , MSC , or HSC are responsible for the cell fates observed subsequent to the transplantation of unmanipulated bone marrow remains unresolved ( for review see Herzog et al . , 2003 ) . In some cases , cell fusion is emerging as the most likely explanation ( Terada et al . , 2002 ; Ying et al . , 2002 ; Alvarez - Dolado et al . , 2003 ; Wehner et al . , 2003 ) . The multipotency of MSC may also be enhanced by in vitro culture conditions , in a manner similar to that seen when embryoid bodies are treated with bFGF . In such cultures , small numbers of cells differentiated into neurons and glia as soon as bFGF was withdrawn ( Okabe et al . , 1996 ; Brustle et al . , 1999 ) . Could preconditioning regi - ments result in loss of patterning information and in the acquisition of a broader developmental potential ? A recent study showed that treatment of bone marrow cells with different combinations of growth factors and RA induced a neuronal phenotype ; however , the intracellular distribu - tion of neural proteins was distinct from that of genuine neurons ( Jin et al . , 2003 ) . Thus , the extent to which MSC may be able to transdifferentiate into mature , functional neurons remains unknown . In conclusion , we do not dispute that MSC may exhibit multipotential properties beyond differentiation into mesenchymal lineages . Bone marrow , or other tissues , may contain a small population of early precursor cells that can differentiate into tissues other than those originating from mesoderm . In addition , treatment of MSC with physiological factors known to drive differentiation may well result in transdifferentiation or dedifferentiation fol - lowed by neural differentiation of MSC . However , it seems unlikely that in vitro exposure of MSC to DMSO and similar reagents will result in the transdifferentiation of MSC into cells with the morphologic attributes and func - tional qualities of mature neurons . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Maria Obrocka for assistance with tissue culture and Dr . B . Tim Himes for critically reviewing the manuscript . The antibody for vimentin ( 40E - C ; developed by A . Alvarez - Buylla ) was obtained from the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank maintained by the University of Iowa Department of Biological Sci - ences . L . H . , L . K . , and A . M . are supported by NIST Advanced Technology Program cooperative agreement 70NANH3017 . REFERENCES Akiyama Y , Radtke C , Kocsis JD . 2002 . Remyelination of the rat spinal cord by transplantation of identiﬁed bone marrow stromal cells . J Neu - rosci 22 : 6623 – 6630 . Alvarez - Dolado M , Pardal R , Garcia - Verdugo JM , Fike JR , Lee HO , Pfeffer K , Lois C , Morrison SJ , Alvarez - Buylla A . 2003 . Fusion of bone - marrow - derived cells with Purkinje neurons , cardiomyocytes and hepatocytes . Nature 425 : 968 – 973 . Bang YJ , Pirnia F , Fang WG , Kang WK , Sartor O , Whitesell L , Ha MJ , Tsokos M , Sheahan MD , Nguyen P , Nikliaski WT , Myers CE , Trepel JB . 1994 . Terminal neuroendocrine differentiation of human prostate carcinoma cells in response to increased intracellular cyclic AMP . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91 : 5330 – 5334 . Black MM , Slaughter T , Moshiach S , Obrocka M , Fischer I . 1996 . Tau is enriched on dynamic microtubules in the distal region of growing axons . J Neurosci 16 : 3611 – 3619 . Brustle O , Jones KN , Learish RD , Karram K , Choudhary K , Wiestler OD , Duncan ID , McKay RD . 1999 . Embryonic stem cell - derived glial pre - cursors : a source of myelinating transplants . Science 285 : 754 – 756 . Chopp M , Li Y . 2002 . Treatment of neural injury with marrow stromal cells . Lancet 1 : 92 – 100 . Corti S , Locatelli F , Strazzer S , Guglieri M , Comi GP . 2003 . Neuronal generation from somatic stem cells : current knowledge and perspectives on the treatment of acquired and degenerative central nervous system disorders . Curr Gene Ther 3 : 247 – 272 . Cox ME , Deeble PD , Lakhani S , Parsons SJ . 1999 . Acquisition of neu - roendocrine characteristics by prostate tumor cells is reversible : implica - tions for prostate cancer progression . Cancer Res 59 : 3821 – 3830 . Darling D , Tavassoli M , Linskens MH , Farzaneh F . 1989 . DMSO induced modulation of c - myc steady - state RNA levels in a variety of different cell lines . Oncogene 4 : 175 – 179 . Deng W , Obrocka M , Fischer I , Prockop DJ . 2001 . In vitro differentiation of human marrow stromal cells into early progenitors of neural cells by conditions that increase intracellular cyclic AMP . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 282 : 148 – 152 . Reevaluating MSC Differentiation 203 Edson K , Weisshaar B , Matus A . 1993 . Actin depolymerization induces process formation on MAP2 - transfected non - neuronal cells . Develop - ment 117 : 689 – 700 . Giulian D , Baker TJ . 1986 . Characterization of ameboid microglia isolated from developing mammalian brain . J Neurosci 6 : 2163 – 2178 . Herzog EL , Chai L , Krause DS . 2003 . Plasticity of marrow derived stem cells . Blood 102 : 3483 – 3493 . Hofstetter CP , Schwarz EJ , Hess D , Widenfalk J , El Manira A , Prockop DJ , Olson L . 2002 . Marrow stromal cells form guiding strands in the injured spinal cord and promote recovery . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99 : 2199 – 2204 . Isom HC , Secott T , Georgoff I , Woodworth C , Mummaw J . 1985 . Maintenance of differentiated rat hepatocytes in primary culture . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 82 : 3252 – 3256 . Jiang Y , Vaessen B , Lenvik T , Blackstad M , Reyes M , Verfaillie CM . 2002 . Multipotent progenitor cells can be isolated from postnatal murine bone marrow , muscle , and brain . Exp Hematol 30 : 896 – 904 . Jiang Y , Henderson D , Blackstad M , Chen A , Miller RF , Verfaillie CM . 2003 . Neuroectodermal differentiation from mouse multipotent adult progenitor cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100 ( Suppl 1 ) : 11854 – 11860 . Jin K , Greenberg DA . 2003 . Tales of transdifferentiation . Exp Neurol 183 : 255 – 257 . Jin K , Mao XO , Batteur S , Sun Y , Greenberg DA . 2003 . Induction of neuronal markers in bone marrow cells : differential effects of growth factors and patterns of intracellular expression . Exp Neurol 184 : 78 – 89 . Kim BJ , Seo JH , Bubien JK , Oh YS . 2002 . Differentiation of adult bone marrow stem cells into neuroprogenitor cells in vitro . Neuroreport 13 : 1185 – 1188 . Kimhi Y , Palfrey C , Spector I , Barak Y , Littauer UZ . 1976 . Maturation of neuroblastoma cells in the presence of dimethylsulfoxide . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 73 : 462 – 466 . Kohyama J , Abe H , Shimazaki T , Koizumi A , Nakashima K , Gojo S , Taga T , Okano H , Hata J , Umezawa A . 2001 . Brain from bone : efﬁcient “meta - differentiation” of marrow stroma - derived mature osteoblasts to neurons with Noggin or a demethylating agent . Differentiation 68 : 235 – 244 . Koksoy S , Phipps AJ , Hayes KA , Mathes LE . 2001 . SV40 immortalization of feline ﬁbroblasts as targets for MHC - restricted cytotoxic T - cell assays . Vet Immunol Immunopathol 79 : 285 – 295 . Kopen GC , Prockop DJ , Phinney DG . 1999 . Marrow stromal cells migrate throughout forebrain and cerebellum , and they differentiate into astro - cytes after injection into neonatal mouse brains . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96 : 10711 – 10716 . Lennon DP , Haynesworth SE , Young RG , Dennis JE , Caplan AI . 1995 . A chemically deﬁned medium supports in vitro proliferation and maintains the osteochondral potential of rat marrow - derived mesenchymal stem cells . Exp Cell Res 219 : 211 – 222 . Liu Y , Rao MS . 2003 . Transdifferentiation—fact or artifact . J Cell Biochem 88 : 29 – 40 . Mackay AM , Beck SC , Murphy JM , Barry FP , Chichester CO , Pittenger MF . 1998 . Chondrogenic differentiation of cultured human mesenchymal stem cells from marrow . Tissue Eng 4 : 415 – 428 . McBurney MW , Jones - Villeneuve EM , Edwards MK , Anderson PJ . 1982 . Control of muscle and neuronal differentiation in a cultured embryonal carcinoma cell line . Nature 299 : 165 – 167 . Mujtaba T , Han SS , Fischer I , Sandgren EP , Rao MS . 2002 . Stable expression of the alkaline phosphatase marker gene by neural cells in culture and after transplantation into the CNS using cells derived from a transgenic rat . Exp Neurol 174 : 48 – 57 . Munoz - Elias G , Woodbury D , Black IB . 2003 . Marrow stromal cells , mitosis , and neuronal differentiation : stem cell and precursor functions . Stem Cells 21 : 437 – 448 . Okabe S , Forsberg - Nilsson K , Spiro AC , Segal M , McKay RD . 1996 . Development of neuronal precursor cells and functional postmitotic neu - rons from embryonic stem cells in vitro . Mech Dev 59 : 89 – 102 . Pittenger MF , Mackay AM , Beck SC , Jaiswal RK , Douglas R , Mosca JD , Moorman MA , Simonetti DW , Craig S , Marshak DR . 1999 . Multilineage potential of adult human mesenchymal stem cells . Science 284 : 143 – 147 . Reyes M , Verfaillie CM . 2001 . Characterization of multipotent adult progenitor cells , a subpopulation of mesenchymal stem cells . Ann N Y Acad Sci 938 : 231 – 233 . Sanchez - Ramos J , Song S , Cardozo - Pelaez F , Hazzi C , Stedeford T , Willing A , Freeman TB , Saporta S , Janssen W , Patel N , Cooper DR , Sanberg PR . 2000 . Adult bone marrow stromal cells differentiate into neural cells in vitro . Exp Neurol 164 : 247 – 256 . Santos NC , Figueira - Coelho J , Martins - Silva J , Saldanha C . 2003 . Multidisciplinary utilization of dimethyl sulfoxide : pharmacologi - cal , cellular , and molecular aspects . Biochem Pharmacol 65 : 1035 – 1041 . Sawai M , Takase K , Teraoka H , Tsukada K . 1990 . Reversible G1 arrest in the cell cycle of human lymphoid cell lines by dimethyl sulfoxide . Exp Cell Res 187 : 4 – 10 . Seshi B , Kumar S , King D . 2003 . Multilineage gene expression in human bone marrow stromal cells as evidenced by single - cell microarray analysis . Blood Cells Mol Dis 31 : 268 – 285 . Spinella MJ , Kerley JS , White KA , Curtin JC . 2003 . Retinoid target gene activation during induced tumor cell differentiation : human embryonal carcinoma as a model . J Nutr 133 : 273S – 276S . Stocum DL . 2002 . Development . A tail of transdifferentiation . Science 298 : 1901 – 1903 . Terada N , Hamazaki T , Oka M , Hoki M , Mastalerz DM , Nakano Y , Meyer EM , Morel L , Petersen BE , Scott EW . 2002 . Bone marrow cells adopt the phenotype of other cells by spontaneous cell fusion . Nature 416 : 542 – 545 . Terasawa T , Miura Y , Masuda R . 1981 . The mechanisms of the action of DMSO on the heme synthesis of quail embryo yolk sac cells . Exp Cell Res 133 : 31 – 37 . Tremain N , Korkko J , Ibberson D , Kopen GC , DiGirolamo C , Phinney DG . 2001 . MicroSAGE analysis of 2 , 353 expressed genes in a single cell - derived colony of undifferentiated human mesenchymal stem cells reveals mRNAs of multiple cell lineages . Stem Cells 19 : 408 – 418 . Wehner T , Bontert M , Eyupoglu I , Prass K , Prinz M , Klett FF , Heinze M , Bechmann I , Nitsch R , Kirchhoff F , Kettenmann H , Dirnagl U , Priller J . 2003 . Bone marrow - derived cells expressing green ﬂuorescent protein under the control of the glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein promoter do not differentiate into astrocytes in vitro and in vivo . J Neurosci 23 : 5004 – 5011 . Woodbury D , Schwarz EJ , Prockop DJ , Black IB . 2000 . Adult rat and human bone marrow stromal cells differentiate into neurons . J Neurosci Res 61 : 364 – 370 . Woodbury D , Reynolds K , Black IB . 2002 . Adult bone marrow stromal stem cells express germline , ectodermal , endodermal , and mesodermal genes prior to neurogenesis . J Neurosci Res 69 : 908 – 917 . Ying QL , Nichols J , Evans EP , Smith AG . 2002 . Changing potency by spontaneous fusion . Nature 416 : 545 – 548 . 204 Neuhuber et al .