Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) 1 3 Mol Cell Biochem DOI 10 . 1007 / s11010 - 017 - 3019 - 8 The role of actin depolymerizing factor in advanced glycation endproducts - induced impairment in mouse brain microvascular endothelial cells Xinfeng Liu 1 · Rongju Zhang 1 · Hai Di 1 · Dengfa Zhao 1 · Jun Wang 1 Received : 27 October 2016 / Accepted : 21 March 2017 © Springer Science + Business Media New York 2017 overexpression of ADF . Additionally , knockdown of ADF aggravated AGEs - induced impairment in endothelial per - meability and vasculogenic property in MBMECs . In con - clusion , AGEs treatment increased endothelial permeability and reduced vasculogenic property of MBMECs , at least in part , via downregulation of ADF . Keywords Actin depolymerizing factor · Actin cytoskeleton · Endothelial permeability · Angiogenesis · Brain Abbreviations ADF Actin depolymerizing factor ADMA Asymmetric dimethylarginine AGEs Advanced glycation endproducts DDAH2 Dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase 2 MBMECs Mouse brain microvascular endothelial cells NO Nitric oxide RAGE Receptor for advanced glycation endproducts ROS Reactive oxygen species TER Transendothelial electrical resistance VEGFR2 Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 ZO - 1 Zonula occludens - 1 Introduction Diabetes mellitus is a major risk factor for stroke and poor recovery after stroke and individuals with diabetes are at greater risk of stroke than patients without diabetes [ 1 , 2 ] . Microvascular dysfunction is believed to play an important role in the pathogenesis and progression of diabetes - related stroke [ 3 , 4 ] . Nevertheless , underlying mechanisms regulat - ing cerebral microvascular endothelial function in diabetes remain poorly elucidated . Abstract Endothelial dysfunction is one of the most important pathological events during the development of several diabetic complications including stroke . The aim of this work was to investigate the role of actin depolym - erizing factor ( ADF ) in advanced glycation endproducts ( AGEs ) - induced impairment in mouse brain microvascu - lar endothelial cells ( MBMECs ) . Incubation of MBMECs with AGEs led to downregulation of expression of ADF , which was reversed by treatment with soluble receptor of AGEs or tempol ( an antioxidant ) . Incubation of MBMECs with AGEs enhanced ratio of F / G - actin , increased endothe - lial permeability and reduced vasculogenic property , which was attenuated by overexpression of ADF . Furthermore , overexpression of ADF attenuated AGEs - induced down - regulation of zonula occludens - 1 and dephosphorylation of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 . Incuba - tion of MBMECs with AGEs downregulated dimethylar - ginine dimethylaminohydrolase 2 , enhanced formation of asymmetric dimethylarginine and reduced formation of nitric oxide , which was attenuated by overexpression of ADF . Incubation of MBMECs with AGEs induced activa - tion of NF - κB , upregulated RAGE and enhanced forma - tion of reactive oxygen species , which was attenuated by Xinfeng Liu and Rongju Zhang have contributed equally to the work . Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article ( doi : 10 . 1007 / s11010 - 017 - 3019 - 8 ) contains supplementary material , which is available to authorized users . * Jun Wang juw301 @ 163 . com 1 Department of Neurology , The General Hospital of PLA , 28 Fuxing Road , Beijing 100853 , China Mol Cell Biochem 1 3 Accumulated evidence indicated that actin cytoskel - eton rearrangement through actin dynamics implicated in the modulation of endothelial function [ 5 , 6 ] . The family of actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) / cofilin enhanced actin dynamics mainly in three ways : by depolymeriza - tion ( accelerating monomer loss at the pointed end ) , by severing filaments into shorter protomers , and by directly or indirectly facilitating actin filament growth [ 7 , 8 ] . ADF showed the strongest depolymerization activity out of all family members and was expressed in endothelial cells [ 9 ] . Advanced glycation endproducts ( AGEs ) , as a heterogene - ous group of complex compounds , were irreversibly syn - thesized from proteins or lipids under the diabetic condi - tions through a chain of non - enzymatic chemical reactions [ 10 ] . It was reported by our lab that overexpression of ADF alleviated oxidized low density lipoprotein - induced barrier dysfunction of mouse brain microvascular endothelial cells ( MBMECs ) [ 11 ] . AGEs treatment triggered the formation of F - actin stress fibers and induced damages in human der - mal microvascular endothelial cells [ 12 ] and human umbil - ical vein endothelial cells ( HUVECs ) [ 13 ] . In this work , we found that incubation of MBMECs with AGEs suppressed protein expression of ADF in a dose - dependent manner . Therefore , we next focused on the role of ADF in AGEs - induced damages in MBMECs in vitro . Materials and methods Materials and cell culture Unless otherwise specified , chemicals and regents were purchased from Sigma - Aldrich ( St Louis , MO , USA ) . AGEs ( modified with BSA ) were purchased from BioVi - sion ( Milpitas , CA , USA ) . Primary mouse brain microvascular endothelial cells ( MBMECs ) were isolated from C57BL / 6 mice ( 4 - to 6 - week - old , obtained from the Vital - Aiver Animal Ltd , Beijing , China ) as the method described previously [ 14 ] . Primary mouse brain microvascular endothelial cells were used on day 5 or 6 after isolation . Cells were maintained in growth media containing M199 media ( Gibco ) sup - plemented with 10 % FBS , 1 μg / ml hydrocortisone , 3 μg / ml FGF ( Peprotech ) , 10 μg / ml EGF ( Peprotech ) , 10 μg / ml heparin , 2 mM Glutamax ( Gibco ) , and 80 μM butyryl cAMP . Mouse astrocyte cell lines were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS , 100 units / ml penicillin , and 100 μg / ml streptomycin at 37 °C under a 5 % CO 2 atmos - phere . All the animals used in our work received humane care in compliance with institutional animal care guide - lines , and were approved by the Local Institutional Com - mittee . All the surgical and experimental procedures were in accordance with institutional animal care guidelines . Preparation of the recombinant adenovirus The ADF - overexpressing plasmid was constructed accord - ing to the method described in report of Vartiainen et al . [ 15 ] and our previous report [ 11 ] . 1 day after transfec - tion , transfection of MBMECs with Ad - ADF markedly increased ADF expression ( the result has been published in our previous study ) [ 11 ] . ADF shRNA ( m ) lentiviral particles ( sc - 43201 - V , Santa Cruz , CA ) and negative lentiviral particles were obtained from Santa Cruz Inc . 1 day after transfection , transfection of MBMECs with ADF shRNA markedly decreased ADF protein expression ( the result has been published in our pre - vious study ) [ 11 ] . Cell viability assay Cell viability was determined using a 3 - ( 4 , 5 - dimethylthia - zol - 2 - yl ) - 2 , 5 - diphenyltetrazolium bromide ( MTT ) assay kit ( Beyotime Biotechnology , Shanghai , China ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions . The index of cell viability was quantified using a multiplate reader spectrophotometer ( PowerWave 2 , Bio - Tek Instruments , Winooski , VT , USA ) based on the absorbance at 570 nm . Measurement of transendothelial electrical resistance ( TER ) One day after transfection with Ad - ADF or Ad - lacZ , MBMECs were treated with or without AGEs ( 200 μg / ml ) for 12 h . TER , reflecting the permeability of intercellular tight junctions for ions , was qualified using a Millicell ERS Voltohmmeter ( Millipore , Billerica , MA , USA ) , and the values are shown as Ω cm 2 based on culture inserts . Quantitative RT - PCR analysis Total RNA was prepared from MBMECs with TRIzol rea - gent ( Invitrogen , Eugene , OR , USA ) . Total RNA were then used for the reverse transcription reaction to be transcribed into cDNA using SuperScript reverse transcription ( Invitro - gen ) . Quantitative PCR was performed using an ABI Prism 7500 Sequence Detection System ( Applied Biosystems Inc , Foster City , CA ) . PCR amplification was performed in trip - licate , and water was used to replace cDNA in each run as a negative control . PCR primer pairs were as follow : ADF , 5 ′ - GTT CAG GTT GCG GAT GAA GTA - 3 ′ , 5 ′ - GGT GTG GAA CAT TTC CGA ACTTT - 3 ′ ; ZO - 1 , 5 ′ - AGG CGC AGC TCC ACG GGC TTC AGG AAC TTG - 3 ′ ; 5 ′ - CAG AAG CAG AAG TAG GGA GAG GTG CCG ATC - 3 ′ . The results were normalized to the housekeeping gene GAPDH ( 5 ′ - CTA GAG AGC TGA CAG TGG GTAT - 3 ′ ; 5 ′ - AGA CGA CCA ATG CGT CCA AA - 3 ′ ) . Mol Cell Biochem 1 3 Western blotting analysis Cells were scraped into RIPA lysis buffer ( Beyotime Bio - technology , Shanghai , China ) . Protein concentration was measured using the BCA Protein Assay ( Tiangen Biotech , Beijing , China ) . Equal amounts of protein ( 20 μg ) were separated on 10 % SDS - polyacrylamide gel and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes . Membranes were blocked with 5 % skim milk for 4 h , and then incubated with the primary antibodies including ADF , ZO - 1 , VEGFR2 , p - VEGFR2 , NF - κB , RAGE , and DDAH2 ( Abcam , CA , USA ) , extensively washed , and incubated with the cor - responding HRP - conjugated secondary antibodies . Blots were developed with an Enhanced ECL Chemiluminescent Substrate Kit ( Beyotime Biotechnology ) . Band intensity was quantified using the software Quantity One ( version 4 . 5 . 2 ; Bio - Rad ) , and results were normalized to band inten - sity of the corresponding GAPDH . Measurement of nitric oxide ( NO ) and asymmetric dimethylarginine ( ADMA ) To assess NO production , the levels of nitrite / nitrate ( NOx ) , the stable breakdown product of NO , were measured with a nitrite / nitrate assay kit ( Beyotime Biotechnology ) , follow - ing the manufacturer’s instructions which employed the Griess method . For the determination of ADMA levels in the medium , we adopted the HPLC – mass spectrometry method as previ - ously described [ 16 ] . Measurement of reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) formation To assess oxidative stress , the formation of ROS was qualified using a fluorometric detection probe , chloro - methyl - dichloro - dihydro - fluorescein diacetate ( DCFDA ) ( Beyotime Biotechnology ) following the manufacturer’s instructions . Fluorescence was recorded at 485 nm excita - tion and 520 nm emission wavelengths . In vitro permeability assay Briefly , co - culture system was prepared according to the method described previously [ 17 ] . Mouse astrocytes were plated onto the lower side of the Transwell inserts . After 4 h , the inserts were inverted and mouse MBMECs trans - fected with Ad - ADF or Ad - lacZ were seeded in the upper chamber . The permeability of MBMECs in vitro was meas - ured [ 18 ] . Sterile Evans Blue was added into the upper chamber and 200 μg / ml AGEs was added or not . At dif - ferent timepoints ( 6 or 12 h ) , samples collected from the lower chamber were read at 620 nm for Evans Blue dye to measure the concentrations of infiltrated tracers . Measurement of F / G - actin ratio The ratio of F - actin and G - actin of cells was measured with an F - actin / G - actin assay kit ( Cytoskeleton , Denver , CO , USA ) based on the manufacturer’s protocol as previously described [ 19 ] . Tube formation One day after transfection with Ad - ADF or Ad - lacZ , MBMECs tube formation assay was performed using an ECMatrix assay kit ( Millipore , Temecula , CA , USA ) according to the manufacturer’s instruction . Briefly , Matrigel was thawed at 4 °C overnight , and each well of pre - chilled 96 - well culture plates was coated with 50 μl Matrigel and incubated at 37 °C for 1 h . MBMECs ( 5000 cells ) were added in 100 μl culture medium with or without AGEs ( 200 μg / ml ) . Following 12 h of incubation , tube net - works were observed and photographed using a microscope ( Observer . A1 , Carl Zeiss , Oberkochen , Germany ) . The length of tubes in three randomly chosen low power fields from each well was measured manually with the Image Pro analysis program . Statistical analysis All data presented are means ± SD . All experiments were repeated at least three times . Comparison among groups was analyzed using one - way ANOVA followed by New - man – Keuls multiple comparison tests . Statistical signifi - cance was declared at P < 0 . 05 . Results Expression of ADF in MBMECs Incubation of MBMECs with AGEs ( 50 , 100 , 200 μg / ml ) for 12 h led to downregulation of ADF protein ( Fig . 1a ) and mRNA ( Fig . 1b ) expression , in a dose - dependent manner . Inhibition of AGEs ( 200 μg / ml ) on ADF pro - tein ( Fig . 1c ) and mRNA ( Fig . 1d ) expression was abro - gated by treatment with sRAGE ( a competitive inhibitor of AGEs – RAGE interaction ) or tempol ( an antioxidant ) , at least in part . Our results indicated that AGEs - induced downregulation of ADF might be mediated by RAGE / ROS pathway in MBMECs . In addition , in the brains of streptozotocin - induced diabetic mice , ADF mRNA and protein expression was Mol Cell Biochem 1 3 downregulated , which was time - dependently ( shown in supplementary data , Fig . S1 ) . Incubation with AGEs ( 50 , 100 , 200 μg / ml ) for 24 or 48 h had no significant effect on cell viability of MBMECs ( Fig . 2a ) . Actin cytoskeleton and endothelial permeability To investigate the role of ADF in AGEs - induced endothe - lial dysfunction , the ADF was overexpressed in cultured MBMECs . Overexpression of ADF attenuated AGEs - induced augmentation of F / G - actin ratio ( Fig . 3a ) . How - ever , overexpression of ADF had no significant effect on cell viability of MBMECs in control group or AGEs - treated group ( Fig . 2b ) . Incubation with AGEs in MBMECs led to significant reduction in TER ( Fig . 3b ) and augmentation of permeabi - lized Evans Blue ( Fig . 3c ) and downregulated mRNA and protein expression of ZO - 1 ( Fig . 3d , e ) . Overexpression of ADF enhanced TER , reduced Evans blue extravasation , and upregulated ZO - 1 expression , indicating that AGEs - induced notable impairment of the endothelial barrier of MBMECs was , at least in part , through downregulation of ADF expression . Capillary tube formation To confirm the role ADF in the inhibition of AGEs on the vasculogenic property of MBMECs , we performed a Fig . 1 Expression of ADF in MBMECs . MBMECs were treated with AGEs ( 50 , 100 , and 200 μg / ml ) for 12 h ( a , b ) . MBMECs were treated with AGEs ( 200 μg / ml ) , sRAGE ( 4 μg / ml ) , or tempol ( 100 μM ) for 12 h ( c , d ) , either alone or in combination . The ADF protein ( a , c ) and mRNA ( b , d ) expression was assessed by Western blotting analysis and RT - PCR assay , respectively . ADF actin depo - lymerizing factor , AGEs advanced glycation endproducts , MBMECs mouse brain microvascular endothelial cells , RAGE receptor for advanced glycation endproducts ; values are means ± SD . * P < 0 . 05 compared with control group ; # P < 0 . 05 compared with AGEs - treated group Fig . 2 Cell viability of MBMECs . MBMECs were treated with AGEs ( 50 , 100 , and 200 μg / ml ) for 24 or 48 h . Cell viability of MBMECs was determined by MTT assay ( a ) . 24 h after transfection with Ad - ADF or Ad - lacZ , cells were incubated with AGEs ( 200 μg / ml ) for 24 h . Cell viability of MBMECs was determined by MTT assay ( b ) . ADF actin depolymerizing factor , AGEs advanced glyca - tion endproducts , MBMECs mouse brain microvascular endothelial cells ; values are means ± SD Mol Cell Biochem 1 3 vascular - like tube formation assay on Matrigel , a com - monly used method for in vitro vasculogenesis . It was found that incubation with AGEs in MBMECs for 12 h suppressed capillary tube formation ( Fig . 4a , b ) of cul - tured MBMECs and reduced phosphorylation of VEGFR2 ( Fig . 4c ) , which was reversed by overexpression of ADF . Our results indicated that AGEs - induced reduction of vasculogenic property of MBMECs was , at least in part , through downregulation of ADF expression . Overexpression of ADF in control cells had no signifi - cant effect on vasculogenic property and phosphorylation of VEGFR2 . NO formation Incubation of MBMECs with AGEs for 12 h reduced NOx levels ( Fig . 5a ) and enhanced ADMA levels ( Fig . 5b ) in the media and downregulated protein expres - sion of DDAH2 ( Fig . 5c ) . Overexpression of ADF in AGEs - treated MBMECs upregulated DDAH2 expression and reduced ADMA levels and enhanced NOx levels . Our results indicated that the suppression of AGEs on NO formation in MBMECs was , at least in part , through downregulation of ADF expression . Fig . 3 Effect of ADF overexpression on actin cytoskeleton and endothelial permeability in MBMECs exposed to AGEs . 24 h after transfection with Ad - ADF or Ad - lacZ , cells were incubated with AGEs ( 200 μg / ml ) . Then the F / G - actin ratio ( a ) and endothelial per - meability were qualified . Changes in the permeability of Evan Blue over time ( b ) and changes in the TER over time ( c ) were recorded . The ZO - 1 mRNA ( d ) and protein ( e ) expression was measured by RT - PCR method and Western blot analysis , respectively . ADF actin depolymerizing factor , AGEs advanced glycation endprod - ucts , MBMECs mouse brain microvascular endothelial cells , TER transendothelial electrical resistance , ZO - 1 zonula occludens - 1 ; val - ues are means ± SD . * P < 0 . 05 compared with Ad - lacZ plus control ; # P < 0 . 05 compared with Ad - lacZ plus AGEs Mol Cell Biochem 1 3 Fig . 4 Effect of ADF overexpression on capillary tube formation of MBMECs exposed to AGEs . 24 h after transfection with Ad - ADF or Ad - lacZ , cells were incubated with AGEs ( 200 μg / ml ) . Tube for - mation assay ( a , b ) was performed using an ECMatrix assay kit . Phosphorylation of VEGFR2 ( c ) was evaluated by Western blotting analysis . ADF actin depolymerizing factor , AGEs advanced glyca - tion endproducts , MBMECs mouse brain microvascular endothelial cells , VEGFR2 vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 ; val - ues are means ± SD . * P < 0 . 05 compared with Ad - lacZ plus control ; # P < 0 . 05 compared with Ad - lacZ plus AGEs Fig . 5 Effect of ADF overexpression on NO formation of MBMECs exposed to AGEs . 24 h after transfection with Ad - ADF or Ad - lacZ , cells were incubated with AGEs ( 200 μg / ml ) for 12 h . The levels of NOx ( the stable endproducts of NO , a ) and ADMA ( b ) in the medium were determined using a total nitrite / nitrate assay kit and by HPLC – mass spectrometry method , respectively . Protein expression of DDAH2 ( c ) was determined by Western blotting analysis . ADF actin depolymerizing factor , AGEs advanced glycation endproducts , MBMECs mouse brain microvascular endothelial cells , NO nitric oxide , ADMA asymmetric dimethylarginine , DDAH2 dimethylargi - nine dimethylaminohydrolase 2 ; values are means ± SD . * P < 0 . 05 compared with Ad - lacZ plus control ; # P < 0 . 05 compared with Ad - lacZ plus AGEs Mol Cell Biochem 1 3 Overexpression of ADF in control cells had no sig - nificant effect on NOx and ADMA levels and DDAH2 expression . ROS formation , NF - κB activation , and RAGE expression Incubation with AGEs for 12 h in MBMECs enhanced for - mation of ROS ( Fig . 6a ) and upregulated protein expres - sion of NF - κB p65 and RAGE ( Fig . 6b ) . Overexpression of ADF in AGEs - treated MBMECs suppressed ROS forma - tion and downregulated protein expressions of NF - κB p65 and RAGE . Overexpression of ADF in control cells had no significant effect on ROS formation , NF - κB activation , and RAGE expression . Effect of siRNA - mediated downregulation of ADF expression on endothelial permeability and vasculogenic property in MBMECs when treated with AGEs Twenty four hours after transfection with ADF shRNA ( RNAi group ) lentiviral particles and negative lentiviral particles ( Con - RNAi group ) , cells were incubated with AGEs ( 200 μg / ml ) for 12 h . Knockdown of ADF had no significant effect on cell viability ( shown in supplementary data , Fig . S2 ) , but aggravated AGEs - induced augmenta - tion of F / G - actin ratio ( shown in supplementary data , Fig . S3 ) . Knockdown of ADF in MBMECs aggravated AGEs - induced disruption of endothelial barrier , evidenced by decreased TER ( Fig . 7a ) and enhanced permeabilized Evans Blue ( Fig . 7b ) . Knockdown of ADF in MBMECs Fig . 6 Effect of ADF overexpression on ROS formation of MBMECs exposed to AGEs . 24 h after transfection with Ad - ADF or Ad - lacZ , cells were incubated with AGEs ( 200 μg / ml ) for 12 h . Then intra - cellular ROS formation ( a ) was determined . Protein expression of NF - κB p65 and RAGE ( b ) was determined by Western blotting anal - ysis . ADF actin depolymerizing factor , AGEs advanced glycation end - products , MBMECs mouse brain microvascular endothelial cells , ROS reactive oxygen species , RAGE receptor for advanced glycation end - products ; values are means ± SD . * P < 0 . 05 compared with Ad - lacZ plus control ; # P < 0 . 05 compared with Ad - lacZ plus AGEs Fig . 7 Effect of ADF knockdown on AGEs - induced impairment in MBMECs . 24 h after transfection with ADF shRNA ( RNAi group ) lentiviral particles and negative lentiviral particles ( Con - RNAi group ) , cells were incubated with AGEs ( 200 μg / ml ) for 12 h . Then the endothelial permeability and vasculogenic property of MBMECs were measured . Changes in the TER ( a ) and permeability of Evan Blue over time ( b ) were recorded . Tube formation assay ( c ) was performed using an ECMatrix assay kit . ADF actin depolymerizing factor , AGEs advanced glycation endproducts , TER transendothelial electrical resistance , MBMECs mouse brain microvascular endothe - lial cells ; * P < 0 . 05 versus Con - RNAi plus control ; # P < 0 . 05 versus Con - RNAi plus AGEs Mol Cell Biochem 1 3 aggravated AGEs - induced reduction in capillary tube for - mation ( Fig . 7c ) . Knockdown of ADF in control cells had no significant effect on endothelial permeability and vascu - logenic property . Discussion Diabetes increases the risk and amplifies the severity of a number of cerebral complications including stroke , vascu - lar cognitive impairment , and Alzheimer’s disease , in all of which the cerebrovasculature plays an important role in disease onset , progression , and treatment [ 20 ] . In this work , AGEs treatment increased endothelial permeability and reduced vasculogenic property of MBMECs , which could be attenuated by overexpression of ADF , at least in part . Microvessel endothelial cells form part of the blood – brain barrier , a restrictively permeable interface which is important for the maintenance of the homeostasis of brain interstitial fluid [ 21 ] . Endothelial permeability is primarily mediated by the tight junctions between endothe - lial cells of the capillary , which restrict paracellular move - ment of solutes , ions , and water . In this work , AGEs treat - ment in MBMECs promoted polymerization of actin and formation of F - actin stress fibers and suppressed expres - sion of ZO - 1 , an important tight junction - associated pro - tein . The construct encoding the N - terminal half of ZO - 1 was specifically associated with tight junctions , whereas the unique C - terminal half of ZO - 1 also bound directly to F - actin , establishing a link between the transmembrane protein occludin and the actin cytoskeleton [ 22 ] . The actin stress fibers increased centripetal tension and , along with the reorganization of adhesion complex architecture , medi - ated retraction of cell – cell borders into discernible gaps , ultimately led to impairment of endothelial barrier [ 23 , 24 ] . ADF was the primary regulator of actin dynamics and pro - moted the depolymerization of F - actin into its monomeric form and filament severing [ 25 ] . In this work , overexpres - sion of ADF in MBMECs not only inhibited actin polym - erization , but also upregulated mRNA expression of ZO - 1 when exposed to AGEs , which explained the protection of ADF overexpression against AGEs - induced impairment of the endothelial barrier . In addition , these results indicated that there might be unknown mechanism of modulation of cytoskeletal rearrangement on transcriptional expression of ZO - 1 . Angiogenesis following stroke was directly associated with stroke outcomes and poststroke functional recovery because blood supply was necessary for the survival of neurons [ 26 ] . In this work , AGEs treatment in MBMECs suppressed capillary tube formation and phosphorylation of VEGFR2 , which was attenuated by overexpression of ADF . The binding of VEGF to its receptors on the surface of endothelial cells activated intracellular tyrosine kinases and triggered multiple downstream signals that promoted angiogenesis [ 27 ] , and blocking VEGFR2 with the selec - tive inhibitor attenuated ischemia - induced regenerative responses in stroke [ 28 ] . It was reported that treatment of HUVECs with phalloidin , which could bind to actin with high affinity at a 1 : 1 stoichiometric concentration , pro - mote actin polymerization , and stabilize the filaments [ 29 ] , reduced vascular - like tube formation and inhibited phos - phorylation of VEGFR2 of HUVECs when exposed to AGEs [ 30 ] . It explained that the effect of overexpression of ADF on vasculogenic property of MBMECs and VEGFR2 might be dependent on its effect on actin cytoskeleton . In this work , treatment with AGEs suppressed expres - sion of DDAH2 ( metabolizing enzyme of ADMA ) Fig . 8 A schematic diagram illustrating the role of ADF in AGEs - induced impairment in MBMECs . ADF actin depolymerizing fac - tor , AGEs advanced glycation endproducts , MBMECs mouse brain microvascular endothelial cells , ROS reactive oxygen species , RAGE receptor for advanced glycation endproducts , NO nitric oxide , ADMA asymmetric dimethylarginine , DDAH2 dimethylarginine dimethyl - aminohydrolase 2 , VEGFR2 vascular endothelial growth factor recep - tor 2 , ZO - 1 zonula occludens - 1 Mol Cell Biochem 1 3 enhanced ADMA formation in MBMECs . ADMA inter - fered with NO formation and promoted the production of ROS via uncoupling of endothelial nitric oxide synthases ( eNOS ) , causing endothelial dysfunction [ 31 ] . ADMA was recognized as a risk marker for ischemic stroke and could be a marker for the outcome of stroke [ 32 ] . Overexpression of ADF attenuated the effect of AGEs on DDAH2 / ADMA / NO axis in MBMECs . In addition , it was reported that ADMA treatment in HUVECs increased the formation of stress fiber and activated NF - κB pathway , which was atten - uated by coincubation with cytochalasin D , an actin polym - erization inhibitor [ 33 ] , which might partly explain the effect of ADF overexpression on NF - κB activation induced by AGEs . In this work , the inhibition of AGEs on ADF protein expression was abrogated by treatment with sRAGE or tempol , indicating that the downregulation of ADF expres - sion might lie downstream of AGEs / RAGE / ROS activa - tion . In addition , in our previous study , overexpression of ADF blocked ox - LDL - induced formation of ROS [ 11 ] . In this work , we found that overexpression of ADF could also suppress AGEs - induced upregulation of protein expres - sion of RAGE and reduced formation of ROS , indicating that AGEs - induced downregulation of ADF might furtherly aggravate AGEs - induced oxidative stress . In conclusion , AGEs treatment increased endothe - lial permeability and reduced vasculogenic property of MBMECs , at least in part , via downregulation of ADF ( Fig . 8 ) . ADF might be a key signaling molecule in the reg - ulation of blood – brain barrier integrity and cerebral angio - genesis in diabetic individuals . Funding This work was supported by grants from the National Nat - ural Science Foundation of China ( 81371296 ) . Author contributions XL , RZ , JW : conception and design of the experiments . XL , RZ , HD , DZ , JW : collection , analysis , and interpre - tation of data . XL , JW : drafting the article . Compliance with ethical standards Conflict of interest We declare that we have no conflict of interest . References 1 . Ullberg T , Zia E , Petersson J , Norrving B ( 2015 ) Changes in functional outcome over the first year after stroke : an observa - tional study from the Swedish stroke register . Stroke 46 : 389 – 394 2 . Guo L , Yu M , Zhong J , Wu H , Pan J , Gong W , Wang M , Fei F , Hu R ( 2016 ) Stroke risk among patients with type 2 diabe - tes mellitus in Zhejiang : a population - based prospective study in China . Int J Endocrinol 2016 : 6380620 3 . Yu X , Xu X , Jackson A , Sun J , Huang P , Mao Y , Chen Z , Lou M , Jiang Q , Zhang M ( 2016 ) Blood brain barrier disruption in diabetic stroke related to unfavorable outcome . Cerebrovasc Dis 42 : 49 – 56 4 . Viberti GC ( 1983 ) Increased capillary permeability in diabetes mellitus and its relationship to microvascular angiopathy . Am J Med 75 : 81 – 84 5 . Shao Y , Mann JM , Chen W , Fu J ( 2014 ) Global architecture of the F - actin cytoskeleton regulates cell shape - dependent endothe - lial mechanotransduction . Integr Biol 6 : 300 – 311 6 . Nag S ( 1995 ) Role of the endothelial cytoskeleton in blood - brain - barrier permeability to protein . Acta Neuropathol 90 : 454 – 460 7 . Andrianantoandro E , Pollard TD ( 2006 ) Mechanism of actin fila - ment turnover by severing and nucleation at different concentra - tions of ADF / cofilin . Mol Cell 24 : 13 – 23 8 . Bernstein BW , Bamburg JR ( 2010 ) ADF / cofilin : a functional node in cell biology . Trends Cell Biol 20 : 187 – 195 9 . Carbó C , Arderiu G , Escolar G , Fusté B , Cases A , Carrascal M , Abián J , Díaz - Ricart M ( 2008 ) Differential expression of pro - teins from cultured endothelial cells exposed to uremic versus normal serum . Am J Kidney Dis 51 : 603 – 612 10 . Vlassara H , Uribarri J , Cai W , Striker G ( 2008 ) Advanced gly - cation end product homeostasis : exogenous oxidants and innate defenses . Ann N Y Acad Sci 1126 : 46 – 52 11 . Wang J , Sun L , Si YF , Li BM ( 2012 ) Overexpression of actin - depolymerizing factor blocks oxidized low - density lipoprotein - induced mouse brain microvascular endothelial cell barrier dys - function . Mol Cell Biochem 371 : 1 – 8 12 . Wang J , Liu H , Chen B , Li Q , Huang X , Wang L , Guo X , Huang Q ( 2012 ) RhoA / ROCK - dependent moesin phosphorylation regu - lates AGE - induced endothelial cellular response . Cardiovasc Diabetol 11 : 7 13 . Li Z , Zhong Q , Yang T , Xie X , Chen M ( 2013 ) The role of pro - filin - 1 in endothelial cell injury induced by advanced glycation end products ( AGEs ) . Cardiovasc Diabetol 12 : 141 14 . Navone SE , Marfia G , Invernici G , Cristini S , Nava S , Balbi S , Sangiorgi S , Ciusani E , Bosutti A , Alessandri G , Slevin M , Parati EA ( 2013 ) Isolation and expansion of human and mouse brain microvascular endothelial cells . Nat Protoc 8 : 1680 – 1693 15 . Vartiainen MK , Mustonen T , Mattila PK , Ojala PJ , Thesleff I , Partanen J , Lappalainen P ( 2002 ) The three mouse actin - depo - lymerizing factor / cofilins evolved to fulfill cell - type - specific requirements for actin dynamics . Mol Biol Cell 13 : 183 – 194 16 . Scalera F , Borlak J , Beckmann B , Martens LJ , Thum T , Tager M , Bode - Boger SM ( 2004 ) Endogenous nitric oxide synthesis inhibitor asymmetric dimetlyl L - arginine accelerates endothelial cell senescence . Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 24 : 1816 – 1822 17 . Dimitrijevic OB , Stamatovic SM , Keep RF , Andjelkovic AV ( 2006 ) Effects of the chemokine CCL2 on blood - brain barrier permeability during ischemiareperfusion injury . J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 26 : 797 – 810 18 . Eugenin EA , Osiecki K , Lopez L , Goldstein H , Calderon TM , Berman JW ( 2006 ) CCL2 / monocyte chemoattractant protein - 1 mediates enhanced transmigration of human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) - infected leukocytes across the blood - brain barrier : a potential mechanism of HIV - CNS invasion and NeuroAIDS . J Neurosci 26 : 1098 – 1106 19 . Verdoni AM , Aoyama N , Ikeda A , Ikeda S ( 2008 ) Effect of destrin mutations on the gene expression profile in vivo . Physiol Genomics 34 : 9 – 21 20 . Ergul A , Kelly - Cobbs A , Abdalla M , Fagan SC ( 2012 ) Cer - ebrovascular complications of diabetes : focus on stroke . Endocr Metab Immune Disord Drug Targets 12 : 148 – 158 21 . Engelhardt B ( 2003 ) Development of the blood - brain barrier . Cell Tissue Res 314 : 119 – 129 22 . Fanning AS , Jameson BJ , Jesaitis LA , Anderson JM ( 1998 ) The tight junction protein ZO - 1 establishes a link between the Mol Cell Biochem 1 3 transmembrane protein occludin and the actin cytoskeleton . J Biol Chem 273 : 29745 – 29753 23 . Dudek SM , Garcia JG ( 2001 ) Cytoskeletal regulation of pulmo - nary vascular permeability . J Appl Physiol 91 : 1487 – 1500 24 . van Buul JD , Timmerman I ( 2016 ) Small Rho GTPase - mediated actin dynamics at endothelial adherens junctions . Small GTPases 7 : 21 – 31 25 . McGough A , Pope B , Chiu W , Weeds A ( 1997 ) Cofilin changes the twist of F - actin : implications for actin filament dynamics and cellular function . J Cell Biol 138 : 771 – 781 26 . Ergul A , Valenzuela JP , Fouda AY , Fagan SC ( 2015 ) Cellular connections , microenvironment and brain angiogenesis in diabe - tes : lost communication signals in the post - stroke period . Brain Res 1623 : 81 – 96 27 . Beck H , Plate KH ( 2009 ) Angiogenesis after cerebral ischemia . Acta Neuropathol 117 : 481 – 496 28 . Li WL , Fraser JL , Yu SP , Zhu J , Jiang YJ , Wei L ( 2011 ) The role of VEGF / VEGFR2 signaling in peripheral stimulation - induced cerebral neurovascular regeneration after ischemic stroke in mice . Exp Brain Res 214 : 503 – 513 29 . Estes JE , Selden LA , Gershman LC ( 1981 ) Mechanism of action of phalloidin on the polymerization of muscle actin . Biochemis - try 20 : 708 – 712 30 . Kim S , Kwon J ( 2015 ) Actin cytoskeletal rearrangement and dysfunction due to activation of the receptor for advanced gly - cation end products is inhibited by thymosin beta 4 . J Physiol 593 : 1873 – 1886 31 . Chen YH , Xu X , Sheng MJ , Zheng Z , Gu Q ( 2011 ) Effects of asymmetric dimethylarginine on bovine retinal capillary endothelial cell proliferation , reactive oxygen species production , permeability , intercellular adhesion molecule - 1 , and occludin expression . Mol Vis 17 : 332 – 340 32 . Petrova JJ , Manolov VE , Vasilev VG , Zlatareva DK , Tzatchev KN ( 2015 ) ADMA—a possible marker for early therapeutic out - come in acute stroke . Clin Lab 61 : 1653 – 1658 33 . Wei - Kang G , Dong - Liang Z , Xin - Xin W , Wei K , Zhang Y , Qi - Dong Z , Wen - Hu L ( 2011 ) Actin cytoskeleton modulates ADMA - induced NF - kappaB nuclear translocation and ICAM - 1 expression in endothelial cells . Med Sci Monit 17 : BR242 – 247