CREATIVE DESIGNING : AN ONTOLOGICAL VIEW JOHN S GERO Krasnow Institute for Advanced Study , George Mason University , USA and UDO KANNENGIESSER NICTA , Australia Abstract . This paper presents an ontological account of creative designing . It identifies processes and activities in designing that can produce novel design concepts to change the state space of possible designs . Activities that foster creativity are integrated in an ontological framework of design , the situated function - behaviour - structure ( FBS ) framework . This provides a foundation for locating these activities across the design steps . An important outcome of this approach is that most steps of designing can be shown to contain opportunities for creativity . 1 . Introduction Designing is often seen as the prototypical example of a creative human act . By definition , it is concerned with “creating” , be it new products , systems , processes or organisations . Novelty , however , is not inherent to the thing being created ; rather , it is a notion relative to what has been known to exist previously . As a consequence , whether or not a design is characterised as being creative ultimately depends on subjective experience . Boden ( 1991 ) has introduced the distinction between “historical” ( or h - ) creativity and “psychological” ( or p - ) creativity . H - creativity is a stronger form of creativity , where novelty is evaluated in relation to the history of humankind . For example , the first steam engine was a h - creative design . P - creativity implies novelty only with respect to the history of an individual . A novice architect designing a high - rise office building for the first time can be viewed as producing a p - creative design . H - and p - creativity are often understood as describing the social and the individual aspects of creativity , respectively . 2 J . S . GERO AND U . KANNENGIESSER Suwa et al . ( 1999 ) have extended Boden’s classification by adding the notion of “situated” ( or s - ) creativity . This kind of creativity is defined relative to the process of designing rather than to the outcomes of this process . A design or design feature is viewed as s - creative if it is introduced for the first time in the ongoing design process . S - creativity is independent of any post hoc ascriptions of creativity to the product of designing , and thus independent of the location of the knowledge required for these ascriptions . The concept of creativity used in this paper is the one of s - creativity . S - creativity can also be p - or h – creative . S - creativity allows characterising designing as either routine or non - routine . Routine designing describes the case where the state space of possible designs is well defined , fixed and bounded at the outset of the design process . All design variables and their ranges of values are known in advance . Designing then only consists of finding a specific set of values . This maps onto a view of designing as search . Design optimization is often regarded as an instance of routine designing . No creativity is involved in this idealised view of designing . Non - routine designing can be subdivided into two further groups : innovative designing and creative designing . Innovative designing assumes a well - defined , fixed and bounded set of design variables but manipulates the ranges of values to be outside the norm . Creative designing introduces new design variables , which extends the state space of possible designs . Variables can be introduced additively or substitutively . The former results in an expanded design state space . The latter results in a shift of the design state space , which , in the extreme case , may be disjoint from the original design state space . 2 . Activities in Creative Designing Research in creative designing can be separated into two strands . One strand of research is concerned with developing computational processes that can extend the design state space . Here , five classes of processes have been suggested ( Gero 1996 ) : emergence , analogy , combination , mutation and first principles . Another strand of research deals with human behaviour involved in changing the state space of possible designs . Here , creativity is viewed as part of more general design behaviour including cognitive and physical activities carried out by the designer . A paradigm that characterises designing in terms of the activities performed by human designers is situatedness . Its foundational concepts go back to the work of Dewey ( 1896 ) and Bartlett ( 1932 ) . Their ideas have strongly influenced the more recent notion of situated cognition ( Clancey 1997 ) . From the situated perspective , designers perform actions in order to change their environment . By observing and interpreting the results of their CREATIVE DESIGNING : AN ONTOLOGICAL VIEW 3 actions , they then decide on new actions to be executed . This means that the designers’ concepts may change according to what they are “seeing” , which itself is a function of what they have done . One may speak of an “interaction of making and seeing” ( Schön and Wiggins 1992 ) that strongly determines the course of designing by modifying the design state space . A number of activities related to potential design creativity have been studied that fit with the notion of situatedness . Most of them can be grouped into two classes : interpretation and reflection . Interpretation : There is significant experimental evidence that the interpretation of sketches can be used as a source for modifications in the design state space . For example , Schön and Wiggins ( 1992 ) found that designers use their sketches as a means to reinterpret what they have drawn , thus leading the design in a new direction . This extends the traditional view that sketches only serve as static , external memory aids . Suwa et al . ( 1999 ) noted , in studying designers , a correlation of unexpected discoveries in sketches with the invention of new issues or requirements during the design process . They concluded that “sketches serve as a physical setting in which design thoughts are constructed on the fly in a situated way” . Many studies of creativity in design interpretation connect unexpected discoveries to the process of emergence – the process that transforms implicit features of the design into explicit ones , substitutively introducing new variables in the design state space . Consider , for instance , the shapes in Figure 1 ( a ) . They have initially been drawn with the intention to represent two overlapping squares . The three shapes in Figure 1 ( b ) can emerge from this representation by considering the intersection and differences of the two squares . ( a ) ( b ) Figure 1 . An example of shape emergence : ( a ) the two squares drawn , ( b ) the three emergent shapes perceived . Reflection : Schön’s notion of reflection - in - action describes a practitioner’s activity of “thinking [ about ] what they are doing while they are doing it” ( Schön 1987 ) . It is connected to the idea of change , serving “to reshape what we are doing while we are doing it” ( Schön 1987 ) . In creative designing , reflection plays the role of a transformation of the current design state space using the designer’s memory . Specifically , reflection can be viewed as an instance of the idea of constructive memory , which holds that memory is not just laid down and fixed at the time of the original sensate experience but is a function of what comes later as well . Memories are 4 J . S . GERO AND U . KANNENGIESSER constructed in response to a specific demand , based not only on the original experience but also on the situation pertaining at the time of the demand for this memory . Therefore , everything that has happened since the original experience determines the result of memory construction . Clancey ( 1997 ) has exemplified constructive memory by a paraphrase of Dewey : “Sequences of acts are composed such that subsequent experiences categorize and hence give meaning to what was experienced before” . Each memory , after it has been constructed , is added to the existing knowledge and is now available to be used later , when new demands require the construction of further memories . These new memories can be viewed as new interpretations of the augmented knowledge . These classes of design activities are orthogonally related to Gero’s ( 1996 ) five computational processes . This means that any of these processes may occur in any of the two classes of design activities . 3 . Towards an Ontological Framework 3 . 1 . THE FBS ONTOLOGY Gero ( 1990 ) has proposed an ontology of design objects that provides three high - level categories for the properties of an object : function , behaviour and structure . Function ( F ) of an object is defined as its teleology , i . e . “what the object is for” . An example is the function “to wake someone up” that humans generally ascribe to the behaviour of an alarm clock . The set of functions used in a particular design process is a subset of the design state space , termed function state space . Behaviour ( B ) of an object is defined as the attributes that are derived or expected to be derived from its structure , i . e . “what the object does” . An example of behaviour is “weight” , which can be derived directly from a physical object’s structure properties of material and spatial dimensions . The set of behaviour variables and their ranges of values used in a particular design process is a subset of the design state space , termed behaviour state space . Structure ( S ) of an object is defined as its components and their relationships , i . e . “what the object consists of” . It represents the object’s “building blocks” that can be directly created or modified by the designer . Examples include molecule structures , mechanical structures , floor and wall structures , spatial structures and program structures . The set of structure variables and their ranges of values used in a particular design process is a subset of the design state space , termed structure state space . CREATIVE DESIGNING : AN ONTOLOGICAL VIEW 5 3 . 2 . THREE INTERACTING WORLDS Gero and Kannengiesser ( 2004 ) have proposed a three - world model of design interactions , Figure 2 ( a ) . Figure 2 . Three interacting worlds : ( a ) general model , ( b ) specialised model for design representations ( after Gero and Kannengiesser ( 2004 ) ) . The external world is the world that is composed of representations outside the design agent . The interpreted world is the world that is built up inside the design agent in terms of sensory experiences , percepts and concepts . It is the internal representation of that part of the external world that the design agent interacts with . The expected world is the world imagined actions of the design agent will produce . It is the environment in which the effects of actions are predicted according to current goals and interpretations of the current state of the world . These three worlds are linked together by three classes of connections . Interpretation transforms variables which are sensed in the external world into the interpretations of sensory experiences , percepts and concepts that compose the interpreted world . Focussing takes some aspects of the interpreted world , and uses them as goals for the expected world that then become the basis for the suggestion of actions . These actions are expected to produce states in the external world that reach the goals . Action is an effect which brings about a change in the external world according to the goals in the expected world . 6 J . S . GERO AND U . KANNENGIESSER Figure 2 ( b ) presents a specialised form of this view with the design agent ( as the internal world ) located within the external world and general classes of design representations placed into the resultant “onion” model . The set of expected design representations ( Xe i ) corresponds to the notion of a design state space , i . e . the state space of all possible designs that satisfy the set of requirements . This state space can be modified during the process of designing by transferring new interpreted design representations ( X i ) into the expected world and / or transferring some of the expected design representations ( Xe i ) out of the expected world . This leads to changes in external design representations ( X e ) , which may then be used as a basis for re - interpretation changing the interpreted world . Novel interpreted design representations ( X i ) may also be the result of constructive memory , which can be viewed as a process of interaction among design representations within the interpreted world rather than across the interpreted and the external world . Both interpretation and constructive memory are viewed as push - pull activities . This emphasises the role of individual experience in constructing the interpreted world , by “pulling” interpreted representations rather than just “pushing” what is presented in the external world ( Gero and Fujii 2000 ) . It is the interaction of push and pull that may produce new representations that can be used to modify the design state space . 3 . Creative Designing in the Situated FBS Framework Gero and Kannengiesser’s ( 2004 ) situated FBS framework , Figure 3 , combines the FBS ontology with the three - world model . Here , the variable X in Figure 2 ( b ) is replaced with the more specific representations F , B and S . The situated FBS framework also uses explicit representations of external requirements given to the designer . Specifically , there are external requirements on function ( FR e ) , external requirements on behaviour ( BR e ) , and external requirements on structure ( SR e ) . The situated FBS framework specifies a set of 20 activities . Their numbering in Figure 3 does not prescribe a fixed order of execution . They can be mapped onto a set of eight fundamental design steps [ 8 ] , which will be presented in the remainder of this Section as creative designing is articulated through this ontology . 4 . 1 . FORMULATION AND CREATIVITY Formulation produces an initial state space of potential design solutions ( structure state space ) and a set of criteria for assessing these solutions ( behaviour state space ) . This design step uses a set of goals ( function state space ) and constraints that are given to the designer by external CREATIVE DESIGNING : AN ONTOLOGICAL VIEW 7 Figure 3 . The situated FBS framework ( after Gero and Kannengiesser ( 2004 ) ) . specification or are constructed based on the designer’s experience . In the situated FBS framework , this design step includes activities 1 to 10 . Formulation can already be viewed as a creative act , as it produces a set of design variables for the first time in the design process . It is based on the two classes of activities that have been identified in Section 2 as the generators of new design variables : interpretation and reflection . Interpretation ( activities 1 , 2 and 3 ) produces function , behaviour and structure variables based on external requirements . However , this is not a simple reproduction of what is given to the designer . Any two designers will be likely to interpret the same requirements differently , depending on their individual experiences . As a result , they produce different sets of variables for the function , behaviour and structure of the design . This ability is also needed to resolve ambiguities that often occur in externally represented requirements , especially in function requirements that are represented in informal ways . Reflection ( activities 4 , 5 and 6 ) is used in formulation to produce additional , implicit requirements that have not been explicitly given to the designer . Most implicit requirements are constructed by default and are often 8 J . S . GERO AND U . KANNENGIESSER accepted as common knowledge . For example , the function of a window “to provide daylight” , though not explicitly stated , can be considered common knowledge . Other requirements are more clearly based on the individual designer’s experience . Cross ( 2002 ) provides the example of an expert engineer performing the task of designing a device that allows fastening and carrying a backpack on a mountain bike . Based on the engineer’s personal experience as a cyclist , an implicit constraint on the structure of the device was constructed , namely to select its location ( and thus the location of the backpack ) as low as possible for better riding control . The transformation of function into behaviour ( activity 10 ) can be supported by analogy processes . Maiden and Sutcliffe ( 1992 ) present examples of behaviour specifications of a flexible manufacturing system ( FMS ) based on similarities with the domain of air traffic control ( ATC ) . Similarities between the two domains , Figure 4 , can be used to derive and match functions of FMS and ATC systems . Functions such as “prevent collisions” and “ensure movements according to the pre - defined plan” are general goals of both systems . Behaviours of one system can then be mapped onto the other . Figure 4 . Key features of the domains of ( a ) air traffic control and ( b ) flexible manufacturing ( taken from Maiden and Sutcliffe ( 1992 ) ) . 4 . 2 . SYNTHESIS AND CREATIVITY Synthesis generates a design solution in terms of a point in the structure state space ( activity 11 ) , and subsequently produces an external representation of that structure ( activity 12 ) . Synthesis does not modify the design state space , as it uses the variables produced by formulation without adding new ones . In our definition , all techniques and strategies used for searching a design CREATIVE DESIGNING : AN ONTOLOGICAL VIEW 9 solution operate on the values of structure variables rather than on the structure variables themselves . This view excludes a direct association of creativity with the design step of synthesis . The connection between synthesis and creativity lies in the interpretation of synthesised structure . 4 . 3 . ANALYSIS AND CREATIVITY Analysis derives behaviour from synthesised design structure . In the situated FBS framework , this design step is composed of activities 13 and 14 . Creativity is generally not desired in analysis , as the primary purpose of this design step is to prepare for the evaluation of the design solution against the pre - determined set of criteria , i . e . within the bounds of the current design state space . However , it is often during the act of analysis that new design issues and ideas emerge that may lead to additions to the design state space . One driver is the interpretation of structure ( activity 13 ) , providing the potential for the process of emergence to occur . Examples presented by Jun and Gero ( 1997 ) are concerned with the emergence of shapes through re - representation of external structure . The wide range of drafting tools available may support re - representations , such as 2D - , 3D - , “fly - through” and simulation models , each of which can enable the discovery of specific types of design issues . Emergence during the analysis step is not limited to the structure level . New behaviour often emerges when using computational analysis tools that derive more performances from a given structure than necessary for the currently intended evaluation ( activity 14 ) . Take the designer of a material flow system , interested in evaluating the speed of that system . The simulation tool used for the analysis calculates not only speed , but also machine utilisation . This can be seen as the generation of an additional behaviour variable that may be used to augment the behaviour state space . The creativity in this case can be seen in the interaction between the designer and the analysis tool . 4 . 4 . EVALUATION AND CREATIVITY Evaluation assesses the design solution on the basis of the formulated criteria , i . e . by comparison of the behaviour derived from the design solution with the expected behaviour ( activity 15 ) . No creativity is involved here . 4 . 5 . DOCUMENTATION AND CREATIVITY Documentation produces an external representation of the final design solution for purposes of communicating that solution ( activities 12 , 17 and 18 ) . This design step is required to provide the builder , manufacturer or implementer with a “blueprint” for realising the design solution . Creativity 10 J . S . GERO AND U . KANNENGIESSER plays no direct role here , because the ongoing process of design generation is usually terminated once the design has been released for documentation . 4 . 6 . REFORMULATION TYPE 1 AND CREATIVITY Reformulation type 1 modifies the structure state space ( activity 9 ) . It is based on creative processes that may produce new structure variables . Any of three classes of input is needed for these processes : external requirements on structure , external representations of existing design structure , and interpreted structure representations . The interpretation of external requirements on structure ( activity 3 ) can bring about new structure variables in two cases . In the first case , modified external requirements are given to the designer after commencement of the design process . Here , the creativity is located in the environment in which the design process is carried out rather than in the design process itself . In the second case , the same external requirements as given at the outset of the design process are interpreted differently . This locates the creativity in the process of interpretation . The interpretation of external design structure ( activity 13 ) can involve creative processes that generate new structure variables . One example is the process of emergence that has also been described as a location of creativity in analysis . Another example is the process of analogy . Here , an external structure is a source design exhibiting identical behaviour as the current ( target ) design . The matching and then mapping of the source structure onto the target structure is the creative element of interpretation . Reflection on interpreted structure ( activity 6 ) constructs new structure variables without the use of external representations . This creative activity is frequently used across the design disciplines to lead the design process into new directions ( Schön 1987 ) . Reflection on structure is the best - studied type of the reflection processes . For example , the domain of drug design uses reflection on structure to incrementally modify molecules to generate new drugs that meet specified behaviours . Here , reflection is often implemented as crossover ( or combination ) and mutation processes , embedded in design methodologies using Genetic Algorithms ( GAs ) . GAs simulate biological evolution by applying crossover and mutation operators over populations of candidate structures . Candidates are selected using a fitness function that measures individual performances that correspond to the values of a given behaviour . Figure 5 shows examples of crossover and mutation operating on organic molecules . CREATIVE DESIGNING : AN ONTOLOGICAL VIEW 11 ( a ) ( b ) Figure 5 . Examples of ( a ) crossover , and ( b ) mutation in the domain of drug design ( taken from Douguet et al . ( 2000 ) ) . 4 . 7 . REFORMULATION TYPE 2 AND CREATIVITY Reformulation type 2 modifies the behaviour state space ( activity 8 ) . It is based on creative processes that produce new behaviour variables . Any of four classes of input is needed for these processes : external requirements on behaviour , external representations of design behaviour , interpreted behaviour representations , and interpreted structure representations . The interpretation of external requirements on behaviour ( activity 2 ) can produce new behaviour variables in an analogous way as in reformulation type 1 . Creativity is located either outside the system via modified requirements or inside the system via modified interpretation . The interpretation of external design behaviour ( activity 19 ) can produce new behaviours to alter the behaviour state space . This activity often uses emergence to reconceptualise current behaviours , which has mainly been studied in software requirements engineering ( Nguyen and Swatman 2003 ) . Reflection on interpreted behaviour ( activity 5 ) constructs new behaviour variables without the use of any external representations . It reconceptualises current behaviours in a similar way as interpretation . Its underlying mechanism can be assumed to be emergence , although little research has been done here . The derivation of additional behaviour from structure ( activity 14 ) can drive reformulation type 2 in the same way as described for the analysis step . Creativity here is fostered by the interaction between designers and computational tools . Another way to derive new behaviour from structure is via analogy . Consider the following example : A lamp designer , after coming home from work , looks at a book that still lies half open on his bedside table , Figure 6 ( a ) . He becomes aware that the front and back covers of the book can be thought of as defining an arched aperture that can be expanded or reduced by opening or closing the covers . This can be viewed as behaviour derived from an abstraction of the book’s structure . The designer realises that in the lighting domain this behaviour could be used as a physical mechanism to fulfil the function of dimming light . He finds this idea interesting and decides to change the design of a desk lamp he is currently working on by implementing this physical dimming mechanism instead of 12 J . S . GERO AND U . KANNENGIESSER the originally intended electrical one . Figure 6 ( b ) shows a CAD model of the new lamp . It incorporates behaviour and structure features of the book as the source design . ( a ) ( b ) Figure 6 . Example of analogy in interpretation : ( a ) a half - open book as a source structure , ( b ) the desk lamp ( model “Hamlet” ) as the target structure ( Source : Stimulo Design ) . 4 . 8 . REFORMULATION TYPE 3 AND CREATIVITY Reformulation type 3 modifies the function state space ( activity 7 ) . It is based on creative processes that produce new function variables . Any of four classes of input is needed for these processes : external requirements on function , external representations of design function , interpreted function representations , and interpreted behaviour representations . The interpretation of external requirements on function ( activity 1 ) can produce new function variables in an analogous way as in reformulation type 1 and 2 . Creativity is located either outside the system via modified requirements or inside the system via modified interpretation . The interpretation of external design function ( activity 20 ) can produce new functions to alter the function state space . Maiden et al . ( 2004 ) have described how designers of air traffic management software combined existing software functions into new ones during a creativity workshop . Here , the two functions “to allow air traffic controllers to maintain an accurate mental model of the air space” and “to offer new types of situational display to air traffic controllers” were combined into the new function “to allow air traffic controllers to rewind and fast - forward aircraft movements to develop their mental models of the air space before taking responsibilities for decisions that they will make” . CREATIVE DESIGNING : AN ONTOLOGICAL VIEW 13 Reflection on interpreted function ( activity 4 ) constructs new functions without the use of any external representations . Little research has been done in this area . The derivation of function from behaviour ( activity 16 ) can result in new functions to be incorporated in the design . Schön ( 1983 ) has presented the example of Scotch Tape , whose initial function was “to mend books” . However , the people buying this product invented additional functions , such as “to wrap packages” and “to curl hair” . These functions have been likely to be derived from the behaviour of removable adhesiveness . They subsequently led to adaptations of the product to different applications such as packaging and hair curling . Finke ( 1990 ) has provided a number of other examples of functions that can emerge through reasoning about possible behaviours of a given object , Figure 7 . Figure 7 . Various functions emerging from behaviours of the same structure : ( a ) lawn lounge , ( b ) global earrings , ( c ) water weigher , ( d ) portable agitator , ( e ) snow sled , ( f ) rotating masher , ( g ) top of spinner , ( h ) slasher basher ( taken from Finke ( 1990 ) ) . 5 . Conclusion The ontological framework of creative designing , presented in this paper , supports the view of designing as the prototypical example of a creative human act . We have shown that there is the potential for creativity to occur at most steps in the design process . Reformulation ( of all three types ) is the design step that is most extensively based on novel discoveries and the construction of new issues during the ongoing design process . The design step of synthesis does not modify the design state space , and therefore does 14 J . S . GERO AND U . KANNENGIESSER not directly include creative activities . This is in contrast to most other models of synthesis that view it as the major creative act in designing . This is because they do not differentiate in the same way between formulation and synthesis . Locating design creativity in an ontological framework can enhance the development of better computational tools to support creativity . This is based on the independence of an ontological view of creative designing with respect to its embodiment . All creative processes and activities in designing can be located in human designers , their tools and the interaction between the designers and the tools . Acknowledgements This research is supported by a grant from the Australian Research Council , grant no . DP0559885 – Situated Design Computing . This paper has been submitted to a journal for publication . The authors wish to thank the company Stimulo Design for providing the example of the “Hamlet” desk lamp . References Bartlett , FC : 1932 reprinted in 1977 , Remembering : A Study in Experimental and Social Psychology , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . Boden , MA : 1991 , The Creative Mind : Myths and Mechanisms , Basic Books , New York . Clancey , WJ : 1997 , Situated Cognition : On Human Knowledge and Computer Representations , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . Cross , N : 2002 , Creative cognition in design : Processes of exceptional designers , in T Hewett and T Kavanagh ( eds ) Creativity and Cognition’02 , ACM Press , New York , pp . 14 - 19 . Dewey , J : 1896 reprinted in 1981 , The reflex arc concept in psychology , Psychological Review 3 : 357 - 370 . Douguet , D , Thoreau , E and Grassy , G : 2000 , A genetic algorithm for the automated generation of small organic molecules : Drug design using an evolutionary algorithm , Journal of Computer - Aided Molecular Design 14 ( 5 ) : 449 - 466 . Finke , R : 1990 , Creative Imagery , Lawrence Erlbaum , Hillsdale . Gero , JS : 1990 , Design prototypes : A knowledge representation schema for design , AI Magazine 11 ( 4 ) : 26 - 36 . Gero , JS : 1996 , Creativity , emergence and evolution in design , Knowledge - Based Systems 9 ( 7 ) : 435 - 448 . Gero , JS and Fujii , H : 2000 , A computational framework for concept formation for a situated design agent , Knowledge - Based Systems 13 ( 6 ) : 361 - 368 . Gero , JS and Kannengiesser , U : 2004 , The situated function - behaviour - structure framework , Design Studies 25 ( 4 ) : 373 - 391 . Jun , HJ and Gero , JS : 1997 , Representation , re - representation and emergence in collaborative computer - aided design , in ML Maher , JS Gero and F Sudweeks ( eds ) Preprints Formal Aspects of Collaborative Computer - Aided Design , Key Centre of Design Computing and Cognition , University of Sydney , Australia , pp . 303 - 320 . Maiden , NA , Gizikis , A and Robertson , S : 2004 , Provoking creativity : Imagine what your requirements could be like , IEEE Software 21 ( 5 ) : 68 - 75 . Maiden , NA and Sutcliffe , AG : 1992 , Exploiting reusable specifications through analogy , Communications of the ACM 35 ( 4 ) : 55 - 63 . CREATIVE DESIGNING : AN ONTOLOGICAL VIEW 15 Nguyen , L and Swatman , PA : 2003 , Managing the requirements engineering process , Requirements Engineering 8 ( 1 ) : 55 - 68 . Schön , DA : 1983 , The Reflective Practitioner : How Professionals Think in Action , Harper Collins , New York . Schön , DA : 1987 , Educating the Reflective Practitioner : Toward a New Design for Teaching and Learning in the Professions , Jossey - Bass Publishers , San Francisco . Schön , DA and Wiggins , G : 1992 , Kinds of seeing and their functions in designing , Design Studies 13 ( 2 ) : 135 - 156 . Suwa , M , Gero , JS and Purcell , T : 1999 , Unexpected discoveries and s - inventions of design requirements : A key to creative designs , in JS Gero and ML Maher ( eds ) Computational Models of Creative Design IV , Key Centre of Design Computing and Cognition , University of Sydney , Sydney , Australia , pp . 297 - 320 .