Learning to Write Together Using Groupware Ilona Posner , Alex Mitchell and Ronald Baecker Dynamic Graphics Project , University of Toronto 10 Kings College Road Toronto , ON M5S 1A1 , CANADA Tel : 1 - 416 - 978 - 5473 E - mail : ilona @ dgp . toronto . edu Appears in Computer Supported Cooperative Writing ( R . Rada , Editor ) , Academic Press , 1996 , 161 - 185 . GA Book Chapter — Posner , Mitchell , and Baecker 1 Learning to Write Together Using Groupware 1 ABSTRACT Most studies of collaborative writing have focused on mature writers who have extensive experience with collaborative writing . Typically , these studies also deal with short , somewhat artificial tasks carried out in a laboratory , and thus do not extend over a period of time as real writing usually does . This paper describes an ethnographic study of collaborative writing by two groups of 4 grade six students using synchronous collaborative writing software for one hour per week over a 12 week period . Despite initially having no idea of what it means to write together , and no experience in doing so , both groups produced nearly one dozen short collaboratively conceived , written , and edited documents by the end of the study . A careful analysis of video tape records , written documents , questionnaires , and interviews provided insight into the way in which novices learn to write together , and the role groupware technology can play in the process . It also demonstrated the importance of concepts such as awareness , ownership , and control in the writing process , and highlighted many examples of strengths and weaknesses in the writing software . INTRODUCTION Writing together , while often necessary , is never easy . We have seen this repeatedly in our research into the ways in which people write together , how people learn to write together , and how computer - based tools can help with the learning and writing processes [ 1 , 13 , 17 , 22 ] . Other investigators have studied collaborative writing among mature writers [ 3 , 6 , 11 , 23 ] . A number of theories of collaborative writing have been developed [ 6 , 23 , 26 ] to characterize the writing process . There have also been a number of tools designed to support collaborative writing [ 1 , 7 , 12 , 18 , 20 ] . We learned that experienced writers have biases towards groupware based on the way they write using conventional non - groupware tools , and they often resist the new paradigms introduced by groupware technology . In order to learn more about the process of collaborative writing , we decided to focus this study on novice writers learning to use groupware to write collaboratively . We chose to observe extended usage of groupware technology in the realistic setting of a classroom in order to observe the effects of groupware tools on the collaborative writing process and to learn how to design better software . In our study , two groups of grade six students worked together for twelve weeks to produce a magazine on prejudice ( see Figure 1 ) . The students learned how to use Aspects 2 , a commercial synchronous collaborative editor , and developed the skills necessary to work as a group and to successfully write together . Although collaborative writing is a common practice among mature writers , our experience with the SASSE [ 1 ] group editor suggests that novice writers are uncertain as to how to proceed , and often have difficulty even understanding what is meant by collaborative writing . Other researchers have dealt with group writing in the classroom [ 4 , 8 ] , identifying the difficulties facing novice writers in collaborative situations , without the added complexity of using groupware tools . Our early trials using naive collaborative writers highlighted the importance of demonstrating to novices a variety of approaches to group writing . Because of this , we began our study by providing the students with training in collaborative writing , and concluded by observing their attempts to write together using groupware . 1 This paper combines materials presented in the paper appearing at CHI ' 95 [ 16 ] and CSCL ' 95 [ 24 ] . 2 Aspects was developed by Group Logic Inc . , formerly Group Technologies Inc . GA Book Chapter — Posner , Mitchell , and Baecker 2 Figure 1 : Magazine Cover . Created by Ryan Field , age 12 . This paper presents the results of this study . We will begin with an overview of the study itself , and describe the methods used to observe the sessions and analyze the collected data . We then discuss the process of learning to write together by describing the writing approaches and activities employed by the students , and the ways in which these approaches and activities developed over the twelve hours of the study . We continue with a brief look at the effects of these writing approaches and activities on the resulting documents . We also discuss the impact of the project on the participants . A detailed section examines the effects of the technology on the process of learning to write together ; it describes the students ' experiences and how our observations can inform the design of future collaborative writing tools . We conclude the paper with implications for future studies . THE PREJUDICE PROJECT The Prejudice Project took place at the Huron Street Public School in Toronto between February and May 1994 . The goal of this project was for grade six students to learn about prejudice while collaboratively writing and producing a magazine on that topic . We conducted an ethnographic study of two groups of four grade six students preparing the written material for this magazine . Eight students were selected , with the assistance of their teachers , from 14 volunteers out of two grade 5 / 6 classes . The students were familiar with the Computer Supported Intentional Learning Environment ( CSILE ) , a shared knowledge building system [ 25 ] , but had never used synchronous collaborative software . Through the course of the study the students learned to write together using Aspects on networked Macintosh computers . Aspects is a synchronous text editor , which allows multiple users to work concurrently on a document , entering text at the same time in different paragraphs , with changes immediately visible on all users ' screens . Aspects also provides telepointers , individual cursors which can be made visible on all users ' screens . GA Book Chapter — Posner , Mitchell , and Baecker 3 The Study Each group met once a week for one hour after school over a period of twelve weeks . The students worked in one classroom , sitting at four adjacent Macintosh computers ( see Figure 2 ) . The computers were connected by a local area network , and all ran Aspects , allowing the sharing of documents among different machines . Seating arrangements were rotated weekly to reduce the likelihood of subgroup formation and to assign the preferred seats equally among the students . During the study they were given training in the use of Aspects , introduced to collaborative writing techniques , and given the freedom to use their new skills . Figure 2 : Physical setup of the study . The first five weeks were highly structured in order to allow us to cover a variety of topics related to prejudice and to introduce a number of collaborative writing techniques . Students were shown the mechanisms provided by Aspects which were required to perform the assigned writing tasks . These tasks included working as a group to write a poem and a story . The tasks were designed to expose the students to a variety of writing approaches [ 22 , 23 ] , which were introduced by the instructor to show them the various different ways of writing together . The following schedule outlines the breakdown of the first five weeks of the study : 1 Introduction to the project : goals , rules , responsibilities Feb 1 Exercise : Differences : Interview a partner , getting to know each other better & tell the group Exercise : Similarities : As a group find what makes you all happy & sad Exercise : Perception : Look at a picture write down 3 things you find most interesting Goal of Excercises : Get students talking , expressing their opinions , more comfortable with each other . See that they are all unique and have different opinions but that they agree about other things . Technical Goals : Start writing on - line using CSILE . Writing approaches : independent & scribe 2 Ex : Perception : Advantages and disadvantages of differences in perception Feb 8 Goal of Excercise : To show that people have different perceptions of the same things , people , events . Technical Goals : Introduction to groupware and group writing exercise , introduce consept of revising their work . Writing approaches : scribe , parallel , joint . 3 Exercise : Minority Poem : When I ' m in the Minority I feel . . . Feb 15 Goal of Excercise : To introduce concept of minority and how it might feel to be a member of a minority . Technical Goals : Introduction to groupware . Use both CSILE and Aspects , learn how to Cut / Paste between two applications . Writing approach : parallel & joint . Exercise : Develop Orientation Plan : How to Welcome a New Student to Your Class . Technical Goals : More practice with software and collaborative writing . Writing approach : joint / parallel . GA Book Chapter — Posner , Mitchell , and Baecker 4 4 Exercise : Generalizations : Need to qualify what we say , " Basketball players are tall " better " most… " Feb 22 Exercise : Stereotypes : Discussion how stereotypes are created & group writing exercise . Goal of Excercises : To introduce concept of generalization , stereotype , and prejudice . Make them aware that all generalizations , particularly those about people , need to be qualified . Technical Goals : More practice using software and doing collaborative writing . Writing approach : parallel . 5 Exercise : Prejudice : Define concepts , read a sample story , group writing exercise ( story ) . Mar 1 Technical Goals : More practice in collaborative writing . Writing approaches : scribe & joint . In the remaining weeks the students were free to choose what they wanted to work on and how they would work together . The students ' work during the second half of the study included doing research , writing articles , creating artwork , and editing materials created in the first five weeks which they had chosen to include in the magazine . After the initial training in the uses of technology and the group writing approaches , we minimized our guidance so that we could observe the choices the students would make . Data Collection and Analysis During each weekly session all of the groups ' interactions were videotaped ( see Figure 3 ) . Two cameras covered the students working on the computers , and two cameras captured screen images . In addition , time - indexed notes were made using the Timelines [ 9 ] sequential data analysis and video annotation software while the sessions were in progress . Exploratory analysis was conducted on the video records of the sessions by two people using Timelines . This analysis focused on identifying common problems , incidents and trends in the data . Cameras Cameras Workstations 1 2 3 4 Figure 3 : Data collection . A number of other measures were used to provide a rich view of the sessions . The students ' teachers were asked to evaluate the students ' writing skills and ability to work together . Each individual ' s writing skills were rated using a seven point scale according to vocabulary , spelling , grammar , ideas and creativity , and writing style . The teachers also provided blind evaluations of a selection of work , both individual and group , using these categories . These scores were then averaged for each individual , and across each group , to give an indication of general writing level . Each student ' s ability to work in a group was also rated according to interpersonal skills , communication skills , leadership skills , maturity , and task focus . We also conducted two questionnaires , one at the halfway point and one at the end of the project , and a final individual interview with each student . A few weeks after the end of the project , GA Book Chapter — Posner , Mitchell , and Baecker 5 we came back and conducted a group discussion about the project , which gave additional insight into the students ' experiences . THE PROCESS OF LEARNING TO WRITE TOGETHER By writing together or collaborative writing we mean the creation of documents with the participation of several individuals . There may be numerous stages in the creation process , including brainstorming , planning , choosing a writing approach , assigning activities , combining ideas , resolving conflicting ideas , entering text , editing , and reaching consensus about the final text . Given this complexity , it was not surprising that when the students were asked to write together early in the project they did not understand what this meant . They gradually developed an understanding of group writing as they were coached about different writing approaches , experimented with different writing activities , and gained experience over the 12 week period . We will now look at the different writing approaches and activities used by the students , examining how these approaches and activities changed over the course of the study . We will focus specifically on three texts : a poem written during the third week , a story written during the fifth week , and the introduction to the magazine written during the eleventh week . These documents were selected from among the documents that the students chose for inclusion in their magazine . The writing of these documents spanned the duration of the project and involved the use of a variety of writing approaches . Writing Approaches When a group project is assigned during their everyday classroom work , the students generally use the independent writing approach — dividing the task into distinct components and working on those sections individually , with minimal feedback between group members . We started by using this approach to minimize the transition from the students ' everyday writing , since they already had to contend with many changes due to the physical setup of our study . This early writing also provided us with samples of individual work that we could evaluate and compare to the students ' individual in - class writing and to their group work . Since all of our students enjoyed typing on the computers , they found the synchronous access provided by Aspects to be fun . However , introducing a shared workspace did not spontaneously lead to close collaborative work . The students tended to use the parallel writing approach , working on different parts of one document , and seldom examined each others ' entries . This approach was used by both groups when writing the poem . When segments were written in parallel by different individuals , information was often duplicated . The students also noticed that this parallel writing approach often resulted in a fragmented writing style . Here Sue 3 discusses how to improve the poem that the group had written in parallel : Sue I think we should write the whole thing over because it sounds like 3 poems stuck together . Hope Yeah , I think one person has to rewrite it . Liz Yeah . The scribe writing approach , where one person enters the text at the keyboard while the rest of the group suggest ideas , was also familiar to the students . This approach is often used by individuals working simultaneously on one document using traditional writing software . By making the group document available to different writers on several different computers , Aspects subtly alters the dynamics of the scribe approach . Even though a document was accessible on several computers , in the early stages of the project the group would still gather around one machine with the scribe controlling the document and making all the final decisions . This is the way the scribe approach is normally used with a single - user word processor . 3 Note that the names of the students have been changed , but their gender preserved . GA Book Chapter — Posner , Mitchell , and Baecker 6 However , Aspects makes the shared document visible on all users ' computers , letting all the participants have an equal opportunity to view the text . After a few weeks , when the students had become used to the idea of a shared document , they would follow the text being typed by the scribe on their own computers , suggest changes to the scribe , and use telepointers to indicate where the changes should be made . Despite the fact that the scribe still had control of the document , other group members provided input that led to very fine grain changes in the text , including spelling , wording , and grammar . Later in the project , individuals were seen correcting the text which was just typed by the scribe as soon as it was accessible to them 4 ; we call this the joint writing approach . Joint writing involves all participants taking an active role in the actual manipulation of the emerging document , a role not possible in traditional single - user word processors . These approaches should be viewed as four points in the space of collaborative writing possibilities . Real collaborations may include a combination of several approaches . For example , while writing the story , both groups used primarily the scribe writing approach , but there were some instances of joint writing ; we ' ll call this scribe / joint writing . As they gained experience with the technology and the group writing approaches , the students in the first group expanded their repertoire , using a parallel / joint writing approach . While writing the magazine ' s introduction on the eleventh day , each member of the group worked inside the shared document , writing quietly and making changes to his / her entries based on each others contributions but without much discussion . At times students would glance at other parts of the document or discuss ideas , assuming that everyone was aware of the entire document ' s contents . As they became more experienced with collaborative writing , the students also became more selective in their use of writing approaches , to the point of switching strategies in the middle of composing a document . For example , when working on the magazine ' s introduction , the second group shifted between scribe / joint and parallel writing to solve a consensus problem . During the scribe / joint writing component , the group couldn ' t agree on the best wording for one section of the document . To solve this , three members worked in parallel to enter their own ideas . Once the ideas had been entered , they all read these entries and combined them into a single paragraph . The group then shifted back to scribe / joint writing to complete the document . By the end of the study , both groups had progressed from the simple use of an independent writing approach to an understanding and use of a variety of collaborative writing approaches . They where able to select an approach appropriate to a given task , and to adapt their writing approach to suit the demands of each stage of writing . After twelve hours of training and practice , they had clearly developed significant proficiency and sophistication in collaborative writing . Writing Activities Among writing activities [ 23 ] we include planning , typing , dictating , correcting mistakes , and editing , where editing implies clarifying the language , ideas , spelling , vocabulary , and grammar . The notion of different writing activities was familiar to the students . Each student participated in various activities throughout the project . We will now discuss how the students perceived these activities and how the activities were assigned to individuals in the groups . In the final questionnaire the students were asked to rate the importance of the various activities that are involved in group writing . At the same time they were asked to rate each activity according to how much they enjoyed it . The students felt that correcting mistakes was the most important activity , followed by planning and making changes . However , the most enjoyed activity was typing the words , followed by planning and dictating . All the students were willing to perform activities they did not necessarily enjoy since they recognized their importance . The students used a variety of methods to assign activities to individuals . The easiest method was to have someone volunteer for an activity and have their suggestion remain 4 During the project we set Aspects ' locking at the paragraph level , so paragraphs could be controlled by only one individual at a time . GA Book Chapter — Posner , Mitchell , and Baecker 7 unchallenged by the rest of the group . Another method was to have someone assign an activity to a willing individual . The remaining assignment methods involved negotiation , compromises , and at times even power struggles to attain a desired activity . The most preferred and contested activity was typing . Both groups witnessed lengthy and intense debates over who should type the story , which was to be jointly written by the group : Hope I ' ll type Liz I ' ll type Sue I ' m the fastest Dan I ' m typing Sue We can all type Liz Its not fair Instructor Wait wait wait ! The point here is not the typing . The point here is the story ! Dan They always get to do everything ! They ' re being sexist 5 and its no fair ! [ punches table ] Liz [ typing already ] Hope [ also typing ] Dan Okay I ' m starting The group went along with this , everyone dictating while Dan typed . Ideas were passed around and negotiated , but the final decisions were made by Dan . The assignment of activities was often informal , and people frequently shifted between activities during the writing process . Which activity an individual chose was guided by the activity ' s perceived enjoyment as well as the individual ' s skill at each activity . Rob typed the group ' s story , but delegated the corrections to other group members after admitting that he is a bad speller . The ideas for the story originated mostly with the other group members . Carol fixed the grammar , which is her strength , and Kim corrected the spelling . Thus , unlike individual work , where one person performs all writing related activities , participants on group projects are able to pick and choose among activities based on their strengths and their preferences . Which activities to perform and in what sequence these are to occur are decisions that must be made explicit in group work . The resulting patterns evolve out of the writing habits of the individual participants . Rob tried to guide the second group into following his favorite writing scheme , of first producing a rough draft of the text then later going back to make changes . Some of his collaborators were not as comfortable with this scheme , and preferred to correct the spelling and grammar mistakes as soon as these occurred . While writing the story , the group compromised and corrected some mistakes right away , with minimal interruption to the creative process , and made a separate pass correcting the remaining mistakes . During the various passes , different people took control of the document performing different activities : Rob typed the text ; Carol fixed the grammar , and Kim corrected the spelling . Throughout the entire writing process , the group remained extremely goal oriented and task focused with only a few distractions . This had a positive impact on the final product . IMPACT OF GROUP WORK ON THE PRODUCT There is some disagreement in the literature about whether group work has a positive or negative effect on the quality of the product [ 4 , 8 ] . We will now examine how , in this study , the quality of the group document relates to the writing ability of the individual writers and to the quality of their individual work , and how the writing process seems to affect the product quality . As mentioned earlier , the two teachers were asked to evaluate the students ' writing created while working on our project . Each teacher also produced a score to estimate his students ' in - class writing average ; we used this score as a baseline measure of the students ' writing ability . During this project , each group produced eleven writing samples including both individual and group work . 5 The groups consisted of three girls and one boy . This imbalance led to some subgroup formations and some disputes where gender differences became an issue . Dan complained that " Group writing was very stressful . . . they all ganged up on me , every time , because I ' m a boy . " He did , however , obtain control of the group ' s document at critical moments . GA Book Chapter — Posner , Mitchell , and Baecker 8 We will focus our discussion on the students ' independent work done during the project ( on - project average ) and on three jointly written documents ( poem , story , and introduction ) . Table 1 summarizes our results . WritingSamples AverageScore Week # Lines # Plan Writing Approach Write Edit GROUP 1 Individual in - class avg . 6 I Work on - proj avg . 4 . 4 2 , 4 I Group poem 5 . 1 3 35 — P [ 5mins ] J [ 7 ] Work story 6 . 1 5 26 J [ 6 ] Sj [ 19 ] Sj [ 10 ] introduction 4 . 5 11 11 J [ 1 ] Pj * [ 23 ] while writing GROUP 2 Individual in - class avg . 4 I Work on - proj avg . 3 . 2 2 , 4 I Group poem 3 . 4 3 18 — P [ 7 ] Pj [ 9 ] , J [ 6 ] Work story 4 . 1 5 18 J [ 5 ] Sj [ 20 ] J [ 11 ] , I [ 2 ] , J [ 3 ] introduction 4 . 7 11 7 J [ 3 ] Sj [ 11 ] , P [ 3 ] , Sj * [ 11 ] while writing Table 1 : Teachers rating of students ' individual and group work . The average scores are evaluated on a 7 point scale and each value averages ratings in these categories : vocabulary , spelling , grammar , ideas , and writing style . The first initials of the writing approaches are used as follows : I independent , P parallel , J joint , S scribe , Sj scribe / joint , Pj parallel / joint . Time estimates in minutes are displayed in [ ] , for each writing approach . * indicates that students were very distracted while working . When examining the students individual work , we note that their in - class writing is rated higher than their on - project writing . Some of this difference may be due to the fact that the on - project work was evaluated blind — the teachers did not know the identity of the writer . We found that , in all but one case , the teachers ' rating of students ' in - class work was higher than their blind evaluations of the same person ' s on - project work . Another possible explanation is that the individual on - project writing was done in the early weeks while the students were getting used to the distractions of the foreign surroundings and the project setup . Next , we note that the students ' group work shows an improvement over their individual on - project work . Since the individual work was done mostly earlier than the group writing , perhaps the students ' performance was hindered by the fact that they were still becoming accustomed to our setup and to the new software . Another possible explanation for this improvement is that during group work each document is available for scrutiny to all the group members , thus increasing the number of potential criticisms and new ideas which , combined , produce an improved final product . Let us now examine the group work segments of the table . In both groups the story is rated higher than the poem . First , the story is written two weeks later than the poem and the groups ' writing may be improving with experience . Second , both poems were written using the parallel writing approach — segments were written separately by the students in different documents , and later combined into one document , with minimal feedback between participants . The stories were written using the scribe / joint writing approach — the scribe typed the document produced by the group working together from conception and initial ideas through the final editing changes . If we consider these two writing approaches it becomes clear that in scribe / joint writing there is significantly more task related interaction among group members ; the products are scrutinized by the whole group at every stage of the writing process . In addition , the poems were written with no planning prior to writing , whereas before writing the stories each group spent at least five minutes GA Book Chapter — Posner , Mitchell , and Baecker 9 discussing their tasks away from the computers 6 . Note also that the story is rated slightly higher than even the baseline in - class individual writing . The reader will have noticed that group one has higher overall ratings than group two . This occurred because we unintentionally formed two groups whose abilities differed in both writing skills and group work skills . However , despite this , the introduction written by group two is rated slightly higher than that of group one . Both groups spent minimal time ( less than 3 minutes ) planning prior to writing and spent a long time working on this relatively short document . The main difference lies in the writing approaches they used . Group one wrote using the parallel / joint writing approach , each member of the group worked inside the shared document , making changes to his / her entries based on each others contributions but without much discussion related to their task ; this group was very distracted during this task . Group two , on the other hand , remained more focused , using the scribe / joint approach with everyone contributing ideas and comments to the scribe throughout the writing . At one point they switched to parallel writing for three minutes but later returned to their original approach . By increasing the scrutiny of the document during the writing process , scribe / joint writing enabled all participants to apply their talents , to the benefit of the final product . IMPACT OF TECHNOLOGY ON LEARNING AND WRITING In addition to learning about the task of writing together , the students had to learn to use the tools provided . The students had no problem working with the computers . All had extensive experience with computers both in the classroom and at home . In fact , the students were so comfortable with the computers that they took a cruel pleasure in causing the software to crash . Collaborative writing is a very difficult task . To support it successfully , the tools provided must not add to that complexity . Experienced writers often get distracted from the content of their writing when composing on a computer [ 10 ] . The vast number of fonts and styles available tend to encourage a focus on format and layout . This is especially true for novice writers . The students found it hard enough to stay on task without technological distractions . Tools such as chat boxes and cute telepointer shapes were often more distracting than useful . An interface that supports gradual disclosure of features would allow users to be comfortable with the system at all stages of learning ( a ) 7 . The feedback provided by the system was often obscure and confusing , leading the students to ignore it . When the messages were critical , such as when document consistency was lost , this led to later problems ( b ) . The fact that documents are shared , yet replicated , caused continuous confusion to both the students and the experimenters . A number of documents were lost and had to be reentered because the various contributors all assumed that someone else had saved the document . The location of the document was not at all obvious from the interface ( c ) . However , as the students became more familiar with the concept of shared access to a common document , they developed working patterns that took advantage of the technology . As will be discussed below , the students came to realize how the technology could be used in different situations . Having described the process through which the students learned to use Aspects to write together , we will now focus on the various aspects of the collaborative writing experience , discuss how the tools provided influenced this experience , and suggest how these observations can inform the design of future collaborative writing tools . 6 The students found the computers extremely enticing ; given the opportunity they usually wanted to explore or play with telepointers and Chat boxes . On several occasions we had to resort to " hands on the heads " and " turn the machines off " techniques , in order to reduce chaos and regain the groups ' focus . 7 Throughout our discussion of the study we will use letters such as ( a ) to link our observations to the list of design recommendations appearing near the end of this paper . GA Book Chapter — Posner , Mitchell , and Baecker 10 Collaboration and Awareness The first major difference encountered by any user when moving from single - user to multi - user software is the notion of a shared space in which other people are working . The importance of collaborator awareness mechanisms has been well recognized [ 1 , 5 , 17 ] . When dealing with novice writers , this is especially important . Self - Awareness Even after becoming familiar with the notion of a shared workspace and having worked on the system for six weeks , the students still had difficulty determining where they were and what they were doing . Where Am I ? There are several things that the students were asking when they asked " Where am I ? " The simplest is location in the shared document . However , it is also important to provide some feedback as to whether the user is in a conference or working alone , and whether the current document is private or shared with others ( d ) . It was common for people to become confused as to whether their work would be seen by others or not , and whether they would be able to see others ' work . This was especially true when someone stopped working closely with the group , and then later returned . In one case , it turned out that the students who had been working together to edit a document had in fact been working in separate copies of the document ( e ) . Sue [ moving her mouse and looking at Hope ' s screen ] Why doesn ' t it [ her pointer ] show up ? Instructor Why don ' t I have a copy of that ? Dan [ moves mouse , looks at Sue ' s ] This situation wasn ' t discovered until Sue happened to glance at Hope ' s screen and notice that her telepointer was not showing up . What Am I Doing ? Similarly , in a multi - user conference with multiple documents it isn ' t always obvious what you are doing at a given moment . This can range from confusion as to whether you are telepointing or not , a simple interface problem , to more subtle concerns , such as whether you are interfering with someone else ' s attempts to edit text . The system needs to make the information about your relative location and influence on others readily available ( e ) . Collaborator Awareness Collaborator awareness is always important , but even more than usual when dealing with users who are learning to work together . Awareness not only includes awareness of where people are within a document , but who is present for collaboration and who is potentially present . Where Are You ? Lack of any reminder of where others are makes it easy to forget that there is a shared workspace ( f ) : Group [ they start to divide the task up by questions - each group member tells the others what they wrote as if the others can ' t see it ] Instructor Everyone can see the same thing . [ goes over and scrolls Sally ' s to show them ] What Are You Doing ? When working individually , it is easy to lose track of what others are doing . This problem is often overcome by resorting to physical pointing and glancing at each other ' s screens ( g ) : Sally I’m getting confused . Rob , what are we changing here ? Rob [ makes changes , points to screen to indicate what he is doing ] Carol [ watches what Rob is doing ] Sally [ doesn ' t notice Rob ' s gesture ] Rob what are we doing here ? Rob Its gonna look like a poem . Sally [ sees gesture and looks over ] Okay Who Did That ? With synchronous shared access to the document , it is possible to enter text or to delete someone else ' s text without that person ' s knowledge . This can lead to confusion : Dan [ deleting something ] Liz No no don ' t erase it DON ' T ! who erased that ? Hope Not me I just got in . GA Book Chapter — Posner , Mitchell , and Baecker 11 Liz [ looks over at Sue ] Sue ? ! ? Dan [ looks around , says nothing ] Tracking of where other people are and what they are doing can come in many forms . Aspects provides bars alone the side of the document indicating that someone has control of a region of text . This tells you that someone is there , but not who it is . Pointing and Gesturing Users may also want to explicitly provide information to others about their actions . Aspects provides a simple telepointing mechanism , allowing each user to gesture with a remote cursor of a user - selected shape . However , the students often found it easier to use physical pointing and gestures : Sally Rob , can you show me what you’re trying to do ? Rob Take a look here . [ points to her screen ] Telepointers were too limiting because they were both unable to draw collaborators ' attention and lacked information about the person who was pointing . All this information is available in a simple hand gesture ( g ) . The telepointers also tended to be rather distracting ; the students often ended up chasing each others ' pointers around the screen . However , one group did learn to use them effectively when proofreading and editing : Liz Meant is spelled M - E - A - N - T [ points at her screen ] Dan Where is it ? Liz Its , I ' ll mark it , there I ' ve marked it . See ? That ' s where it is [ uses telepointer ] where my little annoying thingy is . Having discovered this function , Liz explains it to the others : Liz Say he spelt birth wrong [ points with finger , Sue looks ] you go to that [ moves telepointer there ] and go like that . [ wiggles it ] Sue OHHH . The shared workspace encourages this type of consulting and collaborative learning . Effect of Physical Placement The students tended to take advantage of the physical placement of the computers to aid in their awareness of group activities . The computers were placed in a row , allowing each student to glance around at the other students and at their screens . From the start , they tended to glance around a lot , anxious to stay aware of what the rest of the group is doing . This ability to look at each other ' s computers also led to shifts between working independently or together on separate computers and working huddled around one machine . The physical placement of the machines also allowed people to notice when someone is looking at their work ; this is useful for encouraging and facilitating collaboration and consultation : Group [ they start entering comments ] Liz [ glances at Hope’s screen for confirmation she’s doing it right ] Hope [ notices , gives her advice ] However , the physical placement can also lead to formation of subgroups and exclusion of peripheral group members . To minimize this , we rearranged seating patterns each session . Document Ownership The perception of who has a claim to ownership of a section of text , or over the entire document , was independent of how ownership was represented by the technology . Aspects doesn ' t provide any explicit indication of who wrote a section of text . However , the students would often assume , especially in the early parts of the study , that the person who typed a section was the only person who could change it . Similarly , there was a connection between who typed in a section of text and who got credit for the ideas contained in the text . We observed that the scribe usually provided fewer ideas than the rest of the group . Despite this , the scribe occasionally took credit for the content of the GA Book Chapter — Posner , Mitchell , and Baecker 12 document . For example , in the first group , the person who typed a story claimed the next day that it was his story : Dan I wrote the story . Sue No I did . Liz I did . Hope We all did . Dan The one about the . . . Hope I made up Tiger Lily . Instructor I thought everybody wrote it . Dan I wrote it most cause I typed everything . Although the system did not provide explicit ownership information , the students tended to continue to identify text with the person who typed it . This showed up most clearly when the second group was editing one of the documents . In this case , the sections of the document were all written in parallel , with each section easily identifiable as belonging to a different person . Two of the group members were suggesting changes , but refused to make the final alterations until the entire group gave permission . However , when the group was working together on a document that had already been edited , the group members had no reservations about arbitrarily deleting someone else ' s text without telling them ( h ) . This suggests that at this point the group members had come to regard the text as shared , rather than just owned by the person who typed it . Document Control The system ' s assumptions about control over the document , both in terms of the ability of group members to edit sections of text and to access documents , had several effects on the collaborative writing processThe students in the study used Aspects in paragraph locking mode . This allows each user to gain control of a paragraph of text and make changes within that paragraph . As long as the user doesn ' t move the selection point out of the paragraph , other users are locked out . This granularity of locking led to some interesting behaviour . When working with physical documents , the students were able to gain control over a paper by grabbing it if necessary . In Aspects there was no way to force a shift in control . One student understood the technology to the extent that he deliberately kept an entire document as one paragraph to keep control of the changes being made to the text , even when encouraged to add paragraph breaks : Instructor Can I suggest you put some more returns in there ? [ gets up and puts returns in so Dan isn ' t locking the whole document ] Liz [ starts typing like mad as Instructor puts in spaces ] Sue [ starts typing like mad as Instructor puts in spaces ] Dan I didn ' t want to or else they ' ll start doing funny things with it . However , the group soon learned to overcome the limitations of the locking mechanism by simply using the other person ' s computer rather than trying to get control of the document from within the system . Dan [ takes Sue ' s mouse when she ' s not looking , moves her out of a paragraph ] Sue [ looks back , sees Dan ] Dan One sec . . . stop , let me work on this part . Control over the text also had an effect on the roles taken on by the group members . When deciding who would be the scribe , the group would either take a vote or argue until someone managed to get control of the text . For example , when the first group was composing a story , Dan ended up gaining control of the text . The group went along with this , everyone dictating while he types ; ideas were passed around , negotiated , and the final decision was made by the scribe . Although the system gave the scribe explicit control of the document , the other members of the group were still able to make significant contributions and provide feedback which affected the contents of the document . In the above example , where Dan had control of the document , there GA Book Chapter — Posner , Mitchell , and Baecker 13 were several occasions where other students tried to make changes . Kim would attempt to alter a sentence , and failing that would ask Dan to make the change , using the telepointer to indicate the change . So , in spite of the control mechanisms provided by the technology , the entire group was able to influence the document ( i ) . Synchronous Access and Collaboration The fact that everyone could access the workspace influenced the style of collaboration . Initially , everyone wanted to type just because they could . However , as they gained experience with the technology and with group writing , the students became more selective in their choice of writing style . For example , when working on the last day on the magazine ' s introduction , the second group shifted between scribe and independent parallel writing to solve a consensus problem . Sally was acting as scribe , but the group couldn ' t decide on the wording of one section of the document . To solve this , they all entered their own ideas , then all read them and selected the best . They then shifted back to scribe mode , and continued ( h ) . Working synchronously but on separate sections of the document worked well in a task that lends itself to division . On the tenth day , the two members of the first group were preparing the questions for an interview – they discussed the content , then split the task up , but talked back and forth while entering the text . Then , after the interview , they worked in a scribe fashion , one student dictating the answers while the other typed . However , it was not always clear who had been given the role of scribe . In fact , the assignment of roles tended to change dynamically , since the technology lets anyone take control as long as the previous scribe is willing to relinquish control . In general the groups were able to adapt to this shifting of control . If someone ' s ideas were not being accepted or they were being ignored , that person would sometimes go off and start entering the ideas independently in a different section of the document . The students were able to adapt their use of the system to suit their working patterns , and to take in to consideration the social and group interactions taking place as they worked . It was possible because the system did not attempt to impose strict roles and patterns of usage on the students ( j ) . Design Recommendations The above observations stress the importance of maintaining an awareness of both the shared space in which you are working , and the fact that there are other people working in that shared space . Dourish and Bellotti [ 5 ] indicate that the use of shared feedback , the notion of providing implicit , peripheral information about everyone in a shared space , is a promising approach . Examples of this approach can be seen in ShrEdit [ 14 ] and SASSE [ 13 , 17 ] . ShrEdit allows you to request that the system find and track movements of others ; SASSE provides peripheral information in the form of colour - coded , shared scrollbars , audio cues , a document overview ( or gestalt ) , and a tracking mode . Another important problem introduced by collaborative tools is the need to keep track of changes in a shared document . One way to provide the necessary information about changes in the document is through the display of differences in the document , often called " diffs " , either as change bars [ 18 ] , through the use of annotations [ 17 ] , or through more active notification [ 15 ] . Ownership of and access to the shared workspace are also important considerations . As we have seen , the way in which both of these are handled by the system have an influence on the behaviour of the group . While some systems such as Grove [ 7 ] and PREP [ 19 ] assign roles to collaborators , most systems leave this up to the group . This , along with flexible access and floor control mechanisms , allows social interactions , not the system , to determine working patterns and group behaviour . The above discussion suggests a number of design recommendations , which we will summarize below : ( a ) provide tools appropriate to the users ' level of expertise ; avoid distracting tools ; use gradual disclosure GA Book Chapter — Posner , Mitchell , and Baecker 14 ( b ) make sure the system ' s feedback is simple and concise ( c ) provide a clear and accurate mental model of the system ( d ) provide self - awareness in terms of location in the shared workspace , and potential actions in that location ( e ) provide awareness of the user ' s effects on others ( f ) provide awareness of the presence of others in the shared workspace to encourage discussion and negotiation ( g ) provide collaborator awareness in terms of shared feedback and explicit information such as gestures ( h ) provide flexibility in terms of the representation of ownership information to allow for changes over time ( i ) allow flexibility in terms of document control to allow for shifting roles at different stages of the writing process ( j ) avoid imposing patterns on natural social interactions . IMPACT OF THE PROJECT ON PARTICIPANTS After a total of twelve hours of working on this project , the students felt that they had learned a lot about the topic of prejudice . They quickly became extremely conscious and sensitive about these topics in their everyday lives . They even enjoyed the learning process : Liz I liked learning everything … like prejudice , minorities , stereotypes , perception Aside from the structured exercises , the students learned many important things from the extra projects that some of them elected to do . Sue and Liz conducted a survey around the school ; they collected 37 responses , and compiled and tabulated the results . After the survey Sue discussed one surprising discovery : Sue I didn ' t think that it would have happened so much , people getting insulted racially . I didn ' t know that there were actually so many people , that did and remembered . In the group discussion , conducted several weeks following the project , the students expressed some insightful opinions that demonstrated a deep and mature understanding of these complex issues . The product of their work , the magazine " Prejudice in the 1990 ' s " , was well received by their classmates and teachers . The students had differing ideas about the possible impact of their magazine , and about who would benefit the most from reading it . Sue felt that the people who wrote the magazine would benefit the most ; others disagreed about its impact : Carol Bad people [ prejudiced people ] will understand what they are doing is bad and they will become friends [ with their victims ] . Kim People who discriminate against people for their difference , they may learn how a person might feel and won ' t do that . Dan Someone who doesn ' t understand about racism [ will benefit from the magazine ] . . . I don ' t think that a racist person would benefit very much , cause they are ignorant and they ' d ignore the magazine . By working so closely together on this project , the students learned many things from each other . They learned new words and the correct spelling of other words . They also learned new concepts from group discussions . Rob described the most important thing that he learned from this whole project : Rob Everybody is different period . I didn ' t know it that much . We looked at the topic a lot and learned how and why . I knew that people were different but not by how much . Aside from these topics , the students learned about working and writing together . Rob reflected on the learning process : Rob When I first came I didn ' t think it would work out , but the computer helped , talking to the group helped , planning helped . I ' ve never did this [ collaborative writing ] before . GA Book Chapter — Posner , Mitchell , and Baecker 15 With time , the students also began to appreciate the complexity of collaborative writing . Carol expressed what she learned about group writing : Carol It ' s important to hear other people ' s opinions . Important to talk before we write . [ The result is ] sometimes worse [ than individual writing ] because there are so many different opinions the story comes out messed up . The groups experienced the frustrations and stress that accompany conflict resolution and consensus forming . The girls in particular felt that the worst part of their experience was arguing with their collaborators . The boys felt outnumbered and excluded ( each group consisted of three girls and one boy ) , one boy complaining that " they did not listen to me ! " We have already seen that , despite these complaints , the boys were able to gain control of the group document at key moments during the writing . In the final questionnaire all the students agreed that they enjoyed writing in a group . Several students stated that they felt more comfortable now about working in a group , writing in a group , and about writing in general . In these few weeks the group developed a sense of identity . In the eyes of their peers they became known as " the after school group " and were viewed with some respect and envy , since they got to work on computers and be surrounded with a lot of special video equipment . The groups even developed a common language ; group two coined a phrase " prejudice matters " which then became transformed into " minority matters " and other such expressions . The gender differences were put aside when the two groups joined together to produce a single magazine and do a presentation in front of two classes of their peers . The students ' feeling of ownership of the magazine increased towards the end of the project . In the early weeks , they would continuously ask the instructor for feedback about their ideas and writing . When this happened , they were instructed to consult with their group and sometimes minimal feedback was provided . In the later weeks of the project they requested much less feedback . In the final week , when Sally went to ask for help , Rob interrupted her saying " No ! Don ' t ask . This is our magazine ! " All the participants expressed a sense of pride about the finished product . From the final questionnaire we discovered that every student was happy to have their name on the magazine because " it shows that I contributed " and because " it is a good magazine and I like my name being on something my friends and I worked on ! " This pride was also expressed in their decision to make a class presentation , explaining what they learned , and recounting their experiences from this project . Despite never having previously worked with synchronous collaborative writing software , both groups managed to produce coherent documents which they felt reflected the work of the entire group . They testified to having written a magazine " together " , something that they did not even know the meaning of at the start of the study . Perhaps this in itself is the best definition of group writing - the perception that the results of your work are the results of the group ' s work , rather than the work of the individual members of the group . SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS The observations we have made of the students working together using Aspects are very encouraging . Over the 12 hours they were working with Aspects , they developed distinct , mature strategies for working together . Between them the two groups successfully produced a 32 page magazine which will be on display starting in early 1996 as part of an exhibit at the Ontario Science Centre . This achievement validates the concept of a synchronous shared text editor , and provides promise for the use of such technology in education , and for writing in general . The group jointly learned about an important topic , prejudice . As one student said in the final group discussion : Liz Everyone is different , we all have different beliefs , and we should respect that ; this is what we learned . They had become comfortable with the idea of writing together , and confident with the technology . From not knowing what it means to write together , they had progressed to feeling that they were GA Book Chapter — Posner , Mitchell , and Baecker 16 able to succeed at , and enjoy , group writing . During the final group discussion , one student volunteered the following : Rob The best thing was learning how to work with everybody , we weren ' t too good at that before . By observing this learning process , we have been able to gain an insight into the nature of group writing , and identify some of the effects of the use of collaborative writing tools on this process . We have seen that the technology has a distinct effect on the way in which novice writers approach the collaborative writing task . However , at the same time we have seen that writers , as they become familiar with both the task and the technology , are able to exploit the features of the system and use it to their advantage in creative ways . The observations we have made of the problems students have learning to write together are very similar to those seen among adult writers . From these observations we have drawn a series of recommendations for future design . To summarize , we would like to briefly present a number of important insights . • Groups of novice collaborators can learn to write together relatively quickly . The new skills required include flexibility in choosing the writing approach appropriate to the situation and task , and the ability to divide up writing activities to take advantage of each individual ' s strengths . • Novice collaborators require some instruction . We helped the students learn to write together by guiding them through different writing approaches and activities . Many of these activities were already familiar to the students , but needed to be made explicit and become part of the groups ' experience before the students felt comfortable using them in group writing . • Groupware technology can be both a powerful tool and a compelling distraction . We had to carefully balance the students ' need to experiment with the technology against their desire to play with the computers and forget about their tasks . • The task had to be selected with great care in order to encourage interest and debate and thus lead the group towards a motivating and rewarding experience . • When forming groups one must consider the following variables : gender , different ages , different writing levels , different maturity levels , and whether the group members were friends or just acquaintances . During the project we observed fluctuations in the groups ' power structures , changes in their attitudes towards the task , and changes in their utilization of the technology . This highlights the importance of studying real groups , in real situations , performing real tasks , over extended periods of time to observe interactions that typically cannot be seen in artificially constructed scenarios , experiments , and usability laboratories . This allows usage patterns to develop naturally , and provides the time needed for the participants to learn about the task and the technology . Although this type of ethnographic study is harder to run and much more time - consuming to analyze than a traditional lab study , the type of real usage that we have observed could never be seen in a usability laboratory . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors would like to thank the teachers and students at the Huron Street Public School for their time and enthusiasm , and the researchers at OISE for their help with the project . Ben Smith - Lea and Russell Owen provided valuable technical support . Hiroshi Ishii , Sara Bly and our reviewers provided valuable comments . We would also like to thank those who provide funding for our research , especially the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada . GA Book Chapter — Posner , Mitchell , and Baecker 17 REFERENCES 1 . Baecker , R . M . , Nastos , D . , Posner , I . R . , and Mawby , K . L . The User - Centred Iterative Design of Collaborative Writing Software . Proceedings of InterCHI ' 93 , ACM , 1993 , 399 - 405 , 541 . 2 . Baecker , R . , M . Readings in Groupware and Computer - Supported Cooperative Work : Facilitating Human - Human Collaboration , Morgan Kaufmann , 1993 . 3 . Beck , E . A Survey of Experiences of Collaborative Writing . In Sharples , M . ( Ed . ) , Computer Supported Collaborative Writing , Springer - Verlag , 1993 . 4 . DiPardo , A . and Freedman , S . W . Historical Overview : Groups in the Writing Classroom . Technical Report No . 4 , Centre for the Study of Writing , University of California , Berkeley , 1987 . 5 . Dourish , P . and Bellotti , V . Awareness and Coordination in Shared Workspaces . Proceedings of CSCW’92 , ACM , 1992 , 107 - 114 . 6 . Ede , L . and Lunsford , A . Singular Texts / Plural Authors : Perspectives on Collaborative Writing . Southern Illinois University Press , 1990 . 7 . Ellis , C . A . , Gibbs , S . J . , and Rein , G . L . Groupware : Some Issues and Experiences . CACM 34 ( 1 ) , 1991 , 38 - 58 . Reprinted in Baecker 1993 . 8 . Freedman , S . W . Peer Response Groups in Two Ninth - Grade Classrooms . Technical Report no . 12 , Centre for the Study of Writing , University of California , Berkeley , 1987 . 9 . Harrison , B . , Owen , R . , and Baecker , R . M . Timelines : An Interactive System for the Collection and Visualization of Temporal Data . Proceedings of Graphical Interface ' 94 , Morgan Kaufmann , 1994 . 10 . Hass , C . Does the Medium Make a Difference ? Two Studies of Writing with Pen and Paper and with Computers . Human - Computer Interaction , 4 , 1989 , 149 - 169 . 11 . Kraut , R . E . , Egido , C . , and Galegher , J . Patterns of Contact and Communication in Scientific Research Collaborations . In Galegher , J . , Kraut , R . E . , and Egido , C . ( Eds . ) , Intellectual Teamwork : Social and Technological Foundations of Cooperative Work , Erlbaum , 1990 , 149 - 171 . 12 . Leland , M . D . P . , Fish , R . S . , and Kraut , R . E . Collaborative Document Production Using Quilt . Proceedings of CSCW ' 88 , ACM , 1988 , 206 - 215 . 13 . Mawby , K . Designing Collaborative Writing Tools . M . Sc . Thesis , Department of Computer Science , University of Toronto , 1991 . 14 . McLaughlin Hymes , C . and Olson , G . M . Unblocking Brainstorming Through the Use of a Simple Group Editor . Proceedings of CSCW ' 92 , ACM , 1992 , 99 - 106 . 15 . Minor , S . , and Magnusson , B . A Model for Semi - ( a ) Synchronous Collaborative Editing . Proceedings of ECSCW ' 93 , 1993 , 219 - 231 . 16 . Mitchell , A . , Posner , I . R . and Baecker , R . M . Learning to Writer Together Using Groupware . Proceedings of CHI ' 95 , ACM , 1995 , 288 - 295 . 17 . Nastos , D . A Structured Environment for Collaborative Writing . M . Sc . Thesis , Department of Computer Science , University of Toronto , 1992 . 18 . Neuwirth , C . M . , Chandhok , R . , Kaufer , D . S . , Erion , P . , Morris , J . , and Miller , D . Flexible DIFF - ing in a Collaborative Writing System . Proceedings of CSCW’92 , ACM , 1992 , 147 - 154 . 19 . Neuwirth , C . M . , Kaufer , D . S . , Chandhok , R . , and Morris , J . H . Issues in the Design of Computer Support for Co - authoring and Commenting . Proceedings of CSCW 90 , ACM , 1990 , 183 - 195 . Reprinted in Baecker 1993 . 20 . Olson , J . S . , Olson , G . M . , Mack , L . A . , and Wellner , P . Concurrent Editing : The Group ' s Interface . Proceedings of Interact ' 90 , 1990 , 835 - 840 . 21 . Olson , J . S . , Olson , G . M . , Storrøsten , M . , and Carter , M . How a Group - Editor Changes the Character of a Design Meeting as well as its Outcome . Proceedings of CSCW’92 , ACM , 1992 , 91 - 98 . 22 . Posner , I . R . A Study of Collaborative Writing . M . Sc . Thesis , Department of Computer Science , University of Toronto , 1991 . 23 . Posner , I . R . and Baecker , R . M . How People Write Together . Proceedings of the Twenty - fifth Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , 1992 , 127 - 138 . Reprinted in Baecker 1993 . 24 . Posner , I . R . , Mitchell , A . , and Baecker , R . M . Learning to Write Together Using Computers . Submitted for review to the Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning , 1995 . 25 . Scardamalia , M . , Bereiter , C . , McLean , R . , Swallow , J . , and Woodruff , E . Computer Supported Intentional Learning Environments . Journal of Educational Computing Research 5 ( 1 ) , 1989 , 51 - 68 . GA Book Chapter — Posner , Mitchell , and Baecker 18 26 . Sharples , M . , Goodlet , J . S . , Beck , E . E . , Wood , C . C . , Easterbrook , S . M . , and Plowman , L . Research Issues in the Study of Computer Supported Collaborative Writing . In Sharples , M . ( Ed . ) , Computer Supported Collaborative Writing , Springer - Verlag , 1993 , 9 - 28 .