424 Membrane microdomains and caveolae Teymuras V Kurzchalia * and Robert G Pat - ton ? Glycosphingolipid - and cholesterol - enriched microdomains , or rafts , within the plasma membrane of eukaryotic cells have been implicated in many important cellular processes , such as polarized sorting of apical membrane proteins in epithelial cells and signal transduction . Until recently , however , the existence of such domains remained controversial . The past year has brought compelling evidence that microdomains indeed exist in living cells . In addition , several recent papers have suggested that caveolae , which are considered to be a specific form of raft , and caveolins , the major membrane proteins of caveolae , are involved in the dynamic cholesterol - dependent regulation of specific signal transduction pathways . Addresses * Max Planck Institute for Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics , Dresden , Germany or Department of Cell Biology , Max - Delbrtick Centre for Molecular Medicine , Robert - Rossle - Strasse 10 , 13092 Berlin - Buch , Germany ; e - mail : kurzchal @ mdc - berlin . de tCentre for Microscopy and Microanalysis , Department of Physiology and Pharmacology , and Centre for Molecular and Cellular Biology . University of Queensland , Queensland 4072 , Brisbane , Australia ; e - mail : r . parton @ mailbox . uq . edu . au Current Opinion in Cell Biology 1999 , 11 : 424 - 431 http : / / biomednet . com / elecref / 0955067401100424 0 Elsevier Science Ltd ISSN 0955 - 0674 Abbreviations APP amyloid precursor protein CSD caveolin scaffolding domain DIG detergent - insoluble glycolipid - rich domain eNOS endothelial nitric oxide synthase ER endoplasmic reticulum FRET fluorescent resonance energy transfer technique GFP green fluorescent protein GPI - AP glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored proteins MAPK mitogen - activated protein kinase NPC Niemann - Pick type C Shh Sonic hedgehog Introduction According to a textbook view , the cell membrane is a two - dimensional liquid where membrane proteins are uniformly solubilized in the lipid solvent . This simple view has been seriously questioned in the past few years . Perhaps the most profound articulation of an opposing view is the raft hypothesis , which was proposed by Simons and co - workers [ l , Z ] . This hypothesis postulates the existence of lateral assemblies ( rafts ) of glycosphin - golipids and cholesterol , which associate with specific proteins while excluding others . The main forces driving the formation of rafts are lipid - lipid interactions , depen - dent on the biophysical characteristics of the lipid components . Rafts are viewed as platforms to concentrate signaling molecules or any other molecules with the same destination in the cell . Although very appealing , the hypothesis remained speculative because the methods for detection of rafts in living cells or their biochemical isolation were missing . Caveolae - small invaginations on the surface of many cells - can be considered to be a specialized form of raft with a specific form . The role of caveolae and caveolins ( protein components of caveolae ) in cellular function is a long - stand - ing question . In this review we discuss the latest data supporting the existence of microdomains . We then go on to consider the involvement of caveolins in signal transduction and cholesterol traffic and the intriguing interrelationship between these two apparently unrelated phenomena . Observation of rafts in living cells The main evidence for the existence of rafts was based on biophysical studies of artificial lipid reconstitution systems and on the use of non - ionic detergent extraction of cells or membranes at low temperature . Using the latter tech - nique , some lipids and proteins are found in a detergent - insoluble fraction , which can be isolated by sucrose gradient centrifugation . This fraction ( called deter - gent - insoluble glycolipid - rich domain [ DIG ] , or TIFF , GLS etc . ) , which is enriched in glycosphingolipids , sphin - gomyelin and cholesterol , was thought to represent microdomains ( or even caveolae ) in intact cells . As previ - ously pointed out [ Z - 4 ] , however , this method could lead to artifacts . Many proteins identified in DIGS were not localized to caveolae and DIGS even contained proteins from different cellular organelles . It became clear that more sophisticated , non - invasive methods would be need - ed to visualize rafts . A major advance in the detection of rafts in living cells in the past year came from studies of glycosylphosphatidyli - nositol - anchored proteins ( GPI - APs ) . Members of this protein class are attached to membranes via their carboxy - terminal lipid modification . GPI - APs have been considered as constituents of rafts because of their insolubility in Triton - X - 100 [ S ] ; however , previous usage of conventional immunofluorescence techniques revealed no clusters of these proteins on the cell surface [ 6 , 7 ] . This observation could be explained either by non - existence of rafts or by the possibility that microdomains are smaller than the limit of detection of fluorescence microscopy ( > 300 nm ) . Although a previous electron microscopic study favored the existence of microdomains containing GPI - APs at a submicron level [ 8 ] , it is only through the use of different versatile techniques by several groups that a breakthrough in our understanding of rafts has been achieved . Using the elegant single - particle tracking method in one study [ 9 ] , gold particles were attached to the components of interest and so - called transient confinement zones were deter - mined . The authors demonstrated that a fraction of the Membrane microdomains and caveolae Kurzchalia and Parton 425 glycosphingolipid , GM1 - as well as Thy - l , a GPI - AP - were confined to zones of 200 - 300 nm in diameter . A more direct demonstration that GPI - APs are clustered on the surface of the cell was provided by Varma and Mayor [ lO” ] using a new variant of the fluorescent reso - nance energy transfer technique ( FRET ) . With a random distribution of fluorophore , emission is depolarized because of energy transfer ; in contrast , clusters of fluo - rophores should have a constant value of anisotropy in a wide concentration range . Indeed , when folate receptor ( GPI - AP ) on living cells was labeled with a fluorescent lig - and , depolarization was constant over the entire concentration range . Only photobleaching or dilution of the ligand with a non - fluorescent analogue led to the change of anisotropy . In contrast , anisotropy values for folate receptor isoform with a transmembrane anchor were inversely dependent on fluorescence intensity . The authors calculated that GPI - anchored folate receptors should be clustered in domains of about 70 nm diameter ; moreover , in agreement with the role for cholesterol in raft formation , depletion of cholesterol from the cell surface led to disaggregation of these clusters . Another argument for clustering of GPI - APs came from the use of a newly discovered property of green fluorescent pro - tein ( GFP ) to change the relative intensity ratio of green fluorescence emitted upon excitation by light at 395 nm and 475 nm wavelength at maxima of emission upon interaction of two GFP molecules [ ll’ ] . The ratio of fluorescence intensities at 410 nm / 470 nm for GPI - anchored GFP , which was expressed in HeLa cells , was significantly lower then that of cytoplasmic GFP but much higher if the protein was cross - linked by antibodies against GFP . The authors con - cluded that although the clustering caused by GPI anchors was significant , it must be rather loose and / or transient . It must be noted that the above data are somewhat contra - dictory to those obtained in a study using a conventional FRET approach [ 12 ] in which the distribution of 5’ - nucleotidase ( a GPI - AP ) on the surface of MDCK cells was studied using antibodies ( Cy3 and Cy5 ) labeled with two types of fluorophores . Applying different ratios of antibodies , no significant transfer of energy between donor ( Cy3 ) and acceptor ( Cy5 ) molecules could be detected suggesting that 5’ - nucleotidase is randomly distributed on the cell surface . In contrast to the study by Varma and Mayor [ lO” ] , however , fixed cells were used . It is possible that either the fixation procedure or antibody molecules disrupt rafts . Besides the above microscopic studies , there are also bio - chemical data supporting the clustering of GPI - APs in living cells [ 13” ] . In this study , chemical cross - linking with a bifunctional reagent was used to show that GPI - APs are in spatial vicinity on the cell surface . When MDCK cells expressing a reporter protein bearing a GPI - anchor were subjected to cross - linking , oligomers consisting of up to 15 molecules were detected . The clustering was specific for the GPI - anchored form , as two transmembrane forms bear - ing the same ectodomain did not form oligomers . As in the study by Varma and Mayor [ 10” ] , depletion of cholesterol caused the unclustering of microdomains . In contrast , if cells were extracted by detergent prior to the cross - linking , more oligomers of higher molecular mass were visible . Two main conclusions can be drawn from these studies . First , that rafts are rather small ( of about 70 nm in diameter ) and second that they are very dynamic . Future studies should clarify which biophysical properties of lipids and pro - teins determine their association with rafts . Also , the mechanisms that regulate their spatial distribution on the cell surface and their temporal stability need to be unraveled . Rafts in lymphoid cells Under various conditions , small rafts tend to coalesce . This may not be simply an in vitro artifact of , for example , deter - gent extraction [ 13” ] but might have very important physiological functions . It was recently demonstrated that upon cross - linking with antibodies smaller rafts form larger patches [ 14’ ] . These patches could accumulate filamentous actin and tyrosine - phosphorylated proteins and serve as cen - ters for signal - transduction in lymphocytes [ 15 ] . Two recent papers [ 16” , 17” ] impressively demonstrate the importance of large raft formation for T cell activation . In order to be activated , T cell receptors need costimula - tory molecule pairs like B7 - CD28 or ICAM - l - LFA - 1 ; however , the molecular mechanisms involved in this co - activation were not clear . Using beads covered with antibodies against surface proteins , two groups demon - strated that costimulation directs active transport of lipids and proteins to the site of cell - cell contact between the T cell and antigen - presenting cell . This process is depen - dent on cytoskeletal components ( myosin and actin ) . Although the influence of cholesterol was not investigated in these papers , others illustrate that cholesterol plays an important role in compartmentalization of T cell receptor and downstream molecules [ 18’ , 19’ ] . Caveolae : endocytosis , and mechanotransduction Rafts appear to be a universal organizing principle of mam - malian cells and clearly have important roles in concentrating signaling molecules . For example , signaling proteins sharing a simple lipid modification , such as multiple palmitoylation , could be brought together simply by virtue of their affinity for the raft domain [ 20 ] . The functions of rafts are more widespread than this , however , and it is clear that many cel - lular processes such as apical sorting in epithelia [ Zl’ ] and possibly even the formation of the transverse - tubule system of muscle [ 22 ] may rely on similar organizing principles . This raises the question of what is the role of caveolae , specific forms of rafts , and the major proteins of caveolae , caveolins , in cellular function . We first consider the role of the caveolar invagination as distinct from the DIG domain . 426 Membranes and sorting The bulb - shaped caveolar pit is a characteristic , highly uniform , feature of many mammalian cells , which is appar - ently generated by caveolins [ 23 ] . Through their ability to bind cholesterol [ 24 ] and glycosphingolipids [ Z ] , cave - olins have been suggested to stabilize and cause coalescence of DIG domains to form caveolae [ 2 , 23 , 26 ] . Whether caveolins physically deform the pit to form the caveolae or whether the caveolar shape is a result of a unique lipid composition generated by caveolins is as yet unknown . The caveolar invagination appears to be well suited as an endocytic vehicle . Consistent with an endo - cytic function of caveolae , two recent studies showed that dynamin , a large GTPase which is involved in budding of clathrin coated pits , is also a regulator of caveolae budding [ 27’ , 28’ ] . Indeed it has long been proposed that in endothelial cells caveolae endocytosis is a constitutive process involved in vesicular transport across the endothe - lial monolayer . In contrast , in fibroblasts this may be an infrequent , possibly regulated process [ 29 ] . The actual role of caveolae endocytosis in fibroblasts is , however , unclear . A model for transient closure of caveolae playing a role in the GPI - anchored protein - mediated uptake of small metabolites , termed potocytosis [ 30 ] , has been questioned by recent studies of GPI - anchored protein trafficking [ 31’ ] . Caveolae budding may remove and inactivate a sig - naling event initiated at the cell surface , or may be required for activation of certain pathways , as shown for the clathrin coated pit pathway [ 32 , 33 ] . The latter is con - sistent with a recent study of the role of caveolae endocytosis in the Ras / mitogen activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) pathway [ 34 ] . Although caveolae have been implicated in endocytosis in endothelial cells , another endothelial cell function , which has recently gained attention , is a role of caveolae in mechanotransduction . Recent studies have suggested that caveolae can monitor blood flow over the endothelial cell surface and respond by activating specific signal transduc - tion pathways , including endothelial nitric oxide synthase ( eNOS ) and Ras / MAPK , in a cholesterol - dependent man - ner [ 35’ - 37’1 . This attractive model for the function of caveolar invagination provides an alternative or parallel role of endothelial caveolae , which may depend on the unique architecture of the caveolar invagination to act as a flow sensor . Of further interest is the finding that caveolae may represent a site of calcium signal generation in endothelial cells with calcium waves emanating from cave - olae - rich domains [ 38 ] . In addition to the role of caveolae in normal cellular processes , it appears that caveolae endocytosis has been exploited by pathogenic agents as an entry route into ani - mal cells . Cholera toxin requires caveolae , or caveolae - like domains [ 39 , 40 ] , for endocytic uptake in a pathway that leads to the active subunit of the toxin reaching the endo - plasmic reticulum ( ER ) and then the cytosol [ 41 ] . Simian Virus 40 ( SV40 ) has apparently used a similar pathway to reach the ER [ 4244 ] ; it was proposed that recruitment of caveolin , and presumably associated DIG domains , around the virus leads to enclosure of the virus and thus internal - ization [ 44 ] . A quite different type of pathogen may have taken advantage of this pathway ; FimH - positive E . cob bind to cell surface GPI - APs and are then internalized in a cholesterol - dependent process involving recruitment of caveolin - l [ 45 ] . Caveolae and caveolins ; signaling , and cholesterol In the past few years , caveolae have been implicated as organizing centers for signaling molecules . The list of signaling molecules apparently localized to caveolae has increased and includes Src family kinases , nitric oxide synthases , epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) , platelet derived growth factor receptor ( PDGFR ) , phos - pholipase Cy ( PLCy ) , protein kinase C ( PKC ) a , PKCP , Ras , trimeric G protein Ga subunits , Mekl and Erk2 ( reviewed in [ 46’ , 47’ ] ) . Caveolin can directly interact with many of these signaling molecules via a conserved 20 amino - acid domain termed the caveolin scaffolding domain ( CSD ; residues 82 - 101 of caveolin - 1 ) [ 48 ] . In the majority of cases the interaction with the CSD appears to hold the signaling proteins in an inactive conformation [ 46’ ] . Maybe the best - characterized example of this interaction and its role in signal transduction is the inter - action of caveolin - l with eNOS [ 49 ] . Interaction of caveolin with eNOS holds the enzyme in an inactive conformation , which is released upon activation by calci - urn - calmodulin . This type of mechanism appears important in both endothelial cells [ 49 ] and cardiac myocytes [ SO’ ] . These studies suggest a primary role for caveolin - and particularly the CSD - as a negative regulator of many signaling events ; only release of inhibitory constraints through caveolin dissociation allows the signaling to take place . In some cases , however , this general principle has been seriously questioned by the finding that the signaling molecules ( e . g . trimeric G protein a subunits [ 51 , 52 ] or Ras [ 53’ ] ) are not all directly associated with caveolae and caveolins . This argues against a simple model in which the caveolin interaction is required to prevent the signaling event . Moreover , caveolin - l can also have an activating role in signal transduction , for example in insulin signaling [ 54 ] and in the integrin - mediated activation of Ras - signal - ing pathways [ 53’ ] . Activation of integrins was shown to cause caveolin - dependent activation of fyn . The caveolin pool involved in the integrin - mediated signaling event constituted a Triton - soluble - presumably non - caveolar - form of the protein . This soluble pool was associated with integrins and with Fyn but not with Ras , c - Src or trimeric Ga subunits . Interestingly , the interaction with caveolin was proposed to be mediated through the transmembrane domain of the integrin a - subunit and therefore presumably with the caveolin intramembrane domain , in contrast to the interaction of other signaling proteins with the inhibitory CSD . Membrane microdomains and caveolae Kurzchalia and Parton 427 After summarizing these studies showing interactions of a wide range of proteins with caveolin - 1 , it is important to add a word of caution . The special properties of caveolins could lead to artifacts in co - immunoprecipitation experi - ments . The extraction procedures using detergents might retain lipids , leading to co - precipitation of rather large complexes ( aggregates of DIGS ) containing many proteins , not just directly interacting partners . Indirect evidence for involvement of caveolin in signal transduction comes from studies of cellular transformation . Caveolin is downregulated and caveolae numbers are reduced in NIH3T3 cell lines transformed by v - Abl , Bcr - Abl and Ras [ . 55 ] . Conditional expression of caveolin - 1 in Ras and Abl transformed cells , at levels sufficient to induce formation of caveolae , abrogates anchorage inde - pendent growth [ 56 ] . Most interestingly , antisense inhibition of caveolin expression has the reverse effect causing activation of Ras / MAPK - dependent signaling pathways and cell transformation [ 57” ] . Consistent with this study , analyses of several different types of tumors show a reduced caveolin expression [ 58 ] although increased caveolin expression has also been correlated with some tumor phenotypes [ . 59 ] . While there is accumulating evidence to suggest that cave - olin can interact with signaling molecules and can influence signaling pathways in vitro and in viva , other fea - tures of the caveolar system should be taken into consideration when examining caveolin and caveolae func - tion . In particular , the relationship of caveolin to cholesterol is of considerable interest [ 60 ] . Caveolin - l binds cholesterol [ 24 ] and caveolin - l expression is regulat - ed at the transcriptional level by cholesterol [ 61 , 62 ] . Caveolin - l transfection also increases ER to plasma mem - brane cholesterol transport [ 63 , 64 ] . These results suggest a primary role for caveolin , and presumably caveolae , in cho - lesterol regulation . Biochemical studies show that caveolae fractions are enriched in cholesterol and represent sites of cholesterol efflux to extracellular carriers [ 60 ] . The high density lipoprotein - binding protein SR - B 1 , which has been proposed to facilitate transfer of cholesterol between extracellular high density lipoprotein and the plasma membrane , is also concentrated in caveolae [ 65 ] ; moreover , the efflux of cholesterol and the expression of caveolin are regulated during the cell cycle [ 66 ] . Caveolin also appar - ently cycles between internal compartments and the cell [ 21’ , 67 , 68 ] . How can the cholesterol related properties of caveolin be equated with a role for caveolin in signal transduction ? In fact , it is now apparent that cholesterol plays a vital role in signaling in higher eukaryotes . Signaling pathways that are crucial for normal development are inhibited by cho - lesterol - disrupting teratogenic toxins in viva [ 69 ] . The Patched protein , a surface receptor for Sonic hedgehog ( Shh ) , has a putative cholesterol - sensing domain , which is crucial to its function [ 70’ ] and Shh itself is modified covalently by cholesterol [ 71 ] . A recent study provided more direct evidence for a key role of cholesterol - rich domains in signaling [ 72” ] . In this study it was shown that cholesterol depletion directly activates Ras - depen - dent signaling pathways in the absence of growth factors . The authors suggested that the reduced plasma mem - brane cholesterol of transformed cells may trigger hyperactivation of signaling pathways involved in cell division and therefore contribute to cell transformation . Two recent studies using different systems support this model and provide crucial links between these cholesterol effects and the role of caveolin in viva . In the first study [ 73 ] , a caveolin - l deficient Caenorhabditis elegans was gen - erated using RNA - interference methodology and phenocopies were analyzed . The effect of a loss of cave - Olin - 1 was an acceleration of meiotic cell cycle progression through the earlier exit from the pachytene arrest . This process in C . elegans depends on Ras / MAPK pathway and genetic analysis confirmed a close link between the Ras and caveolin regulation of cell cycle progression . Intriguingly , cholesterol depletion caused an identical phe - notype and the authors suggested that caveolin - l links the cellular cholesterol level to the control of meiosis , an inter - esting concept in view of recent studies showing a role of caveolin and decreased cellular cholesterol in cell cycle progression [ 66 ] . The second study of interest in this context employed a mutational approach in an attempt to generate caveolin mutants that acted as dominant - negative inhibitors of cave - olar function [ 74 ] . A caveolin truncation mutant completely blocked H - Ras - , but not K - Ras - mediated Raf activation . H and K - Ras differ in their plasma membrane localization motifs ; both are farnesylated but only H - Ras is palmitoylat - ed [ 75 ] . The mutant caveolin did not impair the plasma membrane localization of H - Ras , or the recruitment of Raf to the plasma membrane . The mutant protein was not detectable on the cell surface , but was localized to the Golgi complex and non - endocytic cholesterol - rich vesicles . These findings suggested that the caveolin mutant is unable to follow the normal caveolin cycling pathway but is held up in some cholesterol - rich compartment . Together with the known enrichment of palmitoylated proteins in cholesterol - enriched raft domains , this suggested that the mutant may inhibit H - Ras function through an effect on cellular cholesterol . A crucial experiment supporting this hypothesis showed that a short incubation of the mutant - expressing cells with cyclodextrin - complexed cholesterol rescued the block in Raf activation [ 74 ] . This strongly sug - gests that the caveolin mutant acts through an effect on maintenance or generation of the cholesterol - rich surface domains required for H - Ras function and supports the idea that maintenance of high cholesterol in caveolae ( or DIG domains ) is an active process requiring caveolin - l [ 72” ] . Taken together , these studies raise the possibility that caveolin regulation of cellular cholesterol may be equally 428 Membranes and sorting as important as direct interactions of caveolin with signal - ing molecules in the regulation of signal transduction . The studies show a crucial importance of caveolin in reg - ulating intracellular cholesterol levels and thus maintaining and modulating the function of cholesterol - enriched surface microdomains . Many kinds of rafts ? As postulated previously caveolae are only one specific form of raft with a specific shape and rafts can exist in the absence of caveolins . Are there other molecules having similar properties to caveolin and do different kinds of lipid rafts exist ? Maybe the best candidates to form non - caveolar rafts are proteins of the MEC - Z / stomatin family [ 76 - 781 . These pro - teins like caveolins have a very long hydrophobic amino acid stretch and similar membrane orientation and are also found in detergent - insoluble complexes . The reggie / flotill - in family of proteins has also been suggested to associate with caveolae or non - caveolar detergent - insoluble domains [ 79 , 80 ] . A recent paper also presented evidence for a non - caveolar detergent - insoluble glycolipid signaling domain containing GM3 , c - Src , cholesterol and sphingomyelin ; this fraction could be separated from the caveolar domain con - taining caveolin , Ras , and higher levels of cholesterol [ Sl ] . DIGS and disease Over the past year it has become increasingly apparent that DIGS , caveolae , and caveolins are involved in several human disease states . Mutations in the predominantly muscle - specific isoform of caveolin , caveolin - 3 , cause a form of limb girdle muscular dystrophy [ 82’ , 83’ ] . Other dis - ease states indirectly implicate caveolae - related processes in disease progression . Niemann - Pick type C ( NPC ) dis - ease is characterized by an imbalance in cellular cholesterol . The underlying defect resides in NPCl , a multispanning membrane protein with a putative cholesterol - sensing domain [ 70’ ] . Homozygotes lacking the NPCl protein show an aberrant accumulation of free cholesterol in the lysosomal system . In NPCl heterozygotes , caveolin - l pro - tein levels are increased several - fold [ 84 ] . This is presumably a compensatory response as free cholesterol levels are maintained at near normal levels . In contrast , homozygotes show only slightly increased caveolin - l pro - tein levels despite greatly increased free cholesterol . This may indicate that the heterozygotes have the capacity to regulate caveolin levels in response to a cholesterol imbal - ance but that this mechanism is absent in the homozygotes completely lacking the NPCl protein . This would indicate a close link between the NPCl protein and caveolin - l in regulating cellular free cholesterol [ 84 , 85 ] . Another important area in which DIGS , and possibly cave - olae , have been implicated is the generation of the amyloid peptide from the amyloid precursor protein ( APP ) , which occurs in Alzheimer’s Disease . Generation of the P - amy - loid peptide has been shown to occur in DIG domains in a 1 . 2 . 3 . 4 . 5 . 6 . 7 . 8 . cholesterol - dependent process [ 86 - 881 . Intriguingly , het - erologous expression of caveolin in non - neuronal cells facilitates cleavage of the APP and is inhibited by anti - sense inhibition of caveolin expression [ SS ] . While this may also be compatible with an indirect effect on cellular cholesterol , cross - linking experiments showed an associa - tion of caveolin and APP in the transfected cells . Clinical links between cholesterol disease and susceptibility to Alzheimer’s disease [ 89 ] support the postulated impor - tance of cholesterol in amyloid generation and emphasize the universal importance of cholesterol - rich domains in cellular function . Conclusions Several papers in the last year have unambiguously demonstrated the existence of glycosphingolipid - and cho - lesterol - enriched microdomains , or rafts , within the plasma membrane of living cells . We now need to understand what biophysical properties govern the formation of rafts , and what factors regulate their stability or distribution on the cell surface . Distinct types of rafts may exist and the challenge is to dissect how these distinct microdomains form and function . Caveolae and caveolins remain an enig - matic subject with their apparently bewildering array of possible functions ; however , the past year has produced key insights into the role of caveolins and cholesterol in the functional organization of specific signal transduction pathways and in particular the essential role of the caveo - lae system and cholesterol in the regulation of cell division . Acknowledgements We would like to thank John Hancock , Kai Simons , Satayajit Mayor , Jean Wilson , Alpha Yap and members of the Kurzchalia and Parton laboratories for comments on the manuscript . References and recommended reading Papers of particular interest , published within the annual period of review , have been highlighted as : l of special interest * * of outstanding interest Simons K , lkonen E : Functional rafts in cell membranes . Nature 1997 , 387 : 569 - 572 . Harder T , Simons K : Caveolae , DIGS , and the dynamics of sphingolipid - cholesterol microdomains . Curr Opin Cell Viol 1997 , 9534542 . Kurzchalia T , Hartmann E , Dupree P : Guilt by insolubility : does a protein’s detergent insolubility reflect caveolar location . fiends Cell Bioll995 , 5 : 187 - l 89 . Parton RG : Caveolae and caveolins . Gun Opin Cell Bioll996 , 8 ~ 542 - 548 . Brown D , Rose J : Sorting of GPI - anchored proteins to glycolipid - enriched membrane subdomains during transport to the apical cell surface . Cell 1992 , 88 : 533 - 544 . Mayor S , Rothberg KG , Maxfield FR : Sequestration of GPI - anchored proteins in caveolae triggered by cross - linking . Science 1994 , 264 : 1948 - l 951 . Mayor S , Maxfield FR : Insolubility and redistribution of GPI - anchored proteins at the cell surface after detergent treatment . MO / Biol Cell 1995 , 6 : 929 - 944 . Wu M , Fan J , Gunning W , Ratnam M : Clustering of GPI - anchored folate receptor independent of both cross - linking and association with caveolin . J Membr Biol 1997 , 159 : i 37 - l 47 . Membrane microdomains and caveolae Kurzchalia and Parton 429 9 . Sheets ED , Lee GM , Simson R , Jacobson K : Transient confinement of a glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored protein in the plasma membrane . Biochemistry 1997 , 36 : 12449 - l 2458 . 10 . Varma R , Mayor S : GPI - anchored proteins are organized in . . submicron domains at the cell surface . Nature 1998 , 394 : 798 - 801 . Using a novel FRET - approach , this study represents the first demonstration of the existence of submicron size clusters of GPI - APs on the surface of liv - ing cells . The clustering of GPI - AP seems to depend on the cholesterol con - tent of the membrane . The described FRET - approach potentially could be used to detect other interacting molecules in intact cells . ( See also De Angelis et al . [ I 1 ‘I . ) 11 . De Angelis DA , Miesenbock G , Zemelman BV , Rothman JE : PRIM : . proximity imaging of green fluorescent protein - tagged polypeptides . Proc Nat / Acad Sci USA 1998 , 95 : 12312 - l 2318 . The authors discovered a novel property of GFP to change its relative inten - sity ratio at maxima of emission upon dimerization . Authors show that GFP molecules with a GPI - tail are loosely associated or that this association is rather transient . Like the above - mentioned FRET - approach , the method could be applied to detect interacting molecules in the living cell . 12 . Kenworthy AK , Edidin M : Distribution of a glycosylphosphatidyl - inositol - anchored protein at the apical surface of MDCK cells examined at a resolution of < I 00 A using imaging fluorescence resonance energy transfer . J Cell Bioll998 , 142 : 69 - 84 . 13 Friedrichson T , Kurzchalia TV : Microdomains of GPI - anchored . . proteins in living cells revealed by crosslinking . Nature 1998 , 394 : 802 - 805 . This study provides compelling biochemical data for the association of GPI - APs on the surface of living cells . A reporter GPI - AP , GH - DAF , was found in clusters of about 15 molecules when a conventional cross - linking approach was applied . The clustering was specific for the GPI - anchored form of the molecule and was dependent on cholesterol . Remarkably , the clusters became much larger upon detergent extraction of cells . This find - ing makes a link between small intact rafts and TX - insoluble aggregates for the first time . 14 . Harder T , Scheiffele P , Verkade P , Simons K : Lipid domain structure . of the plasma membrane revealed by patching of membrane components . J Cell Bioll998 , 141 : 929 - 942 . Coalescence of small rafts into larger patches upon antibody cross - linking is described . Whereas patches of raft molecules ( GPI - APs , GM1 or influenza hemagglutinin ) were overlapping , non - raft molecules ( transferrin receptor ) were found in separate patches . This segregation was abrogated when cells were depleted of cholesterol . The patches of raft proteins accumulated the Src - kinase Fyn on the cytoplasmic leaflet of the membrane . 15 . Harder T , Simons K : Clusters of glycolipid and glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored proteins in lymphoid cells : accumulation of actin regulated by local tyrosine phosphorylation . Eur J lmmunol 1999 , 29 : 558 - 562 . 16 . Wiilfing C , Davis MM : A receptor / cytoskeletaI movement triggered l * by costimulation during T cell activation . Science 1998 , 282 : 2266 - 2269 . See annotation [ I 7” ] . 17 . Viola A , Schroeder S , Sakakibara Y , Lanzavecchia A : T lymphocyte . . costimulation mediated by reorganization of membrane microdomains . Science 1999 , 283 : 680 - 882 . These two papers visualize the formation of immunological synapses between T and antigen - presenting cells . Costimulation of T cell receptor by CD28 leads to active transport of lipids ( GMI ) and GPI - APs ( CD59 ) to the site of cell - to - cell contact . A novel mechanism to explain the T cell activation , based on the formation of large rafts , is suggested . 18 . Montixi C , Langlet C , Bernard AM , Thimonier J , Dubois C , Wurbel MA , . Chauvin JP , Pierres M , He HT : Engagement of T cell receptor triggers its recruitment to low - density detergent - insoluble membrane domains . EMBO J 1998 , 17 : 5334 - 5348 . See annotation [ I 9’1 . IQ . Xavier R , Brennan T , Li Q . McCormack C , Seed B : Membrane . compartmentation is required for efficient T cell activation . Immunity 1998 . 8 ~ 723 - 732 . This study demonstrates that T cell activation leads to compartmentalization of signaling molecules into rafts as revealed by Triton - X - insolubility . Dispersion of rafts by filipin and nystatin , or cholesterol - depletion , abolishes T cell activation and compartmentalization of signaling molecules . 20 . Melkonian KA , Ostermeyer AG , Chen JZ , Roth MG , Brown DA : Role of lipid modifications in targeting proteins to detergent - resistant membrane rafts . Many raft proteins are acyleted , while few are prenylated . J Biol Cbem 1999 , 274 : 391 O - 391 7 . 21 . Scheiffele P , Verkade P , Fra AM , Virta H , Simons K , lkonen E : . Caveolin - l and - 2 in the exocytic pathway of MDCK cells . J Cell Bioll998 , 140 : 795 - 808 . Caveolin - l / - 2 hetero - oligomers are present in basolaterally - destined vesi - cles in MDCK cells , whereas caveolin - l homo - oligomeric complexes are tar - geted to the apical surface . Caveolin - l antibodies specifically inhibit apical transport of a viral protein , without affecting basolateral transport . These results implicate caveolin - l in the machinery involved in apical exocytic trans - port and also suggest that mechanisms must exist to recycle caveolins back to the GolQi complex . 22 . Parton RG , Way M , Zorzi N , Stang E : Caveolin - associates with developing T - tubules during muscle differentiation . J Cell Biol 1997 , 136 : 137 - l 54 . 23 . Fra AM , Williamson E , Simons K , Parton RG : De no ~ o formation of caveolae in lymphocytes by expression of VI P21 caveolin . Proc Nat / Acad Sci USA 1995 , 92 : 8655 - 8659 . 24 . Murata M , Peranen J , Schreiner R , Wieland F , Kurzchalia TV , Simons K : VIPll / caveolin is a cholesterol - binding protein . Proc Nat / Acad Sci USA 1995 , 92 : 10339 - l 0343 . 25 . Fra AM , Masserini M , Palestini P , Sonnino S , Simons K : A photo - reactive derivative of ganglioside GM1 specifically cross - links VIPSl - caveolin on the cell surface . FEBS Lett 1995 , 375 : l I - 14 . 26 . Parton RG , Simons K : Digging into caveolae . Science 1995 , 269 : 1398 - 1399 . 27 . . Henley JR , Krueger EW , Oswald BJ , McNiven MA : Dynamin mediated internalization of caveolae . J Cell Bioll998 , 141 : 85 - 99 . _ - - _ See annotatron 128’1 . 28 . Oh P , McIntosh DP , Schnitzer JE : Dynamin at the neck of caveolae . mediates their budding to form transport vesicles by GTP - driven fission from the plasma membrane of endothelium . J Cell Biol 1998 , 141 : 101 - 114 . These two studies suggest that dynamin function is not restricted to clathrin coated pits but is also required for caveolae budding . In contrast to coated pits , dynamin sits at the neck of caveolae prior to budding , at least in endothelial cells . In both studies [ 27’ , 28’1 inhibition of dynamin function inhibited cholera toxin endocytosis - a marker internalized at least partially through caveolae . 29 . Parton RG , Joggerst B , Simons K : Regulated internalization of caveolae . J Cell & o / 1994 , 127 : 1199 - l 215 . 30 . Anderson RG : Plasmalemmal caveolae and GPI - anchored membrane proteins . Curr Opin Cell Viol 1993 , 5 : 647 - 852 . 31 . Mayor S , Sabharanjak S , Maxfield FR : Cholesterol - dependent . retention of GPI - anchored proteins in endosomes . EM60 J 1998 , 17 : 4626 - 4838 . This study addresses a tong - standing question regarding the involvement of endosomes in GPI - anchored protein trafficking . In contrast to a previous model , it is shown that GPI - anchored folate receptors are internalized into transferrin - containing early endosomes ; cholesterol plays a role in retention of the folate receptor in the recycling endosomes . These results suggest an important role for the GPI - anchor in intracellular sorting and suggest an endosomal mechanism - rather than caveolae - mediated potocytosis - in folate uptake . 32 . Vieira AV , Lamaze C , Schmid SL : Control of EGF receptor signaling by clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Science 1996 , 274 : 2086 - 2089 . 33 . Ahn S , Maudsley S , Luttrell LM , Lefkowitz RI , Daaka Y : Src - mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of dynamin is required for beta2 - adrenergic receptor internalization and mitogen - activated protein kinase signaling . J Biol Chem 1999 , 274 : 1185 - l 188 . 34 . Pol A , Calve M , Enrich C : Isolated endosomes from quiescent rat liver contain the signal transduction machinery . Differential distribution of activated Raf - I and Mek in the endocytic compartment . FEBS Letf 1998 , II : 34 - 38 . 35 . Park H , Go YM , St John PL , Maland MC , Lisanti MP , Abrahamson DR , . Jo H : Plasma membrane cholesterol is a key molecule in shear stress - dependent activation of extracellular signal - regulated kinase . J Biol Chem 1998 , 273132304 - 3231 I . See annotation 137’1 . 36 . Riuo V , McIntosh DP , Oh P , Schnitzer JE : In situ flow activates . endothelial nitric oxide synthase in luminal caveolae of endothelium with rapid caveolin dissociation and calmodulin association . J Biol Chem 1998 , 273 : 34724 - 34729 . See annotation [ 37’1 . 430 Membranes and sorting 37 . Rizzo V , Suna A . Oh P , Schnitzer JE : Rapid mechanotransduction in . situ at the luminal ceil surface of vas & lar endothelium and its caveolae . J Biol Chem 1998 , 273 : 26323 - 26329 . These three studies by Park et a / . [ 35 - l and Riuo et a / . [ 36’ , 37 * ] suggest a role for caveolae as flow - sensing organelles , able to convert mechanical stimuli into an intracellular signal . 38 . 39 . 40 . 41 . 42 . 43 . 44 . 45 . 46 . . lsshiki M , Ando J , Korenaga R , Kogo H , Fujimoto T , Fujita T , Kamiya A : Endothelial Ca2 + waves preferentially originate at specific loci in caveolin - rich cell edges . Proc Nat / Acad . % i USA 1698 , 95 : 5009 - 5014 . Orlandi PA , Fishman PH : Filipin - dependent inhibition of cholera toxin : evidence for toxin internalization and activation through caveolae - like domains . J Cell Biol1998 , 141 : 905 - 915 . Wolf AA , Jobling MG , Wimer - Mackin S , Ferguson - Maltzman M , Madara JL , Holmes RK , Lencer WI : Ganglioside structure dictates signal transduction by cholera toxin and association with caveolae - like membrane domains in polarized epithelia . J Cell Biol1998 , 141 : 917 - 927 . Maioul I , Sohn K . Wieland FT . Peooerkok R . Pizza M . Hillemann J . Soing HD : KDEL receptor ( Erd & - mediated retrograde iransport of the cholera toxin A subunit from the Golgi involves COPI , ~ 23 , and the COOH terminus of ErdPp . J Cell Biol 1998 , 143 : 601 - 612 . Kartenbeck J . Stukenbrok H . Helenius A : Endocvtosis of simian virus 40 intd the endoplasmic reticulum . J Ceil Biol1989 , 109 : 2721 - 2729 . Anderson HA , Chen Y , Norkin LC : Bound simian virus 40 translocates to caveolin - enriched membrane domains , and its entry is inhibited by drugs that selectively disrupt caveolae . Mol Biol Cell 1996 , 7 : 1825 - l 834 . Stang E , Kartenbeck J , Parton RG : Major histocompatibility complex class I molecules mediate association of SV40 with caveolae . Mol Biol Cell 1997 , 8 : 47 - 57 . Baorto DM , Gao Z , Malaviya R , Dustin ML , van der Met - we A , Lublin DM , Abraham SN : Survival of FimH - expressing enterobacteria in macrophages relies on glycolipid traffic . Nature 1997 , 389 : 636 - 639 . Okamoto T , Schleael A , Scherer PE . Lisanti MP : Caveolins . a familv of scaffolding proteins for organiiing ‘preassembled signaling - complexes’ at the plasma membrane . J Biol Chem 1996 , 273 : 5419 - 5422 . CornprehensIve review of the signaling functions of caveolae and the role of the caveolae scaffolding domain as a distinct module , which acts as a neg - ative regulator of signaling molecules . 47 . Shaul PW , Anderson RG : Role of plasmalemmal caveolae in signal . transduction . Am J Physiol1998 , 275 : L843 - L851 . An up - to - date review of the caveolae system and its role in signaling . 48 . Couet J , Li S , Okamoto T , lkezu T , Lisanti MP : Identification of peptide and protein ligands for the caveolin - scaffolding domain . Implications for the interaction of caveolin with caveolae - associated proteins . J Biol Chem 1997 , 272 : 6525 - 6533 . 49 . Feron 0 . Saldana F . Michel JB . Michel T : The endothelial nitric oxide synthase - caveolin’regulatoi cycle . J Biol Chem 1998 , 273 : 3125 - 3128 . 50 . Feron 0 , Dessy C , Opel DJ , Arstall MA , Kelly RA , Michel T : . Modulation of the endothelial nitric - oxide synthase - caveolin interaction in cardiac myocytes . Implications for the autonomic regulation of heart rate . J Biol Chem 1998 , 273 : 30249 - 30254 . Elegant studies suggesting a role for the CSD of caveolin - in modulating the function of eNOS in regulating myocyte contractility . 51 . 52 . 53 . . Nomura R , lnuo C , Takahashi Y , Asano T , Fujimoto T : Two - dimensional distribution of Gi2a in the plasma membrane : a critical evaluation by immunocytochemistry . FEBS Leti 1997 , 415 : 139 - l 44 . Huang C , Hepler JR , Chen LT , Gilman AG , Anderson RGW , Mumby SM : Organization of G proteins and adenylyl cyclase at the plasma membrane . MO / Biol Cell 1997 , 8 : 2365 - 2378 . Wary KK , Mariotti A , Zurzolo C , Giancotti FG : A requirement for caveolin - l and associated kinase Fyn in integrin signaling and anchorage - dependent cell growth . Cell 1998 , 94 : 625 - 634 . . , _ . ~ . - Normal ( nontranstormed ) cells requfre substratum contact to proliferate . This study suggests a role in this process for a soluble pool of caveolin - 1 , acting as a membrane adaptor to link integrin subunits to Fyn and thus initiating a sequence of events , involving She and GrbP , which lead to cell division . A direct role for caveolin in this process is suggested by immunoprecipitation and by comparison of caveolin - l - expressing , and caveolin - l - deficient , cells . Surprisingly , all tested integrins associated with soluble caveolin - showing that integrin association with caveolin - l is not sufficient for She recruitment , 54 . 55 . 56 . 57 . . . Yamamoto M , Toya Y , Schwencke C , Lisanti MP , Myers MG Jr , lshikawa Y : Caveolin is an activator of insulin receptor signaling . J Biol Chem 1998 , 273 : 26962 - 26968 . Koleske AJ , Baltimore D , Lisanti MP : Reduction of caveolin and caveolae in oncogenically transformed cells . Proc NaN Acad Sci USA 1995 , 92 : 1381 - 1385 . Engelman JA , Wykoff CC , Yasuhara S , Song KS , Okamoto T , Lisanti MP : Recombinant expression of caveolin - l in oncogenically transformed cells abrogates anchorage - independent growth . J Biol Chem 1997 , 272 : 16374 - l 6381 , Galbiati F , Volonte D , Engelman JA , Watanabe G , Burk R , Pestell RG , Lisanti MP : Targeted downregulation of caveolin - l is sufficient to drive cell transformation and hyperactivate the ~ 42144 MAP kinase cascade . EMBO J 1998 , 17 : 6633 - 6648 . Direct evidence of a role for caveolin - l in regulating cell division . NIH3T3 cell lines with reduced caveolin - l expression show anchorage - independent cell growth and form tumors in immunodeficient mice . Caveolin - l deficiency causes hyperactivation of the MAPK cascade . These results , together with evidence for regulated expression of caveolin - l by cell density and growth factors , suggest a vital role for caveolin - l in regulating cell division via the MAPK pathway . 58 . 59 . 60 . 61 . 62 . 63 . 64 . 65 . 66 . 67 . 68 . 69 . 70 . . Engelman JA , Lee RJ , Karnezis A , Bearss DJ , Webster M , Siegel P , Muller WJ , Windle JJ , Pestell RG , Lisanti MP : Reciprocal regulation of neu tyrosine kinase activity and caveolin - l protein expression in vitro and in viva . Implications for human breast cancer . J Biol Chem 1998 , 273 : 20448 - 20455 , Yang G , Truong LD , Timme TL , Ren C , Wheeler TM , Park SH , Nasu Y , Bangma CH , Kattan MW , Scardino PT , Thompson TC : Elevated expression of caveolin is associated with prostate and breast cancer . Clin Cancer Res 1998 , 4 : 1873 - l 880 . Fielding CJ , Fielding PE : Intracellular cholesterol transport . J Lipid Res 1997 , 38 : i 503 - l 521 . Fielding CJ , Bist A , Fielding PE : Caveolin mRNA levels are up - regulated by free cholesterol and down - regulated by oxysterols in fibroblast monolayers . Proc Nat / Acad Sci USA 1997 , 9413753 . 3758 . Hailstones D , Sleer LS , Parton RG , Stanley KK : Regulation of caveolin and caveolae by cholesterol in MDCK cells . J Lipid Res 1998 , 39 : 369 - 379 . Smart EJ , Ying Y , Donzell WC , Anderson RG : A role for caveolin in transport of cholesterol from endoplasmic reticulum to plasma membrane . J Biol Chem 1996 , 271 : 29427 - 29435 . Uittenboaaard A . Yina Y . Smart El : Characterization of a cvtosolic heat - shock protein - caveolin chaperone complex . Involv ; ment in cholesterol trafficking . J Biol Chem 1998 , 273 : 6525 - 6532 . Babitt J , Trigatti B , Rigotti A , Smart EJ , Anderson RG , Xu S , Krieger M : Murine SR - BI , a high density lipoprotein receptor that mediates selective lipid uptake , is N - glycosylated and fatty acylated and colocalizes with plasma membrane caveolae . J Biol Chem 1997 , 272 : 13242 - 13249 . Fielding CJ , Bist A , Fielding PE : Intracellular cholesterol transport in synchronized human skin fibroblasts . Biochemistry 1999 , 38 : 2506 - 2513 . Dupree P , Parton RG , Raposo G , Kurzchalia TV , Simons K : Caveolae and sorting in the trans . Golgi network of epithelial cells . EM60 J 1993 , 12 : 1597 - l 605 . Smart EJ , Ying YS , Conrad PA , Anderson RG : Caveolin moves from caveolae to the Golgi apparatus in response to cholesterol oxidation . J Cell Bioll994 , 127 : 1185 - l 197 . Cooper MK , Porter JA , Young KE , Beachy PA : Teratogen - mediated inhibition of target tissue response to Shh signaling . Science 1998 , 28O : i 603 - l 607 . Osborne TF , Rosenfeld JM : Related membrane domains in proteins of sterol sensing and cell signaling provide a glimpse of treasures still buried within the dynamic realm of intracellular metabolic regulation . Curr Opin Lipidol 1998 , 9 : 137 - l 40 . A review of a fascinating area of cell biology , discussing a family of mem - brane proteins ( Patched , NPCI , 3HMGCoA reductase , and Sterol regula - tory element binding protein ) , which have apparently diverse functions but share conserved sterol - sensing domains . Membrane microdomains and caveolae Kutzchalia and Patton 431 71 . Porter JA , Young KE , Beachy PA : Cholesterol modification of hedgehog signaling proteins in enimel development . Science 1996 , 274 : 255 - 259 . 72 . Furuchi T , Anderson RG : Cholesterol depletion of caveolae causes l * hyperactivation of extracellular signal - related kinase ( ERK ) . J Biol Chem 1998 , 273 : 21099 - 21104 . This study shows for the first time that there is a direct link between caveo - lar domain cholesterol levels and the MAPK pathway . Cholesterol depletion caused a reduction in components of the MAPK cascade associated with a caveolar fraction . Despite this reduction , epidermal growth factor EGF caus - es hyperactivation of the remaining Erk in the fraction . Remarkably , choles - terol depletion alone causes a reversible stimulation of MAPK suggesting that reduced cholesterol is sufficient to activate pathways leading to cell divi - sion . It is oostulated that caveolin - l miaht olav a role as a cholesterol trans - porter involved in maintaining caveolaecholesterol and that inhibition of the MAPK pathway by caveolin expression in transformed cells might occur through an effect on cholesterol . 73 . 74 . 75 . 76 . 77 . 78 . 79 . 80 . Scheel J , Srinivasan J , Honnert U , Henske A , Kurzchalia TV : Involvement of Ceveolin - l in meiotic cell cycle progression in C . elegans . Nat Cell Biol 1999 , 1 : 127 - l 29 . Roy S , Luetterforst R , Harding A , Apolloni A , Etheridge M , Stang E , Rolls B , Hancock JF , Parton RG : Dominant negative caveolin selectively inhibits H - Ras function by disrupting cholesterol - rich domains . Nat Cell Biol 1999 , 1 : 98 - l 05 . Hancock JF , Paterson H , Marshall CJ : A polybasic domain or palmitoylation is required in addition to the CAAK motif to localize p21 ras to the plasma membrane . Ce / / 1990 , 63 : 133 - l 39 . Hiebl - Dirschmied CM , Entler B , Glotzmann C , Maurer Fogy I , Stratowa C , Prohaska R : Cloning and nucleotide sequence of cDNA encoding human erythrocyte band 7 integral membrane protein . Biochim Biophys Acta 1991 , 1090 : 123 - l 24 . Snyers L , Umlauf E , Prohaska R : Oligomeric nature of the integral membrane protein stomatin . J Biol Chem 1998 , 273 : 17221 - l 7226 . Huang M , Gu G , Ferguson EL , Chalfie M : A stomatin - like protein necessary for mechanosensation in C . elegans . Nature 1995 , 376 : 292 - 295 . Bickel PE , Scherer PE , Schnitzer JE , Oh P , Lisanti MP , Lodish HF : Flotillin and epidermal surface antigen define a new family of caveolae - associated integral membrane proteins . J Biol Chem 1997 , 272 : i 3793 - l 3802 . Lang DM , Lommel S , Jung M , Ankerhold R , Petrausch B , Laessing U , Wiechers MF , Plattner H , Stuermer CA : Identification of reggie - 1 and reggie - 2 as plasmamembrane - associated pmteins which cocluster with activated GPI - anchored cell adhesion molecules in non - caveolar micmpatches in neurons . J Neurobiol1998 , 37 : 502 - 523 . 81 . lwabuchi K , Handa K , Hakomori S : Separation of ‘glycosphingolipid signaling domain’ from ceveolin - containing membrane fraction in mouse melanoma 816 cells and its role in cell adhesion coupled with signaling . J Biol Chem 1998 , 273133766 - 33773 . 82 . McNally EM , de Sa Moreira E , Duggan DJ , Bonnemann CG , . Lisanti MP , Lidov HGW , Vainzof M , Passos - Bueno MR , Hoffman EP , Zatz M , Kunkel LM : Ceveolin - 3 in muscular dystrophy . Hum MO / Genet 1998 , 7187 l - 877 . See annotation [ 83 - I . 83 . Minetti C , Sotgia F , Bruno C , Scarteuini P , Broda P , Bado M , . Masetti E , Mazzocco M , Egeo A , Donati MA et aL : Mutations in the caveolin - gene cause eutosomal dominant limb - girdle muscular dystrophy . Nat Genet 1998 , 18 : 365 - 368 . These studies by McNally et a / . [ 82’ ] and Minetti et a / . [ 83’ ] show that in total four different mutations in caveolin - ( three point mutations and a small deletion ) cause a rare form of limb - girdle muscular dystrophy . The elucida - tion of the underlying molecular defects associated with these mutations is a subject of considerable interest . 84 . 85 . 86 . 87 . 88 . 89 . Garver WS , Hsu SC , Erickson RP , Greer WL , Byers DM , Heidenreich RA : Increased expression of caveolin - l in hetemzygous Niemann - Pick type II human fibmblasts . B & hem Biophys f ? es Commun 1997 , 236 : 189 - l 93 . Garver WS , Hossain GS , Winscott MM , Heidenreich RA : The Npcl mutation causes an altered expression of caveolin - l , annexin II and protein kinases and phosphorylation of caveolin - l and annexin II in murine livers . Biochim Biophys Acta 1999 , 1453 : 193 - 206 . Lee SJ , Liyanage U , Bickel PE , Xia W , Lansbury PT Jr , Kosik KS : A detergent - insoluble membrane compartment contains A beta in vivo . Nat Med 1998 , 4 : 730 - 734 . Simons M , Keller P , De Strooper B , Beyreuther K , Dotti CG , Simons K : Cholesterol depletion inhibits the generation of bete - amyloid in hippocampal neurons . Proc Nat / Acad Sci USA 1998 , 95 : 6460 - 6464 . lkezu T , Trapp BD , Song KS , Schlegel A , Lisanti MP , Okamoto T : Caveolae , plasma membrane microdomains for alpha - secretase - mediated processing of the emyloid precursor protein . J Biol Chem 1998 , 273 : 10485 - l 0495 . Howland DS , Trusko SP , Savage MJ , Reaume AG , Lang DM , Hirsch JD , Maeda N , Siman R , Greenberg BD , Scott RW , Flood DG : Modulation of secreted beta - amyloid precursor protein and amyloid beta - peptide in brain by cholesterol . J Biol Chem 1998 , 273 : 16576 - l 6582 .