Mechanics of surface area regulation in cells examined with confined lipid membranes Margarita Staykova , Douglas P . Holmes , Clarke Read , and Howard A . Stone 1 Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering , Princeton University , Princeton , NJ 08544 Edited * by Howard C . Berg , Harvard University , Cambridge , MA , and approved April 7 , 2011 ( received for review February 11 , 2011 ) Cells are wrapped in inelastic membranes , yet they can sustain large mechanical strains by regulating their area . The area regula - tion in cells is achieved either by membrane folding or by mem - brane exo - and endocytosis . These processes involve complex morphological transformations of the cell membrane , i . e . , invagi - nation , vesicle fusion , and fission , whose precise mechanisms are still under debate . Here we provide mechanistic insights into the area regulation of cell membranes , based on the previously neglected role of membrane confinement , as well as on the strain - induced membrane tension . Commonly , the membranes of mammalian and plant cells are not isolated , but rather they are adhered to an extracellular matrix , the cytoskeleton , and to other cell membranes . Using a lipid bilayer , coupled to an elastic sheet , we are able to demonstrate that , upon straining , the confined membrane is able to regulate passively its area . In particular , by stretching the elastic support , the bilayer laterally expands without rupture by fusing adhered lipid vesicles ; upon compression , lipid tubes grow out of the membrane plane , thus reducing its area . These transformations are reversible , as we show using cycles of expansion and compression , and closely reproduce membrane processes found in cells during area regulation . Moreover , we demonstrate a new mechanism for the formation of lipid tubes in cells , which is driven by the membrane lateral compression and may therefore explain the various membrane tubules observed in shrinking cells . supported bilayer ∣ giant vesicles ∣ adhesion C ells change their surface area during physiological processes such as mitosis ( 1 ) , motility , phagocytosis ( 2 ) , and because of mechanical stimulation . For example , neuronal or plant cells regulate their volume and surface area in response to osmotic pressure perturbations ( 3 , 4 ) and the epithelial cells in the urinary tract and lung alveoli undergo cyclic expansion and compression ( 5 , 6 ) . Because the lipid membrane is inelastic and cannot sustain large strains ( 7 ) many cells respond to straining by adding or removing membrane area , through the processes of exo - and endocytosis ( 2 – 4 , 6 , 8 ) . The complex morphological transforma - tions of the cell membrane , such as invagination , fusion , and fission , which occur during exo - and endocytosis , are assisted structurally by various proteins and the composition of the lipid matrix ( 9 , 10 ) , and are mechanically regulated by the membrane tension ( 3 , 11 ) . The latter has been confirmed by observations on cells , which qualitatively indicate that tension is involved in the activation of mechano - sensitive channels , facilitates the fusion process between vesicles and the membrane , and can regulate the rates of exo - and endocytosis ( 5 , 11 , 12 ) . Despite the signifi - cant progress in disentangling the complex cell responses under mechanical stimuli , it remains difficult to identify the processes of major relevance . Moreover , the available studies on area regulation neglect an important characteristic of the cell mem - brane , i . e . , its confinement to extracellular matrix , the cytoskele - ton , other cell membranes , or a solid support . The confinement restricts the modes of the membrane deformation and so influ - ences the mechanisms for surface area regulation . For example , endocytosis has been observed in shrinking protoplasts but not in intact plant cells , which are surrounded by a rigid cell wall ( 13 ) . We approach the complex problem of the regulation of cell area in vitro by introducing an experimental setup , which couples a lipid bilayer to the strain - controlled deformation of an elastic sheet ( Fig . 1 A ) . A fluorescently labeled supported bilayer , com - posed of 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphocholine ( DOPC ) is prepared on a deformable polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) sub - strate ( 14 , 15 ) . For details of the preparation procedures , see Materials and Methods . We modulate the strain of the substrate ( maximal strains on the order of 0 . 3 – 0 . 5 ) , which results in the equibiaxial lateral expansion or compression of the bilayer ( Fig . S1 ) . The structural rearrangements of the membrane in response to the imposed area variations are studied with confocal microscopy . Results and Discussion Confined Lipid Bilayers Adjust Their In - Plane Area When Strained . We first outline the main qualitative results identified with our experiments on the controlled membrane straining , which consist of an expansion step , followed by compression . In the initial state of an unstrained substrate ( Fig . 1 A ) , as a consequence of the pre - paration procedure , the bilayer contains a number of randomly distributed , adhered vesicles ( 14 ) . Upon expansion , which signif - icantly exceeds the critical rupture strain , we observe that the bilayer preserves its integrity ( indicated by the homogeneous fluorescence ) but the number of the vesicles decreases ( Fig . 1 B ) , which suggests their role as a lipid reservoir . Upon compression , the membrane reduces its in - plane area by the expulsion of a multitude of lipid tubes , which have lengths up to 100 μ m and diameters up to few microns ( Fig . 1 C ) . These morphological transformations are discussed in more details below . The membrane response to straining observed with our experi - mental system is entirely passive . It is governed mechanically by the applied lateral strain and the membrane proximity to a con - fining surface . We argue that a similar mechanism is present also in cells . Indeed , our in vitro findings resemble membrane trans - formations observed in cells during surface area regulation ( Fig . 1 D ) . The fusion of vesicles with the expanding bilayer is equivalenttotheexocytosis of cytoplasmic vesicles , which is documented in expanding cells ( 3 , 6 , 8 ) . The tubes formed by compressing the supported bilayers strikingly resemble the microtubular invagina - tions of the membrane observed in shrinking neurons , and renal and plant cells , because such invaginations occur at sites of mem - brane adhesion to a solid substrate or the cell wall ( 3 , 5 , 13 ) . Next , we present the quantitative dynamics of bilayer transformations Author contributions : M . S . , D . P . H . , and H . A . S . designed research ; M . S . and C . R . performed research ; M . S . , D . P . H . , C . R . , andH . A . S . analyzeddata ; andM . S . andH . A . S . wrotethepaper . The authors declare no conflict of interest . * This Direct Submission article had a prearranged editor . 1 To whom correspondence should be addressed . E - mail : hastone @ princeton . edu . This article contains supporting information online at www . pnas . org / lookup / suppl / doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1102358108 / - / DCSupplemental . 9084 – 9088 ∣ PNAS ∣ May 31 , 2011 ∣ vol . 108 ∣ no . 22 www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1102358108 upon expansion and compression ( for procedures , see Materials and Methods ) . Lateral Expansion of the Lipid Membranes is Achieved by Vesicle Absorption . We observe that the magnitude to which a membrane can be expanded depends on the vesicle area adherent to the membrane ( Fig . 2 A ) . Without a lipid reservoir , the bilayer can sustain an area expansion ≈ 0 . 02 ( Fig . 2 B ) , which is comparable to the critical rupture dilation of a giant unilamellar vesicle ( GUV ) ( 7 , 12 ) . In contrast , the supported bilayer analyzed in Fig . 2 A expands at least ten times above this critical value . We observe that during the expansion the relative vesicle area , A ∕ A 0 , adherent to the bilayer decreases linearly with the bilayer expansion , Δ A m ∕ A m 0 ( Fig . 2 A ) . Throughout the whole area of observation , smaller vesicles disappear first , whereas the larger vesicles initially shrink and then are absorbed . Thus , by continu - ously adding lipids , the expanding membrane maintains a con - stant area / molecule , and so maintains a uniform surface tension below the rupture threshold . The important role of the membrane tension in promoting membrane fusion has been already reported in cells ( 12 , 16 , 17 ) . Using our setup , we are able to visualize the details of this process . We add positively charged GUVs that adhere via electrostatic interactions ( 18 ) to the planar bilayer , which is fluorescently labeled by the negative 1 , 2 - dipalmitoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphoethanolamine - N - ( lissamine rhodamine B sulfonyl ) ( ammonium salt ) ( Rh - DPPE ) ( Fig . 2 C , i ) . The adhesion state is accompanied by an exchange of lipids between the GUV and the bilayer ( indicated by changes in their fluorescence ; see Fig . S2 ) , but does not lead to any visible morphological transfor - mations . Only , after a finite expansion of the supporting sub - strate , which increases the surface tension of both the planar bilayer and the adhered GUV , do we observe a hemi - fusion of their proximal leaflets . The hemi - fusion , detected as regions of lower fluorescence in our experiments ( Fig . 2 C , ii ) , is a common intermediate step in the fusion process ( 9 ) . However , contrary to the usual fusion pathway of pore formation within the hemi - fusion region ( 9 , 17 , 19 ) , a pore / pores open on an unadhered portion of the GUV membrane . Thus , our observa - A D B C Fig . 1 . Membrane transformations upon lateral stretching and compression . ( A ) Lipid membrane in the initial state , with firmly adhered vesicles ( diameters , a ≈ 200 nm – 4 μ m ) . The membrane is supported on a thin circular PDMS sheet ( thickness , h ≈ 100 μ m ) , which seals one end of an air - or water - filled microfluidic channel . Controlled positive or negative pressure ( P ) applied by a pump attached to the other end , respectively , inflates or deflates the PDMS sheet , which results in the biaxial lateral expansion or compression of the coupled lipid bilayer ( indicated below each image ) . Confocal micrographs of ( B ) the expanded membrane , where the originally adhered vesicles have been absorbed and ( C ) , the compressed membrane , where expulsion of lipid tubes has occurred . Scale bar : 50 μ m . ( D ) Analogous membrane transformations , observed in osmotically perturbed cells ( 3 , 5 , 13 ) . A B I II III I II III C I II III IV Fig . 2 . Vesicle absorption in an expanding lipid membrane . The bilayer was expanded with a relative rate of 0 . 002 ∕ s . ( A ) Dynamics of vesicle absorption , shown as the dependence of the relative projected vesicle area ( A ∕ A 0 ) adhered to the bilayer to the bilayer relative area increase ( Δ A m ∕ A m 0 ) . A m denotes the area of the in - plane membrane , and , A is the out - of - plane lipid area ( adhered vesicles ) ; the subscript 0 refers to the beginning of the expan - sion , and Δ A m denotes the membrane area increase between two consecu - tive video frames . Three images i , ii , and iii are shown for progressively larger membrane expansion . ( B ) The rupture of a supported bilayer at a critical strain of 0 . 02 ( dotted line ) in the absence of a vesicle reservoir . Black zones indicate rupture locations . ( C ) The absorption of a GUV ( green - yellow ) to the expanding planar bilayer ( red ) shows stages of ( i ) adhesion , ( ii ) hemi - fusion zone and expulsion of the GUV content , and ( iii , iv ) incorporation and diffusion of the vesicle lipids into the bilayer . Scale bars : 20 μ m . Staykova et al . PNAS ∣ May 31 , 2011 ∣ vol . 108 ∣ no . 22 ∣ 9085 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y tions support an alternative fusion pathway , which has been already suggested by molecular simulations ( 20 , 21 ) . The vesicle expels its contents through the pores ( Fig . 2 C , ii ) and forms a flat membrane patch on the supported bilayer , in a process reminis - cent of vesicle rupture on solid substrates ( 22 ) . Further expansion leads to the gradual absorption of the flat patch into the lower bilayer , progressing from the outer rim to the center ( Fig . 2 C , iii and iv ) . The absorption of even larger GUVs may exhibit some variations , including multiple hemi - fusion zones ( Fig . S2 ) . Lateral Compression of Confined Lipid Membranes Results in Forma - tion of Lipid Tubes . To investigate the mechanics of membrane compression we use lipid bilayers , which are left to equilibrate for a few minutes after expansion . In parallel to the compression of the substrate , we observe that the bilayer reduces its surface area through the expulsion of lipid tubes , whose free ends project into the solution . The nucleation of these tubes is observed after a finite relative area compression ( Fig . 3 A ) , which varies from experiment to experiment , and is typically 0 . 02 – 0 . 1 ( Fig . 3 B and Fig . S3 ) . The release of lipid area with compression is achieved through the elongation of the tubes and proceeds line - arly ( Fig . 3 A ) . Examination of single tubes ( Fig . 3 C ) reveals that ( i ) they are nucleated in a narrow range of compressive strains , and ( ii ) their length increases linearly with compression , with elongation rates 0 . 1 – 0 . 3 μ m ∕ s ( Fig . S4 A ) , which results in a max - imum length of about 30 μ m ; in other experiments , equivalent compression leads to fewer but much longer tubes ( Fig . S5 ) . Upon cessation of the compression , the tubes retract during a few hours ( Fig . 3 D ) , which is significantly longer than the relaxa - tion of tethers extracted from GUVs ( 23 ) . To interpret our observations we note that the compressive strain of the substrate translates into in - plane compression of the supported lipid bilayer ( no area relaxation occurs through bending ) , which decreases the area per lipid molecule , and thus the effective tension of the bilayer . At a critical tension , the bilayer destabilizes and expels lipid tubes to relax its area in the plane . A similar type of collapse has been theoretically explained for free - standing lipid monolayers ( 24 ) and bilayers ( 25 , 26 ) , and transiently observed on GUVs upon a rapid lipid exchange ( 27 ) . A difference between prior theory and our experiments arises due to the confinement of our bilayers for which destabilization is influenced by interactions with the substrate . For example , the experimentally observed dynamics of tube expulsion , i . e . , the discrete sites and the different compressive thresholds of tube nu - cleation , as well as the varying elongation rates , suggest , respec - tively , local variations in the bilayer adhesion energy , surface tension , and shear viscosity , which arise presumably from the nonhomogenous interactions with the substrate . Similar hetero - geneities are expected to occur in cells . We have not been able to study the structure of the tubes with submicroscopic resolution , but recent research suggests that they are hollow cylinders en - closed by a bilayer wall ( 28 ) . The elongation of the lipid tubes with further compression may be rationalized by a Marangoni flow , as observed in lipid tethers connecting vesicles of different tension ( 29 , 30 ) . The apparent stability of the tubes may be ex - plained by the higher shear modulus of the supported bilayer , which slows the membrane bending kinetics , and the equilibrated tension at the cessation of the compression . Finally , we note that lipid tubes were previously shown to form in vivo in cells by molecular motors exerting point forces ( 31 ) or by the curving of the membrane through molecular ( 32 ) and chemical interac - tions ( 33 ) . Our observations indicate a unique passive route for tube formations , determined solely by mechanical constraints on the membrane . Lipid Bilayers Reversibly Adjust Their Area . Cells must reversibly change their surface area during cycles of stress . To probe the reversibility of the induced membrane transformations we use cycles of mechanical expansion and compression . The response of a bilayer , with tubes formed upon a previous compression , to a new cycle of expansion is shown in Fig . 4 . By measuring the projected area of the tubes as a function of the membrane expan - A B D C Fig . 3 . Tube formation upon membrane compression . ( A ) Dynamics of tube expulsion , shown as the dependence of the relative projected tube area ( A ∕ A f ) to the relative membrane area compression , Δ A m ∕ A m 0 . The subscript f refers to the end of the compression and Δ A m denotes the membrane area decrease between two consecutive video frames . Confocal micrographs of the tubes in the initial ( i ) , intermediate ( ii ) , and final ( iii ) stages of the compression are provided . Scale bar : 10 μ m . ( B ) Critical compressive strain for tube nucleation , as determined from many experiments . ( C ) The relative increase of the tube length , L ( micrometers ) as a function of Δ A m ∕ A m 0 is shown for three tubes . A schematic of our interpretation of the mechanism underlying the tube formation are depicted in i , ii , and iii . ( D ) Tube retraction time at the cessation of the compression . 9086 ∣ www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1102358108 Staykova et al . sion , Δ A m ∕ A m 0 , and comparing with the optical images , we distinguish two regimes in the dynamics of the tube absorption . After a finite relative expansion Δ A m ∕ A m 0 , there is a rapid decrease in the projected tube area , which reflects the simulta - neous retraction of the tubes into spherical shapes ( Fig . 4 A , i and ii ) . This process occurs about 150 times faster than the pas - sive tube relaxation ( Fig . S4 B ) , but is slower than retraction of lipid tethers in GUVs ( 23 ) . The retraction may follow two path - ways : a gradual retraction ( Fig . 4 B ) or a snap - like transition into spherical formations ( Fig . 4 C ) . The retraction phase is followed by a slower phase of gradual absorption of the spherical lipid formations into the expanding bilayer . Because of insufficient microscopic resolution , we are unable to say whether these for - mations are vesicles or lipid aggregates but we note that similar lipid aggregates have been observed by transmission electron microscopy in shrinking plant guard cells ( 13 ) . Finally , we observe that during cyclic expansion and compression , tubes form and retract recurrently at the same location on the bilayer . This result is consistent with observations on cells ( 3 , 5 ) and can be explained by the discrete adhesion of the cell membrane to the confining surfaces . In summary , our in vitro findings imply that changes in the surface tension upon lateral straining directly trigger compensa - tory remodeling of lipid membranes , which depends solely on the physical properties of the lipid matrix and the effects of the membrane confinement . The generality of our findings and their similarity to observations on real cells suggest that similar mechanisms may also be employed by cells for surface area regulation . Moreover , our observation that lipid tubes form mechanically from confined and laterally compressed membranes indicate a unique passive pathway for their formation . As already suggested in the literature , such a mechanism may play an impor - tant role for preserving the adhesion contacts of cells during area variations ( 34 ) . Moreover , the mechanism is also expected to be applicable to membranes laterally compressed by rapid intake of lipids or proteins ( 27 , 28 ) . Our future research will address the details of the membrane confinement ( e . g . , adhesion strength , discretization of adhesion contacts ) and the influence of the strain rate and the bilayer composition on membrane remodeling upon expansion and com - pression . We are also interested in the cooperativity of the struc - tural rearrangements of expanding or compressing membranes , for example the mutual interactions between tubes and their conformational response to , for example , curvature - sensitive molecules . Materials and Methods Chemicals . DOPC , 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - 3 - trimethylammonium - propane ( chloride salt ) ( DOTAP ) , Rh - DPPE , 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphoethanolamine - N - ( lissa - mine rhodamine B sulfonyl ) ( ammonium salt ) ( Rh - DOPE ) , and 1 - oleoyl - 2 - [ 12 - [ ( 7 - nitro - 2 - 1 , 3 - benzoxadiazol - 4 - yl ) amino ] lauroyl ] - sn - Glycero - 3 - phosphocho - line ( NBD - PC ) were all purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids . Chloroform , trizma hydrichloride ( Tris · HCl ) , and sucrose were purchased from Sigma Aldrich . Materials . For the experimental setup we use PDMS and curing agent from Dow Corning ( Sylgard 184 Silicone Elastomer Kit , catalog no . 240 401 9862 ) , microscope slides from Fisher Scientific ( catalog no 12 - 544 - 1 ) , and cover glasses from VWR ( catalog no . 48366 045 ) . For the preparation procedure of GUVs we used Indium Tin Oxide coated glasses ( ITO glasses ) from Delta Technologies ( no . X180 ) . Supported Lipid Bilayer . Supported bilayers are prepared using standard vesicle fusion technique ( 15 , 35 , 36 ) . A thin film of 1 mg lipids ( DOPC and Rh - DPPE in a 99 . 5 / 0 . 5 mol % ratio ) is dried overnight under vacuum on the walls of a glass vial . The dried lipid film is rehydrated in a Tris · HCl buffer ( 10 mM Tris · HCl , 150 mM NaCl , 2 mM CaCl2 , adjusted with 1 M HCl to pH ≈ 7 . 5 ) to a concentration of 0 . 5 mg lipids / mL , resulting in the formation of a turbid suspension , which is then sonicated using a probe sonicator ( Bran - son ) for 10 min at 40 % power to obtain small unilamellar vesicles ( SUV ) . A dilution of the SUVs suspension with Tris · HCl buffer at a 20 ∶ 1 volume ratio is spread over the clean hydrophilic PDMS surface ( see below ) , in a volume created by a 1 × 1 × 0 . 5 cm gasket . Incubation for about 30 – 60 min results in the formation of a supported lipid bilayer . The excess of unfused vesicles is removedbywashingwithultrapurewater . Forthemicroscopicrecordingsthe whole volume is then sealed with a coverslip . In the absence of large defects , fluorescently labeled DOPC bilayers on PDMS planar substrates are known to be homogenous ( 15 ) , except for some vesicles adhered onto the bilayer ( 14 ) . The number of vesicles depends on the buffer composition , the incubation time , the extent of washing , etc . To prove that the choice of the fluorescent marker does not influence the results , we perform also experiments with SUVs , labeled by Rh - DOPE or NBD - PC . Experimental Setup . PDMS ( with 10 wt % curing agent ) stamps of a straight microfluidic channel are manufactured by the soft lithography technique ( 37 ) . On the PDMS stamp , we punch two holes of 1 mm in diameter with a biopsy puncher ( Miltex ) at both ends of the channel and plasma - seal it to a microscope slide to close the channel . The inlet hole is connected via a polyethylene tube to a syringe . Over the second hole , we bond a 100 μ m thick PDMS sheet ( obtained by spin - coating PDMS ) , whose surface above the channel will serve as a support for the lipid bilayer . Note that the microfluidic channel is used only to apply pressure on the PDMS sheet ; therefore , its dimensions are not of major importance . The PDMS surface is cleaned via sonication for 10 min in ethanol , followed by water , and its surface is converted tohydrophilic via exposure toplasmafor 10 s in a Harrick Plasma Cleaner / Sterilizer PDC - 32G at maximum power , shortly before introducing the lipids . Stretching and Compressing Lipid Membranes . It has been shown that lipid bilayers strongly couple to PDMS surfaces ( 15 ) . Therefore , to induce lateral expansion or compression of the bilayer , we simply expand or compress the area of the PDMS sheet underneath by applying pressure via a microsyringe A B C I II III I II III Tube Collapse Absorption Fig . 4 . Tube retraction in an expanding lipid bilayer . ( A ) Projected relative area of the tubes and later of the spherical formations ( A ∕ A 0 ) versus the relative membrane area expansion Δ A m ∕ A m 0 , as measured on the same bi - layer sample fordifferentexpansion cycles ( open and closedcircles ) . Confocal micrographs are provided of ( i ) the beginning and ( ii ) the end of the tube collapse phase , and ( iii ) the consequent stage of aggregate absorption . Scale bar : 20 μ m . Decrease of the tube length ( L ∕ L 0 ) as a function of Δ A m ∕ A m 0 de - picts two different dynamics : gradual tube shortening into an aggregate ( B ) and tube shortening followed by a rapid collapse into an aggregate ( C ) . Staykova et al . PNAS ∣ May 31 , 2011 ∣ vol . 108 ∣ no . 22 ∣ 9087 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y pump ( Harvard Apparatus ) . A positive pressure underneath the PDMS sheet will inflate it , which leads to equibiaxial stretching of its surface area . A consequent deflation of the PDMS balloon will lead to a surface area com - pression . The rates of increasing / decreasing the pressure in the channel , as controlled via the syringe pump , and the consequent rates of inflation / deflation of the PDMS sheet , are linearly proportional to the rate of surface area change of the PDMS sheet , but only for small area variations . Above approximately 25 % area variation from the flat initial state , the area of the PDMS sheet changes more rapidly ( Fig . S1 A ) , which is in agreement with the nonlinearity associated with inflating / deflating a thin - walled shell ( 38 ) . Therefore , controlled rate experiments are possible by properly calibrating the PDMS expansion . Preparation of GUVs . GUVs are prepared from DOPC , DOTAP , and the fluorescent lipid NBD - PC in 94 / 3 / 3 mol percent , using the electro - formation method ( 39 ) . A small amount of the 4 mM lipid mixture in chloroform is dried overtheconductivesurfaceoftwoindium tinoxide ( ITO ) glassslides . Acham - ber constructed from these ITO surfaces , and separated by a 2 mm - thick Teflon gasket , is filled with 0 . 1 M sucrose solution and subjected to an alter - nating current ( 900 mV , 10 Hz frequency ) . After about 4 h , we obtain GUVS with an average size of 20 μ m . A small amount of the GUV suspension is introduced to the chamber containing the supported bilayer in Tris · HCl buffer ( at room temperature ) . The denser and positively charged vesicles ( containing DOTAP ) sediment and adhere by electrostatic forces on the slightly negatively charged supported bilayer ( containing Rh - DPPE ) . Image Analysis . The membrane transformations during PDMS expansion and compression are recorded by an inverted confocal laser scanning microscope ( Leica Microsystems ) , in a time sequence of confocal micrographs ( one frame per 1 . 3 s ) . For the analysis , we define on the first image a small rectangular area on the supported bilayer , where at least four vesicles are unabsorbed , and follow the change in the area for every image in the sequence . The selected area must be around the center of the circular PDMS sheet to ensure that it is under an equibiaxial strain . We use a homemade MATLAB code to estimate the two - dimensional projected area of the vesicles / tubes onto the selection area of the bilayer . Because the tubes and the adhered vesicles appear brighter than the bilayer in the plane , we simplycount thepixels with an intensity above a certain threshold for every frame taken during the membrane expansion and compression . Next , we obtain the relative pro - jected areas , by dividing the current area by the initial ( for expansion ) or the final ( for compression ) projected area . The lipid tubes assume random configurations in space , which constantly vary in time . Therefore , the mea - sure of the relative projected area reflects dynamics of the changes in the area during vesicle absorption and tube expulsion . We use ImageJ to estimate the projected length of the tubes by manually tracing them . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . We thank S . Lecuyer and P . Kim for help with experi - ments and P . Nassoy and L . Staykov for helpful feedback . We thank Princeton University and the Project X Fund for financial support . 1 . Boucrot E , Kirchhausen T ( 2007 ) Endosomal recycling controls plasma membrane area during mitosis . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 : 7939 – 7944 . 2 . Kay RR , Langridge P , Traynor D , Hoeller O ( 2008 ) Surface area regulation : Underex - plored yet crucial in cell motility . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9 : 662 ( lett ) . 3 . Morris E , Homann U ( 2001 ) Cell surface area regulation and membrane tension . J Membr Biol 179 ( 2 ) : 79 – 102 . 4 . Shope JC , DeWald DB , Mott KA ( 2003 ) Changes in surface area of intact guard cells are correlated with membrane internalization . Plant Physiol 133 : 1314 – 1321 . 5 . ApodacaG ( 2002 ) Modulationofmembranetrafficbymechanicalstimuli . AmJPhysiol Renal Physiol 282 : 179 – 190 . 6 . Fisher J , Levitan I , Margulies S ( 2004 ) Plasma membrane surface increases with tonic stretch of alveolar epithelial cells . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 31 : 200 – 208 . 7 . Evans E , Hochmuth R - M ( 1978 ) Topics in Membrane and Transport , eds A Kleinzeller and FEC Bronner ( Academic , New York ) , Vol 10 , pp 1 – 64 . 8 . Groulx N , Boudreault F , Orlov S , Grygorczyk R ( 2006 ) Membrane reserves and hypotonic cell swelling . J Membr Biol 214 ( 1 ) : 43 – 56 . 9 . ChernomordikL , KozlovM ( 2008 ) Mechanicsof membranefusion . Nat StructMolBiol 15 : 675 – 683 . 10 . Lenz M , Morlot S , Roux A ( 2009 ) Mechanical requirements for membrane fission : Common facts from various examples . FEBS Lett 583 : 3839 – 3846 . 11 . DaiJ , SheetzM ( 1995 ) Regulationof endocytosis , exocytosis , andshape bymembrane tension . Cold Spring Harbor Symp Quant Biol 60 : 567 – 571 . 12 . Hamill O , Martinac B ( 2001 ) Molecular basis of mechanotransduction in living cells . Physiol Rev 81 : 685 – 740 . 13 . Li B , et al . ( 2010 ) Excretion and folding of plasmalemma function to accommodate alterations in guard cell volume during stomatal closure in Vicia faba L . J Exp Bot 61 : 3749 – 3758 . 14 . Nollert P , Kiefer H , Jähnig F ( 1995 ) Lipid vesicle adsorption versus formation of planar bilayers on solid - surfaces . Biophys J 69 : 1447 – 1455 . 15 . Sanii B , Smith A , Butti R , Brozell A , Parikh A ( 2008 ) Bending membranes on demand : Fluid phospholipid bilayers on topographically deformable substrates . Nano Lett 8 : 866 – 871 . 16 . Finkelstein A , Zimmerberg J , Cohen FS ( 1986 ) Osmotic swelling of vesicles — its role in thefusionofvesicleswithplanarphospholipid - bilayermembranesanditspossiblerole in the exocytosis . Annu Rev Physiol 48 : 163 – 174 . 17 . Grafmüller A , Shillcock J , Lipowsky R ( 2007 ) Pathway of membrane fusion with two tension - dependent energy barriers . Phys Rev Lett 98 : 218101 . 18 . Solon J , Streicher P , Richter R , Brochard - Wyart F , Bassereau P ( 2006 ) Vesicles surfing on a lipid bilayer : Self - induced haptotactic motion . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 : 12382 – 12387 . 19 . Haluska C , et al . ( 2006 ) Timescales of membrane fusion revealed by direct imaging of vesiclefusionwithhightemporalresolution . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 103 : 15841 – 15846 . 20 . Müller M , Katsov K , Schick M ( 2003 ) A new mechanism of model membrane fusion determined from Monte Carlo simulations . Biophys J 85 : 1611 – 1623 . 21 . Smeijers AF , Markvoort AJ , Pieterse K , Hilbers PAJ ( 2006 ) A detailed look at vesicle fusion . J Phys Chem B 110 : 13212 – 13219 . 22 . LenzP , JohnsonJM , ChanY - HM , BoxerSG ( 2006 ) Tension - inducedporeformationand leakage in adhering vesicles . Europhys Lett 75 : 659 – 665 . 23 . Rossier O , et al . ( 2003 ) Giant vesicles under flows : Extrusion and retraction of tubes . Langmuir 19 : 575 – 584 . 24 . Baoukina S , Monticelli L , Jelger - Risselada H , Marrink SJ , Tieleman DP ( 2008 ) The molecular mechanism of lipid monolayer collapse . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105 : 10803 – 10808 . 25 . Rao M , Sarasij R ( 2001 ) Active fusion and fission processes on a fluid membrane . Phys Rev Lett 87 : 128101 . 26 . GirardP , JuelicherF , ProstJ ( 2004 ) Fluidmembranesexchangingmaterialwithexternal reservoirs . Eur Phys J E Soft Matter Biol Phys 14 : 387 – 394 . 27 . Solon J , et al . ( 2006 ) Negative tension induced by lipid uptake . Phys Rev Lett 97 : 098103 . 28 . Domanov YA , Kinnunen PK ( 2006 ) Antimicrobialpeptides Temporins B and L induce formation of tubular lipid protrusions from supported phospholipid bilayers . Biophys J 91 : 4427 – 4439 . 29 . Karlsson R , et al . ( 2002 ) Moving - wall - driven flows in nanofluidic systems . Langmuir 18 : 4186 – 4190 . 30 . Dommersnes P , Orwar O , Brochard - Wyart F , Joanny J ( 2005 ) Marangoni transport in lipid nanotubes . Europhys Lett 70 : 271 – 277 . 31 . Roux A , et al . ( 2002 ) A minimal system allowing tubulation with molecular motors pulling on giant liposomes . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99 : 5394 – 5399 . 32 . Stachowiak JC , Hayden CC , Sasaki DY ( 2010 ) Steric confinement of proteins on lipid membranes can drive curvature and tubulation . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107 : 7781 – 7786 . 33 . Fournier JB , Khalifat N , Puff N , Angelova MI ( 2009 ) Chemically triggered ejection of membrane tubules controlled by intermonolayer friction . Phys Rev Lett 102 : 018102 . 34 . Morris CE ( 2001 ) Mechanosensitive membrane traffic and an optimal strategy for volume and surface area regulation in CNS neurons . Am Zool 41 : 721 – 727 . 35 . HovisJS , BoxerSG ( 2001 ) Patterningandcompositionarraysofsupportedlipidbilayers by microcontact printing . Langmuir 17 : 3400 – 3405 . 36 . Subramaniam A , Lecuyer S , Ramamurthi K , Losick R , Stone HA ( 2010 ) Particle / fluid interface replication as a means of producing topographically patterned polydi - methylsiloxane surfaces for deposition of lipid bilayers . Adv Mater 22 : 2142 – 2147 . 37 . Duffy DC , McDonald JC , Shueller OJA , Whitesides GM ( 1998 ) Rapid prototyping of microfluidic systems in poly ( dimethylsiloxane ) . Anal Chem 70 : 4974 – 4984 . 38 . Gent AH ( 2005 ) Elastic instabilities in rubber . Int J Non Linear Mech 40 : 165 – 175 . 39 . Angelova M , Dimitrov DS ( 1986 ) Liposome electroformation . Faraday Discuss 81 : 303 – 311 . 9088 ∣ www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1102358108 Staykova et al . Supporting Information Staykova et al . 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1102358108 Fig . S1 . Relative expansion of the polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) and the supported bilayer . ( A ) Rate of surface area expansion of the PDMS substrate , Δ A PDMS ∕ A PDMS 0 . To estimate the area expansion of the PDMS sheet we define an initial area by some visible defects on the sheet and follow their displacement throughout the inflation . ( B ) The expansion of the PDMS sheet , Δ A PDMS ∕ A PDMS 0 causes an equal in magnitude area expansion of the supported bilayer , Δ A m ∕ A m 0 . The consecutive points on the line correspond to equivolume inflation steps . The increasing distance between the points for larger area variation corresponds to an increased rate of area expansion . Fig . S2 . Absorptionofgiant unilamellar vesicle ( GUV ) byan expandinglipid bilayer . A selection ofimagesfrom thetime sequencefollowingtheabsorption of GUV ( green ) onto a supported lipid bilayer ( red ) . Because of an exchange of lipids between GUV and the supported bilayer , GUV fluoresces also in red . ( A ) Adhesion zone between the GUVand the supported bilayer at the start of the expansion . There is a lipid flow from the vesicle to the stretched bilayer through this zone , which results in a decreasing GUV size parallel to the bilayer expansion . ( B ) Formation of several hemifusion sites in the adhesion zone between the two lipid membranes , which appear with lower fluorescentintensity . ( C ) The area ofthehemifusion sites increases and thediameter of theGUV decreases with further expansion of the bilayer . The expulsion of the vesicle content in the surrounding medium is also captured . ( D ) The upper unadhered membrane of the emptied vesicle lays flat on the lower bilayer , forming a double membrane patch . The brighter fluorescence on one side of the contact rim , presumably indicates local destabilization of the membrane . ( E ) The double membrane patch disintegrates into smaller vesicles , starting from the destabilized zone . ( F ) Smaller vesicles absorb further into the expanding bilayer . Scale bar : 50 μ m . Staykova et al . www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1102358108 1 of 2 Fig . S3 . Critical compressive strain for tube nucleation , as a function of the vesicle density adhered to the bilayer , at the onset of the compression . A trend is observed that supported bilayers with imperfections , i . e . , many attached vesicles or lipid aggregates at sites of visual PDMS defects , tend to expel tubes at lower compressive strains . Fig . S4 . Velocities of tube extraction and retraction . ( A ) Tube elongation , L ( micrometers ) during bilayer compression as a function of time . The average elongation velocity is about 0 . 4 μ m / s . The decrease in the rate of tube elongation with time coincides with the decrease in the area compression rate of the bilayer ( see Fig . S1 A ) . ( B ) Fast retraction of tubes versus time upon the expansion of the bilayer , showing two dynamics : a gradual ( diamond ) and a snap - like ( inverted triangle ) retraction of tubes to vesicles . Fig . S5 . Tether morphology . Two bilayers , whose surface areas have been equally compressed by 25 % exhibit different tube morphologies : fewer and very long lipid tubes ( A ) , or many but short tubes ( B ) . Note that not all vesicles are nucleation sites for tube . Scale bar : 50 μ m . Staykova et al . www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1102358108 2 of 2