Operational Research for the Real World : big questions from a small island $ G Royston (cid:2) Operational Research Society , Birmingham , UK The address explores three questions that are important for operational research : ‘Where do we come from ? ’ , ‘What are we ? ’ and ‘Where are we going ? ’ First , it looks brieﬂy at the history of O . R . from Babbage to Blackett and the importance of a ‘union of theory and practice’ in our work . Then it looks at O . R . ’s identity and image and argues that we do have a reasonably clear idea of our identity , although we do not give sufﬁcient prominence to our contribution to improving system design . It also argues that the ‘brand image’ of O . R . has become diluted and needs to be simple , distinctive , relevant and compelling . In considering how we might achieve that , by addressing the third question , it proposes that we should grow our capability and activity in accommodating ‘analytics’ , in building in behavioural science , in coping with complex systems , in developing design thinking and in encouraging evaluation . It also suggests strengthening bridges between academics and practitioners , between those working in different specialisms and in diverse sectors and between O . R . and the public . Finally , it argues that such developments would assist O . R . to reinforce our bridge between science and the humanities and enable us to better meet the challenges of the ‘real world’ . Journal of the Operational Research Society ( 2013 ) 64 , 793 – 804 . doi : 10 . 1057 / jors . 2012 . 188 Published online 3 April 2013 Keywords : History of O . R ; Philosophy of O . R ; Practice of O . R . Introduction In the early April of 1891 , an artist in search of a simpler life set out on a journey half way round the world . He would be voyaging at sea for two months , heading for a small island in the South Paciﬁc . The artist was Paul Gauguin and the island was Tahiti . Tahiti inspired Gauguin to create a series of astounding post - impressionist paintings . Probably the most famous is the one he created in 1897 and which he considered to be his ﬁnest work . The painting is entitled ( in French ) ‘ Where do we come from ? What are we ? Where are we going ? ’ This painting has been with the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston , Massachusetts , since 1936 . They purchased it for $ 80000 . Today , it would probably cost a thousand times as much . We will return to Tahiti at the end of this talk , but for now let us take from that small island Gauguin’s three big questions as valuable ones for us in operational research . In what follows , I am going to speak mainly about O . R . rather than the OR Society , but I shall refer in a few places to the latter ; the past , present and futures of both are of course intertwined . Where do we come from ? Modern origins The ﬁrst recorded application of operational research , under that speciﬁc name , took place in 1937 – 1939 at Bawdsey Research Station by teams led by Eric ( ‘Bill’ ) Williams and Geoffrey Roberts , directed from the outbreak of WW2 by Harold Larnder . The name ‘operational research’ appears to have been coined by Bawdsey’s Superintendent , A . P . Rowe , secretary of the renowned Committee for the Scientiﬁc Survey of Air Defence , chaired by Sir Henry Tizard . This work was on analysis to improve the design and performance of an air defence information system that integrated radar with other observational , data transmis - sion and interpretation tools . This system has been estimated to have doubled the efﬁcacy of UK ﬁghter command in the Battle of Britain . National survival was then hanging in the balance . A small reduction in air power would almost certainly have led to a very different result . A similar critical tipping of the military balance has been credited to wartime operational research on the ﬁght at sea . This was the work of Patrick Blackett and his O . R . teams—particularly on convoy protection measures . Blackett was a key member of the Tizard committee and was of course to become pivotal in leading and disseminat - ing O . R . during the war . Journal of the Operational Research Society ( 2013 ) 64 , 793 – 804 © 2013 Operational Research Society Ltd . All rights reserved . 0160 - 5682 / 13 www . palgrave - journals . com / jors / $ Inaugural Presidential Address , given at OR54 in Edinburgh on 4 September 2012 . (cid:2) Correspondence : G Royston , Burton Leonard , Harrogate HG3 3SJ , UK . E - mail : geoff . royston @ gmail . com The stories of Blackett’s Circus and other wartime O . R . teams have often been told and I am not going to recount them again here—I strongly recommend reading the fascinating accounts provided by Maurice Kirby in the Society’s own History of O . R . ‘ Operational Research in War and Peace ’ ( Kirby , 2003 ) . Those wanting to dig into the history of O . R . will also ﬁnd much of interest in the book by Saul Gass and Arjang Assad , giving an O . R . timeline from the middle ages ( Gass and Assad , 2005 ) . Blackett is recognised as the father of O . R . , but I want to look a bit further back . There is some fun to be had in looking for the early origins of O . R . Forerunners can be found in the ancient world . For example the Greek mathematician and engineer Archimedes , living in another small island , Sicily , applied scientiﬁc methods to design equipment and devise techni - ques to counter the Roman army attacks on Syracuse , and is often credited as being the ﬁrst operational researcher . But we can ﬁnd a more immediate forbear of O . R . in yet another small island , Britain . A Victorian grandparent On the walls of an NHS clinic in Walworth , near the Elephant and Castle in London , there is a blue commem - orative plaque to man born in 1791—exactly a century before Gauguin set out for Tahiti . It is for the mathema - tician and inventor Charles Babbage . We all know of Babbage because of his legacy to computing , devising ‘Difference’ and ‘Analytical’ mechan - ical calculating engines . The problems he ran into with constructing these are well known but his astonishing designs were entirely sound , as demonstrated by the suc - cessful completion in 1991—the bicentenary of Babbage’s birth—at the Science Museum of the ‘Difference Engine No . 2’ to his design of around 1848 . It has 8000 parts , is 11 feet long and weighs 5 tons . It works perfectly ( Swade , 2000 ) . Given the importance of computers to O . R . that link alone might justify us paying some attention to Babbage . But Babbage was a polymath with interests and achieve - ments in many other ﬁelds including machine tools , cryptography , ophthalmology , telecommunications and rail transport . ( He invented cow - catchers and conceived the idea of ‘black box’ accident recorders . ) In many of these , Babbage was concerned with issues beyond the purely technical , advocating the systematic deployment of science and technology to support industry and commerce and promoting what he described as the ‘union of theory and practice’ . In pursuit of that union , Babbage visited many factories and other businesses , to understand their practices and uncover general principles on which they operated . He also carried out a number of extended in - depth studies in this ﬁeld . One was on the postal service where his analysis showed that the cost incurred by charging for letters according to distance travelled far exceeded the cost of the transportation itself , work that led Rowland Hill to introduce the ﬂat rate ‘penny post’ . Another was Babbage’s work on the safety and comfort of rail travel on Brunel’s Great Western Railway for which Babbage devised and constructed a vehicle and its instrumentation to take and record automated measurements of speed , vibration , etc— thought to be the ﬁrst example of what we now call a dynamometer car . ( On one occasion during this work , Babbage , having been informed the line was clear , was about to proceed out of a siding with his heavy experimental vehicle when he heard to his surprise an engine coming the other way down the main line . Its driver was Brunel himself , making an unscheduled trip , and also believing the line to be clear , moving at extraordinary speed . England had narrowly avoided the simultaneous loss of two of its 19th century geniuses . ) Babbage is often understandably described as the father of computing , but his biographers also describe him as a pioneer of operational research ( Hyman , 1982 ) . He would have a good claim to the title of Victorian grandfather of O . R . One of his most inﬂuential books ‘ On the Economy of Machinery and Manufactures ’ ( Babbage , 1832 ) —a best seller in its time , its ﬁrst edition sold out in two months— demonstrates why he merits this accolade . In it Babbage constantly emphasises the need for rigorous analysis and reliable data in seeking to tackle problems of industry and commerce , obtainable through becoming intimately ac - quainted with the actual processes concerned . He empha - sises the importance of asking the right question . And he comes up with some remarkably modern - sounding con - cepts—for instance , he pointed out the need for a system - wide perspective in considering the impact of introducing a new piece of equipment into a workplace . So , what messages do these glimpses of O . R . ’s past have for us ? I would pick three . First , that the WW2 work and the earlier work of Babbage were concerned with drawing out key insights and general principles about , respectively , the performance of military operations or industrial processes through obser - ving and analysing them in their working environment— the union of theory and practice . Second , that the products of this early and pre - history were innovative designs for improving ‘real world’ systems—like the WW2 UK air defence system or the Victorian postal service . Third , maybe we mention the war too much , but to be able to point to at least two achievements where O . R . contributions are reckoned to have tipped the scales when national survival hung in the balance is a history of which surely we can be justiﬁably proud . 794 Journal of the Operational Research Society Vol . 64 , No . 6 What are we ? A problem of identity ? Anybody who has been involved in operational research will know that over the years there has been much soul - searching over questions of identity . I think there are some real issues around this , but perhaps not quite what they are often stated to be . Identity should not be confused with name or image . The latter are important , and I will be saying something about both of them , but identity is fundamentally about what something is . Now this is not really about deﬁnition , the philosopher Wittgenstein noted that we don’t have to deﬁne something to know what it is , as he demonstrated by showing that it is hard to deﬁne what makes a game a game—deﬁnitions based on , say , cricket are unlikely to capture , say , chess—but pointing out that everybody knows one when they see one . Identiﬁcation is more a case of looking for certain key characteristics and ﬁnding enough of them to be present to recognise what you are looking at . So how would we recognise work as operational research ? I would be looking out for three identiﬁcation marks in particular : K a focus on improving the design , management and per - formance in their usual environment of , often complex , systems typically involving the organisation of physical resources , people and information ; K involvement with users , decision makers and other stakeholders in exploring the working of these sys - tems and identifying , assessing and helping implement options for improvement ; K use of rigorous—often quantitative—analysis , drawing on data from , observation of and sometimes experi - mentation on the relevant system , typically involving construction of a model ( mathematical , computational , logical , visual or otherwise ) , which addresses the design and decision issues of concern . You will recognise similarities here with other descrip - tions , not least the one that used to appear in the Society’s main journal . Obviously any such outlines will have limitations—for a start I think the pioneers of O . R . would want to see mention of multidisciplinary team working . Nevertheless , I don’t think that there is anything like as much of a problem of knowing what we are about as has sometimes been suggested . In brief , we are about using analytical and modelling methods to inform decisions about the direction and management of enterprises and to improve their design and performance in the ‘real world’ . We have I think a rea - sonably clear view of what I think marketing folk would term our particular ‘brand idea’ . The O . R . ideal of multi - disciplinarity , or at least of practitioners drawing upon skills and knowledge from various disciplines ( Mu¨ller - Merbach , 2009 ) , need not conﬂict with that distinctive - ness—consider , for example , the general practitioner in medicine whose distinctive identity lies precisely in having a broad systemic approach . There is , however , one particular aspect of what we are about , which seems not to be given the prominence it deserves . We rightly describe our work as being to inform management decisions , but this appears to be at the expense of portraying our work as being to improve system design . If we look at O . R . work from the per - spective of a standard problem – solution cycle , from initial exploration and discovery to eventual implemen - tation and delivery , with learning going on at each stage ( and ideally more formal evaluation at the completion of the cycle ) , then I would place design and decision as its two central components . I said something about this in a recent leader article for Inside O . R . and I will elaborate a little on that here . Design thinking The focus on improvement rather than on knowledge for its own sake immediately distinguishes O . R . from any pure academic discipline and places us in the domain of pro - fessions like medicine , law , engineering or architecture . Indeed , the O . R . professional is often in a similar position to an architect , and not just because we both work with models . Although in O . R . we may sometimes be asked to help with a well - deﬁned decision problem , typically , like the architect , we are given—or ﬁnd—a much more open - ended challenge : conceiving and creating something that will improve a situation . That is a broad question of design . The concept of design in modern use is not limited to the creation of physical objects but includes abstract artefacts such as software , systems or strategies and extends from working on changes in physical space to working on changes over time . So designing is a key part of the work of planners and managers . Indeed , what has usefully been termed ‘design thinking’ is beginning to penetrate manage - ment in both civil ( Martin , 2009 ; Wastell , 2010 ) and military ( de Czege , 2009 ) arenas . What about O . R . ? We are often intimately involved in designing systems through simulation , scenario analysis and so on . Yet O . R . is persistently characterised as being primarily concerned with the important but narrower task of assisting decisions . This sells O . R . short . ‘Design thinking’ should in my view be a fundamental , conscious and explicit part of the work of an operational research professional . A wider vision of O . R . The importance of design for operational research and management science was for - mally recognised by early luminaries such as the Nobel laureate Herbert Simon . Simon said that design , construed G Royston— Operational Research for the Real World 795 as the process of devising courses of action to improve situations , should be the core of training in any profes - sion . He called for ‘ a science of design ’ , which would concern itself with topics such as the representation of design problems and the search for alternatives . He included in his seminal book ‘ The Sciences of the Artiﬁcial ’ many of the then new methods of operational research ( Simon , 1969 ) . Simon warned that design skills were being squeezed out of management training , warnings which were radically extended by Russ Ackoff , who argued that such skills were also being sidelined in management science and operational research . In a paper ( Ackoff , 1979 ) that created major shockwaves when he delivered it ( as one of a pair ) at the ORS Annual Conference in 1978 , Ackoff stated that traditional techniques of analysis—techniques he himself had done so much to promulgate—were insufﬁcient for tackling important managerial and societal problems . He argued that what were needed were the skills of synthesis . His stated view was that the paradigm of O . R . should involve ‘ designing a desirable future ’ and his explicit challenge to O . R . pro - fessionals was ‘ to improve our methods of design and invention ’ . Such concerns were noted by thinkers like Donald Scho¨n ( 1983 ) and Hilton Boothroyd ( 1978 ) who wrote inﬂuential books that proposed expanding the role of the O . R . professional from technical expert with an emphasis on solving precise and sometimes unrealistic problems to that of reﬂective inquirer with an emphasis on helpful ways of framing and structuring problems of the real world . The most obvious result was the development of what came to be called ‘soft O . R . ’ , featuring approaches pioneered by Peter Checkland , Colin Eden , John Friend and others , popularised by the book ‘ Rational Analysis for a Problematic World ’ edited by Jonathan Rosenhead ( 1989 ) . These approaches undoubtedly widened the vision of OR , at least on this side of the Atlantic , and did much to meet the criticisms of Ackoff and others . They showed that ‘soft’ skills are not some sort of optional sugary coating for the crunchy kernel of ‘hard’ O . R . but that problem solving is always embedded in problem setting and structuring . Despite the above history , design thinking can hardly be said at present to be widely regarded as a foundation stone of operational research . There has been the occasional acknowledgement of the relationship between the two disciplines—for example , in the management science literature , papers by Holzman ( 1979 ) , O’Keefe ( 1995 ) or Holmstrom et al ( 2009 ) . ( There is an interesting reciprocal history in the design literature , for example the account by Cross ( 2001 ) ) . Generally , however , the recognition of the role of design in O . R . has been far less prominent than it deserves . Even the tagline developed to help publicise O . R . , ‘ the science of better ’ , only hints at something that goes beyond decision support—O . R . as the science of improving systems . This lack of acknowledgement of the importance of design in O . R . is all the more surprising when one looks at the nature of some of the achievements of O . R . , from the WW2 defence information system onwards . Even a cursory glance at , for example , the winners of the INFORMS Edelman awards or the ORS President’s medal shows that many of the projects have involved considerable amounts of system design work . Are we like Molie ` re’s Monsieur Jourdain who spoke prose without realising it ? Maybe , but unconscious and implicit design work is not likely to be as effective as more conscious and explicit efforts . Branding issues The above concerns about us underplaying our work on system design apart , I think , as I have already said , that we have a reasonably clear and coherent view of what we are about—our ‘ brand idea ’ . What seems less clear and less coherent is how well we signal that brand idea and hence what we stand for in the minds of others—our ‘ brand image ’ . In his presidential address in 2000 , Mike Pidd ( 2001 ) spoke of various images of O . R . —O . R . as decision mathe - matics , as optimisation and improvement , as management engineering , as management science , as design and syn - thesis , and as intervention and change . All of these are entirely consistent with various elements of our ‘brand idea’ discussed earlier . As Mike pointed out , they help illustrate the multifaceted nature of O . R . But they also indicate a difﬁculty ; multiple shafts of light shining in different directions off the various faces of this jewel can lead to a confused clientele . Or , to take another optical metaphor , there can be a sort of chromatic aberration in the lens through which others see O . R . , prismatically separating it into its various spectral colours of which they perceive only one or two when what we want them to see is a broad coherent rainbow , integrating into a single white illuminating beam . Like it or not O . R . lives in a competitive market for people’s attention and therefore , for it to spread and prosper widely , needs to meet the well - known conditions for successful branding : that people need to have an image of it that is simple and distinctive and they have to ﬁnd that image relevant and compelling ( Adamson , 2006 ) . Being simple and distinctive makes a brand image memorable , being distinctive , relevant and compelling generate a unique selling point or USP . There are various ways we signal what we are about : our name ; our logo , our slogans or taglines—like ‘the science of better’ or ‘at the heart of analytics’ ; what we say to people who ask us what we do , and of course , what we actually do do for them . 796 Journal of the Operational Research Society Vol . 64 , No . 6 Let’s start with the name ; for better or worse probably the most inﬂuential signal for any brand . What’s in a name ? In the 1980s , the US car manufacturer General Motors had a division making a brand of car that was popular with the over 60s but it wanted to sell to a younger clientele . It ran a big advertising campaign , featuring Ringo Starr and his daughter , aimed at this new youthful market . Unfortunately , the brand was called Oldsmobile . The campaign failed . The division closed . Long deliberations in the past have often concluded that that ‘operational research’ is not a very desirable ‘brand name’ . People can assume that ‘operational’ means low - level or tactical , that ‘research’ can imply work that will be overlengthy or otherworldly , or just ﬁnd it a bit of a multisyllabic mouthful , especially when turned into the job descriptor ‘operational researcher’ . But such deliberations have also normally concluded that there is no better alternative ( Rosenhead and Mitchell , 1986 ) ! Are we locked in to our history like Oldsmobile or the QWERTY keyboard ? Yet many people clearly do use alternatives . For example , more of the Committee of Professors of O . R . have Management Science in their job title than have O . R . ; many courses on O . R . and many teams doing what we would recognise as O . R . are called something else such as business modelling . It might be argued that this does not matter much—a rose by any other name would smell as sweet—indeed , probably sweeter judging by the apparent popularity of some of the newer - named courses . The argument being that the important thing is that the core activity—the delivery of the idea behind the brand—continues . The counter - argument is the problem I have already mentioned about O . R . having a dispersed image . Flying under so many ﬂags of so many different colours dilutes the brand . Continued dilution could eventually render us invisible—which , let us not pretend otherwise—is what O . R . already is to much of the real world—and could end in our dissolution . One of the Society’s Past Presidents , Roy Stainton , has said that O . R . missed its opportunity when it failed to deﬁne itself as an ‘ology’ or something similar ( Stainton , 2010 ) . I agree ; a single , pithy , generic and meaningful word for what we do would have been nice . I suppose ‘operology’ might have sounded too much like something to do with opera . Perhaps we could have been ‘opristics’ , ‘opreneering’ , ‘operlytics’ or ‘opronomy’ ? Or maybe something with just ‘O . R . ’ in it ? I fear ‘orology’ is taken ( it’s the study of mountains ) —although the ‘science of better’ slogan , mixing Latin and Greek , would have given us ‘meli - or - ology’ ! I would not want to discourage creative thinking about this—being able to say that one was an opronomist or a meliorologist or whatever would at least be a conversation piece at parties—and I don’t think much weight should be placed on the argument that O . R . is too interdisciplinary and too lacking in a profession - speciﬁc body of knowledge and skills to justify a unique generic word of its own—that may have been the case in early years but surely not any longer . However , a few words of caution may be in order . New brieﬂy popular names in our ﬁeld come and go— business re - engineering anybody ? And the O . R . name may not be quite as restricting as some feel . ‘ Operational ’ sug - gests a real - world relevance , and an organisation’s opera - tions—if perceived broadly , as the functions it exists to perform—will extend beyond the simply tactical . ‘ Re - search ’ implies exploration and innovation and does not seem to generate a charge of otherworldliness in ﬁelds such as market research . There is some accumulated capital in our name . If we came to the conclusion that this was an irreversibly dimin - ishing asset , then a name change might become increas - ingly desirable , but an appropriate new name is clearly not something that would be easy to ﬁnd—or that would be easy to get accepted internally or adopted externally . There may be echoes of history here . Back in the early 19th century , there was increasing dissatisfaction with the name—‘natural philosopher’—then used for people carrying out science . There was felt to be a need for a less old - fashioned , less cumbersome but still generic word to show the underlying unity of people working in what were becoming fragmented scientiﬁc ﬁelds . A new name—‘scientist’—was proposed . It met with wide resistance . Eventually of course it stuck , but it took 70 years ( Ross , 1962 ) . Other brand signals . So , pending an unexpected ﬂash of neologistic inspiration , and however long it might take a new name to be accepted and adopted in common parlance , what about other ways of signalling better what we are about ? Can we improve the image and make sure it is seen as simple , distinctive , relevant and compelling without changing the name ? After all , no amount of name changing can sustainably attract people to a product they don’t see as useful . Can we get people to judge the book by its content rather than its cover ? This might be described as the Radio Times , the IBM or the Fujiﬁlm solutions—none of these nowadays focus on what their name indicates , but that does not seem to cause them many problems . People have shifted from using the name of these enterprises as a literal description of what they do to using it more as a handy label , to which they attach an image based on the actual content of the product or service . Efforts have been made on these lines for O . R . with simple mind - catching statements or slogans—we have ‘the science of better’ and ‘at the heart of analytics’ . Such efforts should continue . G Royston— Operational Research for the Real World 797 But I think we need to go further than names and slogans . We need to address another tough question . How well is our work aligned to the reality of the client’s world ? We need , I think , to acknowledge that our ‘brand image’—where we have one at all—is not always what we would hope . For some , we are viewed as a ‘stop - watch science’ concerned only with the mechanical minu - tiae of organisation , for others we are seen as an esoteric ‘otherworldly’ activity concerned with theoretical puzzles of little or no practical relevance . Might there be some truth in these views ? The best assessment of this problem that I know of is the one given in Peter Drucker’s famous book ‘Management’ ( Drucker , 1977 ) . This contains a trenchant critique of management science . Drucker’s main criticism was not that management science was an unworthy pursuit . Far from it . His charge was that it did not sufﬁciently respect its subject matter—a pretty damning verdict for any science . He said that it did not adequately reﬂect the fact that a business enterprise is made up of human beings and so its operations could not be regarded as a purely mechanistic process ; its domain of study needed to include people’s—especially managers’— assumptions , opinions and errors . To quote him directly : Insight , understanding , ranking of priorities and a ‘feel’ for the complexity of an area are as important as precise , beau - tifully elegant mathematical models—and in fact usually inﬁnitely more useful and indeed more ‘scientiﬁc’ . They reﬂect the reality of the manager’s universe . Now you may or may not agree with this critique—and it , like Ackoff’s , was addressed particularly to a US audience—but the charge of not adequately reﬂecting the real world cannot be ignored . Addressing this takes us into the area of Gauguin’s third question . Where are we going ? Designing our own future Having done some work as an analyst on horizon scanning and scenario planning , I have always been conscious of the physicist Neil Bohr’s dictum that ‘ Prediction is very difﬁcult , especially about the future ’ . A safer path is often to follow another aphorism , that ‘ the future is not to be predicted but to be made ’ and to look not for predictions but for possibilities . I note that at least one past president has had the wisdom to take that route in their plenary address ( Pidd , 2001 ) , and indeed I followed it myself in a paper ( Royston , 2009 ) that I gave at this conference a few years ago when I suggested some possible futures for operational research in the health arena . However , I would like now to take matters a step further , possibly a step too far . I want to suggest to you not so much places to which we could be headed as some places to which , in my view , we should be going . Taking up the design challenge applied to our own future . Where we have not gone First , however , I think it is instructive to look at one past prediction that has not , or at least only partially , been fulﬁlled . Having presented some of the 1970s criticisms or O . R . , particularly those of Ackoff and Drucker , it is only fair that I point out that some of those warnings have proven to be wrong , or at least overstated . Ackoff was concerned that O . R . was becoming increas - ingly focused on minor technical puzzles and less on the big issues of management , and that as a result it would be increasingly excluded from organisations’ boardrooms and pushed down into their bowels . Yet the dire prophesies about the death of O . R . appear to have been considerably exaggerated . We are still alive and hopefully kicking ! Why is this ? One reason of course is that the warnings were not ignored , as I have discussed . But there are at least two other , interconnected , reasons . First , the rise of areas such as supply chain management , credit scoring , adaptive booking or logistics , and enterprises such as call centres and online businesses . These are all areas where traditional analytical techniques , and their latest developments boosted by the explosion in computing power that we have enjoyed over the last few decades , can make a useful contribution . Indeed , that contribution has enabled their rise . Second , that the growth of these areas indicates—and is partially a consequence of—organisations realising that what goes on in their ‘tactical bowels’ has strategic importance and can make or break a business ; the growth of business analytics provides some recent evidence for this realisation . A salutory lesson in the importance of the mundane . Indeed , these developments could be used as a defence against Drucker’s charge of otherworldliness and , further , to suggest that management science and operational research could survive and even prosper by just focusing on fairly technical problems , particularly those that are about the ‘physics’ of organisation—scheduling , routing and so on . This would have its merits—for instance , it is probably where there is least competition from other disciplines—and I am not for a moment suggesting we should not continue to work in these areas . But if that was all we did it would set quite restrictive boundaries for our work . We are deﬁnitely not dead , but are we perhaps resting ? Our growth since the 1970s , at least in easily recognisable form , does seem to have been stunted . We risk not 798 Journal of the Operational Research Society Vol . 64 , No . 6 achieving our potential , or worse . How might we put on a growth spurt ? Developing O . R . for the real world Back in 1955 , the ﬁrst president of the Operations Research Society of America , Philip Morse , noted ‘ operations research is an experimental science , concerned with the real world ’ ( Morse , 1955 ) . We need to continue to respect the past and the concern of the early O . R . workers with investigating and seeking to improve the world as it actually is . I would want us to maintain that tight focus on O . R . as a science—or if you prefer , a social technology , or a structured and reﬂective mode of enquiry and intervention—for the real world . In what areas and ways does O . R . need to develop if we are , to use Drucker’s words , to take our subject matter more seriously , becoming more attuned to the real world of managers and others that we want to help ? I will suggest an abbreviated alphabet of ﬁve : K Accommodating analytics K Building in behaviour K Coping with complexity K Developing design thinking K Encouraging evaluation Accommodating analytics . As I have just mentioned , there remain plenty of situations and problems—and not just the less important ones—where technical analysis , sometimes analysis right at the cutting - edge of new theory and novel techniques , is a key requirement . Moreover , new developments keep cropping up , which often need some pretty traditional modelling work ( eg capacity planning for call centres ) . Perhaps the most obvious example is the rapid rise of ‘business analytics’ . This includes some techniques and tools for handling what has been termed ‘big data’ with which some O . R . workers may not be well acquainted , and it has sprung up , initially at least , somewhat independently from O . R . , but much of its coverage of descriptive , pre - dictive and prescriptive analysis will be familiar territory to O . R . practitioners ( Liberatore and Luo , 2010 ) . Why has analytics gained interest and enthusiasm among managers in a way that O . R . has not lately enjoyed ? Some of this may just be that the word ‘analytics’ sounds more modern , meaningful and relevant to managers than the term ‘operational research’ . But I suspect a more fundamental reason is that analytics has been driven not so much by analysts as by managers wanting to take advan - tage of business intelligence that IT systems were now beginning to enable . It is seen as a useful , down - to - earth , activity because it has emerged from the real world of managers and their business . There is a clear and considerable mutual advantage in pulling analytics and O . R . more explicitly together , not least in that it should strengthen our links to real - world concerns . The O . R . world can and should accommodate analytics . Indeed , some have wondered whether we should adopt ‘analytics’ in our name in some way . ( Incidentally , when he was a student at Cambridge , Babbage founded an ‘Analytics Society’ ! ) The OR Society has followed the example of INFORMS , who are investing heavily in analytics and have seen as a result their ﬁrst increase in membership in years as a result . We commissioned some research by Capgemini and carried out a survey of members , which gave strong support for developing our work in this area . You will recall that we held a very successful meeting in April and we are going to build on that , under the leadership of our Vice President John Hopes and one of our former Presidents , John Ranyard . You can hear more in the plenary session that John Hopes will be giving on O . R . and analytics later today , and of course in the conference stream on analytics . Building in behaviour . Best - selling management books like Freakonomics ( Levitt and Dubner , 2005 ) and Nudge ( Thaler and Sunstein , 2008 ) recognise , and seek to remedy , how economics had paid too much attention to theories about how the world works and not enough to how people actually behave . O . R . , being more agnostic about theory and preferring more pragmatic modelling that takes relevant ideas from wherever they are to be found—‘broad spectrum management science’—should have been ahead of the game here , but we do not seem to have been . Much of this relates to earlier - mentioned criticism by Drucker ; management science has focused on what might be called the physics of organisation and paid too little attention to its psychology . I have always thought the claim that O . R . is ‘ the science of decision making ’ is a hazardous one to make . It puts us in a double jeopardy , of both under and over selling ourselves . Underselling because it ignores our role in design , and overselling because we are not the only people who know something about decision science—economists and , above all , psychologists would have something to say about such a claim ! There is a growing body of work—outlined in the best - selling book ‘ The Decisive Moment ’ by Jonah Lehrer ( 2009 ) and in the more learned work ‘ Thinking Fast and Slow ’ by the Nobel Prize - winning psychologist Daniel Kahneman ( 2011 ) —that demonstrates how managers and others actually make decisions , particularly decisions under uncertainty . They explain how people have two decision - making approaches , one rational and slow , the other fast and intuitive . Both have advantages and disadvantages and G Royston— Operational Research for the Real World 799 much has been done to clarify these and to establish the situations in which each performs best . Kahneman shows how ‘framing’ effects—for example , presenting fuel consumption as gallons per mile rather than miles per gallon—can lead to very different decisions . He discusses the ‘planning fallacy’ through which project costs are so often underestimated ( eg , the Scottish Parliament building was originally estimated to cost up to £40 million , its ﬁnal cost was about £400 million ) and he shows how that can be avoided . And—this was his Nobel Prize winning work—he explains how standard utility theory is wrong and how a different approach—‘prospect theory’— can account for the way that people actually value gains and losses , and why , for example , they will take risks that ‘often turn manageable failures into disasters’ . O . R . seems to have been slow to take advantage of this burgeoning body of new knowledge about real - world decision making . O . R . practitioners certainly won’t get far without being aware of behavioural factors and we will recognise this in any successful work with clients . My point is , however , that O . R . has been slow ( certainly compared with economics , which has come up from behind in this area , opening up the new ﬁeld of behavioural economics ) in drawing on scientiﬁc advances in understanding these and in building that into our analysis and modelling . Some management science programmes offer courses on decision science and some approaches such as cognitive mapping do build on psychological constructs , but these seem to be the exception . Yet this knowledge is hugely relevant to our work . Surely , for example , O . R . practitioners should be interested in advances in simple ‘fast and frugal’ classiﬁcation and decision heuristics , as researched by Gerd Gigerenzer and Goldstein ( 1996 ) , Gigerenzer and Selten ( 2001 ) that can be at least as powerful as more elaborate and data - hungry algorithms and more likely to be used in the messy conditions of the real world—what could I suppose be called ‘lean analytics’ . This can be literally life - saving ; a ‘fast and frugal’ approach is used in checklists such as the famous Apgar test for determining whether newborn babies are in serious distress . If we got up to speed in this area , then maybe O . R . too could be getting books in the bestseller lists ! Coping with complexity . O . R . claims to be able to help with the problems of managing complex systems . And so it can . We are , I hope , natural ‘systems thinkers’ . But there are many systems that exhibit aspects of complexity that O . R . seems to ﬁnd difﬁcult to address . This is not so surprising ; dynamic systems that are non - linear , especially those in which feedback features strongly , which are of course the particular objects of study for system dynamics , are challenging enough for analysts , though there have been some striking achievements in this area . Those that are more complex still and adapt , are self - organising , or display emergent properties ( Mitchell , 2009 ) —what has been called generative complexity—are even more analytically demanding . Yet dynamic and generative complexity are the very features that loom large in the real world and play a major role in many of our biggest challenges—from collapse of national banking systems to international pandemics to global warming . Lord Robert May gave us some vivid illustrations from ﬁnance , ecology and epidemiology ( May et al , 2008 ) when he delivered the Society’s annual Blackett memorial lecture in 2010 . One of O . R . ’s giants , Stafford Beer , in his classic book ‘ Decision and Control ’ ( Beer , 1966 ) , wrote 40 years ago a strikingly prescient chapter setting out the importance of complex systems of this type . Another prescient statement , this time by that wartime champion of O . R . Sir Henry Tizard ( noted by Eric Williams , in his Presidential address ( Williams , 1968 ) ) , was that management in the future will be faced not so much with trial and error as ‘ trial and catastrophe ’ affecting not just single businesses but the whole economy—and we might nowadays add , the entire planet . Developing our capabilities for coping with complexity should enable O . R . to help reduce such risks . Computer simulation , especially that using the new tool of agent - based modelling , now helps us to explore such systems ( Miller and Page , 2007 ) . To the insights already gained from system dynamics , we can now add those coming from the study of generative complexity in what is commonly called ‘complexity science’ ( E´rdi , 2008 ) . And to whatever the more quantitative or computational ap - proaches can offer , we can add the more qualitative , exploratory , approaches of horizon scanning , scenario planning and futures thinking ( Ringland , 1998 ) . To tackle the biggest and most complex real - world challenges , such as global health ( Royston , 2011 ) , we need to deploy a wide armoury of tools . Developing design thinking . I have already argued that design thinking already has a key place in O . R . , but that this has been downplayed . We need to ensure that our creative strengths in innovative design thinking are recognised by our clients : that O . R . carries a designer label . There is a further reason for according greater emphasis to the design aspect of O . R . It places a spotlight on implementation . Investigations , at least in the areas with which I am most familiar , too often indicate a worryingly low level of implementation of results of operational research . Now the problem of translating research results into practice is well recognised across all the sciences—but it is a particularly serious charge in regard to operational research , given that it has improvement as its raison d’eˆtre . Thinking about design practicalities forces thought about the realities of implementation . 800 Journal of the Operational Research Society Vol . 64 , No . 6 But I suggest that we need to do more than recognise and make more use of our designerly skills . We need to get better at them . Our training and development will need to give much greater attention to the relevant skills and mindsets ( Lawson , 1990 ) . For example , there are some interesting ﬁndings from experiments about the different approaches of designers and scientists to solving the same problem ( Lawson , 1984 ) . These suggested that scientists problem - solve by analysis , whereas designers problem - solve by synthesis ; scientists use ‘problem - focused strategies’ and designers use ‘solution - focused strategies’ . Although , as I have said , I think O . R . work frequently incorporates elements of design thinking , I suggest that we appear currently rather too oriented towards problem solving by explanation and analysis rather than solution ﬁnding by exploration and synthesis . To be fully effective in the real world , we need both . Analysis and synthesis . Convergent and divergent thinking . Left brain and right brain . These skills form part of a coherent whole that make us what we are—not only analysts but also ‘synthesists’ . In operational research , analysis and synthesis need to be interwoven in a double helix through which problems and solutions co - evolve as we carry out our work . Weaving that golden braid more tightly will be a challenge , but I think a stimulating one for us all . Encouraging evaluation . A good deal of our contribution in O . R . is about assessing how well something is likely to work , monitoring how well it is working or evaluating how well it has worked . In the real world , things often don’t work as well as hoped ( Wildavsky and Pressman , 1984 ) . Worse , people sometimes prefer not to know how things are not working . It might be embarrassing or expensive . So people involved in monitoring or evaluation can have a problem . While much of what we do in O . R . —for example , the creative design task of searching for options—can be fun , evalua - tion can be a somewhat purgatorial task . I have done a fair bit of both sorts of work so I know ! Yet a proper evaluation is so often worthwhile even when its results are disappointing . I can think of one case where an organisation muddled along for a decade not knowing the impact of a particular activity , valued at getting on for a hundred million pounds a year , yet was resistant to having it rigorously evaluated . When it eventually did bite the evaluation bullet , the results were , unsurprisingly , not quite as good as had been previously assumed , which was a minor embarrassment . But the gains , in knowing at last how things stood , in gaining much greater insight into the activity , in having a solid foun - dation on which to build and defend future plans , far exceeded that . And O . R . has so much to offer in this area—as well as the basic analytical knowledge needed we have an uncom - mon ability to combine various modes of enquiry— observation , simulation and experiment—in powerful ways , selecting a cost - effective and time - saving balance between , say , computer simulation and ﬁeld testing , which sometimes can be much better attuned to the exigencies of the real world than , say , the classic randomised control trial . So this last suggested growth area is one in which I think our main effort needs to be that of prodders and proselytes . To encourage clients to give greater support to evaluative work , especially if it appears that they may be living in something of a make - believe world , so they can gain a more realistic view of the impact that projects and pro - grammes are having and get the information needed for their improvement . And to do more evaluation of our own work , so we can become a ‘better science of better’ . Back to the future ? This would seem an appropriate moment to say that , looking at past Presidents’ inaugural addresses , there is much to be found in common with what I have said , and indeed with what I still have to say . Let’s brieﬂy go back to the future . I have already mentioned Mike Pidd’s ( 2001 ) discussion of images and futures of O . R . and I note , as he did , that George Mitchell ( 1980 ) two decades previously had examined such matters , as of course did others such as Lyn Thomas ( 1994 ) and Brian Haley ( 1982 ) , who gave his address as the 15th ORS President three decades before mine now as its 30th . The address by Chris Chapman ( 1992 ) exactly 20 years ago presented thoughts on how O . R . should develop . Paul Thornton’s ( 1990 ) just before that discussed marketing O . R . And Rolfe Tomlinson’s ( 1974 ) address of almost 40 years ago , gave a statement of principles for effective O . R , which together with those set out by Blackett , seem as relevant as ever . I could go on , but the addresses are nearly all freely available to members on the Society’s website , in the JORS archive ; do go and have a look for yourself . Bridge building While we are casting our minds back , let me remind you of something that occurred 48 years ago to this very day . We have the good fortune that this conference is taking place in the ﬁne city of Edinburgh . On 4 September 1964 , Edinburgh saw the ofﬁcial opening by HM The Queen of a major new landmark : the new road bridge over the River Forth , a 20th century feat of engineering rising alongside the marvel of the 19th century rail bridge . How is O . R . getting on with our bridge building ? Let’s look at three construction sites . G Royston— Operational Research for the Real World 801 Bridges between academics and practitioners . As some of you will know , I have spent my O . R . career as a prac - titioner . I make no apologies for that . But I would not want , as President of the OR Society , to give any impression , or more importantly , any reality , of imbal - ance of concern between the interests of each group . Indeed , I am quite clear that the relationship between academics and practitioners must be one of synergy . However , it may not be obvious how this maps out in regard to a practical theme like ‘O . R . for the real world’ . One way of course is to recognise that the divide is somewhat artiﬁcial—many academics have extensive ex - perience of practice through collaborative or consultancy work—I myself have done a good deal of collaborative work with academics . Another is to recognise that what may appear quite arcane research can eventually have profound practical implications . The one qualiﬁcation I would make is that development of theories and techniques in O . R . should have in mind some useful and preferably important real - world application . The new Research Excellence Framework requires academics to demonstrate external impact from their research . This ought to be good news for O . R . ! I am delighted to see recent developments in O . R . such as the LANCS initiative , spanning four universities— Lancaster , Nottingham , Cardiff and Southampton—and funded to the tune of well over £10 million that seek to advance what Babbage called ‘the union of theory and practice’ . I think we could do more to build effective academic – practitioner relationships and am pleased to say that the Society , under the leadership of our Vice President Stewart Robinson , is embarking on some work to progress this . And I hope many of you will be going along to the conference session on Wednesday afternoon on practitioner – academic collaboration ! Bridges between people working in different areas . Your particular interests may lie in different areas—simulation or strategy , optimisation or problem structuring methods , queueing or forecasting . The sectors in which you work may vary—health or education , transport or defence , ﬁnance or energy . But what we have in common in our objectives , knowledge and skills under the broad umbrella that O . R . provides are at least as important as our differences . A conference like this affords an opportunity to build some bridges across these various divides , both to celebrate what we share and to learn from each other’s differences . Please ensure that you go to some presentations that are not about your own areas of technical expertise or sector of work . You may be surprised by how much you get out of it . Bridges between O . R . and clients , stakeholders and the rest of the real world . Much of this talk has been about these bridges—certainly the points on brand image and on the ﬁve areas that I have suggested particularly merit development , including strengthening bridges of both of theory and of practice between ‘hard’ and ‘soft’ methods and between analysis and synthesis . So I will just add one more point here . We have been steadily widening our concept of clients and stakeholders for O . R . —the early work on Community O . R . and more recently on 3rd Sector O . R . springs to mind . And I would include in this our Schools Initiative work on bringing O . R . to the attention of a younger , wider audience . Such developments can interest and inspire people—and all very much deserve our support and encouragement . But there is one area where we have not done so much to build bridges that does concern me . This is with the public at large . A couple of weeks ago , I was pleased to see the New Scientist front cover and lead article ( entitled ‘The algorithm that runs the world’ ) on the continuing saga of the simplex algorithm and its ubiquitous real - world applications but less pleased to see that it did not explicitly mention O . R . We need to see more about O . R . in newspapers , T . V . and the radio . Conclusions We have now considered O . R . from the perspective of each of Gauguin’s three questions . It is time to begin to draw matters to a close . To recap , I have suggested three areas of challenge for O . R . : K Presenting a clearer , more attractive image : J simple , distinctive ; relevant , compelling K Growing capability and activity in : J Accommodating analytics J Building in behaviour J Coping with complexity J Developing design thinking J Encouraging evaluation K Strengthening bridges : J academic and practitioner ; different specialisms and diverse sectors ; O . R . and the public ‘What are the implications for me ? ’ You may perhaps feel that I have focused too much on where I think we could develop and not enough on our achievements . There is of course much to celebrate and I have brieﬂy mentioned a few of these , from our game - changing wartime contribution to current growth points like the LANCS initiative . I could easily have devoted an entire presentation to our achievements . The reason I did not is simple . We are about improving things—‘the science of better’ . I think that obliges us to start with looking for improvements at home . 802 Journal of the Operational Research Society Vol . 64 , No . 6 Hopefully , you will have agreed with at least some of what I have said about the need to present a clearer , attractive , image to others , about developing growth areas and about strengthening bridges . If so , my challenge to you is to consider , in your own area , what you are doing about these issues , what more you could do to take them forward , and to do it . And ﬁnally—back to Tahiti We have come a long way from Tahiti . I said we would return , and it’s now time to do so and bring our journey to its end . In April 1769 , 22 years before Babbage’s birth and well over a century before Gauguin’s journey there , during a daring voyage of discovery around the world , Captain James Cook made his ﬁrst visit—almost the ﬁrst visit by any European—to Tahiti . Cook’s journey round the world , on a ship appropriately called the Endeavour , took three years . It was extremely hazardous ; almost half his crew perished from disease , and his ship was very nearly lost when it struck a reef . His mission , on orders from the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty and from the Royal Society , was to observe from Tahiti the transit of Venus on 3 June 1769 to enable accurate measurement of the distance from the Earth to the Sun . [ You will recall that we had a transit of Venus this year , in one of only the 2nd pair of transits to have taken place since Cook’s expedition nearly 250 years ago . ] So Tahiti helped make two pieces of history . Cook was on a scientiﬁc mission , and Gauguin on an artistic one . In O . R . , we require elements of both . We need one foot in the world of the sciences—with respect for facts , desire to understand what underlies and explains observed phenom - ena and use of the powerful language of mathematics . But the other foot needs to be in the world of the humanities— with concern for values , desire to create new and stimulating things and use of the rich languages of words and images . The need to have a foot in both these worlds is the need for what one of our former Presidents , Pat Rivett , called the lion and the unicorn ( Rivett , 1981 ) —if you like , the left brain and the right brain—of O . R . This could take us into a much wider debate about O . R . methodology ( eg Midgley and Reynolds , 2004 ; Ormerod , 2006 ; Jackson , 2006 ; Paucar - Caceres and Espinosa , 2011 ) . But that must be for another time and place . For today , let me just suggest that if we could develop the areas that I have outlined in this address it would do much to span the divide between the lion and the unicorn of O . R . , and reinforce our bridge between science and the humanities . I can’t promise that this will lead us to Paradise Island , but I do think it would enable O . R . to better meet the challenges of the Real World . Acknowledgements — I am most grateful for helpful comments at various stages of development of this paper from those listed below ( responsibility for the use or misuse of their contributions is of course mine ! ) David Bensley , Gavin Blackett , Chris Chapman , Peter Dick , Jeff Grifﬁths , David Halsall , Ruth Kaufman , Howard Malin , George Mitchell , Ian Mitchell , Jane Parkin , Mike Pidd , John Ranyard , Stewart Robinson , Jo Smedley , Roy Stainton and Rolfe Tomlinson . References Ackoff RL ( 1979 ) . The future of operational research is past . Journal of the Operational Research Society 30 ( 2 ) : 93 – 104 . Adamson AP ( 2006 ) . Brand Simple . Palgrave Macmillan : Basingstoke , UK . Babbage C ( 1832 ) . On the Economy of Machinery and Manufac - tures . Dodo Press : Gloucester , UK . Beer S ( 1966 ) . Self - organising systems . In : Decision and Control : The Meaning of Operational Research and Management Cybernetics . Wiley : New York , pp 345 – 369 . Boothroyd H ( 1978 ) . Articulate Intervention . Taylor and Francis : London . Chapman CB ( 1992 ) . My two cents worth on how OR should develop . Journal of the Operational Research Society 43 ( 7 ) : 647 – 664 . Cross N ( 2001 ) . Designerly ways of knowing : Design discipline versus design science . Design Issues 17 ( 3 ) : 49 – 55 . de Czege HW ( 2009 ) . Systemic operational design : Learning and adapting in complex missions . Military Review 89 ( 1 ) : 2 – 12 . Drucker PF ( 1977 ) . Chapter 33 . In : Management . Pan : London . E´rdi P ( 2008 ) . Complexity Explained . Springer : New York . Gass SI and Assad AA ( 2005 ) . An Annotated Timeline of Operations Research : An Informal History . Kluwer : Dordrecht , The Netherlands . Gigerenzer G and Goldstein DG ( 1996 ) . Reasoning the fast and frugal way : Models of bounded rationality . Psychological Review 103 ( 4 ) : 650 – 669 . Gigerenzer G and Selten R ( eds ) . ( 2001 ) . Why and when do simple heuristics work ? In : Bounded Rationality : The Adaptive Toolbox . MIT Press : Cambridge , MA , pp 173 – 190 . Haley KB ( 1982 ) . O . R . as apocrypha . Journal of the Operational Research Society 33 ( 3 ) : 207 – 292 . Holmstrom J , Ketokivi M and Hameri A - P ( 2009 ) . Bridging practice and theory : A design science approach . Decision Sciences 40 ( 1 ) : 65 – 87 . Holzman AG ( 1979 ) . Engineering design and operations research . Operations Research 27 ( 2 ) : 420 – 422 . Hyman A ( 1982 ) . Charles Babbage : Pioneer of the Computer . Oxford University Press : Oxford . Jackson MC ( 2006 ) . Beyond problem structuring methods : Reinventing the future of OR / MS . Journal of the Operational Research Society 57 ( 7 ) : 868 – 878 . Kahneman D ( 2011 ) . Thinking , Fast and Slow . Allen Lane : London . Kirby MW ( 2003 ) . Operational Research in War and Peace : The British Experience from the 1930s to 1970 . Imperial College Press : London . Lawson B ( 1984 ) . Cognitive strategies in architectural design . In : Cross N ( ed ) . Developments in Design Methodology . Wiley : New York . Lawson B ( 1990 ) . How Designers Think , 2nd edn . Butterworth : London . Lehrer J ( 2009 ) . The Decisive Moment . Canongate : Edinburgh . Levitt SD and Dubner SJ ( 2005 ) . Freakonomics . Allen Lane : London . Liberatore MJ and Luo W ( 2010 ) . The analytics movement : Implications for operations research . Interfaces 40 ( 4 ) : 313 – 324 . G Royston— Operational Research for the Real World 803 Martin R ( 2009 ) . The Design of Business : Why Design Thinking is the Next Competitive Advantage . Harvard Business Press : Cambridge , MA . May RM , Levin SA and Sugihara G ( 2008 ) . Complex systems : Ecology for bankers . Nature 451 ( 7181 ) : 893 – 895 . Midgley G and Reynolds M ( 2004 ) . Systems / operational research and sustainable development : Towards a new agenda . Sustain - able Development 12 ( 1 ) : 56 – 64 . Miller JH and Page SE ( 2007 ) . Complex Adaptive Systems . An Introduction to Computational Models of Social Life . Princeton University Press : Princeton , NJ . Mitchell GH ( 1980 ) . Images of operational research . Journal of the Operational Research Society 31 ( 3 ) : 459 – 466 . Mitchell M ( 2009 ) . Complexity : A Guided Tour . Oxford University Press : Oxford . Morse PM ( 1955 ) . Where is the new blood ? Journal of the Operations Research Society of America 3 ( 4 ) : 384 – 385 . Mu¨ller - Merbach H ( 2009 ) . The interdisciplinary generalist . Omega 37 ( 3 ) : 495 – 496 . O’Keefe RM ( 1995 ) . MS / OR enabled systems design . Operations Research 43 ( 2 ) : 199 – 207 . Ormerod RJ ( 2006 ) . The history and ideas of pragmatism . Journal of the Operational Research Society 57 ( 8 ) : 892 – 909 . Paucar - Caceres A and Espinosa A ( 2011 ) . Management science methodologies in environmental management and sustainability : Discourses and applications . Journal of the Operational Research Society 62 ( 9 ) : 1601 – 1620 . Pidd M ( 2001 ) . The futures of OR . Journal of the Operational Research Society 52 ( 11 ) : 1181 – 1190 . Ringland G ( 1998 ) . Scenario Planning : Managing for the Future . Wiley : New York . Rivett P ( 1981 ) . In praise of unicorns . Journal of the Operational Research Society 32 ( 12 ) : 1051 – 1059 . Rosenhead J ( ed ) . ( 1989 ) . Rational Analysis for a Problematic World . Wiley : New York . Rosenhead J and Mitchell GH ( 1986 ) . Report on the commission on the future practice of operational research . Journal of the Operational Research Society 37 ( 9 ) : 831 – 886 . Ross S ( 1962 ) . Scientist : The story of a word . Annals of Science 18 ( 2 ) : 65 – 85 . Royston G ( 2009 ) . One hundred years of operational research in health : UK 1948 – 2048 . Journal of the Operational Research Society 60 ( S1 ) : S169 – S179 . Royston G ( 2011 ) . Meeting global heath challenges through operational research and management science . Bulletin of the World Health Organisation 89 ( 9 ) : 683 – 688 . Scho¨n DA ( 1983 ) . The Reﬂective Practitioner . Basic Books : New York . Simon HA ( 1969 ) . The Sciences of the Artiﬁcial . MIT Press : Cambridge , MA ( 2nd edition 1981 ) . Stainton RS ( 2010 ) . OR—A personal perspective . Journal of the Operational Research Society 61 ( 1 ) : 11 – 13 . Swade D ( 2000 ) . The Cogwheel Brain : Charles Babbage and the Quest to Build the First Computer . Little , Brown and Co : London . Thaler RH and Sunstein CR ( 2008 ) . Nudge . Yale University Press : New Haven , CT . Thomas LC ( 1994 ) . Forty years on : Challenges and successes . Journal of the Operational Research Society 45 ( 12 ) : 1343 – 1350 . Thornton P ( 1990 ) . Stimulating the demand for operational research . Journal of the Operational Research Society 41 ( 7 ) : 553 – 560 . Tomlinson RC ( 1974 ) . OR is . Journal of the Operational Research Society 25 ( 3 ) : 347 – 359 . Wastell D ( 2010 ) . Managing as designing : ‘Opportunity knocks’ for the IS ﬁeld ? European Journal of Information Systems 19 ( 4 ) : 422 – 431 . Wildavsky A and Pressman Jl ( 1984 ) . Implementation : How Great Expectations in Washington are dashed in Oakland , 3rd edn . University of California Press : Berkeley , CA . Williams EC ( 1968 ) . Operational research as genesis . Journal of the Operational Research Society 19 ( 4 ) : 353 – 360 . Received September 2012 ; accepted December 2012 after one revision 804 Journal of the Operational Research Society Vol . 64 , No . 6