Cite this article : Chen , L . , Cai , Z . , Jiang , Z . , Long , Q . , Sun , L . , Childs , P . , Zuo , H . ( 2023 ) ‘A Knowledge - Based Ideation Approach for Bio - Inspired Design’ , in Proceedings of the International Conference on Engineering Design ( ICED23 ) , Bordeaux , France , 24 - 28 July 2023 . DOI : 10 . 1017 / pds . 2023 . 24 ICED23 231 INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON ENGINEERING DESIGN , ICED23 24 - 28 JULY 2023 , BORDEAUX , FRANCE ICED A KNOWLEDGE - BASED IDEATION APPROACH FOR BIO - INSPIRED DESIGN Chen , Liuqing ( 1 , 2 ) ; Cai , Zebin ( 1 ) ; Jiang , Zhaojun ( 3 ) ; Long , Qi ( 4 ) ; Sun , Lingyun ( 1 , 2 ) ; Childs , Peter ( 5 ) ; Zuo , Haoyu ( 5 ) 1 : Department of Computer Science and Technology , Zhejiang University , Hangzhou 310030 , China ; 2 : Singapore Innovation and AI Joint Research Lab , Zhejiang University , Hangzhou 310030 , China ; 3 : School of mechanical engineering , Tianjin University , Tianjin 300350 , China ; 4 : Zhejiang University - University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign Institute , Haining 314400 , China ; 5 : Dyson School of Design Engineering , Imperial College London , London SW7 2AZ , UK ABSTRACT Bio - inspired design ( BID ) involves generating innovative ideas for engineering design by drawing inspiration from natural biological phenomena and systems , using a form of design - by - analogy . Despite its many successes , BID approaches encounter research challenges including unstructured data and existing models that hinder comprehension and processing , limited focus on finding biological knowledge compared to defined problems , and insufficient guidance of the ideation process with algorithms . This paper proposes a knowledge - based approach to address the challenges . The approach involves transforming unstructured data into structured knowledge , including information about natural sources , their benefits , and applications . The structured knowledge is then used to construct a semantic network , enabling designers to retrieve information for BID in two ways . Furthermore , a three - step ideation method is developed to encourage divergent thinking and explore additional potential solutions by drawing inspiration and utilizing knowledge . The knowledge - based BID approach is implemented as a tool and design cases are conducted to illustrate the process of applying this tool for BID . Keywords : Bio - inspired design / biomimetics , Big data , Design methods , Semantic network , Data - driven - design Contact : Zuo , Haoyu Imperial College London United Kingdom hz2019 @ ic . ac . uk 232 ICED23 1 INTRODUCTION Design - by - analogy is a design methodology that draws inspiration from a source domain to a target domain through analogical reasoning ( Jiang et al . , 2021 ) . Studies have demonstrated that Design - by - Analogy ( DbA ) can aid designers in mitigating design fixation ( Linsey et al . , 2010 ) and enhance design ideation outcomes when utilizing DbA - related tools ( Fu et al . , 2013 ; Zuo et al . , 2022 ; Shi et al . , 2017 ; Sarica et al . , 2020 ) . Bio - inspired design ( BID ) is a form of design - by - analogy wherein innovative ideas are generated from natural biological phenomena and systems for engineering design . This methodology attempts to leverage biological designs already existing in nature and is gaining popularity among designers aspiring for design innovations . In recent years , many efforts have been made to develop databases and methods for BID approaches . There is ample evidence that biologically inspired design has led to many novel , useful , robust and efficient designs . Despite its many successes , BID approaches still encounters research challenges . The first challenge is the unstructured data and existing models which impose difficulties for engineering designers to comprehend whole bio - design cases efficiently and further processing ; a further challenge is that BID tools focus on retrieving biological models for a defined problem with limited emphasis on finding biological knowledge of interest ; the ideation process with retrieval is also not guided sufficiently and augmented with algorithms . To address the challenges highlighted , this paper proposes a novel knowledge - based BID approach . The approach involves transforming unstructured data into structured knowledge , including information about natural sources , their benefits , and applications . This structured knowledge is then used to construct a semantic network , which allows designers to retrieve information for BID in two ways . Additionally , a three - step ideation method is developed to explore more potential solutions and support divergent thinking , providing a feature for drawing inspiration and utilizing knowledge . The knowledge - based BID approach is implemented as a tool and design cases are conducted to demonstrate the process of applying this tool for BID . 2 RELATED WORK Bio - inspiration is a creative approach based on observing biological systems . In the field of engineering design , the approach has evolved into an innovative design method , namely bio - inspired design , which uses analogies to biological systems to develop solutions for engineering problems . Benefiting from natural selection and biodiversity ( Vincent , 2009 , Müller et al . , 2018 ) , bio - inspired design provides considerable potential to produce innovative solutions ( Fu et al . , 2014 , Chirazi et al . , 2019 ) . There are two main different approaches to bio - inspired design , solution - driven and problem - driven . The former starts with a particular biological system , which performs a potential function applied to technical solutions . The latter begins with a practical engineering problem , which could be the development of a new product or the improvement of an existing product . Since bio - inspired design plays a vital role in problem - solving and concept design , it has received substantial attention from various industries ( Wanieck et al . , 2017 ) . According to Wanieck et al . ( 2017 ) , existing bio - inspiration - related tools can be classified into databases or methods . A database is a collection of biological organisms , biological characteristics , biological construction principles , biological functions or the like . A method describes a way of doing a task during the process of biomimetics . In the research reported here , the focus in review of prior material was mainly on open - sourced and scientific paper - recorded database tools . AskNature is a publicly available database of biological information classified by function . This database organizes biological information according to the biomimicry taxonomy ( Deldin and Schuknecht , 2014 , Goel et al . , 2015 ) , which is a hierarchy of functions of biological systems . AskNature allows users to retrieve biological information by keywords ( Hooker and Smith , 2016 ) . Graeff notes that AskNature is the largest database for bio - inspired design providing over 1700 pieces of biological information . DANE ( Design by Analogy to Nature Engine ) ( Goel et al . , 2015 ) is a computational tool and database of biological Structure - Behavior - Function ( SBF ) models . This tool requires manual input of information entries , and the representations of biological systems depend on the modeling experience of designers . Idea - Inspire 4 . 0 ( Siddharth and Chakrabarti , 2018 ) is another computational tool that supports analogical design with multimodal representation : function decomposition model , text , function model , image , video , and audio . The tool provides access to a number of biological systems using a searchable knowledge base . Ontology - Explorer ( Kozaki and ICED23 233 Mizoguchi , 2014 ) is a web tool for the identification of biological models and exploring biomimetics databases . It is based on linked data techniques and allows the users to find important keywords so that they can search for meaningful knowledge from various databases . Design Study library ( Goel et al . , 2022 ) is another web - based digital library that collects case studies during their 8 - years of teaching into a digital library , thus supporting analogical learning . IBID extracts knowledge of the function , structure , and portions of the causal mechanisms of biological systems from their natural language descriptions . This knowledge is organised as a Structure - Behavior - Function ( SBF ) model . Finally , it uses the SBF annotations to retrieve biology articles relevant to design queries . To systematically elucidate these databases , we further provide a structured analysis of all works in Table 1 from the following aspects : 1 ) structural knowledge : whether the biological knowledge is well structured or not ( just plainly documented ) ; 2 ) method : solution - driven method , problem - driven method or both . The structural data is to review whether the analogical data is structurally represented or documentation represented . Structural representation can indicate biological systems in an abstract form . The abstracted form needs to follow a certain design principle , such as Structure - Behaviour - Function ( SBF ) or Structure - Function Knowledge ( SFK ) ( Helfman Cohen et al . , 2014 , Gleich et al . , 2010 ) , to describe the characteristics of the biological models . The documentation representation is to record the biological systems in pure text . Compared with documentation representation , the structured approach can enhance the designer’s ability to conceive technical solutions ( Cohen and Reich , 2016 ) . The design approach is to review whether the tools are developed for the solution - based or problem - driven approach of the BID . A tool that is classified as for the solution - based approach tends to start with the biological knowledge of interest and then tries to match the extracted underlying principles to a problem . If a tool is classified as being for the problem - driven approach only , it attempts to start with the given practical problem and then facilitate a problem - solving process of transferring biological strategies to technology as a solution . Furthermore , both solution - driven and problem - driven approaches can exist within one tool . Table 1 . The choices of structural data and method of BID tools Structural data Design approach AskNature No Both DANE Yes Problem - driven IDEA - INSPIRE 4 . 0 Yes Problem - driven Ontology - explorer Yes Problem - driven Design Study Library No Problem - driven IBID Yes Problem - driven DANE , IDEA - INSPIRE 4 . 0 , Ontology - explorer , and IBID organized their bio - design cases in a structural form using the SBF or SAPPIRE models . While these models provide a useful decomposition of a system for browsing , they do not effectively bridge the natural source and target domains ( Siddharth and Chakrabarti , 2018 ) . This limitation still imposes difficulties for engineering designers to encode and comprehend whole bio - design cases efficiently . By further checking the tool , Ontology - explore applies the structural representation in the form of a semantic network which further support biological retrieval and ideation . Semantic network technologies can facilitate biomimetics - based innovations because it helps integrate knowledge from heterogeneous sources and can apply algorithms from different requirements and viewpoints . While all classified tools facilitate the tasks of the problem - driven approach , only AskNature can facilitate the solution - driven approach at the same time . The solution - driven approach is not fully developed and embedded into tools , even if they are of the same importance . In summary , these databases all support the BID process and contribute in some manner . A promising database tool could be constructed under a new structural framework , therefore , to help enhance the designer’s efficiency to conceive technical solutions . Besides , since both problem - driven and solution - based approaches contribute equally to developing solutions for design problems ( Jacobs et al . , 2014 ) , a sophisticated BID approach should present a designer with both approaches to retrieve the structured scientific biological knowledge . A further retrieval method for ideation method could be developed after the retrieval . 234 ICED23 3 KNOWLEDGE - BASED BID APPROACH We propose a knowledge - based BID approach from the conceptual design process in accordance with the design requirements and development direction . The approach supports the BID ideation for designers from three elements : structural data , two patterns of BID , and retrieval method for ideation . Details about the three elements are described in the following sub - sections . 3 . 1 Structural data To overcome the problem of unstructured bionic data and existing model , our approach structures bionic data by summarizing bio - design cases into three types of keywords : ‘source , ’ ‘application , ’ and ‘benefits’ as the fundamental layer of the BID approach . These three types of keywords together describe the most critical information of the bio - design case in the form of structured data . For each page providing a possibility for a bio - design case , the definitions of the three keywords are as follows . – ‘source’ : the natural and biological sources stated on the page . – ‘benefits’ : the features and advantages of the ‘source’ stated on the page . – ‘application’ : the scenarios or fields of the source that could potentially be applied stated on the page . By extracting these design knowledge , designers can be informed about how knowledge in the biological domain is transformed into engineering concepts . For example , ‘Paint inspired by lotus leaves creates self - cleaning and stain - resistant surface . ’ In this bio - design case , the ‘source’ is ‘lotus leaves , ’ the ‘benefits’ are ‘self - cleaning’ and ‘stain - resistant , ’ and the ‘application’ is ‘paint . ’ Because lotus leaves have self - cleaning and stain - resistant properties , a particular application , paint , is created . Thus , bio - design cases can be described as information transfer links with three nodes in each link : ‘source’ - > ’ benefit’ - > ‘application’ ( called S - B - A link ) . Based on the three keywords and S - B - A links , a bionic semantic network is constructed as a carrier for storing structured data . Every keyword forms a node , and the direction of the S - B - A link is also applied in the semantic network . In order to eliminate confusion due to capitalization variations , all nodes in the semantic network have been normalized to lowercase letters . The keywords associated with the ' source ' and ' application ' nodes have been standardized as nouns , while the keywords for the ' benefits ' node have been standardized as either ' verb + noun ' or ' adjective + noun ' phrases . Furthermore , the synonymous keywords , such as " flexibility " and " flexible , " are merged according to semantic similarity . From the perspective of cognitive psychology , the semantic network is highly suitable for applying knowledge - based design for creativity by using structured data ( Chen et al . , 2019 , Han et al . , 2021 ) . Therefore , the proposed approach employs the semantic network for potential BID ideation process . Compared with traditional BID , structured data is more supportive for the information retrieval process as it facilitates information exchange so designers can take less time to find suitable inspiration . For implementation , this work uses information extraction techniques in natural language processing to summarize bio - design cases into ‘source’ , ‘application’ and ‘benefits’ . This way , thousands of bio - design cases can be processed quickly , replacing the slow processing by hand . 3 . 2 Knowledge retrieval for two patterns of BID There are two main different BID patterns ( Fayemi et al . , 2017 ; Shu et al . , 2011 ) , solution - driven and problem - driven BID . The former starts with a particular biological system , which performs a potential function applied to technical solutions . The latter begins with a practical engineering problem , which could be developing a new product or improving an existing product . Then designers search biological information , extract and transfer design knowledge to technical solutions . In our approach , a semantic network based on structured bionic data is utilized for knowledge - based BID ideation process . Since the link of the semantic network has two directions , when developing the retrieval strategy of the semantic network , the input and output can be reversed according to the direction of the link . If the input is ‘source’ , the output is related to ‘benefits’ and engineering applications that could potentially be applied based on the input biological term . In contrast , when the input is ‘application’ , the output is biological sources and related ‘benefits’ that could be utilized as technical solutions to solve a practical engineering problem . These two retrieval strategies correspond , in turn to two patterns of BID : solution - driven and problem - driven BID , which are of the same importance in design - related activities . ICED23 235 3 . 3 Three - step retrieval method for BID ideation We propose a three - step retrieval method for BID ideation process with divergent thinking . Divergent thinking promotes idea generation tools by fostering creativity and encouraging exploration of multiple potential solutions ( Childs et al . , 2022 ) . Inspired by the principles of divergent thinking , the retrieval method is shown in Figure 1 . This method consists of three steps that provide information with different divergent depths , i . e . , the information diverges with the increasing volume in each step sequentially . The results of the three steps are , in order , direct , related , and potential . The direct retrieval results are retrieved from the input and validated as they are derived directly from an authentic bio - design case . The second step presents related results . The result is a divergent result which represents a potential solution between the source and new target based on shared sub - functions of the parts of products . The third step presents potential results based on semantic similarities between the source and target . The result is a more divergent result which represents a potential connection between the source and another new target based on these semantically similar sub - functions . Figure 1 . Three - step retrieval method for ideation Taking the solution - driven pattern as an example . The definitions of these three steps are illustrated as follows . Assuming that the ‘source’ keyword entered in this case is Source _ Origin . • Step 01 : In this step , the output is to find the S - B - A links where the Source _ Origin is located . All the nodes are in the same S - B - A links as Source _ Origin will be retrieved to show to designers . These ‘benefits’ and ‘applications’ mean direct benefits and direct applications . They give the designer the direction in which Source _ Origin will most likely be applied . • Step 02 : The functionality of step two is to search reasonably extensional information based on direct benefits . All the S - B - A links which connect ‘application’ nodes and direct benefits nodes will be retrieved to show to designers . The output is related applications . This step shows more possibilities to employ the direct benefits obtained in step one to perform BID . • Step 03 : Step three provides extrapolated and divergent information . Notice that besides direct benefits , Source _ Origin is likely to have other benefits ( potential benefits ) , so similarity - between - benefits - oriented excavation can provide broader possibilities in the design process . These potential benefits can be obtained by calculating the semantic similarity with direct benefits in the semantic network . In order to determine the semantic similarities between the benefits nodes , the similarity metric S - BERT ( Reimers and Gurevych , 2019 ) is utilized . S - BERT calculates the cosine similarity between the word embeddings of two nodes to determine the semantic similarity value . Then the potential applications linked to potential benefits would be retrieved . This step stimulates the divergent thinking of designers with a much more comprehensive range of ideas . Compared to problem - driven BID , the difference with solution - driven BID is the replacement of the input with ‘application’ and reversing the data flow of the retrieval process . 236 ICED23 4 IMPLEMENTATION AND DESIGN CASE 4 . 1 Implementation In order to demonstrate how the proposed knowledge - based BID approach would be applied , we constructed a tool to implement the approach named AskNatureNet . AskNatureNet stores a bionic semantic network based on structured data and develops an algorithm according to the proposed three - step retrieval method . It can be used to complete both solution - driven and problem - driven BID ideation . The interface of AskNatureNet is shown in Figure 2 . The upper part of the interface is the input section , where designers input the keyword they would like to retrieve and select the BID pattern and targeted step . During the retrieval , finding the best match for the inputted source / application is prioritized . If an exact match is not found , the tool outputs the closest match based on semantic similarity . The Source button indicates a solution - driven design , while the Application button indicates a problem - driven design . The lower part is the display section , which displays the results in a semantic network structure . The legend section on the right side introduces the data flow , current step , and some other prompt pages ( e . g . indicating result is not an exact match ) . The results of AskNatureNet are given in a semantic network structure , consisting of several links ( S - B - A or A - B - S ) . To distinguish different kinds of nodes , ‘source’ nodes are displayed in green , benefits’ nodes in blue and ‘application’ nodes in grey . The gradation of color varies for different steps . Edges are displayed in solid lines between related nodes and dash lines between potential nodes . If the designer has difficulty understanding the meaning of the keywords in the node , they can click on the node to see the details and links to the original website of this keyword . Finally , for the case where the original word is not found in the semantic network , we apply a semantic similarity algorithm to find the node with the highest semantic similarity to the original word to replace the original word . Figure 2 . Functional interface of AskNatureNet 4 . 2 Design cases A designer was recruited to conduct two design cases to illustrate how the knowledge - based BID approach could assist designers with problem - driven and solution - based bionic design using AskNatureNet . Generally , for the solution - driven design , the designer initially had a ‘source’ and was asked to apply the ‘source’ - > ‘benefits’ - > ‘application’ ( S - B - A ) link in AskNatureNet to freely ICED23 237 explore the biological properties and bionic applications of the ‘source . ’ For problem - driven design , the designer initially had a specific ‘application’ and was asked to freely search related keywords in the ‘application’ by applying the ‘application’ - > ‘benefits’ - > ‘source’ ( A - B - S ) link in AskNatureNet . For problem - driven design , surgical robot arms require high flexibility , precision and tight temperature control but there are technical barriers and industrial monopolies in the market . Thus , ‘robot arms , ’ as an application area where innovation from designers is urgently needed , was chosen as the ‘application . ’ The designer used AskNatureNet to obtain the A - B - S link in STEP 01 , which is directly relevant to the input word . Then , in STEP 02 and STEP 03 , more inspiration prompts were obtained based on the related and potential nodes . After the initial exploration of AskNatureNet , the designer gained some inspiration prompts from nature . The example of retrieved nodes is shown in Figure 3 - a . At the same time , the designer could click on the nodes to explore keywords of interest that appear in AskNatureNet . Figure 3 . Examples for retrieved nodes : ( a ) Results for ‘robot arms’ in STEP 03 ; ( b ) Results for ‘mushrooms’ in STEP 01 Results for designer formed ‘BID ideation links’ are shown in Figure 4 - a recording inspiring biological keywords in the semantic network . Starting from the design problem of surgical robot arms , the designer obtained the direct A - B - S links by searching ‘robot arms’ in STEP01 : ‘robot arms’ - > ‘strong grip , ’ ‘agile movement’ - > ‘elephant trunks’ and ‘robotics’ - > ‘cooler temperature , ’ ‘automatic reaction’ - > ‘mammal perspiration . ’ The closely spaced muscle structure of the elephant’s trunk inspired the designer to apply it to the moving part for flexible movement and fine manipulation . The mammal heat dissipation mechanism prompted the designer to use evaporation and heat absorption to prevent the machine from overheating . In further divergent thinking , the designers went on to get more A - B - S links in STEP 02 and STEP 03 that could inspire the design : ‘robot arms’ - > ‘strong grip’ - > “grapple plant’s fruit” ( STEP 02 ) and ‘robot arms’ - > ‘grip well’ - > “polar bear’s paws” ( STEP 03 ) . The structure of the grapple plant’s fruit can be used in the gripping part of the surgical robot to improve the gripping strength . The polar bear’s rough paw inspired the designer to improve the reliability of the gripper by treating its surface . As shown in Figure 5 , the designer integrated the above design ideas to form the final design case . Figure 4 . Examples of ‘BID ideation link’ : ( a ) ‘BID ideation link’ for problem - driven design ; ( b ) ‘BID ideation link’ for solution - driven design 238 ICED23 For solution - driven design , the designer was asked to design a product inspired by the biological strategies of mushrooms and to record the strategies used . Firstly , the designer entered ‘mushrooms’ as the input ‘source , ’ and the rest tool operation steps are the same as the problem - driven design . The example of retrieved nodes is shown in Figure 3 - b . Figure 5 . Sketch of the surgical robot inspired by ‘elephant trunks , ’ ‘mammal perspiration , ’ “grapple plant’s fruit” and “polar bear’s paws Then , the designer wrote down all the inspiring keywords and formed ‘BID ideation link’ ( Figure 4 - b ) . Based on the design solution of mushrooms , the designer obtained the S - B - A links in STEP 01 : ‘mushrooms’ - ‘resist water , ’ ‘provide insulation , ’ ‘compostable material , ’ ‘provide strong bond’ - ‘mushroom packaging’ and ‘mushrooms’ - ‘improve flexibility , ’ ‘sufficient interlocking force , ’ ‘safe connection’ - ‘fasteners . ’ Among them , the lightness and biodegradability of the mycelium material and the safety of the mushroom head structure fastener inspired the designers to use them in products that need to be lightweight , safe and changed frequently . Most of the existing children’s watches on the market are one - piece watches with silicone plastic straps , and the hook and loop adhesive part often scratches clothing . Therefore , the designer used lightweight , biodegradable , waterproof and heat - insulating mycelium as the strap material to reduce the weight burden on children’s wrists and the environmental hazards . At the same time , the designer was inspired by the structure of the mushroom head fastener and imitated its structure to make Velcro , which achieves a safe connection without irritating children’s skin while ensuring sufficient bite force . The final design is shown in Figure 6 . In summary , the designer used AskNatureNet to complete problem - driven and solution - driven BID , respectively . In solution - driven BID , the designer obtained inspiration for the open - ended design using AskNatureNet’s STEP 01 function . He designed a detachable children’s strap by combining two mushroom properties generated by the STEP 01 function : lightweight , environmentally friendly mycelium material and a detachable structure based on the mushroom head . In problem - driven BID , the designer considered the surgical arm the design object . After using STEP 01 for direct inspiration and STEP 02 , STEP 03 for divergent thinking , the designer utilized an elephant trunk - inspired arm structure and a mammalian sweating - inspired cooling system to achieve a surgical arm that is both flexible and temperature manageable . In both cases , designers can efficiently acquire highly relevant and valuable inspiration by simply entering the right words and selecting the pattern of the BID . If the result of the STEP 01 function is not enough to complete a satisfying idea , the designer can obtain more bionic links through the STEP 02 function and STEP 03 function to help divergent thinking and associative ideation . In conclusion , the two design cases demonstrate the process of applying AskNatureNet for design creativity , and provide indication of the potential benefits of the tool . The case studies are a starting point for exploring the potential of the tool , more comprehensive research is needed to fully understand its usefulness . ICED23 239 Figure 6 . Sketch for the detachable children’s watchband inspired by ‘mushroom packaging’ and ‘fasteners’ 5 CONCLUSION This study presents a knowledge - based approach for bio - inspired design ( BID ) ideation , aimed at overcoming the limitations of existing BID tool : Existing unstructured data and models limit the ability of designers to efficiently comprehend bionic design ; current BID ideation approaches only support one - way bionic information retrieval ; the lack of algorithms that support ideation in BID . Our approach proposes the use of structured data to build a bionic semantic network that supports bidirectional information retrieval and developed algorithms to enable divergent thinking in BID . This approach is implemented as a BID tool called AskNatureNet . The main contributions of this study are : 1 . A method to extract bio - design cases into structured data 2 . The construction of a semantic network based on the structured data to support bidirectional BID retrieval 3 . Development of a divergent retrieval method for ideation inspiration The process of the knowledge - based BID ideation approach was demonstrated through two design cases in which the designer used AskNatureNet to generate solutions for a detachable children ' s strap inspired by mushrooms and a surgical arm combining the features of an elephant trunk and mammalian sweat glands . The results showed that AskNatureNet could be applied to both solution - driven and problem - driven BID processes . The BID approach presented here offers implications for fitting into the real - world BID process . The extraction of bio - design - cases and organization of knowledge into the S - A - B structure is the analogy encoding process , which involves the storage and organization of information about source analogies . The two patterns of BID and the retrieval method for ideation , support the analogy retrieval and mapping process . The results of the case studies suggest that the AskNatureNet tool has the potential to support designers in generating innovative and novel solutions through bio - inspired design . While the case studies provide some preliminary evidence of the tool ' s potential , more evidence is necessary to make definitive conclusions about its usefulness . Although AskNature is one of largest BID data source , it still cannot cover all BID design fields . To improve its practical use and ideation outcomes , future work will focus on expanding and fusing the other heterogeneous data . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research is supported by National Key R & D Program of China ( 2022YFB3303300 ) and National Natural Science Foundation of China ( 62207023 ) . 240 ICED23 REFERENCES Chen , L . , Wang , P . , Dong , H . , Shi , F . , Han , J . , Guo , Y . , Childs , P . R . , Xiao , J . and Wu , C . , 2019 . An artificial intelligence based data - driven approach for design ideation . Journal of Visual Communication and Image Representation , Vol . 61 , pp . 10 - 22 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jvcir . 2019 . 02 . 009 Childs , P . , Han , J . , Chen , L . , Jiang , P . , Wang , P . , Park , D . , Yin , Y . , Dieckmann , E . and Vilanova , I . , 2022 . The creativity diamond—a framework to aid creativity . Journal of Intelligence , Vol . 10 , p . 73 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / jintelligence10040073 Chirazi , J . , Wanieck , K . , Fayemi , P . - E . , Zollfrank , C . & Jacobs , S . 2019 . What Do We Learn From Good Practices Of Biologically Inspired Design In Innovation ? Applied Sciences , Vol . 9 , p . 650 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / app9040650 Cohen , Y . H . & Reich , Y . 2016 . Biomimetic design method for innovation and sustainability ( Vol . 10 ) . Berlin , Germany . Springer . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 33997 - 9 Deldin , J . - M . & Schuknecht , M . 2014 . The Asknature Database : Enabling Solutions In Biomimetic Design . Biologically Inspired Design . Springer . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4471 - 5248 - 4 _ 2 Fayemi , P . e . , Wanieck , K . , Zollfrank , C . , Maranzana , N . , Aoussat , A . , 2017 . Biomimetics : Process , Tools And Practice . Bioinspir . Biomim . Vol . 12 , p . 011002 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 1748 - 3190 / 12 / 1 / 011002 Fu , K . , Chan , J . , Cagan , J . , Kotovsky , K . , Schunn , C . & Wood , K . 2013 . The Meaning Of “Near” And “Far” : The Impact Of Structuring Design Databases And The Effect Of Distance Of Analogy On Design Output . Journal Of Mechanical Design , Vol . 135 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4023158 Fu , K . , Moreno , D . , Yang , M . & Wood , K . L . 2014 . Bio - inspired Design : An Overview Investigating Open Questions From The Broader Field Of Design - by - analogy . Journal Of Mechanical Design , Vol . 136 , p . 111102 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4028289 Goel , A . , Hagopian , K . , Zhang , S . & Rugaber , S . Towards A Virtual Librarian For Biologically Inspired Design . Design Computing and Cognition , Cham . Springer International Publishing , pp . 369 - 386 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 90625 - 2 _ 21 Goel , A . K . , Mcadams , D . A . & Stone , R . B . 2015 . Biologically Inspired Design , Springer . Han , J . , Sarica , S . , Shi , F . , Luo , J . , 2021 . Semantic Networks For Engineering Design : State Of The Art And Future Directions . J . Mech . Des . pp . 1 – 45 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4052148 Helfman Cohen , Y . , Reich , Y . & Greenberg , S . 2014 . Biomimetics : Structure – function Patterns Approach . Journal Of Mechanical Design , Vol . 136 , p . 111108 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4028169 Hooker , G . & Smith , E . 2016 . Asknature And The Biomimicry Taxonomy . Insight , Vol . 19 , pp . 46 - 49 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / inst . 12073 Jacobs , S . R . , Nichol , E . C . & Helms , M . E . 2014 . “Where Are We Now And Where Are We Going ? ” The Biom Innovation Database . Journal Of Mechanical Design , Vol . 136 , p . 111101 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4028171 Jiang , S . , Hu , J . , Wood , K . L . & Luo , J . 2021 . Data - driven Design - by - analogy : State - of - the - art And Future Directions . Journal Of Mechanical Design , Vol . 144 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4051681 Kozaki , K . & Mizoguchi , R . , 2014 . pp . 469 - 472 . Linsey , J . S . , Tseng , I . , Fu , K . , Cagan , J . , Wood , K . L . & Schunn , C . 2010 . A Study Of Design Fixation , Its Mitigation And Perception In Engineering Design Faculty . Journal Of Mechanical Design , Vol . 132 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4001110 Müller , R . , Abaid , N . , Boreyko , J . B . , Fowlkes , C . , Goel , A . K . , Grimm , C . , Jung , S . , Kennedy , B . , Murphy , C . & Cushing , N . D . 2018 . Biodiversifying Bioinspiration . Bioinspiration & Biomimetics , Vol . 13 , p . 053001 . Reimers , N . & Gurevych , I . Sentence - BERT : Sentence Embeddings using Siamese BERT - Networks . Association for Computational Linguistics . 2019 Hong Kong , China . , pp . 3982 - 3992 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 18653 / v1 / D19 - 1410 Sarica , S . , Luo , J . & Wood , K . L . 2020 . Technet : Technology Semantic Network Based On Patent Data . Expert Systems With Applications , Vol . 142 , p . 112995 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . eswa . 2019 . 112995 Shi , F . , Chen , L . , Han , J . & Childs , P . 2017 . A Data - driven Text Mining And Semantic Network Analysis For Design Information Retrieval . Journal Of Mechanical Design , Vol . 139 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4037649 Shu , L . H . , Ueda , K . , Chiu , I . , Cheong , H . , 2011 . Biologically Inspired Design . Cirp Ann . Vol . 60 , pp . 673 – 693 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cirp . 2011 . 06 . 001 Siddharth , L . & Chakrabarti , A . 2018 . Evaluating The Impact Of Idea - inspire 4 . 0 On Analogical Transfer Of Concepts . Artificial Intelligence For Engineering Design , Analysis And Manufacturing , Vol . 32 , pp . 431 - 448 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / s0890060418000136 Zuo , H . , Jing , Q . , Song , T . , Sun , L . , Childs , P . & Chen , L . 2022 . Wikilink : An Encyclopedia - based Semantic Network For Design Creativity . Journal Of Intelligence , Vol . 10 , p . 103 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / jintelligence10040103