1 Copyright © 2013 by ASME Proceedings of the ASME 2013 International Design Engineering Technical Conferences & Computers and Information in Engineering Conference IDETC / CIE 2013 August 4 - 7 , 2013 , Portland , Oregon , USA DETC2013 - 13072 METHODS FOR PROTOTYPING STRATEGIES IN CONCEPTUAL PHASES OF DESIGN : FRAMEWORK AND EXPERIMENTAL ASSESSMENT Bradley A . Camburn University of Texas at Austin Austin , TX , USA Brock U . Dunlap University of Texas at Austin Austin , TX , USA Rachel Kuhr Singapore University of Technology and Design , Singapore Vimal K . Viswanathan Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta , GA , USA Julie S . Linsey Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta , GA , USA Dan D . Jensen US Air Force Academy Colorado Springs , CO , USA Richard H . Crawford University of Texas at Austin , TX , USA Kevin Otto Singapore University of Technology and Design , Singapore Kristin L . Wood Singapore University of Technology and Design , Singapore ABSTRACT Prototyping may be simultaneously one of the most important and least formally explored areas of design . Over the last few decades , designers and researchers have developed many methodologies for ideation , product architecture , design selection , and many other aspects of the design process . However , there have been relatively few methodologies published regarding the efficient and effective development of prototypes for new products . This research explores a methodology for enhancing the prototyping process . It is founded on extensive literature review of the best practices of engineering prototype development . These findings have been aggregated and form the foundation of a methodology for formulating prototyping strategies . This methodology has then been experimentally evaluated in a controlled design environment , and its effect on the performance of prototypes has been demonstrated . The method consists of a set of guiding questions with corresponding flowcharts and foundational equations that assist the designer to make choices about how to approach the prototyping process in an efficient and effective manner . 1 . INTRODUCTION As technology advances , companies are always searching for ways to enhance and streamline the product development process . In fact , in the last thirty years , numerous experimentally derived methodologies for concept generation and manufacturing have been formulated to assist product designers . However , there are relatively few structured approaches to prototyping . Given that prototyping is an integral part of the design process that brings ideas to realization , it stands to reason this is a topic worthy of detailed attention . This research focuses on methodologies to enhance prototyping during or in conjunction with concept development . This research was evaluated with two structured studies , one in which the method was employed in situ by various design teams [ 36 ] and another in which a controlled experimental study was used to evaluate the method’s effect on performance . The methodologies introduced in this paper will provide a systematic translation between design context variables ( based on the specific design problem being addressed ) and practical planning for a prototyping effort . The goal of this research is to provide generalized methodologies to enhance development , modeling and testing of prototypes that are drawn from experimental and theoretical analyses as well as heuristic exploration of best design practices . Additionally , the following are anticipated contributions we foresee stemming from this research : • Contribution 1 : Analysis that provides an enhanced approach to prototyping choices based on derivations from best practices of prototyping . • Contribution 2 : Formalization of a methodology that provides a template for deploying the results of these analyses into any given engineering prototyping effort . • Contribution 3 : Experimental evaluation of the methodology including correlation between performance ( effectiveness and efficiency ) and usage of the method . This paper includes an experimental evaluation of the method . It also provides a way to explore several choices 2 Copyright © 2013 by ASME within a prototyping strategy with one method . Additionally we include design variables that are practically identifiable . 2 . BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION During prototyping , designers will undoubtedly have logistical concerns regarding : the number of prototypes which should be constructed , the nature of these prototypes in terms of material , fidelity and functionality , and the forms of testing which should be applied to the prototype . We investigate a methodology for developing engineering type prototypes as opposed to marketing or manufacturing . Engineering prototypes are typically developed for the purpose of examining functionality , layout and interfacing [ 36 ] . These concerns are currently resolved , without using a specific methodology , intuitionally by the designer or by project managers based on cost and schedule or on historical precedent . Hence , a formalized and structured approach to prototyping is needed . Such a structured methodology considers basic quantification of key factors for distribution of time and resources . It also provides suggested guidance for detailed methods regarding the formalities of constructing the prototypes themselves . A prototyping strategy is defined herein as the set of choices that dictate the actions that will be taken to accomplish the development of the prototype ( s ) [ 16 ] . It is a method for creating a plan for development of prototypes . It is a repeatable tool that translates design context characteristics ( such as available budget or the uncertainty in modeling accuracy , etc . ) into the decisions made during prototyping ( such as number of prototypes to build , whether the device will be scaled , functionally relaxed , or functionally isolated , etc . ) . As a motivating example , consider the design of transducers such as acoustic speakers common to sound systems , laptop computers , or everyday headphones . The basic transducer architecture has been static for many decades : a rigid paper or cloth cone is attached on the outside to a metal frame , with an electric voice coil wire glued to the center of the cone configured to be concentric to a permanent magnet . There are many different concepts that implement this architecture , however , with different cone sizes , angles and profiles , many different coil diameters , attachment geometries , materials and methods . At the center of the speaker cone , there can be many different centerpiece geometries inside of the voice coil from hemispheres , inverted hemispheres , flat discs , spiral grooved discs , etc . There can also be many materials , shapes and features on the ring attaching the outer edge of the rigid moving cone to the rigid non - moving frame . In a typical design effort the size and acoustic performance requirements are given , and alternative materials and geometry selected . However , speaker cones are formed through a stamping process that radically alters local cone thicknesses and internal material stress . Gluing materials together also changes local masses and internal stresses . The result is that the transducer natural frequency response and acoustic performance is very difficult to assess until it is prototyped , complete with tooling for the stamping process . Each unique geometry involves unique tooling which can therefore be expensive . While several different paper or fabric materials can be tested for any tool at less expense , there are usually also fewer differences in dynamic acoustic performance results . Therefore , a key development process question in transducer design is to determine the number of geometries to prototype as a part of selecting a design concept , before continuing into later design phases with one concept . 2 . 1 . Related Work Each year top global innovative companies average 141 . 8 billion dollars in product research and development . Of that money , estimates show that 40 - 46 % is spent on cancelled products or those which yield inadequate returns [ 1 ] . To increase returns businesses often focus on project management type logistics like lead times , budgets and so forth . Although these management methods are reproducible and successful , they do not alleviate the challenges of prototyping . We find the literature exists in two communities , the management science and the engineering literature . The most in depth books , e . g . , by Thomke or Schrage , suggest minimal , though useful strategies , such as “pursue parallel development of prototypes” or “iterate prototypes , instead of initially including all features” [ 8 , 9 ] . There are a number of resources regarding the detailed implementation of certain prototyping methods for specific prototyping technologies . Yet , the bulk of prototyping literature is , as mentioned , largely focused on logistical management : time , cost and functionality [ 10 , 16 ] . Dahan and Mendelson find that sequential designs succeed in cost constrained environments while parallel designs succeed in time - constrained environments [ 11 ] . Thomke and Bell [ 12 , 13 ] add that significant savings can be achieved through multiple low fidelity prototypes . An in depth DoD study makes the following observations on best practices over forty years of prototyping : [ 13 ] : 1 . Make sure the prototypes meet the minimum design requirements ; 2 . The goal of a prototype is to prove that the final product is viable in the real world ; 3 . Prototypes are intended to be focused on determining unknown quantities ; therefore , avoid adding non - critical features ; 4 . During prototyping there should be no commitment to production ; 5 . Once the design process is underway , do not add design requirements or performance expectations . Dahan [ 11 ] pursued a method for determining the number of prototypes that may be most beneficial to pursue based on the optimization of an equation for the uncertainty of success of a prototype and the marginal increase in profit of that prototype . In the technical engineering literature , we find engineers often rely on experience and domain knowledge when prototyping . A few publications proffer anecdotal stories about the importance of prototyping [ 3 , 4 , 5 ] . Others go into some depth about the importance or rationale [ 6 ] but none reach the level of providing actual strategies . However , it is likely that successful engineers must have some methodology , albeit trade secret , intuitive or ad hoc ( based on historical precedent ) . 3 Copyright © 2013 by ASME Although the evidence suggests that prototyping is one of the most important aspects of new product creation , there is no apparent work that translates the findings in logistical management studies into an engineering framework . Otto and Wood address prototyping in multiple chapters that cover various analytical modelling techniques , physical prototype development processes and suggestions , and proper testing strategies to ensure that physical models meet requirements . The authors recognize that while non - physical modelling is certainly important , designers must eventually move into the development and testing of physical prototypes [ 16 ] . Otto and Wood then further the discussion by suggesting a basic method for physical prototype design , and a case study that implements this method . They give suggestions for a prototype design procedure , some guidelines for prototype development , and a sample template for keeping track of design decisions . While the information provided in this book is valuable and makes an excellent attempt at strategizing prototyping , it is not the main focus of the authors’ work . It provides excellent building blocks for future work and gives many ideas towards the work that we present later in this paper [ 16 ] . Ulrich and Eppinger [ 17 ] provide extensive material regarding benefits of physical versus virtual prototypes , and focuses on strategic approaches to prototyping . They look for general aspects to describe the prototyping process , such as the observation that a prototype may fall anywhere in a two axis field between fully physical and fully virtual design . They further stipulate that the model that is most cost effective should be pursued . Yang [ 41 ] shows that prototypes built with fewer parts are correlated to more successful designs . Psychological studies on the effects of prototyping show that several aspects of the design process are enhanced as a result of prototyping [ 20 ] : ( 1 ) Failure is reframed as an opportunity for learning ; ( 2 ) A sense of forward progress is fostered ; and ( 3 ) Beliefs about creative ability are strengthened . These studies are very informative yet focused on either management aspects of prototyping or on a very limited part of the engineering prototyping process . Based on the review of the literature on prototyping , there is a distinct need for broader and more inclusive methods to strategizing an approach to prototyping . The recent study from Moe , et . al . is a possible exception to this [ 16 ] . In Moe’s work , three prototyping decisions are considered . These include : 1 ) how many concepts to prototype in parallel , 2 ) how many iterations in prototyping to plan for each of these concepts and 3 ) should we allow the prototyping plan to be altered midway through the prototyping process . The work suggests that answers to these three questions should be based on the rigidity of cost , schedule and performance for that particular design . While Moe’s work is instructive , it deals with only three prototyping questions . Christie et al . have developed a set of heuristics , or decision variables that should be considered in the development of a prototyping strategy [ 16 , 38 ] , Including whether prototypes are scaled , built in house , outsourced , or rapid prototyped . We examine several of these heuristics in our method . Although Christie et al . do not claim to provide a fully comprehensive list of prototyping decisions it provides a starting foundation to consider . A second set of heuristics , which outline best practices , was also developed by Viswanathan [ 34 ] . Their experiment involved data collection over three semesters of a graduate design course . These students study the design methodologies from Otto and Wood [ 15 ] , and apply them to design projects with a variety of topics from corporate sponsored projects to those based on issues common in the developing world . These teams begin with customer needs analysis and go as far into the development process as building a functional prototype . A testing strategy was used in which these data were classified into general codes . These results include heuristics such as “use standardized parts” and “support building with analytical calculations” . 2 . 2 . Combined / synthesized prototyping design context variables Based on examining the heuristics from Moe , Christie , and Viswanathan we have developed a synthesized list of variables for a prototyping strategy , or a list of the majority of the relevant choices a designer faces when developing a prototype ( Table 1 ) . The list is formed by extracting the implicit decision variables embedded in the heuristics . For instance a heuristic “ build a scaled prototype” becomes the decision “ build a scaled prototype or an exact size prototype” . Not only does the list represent the extracted decisions , it is also the union of both sets . We also add a hierarchy to the decisions . Finally , each element has been re - phrased to be more general . They are reduced from specific concepts such as ‘avoid complicated machining’ to general elements in a hierarchical decision list like choose ‘ad hoc or precise manufacture’ , which is under the ‘embodiment’ category . The one - to - one mapping by which the elements of this list were developed can be seen in the Appendices . For the purpose of this study we have chosen a set of five heuristics ( or dependent prototyping strategy variables ) : 1 . Number of design concepts 2 . Number of iterations of each concept 3 . Scaling 4 . Subsystem isolation or design of integrated system 5 . Relaxation or rigid application of design requirements These five were chosen as an initial foundation for developing the prototyping strategy methodology . We believe these can be derived from six independent design context variables : 1 . Budget 2 . Time 3 . Difficulty of meeting the design requirements 4 Copyright © 2013 by ASME 4 . Interactivity 5 . Designer’s experience 6 . Rigidity of design requirements 3 . PROTOTYPING STRATEGY METHOD : OVERVIEW The prototyping strategy method provides a means of translating between independent design context variables and dependent prototyping strategy variables . The correlation between the independent and dependent variables is described below . As an example of this correlation we hypothesize that the designers’ experience can be used to predict their likelihood of constructing a successful design using the fewest . The method was developed by making several assumptions : ( 1 ) an effective and efficient initial prototyping strategy plans to exhaust resources , regardless of anticipated ease in meeting design requirements ; ( 2 ) the effective and efficient prototyping strategy is one that maximizes profit or design performance [ 11 ] ; ( 3 ) the more iterations of a single concept , the more likely one of them will be successful at meeting the design requirements [ 16 ] ; ( 4 ) the more concepts that are developed in parallel , the greater likelihood of determining the best concept [ 16 ] ; and ( 5 ) the more experience a designer has , the more likely they are to develop a prototype that meets the design requirements in the fewest prototype iterations . These assumptions were based on analytical review of the prototyping literature , and the extension of the appropriated theories of prototyping into practical application . It should be noted that the strategy method developed herein does not deterministically address every variable within a possible prototyping strategy . Included are those that were identified as the most critical to success , especially when considering an early stage trajectory , or plan . The selected variables are those that must be chosen first , or that will lead to the determination of other variables . The process consists of four primary phases : ( 1 ) determination of the number of iterations required to meet target operational performance for each concept in consideration , ( 2 ) evaluation of the need for scaling , functional isolation , and subsystem isolation for each iteration of each concept , ( 3 ) determination of which concepts to pursue in parallel , ( 4 ) write - up of strategy and execution . Each of these phases is explained in detail throughout this section . Figure 1 shows the flow of this method graphically and Figure 2 shows the design of an example prototyping strategy . Table 1 : Hierarchical List of all Decisions for a Broad Prototyping Strategy . Scale Scaled or actual boundary conditions / parameters Scaled or actual function Scaled or actual geometry ( dimensions , shape , tolerances ) Integration Physical integration or segmentation / subsystem isolation Functional integration or segmentation Logistics Allocations Rigid or flexible scheduling Rigid or flexible budgeting Make Number of design concepts ( in parallel ) Number of iterations of each concept Embodiment COTS ( Commercial Off - the - Shelf ) or custom parts Material Actual or easy to manufacture Method Ad hoc or precise ( formal or systematic ) Virtual or physical Outsourced or in - house Evaluation Relaxed or stringent parametric design requirements Exploration or verification Testing Dynamic or static Run conditions or failure conditions Multiple test conditions or single condition Continuous or discrete variation of parameters Figure 1 . Depiction of ( current ) Prototyping Strategy Method Architecture as a Flowchart 5 Copyright © 2013 by ASME 3 . 1 . NUMBER OF ITERATIONS Minimization of uncertainty leads to a heuristic equation for determining the number of iterations of a single concept versus the number of parallel concepts for a prototyping strategy . It is based on the execution of assumption 2 and 4 . Representations for uncertainty are ultimately reduced to an equation of designer’s experience , difficulty of meeting the design requirements with a given design concept , and stringency of the design requirements . This is used to help determine the number of iterative and parallel prototypes to be developed and is employed in the method worksheet , Appendices . Uncertainty is taken as the inverse of certainty or the likelihood of an initial concept succeeding ( meeting design requirements within cost and schedule constraints ) . When uncertainty is high one should pursue multiple iterations , as it will likely take further iterations until success is met . When uncertainty is low , or certainty is high , one should pursue more concepts in parallel as pressure to meet requirements is lower and the designer is freer to explore the design space . Uncertainty is roughly proportional to the number of iterations required for the design to meet requirements . The equation for uncertainty is [ 36 ] : 𝑈 = ! ! " ! ! ! ! ! ( 1 ) Where 𝐸 ! is the designer’s experience 𝑅 ! " is the rigidity of the design requirements and D is the anticipated difficulty in meeting the design requirements ( with a particular design concept ) [ 36 ] . 3 . 2 . SCALING , SUBSYSTEM ISOLATION AND RELAXATION OF REQUIREMENTS Diagrammatic flowcharts are utilized to map between independent design context variables and the choices of whether or not to scale the design , isolate some of the subsystems , or relax the parameters of the design requirements when prototyping . The definitions for these terms can be found in Table 2 . They represent one of the original contributions of this work . However , they are firmly grounded in the prototyping theories identified in previous research . These flowcharts are also based on application of assumptions 1 - 3 ( see Section 3 . 0 ) . Additionally , these flowcharts take into account the results from Viswanathan et . al . , Christie et al . and Moe et al . for optimizing the prototyping process . All three flowcharts should be applied to each iteration of each concept for which there is available budget ( cost and schedule ) i . e . all those which will be built . There are three independent flowcharts as seen in Figure 3 . The scaling flowchart encourages scaling only if it will simplify the problem , a scaling law is known , and it is accurate enough to predict the design requirements within the specified accuracy . This assumes that there is an uncertainty in the extrapolation that can be predicated . If there is a higher uncertainty in the extrapolation , do not scale , or scale only to a reduced extent . The second flowchart , subsystem isolation / integration , examines whether the designer should isolate a subsystem of the design , that is , build and analyze one particular subsystem or set of subsystems as opposed to the complete system . This flowchart encourages subsystem isolation if it will reduce the difficulty of the prototyping process and the system is relatively un - integrated as determined from the interactivity value found in the survey , and / or can be integrated in the future with reasonable effort . The interactivity , I nt , is defined as the qualitatively assessed value of a design on a scale of one to ten that describes the level by which subsystems are dependent on each other for operation . For instance a Swiss army knife has a low I nt value , while that of a four bar linkage is very high . The final flowchart examines the relaxation of design requirements . For this decision variable the designer is considering whether or not to build a prototype that is expected to meet requirements less than the actual values of the given requirements , e . g . the prototype operates at half of the desired speed . This approach should be adopted if relaxation will simplify the prototyping process , and the requirements are flexible and / or a future iteration can be built to sufficient specifications . Figure 3c . This flowchart includes calculating the rigidity of the design requirements , R eq , which assesses how inflexible the parametric values of the design requirements are on a one to ten scale . R eq is low for a proof of concept design . Figure 2 An Example Prototyping Strategy Write - up 6 Copyright © 2013 by ASME Table 2 : Definitions of S . I . R . S / I / R Definition Example Scaling Scaling proportionately changes the size of the prototype . It is useful when the actual device size is too difficult or costly to produce or test . A navy ship is built at ~ 1 / 100 scale the first several iterations . Subsystem Isolation With subsystem isolation , one of the subsystems of the device can be prototyped or experimentally evaluated while other subsystems are prototyped independently or not at all . Monitor design project - prototype the LCD array but ignore casing design . Relaxation of Design Requirement With functional requirement relaxation , the values or parameters of the design can be altered to simplify prototyping . Prototype a new engine - spec it to run at ½ designated torque for the prototype . a : Scaling b : Subsystem Isolation c : Relaxation of Design Requirements Figure 3 Preliminary Flowcharts for Determining Scaling ( a ) , Isolation ( b ) and Relaxation ( c ) 7 Copyright © 2013 by ASME 3 . 3 . CONCEPTS IN PARALLEL Once the required numbers of iterations for each concept and the corresponding choices for S . I . R . have been determined , the next step is to estimate the cost of each iteration . This is done in both dollars and person hours . These values are used to determine to total cost of each concept . The total cost of each concept is the sum of the cost of all iterations . A concept should not be pursued if there is insufficient budget ( dollars or person hours ) to pursue the estimated necessary number of iterations required to meet target functionality with that concept . For instance , if a concept will require 4 iterations resulting in an anticipated cost of $ 300 while the budget is only $ 200 , even though the cost of the first iteration were only $ 50 , do not include this concept as there is likely to be insufficient budget to evaluate it completely . To determine which concepts should be built , this total cost of the concept can be subtracted from the allocations to determine if there is enough time and budget to build that concept . Equation 2 , 3 ( this process is repeated for dollars ) . This subtraction is performed iteratively , the cost of each subsequent concept being subtracted from the remaining budget until there is insufficient budget for the next concept . The concepts for which there was sufficient budget should be developed in parallel . Remaining budget after concept A 𝐵 ! − 𝐶 ! ( 𝑖𝑡 ℎ 𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑜𝑓 𝐴 ) ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ( 2 ) Remaining budget after concept A and B 𝐵 ! − 𝐶 ! 𝑖𝑡 ℎ 𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑜𝑓 𝐴 ! ! ! ! ! ! ! − 𝐶 ! ( 𝑖𝑡 ℎ 𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑜𝑓 𝐵 ) ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ( 3 ) Where 𝐵 ! is the total available time ( person hours ) for the entire prototyping effort , 𝐶 ! is the cost of the iteration in person hours , 𝐼 ! ! ! is the number of iterations for concept A The designer is encouraged to build as many concepts as there is sufficient time and budget to build . Notably however , the method does not indicate a ranking system any methodology such as the Pugh chart , utility method etc . can be used . For instance , one might select the top scoring concepts from a set or instead choose to select the set of concepts ( based on the cost of each ) that allows for the maximum number of concepts to be pursued . Once all five of the strategy variables have been determined using the approaches outlined above , the designer records the over - all strategy as a tabulation of the choices made and commences the prototyping process accordingly . An example of an over - all strategy can be seen in Figure 2 . 4 . EXPERIMENTAL ASSESSMENT OF THE METHOD A twofold experimental approach was taken to evaluate and advance the method . A first study followed real design teams that were exploring a broad range of design problems ( from university design courses ) and were provided with the method [ 44 ] . This study investigated the quantitative influence of the method on prototyping strategy , and a qualitative assessment of its value . In the second experiment , small design teams developed a physical solution to a problem in a pre - allotted amount of time . There was a control group who employed an ad - hoc prototyping procedure and an experimental group that employed our method . Previously , the authors examined some effects of introducing the prototyping strategy method [ 36 ] . Teams of senior engineering design students were first asked to create a prototyping strategy , and then were then exposed to the method . Next they were asked to re - create a prototyping strategy based on the method . This resulted in a comparison of the pre - and post - method strategy . Results showed that the method changed by 48 % ( meaning that 48 % of the prototyping strategy dependent variables changed values after the introduction of the method ) ) . This experiment included a follow up survey , disseminated after design work was completed , which included Likert - scaled self - reported values for success of the prototyping strategy . It was shown , with statistical significance that the method improves the over - all effectiveness of the design process ( p = 0 . 0048 ) . Also , more detailed analysis showed that teams were more likely avoid exceeding allotted material resources and to complete the project within time . While this result indicates effectiveness for the classroom learning design , the results were confounded with many different design projects , experience levels , and contexts . In the experiment reported here , these issues were eliminated and the strategy decision structure of the method refined . The correlation between prototype performance and implementation of the prototyping strategy method was directly evaluated in a controlled design problem study , rather than a variety of design problems found in the earlier classroom work . The approach of this portion of the prototyping strategy research is to directly compare the design performance of teams that have been exposed to the strategy method to the performance of those who have not . This comparison was meant to be an effective assessment of the prototyping strategy itself , given that the sets of teams were completing the same design problem . 4 . 1 . CONTROLLED STUDY EXPERIMENT In this experiment design teams of two from a set of forty participants were divided into two groups of ten teams : ( 1 ) control , which will not see any prototyping strategy method , and ( 2 ) experimental , which will utilize the prototyping strategy method . Participants were mostly senior mechanical engineers in a design course , with about five randomly intermixed students from the design school ( industrial design ) . Both groups were given the same amount of time to complete the same design problem . The problem is one that can be solved in roughly three hours of prototyping time . 8 Copyright © 2013 by ASME The design problem , shown schematically in Figure 4 , was to move an object ( a quarter ) to a target without using human energy during release . The target was an ‘X’ on the floor . The device had to start behind a line and then somehow move the object to the target . Teams were each provided the exact same kit of materials to eliminate noise from excessive material exploitation . Design concepts were provided to the teams to eliminate noise from varying creativity ( for solution ideation ) between individuals and increase the focus on effective prototyping . Teams were given an equal amount of time to consider the design problem . The control performed a supervised activity ( educational videos about technology ) after seeing the design problem for one half hour while the experimental group completed the prototyping strategy method . The teams were then exposed to their prototyping materials which were basic supplies such as paper , scissors , masking tape , cardboard , straws , etc . Finally the teams completed their prototype designs and the performance of their devices was measured . 4 . 2 . METRICS FOR CONTROLLED STUDY There are several metrics for this study : 1 . Performance of the resulting design ( prototype ) as a comparison between the experimental and control groups . 2 . Self - assessed success of the prototyping strategy for experimental and control group , in terms of : a . Effectiveness : Was the prototyping approach successful over - all ? b . Sufficient Time : Was the prototype finished in time ? c . Sufficient Materials : Were there sufficient materials ? The first metric is critical in that it is an objective evaluation of the effect the method induces on prototyping success . The second metric encompasses the results of various surveys using Likert scales to evaluate the perceived effect of the method by the designers in the study . 4 . 3 . RESULTS The results of the second experiment correlate to the performance metric cited above . Specifically , the performance metric is defined as the final position of the coin after the teams have built and deployed their design . The results are binary . Scores are separated into two categories . These are : teams for which the coin was over the dot , i . e . the dot was under the quarter , and teams for which the quarter was outside the dot . The results of the experiment are shown in Table 4 . Results show that ten out of ten teams in the experimental group achieved target performance ( coin landed at least once within three quarter widths of the target ) , while only seven of nine teams achieved target performance for the control group . This corresponds to a p value of 0 . 016 determined using a 2 - proportion test between the experimental and control group performance results , indicating that the results are statistically significant that the experimental group performs better than the control . Also shown in Table 4 are the results of the self assessment . Interestingly , there was no statistically significant ( p < . 05 ) effect of the self - perceived effectiveness of the method on the prototyping effort achieved from its application . This self - reflected assessment differs from reality , when in fact there was a significant improvement with the experimental group as users of the method . One possible interpretation of this result is that the directed prototyping strategy method is non - intuitive , leading designers outside of their comfort zone . A comparison with design teams executing the method on their actual design problems ( in another study [ 36 ] ) shows the Figure 4 Playing Field for Object Deposition Design Problem Table 4 : Experimental Results . Measured Performance Results Experimental Control Significance Percent Teams Within 3 * D quarter 100 % 78 % p = 0 . 016 Designers’ Self - Assessed Results Effectiveness 𝑋 ! = 7 . 61 𝜎 = 1 . 74 𝑋 ! = 8 . 4 𝜎 = 1 . 29 p = 0 . 26 Sufficient Materials 90 . 1 % 100 % p = 0 . 03 Sufficient Time 76 % 93 % p = 0 . 06 9 Copyright © 2013 by ASME opposite results : design teams using the method indicate a self - perceived greater effectiveness of prototyping with the method . As expected , the method did not significantly correlate with the teams having sufficient time . Both the experimental and control groups had sufficient time . A parallel study [ 36 ] of teams implementing the method with actual design problems shows a better use of time resources with the method . There was a significant reduction in teams’ perception of having sufficient material to complete the project , seen in Table 4 . This may be due to the fact that several teams in the test group prototyped more than one concept , and continued building after the first concept was complete , while more teams in the control group only built one concept . Specifically , 60 % of experimental teams built two or more concepts while only 30 % of control teams built two or more concepts . The prototyping strategy method presents a potentially ground breaking effort in design methodology . Assessment of a method with qualitative aspects requires a rigorous scientific approach . The two stage experimental approach helps to isolate the effects of the method from noise and subjectivity . The final results of the experiments show a positive correlation between implementation of the method and successful design , therefore this approach should be pursued and its representation and documentation made accessible . 5 . FUTURE RESEARCH Experimental evaluations of the prototyping strategy method are described in this paper . However , additional research is needed to expand the analysis to additional assumptions on best prototyping practices , such as investigating the relation between the type of design problem , time allotted for the project , experience of the designers , and effect of a complete method versus a succinct method , etc . In addition , we plan to pursue an expanded method that will provide insight into decisions related to other prototyping variables , such as whether prototypes should be virtual or physical , whether materials used in prototypes should be the same as those planned for the production systems and whether manufacturing processes used for prototyping should be the same as those planned for the production systems . Other prototyping variables may be investigated as well ( rapid prototyping , out sourcing prototypes , prototypes as part of concept generation and prototyping integrated into the testing process ) . We intend to continue development of method and the refinement of its representation and documentation . 6 . CONCLUSION This research reports novel findings from a controlled study on the impact of a disciplined strategy for managing prototyping efforts . The results indicate that a structured method for making prototyping plans strongly influences the prototyping process in a positive manner . The results indicate that the influences are an increased likelihood of staying within budget and time constraints while providing an increase in design performance . This method and the promise of associated research have been received with great enthusiasm by the product design participants . Yet , we realize that the method in its current form is not comprehensive in terms of addressing every question related to prototyping and , as such , there remain further opportunities to further enhance the method and to create new methods along similar lines . 7 . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This material is based on research sponsored by the United Sates Air Force Academy under agreement number FA7000 - 12 - 2 - 2005 . The US Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation thereon . The research is also supported in part by the International Design Centre at the Singapore University of Technology and Design . The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies or endorsements , either expressed or implied , of the United States Air Force Academy or the US government . 8 . BIBLIOGRAPHY [ 1 ] Cooper , R . G . , Winning at New Products : Accelerating the Process from Idea to Launch , Cambridge , MA : Perseus , 1993 . [ 2 ] Barczak , G . , Griffin , A . and Kahn , K . B . , 2009 , PERSPECTIVE : Trends and Drivers of Success in NPD Practices : Results of the PDMA Best Practices Study . Journal of Product Innovation Management , 26 : 3 – 23 , 2003 . [ 3 ] Christensen , C . M , The Innovator’s Dilemma , HarperBusiness , 2003 . [ 4 ] Dodgson , M . , Think , Play , Do : Technology , Innovation , and Organization , OUP Oxford , 2005 . [ 5 ] Verganti , R . , Design - Driven Innovation : Changing the Rules of Competition by Radically Innovating What Things Mean , Harvard Business Press , 2009 . [ 6 ] Martin , R . , The Design of Business : Why Design Thinking Is the Next Competitive Advantage , Harvard Business Press , 2009 . [ 7 ] Kelley , T . , The Art of Innovation : Lessons in Creativity from IDEO , America ' s Leading Design Firm , random House Digital , inc . , 2001 . [ 8 ] Thomke , S . H . , Experimentation Matters : Unlocking the Potential of New Technologies for Innovation , Harvard Business Press , 2003 . [ 9 ] Schrage , M . , Serious Play : How the World ' s Best Companies Simulate to Innovate , Harvard Business Press , 2000 . [ 10 ] Clark , K . , Fujimoto , T . , Product Development Performance : Strategy , Organization , and Management in the World Auto Industry . Boston : Harvard Business School Press , 1991 . [ 11 ] Dahan , E . , Mendelson , H . , Optimal parallel and sequential prototyping in product design , unpublished manuscript , Stanford University Graduate School of Business , Stanford , CA , 1998 . 10 Copyright © 2013 by ASME [ 12 ] Thomke , S . H . , Bell , D . , Sequential testing in product management science , 2001 . [ 13 ] Thomke , S . H . , 1998 , Managing experimentation in the design of new products , Mgmt Sci . 44 ( June ) 743 – 762 [ 14 ] Drezner , J . , 2009 , On Prototyping , RAND Corp . [ 15 ] Otto , K . N . , Wood , K . L . , 2001 , Product Design : Techniques in Reverse Engineering and New Product Development , Upper Saddle River , N . J . : Prentice - Hall [ 16 ] Moe , R . , Jensen , D . , Wood , K " Prototype partitioning based on requirement flexibility” , ASME - DTM , 2004 [ 17 ] Ulrich , K . T . , Eppinger S . D . , 2000 , Product Design and Development , NY : Mc Graw - Hill . http : / / www . industryweek . com / articles / visualize _ this _ 20809 . aspx [ 18 ] Banga , K . , Takai , S . , 2011 , “Effects of design parameters in cost estimation and cost uncertainty modeling” , ASME Design Engineering Technical Conference , Washington D . C . [ 19 ] Ruffo , M . , Tuck , C . , Hague , R . , “Make or buy analysis for rapid manufacturing” , Rapid Prototyping Journal , Vol . 13 Iss : 1 , pp . 23 - 29 , 2007 . [ 20 ] Franck , C . , Rosen , D . , “Measuring value of prototypes during product development” , ASME Design Engineering Technical Conference , Baltimore , MD 2000 . [ 21 ] Bernard , A . , Deglin , A . , Ris , G . , “An original approach for the memorisation and the generation of rapid product development processes” , Rapid Prototyping Journal , Vol . 9 Iss : 2 , pp . 58 – 67 , 2003 . [ 22 ] Gerber , Elizabeth , Maureen , Carroll , “The psychological experience of prototyping” Design Studies , In Press : 1 - 21 , 2011 . [ 23 ] Linsey , J . , Tseng , I . , Fu , K . , Cagan , J . , Wood , K . , and Schunn , C . , " A Study of Design Fixation , Its Mitigation and Perception in Engineering Design Faculty , " ASME Transactions : Journal of Mechanical Design , 132 pp . 041003 , 2010 . [ 24 ] Jansson , D . , and Smith , S . , " Design Fixation , " Design Studies , 12 ( 1 ) , pp . 3 - 11 , 1991 . [ 25 ] Kershaw , T . , Holtta - Otto , L . , Yoon , S . , “The Effect of Prototyping and Critical Feedback on Fixation in Engineering Design” , Cognitive Science Society , CogSci 2011 . [ 26 ] Collins , A . M . , and Loftus , E . F . , " A Spreading - Activation Theory of Semantic Processing , " Psychological review , 82 ( 6 ) , pp . 407 - 428 , 1975 [ 27 ] Anderson , J . R . , " A Spreading Activation Theory of Memory , " Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 22 ( 3 ) , pp . 261 - 295 , 1983 . [ 28 ] Matlin , M . W . , Cognition , Hoboken , NJ 2005 . [ 29 ] Ward , A . , Liker , J . K . , Cristiano , J . J . , and Sobek , D . K . , " The Second Toyota Paradox : How Delaying Decisions Can Make Better Cars Faster , " Sloan Management Review , 38 pp . 43 - 43 , 1995 . [ 30 ] Luchins , A . S . , and Luchins , E . H . , Rigidity of Behavior : A Variational Approach to the Effect of Einstellung , University of Oregon books Eugene , OR , 1959 . [ 31 ] Kiriyama , T . , and Yamamoto , T . , " Strategic Knowledge Acquisition : A Case Study of Learning through Prototyping , " Knowledge - based Systems , 11 ( 7 - 8 ) , pp . 399 - 404 , 1998 . [ 32 ] Christensen , B . T . , and Schunn , C . D . , " The Relationship of Analogical Distance to Analogical Function and Pre - Inventive Structure : The Case of Engineering Design , " Creative Cognition : Analogy and Incubation , 35 ( 1 ) , pp . 29 - 38 , 2005 . [ 33 ] Viswanathan , V . K . , and Linsey , J . S . , " Enhancing Student Innovation : Physical Models in the Idea Generation Process , " ASEE / IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference , San Antonio , TX , 2009 . [ 34 ] Viswanathan , K . “Cognitive effects of physical models in engineering data generation” PhD . Thesis , Texas A & M University , 2012 . [ 35 ] Dahan , E . , Mendelson , H . “An extreme value model of concept testing” Management science , 2001 . [ 36 ] Camburn , B . , Dunlap , B . , Linsey , J . , Viswanathan , V . , Jensen , D . , Crawford , R . , Otto , K . , Wood , K . L . “Using Design Problem Characteristics to Build a Prototyping Strategy , ” ASEE Annual Conference , Atlanta , GA , 2013 . [ 37 ] Tadepalli , S . “Advances in empirical similitude method” , PhD thesis , University of Texas , 2009 . [ 38 ] Christie , E . , Buckley , R . Ziegler , K . , Jensen , D . , Wood , K . , “Prototyping strategies : Literature review and critical variables” , DETC 2012 . [ 39 ] Gerber , Elizabeth , and Maureen Carroll . " The psychological experience of prototyping . " Design Studies 33 . 1 : 64 - 84 , 2012 . [ 40 ] Kershaw , Trina C . , Katja Hölttä - Otto , and Yoon Soo Lee . " The Effect of Prototyping and Critical Feedback on Fixation in Engineering Design . " , http : / / www . mindmodeling . org , 2012 . [ 41 ] Yang , Maria C . " A study of prototypes , design activity , and design outcome . " Design Studies 26 . 6 ( 2005 ) : 649 - 669 . [ 42 ] Krishnan , Viswanathan , and Karl T . Ulrich . " Product development decisions : A review of the literature . " Management Science 47 . 1 : 1 - 21 , 2001 [ 43 ] Youmans , Robert J . " The effects of physical prototyping and group work on the reduction of design fixation . " Design Studies 32 . 2 : 115 - 138 , 2011 .