Reference Books and the Organization of Knowledge History of Information , July 19 , 2010 Women , Fire and Dangerous Things  Lakoff  “Framing”  To control a metaphor is to control the referent’s meaning ; use of said metaphor implies a subconcious support of the concept  Tax Relief vs . Tax Cuts  Death Tax vs . Estate Tax Lakoff ( 2 )  “Women , Fire , and Dangerous Things : What Categories Reveal About the Mind”  Australian aboriginal language has a category ( balan ) that includes these signifiers , among others  “The inference is based on the common idea of what it means to be in the same category : things are categorized together on the basis of what they have in common . ”  But this classical view is only part of the story  Most categorization is “automatic and subconscious” , and is often performed on abstract , rather than physical entities . Categorization  What sorts of categorizations occur in society on a daily basis ? Categorization  What sorts of categorizations occur in society on a daily basis ?  Ethnic identification / racial profiling  “Good / Desirable” Schools / Workplaces  Political / National affiliation  Email vs . Spam  Others ?  Would you have perceived this course differently if it had been listed under Dance Studies ? Forestry ? Folklore ? “Knowledge”  Epistemic Hierarchy  Data  #  Categorized , organized , rationalized by the processing mind’s perspective  Information  #  Authentication , verification  Knowledge  #  Broadly codified and integrated both with knowledge from other disciplines and with a culture or society  Wisdom  “involves forgetting as much as remembering and is made up of insights and understandings as to what is true , right , and lasting” Src : Mason , Mason , and Culnan , Information Ethics , 1995 , p . 52 Shifting Conceptions of Knowledge , 1500 - 1800  Renaissance understanding of knowledge  Varieties of knowledge : private / public ; scientiae / artes ; liberal / useful , etc .  Burke traces shifts in the " tripod " of the curriculum , library ( including the bibliography ) and the encyclopedia . The 15 th Century Curriculum  The enkyklios paideia ( " circle of learning " ) :  Trivium : grammar , logic , rhetoric  Quadrivium : arithmetic , astronomy , geometry , music  The three philosophies : ethics , metaphysics , " natural philosophy”  Higher faculties : theology , medicine , law The 15 th Century Curriculum  Scholarship and education exclusively in Latin until the Renaissance  System of knowledge is " closed " ; built around classical sources and religious texts ( courses organized around texts , not subjects )  Organization of knowledge is ﬁxed and " natural " Breaking with the Past  It would disgrace us , now that the wide spaces of the material globe , the lands and seas , have been broached and explored , if the limits of the intellectual globe should be should be set by the narrow discoveries of the ancients . - Francis Bacon , The Advancement of Learning , 1605 Breaking with the Past  Within 200 years , something like the modern system emerges .  Responses to inﬂuences that are :  Pragmatic / material  Philosophical / academic  Symbolic / political  ( Not independent… ) Bacon  Reflecting Renaissance’s larger context , his categorization scheme puts man at center  Nature ( astronomy , meteorology , etc . )  Man ( anatomy , powers , actions )  Man acting on nature ( medicine , visual arts , arithmetic ) Language and Politics  “All words , good and bad…” - Lord Chesterfield  1647 - Vaugelas elevates “usage” above individual as proper legislator of language  Whose usage ?  What were the goals of the Academie Francaise ?  1747 – Johnson presents aim of “fixing” language once and for all  What was the subtext of the English dictionary efforts ?  What was Johnson’s stance by the time the dictionary was completed ? Dictionary vs . Encyclopedia  What’s the difference ? Dictionary vs . Encyclopedia  “The distinction between a dictionary and an encyclopedia is easy to state but difficult to carry out in a practical way : a dictionary explains words , whereas an encyclopedia explains things . Because words achieve their usefulness by referring to things , however , it is difficult to construct a dictionary without considerable attention to the objects and abstractions designated . ” - Allen Walker Read , 1976 Diderot’s Encyclopedie  “one of the most politically significant reference books in human history” ( McArthur , p . 104 )  “did not simply inform ; it incited” ( p . 105 )  What was so incendiary about it ?  What were the consequences for the Encyclopedie and Diderot , and why ? Diderot’s Encyclopedie  “one of the most politically significant reference books in human history” ( McArthur , p . 104 )  “did not simply inform ; it incited” ( p . 105 )  What was so incendiary about it ?  Challenged traditional Christian belief system  Advocated social equality / engineering  What were the consequences for the Encyclopedie and Diderot , and why ?  Relative immunity  Traditional mystique around reference works  Distributed nature of articles worked against preemption Webster  “This was the radical American Dictionary of the English Language . ” – McArthur , p . 100  What was so radical about Webster’s work ? Src : http : / / upload . wikimedia . org / wikipedia / commons / thumb / d / d2 / Noah _ Webster _ The _ Schoolmaster _ of _ the _ Republic . jpg / 260px - Noah _ Webster _ The _ Schoolmaster _ of _ the _ Republic . jpg Webster  “This was the radical American Dictionary of the English Language . ” – McArthur , p . 100  What was so radical about Webster’s work ?  Consistent orthography  Magick  Magic  Colour  Color  Polycentric High Mode  “good” American written sources just as “good” as British  Multiuse reference catered to the needs of a new kind of territory  Invested the publishing house , rather than academia , with the power to arbitrate language in this way Non - alphabetical schemes  Wilkins’ universal language ( 1668 )  Ideogram - based  Roget’s Thesaurus  Similar thematic approach  “the Thesaurus is the converse of a dictionary and some kind of analogue to the brain…whatever does happen in our minds , when we order and retrieve ‘words’ and ‘ideas’ , it is not done alphabetically . ” - McArthur , p . 123 Categorization Online  Yet Another Hierarchical Officious Oracle ( YAHOO ! )  Wikipedia  Tagging with del . icio . us , flickr , etc .  Non - human categorization  Are search engine page ranks a form of categorization ?  Pages that are relevant to your query vs . Pages that are less so ?  Are they objectively categorized ? Doctorow and the Democratization of Categorization  2 . The problems  There are at least seven insurmountable obstacles between the world as we know it and meta - utopia . I ' ll enumerate them below : .  2 . 1 People lie  2 . 2 People are lazy  2 . 3 People are stupid  … - Cory Doctorow , Metacrap , 2001 Src : http : / / www . well . com / ~ doctorow / metacrap . htm Assessing The Academie Francaise : A Question  Did the Academie Francaise achieve its stated goal of “elevating” French from old vernaculars ? Src : http : / / online . wsj . com / article / SB125544523318682497 . html Assessing The Academie Francaise : An Unintended Consequence  The French Get Lost in the Clouds Over a New Term in the Internet Age ( Wall Street Journal , October 14 , 2009 ) To translate the English term for computing resources that can be accessed on demand on the Internet , a group of French experts had spent 18 months coming up with " informatique en nuage , " which literally means " computing in cloud”… Keeping the French language relevant isn ' t easy in the Internet age . For years , French bureaucrats have worked hard to keep French up to date by diligently coming up with equivalents for English terms . Though most French people say " le week - end " and " un surfer , " the correct translations of the terms are " fin de semaine " ( " end of the week " ) and " aquaplanchiste " ( " water boarder " ) . A " start - up " company is referred to as " jeune pousse , " or " young shoot " ( the term pousse is used for vegetable sprouts ) , while the World Wide Web is translated as " toile d ' araignée mondiale " ( literally , global spider web ) . But technological advancements mean new Anglicisms are spreading over the Internet at warp speed , leaving the French scratching their heads… " We won ' t cut people ' s heads off if they don ' t use it , " says Mr . North [ head of France ' s General Commission of Terminology and Neology ] . But , he adds : " Language is what brought this country together . " Src : http : / / online . wsj . com / article / SB125544523318682497 . html