Voice and Representation : Engaging with the Voices of Children Who Have Disabilities Seray Ibrahim ( corresponding author , s . ibrahim @ ucl . ac . uk ) and Asimina Vasalou , UCL Institute of Education DIALOGUES : Standpoint Consider the following scenario : Grace is a 9 - year - old child who communicates using body movements , vocal sounds , and a paper - based book with graphic icons . Two years ago , her teachers and therapist assessed her abilities to use an electronic communication aid , and consequently issued her a high - spec , eye - gaze - enabled , speech - generating device . To date , she mostly uses this with her teachers to respond to rehearsed topics during class . Despite everyone having high hopes and fighting hard to fund the device , Grace isn’t keen on it and chooses to use other modes instead . This scenario is all too common in designing for disability and children . Many studies have looked at the reasons for underuse and abandonment of assistive technologies for communication , which include ease of use , technical support , and environmental barriers [ 1 ] . However , bringing these concerns into the realm of interaction design , the underuse and abandonment also make us ask : Does the design of these technologies reflect the contemporary concerns and preferences of children with disabilities ? In recent work , we discussed how assistive technologies , like speech - generating devices , have predominantly been designed for a limited range of purposes [ 2 ] . Often , they foreground corrective or developmental goals , for example , providing language options to account for a lack of verbal speech or supporting children to “catch up” with traditional stages of child development . These technologies are undoubtedly important for overcoming some of the real challenges that children can face , yet design for disability still has some way to go to expand the potential roles that assistive technologies can take in disabled children’s lives . In order to promote more varied perspectives in designing for disability , one option is to rev isit how we listen to and respond to children’s contributions . The HCI community continues to advocate for carefully considering how children are involved in the design process [ 3 ] , including ethical and pragmatic concerns for involving children who have disabilities [ 4 ] . Yet while political and academic discourses are increasingly viewing children as competent social actors , there are inescapable challenges in understanding how to legitimately engage with children’s voices for the purposes of informing change . We propose that child - centered perspectives can inform new and generative ways of designing for disability by examining children’s lived experiences . In line with a constructivist view that recognizes voice , disability , and childhood as socially enacted , we consider how our own actions as researchers have an impact on constructions of new knowledge . One way of doing this is to use reflexivity as a tool [ 5 ] for problematizing and critically engaging with the issue of voice . Drawing on our empirical research that investigated some of the salient features of communication from the perspectives of children with severe speech and physical impairments , the remainder of this article considers how methodological decisions can have a significant impact on constructions of voice in the design process . The Histories that Shape Our Orientations Theory . Whether directly or indirectly expressed , as design researchers , we hold assumptions about ways of being that ultimately inform ways of acting . For instance , considering the subject matter of communication , two opposing perspectives might separately treat communication as a ) human centered or b ) not human centered . Researchers who align with the former might choose to study communication by focusing on the child’ s agency in creating meaning and expressing themselves . In the latter perspective , another researcher might instead study how meaning is created through a distributed network of people , objects , and actions . In our own work , we recognize that power is a fundamental aspect of relationships and interactions . We therefore focused on how children used resources that were available to them for advancing their goals . In doing so , we aimed to advance a strength - oriented perspective by attending to how children with severe speech and physical impairments communicated on their own terms . Practice . The field of HCI is vastly interdisciplinary . It is this richness in perspectives that makes the work presented at the CHI conference and related venues so interesting . Design for disability can sometimes be motivated by personal experiences with disability , but also professional experiences as practitioners working across disciplines . We acknowledge that our professional ways of seeing can greatly influence how we treat the contributions of children with disabilities . Many HCI researchers working in disability have also worked as teachers or allied health professionals . Given that their research is often carried out in schools or therapy contexts , this can present challenges in the relational roles that they and the children have learned to take . For the purposes of design research , being aware of these underlying roles can be helpful in regulating how our own behaviors support or hinder the production of new narratives . Alongside the challenges of mitigating their past roles , a strength for researchers who have been practitioners is that they are able to recognize these role dynamics . This can be generative for design by allowing researchers to problematize ways of supportin g children’s agency in conversations that involve people and technology — for example , by regulating the volume of questions that the teacher asks or allowing for interactions that have more open - ended topics or are child - initiated . Producing Credible Accounts Through Prominent Ideas In qualitative research , it is critical to apply analytic techniques that ensure the researcher’s interpretation of the data is credible [ 6 ] . One way to do this is to use a variety of methods . This allows the researcher to identify strong and prominent ideas that are consistently conveyed across methods used . In our own work , as our goal was to represent what children might value or prioritize for communication , we attempted to build a picture of what children were expressing over time . We did this both by attending to how varied data sources conveyed ideas that would repeatedly occur across methods , as well as by examining how varied methods helped us to reach detailed understandings about different dimensions of complex situations . Our findings included that children valued protecting their privacy as well as the ability to advance social interactions . For example , during an interaction with a child participant , the researcher asked the child a series of questions about what he would like to do during playtime . The child responded by holding up his hand to indicate “stop” or “no” to the researcher’s repeated requests for information ( Figure 1 ) . In this instance , by regulating his disclosure , the child expressed a need for protecting privacy . Figure 1 . Protecting privacy was one prominent idea expressed across methods . Children’s Ways of Participating Evidencing Their Voices There are explicit and implicit ways in which children can contribute to the design process . One major challenge for researchers is interpreting what a child appears to be expressing on their own terms . In some cases , there can be huge disparities in what children express through different modes of action , as well as how they express themselves in alternative contexts with different researchers . As researchers interpreting these actions , there is often a risk of filtering out disabled children’s contributio ns that are not understood or not seen as legitimate . For instance , when a child doesn’t respond to an adult’s question or looks away for an extended amount of time , one might assume that the child is disinterested or is not understanding , leading the researcher to question their ability to participate . These challenges can be further exacerbated in cases where children communicate in ways that are unfamiliar to the researcher . To understand how children would take part in research , we focused on what chi ldren’s forms of involvement might be conveying and how child voice was influenced by adult - designed agendas . Sometimes this involved carrying out a detailed analysis of social interactions through recording and transcribing to understand the conversational dynamics . At other times , we focused on how children responded to our methods . We anticipated that children’s contributions could expose multiple understandings beyond face value and observed that children’s behavioral engagements with the methods expres sed insights about what was important in their lives . For example , on one occasion a child participant expressed her desire for regulating her privacy by tearing up and discarding a sheet of sugar paper that had her photograph attached to it , otherwise intended to be used for creating a collage of her interests ( Figure 2 ) . Figure 2 . Children’s behavioral engagements with methods signified what was important to them . On a different occasion , during a baking session in class , another child challenged the adult’s assessment of her capability to hold a spoon and whisk an egg mixture , by attempting to pull away from the adult , extending backward in her standing frame ( Figure 3 ) . In this moment , she expressed her desire for less physical adult support . These instances highlighted the need for being prepared to adapt methods in the moment , to potentially interrupt existing power dynamics that are common in teaching contexts . Figure 3 . Child expresses her desire for doing a physical activity without adult support . Conclusion In this article we have identified how methodological decisions can support design researchers to engage with the voices of children who have disabilities . Through our examples , we identify considerations that relate to issues of recognition on the part of the design researcher . We recognize that theories shape the capabilities we see in children , for those who have been teachers or related practitioners , and that our past professional histories allow us to see contextual dynamics as well as sometimes influence how we interact with children . We also recognize that there are multiple interpretations of what children are expressing through the ways in which they engage with methods , and that as researchers , we decide to foreground the parts of these interpretations that we treat as representative of children’s voices . By scrutinizing our methodological decisions , we force ourselves to consider whether we are credibly producing child - centered accounts , and to justify why we treat certain insights as more important than others . Ultimately , our goal is to be more generative so that design can serve multiple purposes and move toward acting on what children express as important in their own lives . Acknowledgments This research was funded by an ESRC studentship . We would like to thank Mike Clarke and Laura Benton for their feedback on this research and extend our heartfelt thanks to the children , families and school who agreed to take part . Endnotes 1 . Judge , S . and Townend , G . Perceptions of the design of voice output communication aids . International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders 48 , 4 ( Aug . 2013 ) , 366 – 381 ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 1460 - 6984 . 12012 . 2 Ibrahim , S . B . et al . Can design documentaries disrupt design for disability ? Proc . of the Interaction Design and Children Conference . ACM , New York , 2020 , 96 – 107 ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3392063 . 3394403 3 . Giannakos , M . N . et al . Movement forward : The continued growth of Child – Computer Interaction research . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 26 , ( Dec . 2020 ) , 100204 ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijcci . 2020 . 100204 . 4 . Spiel , K . et al . Micro - ethics for participatory design with marginalised children . Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference on Full Papers . ACM , New York , 2018 , 1 – 12 ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210586 . 3210603 5 . Rode , J . A . Reflexivity in digital anthropology . Proc . of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , 2011 , 123 – 132 ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978942 . 1978961 6 . Lincoln , Y . S . and Guba , E . G . Naturalistic Inquiry . Sage Publications , 1985 . Seray Ibrahim is an ESRC postdoctoral research fellow at the UCL Institute of Education and a speech - language therapist . Her research interests span human - computer interaction , multimodality , and assistive technology . Her Ph . D . investigated communication and non - speaking children with physical impairments , with the view to informing new perspectives on designing communication technologies . s . ibrahim @ ucl . ac . uk Asimina Vasalou is an associate professor and researcher in interaction design based at UCL Knowledge Lab at the Institute of Education . Her research focuses on interaction design for children’s learning , methods for invol ving people in the design process , and designing for disability . a . vasalou @ ucl . ac . uk