Das et al . , Sci . Adv . 2018 ; 4 : eaar3448 20 June 2018 S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E 1 of 14 HEALTH AND MEDICINE A transgenic mouse for imaging activity - dependent dynamics of endogenous Arc mRNA in live neurons Sulagna Das 1 * , Hyungseok C . Moon 2 * , Robert H . Singer 1 , 3† , Hye Yoon Park 2 , 4† Localized translation plays a crucial role in synaptic plasticity and memory consolidation . However , it has not been possible to follow the dynamics of memory - associated mRNAs in living neurons in response to neuronal activity in real time . We have generated a novel mouse model where the endogenous Arc / Arg3 . 1 gene is tagged in its 3 ′ untranslated region with stem - loops that bind a bacteriophage PP7 coat protein ( PCP ) , allowing visualization of individual mRNAs in real time . The physiological response of the tagged gene to neuronal activity is identical to endogenous Arc and reports the true dynamics of Arc mRNA from transcription to degradation . The transcription dynamics of Arc in cultured hippocampal neurons revealed two novel results : ( i ) A robust transcriptional burst with prolonged ON state occurs after stimulation , and ( ii ) transcription cycles continue even after initial stimula - tion is removed . The correlation of stimulation with Arc transcription and mRNA transport in individual neurons revealed that stimulus - induced Ca 2 + activity was necessary but not sufficient for triggering Arc transcription and that blocking neuronal activity did not affect the dendritic transport of newly synthesized Arc mRNAs . This mouse will provide an important reagent to investigate how individual neurons transduce activity into spatiotemporal regulation of gene expression at the synapse . INTRODUCTION A fundamental question in neuroscience is how neuronal stimulation is converted into a structural change to establish a stable connection . For this process to occur , activity - dependent transcription and local protein synthesis are critical events involved in the formation and alteration of neural circuits ( 1 – 5 ) . However , it is unclear how spe - cific genes can be activated in response to neuronal activity and how this genetic information can be transferred to a specific site where a connection is affected . Activity - regulated cytoskeleton - associated protein ( Arc ; also known as Arg3 . 1 ) is an immediate early gene ( IEG ) that is rapidly induced in the brain by synaptic activity ( 6 , 7 ) . Arc is required for long - term memory formation ( 8 , 9 ) and has a crucial function for sensitizing the synapse to activity [ physiological responses known as long - term potentiation ( LTP ) ( 10 , 11 ) , long - term depression ( LTD ) ( 12 , 13 ) , and homeostatic plasticity ( 14 ) ] . Besides neurons , Arc regulates actin dynamics and cytoskeletal rearrangements in various other cell types ( 15 , 16 ) . In neurons , Arc transcription sites appear in the nucleus within a few minutes after stimulation , and mRNAs are subsequently ex - ported and localize to the activated region of dendrites ( 17 , 18 ) . Because Arc mRNA induction is sensitive to changes in behavioral tasks ( 9 , 19 ) , imaging of Arc expression is one of the most powerful approaches to identify activated neurons in response to various learning and memory paradigms . A technique , termed cellular compartment analysis of temporal activity by fluorescence in situ hybridization ( catFISH ) ( 9 ) , has been widely used to identify activated neurons in fixed brain tissues . In attempts to image Arc expression in living animals , several mouse models have been generated : a knock - in mouse in which green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) replaces the Arc protein sequence ( 20 ) , and a transgenic mouse expressing GFP or luciferase ectopically under the control of the Arc promoter ( 21 – 23 ) . Mouse models that express tamoxifen - dependent recombinase CreER T2 upon Arc transcription have also been developed to identify neurons activated by defined stimuli ( 24 , 25 ) . However , all these mouse models rely on the expres - sion of an Arc promoter – driven reporter protein as an indicator of neuronal activation but do not report the spatiotemporal distribution of the mRNA , which carries the information from the gene to a specific location in the dendrite . An animal model that allows direct visualiza - tion of endogenous Arc mRNA dynamics in vivo does not exist . To address this experimental deficit , we developed a novel mouse model where a tandem array of PP7 binding sites ( PBS ) was inserted into the 3 ′ untranslated region ( 3 ′ UTR ) of the activity - inducible Arc gene , using a similar genetic approach that was used to detect the con - stitutively expressed  - actin mRNA ( 26 , 27 ) . In heterozygous mouse , the PBS - tagged Arc allele was activated similarly to the untagged wild - type ( WT ) allele , faithfully capturing the dynamics of endogenous Arc mRNA from activity - dependent transcription to degradation at single - molecule and single - cell resolution . Using cultured hippocampal neurons from homozygous Arc - PBS ( Arc P / P ) mouse , we characterized the temporal kinetics of transcriptional bursting of the Arc gene in re - sponse to neuronal activity . The correlation between neuronal activity and transcription dynamics was investigated using single - molecule FISH ( smFISH ) and by simultaneous imaging of Ca 2 + transients and Arc transcription . In addition , we assessed the effect of neuronal activity on dendritic transport of Arc mRNA by tracking individual mRNAs in real time . The Arc - PBS mouse provides a unique model to inves - tigate the temporal dynamics of transcription from each Arc allele and also of single Arc mRNAs in response to neuronal stimulation . RESULTS Generation of Arc - PBS knock - in mouse The Arc gene consists of three exons spanning 3 . 5 kilo – base pairs ( kbp ) and encodes for the 396 – amino acid Arc protein . To label full - length Arc mRNA , we inserted a 1 . 5 - kbp cassette containing 24 repeats of the PBS stem - loop motif in the 3 ′ UTR of the Arc gene ( Fig . 1A ) . To avoid 1 Department of Anatomy and Structural Biology , Albert Einstein College of Medicine , Bronx , NY 10461 , USA . 2 Department of Physics and Astronomy , Seoul National Uni - versity , Seoul 08826 , Korea . 3 Howard Hughes Medical Institute , Janelia Research Campus , Ashburn , VA 20147 , USA . 4 The Institute of Applied Physics , Seoul National University , Seoul 08826 , Korea . * These authors contributed equally to this work . †Corresponding author . Email : hyeyoon . park @ snu . ac . kr ( H . Y . P . ) ; robert . singer @ einstein . yu . edu ( R . H . S . ) Copyright © 2018 The Authors , some rights reserved ; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science . No claim to original U . S . Government Works . Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 4 . 0 ( CC BY - NC ) . Das et al . , Sci . Adv . 2018 ; 4 : eaar3448 20 June 2018 S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E 2 of 14 disruption of evolutionarily conserved cis - acting regulatory elements , we aligned the sequences of the Arc genes in chicken , mouse , rat , and human and 250 nucleotides after the stop codon was targeted for insertion in a nonconserved region . The knock - in of the PBS cassette was performed by homologous recombination , and the embryonic stem ( ES ) colonies were selected on the basis of neomycin resistance and polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) . ES cell clones screened for homologous recombination were microinjected into blastocysts , and chimeras were mated to FLPeR mice ( ROSA26 : : FLP ) to remove the FLP recombinase target ( FRT ) – flanked neomycin resistance cassette . Arc - PBS mouse pups without the neomycin cassette were used to backcross to a C57BL / 6 background . − 2 0 2 4 6 8 10 ( kb ) Arc - CDS Left arm Right arm Arc - CDS Left arm Right arm 24 × PBS PGK - neo Arc - PBS targeting construct Endogenous Arc locus Arc - CDS Left arm Right arm 24 × PBS Arc - PBS targeted locus A 0 15 30 45 60 75 90 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 WT Arc P / P E x p l o r a t o r y sc o r e ( t r a i n ) WT Arc P / P P r e f e r en c e sc o r e 0 15 30 45 60 75 90 P r e f e r en c e sc o r e Object placement Object recognition Total exploration Train WT Arc P / P 0 5 10 15 20 25 WT Arc P / P Elevated plus maze test % O pen a r m t 0 4 8 12 16 WT Arc P / P E x p l o r a t o r y sc o r e ( c en t e r ) Center zone exploration Test Retention 3 hours Train Test Retention 45 min 5 min 3 min 3 min 5 min B C D E F r a ck Fig . 1 . Generation of Arc - PBS knock - in mouse model and behavior characterization . ( A ) Schematic of the endogenous Arc locus , Arc - PBS targeting construct , and the final targeted locus . Blue boxes , homology arms for homologous recombination ; gray boxes , UTR ; green boxes , Arc coding sequence ( Arc - CDS ) ; orange boxes , 24× PBS cassette ; black lines , introns ; pink boxes , FRT sequences ; yellow box , PGK - neomycin resistance gene cassette ( PGK - neo ) . PBS cassette was inserted 250 nucleotides downstream of the stop codon of the Arc gene . ( B ) Exploratory behavior tested by placing animals in an enriched environment and scored during training . ( C ) Object recognition memory evaluated by training animals for 5 min and then testing after a long retention interval of 3 hours . Scores indicate preference for the novel object . ( D ) Spatial memory evaluated by training animals for 5 min and then testing after 45 min of retention . Scores indicate preference for the displaced object . Dashed line shows minimum score required to pass . ( E and F ) Anxiety - like behavior tested on an elevated plus maze test by scoring percentage of track length traversed in the open tracks ( E ) and time spent in the center zone in an open - field test ( F ) . n = 8 WT and 10 Arc P / P animals . Das et al . , Sci . Adv . 2018 ; 4 : eaar3448 20 June 2018 S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E 3 of 14 Both heterozygous and homozygous Arc - PBS knock - in mice were bred and maintained , without any measurable effect on viability and fertility . A battery of behavioral tests was performed on homozygous Arc P / P mice , and they performed comparably to age - matched WT C57BL / 6 mice on behaviors related to motor coordination and explo - ration ( Fig . 1B ) . On hippocampal memory tasks like novel object recog - nition and spatial memory , they scored similarly to the WT animals ( Fig . 1 , C and D ) . Besides , the Arc P / P animals showed no signs of anxiety or stress , as tested from the elevated plus maze tests and center zone exploration [ P > 0 . 05 , one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) ; Fig . 1 , E and F ] . At the protein level , there were no distinguishable differences in the expression levels of Arc protein in the brains of WT ( Arc + / + ) and homozygous ( Arc P / P ) mice ( fig . S1A ) . The stability of Arc mRNA with and without PBS tagging was determined by measuring mRNA life - time in hippocampal neurons from WT and Arc P / P mice ( fig . S1B ) . Arc mRNAs were induced by stimulating neurons with bicuculline , which blocks GABA A (  - aminobutyric acid type A ) receptors and thereby increases neuronal activity . By fitting mRNA levels to a single - exponential decay function , Arc mRNA had a t 1 / 2 = 60 min for WT and t 1 / 2 = 66 min for PBS - tagged mRNA , indicating that 24× stem - loop insertion did not render the mRNA either unstable or resistant to degradation . PBS tagging of Arc loci does not alter transcriptional output A two - color smFISH approach was designed to simultaneously recog - nize the coding sequence ( Arc - CDS ) and 24× PBS tag ( PBS ) on in - dividual Arc mRNAs ( Fig . 2A ) . This approach distinguished mRNAs produced from the WT versus PBS - tagged allele in heterozygous ( Arc P / + ) mouse , where WT mRNAs were identified by only CDS probes , and PBS - tagged mRNAs had both CDS and PBS probes ( Fig . 2B ) . Quantifi - cation of nascent Arc transcripts produced at the transcribing WT versus the PBS - tagged allele showed similar transcriptional output from either allele at different time points of stimulation ( Fig . 2C ) . We also determined that the ratio of the PBS - tagged mRNAs to the total Arc mRNA population was approximately half , as expected , in both the soma and dendrites of heterozygous Arc P / + mouse ( Fig . 2D ) ; no significant difference was observed from the expected value of 0 . 5 ( P > 0 . 05 ) . This suggested that PBS tagging did not alter the production and stability of Arc mRNA differently from the WT untagged allele at any given time after stimulation . To further validate the integrity of PBS - tagged Arc transcripts ( 28 ) , we performed two - color smFISH using Arc - CDS and PBS probes on stimulated neurons from Arc P / P mouse to detect full - length mRNAs ( Fig . 2 , E and F ) . The number of mRNAs detected by either probe ( Arc - CDS or PBS ) was quantified for individual neurons , and high correlations were observed across both soma ( r 2 = 0 . 94 ) and dendrites ( r 2 = 0 . 83 ) ( Fig . 2 , G and H ) , indicating that most PBS - tagged Arc mRNAs were intact full - length transcripts . This high correlation ( r 2 = 0 . 91 ) was maintained following binding of multiple PCP ( PP7 coat protein ) – GFP molecules to the 24× PBS array on each mRNA ( fig . S2 , A and B ) in PCP - GFP – infected neurons , indicating that no aberrant degradation products owing to the stem - loop – coat protein interactions were being formed . Moreover , neurons with and without PCP - GFP produced a similar number of Arc transcripts after stimulation , indicating that PCP expression and binding to PBS did not affect gene expression ( fig . S2 , A and C ) . Hence , PBS tagging and the binding of the PCP to PBS - tagged mRNA did not alter transcriptional output and stability of mRNAs . This is particularly important for Arc , because it is a short - lived mRNA with a tightly controlled degradation after induction . Therefore , PBS tagging can be used reliably to image spatiotemporal fluctuations of Arc mRNA levels . Immediate early activation of the PBS - tagged Arc gene in response to stimulation Previous studies have reported rapid induction of Arc transcription in response to neuronal activity in neuronal cultures ( 29 , 30 ) . Silencing neuronal electrical activity for 12 to 16 hours using tetrodotoxin ( TTX ) , a sodium channel blocker , followed by withdrawal of TTX induces synchronous neuronal activity . smFISH was performed using PBS probes to detect single Arc mRNAs in neurons from Arc P / P mouse ( Fig . 3A ) . No Arc mRNAs were detected during TTX incubation . Within 10 min of TTX withdrawal , robust Arc induction with transcription from both alleles was observed , reaching maximal transcriptional output at 30 min after TTX withdrawal ( Fig . 3 , A to C and E ) . The number of Arc mRNAs in the cytoplasm was the highest at 30 min , followed by a decrease at 120 min after withdrawal ( Fig . 3 , A and C ) . These newly synthesized PBS - tagged Arc mRNAs were exported effectively out of the nucleus , as indicated by the nuclear / cytoplasmic ratio , which showed high levels of nuclear transcripts ( high ratio ) within the first 30 min , followed by transfer to the cytoplasm ( lower ratio ) at later times ( Fig . 3D ) . Surprisingly , after the initial activation - decay cycle of 2 hours , the Arc genes in the culture demonstrated subsequent transcrip - tional activity without additional external stimulation . This phenomenon was also observed using a different stimulation paradigm of bicuculline ( 40  M ) treatment for 15 min and washout ( Fig . 3E ) , indicating that the transcription continued after the stimulation , and possibly represents an inherent feature of the Arc gene or the activity of the network of cultured neurons . Thus , at this ensemble level , a pulsatile behavior of Arc mRNA production was observed with a periodicity of approxi - mately 2 hours ( Fig . 3F ) . Transcriptional bursting of Arc in hippocampal neurons from Arc P / P mice Imaging Arc transcription and mRNA dynamics in live neurons is the primary advantage of the Arc - PBS mouse . Cultured hippocampal neurons from Arc P / P mice were infected with lentivirus expressing stdPCP - stdGFP fusion protein with a nuclear localization signal ( NLS ) . The freely diffusible stdPCP - stdGFP proteins are sequestered in the nucleus and bind to the newly transcribed PBS stem - loops with a high specificity and affinity ( 31 , 32 ) , enabling visualization of Arc mRNA synthesis at each active allele . Under basal ( nonstimulated ) conditions , Arc transcription was detected in a small percentage of neurons due to spontaneous activity in cultures , and this was completely eliminated by TTX incubation . Upon stimulation ( TTX withdrawal ) , transcription from one or both Arc alleles was observed ( Fig . 4A and movie S1 ) . As evident from the images and the representative transcription intensity traces , individual neurons after stimulation showed tran - scriptional activity , followed by periods of inactivity ( Fig . 4 , A and B ) . This phenomenon , referred to as transcriptional bursting , has been associated with many mammalian genes and contributes to stochas - ticity in gene expression ( 33 ) . An example time series with the Arc gene switching between transcriptionally active ( ON ) and inactive ( OFF ) states is shown for basal and stimulated conditions ( Fig . 4B ) . With stimulation , a twofold higher probability of transcriptional ON state was observed compared to the basal level ( P < 0 . 05 , t test ; Fig . 4C ) . On the basis of the model of transcriptional bursting , the higher tran - scriptional output of the Arc gene can occur by ( i ) increasing the du - ration of active ( ON ) period , ( ii ) increasing the frequency of bursts , Das et al . , Sci . Adv . 2018 ; 4 : eaar3448 20 June 2018 S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E 4 of 14 0 10 20 30 40 50 0 60 120 180 240 300 # mRNAs in soma ( Arc - CDS ) # m RN A s i n s o m a ( PBS ) r = 0 . 94 Soma Dendrites # M a t u r e m RN A s 0 . 52 # N a sc en t m RN A s Arc - CDS 3 UTR Arc mRNA 5 UTR 24 × PBS A B D Arc - CDS PBS WT allele PBS - tagged allele Hets Arc P / + Arc - CDS PBS G 2 E Merged Arc - CDS PBS Merged 50 0 100 200 150 0 50 100 150 200 Arc - CDS Merged PBS P / + Hets Arc WTArc - CDS Merged PBS C F H # mRNAs in dendrites ( Arc - CDS ) # m RN A s i n den d r i t e s ( PBS ) r = 0 . 83 2 10 0 20 40 30 0 10 20 30 40 250 250 Bic 10 Bic 30 Bic 60 0 . 51 ' ' ' ' ' Fig . 2 . PBS tagging does not affect Arc transcription and mRNA stability . ( A ) smFISH probes against Arc - CDS and PBS linkers ( PBS ) to detect mature full - length PBS - tagged Arc mRNAs . ( B ) Detection of WT and PBS - tagged allele in WT mouse ( top ) and heterozygous Arc P / + mouse ( bottom ) by smFISH with Arc - CDS and PBS probes in bicuculline ( Bic ) – stimulated neurons . Inset shows transcription sites . Arrows indicate untagged WT allele ; yellow arrowhead indicates PBS - tagged allele . ( C and D ) Quantification of Arc transcripts produced from WT and PBS - tagged allele , as detected by smFISH in neurons from Arc P / + mouse after bicuculline stimulation . Graphs represent ( C ) nascent Arc mRNAs produced at transcription sites at different time points after stimulation ( n = 40 neurons for Bic 10 ′ , n = 20 for Bic 30 ′ , n = 15 for Bic 60 ′ ; no significant differences , P > 0 . 05 for all conditions ) and ( D ) mature full - length mRNAs in soma and in dendritic segments ( up to 100  m from soma ) in Arc P / + mouse . Ratios of PBS - tagged mRNAs to total Arc mRNAs are shown in ( D ) . Nonsignificant difference from expected 0 . 5 value ( P = 0 . 60 , n = 49 for soma ; P = 0 . 37 , n = 45 for dendrites ) . ( E and F ) Detection of full - length Arc mRNAs by two - color smFISH with Arc - CDS and PBS probes in Arc P / P mouse . White arrows indicate PBS - tagged Arc alleles in inset ( E ) , and colocalization of CDS and PBS FISH spots in dendrites ( F ) . ( G and H ) Correlation between the number of mature cytoplasmic mRNAs detected by Arc - CDS and PBS smFISH in the soma ( G ) and in the dendrites ( H ) of Arc P / P neurons , indicated by Pearson’s coefficient ( r 2 ) ( n = 71 for soma , n = 39 for dendrites ) . Error bars represent SEM . Scale bars , 5  m . Das et al . , Sci . Adv . 2018 ; 4 : eaar3448 20 June 2018 S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E 5 of 14 or ( iii ) up - regulating the amplitude of each burst . Each of these sce - narios was evaluated on the basis of the bursting kinetics of the Arc gene . The duration of the ON states (  ON ) can be fitted to two com - ponents :  1 ( < 10 min ) and  2 ( ≥20 min ) ( r 2 > 0 . 94 for all conditions ; Fig . 4D ) . Under basal conditions , most transcriptional bursts are short and have an average  ON of 8 . 1 min corresponding to  1 . Following stimulation , a higher fraction of bursts corresponds to longer  2 com - ponent ( Fig . 4 , D and E ) , likely resulting in increased transcriptional activity . Stimulation paradigms like TTX withdrawal and bicuculline were more effective in inducing  2 burst than KCl depolarization ( Fig . 4E ) . The average peak brightness or amplitude of each transcriptional burst remained unchanged after any mode of stimulation ( P > 0 . 05 , two - tailed t test ; Fig . 4F ) , indicating that the maximum number of nascent mRNAs produced at the site of transcription is similar between basal and stimulated neurons . The frequency of these transcriptional bursts , however , was reduced after stimulation compared to basal conditions ( Fig . 4G ) . On the basis of these findings , we postulated that the activity - regulated increase in transcriptional output of the Arc gene resulted from increased probability of transcription initiation and a longer transcriptional burst ( ON duration ) , but not from an increase in amplitude or frequency of the active period . To further investigate the relationship between active and inactive periods of Arc transcription in stimulated neurons , the OFF durations (  OFF ) immediately following an initial  ON duration of  2 or longer were plotted , and a clustering phe - nomenon ( 33 ) was observed , where an average  ON of 32 . 86 ± 1 . 35 min was followed by  OFF of 78 . 56 ± 2 . 29 min ( means ± SEM ) ( Fig . 4H ) . This highlighted an unknown feature of the Arc gene , whereby a pro - longed immediate early active state is followed by long OFF periods . Network activity persists during these OFF periods , as shown by Ca 2 + activity even after 60 min of bicuculline washout ( fig . S3 ) , but addi - tional transcriptional bursts during this time are not observed . Dual - color imaging of Ca 2 + activity and Arc transcription in live neurons On the basis of real - time observation of Arc transcription following neuronal stimulation , the relationship between neuronal Ca 2 + ac - tivity and Arc transcription in individual neurons was investigated . Somatic Ca 2 + transients have been implicated in activating kinases 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 0 10 20 30 40 50 A B 0 50 100 150 200 250 10 ' 30 ' 60 ' 120 ' 10 ' 30 ' 60 ' 120 ' Time after TTX withdrawal # M a t u r e m RN A s i n s o m a # N a sc en t m RN A s / neu r on Time after TTX withdrawal C D N u c l eu s / cy t op l a s m r a t i o E % o f neu r on s t r an sc r i b i ng Time after stimulation ( hours ) Bicuculline TTX - w Time after stimulation ( hours ) # M a t u r e m RN A s i n s o m a 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 F 0 . 5 1 2 3 4 6 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 10 ' 30 ' 60 ' 2h Time after TTX withdrawal 120 ' Time after TTX withdrawal 10 ' 30 ' 60 ' TTX Fig . 3 . Time course of Arc transcription in Arc P / P mouse neurons after stimulation . ( A ) Hippocampal neurons were treated with TTX ( 1 . 5  M ) for 12 to 16 hours , followed by release from TTX , and then fixed at different time points for smFISH using probes against the PBS linkers . Transcription from both alleles was observed . ( B to D ) Graphs representing the time course of average number of nascent transcripts produced at both transcribing alleles ( B ) , average number of mature mRNAs in the soma ( C ) , and the nuclear / cytoplasmic ratio of mRNAs in soma ( D ) . ( E ) Percentage of Arc - transcribing neurons at different time points following TTX withdrawal ( TTX - w ) and bicuculline treatment ( n = 3 independent experiments , 70 to 80 neurons each time point ) . ( F ) Average number of Arc mRNAs in the soma after bicuculline stimulation . Black dashed line indicates average number of mRNAs in the basal condition ( n = 40 to 50 neurons per time point ) . Error bars represent SEM . Scale bar , 5  m . Das et al . , Sci . Adv . 2018 ; 4 : eaar3448 20 June 2018 S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E 6 of 14 “ON” duration Time ( min ) A D 1 = 8 . 1 ( 99 . 9 % ) 2 = 28 . 6 ( 0 . 1 % ) 1 = 2 . 4 ( 73 % ) 2 = 28 . 2 ( 27 % ) Basal TTX - w C oun t s # of bursts ( in 2 hours ) BicBasal TTX - w ( m i n ) ( min ) N o r m a li z ed i n t en s i t y ( a . u . ) Time ( min ) Time ( min ) H G 10 20 30 40 50 60 0 1 - CD F 1 0 . 6 0 . 2 0 1 0 . 6 0 . 2 0 Basal 1 2 3 4 6 7 5 8 9 TTX - w 1 2 0 . 4 0 . 8 0 . 4 0 . 8 TTX 15 22 . 5 37 . 5 45 60 75 90 ON O FF B 2 ( % ) KCl 00 20 40 80 40 60 60 80 100 100 20 120 120 E 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0 20 40 60 80 P e r c en t age i n 0 10 20 30 TTX - w Bic KCl 0 10 20 30 40 Basal TTX - w Bic % o f t i m e t r an sc r i b i ng C I n t en s i t y ( a . u . ) F KCl 0 1 2 3 4 Basal TTX - w Bic KCl ' ' ' ' ' ' ' Fig . 4 . Real - time measurements of activity - dependent transcription dynamics of Arc . ( A ) Snapshots of Arc - transcribing alleles , before and after TTX withdrawal ( time in minutes ) . Green and yellow arrowheads indicate transcription from a single and both Arc alleles , respectively . ( B ) Intensity profiles of transcription sites under basal and stimulated conditions . Solid line indicates the baseline normalized to the nuclear background . Dashed line indicates the threshold for transcriptional burst ( ON state ) . Numbers indicate the count of transcriptional bursts . a . u . , arbitrary units . ( C ) Percentage of time in the actively transcribing state within the 2 - hour time window for basal and stimulated conditions ( * P < 0 . 05 , two - tailed t test ) . ( D ) Inverse cumulative probability distribution of active ( ON ) duration of Arc transcription fitted to a two - component model , showing two time constants :  1 and  2 . Percentage of events belonging to either  1 or  2 is indicated . CDF , cumulative distribution function . ( E ) Percentage of events in  2 duration using different stimulation paradigms . ( F ) Amplitude of transcriptional burst . ( G ) Frequency histogram of transcriptional bursts in 2 - hour time win - dow . ( H ) Graph representing the relationship of OFF duration (  OFF ) following an ON duration (  ON ≥  2 ) in neurons after stimulation . Shaded ellipse indicates means ± 2 SDs ( n = 36 alleles ) . Error bars for all panels indicate SEM ( n = 37 cells for basal , 41 for TTX - w , 30 for Bic , and 32 for KCl from three independent experiments ) . Scale bar , 10  m . Das et al . , Sci . Adv . 2018 ; 4 : eaar3448 20 June 2018 S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E 7 of 14 and transcription factors necessary for inducing transcription ( 34 , 35 ) . We imaged both Ca 2 + activity and Arc transcriptional activity from the same neuron before and after stimulation ( Fig . 5A ) . Stimulation with bicuculline induced synchronized somatic Ca 2 + spikes in neu - rons within the field of view ( Fig . 5 , B and C , and movie S2 ) , with frequency ranging from 0 . 008 to 0 . 04 Hz ( 0 . 019 ± 0 . 009 Hz in aver - age ) and duration ( full width at half maximum ) ranging from 2 to 14 s ( 6 . 4 ± 3 . 2 s in average ) . Synchronous Ca 2 + spiking was also confirmed by imaging ~ 20 neurons simultaneously at a lower mag - nification ( fig . S4 ) . Such synchronized Ca 2 + activity is possibly due to the highly connected network within a culture dish . About 40 % of neurons showed synchronized somatic Ca 2 + activity even before the stimulation , but the frequency of basal Ca 2 + activity was lower ( < 0 . 006 Hz in average ) compared to that immediately after bicucul - line treatment ( 0 . 02 Hz in average ) ( fig . S4E ) . Upon exposure to bicuculline , all neurons showed an immediate increase in the frequency of Ca 2 + activity , but only 43 % exhibited induction of Arc transcription within ~ 30 min of stimulation ( Fig . 5 , D and E , and movie S3 ) . Transcriptional initiation time was also highly heterogeneous , ranging from a few minutes to longer than 20 min after stimulation , although Ca 2 + activity persisted during the entire duration of bicuculline treatment ( fig . S5 ) . The burst width and frequency of Ca 2 + activity were compared between neurons with and without Arc transcription within 30 min after bicuculline stimulation ( fig . S6 ) ; no significant difference was observed ( P ks > 0 . 05 , Kolmogorov - Smirnov test ) . These results indicate that although elevated Ca 2 + activity is a prerequisite for Arc transcription , it is not sufficient in inducing an active transcriptional burst . We next investigated a possible mechanism underlying the het - erogeneity in Arc transcriptional response to stimulation . The tran - scription factor CREB ( adenosine 3 ′ , 5 ′ - monophosphate response element – binding protein ) has been shown to play a key role in IEG activation ( 36 , 37 ) . To evaluate the levels of nuclear phosphorylated CREB ( pCREB ; Ser 133 residue ) in Arc - transcribing cells , we per - formed immunofluorescence of pCREB along with smFISH for Arc ( Fig . 5F ) . A correlation was apparent when comparing the levels of nuclear pCREB and Arc transcription : a higher probability of Arc transcription in neurons with higher pCREB expression ( Fig . 5G ) . Our results support the idea that , in addition to Ca 2 + spiking fre - quency , other factors such as the amplitude of nuclear Ca 2 + signal ( 34 ) , the absolute amount of CREB ( 37 , 38 ) , and the intrinsic noise in transcription machinery ( 39 ) may play important roles in deter - mining the efficiency of transcriptional response to stimulation . Localization and transport of Arc mRNA in dendrites Once transcribed , Arc mRNAs are transported to the dendrites and localize at activated synapses ( 17 ) . In Arc P / P neurons , PBS - tagged en - dogenous Arc mRNAs were targeted to the dendrites ( Fig . 1F ) and localized near dendritic spine necks and inside dendritic spines ( Fig . 6A ) . Quantification of total Arc mRNAs within a dendritic seg - ment 100  m from the soma revealed maximum levels at 60 min , fol - lowed by a decrease at 2 hours after stimulation ( Fig . 6B ) . This indicated that , soon after Arc mRNAs were produced , they were compartmen - talized into dendrites , where they underwent degradation ( 40 ) . We next performed single - particle tracking to follow the move - ment of individual Arc mRNAs . The directed transport of Arc mRNA occurred in both anterograde and retrograde directions and was often interrupted by pauses ( Fig . 6C and movie S4 ) , similar to the previously reported transport behavior of  - actin mRNA ( 26 , 41 ) and Arc 3 ′ UTR reporter mRNA ( 42 ) . The fraction of mobile Arc mRNAs that moved longer than 1 . 5  m during 1 min of observation was 23 ± 3 % ( means ± SEM ) upon bicuculline stimulation and 18 ± 2 % upon KCl depolarization , showing no significant difference be - tween the two stimulation paradigms ( P = 0 . 35 , two - tailed t test ; Fig . 6D ) . Because neuronal activity is crucial for the induction of Arc mRNA , we assessed the effect of neuronal activity on transport dynamics of Arc mRNA . A cocktail of TTX , N - methyl - d - aspartate ( NMDA ) re - ceptor antagonist [ d , l - 2 - amino - 5 - phosphonovaleric acid ( APV ) ] , and AMPA receptor antagonist [ 6 - cyano - 7 - nitroquinoxaline - 2 , 3 - dione ( CNQX ) ] was used to block both evoked and spontaneous activity . Dendritic transport of newly synthesized Arc mRNAs was imaged in the proximal dendrites 20 to 40 min after bicuculline treatment and washout ( control ) , bicuculline washout and TTX treatment ( TTX ) , and bicuculline washout followed by TTX , APV , and CNQX treatment ( TTX + APV + CNQX ) . Surprisingly , there was no significant difference in the fraction of actively moving Arc mRNA among all conditions . The percentage of mobile Arc mRNA was 23 ± 3 % ( means ± SEM ) in control condition , 21 ± 3 % in TTX condition , and 26 ± 3 % in TTX + APV + CNQX condition ( Fig . 6E ) . The motion of Arc mRNA was further analyzed by segmenting the kymographs ( Fig . 6C ) into two states , run and rest / pause phases , where movement longer than 1 . 5  m was defined as a run phase . The velocity probability density functions ( PDFs ) of run phases were also similar across the three conditions , suggesting that the run phase occurs independent of synaptic activity ( P ks > 0 . 07 for all three pairs , Kolmogorov - Smirnov test ; Fig . 6F ) . The speed of a single run was 1 . 5 ± 0 . 7  m / s , 1 . 4 ± 0 . 7  m / s , and 1 . 6 ± 0 . 7  m / s ( means ± SD ) for each condition , respectively , which indicates that the active transport of Arc mRNAs on microtubules was not altered by inhib - iting neuronal activity . This was irrespective of whether the runs were in anterograde or retrograde directions , because the percent - age of run events in either direction was similar in all conditions ( Fig . 6G ) . The average distance traveled by a single anterograde run ( 9 . 2 ± 0 . 8  m ) was significantly longer than that by a retro - grade run ( 6 . 7 ± 0 . 6  m ) under stimulated conditions ( P < 0 . 05 , two - tailed t test ; Fig . 6H ) . This result suggests that the slightly biased walk with a longer run phase to the anterograde direction possibly mediates the delivery of Arc mRNAs to the distal dendrites . However , neuronal activity did not play a significant role in the transport veloc - ities of Arc mRNA . DISCUSSION Here , we have developed a knock - in mouse where the endogenous Arc locus has been labeled with a bacteriophage - derived PBS cas - sette , which offered unique capabilities for imaging single Arc mRNAs from transcription to dendritic localization . This labeling strategy , albeit with a different stem - loop cassette ( MBS ) , has been used before for the constitutive gene  - actin , allowing visualization of  - actin mRNA dynamics in fibroblasts , neurons , and tissues ( 26 , 27 ) . The work here illustrates that the mRNA labeling strategy with an orthologous bacteriophage stem - loop ( PP7 ) can be successfully applied in this case to an activity - related gene like Arc , which is tightly regulated with a short half - life mRNA . The expression of Arc is important in learning and memory , as Arc null mice show deficits in long - term memory ( 8 ) . At the molecular level , localization and local translation of Arc mRNA influence LTP and spine remodeling Das et al . , Sci . Adv . 2018 ; 4 : eaar3448 20 June 2018 S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E 8 of 14 by associating with F - actin , as well as LTD - like processes by regu - lating AMPA receptor endocytosis ( 43 , 44 ) . Therefore , understand - ing the life cycle of Arc mRNA from its production to decay with high temporal resolution is imperative for understanding the struc - tural and functional changes associated with plasticity . The Arc - PBS knock - in mouse described here can faithfully capture all life cycle events , without altering the kinetics of production or degrada - tion of the mRNAs . Our mRNA lifetime measurements , as well as dual - color smFISH , confirm that the PBS - tagged mRNAs behave similarly to WT endogenous Arc mRNAs . Furthermore , PBS tag - ging of both Arc alleles does not result in any behavioral deficits in Arc P / P mouse on hippocampal learning and memory tasks . There - fore , the Arc P / P mouse offers possibilities to investigate the regula - tion of Arc mRNA in the context of intracellular targeting and localized translation . The PBS knock - in at the 3 ′ UTR offers unique advantages ; the gene is in its native chromosome locus , where its interaction with the cis - regulatory elements ( promoters , terminators , enhancers , etc . ) is maintained , and therefore , measurements of transcription dynam - ics by live imaging reflect the gene’s response to stimulation . We demonstrate that transcriptional responses in a neuronal popula - tion after global stimulation are heterogeneous and can most likely be attributed to differential levels of transcription factors in the nu - cleus . For example , the pCREB level in neurons is correlated with higher transcription efficiency , although to establish causality more detailed analysis of CREB regulation and upstream signals is re - quired . Our results emphasize that visualizing an inducible tran - scriptional response in individual cells is an important complement to ensemble measurements that represent global aspects of gene expression with less precise time resolution . This is illustrated by the correlation between stimulus and gene expression made possi - ble by detection of Ca 2 + spikes and Arc transcription in the same neuron . We show that although Ca 2 + activity is elevated in most neurons , only about half of the neurons induce Arc transcription . Experiment start t = 0 min t = 30 min t = 5 min = Ca 2 + activity imaging = Stimulation = Arc mRNA imaging A B D C E Cell 1 Cell 2 Cell 1 Cell 2 F G Fig . 5 . Dual - color imaging of Ca 2 + activity and Arc transcription in live neurons . ( A ) Experimental scheme of measuring both Ca 2 + activity and Arc transcription from the same neuron . One green block represents one z scan through the nucleus to detect Arc transcription sites in the green channel . One red block represents continuous imaging of Ca 2 + activity at the mid - plane of the nucleus for ~ 5 min in the red channel . The same neuron was monitored before and after the stimulation by 50  M bicu - culline . ( B ) Representative Ca 2 + image from the red channel . ( C ) Synchronized Ca 2 + spikes measured from the soma ( area within dashed line ) of cell 1 ( top ) and cell 2 ( bottom ) 5 min after bicuculline stimulation . ( D ) Representative image of Arc transcription in the same neurons as shown in ( B ) . Transcription from both alleles in cell 1 ( cyan and magenta arrowheads ) versus no transcription site in cell 2 . ( E ) Time course plot of Arc transcription site ( TS ) intensity in cell 1 ( top ) and cell 2 ( bottom ) . ( F ) Rep - resentative image of smFISH - IF showing Arc transcription ( green ) and pCREB ( red ) in the nucleus [ 4 ′ , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ( DAPI ) , blue ] . ( G ) Probability of Arc transcription ( TXN ) in neurons grouped by pCREB levels in the nucleus . * * P < 0 . 01 , * P < 0 . 05 , two - tailed t test . A total of 203 neurons were imaged from four independent experiments . Error bars represent SEM . Scale bars , 5  m . Das et al . , Sci . Adv . 2018 ; 4 : eaar3448 20 June 2018 S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E 9 of 14 This result indicates that Ca 2 + activity alone is not sufficient to in - duce Arc transcription in cultured hippocampal neurons . It is likely that a highly interconnected signaling network regulates Arc tran - scription in a tightly controlled manner ( 45 ) . Real - time transcription measurements indicate that a possible mechanism by which increased neuronal activity resulted in higher transcriptional output of the Arc gene could be due to induction of a prolonged ON state of transcriptional bursting without changing the amplitude of each burst . This suggests that once RNA Pol II that may have been stalled at the transcription start sites were released upon stimulation ( 30 ) , they produced the same number of transcripts . Following the activity - induced ON state , we also identified a char - acteristically long OFF state of the Arc gene , which may have resulted from a closed chromatin conformation ( 46 ) and possibly indicates a refractory period of the gene . Similar mechanisms of regulating IEG expression by altering the burst parameters have been described in nonneuronal cells , for example , increased burst frequency of the c - fos gene by changing the levels of transcription factors and increased burst duration of the Ctgf gene in response to stimuli ( 47 , 48 ) . Our results from real - time imaging of Arc loci provide one of the first characterizations of transcriptional bursting in neurons in response to activity . Our smFISH data show that although Arc is an IEG , Arc mRNA levels cycle within the cultured network , suggesting that a feedback loop for reactivation may exist , similar to reports on other genes ( 49 ) . The transcription dynamics in cultured hippocampal neurons may be relevant to the known physiology of memory formation in the hippocampus following a fear experience ( 50 ) or novel environment exploration ( 51 ) . Toward this end , the Arc - PBS mouse offers possibilities of visualizing mRNAs in the native envi - ronment of tissue . Intracranial injection of viral vectors expressing the fluorescent PCP will be a useful strategy to label Arc mRNA in specific brain areas . Alternatively , similar to the approach of the MBS × MCP mouse , we are currently generating an Arc - PBS × PCP - GFP mouse line , where all Arc mRNAs will be fluorescently labeled , facilitating visualization of endogenous mRNAs in the en - tire neuronal population . # M a t u r e m RN A s i n dend r i t e s A B C D E G H F Fig . 6 . Localization and transport dynamics of dendritic Arc mRNA . ( A ) Representative image of Arc mRNAs localized at the neck of a dendritic spine ( top right panel ) and inside a spine ( bottom right panel ) . ( B ) Quantification of the average number of mature mRNAs detected in the dendrites ( within 100  m of soma ) after TTX withdraw - al . ( C ) Kymograph showing both stationary and actively moving Arc mRNAs in a dendrite . ( D ) Fraction of mobile Arc mRNAs that moved more than 1 . 5  m during 1 min of observation after bicuculline and KCl stimulation . n = 510 and 141 mRNAs for Bic and KCl conditions , respectively . ( E ) Fraction of mobile Arc mRNAs in the bicuculline washout ( control ) , bicuculline washout + TTX ( TTX ) , and bicuculline washout + TTX + APV + CNQX ( TTX + APV + CNQX ) . n = 510 , 427 , and 549 mRNAs for control , TTX , and TTX + APV + CNQX conditions , respectively . ( F ) PDF of the run velocity in control ( yellow ) , TTX ( blue ) , and TTX + APV + CNQX ( red ) conditions . Velocity of active movement of Arc mRNA was similar among all conditions . ( G ) Percentage of anterograde ( Antero ) and retrograde ( Retro ) movements in all conditions . ( H ) Histogram of distance traveled by a single run in anterograde and retrograde directions for control , TTX , and TTX + APV + CNQX conditions . * P < 0 . 05 , two - tailed t test . For ( E ) to ( H ) , a total of 173 , 146 , and 212 active movements from five independent experiments were analyzed for control , TTX , and TTX + APV + CNQX conditions , respectively . Error bars rep - resent SEM . Scale bars , 5  m ( horizontal ) and 10 s ( vertical ) . Das et al . , Sci . Adv . 2018 ; 4 : eaar3448 20 June 2018 S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E 10 of 14 The Arc - PBS mouse also allowed tracking of single mRNAs to determine the route of localization , showing that Arc mRNA trans - port was bidirectional but biased toward the anterograde direction , possibly due to the slightly polarized orientation of microtubules in dendrites ( 52 , 53 ) . Previously , it has been shown that Arc mRNAs localize to activated synapses ( 18 ) , and this anterograde bias may be important for localization to distal sites . We investigated whether the moving fraction of the mRNAs and their dynamics were altered by inhibiting neuronal activity . Blocking action potentials and gluta - matergic currents for 20 to 40 min did not significantly change the moving fraction of Arc mRNAs or the speed and distance of a single run . This might be due to the effect from signaling cascades or syn - aptic tags that were activated during stimulation and were retained . Our results support the idea that NMDA receptor – dependent local - ization of Arc mRNA ( 18 ) may occur by docking and / or degrada - tion of the mRNA ( 40 ) rather than by controlling the mRNA mobility . This temporal nature of Arc mRNA localization can be further in - vestigated in tissue by stimulation or inhibition of synaptic pathways . Therefore , the Arc P / P mouse offers possibilities to investigate the regulation of Arc mRNA in the context of intracellular targeting and localized translation in tissues and in the live animal as well . In light of the recent findings of Arc mRNA and proteins capable of forming Arc capsids and mediating intercellular transport across neurons ( 54 , 55 ) , the Arc - PBS – tagged mouse will allow visualiza - tion of such events during synaptic plasticity . We anticipate that the Arc - PBS mouse will be a powerful tool to bridge the gap between electrophysiology and spatiotemporal gene expression , by correlat - ing behavior with the life cycle of Arc mRNA , under learning and behaving conditions in vivo . MATERIALS AND METHODS Generation of Arc - PBS knock - in mouse Animal care and experimental procedures were carried out in ac - cordance with the protocols approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Albert Einstein College of Medicine , Janelia Research Campus of Howard Hughes Medical Institute ( HHMI ) , and Seoul National University . Targeting construct for Arc allele was produced by using conventional cloning approaches with homology arms amplified from the C57BL / 6J mouse bacterial artificial chromosome vector RPCI - 23 - 81J22 . After verification by sequencing , the targeting construct was electroporated into 129S6 × C57BL / 6 F1 hybrid ES cell line . ES cell clones were screened for homologous recombination by PCR . Correctly targeted ES cells were microinjected into BL / 6 blastocysts , and chimeras were mated to FLPeR mice ( ROSA26 : : FLP ) to remove the FRT - flanked neomycin resistance cassette in the offspring . Pups without the PGK - neo cas - sette were identified by PCR and used to backcross to a C57BL / 6J background . Experiments were performed using either nonback - crossed mouse line or seventh backcross generation line . We have not observed any qualitative difference between nonbackcrossed and seventh backcross generation mice . Genotyping To genotype Arc - PBS knock - in mice , we performed PCRs using the following primer sets . For the 5 ′ end , we used two forward primers , Arc - PBS gt 5F ( 5 ′ - TGTCCAGCCAGACATCTACT - 3 ′ ) and Arc - PBS gt 5R ( 5 ′ - TAGCATCTGCCCTAGGATGT - 3 ′ ) , and one reverse primer , PBS scr R1 ( 5 ′ - GTTTCTAGAGTCGACCTGCA - 3 ′ ) , yield - ing a 320 - bp product for the WT allele and a 228 - bp product for the PBS knock - in allele . For the 3 ′ end , we used a forward primer , Arc - PBS gt 3F ( 5 ′ - GACCCATACTCATTTGGCTG - 3 ′ ) , and a reverse primer , Arc - PBS gt 3R ( 5 ′ - GCCGAGGATTCTAGACTTAG - 3 ′ ) , yielding a 332 - bp product for the WT allele and a 413 - bp product for the PBS knock - in allele . PCR conditions were 94°C for 30 s , 55°C for 30 s , and 72°C for 30 s for 35 cycles . Hippocampal neuron preparation , viruses , and stimulation paradigms Hippocampi were dissected out from postnatal day 1 ( P1 ) pups from Arc P / P homozygous , Arc P / + heterozygous , and C57BL / 6 WT ( Charles River Laboratories ) mice . Hippocampal neurons were iso - lated as described before ( 56 ) . Briefly , hippocampi were digested with 0 . 25 % trypsin at 37°C for 15 min , followed by trituration and plating onto poly - d - lysine – coated MatTek dishes . For FISH and live experiments , 45 , 000 and 65 , 000 cells per dish , respectively , were plated . Neurons were plated and maintained in NGM ( Neurobasal A medium supplemented with B - 27 , GlutaMAX , and primocin ) . All reagents were obtained from Life Technologies unless mentioned otherwise . Coding sequences for NLS - stdPCP - stdGFP were cloned into lentiviral or adeno - associated virus ( AAV ) expression vectors . The synonymous versions of PCP ( stdPCP ) and GFP ( stdGFP ) were de - signed on the basis of previously described coat proteins and fluo - rescent proteins ( 32 ) . Lentivirus was generated as described before using the plasmids for ENV ( pMD2 . VSVG ) , p / MDLG , Rev ( pRSV - Rev ) , and pMDLg / pRRE along with the expression vector in human embryonic kidney ( HEK ) 293T cells by calcium phosphate method . Virus containing supernatant was concentrated using a Lenti - X concentrator ( Clontech Laboratories ) , resuspended in Neurobasal A medium , and stored at −80°C . Dissociated hippocampal neurons were infected with NLS - stdPCP - stdGFP lentivirus ( 32 ) at 10 days in vitro ( DIV 10 ) and imaged at DIV 16 and 17 for transcription sites and single mRNAs . Serotype 2 / 1 AAV vector for the expression of hSyn - NLS - stdPCP - stdGFP was generated using the AAV Helper - Free System ( Agilent Technologies ) . The final concentration of AAV infection was ~ 10 9 genome copies per milliliter . After infection with either lentivirus or AAV , no medium change was performed , and NGM was added to the cultures every 3 days . Three kinds of stimulation paradigms were used to study Arc induction in hippocampal cultures . Before any stimulation , 1 ml of conditioned medium ( CM ) was saved from each MatTek dish to be added back later after washout of the drug . For bicuculline stimula - tion , 50  M bicuculline methiodide ( Tocris Bioscience ) was added for 15 min , followed by two washes with Neurobasal A medium and adding back CM along with NGM . For TTX withdrawal experi - ments , cultures were treated with 1 . 5 to 2  M TTX ( TTX citrate , Tocris Bioscience ) overnight ( 14 to 16 hours ) , followed by two washes with Neurobasal A medium and adding back CM along with NGM . KCl stimulation was performed in Hepes - buffered saline ( HBS ) medium containing 60 mM KCl for 3 min , followed by three washes with HBS . All time points were measured after washout . Behavioral experiments Two - month - old animals from WT ( n = 8 ) and Arc P / P ( n = 10 ) were used for the study . All mice were subjected to a battery of tests on the behavioral spectrometer ( Behavioral Instruments ) , which can auto - matically monitor different behavioral classes—general locomotion , Das et al . , Sci . Adv . 2018 ; 4 : eaar3448 20 June 2018 S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E 11 of 14 grooming , orientation , exploratory behavior , and thigmotaxis ( cen - ter versus peripheral exploration ) . The test is conducted for a total of 9 min . For object recognition and object placement tests , the mice were placed in an opaque arena with two identical objects for 5 min , after which they were returned to their home cages . For objection recognition , the animals were returned to the arena after a reten - tion interval of 180 min , in which one of the familiar objects had been replaced with a novel object . For object placement , after a re - tention interval of 45 min , one of the identical objects was moved to a different location . For both conditions , the test period was for 3 min . A preference score was calculated on the basis of the time spent in exploring the novel object ( object recognition ) or the new - ly displaced object ( object placement ) divided by the total time spent exploring both objects . An exploratory preference score higher than 50 % indicates intact recognition memory . A cutoff criterion for pass - ing was empirically set at 55 % preference . In elevated plus maze test , the animals were placed in the center of an elevated four - arm maze , having two open and two enclosed arms for 5 min . The activity was measured by total track length traversed in the entire arena . The per - cent of track spent in the open arms was calculated . Anxiety - like behav - ior was determined by reduced exploration of the open arms . For all the tests , one - way ANOVA was performed to determine the statistical sig - nificance in the performance score between WT and Arc P / P animals . smFISH and smFISH - IF Hippocampal neurons at DIV 16 to 18 were stimulated with bicuc - ulline ( 40  M for 15 min ) , followed by washout with Neurobasal medium three times , and incubated with a 1 : 1 ratio of previously stored CM and fresh NGM . In TTX withdrawal paradigm , neurons were incubated with 1 . 5  M TTX for 12 hours ( overnight ) , followed by withdrawal by washing twice with Neurobasal medium and add - ing NGM . The dishes were incubated for different time points after stimulation . Neurons were fixed with ice - cold 4 % paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) and 4 % sucrose containing phosphate - buffered saline sup - plemented with 1 mM MgCl 2 and 0 . 1 mM CaCl 2 ( PBS - MC ) , as de - scribed before ( 57 ) . Following permeabilization with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 in PBS - MC for 15 min on ice , neurons were treated with a prehybrization buffer containing 12 % formamide , 2× SSC in ribo - nuclease ( RNase ) – free water for 30 min . Hybridization was carried out at 37°C using a hybridization buffer [ 2× SSC , 10 % formamide , 10 % dextran sulfate , bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) ( 20 mg / ml ) , Escherichia coli transfer RNA ( 1 mg / ml ) , 2 mM vanadyl ribonucle - oside complex , SUPERase·In ( 10 U / ml ; Ambion ) in RNase - free wa - ter ] for 4 hours , as described before ( 57 ) , using 20 - mer DNA probes . Probes were used against the PBS linker sequences ( 27 ) ( a mix of three probes , dual end - labeled ) , called PBS , conjugated to Cy3 or Cy5 ( Amersham Biosciences ) , and also against Arc - CDS conju - gated to Quasar 570 ( Biosearch ) ( table S1 ) . The neurons were then washed with prehybridization buffer , followed by 2× SSC to remove excess unbound probes , counterstained with DAPI ( 0 . 5  g / ml in phosphate - buffered saline ) , and mounted using the ProLong Gold Antifade Reagent ( Invitrogen ) . Images were acquired using oil im - mersion 40× and 100× objectives on an epifluorescence Olympus BX83 microscope , with an X - Cite 120 PC lamp ( EXFO ) and an ORCA - R2 digital charge - coupled device ( CCD ) camera ( Hamamatsu ) . Z sec - tions were acquired every 300 nm , and the entire volume of the neu - ron was imaged . FISH spots were analyzed by three - dimensional ( 3D ) Gaussian fitting of spots using FISH - quant software ( 58 ) on MATLAB platform . The number of FISH spots varies depending on the probes used and the efficiency of hybridization . Therefore , using two dif - ferent probe sets for the same mRNA may yield differences in the absolute mRNA counts . For simultaneous detection of pCREB and Arc transcription , a combination of smFISH and immunofluorescence ( smFISH - IF ) was performed . AAV viral infection ( AAV - hSyn - NLS - tdPCP - tdGFP ) was done on DIV 6 and 7 . After neurons were placed in 37°C , 5 % CO 2 incubator for 20 min with 50  M bicuculline , they were fixed for 20 min with cold 4 % PFA and 4 % sucrose in PBS - MC . Quench - ing was done for 15 min with 50 mM glycine in PBS - MC . Neurons were permeabilized for 15 min with cold 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 and 0 . 5 % BSA in PBS - MC . Blocking and prehybridization were per - formed for 30 min at room temperature with 10 % formamide , 2× SSC , and 0 . 5 % BSA in RNase - free water . Hybridization of FISH probes and primary antibody was done together . Neurons were incubated at 37°C for 3 hours with 10 ng of PBS probes ( 27 ) and primary antibody against Ser 133 residue pCREB ( 06 - 519 , Millipore ) in hybridization buffer . Neurons were quickly washed twice with warm 10 % formamide , 3 % BSA in 2× SSC . Then , hybridization with the secondary antibody was performed twice with Alexa Fluor 647 – conjugated secondary antibody ( A21245 , Thermo Fisher Sci - entific ) in 10 % formamide and 2× SSC in RNase - free water at 37°C for 20 min each . After cells were washed four times with 2× SSC , they were stained with DAPI ( 57 ) . Real - time imaging of transcription Hippocampal neurons were plated at densities of 65 , 000 to 70 , 000 cells per MatTek dish and infected with lentivirus expressing stdPCP - stdGFP at DIV 10 . Neurons were grown in NGM containing phenol - free Neurobasal A ( Invitrogen ) and imaged between DIV 16 and 19 in NGM on a heated chamber at 35°C , with flow of 5 % CO 2 . For TTX withdrawal experiments , neurons were incubated with TTX ( 1 . 5  M ) for 12 to 16 hours . Live imaging was first done in TTX - containing medium , followed by washes with Neurobasal A and addition of fresh medium , and then imaged 10 min after wash - out . For bicuculline experiments , neurons were treated with 40  M bicuculline for 15 min , washed twice with Neurobasal A , and imaged in fresh medium . For basal conditions , the neurons were imaged in NGM , without any treatment or washout . A wide - field fluores - cence microscope equipped with iXon Ultra DU - 897U electron - multiplying CCD ( EMCCD ) camera ( Andor ) , 60× oil immersion objectives ( Olympus ) , MS - 2000 - 500 XYZ automated stage ( ASI ) , and IX73 microscope body ( Olympus ) was used , as described before ( 56 ) . Excitation was achieved using a 488 - nm laser , and z sections of the nuclei were acquired every 500 nm . Maximal projection images were shown , with a filtering of Gaussian blur of 0 . 2 , done on ImageJ . Time - lapse imaging of Arc transcription sites was performed in NGM for 2 to 3 hours , with an imaging interval of either 60 or 90 s . Two - color imaging of Ca 2 + and Arc transcriptional dynamics Neurons were infected with AAV - hSyn - NLS - tdPCP - tdGFP on DIV 6 and 7 . Live - cell imaging experiments were performed on DIV 14 to 17 . Two microliters of 2 mM red - shifted Ca 2 + indicator ( Ca 2 + Orange , Molecular Probes ) was added to neurons in 2 ml of NGM , and neurons were incubated in 37°C , 5 % CO 2 incubator for 30 min . Then , cells were washed twice with warm HBS ( 119 mM NaCl , 5 mM KCl , 2 mM CaCl 2 , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 30 mM d - glucose , 20 mM Hepes in deionized water at pH 7 . 4 ) and placed in 37°C , 5 % CO 2 incubator for 30 min again . Das et al . , Sci . Adv . 2018 ; 4 : eaar3448 20 June 2018 S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E 12 of 14 After 30 min of incubation , neurons were imaged by using a wide - field fluorescence microscope equipped with an iXon Ultra DU - 897U EMCCD camera ( Andor ) , a UApo 150× oil immersion objective ( Olympus ) , an MS - 2000 - 500 XYZ automated stage ( ASI ) , and an IX73 microscope body ( Olympus ) . A CU - 201 heating cham - ber ( Live Cell Instrument ) was used to maintain the temperature at 37°C . The Micro - Manager software was used for image acquisition . Fluorescence excitation source was SOLA SE white light - emitting diode ( Lumencor ) , and appropriate filter sets were used for fluo - rescence observation [ 49002 ET - EGFP filter set ( Chroma ) for GFP - tagged Arc mRNA observation and 49004 ET - Cy3 / TRITC filter set ( Chroma ) for Ca 2 + activity observation ] . Separate image acquisition schemes were used for imaging transcription and Ca 2 + activity . To detect any transcription site in the whole nucleus , a z - section image of a neuron was taken in green fluorescence channel . Then , time - lapse images of baseline Ca 2 + activity were acquired at 2 Hz for 4 to 6 min in red fluorescence channel at a single plane . After 50  M bicuculline was added , induced Ca 2 + activity was imaged for 4 to 5 min , followed by z - section images of Arc mRNA transcription every 2 min starting from 5 min until 27 min . Finally , Ca 2 + activity was imaged again for 4 to 7 min . Imaging dendritic transport of Arc mRNA Neurons were infected with AAV - hSyn - NLS - stdPCP - stdGFP on DIV 11 to 13 . Live - cell imaging experiments were performed on DIV 14 and 15 . For bicuculline washout condition , neurons were stimulated with 50  M bicuculline in NGM and placed in 37°C , 5 % CO 2 incubator for 20 min . After washing with warmed HBS medi - um , neurons were brought to the wide - field fluorescence micro - scope described above and incubated at 37°C for 20 min until the microscope system became equilibrated . During equilibration , sev - eral fields of view that contained a few dendrites were selected . Then , each site was imaged at 5 Hz for 1 min during 40 to 60 min after the onset of bicuculline stimulation . To inhibit action poten - tials , the sodium channel blocker TTX was used . To inhibit NMDA and AMPA receptors , APV and CNQX were used , respectively . For bicuculline washout + TTX and bicuculline washout + TTX + APV + CNQX conditions , Arc transcription was also induced by 50  M bicuculline for 20 min . Then , neurons were washed and incubated with 1 . 5  M TTX or 1 . 5  M TTX + 300  M APV + 10  M CNQX in HBS medium . All the following procedures and parameters for imaging of bicuculline washout + TTX condition and bicuculline washout + TTX + APV + CNQX condition were the same as those for bicuculline washout condition . Image analysis Transcription sites were analyzed on the basis of a custom script in MATLAB for particle tracking , as described before ( 59 ) . Semi - automated tracking of transcription sites was performed based on the maximum intensity pixel . The intensity traces of transcrip - tion sites in the filtered images were normalized by the background signal of the nucleus . The value of normalization to 1 represents the basal signal when no transcription sites are detected . A rolling aver - age of three frames was done for analysis of transcription sites and to rule out any artifacts in intensity fluctuations from imaging . An intensity threshold of 50 % increase above baseline was used for de - tection of a transcription burst ( “ON” state ) . On the basis of these averaged normalized traces , the ON durations were calculated and plotted as inverse cumulative frequency distributions . These distribu - tions were then fitted to a double - exponential decay function to derive the two ON duration components :  1 and  2 . The parameters were determined by a maximal likelihood analysis , and the good - ness of fit ( r 2 ) was determined . To analyze the data from simultaneous imaging of Arc tran - scription and Ca 2 + activity , time - lapse Arc transcription activity plot was generated by using custom - made transcription analysis program using a part of u - track ( 60 ) , which detected transcription sites and calculated the intensity amplitude from 2D Gaussian fit - ting . The average fluorescence intensities of pCREB in the nucleus and background were obtained using ImageJ . The background - subtracted value of pCREB intensity was considered as the pCREB level in the nucleus . Movements of Arc mRNAs in dendrites were analyzed on the basis of kymographs generated by ImageJ . The run phase was de - fined as movement with displacement larger than 1 . 5  m . The start point and the end point of run phase were annotated manually on kymographs and used to calculate the displacement and the velocity of each particle . The average and SEM were calculated from five independent experiments for each condition in Fig . 6 ( E , G , and H ) . Two - tailed t test was used to determine the P values . For Fig . 6F , the PDFs of run velocity were also obtained from five independent ex - periments for each condition . Kolmogorov - Smirnov test was used to measure the significance of difference between velocity PDFs . SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS Supplementary material for this article is available at http : / / advances . sciencemag . org / cgi / content / full / 4 / 6 / eaar3448 / DC1 Supplementary Materials and Methods fig . S1 . Comparison of homozygous Arc - PBS mouse to WT mouse . fig . S2 . PCP binding to PBS - tagged mRNAs does not alter mRNA integrity . fig . S3 . Persistent synchronized Ca 2 + spikes after bicuculline washout . fig . S4 . Synchronized Ca 2 + spikes during bicuculline incubation . fig . S5 . Plot of Ca 2 + activity and Arc transcription dynamics . fig . S6 . Comparison of somatic Ca 2 + spikes between neurons with and without Arc transcription within 30 min after bicuculline stimulation . table S1 . Sequence of the probes used for smFISH against the Arc - CDS and PBS linkers ( PBS ) . movie S1 . Immediate early activation of transcription from PBS - tagged Arc allele . movie S2 . Ca 2 + activity of neurons induced by bicuculline stimulation . movie S3 . Arc transcription dynamics induced by bicuculline stimulation . movie S4 . Dendritic transport of Arc mRNA . Reference ( 61 ) REFERENCES AND NOTES 1 . A . R . Buxbaum , Y . J . Yoon , R . H . Singer , H . Y . Park , Single - molecule insights into mRNA dynamics in neurons . Trends Cell Biol . 25 , 468 – 475 ( 2015 ) . 2 . H . Jung , C . G . Gkogkas , N . Sonenberg , C . E . Holt , Remote control of gene function by local translation . Cell 157 , 26 – 40 ( 2014 ) . 3 . K . Minatohara , M . Akiyoshi , H . Okuno , Role of immediate - early genes in synaptic plasticity and neuronal ensembles underlying the memory trace . Front . Mol . Neurosci . 8 , 78 ( 2015 ) . 4 . C . Glock , M . Heumüller , E . M . Schuman , mRNA transport & local translation in neurons . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 45 , 169 – 177 ( 2017 ) . 5 . O . Steward , S . Farris , P . S . Pirbhoy , J . Darnell , S . J . Van Driesche , Localization and local translation of Arc / Arg3 . 1 mRNA at synapses : Some observations and paradoxes . Front . Mol . Neurosci . 7 , 101 ( 2015 ) . 6 . W . Link , U . Konietzko , G . Kauselmann , M . Krug , B . Schwanke , U . Frey , D . Kuhl , Somatodendritic expression of an immediate early gene is regulated by synaptic activity . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 92 , 5734 – 5738 ( 1995 ) . 7 . G . L . Lyford , K . Yamagata , W . E . Kaufmann , C . A . Barnes , L . K . Sanders , N . G . Copeland , D . J . Gilbert , N . A . Jenkins , A . A . Lanahan , P . F . Worley , Arc , a growth factor and activity - regulated gene , encodes a novel cytoskeleton - associated protein that is enriched in neuronal dendrites . Neuron 14 , 433 – 445 ( 1995 ) . 8 . N . Plath , O . Ohana , B . Dammermann , M . L . Errington , D . Schmitz , C . Gross , X . Mao , A . Engelsberg , C . Mahlke , H . Welzl , U . Kobalz , A . Stawrakakis , E . Fernandez , R . Waltereit , A . Bick - Sander , E . Therstappen , S . F . Cooke , V . Blanquet , W . Wurst , B . Salmen , M . R . Bösl , Das et al . , Sci . Adv . 2018 ; 4 : eaar3448 20 June 2018 S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E 13 of 14 H . - P . Lipp , S . G . N . Grant , T . V . P . Bliss , D . P . Wolfer , D . Kuhl , Arc / Arg3 . 1 is essential for the consolidation of synaptic plasticity and memories . Neuron 52 , 437 – 444 ( 2006 ) . 9 . J . F . Guzowski , B . L . McNaughton , C . A . Barnes , P . F . Worley , Environment - specific expression of the immediate - early gene Arc in hippocampal neuronal ensembles . Nat . Neurosci . 2 , 1120 – 1124 ( 1999 ) . 10 . J . F . Guzowski , G . L . Lyford , G . D . Stevenson , F . P . Houston , J . L . McGaugh , P . F . Worley , C . A . Barnes , Inhibition of activity - dependent Arc protein expression in the rat hippocampus impairs the maintenance of long - term potentiation and the consolidation of long - term memory . J . Neurosci . 20 , 3993 – 4001 ( 2000 ) . 11 . E . Messaoudi , T . Kanhema , J . Soulé , A . Tiron , G . Dagyte , B . da Silva , C . R . Bramham , Sustained Arc / Arg3 . 1 synthesis controls long - term potentiation consolidation through regulation of local actin polymerization in the dentate gyrus in vivo . J . Neurosci . 27 , 10445 – 10455 ( 2007 ) . 12 . S . Park , J . M . Park , S . Kim , J . - a . Kim , J . D . Shepherd , C . L . Smith - Hicks , S . M . Chowdhury , W . A . Kaufmann , D . Kuhl , A . G . Ryazanov , R . L . Huganir , D . J . Linden , P . F . Worley , Elongation factor 2 and fragile X mental retardation protein control the dynamic translation of Arc / Arg3 . 1 essential for mGluR - LTD . Neuron 59 , 70 – 83 ( 2008 ) . 13 . M . W . Waung , B . E . Pfeiffer , E . D . Nosyreva , J . A . Ronesi , K . M . Huber , Rapid translation of Arc / Arg3 . 1 selectively mediates mGluR - dependent LTD through persistent increases in AMPAR endocytosis rate . Neuron 59 , 84 – 97 ( 2008 ) . 14 . J . D . Shepherd , G . Rumbaugh , J . Wu , S . M . Chowdhury , N . Plath , D . Kuhl , R . L . Huganir , P . F . Worley , Arc / Arg3 . 1 mediates homeostatic synaptic scaling of AMPA receptors . Neuron 52 , 475 – 484 ( 2006 ) . 15 . F . Ufer , P . Vargas , J . B . Engler , J . Tintelnot , B . Schattling , H . Winkler , S . Bauer , N . Kursawe , A . Willing , O . Keminer , O . Ohana , G . Salinas - Riester , O . Pless , D . Kuhl , M . A . Friese , Arc / Arg3 . 1 governs inflammatory dendritic cell migration from the skin and thereby controls T cell activation . Sci . Immunol . 1 , eaaf8665 ( 2016 ) . 16 . B . Maier , S . Medrano , S . B . Sleight , P . E . Visconti , H . Scrable , Developmental association of the synaptic activity - regulated protein arc with the mouse acrosomal organelle and the sperm tail . Biol . Reprod . 68 , 67 – 76 ( 2003 ) . 17 . O . Steward , C . S . Wallace , G . L . Lyford , P . F . Worley , Synaptic activation causes the mRNA for the IEG Arc to localize selectively near activated postsynaptic sites on dendrites . Neuron 21 , 741 – 751 ( 1998 ) . 18 . O . Steward , P . F . Worley , Selective targeting of newly synthesized Arc mRNA to active synapses requires NMDA receptor activation . Neuron 30 , 227 – 240 ( 2001 ) . 19 . J . F . Guzowski , B . Setlow , E . K . Wagner , J . L . McGaugh , Experience - dependent gene expression in the rat hippocampus after spatial learning : A comparison of the immediate - early genes Arc , c - fos , and zif268 . J . Neurosci . 21 , 5089 – 5098 ( 2001 ) . 20 . K . H . Wang , A . Majewska , J . Schummers , B . Farley , C . Hu , M . Sur , S . Tonegawa , In vivo two - photon imaging reveals a role of Arc in enhancing orientation specificity in visual cortex . Cell 126 , 389 – 402 ( 2006 ) . 21 . M . Eguchi , S . Yamaguchi , In vivo and in vitro visualization of gene expression dynamics over extensive areas of the brain . Neuroimage 44 , 1274 – 1283 ( 2009 ) . 22 . V . Grinevich , A . Kolleker , M . Eliava , N . Takada , H . Takuma , Y . Fukazawa , R . Shigemoto , D . Kuhl , J . Waters , P . H . Seeburg , P . Osten , Fluorescent Arc / Arg3 . 1 indicator mice : A versatile tool to study brain activity changes in vitro and in vivo . J . Neurosci . Methods 184 , 25 – 36 ( 2009 ) . 23 . H . Izumi , T . Ishimoto , H . Yamamoto , H . Nishijo , H . Mori , Bioluminescence imaging of Arc expression enables detection of activity - dependent and plastic changes in the visual cortex of adult mice . Brain Struct . Funct . 216 , 91 – 104 ( 2011 ) . 24 . C . A . Denny , M . A . Kheirbek , E . L . Alba , K . F . Tanaka , R . A . Brachman , K . B . Laughman , N . K . Tomm , G . F . Turi , A . Losonczy , R . Hen , Hippocampal memory traces are differentially modulated by experience , time , and adult neurogenesis . Neuron 83 , 189 – 201 ( 2014 ) . 25 . C . J . Guenthner , K . Miyamichi , H . H . Yang , H . C . Heller , L . Luo , Permanent genetic access to transiently active neurons via TRAP : Targeted recombination in active populations . Neuron 78 , 773 – 784 ( 2013 ) . 26 . H . Y . Park , H . Lim , Y . J . Yoon , A . Follenzi , C . Nwokafor , M . Lopez - Jones , X . Meng , R . H . Singer , Visualization of dynamics of single endogenous mRNA labeled in live mouse . Science 343 , 422 – 424 ( 2014 ) . 27 . T . Lionnet , K . Czaplinski , X . Darzacq , Y . Shav - Tal , A . L . Wells , J . A . Chao , H . Y . Park , V . de Turris , M . Lopez - Jones , R . H . Singer , A transgenic mouse for in vivo detection of endogenous labeled mRNA . Nat . Methods 8 , 165 – 170 ( 2011 ) . 28 . E . Tutucci , M . Vera , J . Biswas , J . Garcia , R . Parker , R . H . Singer , An improved MS2 system for accurate reporting of the mRNA life cycle . Nat . Methods 15 , 81 – 89 ( 2018 ) . 29 . V . R . Rao , S . A . Pintchovski , J . Chin , C . L . Peebles , S . Mitra , S . Finkbeiner , AMPA receptors regulate transcription of the plasticity - related immediate - early gene Arc . Nat . Neurosci . 9 , 887 – 895 ( 2006 ) . 30 . R . N . Saha , E . M . Wissink , E . R . Bailey , M . Zhao , D . C . Fargo , J . - Y . Hwang , K . R . Daigle , J . D . Fenn , K . Adelman , S . M . Dudek , Rapid activity - induced transcription of Arc and other IEGs relies on poised RNA polymerase II . Nat . Neurosci . 14 , 848 – 856 ( 2011 ) . 31 . J . A . Chao , Y . Patskovsky , S . C . Almo , R . H . Singer , Structural basis for the coevolution of a viral RNA - protein complex . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 15 , 103 – 105 ( 2008 ) . 32 . B . Wu , V . Miskolci , H . Sato , E . Tutucci , C . A . Kenworthy , S . K . Donnelly , Y . J . Yoon , D . Cox , R . H . Singer , L . Hodgson , Synonymous modification results in high - fidelity gene expression of repetitive protein and nucleotide sequences . Genes Dev . 29 , 876 – 886 ( 2015 ) . 33 . D . M . Suter , N . Molina , D . Gatfield , K . Schneider , U . Schibler , F . Naef , Mammalian genes are transcribed with widely different bursting kinetics . Science 332 , 472 – 474 ( 2011 ) . 34 . G . E . Hardingham , F . J . L . Arnold , H . Bading , Nuclear calcium signaling controls CREB - mediated gene expression triggered by synaptic activity . Nat . Neurosci . 4 , 261 – 267 ( 2001 ) . 35 . M . Sheng , G . McFadden , M . E . Greenberg , Membrane depolarization and calcium induce c - fos transcription via phosphorylation of transcription factor CREB . Neuron 4 , 571 – 582 ( 1990 ) . 36 . H . Bito , K . Deisseroth , R . W . Tsien , CREB phosphorylation and dephosphorylation : A Ca 2 + - and stimulus duration - dependent switch for hippocampal gene expression . Cell 87 , 1203 – 1214 ( 1996 ) . 37 . J . - H . Han , S . A . Kushner , A . P . Yiu , C . J . Cole , A . Matynia , R . A . Brown , R . L . Neve , J . F . Guzowski , A . J . Silva , S . A . Josselyn , Neuronal competition and selection during memory formation . Science 316 , 457 – 460 ( 2007 ) . 38 . Y . Zhou , J . Won , M . G . Karlsson , M . Zhou , T . Rogerson , J . Balaji , R . Neve , P . Poirazi , A . J . Silva , CREB regulates excitability and the allocation of memory to subsets of neurons in the amygdala . Nat . Neurosci . 12 , 1438 – 1443 ( 2009 ) . 39 . M . B . Elowitz , A . J . Levine , E . D . Siggia , P . S . Swain , Stochastic gene expression in a single cell . Science 297 , 1183 – 1186 ( 2002 ) . 40 . S . Farris , G . Lewandowski , C . D . Cox , O . Steward , Selective localization of Arc mRNA in dendrites involves activity - and translation - dependent mRNA degradation . J . Neurosci . 34 , 4481 – 4493 ( 2014 ) . 41 . N . Monnier , Z . Barry , H . Y . Park , K . - C . Su , Z . Katz , B . P . English , A . Dey , K . Pan , I . M . Cheeseman , R . H . Singer , M . Bathe , Inferring transient particle transport dynamics in live cells . Nat . Methods 12 , 838 – 840 ( 2015 ) . 42 . J . L . Dynes , O . Steward , Dynamics of bidirectional transport of Arc mRNA in neuronal dendrites . J . Comp . Neurol . 500 , 433 – 447 ( 2007 ) . 43 . C . R . Bramham , M . N . Alme , M . Bittins , S . D . Kuipers , R . R . Nair , B . Pai , D . Panja , M . Schubert , J . Soule , A . Tiron , K . Wibrand , The Arc of synaptic memory . Exp . Brain Res . 200 , 125 – 140 ( 2010 ) . 44 . E . Korb , S . Finkbeiner , Arc in synaptic plasticity : From gene to behavior . Trends Neurosci . 34 , 591 – 598 ( 2011 ) . 45 . R . E . Carmichael , J . M . Henley , Transcriptional and post - translational regulation of Arc in synaptic plasticity . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 77 , 3 – 9 ( 2018 ) . 46 . C . V . Harper , B . Finkenstädt , D . J . Woodcock , S . Friedrichsen , S . Semprini , L . Ashall , D . G . Spiller , J . J . Mullins , D . A . Rand , J . R . E . Davis , M . R . H . White , Dynamic analysis of stochastic transcription cycles . PLOS Biol . 9 , e1000607 ( 2011 ) . 47 . A . Senecal , B . Munsky , F . Proux , N . Ly , F . E . Braye , C . Zimmer , F . Mueller , X . Darzacq , Transcription factors modulate c - Fos transcriptional bursts . Cell Rep . 8 , 75 – 83 ( 2014 ) . 48 . N . Molina , D . M . Suter , R . Cannavo , B . Zoller , I . Gotic , F . Naef , Stimulus - induced modulation of transcriptional bursting in a single mammalian gene . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 110 , 20563 – 20568 ( 2013 ) . 49 . J . R . Chubb , T . Trcek , S . M . Shenoy , R . H . Singer , Transcriptional pulsing of a developmental gene . Curr . Biol . 16 , 1018 – 1025 ( 2006 ) . 50 . D . Nakayama , H . Iwata , C . Teshirogi , Y . Ikegaya , N . Matsuki , H . Nomura , Long - delayed expression of the immediate early gene Arc / Arg3 . 1 refines neuronal circuits to perpetuate fear memory . J . Neurosci . 35 , 819 – 830 ( 2015 ) . 51 . Z . Penke , C . Chagneau , S . Laroche , Contribution of Egr1 / zif268 to activity - dependent Arc / Arg3 . 1 transcription in the dentate gyrus and area CA1 of the hippocampus . Front . Behav . Neurosci . 5 , 48 ( 2011 ) . 52 . P . W . Baas , M . M . Black , G . A . Banker , Changes in microtubule polarity orientation during the development of hippocampal neurons in culture . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 3085 – 3094 ( 1989 ) . 53 . P . W . Baas , J . S . Deitch , M . M . Black , G . A . Banker , Polarity orientation of microtubules in hippocampal neurons : Uniformity in the axon and nonuniformity in the dendrite . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 85 , 8335 – 8339 ( 1988 ) . 54 . E . D . Pastuzyn , C . E . Day , R . B . Kearns , M . Kyrke - Smith , A . V . Taibi , J . McCormick , N . Yoder , D . M . Belnap , S . Erlendsson , D . R . Morado , J . A . G . Briggs , C . Feschotte , J . D . Shepherd , The neuronal gene Arc encodes a repurposed retrotransposon Gag protein that mediates intercellular RNA transfer . Cell 172 , 275 – 288 . e18 ( 2018 ) . 55 . J . Ashley , B . Cordy , D . Lucia , L . G . Fradkin , V . Budnik , T . Thomson , Retrovirus - like Gag protein Arc1 binds RNA and traffics across synaptic boutons . Cell 172 , 262 – 274 . e11 ( 2018 ) . 56 . Y . J . Yoon , B . Wu , A . R . Buxbaum , S . Das , A . Tsai , B . P . English , J . B . Grimm , L . D . Lavis , R . H . Singer , Glutamate - induced RNA localization and translation in neurons . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 113 , E6877 – E6886 ( 2016 ) . 57 . C . Eliscovich , S . M . Shenoy , R . H . Singer , Imaging mRNA and protein interactions within neurons . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 114 , E1875 – E1884 ( 2017 ) . 58 . F . Mueller , A . Senecal , K . Tantale , H . Marie - Nelly , N . Ly , O . Collin , E . Basyuk , E . Bertrand , X . Darzacq , C . Zimmer , FISH - quant : Automatic counting of transcripts in 3D FISH images . Nat . Methods 10 , 277 – 278 ( 2013 ) . 59 . A . M . Corrigan , J . R . Chubb , Quantitative measurement of transcription dynamics in living cells . Methods Cell Biol . 125 , 29 – 41 ( 2015 ) . Das et al . , Sci . Adv . 2018 ; 4 : eaar3448 20 June 2018 S C I E N C E A D V A N C E S | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E 14 of 14 60 . K . Jaqaman , D . Loerke , M . Mettlen , H . Kuwata , S . Grinstein , S . L . Schmid , G . Danuser , Robust single - particle tracking in live - cell time - lapse sequences . Nat . Methods 5 , 695 – 702 ( 2008 ) . 61 . T . P . Patel , K . Man , B . L . Firestein , D . F . Meaney , Automated quantification of neuronal networks and single - cell calcium dynamics using calcium imaging . J . Neurosci . Methods 243 , 26 – 38 ( 2015 ) . Acknowledgments : We thank C . Guo and Janelia Gene Targeting and Transgenics Resources for cloning , electroporation , ES cell screening , and microinjection . We also thank A . Senecal for help with analysis of transcription sites from live imaging . For carrying out the behavioral experiments , we thank M . Gulinello from Behavioral Core , Albert Einstein College of Medicine ( Bronx , NY ) . We thank C . Nwokafor and S . H . Kim for animal maintenance and M . L . Jones for genotyping . Funding : This research was supported by NIH grant NS083085 to R . H . S . and Samsung Science and Technology Foundation project number SSTF - BA1602 - 11 to H . Y . P . Author contributions : H . Y . P . designed and generated the Arc - PBS knock - in mouse model , done at the Janelia Research Campus of the HHMI . All the authors participated in the study design . S . D . performed all smFISH experiments and live - cell imaging experiments on transcriptional bursting and pulsing . H . C . M . performed experiments on dual - color imaging of Ca 2 + activity and transcription , and mRNA transport in dendrites . All authors discussed the results and wrote the paper together . Competing interests : The authors declare that they have no competing interests . Data and materials availability : All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and / or the Supplementary Materials . Additional data related to this paper may be requested from the authors . Submitted 27 October 2017 Accepted 10 May 2018 Published 20 June 2018 10 . 1126 / sciadv . aar3448 Citation : S . Das , H . C . Moon , R . H . Singer , H . Y . Park , A transgenic mouse for imaging activity - dependent dynamics of endogenous Arc mRNA in live neurons . Sci . Adv . 4 , eaar3448 ( 2018 ) .