Page 1 of 5 Supplementary Material for A microfluidic biochip for locally confined stimulation of cells within an epithelial monolayer Roland Thuenauer , a , b , c , * Simon Nicklaus , a , b , c Marco Frensch , a , b , c , d Kevin Troendle , a , b Josef Madl , a , b , c and Winfried Römer a , b , c , * a . Faculty of Biology , Schänzlestraße 1 , Albert - Ludwigs - University Freiburg , 79104 Freiburg , Germany . b . BIOSS - Centre for Biological Signalling Studies , Schänzlestraβe 18 , Albert - Ludwigs - University Freiburg , 79104 Freiburg , Germany . c . Freiburg Center for Interactive Materials and Bioinspired Technology ( FIT ) , Georges - Köhler - Allee 105 , Albert - Ludwigs - University Freiburg , 79110 Freiburg , Germany d . International Max Planck Research School for Molecular and Cellular Biology , Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics , Stübeweg 51 , 79108 Freiburg , Germany * to whom correspondence should be addressed : roland . thuenauer @ gmail . com and winfried . roemer @ bioss . uni - freiburg . de Electronic Supplementary Material ( ESI ) for RSC Advances . This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018 Page 2 of 5 Fig . S1 : Outline of the manufacturing procedure for the biochip . PDMS structures are shown in different shades of blue . Masters are shown in different shades of grey and consist of silicon wafers and structures made from the photoresists SU - 8 and ma - P 1275 . The glass cover slip is shown in light green . Page 3 of 5 Fig . S2 : Determination of the thicknesses of layers 1 and 2 . ( A ) During production of the chip , fluorescent TetraSpeck beads were incorporated between each layer . This allowed determining the thicknesses of layers 1 and 2 from the image stack recorded by a confocal microscope . A representative x - z section is shown and white lines indicate the layer interfaces . ( B ) Results of the thickness determination as described in ( A ) . For each production cycle 5 chips were analysed , error bars represent standard error mean ( SEM ) . Page 4 of 5 Fig . S3 : Verification of valve functionality . The flow channel was filled with green fluorescent solution and the actuator channel was filled with red fluorescent solution . In ( A ) and ( C ) the valve is open , in ( B ) and ( D ) the valve is closed . ( A ) and ( B ) show x - y sections of overlays of a white light transmission image and fluorescence images . ( C ) and ( D ) show x - y sections ( middle panels ) , x - z sections ( lower panels ) , and y - z sections ( right panels ) of the fluorescence images . Yellow dashed lines indicate the edge of the actuator chamber of the valve . White dashed lines indicate the positions of the x - y sections in the x - z and y - z section images . The scale bars correspond to 20 µm . Page 5 of 5 Fig . S4 : Local stimulation with the Pseudomonas aeruginosa lectin LecB at multiple positions in a chip with two pores per channel . A chip was produced with two pores per channel . In the top right white light ( WL ) transmission image the two magenta arrows point to the positions of the pores . In the fluorescence images yellow circles outline the pores . For the experiment MDCK cells expressing ML - GFP ( green ) were grown as confluent monolayer on the chip and 5 µM of LecB tagged with Cy3 ( LecB - Cy3 ; red ) was introduced to the basolateral channel at 2 min while an image plane on which the cells are attached to the chip was observed with a confocal microscope .