TRONIC M E E T I N G S Y S T E M S T O S U P P O R T GROUP W O R K • Am lmost every time there l u is a genuinely impor - ~ tant decision to be made in an organization , a group is assigned to make it - - or at least to counsel and advise the individual who must make it . " [ 21 , p . 459 ] . No one works completely indepen - dently . Almost everyone is part of at least one group , typically several groups at any point f ~ 1 ~ in time . Groups communicate , share infor - mation , generate ideas , organize ideas , draft policies and procedures , collaborate on the writing of reports , share a vision , build consensus , make decisions , and so on . However , group meetings are often not as effective as they could be [ 42 ] . Meetings may lack a clear focus . Group members may not partici - . ~ pate because ~ ~ they are ap - prehensive about how their ideas will be received or because a few members dom - ' inate discussions . • Hidden agendas ~ may promote political de - cisions that ' ~ ; ! l ~ ~ are not in the best interests of the organization . Meetings may end without a clear understanding or record of what was discussed . Yet in spite of these prob - lems , little computer support is available for meetings - - which is somewhat surprising given the ubi - quitous nature of computer support in modern organizations . A new form of meeting environ - ment , which we term an Electronic Meeting System ( EMS ) , has emerged which strives to make group meetings more productive by apply - ing information technology . EMS technology is designed to directly impact and change the behavior of groups to improve group effec - tiveness , efficiency , and satisfaction . Our definition of a meeting is broad - - including any activity where people come together , whether at the same place at the same time , or in dif - ferent places at dif - J . P . Nunamaker Alan R . Dennis Joseph S . Valacich Douglas R . Vogel Joey r . . George ferent times ( see Figure 1 ) [ 5 , 12 ] . The purpose of this article is to present the research conducted at the University of Arizona in developing and using same - time / same - place and same - time / different - place EMS tech - nology . ' The Arizona research pro - gram includes two types of research defined by Ackoff et al . [ 1 ] . The first type is developmental , which at - tempts to create improved work " ~ methods . The second type is empirical , which attempts II ~ " , , to evaluate and under - stand them . The " ~ initial phase of the research pro - gram focused on the devel - opment of tools and techniques to support groups of • analysts FH01 ' O S . The Collaborative Management Room at the University of Arizona PHOTO | . The Electronic Meeting Room at IBM Decision Support Center , Boulder , Colorado 42 July 1991 / Vol , 3 ' 1 " , No . 7 / COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM and users in the construction of information systems . The second phase began in 1984 with the con - struction of a special - purpose meet - ing room to support the same - time / same - place meetings of these groups . This meeting room and the ones that followed are based on a series of networked microcomputer workstations arranged in a U - shape , around a table , or in tiered legislative style ( see Photo 1 ) . A large - screen video display is pro - vided at the front of the room , from where the meeting leader / facilitator guides the meeting . Other audio - visual support is also available - - typically white boards and overhead projectors [ 5 , 36 , 51 , 53 ] . The realization that this technol - ogy enabled groups to perform many tasks beyond system develop - ment ( e . g . , strategic planning ) , led to the third phase which began in 1986 with the establishment of four major research projects with IBM . The number of EMS facilities at Arizona grew from one in 1985 to the three we have now . Four addi - tional facilities are scheduled to open later this year . Each of these new facilities addresses a different cell in Figure 1 ; one is a large group meeting room , one is a small group meeting room , one supports dis - tributed large groups , and the fourth is a meeting room - to - meet - ing room teleconferencing facility . During this phase , new software was developed ( University of Ari - zona GroupSystems 2 ) and was in - stalled at EMS facilities at more than 22 universities and 12 corpo - IMuch valuable EMS and related research has been conducted elsewhere . However , space limitations preclude us from discussing it , since an attempt to compare findings across different EMSs is appropriate only with a careful consideration of the different func - tions they provide . We encourage readers to examine the contributions made by other de - velopers and empirical researchers ( see [ 5 , 39 ] for reviews of this work ) . ~ GroupSystems evolved from the Plexsys Re - search Program . 3See " Strategy on the Screen , " An Open Uni - versity Videotape , Production Centre , British Broadcasting Corp . , 1991 . rations , such as BellSouth and Greyhound Financial Corporation . IBM has built 36 GroupSystems facilities ( e . g . , see Photo 2 ) , with an additional 20 scheduled to be oper - ational by January 1992 . More than 25 , 000 people have used Group - Systems within IBM ; more than 3 , 000 others from 200 public and private organizations have used the Arizona GroupSystems facilities . Another 2 , 000 have used Group - Systems in more than 20 laboratory experiments and 15 doctoral dis - sertations that have been conducted at Arizona . While GroupSystems supports a variety of different tasks , many groups follow a common sequence of use . The group leader meets with a GroupSystems meeting leader / facilitator , who assists in developing an agenda and selecting the GroupSystems tools to be used . Meetings typically begin with par - ticipants generating ideas ( e . g . , " How can we double our sales over the next four years ? " see Figure 2 ) . As they type their comments , the results are integrated and displayed on the large screens at the front of the room , as well as being available on each workstation . Everyone can see the comments of others , but without knowing who contributed what . Participants can build on each others ' ideas , independent of any positive or negative bias about who contributed them - - ideas are evalu - ated on their own merits , rather than on the basis of who contrib - uted them . These ideas are then organized into a list of key issues ( e . g . , " Stronger ties with custom - ers " ) , which the group can priorit - ize into a short list . Next , the group could generate ideas for action plans to accomplish the important issues , followed by more idea orga - nization and prioritization , and so on . The result of the meeting is typ - ically a large volume of input and ideas , and a group consensus for further action . In many cases , final decisions are not made during the meeting , but are made later by the group leader and / or other partici - pants after considering all the in - formation , knowledge and opinions shared . The EMS meeting can en - able wide participation so that broad input has been obtained , ownership established , and consen - sus developed . For example , Greyhound Finan - cial Corporation has used Group - Systems on several occasions for a variety of tasks , including the de - velopment of a mission statement , strategy formulation , evaluations of senior managers , and information systems ( IS ) planning . 3 One meet - ing was a one - day session to de - velop proposals to create competi - tive advantage , in which 30 managers from all departments used a structured idea generation process ( a variant on the value chain technique ) to develop pro - posals . On post - session question - naires , 88 % of participants re - ported that particular meeting was more effective than previous non - EMS meetings [ 7 ] . Said CEO S . L . Eichenfield : " I found that we ac - complished 100 % of our objectives . People usually reluctant to express themselves felt free to take part , and we were surprised by the num - ber of new ideas expressed . We also reached conclusions far more rap - idly . " The experience of this group is typical of the other groups in our field research . Our laboratory re - search generally supports our find - ings in the field . In this article we shall argue that EMS facilities can improve group work in many situa - tions because it : • enables all participants to work simultaneously ( human parallel processing ) ; * provides an equal opportunity for participation ; * discourages behavior that can negatively impact meeting pro - ductivity ; COMMUNICAYIONS OF THE AOM / July 1991 / Vo1 . 34 , No . 7 43 3 - 7 Member Project Group Team Size 7 - n Member Task Force / J J J Multiple One Multiple Individual Group Group Sites Site Sites Group Proximity Different me Time Time Dispersion FIGURE 1 . EMS Domain Activity Idea Generation How can we double sales over the next five years ? Idea Organization Comments from idea ~ eneration are organized 1 : o a list of key issues Prioritization Which are most important ? ¢ Idea Generation For each of the top 5 - 10 ideas , who can do what to accomplish it ? GroupSysterns Output Tool i Brainstorming 30 - 45 minutes of use . a - II [ ' 15 - 50keyideas [ ~ I , uu . a , ~ 1 wiu , s . p ~ o ~ r ~ E Organlzabon ~ ~ 45 - 90 minutes of use J ~ ' - ~ - L Vote I l l P . o . . z . ~ , , = 0 , [ ~ , 10 . 20 minutes of use [ ~ [ 1200lines of [ ~ Topic I , . . ~ I deliberation on [ ~ Commenter • ~ ~ ~ 3045 minutes of use I ~ IGURE 2 . One Sequence of USe F ' ? " . ' ; I FIGURE 3 . Research MOdel • enables larger group meetings which can effectively bring more information , knowledge , and skills to bear on the task ; • permits the group to choose from a spectrum of structured or un - structured techniques and meth - ods to perform the task ; • offers access to external informa - tion ; and • supports the development of an organizational memory from meeting to meeting . We begin by discussing the theo - retical foundations of Group - Systems . These foundations pro - vide the basis for understanding the design and implementation of both our EMS software and facili - ties . We argue that EMS design is one of four contingencies , along with the group , the task , and the context , that affect the process of group meetings which in turn af - fects meeting outcomes [ 5 ] . We will then focus on the key elements in the design of GroupSystems , and how these elements interact with these contingencies . We examine one example of each type of contin - gency , using the findings from our empirical research to illustrate our arguments . Theoretical Foundations Prior research and theory with non - EMS - supported groups pro - vides a rich starting point for EMS research . However , as information technology has the ability to pro - foundly affect the nature of group work [ 26 ] , it becomes dangerous to generalize the outcomes or conclu - sions from research with non - supported groups to the EMS envi - ronment . 4 A better approach is to examine underlying theory that explains why these events occur and consider how EMS use and various situational characteristics may af - fect the theory to produce different outcomes . 4For example , such commonly accepted con - clusions as larger groups are less satisfied than smaller groups , or that groups generate fewer ideas than the same number of individ - uals working separately ( i . e . , nominal groups [ 13 , 27 , 30 ] have been shown not to hold with EMS - supported groups [ 10 , 11 , 48 , 49 ] ) . July 1991 / VoL34 , No . 7 / COMMUNICATIONS OF THE AC : M Figure 3 presents a high - level view of the research model that has guided our work and has evolved with our research program . We contend that the effects of EMS use are contingent on a myriad of group , task , context and technology factors that differ from situation to situation [ 5 ] . Group characteristics that can affect processes and out - comes include ( but are not limited to ) group size , group proximity , group composition ( peers or hier - archical ) , group cohesiveness , etc . Task characteristics include the ac - tivities required to accomplish the task ( e . g . , idea generation , decision choice ) , task complexity , etc . Con - text characteristics include organi - zational culture , time pressure , evaluative tone ( e . g . , critical or sup - portive ) , reward structure ( e . g . , none versus individual versus group ) , etc . Meeting outcomes ( e . g . , efficiency , effectiveness , satis - faction ) depend upon the interac - tion within the meeting process of these group , task , and context fac - tors with the EMS components the group uses ( e . g . , anonymity ) . Thus , it is inappropriate to say that EMS use " improves group task perfor - mance " or " reduces member satis - faction " ; all statements must be qualified by the situation - - the group , task , context and EMS to which they apply . One approach , then , is to conduct developmental research to build an EMS providing certain components that may im - prove meeting outcomes and em - pirical research to determine what effects these components have in what situations . To understand these interac - tions , we need to examine group processes at a lower level of detail . Certain aspects of the meeting pro - cess improve outcomes ( process gains ) while others impair out - comes ( process losses ) relative to the efforts of the same individuals working by themselves or those of groups that do not experience them [ 22 , 47 ] . Meeting outcomes are con - tingent upon the balance of these process gains and losses [ 3 ] . Situa - tional characteristics ( i . e . , group , task , and context ) establish an ini - tial balance , which the group may alter by using an EMS . There are many different pro - cess gains and losses . Table 1 lists several important process gains and losses , but this list is by no means exhaustive . Each of these gains and losses vary in strength ( or may not exist at all ) depending upon the sit - uation . For example , in a verbal meeting , losses due to air time frag - mentation , the need to partition speaking time among members , depend upon group size [ 13 , 27 , 30 ] . Air time fragmentation is a greater problem for larger groups , as the available time must be ra - tioned among more people . If everyone in a 3 - member group contributed equally in a 60 - minute meeting , each person would speak for 20 minutes , while each member of a 15 - member group would speak for 4 minutes . EMS Effects There are at least four theoretical mechanisms by which the EMS can affect this balance of gains and losses : process support , process structure , task structure , and , task support ( Figure 4 ) . Process support refers to the communication infra - structure ( media , channels , and devices , electronic or otherwise ) that facilitates communication among members [ 12 ] , such as an electronic communication channel or blackboard . Process structure refers to process techniques or rules that direct the pattern , timing or content of this communication [ 12 ] , such as an agenda or process methodology such as Nominal Group Technique ( NGT ) . Task support refers to the information and computation infrastructure for task - related activities [ 5 ] , such as external data bases and pop - up cal - culators . Task structure refers to techniques , rules , or models for analyzing task - related information to gain new insight [ 12 ] , such as those within computer models or Decision Support Systems ( DSS ) . For example , suppose a group was charged with generating a plan to encourage more European tour - ists to visit the U . S . Providing each group member with a computer workstation that enabled him / her to exchange typed comments with other group members would be process support . Having each member take turns to contribute ideas ( i . e . , round - robin ) or agreeing not to criticize the ideas of others would be process structure . Task support could include information on when , where and how many European tourists visited last year , or about tourist programs run by other governments . Task structure could include a framework encour - aging the group to consider each U . S . region ( e . g . , New England , California ) or different types of tourists ( e . g . , tour clients , business - men ) , or an economic model of po - tential impacts . These four mechanisms are the fundamental means by which an EMS such as GroupSystems affects meetings . These mechanisms are not unique to EMS technology . The EMS is simply a convenient means by which to deliver process support , process structure , task support , and task structure . But in many cases , the EMS can provide a unique com - bination that is virtually impossible to provide otherwise . We hypothe - size potential effects for each mech - anism . These effects are those sug - gested most strongly by prior research , and again , this list is nec - . essarily incomplete . As we will dis - cuss , each mechanism can have many separate effects on process gains and losses , some positive , some negative . The combined ef - fects are contingent on strength of the preexisting gains and losses and the strength of the EMS impact on them ( e . g . , if the EMS reduces a weak process loss , we would antici - pate few effects on outcomes ) . For COMMUNICATIONS OF THE AOM / July 1991 / Vo1 . 34 , No . 7 4 ~ " - COOrdination Problems : . / " DlfficuiWil ~ tegrating members ; contributions because the group . ~ " " " ~ does hot havean appropriate strategy which Can lead to dysfunc - - tlonal cycling or ~ inc0mplete discussions resulting in premature decisions [ 21 , 241 . Incomplete Use of Information : Incomplete access to and use of information necessa ~ for suc - cessful task completion [ 24 , 34 ] . Incomplete Task Analysis : Incomplete analysis and understanding of task resulting In super - ficlal discussions [ 24 ] . 4 ~ July 1991 / Vol . 34 , No . 7 / GOMMUNIC & TIONS OF THE ACM simplicity , this discussion treats each mechanism separately ; inter - actions are discussed later . This dis - cussion assumes the group actually uses the mechanisms described ; any mechanism that is provided by the EMS but is not used , obviously has few effects . In our discussion of these four mechanisms , the one that has been central to our re - search , process support , will be emphasized . Task structure assists the group to better understand and analyze task information , and is one of the mechanisms by which DSS improve the performance of individual deci - sion makers . Task structure may improve group performance by reducing losses due to incomplete task analysis or increasing process gains due to synergy , encouraging more information to be shared , promoting more objective evalua - tion or catching errors ( by high - lighting information ) . Methods of providing task structure include problem modeling , multicriteria decision making , etc . While task structure is often numeric in na - ture , it is not necessarily so . For example , Greyhound used a variant of the value chain technique . Many other non - numeric approaches to providing task structure are also available - - e . g . , stakeholder analy - sis [ 32 ] . Task support may reduce process losses due to incomplete use of in - formation and incomplete task analysis , and may promote synergy and the use of more information by providing information and compu - tation to the group ( without provid - ing additional structure ) . For ex - ample , groups may benefit from electronic access to information from previous meetings . While members could make notes of po - tentially useful information prior to the meeting , a more effective ap - proach may be to provide access to the complete sources during the meeting itself . Computation sup - port could include calculators or spreadsheets . Task support is also important at an organizational level . Simon ar - gues that technological support for organizational memory is an essen - tial part of organizational function - ing [ 45 ] . An EMS can assist in building this organizational mem - ory by recording inputs , outputs and results in one repository for easy access for subsequent meet - ings . Although the importance of such an organizational memory has been recognized in system develop - ment ( e . g . , CASE tools ) , it has not yet been widely applied to other organizational activities . Process structure has long been used by non - EMS groups to reduce pro - cess losses , although many re - searchers have reported that groups often do not follow the pro - cess structuring rules properly [ 21 , 27 ] . Process structure may be global to the meeting , such as developing and following a strategy / agenda to perform the task , thereby reducing process losses due to coordination problems . The EMS can also pro - vide process structure internal to a specific activity ( local process struc - ture ) by determining who will talk next ( e . g . , talk queues ) or by auto - mating a formal methodology such as NGT . Different forms of local process structure will affect differ - ent process gains and losses . For example , the first phase of NGT requires individuals to work sepa - rately to reduce production block - ing , free riding , and cognitive iner - tia , while subsequent phases ( idea sharing and voting ) use other tech - niques to affect other process gains and losses . Process structure has been found to improve , impair , and have no effect on group perfor - mance [ cf . 21 , 24 , 42 ] . Its effects depend upon its fit with the situa - tion and thus little can be said in general . Process support can be provided by the EMS in at least three ways : par - allel communication , group mem - ory , and anonymity . With parallel communication , each member has a workstation that is connected to all other workstations , thus providing an electronic channel that enables everyone to communicate simulta - neously and in parallel [ 5 ] . No one need wait for someone else to finish speaking . Process losses from air time fragmentation , attenuation blocking and concentration block - ing should be significantly reduced . Free riding may be reduced as members no longer need to com - pete for air time . Domination may be reduced , as it becomes difficult for one member to preclude others from contributing . Electronic com - munication may also dampen dys - functional socializing [ 54 ] . Parallel communication increases informa - tion overload ( as every member can contribute simultaneously ) . Process gains may be enhanced due to syn - ergy and the use of more informa - tion . Increased interaction may also stimulate individuals and promote learning . The EMS can provide a group memory by recording all electronic comments , which is typically done by many , but not all EMSs [ e . g . , 43 ] . Participants can de - couple them - selves from the group to pause , think , type comments and then re - join the " discussion " without miss - ing anything . This should reduce failure to remember , attention blocking and incomplete use of in - formation , and may promote syn - ergy and more information . A group memory that enables mem - bers to queue and filter informa - tion may reduce information over - load . A group memory is also useful should some members miss all or part of a meeting , or if the group is subjected to interruptions that require temporary suspension of the meeting [ 34 ] , The EMS may also provide other forms of group memory that do not capture all comments . An electronic black - COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM / Ju ] y 1991 / Vol . 34 , No . 7 47 A group memory that enables members to queue and filter information may reduce information overload . Process Gains Synergy L . ~ arning ~ ; hmuL ' J * , i : ~ n More In | ormatlon vloro Prc : ciso 3ommlmicatlon = , lore Objective - v , lluat , on Efhzcts Dc , pend Upon Specific Tuchnsqu¢ , Used I . , , EMS Process Support • Group Memory • Anonymity • Parallel Communication • Media Effects Media Speed Depersonalization Media Richness View Size Task Support Task Structure ill Increases : Process Structure • Global • Local Decreases : , _ _ 3 > Process Losses Attc ; ntlon Blocking F ' ; lllUro to R , , mc : mber Conformance Pr ( : . , - sum Evaluation Approh ~ ; n . clon Free Riding Air Time Fragmentation Atttc ; rlLlatiOrl Blocking Concentration Blocking Socmhzing Domination IntoCmntion Overload F : laming . = ; ] ow ( : r Feedback F ~ wer Information Cues Irlcornph : t ( : Use ot Information Incompk : to Task Analysis Coordination Prohk : ms Effects Del : x ; nd Upon Sp ( : ciflc T ( ; chniqtle LJFed FIGURE 4 . Potential EMS Effects 48 July 1991 / Vol . 34 , No . 7 / ¢OMMUNIOAlrlONS OF THE ACM board , for example , may reduce failure to remember by presenting a summary of key information and reduce dysfunctional socializing by increasing task focus [ 46 ] . The electronic channel may pro - vide some degree of anonymity . Anonymity may reduce the pres - sure to conform and evaluation apprehension , but may also in - crease free riding , as it is more dif - ficult to determine when someone is free riding [ 2 ] . However , when the group meets at the same place and time , the lack of process ano - nymity ( i . e . , members can see who is and is not contributing ) as op - posed to content anonymity ( i . e . , members cannot easily attribute specific comments to individuals ) may reduce free riding [ 50 ] . Ano - nymity may encourage members to challenge others , thereby increas - ing process gains by catching errors and a more objective evaluation . Anonymity may also provide a low - threat environment in which less skilled members can contribute and learn . The use of electronic media may also introduce media effects that reflect inherent differences be - tween verbal and electronic com - munication . These include media speed , media richness , depersonaliza - tion / deindividuation and view size . Media speed refers to the fact that typing comments to send electroni - cally is slower than speaking ( which can reduce the amount of informa - tion available to the group and in - troduce losses ) while reading is generally faster than listening ( gains ) [ 54 ] . Electronic media are less rich than face - to - face verbal communication , as they provide fewer cues and slower feedback ( losses ) , but typically promote more careful and precisely worded com - munication ( gains ) [ 4 ] . Depersonal - ization is the separation of people from comments , which may pro - mote deindividuation , the loss of self - and group - awareness [ 54 ] . This may reduce socializing , and encourage more objective evalua - tion and more error catching - - due to less negative reaction to criticism , and increased group ownership of outcomes - - ( gains ) . But reduced socializing and more uninhibited comments like " flaming , " may re - duce group cohesiveness and satis - faction ( losses ) . Workstations typi - cally provide a small screen view for members ( e . g . , 24 - line screen ) , which can encourage information chunking and reduce information overload ( gains ) . But this can also cause members to lose a global view of the task [ 35 , 36 ] , increasing losses due to incomplete use of in - formation . The University of Arizona GroupSystems EMS Here we summarize the develop - mental research conducted at Ari - zona . We have primarily focused on supporting large groups that meet at the same place and time - - legislative sessions [ 5 , 12 ] - - although recent work has studied small project teams and distributed groups meeting at the same time in different places . This focus arose from our early work with a variety of organizations in which project teams of 10 - 20 members were typi - cally assigned to address key issues . What are the needs of large groups meeting at the same place and time ? Research with non - EMS - supported groups has shown that larger groups have a greater need for process structure [ 42 ] , particu - larly if members do not share the same information [ 21 ] . Large non - EMS - supported meetings are usu - ally less effective and less satisfying than small group meetings [ 42 ] , due to sharp increases in process losses as size increases [ 2 , 47 ] . We concluded that , in general , high levels of global process structure and process support were appro - priate . Task structure and task support also depend on task characteristics . Since the groups with whom we worked often faced strategic issues , we developed several tools provid - ing task structure and support for strategic planning ( e . g . , stakeholder analysis ) , as well as general - purpose tools capable of supporting a vari - ety of task structure and support needs . As strategic tasks are often associated with political and highly competitive groups [ 32 ] , process support components such as ano - nymity became important . GroupSystems Architecture The general design for Group - Systems builds on three basic con - cepts : an EMS meeting room , meet - ing facilitation , and a software toolkit . Although many different meeting room designs have been used , the minimum configuration provides a separate networked , hard disk - based , color graphics microcomputer workstation to each participant , with another one or two workstations serving as the meeting leader / facilitator ' s console . A large - screen video display is pro - vided as an electronic blackboard , with other audio - visual support also available ( e . g . , white boards and overhead projectors ) [ 5 , 36 , 51 , 53 ] . Meeting leader ~ facilitator : The person who chairs the meeting is the leader / facilitator . This person may be the group leader , another group member or , more commonly , a sep - arate , neutral , individual who is not a group member . Using a non - member enables all group members to actively participate , rather than losing one member as the chair . A nonmember can be a specialist in EMS and group work , but may lack the task and group knowledge of a regular member . The meeting leader / facilitator provides four functions . First , this person pro - vides technical support by initiating and terminating specific software tools , and guiding the group through the technical aspects nec - essary to work on the task . This reduces the amount of training re - quired of group members by re - COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM / July 199 ] / Vol . 34 , No , 7 49 GI Ol , lp Inlurlic : tiQtt [ Jlll l ( iiIlll ' iIli = ill I I , : , 1 ' . 1 ( ) r ' l IlIl / II ! : : 11 F S ~ : - ~ ' - - ~ , an ' ] L ~ tanager I J l ) , ' . , " , , H l " " ' ! i ' I ' + , ' - ' . , , , . , ' + + , + I < = , i I ; ' I ' ' : l " " • i ; : + : + , ( ' - ~ . . . , . . , , f , . 1 . ' i , : ( } , ' - ' Ic : , I ( 1 " : , " / , . " " I . . , f , ' i . l , J c ; , , , , , , W , , V : I . : . . . f , . A ' , " , . , . ! . , ljll ; i i | , i 1 . ' - : . , U , , ' , " , v [ : 1 , , , , 1 ' - ' • i - , . , ' , : , ' I - : Enterprise Analyzer Graphical Browser Group Dictionary Brief Case - Access to information - Personal productivity I = IGURIm S . GroupSystems Tools Chauffeured Supported Interactive • One person enters group information • Electronic black - board can provide group memory • Verbal communication predominates • All group members can enter comments • Electronic black - board can provide group memory • Both verbal and electronic communication • All group members can enter comments • All comments in group memory accessible via workstations • Electronic communication predominates FIGURE 6 . Electronic Meeting Processes moving one level of system com - plexity . In some cases , technical support is provided by an addi - tional technical facilitator . Second , the meeting leader / facil - itator chairs the meeting , maintains the agenda and assesses the need for agenda changes . The meeting leader / facilitator may or may not take an active role in the meeting to improve group interaction by , for example , providing process struc - ture in coordinating verbal discus - sion . This person also administers the group ' s knowledge . In EMSs designed without support for meet - ing leaders / facilitators , any member may change or delete the group memory . When disagreements occur , members ' competition for control can become dysfunctional ( e . g . , " Scroll Wars " [ 46 ] ) . While this is manageable for small collabora - tive groups , it is much less so for larger groups with diverse mem - bership , where competitive political motives and vested interests exist . With GroupSystems , members can view the group memory and add to it at their own workstation , but in general only the meeting leader / facilitator can modify and delete public information . Third , the meeting leader / facili - tator assists in agenda planning , by working with the group and / or group leader to highlight the prin - cipal meeting objectives and de - velop an agenda to accomplish them . Specific GroupSystems tools are then mapped to each activity . Finally , in on - going organizational settings where meeting leaders / facilitators are not group members , they provide organizational conti - nuity by setting standards for use , developing training materials , maintaining the system , and acting as champion / sponsors , which is key to successful technology transfer [ 31 ] . The roles of the meeting leader / facilitator may also change over time . For example , after a group has some experience using EMS , the need for technical sup - port and agenda planning advice may decrease . SO July 1991 / Vol , 34 , No . 7 / COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM Software toolkit : Many first - genera - tion EMSs were task - driven , as de - fined by Huber [ 25 ] , in that they were designed to support one sin - gle group task . Second - generation EMSs , such as GroupSystems , pro - vide a software toolkit , similar to a DSS model base , which is a collec - tion of generic tools for various group activities such as idea genera - tion and voting rather than being one indivisible system to support the entire task like strategic plan - ning . Such EMSs are activity driven . The key advantage provided by a toolkit is flexibility . Each tool pro - vides a different approach to sup - port a particular activity , thus the EMS can provide various combina - tions and styles of process struc - ture , process support , task struc - ture and task support during any one meeting . Groups use many approaches and often do not pro - ceed in a straightforward manner [ 40 ] . The tools can easily be mixed and matched and combined with non - EMS activities in whatever order the group believes is most effective . This philosophy also en - ables new tools to be easily added to the toolkit and existing tools to be customized to specific needs . While flexibility is important , it is also important to restrict the num - ber and type of functions available to participants [ 44 ] . Restrictiveness provides a more powerful interven - tion , increasing the liklihood that groups will use the EMS as in - tended by its designers ; this has proved a problem with non - computerized techniques [ 21 , 27 ] . Restrictiveness promotes the use of more effective techniques and pre - vents less effective ones , fosters learning , promotes consistency , and provides coordination to en - sure that all group members are using the same tool at the same time . But it can also constrain crea - tivity and exploration , limit the applicability of a system , promote user dissatisfaction , and be seen as manipulative , resulting in non - use of the system . GroupSystems balances these is - sues by being both highly flexible and highly restrictive . The system is flexible in that a wide variety of tools are available , but each tool is locally restrictive so that users can perform only certain functions . The selection of which tools will be used for a specific meeting is done during a pre - meeting planning meeting . During the meeting itself , the system is restrictive , so that members use only those tools deter - mined to be the most appropriate during pre - planning . While agen - das sometimes change , it is the group leader or the group as a whole who makes changes , not in - dividual members . Development of GroupSystems tools has not followed either the Software Development Life Cycle model or the rapid prototyping model , although we do believe in prototyping as a means to deter - mine requirements . GroupSystems tools have typically been " grown . " The basic concept for a tool typi - cally comes from prior group the - ory and research ( e . g . , NGT ) , from a specific task domain ( e . g . , stake - holder analysis [ 32 ] ) or from our own experiences . The concept is first developed and tested within our research group , before being refined into an initial production version . This initial version is inten - tionally not a complete version of the tool , as it is difficult to deter - mine exactly what functions are needed until the tool is actually used by groups . As the tool begins to be used , new functions are iden - tified , and the capabilities of the tool grow . Significant changes are not unusual in the first few months after tools are added . The GroupSystems toolkit pro - vides tools in five areas : 1 . session planning and manage - ment ; 2 . group interaction ; 3 . organizational memory ; 4 . individual work ; and 5 . research data collection . Tools in the first three areas are discussed in Figure 5 . Those in the latter two areas are not , because they are not central to our theme of improving group performance . Tools for Session Planning and Management The GroupSystems tool to support this activity , Session Manager ( SM ) , has three components : pre - session planning , in - session management , and post - session organization . SM supports pre - session planning by providing an electronic question - naire to ensure that important planning information is not over - looked , and an agenda tool to assist in agenda development . An expert system to assist this stage is cur - rently under development . SM pro - vides in - meeting management via the control menu ; all tools are ini - tialized , started , and ended via SM . SM also provides a task assignment tool to record information about the tasks assigned to specific indi - viduals . Members are provided read - only access to this list but only the facilitator is allowed to add to or modify its contents . Post - session organization involves the logical organization and physical storage of the session outputs as part of the organizational memory . Various components can be indexed and stored , task assignment reports generated and distributed , and paper printouts copied and distrib - uted to better integrate information between this session and subse - quent sessions . TOOLS for Group Interaction The purpose of these tools is to provide process structure , process support , task structure and task support for group interaction . While there are many possible com - binations of the process support functions ( i . e . , parallel communica - tion , group memory , anonymity ) , GroupSystems provides three dis - COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM / July 1991 / Vo1 . 34 , No . 7 51 II I As the tool begins to be used , new functions are identified and the capabilities of the tool grows . Significant changes are not unusual in the first few months after tools are added . TABLE 2 Group Interaction Tools ACtivities Process Process Task Task Supported Support Structure Support Structure Electronic Brainstorming 1 , 2 • • ID © Electronic Discussion * 1 , 2 , 3 • © to • ( ~ © Topic Commenter 1 • © ID • Group Outliner 1 , 2 ~ © qD • Idea Organizer 2 , 1 Ib ID • ( ~ Issue Analyzer 2 Ib • • • Group Writer 2 , 1 • © qD © Vote Selection 3 • • • • Alternative Evaluator 3 • © tD • Group Questionnaire 3 • • ID • Group Matrix 3 ID © ID • Stakeholder Identification 4 il ~ • ID • Policy Formation 4 ID • tl ~ • Activities Supported : 1 . Exploration and Idea Generation 2 . Idea Organization 3 . Prioritizing 4 . Policy Development and Evaluation * EDS is used for laboratory research only Process & Task Support & Structure O Low ID Medium • High 52 July 1991 / Vo1 , 34 , No . 7 / COMMUNiCATiONS OF THE ACM tinct styles of process support which blend these functions with different amounts of electronic and verbal interaction : a chauffeured style , a supported style and an interactive style . These styles can be combined with each other and with non - EMS verbal discussion at different stages of any one meeting . We first de - scribe these three styles ( see Figure 6 ) and then consider the process gains and losses that each affects . With a chauffeured style , only one person uses the EMS , either a group member or the meeting leader / facilitator . A workstation is connected to a public display screen , providing an electronic ver - sion of the traditional blackboard . The group verbally discusses the issues , with the electronic black - board used as a group memory to record and structure information . A supported style is similar to a chauffeured style , but differs in that each member has a computer workstation that provides a parallel , anonymous electronic communica - tion channel with a group memory . The meeting proceeds using a mix - ture of verbal and electronic inter - action . The electronic blackboard is still used to present and structure information , but with each member able to add items . With an interac - tive style , the parallel , anonymous electronic communication channel with a group memory is used for almost all group communication . Virtually no one speaks . While an electronic blackboard may be pro - vided , the group memory is typi - cally too large to fit on a screen , and thus it is maintained so that all members can access it electronically at their workstations . The interactive style is the strongest intervention ( but not nec - essarily " the best " ) as it provides parallel communication , group memory and anonymity to reduce process losses due to air time frag - mentation , attenuation blocking , concentration blocking , attention blocking , failure to remember , so - cializing , domination , interrup - tions , evaluation apprehension and conformance pressure . Informa - tion overload may increase , and free riding may be reduced or in - creased . Process gains may be in - creased due to more information , synergy , catching errors , stimula - tion and learning . Media effects increase and decrease process gains and losses as noted previously . The weakest intervention is the chauffeured style ( but not necessar - ily " the worst " ) , for which the EMS does not provide a new communi - cation channel , but rather ad - dresses failure to remember by pro - viding focus through a common group memory displayed on the electronic blackboard . An increased task focus promoted by this style may also reduce socializing . Few other process gains or losses are affected . Between these styles is the sup - ported style . When verbal interac - tion is used , the effects are similar to a chauffeured style ; when elec - tronic interaction is used , the ef - fects are similar to an interactive style . But there are several impor - tant differences . First , while ano - nymity is possible with electronic communication , its effects on eval - uation apprehension and conform - ance pressure are substantially re - duced with the supported style because non - anonymous verbal communication occurs . Second , at - tention blocking ( and possibly fail - ure to remember and information overload ) will be increased beyond that of a traditional meeting ( or an interactive style ) as members must simultaneously monitor and use both verbal and electronic commu - nication channels . Third , process losses due to media speed , media richness and depersonalization will probably be less than with the inter - active style , as members can switch media as needed ( e . g . , if media richness proves a problem when using the electronic channel , mem - bers can switch to verbal interac - tion ) . Each GroupSystems tool was ini - tially designed to use one of these meeting styles to support one spe - cific type of group activity . There are many useful ways of classifying group activities [ 42 ] . We use four categories . The first , exploration and idea generation , involves the development and exploration of issues relevant to the task . The sec - ond category , idea organization , involves the synthesizing , structur - ing , and organizing of ideas into specific alternatives which may fol - low the generation of ideas ; if a group has previously discussed an issue , a meeting may begin with idea organization without idea gen - eration . Tools in the third category , prioritizing , support the individual members in evaluating alternatives . The final category contains tools that provide formal methodologies to support policy development and evaluation , such as stakeholder analysis . The tools may be used in whatever order the group chooses ; there is no mandatory order , al - though many tasks follow a natural order of idea generation , idea syn - thesis , prioritizing , and exploration of important issues . Table 2 summarizes the activities and process support , process struc - ture , task support , and task struc - ture of each group interaction tool . The levels of process support ( low , medium , high ) correspond to the three meeting styles ( chauffeured , supported , interactive ) respectively . While most tools can be used in chauffeured mode or in different ways according to the direction of the meeting leader / facilitator , they are described as they are normally used at Arizona . All tools provide at least a medium level of task support due to BriefCase , a memory resi - dent organizational memory tool . For more information , see [ 7 , 51 ] . Exploration and idea generation : The objective of these tools is to assist the group in exploring issues and generating ideas and alternatives . t rk GOMMUNIGATIONS OF THE ACM / July 1991 / Vol . 34 , No . 7 S 3 Electronic Brainstorming ( EBS ) provides an interactive style in which participants enter comments into marly separate discussions con - tained in separate files that are ran - domly shared throughout the group . The high degree of process structure from this random sharing of many discussions attempts to reduce cognitive inertia by preclud - ing the group from focusing on one approach . Process support and structure are thus high , while task structure is low . Electronic Discus - sion Sy , ; tem ( EDS ) was developed for laboratory research to support exploral ; ion and idea generation , idea organization and voting . Its support for exploration and idea generation works in a manner simi - lar to EBS , except that it can also be configured to provide low process structure . All comments can be placed in one central file accessible by all participants at all times , thus providing only one discussion . Topic C , ommenter ( TC ) , which uses an interactive style ( high process support ) , provides a high level of task structure ; comments are col - lected from participants using a task - specific framework . TC oper - ates like a set of index cards , with each card having a name . Partici - pants select a card , enter com - ments , and read comments entered by others . Group Outliner works similarly to TC , but enables the group to develop the set of cards ( which may be hierarchically struc - tured ) using a supported style and then discuss them with an interac - tive style . Idea organization : The purpose of idea organization is to identify , syn - thesize , formulate and consolidate ideas , proposals or alternatives - - that is , to build a task structure for ideas . Idea Organizer ( IO ) provides a supported style , while Issue Ana - lyzer ( IA ) provides a more struc - tured l : wo - phase approach that first identifies ( via an interactive style ) and then consolidates ( i . e . , achieves consensus on ) ideas ( via a chauf - feurecl style ) . With both tools , each participant works separately to cre - ate a private list of ideas which are submitted to the group . Comments from a previous idea generation activity may be available as task sup - port and may be easily included . As the list grows , the meeting leader / facilitator assists the group in com - bining similar ideas to move to con - sensus . Group Writer is a multi - user word processor that enables a group to jointly write and organize documents . Most group interaction is electronic , but verbal communi - cation is used to coordinate mem - bers ' activities ( e . g . , who works on what ) . Prioritizing . " There are a variety of prioritizing methods available in Vote Selection ( e . g . , yes / no , multi - ple choice , 10 - point scale rating or ranking in order ) , which employ an interactive style to collect votes , fol - lowed by a chauffeured style to dis - cuss the results . Alternative Evalua - tor ( AE ) is a multicriteria decision - making tool that uses a similar in - teractive / chauffeured set of styles . With AE , the group rates each al - ternative on a 1 - 10 scale for each criterion . Criteria can be consid - ered equally important , or can be assigned different weights . With Group Questionnaire each partici - pant completes an electronic ques - tionnaire , which may branch to dif - ferent questions based on user responses . Group Matrix is a con - sensus - building tool that enables participants to dynamically enter and change numeric ( or text ) rat - ings in a two - dimensional matrix . Typically groups initially enter rat - ings with an alternative style . These ratings are then discussed and re - vised using a supported style . Policy development and evaluation : Tools in this category implement formal methodologies to support policy development and evaluation . Stakeholder Identification and As - sumption Surfacing ( SIAS ) , based on the strategic assumption surfac - ing and testing techniques devel - oped by Mason Mitroff [ 32 ] , is used to assess the potential impact of a plan or policy by identifying those individuals and organizations that affect ( or are affected by ) the plan ( i . e . , the " stakeholders " ) . SIAS pro - vides a highly structured supported style , in which participants first identify stakeholders and then their assumptions , before rating assump - tions for importance to the stake - holder and importance to the plan . Policy Formation ( PF ) provides a structured multi - phase supported style for reaching agreement in the exact wording of a policy statement . Each participant independently drafts one version of the policy , which is sent to the public screen at the front of the room . Each of the drafts is discussed verbally , and then the policy is sent out to be re - drafted again by each participant . TOOLS for Organizational Memory The primary purpose of the orga - nizational memory tools is to pro - vide task structure and task sup - port . Thus far , many EMSs have supported meetings as indepen - dent , autonomous events . Group - Systems views the meeting as one part of a larger whole . While im - proving meeting outcomes is im - portant , it is also important to cap - ture the additions to organizational memory and to provide access to them in subsequent meeting ( s ) . The organizational memory tools provide this organizational mem - ory . Some of the files it contains are knowledge bases in the artificial in - telligence sense ( e . g . , semantic nets ) while others are text files or data - bases . Briefcase ( BC ) , mentioned ear - lier , is a memory resident tool that provides immediate read - only ac - cess to any text file in the organiza - tional memory at any point during the session . The user simply presses the appropriate keys and is pre - sented with a menu describing each text file . BC also provides a calcula - tor , notepad and calendar . Enter - prise Analyzer ( EA ) facilitates the structuring and analysis of group information in a semantic net using a variety of user - defined modeling techniques ( e . g . , IBM ' s Business System Planning ( BSP ) , Porter ' s 54 July 1991 / Vol . 34 , NO . 7 / COMMUNICATIONS OF TIlE ACM Value Chain ) . Information can be viewed in tabular form , or in graphical form with the Semantic Graphics Browser ( SGB ) . SGB en - ables the user to move through the organizational memory and " zoom - in " on specific areas to view details , " zoom - out " to obtain a high - level view , or " explode " a view to display detail information under a node . Group Dictionary enables the group to develop and store formal definitions for use in current or subsequent meetings . EMS in Practice : Lessons From Using GroupSystems Our research strategy has been to build on theoretical foundations from prior research to develop EMS environments which are tested via empirical research . Our empirical research has included both laboratory experiments [ e . g . , 3 , 10 , I 1 , 14 , 15 , 18 , 19 , 28 , 29 , 48 , 49 , 50 , 51 , 55 ] and field research [ e . g . , 6 , 7 , 9 , 20 , 35 , 36 , 37 , 51 , 52 ] , as we believe that both are impor - tant in understanding the impacts of EMS , and in developing the EMS components appropriate for vari - ous tasks , groups and organiza - tions . While most studies have found EMS use to improve effec - tiveness , efficiency and satisfaction , they have also found different ef - fects in different situations . Per - haps the most important conclusion is therefore that even within the same EMS , effects depend on the group , the task , the context , and the EMS components used . This should not be surprising ; Figure 4 suggests that the effects depend on interactions among more than three dozen constructs in the meet - ing process . We believe it will be difficult to find universal truths . In the mean - time , we believe it is important to develop contingency theories to identify the best fit between specific EMS components and the specific group , task , and context character - istics . Isolating the individual ef - fects of specific situational charac - teristics and EMS components is difficult , as most studies have ex - amined the combined effects of many factors simultaneously . In this section , we return to the con - tingency model in Figure 3 , which hypothesizes that processes and outcomes depend upon the interac - tion of four sets of characteristics : context , group , task and EMS . There are dozens of potentially important contingencies . We con - sider only five : one from the set of EMS characteristics ( anonymity ) , two from group characteristics ( size and proximity ) , one from the con - text ( evaluative tone ) and one from task ( task activities ) . For each , we present theoretical arguments and empirical evidence that lead us to hypothesize certain effects . In each case , however , more research is warranted . Anonymity Anonymity is possible in interactive styles and in the electronic compo - nent of supported styles , but not with the verbal component of sup - ported and chauffeured styles . Anonymity can affect EMS use by reducing or eliminating evaluation apprehension and conformance pressure , as well as social cues . The reduction of evaluation apprehen - sion and conformance pressure may encourage a more open , hon - est and free - wheeling discussion of key issues . However , the reduction of social cues can lead individuals to behave in ways that are outside of the realms of socially prescribed behavior . Some evidence of the de - individuation associated with the reduction of social cues has been found in some forms of computer - mediated communication , the most extreme form of which is " flaming " [ cf . 43 ] . Changes in evaluation apprehen - sion , conformance pressure and social cues brought about through anonymous communication should have some effect on the meeting process , which should in turn affect the meeting ' s outcomes . The relax - ation of social cues in anonymous EMS groups has been found in varying degrees in five laboratory experiments conducted at the Uni - versity of Arizona . Groups using anonymous EMS have been found to generate more critical comments than groups using EMS where the author of each comment was identi - fied [ 3 , 28 , 50 ] . Jessup and Tansik [ 29 ] also found that anonymous , non - proximate groups generated the most critical comments . How - ever , only one of five experiments found anonymous groups to have increased performance compared to non - anonymous groups [ 3 ] ; there were no performance differ - ences in the other studies [ 19 , 28 , 29 , 50 ] . Participants in field studies have usually reported that anonymity was important , particularly in cases where there were power and status differences in the group ( e . g . , more than two management levels pres - ent ) [ 6 , 9 , 35 , 36 ] . We infer that stu - dent groups in the laboratory have lower evaluation apprehension and conformance pressure , and thus while anonymity may reduce these process losses , there are fewer no - ticeable effects on outcomes . In sit - uations where evaluation appre - hension and conformance pressure are high , anonymity appears to have a more significant impact on meeting outcomes . In all of the laboratory studies referenced here , anonymity was treated as a discrete variable , i . e . , communication was either anony - mous or it was not . However , the Valacich , Dennis , and Nunamaker [ 50 ] study suggests that anonymity may be better thought of as a con - tinuous variable - - it may be more appropriate to think of degrees of anonymity . In this study , there were two independent variables , anonymity and group size . The small anonymous groups in this study were more critical than small COMMUNIGATIONS OF THE ACM / ~ uly 1991 / Voi . 34 , No . 7 S ~ identified groups , but there were no differences in the level of criti - calness among small and large anonymous groups and large iden - tified groups . Because the groups were composed of so many mem - bers , there was already a degree of anonymity built into the structure of the group . This was not the case in the , ; maller groups , where the relative intimacy of the group rein - forced existing social cues . fast with group size ( see Figure 7 ) . A supported style introduces more fixed process losses initially ( e . g . , media speed ) , but reduces the rate at which losses increase with group size . An interactive style addresses most losses ( and thus they should increase very slowly with size ) but introduces more fixed losses ini - tially . Thus we hypothesize that in - teractive styles will be preferred for larger groups , and supported or By Meeting Style Interactive Supported Chauffeured Non - EMS Small Group Size Large FIGURE 1 . Gains and Losses Group Size In general without EMS , process losses ilncrease rapidly with group size [ 47 ] . Previous non - EMS re - search has concluded that in gen - eral , regardless of the task , context or group , the " optimar ' group size is quite small , typically 3 - 5 mem - bers [ 42 ] , because process losses quickly overtake any process gains from increased group size . Our EMS research draws a different conclusion : the optimal group size depends upon the situation ( group , task , context , EMS ) , and in some cases may be quite large . In theory , each of the three EMS styles ( chauffeured , supported , in - teractive ) can reduce or increase process losses in varying degrees . A chauffeured style reduces a few process losses . Thus compared to traditbnal non - EMS meetings , pro - cess losses do not increase quite as chauffeured styles for smaller groups . There is some empirical evidence to support these hypotheses . One measure of process losses is partici - pation , as it is directly affected by air time fragmentation , production blocking , free riding , etc . A labora - tory experiment with small groups found that participation was the same between groups using a chauffeured style and non - supported groups [ 14 ] , suggesting few differences between the two styles . Another experiment found participation to be more equal in groups using an interactive style than in non - supported groups , sug - gesting differences between the two [ 19 ] . Experiments studying interac - tive styles have found per - person participation levels to remain con - stant regardless of the size of the group [ 10 , 48 , 50 ] , suggesting that process losses may remain relatively constant as size increases . Other experiments have found outcome measures such as effectiveness and member satisfaction to increase with size for interactive styles [ 10 , 11 , 49 ] . Another laboratory experi - ment built , tested and confirmed a model of group performance which proposed process losses from inter - active styles to be relatively constant across group size [ 49 ] . Our field studies also provide some support for these hypotheses . Participants in studies with larger groups ( i . e . , 12 - 20 group members ) have re - ported that interactive styles were more important than supported styles [ 37 ] . Task ACtivitieS The type of activities that must be performed to accomplish the task ( e . g . , idea generation ) [ 42 ] has a significant impact on the balance of gains and losses . One primary goal of most group activities is the ex - change of information among members [ 12 ] , and thus the form of this information will have signifi - cant effects . Zack and McKenney [ 56 ] contrast three general states of information [ also see 4 ] . Ambiguity exists when there is both a lack of information and a lack of a frame - work for interpreting that informa - tion . Uncertainty exists when a framework exists , but there is a lack of information . Equivocality exists when there are multiple ( and possi - bly conflicting ) interpretations for the information or the framework . Equivocality requires negotiation among group members to converge to consensus on one interpretation , and media providing information richness are preferred [ 4 ] . In con - trast , ambiguity and uncertainty require someone in the group ( or the group as a whole ) to provide , locate , or create the needed infor - mation or framework components . Thus the degree of media richness is unimportant ; the ability of the group to rapidly gather informa - tion and framework components becomes paramount , especially if members of the group have differ - S6 July 1991 / % 1 . ' 14 , No . 7 / COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM ent information , perceptions , and viewpoints . Exploration and idea generation is more often a problem of ambigu - ity or uncertainty than of equivocal - ity . It is a divergent activity , as members work individually to re - port information , propose elements of the framework , and respond to the comments of others . Prioritiz - ing is also a divergent activity , as members work individually . In con - trast , synthesizing and organizing ideas , building consensus on a framework , or interpreting the meaning of vote to achieve consen - sus are primarily problems of equivocality , as the group focuses on the same issues at the same time to resolve different viewpoints to converge on one interpretation . Therefore , for divergent activi - ties that are problems of uncer - tainty , such as idea generation , we hypothesize that an interactive style is more appropriate as its parallel - ism and anonymity facilitate rapid development of ideas . For conver - gent tasks that are problems of equivocality ( such as synthesis and consensus building ) , process losses from reduced media richness in the interactive style increase dramati - cally . In this case , the relatively hor - izontal line for the interactive style in Figure 7 would move beyond the lines for supported and / or chauf - feured styles for most group sizes , making them more appropriate . Our laboratory and field re - search provide weak support for this hypothesis . A laboratory exper - iment of idea generation - - a task of uncertainty - - found groups using an interactive style to generate more ideas and be more satisfied than verbally interacting groups [ 18 ] . A similar study using Group - Systems at Indiana University had similar findings [ 16 ] . Experiments using purely interactive style for generating and choosing tasks ( tasks which begin with ambiguity but evolve into equivocality ) have found no performance or satisfac - tion differences compared to ver - bally interacting groups [ 19 , 55 ] . The EMS groups in one of these studies also required longer to reach consensus [ 19 ] . Groups in our field studies have typically used interactive styles to generate ideas , options , and analysis framework components , but used supported or chauffeured style to resolve equivo - cality . Group Member Proximity In our definition of an EMS [ 5 ] , we note that groups may be distributed with respect to both space and time , although the majority of our re - search to date has focused on groups interacting in a single room at the same time . Other researchers have also argued that advanced computer - assisted communication and decision technologies , such as an EMS , can be important for project - oriented work groups and temporary task forces that may be distributed geographically and temporally throughout an organi - zation [ e . g . , 26 ] . From a theoretical perspective , group process and performance for distributed groups may be substan - tially different from proximate groups . Social facilitation research has shown that the presence of oth - ers can improve a person ' s perfor - mance for easy tasks and hinder performance for more difficult tasks [ 57 ] . Remoteness may also foster increased anonymity , and increased anonymity may have sev - eral effects on the group , ranging from reduced apprehension to in - creased social loafing and deindi - viduated behavior as noted previ - ously . Further , several small group researchers have found that close group proximity may foster liking and fondness among group mem - bers [ 57 ] , and in EMS environ - ments , proximate groups have been as satisfied [ 48 ] or more satisfied than distributed groups [ 29 ] . Our initial research in this area has built on our growing body of idea generation research ( i . e . , a problem of uncertainty not equivo - cality ) , where groups communicate only through electronic communi - cation . One laboratory experiment found no difference in the number of ideas generated between proxi - mate and distributed groups , but found proximate groups to be more satisfied [ 29 ] . A second study using a similar research design found distributed groups to gener - ate more ideas than proximate groups , with no satisfaction differ - ences [ 48 ] . During these experiments , prox - imate groups were interrupted more often by disruptive move - ments or by laughter prompted by a humorous electronic comment . Social facilitation research suggests that such reaction will generally be stronger when a person is proxi - mate to other group members than when working alone in a distrib - uted group [ 57 ] . Thus , we believe that the primary explanation for these performance effects in the laboratory was that distributed groups remained more task - focused than proximate groups . However , the effects of the prox - imity manipulation may have been different if this research had been conducted in the field . Our groups worked without outside interrup - tions . Yet , there are many potential interruptions for group members working alone in the privacy of their offices by events that cannot be helped ( e . g . , a call from the boss ) or by purposely working on other tasks . As a result , distributed groups in the field may , or may not , be more task focused than groups working together in the same room , and thus may find different effects . Evaluative Tone Several researchers have advocated a supportive , non - judgmental at - mosphere as a means to enhance group productivity by lowering evaluation apprehension and en - couraging " freewheeling " stimula - tion . The withholding of criticism is COMMUNICATIONSOFTHEACM / July 1991 / Vol . 34 , No . 7 57 a cornerstone of many idea genera - tion techniques [ 38 ] . However , other researchers have proposed that group productivity may be stimulated by a more critical atmo - sphere where structured conflict ( e . g . , dialectical inquiry or devil ' s advocacy ) is used to stimulate group members [ e . g . , 41 ] . In any event , there are two very distinct , W e are convinced that • the use of EMS technology cain improve group processes and outcomes in many cases . . . and opposing , positions related to this construct . Connolly , Jessup and Valacich [ 3 ] used a laboratory experiment which crossed anonymity ( anony - mous or identified groups ) with the meeting tone ( supportive or critical as manipulated by a confederate ) to test whether the effects of evalua - tive tone were moderated by ano - nymity . Not surprisingly , anony - mous groups and critical groups made more critical remarks than groups that were identified or sup - portive . Groups working anony - mously and with a critical tone pro - duced the greatest number of ideas of the highest quality . However , groups in supportive and identified conditions were typically more sat - isfied than groups in critical and anonymous conditions . This sug - gests that the combination of a criti - cal tone and anonymity may im - prove idea generation , but also may lower satisfaction . Observations from our field studies provide some insight into possible reasons for these effects . The anonymity may have encour - aged group members to detach themselves from their ideas , allow - ing them to view criticism as a signal to suggest another idea : " I noticed that if someone crit - icized an idea of mine , [ didn ' t get emotional about it . I guess when you are face - to - face and everyone hears the boss say ' You are wrong ' it ' s a slap to you , not necessarily the idea . . . . [ Here ] no one knows whose idea it is , so why be insulted ? No one is picking on me . I think I ' ll just see why they don ' t agree with me . " ( manager , Hughes Aircraft ) . This runs counter to the typical knee - jerk reaction that might occur in a traditional verbal meeting where a critical comment may be seen as directed at the contributor , not the idea ( e . g . , " I wasn ' t as un - comfortable when I saw someone being critical of someone else ' s idea , because I thought ' nobody ' s being embarrassed here at all . ' " manager , Hughes Aircraft ) . Conclusion The Arizona EMS research pro - gram using the GroupSystems Con - cept has included both develop - mental and empirical research . Our developmental research has pro - duced more than two dozen soft - ware tools currently in use at more than 70 EMS facilities worldwide . Our empirical research has studied EMS use in the laboratory and in the fiekl by more than 30 , 000 indi - viduals from more than 200 organi - zations . In this article , we have dis - cussed several key aspects in the theoretical foundation of EMS , have illustrated how these aspects are reflected in the Arizona facility and software designs , and have highlighted the contingent nature of EMS effects . Nonetheless , much more research is needed to develop new group work methods embod - ied in facilities and software , and to empirically test the many contin - gencies involved in their use . While still recognizing the need for future research , we are con - vinced that the use of EMS technol - ogy can significantly improve group processes and outcomes in many cases - - but effects are contin - gent on the situation . For example , we would expect fewer benefits from EMS use for small cohesive groups in supportive contexts , as they face fewer process losses . Based on the theoretical founda - tion of process gains and losses , and our observations of EMS use in the field and the laboratory , we believe that EMS use may provide benefits because : • Parallel communication pro - motes broader input into the meeting process and reduces the chance that a few people domi - nate the meeting ; • Anonymity mitigates evaluation apprehension and conformance pressure , so that issues are dis - cussed more candidly ; • Group memory enables members to pause and reflect on informa - tion and opinions of others dur - ing the meeting and serves as a permanent record of what oc - curred ; • Process structure helps focus the group on key issues and discour - ages irrelevant digressions and unproductive behaviors ; and • Task support and structure pro - vides information and ap - proaches to analyze it . We have drawn four general conclusions about conducting EMS developmental and empirical re - search . First , the effects of EMS use are contingent upon the situation . Thus we believe that it is critical to ~ July 1991 / Vol . 34 , No , 7 / COMMUNICATIONS OF THE AOM clearly document specifics about the group , task , context , and EMS in all research . Who were the group members and were they a cohesive team , strangers , or competitors ? Exactly what did the task entail ? Were group members motivated ? What did the EMS provide at what points , and exactly how did the group use them ? Without such de - tail , the contribution of a study can - not be clearly interpreted or ex - tended . Second , the results of any one study will not apply to all group work , so it is important to explicitly consider the bounds to which the findings can be generalized . Do they apply to large or small groups , chauffeured , supported or interac - tive styles , choice or idea generation activities , etc . ? We agree with Huber [ 26 ] that even apparently subtle differences may have signifi - cant impacts . For example , in the - ory , slower system response time should increase process losses due to attenuation and concentration blocking ; one experiment found groups using EBS with a few sec - onds slower response time to gen - erate significantly fewer ideas than those using the standard version [ 17 ] . Only by carefully defining the scope of a study and interpreting the results within it can we extend our understanding of EMS effects . Third , much EMS research to date has addressed the " what " of EMS technology ; researchers have compared EMS and non - EMS groups to determine if there are differences between the two , which is typical of initial research into new technologies . From this research , we know that EMS and non - EMS meetings are different , but cannot completely explain why . While there is still a place for such research , we believe that it is now more impor - tant to understand why EMS en - courages different effects in differ - ent situations . The research question becomes " does this factor explain why EMS use produces these results in this situation ? " rather than " is there a difference ? " To understand the " why , " it is nec - essary to compare situations that differ only in the one or two factors of interest . As EMS and non - EMS groups can differ in so many ways ( e . g . , production blocking , media richness ) , this research will typically not involve a comparison between EMS and non - EMS groups , as there are too many potential differences to draw conclusions . Field research presenting qualitative investiga - tions of EMS effects on group pro - cess in different meeting situations and over the long term will also become important . Our future empirical research will continue to develop contingency models to iso - late and explain why certain EMS features ( i . e . , types of process sup - port , process structure , task sup - port and task structure ) are of value for certain groups , tasks and con - texts . Finally , we believe that in devel - oping new EMS tools , it is impor - tant to strive to understand what EMS components are useful in what situations . A focus on these four mechanisms may help clarify the needs of specific situations . It will become increasingly important for developmental researchers to work closely with empirical re - searchers to best fit the components offered by different configurations of EMS technology to user needs . In the early years of EMS , there was little empirical research to guide developers . Developers built EMS environments , gave them to users to see what happened , and then redesigned them in an iterative cycle of design - test - redesign . Today , there is a growing base of empirical research , and while itera - tive development remains impor - tant , developers building on this empirical foundation can provide more successful initial environ - ments requiring less redesign . The study of EMS is still in its infancy . It is reminiscent of the early days of the automotive indus - try when a motor was put into a car - riage giving the world a horseless carriage . We are now in the horse - less carriage phase of EMS , having installed computers into existing manual processes . We need to learn how best to support groups and group meeting processes , to build on these experiences to create sys - tems that take better advantage of the abilities of technology and of groups . We may discover that many current EMS components ( e . g . , a facilitator ) are the buggy whips of this horseless carriage phase . We are only beginning to discover what functions are robust and valuable , from which will emerge the next generation of EMS . Nonetheless , based upon research and experi - ences to date , we are convinced that this technology is fundamentally changing the nature of group work . Acknowledgments This research was partially sup - ported by grants from IBM . Addi - tional funding for several labora - tory experiments was provided by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada . We would like to acknowledge the ef - forts of the following people who have been involved in the Group - Systems project : Erran Carmel , David Chappell , Kathy Chudoba , Bob Daniels , Mark Fuller , Glenda Hayes , Barbara Gutek , Bruce Her - niter , Suzanne Iacono , Ben Martz , Jolene Morrison , Mike Morrison , David Paranka , Mark Pendergast , V . Ramesh , Ed Roberts , Bill Saints , Craig Tyran , Lee Walker , and Su - zanne Weishand . We would like to thank Brent Gallupe , Karen Jud - son , the anonymous reviewers , and the editor for particularly helpful comments on earlier drafts of this article . [ ' . 1 References 1 . Ackoff , R . L . , Gupta , S . K . and Minas , J . S . Scientific Method , John Wiley & Sons , 1962 . 2 . Albanese , R . and Van Fleet , D . D . Rational behavior in groups : The COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM / July 1991 / VoJ . 34 , No . 7 S9 free riding tendency . Academy of Management Review , 10 ( 1985 ) , 244 - 255 . 3 . Conrtolly , T . , Jessup , L . M . and Valacich , J . S . Effects of anonymity and evaluative tone on idea genera - tion ! in computer - mediated groups . Management Science , 36 , 6 ( 1990 ) , 689 - 703 . 4 . Daft , R . L . and Lengel , R . H . Orga - nizational information require° merits , media richness and struc - tural design . Management Science , 32 , 5 ( 1986 ) , 554 - 571 . 5 . Dennis , A . R . , George , J . F . , Jessup , L . M . , Nunamaker Jr . , J . F . and Vogel , D . R . Information technol - ogy I - o support electronic meetings . MIS Quarterly 12 , 4 ( 1988 ) , 591 - 624 . 6 . Dennis , A . R . , Heminger , A . R . , Nunamaker Jr . , J . F . and Vogel , D . R . Bringing automated support to large groups : The Burr - Brown Experience . Information and Man - agement , 18 , 3 ( 1990 ) , 111 - 121 . 7 . Dennis , A . R . , Nunamaker Jr . , J . F . and Paranka , D . Supporting the search for competitive advantage . Journal of M1S , forthcoming . 8 . Dennis , A . R . , Nunamaker Jr . , J . F . and Vogel , D . R . A comparison of laboratory experiments and field studies in the study of electronic meeting systems . Journal of MIS , 7 , 2 ( 1991 ) , 107 - 135 . 9 . Dermis , A . R . , Tyran , C . K . , Vogel , D . R . and Nunamaker Jr . , J . F . An eval . uation of electronic meeting support for strategic management . In Proceedings oflCIS ( 1990 ) , 37 - 52 . 10 . Dennis , A . R . , Valacich , J . S . and Nunamaker Jr . , J . F . An experimen - tal ! investigation of group size in an electronic meeting system environ - merit . IEEE Transactions on Systems , Man , and Cybernetics , 20 , 5 ( 1990 ) , 1049 - 1057 . 11 . Dennis , A . R . , Valacich , J . S . and Nunamaker Jr . , J . F . Group , Sub - group and Nominal Group Idea Generation in an Electronic Meet - ing Environment , HICSS - 24 , 1991 , III : 573 - 579 . 12 . DeSanctis , G . and Gallupe , R . B . A foundation for the study of group decision support systems . Manage - ment Science , 33 , 5 ( 1987 ) , 589 - 609 . 13 . Diehl , M . and Stroebe W . Produc - tivity loss in brainstorming groups : Toward the solution of a riddle . J . Pe : ~ sonality and Social Psychology , 53 , 3 ( 1987 ) , 497 - 509 . 14 , Easton , A . C . , Vogel , D . R . and Nunamaker Jr . , J . F . Stakeholder identification and assumption sur - facing in small groups : An experi - mental study . HICSS - 22 , 1989 , III 344 - 352 . 15 . Easton , G . , George , J . F . , Nuna - maker Jr . , J . F . and Pendergast , M . O . Using two different electronic meeting system tools for the same task : An experimental comparison . J . of MIS , 7 , 1 ( 1990 ) , 85 - 100 . 16 . Fellers , J , W . The effect of group size and computer support on group idea generation for creativity tasks : An experimental evaluation using a repeated measures design . Unpublished Ph . D . Thesis , Indiana University , 1989 . 17 . Gallupe , R . B . , Cooper , W . and Bas - tianutti , L . Why is electronic brain - storming more productive than traditional brainstorming . Adminis - trative Sciences Association of Can - ada Conference Proceedings , In - formation Systems Division ( Whistler , Canada , 1990 ) , 82 - 92 . 18 . Gallupe , R . B . , Dennis , A . R . , Cooper , W . H . , Valacich , J . S . , Nunamaker Jr . , J . E , and Bas - tianutti , L . Group size and elec - tronic brainstorming . Queen ' s Uni - versity Working Paper , 1991 . 19 . George , J . F . , Easton , G . K . , Nuna - maker Jr . , J . F . and Northcraft , G . B . A study of collaborative group work with and without computer based support . Inf . Syst . Res . , 1 , 4 ( 1990 ) , 394 - 415 . 20 , Grohowski , R . B . , McGoff , C . , Vogel , D . R . , Martz , W . B . and Nunamaker Jr . , J . F . Implementa - tion of electronic meeting systems at IBM . MIS Quarterly , 14 , 4 ( 1990 ) , 369 - 383 . 21 . Hackman , J . R . and Kaplan , R . E . Interventions into group process : An approach to improving the ef - fectiveness of groups . Decision Sci - ences , 5 ( 1974 ) , 459 - 480 . 22 . Hill , G . W . Group versus individual performance : Are N + 1 heads bet - ter than one ? Psychological Bulletin , 91 , 3 ( 1982 ) , 517 - 539 . 23 . Hiltz , S . R . and Turoff , M . Structur - ing computer - mediated communi - cation systems to avoid information overload . Commun . ACM , 28 , 7 ( 1985 ) , 680 - 689 . 24 . Hirokawa , R . Y . and Pace , R . A de - scriptive investigation of the possi - ble communication based reasons for effective and ineffective group decision making . Commun . Mono - graphs , 50 ( 1983 ) , 363 - 379 . 25 . Huber , G . P . Issues in the design of group decision support systems . MIS Quarterly , ( 1984 ) , 195 - 204 . 26 . Huber , G . P . A theory of the effects of advanced information technol - ogy on organizational design , intel - ligence , and decision making . Acad . of Manag . Rev . , 15 , 1 ( 1990 ) , 47 - 71 . 27 . Jablin , F . M . and Seibold , D . R . Im - plications for problem solving groups of empirical research on ' brainstorming ' : A critical review of the literature . The Southern States Speech Commun . J . , 43 ( Summer 1978 ) , 327 - 356 . 28 . Jessup , L . M . , Connolly , T . and Galegher , J . The effects of anonym - ity on group process in automated group problem solving . MIS Quar - terly , 14 , 3 ( 1990 ) , 313 - 321 . 29 . Jessup , L . M . Tansik , D . A . and Lasse , T . D . Group problem solving in an automated environment : The effects of anonymity and proximity on group process and outcome with a GDSS . Decision Sciences , forthcom - ing . 30 . Lamm , H . and Trommsdorff , G . Group versus individual perfor - mance on tasks requiring ideational proficiency ( brainstorming ) : A re - view . European J . of Soc . Psy . , ( 1973 ) , 361 - 387 . 31 . Maidique , M . A . Entrepreneurs , champions , and technological inno - vations , Sloan Manag . Rev . , 21 , 2 ( 1980 ) , 59 - 76 . 32 . Mason , R . O . and Mitroff , I . I . Chal - lenging Strategic Planning Assump - tions , John Wiley & Sons , New York , 1981 . 33 . Miller , J . C . Information input over - load and psychopathology . J , of Psy - chiatry , ( Feb . 1960 ) , 696 - 704 . 34 . Mintzberg , H . , Raisinghani , D . and Theoret , A . The structure of ' un - structured ' decision processes . Ad - ministrative Sciences Quarterly , 21 ( 1976 ) , 246 - 275 . 35 . Nunamaker Jr . , J . F . , Applegate , L . M . , and Konsynski , B . R . Facilitat - ing group creativity with GDSS . J . of MIS , 3 , 4 ( 1987 ) , 5 - 19 . 36 . Nunamaker Jr . , J . F . , Applegate , L . M . and Konsynski , B . R . Com - puter - aided deliberation : Model management and group decision support . J . of Operations Res . , 36 , 6 ( 1988 ) , 826 - 848 . 37 . Nunamaker Jr . , J . F . , Vogel , D . , Heminger , A . , Martz , B . , Grohowski , R . and McGoff , C . Ex - periences at IBM with group sup - 60 July 1991 / Vo1 , 34 , No , 7 / COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM port systems : A field study . Decision Support Systems , 5 , 2 ( 1989 ) , 183 - 196 . 38 . Osborn , A . F . Applied Imagination : Principles and Procedures of Creative Thinking . 2nd edition , Scribners , New York , 1957 . 39 . Pinsonnault , A . and Kraemar , K . L . The impact of technological sup - port on groups : An assessment of the empirical research . Decision Sup - port Syst . , 5 , 2 ( 1989 ) , 197 - 216 . 40 . Poole , M . S . Decision development in small groups II : A study of multi - ple sequences of decision making . Communication Monographs , 50 ( 1983 ) , 206 - 232 . 41 . Schweiger , D . M . , Sandberg , W . R . , and Rechner , P . L . Experimental effects of dialectical inquiry , devil ' s advocacy , and consensus ap - proaches to strategic decision mak - ing . Academy of Management Review , 32 , 4 ( 1989 ) , 745 - 772 . 42 . Shaw , M . Group Dynamics : The Psy - chology of Small Group Behavior . 3rd edition , McGraw - Hill , New York , 1981 . 43 . Siegel , J . , Dubrovsky , V . Kiesler , S . and McGuire , T . W . Group pro - cesses in computer mediated com - munication . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 37 ( 1986 ) , 157 - 187 . 44 . Silver , M . S . Decision support sys - tems : Directed and non - directed change . Information Systems Research , 1 , 1 ( 1990 ) , 47 - 70 . 45 . Simon , H . A . Administrative Behavior . 3rd edition , Free Press , 1976 . 46 . Stefik , M . , Foster , G . , Bobrow , D . G . , Khan , K . , Lanning , S . , and Suchman , L . Beyond the chalk - board : Computer support for col - laboration and problem solving in meetings . Commun . ACM , 30 , 1 ( 1987 ) , 33 - 47 . 47 . Steiner , I . D . Group Process and Pro - ductivity . Academic Press , New York , 1972 . 48 . Valacich , J . S . Group size and prox - imity effects on computer mediated generation : A laboratory investiga - tion . Doctoral dissertation , Univer - sity of Arizona , 1989 . 49 . Valacich , J . S . , Dennis , A . R . , George , J . F . and Nunamaker Jr . , J , F . Electronic support for group idea generation : Shifting the bal - ance of process gains and losses . Arizona working paper , 1991 . 50 . Valacich , J . S . , Dennis , A . R . , and Nunamaker Jr . , J . F . Anonymity and group size effects on computer mediated idea generation . Proceed - ings of Academy of Mangagement Meeting , 1991 , forthcoming . 51 . Valacich , J . S . , Dennis , A . R . and Nunamaker Jr . , J . F . Electronic Meeting Support : The Group - Systems concept . Intern . j . of Man Machine Studies , forthcoming . 52 . Vogel , D . R . , Martz , W . B . , Nuna - maker Jr . , J . F . , Grohowski , R . B . and McGoff , C . Electronic meeting system experience at IBM . J . of MIS , 6 , 3 ( 1990 ) , 25 - 43 . 53 . Vogel , D . R . , Nunamaker Jr . , J . F . , George , J . F . and Dennis , A . R . Group decision support systems : Evolution and status at the Univer - sity of Arizona . In R . M . Lee , A . M . McCosh , and P . Migliarese Eds . Or - ganizational Decision Support Systems , Proceedings of IFIP WG 8 . 3 Work - ing Conference on Organizational DSS , North Holland , 1988 , 287 - 305 . 54 . Williams , E . 1977 . Experimental comparisons of face - to - face and medidated communication : A re - view . Psychol . Bull . , 84 , 5 , 963 - 976 . 55 . Winniford , M . A . The effect of elec - tronic meeting support on large and small decision - making groups . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , University of Arizona , 1989 . 56 . Zack , M . H . and McKenney , J . L . Characteristics of organizational information domain : An organiza - tional information processing per - spective . Harvard Business School Working Paper 89 - 027 , 1989 . 57 . Zajonc , R . B . Social facilitation . Sci - ence , 149 ( 1965 ) , 269 - 274 . CR Categories and Subject Descrip - tors : H . 1 . 2 [ Models and Principles ] : User / Mactfine Systems - - human informa - tion processing ; H . 4 . 2 [ Information Sys - tems Applications ] : Types of Systems - - decision support ; H . 4 . 3 [ Information Sys - tems Applications ] : Communications Applications - - computer conferencing and teleconferencing ; H . 5 . 3 [ Information In - terfaces and Presentations ] : Group and Organization Interfaces - - synchronous interfaces ; theo ~ and models ; J . 1 [ Admin - istrative Data Processing ] : General . General Terms : Design Additional Key Words and Phrases : Communication , computer - supportive cooperative work , electronic meeting systems , group decision support sys - tems , groupware , group work , multi - user systems About the Authors J . F . NUNAMAKER heads the Depart - ment of MIS at the University of Ari - zona where he is a professor of MIS and Computer Science . His research inter - ests include computer - aided support of systems analysis and design , and systems for management . ALAN R . DENNIS is a doctoral candi - date in MIS at the University of Ari - zona . His current research interests in - clude electronic meeting systems , systems analysis and design , and busi - ness process re - engineering . JOSEPH S . VALACICH is assistant professor of information systems at the University of Indiana . His current re - search interests include the design and investigation of communication and decision technologies to support collab - orative group work , systems analysis and design , and group and organiza - tional memory . Authors ' Present Ad - dress : Decision and Information Sys - tems Department , School of Business , Indiana University , Bloomington , IN 47405 , valacich @ iubacs . bitnet . DOUGLAS R . VOGEL is an assistant professor of MIS at the University of Arizona . His research interests bridge the business and academic communities in addressing group support system development , implementation , and evaluation issues . JOEY E GEORGE is an assistant pro - fessor in the Department of MIS at the University of Arizona . His research in - terests focus on information technology in the work place , and currently include the study of group decision support sys - tems . Authors ' Present Address for Nunamaker , Dennis , Vogel , and George : Department of MIS , Eller Graduate School of Management , Uni - versity of Arizona , Tuscon , AZ 85721 , nunamake @ arizmis . hitnet , dennisa @ arizmis . bitnet , vogel @ arizmis . bimet , george @ arizmis . bimet . Permission to copy without fee all or part of this material is granted provided that the copies are not made or distributed for direct commercial advantage , the ACM copyright notice and the title of the publication and its date appear , and notice is given that copying is by permission of the Association for Computing Machinery . To copy otherwise , or to republish , requires a fee and / or specific permission . © ACM 0002 - 0782 / 91 / 0700 - 040 $ 1 . 50 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM / July 1991 / Vol . 34 , No , 7 61