MINI REVIEW published : 30 May 2022 doi : 10 . 3389 / fdgth . 2022 . 891634 Frontiers in Digital Health | www . frontiersin . org 1 May 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 891634 Edited by : Benjamin Schooley , University of South Carolina , United States Reviewed by : Paraskevi Papadopoulou , American College of Greece , Greece Tonia San Nicolas - Rocca , San Jose State University , United States * Correspondence : Plinio Pelegrini Morita plinio . morita @ uwaterloo . ca Specialty section : This article was submitted to Health Technology Innovation , a section of the journal Frontiers in Digital Health Received : 08 March 2022 Accepted : 04 April 2022 Published : 30 May 2022 Citation : Lam L , Fadrique L , Bin Noon G , Shah A and Morita PP ( 2022 ) Evaluating Challenges and Adoption Factors for Active Assisted Living Smart Environments . Front . Digit . Health 4 : 891634 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fdgth . 2022 . 891634 Evaluating Challenges and Adoption Factors for Active Assisted Living Smart Environments Lena Lam 1 , Laura Fadrique 1 , Gaya Bin Noon 1 , Aakanksha Shah 1 and Plinio Pelegrini Morita 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 * 1 School of Health , University of Waterloo , Waterloo , ON , Canada , 2 Research Institute for Aging , University of Waterloo , Waterloo , ON , Canada , 3 Department of Systems Design Engineering , University of Waterloo , Waterloo , ON , Canada , 4 eHealth Innovation , Techna Institute , University Health Network , Toronto , ON , Canada , 5 Institute of Health Policy , Management , and Evaluation , Dalla Lana School of Public Health , University of Toronto , Toronto , ON , Canada While there have been rapid advancements in individual technologies such as Internet of Things ( IoT ) and Active Assisted Living ( AAL ) to address challenges related to an aging population , there remain large gaps in how these technologies can be integrated into the broader ecosystem to support older adults in aging in place . This research provides an overview of 15 solutions available to date around the globe and compares key factors for adoption in each solution , including user acceptance , privacy and security , accessibility , and interoperability . To scale these solutions sustainably and universally , the development and implementation of standards for key factors for adoption in AAL environments is critical . There is also a need for increased and sustainable funding to complement research priorities , to continue advancing AAL technologies . Keywords : Active Assisted Living ( AAL ) , aging in place , smart city , ambient assisted living , smart living INTRODUCTION Global population aging is increasing dramatically at an unprecedented pace . It is estimated that the proportion of the world’s population over 60 will nearly double from 12 to 22 % , between 2015 and 2050 ( 1 ) . This demographic shift presents challenges to all countries , such as ensuring healthcare and social support systems are adept to meet the increasing needs and demands of an aging population . The current literature indicates that well - designed technological solutions may act as facilitators to help address challenges related to an aging population ( 2 ) . As the development of technologies such as Internet of Things ( IoT ) and Active Assisted Living ( AAL ) technologies continue to advance , it is anticipated that these innovations will inﬂuence future architecture and infrastructure development , giving rise to more smart communities and cities , oﬀering both sensing and actuating capabilities such as assistive interventions for older adults ( 3 – 5 ) . Advances in technology can aid in preventing , educating , and monitoring behaviors to assist older adults with their activities of daily living ( ADL ) and support them in learning and remembering healthy behaviors ( 6 ) . Furthermore , technologies can help older adults remain in the community , shifting to a more decentralized model of care , which can present cost - savings for healthcare systems , yet more eﬀective patient - centered care ( 7 ) . While there have been promising advancements , there is limited research available on the key challenges in scaling assistive communities to meet the needs of older adults for active and successful aging . In this article , we provide an overview of the key factors for adoption of AAL technologies and highlight 15 case studies of solutions from around the globe . As a secondary Lam et al . Evaluating Challenges in Adopting AAL TABLE 1 | Summary tables of SLEs . Categories Sub - categories Total * / ( % ) * * Type of smart living environments Smart home 5 / 33 % Smart community 5 / 33 % Smart city 5 / 33 % Status of smart living environments Pilots ( inactive ) 6 / 40 % In development 5 / 33 % Operational ( active ) 3 / 20 % Canceled 1 / 7 % Geographical location of smart living environments Europe 6 / 40 % North America 6 / 40 % Asia 3 / 20 % Funding and ownership of smart living environments Publicly owned or funded ( i . e . , research institutions , universities or governments ) 5 / 33 % Privately owned and solely funded by technology corporations 3 / 20 % Owned and funded by public institutions with partnerships with private partners 7 / 47 % Priority for health and AAL in smart living environments Health as a priority 13 / 86 % AAL as a priority 7 / 46 % * Number of smart living environments that ﬁt the category / sub - category . * * Percentage based on 15 total smart living environments reviewed . insight , we provide a comparison between the state of AAL globally compared to within the Canadian context . MATERIALS AND METHODS In this research , a narrative literature review was conducted followed by a document analysis to synthesize the current state of knowledge of AAL systems . For the narrative review , select papers included those published in peer - reviewed journals in English . The data sources included Google Scholar , PubMed , PsycINFO , Cochrane Library , and Scopus . The inclusion criteria for the research focused on AAL communities in any stage of deployment that assessed or mentioned at least one of the following factors : user acceptance , privacy and security concerns , accessibility , and interoperability , which are factors derived from Design for All framework ( 8 , 9 ) . The Design for All framework is a holistic paradigm that considers a broad spectrum of human diversity ( 9 ) . It proposes ﬂexible designs , oﬀering universal features easily adapted to the needs of a speciﬁc user ( 9 ) . For the document analysis , documents from Google , including reports published by institutions , industry , governments , and independent research groups , were analyzed . Books , background papers , program proposals , application forms , summaries , and manuals were also included in the analysis . The four factors selected for comparison and analysis of the AAL communities have been previously identiﬁed in the literature as key factors for consideration when deploying AAL systems . The themes for analysis are described below . User Acceptance User acceptance is an important aspect for the successful adoption of health technologies . Acceptance of new technologies depends on perceived risks , including whether the technology delivers services in a secure , reliable , and eﬀective manner ( 10 , 11 ) . The results in Oﬀermann - van Heek et al . suggested that “personal care needs” were a parameter that potentially inﬂuenced AAL technology acceptance in older adults ( 12 , 13 ) . Higher needs for care would lead to higher acknowledgments of the technology’s beneﬁts . Privacy and Security Privacy and security issues have been widely cited as concerns by users as AAL technologies monitor , communicate and provide services based on a full - time surveillance basis ( 14 ) . AAL systems collect and analyze an immense amount of sensitive information about users , including medical and behavior pattern information ( 15 ) . The use of privacy protection standards is important for respecting a person’s autonomy , as well as for building and promoting trust ( 16 ) . Standards and methodologies such as Privacy by Design should be utilized during the early stages of a system design . This helps ensure that end user privacy concerns are taken into consideration and inﬂuence the design of the overall system architecture ( 17 ) . Accessibility Accessibility refers to the degree to which diﬀerent entities such as a device , interface , resource , system , environment can be used and provide a beneﬁt for as many people as possible ( 18 ) . The term “accessibility” is often used in the context of people with physical disabilities and their right to access available products and services . However , accessibility is inﬂuenced by a multitude of interconnected factors ranging many levels of impact , such as physical , mental , behavioral , social , and environmental ( 18 ) . It is imperative that AAL systems have a broad range of intelligent functions to support usable and accessible interfaces with adaptive mechanisms for user interactions ( 19 ) . Interoperability The current landscape of AAL systems and environments is highly fragmented due to a lack of reference standards in AAL systems and competition between diﬀerent vendors ( 20 ) . Interoperability is recognized as a key requirement for the deployment of successful products in AAL environments as systems and devices must be highly integrated to provide users with comprehensive and eﬀective services ( 21 ) . In addition , there are upfront costs associated with implementing AAL systems , including but not limited to hardware and software costs and installation fees . From a user’s perspective , it is important that Frontiers in Digital Health | www . frontiersin . org 2 May 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 891634 Lam et al . Evaluating Challenges in Adopting AAL TABLE 2 | Overview of 15 SLEs . No . Type Smart living environment Continent Level of readiness Type of project owner Consideration for health Consideration for AAL 1 Home Make it REAAL Europe Pilot ( inactive ) Public Yes Yes 2 Home Vesta Europe Pilot ( inactive ) Public Yes No 3 Home SOPRANO project Europe Pilot ( inactive ) Public Yes Yes 4 Home HomeSense North America Pilot ( inactive ) Public Yes Yes 5 Home UbiCare Europe Pilot ( inactive ) Public Yes Yes 6 Community Fujisawa sustainable smart town Asia Ready ( active ) Private Yes Yes 7 Community Montreal North America In development Public with private partners Yes No 8 Community Edmonton North America In development Public with private partners Yes N / A 9 Community The orbit North America In development Public with private partners Yes N / A 10 Community Drayton valley North America Pilot ( inactive ) Public with private partners No No 11 City Woven city Asia In development Private Yes Yes 12 City Sidewalk labs Toronto Quayside North America Canceled Private No No 13 City U - City Asia In development Public with private partners Yes Yes 15 City Barcelona Europe Ready ( active ) Public with private partners Yes No 15 City Amsterdam Europe Ready ( active ) Public with private partners Yes No the AAL systems are “future - proof” in terms of the possibility to grow and adapt to users’ changing needs over the years ( 21 , 22 ) . RESULTS Smart Living Environments ( SLEs ) Around the Globe The results include an analysis of 15 smart living environments around the globe ; six located in Europe , six located in North America and the remaining three located in Asia ( Table 1 ) . Of the 15 environments , ﬁve are smart homes , ﬁve are smart communities and ﬁve are smart cities ( Table 2 ) . Six of the environments were pilots , which are now inactive ; ﬁve are currently in development ; three are currently operational and active and one project was canceled ( Table 1 ) . Project Ownership Within the 15 smart living environments , ﬁve are publicly owned and funded either by research institutions , universities , or governments . Three are privately - owned and solely funded by technology corporations . Lastly , seven are owned and funded by public institutions with partnerships with private partners to provide technological capacity and infrastructure ( Table 1 ) . Priority for Health and AAL Out of the 15 smart living environments , 13 had health as a priority . Of those thirteen , ﬁve are smart homes , four are smart communities and four are smart cities ( Table 1 ) . Beyond health , AAL was a priority in four smart homes , one smart community and two smart cities ( Table 1 ) . Technologies included in smart living environments enabling health and AAL include both ambient and wearable sensors to help visualize daily activity and provide real time notiﬁcation systems to signal adverse events ( 22 , 23 ) . SLE Analysis for Factors of Adoption User Acceptance The level of publicly available information and understanding of user acceptance varied between project owners and funders . Most notably , there was a lack of publicly available information on user acceptance for privately - owned projects that are solely funded by technology corporations . This could potentially be due to non - disclosure agreements between residents and the technology companies . Regarding end - user testing to understand user acceptance , the richness of data decreased as project sizes increased . At the smart home level , all projects conducted some form of end user consultation and end users were involved in testing in a real - life setting . End users for all ﬁve smart home projects were also involved in the early scoping phases . In three out of ﬁve projects , user input was heavily considered throughout the entire development process of the platform to iterate on service oﬀerings , prior to implementation ( Table 3 ) . Two smart home projects used a framework to Frontiers in Digital Health | www . frontiersin . org 3 May 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 891634 Lam et al . Evaluating Challenges in Adopting AAL TABLE 3 | User acceptance results . User acceptance factors N * / ( % of total ) * * Smart living environments Conducted end user testing 5 / 33 % Make it REAAL , Vesta , SOPRANO Project , HomeSense , UbiCare User input heavily considered throughout development 3 / 20 % Make it REAAL , SOPRANO and HomeSense Formal user acceptance framework utilized 2 / 13 % The Make it REAAL project SOPRANO Project Public consultation in the beginning scoping phases 3 / 20 % Montreal in Quebec , The Orbit in Innisﬁl and Drayton Valley in Alberta Platform to collect ongoing user feedback 1 / 7 % Barcelona * Number of smart living environments that ﬁt the category / sub - category . * * Percentage based on 15 total smart living environments reviewed . Total N > 100 % as smart living environments could have had multiple factors related to user acceptance . evaluate user needs , including the Technology Acceptance Model and The Smart Home Technology Acceptance Model ( Table 3 ) . As the project sizes increased , smart community and city projects had less extensive end user feedback collection cycles , as well as less end user testing protocols . For example , public consultations only occurred in the beginning scoping phases to understand needs and project focus . Three communities collected public responses in the early development phase ( Table 3 ) . Only one project developed a platform to collect ongoing feedback from citizens to iterate on service oﬀerings and understand user needs ( Table 3 ) . In most cases , it is unclear how public feedback is incorporated into the development and iteration of services as smart living environment projects get larger . Privacy and Security As smart living environments collect , retain , and analyze large volumes of personal data , privacy and security become major consideration . Ownership of data , technologies used to ensure encryption and regulations , or policies in place are key themes that emerged when analyzing privacy and security . Ownership of Data The data custodian refers to an entity that oversees the storage , aggregation , and use of data sets . In this research , it was found that the primary data custodian oftentimes is dependent on the project owner and the main funder . The results showed that 12 environments were governed by public institutions while 3 environments were governed by a private system . In the smart home projects , data was primarily collected , analyzed , and governed by research teams or public institutions , such as governments ( Table 4 ) . In three smart community projects , there were dedicated governing bodies responsible for data ownership . TABLE 4 | Privacy and security results—type of data custodian and project lead . Type of data custodian and project lead N * / ( % of total ) * * Smart living environments Governed by public institution 12 / 80 % Make it REAAL , Vesta , SOPRANO Project , HomeSense , UbiCare , Montreal , Edmonton , The Orbit , Drayton Valley , U - City , Barcelona , Amsterdam Governed by private and proprietary system 3 / 20 % Fujisawa Smart Town , Woven City , Sidewalk Labs Toronto Quayside * Number of smart living environments that ﬁt the category / sub - category . * * Percentage based on 15 total smart living environments reviewed . Technological Elements to Security There were also diﬀerent technological methods deployed to encrypt data and keep data secure and private . At the smart home level , technological elements were used in the system’s security setup , such as Zigbee and OSGI . Zigbee addresses basic privacy requirements in AAL systems and is a speciﬁcation that supports message conﬁdentiality , integrity on network and application layers ( 23 ) . OSGI provides a general purpose , secure support for deploying Java - based service applications , which is utilized in smart living environments ( 24 ) . In one project , called the Ubicare project in Europe , developers did not use cameras or microphones , as these devices are commonly perceived as privacy violators ( 23 ) . Rather , unobtrusive sensors were integrated into the physical environment to be minimally invasive ( 23 ) . Policies and Regulation In terms of regulations and policies , there were many methods utilized across the smart living environments . For example , two environments conducted Privacy Assessment Impacts ( PIAs ) while developing smart environment plans . Only one smart home was Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act ( HIPAA ) compliant among the environments collecting health information . Some environments adhered to various protocols including the Privacy by Design approach , the Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy ( FOIP ) Act , and the General Data Protection Regulation ( GDPR ) ( Table 5 ) . User Autonomy Ten environments considered the security , and autonomy of users . When considering end user autonomy and respecting privacy , only three environments explicitly oﬀered users the ability to opt - out of data sharing and collection ( Table 6 ) . Out of the 15 environments , only one did not consider privacy and security implications before implementation while four did not have any information available on their privacy and security policies ( Table 6 ) . Accessibility There was limited data in the literature discussing accessibility as a priority in smart living environment strategies . In total , six environments had a strategic priority for accessibility ( Table 7 ) . Frontiers in Digital Health | www . frontiersin . org 4 May 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 891634 Lam et al . Evaluating Challenges in Adopting AAL TABLE 5 | Privacy and security results—polices and regulations related to privacy and security . Regulation / protocol N * ( % of total ) * * Smart living environments Privacy impact assessments 2 / 13 % Make it REAAL , Edmonton Health insurance portability and accountability act 1 / 7 % HomeSense Privacy by design 1 / 7 % Edmonton Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy ( FOIP ) ACT 2 / 13 % Edmonton , Drayton Valley General data protection regulation 2 / 13 % Amsterdam , Barcelona N / A 9 / 60 % Vesta , SOPRANO Project , UbiCare , Fujisawa Sustainable Smart Town , Montreal , The Orbit , Woven City , U - City * Number of smart living environments that ﬁt the category / sub - category . * * Percentage based on 15 total smart living environments reviewed . Total N > 100 % as smart living environments could have had multiple polices and regulations related to privacy and security . TABLE 6 | Privacy and security results—consideration for user autonomy and privacy . Privacy , security and autonomy of users N * / ( % of total ) * * Smart living environments > 1 Consideration for privacy , security and autonomy of users 10 / 67 % Make it REAAL , SOPRANO Project , HomeSense , UbiCare , Fujisawa Sustainable Smart Town , Edmonton , Drayton Valley , Sidewalk Labs Toronto Quayside , Barcelona , Amsterdam Offered ability to opt - out of data sharing and collection 3 / 20 % HomeSense , Fujisawa , and Sidewalk Labs No consideration of privacy , security and autonomy of users 1 / 7 % U - City N / A 4 / 26 % Vesta , Montreal , The Orbit , Woven City * Number of smart living environments that ﬁt the category / sub - category . * * Percentage based on 15 total smart living environments reviewed . Total N > 100 % as smart living environments could have had considerations for privacy , security and autonomy as well as offered ability to opt - out of data sharing . Two smart city initiatives—Edmonton ( Canada ) and Quayside Sidewalk Labs ( Canada ) had a strategy for inclusive engagement . Moreover , Edmonton had a priority to create a smart city that considered the needs of marginalized groups such as newcomers to Canada , urban Indigenous population , seniors , children , and youth , as well as people living in poverty and homelessness ( 25 ) . Sidewalk Labs had a priority that combined inclusivity , accessibility , and equitable measures for digital literacy eﬀorts to promote the skills to use the proposed resources ( 26 ) ( Table 7 ) . Only two smart home projects , evaluated service and interface usability while four smart home projects were more cost - conscious and energy - eﬃcient for end users ( Table 7 ) . TABLE 7 | Accessibility results . Consideration for accessibility N * / ( % of total ) * * Smart living environments Evaluated service or interface usability 2 / 13 % Vesta , SOPRANO Cost conscious development 4 / 27 % Make it REAAL , Vesta , SOPRANO Project , Ubicare Strategy for inclusive engagement 6 / 40 % Make it REAAL , Vesta , SOPRANO Project , HomeSense , Edmonton , Quayside Sidewalk Labs N / A 8 / 53 % Fujisawa Sustainable Smart Town , Montreal , The Orbit , Drayton Valley , Woven City , U - City , Barcelona , Amsterdam * Number of smart living environments that ﬁt the category / sub - category . * * Percentage based on 15 total smart living environments reviewed . Total N > 100 % as smart living environments could have had multiple factors and consideration points related to accessibility . TABLE 8 | Interoperability results . Consideration for interoperability N * / ( % of total ) * * Smart living environments Utilize technological elements in system setup related to interoperability ( i . e . , middleware ) 5 / 33 % Make it REAAL , Vesta , SOPRANO Project , HomeSense Strategic priority 4 / 27 % Make it REAAL , Montreal , Sidewalk Labs , U - City N / A 7 / 47 % Fujisawa Sustainable Smart Town , Edmonton , The Orbit , Drayton Valley , Woven City , Barcelona , Amsterdam * Number of smart living environments that ﬁt the category / sub - category . * * Percentage based on 15 total smart living environments reviewed . Total N > 100 % as smart living environments could have utilized technological elements and had a strategic priority for interoperability . Interoperability Five smart living environments utilized technological elements , such as a middleware , to create an interoperable network for sensors to provide the end user with a comprehensive service ( Table 8 ) . Make it REAAL was focused on building their own open - source middleware to provide interoperable services to end users ( 27 ) . HomeSense utilized an array of networked wireless Z - Wave devices and a Raspberry Pi connected to the internet as a remote gateway ( 28 ) . Vesta used four Raspberry Pis as gateways and one 4G router ( 29 ) . Ubicare used Arduino microcontrollers coupled with ZigBee - compatible XBee RF networking modules for wireless communication among the nodes ( 23 ) . SOPRANO used an open platform based on a combination of semantic - enabled technologies and service - orientation ( 30 ) . Furthermore , four environments had interoperability as a strategic priority outlined in their strategies and plans ( Table 8 ) . Frontiers in Digital Health | www . frontiersin . org 5 May 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 891634 Lam et al . Evaluating Challenges in Adopting AAL TABLE 9 | Results of strategic priority for health and AAL in each level of SLE . Type Priority for health , Priority for AAL , N * / ( % ) * * N * / ( % ) * * Home 5 / 100 % 5 / 100 % Community 4 / 80 % 1 / 20 % City 3 / 60 % 2 / 40 % * Number of smart living environments that ﬁt the category / sub - category . * * Percentage based on total N ( 5 ) for each type of smart living environment reviewed . Strategic Priority for Health and AAL As project sizes increased from the smart home to city level , priority for health and AAL decreased in tandem . All smart homes that were evaluated had a focus on health and AAL . At the smart community level , four out of ﬁve projects had health as a priority , but only one also focused on AAL ( Table 9 ) . Three smart cities with the largest - sized projects prioritized health while two also focused on AAL ( Table 9 ) . More broadly , smart communities and cities were observed to have more of a focus on mobility , renewable and sustainable energy , and overall safety . However , it has been noted in some projects , such as the smart city in Amsterdam , that although health was not a part of the initial strategy , as environments evolve and expand their service oﬀerings , healthcare will be added to the agenda ( 31 ) . Funding for the Canadian Smart Living Environment Landscape Compared to the World Canada has only recently introduced a framework for smart living environments called The Smart Cities Challenge , which began in 2017 with funding results announced in 2019 ( 32 ) . The Smart Cities Challenge is a pan - Canadian competition , focused on empowering communities to adopt a smart cities approach to improve people’s quality of life through innovation , data , and technology ( 32 ) . Over 200 communities applied but only 20 were listed as ﬁnalists . Out of twenty , nine communities had a focus on healthy living and recreation , two focused on older adults’ health , while one speciﬁcally proposed AAL in the City of Cote Saint - Luc . The other seven proposals proposed supporting healthy active lifestyles to reduce non - communicable diseases like diabetes , mental health using health data and digital tools for better decision - making support ( Table 10 ) . There was a total of $ 75 million CAD available and four winning spots . When compared to Europe , the EU has provided multiple frameworks and programs for smart city initiatives dating back to 2014 . Under the Horizon 2020 framework , the EU funded 15 smart city projects in 2019 , providing a total of ∼ e 83 million in funding , which is ∼ 123 million CAD ( 33 ) . Canada is currently behind other comparable countries in technology deployment , which is primarily limited to the research and development phase ( 34 ) . In contrast , the European AAL Programme was introduced by the European Commission to advance innovative research and services for older adults and supports 17 countries with a funding pool of e 700 M ( 35 ) . Canada is now involved in the European AAL Programme , to continue advancing the Canadian AAL landscape . DISCUSSION When developing smart living environments , public consultations , and methodologies to frame user - guided iterations of service oﬀerings are critical . This process can increase user acceptance , trust , and adoption . A growing number of studies have emphasized the importance of participatory and user - centered design since decisions on solutions’ design , made independently of users can reduce user acceptance ( 36 – 38 ) . Yet , a technocentric approach still seems to persist in AAL developments , resulting in solutions that are high - tech but have low impact for end users ( 39 – 41 ) . Participatory design and collaboration among the diﬀerent stakeholders and end users need to be reinforced in projects and policies when developing smart living environments . This approach will help assure the public that integrative smart technologies in living environments are there to complement and support their daily living and not replace human autonomy or capacity . Furthermore , there is currently no standardization as it relates to privacy and security policies around the world . In Europe , the cities of Barcelona and Amsterdam both utilize The General Data Protection Regulation ( GDPR ) , which is a regulated by the EU and is centered on data protection and privacy . It is regarded as one of the toughest privacy and security laws in the world that deals with the transfer of personal data outside the EU and European Economic Areas [ EAA ] ( 40 ) . In comparison , the cities of Edmonton and Drayton Valley in Canada have adopted the Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act ( FOIP Act ) , which is a legislation enforceable only in the province of Alberta . Interoperability and accessibility standards pose challenges for the development and implementation of smart living environments . As AAL environments are primarily targeted toward older adults and aging populations with diverse needs , accessibility is an area that requires more dedicated attention and advancement . For interoperability to work well , a wide network of service provider stakeholders are required to collaborate on projects to create a product that brings value to end users . However , due to a lack of technical standards , there are challenges when scaling smart living environments and conducting iterations when adding new features and services . In addition , without interoperable standards , vendor lock - in can cause problems for end users such as the inability to consume products that meet all their needs . Vendor lock - in can also drive - up costs and make services inaccessible for users . Lastly , it’s important to recognize that the work contained in this review is limited to materials published in the English language due to the scope of the research project . As such , it is possible that the results cannot be generalized to materials published in other languages and some studies may have been missed . Frontiers in Digital Health | www . frontiersin . org 6 May 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 891634 Lam et al . Evaluating Challenges in Adopting AAL TABLE 10 | Summary of Canadian smart cities challenge ﬁnalists . Project Location Funding Focus areas Description Biigtigong Nishnaabeg Ontario $ 5M • Economic opportunity • Empowerment and inclusion • Revitalize Indigenous language and culture while preparing their K - 12 students for the smart technology future • Utilizing open source software and results - oriented approaches to facilitate effective online learning , effective online acquisition of their endangered Nishnaabe language , and revitalization of their culture—all as an enhancement to their brick - and - mortar K - 12 curriculum delivery model Cree Nation of Eastmain Quebec $ 5M • Economic opportunity • Empowerment and inclusion • Addressing the housing shortage crisis , poor quality design and costly construction of homes in Eastmain by developing affordable Net Zero Energy Housing Program offering culturally appropriate design utilizing smart technologies and innovative building techniques City of Yellowknife Northwest Territories $ 5M • Economic opportunity • Healthy living and recreation • Incorporating technological innovations into lampposts and creating mesh network allowing them to communicate with one another and a central location • Innovations will include smart motion activated lighting , electric vehicle charging stations , data collection and monitoring , interactive tourism info and Wi - Fi hotspot Mohawk Council of Akwesasne Quebec $ 5M • Healthy living and recreation • Mobility • Utilizing smart technologies such as electric vehicles , smart greenhouses and integration of mobile / web systems to achieve positive change in lifestyle , education and accessibility to reduce the prevalence of new cases of diabetes Town of Bridgewater Nova Scotia $ 5M • Environmental quality • Empowerment and inclusion • Implementsophisticatedenergymonitoringandcommunications equipment in low - income homes • Develop self - funding energy retroﬁt ﬁnancing program • Improve transportation systems • Increase local tech sector training and literacy The Pas , Opaskwayak Cree Nation , Rural Municipality of Kelsey Manitoba $ 10M • Healthy living and recreation • Safety and security • LED Smart Farm technology will be implemented to support local nutritious food growth and promote food security • Creation of a smart phone distribution system and integration of wearable technology to achieve a reduction in the number of imported vegetables and a reduction in community diabetes rates City of Cote Saint - Luc Quebec $ 10M • Environmental quality • Healthy living and recreation • Aims to address a rapidly aging population by implementing a connected framework , leveraging smart devices and related technologies that will empower seniors to live more safely and independently in their homes , be better connected to their communities and city services , be more socially engaged • Improving the overall wellbeing and quality of life for older adults and reducing stress on families and caregivers , the healthcare system , and long - term care facilities . Nunavut Communities Nunavut $ 10M • Empowerment and inclusion • Healthy living and recreation • Development and implementation of decentralized and community - based digital health application intervention called “The Community , Connectivity , and Digital Access for Suicide Prevention” which aims to reduce the risk of suicide • This platform will leverage digital access and connectivity to increase the availability and accessibility of mental health resources and support systems like peer to peer networks , educational initiatives , and creative outlets to all Nunavummiut . This includes an Inuktitut based digital literacy curriculum , improved and innovative network infrastructure , mobile applications , gamiﬁed interventions , digital art therapy , and permanent makerspaces available in each community St . Mary’s First Nation and Fredericton New Brunswick $ 10M • Empowerment and inclusion • Recognizingwhat’simportanttoindividualsandconnectingthem to what matters most • Create a community that is accessible , welcoming , supportive community , starting with youth , newcomers , older adults , and persons with mobility - related disabilities • Empowering residents with personalized digital tools , data & technology that enable them to create an exceptional quality of life ( Continued ) Frontiers in Digital Health | www . frontiersin . org 7 May 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 891634 Lam et al . Evaluating Challenges in Adopting AAL TABLE 10 | Continued Project Location Funding Focus areas Description Parkland , Brazeau Lac Ste Anne and Yellowhead Counties Alberta $ 10M • Empowerment and inclusion • Economicopportunity • Aim to transform how rural Canada uses and accesses Information Communications Infrastructure to lever the beneﬁts of connected technologies to improve rural lives , rural economies and rural environments • Greater technology adoption and proper decision support tools will help build more prosperous market and knowledge links with urban Canada and beyond Greater Victoria British Columbia $ 10M • Empowerment and inclusion • Mobility • Collaboratively create a multimodal transportation network that is convenient , green and affordable increasing mobility wellbeing City of Guelph and Wellington County Ontario $ 10M • Empowerment and Inclusion • Economicopportunity • Canada’s ﬁrst technology - enabled Circular Food Economy • Reimagining an inclusive food - secure ecosystem that increases access to affordable , nutritious food , where “waste” becomes a resource City of Saskatoon Saskatchewan $ 10M • Empowerment and inclusion • Safety and security • Use innovative technology to strengthen and connect the supports for youth to grow in a positive learning cycle focused on building purpose , belonging , security and identity and break the cycle of Indigenous youth incarceration City of Richmond British Columbia $ 10M • Mobility • Safety and security • Develop and implement an integrated platform enabling data driven decision making to improve emergency response rates and reduce recovery time City of Airdrie and Area Alberta $ 10M • Empowerment and inclusion • Healthy living and recreation • Create an open data platform for use by all by leveraging , connecting existing and adding new infrastructure , platforms and applications to enable informed action to create a healthy community Waterloo Region Ontario $ 50M • Empowerment and inclusion • Healthy living and recreation • Create framework for data - driven , adaptive and scalable programs that improve early child development , mental health and high school graduation rates • Build Canada’s ﬁrst real - time child and youth wellbeing dashboard that connects data from multiple organizations Quebec City Quebec $ 50M • Environmental quality • Healthy living and recreation • Utilizing collective intelligence and deployment of digital tools that support decision - making and follow - ups to increase sustainable health and wellbeing City of Edmonton Alberta $ 50M • Empowerment and Inclusion • Healthy living and recreation • Creating of a Health Data Repository , connecting data from many stakeholders and new technologies to facilitate assessment , analytics and data mining • New municipal health support through digital tool and devices , allowing them to identify and access services , relationships and technologies to improve health and connectedness City of Surrey and City of Vancouver British Columbia $ 50M • Mobility • Safety and security • Advancing smart mobility infrastructure by implementing Canada’s ﬁrst two collision - free multi - modal transportation corridors , leveraging autonomous vehicles and smart technologies to create safer , healthier and more socially connected communities while reducing emissions , improving transportation efﬁciency and enhancing livability in the face of rapid growth and trafﬁc congestion Montreal Quebec $ 50M • Mobility • Environmental quality • Addressing systemic issues of urban life including mobility and access to food • Use technology to implement efﬁcient and sustainable transportation alternatives ( car sharing on - demand , autonomous vehicles , bike sharing , etc . ) • Innovative transportation alternatives will reinforce the access to local services , most notably to food supply Adopted from Infrastructure Canada , Government of Canada ( https : / / www . infrastructure . gc . ca / cities - villes / proﬁles - proﬁls - eng . html ) . CONCLUSION While there have been rapid advancements in technologies to address challenges related to an aging population and support theories active and successful aging , there is a limited amount real - world deployment of AAL technologies , despite the potential beneﬁts they provide to users . There remain wide gaps and challenges when it comes to scaling and integrating AAL into Frontiers in Digital Health | www . frontiersin . org 8 May 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 891634 Lam et al . Evaluating Challenges in Adopting AAL larger environments such as communities and cities . Most communities are more concerned with addressing areas such as mobility and , renewable and sustainable energy . Canada lags behind in AAL deployment compared to other countries around the world like Europe and Asia . As the research and development process of AAL projects often requires a heavy up - front investment and are primarily led by academic institutions , funding may not be sustainable for long periods of time . Providing sustainable and monetary incentives , such as large pools of funding with the focus of AAL can help increase the innovation , development , and implementation . IMPLICATIONS The ﬁndings of this study are currently being used in a novel research project that is focused on exploring the continuum between AAL technologies , AAL services , and smart communities . The goal of this project is to develop guidelines for the implementation of smart homes and smart communities that fully leverage the beneﬁts of independent living supported by AAL technology , for use by ( i ) new AAL technology manufacturers , ( ii ) developers of new smart communities , and ( iii ) existing communities seeking to leverage data generated by AAL and IoT sensors into fully integrated community health services . These guidelines will be the product of not only an examination of existing literature , such as what is analyzed in this study , but also focus groups and interviews with relevant actors in the health care sector . An essential component of these guidelines will be the development of a framework for data governance . AAL technologies generate mass amounts of home care - recipient data . Thus , it is important to implement a data governance framework that will ensure the privacy and security of the end - users are prioritized throughout the continuum of care . To develop the framework , it is necessary to identify factors such as independent and dependent variables , relevant actors , collective problems , internal processes , and social norms within the AAL domain . Understanding these factors will in turn unveil data ﬂow requirements , which regulated and unregulated AAL technologies are needed , and how these requirements change as the factors change . With the prioritization of AAL emerging in Canada , such as the newly established Smart Cities Challenge initiative , and involvement in the European AAL Programme , the creation of a data governance framework is critical for the development of smart communities as AAL systems become more complex and integrate more actors . If available , the outcomes of research projects in the European AAL Programme will be considered for the development of guidelines in the subsequent research project . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS LL , PM , and LF : research concept and methodology . LL , AS , and GB : original draft . PM , LF , and GB : review and editing . PM and LF : supervision . All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version . REFERENCES 1 . WHO . Ageing and Health . ( 2018 ) . Available online at : https : / / www . who . int / news - room / fact - sheets / detail / ageing - and - health ( accessed November 12 , 2020 ) . 2 . Rocha N , Dias A , Santinha G , Rodrigues M , Queirós A , Rodrigues C . A systematic review of smart cities’ applications to support active ageing . Proc Comput Sci . ( 2019 ) 160 : 306 – 13 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . procs . 2019 . 11 . 086 3 . Arroub A , Zahi B , Sabir E , Sadik M . A literature review on Smart Cities : paradigms , opportunities and open problems . In : 2016 International Conference on Wireless Networks and Mobile Communications ( WINCOM ) . Fes : IEEE ( 2016 ) . p . 180 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1109 / WINCOM . 2016 . 7777211 4 . Consel C , Kaye J . Aging with the internet of things . The bridge , National Academy of Sciences . Technol Aging . ( 2019 ) 49 : 6 – 12 . 5 . Abril - Jiménez P , Lacal JR , de los Ríos Pérez S , Páramo M , Colomer JBM , Waldmeyer MT . Ageing - friendly cities for assessing older adults’ decline : IoT - based system for continuous monitoring of frailty risks using smart city infrastructure . Aging Clin Exp Res . ( 2020 ) 32 : 663 – 71 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s40520 - 019 - 01238 - y 6 . JohnO , FallavollitaP . Healthpromotiontechnologyandtheagingpopulation . In : Connected Health in Smart Cities . Cham : Springer ( 2020 ) . p . 179 – 90 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 27844 - 1 _ 9 7 . Blackman S , Matlo C , Bobrovitskiy C , Waldoch A , Fang ML , Jackson P , et al . Ambient assisted living technologies for aging well : a scoping review . J Intellig Syst . ( 2016 ) 25 : 55 – 69 . doi : 10 . 1515 / jisys - 2014 - 0136 8 . Pieper M , Antona M , Cortés U . Introduction to the Special theme - ambient assisted living . In : Interuniversity Centre for Social Science Theory and Methodology . ( 2011 ) . http : / / ercim - news . ercim . eu / en87 / special / introduction - to - the - special - theme - ambient - assisted - living ( accessed February , 2021 ) . 9 . Sacco M , Caldarola EG , Modoni G , Terkaj W . Supporting the design of AAL through a SW integration framework : the D4All project . In : International Conference on Universal Access in Human - Computer Interaction . Cham : Springer ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 07437 - 5 _ 8 10 . Kleinberger T , Becker M , Ras E , Holzinger A , Müller P . Ambient intelligence in assisted living : enable elderly people to handle future interfaces . In : International Conference on Universal Access in Human - Computer Interaction . Berlin ; Heidelberg : Springer ( 2007 ) . p . 103 – 12 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 540 - 73281 - 5 _ 11 11 . Saﬁ S , Thiessen T , Schmailzl KJ . Acceptance and resistance of new digital technologies in medicine : qualitative study . JMIR Res Protoc . ( 2018 ) 7 : e11072 . doi : 10 . 2196 / 11072 12 . Oﬀermann - van Heek J , Schomakers EM , Zieﬂe M . Bare necessities ? How the need for care modulates the acceptance of ambient assisted living technologies . Int J Med Informatics . ( 2019 ) 127 : 147 – 56 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ijmedinf . 2019 . 04 . 025 13 . Zieﬂe M , Rocker C , Holzinger A . Medical technology in smart homes : exploring the user’s perspective on privacy , intimacy and trust . In : 2011 IEEE 35th Annual Computer Software and Applications Conference Workshops . Munich : IEEE ( 2011 ) . doi : 10 . 1109 / COMPSACW . 2011 . 75 14 . Wang S , Bolling K , Mao W , Reichstadt J , Jeste D , Kim HC , et al . Technology to support aging in place : older adults’ perspectives . Healthcare . ( 2019 ) 7 : 60 . doi : 10 . 3390 / healthcare7020060 15 . Rothenpieler P , Becker C , Fischer S . Privacy concerns in a remote monitoring and social networking platform for assisted living . In : IFIP PrimeLife International Summer School on Privacy and Identity Management for Life . Berlin ; Heidelberg : Springer ( 2010 ) . p . 219 – 30 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 20769 - 3 _ 18 16 . Gerke S , Shachar C , Chai PR , Cohen IG . Regulatory , safety , and privacy concerns of home monitoring technologies during Frontiers in Digital Health | www . frontiersin . org 9 May 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 891634 Lam et al . Evaluating Challenges in Adopting AAL COVID - 19 . Nat Med . ( 2020 ) 26 : 1176 – 82 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41591 - 020 - 0 994 - 1 17 . CaireP , MoawadA , EfthymiouV , BikakisA , LeTraon Y . Privacy challengesin ambientintelligencesystems . JAmbientIntellSmartEnviron . ( 2016 ) 8 : 619 – 44 . doi : 10 . 3233 / AIS - 160405 18 . Queirós A , Silva A , Alvarelhão J , Rocha NP , Teixeira A . Usability , accessibility and ambient - assisted living : a systematic literature review . Univ Access Inform Soc . ( 2015 ) 14 : 57 – 66 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10209 - 013 - 0328 - x 19 . Hoareau C , Satoh I . Modeling and processing information for context - aware computing : a survey . New Gen Comput . ( 2009 ) 27 : 177 – 96 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00354 - 009 - 0060 - 5 20 . Gambi E , Montanini L , Raﬀaeli L , Spinsante S , Lambrinos L . Interoperability in IoT infrastructures for enhanced living environments . In : 2016 IEEE International Black Sea Conference on Communications and Networking ( BlackSeaCom ) . Varna : IEEE ( 2016 ) . doi : 10 . 1109 / BlackSeaCom . 2016 . 7901573 21 . Rossi L , Belli A , De Santis A , Diamantini C , Frontoni E , Gambi E , et al . Interoperability issues among smart home technological frameworks . In : 2014 IEEE / ASME 10th International Conference on Mechatronic and Embedded Systems and Applications ( MESA ) . Senigallia : IEEE ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1109 / MESA . 2014 . 6935626 22 . AALiance2 D4 . 4 Report on Standards and Certiﬁcation in AAL ( n . d . ) . Available online at : http : / / www . aaliance . eu / sites / default / ﬁles / ﬁles _ list / AA2 _ D4 . 4 _ Report _ on _ Standards _ and _ Certiﬁcations _ in _ AAL . pdf ( accessed February , 2021 ) . 23 . Dasios A , Gavalas D , Pantziou G , Konstantopoulos C . Hands - on experiences in deploying cost - eﬀective ambient - assisted living systems . Sensors . ( 2015 ) 15 : 14487 – 512 . doi : 10 . 3390 / s150614487 24 . Lee C , Nordstedt D , Helal S . Enabling smart spaces with OSGi . IEEE Pervasive Comput . ( 2003 ) 2 : 89 – 94 . doi : 10 . 1109 / MPRV . 2003 . 1228530 25 . City of Edmonton . Smart Cities Challenge Edmonton Final Proposal . ( 2019 ) . Available online at : https : / / www . edmonton . ca / public - ﬁles / assets / document ? path = CityofEdmontonSmartCitiesProposal _ 21MB . pdf ( accessed February , 2021 ) . 26 . Waterfront Toronto . Draft Digital Principles . ( 2019 ) . Available online at : https : / / quaysideto . ca / wp - content / uploads / 2019 / 11 / Final - Draft - Digital - Principles . pdf ( accessed February , 2021 ) . 27 . EU CIP . Evaluation , validation and evidence report . EUROPA ( 2016 ) . Available online at : https : / / ec . europa . eu / eip / ageing / sites / eipaha / ﬁles / results _ attachments / 20160803 _ d5 - 3 _ evaluation - validation - and - evidence - report . pdf ( accessed February , 2021 ) . 28 . VandeWeerd C , Yalcin A , Aden - Buie G , Wang Y , Roberts M , Mahser N , et al . HomeSense : design of an ambient home health and wellness monitoring platform for older adults . Health Technol . ( 2020 ) 10 : 1291 – 309 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s12553 - 019 - 00404 - 6 29 . McConville R , Archer G , Craddock I , Kozlowski M , Piechocki R , Pope J , et al . Vesta : a digital health analytics platform for a smart home in a box . Fut Gen Comput Syst . ( 2021 ) 114 : 106 – 19 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . future . 2020 . 07 . 046 30 . Wolf P , Schmidt A , Klein M . SOPRANO – an extensible , open AAL platform for elderly people based on semantical contracts . In : 18th European Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence ( ECAI 08 ) . ( 2008 ) . Available online at : https : / / www . researchgate . net / proﬁle / Andreas - Schmidt - 11 / publication / 228880133 _ SOPRANO - An _ extensible _ open _ AAL _ platform _ for _ elderly _ people _ based _ on _ semantical _ contracts / links / 0912f50a27d0abec7c000000 / SOPRANO - An - extensible - open - AAL - platform - for - elderly - people ( accessed February , 2021 ) . 31 . Noori N , Hoppe T , de Jong M . Classifying pathways for smart city development : comparing design , governance and implementation in Amsterdam , Barcelona , Dubai , and Abu Dhabi . Sustainability . ( 2020 ) 12 : 4030 . doi : 10 . 3390 / su12104030 32 . Government of Canada . Smart Cities Challenge . ( 2020 ) . Available online at : https : / / www . infrastructure . gc . ca / cities - villes / index - eng . html ( accessed February , 2021 ) . 33 . European Commission . Horizon 2020 . ( 2020 ) . Available online at : https : / / ec . europa . eu / inea / en / horizon - 2020 ( accessed February , 2021 ) . 34 . Fadrique LX , Rahman D , Morita PP . The Active Assisted Living Landscape in Canada Insights for Standards , Policies , and Governance . Available online at : https : / / www . csagroup . org / wp - content / uploads / CSA - Group - Research - AAL . pdf ( accessed February , 2021 ) . 35 . AAL Programme . Active and Assisted Living Programme – Objectives . AAL Programme ( 2018 ) . Available online at : http : / / www . aaleurope . eu / about / objectives / ( accessed February , 2021 ) . 36 . Peek ST , Wouters EJ , Van Hoof J , Luijkx KG , Boeije HR , Vrijhoef HJ . Factors inﬂuencing acceptance of technology for aging in place : a systematic review . Int J Med Inform . ( 2014 ) 83 : 235 – 48 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ijmedinf . 2014 . 01 . 004 37 . Lindsay S , Jackson D , Schoﬁeld G , Olivier P . Engaging older people using participatory design . In : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Elsevier Ireland Ltd . ( 2012 ) . p . 1199 – 208 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208570 38 . Röcker C . User - centered design of intelligent environments : requirements for designing successful ambient assisted living systems . In : Central European Conference on Information and Intelligent Systems . Austin , TX : Faculty of Organization and Informatics Varazdin ( 2013 ) . p . 4 . 39 . van Gemert - Pijnen JE , Nijland N , van Limburg M , Ossebaard HC , Kelders SM , Eysenbach G , et al . A holistic framework to improve the uptake and impact of eHealth technologies . J Med Internet Res . ( 2011 ) 13 : e111 . doi : 10 . 2196 / jmir . 1672 40 . European Union . What Is GDPR , the EU’s New Data Protection Law ? ( 2021 ) . Available online at : https : / / gdpr . eu / what - is - gdpr / ( accessed February , 2021 ) . 41 . Corno F , Guercio E , De Russis L , Gargiulo E . Designing for user conﬁdence in intelligent environments . J Reliable Intell Environ . ( 2015 ) 1 : 11 – 21 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s40860 - 015 - 0001 - 7 Conﬂict of Interest : The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest . Publisher’s Note : All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated organizations , or those of the publisher , the editors and the reviewers . Any product that may be evaluated in this article , or claim that may be made by its manufacturer , is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher . Copyright©2022Lam , Fadrique , BinNoon , ShahandMorita . Thisisanopen - access articledistributedunderthetermsoftheCreativeCommonsAttributionLicense ( CC BY ) . The use , distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted , provided the original author ( s ) and the copyright owner ( s ) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited , in accordance with accepted academic practice . No use , distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms . Frontiers in Digital Health | www . frontiersin . org 10 May 2022 | Volume 4 | Article 891634