JCB : Article The Rockefeller University Press $ 30 . 00 J . Cell Biol . www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200910136 Cite by DOI : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200910136 JCB 1 of 15 G . A . Quinones and J . Jin contributed equally to this paper . Correspondence to Anthony E . Oro : oro @ stanford . edu Abbreviations used in this paper : BAR , Bin / Amphiphysin / Rvs domain ; CD2AP , CD2 - associated protein ; GMA , GFP fused to the actin - binding domain of moesin ; IRS , insulin receptor substrate ; MEF , mouse embryonic fibroblast ; MIM , missing - in - metastasis ; PGC , primordial germ cell ; pTyr , phosphotyrosine . Introduction Directed cellular migration facilitates the coordinated move - ment of individual cells , cell clusters , and sheets of cells during development and regeneration . Directed cell migration is im - portant for individual cells as well as groups of cells ; there are key differences between these types of migrating cells . Individ - ual cells migrating , either on a plastic dish or in a living tissue matrix , must correctly sense or respond to migratory cues . These cells then undergo changes in their cytoskeletal structure in order to project their cell bodies forward , put down new ad - hesion complexes , and remove older adhesion complexes at the trailing end of the cell ( Harden , 2002 ; Friedl et al . , 2004 ; Blaser et al . , 2005 ; Montell , 2006 ; Rørth , 2007 ) . Although cells in a cluster or sheet must also respond to directional cues , they must also maintain the correct cell – cell adhesions and spatial aware - ness in order to maintain their structure . Directed cluster migra - tion forms the foundation for organ morphogenesis and , when abnormal , has been implicated in disease states such as mental retardation , birth defects , and cancer ( Friedl et al . , 2004 ; Kopfstein and Christofori , 2006 ) . Insights into directed cell migration of groups of cells have come from the studies of relatively small clusters of cells , such as border cell migration during Drosophila oogenesis ( Rørth , 2002 ; Montell , 2006 ) or the rearrangement of larger sheets , as is the case during vertebrate gastrulation ( Keller , 2005 ) . In Drosophila border cell migration , cell clusters initially become autonomously motile , elaborating nondirec - tional actin - based cellular extensions with little net cellular dis - placement . Border cell migration is mediated in response to local migratory cues emanating from the ovary via guidance receptors , the Drosophila epidermal growth factor receptor ( DER ) and the PDGF / VEGF - like ( PVR ) receptor , on the clus - ter surface . Signaling through the receptors allows border cell membranes to become polarized to form actin - based mem - brane extensions and migrate along the growth factor gradient ( Bianco et al . , 2007 ; Prasad and Montell , 2007 ) . Genetic studies overexpressing DER in border cells indicate that it is not the total levels of receptor , but the location of activated receptors that determines directional migration ( Jékely and Rørth , 2003 ) . Despite its importance , our understanding of signaling mecha - nisms downstream of the guidance receptors that operate in the context of developing organisms remains primitive . Previous work points to a central role for guidance receptor endocytosis in interpreting local migratory cues to the A lthough directed cellular migration facilitates the coordinated movement of cells during devel - opment and repair , the mechanisms regulating such migration remain poorly understood . Missing - in - metastasis ( MIM ) is a defining member of the inverse Bin / Amphiphysin / Rvs domain ( I - BAR ) subfamily of lipid binding , cytoskeletal regulators whose levels are altered in a number of cancers . Here , we provide the first genetic evidence that an I - BAR protein regulates directed cell migration in vivo . Drosophila MIM ( dmim ) is involved in Drosophila border cell migration , with loss of dmim function resulting in a lack of directional movement by the border cell cluster . In vivo endocytosis assays com - bined with genetic analyses demonstrate that the dmim product regulates directed cell movement by inhibiting endocytosis and antagonizing the activities of the CD2 - associated protein / cortactin complex in these cells . These studies demonstrate that DMIM antagonizes pro - endocytic components to facilitate polarity and localized guidance cue sensing during directional cell migration . I - BAR protein antagonism of endocytosis mediates directional sensing during guided cell migration Gabriel A . Quinones , Janet Jin , and Anthony E . Oro Program in Epithelial Biology and Cancer Biology Graduate Program , Stanford University School of Medicine , Stanford , CA 94305 © 2010 Quinones et al . This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike – No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date ( see http : / / www . rupress . org / terms ) . After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported license , as described at http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 / ) . T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y on A p r il 5 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 12 , 2010 JCB 2 of 15 Here , we provide the first in vivo genetic evidence for the involvement of an I - BAR family member in regulating direc - tional migration . We show that MIM and cortactin antagonism underlies a novel molecular steering mechanism . Results Vertebrate MIM inhibits endocytosis Increasing attention has been directed toward the role of the BAR family proteins in endocytosis and vesicle trafficking . Because each subfamily of BAR proteins has been shown to positively regulate endocytosis , we sought to test whether I - BAR proteins function in a similar manner , or because they are struc - turally distinct from the other families , do they act to antagonize endocytosis . We asked whether MIM , a founding member of the I - BAR family , regulates cell migration and endocytosis using well - characterized , receptor - mediated endocytosis assays in vertebrate cells . Using transferrin endocytosis assays , we found the uptake of HRP - labeled transferrin within 5 min of cell warming to be increased where MIM protein levels are reduced ( Fig . 1 A ) . Similar effects were seen when the kinetics of 125 I - labeled EGF uptake were observed after siRNA knock - down of MIM ( Fig . 1 B ) . This effect was not due to altered ini - tial levels of receptor ( Fig . 1 , F and H ) . We also observed an increase in recycling levels of both transferrin and EGF ( Fig . 1 , C and D ) , consistent with the increase in 125 I - EGF uptake . These results indicate that a reduction in MIM protein levels increases endocytosis and recycling , but not receptor degradation , leading us to examine if MIM knockdown alters signaling downstream of the receptor . We tested this by assaying levels of phospho - ERK1 / 2 ( Fig . 1 , G and I ) . In MIM knockdown cells , peak levels of pERK1 / 2 immunoreactivity remained unchanged , but the du - ration of the signal persisted twice as long as in control cells . In our short - term cell - based assays we noted no differences in proliferation , adhesion , or overall morphology compared with control - treated cells ( not depicted ) . We also found a marked abnormality in the ability of cells to directionally migrate in response to EGF ( Fig . 1 E ) . From these data we conclude that MIM functions to inhibit receptor - mediated endocytosis , resulting in altered downstream signaling and reduced direc - tional cell migration in vitro . DMIM is a novel Drosophila I - BAR protein Although MIM is one of the founding members of the I - BAR subfamily of lipid - binding BAR domain proteins , MIM func - tions have not yet been delineated in vivo , although studies have been conducted with IRSp53 knockout mice ( Kim et al . , 2009 ; Sawallisch et al . , 2009 ) . Because the BAR subfamilies are rep - resented in Dipterans , we chose to use Drosophila to better under - stand the in vivo roles of these important proteins . Drosophila MIM ( DMIM , GenBank / EMBL / DDBJ accession no . CG33558 ) shares strong identity in the I - BAR and WH2 domains with its vertebrate counterpart and ABBA , and less similarity with the I - BAR family member IRS53 ( Fig . S1 ; Scita et al . , 2008 ) . Previous structural studies have demonstrated that MIM binds and bends phospholipid - containing membranes ( Mattila et al . , 2007 ) . To determine whether DMIM retains similar properties , underlying cytoskeleton . In cultured mammalian cells , localized receptor - mediated endocytosis and receptor recycling amplifies the guidance signal to focally activate key regulators of the cyto - skeleton such as the GTPase Rac1 ( Palamidessi et al . , 2008 ) . Similar mechanisms appear to control Drosophila border cell migration ( Jékely et al . , 2005 ; Minina et al . , 2007 ) . Forward genetic screens for migration mutants have identified cue - specific components such as the nonreceptor tyrosine kinase Src , com - ponents of the endocytic machinery ( Jékely et al . , 2005 ; Palamidessi et al . , 2008 ) , and the CD2 - associated protein ( CD2AP ) / cortactin complex ( Lynch et al . , 2003 ; Somogyi and Rørth , 2004 ) . Each of these components has been shown to regulate endocytosis and cell migration , but little information exists about how they function to regulate directionality during migration . Increasing attention has been directed toward the Bin / Amphiphysin / Rvs ( BAR ) superfamily of proteins and their role in endocytosis and vesicle trafficking ( Dawson et al . , 2006 ; Frost et al . , 2007 ) . Each of the BAR domain subfamilies of cur - vature - dependent molecular scaffolds are thought to bring to - gether effector complexes to distinct lipid surface in order to regulate actin cytoskeletal remodeling near vesicles . For exam - ple , the BAR protein endophilin is critical for early vesicle scis - sion and EGF receptor signaling ( Kaneko et al . , 2005 ) , and isoforms have been associated with both tumor suppression and oncogenesis . Endophilin is recruited in a receptor - dependent manner through the formation of complexes with the Cbl - associated proteins CIN85 and CD2AP . The endophilin / CD2AP complex in turn mediates vesicle scission through the recruit - ment of cortactin and the actin - polymerization machinery ( Dikic , 2002 ; Lynch et al . , 2003 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2006 ) . The newest family of BAR domain proteins is the inverse or IMD BAR ( I - BAR ) family . IMD proteins are defined by the proteins Missing - In - Metastasis ( MIM ) and the insulin receptor substrate 53 ( IRSp53 ) cytoskeletal regulators ( Miki et al . , 2000 ; Lee et al . , 2002 ) . MIM was originally identified as a gene whose expression is down - regulated in a variety of urogenital meta - static cancers ( Lee et al . , 2002 ; Wang et al . , 2007 ) , but other studies have also demonstrated elevated MIM levels in many hedgehog - dependent tumors ( Callahan et al . , 2004 ) and meta - static endodermal tumors such as hepatocellular carcinomas ( Ma et al . , 2007 ) . Like many BAR family proteins , MIM contains several protein – protein interaction modules that sug - gest it functions to scaffold protein complexes at membranes ( Mattila et al . , 2003 ; Woodings et al . , 2003 ; Gonzalez - Quevedo et al . , 2005 ; Lin et al . , 2005 ) . Crystal structure analysis indi - cates that the shape of the IMD dimer is the most convex of the family members thus far , suggesting that the I - BAR family senses a very distinct class of membranes ( Lee et al . , 2007 ) . I - BAR family members have also been well studied as membrane - deforming proteins with the capacity to cause membrane tubu - lation and projections ( Suetsugu et al . , 2006 ; Mattila et al . , 2007 ; Saarikangas et al . , 2008 , 2009 ; Yang et al . , 2009 ) . Because each of the other BAR family members has roles in posi - tively regulating endocytosis , the convex shape of the I - BAR proteins is proposed to be involved in antagonizing endocytosis , although this supposition has not been directly tested ( Dawson et al . , 2006 ; Lee et al . , 2007 ) . on A p r il 5 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 12 , 2010 3 of 15 Missing - in - metastasis regulates endocytosis during cell migration • Quinones et al . Figure 1 . Vertebrate MIM loss of function results in increased endocytosis and reduced directional migration . ( A and B ) Quantification of the ratio of internalized to surface - bound Transferrin ( A ) of EGF ( B ) in ptc  /  MEFs treated with indicated siRNAs . Data are represented as the mean ± SEM from three separate experiments ( * , P < 0 . 01 ; t test ) . ( C and D ) Quantification of the amount of recycled Transferrin ( C ) or EGF ( D ) in the medium of ptc  /  MEFs treated with indicated siRNAs . Data are represented as the mean ± SEM from three separate experiments . Inset in C shows immunoblots of protein level knockdown after treatment with indicated siRNAs . ( E ) MIM knockdown alters EGF - induced directional cell migration . Transwell migration assays showing alterations in the migration of ptc  /  MEFs through a permeable membrane in response to an EGF or PDGF gradient over the course of 8 h . Data are represented as the mean ± SEM from three separate experiments ( * , P < 0 . 01 ; t test ) . ( F ) EGFR levels in siRNA - treated cells show that si - MIM – treated cells do not display enhanced degradation of the EGF receptor over time . ( G ) Phospho - ERK1 and 2 levels in cells treated with control or MIM siRNA . MIM knockdown results in prolonged levels of pERK1 / 2 after the addition of EGF to the cell medium . ( H and I ) Quantification of immunoblots used for F and G . Data are represented as the mean ± SEM from three separate experiments ( * , P < 0 . 01 ; t test ) . on A p r il 5 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 12 , 2010 JCB  of 15 partial female sterility ( Fig . S2 , F and G ) . dmim mutant adults appear phenotypically normal , but display defects in locomotor activity ( Fig . S2 , H and I ) . We also observed that dmim mutants display marked abnormalities in guided cell migration . Two cell types requiring precise cellular movement during development are the ovarian border cells and the primordial germ cells ( PGCs ) in the embryo . In the early embryo , PGCs respond to both maternal and zygotic cues from the mesoderm to trans - migrate across an epithelial layer toward the genital mesoderm ( Kunwar et al . , 2006 ) . dmim mutant PGCs fail to arrive at the mesodermal target despite apparently normal mesoderm as measured by Clift immunoreactivity ( unpublished data ) . Approximately 10 % of the PGCs arrest outside the embryo after germ band extension . Of those that enter , all are capable of transmigration , but only 20 % appropriately migrate toward the gonadal mesodermal attractants . The remaining dmim PGCs demonstrate a metastatic phenotype , with PGCs scattered throughout the posterior embryo ( Fig . 3 , A and B ) . In the ovary , border cells also perform a well - defined directional migration in response to oocyte - derived growth factor migratory cues ( Rørth , 2002 ; Montell , 2006 ) . The border cell cluster first migrates toward the posterior end of the egg cham - ber , and then dorsally as the migratory cue changes position . dmim mutant border cell clusters have normal numbers and we compared the lipid - binding properties of purified fly and human MIM I - BAR domains ( Fig . 2 , B and C ) . Both human and DMIM proteins bound to PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 - containing vesicles , whereas the DMIM mutant I - BAR domain failed to bind to these vesicles . The DMIM I - BAR domain was also able to bind to PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 - containing vesicles , whereas the human I - BAR was not . This binding was quite specific as mutation of the con - served lipid - binding motifs completely abrogated lipid binding ( Mattila et al . , 2007 ) . Further , fly or human MIM overexpres - sion in Drosophila S2 cells results in the same dramatic cyto - skeletal reorientation and extensions ( Fig . 2 D ) , indicating that DMIM functions similarly to its vertebrate orthologue . Migration defects in dmim mutants To understand the role of DMIM and other I - BAR family mem - bers , we generated a dmim - null mutant through homologous re - combination ( Fig . 2 A ) . We confirmed that the dmim mutant lacked the conserved I - BAR domain and much of the scaffold - ing domain ( Fig . S2 A ) and dmim / dmim phenotypes equaled those from dmim / deficiency mothers , arguing the dmim mutant is a strong loss - of - function mutant . The dmim locus produces a maternal transcript in the ovary , which is then distributed into the germ cells during early embryogenesis ( Fig . S2 , B – E ) . Consistent with this maternal expression , dmim mutants display Figure 2 . DMIM is the Drosophila homologue of human MIM . ( A ) The genomic structure of the dmim locus on chromosome 2R , 42C - 42E , showing the transcriptional start ( arrow ) and exons encoding the I - BAR , scaffolding , and WH2 domains . The black box above indicates the exons ( 3 – 10 ) deleted by homologous recombination to make dmim - null flies . ( B ) Native gel of hMIM , DMIM , or DMIM mutant ( 4KA ) I - BAR domains binding with lipids . Only when the I - BAR domain ( s ) bind to lipids will they run down the native gel . ( C ) hMIM , DMIM , or DMIM mutant ( 4KA ) I - BAR domain cosedimented with PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 - or PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 - rich ( 30 % ) large multilamellar vesicles . Human and fly MIM display similar specificity in binding for specific lipids . ( D ) Overexpressing human or Drosophila MIM in Drosophila S2 cells results in similar changes in the actin cytoskeleton . Overexpression of either protein results in the formation of actin - based protrusions from the cell membrane . Bar = 20 µm . on A p r il 5 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 12 , 2010 5 of 15 Missing - in - metastasis regulates endocytosis during cell migration • Quinones et al . Figure 3 . dmim - null flies display abnormal cell migration . ( A ) Immunohistochemistry of Drosophila embryos at different developmental stages stained with anti - VASA antibody to highlight the progress of germ cell migration . dmim mutants display retained germ cells outside of the embryo at stage 9 and mislocalized germ cells in the mesoderm at stage 15 . Red arrowheads indicate the position of the primordial germ cells throughout each stage . Bar = 50 µm . ( B ) Quantification of germ cell migration from two different developmental stages where dmim mutants display an aberrant migration pattern . ( C ) dmim mutants are delayed in migration of the border cells in stage 10 egg chambers . The egg chambers are stained with phalloidin ( F - actin , red ) . Bar = 50 µm . ( D ) Expression of a UAS - DMIM - Myc transgene under the 306 - Gal4 driver shows expression of the construct in the border cells in both the dmim mutant and wild - type backgrounds . White arrowheads indicate the border cell cluster . Bar = 50 µm . ( E ) Quantification of border cell migration using the scale described in F ; more than 100 egg chambers were examined per genotype . ( F ) Schematic of a stage 10 egg chamber and scale used to score border cell migration defects . Anterior is to the left . ( G ) Border cell stained for pTyr ( green ) and F - actin ( red ) indicating the portion of the cell membrane where active signaling is occurring . Bar = 5 µm . ( H ) Quantification of the ratio of posterior to anterior pixel staining with the pTyr antibody . Initial polarized pTyr has been shown to be crucial for proper border cell migration ( Jékely et al . , 2005 ) . on A p r il 5 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 12 , 2010 JCB 6 of 15 Figure 4 . dmim mutants show border cell migration defects and altered endocytosis . ( A ) Time - lapse series of confocal micrographs of early stage 9 border cell clusters expressing UAS - GMA under 306 - Gal4 in wild - type , dmim mutant , and dmim mutants expressing UAS - DMIM - Myc transgene in the border cells showing the migration of the border cell clusters over  3 h . White arrowheads indicate the border cell cluster and the dashed line indicates the anterior end of the oocyte ( the end point of border cell migration ) . Bar = 50 µm . ( B ) Quantification of the directionality index ( DI ) of the border cell cluster . The DI is calculated as ( A  B ) / ( A + B ) , where A is the number of forward extensions and B is the number of rearward extensions . Forward and rearward extensions are defined by which direction they point away from a vertical line on the dorsal ventral axis of the egg chamber . ( C ) Quantification of the migration speed of the border cell cluster , independent of the direction of migration . ( D ) Quantification of the average lifetime of each extension from the border cell cluster . All analyses were conducted using five separate movies for each genotype . ( * * , P < 0 . 001 ; * * * , P < 0 . 0001 ; t test ) . ( E ) Time - lapse on A p r il 5 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 12 , 2010  of 15 Missing - in - metastasis regulates endocytosis during cell migration • Quinones et al . modes of border cell membrane dynamics : initial random ex - tensions independent of cue direction , posterior - directed move - ment characterized by long extensions toward the guidance cue source , and as the cluster comes closer to the guidance cue source , slower dorsal migration toward the oocyte nucleus . Border cells with constitutively active guidance receptors fail to detach from the anterior chamber and lack cell protrusions , whereas border cells with a lack of guidance receptor activity ( i . e . , those expressing dominant - negative receptors ) have nor - mal cytoplasmic extensions , but lack directional migration ( Prasad and Montell , 2007 ) . To examine how the dmim product effects border cell mi - gration , we imaged dmim mutant border cells expressing the actin - binding domain of moesin tagged with GFP ( GMA ) com - pared with isogenic wild - type controls ( Fig . 4 A ; Video 1 [ wt ] , Video 2 [ dmim mutant ] , Video 3 [ dmim ; DMIM + rescue ] ) . Using a directional migration index ( Prasad and Montell , 2007 ) , we found that wild - type border cells displayed marked direc - tionality toward the cue source , with a directionality index close to 1 . 0 . These data emphasize the marked asymmetry of exten - sions accompanying normal cluster migration . DMIM depletion impairs the directionality of the border cell cluster ( Fig . 4 B ) , and phenocopies border cell clusters lacking guidance receptors ( Prasad and Montell , 2007 ) . Further , we ascertained the dura - tion of the cytoplasmic extensions to determine whether dmim had affected the actin cytoskeleton itself . Measurement of the time to maximal extension or retraction in several independent movies clearly indicated no difference in extension lifetime , suggesting that dmim is not required for general actin dynamics in these cells in vivo ( Fig . 4 D ) . Because the I - BAR proteins have been shown , when overexpressed , to promote formation of small filopodial - like plasma membrane protrusions in migrating cells , we assayed the number of small cellular projections on the cell surface of individual border cells over time ( Fig . 4 E ) . Similar to our results with larger extensions , we observed no difference in the number of these fine projections ( Fig . 4 F ) . The dmim mutants also displayed reduced migration speeds inde - pendent of their direction , with dmim mutant border cells mov - ing much slower . The average speed for dmim mutants was 0 . 35 µm / min as compared with 0 . 65 µm / min displayed by wild - type clusters ( Fig . 4 C ) . Expression of DMIM back into the dmim mutant border cells ( dmim ; DMIM + ) rescues both the directionality index and migration speed phenotypes . Live - cell imaging data in vivo lead us to conclude that DMIM plays a role in properly sensing and responding to directional migratory cues in an otherwise normal migratory environment . DMIM inhibits endocytosis in border cells Our in vitro data suggest that MIM inhibition of endocytosis under - lies the inability to directionally sense guidance cues . To confirm size ( Fig . S3 C ) , but are significantly delayed in the initial phase of polarized movement compared with their wild - type counter - parts . By stage 10 , nearly half of the mutant border cells are still delayed , whereas greater than 95 % of wild - type clusters have traversed the egg chamber to the oocyte ( Fig . 3 , C and E ) . We focused further on dmim function in the border cells because of the ease of genetic manipulation and live imaging in this system . To determine whether the dmim product functions in migrating cells or in the surrounding environment , we ana - lyzed the structure of the dmim mutant ovary . The polarity , membrane , and cytoskeletal structure appeared to be unaffected as detailed by Fas2 , oskar , armadillo , DE - cadherin , and phalloi - din immunoreactivity ( Fig . S3 , A and B ) . Moreover , expression levels of the migratory cues such as gurken exhibited immuno - reactivity comparable to wild type , arguing that dmim mutants retain a normal migratory environment . Because the dmim locus sits immediately adjacent to recombination sites on the second chromosome , the generation of dmim mutants specifically in border cells was not possible . Rather , we aimed to demonstrate cell autonomy by rescuing the dmim phenotype through expres - sion of wild - type DMIM in the border cells . Expression of DMIM in border cells resulted in uniform distribution of DMIM protein at both the leading and lagging edges of the migrating border cells ( Fig . S3 D ) . This uniformly distributed expression restored the ability of the cluster to respond to its normal migra - tory cues ( Fig . 3 E ) . Further , we tested whether higher levels of DMIM expression altered border cell migration using two dif - ferent lines , the slbo - Gal4 and 306 - Gal4 drivers ( Fig . S3 D ) . Gain - of - function dmim border cells expressing elevated levels of DMIM protein displayed normal cell shape and border cell migration ( Fig . 3 D ) . Previous studies indicate that membrane response to directional guidance cues are polarized , as measured by phosphotyrosine ( pTyr ) staining at the leading edge . ( Rørth , 2002 , 2007 ; Jékely et al . , 2005 ) . dmim mutant border cells fail to correctly polarize , as assayed by nonlocalized pTyr staining around the border cell membrane ( Fig . 3 , G and H ) . These data suggest that DMIM acts in migrating border and PGC cells to facilitate the initial membrane polarity as the border cells begin to migrate . dmim mutant border cell migration phenocopies loss of guidance receptors The study of cell dynamics during migration both in vitro and in vivo has been hampered by the lack of a natural environment to study cell movement or the necessity for fixation to observe the migratory cells . Using recent technical developments that allow live imaging of migrating border cell clusters , we examined the role for dmim in border cell motility in a native environment ( Bianco et al . , 2007 ; Prasad and Montell , 2007 ; Tekotte et al . , 2007 ) . In vivo cell motility studies have observed three distinct series of confocal micrographs of individual border cells expressing UAS - GMA under 306 - Gal4 . Red arrowheads indicate tracking of a single cellular projection over time . Images were taken every 5 min , and the area shown is a magnification of the leading edge of a single border cell within a migrating cluster . ( F ) Quantification of the number of small surface projections in E . Data are represented as the mean ± SEM from 10 separate time series for each genotype . ( G ) Quantification of the amount of FM4 - 64 dye uptake over time for each indicated genotype . Data are represented as the mean ± SEM from five separate time series for each genotype . ( H ) Live confocal imaging of border cell clusters stained with the membrane - selective dye FM4 - 64 . Each time series shows the gradual uptake and increase of the dye at the membrane of the border cells . Bar = 5 µm . on A p r il 5 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 12 , 2010 JCB 8 of 15 Figure 5 . Loss of dcortactin or cindr rescues dmim border cell migration defects . ( A ) GST cosedimentation assay using candidate GST proteins and S2 cell - derived DMIM protein . DMIM binds to itself , human MIM , and DCortactin . ( B ) Immunoprecipitation assay using an antibody to endogenous DCortac - tin and lysates from Myc - tagged DMIM constructs . FL ( full length DMIM ) ;  I - BAR ( lacking the IBAR domain ) ;  PRD ( lacking the polyproline - rich domain ) . ( C ) MIM or Cortactin knockdown alters EGF - induced directional cell migration . Transwell migration assays showing alterations in the migration of ptc  /  MEFs through a permeable membrane in response to an EGF or PDGF gradient over the course of 8 h . Data are represented as the mean ± SEM from three separate experiments ( * , P < 0 . 01 ; * * , P < 0 . 001 ; t test ) . ( D ) Schematic of a stage 10 egg chamber and scale used to score border cell migration defects . Anterior is to the left . ( E ) Confocal immunofluorescence images of egg chambers from wild - type , dmim , dcortactin , dmim ; dcortactin , cindr RNAi , and dmim / cindr RNAi double - mutant egg chambers stained with phalloidin ( F - actin , red ) . White arrowheads indicate the border cell cluster . Bar = 50 µm . ( F and H ) Quantification of stage 10 border cell migration for the indicated genotypes ; more than 100 egg chambers were examined per genotype . on A p r il 5 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 12 , 2010 9 of 15 Missing - in - metastasis regulates endocytosis during cell migration • Quinones et al . We determined the functional relationship between DMIM and Dcortactin through the examination of border cell phe - notypes in double mutants . Previous analysis of dcortactin mutants identified a mild border cell migration phenotype ( Somogyi and Rørth , 2004 ) , a phenotype we confirmed ( Fig . 5 , E and F ) . Surprisingly , we found that dmim ; dcortactin double mutant border cells do not enhance the mutant phenotype , but rather display a wild - type phenotype . This suggests that DMIM acts antagonistically to Dcortactin to regulate directional cell migration in border cells . Because cortactin is recruited to en - dophilin via the adapter CD2AP ( Dikic , 2002 ; Soubeyran et al . , 2002 ; Lynch et al . , 2003 ) , if the CD2AP / cortactin complex functions antagonistically to MIM in guided migration , then CD2AP mutant border cells should phenocopy dcortactin mutants , and also rescue the dmim mutant border cell cluster migration phenotype . We assayed the effects of mutations in the single fly CD2AP gene , cindr , on border cell migration . Previ - ous studies have indicated that two cindr i lines have strong effects on photoreceptor cell morphology ( Johnson et al . , 2008 ) . We expressed these two independent cindr i lines in border cells , where they demonstrated a moderate border cell migration phe - notype , mimicking that of dcortactin mutants ( Fig . 5 , E and H ) . Like dcortactin , cindr i expression in a dmim mutant background partially restores the ability of border cell clusters to migrate , increasing the fraction of clusters that have migrated more than half the distance to the oocyte . We also found that the loss of dcortactin or cindr results in a mild reduction in the uptake of the FM4 - 64 dye in border cells ( Fig . 5 , G and I ) . As predicted , knockdown of dmim in combination with either dcortactin or cindr results in a partial rescue of the dmim increase in dye uptake . From these data , we conclude that the cindr / Dcortactin complex acts to promote endocytosis in opposition to that of DMIM . Our genetic data suggest guided cell migration is regu - lated in part from competition for cortactin between the pro - endocytic BAR domain complex endophilin / CD2AP , and the anti - endocytic BAR MIM . To confirm this model , we examined MIM antagonism of cortactin and other endocytic regulators in cultured vertebrate cells to determine whether double mutants would also restore normal receptor uptake in vitro . As predicted , whereas treatment with siRNA against cortactin decreases the levels of EGF receptor endocytosis , siRNA - mediated knock - down of both MIM and cortactin restores receptor uptake levels back to those in the control - treated cells ( Fig . 6 A ) . Consistent with our genetic data , combination knockdowns of MIM with CD2AP also restore EGF uptake levels to control values . We further tested whether MIM antagonism extended to other endocytic regulators . Knockdown of endophilin leads to a reduction in endocytosis with the combined knockdown of en - dophilin and MIM demonstrating a reproducible trend in eleva - tion of endocytosis over endophilin alone . Knockdown of Cbl , clathrin , or dynamin results in decreased endocytosis and is not our in vitro results , we examined border cell membrane dynamics using a live - cell lipophilic dye uptake assay , previously used to measure clathrin - dependent endocytosis rates during Drosophila synaptic reuptake ( Verstreken et al . , 2008 ) . We confirmed the dynamin dependence of dye uptake by showing dramatic reduc - tion of dye uptake in clusters expressing dominant - negative dynamin ( slbo - Gal4 ; shi K44A ) , or those treated with the dyna - min inhibitor Dynasore ( Georgiou et al . , 2008 ; Kirchhausen et al . , 2008 ; Fig . 4 , G and H ) . If MIM inhibits receptor - mediated endocytosis , we would expect increased dye uptake in border cells lacking DMIM . During live imaging the dye is taken up throughout the entire egg chamber , including the border cells , and continues to increase after dye addition . However , in dmim mutants , the rate of dye uptake compared with wild type was dramatically increased ( Fig . 4 G ) . This effect was not simply due to an increase in general membrane uptake or permeability , as the increased uptake was dynamin dependent and expression of the wild - type DMIM protein in mutant border cells partially rescued the uptake phenotype . The live - cell imaging data , in con - junction with dye uptake studies , support the idea that DMIM regulates guided cell migration through its ability to inhibit receptor - mediated endocytosis . MIM competes with endophilin / CD2AP for binding to cortactin BAR domain proteins function through regulating the assem - bly of protein complexes at membrane surfaces ( Ren et al . , 2006 ; Machesky and Johnston , 2007 ) . To understand mecha - nistically how dmim regulates border cell guidance sensing , we sought to discover which proteins , previously known to regulate border cell migration , interact with the scaffolding portion of DMIM . In GST pull - downs and coimmunoprecipi - tation assays , DMIM formed protein complexes with Dro - sophila cortactin ( Dcortactin ) , but not with Rac1 , Cdc42 , several RPTPs , and the BAR domain protein amphiphysin ( Fig . 5 A ) . Dcortactin is a major Src phosphorylation target downstream of growth factor signaling and is part of the pro - endocytic complex comprised of the BAR domain protein endophilin and its binding partner CD2AP . The endophilin / CD2AP / cortactin complex helps to provide force for endo - cytosis and scission of the early endosome by inducing local actin polymerization . Like their vertebrate counterparts , DMIM interacts with Dcortactin through the proline - rich domain ( Fig . 5 B ) . Both MIM and cortactin also affect the directional migration of vertebrate cells in culture . Cells treated with siRNA against either MIM or cortactin display a reduction in cell motility in response of EGF ( Fig . 5 C ) . Simultaneous knockdown of both MIM and cortactin results in normal cell motility , suggesting that these two proteins work antagonisti - cally . The loss of both proteins resulting in a wild - type pheno - type also suggests that there is redundancy with another set of proteins with a similar function . ( G and I ) Quantification of the amount of FM4 - 64 dye uptake over time for each indicated genotype . Data are represented as the mean ± SEM from three separate time series for each genotype . Knockdown of dmim in combination with either dcortactin or cindr is able to partially rescue the increase in dye uptake seen in the dmim mutant border cells . on A p r il 5 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 12 , 2010 JCB 10 of 15 rescued in combination knockdowns with MIM , suggesting that MIM acts uniquely through CD2AP / cortactin ( Fig . 6 A ) . These results , along with previous studies , suggest that endophilin could be interacting with additional proteins when CD2AP and cortactin are unavailable during EGFR endocytosis ( Soubeyran et al . , 2002 ; Schmidt et al . , 2003 ; Kaneko et al . , 2005 ; Gareus et al . , 2006 ; Uezu et al . , 2007 ) . Because circular dorsal ruffles ( CDRs ) and cortactin have been shown to be an alternative endocytosis pathway for the in - ternalization of growth factor receptors , we investigated MIM and cortactin’s role in CDR formation ( Lynch et al . , 2003 ; Bompard et al . , 2005 ; Orth et al . , 2006 ; Machesky and Johnston , 2007 ; Teodorof et al . , 2009 ) . In vivo , we found no evidence for CDR formation in migrating border cells . In cultured cells ( Fig . S4 ) , we observed that the loss of MIM resulted in a reduction of the CDR formation in response to both PDGF - BB and EGF . However , in contrast to border cells , EGF endocytosis in our MIM and cortactin double mutant cells failed to rescue CDR formation . These results suggest that the effects seen in border cell migration are not a result of increased internaliza - tion of the growth factor receptors due to dorsal ruffle forma - tion ( Fig . S4 C ) . We examined the kinetics of cortactin association with guidance cue addition by performing cortactin immunoprecipi - tations upon the addition of EGF ligand . Under serum - free conditions , we find that cortactin associates with both endophilin / CD2AP and MIM complexes , but within 5 min after EGF addition , cortactin begins to disassociate from the CD2AP / endophilin complex ( Fig . 6 C ; Lynch et al . , 2003 ) . In the absence of MIM , cortactin fails to dissociate from CD2AP after EGF Figure 6 . MIM regulates endocytosis by competing with CD2AP for cortactin binding . ( A ) Quantification of the ratio of internalized to surface - bound EGF at 0 and 15 min in ptc  /  MEFs treated with the indicated siRNAs . MIM knockdown shows an increase in EGF uptake , whereas cortactin or CD2AP knockdown shows a decrease in EGF uptake after 15 min . The combination of siRNAs against both MIM and cortactin or MIM and CD2AP restores the phenotype to wild - type levels at 15 min . The phenotype is not restored by simultaneous knockdown with clathrin heavy chain , dynamin , cbl , or endophilin . Data are represented as the mean ± SEM from three separate experiments ( * , P < 0 . 01 ; t test ) . ( B ) Immunoblots indicating the level of protein knockdown after treatment with siRNAs for A . ( C ) Coimmunoprecipitations of CD2AP and endophilin with cortactin in si - GFP – or si - MIMtreated ptc  /  MEF lysate showing a decrease in the association of both proteins with cortactin after EGF stimulation . In the si - MIM – treated cells , a prolonged association of CD2AP and endophilin with cortactin is seen when compared with si - GFP – treated cells . ( D ) Direct competition between in vitro – translated CD2AP and bacterially expressed MIM for the SH3 domain of cortactin . MIM lacking the region that binds cortactin ( MIM 1 – 277 ) is unable to compete with CD2AP for cortactin binding . ( E ) Coimmunoprecipitations of GFP - tagged endophilin or GFP - tagged MIM with cortactin in NIH 3T3 cells treated with increasing concentrations of EGF ligand . The interaction between endophilin and cortactin quickly increases within 5 min after stimulation with EGF , and subsequently dissociates within 30 min . The interaction between MIM and cortactin increases within 5 min , but persists strongly even 30 min after stimulation when compared with endophilin . on A p r il 5 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 12 , 2010 11 of 15 Missing - in - metastasis regulates endocytosis during cell migration • Quinones et al . but dmim mutants display a wild - type number of border cells . This discrepancy could be explained in part due to the obser - vation that MIM associates with vertebrate Suppressor of Fused ( Callahan et al . , 2004 ) , which is redundant in flies . The data presented here uncover migratory defects in PGCs , border cells , and vertebrate cultured fibroblasts , all responding to different migratory cues . This suggests that although cells use different cues and receptors for migration in a variety of systems , the regulation of this process at the level of endocytosis appears to be shared . Our studies identify DMIM as novel I - BAR protein , and one of the first negative regulators of endocytosis with a role in guided cell migration . Genetic , cell biological , and biochemical data support the model that DMIM and CD2AP compete for cortactin in regulating receptor - mediated endocytosis . The observation that removing both MIM and cindr / cortactin results in wild - type migration suggests that MIM and cortactin consti - tute one of several redundant regulatory systems to control the directional migration of the border cells . Because removal of both proteins restores normal border cell migration but disrup - tion of clathrin and dynamin function does not , we speculate that other combinations of pro - and anti - endocytosis complexes downstream of dynamin must be operating to balance this pro - cess in migrating cells . Although we see a trend in increased en - docytosis with MIM / endophilin double knockdown , the lack of complete rescue further suggests endophilin possesses MIM - independent endocytosis functions . Current studies are ongoing to identify these additional signaling pathways in the sensi - tized dmim ; dcortactin background . More importantly , our data show the dramatic effects on migration when components of the steering mechanism are missing or out of balance . Similar effects have also been seen with gross overexpression of cortac - tin ( Timpson et al . , 2005 ) and may explain the relatively high frequency of cortactin and MIM alterations in late - stage cancers ( Patel et al . , 1996 ; Lee et al . , 2002 ; Timpson et al . , 2007 ; Hofman et al . , 2008 ) . These results provide a new mechanistic understanding of BAR domain function by showing that directional sensing comes in part from protein complexes competing for common effector proteins during endocytosis . These data support the notion that MIM acts to dampen guidance receptor signaling at a variety of ligand concentrations by sequestering cortactin . Guidance cue binding assembles the N - BAR subfamily mem - ber endophilin and its adapter CD2AP , which binds cortactin , shifting it away from MIM sequestration . We postulate that in - creased endocytosis and MIM’s persistent binding of cortactin prevent the cell from improperly sensing guidance cues and misinterpreting directional differences . Previous studies sug - gest that phosphorylation of cortactin modulates its interaction with a number of proteins ( Zhu et al . , 2007 ) ; however , we do not detect such alteration using phosphospecific cortactin anti - bodies in our system ( unpublished data ) . Consistent with this data are the lack of localized bulk MIM protein at the leading edge of cultured cells or rescued dmim ; DMIM + border cells . Altogether , these data suggest that there is a novel MIM - dependent steering mechanism that guides cell migration through interactions with other protein complexes . Jékely et al . ( 2005 ) addition , resulting in an increase of the amount and duration of endophilin / CD2AP in complex with cortactin ( Fig . 6 C ) . The duration of cortactin association mirrors that of the persistent pERK1 / 2 immunoreactivity ( Fig . 1 , H and J ) . Our work and other studies indicate that both CD2AP and MIM associate through their proline - rich domains with cortactin’s SH3 domain ( Fig . 5 B ; Lynch et al . , 2003 ; Lin et al . , 2005 ) . Indeed , in vitro – translated CD2AP readily associates with the purified SH3 do - main of cortactin . Increasing concentrations of purified MIM abrogate the binding of cortactin to CD2AP ( Fig . 6 D ) , support - ing a direct competition between MIM and CD2AP for cortac - tin binding . MIM lacking its proline - rich domain ( MIM 1 – 277 ) fails to compete with CD2AP , providing additional support for the idea that MIM antagonizes the ability of cortactin to associ - ate with the pro - endocytic CD2AP / endophilin complex . We then used stable GFP - tagged MIM and endophilin lines to ex - amine cortactin association with each of the proteins at different EGF ligand concentrations over time . The antagonism between MIM and CD2AP / endophilin for cortactin binding could be ex - plained by the prolonged association between cortactin and MIM , which persists longer after stimulation with EGF ligand than the association between endophilin and cortactin , even at different ligand concentrations ( Fig . 6 E ) . Discussion We have shown through genetic interaction and live - cell imag - ing that migrating cells use a MIM - dependent steering mecha - nism to interpret local migratory signals . MIM’s role appears to be general , as both border cell and PGC migration are affected in dmim mutants and involve different cell types responding to different guidance cues . Our data indicate that MIM inhibits guidance receptor endocytosis by competing directly with CD2AP for cortactin , resulting in dampened guidance receptor signaling . This study provides the first genetic and biochemical evidence for the function of a member of the I - BAR family of proteins in directed cell migration , and provides a mechanistic link between MIM and cell migration . Directional cell migration is a complex process requiring dynamic rearrangements of the cytoskeleton and precise direc - tional sensing of local migratory cues ( Prasad and Montell , 2007 ) . Our live - cell imaging data suggest that DMIM is involved in directing cell migration through the inhibition of endocytosis . Although previous studies demonstrate that MIM is an actin cytoskeletal remodeling protein ( Gonzalez - Quevedo et al . , 2005 ; Lee et al . , 2007 ; Mattila et al . , 2007 ) , our imaging studies argue against a major , direct role for MIM in general actin polymerization . Consistent with this notion is the lack of apparent defects in adherens junctions , the actin cytoskeleton , or anteroposterior polarity in dmim mutant egg chambers . This is not to say that MIM does not affect the actin cytoskeleton in other cases of cell migration , just that in the case of Drosophila border cell migration the function of DMIM is not required for actin cytoskeletal dynamics . Previous studies have also implicated MIM in regulating Sonic Hedgehog signaling ( Callahan et al . , 2004 ) . Mutations in the hedgehog pathway component costal2 result in aberrant border cell numbers ( Liu and Montell , 1999 ) , on A p r il 5 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 12 , 2010 JCB 12 of 15 North Carolina , Chapel Hill , NC ) . The primers used were , 5  - CCC - GGGAGCGAGTGAGGACGCGCAAATGG - 3  and 5  - GGTACCGAC - CAGTTCCTGGGCCACAGAC - 3  to amplify the 5  region and 5  - AGATC - TAGTCAGGTGAGAGTAGGAAATC - 3  and 5  - GAATTCCTGCCACAC - GCTCCCATTCCATATCC - 3  to amplify the 3  region . Mutant chromosomes were out crossed to yw flies for five generations to minimize linked enhanc - ers and suppressors . DMIM rescue lines were made by cloning the dmim cDNA into the pUAST or pUASp vectors with a myc - his epitope tag on the C terminus . Transgenic lines were generated using standard methods . Transgenic lines were crossed into the 306 - Gal4 ( Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center , Bloomington , IN ) for expression in the border cells . The slbo - Gal4 and shi K44A lines were obtained from the Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center . UAS - cindr - IR 2 . 21A + 2 . 23A ( cindr IR 2 ) targets the long and inter - mediate cindr transcripts and UAS - cindr - IR 3 . 73B + 3 . 81A ( cindr IR 3 ) targets all three transcripts , as described previously ( Johnson et al . , 2008 ) . The Cortactin M7 line has been described previously ( Somogyi and Rørth , 2004 ) . In vitro migration assays For directional cell migration assays in vitro , cells were seeded into the upper compartment of a Transwell 12 - well plate ( Costar 3403 ; Corning ) in serum - free medium after 16 h of serum starvation . The lower compartment of each well contained serum - free medium with or without the indicated growth factor . Cells were allowed to migrate for 8 h , then the medium was removed and the cells were fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde . Fixed cells were stained with 0 . 5 % crystal violet and the cells in the upper compart - ment were scraped off of the insert membrane . The well was then exten - sively washed with water and allowed to air dry . Only cells that migrated down through the porous membrane remained . The crystal violet remaining in these cells was then extracted with 30 % acetic acid and assessed by measuring the absorbance at 590 nm . Lipid vesicle cosedimentation assays 6XHis fusion proteins of DMIM I - BAR ( aa 1 – 477 ) , hMIM I - BAR ( aa 1 – 255 ) , and DMIM 4KA I - BAR were cloned by standard techniques in pQE80L vector , expressed in bacteria and purified on Superflow Nickel Beads ( QIAGEN ) . DMIM 4KA contained mutations K139A , K140A , K149A , and K150A gen - erated by QuikChange Mutagenesis ( Stratagene ) . PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( l -  - phosphati - dylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ; porcine brain , tri - ammonium salt ) , PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 ( 1 , 2 - dileoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - [ phosphoinositol - 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ] , tetra - ammonium salt ) , phosphatidylserine ( PS ; brain ) , phosphatidylcholine ( PC ; brain ) , and phosphoethanolamine ( PE ) were purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids , Inc . Fusion proteins were diluted to desired concentrations in F - buffer ( 10 mM im - idazole , pH 7 . 5 , 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 1 mM DTT , 100 mM KCl , 2 mM MgCl 2 , and 1 mM EGTA ) . For vesicle cosedimentation assays the following mixtures were prepared : 5 % PE , 20 % PS , 45 – 75 % PC , and 0 – 30 % PI ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 or PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P 3 . Samples were vacuum dried under N 2 and hydrated for a minimum of 4 h in 0 . 2 mM Hepes - KOH , pH 7 . 5 , and 100 mM NaCl to a 1 - mM total lipid concentration . Large multilamellar vesicles were formed by repeated freeze / thaw cycles between liquid nitrogen and a hot water bath . Vesicles were also vortexed before each experiment . I - BAR constructs were diluted in desired concentrations in F - buffer and sedimented at 360 , 000 g for 30 min at room temperature . For native gel electropho - resis , fusion proteins were diluted to desired concentration in F - buffer . Lipid / protein reactions were incubated at room temperature for 1 h , run on 12 % native PAGE gels , stained with Coomassie , and scanned . Drosophila egg chamber immunofluorescence For confocal immunofluorescence , ovaries from 1 – 2 - d - old females were dissected in PBS , fixed , and permeabilized in 4 % paraformaldehyde and PBSX ( 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 ) for 20 min at room temperature and subsequently washed in PBSX , blocked in 5 % normal horse serum ( Vector Laboratories ) , and then incubated overnight in primary antibody at 4°C . The primary antibodies used were : mouse anti - armadillo ( 1 : 200 ; Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank [ DSHB ] , Iowa City , IA ) , mouse anti - Myc ( 1 : 100 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , phalloidin - AF633 ( 1 : 100 ; Invitrogen ) , mouse anti - DE cadherin ( 1 : 250 ; DSHB ) , mouse anti - oskar ( 1 : 250 ; DSHB ) , mouse anti - lectin FITC ( 1 : 250 ; Vector Laboratories ) , mouse anti - FasIII ( 1 : 500 ; DSHB ) , mouse anti - gurken ( 1 : 100 ; DSHB ) , rabbit anti - DCortactin ( 1 : 250 ; a gift from Dr . Togashi , Tohoku University , Sendai , Japan ) , mouse anti - GFP ( 1 : 250 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , and phalloidin - TRITC ( 1 : 100 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) . Alexa Fluor – conjugated anti - bodies ( Invitrogen ) were used as secondaries . Drosophila egg chamber live imaging For live confocal imaging , egg chambers from ovaries were prepared ac - cording to previous protocols ( Bianco et al . , 2007 ; Prasad and Montell , 2007 ; Tekotte et al . , 2007 ) with some modification . Egg chambers were demonstrated the importance for regulating both polarity and a localized response to external stimuli during the migration of the border cell cluster . Their studies focused on regulation of receptor tyrosine kinase signaling through the action of key pro - teins involved in the endocytosis of the receptor . We have fo - cused our studies on a negative regulator of endocytosis , which in the Drosophila border cell cluster regulates both polarity and a local response to guidance cues as a means of mediating direc - tional migration . Materials and methods Transferrin internalization and recycling Ptc1 - null mouse embryonic fibroblasts ( MEFs ; Taipale et al . , 2000 ) were used throughout these studies due to the increased levels of MIM protein expressed when compared with NIH 3T3 cells , as well as the ease of MIM knockdown at the protein level in these cells . Ptc1 - null MEFs were nucleo - fected with the appropriate siRNA 2 d before the endocytosis assays , and were serum starved overnight before the assays . Endocytosis was mea - sured using HRP - conjugated mouse Transferrin ( Tfn ; Sigma - Aldrich ) and detected using a Sensolyte ADHP HRP ELISA Assay kit ( AnaSpec ) . To mea - sure the amount of internalized HRP - Tfn , cells were serum starved over - night , the HRP - Tfn ( 100 µg / ml ) in serum - free DME was added to each well , and the plate was placed at 37°C for the indicated time ( s ) . Endocytosis was stopped by placing the plate on ice , washing with ice - cold PBS , pH 5 . 0 , for 2 min each , and then 4 times with PBS , pH 7 . 0 . The cells were then lysed in 20 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 9 , 150 mM NaCl , and 1 % NP - 40 for 10 min on ice . The amount of HRP - Tfn in the lysate was then measured following the Sensolyte kit protocol . To measure recycling of HRP - Tfn , cells were treated as per the above protocol . After stripping the unbound ligand from the cell surface , fresh serum - free medium was placed on the cells . Medium was then collected from the wells at the indicated time points and assayed for HRP - Tfn content following the Sensolyte kit protocol . EGF stimulation , internalization , and recycling For the EGF stimulation , Ptc1 - null MEFs were grown for 2 d after nucleofec - tion and then serum starved overnight . Cells were stimulated with EGF at 100 ng / ml ( Sigma - Aldrich ) in serum - free DME for the indicated times , washed twice with PBS , and lysed . Lysates were loaded onto SDS - PAGE gels for Western blot analysis . The primary antibodies used were : rabbit anti - cortactin ( 1 : 1 , 000 ; Millipore ) , mouse anti –  - actin ( 1 : 10 , 000 ) , rabbit anti - MIM ( 1 : 500 ) , mouse anti - CD2AP ( 1 : 500 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . ) , mouse anti - endophilin ( 1 : 1 , 000 ; Abcam ) , rabbit anti - dynamin ( 1 : 1 , 000 ; Abcam ) , rabbit anti - clathrin heavy chain ( 1 : 1 , 000 ; Abcam ) , and goat anti - CBL ( 1 : 1 , 000 ; Abcam ) . For 125 I - EGF assays , ptc1 - null cells were grown for 2 d after nucleo - fection and then serum starved overnight . After serum starvation , the cells were stimulated with EGF ( 100 ng / ml ) in serum - free DME for the indicated times . Radiolabeled EGF at 1 ng / ml , ( NEX1600 ; PerkinElmer ) was com - bined with unlabeled EGF to a final concentration of 100 ng / ml . For inter - nalization assays , unbound ligand was removed by washing three times with ice - cold buffer containing : 20 mM Hepes , 130 mM NaCl , 5 mM KCl , 0 . 5 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM CaCl 2 , and 1 mg / ml polyvinylpyrolidione , pH 7 . 4 . Surface - bound ligand was then collected in ice - cold acid strip buffer ( 50 mM glycine - HCl , 100 mM NaCl , and 1 mg / ml polyvinylpyrolidione , pH 3 . 0 ) for 2 min . Internalized ligand was then released with 5 N NaOH for 30 min , added to reducing sample buffer , and analyzed with a scintillation counter . For recycling assays , unbound ligand was removed as described above , then fresh serum - free medium was added to the cells . The cells were placed at 37°C for the indicated times . At each time point , medium was removed from the well and assayed for EGF content . Results were normalized to the initial amount of EGF in the medium at time 0 . All siRNAs were ordered from Thermo Fisher Scientific ; si - MIM : 5  - GCAAGGCACUCAUCGAA - GAUU - 3  , ON - TARGETplus SMARTpool siRNAs were used for : Cbl , CD2AP , clathrin , cortactin , dynamin , and endophilin . Fly genetics The dmim mutant was made using a modified version of “ends - out” homol - ogous recombination ( Gong and Golic , 2003 ) . The donor vector was con - structed by cloning PCR products of the homologous regions in the dmim genomic region upstream and downstream of the deleted exons ( exons 3 – 10 ) into the pP [ EndsOut2 ] vector ( a gift from Dr . Jeff Sekelsky , University of on A p r il 5 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 12 , 2010 13 of 15 Missing - in - metastasis regulates endocytosis during cell migration • Quinones et al . ( Promega ) . GST beads containing the SH3 domain of cortactin were incu - bated with equal amounts of CD2AP and increasing amounts of bacterially expressed full - length 6X - His MIM protein or 6X - His MIM lacking the C - terminal proline - rich domain . The beads were washed with PBST and run on SDS - PAGE gels for Western blot analysis using rabbit anti - CD2AP ( 1 : 500 ; Cell Signaling Technology ) . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 shows ClustalW2 alignment of the I - BAR and WH2 domain of Drosophila , human , and mouse MIM as well as mouse ABBA and mouse IRSp53 . Fig . S2 shows eclosion and hatching frequency deficiencies in dmim mutants as well as locomotor defects in the adults . Fig . S3 shows a comparison of staining patterns of cell – cell junctions , membranes , growth factor gradients , and the actin cytoskeleton between wild - type and dmim mutant egg chambers . Fig . S4 shows the effect of MIM knockdown on the formation of circular dorsal ruffles in vertebrate cell culture . Video 1 shows wild - type border cells migrating normally toward the oocyte ( right ) . Video 2 shows dmim mutant border cells fail to migrate toward the oocyte ( right ) . Video 3 shows dmim / DMIM + border cells migrating normally toward the oocyte ( right ) . Online supplemental material is available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 200910136 / DC1 . We wish to thank P . Rorth , J . Sekelsky , and D . Kiehart for flies and plasmids ; R . Johnson and R . Cagan for the cindr RNAi fly lines ; P . Khavari , H . Chang , and S . Pfeffer for comments on the work ; M . Bershteyn for MIM siRNA sequences ; and L . Edgington and A . Bailey for technical support . This work was supported by NSF predoctoral fellowships to G . A . Quinones and J . Jin , and an NIH / NIAMS grant to A . E . Oro ( R01 AR052785 ) . Submitted : 23 October 2009 Accepted : 19 March 2010 References Bianco , A . , M . Poukkula , A . Cliffe , J . Mathieu , C . M . Luque , T . A . Fulga , and P . Rørth . 2007 . Two distinct modes of guidance signalling during col - lective migration of border cells . Nature . 448 : 362 – 365 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature05965 Blaser , H . , S . Eisenbeiss , M . Neumann , M . Reichman - Fried , B . Thisse , C . Thisse , and E . Raz . 2005 . Transition from non - motile behaviour to directed migration during early PGC development in zebrafish . J . Cell Sci . 118 : 4027 – 4038 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 02522 Bompard , G . , S . J . Sharp , G . Freiss , and L . M . Machesky . 2005 . Involvement of Rac in actin cytoskeleton rearrangements induced by MIM - B . J . Cell Sci . 118 : 5393 – 5403 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 02640 Callahan , C . A . , T . Ofstad , L . Horng , J . K . Wang , H . H . Zhen , P . A . Coulombe , and A . E . Oro . 2004 . MIM / BEG4 , a Sonic hedgehog - responsive gene that potentiates Gli - dependent transcription . Genes Dev . 18 : 2724 – 2729 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 1221804 Dawson , J . C . , J . A . Legg , and L . M . Machesky . 2006 . Bar domain proteins : a role in tubulation , scission and actin assembly in clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis . Trends Cell Biol . 16 : 493 – 498 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2006 . 08 . 004 Dikic , I . 2002 . CIN85 / CMS family of adaptor molecules . FEBS Lett . 529 : 110 – 115 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0014 - 5793 ( 02 ) 03188 - 5 Friedl , P . , Y . Hegerfeldt , and M . Tusch . 2004 . Collective cell migration in morpho - genesis and cancer . Int . J . Dev . Biol . 48 : 441 – 449 . doi : 10 . 1387 / ijdb . 041821pf Frost , A . , P . De Camilli , and V . M . Unger . 2007 . F - BAR proteins join the BAR family fold . Structure . 15 : 751 – 753 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . str . 2007 . 06 . 006 Gareus , R . , A . Di Nardo , V . Rybin , and W . Witke . 2006 . Mouse profilin 2 regu - lates endocytosis and competes with SH3 ligand binding to dynamin 1 . J . Biol . Chem . 281 : 2803 – 2811 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M503528200 Georgiou , M . , E . Marinari , J . Burden , and B . Baum . 2008 . Cdc42 , Par6 , and aPKC regulate Arp2 / 3 - mediated endocytosis to control local adherens junction stability . Curr . Biol . 18 : 1631 – 1638 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2008 . 09 . 029 Gong , W . J . , and K . G . Golic . 2003 . Ends - out , or replacement , gene targeting in Drosophila . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 100 : 2556 – 2561 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0535280100 Gonzalez - Quevedo , R . , M . Shoffer , L . Horng , and A . E . Oro . 2005 . Receptor tyrosine phosphatase - dependent cytoskeletal remodeling by the hedgehog - responsive gene MIM / BEG4 . J . Cell Biol . 168 : 453 – 463 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200409078 Harden , N . 2002 . Signaling pathways directing the movement and fusion of epi - thelial sheets : lessons from dorsal closure in Drosophila . Differentiation . 70 : 181 – 203 . doi : 10 . 1046 / j . 1432 - 0436 . 2002 . 700408 . x placed in Petri dishes with glass coverslip bottoms ( MatTek ) , surrounded by halocarbon oil 700 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) and covered by the gas - permeable membrane from a Petriperm plate ( Grenier Bio ) . Females were taken 1 – 3 d after eclosion and fed fresh yeast 1 d before dissection . Dissections were performed in Schneider’s Insect medium ( Invitrogen ) supplemented with 15 % fetal bovine serum ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 0 . 20 mg / ml  1 insulin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 0 . 6x penicillin / streptomycin ( Invitrogen ) , and 3 mM FM4 - 64 ( Invitrogen ) . Ovaries were removed , washed in dissection medium , and individual ovarioles were removed from the muscle sheath using fine dis - section forceps . Imaging was performed using a microscope ( LSM - 510 Meta ; Carl Zeiss , Inc . ) with a 340 1 . 3 NA Plan NeoFluor oil immersion objective . Two channels were acquired simultaneously : GFP ( 488 - nm laser and 500 – 550 - nm band - pass filter ) and FM4 - 64 ( 488 - nm laser and 560 - nm long - pass filter ) . 7 sections were taken 5 µm apart with 5 min between stacks . The three to four sections covering the migrating cluster were merged for each time point using the Volocity 4 imaging software package ( PerkinElmer ) . Videos were made using Volocity 4 , and exported as Quick - Time ( . mov ) files at 5 frames per second . Egg chambers were chosen in which border cells had clearly delaminated or were already migrating . For dye uptake assays , egg chambers were incubated in 9 µM FM4 - 64 dye in imaging medium for exactly 30 min before the first image was taken . For Dynasore ( Sigma - Aldrich ) inhibition of dynamin in the egg chambers , dis - sected egg chambers were incubated in imaging medium containing 80 µM Dynasore for 1 h before the addition of FM4 - 64 . Live imaging calculations The directionality index ( DI ) for large cellular extensions emanating from a border cell is calculated as ( A  B ) / ( A + B ) , where A is the number of for - ward extensions and B is the number of rearward extensions . Forward and rearward extensions are defined by which direction they point away from a vertical line on the dorsal ventral axis of the egg chamber . For the pur - poses of this study , cell extensions are defined as transient , large cellular processes that are greater than one quarter of a border cell diameter in width at their base , and extend outward from the cell surface . Cellular filopodial - like projections are defined as cellular processes that are transient , less than one quarter of a cell diameter in width at the base , and extend from the cell surface . Tracking of cellular extensions / projections was per - formed using the tracking module of the Volocity program . Each individual process was manually marked and tracked throughout each frame to cal - culate the amount of time each process persisted . The number of projec - tions was calculated by counting the number of projections along a 10 - µm length of cell surface along a border cell . We are limited in the types of projection studies as our analyses cannot account for projections that form and dissociate faster than the 5 - min time points collected . For FM4 - 64 dye uptake assays , images were taken over time of the border cell cluster and analyzed using ImageJ . A line drawn following the outside of the mem - brane of a single border cell was used to select the area from which the in - tensity measurements were calculated . The intensity measurement was then divided by the area selected to control for normal variations in border cell shapes and sizes . These analyses were all normalized to the overall inten - sity of the entire egg chamber to account for differences in uptake through - out the egg chamber itself . Measurements from single border cells within the same cluster were combined with measurements from cells of a different cluster for both technical and biological replicates within the analyses . A mutant dynamin ( shi K44A ) and a small molecule inhibitor of dynamin were included as negative controls to show that dye uptake is dependent on clathrin - mediated endocytosis , and not just accumulation of the dye in the membrane over time . GST pull - downs and coimmunoprecipitations For GST pull - downs , cells were lysed in PBS with 1 % NP - 40 , protease inhibitors , 1 mM Na 3 VO 4 , and 5 mM NaF for 30 min at 4°C . For coim - munoprecipitations , cell lysates were generated using RIPA buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl , pH 8 . 0 , 150 mM NaCl , 5 mM EDTA , 1 % NP - 40 , 0 . 1 % SDS , 10 % glycerol , 0 . 5 % Na deoxycholate , 1 mM Na 3 VO 4 , and protease inhibitors ) and precleared with Protein G PLUS - Agarose beads ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . ) for 30 min at 4°C . The primary antibodies used were : rabbit anti - cortactin ( 1 : 1 , 000 ; Millipore ) , rabbit anti - MIM ( 1 : 500 ) , mouse anti - CD2AP ( 1 : 500 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . ) , goat anti - endophilin I ( 1 : 500 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc . ) , mouse anti - Myc ( 1 : 500 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , and rabbit anti - Myc ( 1 : 1 , 000 ; Santa Cruz Bio - technology , Inc . ) . Direct binding and competition assays The coding sequence of CD2AP was cloned into pcDNA3 . 1 MHA . CD2AP protein was made using a TNT T7 Coupled Reticulocyte Lysate System on A p r il 5 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 12 , 2010 JCB 1 of 15 Orth , J . D . , E . W . Krueger , S . G . Weller , and M . A . McNiven . 2006 . A novel endocytic mechanism of epidermal growth factor receptor sequestration and internalization . Cancer Res . 66 : 3603 – 3610 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 05 - 2916 Palamidessi , A . , E . Frittoli , M . Garré , M . Faretta , M . Mione , I . Testa , A . Diaspro , L . Lanzetti , G . Scita , and P . P . Di Fiore . 2008 . Endocytic trafficking of Rac is required for the spatial restriction of signaling in cell migration . Cell . 134 : 135 – 147 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2008 . 05 . 034 Patel , A . M . , L . S . Incognito , G . L . Schechter , W . J . Wasilenko , and K . D . Somers . 1996 . Amplification and expression of EMS - 1 ( cortactin ) in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell lines . Oncogene . 12 : 31 – 35 . Prasad , M . , and D . J . Montell . 2007 . Cellular and molecular mechanisms of bor - der cell migration analyzed using time - lapse live - cell imaging . Dev . Cell . 12 : 997 – 1005 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2007 . 03 . 021 Ren , G . , P . Vajjhala , J . S . Lee , B . Winsor , and A . L . Munn . 2006 . The BAR domain proteins : molding membranes in fission , fusion , and phagy . Microbiol . Mol . Biol . Rev . 70 : 37 – 120 . doi : 10 . 1128 / MMBR . 70 . 1 . 37 - 120 . 2006 Rørth , P . 2002 . Initiating and guiding migration : lessons from border cells . Trends Cell Biol . 12 : 325 – 331 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0962 - 8924 ( 02 ) 02311 - 5 Rørth , P . 2007 . Collective guidance of collective cell migration . Trends Cell Biol . 17 : 575 – 579 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2007 . 09 . 007 Saarikangas , J . , J . Hakanen , P . K . Mattila , M . Grumet , M . Salminen , and P . Lappalainen . 2008 . ABBA regulates plasma - membrane and actin dynamics to promote radial glia extension . J . Cell Sci . 121 : 1444 – 1454 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 027466 Saarikangas , J . , H . Zhao , A . Pykäläinen , P . Laurinmäki , P . K . Mattila , P . K . Kinnunen , S . J . Butcher , and P . Lappalainen . 2009 . Molecular mechanisms of membrane deformation by I - BAR domain proteins . Curr . Biol . 19 : 95 – 107 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2008 . 12 . 029 Sawallisch , C . , K . Berhörster , A . Disanza , S . Mantoani , M . Kintscher , L . Stoenica , A . Dityatev , S . Sieber , S . Kindler , F . Morellini , et al . 2009 . The insulin receptor substrate of 53 kDa ( IRSp53 ) limits hippocam - pal synaptic plasticity . J . Biol . Chem . 284 : 9225 – 9236 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M808425200 Schmidt , M . H . , F . B . Furnari , W . K . Cavenee , and O . Bögler . 2003 . Epidermal growth factor receptor signaling intensity determines intracellular pro - tein interactions , ubiquitination , and internalization . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 100 : 6505 – 6510 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1031790100 Scita , G . , S . Confalonieri , P . Lappalainen , and S . Suetsugu . 2008 . IRSp53 : crossing the road of membrane and actin dynamics in the formation of membrane protrusions . Trends Cell Biol . 18 : 52 – 60 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2007 . 12 . 002 Somogyi , K . , and P . Rørth . 2004 . Cortactin modulates cell migration and ring canal morphogenesis during Drosophila oogenesis . Mech . Dev . 121 : 57 – 64 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . mod . 2003 . 10 . 003 Soubeyran , P . , K . Kowanetz , I . Szymkiewicz , W . Y . Langdon , and I . Dikic . 2002 . Cbl - CIN85 - endophilin complex mediates ligand - induced downregulation of EGF receptors . Nature . 416 : 183 – 187 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 416183a Suetsugu , S . , K . Murayama , A . Sakamoto , K . Hanawa - Suetsugu , A . Seto , T . Oikawa , C . Mishima , M . Shirouzu , T . Takenawa , and S . Yokoyama . 2006 . The RAC binding domain / IRSp53 - MIM homology domain of IRSp53 induces RAC - dependent membrane deformation . J . Biol . Chem . 281 : 35347 – 35358 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M606814200 Taipale , J . , J . K . Chen , M . K . Cooper , B . Wang , R . K . Mann , L . Milenkovic , M . P . Scott , and P . A . Beachy . 2000 . Effects of oncogenic mutations in Smoothened and Patched can be reversed by cyclopamine . Nature . 406 : 1005 – 1009 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 35023008 Tekotte , H . , D . Tollervey , and I . Davis . 2007 . Imaging the migrating border cell cluster in living Drosophila egg chambers . Dev . Dyn . 236 : 2818 – 2824 . doi : 10 . 1002 / dvdy . 21305 Teodorof , C . , J . I . Bae , S . M . Kim , H . J . Oh , Y . S . Kang , J . Choi , J . S . Chun , and W . K . Song . 2009 . SPIN90 - IRSp53 complex participates in Rac - induced membrane ruffling . Exp . Cell Res . 315 : 2410 – 2419 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . yexcr . 2009 . 05 . 010 Timpson , P . , D . K . Lynch , D . Schramek , F . Walker , and R . J . Daly . 2005 . Cortactin overexpression inhibits ligand - induced down - regulation of the epidermal growth factor receptor . Cancer Res . 65 : 3273 – 3280 . Timpson , P . , A . S . Wilson , G . M . Lehrbach , R . L . Sutherland , E . A . Musgrove , and R . J . Daly . 2007 . Aberrant expression of cortactin in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cells is associated with enhanced cell proliferation and resistance to the epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor gefitinib . Cancer Res . 67 : 9304 – 9314 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 0008 - 5472 . CAN - 07 - 0798 Uezu , A . , A . Horiuchi , K . Kanda , N . Kikuchi , K . Umeda , K . Tsujita , S . Suetsugu , N . Araki , H . Yamamoto , T . Takenawa , and H . Nakanishi . 2007 . SGIP1alpha is an endocytic protein that directly interacts Hofman , P . , C . Butori , K . Havet , V . Hofman , E . Selva , N . Guevara , J . Santini , and E . Van Obberghen - Schilling . 2008 . Prognostic significance of cor - tactin levels in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma : comparison with epidermal growth factor receptor status . Br . J . Cancer . 98 : 956 – 964 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . bjc . 6604245 Jékely , G . , and P . Rørth . 2003 . Hrs mediates downregulation of multiple sig - nalling receptors in Drosophila . EMBO Rep . 4 : 1163 – 1168 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . embor . 7400019 Jékely , G . , H . H . Sung , C . M . Luque , and P . Rørth . 2005 . Regulators of endo - cytosis maintain localized receptor tyrosine kinase signaling in guided migration . Dev . Cell . 9 : 197 – 207 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2005 . 06 . 004 Johnson , R . I . , M . J . Seppa , and R . L . Cagan . 2008 . The Drosophila CD2AP / CIN85 orthologue Cindr regulates junctions and cytoskeleton dynam - ics during tissue patterning . J . Cell Biol . 180 : 1191 – 1204 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200706108 Kaksonen , M . , C . P . Toret , and D . G . Drubin . 2006 . Harnessing actin dynamics for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 : 404 – 414 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm1940 Kaneko , T . , A . Maeda , M . Takefuji , H . Aoyama , M . Nakayama , S . Kawabata , Y . Kawano , A . Iwamatsu , M . Amano , and K . Kaibuchi . 2005 . Rho mediates endocytosis of epidermal growth factor receptor through phos - phorylation of endophilin A1 by Rho - kinase . Genes Cells . 10 : 973 – 987 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2443 . 2005 . 00895 . x Keller , R . 2005 . Cell migration during gastrulation . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 17 : 533 – 541 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2005 . 08 . 006 Kim , M . H . , J . Choi , J . Yang , W . Chung , J . H . Kim , S . K . Paik , K . Kim , S . Han , H . Won , Y . S . Bae , et al . 2009 . Enhanced NMDA receptor - mediated syn - aptic transmission , enhanced long - term potentiation , and impaired learn - ing and memory in mice lacking IRSp53 . J . Neurosci . 29 : 1586 – 1595 . doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 4306 - 08 . 2009 Kirchhausen , T . , E . Macia , and H . E . Pelish . 2008 . Use of dynasore , the small molecule inhibitor of dynamin , in the regulation of endocytosis . Methods Enzymol . 438 : 77 – 93 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0076 - 6879 ( 07 ) 38006 - 3 Kopfstein , L . , and G . Christofori . 2006 . Metastasis : cell - autonomous mecha - nisms versus contributions by the tumor microenvironment . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 63 : 449 – 468 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00018 - 005 - 5296 - 8 Kunwar , P . S . , D . E . Siekhaus , and R . Lehmann . 2006 . In vivo migration : a germ cell perspective . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 22 : 237 – 265 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . cellbio . 22 . 010305 . 103337 Lee , S . H . , F . Kerff , D . Chereau , F . Ferron , A . Klug , and R . Dominguez . 2007 . Structural basis for the actin - binding function of missing - in - metastasis . Structure . 15 : 145 – 155 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . str . 2006 . 12 . 005 Lee , Y . G . , J . A . Macoska , S . Korenchuk , and K . J . Pienta . 2002 . MIM , a poten - tial metastasis suppressor gene in bladder cancer . Neoplasia . 4 : 291 – 294 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . neo . 7900231 Lin , J . , J . Liu , Y . Wang , J . Zhu , K . Zhou , N . Smith , and X . Zhan . 2005 . Differential regulation of cortactin and N - WASP - mediated actin polymerization by missing in metastasis ( MIM ) protein . Oncogene . 24 : 2059 – 2066 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . onc . 1208412 Liu , Y . , and D . J . Montell . 1999 . Identification of mutations that cause cell migra - tion defects in mosaic clones . Development . 126 : 1869 – 1878 . Lynch , D . K . , S . C . Winata , R . J . Lyons , W . E . Hughes , G . M . Lehrbach , V . Wasinger , G . Corthals , S . Cordwell , and R . J . Daly . 2003 . A Cortactin - CD2 - associated protein ( CD2AP ) complex provides a novel link between epidermal growth factor receptor endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 21805 – 21813 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M211407200 Ma , S . , X . Y . Guan , T . K . Lee , and K . W . Chan . 2007 . Clinicopathological signifi - cance of missing in metastasis B expression in hepatocellular carcinoma . Hum . Pathol . 38 : 1201 – 1206 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . humpath . 2007 . 01 . 004 Machesky , L . M . , and S . A . Johnston . 2007 . MIM : a multifunctional scaffold pro - tein . J . Mol . Med . 85 : 569 – 576 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00109 - 007 - 0207 - 0 Mattila , P . K . , M . Salminen , T . Yamashiro , and P . Lappalainen . 2003 . Mouse MIM , a tissue - specific regulator of cytoskeletal dynamics , interacts with ATP - actin monomers through its C - terminal WH2 domain . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 8452 – 8459 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M212113200 Mattila , P . K . , A . Pykäläinen , J . Saarikangas , V . O . Paavilainen , H . Vihinen , E . Jokitalo , and P . Lappalainen . 2007 . Missing - in - metastasis and IRSp53 deform PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 - rich membranes by an inverse BAR domain - like mech - anism . J . Cell Biol . 176 : 953 – 964 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200609176 Miki , H . , H . Yamaguchi , S . Suetsugu , and T . Takenawa . 2000 . IRSp53 is an essential intermediate between Rac and WAVE in the regulation of mem - brane ruffling . Nature . 408 : 732 – 735 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 35047107 Minina , S . , M . Reichman - Fried , and E . Raz . 2007 . Control of receptor inter - nalization , signaling level , and precise arrival at the target in guided cell migration . Curr . Biol . 17 : 1164 – 1172 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2007 . 05 . 073 Montell , D . J . 2006 . The social lives of migrating cells in Drosophila . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 16 : 374 – 383 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . gde . 2006 . 06 . 010 on A p r il 5 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 12 , 2010 15 of 15 Missing - in - metastasis regulates endocytosis during cell migration • Quinones et al . with phospholipids and Eps15 . J . Biol . Chem . 282 : 26481 – 26489 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M703815200 Verstreken , P . , T . Ohyama , and H . J . Bellen . 2008 . FM 1 - 43 labeling of synaptic vesicle pools at the Drosophila neuromuscular junction . Methods Mol . Biol . 440 : 349 – 369 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 59745 - 178 - 9 _ 26 Wang , Y . , J . Liu , E . Smith , K . Zhou , J . Liao , G . Y . Yang , M . Tan , and X . Zhan . 2007 . Downregulation of missing in metastasis gene ( MIM ) is associated with the progression of bladder transitional carcinomas . Cancer Invest . 25 : 79 – 86 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 07357900701205457 Woodings , J . A . , S . J . Sharp , and L . M . Machesky . 2003 . MIM - B , a putative metastasis suppressor protein , binds to actin and to protein tyrosine phos - phatase delta . Biochem . J . 371 : 463 – 471 . doi : 10 . 1042 / BJ20021962 Yang , C . , M . Hoelzle , A . Disanza , G . Scita , and T . Svitkina . 2009 . Coordination of membrane and actin cytoskeleton dynamics during filopodia protru - sion . PLoS One . 4 : e5678 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0005678 Zhu , J . , D . Yu , X . C . Zeng , K . Zhou , and X . Zhan . 2007 . Receptor - mediated endocytosis involves tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin . J . Biol . Chem . 282 : 16086 – 16094 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M701997200 on A p r il 5 , 2017 D o w n l oaded f r o m Published April 12 , 2010