HAL Id : hal - 01238262 https : / / hal . archives - ouvertes . fr / hal - 01238262 Submitted on 4 Dec 2015 HAL is a multi - disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci - entific research documents , whether they are pub - lished or not . The documents may come from teaching and research institutions in France or abroad , or from public or private research centers . L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL , est destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scientifiques de niveau recherche , publiés ou non , émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche français ou étrangers , des laboratoires publics ou privés . Relaxation of Loaded ESCRT - III Spiral Springs Drives Membrane Deformation Nicolas Chiaruttini , Lorena Redondo - Morata , Adai Colom , Frédéric Humbert , Martin Lenz , Simon Scheuring , Aurelien Roux To cite this version : Nicolas Chiaruttini , Lorena Redondo - Morata , Adai Colom , Frédéric Humbert , Martin Lenz , et al . . Relaxation of Loaded ESCRT - III Spiral Springs Drives Membrane Deformation . Cell , Elsevier , 2015 , 163 ( 4 ) , pp . 866 - 879 . < 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 10 . 017 > . < hal - 01238262 > Article Relaxation of Loaded ESCRT - III Spiral Springs Drives Membrane Deformation Graphical Abstract Highlights d Snf7 forms highly ﬂexible ﬁlaments that spontaneously curl d Snf7 ﬁlaments forms spirals at the surface of lipid membranes d Snf7 spirals are springs as they can deform under lateral compression d Relaxation of compressed Snf7 spirals leads to membrane deformation Authors Nicolas Chiaruttini , Lorena Redondo - Morata , Adai Colom , Fre´de´ric Humbert , Martin Lenz , Simon Scheuring , Aure´lien Roux Correspondence simon . scheuring @ inserm . fr ( S . S . ) , aurelien . roux @ unige . ch ( A . R . ) In Brief A component of the ESCRT - III membrane ﬁssion machinery self - organizes into spiral springs that trigger membrane deformation when released . Chiaruttini et al . , 2015 , Cell 163 , 866 – 879 November 5 , 2015 ª 2015 The Authors http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 10 . 017 Article Relaxation of Loaded ESCRT - III Spiral Springs Drives Membrane Deformation Nicolas Chiaruttini , 1 , 5 Lorena Redondo - Morata , 3 , 5 Adai Colom , 1 , 2 , 3 Fre´de´ric Humbert , 1 Martin Lenz , 4 , 6 Simon Scheuring , 3 , 6 , * and Aure´lien Roux 1 , 2 , 6 , * 1 University of Geneva , Department of Biochemistry , quai Ernest Ansermet 30 , 1211 Geneva 4 , Switzerland 2 Swiss National Centre for Competence in Research Programme Chemical Biology , 1211 Geneva , Switzerland 3 U1006 INSERM , Aix - Marseille Universite´ , Parc Scientiﬁque et Technologique de Luminy , 163 avenue de Luminy , 13009 Marseille , France 4 LPTMS , CNRS , Univ . Paris - Sud , Universite´ Paris - Saclay , 91405 Orsay , France 5 Co - ﬁrst author 6 Co - senior author * Correspondence : simon . scheuring @ inserm . fr ( S . S . ) , aurelien . roux @ unige . ch ( A . R . ) http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 10 . 017 This is an open access article under the CC BY - NC - ND license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - nd / 4 . 0 / ) . SUMMARY ESCRT - III is required for lipid membrane remodeling in many cellular processes , from abscission to viral budding and multi - vesicular body biogenesis . How - ever , how ESCRT - III polymerization generates mem - brane curvature remains debated . Here , we show that Snf7 , the main component of ESCRT - III , poly - merizes into spirals at the surface of lipid bilayers . When covering the entire membrane surface , these spirals stopped growing when densely packed : they had a polygonal shape , suggesting that lateral compression could deform them . We reasoned that Snf7 spirals could function as spiral springs . By measuring the polymerization energy and the rigidity of Snf7 ﬁlaments , we showed that they were deformed while growing in a conﬁned area . Further - more , we observed that the elastic expansion of compressed Snf7 spirals generated an area differ - ence between the two sides of the membrane and thus curvature . This spring - like activity underlies the driving force by which ESCRT - III could mediate membrane deformation and ﬁssion . INTRODUCTION ESCRT - III ( endosomal sorting complex required for transport ) has been implicated in the formation of intralumenal vesicles ( ILVs ) during biogenesis of multi - vesicular bodies ( MVBs ) by ge - netic ( Babst et al . , 2002 ; Coonrod and Stevens , 2010 ) and biochemical assays ( Adell et al . , 2014 ; Henne et al . , 2012 ; Sak - sena et al . , 2009 ; Wollert and Hurley , 2010 ; Wollert et al . , 2009 ) . ESCRT - III budding occurs in an opposite direction than in endo - cytosis : the limiting membrane is pushed outward from the cyto - plasminsteadofcurvinginward . ESCRT - IIIhasbeenproposedto play a role in membrane deformation ( Hanson et al . , 2008 ) and ﬁssion of ILVs ( Adell et al . , 2014 ) . Consistent with this , ESCRT - III is also required for geometrically similar ﬁssion reactions such as viral budding ( von Schwedler et al . , 2003 ) and abscission during cytokinesis ( Carlton et al . , 2008 ; Elia et al . , 2011 ; Guizetti et al . , 2011 ) . ESCRT - III nucleation is promoted by ESCRT - II and its disassembly by the ATPase Vps4 ( Lata et al . , 2008 ) . It is unclear how ESCRT - III deforms lipid membranes . Because of their polymerization abilities , ESCRT - III proteins ( Vps20 , Snf7 , Vps2 , Vps24 ) have been proposed to generate membrane curvature by scaffolding ( Cashikar et al . , 2014 ; Fab - rikant et al . , 2009 ; Hanson et al . , 2008 ; Lata et al . , 2008 ) . In this mode , polymers coating the membrane usually adopt a single speciﬁc shape , or , at least , a set of geometrically similar shapes . ESCRT - IIIﬁlamentsadoptinsteadawidevarietyofshapesinvivo and in vitro : concentric circles , rings , spirals , helices , or linear ﬁl - aments have been observed ( Hanson et al . , 2008 ; Henne et al . , 2012 ; Pires et al . , 2009 ) . Furthermore , no unique shape for the assembly of ESCRT - III proteins arises from the molecular struc - ture of ESCRT - III proteins ( McCullough et al . , 2013 ) . Instead , cur - vature could be generated by other mechanisms : for example , it has been proposed that the amphipathic insertion of the N - termi - nal part of Snf7 could participate in the generation of membrane curvature ( Buchkovich et al . , 2013 ) . We were thus interested in studying how ESCRT - III polymerization could drive membrane curvature . RESULTS Growth of Snf7 Patches on Supported Bilayers To study the polymerization of ESCRT - III , we reconstituted ESCRT - III polymerization by adding puriﬁed yeast Snf7 onto supported lipid membranes . Supported membranes were ob - tained by bursting giant unilamellar vesicles ( GUVs ) composed of 40 % di - oleoyl - phosphatidylserine ( DOPS ) and 60 % of di - oleoyl - phosphatidylcholine ( DOPC ) on cleaned glass coverslips ( Figure S1A , Movie S1 ) . These coverslips were built into a ﬂow chamber , allowing sequential addition and exchange of solutions . First , Snf7 labeled with Alexa488 ( Snf7 - Alexa488 ) was ﬂushed into the chamber , and its association to the membrane was imaged by time - lapse spinning - disk confocal microscopy ( SDC ) . At 400 nM , Snf7 formed patches evenly distributed on 866 Cell 163 , 866 – 879 , November 5 , 2015 ª 2015 The Authors Figure 1 . Nucleation and Growth of Snf7 Patches on Supported Membranes Lipid composition is DOPC 60 % / DOPS 40 % + Rhodamine PE 0 . 1 % . ( A ) Time - lapse images of Snf7 - Alexa488 patches growth ( green ) at [ Snf7 ] = 400 nM on supported membrane ( gray ) . ( B ) Time - lapse images ( every 10 min ) of a single Snf7 - Alexa488 patch ( green ) growing at [ Snf7 ] = 200 nM . ( legend continued on next page ) Cell 163 , 866 – 879 , November 5 , 2015 ª 2015 The Authors 867 the membrane surface ( Figure 1A ) . These circular patches ( Fig - ure 1B ) grew over the course of an hour until becoming conﬂuent , eventually covering the membrane completely . The nucleation rate of the patches depended on Snf7 bulk concentration ( Figure 1C ) . Patch formation was not observed below 200 nM . Above 1 m M , patch formation and growth was so fast that individual patches could hardly be discriminated . Be - tween these limiting concentrations , we were able to follow micron - sized patches individually over several tens of minutes ( Movie S2 ) . Once formed , patches disassembled with a half time of approximately 15 hr upon Snf7 washout ( Figure S1B ; Movie S3 ) . We termed ‘‘patch nucleation’’ this nucleation of patches in the absence of a previous Snf7 structure . The patch nucleation rate was very low , less than 1 seed . m m (cid:1) 2 . hour (cid:1) 1 , and depended on the amount of negatively charged lipids in the membrane ( Fig - ure S1C ) , revealing the critical role of these lipids in promoting Snf7 polymerization . We did not observe Snf7 assemblies in the absence of membranes . The periphery of the patches showed dimmer Snf7 ﬂuores - cence than the center : ﬂuorescence decayed radially at the rim over the outer 4 m m . This gradient of ﬂuorescence was the same as the patch grew in radius ( Figure 1D ) and independent on bulk concentration of Snf7 ( Figure 1E ) . The central part of the patches had the same intensity , constant over time . We postulated that the patch could be made of two parts : a central part whereSnf7 entirely coversthe membrane andcannotfurther assemble , and a rim , representing a growing front . To study whether Snf7 was assembled only in the front region , we gener - ated patches with a solution of Snf7 - Alexa488 , which we then re - placed with Snf7 - Atto647N ( Figure 1F and Movie S4 ) . As postu - lated , Snf7 - Atto647N ﬂuorescence appeared only at the border of the growing patches . These observations conﬁrmed that Snf7 patches were growing by a traveling circular front . The front propagated at constant speed ( Figure 1G ) . The speed was linear with Snf7 concentration ( Figure 1H ) . As a result , and because the ﬂuorescence gradient was independent from Snf7 concentration , ﬂuorescence intensity curves with time at a given point ( Figure S1E ) could be merged into a single one by rescaling time with Snf7 concentration ( Figure S1F ) . The amount of negatively charged lipids also affected the front speed ( Figure S1D ) . In summary , the growth of the Snf7 patches re - ﬂected a nucleation / growth process , with a nucleation rate of less than 1 seed . m m (cid:1) 2 . hour (cid:1) 1 and a radial growth speed of 760 nm . min (cid:1) 1 . m M (cid:1) 1 . Since Snf7 ﬁlaments can curl into circles or spirals ( Hanson et al . , 2008 ; Henne et al . , 2012 ; Shen et al . , 2014 ) , we reasoned that one patch could be made of a single spiral ﬁlament growing from its tips at constant rate . In this case , however , the radial growth speed of the patch should slow down as the square root of time , and a dimmer ﬂuorescence at the periphery of the patches would not be expected . To resolve this apparent contra - diction , we studied the molecular structure of the Snf7 patches with atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) and electron microscopy ( EM ) . Snf7 Patches Are Made of Spiraling Filaments with Lateral Interactions We ﬁrst acquired images of Snf7 patches by AFM . GUVs composed of 60 % DOPC and 40 % DOPS were burst on a mica support ( Figure S2A ) . After a four hours incubation of Snf7 at 1 m M , AFM images revealed that the micron - sized Snf7 patches consisted of packed arrays of Snf7 circular assemblies ( Figure 2A ; Figure S2B ) . Each assembly was formed by concen - tric circle - like structures . However , in these packed conditions , rather than being perfectly circular , each assembly was deformed into polygons with six neighbors on average ( Fig - ure 2B ) . The average external radius was 123 ± 35 nm ( in the following , values are mean ± SD unless otherwise noted ; n = 295 ) ( Figure 2C ) , and the innermost circle had an average radius of 18 ± 3 nm ( n = 120 ) ( Figure 2D ) . The average distance between successive circles was b = 17 ± 3 nm ( n = 80 ) ( Figure 2E ) . To study the structure of these Snf7 assemblies , we performed negative stain electron microscopy ( EM ) of large unilamellar ves - icles ( LUVs ) coated with Snf7 upon incubation for 15 min in a 1 m M Snf7 solution . LUVs coated with circular structures were observed , consistent with AFM images ( Figure 2F ) . The ﬁne structure of the ﬁlaments remained difﬁcult to see because the two hemispheres of the LUV are projected onto the same EM im - age . However , in many cases , LUVs that had adhered on the grid were ﬂushed during staining , leaving Snf7 assemblies attached to the grid surface . Two kinds of structures were then observed : small rings ( 27 ± 4 nm average radius ; n = 61 ; Figure 2G ) and large circular assemblies ( R = 110 ± 40 nm ; n = 46 ; Figure 2H ) . Small rings are composed of ﬁlaments with two different thick - nesses ( Figure 2G and Figure S2C ) . The thinner ones appeared single stranded with an approximate thickness of 4 . 5 ± 0 . 3 nm ( n = 10 ) in agreement with previous data ( Pires et al . , 2009 ; Shen et al . , 2014 ) . The thicker ones were double - stranded , with approximately twice the thickness ( 10 . 7 ± 0 . 7 nm ; n = 7 ) . The larger circular assemblies had an average radius of 110 ± 40 nm ( n = 46 ) . Following the path of the innermost ﬁlament in these assemblies revealed that they were made of a single ﬁla - ment , self - organized into a spiral ( Figure 2H ; Figure S2D ) . Within the spiral , we observed that the ﬁlament could associate laterally with itself , forming double - stranded ﬁlaments . These images showed that the spiraling nature of Snf7 ﬁlaments previously observed in solution ( Shen et al . , 2014 ) is conserved at the ( C ) Patch nucleation rate as a function of [ Snf7 ] . ( D ) Successive ( from bright to dark green , every 10 min ) Snf7 patch ﬂuorescence proﬁles ( circularly averaged ) at [ Snf7 ] = 200 nM . ( E ) Snf7 patch edge ﬂuorescence proﬁle ( average of 3 patches ) as a function of [ Snf7 ] ( data for [ Snf7 ] < 200 nM were obtained by ﬁrst nucleating the patches at 350 nM for 5 min , and then [ Snf7 ] was reduced to the desired value ) . ( F ) Exchange ofbulkSnf7 - Alexa488 ( green ) withSnf7 - Atto647N ( red ) at200nM . Inset : kymograph oftheregionselected ( yellow box ) . Thegreen lineistheswitch between green and red Snf7 . ( G ) Equatorial kymograph of the patch shown in B . ( H ) Patch radial growth speed as a function of [ Snf7 ] . The slope of the linear ﬁt ( gray line ) is 760 nm . min (cid:1) 1 . m M (cid:1) 1 . See also Figure S1 . 868 Cell 163 , 866 – 879 , November 5 , 2015 ª 2015 The Authors Figure 2 . Patches Are Made of Packed Snf7 Spirals ( A ) AFM topographic image of the center of a Snf7 patch . ( B ) Histogram of the number of neighbors per assembly . ( C ) Histogram of the average outer radii of Snf7 assemblies . The average radius is 123 nm ± 33 nm . ( D ) Histogram of the innermost circle radii . The average radius is 18 nm ± 3 nm . ( E ) Histogram of the inter - circle distance . The average distance is b = 17 nm ± 3 nm . ( F ) TEM image of a negatively stained , Snf7 - coated LUV . ( legend continued on next page ) Cell 163 , 866 – 879 , November 5 , 2015 ª 2015 The Authors 869 membrane . It also suggests that previously reported circular as - semblies could also be spirals : in vitro , a Snf7 mutant protein that polymerizes spontaneously onto membranes ( Henne et al . , 2012 ) or , in ﬁbroblasts , the circular structures found upon over - expression of CHMP4A and CHMP4B ( Hanson et al . , 2008 ) . The formation of rings suggests that Snf7 ﬁlaments grow with a preferred curvature and the formation of spiral suggests that Snf7 ﬁlaments can depart from this preferred curvature with some ﬂexibility . The AFM images also revealed that ﬁlaments could split within the disk assemblies ( Figure 2I ) : thick ﬁlaments that appeared as concentric circles are actually interconnected by thinner ﬁla - ments ( Figure 2J , arrows ) . This is consistent with the spiral struc - ture seen by EM : double - stranded parts are combined with sin - gle - stranded connections ( Figure 2H ) . The thinner ﬁlaments had an average thickness of 4 . 9 nm ± 1 . 5 nm ( n = 25 ) , probably cor - responding to single strands , whereas thicker ones had a thick - ness of 10 . 6 ± 1 . 2 nm ( n = 25 ) , consistent with double - strands . The AFM and EM analysis suggested a structure of the Snf7 as - semblies , where a single spiral ﬁlament interacted laterally with itself to form double - stranded ﬁlaments . Occasionally , spirals were directly observed by AFM ( Figure 2I , subpanel 6 ) . These observations prompted the question of how Snf7 patches were formed . Patch nucleation could , for instance , start from a single closed ring , like those seen by EM . It is conceivable that such rings could be prone to break open , thus freeing ﬁla - ment tips that could further grow into a spiral . How would then this initial spiral transform into a patch ? A possible scenario consists of a two - step growth mechanism ( Figure 3A ) . First , new spirals are nucleated in the vicinity of existing spirals ( termed below spiral nucleation ) . Rupture of ﬁlaments would separate the newly formed spirals from the initial spiral . Second , these spirals would grow independently through the addition of monomers at their ﬁlament tips . This scenario accounts for the observed growth dynamics of Snf7 patches : the constant speed of the radial growth of the patches implies that the density of growing ﬁlament tips at their rim stays constant . The formation of new spirals generates new tips , maintaining a constant density of growing tips . To explore quantitatively the implications of such scenario , we developed a mathematical description of the dynamics of sur - face coverage by growing Snf7 spirals ( Figure 3B and Figure S3 ) . In the model , Snf7 spirals are represented by hard disks depos - ited on a surface representing a small ( micron - sized ) piece of membrane . As initial conditions , a few disks with radius r 0 are present , corresponding to events of initial patch nucleation . Patch nucleation is then neglected ( set to zero ) during the rest of the dynamics . New disks are thus generated only by spiral nucleation . Disks growth corresponds to an area gain w per unit time ( in nm 2 . s (cid:1) 1 ) , as expected if the Snf7 ﬁlaments are elongating from their tips at a constant speed w = b ( in nm . s (cid:1) 1 , where b = 17 nm is the distance between Snf7 ﬁlaments in a single spiral ) . As the Snf7 spiral grows , its perimeter increases , offering an increasing number of potential spiral nucleation sites . We model this by stochastic nucleation of new disks with radius r 0 at a rate l P , where P denotes the total perimeter of the existing disks , and l a constant spiral nucleation rate ( expressed in number of nucleation events per second per micrometer ) . In the model , nucleation is prevented if the new disk location is already occu - pied by an existing disk . In addition , both nucleation and polymerization stop when the surface is completely covered with disks ( Figure 3C ) . Solving the model in a mean - ﬁeld approx - imation using the value obtained experimentally for r 0 gives a ﬁnal distribution of disk sizes with one unknown parameter ð w = l Þ ( Supplemental Information , Supplemental Mathematical Modeling part 1 ) . Fitting ð w = l Þ = 9 : 8 ± 1 : 5 3 10 (cid:1) 3 m m 3 , we ﬁnd the distribution in excellent agreement with the experimental size distribution ( Figure 3D ) . We then tested experimentally whether three key features of our theoretical model are indeed fulﬁlled during the generation of Snf7 assemblies . First , both the existence of initial single rings and the growth into spirals imply that Snf7 ﬁlaments have a preferred high curvature . Since the average radius of rings is in the range 25 – 30 nm , this might correspond to the preferred cur - vature . Second , the proposal of secondary nucleation of spirals implies that new spirals can form from existing ones . Third , poly - merization arrest should be correlated with contacts between neighboring disks . Finally , we also sought to determine indepen - dently the parameters w and l , whose ratio ð w = l Þ had been esti - mated from the ﬁt of the size distribution of spirals ( Figure 3D ) . To address all this , we studied the molecular dynamics of spiral growth by total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence microscopy ( TIRFM ) and by dynamic high - speed AFM ( HS - AFM ) imaging ( Casuso et al . , 2012 ) . Snf7 Filament Dynamics Uncovers the Intrinsic Filament Curvature and the Mode of Nucleation To characterize the initial events leading to patch formation , we ﬁrst studied the early steps of Snf7 patch nucleation by TIRFM , which allowed us to quantify the approximate number of Snf7 molecules in diffraction limited spots from their ﬂuorescence in - tensity ( see Experimental Procedures for quantiﬁcation ) . Patch nucleation started with the appearance of a ﬂuorescent diffrac - tion limited spot ( nucleus , Figure 4A ) containing 50 ± 20 mono - mers ( n = 9 ) . At a Snf7 concentration of 300 nM , the intensity of the nuclei remained constant for several minutes until these nuclei started to grow ( Figure 4A ) . Under these conditions , the number of nuclei is very low ( Figure 1C ) . To increase the number of nuclei and to obtain more robust statistics , we nucleated Snf7 assemblies by adding 1 m M ESCRT - II and 1 m M Vps20 to a 75 nM Snf7 solution . Under these conditions , many Snf7 nuclei ( G ) TEM images of Snf7 rings , single ( upper row ) and double ( lower row ) stranded . ( H ) Top : TEMimageofasingleSnf7spiral . TheSnf7ﬁlamentisunderlinedingreen ( resp . red ) whendoublestranded ( resp . singlestranded ) . Bottom : colorcodeof the ﬁlament path from the most inner turn ( red ) to the most outer turn ( purple ) . See also Figure S2D . ( I ) AFM images of connections between ﬁlaments : 1 to 3 , split ﬁlaments connecting two spirals – 4 and 5 , ﬁlament split within a spiral – 6 , a spiral ﬁlament . ( J ) High resolution AFM topographic image of Snf7 ﬁlament splitting and branching within a single Snf7 spiral . See also Figure S2 . 870 Cell 163 , 866 – 879 , November 5 , 2015 ª 2015 The Authors appeared on the membrane surface ( Figure 4B and Figure S4A ) and remained stable for several tens of minutes , consistent with our observations with Snf7 alone ( see Figure 4A ) . The Snf7 nuclei have an average number of molecules of 60 ± 46 ( mean ± SD ; n = 1856 , Figure 4C ) . If arranged in a closed ring , it would generate a circle of about 30 nm radius , considering a distance of 3 . 2 nm between Snf7 monomers in the ﬁlaments ( Shen et al . , 2014 ) ( radius = perimeter / ( 2 p ) = ( 60 3 3 . 2 ) / ( 2 3 3 . 14 ) (cid:3) 32 nm ) . This radius corresponds to those observed in rings seen by EM ( see Figure 2G ) , implying that the arrested nuclei observed by TIRF could be closed rings . This supports that Snf7 patch nucleation starts by the appearance of a single , highly curved Snf7 ring that would break to form a spi - ral . To further conﬁrm this hypothesis , we further showed through photobleaching experiments that breakage of the nuclei induces patch formation ( Figures S4B and S4C ) . The formation of highly curved nucleation rings suggests that Snf7 ﬁlaments have a preferred radius of curvature in the 25 – 30 nm range . Indeed , we measured radii of a 27 nm radius by EM and estimated a 32 nm radius by TIRF , in line with other studies ( 21 nm ( Shen et al . , 2014 ) and 32 nm ( Henne et al . , 2012 ) ) . In spirals , this preference should not be satisﬁed , as outer turns are under - curved ( 123 nm radius , Figure 2C ) and inner turns are over - curved ( 18 nm radius , Figure 2D ) . These forced suboptimal radii of curvature may induce signiﬁcant mechanical stresses in the Snf7 ﬁlaments , which might in turn underlie Snf7 biological function in membrane deformation . To explore the existence of such internal stresses , we used the HS - AFM tip as a nanodissector ( Scheuring et al . , 2003 ) , brieﬂy applying strong forces to partially break a densely packed array Figure 3 . Modeling of Snf7 Patch Growth ( A ) A putative scenario for the nucleation and growth of Snf7 spirals into a patch : new spirals are formedfromﬁlamentsprotruding frompre - existing spirals . The new spirals separate from the mother spiral by ﬁlament break . ( B ) SchematicofthetheoreticalmodelforSnf7patch growth . Snf7spiralsarerepresentedbydisks . Disks arecreatedwithaninitialradius r 0 . Theirareagrows with a constant rate ð w Þ , which leads to a radius growingasthesquarerootoftime ( uppergraphand black curves ) . New spirals are nucleated over time proportionally to the spiral nucleation rate l and to the total perimeter of existing disks . ( C ) Pictorial representations of a small membrane area being covered with Snf7 disks at the begin - ning ( left ) and at the end ( right ) of the growth process . ( D ) Cumulative distribution of spiral sizes ( dots , calculated from Figure 2C ) ﬁtted with our theoret - ical model ( line ) , imposing r 0 = 25 nm . The single ﬁt parameter ð w = l Þ is equal to 9 : 8 3 10 (cid:1) 3 m m 3 . of Snf7 spirals . After breakage , 8 large disks were transformed into 29 small cir - cles ( Figure 4D ) , with a radius of 17 ± 5 nm ( see size distribution Figure S4D ) . This is consistent with a scenario where Snf7 ﬁlaments were excised by rupture from the outer circles and curled back to a radius closer to their preferred radius . The nanodissector experiment indicated that even if polymerized at low radius of curvature , Snf7 ﬁlaments kept their ability to curl into smaller rings . The radius of these broken ﬁlaments ( 17 nm ) is smaller than the one of the initial ring ( (cid:3) 27 nm ) , but very close to the size of the inner turns in large spirals ( 18 nm ; see Figure 2D ) . This could be consistent with a preferred radius of curvature of 17 nm . Alternatively , the nanodissector - induced rings experienced the lateral pressure of the neighbors , forcing them to a smaller radius . To discriminate these two hypotheses , we studied the nucleation of new spirals from pre - existing Snf7 assemblies at molecular resolution by HS - AFM . We focused on areas where Snf7 spirals were already packed , but free membrane was still available ( Figures 4E and F ; Movies S5 and S6 ) . Our image se - quences showed that newly formed spirals were mainly initiated from ﬁlaments protruding from pre - existing spirals ( Figure 4E ) , revealing the mechanism by which spiral nucleation occurs . The outer radius of these spirals grew with time while forming new turns ( Figures 4F and 4G ) . While growing , bundled ﬁlaments can transiently separate and interact laterally with the neigh - boring bundles ( Figure 4H ) . Strikingly , when increasing from 2 to 3 concentric circles , the radius of the innermost circle was reduced from 22 nm to 14 nm ( Figure 4G ) . These observations strongly support our hy - pothesis that the preferred radius of curvature of Snf7 oligomers is about 25 nm , but that lateral pressure can induce higher curvatures . The radial growth of free spirals was initially rapid , but then slowed down ( Figure 4I ) , roughly following a dependence on Cell 163 , 866 – 879 , November 5 , 2015 ª 2015 The Authors 871 the square root of time as expected from our model . From these data , we measured an area growth rate w of 80 ± 36 nm 2 . s (cid:1) 1 ( n = 5 ; see Experimental Procedures for quantiﬁcation ) at 1 m M . We estimated from w a growth rate of approximately 3 subunits . s (cid:1) 1 . m M (cid:1) 1 ( Supplemental Information , Supplemental Mathematical Modeling ) . The estimated ﬁlament growth rate is in the range of other ﬁlament rates : actin and tubulin are in the range of 5 – 10 subunits . s (cid:1) 1 . m M (cid:1) 1 . Using our previous estimate ð w = l Þ = 9 : 8 3 10 (cid:1) 3 m m 3 and this experimental value for w , we ob - tained the spiral nucleation rate as l = 8 . 2 3 10 (cid:1) 3 spiral . m m (cid:1) 1 . s (cid:1) 1 at [ Snf7 ] = 1 m M . This secondary spiral nucleation rate is 500 times larger than the initial patch nucleation rate ( Supplemental Information , Supplemental Mathematical Modeling ) . It validated our assumption that the patch nucleation was negligible in our theoretical model . In summary , these observations indicated ( 1 ) a preferred high curvature of the Snf7 ﬁlaments and ( 2 ) the mechanism of spiral nucleation from existing spirals . We then set up to study the third feature of our model , whether lateral contacts between spirals can inhibit their growth . Polymerization of Snf7 Filaments Induces Compression of the Spirals AFM images of packed arrays of spirals showed that ﬁlaments at the contact zone between spirals were ﬂattened , resulting in spi - rals acquiring a polygonal shape that was more pronounced for longer incubation times ( Figure 5A ) . Moreover , the central area of some of these polygons was pushed toward the substrate , as seen in the height proﬁle of AFM images ( Figure 5B ) . Also , the centers of these spirals were often found to be stiffer as seen in AFM mechanical maps ( Figure 5B ) . We reasoned that this deformation reﬂected lateral compression of the spirals as the membrane became covered with Snf7 . To study the correlation between polymerization rate and lateral compression of the Snf7 assemblies , we ought to measure them simultaneously . We started by reconstituting Snf7 polymerization on GUVs adhered to a glass surface , to avoid any displacement during time - lapse imaging ( Figure S5A ) and followed the increase of Snf7 ﬂuorescence on the vesicle with time . In supported bilayers , which have smaller lipid mobility than free bilayers , diffusion of Snf7 assemblies is very limited . In contrast , Snf7 assemblies had a higher diffusion on GUVs explaining that ﬂuorescence showed a homogeneous distribution ( Figure 5C ) . The dynamics of saturation of Snf7 polymerization over the entire GUV ( Figure 5C , bottom ) was similar to the dynamics of coverage at a single point in the supported bilayer experiments ( Figure S5B ) : after an approximately exponential increase of the ﬂuorescence , the dynamics of coverage saturated through a progressive slow down phase . If polymerization rate is inde - pendent of lateral compression , as it is in our theoretical model , an abrupt arrest of growth is expected ( Figure S5C ) . Conversely , a polymerization rate dependent on lateral compression would cause a progressive slow down until reaching saturation . As an indication of lateral compression , we noticed that coated GUVs underwent dramatic morphological changes upon several hours of Snf7 polymerization : GUVs were not spherical anymore and instead showed extreme irregular shapes , similar to rigid punched table tennis balls ( Figure 5D ) . Upon aspiration into a micropipette , they deformed plastically ( Figure 5E and Figure S5D ) , showing that the Snf7 solidiﬁes the membrane . These observations are consistent with a scenario where a rigid Snf7 coat generates pressure on the GUVs , stretching their membrane . We reasoned that the accumulation of lateral compression in the Snf7 coat would stretch the underlying membrane , increasing its tension ( Figure 5F ) . In order to follow the dynamics of accumulation of lateral compression within the Snf7 layer , we directly measured membrane tension generation during Snf7 polymerization . Using optical tweezers , we pulled a thin tether from a GUV held in an aspiration pipette , that allows to monitor membrane tension through the measurement of the force F exerted on the optical tweezers’ bead ( Cuvelier et al . , 2005 ) ( Fig - ure 5G ) . We then ﬂowed a 500 nM solution of Snf7 using an injec - tion pipette , which triggered protein assembly onto the mem - brane ( Figure 5H ) . Monitoring Snf7 ﬂuorescence , we found that its membrane binding dynamics was identical to that measured previously , reaching the saturation value after 10 – 20 min ( Fig - ure 5I , top ) . Concomitant with this saturation , we observed an in - crease in the force exerted by the tube , indicating an increase of membrane tension ( Figure 5I , bottom ) . These data show that Snf7 polymerization occurs at a slower rate as compression in - creases within the Snf7 layer , suggesting a coupling between polymerization and compression . The dependence of the poly - merization energy m ( polymerization energy per unit surface ) on the changes in tube force is captured by the expression ( Supple - mental Information , Supplemental Mathematical Modeling part 4 . 3 ) : m = F 2 f (cid:1) F 2 i 8 p 2 k ( 1 ) where F i = 8 pN and F f = 35 pN are the tube forces before and after Snf7 polymerization and k = 4 : 8 3 10 (cid:1) 20 J , is the mem - brane bending rigidity ( Figure S5E ) . These values yield m = 3 : 1 3 10 (cid:1) 4 J . m (cid:1) 2 , which is a fairly high polymerization en - ergy , twice that of clathrin ( Saleem et al . , 2015 ) , which by itself is able to cause membrane deformation during endocytosis . This indicates that the polymerization force of Snf7 can plau - sibly cause membrane deformation . These data are therefore compatible with a scenario where Snf7 spirals act as 2D springs that load themselves through poly - merization . Constrained by their neighbors , Snf7 spirals would deform signiﬁcantly during polymerization , from a disk - like to a polygonal shape , until deformation and polymerization force are balanced . To test quantitatively whether the polymerization force is sufﬁcient to deform Snf7 spirals , we established a theo - retical elastic model of spiral compression . In the model , the Snf7 layer is approximated to a hexagonal lattice of individual spirals . Each spiral is composed of a collec - tion of concentric ﬁlaments spaced by a distance b = 17 nm up to a typical radius R = 130 nm similar to the experimental data shown in Figure 2C . The ﬁlaments are circular in the absence of lateral compression , but may deform into hexagons with rounded vertices , to accommodate tighter packing , as illustrated in Figures 5A and 5F . The amount of energy required to deform circular ﬁlaments into more polygonal shapes depend on the 872 Cell 163 , 866 – 879 , November 5 , 2015 ª 2015 The Authors Figure 4 . Nucleation and Growth of Snf7 Spirals on Supported Membranes ( A ) Left : TIRF microscopy kymographs of the nucleation of single Snf7 patches ( green ) at [ Snf7 ] = 300nM . Arrows indicate single ring to multiple spirals transition as postulated from the interpretation of these observations ( right ) . ( B ) TIRFmicroscopyimageofSnf7 - Alexa488dots ( green ) nucleatedbyESCRT - II , [ Snf7 ] = 75nM , [ Vps20 ] = 1 m M , [ ESCRT - II ] = 1 m M . Inset : zoomon4diffraction - limited spots ( scale bar , 2 m m ) . ( C ) Histogram of the estimated number of Snf7 molecules within the dots nucleated by ESCRT - II ( n = 1856 ) . ( D ) HS - AFM nanodissection experiment ( see text ) of Snf7 spirals . 2 cycles of high AFM force were applied , between 0 s and 10 s , and between 10 s and 20 s . ( E ) HS - AFM time - lapse sequence showing the apparition of a new Snf7 spiral from pre - existing ones . Arrowheads show : ﬁlament protruding from a spiral ( t = 8 . 5 s ) , ﬁlament curling from its tip ( t = 17 . 0 s ) , and forming a small spiral ( t = 37 . 4 s ) , growth of a second turn in the spiral ( t = 152 . 2 s ) and ﬁlament rearrangements ( t = 164 . 9 s ) . ( legend continued on next page ) Cell 163 , 866 – 879 , November 5 , 2015 ª 2015 The Authors 873 stiffness of the Snf7 ﬁlaments , which is characterized by its persistence length [ p . We estimated this persistence length from the amplitude of the thermal ﬂuctuations of isolated Snf7 ﬁlaments on a supported bilayer observed by HS - AFM . We obtained [ p = 260 nm ( Supplemental Information , Supplemental Mathematical Modeling part 2 ) . This is in order - of - magnitude agreement with an estimate from a numerical model of Snf7 ﬂexion ð [ p z 800 nm Þ ( Shen et al . , 2014 ) . This value is higher than for DNA ( [ p = 50 nm ) , but smaller than for cytoskeletal ﬁla - ments ( [ p = 15 m m for actin and [ p = 6 mm for microtubules ) ( Ho - ward , 2001 ) , implying that they are intrinsically soft enough to be deformed by moderate forces . In our theoretical 2D spring model , spirals become signiﬁ - cantly deformed when m exceeds a threshold surface energy m (cid:4) = 1 = ð 2 (cid:1) p = ﬃﬃﬃ 3 p Þð k B T [ p = R 2 b Þ log ð R = b Þ ( where k B is the Boltz - mann constant and T the temperature , see Supplemental Infor - mation , Supplemental Mathematical Modeling part 3 ) . Our experimental estimates for R ( (cid:3) 130 nm ) , b ( 17 nm ) and [ p ( 260 nm ) implied m (cid:4) = 4 : 0 3 10 (cid:1) 5 J , m (cid:1) 2 , 8 times smaller than the measured experimental m . It indicates that the Snf7 poly - merization energy , even if underestimated , is sufﬁcient to induce strong deformations . Our data show that the Snf7 spi - rals can deform as spiral springs , and can self - load through a mechanism where deformation is mostly generated by growth of a ﬁlament . Snf7 Spirals Expansion Leads to Membrane Deformation Having established that the Snf7 spirals can deform to store sig - niﬁcant elastic energy , we wondered if they could release this energy to deform the membrane . After several hours of Snf7 in - cubation , holes ( called ‘‘pores’’ in the following ) spontaneously appeared in a few GUVs , releasing membrane tension . Surpris - ingly , instead of bursting , the GUV membrane shrunk from the rim of the pore toward the opposite side of the GUV ( Movie S7 ) . Occasionally , this process stopped before the vesicle had fully collapsed , and stable vesicles with open pores were observed ( Figure 6A ; Movie S8 ) . In this case , a stronger ﬂuores - cence signal is seen at the rim . To understand the stronger signal of the membrane marker at the rim , we imaged these opened GUVs by thin - section EM : the membrane at the rim of the pore was rolled toward the interior of the vesicle ( Figure 6B ) . This process is known as curling , and has previously been observed in a number of situations , including polymersomes ( Mabrouk et al . , 2009 ) and during the bursting of red blood cells ( Callan - Jones et al . , 2012 ) . It occurs when an area difference appears between the two sides of a bi - layered surface . We hypothesized that curling could be driven by the expansion of the previously compressed Snf7 layer following pore formation . To quantitatively study the plausibility of such scenario , we used our theoretical model to compute the ratio of the surface occupied by a compressed spiral ð A compressed Þ to that of the a relaxed state ð A relaxed Þ ( see Supplemental Informa - tion , Supplemental Mathematical Modeling part 3 ) as A compressed A relaxed = " p 2 ﬃﬃﬃ 3 p + (cid:3) 1 (cid:1) p 2 ﬃﬃﬃ 3 p (cid:4) ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ m (cid:4) m r # 2 = 94 % ( 2 ) The value of this ratio implies that , during stress release , the Snf7 layer would expand by 6 % relative to the underlying , almost inextensible lipid bilayer ( Figure 6C ) . As a result , the membrane of the GUV would curl inward ( Figure 6D ) , con - sistently with our observations in ﬂuorescence and electron microscopy . The preferred curvature of the curl can be estimated as r c = ð d = 2 Þð A relaxed + A compressed Þ = ð A relaxed (cid:1) A compressed Þ , where 2 d is the total thickness of the lipid - Snf7 sandwich . Using AFM to measure the thickness of the Snf7 coated membranes , we estimated 2 d = 9 nm ( 5 nm for the membrane plus 4 nm for the Snf7 coat ) . With this value , we can estimate r c = 37 nm . Consid - ering previous studies ( Callan - Jones et al . , 2012 ) , r c corresponds to the curvature of the innermost roll observed ( Figure 6D ) . Experimentally , we ﬁnd a mean radius of r c = 39 ± 6 nm ( n = 9 ) . Therefore curling in the opened vesicles can be explained by the expansion of the Snf7 spiral springs . During this expansion , the spirals release their compression energy accumulated during polymerization . We wondered how much energy was stored in a single spiral , as compared to the energy required for budding of a vesicle . Our elastic model implies that the lateral compression of a single Snf7 spiral corresponds to the accumulation of an elastic energy D E = 170 k B T = 7 : 0 3 10 (cid:1) 19 J , which is bigger than the bending energy 4 pk = 160 k B T required to form a spherical membrane bud ( see Supplemental Information , Supplemental Mathematical Modeling ) . Thus , a single spiral can accumulate enough elastic energy to form a spherical bud when released . In summary , we show here that Snf7 ﬁlaments display the abil - ity to act as spiral springs that load through polymerization . The release of the compression stress accumulated during the defor - mation of the Snf7 spiral is sufﬁcient to drive membrane deformation . DISCUSSION In this study , we ﬁrst showed that lipid membranes trigger the for - mation of wild - type Snf7 assemblies at their surface through a process of nucleation - growth . The patch nucleation rate is low ( less than 1 seed . m m (cid:1) 2 . hour (cid:1) 1 ) which explains the necessity of a polymerization - activated mutant toobserve the same assemblies by EM in previous studies ( Henne et al . , 2012 ) . We found that the circular arrays formed by Snf7 on these membranes are spirals made of a single ﬁlament looping and interacting onto itself . This conﬁrms that the interaction with membrane in vitro retains the ( F ) HS - AFM time - lapse sequence of an isolated Snf7 spiral . Arrowheads show : growth of the spiral at the two - turn stage ( t = 67 . 2 s ) , and ﬁlament split ( t = 75 . 7 s ) leading to the three turns stage . ( G ) The equatorial kymograph ( yellow rectangle ) of this growing spiral : the innermost turn radius decreases from 22 nm to 14 nm upon formation of the third turn . ( H ) Dynamics of ﬁlament splitting and fusing in two Snf7 spirals ( rows ) observed by HS - AFM . Arrowheads show displacement of the splitting points . ( I ) Time plot of the outer radius of ﬁve growing Snf7 spirals followed by HS - AFM . The origin of all curves is the apparition of the ﬁrst turn . The thick curve is the average of all curves . [ Snf7 ] = 1 m M . See also Figure S4 . 874 Cell 163 , 866 – 879 , November 5 , 2015 ª 2015 The Authors spiral structure recently observed in solution ( Shen et al . , 2014 ) or invivo ( Cashikaretal . , 2014 ; Hansonetal . , 2008 ) . Wealsoﬁndthat Snf7 ﬁlaments can bundle into double - stranded ﬁlaments , prob - ably through parallel lateral interactions . In our assay , spirals become tightly packed into polygonal lat - tice at the surface of the supported bilayers . The packing of these spirals is correlated with the increase of lateral compres - sion within the Snf7 coat . These data implies that ESCRT - III spi - Figure 5 . Build - up of Lateral Compression in Snf7 Spirals by Polymerization ( A ) HS - AFM images of Snf7 spirals acquiring polygonal shapes with time . ( B ) AFM Topography and nanomechanical map - ping of polygonal Snf7 spirals . A signiﬁcant pro - portion of spirals ( dashed outlines ) have a lower center with increased mechanical stiffness . ( C ) Snf7 polymerization on GUVs made of DOPC 60 % / DOPS 40 % + Rhodamine - PE 0 . 1 % ( red ) , 0 . 003 % DOPE - Peg2000 - Biotin . GUVs are incu - bated with 500 nM Snf7 - Alexa488 ( green ) . Top : SDC images of a GUV equatorial plane during Snf7 polymerization . Bottom : ﬂuorescence in - tensity ( equatorial plane ) of 4 GUVs with time . ( D ) GUVs before ( top ) and after ( bottom ) several hours of incubation with Snf7 - Alexa488 . ( E ) Snf7 coated GUVs keep the aspirated shape after release from the micropipette . ( F ) Sketch of membrane stretching by Snf7 spiral compression . ( G ) Schematic of the membrane tension mea - surement setup combining holding pipette , injec - tion pipette , bead within an optical trap , giant vesicle ( red ) and Snf7 ( green ) . ( H ) Top image : SDC image of a membrane tension measurement experiment ( red = membrane , green = Snf7 - Alexa488 ) . Note that Snf7 - Alexa488 did not polymerize on the membrane nanotube . Bottom : brightﬁeld image of the same vesicle . The yellow cross indicates the resting position of the bead held by the optical trap . ( I ) Top : Normalized Snf7 ﬂuorescence intensity versus time ( measured from equatorial plane ) ; bottom : force exerted by the membrane nanotube on the bead versus time . See also Figure S5 . rals , because of the relatively high ﬂexi - bility of the Snf7 ﬁlament can be deformed by lateral compression . More - over , we show that the expansion of com - pressed spirals can lead to membrane deformation if conﬁnement is released ( Figure 6 ) . These observations imply that Snf7 can work as a two - dimensional spring , being able to compress and expand . In the following , we discuss how this spring - like activity highlighted by our study is relevant for the in vivo situation . In vivo , it is unlikely that a densely packed array of ESCRT - III spirals is pre - sent at the surface of membranes , which may question the physiological relevance of the spiral compres - sion observed in large patches of ESCRT - III . But the conﬁne - ment required for such lateral compression might come from other membrane proteins , which may provide walls into which single spirals could be conﬁned . In the membrane of MVBs , Lamp1 and 2 are particularly enriched ( Bissig and Gruenberg , 2014 ) and may provide a scaffold onto which ESCRT - III spirals could be compressed . Of course , compression being isotropic Cell 163 , 866 – 879 , November 5 , 2015 ª 2015 The Authors 875 in this in vivo case , compressed spirals would stay circular , instead of polygonal . But another source of lateral compression is intrinsic to the spiral structure , and is present in single Snf7 spiral even in the absence of any external conﬁning structures . We show that the ﬁlaments curl spontaneously at 20 – 30 nm , implying that if they grow at a different radius , they are under mechanical stress . Indeed , when spirals are broken , all the pieces of ﬁlaments further curl to a smaller radius . Thus , in the spiral structure , ﬁla - ments with a radius larger than 25 nm are stretched , compress - Figure 6 . Snf7 Lateral Pressure and Expan - sion Induced Membrane Deformations ( A ) Confocal sections of Snf7 coated vesicles dis - playing stable holes . Fluorescence is more intense at the rim of the pore . ( B ) EM thin section image of a Snf7 coated vesicle with a stable pore . Note the curling of the mem - brane rim . Several other examples of membrane curling are shown in lower panels . ( C ) Sketch of the expected curvature generated by expansion of compressed Snf7 spirals . ( D ) Sketch of the pore opening and curling of Snf7 coated vesicle . Bottom images show theexpected section of a stable pore in the GUV and a zoom on the membrane curled region . ing the inner ﬁlaments . Accordingly , we ﬁnd that even for non - laterally con - strained spirals , the inner turn of the spi - rals tightens when the number of turns in the spirals goes above three . Whatever the source of compression is , our observations show the ability of Snf7 spirals to deform elastically and accumu - late potential energy that can be used for membrane deformation . But how would such energy drive membrane budding ? It was previously proposed that the poly - merization of ESCRT - III could enclose a patch of membrane and then , by reduc - tion of the length of the Snf7 rim , the mem - brane would be folded into a bud in the middle of the Snf7 polymer . The ESCRT - III rim reduction has been proposed to be mediated by depolymerization of the Snf7 spiral ( lasso model , ( Saksena et al . , 2009 ) ) or by further inward polymerization of the Snf7 spiral ( Cashikar et al . , 2014 ) . Our data suggests that Snf7 spiral spring could mediate the rim reduction by its elastic compression down to a 14 nm radius . However in this scenario , because the membrane is ﬂuid , it is difﬁcult to pic - ture how the force of the spiral spring would be transmitted to the membrane . We propose that cargoes play an essen - tial role for the force transmission ( Fig - ure 7 , left ) : the rim reduction would lead to compaction of enclosed membrane cargoes . Theoretical ( Derganc et al . , 2013 ) and experimental studies ( Stachowiak et al . , 2012 ) indicate that highly dense cargoes could mediate budding by asymmetric crowding . This is consistent with a recent in vivo study ( Mageswaran et al . , 2015 ) where ILVs budding was critically dependent on accumulation of cargoes within ESCRT - III assemblies . Another possibility is that the out - of - plane buckling of the spring itself might drive the invagination of the membrane ( Fig - ure 7 , right ) ( Lenz et al . , 2009 ) , which could explain the formation 876 Cell 163 , 866 – 879 , November 5 , 2015 ª 2015 The Authors of membrane tubules by overexpression of the human homolog of Snf7 ( Hanson et al . , 2008 ) . This model implies that the ﬂat membrane could be a metastable state of this elastic system : the stored elastic energy could be suddenly released upon external activation . Our observation that the spirals adopt a curved inverted dome shape ( Figure 5B ) is consistent with this model , and an estimate of the energy stored in one spiral further conﬁrm that this energy is sufﬁcient to bud the membrane into a sphere . The spring - like properties of Snf7 ﬁlaments also nourish our understanding of ESCRT - III role in membrane ﬁssion . Because of their high ﬂexibility , Snf7 ﬁlaments can grow at radii different from their preferred radius of curvature if steric or mechanical constraints force them to do so . This feature explains how Snf7 ﬁlaments could adapt to the wide range of radii observed in the various ESCRT - III mediated ﬁssion reactions : from mi - crons in abscission and hundreds of nanometer in virus budding , down to tens of nanometers in ILV formation and membrane repair ( Jimenez et al . , 2014 ) . However , the smallest size of the inner turn is on average 18 nm radius , which is far from the 1 . 4 nm observed with dynamin to ﬁnalize ﬁssion ( Sundborger et al . , 2014 ) . This raises questions regarding the mechanism necessary to provide ﬁssion and pore closure and supports the role of other ESCRT - III proteins and lipids in these reactions . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Protein Puriﬁcation and Labeling Snf7 ( Addgene plasmid no . 21492 ) , Escrt - II ( Addgene plasmid no . 17633 ) and Vps20 ( Addgeneplasmidno . 21490 ) werepuriﬁedaspreviouslydescribed ( Hi - erro et al . , 2004 ; Wollert et al . , 2009 ) . Snf7 stock solution was 2 . 5 m M in 20 mM HEPES , 100mMNaCl ( pH8 ) . Snf7waslabeledeither withTFP - Alexa - 488 ( Life technologie product no . A37563 ) or with NHS - Atto 647N ( Atto - tec product no . AD 647N - 3 ) . Escrt - II ( 20 m M stock solution in 50 mM Tris , 150 mM NaCl , 5 mM Figure 7 . Models of ESCRT - III Mediated Budding and Fission of Intra - lumenal Vesi - cles Left : cargo sequestration and ESCRT - III lateral compression induces membrane budding . Further ESCRT - III narrowing might lead to ﬁssion . Right : ESCRT - III lateral compression leads to buckling . b - mercaptoethanol [ pH 7 . 5 ] ) and Vps20 ( 10 m M stock solution in 20 mM HEPES 100 mM NaCl [ pH 7 . 5 ] ) were kept unlabeled . Giant Unilamellar Vesicles and Large Unilamellar Vesicles Preparation GUVs were prepared by electroformation using DOPC and DOPS mixtures , purchased fromAvanti Polar Lipids ( Alabaster , USA ) . When necessary , 0 . 1 % ﬂuorescent lipids ( 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphoethanolamine - N - ( lissamine rhodamine B sulfonyl ) ) ( Rhodamine - PE ) were added . LUVs were prepared by evaporating in a round - bottom glass tube , a volume of lipid mix ( DOPC : DOPS , 6 : 4 , mol : mol ) containing 1 mg of total lipids . After addition of 200 m l of buffer , the tube was vortexed and freeze - thaw 3 times . This solution is kept at (cid:1) 20 (cid:5) C until use . Unless otherwise noted , the buffer used for all experiments is composed of 20 mM Tris HCl ( pH 6 . 8 ) , 200 mM NaCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 . Optical Microscopy of Membrane Assays For confocal and TIRF imaging , a coverslip is cleaned with water and ethanol , and then plasma - cleaned for 2 min ( PDC - 32G , Harrick Plasma , NY , USA ) . The coverslip is assembled to a ﬂow chamber ( sticky - Slide VI 0 . 4 , Ibidi , Munich , Germany ) , with one entry connected to a syringe pump ( Aladdin , World Preci - sion Instruments , Sarasota , FL , USA ) , and the other left open for sequential introduction of other solutions . The ﬂow chamber is initially ﬁlled by 200 m l of buffer . 5 m l of GUVs are ﬂushed in the ﬂow chamber ( see Extended Experi - mental Procedures for methods to get supported membranes or partially adhered vesicles ) . Imaging is performed using an inverted microscope assembled by 3i ( Intel - ligent Imaging Innovation , Denver , USA ) and Nikon ( Eclipse C1 , Nikon , Tokyo , Japan ) . For SDC imaging , a 2 - m m - thick volume stack ( 1 m m above and below thesupported membrane ) isacquiredthen rendered to 2Dby maximum inten - sity projection . TIRF Imaging is performed using a motorized Nikon TIRF sys - tem . The number of molecules within Snf7 oligomers is estimated by calibrat - ing the microscope with commercially available ﬂuorescent DNA origamis ( GATTA - Brightness 9R and 18R , GATTAquant , Braunschweig , Germany ) ( Figure S6 ) . Optical Tweezers Tube Pulling Experiment A modiﬁed version of a published setup ( Morlot et al . , 2012 ) allows simulta - neous brightﬁeld imaging , SDC microscopy , and optical tweezing on an in - verted Nikon eclipse Ti microscope . A GUV is aspirated within a micropipette connected to a motorized micromanipulator ( MP - 285 , Sutter Instrument , Novato , CA , USA ) and a pressure control system ( MFCS - VAC (cid:1) 69 mbar , Fluigent , Villejuif , France ) that sets the aspiration pressure D P . A membrane nanotube is then pulled out from the GUV through a streptavidin - coated bead ( 3 . 05 m m diameter , Spherotec , Lake Forest , IL , USA ) held in a ﬁxed op - tical trap . The optical trap was custom - made with a continuous 5 W 1064 nm ﬁber laser ( ML5 - CW - P - TKS - OTS , Manlight , Lannion , France ) focused through a 100X 1 . 3 NA oil immersion objective . The force F exerted on the bead was calculated from the Hooke’s law : F = k . D x , where k is the stiffness of the trap ( k = 60 pN . m m (cid:1) 1 ) and D x the displacement of the bead from its Cell 163 , 866 – 879 , November 5 , 2015 ª 2015 The Authors 877 equilibrium position . Snf7 was injected close to the nanotube with a second micropipette connected to another channel of the Fluigent pressure control system . Electron Microscopy FornegativestainEMobservations , LUVswereincubatedwithSnf7insuspen - sion , spun down ( 4 min at 4 , 000 g ) , washed and then adsorbed onto glow - dis - charged Formvar coated EM grids . The samples were negatively stained for 30 s with 2 % uranyl acetate before visualization . Ultrathin sectioning of Snf7 bound LUVs ﬁxed in epon was performed using a microtome ( Leica Ultracut ) at a cutting angle of 6 (cid:5) . Sections were put on glow - discharged carbon - coated formvar grids and imaged with a Tecnai G2 Sphera ( FEI ) electron microscope . AFM and HS - AFM For both PF - QNM AFM and HS - AFM , GUVs , prepared as described above , were adsorbed to the mica support followed by protein addition . For PF - QNM AFM experiments 5 m l of the GUVs and for HS - AFM experiments 0 . 5 m l of GUVs were deposited onto freshly cleaved mica supports pre - incubated with adsorption buffer ( 220 mM NaCl , 10 mM HEPES , 2 mM MgCl 2 , [ pH 7 . 4 ] ) . Supportedlipidbilayerswereﬁrstimagedtoassessthequalityofthelipid bilayer preparation before injecting Snf7 into the ﬂuidcell to a concentration of (cid:3) 500 nM . Formation of Snf7 assemblies were observable (cid:3) 30 min after Snf7 injection . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures , six ﬁgures , and eight movies and can be found with this article online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 10 . 017 . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS N . C . andA . R . designedtheinitialproject . N . Cperformedphotonicmicroscopy andEMexperiments . HS - AFMandAFMexperimentsweredesignedbyL . R . - M , A . C . , and S . S . , and performed by L . R . - M . and A . C . Theoretical modeling was designedandperformedbyM . L . F . H . providedtechnicalsupportforproteinpu - riﬁcation . All authors performed data analysis and wrote the paper . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank James Hurley and Scott Emr for their kind gifts of plasmids , and Bruno Antonny , Emmanuel Derivery , and Marcos Gonzalez - Gaitan for theiruseful comments on the manuscript . We thank Emmanuel Derivery for in - sights throughout the project . We thank Gorana Perrelet and Pilar Ruga Fahy forhelpfortheEMsamples . WethankGuillaumeMolinardandSarahMachado for careful reading of this manuscript and help with ﬁgure artwork . We thank GATTAquant GmbH for the kind gift of GATTA - Brightness 9R and 18R . A . R . acknowledges funding support from : Human Frontier Science Program ( HFSP ) , Young Investigator Grant # RGY0076 - 2008 : the European Research Council ( ERC ) , starting ( consolidator ) grant # 311536 - MEMFIS : the Swiss Na - tional Fund for Research , grants # 131003A _ 130520 and # 131003A _ 149975 . N . C . acknowledges the European Commission for the Marie - Curie post - doctoral fellowship CYTOCUT # 300532 - 2011 . S . S . acknowledges funding support from : Agence Nationale de la Recherche , France ( ANR ) , ANR - Nano ( ANR - 12 - BS10 - 009 - 01 ) and ANR - BBMS ( ANR - 12 - BSV8 - 0006 - 01 ) grants , and a European Research Council ( ERC ) starting ( consolidator ) grant # 310080 - MEM - STRUCT - AFM . ML’s group belongs to the CNRS consortium CellTiss and is supported by grants from Universite´ Paris - Sud and CNRS , MarieCurieIntegrationGrantPCIG12 - GA - 2012 - 334053and‘‘Investissements d’Avenir’’ LabEx PALM ( ANR - 10 - LABX - 0039 - PALM ) . Received : January 20 , 2015 Revised : May 26 , 2015 Accepted : September 8 , 2015 Published : October 29 , 2015 REFERENCES Adell , M . A . Y . , Vogel , G . F . , Pakdel , M . , Mu¨ller , M . , Lindner , H . , Hess , M . W . , and Teis , D . ( 2014 ) . Coordinated binding of Vps4 to ESCRT - III drives membrane neck constriction during MVB vesicle formation . J . Cell Biol . 205 , 33 – 49 . Babst , M . , Katzmann , D . J . , Estepa - Sabal , E . J . , Meerloo , T . , and Emr , S . D . ( 2002 ) . Escrt - III : an endosome - associated heterooligomeric protein complex required for mvb sorting . Dev . Cell 3 , 271 – 282 . Bissig , C . , and Gruenberg , J . ( 2014 ) . ALIX and the multivesicular endosome : ALIX in Wonderland . Trends Cell Biol . 24 , 19 – 25 . Buchkovich , N . J . , Henne , W . M . , Tang , S . , and Emr , S . D . ( 2013 ) . Essential N - terminal insertion motif anchors the ESCRT - III ﬁlament during MVB vesicle formation . Dev . Cell 27 , 201 – 214 . Callan - Jones , A . , Albarran Arriagada , O . E . , Massiera , G . , Lorman , V . , and Ab - karian , M . ( 2012 ) . Red blood cell membrane dynamics during malaria parasite egress . Biophys . J . 103 , 2475 – 2483 . Carlton , J . G . , Agromayor , M . , and Martin - Serrano , J . ( 2008 ) . Differential re - quirements for Alix and ESCRT - III in cytokinesis and HIV - 1 release . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 10541 – 10546 . Cashikar , A . G . , Shim , S . , Roth , R . , Maldazys , M . R . , Heuser , J . E . , and Hanson , P . I . ( 2014 ) . Structure of cellular ESCRT - III spirals and their relationship to HIV budding . eLife 3 , e02184 . Casuso , I . , Khao , J . , Chami , M . , Paul - Gilloteaux , P . , Husain , M . , Duneau , J . - P . , Stahlberg , H . , Sturgis , J . N . , and Scheuring , S . ( 2012 ) . Characterization of the motion of membrane proteins using high - speed atomic force microscopy . Nat . Nanotechnol . 7 , 525 – 529 . Coonrod , E . M . , and Stevens , T . H . ( 2010 ) . The yeast vps class E mutants : the beginning of the molecular genetic analysis of multivesicular body biogenesis . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 , 4057 – 4060 . Cuvelier , D . , Dere´nyi , I . , Bassereau , P . , and Nassoy , P . ( 2005 ) . Coalescence of membrane tethers : experiments , theory , and applications . Biophys . J . 88 , 2714 – 2726 . Derganc , J . , Antonny , B . , and Copi (cid:1) c , A . ( 2013 ) . Membranebending : the power of protein imbalance . Trends Biochem . Sci . 38 , 576 – 584 . Elia , N . , Sougrat , R . , Spurlin , T . A . , Hurley , J . H . , and Lippincott - Schwartz , J . ( 2011 ) . Dynamics of endosomal sorting complex required for transport ( ESCRT ) machinery during cytokinesis and its role in abscission . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 4846 – 4851 . Fabrikant , G . , Lata , S . , Riches , J . D . , Briggs , J . A . , Weissenhorn , W . , and Ko - zlov , M . M . ( 2009 ) . Computational model of membrane ﬁssion catalyzed by ESCRT - III . PLoS Comput . Biol . 5 , e1000575 . Guizetti , J . , Schermelleh , L . , Ma¨ntler , J . , Maar , S . , Poser , I . , Leonhardt , H . , Mu¨ller - Reichert , T . , and Gerlich , D . W . ( 2011 ) . Cortical constriction during abscission involves helices of ESCRT - III - dependent ﬁlaments . Science 331 , 1616 – 1620 . Hanson , P . I . , Roth , R . , Lin , Y . , and Heuser , J . E . ( 2008 ) . Plasma membrane deformation by circular arrays of ESCRT - III protein ﬁlaments . J . Cell Biol . 180 , 389 – 402 . Henne , W . M . , Buchkovich , N . J . , Zhao , Y . , and Emr , S . D . ( 2012 ) . The endoso - mal sorting complex ESCRT - II mediates the assembly and architecture of ESCRT - III helices . Cell 151 , 356 – 371 . Hierro , A . , Sun , J . , Rusnak , A . S . , Kim , J . , Prag , G . , Emr , S . D . , and Hurley , J . H . ( 2004 ) . Structure of the ESCRT - II endosomal trafﬁcking complex . Nature 431 , 221 – 225 . Howard , J . ( 2001 ) . Mechanics of Motor Proteins and the Cytoskeleton ( Sun - derland , Massachusetts : Sinauer Associates ) . Jimenez , A . J . , Maiuri , P . , Lafaurie - Janvore , J . , Divoux , S . , Piel , M . , and Perez , F . ( 2014 ) . ESCRT machinery is required for plasma membrane repair . Science 343 , 1247136 . Lata , S . , Schoehn , G . , Jain , A . , Pires , R . , Piehler , J . , Gottlinger , H . G . , andWeis - senhorn , W . ( 2008 ) . HelicalstructuresofESCRT - IIIaredisassembledbyVPS4 . Science 321 , 1354 – 1357 . 878 Cell 163 , 866 – 879 , November 5 , 2015 ª 2015 The Authors Lenz , M . , Crow , D . J . , andJoanny , J . - F . ( 2009 ) . Membranebucklinginducedby curved ﬁlaments . Phys . Rev . Lett . 103 , 038101 . Mabrouk , E . , Cuvelier , D . , Brochard - Wyart , F . , Nassoy , P . , and Li , M . - H . ( 2009 ) . Bursting of sensitive polymersomes induced by curling . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 7294 – 7298 . Mageswaran , S . K . , Johnson , N . K . , Odorizzi , G . , and Babst , M . ( 2015 ) . Consti - tutively active ESCRT - II suppresses the MVB - sorting phenotype of ESCRT - 0 and ESCRT - I mutants . Mol . Biol . Cell 26 , 554 – 568 . McCullough , J . , Colf , L . A . , andSundquist , W . I . ( 2013 ) . Membraneﬁssionreac - tions of the mammalian ESCRT pathway . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 82 , 663 – 692 . Morlot , S . , Galli , V . , Klein , M . , Chiaruttini , N . , Manzi , J . , Humbert , F . , Dinis , L . , Lenz , M . , Cappello , G . , and Roux , A . ( 2012 ) . Membrane shape at the edge of the dynamin helix sets location and duration of the ﬁssion reaction . Cell 151 , 619 – 629 . Pires , R . , Hartlieb , B . , Signor , L . , Schoehn , G . , Lata , S . , Roessle , M . , Moriscot , C . , Popov , S . , Hinz , A . , Jamin , M . , et al . ( 2009 ) . A crescent - shaped ALIX dimer targets ESCRT - III CHMP4 ﬁlaments . Structure 17 , 843 – 856 . Saksena , S . , Wahlman , J . , Teis , D . , Johnson , A . E . , andEmr , S . D . ( 2009 ) . Func - tional reconstitution of ESCRT - III assembly and disassembly . Cell 136 , 97 – 109 . Saleem , M . , Morlot , S . , Hohendahl , A . , Manzi , J . , Lenz , M . , andRoux , A . ( 2015 ) . A balance between membrane elasticity and polymerization energy sets the shape of spherical clathrin coats . Nat . Commun . 6 , 6249 . Scheuring , S . , Seguin , J . , Marco , S . , Le´vy , D . , Robert , B . , and Rigaud , J . - L . ( 2003 ) . Nanodissection and high - resolution imaging of the Rhodopseudomo - nas viridis photosynthetic core complex in native membranes by AFM . Atomic force microscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 1690 – 1693 . Shen , Q . - T . , Schuh , A . L . , Zheng , Y . , Quinney , K . , Wang , L . , Hanna , M . , Mitch - ell , J . C . , Otegui , M . S . , Ahlquist , P . , Cui , Q . , and Audhya , A . ( 2014 ) . Structural analysis and modeling reveals new mechanisms governing ESCRT - III spiral ﬁlament assembly . J . Cell Biol . 206 , 763 – 777 . Stachowiak , J . C . , Schmid , E . M . , Ryan , C . J . , Ann , H . S . , Sasaki , D . Y . , Sherman , M . B . , Geissler , P . L . , Fletcher , D . A . , and Hayden , C . C . ( 2012 ) . Membrane bending by protein - protein crowding . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 , 944 – 949 . Sundborger , A . C . , Fang , S . , Heymann , J . A . , Ray , P . , Chappie , J . S . , and Hin - shaw , J . E . ( 2014 ) . A dynamin mutant deﬁnes a superconstricted preﬁssion state . Cell Rep . 8 , 734 – 742 . von Schwedler , U . K . , Stuchell , M . , Mu¨ller , B . , Ward , D . M . , Chung , H . - Y . , Mor - ita , E . , Wang , H . E . , Davis , T . , He , G . - P . , Cimbora , D . M . , et al . ( 2003 ) . The pro - tein network of HIV budding . Cell 114 , 701 – 713 . Wollert , T . , and Hurley , J . H . ( 2010 ) . Molecular mechanism of multivesicular body biogenesis by ESCRT complexes . Nature 464 , 864 – 869 . Wollert , T . , Wunder , C . , Lippincott - Schwartz , J . , andHurley , J . H . ( 2009 ) . Mem - brane scission by the ESCRT - III complex . Nature 458 , 172 – 177 . Cell 163 , 866 – 879 , November 5 , 2015 ª 2015 The Authors 879