Title Molecular Basis of the Ligand - binding Specificity of αvβ8 integrin Author ( s ) 小澤 , 明央 Citation Issue Date Text Version ETD URL https : / / doi . org / 10 . 18910 / 72177 DOI 10 . 18910 / 72177 rights Osaka University Knowledge Archive : OUKA Osaka University Knowledge Archive : OUKA https : / / ir . library . osaka - u . ac . jp / repo / ouka / all / Osaka University Molecular Basis of the Ligand - binding Specificity of  v  8 integrin （  v  8 インテグリンのリガンド結合特異性の分子基盤） A Thesis for Doctor Degree Presented to Osaka University 2018 Akio Ozawa 2 Table of Contents Abbreviations 2 Summary 5 Introduction I . The extracellular matrix ( ECM ) 6 II . The integrins : a family of receptor proteins for ECMs 7 III . RGD - binding integrins 14 IV . Interaction between  v - containing integrins and transforming 18 growth factor -  s ( TGF -  s ) V . Activation of TGF -  by  v - containing integrins 22 Experimental Procedures 25 Results I . In silico screening of RGD - containing proteins as candidates for 32  v integrin ligands II . Recombinant expression and purification of the candidates for  v  8 32 integrin ligands III . Binding activities of  v integrins toward 25 RGD - containing proteins 36 IV .  v  8 integrin preferentially binds to latent TGF -  1 39 V . Leu - 218 residue immediately following the RGD motif is required 41 for high - affinity binding to  v  8 integrin VI .  8 I - like domain defines the binding specificity of  v  8 integrin to 46 latent TGF -  1 VII . Role of the disulfide - linked loop ( DLL ) in latent TGF -  1 recognition 49 by  v integrins VIII .  8 - DLL is not involved in the specific recognition of Leu - 218 52 immediately after the RGD motif Discussion 54 I . Possible mechanisms for the recognition of the Leu - 218 residue 55 by the integrin  8 I - like domain II . Importance of the  hybrid domain in the affinity regulation of 58 ligand binding III . Involvement of the  subunit in determination of the ligand 59 specificity of integrins 3 IV . Distinctive contribution of the Leu - 218 residue in integrin binding 60 between  v  6 and  v  8 integrins V . Problems with in silico screening 61 VI . Possible roles of Leu - 218 in the interaction of latent TGF -  with 62  v  8 integrin VII . Roles of  v  8 integrin in activation of latent TGF -  1 63 Conclusion 65 References 66 List of Publications 74 Acknowledgments 75 4 Abbreviations BSA , bovine serum albumin BI ,  I - like domain CBB , Coomassie Brilliant Blue DLL , disulfide - linked loop DMEM , Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium ECM , extracellular matrix EGF , epidermal growth factor ELISA , enzyme - linked immuno - sorbent assay ER , endoplasmic reticulum GF , growth factor HYB ,  hybrid domain LAP , latency - associated peptide mAb , monoclonal antibody MIDAS , metal ion dependent adhesion site MMP , matrix metalloproteinase Ni - NTA , nickel - nitrilotriacetic acid pAb , polyclonal antibody PBS , phosphate - buffered saline PPC , proprotein convertase RGD , arginine - glycine - aspartic acid SDS - PAGE , sodium dodecyl sulfate - polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis TB , TGF -  - binding TBS , Tris - buffered saline TGF , transforming growth factor 5 Summary  v  8 is an integrin that recognizes an Arg - Gly - Asp ( RGD ) motif and interacts with fibronectin , vitronectin , and latent TGF -  1 . I comprehensively determined the binding activity of  v  8 integrin towards 25 putative secreted proteins having an RGD motif conserved among vertebrates .  v  8 integrin strongly and preferentially bound to latent TGF -  1 with an apparent dissociation constant of 2 . 3 ± 0 . 2 nM , but showed only marginal activity to other RGD - containing proteins including fibronectin and vitronectin . Site - directed mutagenesis of latent TGF -  1 demonstrated that the high - affinity binding of  v  8 integrin to latent TGF -  1 was defined by Leu - 218 immediately following the RGD motif within the latency - associated peptide of TGF -  1 . A 9 - mer synthetic peptide containing an RGDL sequence strongly inhibited interactions of latent TGF -  1 with  v  8 integrin , while a 9 - mer peptide with an RGDA sequence was ~ 60 - fold less inhibitory . Consistent with the critical role of Leu - 218 in latent TGF -  1 recognition by  v  8 integrin , the high - affinity binding toward  v  8 integrin was conferred on fibronectin by substitution of its RGDS motif with an RGDL sequence . Because  v  3 integrin neither exhibited strong binding to latent TGF -  1 nor distinguished the difference between the RGDL - and RGDA - containing peptides , it is less likely that the common subunit ,  v , is involved in the recognition of Leu - 218 . Therefore , I explored whether Leu - 218 is recognized by the integrin  subunit . To this end , I produced a series of swap mutants of integrin  8 and  3 subunits and examined the interaction of these mutants with latent TGF -  1 . The results indicated that the  8 I - like domain primarily defines the high affinity binding of latent TGF -  1 to  v  8 integrin . Taken together , our results provide evidence that the high - affinity binding of  v  8 integrin with latent TGF -  1 was ensured by the interaction between Leu - 218 residue and  8 I - like domain , with the former serving as an auxiliary recognition residue defining the restricted ligand specificity of  v  8 integrin toward latent TGF -  1 . 6 Introduction I . The Extracellular Matrix In multicellular organisms , tissues contain not only cells but also extracellular matrices ( ECMs ) that fill up most extracellular space . Cells produce and assemble ECM components into an organized meshwork in their proximity . The ECM had been defined morphologically as extracellular material visible as fibrils or sheets by the electron microscopic observation . Nowadays it can be defined more broadly to include almost all secreted molecules that are immobilized outside cells , e . g . TGF -  1 ( Reichardt , 1999 ) . There are two types of ECM : one is basement membrane that underlies almost all epithelial and endothelial cells and surrounds muscle and neuronal cells ; the other is interstitial matrix that surrounds all cells existing in connective tissues . The basement membrane is a sheet - like structure constituted of ECM proteins and separates the epithelium from underlying connective tissues . Thus , the basement membrane is the ECM directly associated with epithelial cells that play essential roles in individual organs , while the interstitial matrices provide mechanical support and physical strength to connective tissue as a whole . The ECM had been thought to function merely as materials filling the space between cells . However , recent studies revealed that the ECMs play pivotal roles in cell survival , proliferation , and migration , and are involved in diverse biological processes including organogenesis , thus regarded as an essential factor that regulates behaviors of cells ( Reichardt , 1999 ) . The functions of ECMs are now summarized as follows ; 1 ) providing the mechanical integrity , rigidity , and elasticity for tissues to endure the force or impact from the surroundings ; 2 ) providing adhesive substrates for cells to transmit adhesion signals that are essential for cells to survive ; and 3 ) sequestering soluble factors , such as growth factors and morphogens , to help 7 regulate the spatial and temporal properties of signals conveyed by these factors . II . The Integrins : a Family of Receptor Proteins for ECMs Integrins are a family of adhesion receptors that bind to a variety of extracellular ligands , typically cell - adhesion proteins in the ECM ( Pytela et al . , 1985b ) . Integrins are composed of two non - covalently associated subunits , termed  and  . By integrating the information of extracellular proteins and the intracellular signaling cascades , integrins play mandatory roles in embryonic development and the maintenance of tissue architecture by providing essential links between cells and the ECM ( Hynes , 2002 ) . II - 1 . Integrin Structure One  and one  subunits noncovalently associate with each other to form  -  heterodimeric receptors ( Xiong et al . , 2001 ) . Amino acid sequences and electron microscopic observations of purified integrin heterodimers revealed that integrins consist of a large extracellular domain with a globular head region and two long tails each containing a transmembrane domain and an unstructured cytoplasmic tail domain ( Figure 1A ) ( Nermut et al . , 1988 ) . The  - propeller domain of the  subunit consists of seven segments . Each of the segments forms a blade - like  - sheet structure ( blade I ~ VII ) consisting of four  - strands ( Xiong et al . , 2001 ) . Nine  subunits (  1 / 2 / 10 / 11 / D / E / L / M / X ) contain an additional domain called  I - domain between blade II and III of the  - propeller domain . The I - like domain of  subunit (  I - like domain ) , a similar structure to the  I - domain , contains a ligand - binding site . The head region composed of the  - propeller domain of  subunit and the  I - like domain forms a ligand - binding site while the C - terminal tail functions as a scaffold for signal - transducing molecules such as actin - binding proteins , adapter proteins , and kinase proteins ( Arnaout et al . , 2007 ; Hynes , 2002 ) . The range of motion of the leg region is broad , providing the “integrin flexibility” and enabling them to modulate the ligand - binding affinity of integrins . 8 PS I I - li k e H y b r i d I - E G F 1  - t a il T M T M  - P r ope ll e r T h i gh C a l f - 1 C a l f - 2 I II III I V V V I V II 1 2 3 4   I - do m a i n C e ll m e m b r a n e I n t r ace ll u l a r s p ace C a l f 1 t h i g h 2 3 4 β - T H y b P s i α - I N β - I C a l f 2 T a li n A c t i n  - P r ope ll e r b e n t up r i g h t A B C 1 Figure 1 . Integrin structure . ( A ) Domain structure of typical integrin  and  subunits ( Xie et al . , 2009 ) . PSI , plexin - semaphorin - integrin ; I - EGF , integrin - EGF ; TM , transmembrane domain . ( B ) Structure of  x  2 using the same color code in A ( drawn with PyMOL [ DeLano Scientific ] using PDB coordinates 3K6S ) . ( C ) Conformational change of the  x  2 integrin on activation . The integrin adopts a bent and upright conformation in low - affinity and high - affinity state , respectively . These figures were modified from Campbell and Humphries ( 2011 ) , “Integrin Structure , Activation , and Interaction , ” in Hynes and Yamada , eds . , Exrtracellular Matrix Biology , Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press , p . 170 . Integrins exist in an equilibrium between a bent low - affinity state and an upright high - affinity state . The crystal structures of  v  3 ,  IIb  3 and  x  2 have been determined and are all in a similar conformation that would place the  headpiece near the membrane surface ( Figure 1B and C ) . Integrin can be activated by the binding of ECM ligands to its ectodomains ( known as ‘outside - in’ activation ) or by the binding of the talin head domain to  - integrin cytoplasmic tail and acidic membrane phospholipids ( known as ‘inside - out’ activation ) . These activations lead to conformation rearrangement in the ectodomain through pulling the integrin  subunit cytoplasmic tail by actin filaments , resulting in extension of the  and  subunits ( Figure 1C ) . This model for the conformational changes of integrin on activation is proposed by an electron - microscopic study of  IIb  3 integrin embedded in 9 membrane nanodiscs ( Beglova et al . , 2002 ) . There is strong evidence indicating that the conformational change occurring in the  - I / hybrid region of  3 subunit is required for high - affinity binding of  IIb  integrin to its ligands . The interaction of  IIb  integrin with its ligands initiates the conformational rearrangement , i . e . , structural alteration in  I - like domain . The downward movement of the  - I  7 - helix toward the hybrid domain , in turn , initiates a swing - out motion of the  hybrid domain away from  IIb subunit ( Cheng et al . , 2013 ) ( Figure 2 ) . As a result , the  IIb  integrin shifts from low - affinity to high - affinity state . Figure 2 . An illustration of the movement of  the  7 helix in the I - like domain of  subunit and the swing - out of the hybrid domain ( the domains are defined in Figure 1 ) . This model corresponds to the closed ( left ) and open ( right ) conformations of an  b  integrin . Figure was modified from Cheng et al . , 2013 . II - 2 . The Diversity of Integrin Subunits and Their Interactions In mammals , 18  and 8  subunits have been identified and combinations of these subunits give rise to at least 24 distinct integrin heterodimers , among which 18 isoforms function as ECM receptors . Ligand - binding specificities of integrins are determined by the combination of the  and  subunits ( Takada et al . , 2007 ) ( Figure 3 ) . Based on their ligand - binding specificities , integrins can be classified into five groups : laminin - binding type (  3  1 ,  6  1 ,  6  4 , and  7  1 ) , Arg - Gly - Asp ( RGD ) - binding type (  5  1 ,  V  1 / 3 / 5 / 6 / 8 ,  8  1 , and  IIb  3 ) , collagen - binding type (  1  1 ,  2  1 ,  10  1 , and  11  1 ) ( Pytela et al . , 1985b ) , Leu - Asp - Val ( LDV ) or Ile - Asp - Gly ( IDG ) - binding type (  4  1 ,  4  7 , and  9  1 ) , and Hyb α7 Hyb α7 Extrinsic ligand 10 leukocyte - specific type ( the four members of the  2 superfamily , and  E  7 ) .  4 - and  9 - containing integrins have been shown to interact with the sequences comprised of aliphatic residues adjacent to acidic residues , such as LDV or IDG ( Komoriya et al . , 1991 ; Schneider et al . , 1998 ; Yokosaki et al . , 1998 ) . This classification also reflects ligand - binding specificities of individual integrins , thus showing their specific , non - redundant functions . This is also shown physiologically using integrin gene knockout mice ( Table 1 ) . To date , genes for all integrin  and  subunits have been knocked out , and each phenotype is distinct , reflecting the different roles among the various integrins . Figure 3 . The combinations of integrin  and  subunits and their binding specificities . The mammalian subunits and their  associations ; 8  subunits can assort with 18  subunits to form 24 distinct integrin isoforms . They are fallen into 5 general categories ; laminin - binding type ( light blue ) , RGD - binding type ( purple ) , collagen - binding type ( orange ) , LDV / IDG - binding type ( green ) , and leukocyte - specific type ( yellow ) . There are 5 isoforms specifically expressed in leucocytes . Some subunits show alternatively spliced isoforms ( * ) . All but leukocyte - specific integrins are receptors for ECM proteins . Most integrins are capable of binding multiple ligands , and there are many others beyond those shown here ( Humphries et al . 2006 ) .  v integrins are known as an activator and regulator for TGF -  . Figure was modified from Hynes , 2002 . RGD receptors Lamininreceptors Collagen receptors Leukocyte - specific receptors  1  IIb  1  5  2  10  11  V  8  * 6 * 7 *  2  7  4 *  4  9  E  L  M  X  D  *  5  6  8 11 Table 1 . Integrin gene knockout phenotypes Subunit Lethality Phenotypes  1 viable , fertile No immediately obvious developmental defects , reduced tumor vascularization  2 viable , fertile Few immediately obvious developmental defects , displayed platelet aggregation and reduced binding to monomeric collagen , reduced mammary gland branching  3 perinatal lethal Kidney tubule defects , reduced branching morphogenesis in lungs , mild skin blistering , lamination defects in neocortex  4 E11 / 14 lethal Defects in placenta ( chorioallantoic fusion defect ) and heart ( epicardium , coronary vessels )  5 E10 - 11 lethal Defects in mesoderm ( posterior somites ) and vascular development , neural crest apoptosis  6 perinatal lethal Severe skin blistering , other epithelial tissues also defective . Lamination defects in cortex and retina  7 viable , fertile Muscular dystrophy , defective myotendinous junctions  8 perinatal lethal Smaller or absent kidneys , inner hair cell defects  9 viable Die within 10 days of birth , chylothorax due to lymphatic duct defect  10 viable , fertile Growth retardation of the long bones due to moderate dysfunction of growth plate chondrocytes  11 viable , fertile Dwarfism with increased mortality due to severely defective incisors  v E10 / perinatal lethal Two classes ; embryonic lethality due to placental defects , perinatal lethality with cerebral vascular defects probably due to neuroepithelial defects , cleft palate  IIb viable , fertile Hemorrhage , no platelet aggregation  L viable , fertile Impaired leukocyte recruitment  M viable , fertile Defective phagocytosis and apoptosis of neutrophils , mast cell development defects , adipose accumulation  X viable , fertile Decreased longevity and survival rate upon infection with pneumococci  D viable , fertile No immediately obvious developmental defects , reduced T cell response and phenotypic changes after induction by Staphylococcal enterotoxin  E viable , fertile Greatly reduced numbers of intraepithelial lymphocytes  1 E6 . 5 lethal Peri - implantation lethality , inner cell mass deteriorates , embryo fail to gastrulate  2 viable , fertile Leukocytosis , impaired inflammatory responses , skin infections , T cell proliferation defects  3 viable , fertile Hemorrhage , no platelet aggregation , osteosclerosis , hypervascularisation of tumors  4 perinatal lethal Severe skin blistering , other epithelial tissues also defective .  5 viable , fertile No immediately obvious developmental defects  6 viable , fertile Inflammation in skin and airways , impaired ling fibrosis , all probably due to failure to active TGF -   7 viable deficits in gut - associated lymphocytes - no Peyer ' s patches , reduced intraepithelial lymphocytes  8 E10 / perinatal lethal Two classes ; embryonic lethality due to placental defects , perinatal lethality with cerebral vascular defects probably due to neuroepithelial defects This table is cited from Ivaska et al . , 2013 . 12 II - 3 . Fine - tuning of Ligand - binding Specificity by Integrin  - subunit Although it has been shown that the ligand - binding specificity of individual integrin isoforms is principally dependent on their  subunits ( Barczyk et al . , 2010b ) ( Figure 3 ) , accumulating data suggest that the integrin  subunits also fine - tune the ligand binding preference of integrins by enhancing or attenuating their binding affinities toward specific ligands ( Humphries et al . , 2006 ) . The ligand RGD peptide binds at the junction between the  and  subunits , where the Asp residue of the peptide coordinates the divalent cation in  I - like domain , making it likely that the  I - like domain is directly involved in ligand recognition by  v  and  IIb  integrins ( see below Chapter III - 1 ) ( Cheng et al . , 2013 ; Xiao et al . , 2004 ; Xiong et al . , 2002 ) . For example , although  6  4 integrin shares the same  subunit with  6  1 , it displays a distinct binding specificity toward a panel of laminin isoforms containing distinct  chains ( Nishiuchi et al . , 2006 ) . The  I - like domains of  1 ,  2 ,  3 ,  5 ,  6 and  8 subunits contain a small disulfide - linked loop ( designated DLL , Figure 4 ) , which is predicted to be located close to the  -  interface and involved in determining ligand - binding specificity . Ligand - binding specificities of  v  3 and  v  1 integrins toward von Willebrand factor and fibrinogen were reversed via partial swapping of their DLL regions in the  I - like domain ( Takagi et al . , 1997a ) . Figure 4 . The structure of the head piece of  v  6 integrin .  v and  6 subunits are labeled purple and orange , respectively . The disulfide - linked loop ( DLL ) is boxed and shown in magenta . DLL is located close to the junction between  and  subunits . The structure was displayed by Chimera ( PDB ID ; 4UM9 ) . 13 II - 4 . Recognition Sequences of Integrins The RGD cell - adhesive motif , a well known integrin ligand , was initially identified in fibronectin ( Pierschbacher & Ruoslathi . , 1984 ) . Subsequently , several other ligands or sequences critical for integrin recognition have been identified , as shown in Table 2 .  5  1 ,  8  1 ,  IIb  3 , and all five  v - containing integrins recognize the ligands containing an RGD motif . Crystal structures of  v  3 and  IIb  3 complexed with RGD peptides have been determined and provided the molecular basis for this binding ( Xiao et al . , 2004 ; Xiong et al . , 2002 ) . In addition to the RGD motif ,  IIb  3 integrin binds to the KQAGDV sequence present in the C - terminal region of  chain of fibrinogen ( Calvete et al . , 1992 ; Springer et al . , 2008 ) .  4  1 ,  4  7 , and  9  1 recognize an LDV motif , which is functionally similar to the RGD motif ( Humphries et al . , 2006 ) . Fibronectin contains at least three distinct sequences that bind Table 2 . Integrin recognition sequences Integrin Representative adhesive ligand Peptide sequence Auxiliary sequence required for affinity modulation  2  1 collagen GFOG E R  1  emilin , fibronectin , VCAM - 1 EXX E , L D V , I D S  9  1  polydom , emilin , tenascin , VCAM - 1 EDDMM E VPY , EGL E , EI D G  v  1 fibronectin , vitronectin RG D  v  fibronectin , vitronectin , fibrinogen , osteopontin , bone sialoprotein , fibrillin , EDIL - 3 , lactadherin , nephronectin , thrombospondin , tenascin - C , prothrombin , latent TGF -  1 , vWF RG D  v  fibronectin , vitronectin , latent TGF -  1 RG D  v 6 fibronectin , vitronectin , latent TGF -  1 fibrillin , tenascin - C RG D LXXL / I  1  fibronectin RG D PHSRN and other basic residues  IIb  3 fibrinogen , fibronectin , vitronectin RG D , KQAG D V  8  1 nephronecrin , fibronectin , vitronectin , osteopontin RG D LFEIFEIER  M  2 fibrinogen , C3bi QKRL D GS  4  7 fibronectin , VCAM - 1 , MAdCAM EIL D V The critical acidic residues are shown in bold . 14 to  4  1 ; LDV in the type III - connecting segment 1 ( CS1 ) , IDA in the heparin - binding domain 2 , and EDGIHEL in the extra domain A ( Komoriya et al . , 1991 ; Schneider et al . , 1998 ; Yokosaki et al . , 1998 ) . The key sites for binding to  4  1 in VCAM - 1 are identified as IDS , which is homologous to LDV and IDA of fibronectin ( Clements et al . , 1994 ) . Mutagenesis studies suggest that the binding of emilin - 1 gC1q domain to  4  1 integrin mainly depends on a single Glu - 933 residue that is highly conserved among a wide range of species ( Verdone et al . , 2008 ) . Recently , Sato - Nishiuchi et al ( 2012 ) revealed that  9  1 integrin recognizes the EDDMMEVPY sequence , within which Glu - 2641 is the critical acidic residue involved in the polydom recognition by  9  1 integrin . Structures of the  4 - and  9 - integrin subfamilies are uncharacterized , but it seems likely that the acidic residue within these binding motifs plays a critical role for coordinating a cation bound in the  I - like domain .  1 ,  2 ,  10 , and  11 subunits containing an  I - domain dimerize with  1 subunit and form a distinct collagen - binding subfamily . A crystal structure of an  2 I - domain complexed with a triple - helical collagenous peptide has revealed that a Glu residue within the collagenous motif ( i . e . , GFOGER ) plays a critical role in forming a coordination bond with a metal cation ( Emsley et al . , 2000 ) .  3  1 ,  6  1 ,  6  4 , and  7  1 are classified as members of the laminin - binding integrins . Although the recognition sequence or peptide ligands have not been identified in the laminin - binding integrins , recent studies have demonstrated that the Glu residue at the third position from the carboxyl terminus of  1 chain is critically required for the laminin - integrin interaction ( Ido et al . , 2007 ; Taniguchi et al . , 2017 ; Takizawa et al . , 2017 ) . III . RGD - binding Integrins The RGD - binding integrins include  5  1 ,  8  1 ,  IIb  3 , and five  v - containing integrins , which interact with a variety of ECM ligands containing RGD motif ( s ) with distinct binding specificities . The  v - containing integrins are the most promiscuous among the family . Notably ,  v  3 integrin binds to a large number of extracellular matrix and other secreted proteins . 15 Although the  v  3 integrin interacts with many RGD ligands , the molecular basis for such promiscuous binding specificity of the  v  3 integrin remains to be elucidated . III - 1 . Ligand Recognition Mechanisms by RGD - binding Integrins Crystal structures of  v  3 and  IIb  3 integrins complexed with a cyclic RGD peptide have provided structural insights into the integrin - ligand interaction and greatly advanced our understanding of the mechanisms by which integrins recognize their ligands ( Xiao et al . , 2004 ; Xiong et al . , 2002 ) ( Figure 5 ) . RGD peptide binds at an interface between the  and  subunits , in which the Arg residue fits into a cleft in a  - propeller domain in the  subunit and the Asp side chain coordinates the divalent cation at the metal ion - dependent adhesion site ( designated as ‘MIDAS’ ) in  I - like domain ( Figure 5B ) . Since all of the recognition sequences identified thus far have at least one acidic residue ( aspartate or glutamate ; see Table 2 shown in bold ) , the coordination of the carboxylate group to the divalent cation is considered essential for all integrins to interact with ligands . Substitution of the Asp residue with Glu causes a loss of  v  3 integrin - binding activity of the RGD peptide , indicating the stringency of integrin - ligand interaction ( Xiong et al . , 2002 ) . More importantly , all of the integrin - ligand interfaces analyzed thus far revealed that the MIDAS cation serves as the central anchor point of integrins for their ligands ( Takagi , 2007 ) . Given the fact that the RGD motif in the ligands is indispensable for binding to RGD - binding integrins , the Arg residue , in cooperation with the Asp residue , should also contribute to the ligand recognition by RGD - binding integrins ( Figure 5C ) . 16 Figure 5 . Structure of the  v  3 integrin complexed with RGD - containing peptide . ( A ) The structure of  v  3 integrin is shown by ribbon diagram . Integrin  v and  3 subunits are shown in blue and red , respectively . Integrin  v and  3 subunits are composed of four and eight domains , respectively , and strongly associate with each other at the top of the extracellular region . ( B ) Surface representation of the ligand - binding site of  v  3 integrin , with the cyclic RGD - containing peptide shown as ball - and - stick model . The peptide ligand is bound at the  - propeller -  I - like domain interface . Manganese ions coordinated with MIDAS and adjacent to MIDAS ( ADMIDAS ) are represented as a cyan and a violet spheres , respectively . The carbon , nitrogen , and oxygen atoms of cyclic RGD peptide are shown in yellow , blue , and red , respectively . ( C ) The detail molecular mechanism of the interaction between the RGD - containing peptide and  v  3 integrin . Polypeptides of  v and  3 subunits are simplified as blue and red line , respectively . The RGD - containing peptide is represented by yellow sticks . Hydrogen bonds and salt bridges are represented with dotted lines . A is cited from Xiong , et al . , 2001 ; B and C are cited from Xiong , et al . , 2002 . III - 2 . Auxiliary Sequences Required for Affinity Modulation Although ligand recognition by RGD - binding integrins is primarily determined by the RGD motif in the ligands , several studies have demonstrated that residues outside the RGD motif define binding specificities and affinities toward individual RGD - binding integrins ( Ruoslahti , 1996 ; Takagi , 2007 ) ( see also Table 2 ) . For example ,  5  1 integrin specifically binds to fibronectin through the bipartite recognition of an RGD motif in the 10th type III 17 repeat , together with the PHSRN sequence and several basic residues within the 9th type III repeat , the latter serving as a “synergy site” ( Aota et al . , 1994 ; Redick et al . , 2000 ) .  8  1 integrin binds selectively to nephronectin via a bipartite interaction with the RGD motif and LFEIFEIER sequence , the latter located ~ 10 amino acid residues C - terminal to the RGD motif ( Sato et al . , 2009 ) . The high - affinity binding of  v  6 integrin to its ligands , foot - and - mouth disease virus and latent TGF -  1 , requires the RGD motif and a LXXL / I sequence , of which the latter forms an  - helix to align the two conserved hydrophobic residues along the length of the helix ( DiCara et al . , 2007 ; Dong et al . , 2014 , 2017 ) . Thus , the ligand - binding specificity of RGD - binding integrins might be defined by the bipartite recognition site comprising an RGD motif and residues flanking the RGD motif or those in neighboring domains that come into close proximity with the RGD motif in an intact ligand protein . III - 3 .  v - containing Integrins The integrin  v subunit was originally identified as a receptor for vitronectin ( Pytela et al . , 1985a ) .  v - containing integrins are classified as RGD - binding integrins and are widely expressed on many cell types , including neural crest cells , glial cells , muscle cells , osteoclasts , epithelial cells , and vascular endothelial cells during embryonic development and during angiogenesis in response to tumors ( Brooks et al . , 1994 ; Delannet et al . , 1994 , Hirsch et al . , 1994 ; Drake et al . , 1995 ; Friedlander et al . , 1996 ; Weis and Cheresh , 2011 ) . Mouse embryos containing a null mutation in the  v gene exhibit placental defects and intracerebral hemorrhage ( Table 1 ) , indicative of its important role in placentation and vasculogenesis . To date , the  v subunit has been shown to combine with five  subunits ,  1 ,  3 ,  5 ,  6 , and  8 .  v - containing integrins interact with various extracellular matrix proteins and are considered to be promiscuous in that they exhibit broad binding specificity towards a wide variety of RGD proteins . For example ,  v  3 integrin is a representative  v integrin that has been shown to bind to EDIL3 , fibrillin - 1 , fibrillin - 2 , fibronectin , bone sialoprotein , lactadherin , latent TGF -  1 , 18 nephronectin , osteopontin , prothrombin , thrombonspondin - 1 , thrombospondin - 2 , and vitronectin ( Andersen et al . , 2000 ; Brandenberger et al . , 2001 ; Hidai et al . , 1998 ; Jovanovic et al . , 2008 ; Lawler et al . , 1988 ; Schurpf et al . , 2012 ; Sun et al . , 1992 ; Yokosaki et al . , 2005 ) . Among them , latent TGF -  1 has also been shown to bind to all of  v integrins  in particular  v  6 and  v  8 integrins , for its activation ( Araya et al . , 2006 ; Chen et al . , 2002 ; Lu et al . , 2002 ; Ludbrook et al . , 2003 ; Mu et al . , 2002 ; Munger et al . , 1998 ) . IV . Interaction between  v - containing Integrins and TGF -  s Integrin signaling and function are dependent on not only the interaction with extracellular ligands but also cross - talk with other signaling pathways , especially growth factor ( GF ) signaling pathways ( Huveneers and Danen , 2009 ; Ivaska and Heino , 2010 ; Streuli and Akhtar , 2009 ) . Integrins interact with various extracellular GFs ( Hutchings et al . , 2003 ; Vlahakis et al . , 2007 ) , GF binding proteins ( Munger et al . , 1998 ; Ricort , 2004 ) , and GF receptors ( Soro et al . , 2008 ) . Among GFs that cross - talk with integrins , TGF -  is one of the stimulatory effectors on integrin expression . For example , TGF -  signaling up - regulates the expressions of  v  3 ,  v  5 ,  v  6 and several  1 integrins ( Heino and Massague et al . , 1989 , Heino et al . , 1989 , Ignotz et al . , 1989 , Sheppard et al . , 1992 , Zambruno et al . , 1995 ) . On the other hands , many researchers reported that physical properties and biological activities of TGF -  are regulated by RGD - binding integrins ( Araya et al . , 2006 ; Chen et al . , 2002 ; Lu et al . , 2002 ; Ludbrook et al . , 2003 ; Mu et al . , 2002 ; Munger et al . , 1998 ) . Particularly ,  v integrins interact with the latent form of TGF -  associated with ECM to induce the activation of the TGF -  in a unique mechanism . IV - 1 . Latency and Activation of TGF -  s TGF -  has been widely implicated as a master regulatory cytokine involved in paracrine regulation of blood vessel development , differentiation and function ( Martin et al . , 1995 ) . 19 There are three different isoforms ( TGF -  1 - 3 ) expressed in mammalian tissues ; all of them function through the same receptor signaling pathways . TGF -  is secreted to extracellular space as a latent form containing a propeptide . Thus , TGF -  is synthesized initially as a long precursor consisting of a signal peptide , a propeptide , and the mature TGF -  ( Figure 6 ) . After translocation into the endoplasmic reticulum , a monomeric TGF -  proprotein forms a disulfide - bonded homodimer , pro - TGF -  . Proteolytic cleavage by furin at the proprotein convertase cleavage site yields a complex in which the mature TGF -  remains noncovalently associated with the prodomain . The prodomain is sufficient to confer latency on mature TGF -  and prevents from binding to TGF -  receptors , therefore termed latency - associated peptide ( LAP ) . LAP is required for the proper folding and dimerization of the carboxy - terminal domain of TGF -  ( Gray and Mason , 1990 ; Walton et al . , 2010 ) and is a binding target for integrins . Figure 6 . Structure of the latent complex form of TGF -  1 . ( A ) Schematic diagram of the TGF -  1 proprotein . The propeptide region ( LAP ) is shown in green , and the TGF -  region in yellow . The black arrowhead indicates the positions of the RGD motif . ( B ) LAP homodimer formation . Monomeric TGF -  1 proproteins form homodimer by disulfide bonds shown in black lines . Proteolytic cleavage by furin creates LAP and mature TGF -  The white arrowhead indicates the position of the furin cleavage site . ( C ) Schematic diagram of latent TGF -  1 . After folding , LAP and mature TGF -  1 noncovalently associates at the hydrophobic regions ( blue double - headed arrows ) . These figures were modified from Munger and Sheppard ( 2011 ) , “Cross Talk among TGF -  Signaling Pathways , Integrins , and the Extracellular Matrix , ” in Hynes and Yamada , eds . , Extracellular Matrix Biology , Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press , p . 186 . A RGD Signal peptide Propeptide TGF - β1 sequence Cleavage site N C Furin Mature TGF - β1 LAP Latent TGF - β1 Pro - TGF - β1 SS SS S S Latent TGF - β1 Folding RGD RGD Noncovalent Interactions B C 20 IV - 2 . Interaction of Latent TGF -  with  v - containing Integrins Several factors can activate latent TGF -  ( Annes et al . , 2003 ) . Plasmin and a number of matrix metalloproteinases ( MMPs ) are proposed to cleave LAP in integrin - independent manner , and the released TGF -  activates TGF -  signaling pathways . The LAP - TGF -  complex contains a protease - sensitive hinge region which can be the potential target for this liberation of mature TGF -  . Most of latent TGF -  activations are achieved by  v - containing integrins . LAPs of TGF -  and TGF -  contain an RGD motif that is recognized by a vast majority of  v - containing integrins ,  v  1 ,  v  3 ,  v  5 ,  v  6 and  v  8 . ( Araya et al . , 2006 ; Chen et al . , 2002 ; Lu et al . , 2002 ; Ludbrook et al . , 2003 ; Mu et al . , 2002 ; Munger et al . , 1998 ) . The RGD sequence is highly conserved among TGF -  s in chordates , but is not present in other TGF -  superfamily members , indicating that the activation of latent TGF -  by the  v integrins is the mechanism conserved in the process of evolution . IV - 3 . Redundancy among TGF -  Isoforms and  v - containing Integrins The fact that the  v – containing integrins are physiological activators for TGF -  1 and TGF -  3 is mirrored by strong overlaps among phenotypes of TGF -  - null and integrin  v gene - null mice , as shown in Table 3 . Mice with a knock - in mutation of TGF -  1 , in which an RGD motif is mutated to nonfunctional RGE ( TGF -  1 RGE / RGE mice ) , recapitulate the major phenotype of TGF -  - deficient mice ( TGF -  1 - / - mice ) including multi - organ inflammation and defects in vasculogenesis , thus demonstrating the essential role of  v integrins in TGF -  1 activation during development and growth ( Yang et al . , 2007 ) . Among  v integrins ,  v  6 and  v  8 integrins appear to be largely responsible for TGF -  1 activation at least in regard to the phenotypes of TGF -  1 - deficient mice . Mice with a null mutation of the gene encoding the integrin  6 subunit ( Itgb6 - / - mice ) develop lymphocytic lung inflammation reminiscent of inflammation in TGF -  1 - / - mice ( Huang et al . , 1996 ) , suggesting a possibility that the 21 interaction between  v  6 integrin and latent TGF -  1 is required for normal lung homeostasis and response to lung injury . In contrast , mice deficient in the expression of the integrin  8 subunit ( Itgb8 - / - mice ) exhibit variable embryonic lethality with vasculogenesis failure and severe brain hemorrhage ( Zhu et al . , 2002 ) , as is the case with mice deficient in integrin  v subunit expression ( Bader et al . , 1998 ) . The phenotypes of mice lacking integrin  8 expression largely overlap with those of the mice deficient in integrin - mediated TGF -  1 activation , TGF -  1 RGE / RGE and TGF -  3 - / - mice ( Arnold et al . , 2014 ; Cambier et al . , 2005 ) , demonstrating the importance of TGF -  1 activation by  v  8 integrin . Table 3 . Comparison of phenotypes of mice with TGF -  gene mutations and those lacking  6 and / or  8 integrins . Mouse Phenotype Tgfb1 - / - Variable ( strain - dependent ) embryonic lethality because of vasuculogenesis failure ; lethal multiorgan lymphocyte - mediated inflammation and lack of Langerhans cells in remainder . Tgfb1 RGE / RGE Identical to Tgfb1 - / - , reduced fibrosis in heterozygotes . Tgfb2 - / - Embryonic lethality with defects in multiple organ systems . Tgfb3 - / - Cleft palate caused by failure of fusion of palatal shelves ; mild , variable delayed lung development . Itg av - / - ~ 80 % embryonic lethality because of vasculogenesis failure ; brain hemorrhage and cleft palate in remainder . Note that these mice lack  v  1 ,  v  3 ,  v  5 ,  v  6 , and  v  8 integrins . Itg  6 - / - Lymphocyte - predominant lung inflammation , reduced Langerhans cells , late - onset lung emphysema because of increased MMP - 12 , reduced fibrosis . Itg  - / - Variable embryonic lethality because of vasculogenesis failure , CNS hemorrhage , cleft palate ( ~ 10 % ) ; conditional KO in dendritic cells causes mild inflammation . Itg  6 - / - Itg  8 - / - Individual phenotypes plus high incidence of cleft palate causing early postnatal death . Itg  8 - / - treated prenatally with anti -  v  6 Lethal multiorgan lymphocyte - mediated inflammation , lack of Langerhans cells . This table is cited from Munger and Sheppard ( 2011 ) , “Cross Talk among TGF -  Signaling Pathways , Integrins , and the Extracellular Matrix , ” in Hynes and Yamada , eds . , Extracellular Matrix Biology , Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press , p . 194 . 22 V . Activation of Latent TGF -  by  v  6 and  v  8 Integrins The binding of  v integrins to LAP is not sufficient for TGF -  activation . Currently there are two proposed models of how  v - containing integrins activate latent TGF -  1 ; one model is centered on  v  6 integrin and involves conformational change of the latent TGF -  1 complex that results in releasing the active TGF -  1 ; and the other model focuses on the role of  v  8 integrin and involves protease - dependent mechanism . V - 1 .  v  6 Integrin - mediated Mechanism Underlying TGF -  Activation  v  6 integrin was the first integrin to be identified as latent TGF -  1 activator .  v  6 integrin binds LAP in latent TGF -  1 and TGF -  3 complexes and alters the conformation of the complexes , effectively releasing the mature TGF -  1 ( Annes et al . , 2002 ; Munger et al . , 1999 ) . Importantly , activation of latent TGF -  1 requires the cytoplasmic domain of  6 and rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton , suggesting that contractile forces generated by actin cytoskeleton and translated into biochemical signals are necessary for activation of latent TGF -  1 by  v  6 integrin ( Figure 7A ) . This pathway has been demonstrated for activation of TGF -  in epithelial cells and allows the active TGF -  to bind to its receptors on adjacent cells . This mechanism does not require MMPs and implies that the expression of  v  6 integrin can locally regulate TGF -  function in vivo . V - 2 . Protease - dependent TGF -  Activation by  v  8 Integrin  v  8 integrin binds to the latent TGF -  1 and activates it by releasing mature TGF -  1 from LAP ( Mu et al . , 2002 ) .  v  8 integrin and TGF -  1 are co - expressed in human airway and perivasucular astrocytes ( Cambier et al . , 2005 ; Crawford et al . , 1998 ) . Recent study demonstrated that the  8 integrin is specifically expressed in Schwann cells to activate TGF -  1 , thereby regulating hematopoietic stem cell hibernation in bone marrow ( Yamazaki et al . , 23 Figure 7 . The proposed mechanisms underlying TGF -  activation by the  v  6 ( A ) and  v  8 ( B ) integrins . ( A ) To activate the latent TGF -  1 , the binding of  v  6 integrin to the RGD motif in LAP is the initial step . Then , contractile force through  v  6 integrin , driven by rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton , induces the conformational change of latent TGF -  and releases mature TGF -  1 . ( B ) Activation of latent TGF -  by  v  8 integrin depends on MT - MMP1 , but not on actin cytoskeleton . MT - MMP1 expressed near the  v  8 integrin at the membrane surface cleaves LAP and releases mature TGF -  . Figures are modified from Munger et al . , 1999 ; Tatti et al . , 2008 . 2011 ) . In contrast to the TGF -  1 activation by  v  6 integrin , which requires the  6 subunit cytoplasmic domain and a functional actin cytoskeleton , TGF -  activation by  v  8 integrin is considered independent of the  8 subunit cytoplasmic domain and actin cytoskeleton , because cells expressing a mutated  8 subunit lacking the cytoplasmic tail can activate TGF -  s ( Mu et al . , 2002 ; Araya et al . , 2006 ) . Binding assays combined with cell adhesion studies showed that  v  8 - expressing cells release active TGF -  into the medium in concert with activation of MT1 - MMP ( Mu et al . , 2002 ) . MT1 - MMP co - localizes with  v  8 integrin at the membrane surface of cells adhering to LAP and cleaves near the N - termini of LAP ( Tatti et al . , 2008 ) ( Figure 7B ) . Therefore , the role of the  v  8 integrin is to create a close connection between the latent TGF -  and MT1 - MMP . RGD RGD  8  v Latent TGF - β1 RGD  8  v TGF - β1 RGD RGD 6  v Latent TGF - β1 RGD 6  v TGF - β1 Cytoskeleton A B MT1 - MMP MT1 - MMP force 24 V - 3 . Physiological Roles of  v  8 Integrin The amino acid sequence of the  8 subunit is highly conserved among vertebrates but is divergent from other integrin  subunits ( Moyle et al . , 1991 ) , suggesting that  v  8 integrin may have unique functions among the  v - containing integrins . The exogenous expression of integrin  8 inhibited cell growth , spreading , and focal contact formation ( Cambier et al . , 2000 ; Nishimura et al . , 1994 ) , in contrast to the exogenous expression of other  v - containing integrin  subunits . The  8 subunit is found in the brain , kidneys , airways , and placenta and is localized at brain vessels , synapses , glial cells , and dendritic spines , implying a specific function in the brain ( Moyle et al . , 1991 ; Nishimura et al . , 1998 ) . To date ,  v  8 integrin has been shown to bind vitronectin ( Nishimura et al . , 1994 ) , fibronectin ( Venstrom and Reichardt , 1995 ) , and the LAP of TGF -  1 / 3 ( Mu et al . , 2002 ; Worthington et al . , 2011 ) , among which TGF -  1 is the most characterized ligand for  v  8 integrin . However , neither the mechanism by which  v  8 integrin interacts with TGF -  1 nor the binding capability of  v  8 integrin to its potential ligands containing RGD motif has been comprehensively investigated by a biochemical method using purified proteins , leaving the possibility that unknown proteins containing the RGD motif may also serve as ligands that specifically interact with  v  8 integrin . In the present study , I comprehensively investigated the binding activities of  v  8 integrin towards 25 RGD - containing proteins selected by in silico screening for putative secreted proteins containing a conserved RGD motif . Our results showed that  v  8 integrin has a restricted binding specificity towards latent TGF -  1 , which is primarily defined by the Leu - 218 residue located immediately after the RGD motif . The Leu - 218 residue is critical for the  v  8 integrin - binding ability because substitution of RGDL for RGDS sequence of fibronectin results in binding of  v  8 integrin to fibronectin . The mechanism by which  v  8 integrin recognizes the Leu - 218 residue was investigated by constructing a series of swap mutants between integrin  8 and  3 subunits . 25 Experimental Procedures Cells , Antibodies , and Reagents —FreeStyle™ 293 - F cells were obtained from Life Technologies ( Carlsbad , CA ) and cultured in FreeStyle 293 - F Expression medium . Human plasma fibronectin was purified from outdated human plasma by gelatin affinity chromatography as previously described ( Sekiguchi and Hakomori , 1983 ) . HRP - conjugated mAbs against FLAG and penta - His tags were purchased from Sigma ( Saint Louis , MO ) and Qiagen ( Valencia , CA ) , respectively . An anti - “Velcro” ( ACID / BASE coiled - coil ) antibody was raised in rabbits by immunization with coiled - coil ACID and BASE peptides as previously described ( Takagi et al . , 2001 ) and biotinylated by an Ez - link NHS - Sulfo - LC - biotin kit ( Pierce , Rockford , IL ) to detect recombinant integrins . HRP - conjugated streptavidin was purchased from Pierce . Synthetic peptides were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific ( Dreieich , Germany ) and dissolved in 100 % DMSO . In Silico Screening of RGD Motif - containing Proteins —The Protein Information Resource ( PIR ) Perfect Peptide Match program was used to screen proteins registered in the UniProt Knowledgebase ( UniprotKB ) ( Apweiler et al . , 2004 ; Chen et al . , 2013 ) . Non - redundant proteins possessing at least one RGD motif were selected , and then further screened for their ability to be secreted into the extracellular space , based on their annotation in the Uniprot database or the presence or absence of signal peptides and transmembrane regions , respectively , which were predicted by using PSORT II ( Nakai and Horton , 1999 ) and SOSUI ( Hirokawa et al . , 1998 ) . Conservation of RGD motifs in vertebrates was assessed using the Ensembl genome database ( Hubbard et al . , 2002 ) . cDNA Cloning and Construction of Expression Vectors —cDNA encoding human latent TGF -  1 was amplified by PCR using a latent TGF -  1 cDNA clone purchased from Life Technologies ( IMAGE clone 3356605 ) as a template . The amplified cDNA was subcloned into pBluescript II KS + 26 vector ( Stratagene , La Jolla , CA ) . After verification by DNA sequencing , the amplified cDNA was digested with Hind III / Eco RI and inserted into the corresponding restriction sites of the pSecTag2B vector ( Invitrogen ) , yielding the latent TGF -  1 expression vector pSecTag - TGF -  1 . cDNAs encoding human angiopoietin - related protein 7 ( ANGPTL7 , IMAGE clone 3544149 ) , human EGF - like repeat and discoidin - I like domain - containing protein 3 ( EDIL3 , IMAGE clone 4791845 ) , human osteopontin ( SPP1 , IMAGE clone 4284921 ) , and human vitronectin ( VTN , IMAGE clone 4040317 ) were obtained from the Mammalian Gene Collection and amplified by PCR using individual cDNA clones as templates . cDNAs encoding insulin - like growth factor - binding protein 2 ( IGFBP2 ) , lactadherin ( MFGE8 , deleted for its second discoidin - like domain ) , thrombospondin - 1 ( THBS1 ) , thrombospondin - 2 ( THBS2 ) , bone sialoprotein ( IBSP ) , EGF - like , fibronectin type III and laminin G domains ( EGFLAM ) , prothrombin ( F2 ) , TGF -  1 - induced protein ig - h3 ( BIGH3 ) , proprotein convertase subtilisin / kexin type 6 ( PCSK6 ) , wingless - type MMTV integration site family , member 10A ( WNT10A ) , fibrillin - 1 ( FBN1 ; a truncated form consisting of 23 - 28th EGF - like repeats and 6 - 7th TGF -  - binding ( TB ) domains ) , fibrillin - 2 ( FBN2 ; a truncated form consisting of 5th TB , 21 - 26th EGF - like repeats and 6th TB domains ) , fibulin - 5 ( FBLN5 ) , netrin - 1 ( NTN1 ) , and hemicentin - 2 ( HMCN2 , a truncated form consisting of 4th and 5th immunoglobulin - like domains ) were amplified by reverse transcription - PCR . Template RNAs used for PCR amplification were obtained from A549 cells ( for IGFBP2 and MFGE8 ) , HeLa - S3 cells ( for THBS1 and THBS2 ) , human fetal brain ( Clontech , Palo Alto , CA ; for IBSP , EGFLAM ) , human fetal liver ( Clontech ; for F2 , BIGH3 , PCSK6 and WNT10A ) , and human fetal heart ( Clontech ; for FBN1 , FBN2 , FBLN5 , NTN1 and HMCN2 ) . PCR - amplified cDNAs except for latent TGF -  1 were subcloned into pSecTag2B vector ( Invitrogen ) in which a FLAG tag was inserted in - frame to the Ig  leader sequence at the 5′ end and verified by DNA sequencing . A list of the primer sequences used for PCR is described in Table 4 . A cDNA encoding human fibronectin III7 - 10 ( FNIII7 - 10 ; a truncated form consisting of the 7 - 10th type - III domains ) was amplified by PCR using a fibronectin cDNA clone ( Manabe et al . , 1997 ) as a template . The amplified cDNA was subcloned into the pBluescript II KS + vector . After verification by DNA sequencing , the amplified 27 cDNA was digested with Hind III / Pst I and inserted into the corresponding restriction sites of the pSecTag2B vector , yielding an expression vector for FNIII7 - 10 designated pSecTag - FNIII7 - 10 . A cDNA encoding the extracellular region of human integrin  ,  6 and  8 were amplified by reverse transcription - PCR . Template RNAs used for PCR amplification were extracted from WiDr human colon carcinoma cells ( for  6 and  8 ) and T98G human glioblastoma cells ( for  5 ) as templates , respectively . The PCR - amplified cDNA was digested with Bam HI / Pme I and inserted into the corresponding restriction sites of the pEF expression vector in frame to the sequence encoding the “BASE” peptide and a 6xHis tag at the 3′ end of the integrin  8 cDNA as described previously ( Ido et al . , 2007 ) . Another pEF vector encoding the extracellular region of integrin  8 lacking a C - terminal 6xHis tag was also constructed by overlap extension PCR for expression of recombinant  v  8 integrin lacking the 6xHis tag [ designated as  v  8 ( ΔHis ) ] . The expression vectors for the extracellular regions of integrin  v and  3 were described previously ( Ido et al . , 2007 ; Takagi et al . , 2001 ) . cDNAs encoding a series of swap mutants of the extracellular region of integrin  8 and  3 were amplified by PCR using cDNAs encoding the integrin  8 and  3 as a template , respectively . The primer sequences for PCR are described in Table 4 . After verification by DNA sequencing , PCR - amplified cDNA fragments were digested with Bam HI and Nhe I and inserted into the corresponding restriction sites of pEF - integrin  8 - BASE - 6xHis or pEF - integrin  3 - BASE - 6xHis and verified by DNA sequencing , respectively . Site - directed Mutagenesis —Site - directed mutagenesis of latent TGF -  1 and a truncated form of fibronectin ( FNIII7 - 10 ) was accomplished by overlap extension PCR with KOD polymerase using pSecTag - TGF -  1 and pSecTag - FNIII7 - 10 as templates , respectively . The primer sequences for the site - directed mutagenesis are available upon request . After verification by DNA sequencing , the PCR products containing the mutations were subcloned into pSecTag2B vector . 28 Expression and Purification of Recombinant Proteins and Integrins —GST - fused EGF - like protein 6 ( EGFL6 ) , GST - fused FRAS - 1 related extracellular matrix protein 1 ( FREM1 ) , laminin -  5 ( LAMA5 , as laminin - 511 ) , and nephronectin ( NPNT ) were purified as described previously ( Ido et al . , 2004 ; Kiyozumi et al . , 2005 ; Osada et al . , 2005 ; Sato et al . , 2009 ; Sekiguchi and Hakomori , 1983 ) . For purification of other RGD - containing proteins , FreeStyle 293 - F cells ( Life Technologies ) were transiently transfected with individual expression vectors according to the manufacturer’s instructions . The conditioned media were collected at 72 h after transfection and centrifuged to remove cells and debris , followed by addition of Pefabloc SC ( Roche , Basel , Switzerland ; 0 . 4 mM ) , imidazole ( 10 mM ) , and sodium azide ( 0 . 02 % ) . The conditioned media were incubated with nickel - nitrilotriacetic acid - agarose ( Ni - NTA ) beads ( Qiagen ) , followed by washing with TBS . Bound proteins were eluted with TBS containing 200 mM imidazole . The eluted fractions except for latent TGF -  1 , vitronectin , thrombospondin - 1 , and PCSK6 were applied to columns of anti - FLAG M2 agarose beads ( Sigma ) , and the bound proteins were eluted with 100  g / mL FLAG peptide ( Sigma ) . Recombinant latent TGF -  1 , vitronectin , thrombospondin - 1 , and PCSK6 were purified by one - step Ni - NTA affinity chromatography . The purified proteins were dialyzed against TBS and quantified by a Bio - Rad Protein Assay kit ( Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA ) using bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) as a standard . Recombinant integrins were expressed in FreeStyle 293 - F cells by cotransfection with expression vectors encoding integrin  and  subunits , and purified as described above by two - step affinity chromatography , except for  v  8 ( ΔHis ) , which was purified by one - step chromatography using anti - FLAG - M2 agarose . SDS - PAGE and Western Blotting —SDS - PAGE was carried out according to Laemmli ( Laemmli , 1970 ) using 8 , 12 , or 5 – 20 % gradient gels . Separated proteins were visualized by Coomassie Brilliant Blue ( CBB ) staining or transferred onto PVDF membranes ( Millipore , Billerica , MA ) for immunoblotting . The membranes were treated with TBS containing 5 % skim milk and 0 . 05 % Tween - 20 for detection of FLAG tags or anti - His blocking reagent ( Qiagen ) containing 0 . 05 % Tween - 20 for detection of 6xHis tags . The membranes were then probed with HRP - conjugated 29 antibodies against FLAG or penta - His tags , followed by visualization with the ECL Western blotting substrate ( GE Healthcare ) . Integrin Binding Assay —Integrin binding assays were performed as described previously ( Nishiuchi et al . , 2006 ) . Briefly , microtiter plates ( Nunc - Immuno™ MicroWell™ 96 - well plates ; Thermo Fisher Scientific ) were coated with various RGD - containing proteins ( 10 nM ) overnight at 4°C , and then blocked with TBS containing 10 mg / mL BSA . The plates were incubated with integrins in the presence of 1 mM MnCl 2 with or without 10 mM EDTA . In inhibition assays , integrins were incubated on the plates in the presence of synthetic peptides at various concentrations to evaluate their inhibitory activities . The plates were washed with TBS containing 1 mM MnCl 2 , 0 . 1 % BSA , and 0 . 02 % Tween - 20 with or without 10 mM EDTA , followed by quantification of bound integrins by an ELISA using a biotinylated rabbit anti - Velcro antibody and HRP - conjugated streptavidin . Integrin binding assays were also performed in a reverse manner . Briefly , microtiter plates were coated with 10 nM  v  8 ( ΔHis ) integrin and then incubated with various RGD - containing proteins having a 6xHis tag . Bound proteins were quantified by ELISA using an HRP - conjugated anti - penta - His antibody . The results represent the means of triplicate determinations . Apparent dissociation constants were calculated by saturation binding assays as described previously ( Nishiuchi et al . , 2006 ) . 30 Table 4 . PCR primer sequences Protein names Primer types Sequences Restriction sites 5’end 3’end Latent TGF -  1 Forward Reverse 5’ - AAGCTTCATCATCATCATCATCATGGACTATCCACCTGCAAGAC - 3’ 5’ - AAAGAATTCTCAGCTGCACTTGCAGGAGCGCAC - 3’ HindIII EcoRI ANGPTL7 Forward Reverse 5’ - AAAGAATTCCAGAAGCTCTCTAAGCACAAGACACCAGCACAG - 3’ 5’ - AAACTCGAGAGGCTTGAAGTCTTCTGGGCGGATTTTCATC - 3’ EcoRI XhoI BIGH3 Forward Reverse 5’ - AAAAAGCTTGGTCCCGCCAAGTCGCCCTACCAGCTGGTGCTG - 3’ 5’ - AAACTCGAGAATGCTTCATCCTCTCTAATAACTTTTGATAG - 3’ HindIII XhoI EDIL3 Forward Reverse 5’ - AAAAAGCTTGTCCCCCAGTTCGGCAAAGGTGATATTTG - 3’ 5’ - AAAGGATCCTTCCTCCTCTGTGCAGCCCAGCAGCTC - 3’ HindIII BamHI EGFLAM Forward Reverse 5’ - AAAAAGCTTCTCCGAGCGGCCATCCGAAAACCAGGCAAGG - 3’ 5’ - AAACTCGAGACTTGGCTCCACAAGTGTTGATGTTTTTCCC - 3’ HindIII XhoI FBLN5 Forward Reverse 5’ - TTTAAGCTTCAGGCACAGTGCACGAATG - 3’ 5’ - TTTCTCGAGTGAATGGGTACTGCGACAC - 3’ HindIII XhoI Fibrillin - 1 Forward Reverse 5’ - AAAGGTACCGATCTGGACGAATGTTCCAATGG - 3’ 5’ - AAAGAATTCCTTGACTTCCACAGAGTGTAGCAAAC - 3’ KpnI EcoRI Fibrillin - 2 Forward Reverse 5’ - CCCGGTACCGATGTCAATGAATGTGACCTAAATTC - 3’ 5’ - AAAGAATTCCGCCTTCACCTCCGGGACAC - 3’ KpnI EcoRI HMCN2 Forward Reverse 5’ - AAAAAGCTTCATGCGCCCCAGCTG - 3’ 5’ - AAACTGCAGCACCTGGACCACCAG - 3’ HindIII PstI IBSP Forward Reverse 5’ - AAAAAGCTTTTCTCAATGAAAAATTTGCATCGAAGAGTC - 3’ 5’ - AAACTCGAGACTGGTGGTGGTAGTAATTCTGACCATCATAG - 3’ HindIII XhoI IGFBP2 Forward Reverse 5’ - TTTCTCGAGTAATATCTCTGCATTCGTACTTGAGG - 3’ 5’ - TTTCTCGAGTAATATCTCTGCATTCGTACTTGAGG - 3’ HindIII XhoI MFGE8 Forward Reverse 5’ - CCCAAGCTTCTGGATATCTGTTCCAAAAACCCC - 3’ 5’ - TTTCTCGAGTTCCGTTCAGCTCACAGCCC - 3’ HindIII XhoI NTN1 Forward Reverse 5’ - AAAGGTACCGGGCCCGGGCTCAGC - 3’ 5’ - AAAGAATTCCGGCCTTCTTGCACTTGCCC - 3’ KpnI EcoRI Osteopontin Forward Reverse 5’ - AAAAAGCTTATACCAGTTAAACAGGCTGATTCTGGAAGTTCTG - 3’ 5’ - AAAGGATCCATTGACCTCAGAAGATGCACTATCTAATTCATGAG - 3’ HindIII BamHI PCSK6 Forward Reverse 5’ - AAAGGATCCCCCCCGCCGCGCCCCGTCTACACCAACCAC - 3’ 5’ - AAAGCGGCCGCCCCGGCCAGGAGGCACGTGCGGCAG - 3’ BamHI NotI 31 Prothrombin Forward Reverse 5’ - AAAGGTACCGGCAACCTGGAGCGAGAG - 3’ 5’ - AAAGAATTCCCTCTCCAAACTGATCAATGACC - 3’ KpnI EcoRI Thrombospondin - 1 Forward Reverse 5’ - CCCAAGCTTAACCGCATTCCAGAGTCTGGC - 3’ 5’ - TTTCTCGAGTGGGATCTCTACATTCGTATTTCAGGTC - 3’ HindIII XhoI Thrombospondin - 2 Forward Reverse 5’ - CCCAAGCTTGGTCACCAGGACAAAGACAC - 3’ 5’ - TTTCTCGAGTAATATCTCTGCATTCGTACTTGAGG - 3’ HindIII XhoI Vitronectin Forward Reverse 5’ - AAAAAGCTTGACCAAGAGTCATGCAAGGGC - 3’ 5’ - GGCTGCAGCAGATGGCCAGGAGC - 3’ HindIII PstI WNT10A Forward Reverse 5’ - AAAGGATCCATGCCCAGGTCAGCACCCAATGACATTCTG - 3’ 5’ - AAACTCGAGACTTGCAGACGCTGACCCACTCGGTGATG - 3’ BamHI XhoI  8 integrin Forward Reverse 5’ - GGATCCGAATTTCTCCATCCAAG - 3’ 5’ - GCGGCCGCTTTGTAGCCAAACATG - 3’ BamHI PmeI  5 integrin Forward Reverse 5’ - GGATCCGCTGAGGGAGGCGCCC - 3’ 5’ - GCGGCCGCTCAATGGTGATGGTGATG - 3’ BamHI PmeI  6 integrin Forward Reverse 5’ - GGATCCGAAACGACCACCATGG - 3’ 5’ - GCGGCCGCTCAATGGTGATGGTG - 3’ BamHI PmeI 32 Results I . In Silico Screening of RGD - containing Proteins as Candidates for  v Integrin Ligands —Among the currently available databases for protein sequences , UniProtKB is a suitable resource for the screening of putative  v integrin ligands because it contains ~ 91 , 800 human protein sequences , some of which are manually annotated with information extracted from the literature ( Figure 8 ) . I performed protein sequence - based screening for proteins containing an RGD motif using the Protein Information Resource Perfect Peptide Match program and extracted 5 , 083 proteins containing at least one RGD sequence . Given that this program often assigns different ID numbers for alternatively spliced variants and / or fragments , I reassigned the same ID numbers for such variants , thus yielding a non - redundant protein list comprising 1 , 909 proteins possessing at least one RGD motif . Because integrins are cell - surface receptors that recognize extracellular proteins , I next screened for putative secreted proteins based on the annotation of UniProtKB or the presence of a signal peptide and the absence of transmembrane region ( s ) , respectively , as predicted by PSORTII and SOSUI . This yielded 190 putative secreted proteins with an RGD motif . Because integrin  v is evolutionarily conserved among vertebrates , I assumed that the ligands for  v integrins should have an RGD motif conserved among vertebrates . Screening of 190 putative secreted proteins among vertebrate orthologs that harbored the conserved RGD motif yielded 29 candidates for  v integrin ligands ( Table 5 ) . II . Recombinant Expression and Purification of the Candidates for  v  8 Integrin Ligands —I expressed and purified the 29 RGD - containing proteins listed in Table 5 . Fibronectin , EGF - like protein 6 ( EGFL6 ) , FREM1 , laminin -  5 ( LAMA5 , as laminin - 511 ) , and nephronectin were purified as described previously ( Ido et al . , 2004 ; Kiyozumi et al . , 2005 ; 33 Figure 8 . In silico screening of RGD - containing secreted proteins . All human proteins registered in UniProtKB were screened for putative  v integrin ligands based on the following three criteria : 1 ) possession of an RGD motif ( s ) , 2 ) secretion to the extracellular space , and 3 ) conservation of the RGD motif among vertebrates . For details , see the text and Experimental Procedures . The final list comprising 29 candidate proteins for  v integrin ligands is shown in Table 5 . Osada et al . , 2005 ; Sato et al . , 2009 ; Sekiguchi and Hakomori , 1983 ) . Latent TGF -  1 was expressed as a recombinant protein using a mammalian expression system with a 6xHis tag at the N - terminus and purified from conditioned medium by Ni - NTA affinity chromatography . Other proteins were expressed with N - terminal FLAG and C - terminal 6xHis tags to ensure the secretion of full - length proteins . Secreted recombinant proteins were purified from the conditioned medium by Ni - NTA affinity chromatography . When protein purity was not sufficient , they were further purified by anti - FLAG mAb affinity chromatography . The authenticity of the purified proteins was verified by SDS - PAGE under reducing conditions , followed by CBB staining and immunoblotting against the FLAG and 6xHis tags . Purified latent TGF -  1 gave three bands migrating at 50 kDa ( unprocessed latent TGF -  1 ) , 37 kDa ( LAP ) , and 10 kDa ( mature TGF -  1 ) ( Figure 9A ) , confirming the authenticity of the purified protein ( Dubois et al . , 1995 ) . Except for thrombospondin - 1 , proprotein convertase subtilisin / kexin type 6 ( PCSK6 ) , semaphorin - 3C ( SEMA3C ) , extracellular matrix protein 2 ( ECM2 ) , lysine - tRNA synthetase ( KARS ) , and PCSK5 , the other proteins were also purified at their mass regions ( Figure 9B ) . Thrombospondin - 1 and PCSK6 were obtained as 91800 All human proteins registered in UniProtKB Putative secreted proteins 190 RGD - containing proteins 5083 1909 RGD - containing proteins ( redundant ) 29 Candidates Screening for RGD - containing proteins Consolidation of redundantly assigned proteins Screening for putative secreted proteins Conservation of the RGD motif in vertebrates 34 Table 5 . Candidate proteins for  v  8 integrin ligands . Gene symbols Protein names N - tag C - tag Purification methods ANGPTL7 angiopoietin - related protein 7 FLAG His Ni - NTA & anti - FLAG BIGH3 transforming growth factor -  induced protein ig - h3 FLAG His Ni - NTA & anti - FLAG ECM2 c extracellular matrix protein 2 FLAG His Ni - NTA & anti - FLAG EDIL3 EGF - like repeat and discoidin l - like domain containing protein 3 FLAG His Ni - NTA & anti - FLAG EGFL6 EGF - like protein 6 GST - ( Osada et al . , 2005 ) EGFLAM EGF - like , fibronectin type III and laminin G domains ( pikachurin ) FLAG His Ni - NTA & anti - FLAG F2 Prothrombin FLAG His Ni - NTA & anti - FLAG FBLN5 fibulin - 5 FLAG His Ni - NTA & anti - FLAG FBN1 b fibrillin - 1 FLAG His Ni - NTA & anti - FLAG FBN2 b fibrillin - 2 FLAG His Ni - NTA & anti - FLAG FINC a fibronectin a - - ( Sekiguchi and Hakomori , 1983 ) FREM1 FRAS1 - related extracellular matrix protein 1 GST - ( Kiyozumi et al . , 2005 ) HMCN2 b hemicentin - 2 FLAG His Ni - NTA & anti - FLAG IBSP bone sialoprotein 2 FLAG His Ni - NTA & anti - FLAG IGFBP2 insulin - like growth factor - binding protein 2 FLAG His Ni - NTA & anti - FLAG KARS c lysine - tRNA ligase FLAG His Ni - NTA & anti - FLAG LAMA5 laminin  5 subunit - - ( Ido et al . , 2004 ) MFGE8 b lactadherin FLAG His Ni - NTA & anti - FLAG NPNT nephronectin - FLAG ( Sato et al . , 2009 ) NTN1 netrin - 1 FLAG His Ni - NTA & anti - FLAG PCSK5 c proprotein convertase subtilisin / kexin type 5 FLAG His Ni - NTA & anti - FLAG PCSK6 b proprotein convertase subtilisin / kexin type 6 FLAG His Ni - NTA SPP1 osteopontin FLAG His Ni - NTA & anti - FLAG SEMA3C c semaphorin - 3C FLAG His Ni - NTA & anti - FLAG TGFB1 a transforming growth factor -  1 a His - Ni - NTA THBS1 b thrombospondin - 1 FLAG His Ni - NTA THBS2 thrombospondin - 2 FLAG His Ni - NTA & anti - FLAG VTN a vitronectin a FLAG His Ni - NTA WNT10A wingless - type MMTV integration site family , member 10A FLAG His Ni - NTA & anti - FLAG a Known  v  8 ligands . b Candidate proteins that were purified as truncated forms . c Candidate proteins that could not be purified because of low expression . 35 A CBB FLAG His ( kDa ) 75 - 50 - 37 - 25 - 250 - 150 - 100 - 20 - 15 - 10 - ( kDa ) 250 - 150 - 100 - CBB FLAG His Vitronectin 75 - 50 - 37 - 25 - CBB FLAG His WNT10A 250 - 150 - 100 - 75 - 50 - 37 - 25 - ( kDa ) CBB FLAG His Thrombospondin - 1 250 - 150 - 100 - 75 - 50 - 37 - 25 - ( kDa ) Prothrombin ( kDa ) 250 - 150 - 100 - 75 - 50 - 37 - 25 - CBB FLAG His MFGE8 ( kDa ) 75 - 50 - 37 - 25 - 250 - 150 - 100 - 20 - 15 - CBB FLAG His NTN1 250 - 150 - 100 - 75 - 50 - 37 - 25 - CBB FLAG His Osteopontin ( kDa ) 75 - 50 - 37 - 25 - 250 - 150 - 100 - 20 - 15 - ANGPTL7 CBB FLAG His ( kDa ) 75 - 50 - 37 - 25 - 250 - 150 - 100 - 20 - 15 - 10 - CBB FLAG His EGFLAM ( kDa ) 250 - 150 - 100 - 75 - 50 - 37 - 25 - CBB FLAG His EDIL3 ( kDa ) 75 - 50 - 37 - 25 - 250 - 150 - 100 - 20 - 15 - 10 - BIGH3 CBB FLAG His ( kDa ) 250 - 150 - 100 - 75 - 50 - 37 - 25 - CBB FLAG His Thrombospondin - 2 ( kDa ) 250 - 150 - 100 - 75 - 50 - 37 - 25 - Fibrillin - 2 HMCN2 CBB FLAG His IBSP ( kDa ) ( kDa ) CBB FLAG His IGFBP2 250 - 150 - 100 - 75 - 50 - 37 - 25 - 75 - 50 - 37 - 25 - 250 - 150 - 100 - 20 - 15 - CBB FLAG His FBLN5 CBB FLAG His Fibrillin - 1 75 - 50 - 250 - 150 - 100 - 37 - 25 - ( kDa ) CBB FLAG His 75 - 50 - 37 - 25 - 250 - 150 - 100 - 20 - 15 - CBB FLAG His 75 - 50 - 37 - 25 - 250 - 150 - 100 - 20 - 15 - ( kDa ) ( kDa ) ( kDa ) PCSK6 CBB FLAG His 250 - 150 - 100 - 75 - 50 - 37 - 25 - ( kDa ) B Latent TGF -  1 ( kDa ) 75 - 50 - 37 - 250 - 150 - 100 - 25 - 20 - 15 - 10 - CBB His Latent TGF -  1 ( unprocessed ) Latency - associate peptide Mature TGF -  1 Figure 9 . Purification of recombinant RGD proteins . Purified latent TGF -  ( A ) and other recombinant RGD proteins ( B ) were subjected to SDS - PAGE on 5 – 20 % gradient gels ( ANGPTL7 , EDIL3 , PCSK6 , and latent TGF -  1 ) , 8 % gels ( EGFLAM , BIGH3 , FBLN5 , IGFBP2 , NTN1 , prothrombin , thrombospondin - 2 , vitronectin , WNT10A , and thrombospondin - 1 ) or 12 % gels ( fibrillin - 1 , fibrillin - 2 , HMCN2 , IBSP , MFGE8 , and osteopontin ) under reducing conditions , followed by CBB staining ( left ) , immunoblotting with an anti - FLAG monoclonal antibody ( middle ) , or with an anti - penta His monoclonal antibody ( right ) . Molecular masses are indicated on the left of panels . Arrowheads indicate predicted molecular size of full - length ( close ) or processed form ( open ) of each recombinant protein . 36 proteolytically processed forms comprising N - and C - terminal fragments by Ni - NTA affinity chromatography . It was difficult to obtain sufficient amounts of recombinant SEMA3C , ECM2 , KARS , and PCSK5 for subsequent integrin binding assays because of their low levels of expression and / or proteolytic degradation . III . Binding Activities of  v Integrins toward 25 RGD - containing Proteins —  v - containing integrins are comprised of five closely related isoforms , namely  v  1  v  3  v  5  v  6  and  v  8 , which are considered to be promiscuous in that they exhibit broad binding specificity towards a wide variety of RGD proteins . To compare the ligand binding capabilities of  v integrins , a total of 25 RGD proteins ( hereafter designated as “RGD proteins” ) were purified and subjected to integrin binding assays using recombinant  v integrins .  v integrins were expressed and purified as disulfide - linked heterodimers of the extracellular domains of  v and individual  chains . I excluded  v  1 integrin from comprehensive integrin binding assays because of its low level of expression . The purified four  v integrins including  v  8 ,  v  3 ,  v  5 and  v  6 gave a single band migrating at ~ 250 kDa upon SDS - PAGE under non - reducing conditions and were resolved into four bands , i . e . ~ 150 kDa ( unprocessed  v chain ) , ~ 120 kDa (  v heavy chain ) , ~ 100 kDa (  chain ) , and ~ 30 kDa (  v light chain ) , under reducing conditions , respectively ( Figure 10 ) . The integrin binding assays were performed in the presence of 1 mM Mn 2 + to fully activate integrins . Comprehensive binding assays showed that four  v integrins displayed a distinct binding specificity toward a broad range of RGD proteins , although they share the same integrin  v subunit ( Figure 11 ) .  v  8 integrin strongly bound to latent TGF -  1 , but it also bound to other RGD proteins moderately ( fibrillin - 1 , fibrillin - 2 , fibronectin , and vitronectin ) or only marginally ( EDIL3 , bone sialoprotein ( IBSP ) , and osteopontin ) . 37 Figure 10 . Purification of recombinant  v  8 ,  v  3 ,  v  5 and  v  6 integrins . Purified  v integrins were subjected to SDS - PAGE on 5 – 20 % gradient gels under reducing or non - reducing conditions , followed by CBB staining ( left ) , immunoblotting with an anti - FLAG monoclonal antibody ( middle ) , or with an anti - penta His monoclonal antibody ( right ) . Molecular masses are indicated on the left of panels . Arrowheads indicate predicted molecular size of full - length or processed form of each  v integrins . In contrast ,  v  3 integrin bound strongly to EDIL3 , fibrillin - 1 , fibrillin - 2 , fibronectin , IBSP , and vitronectin , moderately to EGFL6 , FREM1 , laminin  5 , lactadherin ( MFGE8 ) , and osteopontin , but had low binding affinity for EGFLAM , fibulin - 5 ( FBLN5 ) , nephronectin , prothrombin , latent TGF -  1 , thrombospondin - 1 , and thrombospondin - 2 . The binding specificity of  v  5 integrin was remarkably similar to that of  v  3 integrin ;  v  5 integrin strongly bound to EDIL3 , fibrillin - 1 , fibrillin - 2 , IBSP , laminin  5 , and vitronectin , moderately to EGFL6 , EGFLAM , fibronectin , FREM1 , MFGE8 , nephronectin , osteopontin and PCSK6 but had low binding affinity for fibulin - 5 , prothrombin , latent TGF -  1 , thrombospondin - 1 , and thrombospondin - 2 .   v  6 integrin also exhibited a broad spectrum of binding affinity toward  v  8 CBB FLAG His ( kDa ) 250 - 150 - 100 - 75 - 50 - 37 - 25 - 20 -  v ( unprocessed )  8  dimer  v heavy chain αv light chain CBB FLAG His Non - reduced Reduced  v ( unprocessed )  3  dimer  v heavy chain αv light chain CBB FLAG His  v  3 CBB FLAG His ( kDa ) 250 - 150 - 100 - 75 - 50 - 37 - 25 - 20 - Non - reduced Reduced  v ( unprocessed )  5  dimer  v heavy chain αv light chain  v  5 CBB FLAG His ( kDa ) 250 - 150 - 100 - 75 - 50 - 37 - 25 - 20 - CBB FLAG His Non - reduced Reduced  v  6 CBB FLAG His ( kDa ) 250 - 150 - 100 - 75 - 50 - 37 - 25 - 20 -  v ( unprocessed )  6  dimer  v heavy chain αv light chain CBB FLAG His Non - reduced Reduced 38 O D 490 O D 490 O D 490 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 O D 490 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6  v  8  v  3  v  5  v  6 Figure 11 . Binding activities of  v integrins towards 25 RGD proteins . Microtiter plates were coated with RGD proteins ( 10 nM ) and then incubated with individual  v integrins ( 10 nM ) in the presence of 1 mM Mn 2 + . The bound integrins were quantified using a biotinylated anti - Velcro polyclonal antibody and HRP - conjugated streptavidin as described in the Experimental Procedures . The amounts of integrin bound in the presence of 10 mM EDTA were used as negative controls , and subtracted as backgrounds . The results represent the means ± S . D . of triplicate determinations . * Candidate proteins expressed as fragments containing an RGD motif . * * Candidate proteins expressed as recombinant fragments fused to GST at their N - termini . 39 25 RGD proteins , spectrum of binding affinity toward 25 RGD proteins , but it slightly differed from  v  3 and  v  5 integrins in its binding specificity ;  v  6 integrin bound strongly to fibrillin - 1 , fibrillin - 2 , fibronectin and latent TGF -  1 , moderately to EDIL3 , EGFL6 , FREM1 , laminin  5 , osteopontin and vitronectin , but only marginal binding activities were observed toward the other RGD proteins . Consistent with these results , EDIL3 , fibrillin - 1 , fibrillin - 2 , fibronectin , IBSP , MFGE8 , latent TGF -  1 , nephronectin , osteopontin and vitronectin have been shown to interact with individual  v - containing integrins ( Andersen et al . , 2000 ; Brandenberger et al . , 2001 ; Hidai et al . , 1998 ; Jovanovic et al . , 2008 ; Lawler et al . , 1988 ; Schurpf et al . , 2012 ; Sun et al . , 1992 ; Yokosaki et al . , 2005 ) . These results indicated that the  v  8 integrin has a highly restricted ligand specificity to TGF -  1 and significantly differs from other  v integrins in ligand binding specificity . IV  v  8 Integrin Preferentially Binds to Latent TGF -  1 —Among the 25 RGD proteins I examined , latent TGF -  1 was extremely potent in binding to  v  8 integrin , and EDIL3 , fibrillin - 1 , fibrillin - 2 , fibronectin , osteopontin , and vitronectin were moderately active , while other RGD proteins did not show any significant binding to  v  8 integrin ( Figure 11 ) . Because the coating efficiency varies among the 25 RGD proteins , I also performed reverse binding assays in which microtiter plates were coated with  v  8 integrin without a 6xHis tag and then incubated with a panel of RGD proteins added in the solution phase . Bound RGD proteins were detected with an HRP - conjugated anti - penta - His antibody . EGFL6 , fibronectin , FREM1 , laminin -  5 , and nephronectin , all of which did not possess a 6xHis tag , were not included in this assay . Among the 20 RGD proteins tested , only latent TGF -  1 bound strongly to  v  8 integrin in a divalent cation - dependent manner ( Figure 12A ) . ANGPTL7 and IBSP also gave positive signals in the assay , but the signals persisted in the presence of 10 mM EDTA , suggesting that they did not represent authentic interactions of  v  8 integrin with its 40 Figure 12 . Ligand binding specificity of  v  8 integrin . ( A ) Binding activities of  v  8 integrin toward 20 RGD proteins in the solution phase . Microtiter plates were coated with  v  8 ( ΔHis ) integrin ( 10 nM ) and then incubated with RGD proteins ( 10 nM ) in the presence of 1 mM Mn 2 + or 10 mM EDTA . The bound RGD proteins were quantified using an HRP - conjugated anti - 6xHis antibody as described in the Experimental Procedures . ( B and C ) Titration curves of  v  8 ( left ) and  v  3 ( right ) integrins bound to latent TGF -  1 ( yellow circles ) , vitronectin ( red circles ) , fibronectin ( blue triangles ) , fibrillin - 1 ( green diamonds ) , and the RGD → RGE substitution mutant of latent TGF -  1 ( white diamonds ) . The results represent the means of three independent determinations . Bound integrins were quantified as described in the Experimental Procedures . ligand through the divalent cation in the  8 subunit . The results obtained in two separate assays of the reverse format indicated that  v  8 integrin preferentially bound to latent TGF -  1 with an affinity far exceeding those to fibronectin and vitronectin , the known ligands for  v  8 integrin . Saturation binding assays revealed that  v  8 integrin bound to latent TGF -  1 with an apparent dissociation constant of 2 . 3 ± 0 . 2 nM , which was approximately one or two orders of magnitude lower than that of fibrillin - 1 , fibronectin , and vitronectin ( Figure 12B ) . Substitution of the RGD motif of latent TGF -  1 with an inactive RGE sequence completely abrogated the ability of latent TGF -  1 to bind to  v  integrin , confirming the RGD - dependent interaction of latent TGF -  1 with  v  integrin . The low binding affinities of  v  towards vitronectin , fibronectin , and fibrillin - 1 were not caused by inactivation of their RGD ligand activity because they retained the ability to bind to  v  3 integrin , an integrin that binds to these RGD proteins ( Figure 12C ) .  It should be noted that  v  3 integrin showed only marginal binding B O D 490 α v β 8 c on c en t r a t i on ( n M ) 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 100 1000 T G F - β 1 V T N F I NC F B N 1 V i t r one c t i n F i b r one c t i n F i b r illi n - 1 α v β 3 c on c en t r a t i on ( n M ) 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 100 1000 T G F - β 1 V T N F I NC F B N 1 T G F - β 1 - R G E C La t en t T G F -  1 - R G E V i t r one c t i n F i b r one c t i n F i b r illi n - 1 La t en t T G F -  1 La t en t T G F -  1 La t en t T G F -  1 - R G E 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 mM M n 2 + 1 mM M n 2 + 10 mM E D T A + O D 490 A 41 activity to latent TGF -  1 . Its activity was nullified by substitution of the RGD motif with an inactive RGE sequence ( Figure 12C ) . These results indicated that the ligand specificity and binding affinity of  v  8 integrin towards latent TGF -  1 differ significantly from  v  3 integrin . V . Leu - 218 Residue Immediately Following the RGD Motif is Required for High - affinity Binding to  v  8 Integrin —To explore the molecular basis of the restricted ligand specificity of  v  8 integrin , I focused on the LXXI sequence immediately following the RGD motif , because the LXXI sequence was required for the high - affinity binding of latent TGF -  1 to  v  6 integrin in concert with the RGD motif ( DiCara et al . , 2007 ; Dong et al . , 2014 , 2017 ) . I constructed latent TGF -  1 mutants , in which the Leu - 218 and / or Ile - 221 residues of the LXXI sequence were substituted with Ala and assessed their ability to bind to  v  8 integrin ( Figure 13A ) . Although the I221A substitution did not affect the binding of latent TGF -  1 to  v  8 integrin , the L218A substitution almost completely abrogated the binding , similar to an RGD  RGE substitution ( Figure 13B ) . L218A / I221A double substitution also inactivated binding to  v  8 integrin . Dong et al . ( 2014 ) showed that the Leu residue immediately after the RGD motif of latent TGF -  3 binds to a hydrophobic pocket in the  6 subunit . However , the substitution of Leu - 218 residue with Ile or Met , amino acids having larger hydrophobic side chains , also resulted in a marked loss of the ability to bind to  v  8 integrin by latent TGF -  1 ( Figure 13C ) . These results indicated that both the RGD motif and the Leu - 218 residue were strictly required for the high - affinity binding of latent TGF -  1 to  v  8 integrin . 42 Figure 13 . Effect of alanine substitutions within the LATI sequence on  v  8 integrin - binding activity to latent TGF -  1 . ( A ) Schematic of full - length TGF -  1 and the amino acid sequences of wild - type and alanine substitution mutants of latent TGF -  1 . RGD motifs are underlined , and the following LATI sequences are shown in bold . ( B and C ) Titration curves of  v  8 integrin bound to latent TGF -  1 ( wild - type , orange circles ) , L218A substitution mutant ( L218A , red squares ) , I221A substitution mutant ( I221A , green triangles ) , L218A / I221A double substitution mutant ( L218A / I221A , blue diamonds ) , RGD → RGE mutant ( RGE , asterisks ) , L218I substitution mutant ( L218I , green diamonds ) and L218M substitution mutant ( L218M , purple triangles ) . The assays were performed as described in the Figure 12 legend . The results represent the means of three independent determinations . To confirm the importance of Leu - 218 immediately following the RGD motif in latent TGF -  1 binding by  v  8 integrin , I examined whether synthetic peptides modeled after the RGDL - containing sequence in latent TGF -  1 could inhibit the binding of latent TGF -  1 to  v  8 integrin . I synthesized a 9 - mer peptide containing the RGDL sequence ( RRGDLATIH , designated as RGDL ) and its mutant forms with RGDL→RGDA , RGDL→RGEL , and RGDL→RGEA substitutions ( Figure 14A ) , and examined their inhibitory effects on the binding of  v  8 integrin to latent TGF -  1 . The RGDL peptide strongly inhibited the binding of  v  8 integrin to latent TGF -  1 with an IC 50 of ~ 0 . 3  M ( Figure 14B and Table 6 ) . Substitution of the Leu residue with Ala resulted in a ~ 60 - fold decrease in the potency of the peptide to inhibit the  v  8 integrin - latent TGF -  1 interaction , while the RGEL peptide , in which the Asp residue of the RGD motif was substituted with Glu , resulted in a ~ 500 - fold decrease . The RGEA peptide showed little inhibitory effect at the highest peptide concentration A Signal peptide Latency - associated peptide Mature TGF -  1 His tag Latent TGF -  1 wild - type GRRGD LATI HG L218A I221A GRRGD AATI HG GRRGD LATA HG B 213 223 O D 490 αvβ8 concentration ( nM ) 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 100 Wild - type L218A I221A L218A / I221A RGE 0 0 . 3 0 . 6 0 . 9 1 . 2 1 . 5 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 100 1000 RGDL RGDA RGDI RGDM O D 490 C Wild - type L218A L218I L218M αvβ8 concentration ( nM ) 43 Figure 14 . Inhibition of  v  8 integrin binding to latent TGF -  1 by synthetic peptides . ( A ) Amino acid sequences of the synthetic peptides tested . RGD motifs are underlined , and the following LATI sequences are shown in bold . ( B and C ) Integrins ( 10 nM ) were incubated on microtiter plates coated with latent TGF -  1 ( 10 nM ; B ) or fibronectin ( 10 nM ; C ) in the presence of increasing concentrations of synthetic peptides . To prevent precipitation of the peptides , the integrin binding assays were performed in the presence of 10 % DMSO . The amounts of bound integrins are shown as percentages relative to the control , in which integrins were incubated on latent TGF -  1 - or fibronectin - coated plates in the presence of 10 % DMSO . The results represent the means of three independent determinations . Yellow circles , RGDL ( 9 - mer containing both RGD motif and Leu residue ) ; red circles , RGDA ( 9 - mer with the Leu → Ala substitution ) ; black triangles , RGEL ( 9 - mer with RGD → RGE substitution ) ; blue triangles , RGEA ( 9 - mer with RGDL → RGEA double substitution ) .  used . These results indicated that although the RGD motif is the primary determinant , the Leu residue immediately after the RGD motif is critically required for the binding of  v  8 integrin to latent TGF -  1 . I also examined the potency of the peptides to inhibit the binding of  v  3 integrin to fibronectin ( Figure 14C ) . Both the RGDL and RGDA peptides were equally inhibitory with an IC 50 of 0 . 3 - 0 . 4  M , regardless of the presence or absence of the Leu residue following the RGD motif , while RGEL and RGEA peptides were only weakly inhibitory . These results indicated that the Leu residue immediately after the RGD motif is not involved in ligand recognition by  v  3 integrin , while it is indispensable for latent TGF -  1 recognition by  v  8 integrin . RGDL RGDA RGEL RGEA 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 100 1000 RGDL RGDA RGEL RGEA % o f c on t r o l Peptide concentration ( μM ) 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 - 1 10 - 2 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 100 1000 RGDLRGDARGELRGEA % o f c on t r o l 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 - 1 10 - 2 Peptide concentration ( μM ) A B C RRGD LATI H RRGD AATI H RRGE LATI H RRGE AATI H  v  8 vs Latent TGF -  1  v  3 vs Fibronectin 44 Table 6 . Inhibition of  v  8 and  v  3 integrin binding to ligands by synthetic peptides integrin vs ligand Peptides IC50 (  M ) *  v  8 vs latent TGF -  RGDL 0 . 31 ± 0 . 03 RGDA 19 ± 1 RGEL 170 ± 60 RGEA ND  v  3 vs fibronectin RGDL 0 . 40 ± 0 . 10 RGDA 0 . 29 ± 0 . 04 RGEL 170 ± 30 RGEA 220 ± 30 * Determined based on data from Figure 14 . The values represent the mean ± S . D . of three independent determinations . ND , not determined . To further corroborate the critical role of Leu - 218 immediately after the RGD motif in latent TGF -  1 recognition by  v  8 integrin , I examined whether the high - affinity binding of latent TGF -  1 toward  v  8 integrin could be conferred on fibronectin by substituting the RGDL sequence for the RGDS cell - adhesive motif in the 10th FNIII domain of fibronectin . I produced a truncated form of fibronectin consisting of the 7 - 10th type III domains ( FNIII7 - 10 ) and its mutants with substitution of its RGDS sequence with RGDL or RGEL and assessed their abilities to bind to  v  8 integrin ( Figure 15A ) . Although control FNIII7 - 10 bound to  v  8 integrin with only a moderate affinity , the RGDL mutant bound strongly to  v  8 integrin with an apparent Kd of 2 . 2 nM , which was comparable with that of latent TGF -  ( Figure 15B ) . Substitution with the RGEL sequence completely abrogated the ability of FNIII7 - 10 to bind to  v  8 integrin , underscoring the prerequisite role of the RGD motif in ligand recognition by  v  integrin . These results provide further support for a critical role of the Leu residue immediately after the RGD motif in high - affinity binding of  v  8 integrin to its ligands . 45 Figure 15 . Effect of leucine substitution for the serine residue immediately after the RGD motif in the 10th FNIII domain of fibronectin on its  v  8 integrin binding activity . ( A ) Amino acid sequences of wild - type and leucine - substituted mutants of FNIII7 - 10 . RGD motifs are underlined and the subsequent residues are shown in bold . ( B ) Titration curves of  v  8 integrin bound to wild - type FNIII7 - 10 ( blue circles ) , RGDL mutant ( green circles ) RGEL mutant ( asterisks ) , and latent TGF -  1 ( yellow triangles ) . The assays were performed as described in the Figure 12 legend . The results represent the means of three independent determinations .     Dong et al . ( 2014 ) reported the crystal structure of  v  6 integrin complexed with a latent TGF -  3 peptide containing the RGD and LXXL sequences , of which the latter forms an amphipathic  - helical structure and confers high - affinity binding of  v  6 integrin to latent TGF -  3 . To address whether the  - helical structure following the RGD motif may present the RGD motif in a conformation favorable for binding to  v  8 integrin , I produced latent TGF -  1 mutants , in which proline was substituted for Ala - 219 , Thr - 220 , and Ile - 221 , respectively , to disrupt the  - helical structure following the RGD motif ( Figure 16 ) . Although the A219P substitution diminished the ability of latent TGF -  1 to bind to  v  integrin , the T220P and I221P substitutions had no significant impact on integrin binding , suggesting that it is Leu - 218 but not the proposed  - helical structure following the RGD motif that defines the specific recognition of latent TGF -  1 by  v  integrin . A F N III ( 7 - 10 ) w il d - t y pe GRGD S P La t en t T G F - β 1 RRGD L A GRGE L P GRGD L P 1492 1497 F N III ( 7 - 10 ) R G D L F N III ( 7 - 10 ) R G E L O D 490 α v β 8 c o n c e n t r a t i on ( n M ) 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 100 1000 W il d - t y pe S 1527 P R G E T G F - β 1 F N III ( 7 - 10 ) R G E L F N III ( 7 - 10 ) R G D L La t en t T G F - β 1 B F N III ( 7 - 10 ) w il d - t y pe 46 Figure 16 . Effect of proline substitutions within the LATI sequence on  v  8 integrin binding activity of latent TGF -  1 . ( top ) Schematic of the RGD motif and the putative  - helical structure of LATI sequence of latent TGF -  1 . ( bottom ) Binding activities of proline substitution mutants of latent TGF -  1 towards  v  8 integrin . Wild - type , orange ; A219P substitution mutant ( A219P ) , green ; T220P substitution mutant ( T220P ) , cyan ; I221P substitution mutant ( I221P ) , dark red . The assays were performed as described in the Figure 11 legend . The results represent the means of three independent determinations .   VI .  8 I - like Domain Defines the Binding Specificity of  v  8 Integrin to Latent TGF -  1 —Given that the  v  8 and  v  3 integrins share the same  v subunit , the  8 subunit should be responsible for preferential recognition of latent TGF -  1 by the  v  8 integrin . To explore the region within the  8 subunit that defines the ligand binding specificity of  v  8 integrin , I focused on the  I - like and hybrid domains of the  8 subunit , because accumulating evidence suggests that these domains are directly involved in ligand recognition by  v  and  IIb  integrins ( Cheng et al . , 2013 ; Xiao et al . , 2004 ; Xiong et al . , 2002 ) . Since that the  v  3 integrin lacks the ability to bind to latent TGF -  1 , I produced a mutant of  v  integrin , designated  v  3 - 8BI / HYB , in which the  3 I - like and hybrid domains were swapped with those of the  8 subunit ( Figure 17 ) and assessed its binding activities towards latent TGF -  1 , fibronectin , vitronectin , and fibrillin - 1 . Although wild - type  v  integrin showed weak binding to latent TGF -  the  v  3 - 8BI / HYB mutant exhibited strong binding , recapitulating the high - affinity binding of  v  8 integrin to latent TGF -  1 ( Figure 18A ) . In contrast , the binding activities toward fibronectin , vitronectin , and fibrillin - 1 were abrogated in  v  3 - 8BI / HYB , demonstrating that ligand binding specificity of  v  8 integrin was conferred 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 6 Wild - type A219P T220P I221P D G R L A TI 219 220 221 O D 490 Latent TGF - β1 mutants 47  3 BI  8 BI  8 BI HYB HYB ITGB8 ITGB3 ITGB3 - 8BI ITGB3 - 8BI / HYB ITGB8 - 3BI  8 BI  3 BI N C PSI EGF - 1 ~ 4  TD    I - like ( BI ) Hybrid ( HYB ) EGF - 1 ~ 4  TD T h i gh C a l f 1 C a l f 2  - propeller Figure 17 . Schematic of the ectodomain of integrin ( left ) and representations of the  8 /  3 swap mutants ( right ) . The  8 - and  3 - derived domains are represented by yellow boxes and green boxes , respectively . The  8 hybrid domain is represented by red boxes . to  v  3 integrin by swapping the  I - like and hybrid domains . Saturation binding assays revealed that the binding affinity of the  v  3 - 8BI / HYB mutant towards latent TGF -  was similar to that of wild - type  v  integrin , yielding an apparent dissociation constant of 3 . 3 ± 0 . 5 nM ( Figure 18B and Table 7 ) . These results indicated that the ligand specificity and binding affinity of  v  integrin to latent TGF -  1 is defined by the  8 I - like and hybrid domains . To identify further the region responsible for latent TGF -  binding by  v  integrin , I constructed another swap mutant of  v  integrin ,  v  3 - 8  in which only the  I - like domain was swapped with the  8 I - like domain ( Figure 17 ) . The binding specificity towards latent TGF -  was retained by the  v  3 - 8BI mutant , although its binding activity was lower than for the  v  integrin and  v  3 - 8BI / HYB mutants ( Figure 18A ) . The apparent dissociation constant of the  v  3 - 8BI mutant for latent TGF -  1 was 18 ± 1 nM ( Table 7 ) , demonstrating that the binding affinity towards latent TGF -  1 was approximately 6 - fold lower than those of  v  integrin and  v  3 - 8BI / HYB . These results indicated that the  I - like domain primarily defines the ligand specificity of  v  integrin , while the  8 hybrid domain potentiates the binding affinity towards latent TGF -  1 . Consistent with these results ,  v  8 - 3BI , a mutant of  v  8 integrin whose  I - like domain was swapped with the  I - like domain , lost 48 Figure 18 . Ligand binding specificities of domain swap mutants of  v  8 and  v  3 integrins . ( A ) Binding activities of domain swap mutants of  v  8 and  v  3 integrins towards latent TGF -  1 , fibronectin , vitronectin , and fibrillin - 1 . The results represent the means of three independent determinations . ( B ) Titration curves of swap mutants bound to latent TGF -  1 . Increasing concentrations of  v  8 integrin ( yellow circles ) ,  v  3 integrin ( green squares ) ,  v  3 - 8BI / HYB ( black triangles ) ,  v  3 - 8BI ( red squares ) , and  v  8 - 3BI ( purple circles ) were allowed to bind to microtiter plates coated with latent TGF -  1 in the presence of 1 mM MnCl 2 . Bound integrins were quantified as described in the Experimental Procedures . Apparent dissociation constants of recombinant integrins are summarized in Table 7 . ( C ) Inhibition of  v  - 8BI binding to latent TGF -  1 by synthetic peptides . The assays were performed as described in the Figure 14 legend . Yellow circles , RGDL ( 9 - mer containing both RGD motif and Leu residue ) ; red circles , RGDA ( 9 - mer with the Leu → Ala substitution ) ; black triangles , RGEL ( 9 - mer with RGD → RGE substitution ) ; blue triangles , RGEA ( 9 - mer with RGDL → RGEA double substitution ) . Table 7 . Dissociation constants of  v  8 integrin and its swap mutants towards latent TGF -  1 . * Values represent the mean ± S . D . of three independent experiments . ND , not determined . The dissociation constant was not determined because of the partial saturation only being evaluated at the highest integrin concentration .  - chains Kd ( nM ) *  8 2 . 3 ± 0 . 2  3 ND  3 - 8BI / HYB 3 . 3 ± 0 . 5  3 - 8BI 18 ± 1  8 - 3BI ND A C 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 0 . 001 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 100 1000 RGDLRGDA RGEL RGEA Peptide concentration ( μM ) % o f c on t r o l 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 αVβ8 αVβ3 αVβ3 - 8BI / HYB αVβ3 - 8BI αVβ8 - 3BI TGFB1 FINC VTN FBN1 O D 490 Latent TGF -  1 Fibronectin Vitronectin Fibrillin - 1 αvβ8 αvβ3 αvβ3 - 8BI / HYB αvβ3 - 8BI αvβ8 - 3BI B 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 100 1000 αVβ8 αVβ3 αVβ3 - 8BI / HYB αVβ3 - 8BI αVβ8 - 3BI O D 490 Integrin concentration ( nM ) αvβ8 αvβ3 αvβ3 - 8BI αvβ8 - 3BI 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 - 1 10 - 2 10 - 3 αvβ3 - 8BI / HYB 49 the ability to bind to latent TGF -  but bound avidly to fibronectin , vitronectin , and fibrillin - 1 ( Figure 18A ) , recapitulating the ligand specificity of wild - type  v  integrin . The binding of  v  3 - 8BI to latent TGF -  1 was strongly inhibited by RGDL peptide with an IC 50 of ~ 0 . 07  M , while substitution of the Leu residue with Ala resulted in a ~ 60 - fold decrease in the inhibitory potency of the peptide ( Figure 18C and Table 8 ) . These results indicated that the  I - like domains primarily determine the binding specificity of  v - containing integrins and that the  8 I - like domain recognizes the Leu residue following the RGD motif and is necessary for the high - affinity binding of  v  8 integrin to latent TGF -  1 . Table 8 . Inhibition of ligand binding of swap mutants between  v  and  v  integrins by synthetic peptides     * Determined based on data from Figure 18 . The values represent the mean ± S . D . of three independent determinations .   VII . Role of the Disulfide - linked Loop in Latent TGF -  1 Recognition by  v Integrins —To identify the integrin  8 subunit region involved in latent TGF -  1 binding further , I focused on a small disulfide - linked loop consisting of 6 – 8 amino acid residues that resides on the top of the  I - like domain , designated as the “disulfide - linked loop ( DLL ) ” ( Figure 19 ) . The DLL was reported to determine the ligand - binding specificities of  v  1 and  v  3 integrins ( Takagi et al . , 1997b ) . To address the role of the  subunit DLL (  8 - DLL ) in latent TGF -  1 recognition by  v  8 integrin , I produced a swap mutant of  v  3 integrin termed  v  3 - 8DLL , in which the  3 - DLL was swapped with the corresponding residues of the integrin vs ligand Peptides IC50 (  M ) *  v  3 - 8BI vs latent TGF -  RGDL 0 . 07 ± 0 . 01 RGDA 3 . 9 ± 0 . 9 RGEL 32 ± 3 RGEA 63 ± 29 50 Figure 19 . Schematic of the head region of integrin ( left ) and amino acid sequences of the DLL regions of the  8 and  3 subunits and their swap mutants ( right ) . Swapped amino acids between the  8 and  3 subunits are indicated in the boxed area .  8 subunit . The  v  3 - 8DLL mutant exhibited binding to latent TGF -  1 while retaining the ability of  v  3 integrin to bind to fibronectin , vitronectin , and fibrillin - 1 ( Figure 20A ) . A saturation binding assay demonstrated that the binding affinity of  v  3 - 8DLL to latent TGF -  1 was significantly lower than that of wild - type  v  integrin , while the affinity towards fibronectin and vitronectin was only slightly affected ( Figure 20B and Table 9 ) . These results indicated that  - DLL confers latent TGF -  1 binding activity to  v  3 integrin without compromising the ability of  v  3 integrin to bind to its cognate ligands . I also produced another swap mutant ,  v  8 - 3DLL , in which the  8 - DLL was swapped with the  3 - DLL . Unexpectedly , the overall binding specificity of  v  8 integrin remained unaltered after DLL swapping ;  v  8 - 3DLL selectively bound to latent TGF -  1 without acquiring the ability to bind to fibronectin , vitronectin , and fibrillin - 1 ( Figure 20A ) . Saturation binding assays indicated only a small decrease in the binding affinity towards latent TGF -  1 with  v  8 - 3DLL ( Figure 20B ) . Consistent with these results , the binding affinities of  v  8 - 3DLL towards fibronectin and vitronectin were also unchanged after DLL swapping . These results indicated that DLL is not the primary determinant for ligand specificity of  v  8 integrin , although it conferred latent TGF -  1 binding activity to  v  3 integrin upon DLL swapping . It is puzzling , therefore , why  8 - DLL , which is dispensable for defining the ligand specificity of β I - like domain N C …IHNQ CSDYNLDC MPPH… …LENP CYDMKTTC LPMF… ITGB8 ITGB3 ITGB8 - 3DLL ITGB …IHNQ CYDMKTTC MPPH… …LENP CSDYNLDC LPMF… DLL ITGB3 - 8DLL    I - like ( BI ) Hybrid ( HYB )  - propeller Disulfide - linked loop ( DLL ) RGD - binding pocket HYB HYB 51 Figure 20 . Ligand - binding specificities of DLL swap mutants . ( A ) Binding activities of DLL swap mutants of  v  8 and  v  3 integrins towards latent TGF -  1 , fibronectin , vitronectin , and fibrillin - 1 . The results represent the means of three independent determinations . ( B ) Titration curves of DLL swap mutants bound to latent TGF -  1 ( left ) , fibronectin ( middle ) , and vitronectin ( right ) . Increasing concentrations of  v  8 integrin ( yellow circles ) ,  v  3 integrin ( green squares ) ,  v  3 - 8DLL ( red squares ) , and  v  8 - 3DLL ( purple circles ) were allowed to bind to microtiter plates coated with latent TGF -  1 , fibronectin , or vitronectin in the presence of 1 mM MnCl 2 . Bound integrins were quantified as described in the Experimental Procedures . Apparent dissociation constants of recombinant integrins are summarized in Table 9 . Table 9 . Dissociation constants of  v  8 integrin and its swap mutants towards latent TGF -  1 * Values represent the mean ± S . D . of three independent experiments . * * ND , not determined . The dissociation constant was not determined because of the partial saturation only being evaluated at the highest integrin concentration .  - chains Kd ( nM ) *  8 2 . 3 ± 0 . 2  3 ND * *  3 - 8DLL  ND * *  8 - 3DLL 4 . 7 ± 1 . 2 A 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 αvβ8 αvβ3 αvβ3 - 8DLL αvβ8 - 3DLL TGFB1FINCVTN FBN1 Latent TGF -  1 Fibronectin Vitronectin Fibrillin - 1 B O D 490 Latent TGF -  1 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 100 1000 Vitronectin 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 100 1000 αvβ8 αvβ3 αvβ3 - 8DLL αvβ8 - 3DLL O D 490 Integrin concentration ( nM ) Integrin concentration ( nM ) 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 100 1000 Fibronectin Integrin concentration ( nM ) 52  v  8 integrin , confers latent TGF -  1 binding activity to  v  3 integrin without compromising its ability to bind to fibronectin , vitronectin , and fibrillin - 1 . VIII .  8 - DLL Is Not Involved in the Specific Recognition of Leu - 218 Immediately after the RGD Motif —To address the apparent discrepancy of the role of  8 - DLL in defining the ligand specificity of  v  8 integrin , I examined whether  8 - DLL is involved in the recognition of Leu - 218 required for high - affinity binding of latent TGF -  1 to  v  8 integrin . I examined the inhibitory effects of the RGDL and RGDA peptides on the binding of latent TGF -  1 to  v  8 - 3DLL and  v  3 - 8DLL , both of which were capable of binding to latent TGF -  1 ( Figure 21 ) . The binding of  v  8 - 3DLL to latent TGF -  1 was strongly inhibited by the RGDL peptide with an IC 50 of 0 . 06  M , while substitution of the Leu residue with Ala resulted in a ~ 80 - fold decrease in the inhibitory potency of the peptide ( Figure 21A and Table 10 ) . This indicated that Leu - 218 is recognized by  v  8 - 3DLL to sustain its specific binding to latent TGF -  1 . In contrast , RGDL and RGDA peptides equally inhibited the binding of  v  3 - 8DLL to latent TGF -  1 with an IC 50 of 0 . 17  M and 0 . 13  M , respectively , irrespective of the presence or absence of a Leu residue immediately after the RGD motif ( Fig . 21B and Table 10 ) . These results demonstrated that  8 - DLL in  v  3 - 8DLL does not recognize the Leu residue immediately after the RGD motif , consistent with the conclusion that  8 - DLL is not involved in the Leu - 218 - dependent high - affinity binding of  v  8 integrin to latent TGF -  1 . The RGEL peptide did not inhibit the interaction of  v  8 - 3DLL and  v  3 - 8DLL mutants with latent TGF -  1 , highlighting the critical importance of the RGD motif in latent TGF -  1 recognition by  v  8 integrin . Taken together , these results indicate that  8 - DLL is dispensable for the specific binding of the  v  8 integrin to latent TGF -  1 , although the  8 I - like domain is necessary and sufficient for recognition of the Leu - 218 residue by  v  8 integrin . 53 Figure 21 . Inhibition of DLL swap mutant binding to latent TGF -  1 by synthetic peptides .  v  8 - 3DLL ( A ) and  v  3 - 8DLL ( B ) mutants ( 10 nM ) were incubated on microtiter plates coated with latent TGF -  1 ( 10 nM ) in the presence of increasing concentrations of synthetic peptides . To prevent precipitation of the peptides , the integrin binding assays were performed in the presence of 10 % DMSO . The amounts of bound integrins are shown as percentages relative to the control , in which integrins were incubated on latent TGF -  1 - coated plates in the presence of 10 % DMSO . The results represent the means of three independent determinations . Yellow circles , RGDL ( 9 - mer containing both RGD motif and Leu residue ) ; red circles , RGDA ( 9 - mer with the Leu → Ala substitution ) ; black triangles , RGEL ( 9 - mer with RGD → RGE substitution ) . Table 10 . Inhibition of ligand binding of DLL - swap mutants between  v  and  v  integrins by synthetic peptides     * Determined based on data from Figure 14 . The values represent the mean ± S . D . of three independent determinations . integrin vs ligand Peptides IC50 (  M ) *  v  8 - 3DLL vs latent TGF -  RGDL 0 . 06 ± 0 . 02 RGDA 4 . 7 ± 0 . 4 RGEL 120 ± 50  v  3 - 8DLL vs latent TGF -  RGDL 0 . 17 ± 0 . 03 RGDA 0 . 13 ± 0 . 03 RGEL 46 ± 7 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 0 . 001 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 100 1000 RGDL RGDA RGEL 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 0 . 001 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 100 1000 RGDL RGDA RGEL % o f c on t r o l Peptide concentration ( μM ) 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 - 1 10 - 2 % o f c on t r o l 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 - 1 10 - 2 Peptide concentration ( μM ) A B  v  8 - 3DLL vs Latent TGF -  1  v  3 - 8DLL vs Latent TGF -  1 10 4 10 4 54 Discussion This study demonstrated that  v  8 integrin binds strongly and preferentially to latent TGF -  1 with an affinity ~ 100 - fold higher than for other RGD proteins including fibronectin , vitronectin , and fibrillin - 1 . The high - affinity interaction of  v  8 integrin with latent TGF -  1 is determined by the Leu - 218 residue immediately following the RGD motif within the LAP of latent TGF -  1 . Substitution of the Leu - 218 residue with Ala resulted in a dramatic reduction of the latent TGF -  1 binding affinity of  v  8 integrin , even though the RGD motif remained unperturbed . Accumulating evidence indicates that the binding affinities of RGD - containing ligands towards integrins are potentiated by sequences residing outside the RGD motif . The occurrence of such an auxiliary binding sequence was originally proposed in the central cell - binding domain of fibronectin , where a set of residues within the 9th type III repeat ( designated ‘synergy site’ ) potentiates the  5  1 integrin - mediated cell - adhesive activity of the RGD motif within the 10th type III repeat ( Aota et al . , 1994 ) , although electron microscopic analyses failed to confirm a direct interaction of the 9th type III module harboring the synergy site with  5  1 integrin ( Takagi et al . , 2003 ) . Nephronectin also contains an auxiliary sequence LFEIFEIER required for the high - affinity binding of nephronectin to  8  1 integrin , which functions in concert with an RGD motif ( Sato et al . , 2009 ) . DiCara et al . ( 2007 ) reported that the interaction of latent TGF -  1 with  v  6 integrin is determined by an LXXI sequence immediately C - terminal to the RGD motif , in which two hydrophobic residues Leu - 218 and Ile - 221 form an  - helical structure and are required for the high - affinity binding of latent TGF -  1 to  v  6 integrin . Our results show that Leu - 218 is critically required for latent TGF -  1 recognition by  v  8 integrin , but Ile - 221 is dispensable for recognition , because the substitution of Ile - 221 with Ala did not affect the high - affinity binding of latent TGF -  1 to  v  8 integrin . In support of this conclusion , a 9 - mer peptide containing an RGDL sequence 55 strongly inhibited the interaction of latent TGF -  1 with  v  8 integrin while a 9 - mer peptide with an RGDA sequence had a ~ 60 - fold lower inhibitory effect on the interaction . The critical role of Leu - 218 in latent TGF -  1 recognition by  v  8 integrin was further corroborated by site - directed mutagenesis of fibronectin , in which the high - affinity binding toward  v  8 integrin was conferred on fibronectin by substitution of its RGDS motif with an RGDL sequence . The Leu - 218 residue immediately following the RGD motif is conserved in latent TGF -  1 among mammals , underscoring the importance of Leu - 218 as an auxiliary recognition residue defining the high - affinity interaction of latent TGF -  1 with  v  8 integrin . I . Possible Mechanisms for the Recognition of the Lue - 218 Residue by the Integrin  8 I - like Domain The high - affinity binding  of  v  8 integrin with latent TGF -  was conferred upon  v  3 integrin ( which normally exhibits marginal latent TGF -  binding ) by swapping the I - like domain of the  3 subunit with that of the  8 subunit . This demonstrated the  I - like domain primarily defines the high - affinity interaction of  v  8 integrin with latent TGF -  1 . Dong et al . ( 2014 ) reported the crystal structure of  v  6  integrin complexed with an 11 - mer peptide HGRGDLGRLKK derived from a latent TGF -  3 peptide . They demonstrated that the  6 I - like domain interacted with the LGRLK sequence immediately following the RGD motif , which forms an amphipathic  - helix and confers high - affinity binding of  v  6 integrin to latent TGF -  3 . The binding to latent TGF -  1 by  v  3 - 8BI , in which the I - like domain of  3 subunit was swapped with the  8 subunit , was strongly inhibited by the RGDL peptide but less so by the RGDA peptide , indicating the  I - like domain of the  subunit might harbor the region ( s ) responsible for Leu - 218 recognition . To explore this possibility further , I predicted the structures of the  I - like domain of  v  8 and  v  3 integrins complexed with an RGDL - containing peptide using SWISS - MODEL with the crystal structure of  v  6 integrin 56 Figure 22 . Predicted structures of the head region of  v  8 integrin with an 11 - mer peptide containing RGD motif and Leu residue . ( A ) Surface representation of  I - like domain of  v  8 integrin ( left ) and  v  3 integrin ( right ) with the RGDL - containing 11 - mer peptide derived from latent TGF -  3 were created using the crystal structure of  v  6 integrin with this peptide ( PDB ID ; 4UM9 ) as the template . The models were predicted with the SWISS - MODEL ( http : / / swissmodel . expasy . org / ) and fine - tuned by energy minimization with UCSF Chimera ( http : / / www . cgl . ucsf . edu / chimera / ) .  I - like domains of  8 and  3 are shown in pink and cyan , respectively . 11 - mer peptides are colored in magenta , and the Leu residue immediately following the RGD motif is shown with sidechain in yellow . ( B ) Close - up views of the predicted structures of  I - like domain of  v  8 integrin ( left ) and  v  3 integrin ( right ) with the 11 - mer peptide . The  8 I - like domain is predicted to assume a structure of open conformation that allows the side chain of the Leu residue to fit into the  8 I - like domain , while the  3 I - like domain is predicted to assume a closed structure , failing to accommodate the side chain of the Leu residue . ( C ) Close - up views of the predicted interfaces between the 11 - mer peptide and  I - like domains of  8 ( left ) and  8 - 3DLL ( right ) subunits , focusing on the side chain of the Leu residue following the RGD motif . Hydrophobic residues located around the Leu residue , i . e . , Ala - 157 , Cys - 211 , and Cys - 218 , are shown in blue . The  3 - DLL is shown in cyan . 57 complexed with the latent TGF -  peptide ( Dong et al . , 2014 ) and that of  v  3 integrin ( Dong et al . , 2012 ) as templates ( Figure 22A and B ) . The  8 I - like domain was predicted to assume a structure of open conformation that allows the sidechain of the Leu residue to fit into the  8 I - like domain , thus enabling the high - affinity binding of latent TGF -  1 with  v  8 integrin . In contrast , the  3 I - like domain was predicted to assume a closed structure , failing to accommodate the chain of the Leu residue , and therefore resulting in a low affinity binding to latent TGF -  1 . The predicted structure of  v  8 integrin complexed with the 11 - mer peptide also indicates that the side of chain of the Leu residue is surrounded by hydrophobic residues , i . e . , Ala - 157 , Cys - 211 , and Cys - 218 of the  subunit , suggesting that the high - affinity binding of latent TGF -  1 to  v  8 integrin is achieved by hydrophobic interaction of Leu - 218 with the  8 subunit ( Figure 22C ) . Consistent with this prediction , Dong et al . ( 2014 ) demonstrated that the Leu residue immediately following RGD motif of latent TGF -  3 interacts with hydrophobic residues of  6 I - like domain , thereby conferring high - affinity binding to  v  6 integrin . The DLL of  I - like domain has been shown to modulate the ligand specificity of  v - containing integrins ( Takagi et al . , 1997b ) . Although cells expressing  v  1 integrin did not bind to the substrate coated with von Willebrand factor and fibrinogen , which are high - affinity ligands for  v  3 integrin , cells expressing the mutant  v  1 integrin , in which  1 - DLL was swapped with  3 - DLL , bound to these ligands , demonstrating that the ligand - binding specificity of  v  3 integrin can be conferred upon  v  1 integrin by swapping the DLL . In contrast to this report , our results showed that  3 - DLL had little involvement in the recognition of fibronectin , vitronectin , and fibrillin - 1 by  v  3 integrin , because ligand - binding specificities of  v  3 integrin towards these proteins remained unchanged after DLL swapping . Furthermore , the ability of  v  8 integrin to bind to latent TGF -  1 was retained after swapping  8 - DLL with  3 - DLL , indicating that  8 - DLL is not the primary determinant of the specific binding of  v  8 integrin to latent TGF -  1 . Because Leu - 218 is still recognized by  v  8 - 3DLL , 58 which retains specific binding to latent TGF -  1 , it seems likely that the Leu - 218 - binding pocket is maintained in the  8 I - like domain even after replacement of  8 - DLL with  3 - DLL . Consistent with this possibility , the predicted structure of  v  8 - 3DLL integrin complexed with the 11 - mer peptide containing RGDL sequence shows that the hydrophobic pocket comprising Ala - 157 , Cys - 211 , and Cys - 218 remains undisturbed after DLL swapping ( Figure 22C ) . However , why  8 - DLL confers latent TGF -  1 - binding activity to  v  3 integrin , despite  8 - DLL being dispensable for the recognition of latent TGF -  1 by  v  8 integrin , remains to be elucidated . The replacement of  3 - DLL with  8 - DLL might alter the conformation of the  3 I - like domain so that the resulting  I - like domain adopts a structure reminiscent to the open conformation that is competent for latent TGF -  1 binding , whereas the normal  3 I - like domain assumes a closely packed structure that constrains accommodation of Leu - 218 . II . Importance of the  Hybrid Domain in the Affinity Regulation of Ligand Binding Several lines of evidence indicate that the  hybrid domain acts as a mechanical device that regulates the affinity state of integrins by rearrangement at the interface between the  - like domain and the  - propeller domain of the  subunit , which together form the ligand binding site of integrins . Thus , binding of  5  1 integrin to its ligand causes a dramatic change in the position of the  hybrid domain relative to the  - like domain to induce an open conformation of the integrin headpiece ( Takagi et al . , 2003 ) . Xiao et al . ( 2004 ) demonstrated that the hybrid domain of the  3 subunit extends laterally away from the ligand binding site to stabilize the open headpiece conformation . Consistent with the role of the  hybrid domain in the affinity state modulation of integrins , the limiting swing - out of the  3 hybrid domain prevents  IIb  3 integrin to bind to its high - affinity ligand fibrinogen , indicating that the swing - out of the  3 hybrid domain is required for activation of the  IIb  3 integrin ( Cheng et al . , 2013 ) . Our results showed that  v  -  BI / HYB and  v  integrin had a similar binding affinity to latent TGF -  while  v  3 - 8BI had a lower latent TGF -  binding affinity . These 59 results are consistent with previous studies and support the consensus that the  hybrid domain regulates , in collaboration with the  I - like domain , the conformational change of the integrin headpiece from a low - to high - affinity state for ligand binding . III . Involvement of the  Subunit in Determination of the Ligand Specificity of Integrins It has been widely accepted that the ligand specificity of integrins is primarily determined by their  subunit ( Barczyk et al . , 2010a ) .  v - containing integrins are considered to be promiscuous because they exhibit broad binding specificity towards a wide variety of RGD proteins . For example ,  v  3 integrin has been shown to bind to a variety of ECM ligands containing the RGD motif , including EDIL3 , prothrombin , fibrillin - 1 , fibrillin - 2 , fibronectin , bone sialoprotein ( IBSP ) , lactadherin ( MFGE8 ) , nephronectin , osteopontin , TGF -  1 , thrombonspondin - 1 , thrombospondin - 2 , and vitronectin ( Andersen et al . , 2000 ; Brandenberger et al . , 2001 ; Hidai et al . , 1998 ; Jovanovic et al . , 2008 ; Lawler et al . , 1988 ; Schurpf et al . , 2012 ; Sun et al . , 1992 ; Yokosaki et al . , 2005 ) . Our Results showed that  v  3 ,  v  5 and  v  6 integrins have similar ligand specificities , thus strongly binding to EDIL3 , fibrillin - 1 , fibrillin - 2 , fibronectin and vitronectin , but they differ in their binding activities to bone sialoprotein , lactadherin , osteopontin and TGF -  1 depending on their  subunit . No significant binding activities were observed with these  v - containing integrins toward prothrombin , thrombospondin - 1 and thrombospondin - 2 . In contrast to  v  3 ,  v  5 , and  v  6 integrins ,  v  8 integrin has restricted ligand specificity toward 25 RGD proteins ; it strongly bound to  TGF -  1 , but moderately or only marginally toward other RGD proteins . These results indicate that although  v  8 and other  v - containing integrins share the same integrin  v subunit , they displayed distinct binding specificities toward a broad range of RGD proteins , demonstrating that integrin  subunits modulate the ligand binding specificity of  v integrins by enhancing or attenuating their binding affinities toward individual ligands . The binding affinities of  6 - containing integrins toward a panel of laminin isoforms also differ depending on the type of 60  subunit ( Nishiuchi et al . , 2006 ) , confirming the auxiliary role of the integrin  subunits in defining the ligand specificity . IV . Distinctive Contribution of the Leu - 218 Residue in Integrin Binding between  v  6 and  v  8 Integrins Previous studies indicated that TGF -  1 is one of the physiological ligands for  v - containing integrins , of which  v  6 and  v  8 integrins have been shown to be required for the activation of TGF -  1 . In this study , comprehensive binding assays of  v  6 and  v  8 integrins to 25 RGD proteins demonstrated that both integrins strongly bound to latent TGF -  1 . However , their binding activities toward other RGD proteins were markedly different , indicating that  v  6 and  v  8 integrins may recognize their ligands with distinct mechanisms . The mechanisms by which  v  6 integrin interacts with TGF -  1 have been investigated ; NMR analysis revealed that the LXXL / I sequence immediately C - terminal to the RGD motif in TGF -  1 is required for the high affinity binding to  v  6 integrin ( DiCara et al . , 2007 ) . The crystal structure of the  v  6 integrin - TGF -  3 peptide complex suggests that two hydrophobic residues within the LGRLK sequence immediately following the RGD motif form an amphipathic  - helix and interact with the  6 I - like domain ( Dong et al . , 2014 ) . Consistent with these findings , our results showed that Leu - 218 plays a critical role in the latent TGF -  1 recognition by  v  8 integrin . However , neither Ile - 221 residue nor  - helical structure formed by the LXXI sequence is necessary for the latent TGF -  1 recognition by  v  8 integrin , because the substitution of Ile - 221 with Pro did not compromise the ability of latent TGF -  1 to bind to  v  8 integrin . In contrast , the Pro - substitution mutant of Ala - 219 showed a significant decrease in the ability to bind to  v  8 integrin , suggesting the possibilities that the Ala - 219 directly interacts with the  8 I - like domain or presents the Leu residue in a favorable conformation to ensure the high - affinity binding of latent TGF -  1 to  v  8 integrin . There is preliminary data showing that the substitution of Leu - 218 of latent TGF -  1 with Ala ( L218A ) 61 causes a partial decrease in the binding affinity to  v  6 integrin , compared with wild - type latent TGF -  1 ( Figure 23 ) . The results suggest that Leu - 218 is also involved in high - affinity binding of latent TGF -  1 to  v  6 integrin , but its contribution to high - affinity binding is less pronounced with  v  6 integrin , compared with  v  8 integrin . Figure 23 . Effect of alanine substitutions within the LATI sequence on  v  6 integrin - binding to latent TGF -  1 . Titration curves of  v  6 integrin bound to full - length TGF -  1 ( orange circles ) , L218A substitution mutant ( red squares ) , I221A substitution mutant ( green triangles ) , and RGD → RGE mutant ( asterisks ) . The assays were performed as described in the legend for Figure 13 . V . Problems with in silico Screening Because  v - containing integrins bind to a variety of extracellular proteins through their RGD motifs and are highly conserved among vertebrates , putative ligands for  v  8 integrin were extracted in silico from the protein sequences compiled in UniProtKB database , based on the following three criteria : 1 ) possession of at least one RGD sequence , 2 ) secretion to the extracellular space , and 3 ) conservation of RGD motifs among vertebrates . The resulting candidate proteins included vitronectin , an original ligand for  v integrins , fibronectin , fibrillin - 1 , EDIL3 , lactadherin , nephronectin , osteopontin , TGF -  1 , thrombospondin - 1 and thrombospondin - 2 , and 19 other RGD - containing proteins . It should be noted , however , that some known RGD - containing integrin ligands , e . g . , TGF -  3 , tenascin , von Willebrand factor , and fibrinogen were not included in the final list because their RGD motifs are not conserved among vertebrates . Furthermore , our in silico screening excluded ligands that possessed O D 490 αvβ6 concentration ( nM ) 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 0 . 01 0 . 1 1 10 100 Wild - type L218A I221A RGE 62 integrin recognition sequences other than the conventional RGD motif .  IIb  3 integrin binds to the fibrinogen  chain through its KQAGDV sequence and  4  1 integrin binds to the fibronectin type III connecting segment - 1 through its LDV sequence ( Ruoslahti , 1996 ) . I also excluded cell surface transmembrane proteins from the candidates , because most integrin ligands are secreted to the extracellular space . Therefore , I cannot rule out the possibility that unknown transmembrane proteins function as physiological ligands for  v  8 integrin . There is evidence that transmembrane proteins such as VCAM - 1 , MAdCAM - 1 , ICAM , and E - cadherin bind to integrins and facilitate a variety of cell - cell interactions in vivo ( Humphries et al . , 2006 ) . A screening protocol modified to include RGD - containing transmembrane proteins should provide an extended repertoire of candidates for integrin ligands , thereby increasing the chance of identifying novel ligands for  v  8 and other  v - containing integrins . VI . Possible Roles of Leu - 218 in the Interaction of Latent TGF -  with  v  8 Integrin It is still unclear why  v  8 integrin requires strictly the Leu - 218 residue for selective recognition of latent TGF -  1 . Here , I discuss the possible mechanisms underlying the enhancement of the affinities by Leu - 218 , in concert with the RGD sequence . Our study showed that Leu - 218 immediately after the RGD motif is recognized by the integrin  8 I - like domain . Thus , one possibility is that Leu - 218 binds to the hydrophobic residues in the  I - like domain , resulting in a decrease of the dissociation rate , thereby stabilizing the final complex between the integrin and latent TGF  - 1 . This possibility is in agreement with the structure of  v  6 integrin complexed with the latent TGF -  1 , which was determined by X - ray crystallography ( Dong et al . , 2017 ) . The structure of the complex demonstrated that the two hydrophobic residues , Leu - 218 and Ile - 221 , bind in a hydrophobic pocket formed by the integrin  6 subunit to increase the binding affinity to  v  6 integrin , consistent with our model that the side chain of the Leu - 218 residue fits in the hydrophobic pocket of the  I - like domain . Another possibility is that Leu - 218 regulates the conformation of the RGD motif to 63 stabilize the initial encounter of TGF -  1 with  v  8 integrin . This possibility was suggested by the experiments showing that the mutation within the synergy site of fibronectin primarily affects the association rate in the binding to  5  1 integrin , but the dissociation rate is slightly affected ( Takagi et al . , 2003 ) . However , the crystal structure of a dimer complex of latent TGF -  1 shows that the Leu - 218 immediately following the RGD motif is not surface exposed ( Shi et al . , 2011 ) , making this possibility less likely . Therefore , the former model , i . e . , Leu - 218 stabilizes the final complex between  v  8 integrin and latent TGF -  1 through the interaction with the hydrophobic residues in the  8 subunit , seems more reasonable than the latter model . Further studies , particularly structural analyses of the  v  8 integrin - latent TGF -  1 complex , are required to better understand how the Leu - 218 residue of latent TGF -  1 enhances the binding affinity toward  v  8 integrin . VIII . Roles of  v  8 Integrin in Activation of Latent TGF -  1 There is compelling evidence that  v  8 integrin plays a dominant role in activating latent TGF -  1 in the developing brain . Mice deficient in the expression of the integrin  8 subunit exhibit variable embryonic lethality because of vasculogenesis failure and severe brain hemorrhage ( Zhu et al . , 2002 ) , as is the case with mice deficient for integrin  v subunit expression ( Bader et al . , 1998 ) . Notably , when mice with a TGF -  1 gene knock - in mutation that causes an RGE substitution of the RGD motif are crossed with TGF -  3 deficient mice , they die as a result of severe brain hemorrhage ( Mu et al . , 2008 ) , recapitulating the phenotype of integrin  8 - deficent mice . Given the similarities in phenotypes between  v  8 integrin - deficient mice and TGF -  1 ( RGE ) / TGF -  3 double mutant mice ,  v  8 integrin has been proposed to act as an “angiogenic switch” in the brain through TGF -  activation ( Arnold et al . , 2014 ; Cambier et al . , 2005 ) . Consistent with the role of  v  8 integrin in TGF -  1 activation , Yamazaki et al . ( 2011 ) reported that  8 integrin was specifically expressed by Schwann cells and involved in latent TGF -  activation in the bone marrow , thereby regulating 64 hematopoietic stem cell hibernation . Furthermore , the activation of latent TGF -  1 by  v  8 integrin may occur via mechanisms distinct from those for TGF -  1 activation by  v  6 integrin , which requires the  6 subunit cytoplasmic domain and a functional actin cytoskeleton . However , TGF -  activation by  v  8 integrin is considered independent of the  8 subunit cytoplasmic domain and actin cytoskeleton ( Mu et al . , 2002 ; Munger et al . , 1999 ) . Indeed , the amino acid sequence of the cytoplasmic domain of integrin  8 subunit differs significantly from those of other  subunits ( Moyle et al . , 1991 ) , making it unlikely that the  cytoplasmic domain interacts with the actin cytoskeleton and generates traction force for cell spreading and migration as well as the conformational activation of latent TGF -  s ( Cambier et al . , 2000 ) . Given its restricted binding specificity and prominent expression in astrocytes surrounding cerebral blood vessels ( Cambier et al . , 2005 ) ,  v  8 integrin may function as an anchor specialized for latent TGF -  1 , thereby ensuring the localized action of active - TGF -  1 at the neurovascular unit where astrocytes crosstalk with endothelial cells to facilitate brain vascular development . 65 Conclusion I have shown that the  v  8 integrin binds strongly and preferentially to latent TGF -  1 . Its high - affinity binding is primarily defined by the Leu - 218 residue located immediately after the RGD motif within the LAP of latent TGF -  1 . I have provided evidence that the Leu residue confers the  v  8 integrin binding ability to fibronectin , highlighting the auxiliary role of Leu - 218 in defining the ligand specificity to latent TGF -  1 by  v  8 integrin . Given that the side chain of the Leu residue fits into the  8 I - like domain of integrin  8 subunit , but not of integrin  3 subunit , upon prediction of the structures of  v  8 and  v  3 integrins complexed with an RGDL peptide , I propose a model for the Leu - dependent recognition of latent - TGF -  1 by  v integrins , wherein the  v  8 integrin recognizes the Leu residue immediately after the RGD motif through hydrophobic interactions , although it remains to be determined how the  I - like domain recognizes the Leu - 218 residue at the atomic level . Further studies including the X - ray crystallography of the  v  8 integrin complexed with a latent TGF -  1 are awaited to better understand how the Leu - 218 residue is involved in the interaction of  v  8 integrin with latent TGF -  1 . In summary , the comprehensive study on the binding activities of  v  8 integrin and its mutant proteins towards a wide range of RGD proteins has elucidated molecular mechanisms involved in the specific recognition of latent TGF -  1 by  v  8 integrin and established the foundation for understanding physiological and pathological roles of  v  8 integrin . 66 References Andersen , M . H . , Graversen , H . , Fedosov , S . N . , Petersen , T . E . , and Rasmussen , J . T . ( 2000 ) . Functional analyses of two cellular binding domains of bovine lactadherin . Biochemistry 39 , 6200 - 6206 . Annes , J . P . , Munger , J . S . , and Rifkin , D . B . ( 2003 ) . Making sense of latent TGF  activation . J Cell Sci 116 , 217 - 224 . Annes , J . P . , Rifkin , D . B . , and Munger , J . S . ( 2002 ) . The integrin  V  6 binds and activates latent TGF  3 . FEBS Lett 511 , 65 - 68 . Aota , S . , Nomizu , M . , and Yamada , K . M . ( 1994 ) . The short amino acid sequence Pro - His - Ser - Arg - Asn in human fibronectin enhances cell - adhesive function . J Biol Chem 269 , 24756 - 24761 . Apweiler , R . , Bairoch , A . , Wu , C . H . , Barker , W . C . , Boeckmann , B . , Ferro , S . , Gasteiger , E . , Huang , H . , Lopez , R . , Magrane , M . , et al . ( 2004 ) . UniProt : the Universal Protein knowledgebase . Nucleic Acids Res 32 , D115 - 119 . Araya , J . , Cambier , S . , Morris , A . , Finkbeiner , W . , and Nishimura , S . L . ( 2006 ) . Integrin - mediated transforming growth factor -  activation regulates homeostasis of the pulmonary epithelial - mesenchymal trophic unit . Am J Pathol 169 , 405 - 415 . Arnaout , M . A . , Goodman , S . L . , and Xiong , J . P . ( 2007 ) . Structure and mechanics of integrin - based cell adhesion . Curr Opin Cell Biol 19 , 495 - 507 . Arnold , T . D . , Niaudet , C . , Pang , M . F . , Siegenthaler , J . , Gaengel , K . , Jung , B . , Ferrero , G . M . , Mukouyama , Y . S . , Fuxe , J . , Akhurst , R . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Excessive vascular sprouting underlies cerebral hemorrhage in mice lacking  V  8 - TGF  signaling in the brain . Development 141 , 4489 - 4499 . Bader , B . L . , Rayburn , H . , Crowley , D . , and Hynes , R . O . ( 1998 ) . Extensive vasculogenesis , angiogenesis , and organogenesis precede lethality in mice lacking all  v integrins . Cell 95 , 507 - 519 . Barczyk , M . , Carracedo , S . , and Gullberg , D . ( 2010a ) . Integrins . Cell Tissue Res 339 , 269 - 280 . Beglova , N . , Blacklow , S . C . , Takagi , J . , and Springer , T . A . ( 2002 ) . Cysteine - rich module structure reveals a fulcrum for integrin rearrangement upon activation . Nat Struct Biol 9 , 282 - 287 . Brandenberger , R . , Schmidt , A . , Linton , J . , Wang , D . , Backus , C . , Denda , S . , Muller , U . , and Reichardt , L . F . ( 2001 ) . Identification and characterization of a novel extracellular matrix protein nephronectin that is associated with integrin  8  1 in the embryonic kidney . J Cell Biol 154 , 447 - 458 . Cambier , S . , Gline , S . , Mu , D . , Collins , R . , Araya , J . , Dolganov , G . , Einheber , S . , Boudreau , N . , and Nishimura , S . L . ( 2005 ) . Integrin  v  8 - mediated activation of transforming growth factor -  by perivascular astrocytes : an 67 angiogenic control switch . Am J Pathol 166 , 1883 - 1894 . Cambier , S . , Mu , D . Z . , O ' Connell , D . , Boylen , K . , Travis , W . , Liu , W . H . , Broaddus , V . C . , and Nishimura , S . L . ( 2000 ) . A role for the integrin  v  8 in the negative regulation of epithelial cell growth . Cancer Res 60 , 7084 - 7093 . Chen , C . , Li , Z . , Huang , H . , Suzek , B . E . , and Wu , C . H . ( 2013 ) . A fast Peptide Match service for UniProt Knowledgebase . Bioinformatics 29 , 2808 - 2809 . Chen , Y . , Dabovic , B . , Annes , J . P . , and Rifkin , D . B . ( 2002 ) . Latent TGF -  binding protein - 3 ( LTBP - 3 ) requires binding to TGF -  for secretion . FEBS Lett 517 , 277 - 280 . Cheng , M . , Li , J . , Negri , A . , and Coller , B . S . ( 2013 ) . Swing - out of the  3 hybrid domain is required for  IIb  3 priming and normal cytoskeletal reorganization , but not adhesion to immobilized fibrinogen . PLoS One 8 , e81609 . Clements , J . M . , Newham , P . , Shepherd , M . , Gilbert , R . , Dudgeon , T . J . , Needham , L . A . , Edwards , R . M . , Berry , L . , Brass , A . , and Humphries , M . J . ( 1994 ) . Identification of a key integrin - binding sequence in VCAM - 1 homologous to the LDV active site in fibronectin . J Cell Sci 107 ( Pt 8 ) , 2127 - 2135 . Crawford , S . E . , Stellmach , V . , Murphy - Ullrich , J . E . , Ribeiro , S . M . , Lawler , J . , Hynes , R . O . , Boivin , G . P . , and Bouck , N . ( 1998 ) . Thrombospondin - 1 is a major activator of TGF -  1 in vivo . Cell 93 , 1159 - 1170 . DiCara , D . , Rapisarda , C . , Sutcliffe , J . L . , Violette , S . M . , Weinreb , P . H . , Hart , I . R . , Howard , M . J . , and Marshall , J . F . ( 2007 ) . Structure - function analysis of Arg - Gly - Asp helix motifs in  v  6 integrin ligands . J Biol Chem 282 , 9657 - 9665 . Dong , X . , Hudson , N . E . , Lu , C . , and Springer , T . A . ( 2014 ) . Structural determinants of integrin  - subunit specificity for latent TGF -  . Nat Struct Mol Biol 21 , 1091 - 1096 . Dong , X . , Mi , L . Z . , Zhu , J . , Wang , W . , Hu , P . , Luo , B . H . , and Springer , T . A . ( 2012 ) .  V  integrin crystal structures and their functional implications . Biochemistry 51 , 8814 - 8828 . Dong , X . , Zhao , B . , Iacob , R . E . , Zhu , J . , Koksal , A . C . , Lu , C . , Engen , J . R . , and Springer , T . A . ( 2017 ) . Force interacts with macromolecular structure in activation of TGF -  . Nature 542 , 55 - 59 . Dubois , C . M . , Laprise , M . H . , Blanchette , F . , Gentry , L . E . , and Leduc , R . ( 1995 ) . Processing of transforming growth factor  1 precursor by human furin convertase . J Biol Chem 270 , 10618 - 10624 . Emsley , J . , Knight , C . G . , Farndale , R . W . , Barnes , M . J . , and Liddington , R . C . ( 2000 ) . Structural basis of collagen recognition by integrin  2  1 . Cell 101 , 47 - 56 . Gray , A . M . , and Mason , A . J . ( 1990 ) . Requirement for activin A and transforming growth factor -  1 pro - regions in homodimer assembly . Science 247 , 1328 - 1330 . 68 Heino , J . , Massague , J . ( 1989 ) . Transforming growth factor -  switches the pattern of integrins expressed in MG - 63 human osteosarcoma cells and causes a selective loss of cell adhesion to laminin . J Biol Chem 264 , 21806 - 21811 . Heino , J . , Ignotz , R . A . , Hemler , M . E . , Crouse , C . , Massague , J . ( 1989 ) . Regulation of cell adhesion receptors by transforming growth factor -  . Concomintant regulation of integrins that share a common  1 ssubunit . J Biol Chem 264 , 380 - 388 . Hidai , C . , Zupancic , T . , Penta , K . , Mikhail , A . , Kawana , M . , Quertermous , E . E . , Aoka , Y . , Fukagawa , M . , Matsui , Y . , Platika , D . , et al . ( 1998 ) . Cloning and characterization of developmental endothelial locus - 1 : an embryonic endothelial cell protein that binds the  v  3 integrin receptor . Genes Dev 12 , 21 - 33 . Hirokawa , T . , Boon - Chieng , S . , and Mitaku , S . ( 1998 ) . SOSUI : classification and secondary structure prediction system for membrane proteins . Bioinformatics 14 , 378 - 379 . Huang , X . Z . , Wu , J . F . , Cass , D . , Erle , D . J . , Corry , D . , Young , S . G . , Farese , R . V . , Jr . , and Sheppard , D . ( 1996 ) . Inactivation of the integrin  6 subunit gene reveals a role of epithelial integrins in regulating inflammation in the lung and skin . J Cell Biol 133 , 921 - 928 . Hubbard , T . , Barker , D . , Birney , E . , Cameron , G . , Chen , Y . , Clark , L . , Cox , T . , Cuff , J . , Curwen , V . , Down , T . , et al . ( 2002 ) . The Ensembl genome database project . Nucleic Acids Res 30 , 38 - 41 . Humphries , J . D . , Byron , A . , and Humphries , M . J . ( 2006 ) . Integrin ligands at a glance . J Cell Sci 119 , 3901 - 3903 . Hutchings , H . , Ortega , N . , and Plouet , J . ( 2003 ) . Extracellular matrix - bound vascular endothelial growth factor promotes endothelial cell adhesion , migration , and survival through integrin ligation . FASEB J 17 , 1520 - 1522 . Huveneers , S . , and Danen , E . H . ( 2009 ) . Adhesion signaling - crosstalk between integrins , Src and Rho . J Cell Sci 122 , 1059 - 1069 . Hynes , R . O . ( 2002 ) . Integrins : bidirectional , allosteric signaling machines . Cell 110 , 673 - 687 . Ido , H . , Harada , K . , Futaki , S . , Hayashi , Y . , Nishiuchi , R . , Natsuka , Y . , Li , S . , Wada , Y . , Combs , A . C . , Ervasti , J . M . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Molecular dissection of the  - dystroglycan - and integrin - binding sites within the globular domain of human laminin - 10 . J Biol Chem 279 , 10946 - 10954 . Ido , H . , Nakamura , A . , Kobayashi , R . , Ito , S . , Li , S . , Futaki , S . , and Sekiguchi , K . ( 2007 ) . The requirement of the glutamic acid residue at the third position from the carboxyl termini of the laminin  chains in integrin binding by laminins . J Biol Chem 282 , 11144 - 11154 . Ignotz , R . A . , Heino , J . , Massague , J . ( 1989 ) . Regulation of cell adhesion receptors by transforming growth factor -  . Regulation of vitronection receptor and LFA - 1 . J Biol Chem 264 , 389 - 392 . 69 Ivaska , J . , and Heino , J . ( 2010 ) . Interplay between cell adhesion and growth factor receptors : from the plasma membrane to the endosomes . Cell Tissue Res 339 , 111 - 120 . Jovanovic , J . , Iqbal , S . , Jensen , S . , Mardon , H . , and Handford , P . ( 2008 ) . Fibrillin - integrin interactions in health and disease . Biochem Soc Trans 36 , 257 - 262 . Kiyozumi , D . , Osada , A . , Sugimoto , N . , Weber , C . N . , Ono , Y . , Imai , T . , Okada , A . , and Sekiguchi , K . ( 2005 ) . Identification of a novel cell - adhesive protein spatiotemporally expressed in the basement membrane of mouse developing hair follicle . Exp Cell Res 306 , 9 - 23 . Komoriya , A . , Green , L . J . , Mervic , M . , Yamada , S . S . , Yamada , K . M . , and Humphries , M . J . ( 1991 ) . The minimal essential sequence for a major cell type - specific adhesion site ( CS1 ) within the alternatively spliced type III connecting segment domain of fibronectin is leucine - aspartic acid - valine . J Biol Chem 266 , 15075 - 15079 . Laemmli , U . K . ( 1970 ) . Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4 . Nature 227 , 680 - 685 . Lawler , J . , Weinstein , R . , and Hynes , R . O . ( 1988 ) . Cell attachment to thrombospondin : the role of ARG - GLY - ASP , calcium , and integrin receptors . J Cell Biol 107 , 2351 - 2361 . Liu , J . , Zeng , L . , Kennedy , R . M . , Gruenig , N . M . , and Childs , S . J . ( 2012 ) .  Pix plays a dual role in cerebral vascular stability and angiogenesis , and interacts with integrin  v  8 . Dev Biol 363 , 95 - 105 . Lu , M . , Munger , J . S . , Steadele , M . , Busald , C . , Tellier , M . , and Schnapp , L . M . ( 2002 ) . Integrin  8  1 mediates adhesion to LAP - TGF  1 . J Cell Sci 115 , 4641 - 4648 . Ludbrook , S . B . , Barry , S . T . , Delves , C . J . , and Horgan , C . M . ( 2003 ) . The integrin  v  3 is a receptor for the latency - associated peptides of transforming growth factors  1 and  3 . Biochem J 369 , 311 - 318 . Manabe , R . , Ohe , N . , Maeda , T . , Fukuda , T . , and Sekiguchi , K . ( 1997 ) . Modulation of cell - adhesive activity of fibronectin by the alternatively spliced EDA segment . J Cell Biol 139 , 295 - 307 . Martin , J . S . , Dickson , M . C . , Cousins , F . M . , Kulkarni , A . B . , Karlsson , S . , and Akhurst , R . J . ( 1995 ) . Analysis of homozygous TGF  1 null mouse embryos demonstrates defects in yolk sac vasculogenesis and hematopoiesis . Ann N Y Acad Sci 752 , 300 - 308 . Moyle , M . , Napier , M . A . , and McLean , J . W . ( 1991 ) . Cloning and expression of a divergent integrin subunit  8 . J Biol Chem 266 , 19650 - 19658 . Mu , D . , Cambier , S . , Fjellbirkeland , L . , Baron , J . L . , Munger , J . S . , Kawakatsu , H . , Sheppard , D . , Broaddus , V . C . , and Nishimura , S . L . ( 2002 ) . The integrin  v  8 mediates epithelial homeostasis through MT1 - MMP - dependent activation of TGF -  1 . J Cell Biol 157 , 493 - 507 . Mu , Z . , Yang , Z . , Yu , D . , Zhao , Z . , and Munger , J . S . ( 2008 ) . TGF  1 and TGF  3 are partially redundant effectors in 70 brain vascular morphogenesis . Mech Dev 125 , 508 - 516 . Munger , J . S . , Harpel , J . G . , Giancotti , F . G . , and Rifkin , D . B . ( 1998 ) . Interactions between growth factors and integrins : latent forms of transforming growth factor -  are ligands for the integrin  v  1 . Mol Biol Cell 9 , 2627 - 2638 . Munger , J . S . , Huang , X . , Kawakatsu , H . , Griffiths , M . J . , Dalton , S . L . , Wu , J . , Pittet , J . F . , Kaminski , N . , Garat , C . , Matthay , M . A . , et al . ( 1999 ) . The integrin  v  6 binds and activates latent TGF  1 : a mechanism for regulating pulmonary inflammation and fibrosis . Cell 96 , 319 - 328 . Nakai , K . , and Horton , P . ( 1999 ) . PSORT : a program for detecting sorting signals in proteins and predicting their subcellular localization . Trends Biochem Sci 24 , 34 - 36 . Nermut , M . V . , Green , N . M . , Eason , P . , Yamada , S . S . , and Yamada , K . M . ( 1988 ) . Electron microscopy and structural model of human fibronectin receptor . EMBO J 7 , 4093 - 4099 . Nishimura , S . L . , Boylen , K . P . , Einheber , S . , Milner , T . A . , Ramos , D . M . , and Pytela , R . ( 1998 ) . Synaptic and glial localization of the integrin  v  8 in mouse and rat brain . Brain Res 791 , 271 - 282 . Nishimura , S . L . , Sheppard , D . , and Pytela , R . ( 1994 ) . Integrin  v  8 . Interaction with vitronectin and functional divergence of the  8 cytoplasmic domain . J Biol Chem 269 , 28708 - 28715 . Nishiuchi , R . , Takagi , J . , Hayashi , M . , Ido , H . , Yagi , Y . , Sanzen , N . , Tsuji , T . , Yamada , M . , and Sekiguchi , K . ( 2006 ) . Ligand - binding specificities of laminin - binding integrins : a comprehensive survey of laminin - integrin interactions using recombinant  3  1 ,  6  1 ,  7  1 and  6  4 integrins . Matrix Biol 25 , 189 - 197 . Osada , A . , Kiyozumi , D . , Tsutsui , K . , Ono , Y . , Weber , C . N . , Sugimoto , N . , Imai , T . , Okada , A . , and Sekiguchi , K . ( 2005 ) . Expression of MAEG , a novel basement membrane protein , in mouse hair follicle morphogenesis . Exp Cell Res 303 , 148 - 159 . Pytela , R . , Pierschbacher , M . D . , and Ruoslahti , E . ( 1985a ) . A 125 / 115 - kDa cell surface receptor specific for vitronectin interacts with the arginine - glycine - aspartic acid adhesion sequence derived from fibronectin . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 82 , 5766 - 5770 . Pytela , R . , Pierschbacher , M . D . , and Ruoslahti , E . ( 1985b ) . Identification and isolation of a 140 kd cell surface glycoprotein with properties expected of a fibronectin receptor . Cell 40 , 191 - 198 . Redick , S . D . , Settles , D . L . , Briscoe , G . , and Erickson , H . P . ( 2000 ) . Defining fibronectin ' s cell adhesion synergy site by site - directed mutagenesis . J Cell Biol 149 , 521 - 527 . Ricort , J . M . ( 2004 ) . Insulin - like growth factor binding protein ( IGFBP ) signalling . Growth Horm IGF Res 14 , 277 - 286 . Ruoslahti , E . ( 1996 ) . RGD and other recognition sequences for integrins . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 12 , 697 - 715 . 71 Sato - Nishiuchi , R . , Nakano , I . , Ozawa , A . , Sato , Y . , Takeichi , M . , Kiyozumi , D . , Yamazaki , K . , Yasunaga , T . , Futaki , S . , and Sekiguchi , K . ( 2012 ) . Polydom / SVEP1 is a ligand for integrin  9  1 . J Biol Chem 287 , 25615 - 25630 . Sato , Y . , Uemura , T . , Morimitsu , K . , Sato - Nishiuchi , R . , Manabe , R . , Takagi , J . , Yamada , M . , and Sekiguchi , K . ( 2009 ) . Molecular basis of the recognition of nephronectin by integrin  8  1 . J Biol Chem 284 , 14524 - 14536 . Schneider , H . , Harbottle , R . P . , Yokosaki , Y . , Kunde , J . , Sheppard , D . , and Coutelle , C . ( 1998 ) . A novel peptide , PLAEIDGIELTY , for the targeting of  9  1 - integrins . FEBS Lett 429 , 269 - 273 . Schurpf , T . , Chen , Q . , Liu , J . H . , Wang , R . , Springer , T . A . , and Wang , J . H . ( 2012 ) . The RGD finger of Del - 1 is a unique structural feature critical for integrin binding . FASEB J 26 , 3412 - 3420 . Sekiguchi , K . , and Hakomori , S . ( 1983 ) . Domain structure of human plasma fibronectin . Differences and similarities between human and hamster fibronectins . J Biol Chem 258 , 3967 - 3973 . Sheppard , D . , Cohen , D . S . , Wang , A . , Busk , M . ( 1992 ) . Transforming growth factor  differentially regulates expression of integrin subunits in guinea pig airway epithelial cells . J Biol Chem 267 , 17409 - 17414 . Shi , M . , Zhu , J . , Wang , R . , Chen , X . , Mi , L . , Walz , T . , and Springer , T . A . ( 2011 ) . Latent TGF -  structure and activation . Nature 474 , 343 - 349 . Soro , S . , Orecchia , A . , Morbidelli , L . , Lacal , P . M . , Morea , V . , Ballmer - Hofer , K . , Ruffini , F . , Ziche , M . , D ' Atri , S . , Zambruno , G . , et al . ( 2008 ) . A proangiogenic peptide derived from vascular endothelial growth factor receptor - 1 acts through  5  1 integrin . Blood 111 , 3479 - 3488 . Streuli , C . H . , and Akhtar , N . ( 2009 ) . Signal co - operation between integrins and other receptor systems . Biochem J 418 , 491 - 506 . Sun , X . , Skorstengaard , K . , and Mosher , D . F . ( 1992 ) . Disulfides modulate RGD - inhibitable cell adhesive activity of thrombospondin . J Cell Biol 118 , 693 - 701 . Takada , Y . , Ye , X . , and Simon , S . ( 2007 ) . The integrins . Genome Biol 8 , 215 . Takagi , J . ( 2007 ) . Structural basis for ligand recognition by integrins . Curr Opin Cell Biol 19 , 557 - 564 . Takagi , J . , Erickson , H . P . , and Springer , T . A . ( 2001 ) . C - terminal opening mimics ' inside - out ' activation of integrin  5  1 . Nat Struct Biol 8 , 412 - 416 . Takagi , J . , Kamata , T . , Meredith , J . , Puzon - McLaughlin , W . , and Takada , Y . ( 1997a ) . Changing ligand specificities of  v  1 and  v  3 integrins by swapping a short diverse sequence of the  subunit . J Biol Chem 272 , 19794 - 19800 . Takagi , J . , Kamata , T . , Meredith , J . , Puzon - McLaughlin , W . , and Takada , Y . ( 1997b ) . Changing ligand specificities of  v  1 and  v  3 integrins by swapping a short diverse sequence of the  subunit . J Biol Chem 272 , 72 19794 - 19800 . Takagi , J . , Strokovich , K . , Springer , T . A . , and Walz , T . ( 2003 ) . Structure of integrin  5  1 in complex with fibronectin . EMBO J 22 , 4607 - 4615 . Taniguchi , Y . , Li , S . , Takizawa , M . , Oonishi , E . , Toga , J . , Yagi , E . , and Sekiguchi , K . ( 2017 ) . Probing the acidic residue within the integrin binding site of laminin - 511 that interacts with the metal ion - dependent adhesion site of  6  1 integrin . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 487 , 525 - 531 . Tatti , O . , Vehvilainen , P . , Lehti , K . , and Keski - Oja , J . ( 2008 ) . MT1 - MMP releases latent TGF -  1 from endothelial cell extracellular matrix via proteolytic processing of LTBP - 1 . Exp Cell Res 314 , 2501 - 2514 . Van der Flier , A . , and Sonnenberg , A . ( 2001 ) . Function and interactions of integrins . Cell Tissue Res 305 , 285 - 298 . Venstrom , K . , and Reichardt , L . ( 1995 ) .  8 integrins mediate interactions of chick sensory neurons with laminin - 1 , collagen IV , and fibronectin . Mol Biol Cell 6 , 419 - 431 . Verdone , G . , Doliana , R . , Corazza , A . , Colebrooke , S . A . , Spessotto , P . , Bot , S . , Bucciotti , F . , Capuano , A . , Silvestri , A . , Viglino , P . , et al . ( 2008 ) . The solution structure of EMILIN1 globular C1q domain reveals a disordered insertion necessary for interaction with the  4  1 integrin . J Biol Chem 283 , 18947 - 18956 . Vlahakis , N . E . , Young , B . A . , Atakilit , A . , Hawkridge , A . E . , Issaka , R . B . , Boudreau , N . , and Sheppard , D . ( 2007 ) . Integrin  9  1 directly binds to vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) - A and contributes to VEGF - A - induced angiogenesis . J Biol Chem 282 , 15187 - 15196 . Walton , K . L . , Makanji , Y . , Chen , J . , Wilce , M . C . , Chan , K . L . , Robertson , D . M . , and Harrison , C . A . ( 2010 ) . Two distinct regions of latency - associated peptide coordinate stability of the latent transforming growth factor -  1 complex . J Biol Chem 285 , 17029 - 17037 . Worthington , J . J . , Klementowicz , J . E . , and Travis , M . A . ( 2011 ) . TGF  : a sleeping giant awoken by integrins . Trends Biochem Sci 36 , 47 - 54 . Xiao , T . , Takagi , J . , Coller , B . S . , Wang , J . H . , and Springer , T . A . ( 2004 ) . Structural basis for allostery in integrins and binding to fibrinogen - mimetic therapeutics . Nature 432 , 59 - 67 . Xiong , J . P . , Stehle , T . , Diefenbach , B . , Zhang , R . , Dunker , R . , Scott , D . L . , Joachimiak , A . , Goodman , S . L . , and Arnaout , M . A . ( 2001 ) . Crystal structure of the extracellular segment of integrin  v  3 . Science 294 , 339 - 345 . Xiong , J . P . , Stehle , T . , Zhang , R . , Joachimiak , A . , Frech , M . , Goodman , S . L . , and Arnaout , M . A . ( 2002 ) . Crystal structure of the extracellular segment of integrin  v  3 in complex with an Arg - Gly - Asp ligand . Science 296 , 151 - 155 . Yamazaki , S . , Ema , H . , Karlsson , G . , Yamaguchi , T . , Miyoshi , H . , Shioda , S . , Taketo , M . M . , Karlsson , S . , Iwama , A . , and Nakauchi , H . ( 2011 ) . Nonmyelinating Schwann cells maintain hematopoietic stem cell hibernation in the 73 bone marrow niche . Cell 147 , 1146 - 1158 . Yang , Z . , Mu , Z . , Dabovic , B . , Jurukovski , V . , Yu , D . , Sung , J . , Xiong , X . , and Munger , J . S . ( 2007 ) . Absence of integrin - mediated TGF  1 activation in vivo recapitulates the phenotype of TGF  1 - null mice . J Cell Biol 176 , 787 - 793 . Yokosaki , Y . , Matsuura , N . , Higashiyama , S . , Murakami , I . , Obara , M . , Yamakido , M . , Shigeto , N . , Chen , J . , and Sheppard , D . ( 1998 ) . Identification of the ligand binding site for the integrin  9  1 in the third fibronectin type III repeat of tenascin - C . J Biol Chem 273 , 11423 - 11428 . Yokosaki , Y . , Tanaka , K . , Higashikawa , F . , Yamashita , K . , and Eboshida , A . ( 2005 ) . Distinct structural requirements for binding of the integrins  v 6 ,  v  3 ,  v  5 ,  5  1 and  9  1 to osteopontin . Matrix Biol 24 , 418 - 427 . Zambruno , G . , Marchisio , P . C . , Marconi , A . , Vaschieri , C . , Melchiori , A . , Giannetti , A . , DeLuca , M . ( 1995 ) . Transforming growth factor -  1 modulates  1 and  5 integrin receptor and induces the de novo expression of the  v  6 heterodimer in normal human keratinocytes : implication for wound healing . J Cell Biol 129 , 853 - 865 . Zhu , J . , Motejlek , K . , Wang , D . , Zang , K . , Schmidt , A . , and Reichardt , L . F . ( 2002 ) .  8 integrins are required for vascular morphogenesis in mouse embryos . Development 129 , 2891 - 2903 . 74  List of Publications [ Original Articles ] 1 . Miyoshi K , Mori H , Mizobe Y , Akasaka E , Ozawa A , Yoshida M , Sato M . ( 2009 ) . Development of a Noninvasive Monitoring System for Evaluation of Oct - 3 / 4 Promoter Status in Miniature Pig Somatic Cell Nuclear Transfer Embryos . J . Reprod . Dev . 55 : 661 - 669 . 2 . Ozawa , A . , Akasaka , E . , Watanabe , S . , Yoshida , M . , Miyoshi , K . , and Sato , M . ( 2010 ) . Usefulness of a non - invasive reporter system for monitoring reprogramming state in pig cells : results of a cell fusion experiment . J . Reprod . Dev . 56 : 363 - 369 . 3 . Akasaka E , Ozawa A , Mori H , Mizobe Y , Yoshida M , Miyoshi K , Sato M . ( 2011 ) . Whole - genome amplification - based GenomiPhi for multiple genomic analysis of individual early porcine embryos . Theriogenology . 75 : 1543 - 1549 . 4 . Miyoshi K , Mori H , Mizobe Y , Akasaka E , Ozawa A , Yoshida M , Sato M . ( 2012 ) . Valproic Acid Improves the In Vitro Development Competence of Bovine Somatic Cell Nuclear Transfer Embryos . Cell Reprogram . 14 : 138 – 145 . 5 . Sato - Nishiuchi , R . , Nakano , I . , Ozawa , A . , Sato , Y . , Taniguchi , M . , Kiyozumi , D . , Yamazaki , K . , Yasunaga , T . , Futaki , S . , and Sekiguchi , K . ( 2012 ) . Polydom / SVEP1 is a ligand for integrin  9  1 . J . Biol . Chem . 287 : 25615 - 25630 . 6 . Ozawa , A . , Sato , Y . , Imabayashi , T . , Uemura , T . , Takagi , J . , and Sekiguchi , K . ( 2016 ) . Molecular basis of the ligand binding specificity of  v  8 integrin . J . Biol . Chem . 291 : 11551 - 11565 . 75 Acknowledgement It is a genuine pleasure to express my deep sense of thanks and gratitude to my mentor , philosopher and guide Prof . Kiyotoshi Sekiguchi of the Laboratory for Extracellular Matrix Biochemistry ( now Division of Matrixome Research and Application ) , Institute for Protein Research , Osaka University . His firm guidance , essential criticism , and kind consideration have helped me to a very great extent to accomplish my thesis . I would like to express my sincere gratitude to Dr . Junichi Takagi for his great suggestions and comments in my work and dissertation . I owe a deep sense of gratitude to Dr . Sato Yuya , a postdoctoral research fellow , National Institute for Health , United States of America . His timely advice with kindness , meticulous scrutiny , scholarly advice and scientific approach have enabled me to complete this task . I thank profusely Dr . Masashi Yamada , Dr . Sugiko Futaki , Mr . Tsukasa Imabayashi , Mr . Toshihiko Uemura , and all members in the Laboratory for Extracellular Matrix Biochemistry for their kind help and co - operation throughout my study period . I am extremely thankful to Dr . Masato Okada , and Dr . Hiroaki Miki for their review of my dissertation . To all of my friends and family who provided support and encouragement . Akio Ozawa Institute for Protein Research , Osaka University , July 2018