The Joy of Cheques : Trust , Paper and Eighty Somethings John Vines 1 , Paul Dunphy 2 , Mark Blythe 1 , Stephen Lindsay 2 , Andrew Monk 3 , Patrick Olivier 2 1 School of Design Northumbria University Newcastle upon Tyne , UK { john . vines , mark . blythe } @ northumbria . ac . uk 2 Culture Lab School of Computing Science Newcastle University Newcastle upon Tyne , UK { p . m . dunphy , s . c . lindsay , p . l . olivier } @ newcastle . ac . uk 3 Department of Psychology University of York York , UK a . monk @ psych . york . ac . uk ABSTRACT A cheque is a paper document that orders the transfer of money between bank accounts . Whilst an eighty - year - old in the UK is predicted on average to live at least another ten years , cheques may not . Despite many older peoples extensive use of cheques , UK banks are eager to abolish them and design electronic alternatives that are less costly to process and less vulnerable to fraud . This paper reports on two qualitative studies that explored the banking experiences of 23 people over eighty years old . Cheques support financial collaboration with others in ways that digital payment systems do not . We argue that whilst it might be possible to improve the design of digital payment systems to better support financial collaboration , the case for retaining and enhancing cheques is stronger . Rather than replace cheques , we must design ways of making them less costly to process and better linked to electronic payment methods . Author Keywords Banking ; trust ; older old ; cheques ; paper . ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . General Terms Design ; Human Factors . INTRODUCTION The banking industry has a long history of enthusiastically adopting new technology . Money has taken a variety of forms : stone , gold , silver , paper and , more recently , the airy nothingness of digital representation . Although the banks eagerly adopt new technologies , some of their customers remain more cautious . As new forms emerge , older financial instruments such as cheques ( Figure 1 ) may seem outmoded , irrelevant to most people and too costly for businesses to administer . In 2009 , the UK’s Payments Council ( a group of financial institutes who determine payment methods in the UK ) announced the planned withdrawal of cheques from circulation in 2018 [ 30 ] . There followed such uproar that the Payments Council was forced into a “U turn” [ 13 ] . A Treasury Select Committee investigation concluded that the Payments Council was overly dominated by industry and did not adequately represent consumers . The Treasury report warns ‘cheques have been saved , for the moment , but we need to remain vigilant . The incentives for the industry to get rid of cheques has not gone away’ [ 13 ] . Older people in particular objected vociferously to the proposed abolition of cheques . People who are over eighty - years - old are the fastest growing demographic group in the world [ 33 ] . They are commonly referred to as the “older old” [ 9 ] , but in this paper will use a more descriptive and neutral term , eighty somethings [ 34 ] . This paper reports findings from a study of the value of cheques to a group of eighty somethings in the North of England . Cheques are still a popular payment method in many countries , including the United States ( where they are known as checks ) , France ( chèque ) , New Zealand , Australia and the UK [ 8 ] . These paper documents allow a bank account holder to write the name of a person or organisation they would like to pay , the sum they want to pay them , the date and their signature to authorise the transfer of funds . Figure 1 . A cheque as typically used in the UK . In the UK , the number of cheques used per annum peaked in 1990 and has declined steadily over the past five years [ 29 ] . Although the number of cheques being used each year is in decline , there are specific groups of people for whom they are highly desirable , such as charities , small businesses [ 32 ] and eighty somethings . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . CSCW’12 , February 11 – 15 , 2012 , Seattle , Washington , USA . Copyright 2012 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 1086 - 4 / 12 / 02 . . . $ 10 . 00 . Session : Ethnography in the Very Wild February 11 - 15 , 2012 , Seattle , WA , USA 147 Throughout their lives the eighty somethings have had cheques available to them . An eighty - year - old today is predicted to live for another decade [ 9 ] and it remains a possibility that cheques will be discontinued in their lifetime . Any alternative financial instrument or service is likely to benefit from understanding what qualities of cheques make them particularly valued by older people . We conducted two studies involving eighty somethings living in the North of England . The first study involved a series of in - depth , one - to - one interviews in which participants related their ‘financial biographies’ [ 34 ] . The second study involved group discussions centred on the theme of the future of banking and future banking services . Both studies indicated that for these eighty somethings the cheque is essential . The properties of cheques that we identified imply a number of requirements for the design of a future alternative that might bridge the divide between the needs of modern financial institutions and the needs of eighty somethings . BACKGROUND The beginning and end of cheques The 1882 Bills of Exchange Act defines a ‘ bill of exchange [ as ] an unconditional order in writing , addressed by one person to another , signed by the person giving it , requiring the person to whom it is addressed to pay on demand or at a fixed or determinable future time a sum certain in money to or to the order of a specified person , or to bearer ’ [ 5 ] . The current cheque is more uniform in appearance than early bills of exchange but still embodies these same principles . A cheque is used by a bank account holder to request the transfer of money from their account to the account of another person ( or another account of their own ) . Banks typically supply cheques in the form of a book , in which each cheque is attached to a ‘stub’ where information can be recorded about the cheques that have been written and removed . The cheque ‘clearing’ process in the UK is complex and resource intensive [ 28 ] . When a bank cashier receives a cheque from a customer she / he manually enters account details from the cheque into the bank’s electronic database . The cheque is then sent off - site for a second processing stage where it is scanned . After this , a cheque is repacked and sent for physical storage – one UK bank has filled up a disused salt mine in the South of England with used paper cheques ( anonymous pers comm . ) . The paper originals are kept for up to seven years for recording purposes and for validating transfers in the case of disputes . The costs of processing cheques was the primary motivation for the unpopular proposal to withdraw cheques altogether in 2018 [ 29 , 13 ] . For the banking industry cheques are difficult to process and used by only a small minority of customers . This small minority includes our group of eighty somethings . Ageing , banking and paper In 2007 a financial inclusion strategy was proposed in the UK that included accessibility guidelines for banking products and services for all [ 12 ] . The strategy was in part a response to studies and claims by advocacy groups that older people were at serious risk of exclusion from financial information , products and services provided by the retail banking sector [ 35 ] . AgeUK , the largest advocacy group for older people in Britain , has argued at length that older people are particularly vulnerable to the discontinuation of cheques [ 16 ] and are less familiar with alternatives such as telephone and internet banking [ 18 ] . Such concerns are also noted by the Payments Council who stated that ‘the needs of harder - to - reach and vulnerable groups are identified and addressed in our work to develop a choice of alternatives to cheques’ [ 31 ] . There has been a growing interest in recent years in developing novel payment methods , particularly on mobile platforms . Most UK retail banks , such as Barclays Bank PLC [ 2 ] , offer smart phone applications that allow customers to make quick money transfers to pay bills and other people . PayPal’s ‘Bump’ application [ 19 ] allows people in the same location to exchange money by knocking their smart phones against one another . SMS - based banking systems , such as Kenya’s M - PESA [ 17 ] , allow people to transfer money to others on basic mobile phones . Near Field Communication ( NFC ) technologies embedded in mobile phones and bankcards are being introduced by many banks , allowing customers to make payments by waving their device in front of a reader [ 22 ] . Crucially , all of these new payment mechanisms avoid the use of paper . As our study will highlight , the paper - based nature of the cheque is fundamental to how the eighty somethings and the carers in our study financially collaborate and form trust with others . Previous work in CSCW and HCI has identified the significance of paper in work environments [ e . g . 20 , 21 , 25 ] , with Sellen and Harper [ 24 ] providing a comprehensive overview of why attempts to replace paper with digital alternatives often fail . Likewise , our studies sought to go beyond a narrow exploration of functional qualities of cheques and contrast these with digital payment methods ( although these are important ) . Instead , we were interested in the meanings and values associated with the paper cheque that are likely to be more difficult to achieve in any future remediation . FIELD STUDIES Methodology Two data corpuses were drawn on for the analysis reported in the Findings section . The first corpus is a set of financial biographies from a study fully described and reported in [ 34 ] . Briefly , 12 eighty somethings provided in - depth interviews that formed a ‘financial biography’ . Participants were male and female and the majority described themselves as working class . All but one had little to no Session : Ethnography in the Very Wild February 11 - 15 , 2012 , Seattle , WA , USA 148 experience of computers . This first study also drew on interviews with 2 care home managers , a welfare benefits officer , representatives from older people advocacy groups and a representative of a leading British retail bank . The results of this first study were used to inform discussions with a further 10 eighty somethings who took part in three separate participatory design workshops ( 6 participants in the first workshop , and 2 each in the second and third ) . Participants of this second study were all female and recruited from an established research panel of older people based at Northumbria University . Most of the quotes from older people in the Findings section come from these participants . In general , the participants of the second study described themselves as middle - socio - economic class . Three participants considered themselves computer literate and two others were attending computer literacy classes . Only one participant in the second study used online banking . Six participants reported having shared their finances with their husband during their lives , and one reported that she let her husband perform all of her banking on her behalf . Each workshop began with an informal discussion of current financial practices . Participants were encouraged to question one another and the researchers on their behaviours and habits . This often led to useful exchanges between the older participants and younger researchers that highlighted generational differences in financial knowledge and experiences . All of the sessions were recorded , transcribed and anonymised . A thematic analysis [ 6 ] was conducted on the transcripts , where data was summarised in open - ended codes and grouped together into four key themes . Findings from this second corpus have not been reported before . Whilst cheques were a topic of discussion in the earlier interviews—particularly by the care home professionals— we had not realised the significance of these instruments to the eighty somethings until our later workshops . Therefore , the initial study was revisited and previously unused items of data were incorporated into the thematic analysis . FINDINGS Four themes structure the following account : signs ; complexity ; collaboration ; and trust . Signs : control and events Cheques often provide signs that are meaningful to the eighty somethings . Many of the eighty somethings emphasised how the physical form of a cheque book provides a space to document outgoing expenses . Rita prefers to use cheques for this reason , as often when using a credit or debit card she is not offered a receipt . “Whereas a cheque , you fill in the stub … you write your cheque , you fill in the stub , you’ve got your record of where it went , as long as you remember to fill the stub in . ” She goes on to recall the one time in her life she did not completely fill the cheque book stub out . “Ooh , it caused chaos that did . ” She has always ensured that she fills in the stub ever since . When using a cheque the stub it is often the only easily accessible record she has about who and what she paid . In the group discussions , participants talked about how many cheques or cheque books they would “get through” . Margaret uses them “o nce every couple of months or something like that . ” “Oh I use them more often than that ! ” replies Iris . Anna follows with “about 4 or 5 a month . ” A cheque book that lasts longer suggests fewer transactions , at least via cheques . Marjorie states “we run through quite a few cheque books” . Betty , who reported having always been a heavy user of cheques , still uses them “quite often . ” At the same time , she reflects : “the cheque book lasts longer than it used to though , doesn’t it ? ” The realisation that she uses fewer cheques than she used to appeared to sadden Betty . The cheque book itself acts as a physical reminder of the activity , or lack thereof , of a bank account over a period of time . The writing down of transactions and the physical presence of the cheque book is also useful for those who care for eighty somethings . The care home managers would refer to times when they had to keep track of a resident’s spending even if they are not legally authorised to do so . As a consequence , care home managers and staff spent a lot of time looking for indicators as to how well a resident is managing their finances . A dishonoured or ‘bounced’ cheque is one such indicator . Usually , a cheque is bounced when there are insufficient funds in the associated bank account , although a cheque might also be returned if the writing is illegible or it is dated incorrectly . A bounced cheque is usually posted back to the account holder . Unusual looking envelopes from the banks are often a warning sign of unusual activity occurring on a resident’s account . The physicality of the cheque and how it is returned to account holder supports the subtle monitoring practices that are employed by care home staff . The care home managers referred to how many of their residents find it difficult to access cash as a result of mobility or cognitive impairments . Consequently , some care homes hold a fund of cash on - site that the residents can withdraw from if they write out a cheque to the care home . This has a two - fold benefit : the resident has access to cash , and the care home is able to indirectly keep track of how much money that resident is spending . Care home manager Lynn described the situation of one resident , who they suspected was losing money . “Because she comes to us to cash the cheques as she can’t get to the bank , we can actually monitor how much she’s taking and how often . We need to check that money is going somewhere safe , that somebody isn’t walking with it . ” Not only are the care home staff aware of how much is being spent through the amounts that residents withdraw from this on - site fund , but Session : Ethnography in the Very Wild February 11 - 15 , 2012 , Seattle , WA , USA 149 the cheque is marked with information that allows the ongoing tracking of a residents withdrawals over time . As well as acting as signs of financial activity , cheques also act as signs of special events in peoples’ lives . Agnes would send cheques to grandchildren for birthdays and special events . “Usually for birthdays it is a cheque now they are older . If one of the grandchildren comes round and helps me , I will give them £1 cash when they are 6 and 7 . ” Cash would still be used for smaller ‘gifts’ , especially when the children are younger . “You wouldn’t expect them to run to the bank with a couple of pounds , they would probably keep that in their room . ” This choice of the cheque rather than cash often suggests a significant occasion rather than a spontaneous gift or gesture . Marjorie referred to how “with the older ones , really £100 is possibly for a once a year or twice a year , Christmas and birthday , is what we would give to an 18 or 20 year old … I wouldn’t give that in cash . ” This is not to say that cheques are the only method that the participants use to send money to their grandchildren . Agnes discussed how she and her husband are financially supporting one of their grandchildren during his time at university . “We are helping the one at university and I think my husband pays a little something in each month and that’s by direct credit banking . ” Agnes and her husband do not send a cheque in this case , preferring to transfer money using telephone banking . Here , the functional basis of the ‘gift’ appears to be supported by what is perceived to be a more functional method of transferring money . For birthdays , Christmases and special events , however , they would always send a cheque : “it’s much more personal than a money transfer . ” Whilst , for our participants , the use of a cheque instead of cash is a sign of a large gift , it is also related to the age and maturity of the grandchild . Many of the eighty somethings said they would send a larger amount as their grandchild got older . Also , in order to send a cheque to their grandchild , said child must have a bank account into which it can be deposited . Marjorie observed that “when they are young they don’t have an account … I think the younger pair give the cheque to their parents at Christmas and birthday , but the two older ones certainly have a bank account . ” Many of the participants grew up in a period when it was particularly difficult to open a bank account— especially if you were female . Dorlores recalled that when opening an account in the 1970s she had to find a sponsor to “vouch” for her , despite her having a full - time job . “I remember going down to the bank and being told this and I had to go back and find somebody who had an account at [ bank ] . [ It ] was always regarded as the people’s bank … it was the bank for the ordinary folk , but no , they were very strict . I had to find somebody who had an account to come down to the bank with me to say that I was a worthy person to have a bank account . ” Whilst their grandchildren did not require a “sponsor” or full - time work to have a bank account , the opening of a bank account was still described as an important occasion in a child’s life . Cheques hold information that provides immediate access to the incomings and outgoings of a bank account and the state of a person’s finances . But they also signify important moments in people’s lives where large amounts of money have been received or spent . For some of the eighty somethings the cheque adds to the ceremony surrounding these special moments . Complexity : distance and time Whilst cheques are a paper document , its simplicity as a financial instrument disguises the complexity of some of the transactions performed with them . As described by the eighty somethings , payments are performed over large distances in space and time . As Betty reminds us , “for years you’ve been told not to put actual cash in the post . ” Cheques can be sent in the post because they are worthless to anybody other than the named payee . For the person who has written the cheque , there is some security in the knowledge that only the person named can bank it into an account under their name . When the possibility of cheques being withdrawn from use was brought up , many of the eighty somethings became deeply concerned about sending money over a distance . Joyce : “But if they do away with cheques , how do you send money , like if you’ve bought something and you want to pay by cheque ? ” Anna : “If you want to give a present to somebody you send a cheque , like you do with the grandchildren . What do you do . . . you want to send a cheque for their birthday . ” Harriet : “Donations or anything , you know , charitable things . ” There are a number of alternatives to sending a cheque that can be used in these situations such as ordering a bank transfer using phone or internet banking . On a functional level , performing a transaction in this way would have the same end result as using a cheque . However , such alternatives did not appeal to our eighty something participants regardless of their level of computer literacy . Anna is computer literate and confident in browsing the Internet and sending / receiving emails . However , she does not like the idea of using a computer to perform banking “Last week I had a plumber in . I had to pay him and I said will you take a credit card ? He said , no I’ll send you the bill online . So he sent it online . Well how am I going to pay , except by cheque ? ” Many small traders such as plumbers , electricians and builders do not accept credit or debit card transactions as they often do not carry the required terminals or want to avoid the associated processing fees . Cheques therefore have traditionally been the dominant mode of payment in the UK for these types of tradesmen . The expectation in this scenario , however , is that in sending the bill over the internet , Anna will subsequently be able to Session : Ethnography in the Very Wild February 11 - 15 , 2012 , Seattle , WA , USA 150 pay the bill over the internet or request a transfer over the phone . “No way , I’m not going to , I want my cheque . ” It was not a case of Anna not feeling competent enough to make the payment over the internet but rather that she did not want to enter her account details into an unknown system . Using cheques over a distance can cause uncertainty as to when the money will be received . In theory , UK first - class post should arrive within two days of being sent but this is not always the case . Added to this is the unpredictability of when the payee will take the cheque to the bank . Dolores wondered whether her grandchildren know what to do when they receive a cheque from her . “Often I have to ring up and say “you haven’t cashed that cheque . ” They say “oh I forgot . ”” Whilst geographical distance adds time to the completion of cheque transactions , delays in cashing and then clearing cheques also extends the time from the act of giving ( or posting ) and the transfer of funds . The timescales associated with processing a cheque are complex , as described by the Cheque and Credit Clearing Company ( CCCC ) in the following scenario . ‘Daniel collects all cheques made out to his company from the previous week and takes them into his bank to pay in on Monday morning . His company account starts to earn interest on the money on Wednesday ( + 2 days ) , and by Friday morning ( + 4 days ) his bank will enable him to withdraw the money from the deposited cheques from the account , even though the cheques could still bounce . By the end of the following Tuesday ( + 6 days ) , he can be certain that the cheques will not bounce , and the money from them cannot be reclaimed from the company account without his consent’ [ 7 ] . In practice , it is difficult for an account holder to know when a cheque will be processed and the funds transferred . Doris considered it “strange that it takes longer to clear a cheque in these days of instantaneous communication that it used to do . ” However , these perceived irregularities do not bother most of the eighty somethings , as they reported mental strategies to simplify the process . Many of the participants referred to how once a cheque is written it is considered spent money . Iris states that “once I’ve written a cheque it’s gone out of the account as far as I’m concerned . ” This is the same for Anna , who feels “it’s not my money anymore” once a cheque is written and sent to the payee . The complexity of the cheque clearing process means that the system is open to abuse and exploitation . Margaret recalled that she “knew somebody who , when it was getting near the end of the month and she hadn’t got much money , would put the wrong date on a cheque so they would send it back . ” Such stories initiated responses of “oh , gosh ! ” and “the cheek” , signifying many of the participants abhorrence of such behaviour . Yet other exploits in the cheque clearing process – such as being able to cancel a cheque if it has not gone through the final stages of processing – are acceptable . Rita described the one time she cancelled a cheque and her bank still processed it . “I subsequently played war that they hadn’t done what I said and I got my money back . ” In Rita’s situation , the exploitation of the system was considered to be acceptable , to the point that the bank was to blame for not enacting her cancellation of the transaction . Whilst on the surface cheques appear to be mundane paper forms , the practices formed around them are complex and open to negotiation and exploitation . This is highly related to the theme of collaboration , as financial collaboration between people emerges from cheque use . Collaboration : access and deviation Cheques are not always used as a direct means of paying for a service or bill but are often used as a way of having others access cash , or for buying items on another’s behalf . For example , cheques can be used not only as a formal alternative to cash but also as a way of gaining access to it . A bank account holder can write out a cheque to her own name ( or to “CASH” ) and then use it to withdraw cash from that account . Cheques written to withdraw cash accounted for less than 6 % of cheque transactions in the UK in 2009 [ 24 ] although this figure does not account for situations where people collaborate with one another through cheques to access cash . As previously noted , many residents in care homes find it difficult to visit their banks on a regular basis . Lynn , one of the care home managers , describes how her care home uses cheques as a way of giving the residents access to cash . “We’ve got an amount of money in the bank . We draw from that and keep cash here that the residents can take cash from – with their cheques . The cheques then go back into the bank account . ” Lynn describes how residents write out a cheque to the care home . This is then given to a member of the care home staff , who then deposits it in the care home’s bank account . In the meantime , the resident is given cash to the amount on the cheque . For the care home , the collaborative cashing of cheques on - site provides one of the few ways of ensuring that residents can have ready access to cash . “We’re going to get problems because we’re not going to be able to offer that service . It’s – what can we put in its place and how are we going to manage… It’s going to have a major impact here . ” Lynn worries about how the residents will have access to cash if cheques cease to exist . It is not just in care homes that cheque cashing is highly valued . For people that are housebound , either permanently or temporarily , writing cheques is a useful way to access cash . Doris recalled a recent situation where she helped a friend . “During the snow , one of my neighbours who is housebound . . . had no loose cash left to pay his cleaner or small things like that , so he gave me a cheque for £100 and I got £100 out of the hole in the wall . ” In this case , it was not that large bills needed to be paid or that cash was their Session : Ethnography in the Very Wild February 11 - 15 , 2012 , Seattle , WA , USA 151 preferred mode of payment—it was that cash is still needed for small items . This necessity to continue having cash would prevail , even if her neighbour were able to manage their finances over the internet . Cheques are also written collaboratively , that is , by people other than the account holder . Lynn discussed situations where they completed parts of cheques on behalf of the care home residents . “You’d be surprised how many people we have come in the office , we give them a pen , put their hand on the book and say sign there . We’ve filled out the cheque . ” Natalie , another care home manager , describes a similar situation with one of her residents . “We fill it out , he signs it , we take it to Library Square to pay his charges and we’ve got receipts . ” When discussing these situations there is an acceptance on the part the care home managers that these practices are not ideal . However , they feel obliged to help . If not , residents would be unable to pay bills or get access to cash . The nature of the cheque provides the opportunity for these collaborative practices to emerge . In contrast , the dangers of the flexible nature of cheques are not lost on the eighty somethings . “ I only keep one cheque in my purse , not the book . I think the police are dead against you carrying a cheque book around . ” Many of the participants did not keep cheques on them when outside their house and only took their cheque books with them when absolutely necessary . Similarly , the potential for cheques to be completed by another person places care home residents at risk of financial abuse . “We did have somebody here wrote themselves a cheque out , forged a signature . ” In the case that Lynn here describes no money was lost as the account was long - closed . The physical design of the cheque is open to abuse , fraud and deviation from standard usage . At the same time , it is these very same properties of a cheque that make it useful as a collaborative instrument . Trust : checking and security The use of cheques , cards and cash involve different degrees of trust in institutions and people . This became particularly apparent when the participants reflected on their experiences of having cheques refused by trades - people . Betty : “The workman , say the plumber who just comes , “cash please , no I don’t do cheques” . And then of course it doesn’t go through his books so he’s not paying his income tax or whatever . But I find most of them do request ready cash . Doris : “Well it has to go through his books . ” Anna : “A cheque had to go through his accounts and he has to pay tax on it but if he’s got cash in his hand it goes in his pocket . ” Betty , Doris and Anna discussed amongst themselves why they think such trades - people refuse cheques . Their understanding is that cash enables a tradesperson to avoid paying taxes . A cheque is a formalisation of the transaction between customer and seller . Not only does the cheque clearing process make the transaction accountable but it also means the money within the transaction is not immediately available to the tradesperson . The immediate access that cash provides to money compared to cheques can also be beneficial to payments between friends . Margaret noted how she “wouldn’t dream of giving a friend a cheque . . . they would then have to go to the bank and pay it in . . . if you’ve given them cash they’ve got it . ” Cash is preferable in such a situation , as it requires less effort on the part of the person receiving it to access its value . Many of the eighty somethings that used cheques also used bankcards . Most card transactions performed in the UK are authorised by entering a four - digit Personal Identification Number ( PIN ) . Many were concerned with remembering this information . A number of the participants referred to ways in which they had concealed this information for future reference . In a group discussion , the participants responded to an anecdote by one of the researcher’s of how his father wrote down his PIN : Anna : “I’d like to suggest … that he gets a little address book and puts in a false name and false telephone number , with the last 4 digits being his pin . Iris : “I do that , just in case I forget , yes , just as a reference . ” Anna : “Yes , of course , nobody will know that it’s a telephone number . ” Whilst the majority of the participants recorded their PINs by writing them down , many used strategies to ensure there was very little opportunity for another person to access them . Whilst recording PINs using an elaborate code was considered acceptable , sharing PINs with others was not . Margaret has never considered giving her PIN to anyone and said that she has never needed to . Reflecting upon a possible future scenario where she could no longer access the money in her bank account , she noted “I suppose I’d give my son my pin number but he’d have to swear on a stack of bibles he wouldn’t divulge it on pain of death and sign it in blood and things like that ! ” Anna retorts “Well you wouldn’t give it to them unless you trusted them implicitly and that’s the whole thing . ” Joyce referred to the period immediately after she left hospital having had an operation . “When I came out of hospital and was housebound for a few weeks , I gave my daughter my pin number . Let’s hope she has forgotten . ” Marjorie suggested whilst she would trust some people with her details , she would be hesitant to burden them . “It’s putting responsibility on them . ” Agnes was particularly against the sharing of this personal security information , exclaiming “no , never ever . Never would I do that . It’s not that I don’t trust them , but you never know where it might end up . ” She reflects on how Session : Ethnography in the Very Wild February 11 - 15 , 2012 , Seattle , WA , USA 152 this differs from cheques : “ I mean they know the numbers on the cheques , because if I’ve given them cheques , but they don’t know the important numbers that only I know . There’s only me that knows them . ” Whilst Agnes would not ever use a bankcard in a collaborative manner , she has done so with cheques . “We don’t have a computer and sometimes I want to shop online , my friend does it for me , she pays it on the computer and then I give her a cheque . She pays it on her card and then I give her a cheque . … They are friends that we’ve had years and years . We just trust each other , you’ve got to have some friends you trust . ” In her own words , she trusts her friends with the numbers on a cheque but not with the “important numbers” that only she knows . Iris referred to a situation a friend finds herself in . “She is pretty well housebound and her son does her banking for her , he goes to visit every Sunday . He knows the pin number and he gets her card and he goes down to the bank and he draws out money for her … [ once ] it swallowed the card and … refused to give any money . ” For some time , the lady was stuck without a bank card and now will not share the card again . “She said , I don’t really want to give the home help my card and pin number to go and do a bit of shopping . I need cash , how do I get it ? Well actually , she writes a cheque and Tim cashes it at the bank . ” Having come across difficulties with the sharing of the personal information related with collaboratively using bankcards , Iris’ friend reverted to the cheque . Here , the cheque provided a way of accessing cash without having to share the sensitive information associated with bankcards . For many of the eighty somethings , their friends , family and carers , the trust mechanisms associated with cheques stand in sharp contrast to those of cash and bankcards . Cheques engender trust between people . Cheques absorb some of the responsibility of a transaction , supporting collaboration between those who need access to cash or goods and those willing to go out of their way to help them achieve this . DISCUSSION Although the participants note that their own use of cheques is in decline , there are many circumstances where they envisage no other alternative to using them . In part , this may be related to unfamiliarity with electronic alternatives . Some of the situations of cheque use described by our participants have readily available electronic alternatives . Most financial service providers in the UK offer comprehensive internet banking services where money can be transferred quickly , and for free , from one bank account to another . The provision of such services , however , assumes a bank account holder with access to a suitable computer or mobile device to access them . Whilst it is no longer so unusual for an eighty - year - old to actively use computers and participate in online communities [ 10 ] , older people are still far less likely than younger people to have access to the internet [ 18 ] . Indeed , with the exception of one of our participants , even those who used the internet from home did not use online banking services despite it being available to them . The paper it’s written on As with much previous work within CSCW [ e . g . 11 , 15 ] , our findings highlight the importance of the piece of paper a cheque is printed on . We have noted how the eighty somethings and care workers use the specific markings of individuals and the physicality of the paper cheque as denoting specific financial activities . As a cheque is written out , it is written to somebody or something . It is taken as a given that these markings are then checked by the bank when the cheque is paid in . The eighty somethings relate their signing of the cheque to giving a personal authorisation that the payment can be made – although , in reality , UK banks have no way of confirming the legitimacy of these signatures . Electronic records are seen as ephemeral by the eighty somethings in our study , and while the record of electronic payments may in fact be much more secure and permanent than a paper cheque , its essential material qualities suggest otherwise . From the perspective of our participants a cheque is an enduring representation of a transaction from beginning to end . In addition , although the information on the paper cheque is made into an electronic transaction at the bank , the physical record continues its journey to be scanned and then stored . If revoked by the bank or the account holder , this record is physically accessible and the same piece of paper is returned to the person who wrote it . Much like the records that many of the eighty somethings keep in their homes of the money that comes in and out of their accounts each month [ 34 ] , this piece of paper outlasts the transaction it records and is available for checking if needed in the future . Flexibility when needed Cheques often come to the forefront when people have problems paying for bills or accessing money . The unused cheque affords being configured in a collaborative manner between people as a way of working around these difficulties . Someone who cannot physically access cash is able to write a cheque out to a friend , their caregiver , or another organisation and have them collect the money on their behalf . A person wanting to enjoy the benefits of shopping on the internet , but has neither the technical ability nor the equipment to do so , can write a personal cheque to a friend to do it on their behalf . Unlike bankcards , cheques do not require specialist terminals to perform transactions in - situ ( as the processing is done elsewhere ) , and avoids the need to share sensitive information that people believe can be reused and abused . Unlike cash , they are valueless to anyone other than the named payee . Session : Ethnography in the Very Wild February 11 - 15 , 2012 , Seattle , WA , USA 153 Part of the flexibility of a cheque comes from the requirement to only name a ‘payee’ , and not a specific bank account number to which the amount will be transferred to . This has benefits for both the sender and receiver . The sender only needs to know the receiver’s name in order to request the transfer—the receiver has the flexibility to choose what account they wish the money to be deposited into . The sense of giving money to others via cheques is highly valued by the eighty somethings , to the extent that they begin imagining the other receiving their gift . Trust and openness It has been documented in the past that younger people place more trust in online and mobile banking services than older people [ 26 ] . Our study reflects these findings . That the eighty somethings are more willing to trust a cheque than electronic transactions in certain contexts is interesting as , from a security perspective , cheques are a fundamentally insecure instrument . A stolen unused cheque is easily used in a deviant manner . A completed cheque can be physically adjusted to display a larger sum , or the payee can be changed given the right skill . Bauman [ 3 ] argues that the ‘stranger shatters the security upon which daily life rests’ , in the sense that they bring values to a community that undermine the status quo and force reflection on norms . It is likely this happened as people first began receiving cheques from individuals outside the community and beyond the realm of social control . In 1965 the idea of a cheque guarantee scheme was introduced in the UK to retrospectively build trust into the cheque system . Security through openness amongst close communities affords accountability but also enables members to develop a detailed picture of who can be trusted and collaborated with over time . Cheques are grounded in the expectation that the behaviour of members in the community can be influenced by social control . The fact that two individuals collaborate financially using a system that has widely known security loopholes while still arriving at a satisfactory outcome for both parties reflects strongly on their integrity . It is this model of security through openness that allowed one participant’s friend to purchase items on their behalf , despite the cheque not yet being cleared . What is implicit in the sending and receiving of cheques is the ritual where parties probe the integrity of each other by turn - based exposure to risk . By accepting an unguaranteed cheque the recipient makes a gesture of trust towards the sender . Equally by sending a cheque the sender stakes a claim of being trustworthy . It is clear that the original trust - based model is the preferred mode of cheque usage : figures from 2007 show that of 1 . 4 billion cheques sent in the UK , only 7 % were guaranteed [ 29 ] . DESIGNING FOR TRUST Whilst cheques are still based on an eco - system of trust , current digital technologies are less so . Much like cheque use pre - 1965 , the user base of the Internet grew steadily and was mostly formed of people known to one - another . In 1988 Robert Morris Jnr released the Morris Worm which infected 10 % of machines on the Internet . This breach destroyed the socially controlled security of the early Internet community and the focus changed to obtaining security via robust software mechanisms , removing the vulnerabilities that were once left open . In line with this , many modern payment methods , such as bankcards and phone / internet - based systems , are built upon traditional security features of authenticity , integrity and confidentiality . Our study suggests that interpersonal trust cannot be explicitly designed into a payment system . The eighty somethings that would normally entrust friends and family with money are reluctant to do so with the “important numbers ” that only they know . The explicit design of PINs and passwords into the system inhibits the financial collaboration between one another that is sometimes desired and , on occasions , a necessity . Partly , this is because PINs provide all or nothing access—if you share your PIN with someone to withdraw a specific amount of money or pay a particular bill on your behalf , then there is little to stop them using it for other payments or withdrawals if so inclined . Cheque design supports the emergence of trust as they can be pre - configured by the account holder before being passed on . It is possible to configure the amount the transaction is for , the earliest date it should be performed , and who can deposit it . The possibility and extent of fraud is then limited . In the event that something does go wrong , a cheque can only be used once . It can also be revoked , and there is a permanent paper record to call upon . Whilst a cheque’s security is ‘open’ , there are clear aspects of its design that act as catalysts for trusting others . There are design opportunities here to increase support for situations requiring shades of grey—for example , types of accounts and bank cards that are limited in the amounts of money , locations , and length of time they can be used for— so that trust is better enabled between individuals . However , in reference to designing a new cheque perhaps the strongest case is not to design a replacement at all . IMPLICATIONS FOR NON - DESIGN Baumer and Silberman [ 4 ] critique the tendency for HCI research to find applications of computational technologies where they might not be entirely appropriate . They argue that ‘implications not to design’ are a valuable part of a future , more critically aware and reflective , HCI discipline . Clearly , there is a substantial element of the cheque replacement discussion that fits well with this argument . Indeed , during later participatory design workshops with the eighty somethings this case was made quite explicit . When asked what “smart money” might look like Margaret replied “ Well I visualise it as a blank note with no sum on . ” Iris interjected “ Like a cheque in other words ! You can…” Session : Ethnography in the Very Wild February 11 - 15 , 2012 , Seattle , WA , USA 154 Anna took up the thread “ Fill it in yourself ! ” and Iris completed the thought : “ fill it in and validate with whatever amount you want . ” All of the workshop participants became animated and enthused during this exchange . Margaret smiled as she explained that a cheque was smart money : “ Because a cheque has all your details on . ” And Iris laughingly agreed “ It’s only when it gets to the recipient that it’s of any value ! ” Doris offered her delighted conclusion : “ There’s nothing new you know ! ” Doris’ point here is not included simply to illustrate the eighty somethings attachment to the familiar or a reluctance to change . It is included to emphasise that , as GK Chesterton once remarked , progress is not always about leaving things behind . This is not to argue that the situation here requires no design intervention at all . It is clear that UK banks , and possibly those in other countries still using cheque - like payment systems , are intent on withdrawing them , if not sooner then later . Therefore , design and technological innovation is required to reduce the reasons why these paper instruments are so costly to the banks . In this context , rather than replace the paper cheque , it would be more appropriate to explore how it might be kept and better linked to the electronic payments systems banks use today . Previous work has explored the linking of paper documents to webspace via hyperlinks scanned from an OCR adapted pen [ 1 ] , barcode scanners [ 27 ] , and advanced computer vision and object recognition systems [ 23 ] . Anoto digital pen technology [ 14 ] has been established for a number of years , and could feasibly be integrated into the design of a typical cheque book so as to make electronic payments . These advances highlight the plausibility of not necessarily abolishing cheques , but rather finding novel ways of using the current paper cheque to make electronic transactions . Innovations may also be found in approaches that support the continued existence of cheques without the banking industry’s direct involvement . In Kenya , a lack of trust in large banking organisations and a need for accessing funds from a wide variety of locations has made the mobile payment system M - PESA highly popular [ 17 ] . Here money transfers are made via SMS on basic mobile phones and entirely administered by the mobile network . Similarly , in the UK there is a very real sense that large retailers such as Tesco , who have a stronger customer ethos and take more risks in the use of novel technologies , will begin taking significant custom from traditional banks [ 36 ] . Organisations such as ZOPA [ 37 ] make use of peer - to - peer platforms that brings lenders and borrowers together without the need of a bank . The design and technical challenge may be to establish non - banking sector organisations that accept and process cheques on behalf of customers—acting as an intermediary between account holder and the bank . Indeed , following the findings of this study the researchers are exploring how they can act as such an intermediary on behalf of the cheque - using participants . Currently , the eighty somethings are performing small transactions to ‘real’ payees with a pre - paid cheque book , sending them to the first author who arranges the electronic transfer of funds on their behalf . Future work will explore in depth the uses that the participants made of these cheques , and how technology might better support the interactions between cheque user and intermediary . CONCLUSION This study has identified a number of concerns for the design of future payment methods that seek to replace the cheque . Whilst current electronic payment systems separate the recording of transactions from the payment method , cheques and the practices surrounding them make this connection transparent . As we have found , the model of cheque processing imagined by the eighty somethings is one where a piece of paper moves from place to place between people . Digitising even small parts of cheque - based transactions might be detrimental to the models of collaboration , trust and security that the eighty somethings and their carers base their use of cheques on . Trust needs to be allowed to emerge in order to encourage financial collaboration between people . This is counter - intuitive to how contemporary digital payment systems are designed . People born before 1930 have built their attitudes and values to trust not through security protocols and authentication but by learning to keep track of where their money has gone and by knowing who to share it with . The security flaws of the cheque are what make it meaningful to this group of people and make them so useful in a care home setting . Often , groups such as the eighty somethings are considered a special case to be catered for in the final years of their lives . Cheques appear to be a rare case where they are well catered for already—yet we ( researchers , bankers , and younger people ) are inclined to design them a replacement regardless . However , as we have argued in this paper , the implications for design are not always as strong as the implications for preserving much of what we already have . New services such as ZOPA [ 37 ] and M - PESA [ 17 ] indicate that future banking might involve not just new technologies but new institutions . When bankers next consider phasing out cheques it may be that their customers will consider phasing out banks . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We would like to thank our participants for their time , and Emma Jones and Lynn McInnes at Northumbria University for their support in organising the workshops . This research was performed as part of the New Approaches to Banking for the Older Old project and the Social Inclusion through the Digital Economy ( SiDE ) Research Hub , funded by Research Councils UK Digital Economy Theme . Session : Ethnography in the Very Wild February 11 - 15 , 2012 , Seattle , WA , USA 155 REFERENCES 1 . Arai , T . , Aust , D . and Hudson , S . , PaperLink : A technique for hyperlinking from real paper to electronic content . In Proc . CHI ‘97 , ( Atlanta , GA , 1997 ) , ACM . 2 . Barclays mobile banking services . http : / / www . barclays . co . uk / MobileBankingServices / 3 . Bauman , Z . Postmodernity and its discontents . New York University Press , New York , 1997 . 4 . Baumer , E . And Silberman , M . When the implication is not to design ( Technology ) . In Proc . CHI ‘11 , ACM Press ( 2011 ) , 2271 - 2274 . 5 . Bills of Exchange Act 1882 . 1882 . 6 . Braun , V . And Clarke , V . Using thematic analysis in psychology . Qualitative research in psychology , 3 ( 77 ) , ( 2006 ) , 77 - 101 . 7 . Cheque and Credit Clearing Company . 2 - 4 - 6 timescales explained . http : / / www . chequeandcredit . co . uk / 246 / 8 . Cheque and Credit Clearing Company . The Great British Cheque Report , London , UK , 2009 . 9 . Dini , E . and Goldring , S . Estimating the changing population of the ‘oldest old’ . ONS Population Trends , 132 . ( 2008 ) 7 - 16 . 10 . Harley , D . and Fitzpatrick , G . YouTube and intergenerational communication : The case of Geriatric1927 . Universal Access in the Information Society , 8 ( 1 ) , 5 - 20 . 11 . Heath , C . and Luff , P . , Documents and professional practice : ‘Bad’ organisational reasons for ‘good’ clinical records . In Proc . CSCW 1996 , ACM Press ( 1996 ) , 354 - 363 . 12 . HM Treasury Financial Inclusion : An Action Plan for 2008 - 11 . HM Treasury , London , 2007 . 13 . King , M . Cheque Abolition Slammed by Treasury Select Committee . The Guardian , 24 th August 2011 . 14 . Luff , P . , Heath , C . , Norrie , M . , Signer , B . and Herdman , P . , Only Touching the Surface : Creating Affinities Between Digital Content and Paper . In Proc . CSCW ‘04 , ACM Press ( 2004 ) , 523 - 532 . 15 . MacKay , W . Is paper safer ? The role of paper flight strips in air traffic control . Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , 6 ( 4 ) , ACM ( 1999 ) , 311 - 340 . 16 . Malenczuk , L . How will we pay ? Communique , 1 , UK Payments Council ( 2010 ) , 4 - 6 . 17 . Mas , I . and Morawczynski , O . Designing mobile money services : Lessons from M - PESA . Innovations , 4 ( 2 ) , Springer ( 2009 ) , 77 - 91 . 18 . Office of Communications . Accessing the internet at home . OFCOM , London , 2009 . 19 . PayPal iPhone App . http : / / itunes . apple . com / us / app / paypal / 20 . Piper , A . , and Hollan , J . Tabletop displays for small group study : affordances of paper and digital materials . In Proc . CHI ‘09 . ACM Press ( 2009 ) , 1227 - 1236 . 21 . Plimmer , B . , and Apperley , M . Making paperless work . In Proc . CHINZ ‘07 . ACM Press ( 2007 ) , 1 - 8 . 22 . QuickTap . http : / / shop . orange . co . uk / mobile - phones / contactless 23 . Robertson , C . and Robinson , J . , Live Paper : Video augmentation to simulate interactive paper . In Proc . The Seventh ACM international Conference on Multimedia ( Part 2 ) , ACM Press ( 1999 ) . 24 . Sellen , A . and Harper , R . The Myth of the Paperless Office . The MIT Press , Cambridge , 2001 . 25 . Schilit , B . , Golovchinsky G . , , and Price M . Beyond paper : supporting active reading with free form digital ink annotations . In Proc . CHI ‘98 , ACM Press ( 1998 ) , 249 - 256 . 26 . Singh , S . and Morley , C . Young Australians’ privacy , security and trust in internet banking . In Proc . OZCHI ‘09 , ACM Press ( 2009 ) . 121 - 128 . 27 . Smith , J . , Long , J . , Lung , T . and Anwar , M . , PaperSpace : A System for Managing Digital and Paper Documents . In Proc . CHI 2006 , ACM Press ( 2006 ) , 1343 - 1348 . 28 . Tripp , R . Current UK Cheque Clearing Process , 2007 . http : / / www . howbankswork . com / 15 . 1 . html 29 . UK Payments Administration . Fact sheet for people who still write cheques backed by a guarantee card . UK Payments Administration , London , 2008 . 30 . UK Payments Council . The Future of Cheques in the UK . UK Payments Council , London , 2009 . 31 . UK Payments Council . Payments Council Cheque Replacement Programme 2010 – a progress report . UK Payments Council , London , 2010 . 32 . UK Payments Council . Cheque replacement programme : Commitments for consumers , small businesses and the charity and voluntary sector . Payments Council , London , 2010 . 33 . United Nations . World population ageing : 1950 - 2050 . ( 2002 ) . http : / / www . un . org / esa / population / publications / worldageing19502050 34 . Vines , J . , Blythe , M . , Dunphy , P . , and Monk , A . Eighty Something : Banking for the older old . In Proc . BCS - HCI 2011 , BCS ( 2011 ) , 1 - 10 . 35 . Wells , J . An inclusive approach to financial products . Age Concern UK , London , 2008 . 36 . Worthington , S . And Welch , P . Banking without the banks . International Journal of Bank Marketing , 29 ( 2 ) , Emerald ( 2011 ) , 190 - 201 . 37 . ZOPA . http : / / uk . zopa . com / ZopaWeb / Session : Ethnography in the Very Wild February 11 - 15 , 2012 , Seattle , WA , USA 156