a r X i v : c ond - m a t / 0502397v1 [ c ond - m a t . s o f t ] 16 F e b 2005 The origin of stiffening in cross - linked semiﬂexible networks P . R . Onck , T . Koeman , T . van Dillen , E . van der Giessen 1 1 Micromechanics of Materials , Materials Science Centre , Nijenborgh 4 , 9747 AG Groningen , The Netherlands Strain stiffening of protein networks is explored by means of a ﬁnite strain analysis of a two - dimensional network model of cross - linked semiﬂexible ﬁlaments . The results show that stiffening is caused by non - afﬁne network rearrangements that govern a transition from a bending dominated response at small strains to a stretch - ing dominated response at large strains . Thermally - induced ﬁlament undulations only have a minor effect ; they merely postpone the transition . PACS numbers : 87 . 16 . Ka , 87 . 15 . La , 82 . 35 . Lr There is a deep interest in the mechanical response of bio - logical tissues and gels in view of the importance for biolog - ical functions such as cell motility and mechanotransduction . Many network - like biological tissues respond to deformation by exhibiting an increasing stiffness , i . e . ratio between change of stress and change of strain . This has been demonstrated by micropipette and microtwisting experiments [ 1 ] on individ - ual cells and through rheological experiments on in - vitro gels of cytoskeletal ﬁlaments ( actin , vimentin , keratin [ 2 , 3 , 4 ] and neuronal intermediate ﬁlaments [ 5 ] ) , as well as on ﬁbrin [ 6 , 7 ] . These biological gels fall within the class of semiﬂexible poly - mers , which has also attracted much theoretical attention in the last decade [ 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 ] . However , these theoreti - cal studies have primarily focused on the small - strain regime , tractable for analytical treatment . In a simple conceptual view , a biopolymer network is an interlinked structure of ﬁlaments . Thus , stiffening can re - sult from stiffening of the polymeric ﬁlaments between cross - links , from alterations in the network structure , or both . The current paradigm is that stiffening is primarily due to the stiff - ening of the ﬁlaments themselves . This idea has been worked out in detail very recently by Storm et al . [ 5 ] by adopting the worm - like chain model for actin ﬁlaments in combina - tion with the assumption that the network deforms in an afﬁne manner , i . e . , each ﬁlament is assumed to follow the overall de - formation . The worm - like chain model is a well - documented description for the stretching of semiﬂexible polymers , where the longitudinal stiffness of undulated ﬁlaments is attributed primarily to bending ; the axial stiffness of the polymeric chain itself is much higher [ 8 , 13 ] . As the ﬁlament is stretched ( at constant temperature ) , the amplitude of the transverse thermal undulations reduces and , as a consequence , the stiffness in - creases . In the limit that the ﬁlament is pulled straight , all sub - sequent axial deformation would have to originate from axial straining of the chain , but at an enormous energy cost . Given this description of individual ﬁlaments , Storm et al . [ 5 ] pro - ceed by considering a network consisting of inﬁnitely many ﬁlaments . Initially the ﬁlaments are randomly orientated , and as the sample is deformed the network is assumed to distort in an afﬁne manner . The afﬁne deformation assumption is well known in network models for rubber elasticity , and allows for a relatively simple description of the overall network response on the basis of the behavior of a single ﬁlament . The small - strain afﬁne deformation assumption in two - dimensional net - works of straight ﬁlaments has recently been studied in great detail by Head et al . [ 11 ] , who conclude that its validity de - pends on the cross - link density of the ﬁlaments . Their conclu - sion , however , cannot be immediately transferred to the stiff - ening results of Storm et al . since it applies only to the initial response . In contrast with the cited literature , we demonstrate in this paper that stiffening lies in the network rather than in its constituents . During deformation , the ﬁlaments rotate in the direction of straining , which induces a transition from a bending - dominated response to one that is controlled by stretching of aligned ﬁlaments . By comparing cross - linked networks with and without thermal undulations , we show that ﬁlament reorientation is the dominant mechanism , while the thermal undulations only postpone the onset of stiffening . Our model is a two - dimensional network model of ﬁla - ments in a periodic unit cell of dimensions W × W . The net - work is generated by randomly placing ﬁlaments with length L at random orientations inside the cell , with proper account of periodicity . Thermal undulations are mimicked by super - posing on each ﬁlament transverse normal modes of the type b n sin ( n p x / L ) , where the ampitudes b n follow a Gaussian dis - tribution ( cf . [ 14 ] ) with standard deviation p 2 / ( l p L ) ( L / n p ) 2 . The persistence length l p , i . e . , the distance over which the ﬁl - aments appear straight , is expressed as l p (cid:181) k / ( k B T ) in terms of the bending stiffness k of the ﬁlaments , Boltzmann’s con - stant k B and temperature T . Clearly , the ﬁlaments are straight in case the temperature is low or the bending stiffness is high . We use the ﬁrst 10 normal modes to generate the initial ge - ometry of the ﬁlaments and treat l p as an independent quan - tity . During mechanical loading , thermal effects are no longer taken into account . Points where ﬁlaments overlap are considered to be cross - links , similar to the procedure used by Head et al . [ 11 ] and Wilhelm and Frey [ 12 ] . The networks generated by this pro - cedure are taken as the initial , stress - free conﬁguration . In the calculations , the cross - links are assumed to be stiff , so that both displacement and rotation of the two ﬁlaments at the cross - link point remain the same . The ﬁlaments are elastic rods , characterized by a stretching stiffness µ ( axial force [ 15 ] needed to induce a unit axial strain ) and a bending stiffness k ( bending moment needed to induce a unit radius of curvature ) . 2 For isotropic elastic rods these values are related through their cross - sectional geometry , but are treated here as independent . The density of the network is characterized by the line den - sity r , i . e . , the total length of ﬁlaments in the unit - cell divided by the cell area , W 2 . For networks with straight ﬁlaments ( l p / L → ¥ ) , the average distance between cross - links , l c , is inversely proportional to r through l c = p / r [ 16 ] . We con - sider networks of different densities , but only above the rigid - ity percolation threshold [ 12 ] . For the numerical study we use the ﬁnite element method , discretizing each ﬁlament with 10 equal - sized Euler – Bernoulli beam elements accounting for stretching and bend - ing . Geometry changes are accounted for by an updated La - grangian ﬁnite strain formulation . All ﬁlaments are perfectly bonded to rigid top and bottom plates , with the top plate dis - placed horizontally relative to the bottom plate over a distance G W , corresponding to an applied shear strain G . The macro - scopic shear stress t is calculated from the total horizontal reaction force at the top , divided by W . Convergence studies ensured that the cell size W does not affect the results . The parameters governing the system are t , G , µ , k , L , r and l p . We choose to present the results through the follow - ing dimensionless parameters : ¯ t = t L / µ , G , ¯ r = r L , ¯ l p = l p / L and ¯ l b = p k / ( µL 2 ) . Note that ¯ l b is a measure for the ’ﬂoppy - ness’ of the ﬁlaments , which reduces to the slenderness ratio ( thickness over length ) for isotropic elastic rods , and ¯ l p sets the initial shape of the ﬁlaments . G t 0 0 . 05 0 . 1 0 . 15 0 . 2 0 . 25 0 0 . 01 0 . 02 0 . 03 0 . 04 l p > > 1 l p = 1 Map 11 r = 13 r = 19 r = 25 FIG . 1 : Average stress ( ¯ t ) versus strain ( G ) response for networks with ¯ l b = 2 . 3 × 10 − 4 and µ / L = 1 . 6 MPa at three different densities ¯ r and for straight ( ¯ l p > > 1 ) and undulated ( ¯ l p = 1 ) ﬁlaments . The error bars have a length of two times the standard deviation in strain at a given G for ten different realizations at each density . The squares correspond to three instances during deformation for which the net - work geometry is shown in Fig . 2 . In a ﬁrst set of calculations we take ¯ l b = 2 . 3 × 10 − 4 and µ / L = 1 . 6 MPa ( representative for actin microﬁlaments [ 17 ] ) with a density of ¯ r = 13 , which is well above the rigidity per - colation threshold of ¯ r = 5 . 7 [ 12 ] . The persistence length is taken to be much larger than the ﬁlament length ( ¯ l p > > 1 ) , corresponding to straight ﬁlaments . Figure 1 shows the stress - strain response ( averaged over ten different random realiza - tions ) . Three regimes can be identiﬁed : a regime with a rel - atively low stiffness d ¯ t / d G , a transition regime and a high - stiffness regime . Figure 2 shows three snapshots of the ¯ r = 13 network geometry at G = 0 , 0 . 08 and 0 . 24 for a typical real - ization close to the average response ( see the solid squares in Fig . 1 ) . Comparison of Fig . 2b with Fig . 2a reveals that many initially straight ﬁlaments have deformed by bending , which corresponds to the characteristic low stiffness at small strain levels for these densities [ 11 , 12 ] . Subsequently , during the transition regime , percolations of stretched ﬁlaments appear that connect the top and bottom of the cell along a ∼ 45 ◦ di - rection , Fig . 2c . These ﬁlaments are loaded in axial tension , resulting in a higher overall stiffness . Thus , Figs . 2b to 2c demonstrate the transition from a bending dominated regime at small strains ( total mechanical energy of the systems pri - marily consists of bending energy ) to a stretching dominated regime at higher strain levels ( total energy dominated by the axial stretching energy ) . The stress – strain response for two higher densities , ¯ r = 19 and 25 , is included in Fig . 1 . The standard deviation in strain from ten realizations is approximately independent of the stress value for a given density . The scatter in strain , de - ﬁned as the ratio between the standard deviation and the av - erage , is independent of the density and has a value of ap - proximately 0 . 2 . Figure 1 shows that a certain stress level is achieved at smaller strains in case the network is denser . The network thus gets stiffer with increasing density , while the transition from bending to stretching becomes less abrupt and occurs at smaller strain levels . Next , the effect of thermally - induced undulations is inves - tigated . The same parameters are used as before , but now we use ¯ l p = 1 , in accordance with experimental ﬁndings for actin ﬁlaments [ 17 ] . Changing the persistence length from l p ≫ L to l p = L is physically similar to increasing the temperature from 0K to 293K before cross - linking and loading the network in - stantaneously . Figure 3 depicts the initial geometry for a net - work where the initial ﬁlaments’ end - to - end vectors have the same location and orientation as shown in Fig . 2a . The stress – strain results included in Fig . 1 ( dashed lines ) show that the thermal undulations do not change the shape of the overall stress – strain curve , but merely delay the transition from bend - ing to stretching . The associated ‘delay’ strain at an applied strain level of G = 0 . 25 is 0 . 018 , 0 . 029 and 0 . 024 for ¯ r = 13 , 19 and 25 , respectively . Similar values were found for densi - ties up to 38 . Clearly , only a small fraction of the total strain is due to the presence of thermally - induced undulations . To make connection with the small - strain study by Head et al . [ 11 ] , we monitor the degree of afﬁnity of the network during straining to large deformations . For this purpose , we 3 ( b ) ( a ) ( c ) FIG . 2 : ( a ) Initial , G = 0 ; ( b ) intermediate , G = 0 . 08 and ( c ) large strain , G = 0 . 24 , network conﬁgurations for a typical ¯ r = 13 realization close to the average response shown in Fig . 1 ( squares ) . FIG . 3 : Initial conformation of a ¯ r = 13 network with undulated ﬁlaments corresponding to ¯ l p = 1 . deﬁne the deviation from afﬁne behavior , D A , as D A = 1 n n (cid:229) k = 1 k D r ( k ) − D r ( k ) aff k DG k r ( k ) k , ( 1 ) where k r k 2 = r · r , n the number of cross - links and r ( k ) is the current position vector of cross - link k . D r ( k ) is the increment in the position of cross - link k during a shear increment DG in the simulations , while D r ( k ) aff is the corresponding value were the deformation afﬁne . Figure 4 shows the evolution of D A as a function of G for the cases shown in Fig . 1 . It is observed that the deformation is not afﬁne at small strains , in accordance with [ 11 , 12 ] , while the deformation becomes increasingly afﬁne ( D A → 0 ) with increasing strain . By comparing Fig . 4 with Fig . 1 , we ﬁnd that in the transition from the bending to the stretching regime , D A increases signiﬁcantly , indicating a reorientation of the ﬁlaments . The peak in the D A – G curve occurs for both straight and undulated ﬁlaments in the transi - tion regime . This is another indication of the fact that ﬁlament undulations do not change the nature of network deformation , but merely enhance the strain value at which stretching sets in . Once stretching has set in , the deformation becomes more and more afﬁne . G D A 0 0 . 05 0 . 1 0 . 15 0 . 2 0 . 25 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 l p > > 1 l p = 1 r = 13 r = 19 r = 25 FIG . 4 : The deviation from afﬁne behavior , D A , as a function of strain , G , for ¯ l b = 2 . 3 × 10 − 4 and µ / L = 1 . 6 MPa , at three different densities and for straight ( ¯ l p > > 1 ) and undulated ( ¯ l p = 1 ) ﬁlaments . To study the inﬂuence of the ﬁlament properties , the calcu - lations are repeated , but with a larger bending and stretching stiffness , ¯ l b = 8 . 3 × 10 − 4 and µ / L = 8 MPa ( representative for microtubuli [ 18 ] ) . Note that the bending stiffness increases by a factor of 65 , while the stretching stiffness becomes ﬁve times larger . Because of the enhanced bending stiffness , the per - sistence length at the high temperature increases from ¯ l p = 1 to 65 so that the ﬁlaments are almost straight ( in accordance with experimental observations on microtubuli [ 17 ] ) . Figure 5 shows the instantaneous shear stiffness , ¯ G = d ¯ t / d G , as a func - 4 G G 0 0 . 05 0 . 1 0 . 15 0 . 2 0 . 25 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 G (cid:181) rG 2 ( 1 + G ) −3 / 2 l b = 2 . 3 · 10 −4 l b = 8 . 3 · 10 −4 r = 13 r = 19 r = 25 r = 31 r = 38 FIG . 5 : Shear stiffness as a function of strain for networks with straight ﬁlaments having ¯ l b = 2 . 3 × 10 − 4 or 8 . 3 × 10 − 4 . The dot - ted lines represent the scaling relationship ( 2 ) , ﬁtted to ¯ r = 25 . tion of shear strain G for the two different values of ¯ l b ( and ref - erence stress µ / L ) . It can be observed that for the ‘ﬂoppy’ ﬁl - aments ( ¯ l b = 2 . 3 × 10 − 4 ) the transition from the low - stiffness to the high - stiffness regime shifts to lower strains with in - creasing density , consistent with Figs . 1 and 4 . For densities higher than ¯ r = 25 , the transition from bending to stretching is no longer accompanied by severe ﬁlament reorientations that cause a peak in D A ( see Fig . 4 ) , but progresses more smoothly . At higher densities of either ﬂoppy or stiff ﬁlaments , the stiff - ness ﬁrst decreases with strain at small strain levels . This is caused by buckling of ﬁlaments oriented at 135 ◦ away from the horizontal axis ( positive to the right in Fig . 2 ) , which are loaded primarily in compression . Figure 5 also shows that at small strains the overall stiffness for the ﬂoppy ﬁlaments is much lower than that of the stiffer ﬁlaments , but converges to the same value at larger strains . This reﬂects that bending is the dominant deformation mode in the low - stiffness regime at small strains , while ﬁlament stretching governed by µ domi - nates at large strains . When ﬁlament stretching is the dominant deformation mechanism , the following scaling arguments hold . The over - all stress t is distributed , on average , over the ﬁlaments through the force F (cid:181) t l c , where l c (cid:181) 1 / r is the ‘mesh size’ of the network . This force causes the ﬁlaments to deform axially , yielding an elongation d (cid:181) Fl c / µ , which yields an average strain G (cid:181) d / l c . Substitution yields G (cid:181) t / ( r µ ) so that G (cid:181) r µ . In three dimensions the same scaling relation holds [ 19 ] . It should be noted that in the high - stiffness regime , the network ‘locks’ when a number of percolations connects top and bot - tom . Further straining the network only results in stretching the ( ﬁxed number of ) percolations . In that case one would expect the stiffness to converge to a ﬁxed ‘steady state’ value . However , due to non - linear geometrical effects at large strains , the stiffness increases with straining according to [ 20 ] ¯ G (cid:181) ¯ rG 2 ( 1 + G ) − 3 / 2 . ( 2 ) This scaling is seen from Fig . 5 to successfully characterize the steady state stretching regime at large strains . This study leads to the following conclusions . Stiffening of cross - linked semiﬂexible networks is caused by the tran - sition of a bending - dominated response at small strains to a stretching - dominated response at large strains . This transition is mediated by network rearrangements that are not afﬁne . Filament undulations only have a minor effect ; they merely postpone the transition from bending to stretching . Above a density - dependent transition strain , the network stiffness scales linearly with density and the ﬁlament’s stretching stiff - ness , which is expected to hold in three dimensions as well . [ 1 ] N . Wang and D . E . Ingber , Biochemistry and Cell Biology , 73 , 327 – 335 ( 1995 ) . [ 2 ] P . A . Janmey , S . Hvidt , J . Lamb , T . P . Stossel , Nature 345 , 89 ( 1990 ) . [ 3 ] P . A . Janmey , U . Euteneuer , P . Traub and M . Schliwa , J . Cell Biol . 113 , 155 ( 1991 ) . [ 4 ] L . Ma , J . Xu , P . A . Coulomb and D . J . Wirtz , J . Biol . Chem . 2 74 , 19145 ( 1999 ) . [ 5 ] C . Storm , J . J . Pastore , F . C . MacKintosh , T . C . Lubensky and P . A . Janmey , Nature ( in press ) [ 6 ] S . Hvidt and K . Heller , In : Physical Networks : polymers and gels , Eds . W . Burchard and S . B . Ross - Murphy , Elsevier Ap - plied Science , London , 1990 . [ 7 ] J . V . Shah and P . A . Janmey , Rheol . Acta 36 , 262 - 268 ( 1997 ) . [ 8 ] F . C . MacKintosch , J . K¨as and P . A . Janmey , Phys . Rev . Lett . 75 , 4425 ( 1995 ) . [ 9 ] H . Isambert and A . C . Maggs , Macromolecules 29 , 1036 - 1040 ( 1996 ) . [ 10 ] D . C . Morse , Phys . Rev . E , 58 , R1237 ( 1998 ) . [ 11 ] D . A . Head , A . J . Levine and F . C . MacKintosh , Phys . Rev . E , 68 , 061907 ( 2003 ) . [ 12 ] J . Wilhelm and E . Frey , Phys . Rev . Lett . 91 , 108103 ( 2003 ) . [ 13 ] Bending energy is internal energy , but since the bending inside a ﬁlament is induced by transverse thermal undulations , the stiff - ness according to the worm - like chain model is often referred to as ‘entropic stiffness’ . It should , however , be distinguished from the classical entropy elasticity in ﬂexible polymers . [ 14 ] K¨as , J . , Strey , H . , Tang , J . X . , Finger , D . , Ezzel , R . , Sackmann , E . , Janmey , P . A . , Biophys . J . , vol . 70 , 609 - 625 , 1996 . [ 15 ] All quantities with dimension force are computed per unit out - of - plane thickness . [ 16 ] G . Pike and C . Seager , Phys . Rev . B 10 , 1421 ( 1974 ) . [ 17 ] Howard , J . , Mechanics of motor proteins and the cytoskeleton , Sinauer Associates , Inc . , Sunderland , Massachusetts , 2001 . [ 18 ] Consider a microtubule ( MT ) having an inner radius of 8 nm and an outer radius of 12 nm . If we compare the stretch - ing and bending stiffness with that of an actin microﬁlament ( MF ) , represented by a solid rod of radius 4 nm , it follows that µ MT / µ MF = 5 , k MT / k MF = 65 . [ 19 ] In three dimensions we have F (cid:181) t l 2c and l c (cid:181) 1 / √ r , leading again to G (cid:181) r µ . 5 [ 20 ] Consider a ‘network’ consisting of parallel percolated ﬁlament strings that are initially normal to the shear plane and a dis - tance (cid:181) 1 / r apart . The strings only have an axial stiffness µ . Upon application of a shear strain , the strings only rotate ini - tially , but when straining proceeds and the strings rotate by an angle b = tan − 1 G , they have to stretch , thus leading to an in - crease of the overall stiffness . Straightforward mechanics yields G (cid:181) r µ cos b sin 2 b = r µ G 2 ( 1 + G ) − 3 / 2 , leading to Eq . ( 2 ) . The same scaling holds in three dimensions .