PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE This article was downloaded by : [ Karolinska Institute ] On : 22 November 2010 Access details : Access Details : [ subscription number 928166265 ] Publisher Routledge Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number : 1072954 Registered office : Mortimer House , 37 - 41 Mortimer Street , London W1T 3JH , UK Qualitative Research in Psychology Publication details , including instructions for authors and subscription information : http : / / www . informaworld . com / smpp / title ~ content = t781137235 Using thematic analysis in psychology Virginia Braun a ; Victoria Clarke b a University of Auckland , b University of the West of England , To cite this Article Braun , Virginia and Clarke , Victoria ( 2006 ) ' Using thematic analysis in psychology ' , Qualitative Research in Psychology , 3 : 2 , 77 — 101 To link to this Article : DOI : 10 . 1191 / 1478088706qp063oa URL : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1191 / 1478088706qp063oa Full terms and conditions of use : http : / / www . informaworld . com / terms - and - conditions - of - access . pdf This article may be used for research , teaching and private study purposes . Any substantial or systematic reproduction , re - distribution , re - selling , loan or sub - licensing , systematic supply or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden . The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date . The accuracy of any instructions , formulae and drug doses should be independently verified with primary sources . The publisher shall not be liable for any loss , actions , claims , proceedings , demand or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material . Using thematic analysis in psychology Virginia Braun 1 and Victoria Clarke 2 1 University of Auckland and 2 University of the West of England Thematic analysis is a poorly demarcated , rarely acknowledged , yet widely used qualitative analytic method within psychology . In this paper , we argue that it offers an accessible and theoretically ﬂexible approach to analysing qualitative data . We outline what thematic analysis is , locating it in relation to other qualitative analytic methods that search for themes or patterns , and in relation to different epistemological and ontological positions . We then provide clear guidelines to those wanting to start thematic analysis , or conduct it in a more deliberate and rigorous way , and consider potential pitfalls in conducting thematic analysis . Finally , we outline the disadvantages and advantages of thematic analysis . We conclude by advocating thematic analysis as a useful and ﬂexible method for qualitative research in and beyond psychology . Qualitative Research in Psychology 2006 ; 3 : 77 (cid:2) / 101 Key words : epistemology ; flexibility ; patterns ; qualitative psychology ; thematic analysis Thematic analysis is a poorly demarcated and rarely acknowledged , yet widely used qualitative analytic method ( Boyatzis , 1998 ; Roulston , 2001 ) within and beyond psychology . In this paper , we aim to fill what we , as researchers and teachers in qualitative psychology , have experienced as a current gap (cid:2) / the absence of a paper which adequately outlines the theory , ap - plication and evaluation of thematic ana - lysis , and one which does so in a way accessible to students and those not parti - cularly familiar with qualitative research . 1 That is , we aim to write a paper that will be useful as both a teaching and research tool in qualitative psychology . Therefore , in this paper we discuss theory and method for thematic analysis , and clarify Correspondence : Virginia Braun , Department of Psychology , University of Auckland , Private Bag 92019 , Auckland , New Zealand . E - mail : v . braun @ auckland . ac . nz # 2006 Edward Arnold ( Publishers ) Ltd 10 . 1191 / 1478088706qp063oa Qualitative Research in Psychology 2006 ; 3 : 77 (cid:2) / 101 www . QualResearchPsych . com Downlo aded By : [ Karolinska Institute ] At : 14 : 37 22 November 2010 the similarities and differences between different approaches that share features in common with a thematic approach . Qualitative approaches are incredibly diverse , complex and nuanced ( Holloway and Todres , 2003 ) , and thematic analysis should be seen as a foundational method for qualitative analysis . It is the first qualitative method of analysis that re - searchers should learn , as it provides core skills that will be useful for conducting many other forms of qualitative analysis . Indeed , Holloway and Todres ( 2003 : 347 ) identify ‘thematizing meanings’ as one of a few shared generic skills across qualitative analysis . 2 For this reason , Boyatzis ( 1998 ) characterizes it , not as a specific method , but as a tool to use across different meth - ods . Similarly , Ryan and Bernard ( 2000 ) locate thematic coding as a process per - formed within ‘major’ analytic traditions ( such as grounded theory ) , rather than a specific approach in its own right . We argue thematic analysis should be consid - ered a method in its own right . One of the benefits of thematic analysis is its flexibility . Qualitative analytic methods can be roughly divided into two camps . Within the first , there are those tied to , or stemming from , a particular theoretical or epistemological position . For some of these (cid:2) / such as conversation analysis ( CA ; eg , Hutchby and Wooffitt , 1998 ) and interpre - tative phenomenological analysis ( IPA ; eg , Smith and Osborn , 2003 ) (cid:2) / there is ( as yet ) relatively limited variability in how the method is applied , within that framework . In essence , one recipe guides analysis . For others of these (cid:2) / such as grounded theory ( Glaser , 1992 ; Strauss and Corbin , 1998 ) , discourse analysis ( DA ; eg , Burman and Parker , 1993 ; Potter and Wetherell , 1987 ; Willig , 2003 ) or narrative analysis ( Murray , 2003 ; Riessman , 1993 ) (cid:2) / there are different manifestations of the method , from within the broad theoretical framework . Second , there are methods that are essentially in - dependent of theory and epistemology , and can be applied across a range of theoretical and epistemological approaches . Although often ( implicitly ) framed as a realist / experi - ential method ( Aronson , 1994 ; Roulston , 2001 ) , thematic analysis is actually firmly in the second camp , and is compatible with both essentialist and constructionist para - digms within psychology ( we discuss this later ) . Through its theoretical freedom , the - matic analysis provides a flexible and use - ful research tool , which can potentially provide a rich and detailed , yet complex , account of data . Given the advantages of the flexibility of thematic analysis , it is important that we are clear that we are not trying to limit this flexibility . However , an absence of clear and concise guidelines around thematic analysis means that the ‘anything goes’ critique of qualitative research ( Antaki et al . , 2002 ) may well apply in some instances . With this paper , we hope to strike a balance between demarcating thematic analysis clearly (cid:2) / ie , explaining what it is , and how to do it (cid:2) / and ensuring flexibility in relation to how it is used , so that it does not become limited and constrained , and lose one of its key advan - tages . Indeed , a clear demarcation of this method will be useful to ensure that those who use thematic analysis can make active choices about the particular form of analysis they are engaged in . Therefore , this paper seeks to celebrate the flexibility of the method and provide a vocabulary and ‘recipe’ for people to undertake thematic analysis in a way that is theoretically and methodologically sound . 3 As we will show , what is important is that as well as apply - ing a method to data , researchers make their ( epistemological and other ) assump - 78 V Braun and V Clarke Downlo aded By : [ Karolinska Institute ] At : 14 : 37 22 November 2010 tions explicit ( Holloway and Todres , 2003 ) . Qualitative psychologists need to be clear about what they are doing and why , and to include the often - omitted ‘how’ they did their analysis in their reports ( Attride - Stirling , 2001 ) . In this paper we outline : what thematic analysis is ; a 6 - phase guide to performing thematic analysis ; potential pitfalls to avoid when doing thematic analysis ; what makes good thematic analysis ; and advan - tages and disadvantages of thematic analy - sis . Throughout , we provide exam - ples from the research literature , and our own research . By providing examples , we show the types of research questions and topics that thematic analysis can be used to study . Before we begin , we need to define a few of the terms used throughout the paper . Data corpus refers to all data collected for a particular research project , while data set refers to all the data from the corpus that are being used for a particular analysis . There are two main ways of choosing the data set ( which approach you take depends on whether you are coming to the data with a specific question or not (cid:2) / see ‘A number of decisions’ below ) . First , the data set may consist of many , or all , individual data items within your data corpus . So , for example , in a project on female genital cosmetic surgery , Virginia’s data corpus consists of interviews with surgeons , media items on the topic , and surgeon websites . For any particular analysis , her data set might just be the surgeon inter - views , just the websites ( Braun , 2005b ) , or it might combine surgeon data with some media data ( eg , Braun , 2005a ) . Second , the data set might be identified by a particular analytic interest in some topic in the data , and the data set then becomes all instances in the corpus where that topic is referred . So in Virginia’s example , if she was inter - ested in how ‘sexual pleasure’ was talked about , her data set would consist of all instances across the entire data corpus that had some relevance to sexual pleasure . These two approaches might sometimes be combined to produce the data set . Data item is used to refer to each individual piece of data collected , which together make up the data set or corpus . A data item in this instance would be an indivi - dual surgeon interview , a television docu - mentary , or one particular website . Finally , data extract refers to an individual coded chunk of data , which has been identified within , and extracted from , a data item . There will be many of these , taken from throughout the entire data set , and only a selection of these extracts will feature in the final analysis . What is thematic analysis ? Thematic analysis is a method for identify - ing , analysing and reporting patterns ( themes ) within data . It minimally orga - nizes and describes your data set in ( rich ) detail . However , frequently if goes further than this , and interprets various aspects of the research topic ( Boyatzis , 1998 ) . The range of different possible thematic ana - lyses will further be highlighted in relation to a number of decisions regarding it as a method ( see below ) . Thematic analysis is widely used , but there is no clear agreement about what thematic analysis is and how you go about doing it ( see Attride - Stirling , 2001 ; Boyat - zis , 1998 ; Tuckett , 2005 , for other exam - ples ) . It can be seen as a very poorly ‘branded’ method , in that it does not appear to exist as a ‘named’ analysis in the same way that other methods do ( eg , narrative Using thematic analysis in psychology 79 Downlo aded By : [ Karolinska Institute ] At : 14 : 37 22 November 2010 analysis , grounded theory ) . In this sense , it is often not explicitly claimed as the method of analysis , when , in actuality , we argue that a lot of analysis is essentially thematic (cid:2) / but is either claimed as some - thing else ( such as DA , or even content analysis ( eg , Meehan et al . , 2000 ) ) or not identified as any particular method at all (cid:2) / for example , data were ‘subjected to quali - tative analysis for commonly recurring themes’ ( Braun and Wilkinson , 2003 : 30 ) . If we do not know how people went about analysing their data , or what assumptions informed their analysis , it is difficult to evaluate their research , and to compare and / or synthesize it with other studies on that topic , and it can impede other research - ers carrying out related projects in the future ( Attride - Stirling , 2001 ) . For these reasons alone , clarity on process and prac - tice of method is vital . We hope that this paper will lead to more clarity around thematic analysis . Relatedly , insufficient detail is often gi - ven to reporting the process and detail of analysis ( Attride - Stirling , 2001 ) . It is not uncommon to read of themes ‘emerging’ from the data ( although this issue is not limited to thematic analysis ) . For example , Singer and Hunter’s ( 1999 : 67 ) thematic discourse analysis of women’s experiences of early menopause identified that ‘several themes emerged’ during the analysis . Rubin and Rubin ( 1995 : 226 ) claim that analysis is exciting because ‘you discover themes and concepts embedded throughout your inter - views’ . An account of themes ‘emerging’ or being ‘discovered’ is a passive account of the process of analysis , and it denies the active role the researcher always plays in identifying patterns / themes , selecting which are of interest , and reporting them to the readers ( Taylor and Ussher , 2001 ) . 4 The language of ‘themes emerging’ : can be misinterpreted to mean that themes ‘re - side’ in the data , and if we just look hard enough they will ‘emerge’ like Venus on the half shell . If themes ‘reside’ anywhere , they reside in our heads from our thinking about our data and creating links as we understand them . ( Ely et al . , 1997 : 205 (cid:2) / 6 ) At this point , it is important to acknowledge our own theoretical positions and values in relation to qualitative research . We do not subscribe to a naı¨ve realist view of qualita - tive research , where the researcher can simply ‘give voice’ ( see Fine , 2002 ) to their participants . As Fine ( 2002 ) : 218 ) argues , even a ‘giving voice’ approach ‘involves carving out unacknowledged pieces of narrative evidence that we select , edit , and deploy to border our arguments’ . How - ever , nor do we think there is one ideal theoretical framework for conducting quali - tative research , or indeed one ideal method . What is important is that the theoretical framework and methods match what the researcher wants to know , and that they acknowledge these decisions , and recognize them as decisions . Thematic analysis differs from other ana - lytic methods that seek to describe patterns across qualitative data (cid:2) / such as ‘thematic’ DA , thematic decomposition analysis , IPA and grounded theory . 5 Both IPA and grounded theory seek patterns in the data , but are theoretically bounded . IPA is at - tached to a phenomenological epistemology ( Smith et al . , 1999 ; Smith and Osborn , 2003 ) , which gives experience primacy ( Holloway and Todres , 2003 ) , and is about understanding people’s everyday experi - ence of reality , in great detail , in order to gain an understanding of the phenomenon in question ( McLeod , 2001 ) . To complicate matters , grounded theory comes in different versions ( Charmaz , 2002 ) . Regardless , the goal of a grounded theory analysis is to generate a plausible (cid:2) / and useful (cid:2) / theory 80 V Braun and V Clarke Downlo aded By : [ Karolinska Institute ] At : 14 : 37 22 November 2010 of the phenomena that is grounded in the data ( McLeod , 2001 ) . However , in our ex - perience , grounded theory seems increas - ingly to be used in a way that is essentially grounded theory ‘lite’ (cid:2) / as a set of proce - dures for coding data very much akin to thematic analysis . Such analyses do not appear to fully subscribe to the theoretical commitments of a ‘full - fat’ grounded theory , which requires analysis to be directed to - wards theory development ( Holloway and Todres , 2003 ) . We argue , therefore , that a ‘named and claimed’ thematic analysis means researchers need not subscribe to the implicit theoretical commitments of grounded theory if they do not wish to produce a fully worked - up grounded - theory analysis . The term ‘thematic DA’ is used to refer to a wide range of pattern - type analysis of data , ranging from thematic analysis within a social constructionist epistemology ( ie , where patterns are identified as socially produced , but no discursive analyse is conducted ) , to forms of analysis very much akin to the interpretative repertoire form of DA ( Clarke , 2005 ) . Thematic decom - position analysis ( eg , Stenner , 1993 ; Ussher and Mooney - Somers , 2000 ) is a specifically named form of ‘thematic’ DA , which iden - tifies patterns ( themes , stories ) within data , and theorizes language as constitutive of meaning and meaning as social . These different methods share a search for certain themes or patterns across an ( entire ) data set , rather than within a data item , such as an individual interview or interviews from one person , as in the case of biographical or case - study forms of analy - sis , such as narrative analysis ( eg , Murray , 2003 ; Riessman , 1993 ) . In this sense , they more or less overlap with thematic analysis . As thematic analysis does not require the detailed theoretical and technological knowledge of approaches , such as grounded theory and DA , it can offer a more accessible form of analysis , particularly for those early in a qualitative research career . In contrast to IPA or grounded theory ( and other methods like narrative analysis DA or CA ) , thematic analysis is not wedded to any pre - existing theoretical framework , and therefore it can be used within different theoretical frameworks ( although not all ) , and can be used to do different things within them . Thematic analysis can be an essentialist or realist method , which reports experiences , meanings and the reality of participants , or it can be a constructionist method , which examines the ways in which events , realities , meanings , experiences and so on are the effects of a range of discourses operating within society . It can also be a ‘contextualist’ method , sitting between the two poles of essentialism and construction - ism , and characterized by theories , such as critical realism ( eg , Willig , 1999 ) , which acknowledge the ways individuals make meaning of their experience , and , in turn , the ways the broader social context im - pinges on those meanings , while retaining focus on the material and other limits of ‘reality’ . Therefore , thematic analysis can be a method that works both to reflect reality and to unpick or unravel the surface of ‘reality’ . However , it is important that the theoretical position of a thematic analysis is made clear , as this is all too often left unspoken ( and is then typically a realist account ) . Any theoretical framework carries with it a number of assumptions about the nature of the data , what they represent in terms of the ‘the world’ , ‘reality’ , and so forth . A good thematic analysis will make this transparent . A number of decisions Thematic analysis involves a number of choices which are often not made explicit Using thematic analysis in psychology 81 Downlo aded By : [ Karolinska Institute ] At : 14 : 37 22 November 2010 ( or are certainly typically not discussed in the method section of papers ) , but which need explicitly to be considered and dis - cussed . In practice , these questions should be considered before analysis ( and some - times even collection ) of the data begins , and there needs to be an ongoing reflexive dialogue on the part of the researcher or researchers with regards to these issues , throughout the analytic process . The method section of Taylor and Ussher’s ( 2001 ) thematic DA of S & M provides a good example of research which presents this process explicitly ; the method section of Braun and Wilkinson ( 2003 ) does not . What counts as a theme ? A theme captures something important about the data in relation to the research question , and represents some level of patterned response or meaning within the data set . An important question to address in terms of coding is : what counts as a pattern / theme , or what ‘size’ does a theme need to be ? This is a question of prevalence , in terms both of space within each data item and of prevalence across the entire data set . Ideally , there will be a number of instances of the theme across the data set , but more instances do not necessarily mean the theme itself is more crucial . As this is qualitative analysis , there is no hard - and - fast answer to the question of what propor - tion of your data set needs to display evidence of the theme for it to be considered a theme . It is not the case that if it was present in 50 % of one’s data items , it would be a theme , but if it was present only in 47 % , then it would not be a theme . Nor is it the case that a theme is only something that many data items give considerable attention to , rather than a sentence or two . A theme might be given considerable space in some data items , and little or none in others , or it might appear in relatively little of the data set . So , researcher judgement is necessary to determine what a theme is . Our initial guidance around this is that you need to retain some flexibility , and rigid rules really do not work . ( The question of prevalence is revisited in relation to themes and sub - themes , as the refinement of analysis ( see later ) will often result in overall themes , and sub - themes within those . ) Furthermore , the ‘keyness’ of a theme is not necessarily dependent on quantifiable measures (cid:2) / but rather on whether it cap - tures something important in relation to the overall research question . For exam - ple , in Victoria’s research on representa - tions of lesbians and gay parents on 26 talk shows ( Clarke and Kitzinger , 2004 ) , she identified six ‘key’ themes . These six themes were not necessarily the most pre - valent themes across the data set (cid:2) / they appeared in between two and 22 of the 26 talk shows (cid:2) / but together they captured an important element of the way in which lesbians and gay men ‘normalize’ their families in talk show debates . In this in - stance , her thematic analysis was driven by this particular analytic question . How she ‘measured’ prevalence is relevant , as pre - valence can be determined in a number of different ways . Prevalence was counted at the level of the data item ( ie , did a theme appear anywhere in each individual talk show ? ) . Alternatively , it could have been counted in terms of the number of different speakers who articulated the theme , across the entire data set , or each individual occurrence of the theme across the entire data set ( which raises complex questions about where an ‘instance’ begins and ends within an extended sequence of talk (cid:2) / see Riessman , 1993 ) . Because prevalence was not crucial to the analysis presented , Vic - toria chose the most straightforward form , 82 V Braun and V Clarke Downlo aded By : [ Karolinska Institute ] At : 14 : 37 22 November 2010 but it is important to note there is no right or wrong method for determining prevalence . Part of the flexibility of thematic analysis is that it allows you to determine themes ( and prevalence ) in a number of ways . What is important is that you are consistent in how you do this within any particular analysis . There are various ‘conventions’ for repre - senting prevalence in thematic ( and other qualitative ) analysis that does not provide a quantified measure ( unlike much content analysis , Wilkinson , 2000 ) (cid:2) / for instance : ‘the majority of participants’ ( Meehan et al . , 2000 : 372 ) , ‘many participants’ ( Taylor and Ussher , 2001 : 298 ) , or ‘a number of participants’ ( Braun et al . , 2003 : 249 ) . Such descriptors work rhetorically to suggest a theme really existed in the data , and to convince us they are reporting truthfully about the data . But do they tell us much ? This is perhaps one area where more debate is needed about how and why we might represent the prevalence of themes in the data , and , indeed , whether , if , and why prevalence is particularly im - portant . A rich description of the data set , or a detailed account of one particular aspect It is important to determine the type of analysis you want to do , and the claims you want to make , in relation to your data set . For instance , you might wish to provide a rich thematic description of your entire data set , so that the reader gets a sense of the predominant or important themes . In this case , the themes you identify , code , and analyse would need to be an accurate reflec - tion of the content of the entire data set . In such an analysis , some depth and complex - ity is necessarily lost ( particularly if you are writing a short dissertation or article with strict word limits ) , but a rich overall de - scription is maintained . This might be a particularly useful method when you are investigating an under - researched area , or you are working with participants whose views on the topic are not known . An alternative use of thematic analysis is to provide a more detailed and nuanced account of one particular theme , or group of themes , within the data . This might relate to a specific question or area of interest within the data ( a semantic approach (cid:2) / see below ) , or to a particular ‘latent’ theme ( see below ) across the whole or majority of the data set . An example of this would be Victoria’s talk show paper , discussed previously ( Clarke and Kitzinger , 2004 ) , which examined nor - malization in lesbians’ and gay men’s ac - counts of parenting . Inductive versus theoretical thematic analysis Themes or patterns within data can be identified in one of two primary ways in thematic analysis : in an inductive or ‘bot - tom up’ way ( eg , Frith and Gleeson , 2004 ) , or in a theoretical or deductive or ‘top down’ way ( eg , Boyatzis , 1998 ; Hayes , 1997 ) . An inductive approach means the themes identified are strongly linked to the data themselves ( Patton , 1990 ) ( as such , this form of thematic analysis bears some simi - larity to grounded theory ) . In this approach , if the data have been collected specifically for the research ( eg , via interview or focus group ) , the themes identified may bear little relation to the specific questions that were asked of the participants . They would also not be driven by the researcher’s theoretical interest in the area or topic . Inductive analysis is therefore a process of coding the data without trying to fit it into a pre - existing coding frame , or the researcher’s analytic preconceptions . In this sense , this form of thematic analysis is data - driven . Using thematic analysis in psychology 83 Downlo aded By : [ Karolinska Institute ] At : 14 : 37 22 November 2010 However , it is important to note , as we discussed earlier , that researchers cannot free themselves of their theoretical and epistemological commitments , and data are not coded in an epistemological va - cuum . In contrast , a ‘theoretical’ thematic analy - sis would tend to be driven by the research - er’s theoretical or analytic interest in the area , and is thus more explicitly analyst - driven . This form of thematic analysis tends to provide less a rich description of the data overall , and more a detailed analysis of some aspect of the data . Additionally , the choice between inductive and theoretical maps onto how and why you are coding the data . You can either code for a quite specific research question ( which maps onto the more theoretical approach ) or the specific research question can evolve through the coding process ( which maps onto the in - ductive approach ) . For example , if a researcher was inter - ested in talk about heterosex , and had collected interview data , with an inductive approach they would read and re - read the data for any themes related to heterosex , and code diversely , without paying atten - tion to the themes that previous research on the topic might have identified . For exam - ple , the researcher would not look to the influential research of Hollway ( 1989 ) , identifying discourses of heterosex , and code just for male sexual drive , have / hold or permissive discourse themes . In contrast , with a theoretical approach , the researcher may well be interested in the way permis - siveness plays out across the data , and focus on that particular feature in coding the data . This would then result in a number of themes around permissiveness , which may include , speak to , or expand on something approximating Hollway’s origi - nal theme . Semantic or latent themes Another decision revolves around the ‘le - vel’ at which themes are to be identified : at a semantic or explicit level , or at a latent or interpretative level ( Boyatzis , 1998 ) . 6 A thematic analysis typically focuses exclu - sively or primarily on one level . With a semantic approach , the themes are identi - fied within the explicit or surface meanings of the data , and the analyst is not looking for anything beyond what a participant has said or what has been written . Ideally , the analytic process involves a progression from description , where the data have simply been organized to show patterns in seman - tic content , and summarized , to interpreta - tion , where there is an attempt to theorize the significance of the patterns and their broader meanings and implications ( Patton , 1990 ) , often in relation to previous literature ( for an excellent example of this , see Frith and Gleeson , 2004 ) . In contrast , a thematic analysis at the latent level goes beyond the semantic con - tent of the data , and starts to identify or examine the underlying ideas , assumptions , and conceptualizations (cid:2) / and ideologies (cid:2) / that are theorized as shaping or informing the semantic content of the data . If we imagine our data three - dimensionally as an uneven blob of jelly , the semantic approach would seek to describe the surface of the jelly , its form and meaning , while the latent approach would seek to identify the features that gave it that particular form and meaning . Thus , for latent thematic analysis , the development of the themes themselves involves interpretative work , and the ana - lysis that is produced is not just descrip - tion , but is already theorized . Analysis within this latter tradition tends to come from a constructionist paradigm ( eg , Burr , 1995 ) , and in this form , thematic analysis overlaps with some forms of ‘DA’ 84 V Braun and V Clarke Downlo aded By : [ Karolinska Institute ] At : 14 : 37 22 November 2010 ( which are sometimes specifically referred to as ‘thematic DA’ ( eg , Singer and Hunter , 1999 ; Taylor and Ussher , 2001 ) ) , where broader assumptions , structures and / or meanings are theorized as underpinning what is actually articulated in the data . Increasingly , a number of discourse analysts are also revisiting psycho - analytic modes of interpretation ( eg , Hollway and Jefferson , 2000 ) , and latent thematic analysis would also be compatible with that framework . Epistemology : essentialist / realist versus constructionist thematic analysis As we have argued , thematic analysis can be conducted within both realist / essentialist and constructionist paradigms , although the outcome and focus will be different for each . The question of epistemology is usually determined when a research project is being conceptualized , although episte - mology may also raise its head again during analysis , when the research focus may shift to an interest in different aspects of the data . The research epistemology guides what you can say about your data , and informs how you theorize meaning . For instance , with an essentialist / realist approach , you can theo - rize motivations , experience , and meaning in a straightforward way , because a simple , largely unidirectional relationship is as - sumed between meaning and experience and language ( language reflects and enables us to articulate meaning and experience ) ( Potter and Wetherell , 1987 ; Widdicombe and Wooffitt , 1995 ) . In contrast , from a constructionist per - spective , meaning and experience are so - cially produced and reproduced , rather than inhering within individuals ( Burr , 1995 ) . Therefore , thematic analysis con - ducted within a constructionist framework cannot and does not seek to focus on motivation or individual psychologies , but instead seeks to theorize the sociocultural contexts , and structural conditions , that enable the individual accounts that are provided . Thematic analysis that focuses on ‘latent’ themes tends to be more con - structionist , and it also tends to start to overlap with thematic DA at this point . However , not all ‘latent’ thematic analysis is constructionist . The many questions of qualitative research It is worth briefly noting that qualitative research involves a series of questions , and there is a need to be clear about the relation - ship between these different questions . First , there is the overall research question or questions that drive the project . A re - search question might be very broad ( and exploratory ) , such as ‘how is lesbian and gay parenting constructed ? ’ or ‘what are the meanings of the vagina ? ’ . Narrower research questions might be ‘how and why is lesbian and gay parenting normalized ? ’ ( Clarke and Kitzinger , 2004 ) , or ‘what are the discourses around vaginal size ? ’ ( see Braun and Kit - zinger , 2001 ) . These narrow questions may be part of a broader overarching research question , and if so , the analyses they inform would also provide answers to the overall research question . Although all projects are guided by research questions , these may also be refined as a project progresses . Second , if data from interviews or focus groups have been collected , there are the questions that participants have responded to . Finally , there are the questions that guide the coding and analysis of the data . There is no necessary relationship between these three , and indeed , it is often desirable that there is a disjuncture between them . Some of the worst examples of ‘thematic’ analysis we have read have simply used the questions put to participants as the ‘themes’ identified in the ‘analysis’ (cid:2) / Using thematic analysis in psychology 85 Downlo aded By : [ Karolinska Institute ] At : 14 : 37 22 November 2010 although in such instances , no analysis has really been done at all ! To sum up , thematic analysis involves the searching across a data set (cid:2) / be that a number of interviews or focus groups , or a range of texts (cid:2) / to find repeated patterns of meaning . The exact form and product of thematic analysis varies , as indicated above , and so it is important that the questions outlined above are considered before and during thematic analyses . Those appro - aches which consider specific aspects , la - tent themes and are constructionist tend to often cluster together , while those that consider meanings across the whole data set , semantic themes , and are realist , often cluster together . However , there are no hard - and - fast rules in relation to this , and differ - ent combinations are possible . What is important is that the finished product con - tains an account (cid:2) / not necessarily that detailed (cid:2) / of what was done , and why . So what does one actually do ? We now provide what is , we hope , a straightforward step - by - step guide to conducting thematic ana - lysis . Doing thematic analysis : a step - by - step guide Some of the phases of thematic analysis are similar to the phases of other qualitative research , so these stages are not necessarily all unique to thematic analysis . The process starts when the analyst begins to notice , and look for , patterns of meaning and issues of potential interest in the data (cid:2) / this may be during data collection . The endpoint is the reporting of the content and meaning of patterns ( themes ) in the data , where ‘themes are abstract ( and often fuzzy ) constructs the investigators identify [ sic ] before , during , and after analysis’ ( Ryan and Bernard , 2000 : 780 ) . Analysis involves a constant moving back and for - ward between the entire data set , the coded extracts of data that you are analysing , and the analysis of the data that you are produ - cing . Writing is an integral part of analysis , not something that takes place at the end , as it does with statistical analyses . Therefore , writing should begin in phase one , with the jotting down of ideas and potential coding schemes , and continue right through the entire coding / analysis process . There are different positions regarding when you should engage with the literature relevant to your analysis (cid:2) / with some arguing that early reading can narrow your analytic field of vision , leading you to focus on some aspects of the data at the expense of other potentially crucial aspects . Others argue that engagement with the literature can enhance your analysis by sensitizing you to more subtle features of the data ( Tuckett , 2005 ) . Therefore , there is no one right way to proceed with reading for the - matic analysis , although a more inductive approach would be enhanced by not enga - ging with literature in the early stages of analysis , whereas a theoretical approach requires engagement with the literature prior to analysis . We provide an outline guide through the six phases of analysis , and offer examples to demonstrate the process . 7 The different phases are summarized in Table 1 . It is important to recognize that qualitative ana - lysis guidelines are exactly that (cid:2) / they are not rules , and , following the basic precepts , will need to be applied flexibly to fit the research questions and data ( Patton , 1990 ) . Moreover , analysis is not a linear process of simply moving from one phase to the next . Instead , it is more recursive process , where movement is back and forth as needed , throughout the phases . It is also a process 86 V Braun and V Clarke Downlo aded By : [ Karolinska Institute ] At : 14 : 37 22 November 2010 that develops over time ( Ely et al . , 1997 ) , and should not be rushed . Phase 1 : familiarizing yourself with your data When you engage in analysis , you may have collected the data yourself , or they may have been given to you . If you collected them through interactive means , you will come to the analysis with some prior knowledge of the data , and possibly some initial analytic interests or thoughts . Regardless , it is vital that you immerse yourself in the data to the extent that you are familiar with the depth and breadth of the content . Immersion usually involves ‘repeated reading’ of the data , and reading the data in an active way (cid:2) / searching for meanings , patterns and so on . It is ideal to read through the entire data set at least once before you begin your coding , as ideas and identification of possible pat - terns will be shaped as you read through . Whether or not you are aiming for an overall or detailed analysis , are searching for latent or semantic themes , or are data - or theoretically - driven will inform how the reading proceeds . Regardless , it is impor - tant to be familiar with all aspects of your data . At this phase , one of the reasons why qualitative research tends to use far smaller samples than , for example , questionnaire research will become apparent (cid:2) / the read - ing and re - reading of data is time - consum - ing . It is , therefore , tempting to skip over this phase , or be selective . We would strongly advise against this , as this phase provides the bedrock for the rest of the analysis . During this phase , it is a good idea to start taking notes or marking ideas for coding that you will then go back to in subsequent phases . Once you have done this , you are ready to begin , the more formal coding process . In essence , coding continues to be developed and defined throughout the en - tire analysis . Transcription of verbal data If you are working with verbal data , such as interviews , television programmes or poli - tical speeches , the data will need to be transcribed into written form in order to conduct a thematic analysis . The process of transcription , while it may seen time - con - suming , frustrating , and at times boring , can be an excellent way to start familiarizing yourself with the data ( Riessman , 1993 ) . Further , some researchers even argue it should be seen as ‘a key phase of data analysis within interpretative qualita - tive methodology’ ( Bird , 2005 : 227 ) , and recognized as an interpretative act , where Table 1 Phases of thematic analysis Phase Description of the process 1 . Familiarizing yourself with your data : Transcribing data ( if necessary ) , reading and re - reading the data , noting down initial ideas . 2 . Generating initial codes : Coding interesting features of the data in a systematic fashion across the entire data set , collating data relevant to each code . 3 . Searching for themes : Collating codes into potential themes , gathering all data relevant to each potential theme . 4 . Reviewing themes : Checking if the themes work in relation to the coded extracts ( Level 1 ) and the entire data set ( Level 2 ) , generating a thematic ‘map’ of the analysis . 5 . Defining and naming themes : Ongoing analysis to refine the specifics of each theme , and the overall story the analysis tells , generating clear definitions and names for each theme . 6 . Producing the report : The final opportunity for analysis . Selection of vivid , compelling extract examples , final analysis of selected extracts , relating back of the analysis to the research question and literature , producing a scholarly report of the analysis . Using thematic analysis in psychology 87 Downlo aded By : [ Karolinska Institute ] At : 14 : 37 22 November 2010 meanings are created , rather than simply a mechanical act of putting spoken sounds on paper ( Lapadat and Lindsay , 1999 ) . Various conventions exist for transforming spoken texts into written texts ( see Edwards and Lampert , 1993 ; Lapadat and Lindsay , 1999 ) . Some systems of transcription have been developed for specific forms of analysis (cid:2) / such as the ‘Jefferson’ system for CA ( see Atkinson and Heritage , 1984 ; Hutchby and Wooffitt , 1998 ) . However , thematic analysis , even constructionist thematic analysis , does not require the same level of detail in the transcript as conversation , discourse or even narrative analysis . As there is no one way to conduct thematic analysis , there is no one set of guidelines to follow when producing a transcript . However , at a minimum it re - quires a rigorous and thorough ‘ortho - graphic’ transcript (cid:2) / a ‘verbatim’ account of all verbal ( and sometimes nonverbal (cid:2) / eg , coughs ) utterances . 8 What is important is that the transcript retains the information you need , from the verbal account , and in a way which is ‘true’ to its original nature ( eg , punctuation added can alter the meaning of data (cid:2) / for example ‘I hate it , you know . I do’ versus ‘I hate it . You know I do’ , Poland , 2002 : 632 ) , and that the transcription con - vention is practically suited to the purpose of analysis ( Edwards , 1993 ) . As we have noted , the time spent in transcription is not wasted , as it informs the early stages of analysis , and you will develop a far more thorough understanding of your data through having transcribed it . Furthermore , the close attention needed to transcribe data may facilitate the close read - ing and interpretative skills needed to ana - lyse the data ( Lapadat and Lindsay , 1999 ) . If your data have already been , or will be , transcribed for you , it is important that you spend more time familiarising yourself with the data , and also check the transcripts back against the original audio recordings for ‘accuracy’ ( as should always be done ) . Phase 2 : generating initial codes Phase 2 begins when you have read and familiarized yourself with the data , and have generated an initial list of ideas about what is in the data and what is interesting about them . This phase then involves the produc - tion of initial codes from the data . Codes identify a feature of the data ( semantic content or latent ) that appears interesting to the analyst , and refer to ‘the most basic segment , or element , of the raw data or information that can be assessed in a mean - ingful way regarding the phenomenon’ ( Boyatzis , 1998 : 63 ) . See Figure 1 for an example of codes applied to a short segment of data . The process of coding is part of analysis ( Miles and Huberman , 1994 ) , as you are organising your data into meaningful groups ( Tuckett , 2005 ) . However , your coded data differ from the units of analysis ( your themes ) , which are ( often ) broader . Your themes , which you start to develop in the next phase , are where the interpretative analysis of the data occurs , and in relation to which arguments about the phenomenon being examined are made ( Boyatzis , 1998 ) . Coding will , to some extent , depend on whether the themes are more ‘data - driven’ or ‘theory - driven’ (cid:2) / in the former , the Data extract Coded for it ' s too much like hard work I mean how much paper have you got to sign to change a flippin’ name no I I mean no I no we we have thought about it ( ( inaudible ) ) half heartedly and thought no no I jus - I can’t be bothered , it’s too much like hard work . ( Kate F07a ) 1 . Talked about with partner 2 . Too much hassle to change name Figure 1 Data extract , with codes applied ( from Clarke et al . , 2006 ) 88 V Braun and V Clarke Downlo aded By : [ Karolinska Institute ] At : 14 : 37 22 November 2010 themes will depend on the data , but in the latter , you might approach the data with specific questions in mind that you wish to code around . It will also depend on whether you are aiming to code the content of the entire data set , or whether you are coding to identify particular ( and possibly limited ) features of the data set . Coding can be performed either manually or through a software programme ( see , eg , Kelle , 2004 ; Seale , 2000 , for discussion of software programmes ) . Work systematically through the entire data set , giving full and equal attention to each data item , and identify interesting aspects in the data items that may form the basis of repeated patterns ( themes ) across the data set . There are a number of ways of actually coding extracts . If coding manually , you can code your data by writ - ing notes on the texts you are analysing , by using highlighters or coloured pens to indicate potential patterns , or by using ‘post - it’ notes to identify segments of data . You may initially identify the codes , and then match them with data extracts that demonstrate that code , but it is important in this phase to ensure that all actual data extracts are coded , and then collated to - gether within each code . This may involve copying extracts of data from individual transcripts or photocopying extracts of printed data , and collating each code to - gether in separate computer files or using file cards . If using computer software , you code by tagging and naming selections of text within each data item . Key advice for this phase is : ( a ) code for as many potential themes / patterns as possible ( time permitting ) (cid:2) / you never know what might be interesting later ; ( b ) code extracts of data inclusively (cid:2) / ie , keep a little of the surrounding data if relevant , a common criticism of coding is that the context is lost ( Bryman , 2001 ) ; and ( c ) remember that you can code individual extracts of data in as many different ‘themes’ as they fit into (cid:2) / so an extract may be uncoded , coded once , or coded many times , as relevant . Note that no data set is without contradiction , and a satisfactory thematic ‘map’ that you will eventually produce (cid:2) / an overall conceptua - lization of the data patterns , and relation - ships between them 9 (cid:2) / does not have to smooth out or ignore the tensions and inconsistencies within and across data items . It is important to retain accounts that depart from the dominant story in the analysis , so do not ignore these in your coding . Phase 3 : searching for themes Phase 3 begins when all data have been initially coded and collated , and you have a long list of the different codes that you have identified across the data set . This phase , which re - focuses the analysis at the broader level of themes , rather than codes , involves sorting the different codes into potential themes , and collating all the relevant coded data extracts within the identified themes . Essentially , you are starting to analyse your codes and consider how different codes may combine to form an overarching theme . It may be helpful at this phase to use visual representations to help you sort the differ - ent codes into themes . You might use tables , or mind - maps , or write the name each code ( and a brief description ) on a separate piece of paper and play around with organizing them into theme - piles . A thematic map of this early stage can be seen in Figure 2 ( the examples in Figures 2 (cid:2) / 4 come from the analysis presented in Braun and Wilkinson , 2003 of women’s talk about the vagina ) . This is when you start thinking about the relationship between codes , between themes , and between different levels of themes ( eg , main overarching themes and Using thematic analysis in psychology 89 Downlo aded By : [ Karolinska Institute ] At : 14 : 37 22 November 2010 sub - themes within them ) . Some initial codes may go on to form main themes , whereas others may form sub - themes , and others still may be discarded . At this stage , you may also have a set of codes that do not seem to belong anywhere , and it is perfectly acceptable to create a ‘theme’ called ‘mis - cellaneous’ to house the codes (cid:2) / possibly temporarily (cid:2) / that do not seem to fit into your main themes . You end this phase with a collection of candidate themes , and sub - themes , and all extracts of data that have been coded in relation to them . At this point , you will start to have a sense of the significance of individual themes . However , do not aban - don anything at this stage , as without looking at all the extracts in detail ( the next phase ) it is uncertain whether the themes hold as they are , or whether some Figure 2 Initial thematic map , showing ﬁve main themes ( ﬁnal analysis presented in Braun and Wilkinson , 2003 ) Figure 3 Developed thematic map , showing three main themes ( ﬁnal analysis presented in Braun and Wilkinson , 2003 ) 90 V Braun and V Clarke Downlo aded By : [ Karolinska Institute ] At : 14 : 37 22 November 2010 need to be combined , refined and separated , or discarded . Phase 4 : reviewing themes Phase 4 begins when you have devised a set of candidate themes , and it involves the refinement of those themes . During this phase , it will become evident that some candidate themes are not really themes ( eg , if there are not enough data to support them , or the data are too diverse ) , while others might collapse into each other ( eg , two apparently separate themes might form one theme ) . Other themes might need to be broken down into separate themes . Patton’s ( 1990 ) for dual criteria judging categories (cid:2) / internal homogeneity and ex - ternal heterogeneity (cid:2) / are worth consider - ing here . Data within themes should cohere together meaningfully , while there should be clear and identifiable distinctions be - tween themes . This phase involves two levels of review - ing and refining your themes . Level one involves reviewing at the level of the coded data extracts . This means you need to read all the collated extracts for each theme , and consider whether they appear to form a coherent pattern . If your candidate themes do appear to form a coherent pattern , you then move on to the second level of this phase . If your candidate themes do not fit , you will need to consider whether the theme itself is problematic , or whether some of the data extracts within it simply do not fit there (cid:2) / in which case , you would rework your theme , creating a new theme , finding a home for those extracts that do not currently work in an already - existing theme , or discarding them from the analy - sis . Once you are satisfied that your candi - date themes adequately capture the contours of the coded data (cid:2) / once you have a candidate ‘thematic map’ (cid:2) / you are ready to move on to level two of this phase . The outcome of this refinement process can be seen in the thematic map presented in Figure 3 . Level two involves a similar process , but in relation to the entire data set . At this level , you consider the validity of indivi - dual themes in relation to the data set , but also whether your candidate thematic map ‘accurately’ reflects the meanings evident in the data set as a whole . To some extent , what counts as ‘accurate representation’ depends on your theoretical and analytic approach . However , in this phase you re - read your entire data set for two purposes . The first is , as discussed , to ascertain whether the themes ‘work’ in relation to the data set . The second is to code any additional data within themes that has been missed in earlier coding stages . The need for re - coding from the data set is to be expected as coding is an ongoing organic process . If the thematic map works , then you moves on to the next phase . However , if the map does not fit the data set , you need to return to further reviewing and refining of your coding until you have devised a Figure 4 Final thematic map , showing ﬁnal two main themes ( see Braun and Wilkinson , 2003 ) . Using thematic analysis in psychology 91 Downlo aded By : [ Karolinska Institute ] At : 14 : 37 22 November 2010 satisfactory thematic map . In so doing , it is possible that you will identify potential new themes , and you will need to start coding for these as well , if they are of interest and relevent . However , a word of warning : as coding data and generating themes could go on ad infinitum , it is important not to get over - enthusiastic with endless re - coding . It is impossible to pro - vide clear guidelines on when to stop , but when your refinements are not adding any - thing substantial , stop ! If the process of recoding is only fine - tuning and making more nuanced a coding frame that already works (cid:2) / ie , it fits the data well (cid:2) / recognize this and stop . Consider it as similar to editing written work (cid:2) / you could endlessly edit your sentences and paragraphs , but after a few editing turns , any further work is usually unnecessary refinement (cid:2) / similar to rearranging the hundreds and thousands on an already nicely decorated cake . At the end of this phase , you should have a fairly good idea of what your different themes are , how they fit together , and the overall story they tell about the data . Phase 5 : defining and naming themes Phase 5 begins when you have a satisfactory thematic map of your data (cid:2) / see Figure 4 for the final refinements of Virginia’s thematic map . At this point , you then define and further refine the themes you will present for your analysis , and analyse the data within them . By ‘define and refine’ , we mean identifying the ‘essence’ of what each theme is about ( as well as the themes overall ) , and determining what aspect of the data each theme captures . It is important not to try and get a theme to do too much , or to be too diverse and complex . You do this by going back to collated data extracts for each theme , and organizing them into a coherent and internally consistent account , with accompanying narrative . It is vital that you do not just paraphrase the content of the data extracts presented , but identify what is of interest about them and why . For each individual theme , you need to conduct and write a detailed analysis . As well as identifying the ‘story’ that each theme tells , it is important to consider how it fits into the broader overall ‘story’ that you are telling about your data , in relation to the research question or ques - tions , to ensure there is not too much overlap between themes . So it is necessary to consider the themes themselves , and each theme in relation to the others . As part of the refinement , you will need to identify whether or not a theme contains any sub - themes . Sub - themes are essentially themes - within - a - theme . They can be useful for giving structure to a particularly large and complex theme , and also for demon - strating the hierarchy of meaning within the data . For instance , in one of Virginia’s analyses of women’s talk about the vagina , she identified two overarching themes in women’s talk : the vagina as liability , and the vagina as asset ( Braun and Wilkinson , 2003 ) . Within each theme , three sub - themes were identified : for liability the sub - themes were ‘nastiness and dirtiness’ , ‘anxieties’ and ‘vulnerability’ ; for asset the sub - themes were ‘satisfaction’ , ‘power’ and ‘pleasure’ . However , these eventual final themes and sub - themes resulted from a process of re - finement of initial themes and sub - themes , as shown in Figures 2 (cid:2) / 4 . It is important that by the end of this phase you can clearly define what your themes are and what they are not . One test for this is to see whether you can describe the scope and content of each theme in a couple of sen - tences . If not , further refinement of that theme may be needed . Although you will already have given your themes working titles , this is also the point to start thinking 92 V Braun and V Clarke Downlo aded By : [ Karolinska Institute ] At : 14 : 37 22 November 2010 about the names you will give them in the final analysis . Names need to be concise , punchy , and immediately give the reader a sense of what the theme is about . Phase 6 : producing the report Phase 6 begins when you have a set of fully worked - out themes , and involves the final analysis and write - up of the report . The task of the write - up of a thematic anal - ysis , whether it is for publication or for a research assignment or dissertation , is to tell the complicated story of your data in a way which convinces the reader of the merit and validity of your analysis . It is important that the analysis ( the write - up of it , includ - ing data extracts ) provides a concise , coher - ent , logical , non - repetitive and interesting account of the story the data tell (cid:2) / within and across themes . Your write - up must provide sufficient evidence of the themes within the data (cid:2) / ie , enough data extracts to demonstrate the prevalence of the theme . Choose particularly vivid examples , or ex - tracts which capture the essence of the point you are demonstrating , without un - necessary complexity . The extract should be easily identifiable as an example of the issue . However , your write - up needs to do more than just provide data . Extracts need to be embedded within an analytic narrative that compellingly illustrates the story you are telling about your data , and your analy - tic narrative needs to go beyond description of the data , and make an argument in relation to your research question . Pinning down what interpretative analysis actually entails It is difficult to specify exactly what inter - pretative analysis actually entails , particu - larly as the specifics of it will vary from study to study . As a first step , we recom - mend looking at published examples of thematic analysis , particularly of the speci - fic version you are planning to use ( this is made somewhat more difficult in that the - matic analysis is often not a named method , but you can find examples , eg , Ellis and Kitzinger , 2002 ; Kitzinger and Willmott , 2002 ; Toerien and Wilkinson , 2004 ) . In order to provide a sense of the sorts of questions you should be asking of your data , and the sorts of analytic claims you should be seeking to make , we will discuss a particularly good example of an inductive thematic analysis , which emphasizes un - derstanding men’s experiences in relation to the broader social context ( see Frith and Gleeson , 2004 ) . Frith and Gleeson ( 2004 ) aim to ex - plore how men’s feelings about their bodies influence their clothing practices , and they use data gathered in qualitative questionnaires from 75 men to answer this question . They report four themes : practicality of clothing choices ; lack of concern about appearance ; use of cloth - ing to conceal or reveal the body ; use of clothing to fit cultural ideals . Each theme is clearly linked back to the overall research question , but each is distinct . They provide a clear sense of the scope and diversity of each theme , using a combination of analyst narrative and illustrative data extracts . Where relevant , they broaden their analysis out , moving from a descriptive to an interpretative level ( often relating their claims to exist - ing literature ) . For example , in ‘men value practicality’ , they make sense of men’s accounts in relation to gender norms and stereotypes , linking the ac - counts individual men provided to the expectations that men (cid:2) / as members of society (cid:2) / face . What they do , as analysts , Using thematic analysis in psychology 93 Downlo aded By : [ Karolinska Institute ] At : 14 : 37 22 November 2010 is relate the patterns of meaning in men’s responses to an academic analysis of how gender operates . In so doing , they de - monstrate the dual position that analysts need to take : as both cultural members and cultural commentators . Their ‘discus - sion’ section makes broader analytic statements about the overall story that the themes tell us about men’s relation - ship with clothing . This story reveals that men ‘deliberately and strategically use clothing to manipulate their appear - ance to meet cultural ideals of masculi - nity’ ( Frith and Gleeson , 2004 : 45 ) , in a way more traditionally associated with women . This analysis makes an impor - tant contribution in that it challenges perceived wisdom about clothing / appear - ance and masculinity . As this example demonstrates , your ana - lytic claims need to be grounded in , but go beyond , the ‘surface’ of the data , even for a ‘semantic’ level analysis . The sort of ques - tions you need to be asking , towards the end phases of your analysis , include : ‘What does this theme mean ? ’ ‘What are the assump - tions underpinning it ? ’ ‘What are the im - plications of this theme ? ’ ‘What conditions are likely to have given rise to it ? ’ ‘Why do people talk about this thing in this particular way ( as opposed to other ways ) ? ’ and ‘What is the overall story the different themes reveal about the topic ? ’ . These sorts of questions should guide the analysis once you have a clear sense of your thematic map . Potential pitfalls to avoid when doing thematic analysis Thematic analysis is a relatively straight - forward form of qualitative analysis , which does not require the same detailed theore - tical and technical knowledge that ap - proaches such as DA or CA do . It is relatively easy to conduct a good thematic analysis on qualitative data , even when you are still learning qualitative techniques . However , there are a number of things that can result in a poor analysis . In this section we identify these potential pitfalls , in the hope that they can be avoided . The first of these is a failure to actually analyse the data at all ! Thematic analysis is not just a collection of extracts strung together with little or no analytic narrative . Nor is it a selection of extracts with analytic comment that simply or primarily para - phrases their content . The extracts in the - matic analysis are illustrative of the analytic points the researcher makes about the data , and should be used to illustrate / support an analysis that goes beyond their specific content , to make sense of the data , and tell the reader what it does or might mean (cid:2) / as discussed above . A second , associated pit - fall is the using of the data collection questions ( such as from an interview sche - dule ) as the ‘themes’ that are reported . In such a case , no analytic work has been carried out to identify themes across the entire data set , or make sense of the pattern - ing of responses . The third is a weak or unconvincing analysis , where the themes do not appear to work , where there is too much overlap between themes , or where the themes are not internally coherent and consistent . All aspects of the theme should cohere around a central idea or concept . This pitfall has occurred if , depending on what the analysis is trying to do , it fails adequately to capture the majority of the data , or fails to provide a rich description / interpretation of one or more aspects of the data . A weak or un - 94 V Braun and V Clarke Downlo aded By : [ Karolinska Institute ] At : 14 : 37 22 November 2010 convincing analysis can also stem from a failure to provide adequate examples from the data (cid:2) / for example , only one or two extracts for a theme . This point is essen - tially about the rhetorics of presentation , and the need for the analysis to be convin - cing to someone who has not read the entire data set : ‘The ‘‘analysis’’ of the material . . . is a deliberate and self - consciously artful crea - tion by the researcher , and must be con - structed to persuade the reader of the plausibility of an argument’ ( Foster and Parker , 1995 : 204 ) . In so doing , one avoids ( the appearance of ) what Bryman ( 1988 ) has referred to as ‘anecdotalism’ in qualitative research (cid:2) / where one or a few instances of a phenomenon are reified into a pattern or theme , when it or they are actually idiosyn - cratic . This is not to say that a few instances cannot be of interest , or revealing ; but it is important not to misrepresent them as an overarching theme . The fourth pitfall is a mismatch between the data and the analytic claims that are made about it . In such an ( unfounded ) analysis , the claims cannot be supported by the data , or , in the worst case , the data extracts presented suggest another analysis or even contradict the claims . The re - searcher needs to make sure that their interpretations and analytic points are con - sistent with the data extracts . A weak analysis does not appear to consider other obvious alternative readings of the data , or fails to consider variation ( and even contra - diction ) in the account that is produced . A pattern in data is rarely , if ever , going to be 100 % complete and non - contradicted , so an analysis which suggests that it is , without a thorough explanation , is open to suspicion . It is important to pick compelling examples to demonstrate the themes , so give this considerable thought . The fifth involves a mismatch between theory and analytic claims , or between the research questions and the form of thematic analysis used . A good thematic analysis needs to make sure that the interpretations of the data are consistent with the theoretical framework . So , for instance , if you are work - ing within an experiential framework , you would typically not make claims about the social construction of the research topic , and if you were doing constructionist thematic analysis , you would not treat people’s talk of experience as a transparent window on their world . Finally , even a good and inter - esting analysis which fails to spell out its theoretical assumptions , or clarify how it was undertaken , and for what purpose , is lacking crucial information ( Holloway and Todres , 2003 ) , and thus fails in one aspect . What makes good thematic analysis ? One of the criticisms of qualitative research from those outside the field is the percep - tion that ‘anything goes’ . For instance , this sentiment is echoed in the first sentence of Laubschagne’s ( 2003 ) abstract : ‘For many scientists used to doing quantitative studies the whole concept of qualitative research is unclear , almost foreign , or ‘‘airy fairy’’ (cid:2) / not ‘‘real’’ research . ’ However , although ‘quali - tative’ research cannot be subjected to the same criteria as ‘quantitative’ approaches , it does provide methods of analysis that should be applied rigorously to the data . Furthermore , criteria for conducting good qualitative research (cid:2) / both data collection and analysis (cid:2) / do exist ( eg , Elliott et al . , 1999 ; Parker , 2004 ; Seale , 1999 ; Silverman , 2000 ; Yardley , 2000 ) . The British Psycholo - gical Society offers relatively succinct on - line guidelines for assessing quality in qua - litative research ( see http : / / www . bps . org . Using thematic analysis in psychology 95 Downlo aded By : [ Karolinska Institute ] At : 14 : 37 22 November 2010 uk / publications / journals / joop / qualitative - guidelines . cfm ) . ‘Criteria’ for assessing qua - litative research is a not uncontroversial topic , with concerns raised about rigid criteria limiting freedom and stifling meth - odological development ( Elliott et al . , 1999 ; Parker , 2004 ; Reicher , 2000 ) . Reicher ( 2000 ) takes the critique further , by asking whether the incredibly diverse range of qualitative approaches can and should be subject to the same criteria . Bracketing these critiques off , the issues raised in many general qualitative research assessment criteria can be more or less applied to thematic forms of analysis . As thematic analysis is a flexible method , you also need to be clear and explicit about what you are doing , and what you say you are doing needs to match up with what you actually do . In this sense , the theory and method need to be applied rigorously , and ‘rigour lies in devising a systematic method whose assumptions are congruent with the way one conceptualizes the subject matter’ ( Reicher and Taylor , 2005 : 549 ) . A concise checklist of criteria to consider when deter - mining whether you have generated a good thematic analysis is provided in Table 2 . So what does thematic analysis offer psychologists ? We now end this paper with some brief comments on the advantages and disadvan - tages of thematic analysis . As we have shown throughout this paper , thematic ana - lysis is not a complex method . Indeed , as you can see from Table 3 , its advantages are many . However , it is not without some disadvantages , which we will now briefly consider . Many of the disadvantages de - pend more on poorly conducted analyses or inappropriate research questions than on Table 2 A 15 - point checklist of criteria for good thematic analysis Process No . Criteria Transcription 1 The data have been transcribed to an appropriate level of detail , and the transcripts have been checked against the tapes for ‘accuracy’ . Coding 2 Each data item has been given equal attention in the coding process . 3 Themes have not been generated from a few vivid examples ( an anecdotal approach ) , but instead the coding process has been thorough , inclusive and comprehensive . 4 All relevant extracts for all each theme have been collated . 5 Themes have been checked against each other and back to the original data set . 6 Themes are internally coherent , consistent , and distinctive . Analysis 7 Data have been analysed (cid:2) / interpreted , made sense of (cid:2) / rather than just paraphrased or described . 8 Analysis and data match each other (cid:2) / the extracts illustrate the analytic claims . 9 Analysis tells a convincing and well - organized story about the data and topic . 10 A good balance between analytic narrative and illustrative extracts is provided . Overall 11 Enough time has been allocated to complete all phases of the analysis adequately , without rushing a phase or giving it a once - over - lightly . Written report 12 The assumptions about , and specific approach to , thematic analysis are clearly explicated . 13 There is a good fit between what you claim you do , and what you show you have done (cid:2) / ie , described method and reported analysis are consistent . 14 The language and concepts used in the report are consistent with the epistemological position of the analysis . 15 The researcher is positioned as active in the research process ; themes do not just ‘emerge’ . 96 V Braun and V Clarke Downlo aded By : [ Karolinska Institute ] At : 14 : 37 22 November 2010 the method itself . Further , the flexibility of the method (cid:2) / which allows for a wide range of analytic options (cid:2) / means that the poten - tial range of things that can be said about your data is broad . While this is an advan - tage , it can also be a disadvantage in that it makes developing specific guidelines for higher - phase analysis difficult , and can be potentially paralysing to the researcher try - ing to decide what aspects of their data to focus on . Another issue to consider is that a thematic analysis has limited interpretative power beyond mere description if it is not used within an existing theoretical frame - work that anchors the analytic claims that are made . Other disadvantages appear when the - matic analysis is considered in relation to some of the other qualitative analytic meth - ods . For instance , unlike narrative or other biographical approaches , you are unable to retain a sense of continuity and contradic - tion through any one individual account , and these contradictions and consistencies across individual accounts may be reveal - ing . In contrast to methods similar to DA and CA , a simple thematic analysis does not allow the researcher to make claims about language use , or the fine - grained function - ality of talk . Finally , it is worth noting that thematic analysis currently has no particular kudos as an analytic method (cid:2) / this , we argue , stems from the very fact that it is poorly demarcated and claimed , yet widely used . This means that thematic analysis is fre - quently , or appears to be , what is simply carried out by someone without the knowl - edge or skills to perform a supposedly more sophisticated (cid:2) / certainly more kudos - bear - ing (cid:2) / ‘branded’ form of analysis like grounded theory , IPA or DA . We hope this paper will change this view as , we argue , a rigorous thematic approach can produce an insightful analysis that answers particular research questions . What is important is choosing a method that is appropriate to your research question , rather than falling victim to ‘methodolatry’ , where you are committed to method rather than topic / content or research questions ( Holloway and Todres , 2003 ) . Indeed , your method of analysis should be driven by both your research question and your broader theore - tical assumptions . As we have demon - strated , thematic analysis is a flexible approach that can be used across a range of epistemologies and research questions . Notes 1 . Boyatzis ( 1998 ) provides a much more detailed account of thematic analysis . However , we do not feel that it is a particularly accessible account for those unfamiliar with qualitative approaches . Moreover , his approach differs from ours in that , although he acknowledges the subjective dimension of qualitative analysis , his approach is ultimately , if often implicitly , located within a positivist empiricist paradigm . 2 . Dey’s ( 1993 ) account of on ‘qualitative data analysis’ , which aims to identify shared techni - ques across the diverse range of qualitative Table 3 Advantages of thematic analysis Flexibility . Relatively easy and quick method to learn , and do . Accessible to researchers with little or no experience of qualitative research . Results are generally accessible to educated general public . Useful method for working within participatory re - search paradigm , with participants as collaborators . Can usefully summarize key features of a large body of data , and / or offer a ‘thick description’ of the data set . Can highlight similarities and differences across the data set . Can generate unanticipated insights . Allows for social as well as psychological interpreta - tions of data . Can be useful for producing qualitative analyses suited to informing policy development . Using thematic analysis in psychology 97 Downlo aded By : [ Karolinska Institute ] At : 14 : 37 22 November 2010 methods , and demonstrate how to do ‘qualitative analysis’ , reinforces this point in that his focus is largely thematic (cid:2) / but not claimed as such . 3 . Some authors , such as Potter ( 1997 : 147 (cid:2) / 48 ) argue that one should not simply provide ‘recipes’ for qualitative methods , such as DA , because ‘a large part of doing discourse analysis is a craft skill , more like bike riding or sexing a chicken than following the recipe for a mild chicken rogan josh . . . This makes it hard to describe and learn’ . While we do not disagree that the skills needed for qualitative analyses of all types need to be learned , others , such as McLeod ( 2001 ) , argue that by not discussing the ‘how to’ of analysis , we keep certain methods mysterious ( and thus elitist ) . Instead , if we want to make methods democratic and accessible (cid:2) / and indeed , to make qualitative research of all forms more understandable to those not trained in the methods , and arguably thus more popular (cid:2) / we need to provide concrete advice on how to actually do it . We are not questioning the importance of ‘non - recipe’ forms of training , but while ‘recipes’ necessarily diminish the complexity of certain methods , they are impor - tant for making methods accessible . 4 . Foster and Parker ( 1995 ) suggest one way to acknowledge the creative and active role of the analyst is to use the ﬁrst person when writing . 5 . Content analysis is another method that can be used to identify patterns across qualitative data , and is sometimes treated as similar to thematic approaches ( eg , Wilkinson , 2000 ) . How - ever , content analysis tends to focus at a more micro level , often provides ( frequency ) counts ( Wilkinson , 2000 ) , and allows for quantitative analyses of initially qualitative data ( Ryan and Bernard , 2000 ) . Thematic analysis differs from this in that themes tend not to be quantiﬁed ( although sometimes they may be ; and Boyatzis ( 1998 ) suggests thematic analysis can be used to transform qualitative data into a quantitative form , and subject them to statistical analyses ; and the unit of analysis tends to be more than a word or phrase , which it typically is in content analysis . 6 . The deﬁnition by Boyatzis ( 1998 ) of latent and manifest is somewhat narrower than our identiﬁcation of latent and semantic , and he identiﬁes thematic analysis as incorporating both latent and manifest aspects . However , this results from the fact that he associates the process of interpretation with latent analysis (cid:2) / whereas we would argue that it should also be an important element of a semantic approach . 7 . We are assuming that you will be working with a ‘good quality’ data corpus and data set . We would argue that ‘good data’ are deﬁned by a particular set of criteria regarding what , why , and how they were collected , and offer rich , detailed and complex accounts of the topic . Good data do not just provide a surface over - view of the topic of interest , or simply reiterate a commonsense account . The challenge for the novice researcher is to interact with research participants in such a way that they generate rich and complex insights . Producing a good analysis of poor quality data is a far more demanding task for the analyst , although it can potentially be performed by a skilled and ex - perienced analyst . 8 . See Poland ( 2002 ) for a discussion of the problems with the idea of a ‘verbatim’ transcript , and what is left out , and retained , through this process . 9 . What we mean by thematic map is similar to , but less detailed than , the ‘codebook’ Ryan and Bernard ( 2000 ) refer to , which involves a detailed account of the hierarchical relationship between codes , as well as a description of each , their criteria , exemplars and counter (cid:2) / examples , and other such details . Like Boyatzis’s ( 1998 ) account of a thematic code , this model is then applied to ( and revised in relation to ) the data . See Figures 2 (cid:2) / 4 for visual representations of a thematic maps and its reﬁnement . Another ex - ample of a thematic map (cid:2) / this time in table form (cid:2) / can be found in Frith and Gleeson ( 2004 ) . References Antaki , C . , Billig , M . , Edwards , D . and Potter , J . 2002 : Discourse analysis means doing ana - lysis : a critique of six analytic shortcomings . 98 V Braun and V Clarke Downlo aded By : [ Karolinska Institute ] At : 14 : 37 22 November 2010 DAOL Discourse Analysis Online [ electronic version ] , 1 ( 1 ) . Aronson , J . 1994 : A pragmatic view of thematic analysis . Qualitative Report 2 ( 1 ) . Atkinson , J . M . and Heritage , J . 1984 : Structures of social action : studies in conversation analysis . Cambridge University Press . Attride - Stirling , J . 2001 : Thematic networks : an analytic tool for qualitative research . Quali - tative Research 1 , 385 (cid:2) / 405 . Bird , C . M . 2005 : How I stopped dreading and learned to love transcription . Qualitative Inquiry 11 , 226 (cid:2) / 48 . Boyatzis , R . E . 1998 : Transforming qualitative information : thematic analysis and code development . Sage . Braun , V . 2005a : In search of ( better ) female sexual pleasure : female genital ‘cosmetic’ surgery . Sexualities 8 , 407 (cid:2) / 24 . Braun , V . 2005b : Selling the perfect vulva . Manu - script under submission . Braun , V . and Kitzinger , C . 2001 : The perfectible vagina : size matters . Culture Health & Sexu - ality 3 , 263 (cid:2) / 77 . Braun , V . and Wilkinson , S . 2003 : Liability or asset ? Women talk about the vagina . Psycho - logy of Women Section Review 5 , 28 (cid:2) / 42 . Braun , V . , Gavey , N . and McPhillips , K . 2003 : The ‘fair deal ? ’ Unpacking accounts of recipro - city in heterosex . Sexualities 6 , 237 (cid:2) / 61 . Bryman , A . 1988 : Quantity and quality in social research . Routledge . Bryman , A . 2001 : Social research methods . Oxford University Press . Burman , E . and Parker , I . , editors , 1993 : Dis - course analytic research : repertoires and readings of texts in action . Routledge . Burr , V . 1995 : An introduction to social con - structionism . Routledge . Charmaz , K . 2002 : Qualitative interviewing and grounded theory analysis . In Gubrium , J . F . and Holstein J . A . , editors , Handbook of interview research : context and method . Sage , 675 (cid:2) / 94 . Clarke , V . 2005 : ‘We’re all very liberal in our views’ : Students’ talk about lesbian and gay parenting . Lesbian and Gay Psychology Re - view 6 , 2 (cid:2) / 15 . Clarke , V . and Kitzinger , C . 2004 : Lesbian and gay parents on talk shows : resistance or collu - sion in heterosexism . Qualitative Research in Psychology 1 , 195 (cid:2) / 217 . Clarke , V . , Burns , M . and Burgoyne , C . 2006 : ‘Who would take whose name ? ’ An explora - tory study of naming practices in same - sex relationships . Manuscript under submission . Dey , I . 1993 : Qualitative data analysis : a user - friendly guidefor social scientists . Routledge . Edwards , J . A . 1993 : Principles and contrasting systems of discourse transcription . In Ed - wards , J . A . and Lampert , M . D . , editors , Talking data : transcription and coding in discourse research . Lawrence Erlbaum As - sociates , 3 (cid:2) / 31 . Edwards , J . A . and Lampert , M . D . , editors , 1993 : Talking data : transcription and coding in discourse research . Lawrence Erlbaum As - sociates . Elliott , R . , Fischer , C . T . and Rennie , D . L . 1999 : Evolving guidelines for publication of qua - litative research studies in psychology and related ﬁelds . British Journal of Clinical Psychology 38 , 215 (cid:2) / 29 . Ellis , S . J . and Kitzinger , C . 2002 : Denying equal - ity : an analysis of arguments against low - ering the age of consent for sex between men . Journal of Community and Applied Social Psychology 12 , 167 (cid:2) / 80 . Ely , M . , Vinz , R . , Downing , M . and Anzul , M . 1997 : On writing qualitative research : living by words . Routledge / Falmer . Fine , M . 2002 : Disruptive voices : the possibilities for feminist research . University of Michi - gan Press . Foster , J . J . and Parker , I . 1995 : Carrying out investigations in psychology : methods and statistics . BPS Books . Frith , H . and Gleeson , K . 2004 : Clothing and embodiment : men managing body image and Using thematic analysis in psychology 99 Downlo aded By : [ Karolinska Institute ] At : 14 : 37 22 November 2010 appearance . Psychology of Men and Mascu - linity 5 , 40 (cid:2) / 48 . Glaser , B . 1992 : Basics of grounded theory analysis . Sociology Press . Hayes , N . 1997 : Theory - led thematic analysis : social identiﬁcation in small companies . In Hayes , N . , editor , Doing qualitative analysis in psychology . Psychology Press . Holloway , I . and Todres , L . 2003 : The status of method : ﬂexibility , consistency and coher - ence . Qualitative Research 3 , 345 (cid:2) / 57 . Hollway , W . 1989 : Subjectivity and method in psychology : gender , meaning and science . Sage . Hollway , W . and Jefferson , T . 2000 : Doing quali - tative research differently : free association , narrative and the interview method . Sage . Hutchby , I . and Woofﬁtt , R . 1998 : Conversation analysis : principles , practices and applica - tions . Polity Press . Kelle , U . 2004 : Computer - assisted analysis of qualitative data . In Flick , U . , von Kardorff , E . and Steinke , I . , editors , A companion to qualitative research . Sage , 276 (cid:2) / 83 . Kitzinger , C . and Willmott , J . 2002 : ‘The thief of womanhood’ : women’s experience of poly - cystic ovarian syndrome . Social Science & Medicine 54 , 349 (cid:2) / 61 . Lapadat , J . C . and Lindsay , A . C . 1999 : Transcrip - tion in research and practice : from standar - dization of technique to interpretive posi - tionings . Qualitative Inquiry 5 , 64 (cid:2) / 86 . Laubschagne , A . 2003 : Qualitative research (cid:2) / airy fairy or fundamental ? Qualitative Re - port [ electronic version ] , 8 ( 1 ) . McLeod , J . 2001 : Qualitative research in counsel - ling and psychotherapy . Sage . Meehan , T . , Vermeer , C . and Windsor , C . 2000 : Patients’ perceptions of seclusion : a qualita - tive investigation . Journal of Advanced Nur - sing 31 , 370 (cid:2) / 77 . Miles , M . B . and Huberman , A . M . 1994 : Qualita - tive data analysis : an expanded sourcebook , second edition . Sage . Murray , M . 2003 : Narrative psychology . In Smith , J . A . , editor , Qualitative psychology : a practi - cal guide to research methods . Sage , 111 (cid:2) / 31 . Parker , I . 2004 : Criteria for qualitative research in psychology . Qualitative Research in Psy - chology 1 , 95 (cid:2) / 106 . Patton , M . Q . 1990 : Qualitative evaluation and research methods , second edition . Sage . Poland , B . D . 2002 : Transcription quality . In Gubrium , J . F . and Holstein , J . A . , editors , Handbook of interview research : context and method . Sage , 629 (cid:2) / 49 . Potter , J . 1997 : Discourse analysis as a way of analysing naturally occurring talk . In Silver - man , D . , editor , Qualitative research : theory , method and practice . Sage , 144 (cid:2) / 60 . Potter , J . and Wetherell , M . 1987 : Discourse and social psychology : beyond attitudes and behaviour . Sage . Reicher , S . 2000 : Against methodolatry : some comments on Elliott , Fischer , and Rennie . British Journal of Clinical Psychology 39 , 1 (cid:2) / 6 . Reicher , S . and Taylor , S . 2005 : Similarities and differences between traditions . Psychologist 18 , 547 (cid:2) / 49 . Riessman , C . K . 1993 : Narrative analysis . Sage . Roulston , K . 2001 : Data analysis and ‘theorizing as ideology’ . Qualitative Research 1 , 279 (cid:2) / 302 . Rubin , H . J . and Rubin , I . S . 1995 : Qualitative interviewing : the art of hearing data . Sage . Ryan , G . W . and Bernard , H . R . 2000 : Data man - agement and analysis methods . In Denzin , N . K . and Lincoln , Y . S . , editors , Handbook of qualitative research , second edition . Sage , 769 (cid:2) / 802 . Seale , C . 1999 : The quality of qualitative re - search . Sage . Seale , C . 2000 : Using computers to analyse qualitative data . In Silverman , D . , Doing qualitative research : a practical handbook . Sage , 155 (cid:2) / 74 . Silverman , D . , editor 2000 : Doing qualitative research : a practical handbook . Sage . 100 V Braun and V Clarke Downlo aded By : [ Karolinska Institute ] At : 14 : 37 22 November 2010 Singer , D . and Hunter , M . 1999 : The experience of premature menopause : a thematic dis - course analysis . Journal of Reproductive and Infant Psychology 17 , 63 (cid:2) / 81 . Smith , J . A . and Osborn , M . 2003 : Interpretative phenomenological analysis . In Smith , J . A . , editor , Qualitative psychology : a practical guide to methods . Sage . Smith , J . A . , Jarman , M . and Osborn , M . 1999 : Doing interpretative phenomenological ana - lysis . In Murray , M . and Chamberlain , M . M . K . , editors , Qualitative health psychol - ogy : theories and methods . Sage . Stenner , P . 1993 : Discoursing jealousy . In Burman , E . and Parker , I . , editors , Dis - course analytic research : repertoires and readings of texts in action . Routledge , 94 (cid:2) / 132 . Strauss , A . and Corbin , J . 1998 : Basics of quali - tative research : techniques and procedures for developing grounded theory . Sage . Taylor , G . W . and Ussher , J . M . 2001 : Making sense of S & M : a discourse analytic account . Sex - ualities 4 , 293 (cid:2) / 314 . Toerien , M . and Wilkinson , S . 2004 : Exploring the depilation norm : a qualitative question - naire study of women’s body hair removal . Qualitative Research in Psychology 1 , 69 (cid:2) / 92 . Tuckett , A . G . 2005 : Applying thematic analysis theory to practice : a researcher’s experience . Contemporary Nurse 19 , 75 (cid:2) / 87 . Ussher , J . M . and Mooney - Somers , J . 2000 : Nego - tiating desire and sexual subjectivity : narra - tives of young lesbian avengers . Sexualities 3 , 183 (cid:2) / 200 . Widdicombe , S . and Woofﬁtt , R . 1995 : The language of youth subcultures : social iden - tity in action . Harvester Wheatsheaf . Wilkinson , S . 2000 : Women with breast cancer talking causes : comparing content , biogra - phical and discursive analyses . Feminism & Psychology 10 , 431 (cid:2) / 60 . Willig , C . 1999 : Beyond appearances : a critical realist approach to social constructionism . In Nightingale , D . J . and Cromby J . , editors , Social constructionist psychology : a critical analysis of theory and practice . Open Uni - versity Press , 37 (cid:2) / 51 . Willig , C . 2003 : Discourse analysis . In Smith , J . A . , editor , Qualitative psychology : a prac - tical guide to research methods . Sage , 159 (cid:2) / 83 . Yardley , L . 2000 : Dilemmas in qualitative health research . Psychology and Health 15 , 215 (cid:2) / 28 . About the authors V IRGINIA B RAUN is a senior lecturer in the Department of Psychology at the University of Auckland , where she teaches , supervises and conducts qualitative research . Her research interests are primarily focused around women’s health , gendered bodies , and sex and sexuality , and the intersections between these areas . She is currently working on projects related to ‘sex in long - term relationships’ , ‘female genital cosmetic surgery’ and ‘the social context of STI transmission’ . V ICTORIA C LARKE is a senior lecture in social psychology at the University of the West of England . She has published a number of papers on lesbian and gay parenting , and co - edited two special issues of Feminism and Psychology on Marriage ( with Sara - Jane Finlay and Sue Wilkinson ) . She is currently conducting ESRC - funded research on same - sex relationships ( with Carol Burgoyne and Maree Burns ) and co - editing ( with Elizabeth Peel ) a book on LGBTQ psychology ( Out in psychology , Wiley ) . Using thematic analysis in psychology 101 Downlo aded By : [ Karolinska Institute ] At : 14 : 37 22 November 2010