* For correspondence . E - mail : tjeon @ chosun . ac . kr ; Tel . : + 82 - 62 - 230 - 6654 ; Fax : + 82 - 62 - 230 - 6654 § Supplemental material for this article may be found at http : / / www . springerlink . com / content / 120956 . Copyright (cid:59952)(cid:71) 2017 , The Microbiological Society of Korea Hyeseon Kim , Dong - Yeop Shin , and Taeck Joong Jeon * Department of Biology & BK21 - Plus Research Team for Bioactive Control Technology , College of Natural Sciences , Chosun University , Gwangju 61452 , Republic of Korea ( Received Oct 25 , 2016 / Revised Jan 2 , 2017 / Accepted Jan 6 , 2017 ) Journal of Microbiology ( 2017 ) DOI 10 . 1007 / s12275 - 017 - 6550 - 0 eISSN 1976 - 3794 pISSN 1225 - 8873 Minimal amino acids in the I / LWEQ domain required for anterior / posterior localization in Dictyostelium § Establishment of cell polarity is mediated by a series of signal - ing molecules that are asymmetrically activated or localized in the cell upon extracellular stimulation . To understand the mechanism that mediates anterior / posterior asymmetric localization of RapGAP3 during migration , we determined the minimally required amino acids in the I / LWEQ domain that cause posterior localization and found that the minimal region of the F - actin binding domain for posterior localiza - tion could , with some additional deletion at the C - terminal , localize to the anterior . Analysis of the localization and trans - location kinetics to the cell cortex of the truncated proteins suggests that the required regions for anterior / posterior lo - calization might have a preferential binding affinity to pre - existing F - actins at the rear and lateral sides of the cell or newly formed F - actins at the front of the cell , leading to dis - tinct differential sites of the cell . Keywords : cell polarity , cell migration , Dictyostelium , I / LWEQ domain , RapGAP3 Introduction For directional migration , cells should first be polarized to form the front and the rear by differentially localizing sig - naling molecules to the poles of cells . At the front , F - actin is newly polymerized upon stimulation and leads to protru - sions , whereas myosin II is assembled at the rear and along the lateral sides of cells and mediates contractions of the cells in a coordinated manner with pre - existing F - actins at the cortex . The asymmetrical localization of cytoskeletal com - ponents is driven by a series of signaling molecules that are differentially activated or localized upon extracellular sti - mulations such as chemoattractants and electrical stimuli ( Ridley et al . , 2003 ; Lee and Jeon , 2012 ; Artemenko et al . , 2014 ) . In Dictyostelium , an extracellular shallow gradient of the chemoattractant cAMP is detected by G protein - coupled cAMP receptors and is converted into an interior cellular signal , re - sulting in a steep gradient of cellular components . This inter - nal gradient of signaling molecules , including Ras GTPases , Rac GTPases , phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinases ( PI3Ks ) , and TORC2 complexes , induces coordinated remodeling of the cytoskeleton and ultimately directional cell migration ( Lee and Jeon , 2012 ; Artemenko et al . , 2014 ) . One of the early in - tracellular responses displaying distinct asymmetric distri - bution induced by the shallow gradient of the extracellular chemoattractant cAMP is the activation of Ras proteins . Ras Proteins such as RasG and Rap1 are rapidly and transiently activated in response to chemoattractant stimulation and are differentially activated at the leading edge of the cell , result - ing in establishment of cell polarity and directional cell mi - gration ( Sasaki et al . , 2004 ; Jeon et al . , 2007b ; Kortholt and van Haastert , 2008 ; Lee and Jeon , 2012 ; Artemenko et al . , 2014 ) . However , the mechanism that leads to the asymmetric activation of the Ras proteins at the leading edge of the cell remains largely unknown . Rap1 is a key signaling molecule in integrin - mediated cell - substratum adhesion and cadherin - mediated cell - cell adhe - sion ( Retta et al . , 2006 ; Kooistra et al . , 2007 ) . In Dictyoste - lium , Rap1 is asymmetrically activated at the leading edge of migrating cells and controls dynamic regulation of cell adhe - sion and helps establish cell polarity by locally modulating myosin II assembly and disassembly through the Rap1 / Phg2 signaling pathway ( Jeon et al . , 2007b ; Lee and Jeon , 2012 ) . Recently it has been demonstrated that the spatial and tem - poral regulation of Rap1 activity by Rap1 GAP proteins plays an important role in the control of cell adhesion and cell migration ( Jeon et al . , 2007a , 2009 ; Mun et al . , 2014 ) . RapGAP3 , which mediates Rap1 activity regulation at the apical tip - forming stage of multicellular development , is ra - pidly translocated to the cell cortex in response to chemoatt - ractant stimulation and is found preferentially at the ante - rior regions of migrating cells ( Jeon et al . , 2009 ) . RapGAP3 contains three PH domains at the N - terminal , an actin bin - ding I / LWEQ domain in the central region , and a GAP do - main at the C - terminal . The localization of RapGAP3 is me - diated by all of these three different domains ( Lee et al . , 2014 ) . Interestingly , it was reported that the I / LWEQ domain in the central region of RapGAP3 was sufficient for posterior locali - zation in migrating cells , as opposed to leading - edge locali - zation of full - length RapGAP3 , indicating that RapGAP3 contains all components for posterior and anterior locali - zation in migrating cells ( Lee et al . , 2014 ) . The I / LWEQ do - main was originally identified on the basis of sequence si - milarity in several F - actin binding proteins ( McCann and 2 Kim et al . ( A ) ( B ) ( C ) Fig . 1 . Localization of full - length RapGAP3 and the I / LWEQ domain of RapGAP3 in migrating cells . ( A ) Domain structure of RapGAP3 and dia - gram of truncated RapGAP3 proteins . ( B ) Localization of the fragments in chemotaxing cells . The asterisk indicates the position of micropipette emitting chemoattractant cAMP . ( C ) Translocation of the proteins to the cell cortex in response to uniform chemoattractant stimulation . Fluore - scence images were taken after stimulating the cells with cAMP , and rep - resentative images at 0 , 10 , and 30 sec after stimulation from time - lapse recordings are presented . Craig , 1997 ) . To understand the spatial mechanism that me - diates anterior / posterior asymmetric localization of RapGAP3 during migration , here we further examined and compared the subcellular localizations of truncated RapGAP3 proteins and other F - actin binding proteins . Our results show the minimal amino - acid sequence in the I / LWEQ domain of RapGAP3 required for anterior / posterior localization . Materials and Methods Strains and plasmids Dictyostelium KAx - 3 cells were cultured axenically in HL5 medium at 22°C ( Nellen et al . , 1984 ) . The expression plasmid of GFP - ABP ( DictyBase ID # 472 , pDXA - GFPABD120 ) was obtained from the DictyBase Stock Center , and the GFP - Coronin expression plasmid was described previously ( Cha and Jeon , 2011 ; Lee et al . , 2014 ) . For expression of the trun - cated I / LWEQ domains of TalinA and RapGAP3 proteins , the regions in TalinA and RapGAP3 marked in the diagram ( Figs . 2C and 3A ) were amplified by PCR and cloned into the Eco RI - Xho I site and the Bgl II - Xho I site of a pEXP - 4 ( + ) GFP - expression vector , respectively ( Jeon et al . , 2009 ) . The expression plasmids for GFP - coronin , GFP - LD1 ( # 137 ) , and GFP - RapGAP3 ( # 624 ) were described previously ( Jeon et al . , 2009 ; Lee et al . , 2014 ) . The plasmids were transformed into KAx - 3 cells , and the cells were maintained in 10 μg / ml of G418 . The expression of the fusion proteins were confirmed by Western blotting ( Supplementary data Fig . S1 ) . Chemotaxis and image acquisition The subcellular localization of proteins in response to che - moattractant stimulation was examined as previously des - cribed ( Lee et al . , 2014 ) . Aggregation compentent cells were placed on glass - bottomed microwell plates . For imaging che - motaxing cells , a micropipette ( FemtotipsII , Eppendorf Inc ) filled with 150 μM cAMP was positioned near the cells for sti - mulation . Images of chemotaxing cells were taken at time - lapse intervals of 6 sec for 30 min using an inverted micro - scope ( IX71 ; Olympus ) with a camera ( DS - Fi1 ; Nikon ) . Quantitative analysis of membrane or cortical localization of GFP fusion proteins was performed as described pre - viously ( Sasaki et al . , 2004 ; Jeon et al . , 2007a ) . Cells were allowed to adhere to the plates for 10 min , and then were uniformly stimulated with 10 μM cAMP . Fluorescence im - ages were taken at time - lapse intervals of 1 sec for 1 min using a confocal microscope ( DM IRE2 ; Leica ) with HCX plan Apo NA 1 . 40 63 x objective lenses ( oil CS ; Leica ) and a camera ( EM - CCD ; Hamamatsu Photonics ) . The frames were captured using NIS - elements software ( Nikon ) and ana - lyzed using ImageJ software ( National Institutes of Health ) . The fluorescence intensity of the cell cortex was measured , and the level of cortical GFP - fusion proteins was calculated by dividing the intensity at each time point ( Et ) by the in - tensity before stimulation ( Eo ) . Results The I / LWEQ domain in RapGAP3 directs posterior locali - zation RapGAP3 contains several domains , three PH domains at the N - terminal , an I / LWEQ domain in the central region , and a GAP domain at the C - terminal ( Fig . 1A ) . It has been reported that the PH domains and the GAP domain are re - quired for anterior localization of the protein in migrating cells while the I / LWEQ domain is for posterior localization ( Jeon et al . , 2009 ; Lee et al . , 2014 ) . The full - length RapGAP3 was highly accumulated at the anterior in migrating cells and a small amount of the protein was also found at the la - teral and posterior regions ( Fig . 1B ) . In contrast , highly ac - cumulated GFP - fusion I / LWEQ domain of RapGAP3 ( # 137 GFP - LD1 ) was found at the posterior in migrating cells with a decreasing gradient from the rear to the front of cells . These data indicate that a single protein , RapGAP3 , contains all components for both anterior and posterior localization of the protein in migrating cells . When the cells were uniformly stimulated with chemoatt - ractants , the full - length RapGAP3 exhibited rapid and tran - sient translocation to the cell cortex , whereas the truncated , but still I / LWEQ domain - containing RapGAP3 protein showed no clear translocation ( Fig . 1C ) . These results are in agree - ment with the fact that the signaling proteins accumulated at the anterior region in migrating cells show transient trans - Minimal amino acids for anterior / posterior localization 3 ( A ) ( B ) ( C ) ( D ) Fig . 2 . Localization of the I / LWEQ domain of TalinA in migrating cells . ( A ) Block structures of the I / LWEQ domains in RapGAP3 and talin proteins . ( B ) Multiple alignment of amino acid sequences of the I / LWEQ domains . The asterisks indicate the amino acids conserved in the I / LWEQ domains . ( C ) Localization of the I / LWEQ domain of TalinA in migrating cells . The asterisk indicates the position of micropipette emitting chemoattractant cAMP . ( D ) Translocation of the proteins to the cell cortex in response to uniform chemoattractant stimulation . Representative fluorescence images at 0 , 10 , and 30 sec after stimulation from time - lapse recordings are presented . location to the cortex in response to uniform chemoattractant stimulation while the proteins at the posterior display no such clear translocation ( Artemenko et al . , 2014 ; Lee et al . , 2014 ) . Localization analysis of the I / LWEQ domain of TalinA in migrating cells The presence of the I / LWEQ domain in RapGAP3 was pre - dicted by Block Maker analysis of RapGAP3 with Dictyoste - lium Talin A and B proteins . Even though there are slight dif - ferences in the distance among each block between RapGAP3 and talin proteins , RapGAP3 has a similar I / LWEQ domain to that of the talin proteins ( Fig . 2A and B ) . To determine whether the I / LWEQ domain in TalinA shows a similar lo - calization in migrating cells to RapGAP3 , we prepared a se - ries of truncated TalinA proteins containing the I / LWEQ domain and examined localizations of the proteins in mi - grating cells ( Fig . 2C ) . It is known that the F - actin binding affinity of the TalinA I / LWEQ domain is regulated by in - trasteric inhibition of an upstream α - helix region , which is located at around 50 amino - acids upstream of the first block within the I / LWEQ domain ( Senetar et al . , 2004 ) . First , we examined two truncated talin proteins including the regu - latory upstream α - helix region . The two truncated talin pro - teins ( GFP - TalFC and GFP - TalFU ) were highly accumu - lated at the anterior region of most of the migrating cells and were also found at the lateral and posterior regions in some cells . In contrast , the truncated talin proteins ( GFP - TalFB1 ) containing only the region of I / LWEQ domain were found at the posterior but not the anterior regions ( Fig . 2C ) , which is similar to that of the RapGAP3 I / LWEQ domain . The up - stream α - helix region of TalinA I / LWEQ domain is not found in the RapGAP3 I / LWEQ domain . Upon uniform chemo - attractant stimulation , truncated talin protein ( GFP - TalFU ) including the upstream regulatory region showed transient translocation to the cell cortex , while the I / LWEQ domain only protein ( GFP - TalFB1 ) displayed no clear translocation ( Fig . 2D ) . These results indicate that the I / LWEQ domain in TalinA possesses posterior localization determinants , as in RapGAP3 , in migrating cells . Localization of truncated I / LWEQ domain proteins of Rap - GAP3 in migrating cells To characterize minimal determinants of the I / LWEQ do - main in RapGAP3 for asymmetrical posterior localization in migrating cells , we prepared a series of truncated GFP - fusion proteins of the I / LWEQ domain , which were named as localization domains ( LD ) , and examined the localizations of the proteins in migrating cells ( Fig . 3 ) . First , we deter - mined the most N - terminal residues which are required for cell cortex localization . GFP - LD6 ( 528 – 755 a . a ) was found in the cytosol while all other truncated proteins ( LD3 and 4 Kim et al . ( A ) ( B ) ( C ) Fig . 3 . Localization of truncated I / LWEQ domain proteins of RapGAP3 in migrating cells . ( A ) Diagram of truncated RapGAP3 proteins . ( B ) Localization of GFP - fusion truncated proteins in chemotaxing cells . The arrow indicates the direction of cell movement . ( C ) Secondary structure of LD10 RapGAP3 predicted at network protein sequence analysis at NPS @ server . H : α - helix . The arrow indicates the C - terminal of LD11 . LD5 ) containing the same C - terminal region but longer N - terminal regions than LD6 were preferentially found at the posterior of migrating cells , suggesting that the amino acids ( 487 – 527 a . a ) at the N - terminal region of LD5 are required for cell cortex localization . We then examined the localiza - tions of the proteins which contain the same N - terminal as LD5 but further truncated C - terminals . GFP - LD10 ( 487 – 680 a . a ) showed posterior localization in migrating cells almost to the same extent as LD5 , indicating that the amino acids ( 681 – 755 a . a ) at the C - terminal region of LD5 are not re - quired for posterior localization . Surprisingly , GFP - LD11 ( 487 – 604 a . a ) , which was further truncated at the C - termi - nal relative to LD10 , was observed at not only the posterior region but also the anterior and lateral sides of the cell , sug - gesting that the amino acids ( 605 – 680 a . a ) at the C - terminal region of LD10 might play some inhibitory roles to anterior localization of the protein in migrating cells . Additional trun - cated proteins ( # 180 ) that were further deleted from the C - terminal of LD11 were found in the cytosol , indicating that the amino acids ( 576 – 604 a . a and 487 – 527 a . a ) are required for cell cortex localization but not sufficient . These results suggest that the truncated RapGAP3 proteins LD10 and LD11 are at the borderline for minimal - size proteins in the posterior and cell cortex localization in migrating cells , res - pectively . Furthermore , these results indicate that the mini - mal region of RapGAP3 that is required for posterior locali - zation in migrating cells also contains anterior localization components . Further studies for the localizations of the ad - ditionally truncated proteins from LD10 and point - mutated proteins are in progress . LD12 proteins ( 487 – 647 a . a ) , of which the C - terminal region was further truncated , showed similar localizations to LD10 in migrating cells ( Supplementary data Fig . S2A and B ) . When LD11 was expressed in rapGAP3 null cells , the localizations of the proteins were similar to those in wild - type cells ( Supplementary data Fig . S2D ) . Four α - helixes were predicted in the LD10 region of RapGAP3 ( Fig . 3C ) . The fourth α - helix , which were predicted at 607 – 622 amino acids in the region of LD10 , might be important in mediating anterior / posterior localization of the proteins , since this structure was predicted to be present in the pos - terior localizing LD10 proteins but not the LD11 proteins which were observed at the posterior and anterior regions . Comparison of the localizations of GFP - LD10 and GFP - LD11 with other F - actin binding proteins To investigate the probability that GFP - LD10 and GFP - LD11 might have different affinities to distinct sets of actin filaments , we compared the localizations of the proteins in migrating cells with those of specific F - actin marker pro - teins , Coronin and ABP - 120 , and examined the transloca - tion kinetics of the proteins to the cell cortex in response to uniform chemoattractant stimulation ( Fig . 4 ) . GFP - LD10 was observed only at the posterior region in migrating cells with a decreasing gradient from the back to the front ( Fig . 4B ) , whereas the further truncated LD11 was found at the posterior and the anterior protruding regions . The locali - zation of GFP - LD11 was similar to that of GFP - ABP , but not GFP - Coronin . Coronin is a well - known F - actin bind - ing protein , used as a maker protein for newly formed F - actin , physically associates with the Arp2 / 3 complex and inhibits actin nucleation activity of the complex ( Cai et al . , 2007 ; Jeon et al . , 2007a ; Chan et al . , 2011 ) . It was reported that the F - actin binding affinity of human Coronin is appro - ximately 50 - fold higher for freshly polymerized actin com - pared with filaments polymerized from pure ADP - bound Minimal amino acids for anterior / posterior localization 5 ( A ) ( D ) ( B ) ( E ) ( C ) Fig . 4 . Comparison of localizations of GFP - LD10 and GFP - LD11 with GFP - Coronin and ABP . ( A ) Diagram of GFP - LD10 and GFP - LD11 . ( B ) Localizat - ion of GFP - LD10 , GFP - LD11 , GFP - Coronin , and GFP - ABP in migrating cells . The arrow indicates the direction of cell movement . ( C ) Localization of the proteins in the presence of Lat . B . ( D ) Translocation of the proteins to the cell cortex upon chemoattractant stimulation . Three representative fluorescence images at 0 , 10 , 30 sec after stimulation are presented . ( E ) Translocation kinetics of the proteins to the cell cortex in response to chemoattractant stimulation . Fluorescence intensity at the cell cortex was quantified and graphed as described in Fig . 1 . The graphs represent the mean values of data on several cells from at least two separate experiments . n = 46 , 86 , 44 , and 52 cells for # 581 - LD10 , # 582 - LD11 , ABP , and Coronin , respectively . monomers ( Cai et al . , 2007 ) . GFP - Coronin was mainly ob - served at the anterior region , indicating that new F - actin polymerization occurs at the protruding region of the cells ( Fig . 4 ) . In contrast , another F - actin binding protein , ABP - 120 was found at the anterior , lateral , and posterior regions . ABP - 120 is one of the most abundant F - actin cross - linkers in Dictyostelium and contains an actin binding domain ( ABD ) at the N - terminal region . GFP - fusion proteins with the ac - tin binding domain of ABP - 120 were used for visualizing all sets of F - actins at cell cortex , pseudopods , and filopods ( Washington and Knecht , 2008 ) . All proteins in our study were found in the cytosol in the presence of latrunculin B , an inhibitor of F - actin polymeri - zation , indicating that all proteins localize to the cell cortex in an F - actin dependent manner ( Fig . 4C ) . Taken together , these results suggest that LD10 might have a strong binding affinity to pre - existing F - actins at the posterior while LD11 has affinity to not only the F - actins at the posterior but also the newly formed F - actins at the anterior of the cells . In agree - ment with these suggestions , slightly different binding affi - nities to the cytoskeletal fractions between LD10 and LD11 were observed ( Supplementary data Fig . S2C ) . However , we could not exclude a possibility that different actin - binding proteins might mediate the I / LWEQ domains to be recruited to the cell cortex . It should be tested whether the I / LWEQ domain in RapGAP3 directly bind to F - actin . Translocation of the proteins to the cell cortex upon che - moattractant stimulation The level of GFP - LD10 , which localizes at the posterior in migrating cells , at the cortex was not changed upon uniform chemoattractant stimulation . In contrast , the level of GFP - LD11 , which is accumulated at the anterior and the poste - rior regions in migrating cells , rapidly and transiently in - creased at the cortex with a peak at approximately 10 sec in response to chemoattractant stimulation , and then decreased to the basal level within 30 sec ( Fig . 4D and E ) . The two F - actin binding maker proteins showed slightly different translocation kinetics to the cell cortex in response to che - 6 Kim et al . moattractant stimulation . The majority of GFP - Coronin was found in the cytosol before stimulation . Upon chemoatt - ractant stimulation , GFP - Coronin was translocated to the cortex with a peak at 10 – 15 sec , which is slightly delayed compared to previously reported data ( Etzrodt et al . , 2006 ; Jeon et al . , 2007a ) , and the level of the protein decreased to the basal level within 30 sec . The level of GFP - ABP at the cor - tex was more rapidly increased , compared to GFP - Coronin and GFP - LD11 , with a peak at 5 – 7 sec , and then decreased to the basal level within 20 sec . The initial translocation ki - netics of GFP - LD11 was similar to that of GFP - ABP but the delocalization kinetics of the protein at the cortex was similar to that of GFP - Coronin ( Fig . 4E ) , suggesting that LD11 has a partially overlapping F - actin binding property with the two actin binding proteins , ABP - 120 and Coronin . Discussion Cell polarity formation upon extracellular stimulation is re - quired for directed cell migration and is mediated by asym - metrical localization or activation of the signaling molecules in the cell ( Kortholt and van Haastert , 2008 ; Lee and Jeon , 2012 ; Artemenko et al . , 2014 ) . Here we determined the mi - nimally required amino acids in the I / LWEQ domain of RapGAP3 that enables posterior localization in migrating cells . More importantly , we found that the minimal region of the protein required for posterior localization ( LD10 ; Fig . 3 ) could localize to the anterior with some additional deletion of its C - terminal ( LD11 ) , indicating that the same F - actin binding domain can be modulated to localize to the anterior or posterior of the cell through small protein fragments . Our results suggest that anterior or posterior localization of the F - actin binding domain in RapGAP3 is likely dependent upon structural and biochemical properties of F - actins at the cell cortex . Actin filaments in the cell are organized into several dif - ferent forms and functional arrays by various actin - binding proteins , resulting in F - actins with different biochemical and structural properties ( Shimozawa and Ishiwata , 2009 ; Galkin et al . , 2010 ; Uyeda et al . , 2011 ) . A newly formed F - actin at the front of migrating cells provides the mechanical force for membrane protrusion , and another type of F - actin is required for contraction of the cell body by interacting with myosin II at the posterior and lateral sides of the cell ( Ridley et al . , 2003 ; Lee and Jeon , 2012 ; Artemenko et al . , 2014 ) . It has been previously proposed that the I / LWEQ domain of RapGAP3 might bind to only the pre - existing F - actin at the rear and lateral sides of the cell but not the newly formed F - actin at the front in migrating cells , leading to lo - calization to the posterior and lateral sides of the cell ( Lee et al . , 2014 ) . The present study further characterized the mini - mal protein fragments required for posterior or anterior lo - calization of the I / LWEQ domain of RapGAP3 . The locali - zation and translocation kinetics to the cell cortex of GFP - LD11 , which is the minimal size protein required for locali - zation at the cell cortex including the anterior , in response to chemoattractant stimulation was similar to that of GFP - ABP , which is an F - actin binding and cross - linking protein and observed at all cell cortexes including the anterior and the lateral and posterior of migrating cells ( Washington and Knecht , 2008 ) . Another F - actin binding protein Coronin , which was used as a marker protein for a newly formed F - actin ( Jeon et al . , 2007a , 2009 ; Chan et al . , 2011 ) , showed high accumulation at the front of migrating cells and rapid and transient translocation to the cell cortex in response to chemoattractant stimulation , indicating that new polymeri - zation of F - actin occurs at the anterior region of migrating cells . Our results support the suggestion that the minimal protein fragment for anterior localization ( LD11 ) is likely to bind to both newly formed and pre - existing F - actins , lead - ing to localization to the cell cortex including the anterior , lateral , and posterior regions of the cell . On the other hand , the minimal fragment for posterior localization ( LD10 ) might bind to only pre - existing F - actins and are excluded from the anterior , i . e . , the newly formed F - actins , and is directed to localize to the cortex at the posterior and lateral sides of the cell . Two types of F - actins with different biochemical and structural properties - one is a cross - linked and newly formed F - actin at the front and the other is a stretched F - actin at the rear and lateral sides of the cell - appear to be key factors for determining the localization of the actin - binding proteins to specific sites of the cell ; a structural polymorphism in F - actin has been demonstrated in many reports ( Galkin et al . , 2010 ) . Electron cryomicroscopy showed that frozen , hydrated actin filaments contained a multiplicity of different structural states , with variable twist as well as a variable tilt of subunits ( Galkin et al . , 2002 ) . F - actin properties are modulated by over 150 different actin binding proteins , resulting in functionally distinct regions of the cytoskeleton ( Salwinski et al . , 2004 ) . It has been shown that a myosin II domain , which localizes to the posterior of a migrating cell , preferentially binds to stretched actin filaments in the rear cortex and cleavage fur - rows ( Uyeda et al . , 2011 ) . In addition , at the leading edge , actin is assembled as a dendritic network forming a lamelli - podial shape ( Ridley et al . , 2003 ; Galkin et al . , 2010 ) . Our present study suggests that the minimally required regions for anterior / posterior localization in the I / LWEQ domain of RapGAP3 might have preferential binding affini - ties for stretched , pre - existing F - actin at the rear and lateral sides of the cell or cross - linked , newly formed F - actin at the front of the cell . This study contributes to understanding the mechanisms that direct asymmetrical distribution of the signaling molecules in response to extracelluar stimuli and the establishment of cell polarity by locally modulating Rap1 activity . Acknowledgements This research was supported by Basic Science Research Pro - gram through the National Research Foundation of Korea ( NRF ) funded by the Ministry of Education , Science and Technology ( 2011 - 0022220 ) , and by research funds from Chosun University to T . J . Jeon , 2016 . References Artemenko , Y . , Lampert , T . J . , and Devreotes , P . N . 2014 . Moving Minimal amino acids for anterior / posterior localization 7 towards a paradigm : common mechanisms of chemotactic sig - naling in Dictyostelium and mammalian leukocytes . Cell Mol . Life Sci . 71 , 3711 – 3747 . Cai , L . , Makhov , A . M . , and Bear , J . E . 2007 . F - actin binding is es - sential for coronin 1B function in vivo . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 1779 – 1790 . Cha , I . and Jeon , T . J . 2011 . Dynamic localization of the actin - bun - dling protein cortexillin I during cell migration . Mol . Cells 32 , 281 – 287 . Chan , K . T . , Creed , S . J . , and Bear , J . E . 2011 . Unraveling the enigma : progress towards understanding the coronin family of actin re - gulators . Trends Cell Biol . 21 , 481 – 488 . Etzrodt , M . , Ishikawa , H . C . , Dalous , J . , Muller - Taubenberger , A . , Bretschneider , T . , and Gerisch , G . 2006 . Time - resolved responses to chemoattractant , characteristic of the front and tail of Dictyo - stelium cells . FEBS Lett . 580 , 6707 – 6713 . Galkin , V . E . , Orlova , A . , Schroder , G . F . , and Egelman , E . H . 2010 . Structural polymorphism in F - actin . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 17 , 1318 – 1323 . Galkin , V . E . , VanLoock , M . S . , Orlova , A . , and Egelman , E . H . 2002 . A new internal mode in F - actin helps explain the remarkable evo - lutionary conservation of actin’s sequence and structure . Curr . Biol . 12 , 570 – 575 . Jeon , T . J . , Lee , D . J . , Lee , S . , Weeks , G . , and Firtel , R . A . 2007a . Regulation of Rap1 activity by RapGAP1 controls cell adhesion at the front of chemotaxing cells . J . Cell . Biol . 179 , 833 – 843 . Jeon , T . J . , Lee , D . J . , Merlot , S . , Weeks , G . , and Firtel , R . A . 2007b . Rap1 controls cell adhesion and cell motility through the regu - lation of myosin II . J . Cell Biol . 176 , 1021 – 1033 . Jeon , T . J . , Lee , S . , Weeks , G . , and Firtel , R . A . 2009 . Regulation of Dictyostelium morphogenesis by RapGAP3 . Dev . Biol . 328 , 210 – 220 . Kooistra , M . R . , Dube , N . , and Bos , J . L . 2007 . Rap1 : a key regulator in cell - cell junction formation . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 17 – 22 . Kortholt , A . and van Haastert , P . J . 2008 . Highlighting the role of Ras and Rap during Dictyostelium chemotaxis . Cell Signal 20 , 1415 – 1422 . Lee , M . R . and Jeon , T . J . 2012 . Cell migration : regulation of cytos - keleton by Rap1 in Dictyostelium discoideum . J . Microbiol . 50 , 555 – 561 . Lee , M . R . , Kim , H . , and Jeon , T . J . 2014 . The I / LWEQ domain in RapGAP3 required for posterior localization in migrating cells . Mol . Cells 37 , 307 – 313 . McCann , R . O . and Craig , S . W . 1997 . The I / LWEQ module : a con - served sequence that signifies F - actin binding in functionally diverse proteins from yeast to mammals . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 5679 – 5684 . Mun , H . , Lee , M . R . , and Jeon , T . J . 2014 . RapGAP9 regulation of the morphogenesis and development in Dictyostelium . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 446 , 428 – 433 . Nellen , W . , Silan , C . , and Firtel , R . A . 1984 . DNA - mediated trans - formation in Dictyostelium discoideum : regulated expression of an actin gene fusion . Mol . Cell Biol . 4 , 2890 – 2898 . Retta , S . F . , Balzac , F . , and Avolio , M . 2006 . Rap1 : a turnabout for the crosstalk between cadherins and integrins . Eur . J . Cell . Biol . 85 , 283 – 293 . Ridley , A . J . , Schwartz , M . A . , Burridge , K . , Firtel , R . A . , Ginsberg , M . H . , Borisy , G . , Parsons , J . T . , and Horwitz , A . R . 2003 . Cell migration : integrating signals from front to back . Science 302 , 1704 – 1709 . Salwinski , L . , Miller , C . S . , Smith , A . J . , Pettit , F . K . , Bowie , J . U . , and Eisenberg , D . 2004 . The Database of Interacting Proteins : 2004 update . Nucleic Acids Res . 32 , D449 – 451 . Sasaki , A . T . , Chun , C . , Takeda , K . , and Firtel , R . A . 2004 . Localized Ras signaling at the leading edge regulates PI3K , cell polarity , and directional cell movement . J . Cell Biol . 167 , 505 – 518 . Senetar , M . A . , Foster , S . J . , and McCann , R . O . 2004 . Intrasteric in - hibition mediates the interaction of the I / LWEQ module pro - teins Talin1 , Talin2 , Hip1 , and Hip12 with actin . Biochemistry 43 , 15418 – 15428 . Shimozawa , T . and Ishiwata , S . 2009 . Mechanical distortion of sin - gle actin filaments induced by external force : detection by fluo - rescence imaging . Biophys . J . 96 , 1036 – 1044 . Uyeda , T . Q . , Iwadate , Y . , Umeki , N . , Nagasaki , A . , and Yumura , S . 2011 . Stretching actin filaments within cells enhances their af - finity for the myosin II motor domain . PLoS One 6 , e26200 . Washington , R . W . and Knecht , D . A . 2008 . Actin binding domains direct actin - binding proteins to different cytoskeletal locations . BMC Cell Biol . 9 , 10 .