Systematic Identification of Post - Transcriptional Regulatory Modules Matvei Khoroshkin 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , # , Andrey Buyan 5 , # , Martin Dodel 6 , # , Albertas Navickas 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 7 , Johnny Yu 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , Fathima Trejo 8 , Anthony Doty 8 , Rithvik Baratam 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , Shaopu Zhou 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , Tanvi Joshi 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , Kristle Garcia 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , Benedict Choi 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , Sohit Miglani 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , Vishvak Subramanyam 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , Hailey Modi 9 , 10 , 11 , Daniel Markett 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , M . Ryan Corces 9 , 10 , 11 , Ivan V . Kulakovskiy 5 , 12 , Faraz Mardakheh 5 , * , Hani Goodarzi 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , * Affiliations 1 Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics , University of California , San Francisco , San Francisco , CA , USA 2 Department of Urology , University of California , San Francisco , San Francisco , CA , USA 3 Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center , University of California , San Francisco , San Francisco , CA , USA 4 Bakar Computational Health Sciences Institute , University of California , San Francisco , San Francisco , CA , USA 5 Institute of Protein Research , Russian Academy of Sciences , Pushchino , Russia 6 Centre for Cancer Cell and Molecular Biology , Barts Cancer Institute , Queen Mary University of London , London , UK 7 Current address : Institut Curie , UMR3348 CNRS , U1278 Inserm , Orsay , France 8 College of Arts and Sciences , University of San Francisco , San Francisco , CA , USA 9 Gladstone Institute of Neurological Disease , San Francisco , CA , USA 10 Gladstone Institute of Data Science and Biotechnology , San Francisco , CA , USA 11 Department of Neurology , University of California San Francisco , San Francisco , CA , USA 12 Vavilov Institute of General Genetics , Russian Academy of Sciences , Moscow , Russia # These authors contributed equally * Correspondence to : hani . goodarzi @ ucsf . edu ABSTRACT In our cells , a limited number of RNA binding proteins ( RBPs ) are responsible for all aspects of RNA metabolism across the entire transcriptome . To accomplish this , RBPs form regulatory units that act on specific target regulons . However , the landscape of RBP combinatorial interactions remains poorly explored . Here , we performed a systematic annotation of RBP combinatorial interactions via multimodal data integration . We built a large - scale map of RBP protein neighborhoods by generating in vivo proximity - dependent biotinylation datasets of 50 human RBPs . In parallel , we used CRISPR interference with single - cell readout to capture transcriptomic changes upon RBP knockdowns . By combining these physical and functional interaction readouts , along with the atlas of RBP mRNA targets from eCLIP assays , we generated an integrated map of functional RBP interactions . We then used this map to match RBPs to their context - specific functions and validated the predicted functions biochemically for four RBPs . This study highlights the previously underappreciated scale of the inter - RBP interactions , be it genetic or physical , and is a first step towards a more comprehensive understanding of post - transcriptional regulatory processes and their underlying molecular grammar . 1 INTRODUCTION RNA binding proteins ( RBPs ) are crucial for regulating all stages of post - transcriptional regulation , from RNA splicing and nuclear export to translation and decay . Despite the limited number of RBPs encoded in the human genome ( less than 1500 ) ( Gerstberger , Hafner , and Tuschl 2014 ) , they shephard more than 100 , 000 transcripts throughout their life cycles . The conventional " one RBP - one function - one regulon " model is therefore insufficient in capturing the multifaceted roles of RBPs ( Glisovic et al . 2008 ) . Instead , a more precise model is the " one RBP - many functions - many regulons " approach , which acknowledges that RBPs have multiple , context - dependent functions and regulate independent regulons . For instance , muscleblind - like 1 ( MBNL1 ) regulates splicing when binding pre - mRNAs in the nucleus ( Lin et al . 2006 ) ; while modulating RNA stability by binding 3 ' UTRs of target mRNAs in the cytoplasm ( Fish et al . 2016 ) . Similarly , SRSF1 simultaneously controls RNA processing in the nucleus and mRNA translation and decay in the cytoplasm ( Twyffels , Gueydan , and Kruys 2011 ) . These token examples illustrate the importance of recognizing the multifunctionality of RBPs in post - transcriptional regulation . Although systems biology has been effective in providing tools to annotate RBPs , there is still a need for more research to characterize the context of these proteins ' regulatory functions . Several recent large - scale projects have focused on mapping different types of interactions between RBPs and their binding partners . For example , the ENCODE consortium has mapped over 120 RBP binding sites in the human transcriptome , while other projects have mapped the subcellular localization of hundreds of RBPs and RNAs , and investigated changes in gene expression profiles following protein knockdowns ( Replogle et al . 2022 ; Fazal et al . 2019 ; Youn et al . 2018 ) . As a result , the data characterizing interactions between RBPs and RNAs is available for many RNA binding proteins . However , as showcased above , not every RBP - RNA interaction has a similar impact on the fate of the target RNA ( Corley , Burns , and Yeo 2020 ) . The functional consequences of a given RBP - RNA interaction emerge from its molecular context , specifically through interactions with other RBPs that act on the same target . To capture post - transcriptional regulatory networks , we need a comprehensive map of multi - component RBP modules that effectively separate the set of bound RNAs into functionally distinct regulons . In this study , we tackled this challenge by providing a systematic framework for mapping the RBP regulatory modules that form the core of these post - transcription regulatory networks . The challenge of this problem arises from the fact that functional interactions between RBPs are more complex than simple physical interactions . While RBPs can co - localize or directly interact , they also often cooperate by binding the same RNAs simultaneously or sequentially . Moreover , as RBPs form regulatory pathways , we also expect genetic interactions between RBPs , which manifest themselves as epistatic interactions in phenotypic measurements . Since no single biochemical assay is capable of capturing such a variety of interaction modes , a multi - modal approach is required to reliably annotate these RBP - RBP interactions . To capture these , we examined three forms of functional RBP - RBP entanglements : ( i ) two RBPs are co - localized in 2 close physical proximity to each other , likely as part of a complex , ( ii ) two RBPs bind the same RNA targets , either simultaneously or at different times and locations , and ( iii ) two RBPs are part of the same pathway , and their modulations result in similar downstream transcriptomic changes . By combining data from these three independent modalities within a unified statistical and analytical framework , we have successfully captured RBP regulatory modules in their most generalizable form . We further demonstrated that functional RBP interaction networks are significantly more complex than previously appreciated . We also used our multi - modal integrative map of RBP interactions to match individual RBPs to their functional regulons and revealed many previously unknown post - transcriptional regulatory processes governed by combinatorial interactions between RBPs . We have showcased and validated multiple instances of these molecular mechanisms using genetic , molecular , and biochemical approaches . Our discovery of a large repertoire of functional interactions between RBPs , many of which were previously unknown , provides a rich resource for the community to better study the role of post - transcriptional regulatory programs in health and disease . RESULTS Multi - modal approaches for capturing RBP - mediated interactions In order to cover multitudes of functions for thousands of distinct target regulons , RBPs assemble into units of post - transcriptional control in a combinatorial manner ( Cho et al . 2022 ) . This process can be abstracted as a 4 - layer network ( Fig . 1A ) , where the first layer represents RBPs and the final layer their functionally distinct target regulons . In the intermediate layers , RBPs that play related roles and broadly share protein partners , targets , or context , come together to form large groups that we term " regulatory modules " . Then , RBPs within each module assemble into smaller regulatory units , each carrying out a specific regulating function and targeting a defined regulon . The resulting combinatorial RBP interaction network allows a limited number of RBPs to fulfill diverse functional roles in post - transcriptional regulation that is required to govern all aspects of the life cycle for all RNAs in the cell . In order to broadly and systematically annotate regulatory interactions between RBPs , we combined data from three independent modalities , namely ( i ) BioID2 - mediated proximity protein labeling , ( ii ) RBP Perturb - seq , and ( iii ) eCLIP RNA ENCODE dataset ( Fig . 1 , Fig . S1 ) . First , to capture the protein neighborhood of each RBP , we used BioID labeling - based pulldown followed by mass spectrometry ( D . I . Kim et al . 2016 ) . We fused BioID2 to 50 RBPs ( see Methods ) , and generated stable cell lines expressing each fusion construct in a human leukemia cell line K562 . We then performed , in biological triplicates , streptavidin pull - down experiments followed by mass spectrometry . For each RBP , we also included matched controls by processing the same lines without a biotin pulse . This allowed us to generate a high - quality protein neighborhood dataset and 3 to systematically identify co - localized RBPs . Second , we aimed to capture combinations of RBPs whose perturbations similarly impact the gene expression landscape of the cell . For this , we took advantage of Perturb - seq , a parallelized loss - of - function screen with rich single - cell transcriptomic readouts ( Norman et al . 2019 ) . We obtained transcriptome - wide gene expression measurements for 68 RBPs ( representing a variety of regulatory processes ; see Methods ) knockdowns using single - cell RNA sequencing and used the resulting high - dimensional data to systematically delineate genetic interactions between RBPs ( Norman et al . 2019 ) . Finally , we re - analyzed the ENCODE eCLIP data to evaluate the extent to which pairs of RBPs bind to common RNA targets ( Van Nostrand et al . 2016 ) . Integrated RBP interaction maps to reveal regulatory modules The abovementioned data modalities capture complementary aspects of regulatory interactions between RBPs . Therefore , integrating these sources of information is a critical step toward generating a more comprehensive and generalizable map of regulatory interactions ( Fig 1 , Fig . S1 ) . To accomplish this , we first generated RBP - target interaction maps for each individual modality , where ‘target’ can be either neighboring protein ( BioID ) , downstream gene ( Perturb - seq ) , or target RNA ( eCLIP ; Fig . S2A - C ) . In order to make the values comparable between datasets , we z - score transformed them across the target features . RBPs that fall close to each other in this feature space , which reflects physical and functional proximity , likely function as part of the same regulatory modules . Therefore , for each data modality , we estimated pairwise cosine distances between RBPs and transformed them into empirical p - values to achieve a uniform scale for pairwise similarity . Finally , the three separately calculated p - values for RBP - RBP similarities ( i . e . from BioID , Perturb - seq , and eCLIP respectively ) were combined into a single unified probability score ( Fig . S1 ) expressing the overall likelihood of functional interactions between pairs of RBPs . The resulting ‘Integrated RBP Regulatory Map’ , combining physical and genetic interactions , provides the means to elucidate the combinatorial regulatory logic underlying RBP - mediated post - transcriptional control of gene expression ( Fig . 2A ) . Interaction maps are often interpreted by identifying proteins that cluster together into functional complexes in an unsupervised manner . And as shown in Fig . 2A , our map similarly captures a number of canonical RBP modules involved in key post - transcriptional regulatory programs such as ‘cytoplasmic translation’ and ‘mRNA splicing’ . However , as stated above , RBPs carry out multiple independent functions , which are not captured by this “one RBP - one cluster” scheme . This is clearly highlighted by the many significant off - diagonal interactions that are observed in our clustered RBP map . And more importantly , our Integrated RBP Regulatory Map captures substantially more regulatory modules than an analogous map built based on the current state - of - the - art protein - protein interaction database , STRING - DB ( Szklarczyk et al . 2018 ) ( Fig . S2D ) . Our integrative approach brings together RBPs that form key regulatory modules and broadly recapitulates what is known about the functions of these RBPs ; however , tracking the source of 4 the signal to the individual input modalities is also often informative and can highlight the higher resolution of our integrative approach . For example , among the group of 18 RBPs that are collectively associated with splicing - related functions , and bind overlapping RNA targets based on the eCLIP data , HNRNPK and DDX42 are also associated with the regulation of p53 - mediated apoptosis based on Perturb - seq results ; and consistently , they have been previously shown to be upregulated in p53 mutant cells ( Fig . 2A ) ( Escobar - Hoyos et al . 2020 ) . Another example is the group of RBPs associated with mitochondrial and cytoplasmic translation . While eCLIP data brings together the rRNA - binding RBPs , proximity labeling data clearly distinguishes mitochondrial RBPs ( TBRG4 , FASTKD2 , and SUPV3L1 ) from others ( Fig . 2A ) . RBPs form more functional interactions than captured by traditional PPI methods . We tested this hypothesis by comparing the interaction map built using protein - protein interaction data from STRING - DB database with the map built using our multi - modal integrated data from the current study . The integrated map , generally corresponding to the STRING - DB , showed larger regulatory modules , demonstrating the utility of a multi - modal data integration approach in revealing more functional interactions ( Fig S2 D , E ) . Combinatorial interactions between RBPs provides a molecular basis for their multifaceted role in gene regulation Our Integrated RBP Regulatory Map reveals numerous cases of combinatorial interactions and multi - functional roles for RBPs , a number of which have been previously described . Such combinatorial interactions appear as off - diagonal groupings in our clustered interaction map ( Fig . 2B ) . For example , FUS , along with several other proteins , is associated with both mRNA splicing and ribosome biogenesis regulatory modules . Both of these functions have been experimentally demonstrated for FUS ( Fiesel and Kahle 2011 ; Moore 2016 ; Rogelj et al . 2012 ) . Similarly , FASTKD2 , depending on the context , is known to play roles in the regulation of mitochondrial mRNA translation and mitochondrial ribosomal biogenesis , respectively ( Antonicka and Shoubridge 2015 ; Popow et al . 2015 ) . Consistently , FASTKD2 is associated with both of these regulatory modules in our integrated map . These examples further highlight the combinatorial nature of RBP function and our ability to effectively capture and separate these interactions . To go beyond these known examples of multi - functionality and to gain insights into the previously unknown functions , we implemented a label transfer approach for each RBP by analyzing the functions of its closest neighbors in our Integrated RBP Regulatory Map . We observed that , as expected , the closest neighbors often also point to the known functions of RBPs ( Fig . 2C ) . For example , the strong interactions of XRCC6 ( Ku70 ) with DDX51 , UTP18 , and WDR43 suggest a role in ribosome biogenesis , which was recently demonstrated for this RBP ( Shao et al . 2020 ) . Similarly , interactions between PPIL4 , NPM1 , and SAFB suggest that PPIL4 also takes part in transcriptional regulation . Consistent with this observation , PPIL4 was recently shown to interact with JMJD6 , an annotated histone demethylase with known roles in 5 transcriptional control ( Barak et al . 2021 ) . Finally , the interaction between LIN28B and RPS3 , METAP2 , and DDX6 similarly recapitulates its known role in mRNA translation ( Basak et al . 2020 ) . As mentioned above , the use of complementary data types allows our Integrated RBP Regulatory Map to better capture this multifunctionality of RBPs . As a demonstration , for each RBP of interest , we tallied the annotated functions of its closest neighbors across each of our three modalities ( Fig . 2D ) . For instance , when considering ZNF800 , we found that UCHL5 and GRWD1 , which are among its closest neighbors in the eCLIP dataset , are known chromatin remodeling proteins . However , the proximity labeling data showed that ribosome biogenesis factors , such as DDX21 and RPS11 , are also among the proteins in ZNF800’s neighborhood . Consistently , our Integrated RBP Regulatory Map captured both modalities and revealed that the protein neighborhood of ZNF800 consists of both chromatin remodeling and ribosome biogenesis factors ( Fig . 2D , middle panel ) . This showcases that the use of complementary data types allows for the simultaneous capturing of multiple putative RBP functions . TAF15 is another fitting example ; eCLIP data suggests that TAF15 is closely related to transcriptional regulators , such as FUS and EWSR1 . At the same time , proximity labeling data point to an interaction between TAF15 and the splicing machinery ( through SMNDC1 and GPKOW ) . Perturb - seq data , on the other hand , captures translational regulators PABPC4 and EIF4G2 among TAF15’s close neighbors . Again , the Integrated RBP Regulatory Map for TAF15 contains all of the above - mentioned modules ( Fig . 2D , bottom ) . Our integration procedure can also capture weak interactions that are consistent between modalities . For example , transcription regulators TAF15 and AKAP8L are poorly represented among DGCR8 closest neighbors in the individual data modalities , however , they are included in top - 5 RBP’s partners according to the integrated score ( Fig . 2D , top ) and DGCR8 involvement in chromatin organization as well as its direct interaction with FET proteins has been experimentally shown ( Deng et al . 2019 ; Shiohama et al . 2007 ) . Defining functional RBP neighborhoods using BioID - mediated proximity labeling Having defined the modules that each RBP falls into , we next sought to assign regulatory functions to each of these modules . The proximity labeling data allowed us to go beyond RBP - RBP interactions ( Fig . S3A - C ) and study the functions of both individual RBPs and their modules by analyzing the totality of their protein neighborhoods . For each RBP , we ranked its neighbors by their enrichment in the biotinylated fraction . We then performed gene - set enrichment analysis ( GSEA ) to identify the highest over - represented pathways and protein complexes in each RBP neighborhood ( Fig . 3A ) . This procedure allowed us to systematically estimate the involvement of an RBP in a given pathway across all “RBP - pathway” pairs . Conceptually , these estimates reflect the confidence in each annotation , where higher scores denote higher confidence in the proposed association ( Fig . S3D ) . We have visualized the high - confidence annotations in a heatmap along with the major RNA classes that based on our eCLIP analysis are the targets of each RBP module in Fig . 3B . 6 In many cases , the previously known functions of RBPs are clearly captured by this approach ( Fig . 3B ) . For example , we have correctly annotated SRSF7 , NONO , and HNRNPA1 as splicing - related RBPs that bind predominantly pre - mRNAs . Similarly , we identified RPS11 , NPM1 , and DDX52 as RBPs that are involved in ribosome biogenesis and directly interact with rRNAs . Our BioID - based annotations also identified RBPs that regulate transcription ( HNRNPC , NPM1 , QKI ) ( Mallory et al . 2020 ; Box et al . 2016 ; Ren et al . 2021 ) , initiate and regulate mRNA translation ( LARP4 , EIF3G , RPS3 , LIN28B ) ( R . Yang et al . 2011 ; des Georges et al . 2015 ; Basak et al . 2020 ) , participate in snRNA processing ( TAF15 , NPM1 ) ( Kugel and Goodrich 2009 ; Nachmani et al . 2019 ) and mitochondrial metabolism ( SUPV3L1 , FASTKD2 , TBRG4 ) ( A . R . Wolf and Mootha 2014 ) , and modulate centrosome amplification ( YWHAG ) ( Mukhopadhyay et al . 2016 ) . Our findings also reveal novel and previously unexplored " non - canonical " functions for human RBPs , highlighting the gaps in our current knowledge of RBP annotations that can be systematically addressed with our approach . For example , SRSF7 is primarily known as a splicing factor ; however , we observed an equally strong enrichment of mRNA 3 ' - end processing and polyadenylation pathways , which are not yet annotated in GO but are alluded to in recent publications ( Müller - McNicoll et al . 2016 ; Schwich et al . 2021 ) . Overall , we have annotated 19 RBPs with 1 , 111 BP GO terms at 5 % FDR , of which , 736 ( 66 % ) are novel . In the following sections , we have experimentally verified a number of these annotations . ZC3H11A and TAF15 are multifunctional post - transcriptional regulators involved in splicing , translation , and RNA stability We have annotated ZC3H11A and TAF15 as multifunctional RBPs involved in multiple post - transcriptional processes for distinct RNA regulons . ZC3H11A is known to be a part of the TREX complex responsible for mRNA export and was shown to co - localize with SRSF2 in nuclear splicing speckles ( Folco et al . 2012 ; Younis et al . 2018 ) . TAF15 , on the other hand , is predominantly studied as part of the TFIID and RNAPII complexes ( Jobert , Argentini , and Tora 2009 ) . TAF15 ' s role as an RNA - binding protein in post - transcriptional control , however , is not as well characterized . Regardless , several studies have shown TAF15 to be involved in stability and processing of lncRNA LINC00665 , FGFR4 , and GRIN1 mRNAs , and a small subset of other mRNAs in neurons ( Ruan et al . 2020 ; DeJong et al . 2021 ; Ibrahim et al . 2013 ; Kapeli et al . 2016 ) . Additionally , it has been shown that TAF15 participates in miRNA - mediated regulation of cell cycle gene expression , and its role in mRNA transport and translation has been suggested based on its pervasive binding to 3’UTR ( Ballarino et al . 2013 ; Kapeli et al . 2016 ) . Our integrated RBP interaction map suggests that both ZC3H11A and TAF15 are involved in a much wider set of post - transcriptional regulatory processes ( Fig . 2 ) . In particular , TAF15 has the highest interaction scores with FUS , SAFB2 , EIF4G2 , NONO , and SAFB , which in addition to transcription are also associated with translation ( EIF4G2 ) and splicing ( NONO ) . On the other hand , ZC3H11A’s top interacting partners include GPKOW and DHX30 , suggesting putative 7 splicing - related functions . Consistently , gene - set enrichment analysis of the proximity - labeling data revealed mRNA export ( for ZC3H11A ) and transcription ( for TAF15 ) , as the highest - scoring pathways . However , we also noted multiple additional high - scoring pathways , including “spliceosomal snRNP assembly” for both RBPs ( GO : 0000387 , NES = 1 . 5 ) as well as “mRNA stabilization” ( GO : 0048255 , NES = 1 . 5 ) and “positive regulation of translation” ( GO : 0045727 , NES = 1 . 7 ) for TAF15 ( Fig . 4A ) . To verify these putative roles for ZC3H11A and TAF15 in splicing regulation , we used CRISPR - interference to knockdown these RBPs in K562 cells and performed paired - end total RNA - seq in respective knockdown cells ( 96 % and 98 % knockdown efficiency when compared to non - targeting guide RNA , respectively , Fig . S4A - E ) . Upon silencing either of these genes , we observed a large number of significant alternative splicing events ( ASEs ) ( 296 and 190 differentially spliced events for ZC3H11A and TAF15 knockdowns , respectively ; Fig . 4B , D ) . We validated several of these significant ASEs ( Fig . S4F - H ) using quantitative RT - PCR ( Fig . 4C , E ) ; therefore confirming the involvement of ZC3H11A and TAF15 in the regulation of alternative splicing . To confirm that these modulations are the result of direct interaction between ZC3H11A or TAF15 and these target pre - mRNAs in vivo , we performed crosslinking and immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing ( CLIP - seq ) ( Licatalosi et al . 2008 ) for both ZC3H11A and TAF15 in K562 cells . As expected , we observed multiple binding sites in close proximity to the significant ASEs for both ZC3H11A and TAF15 ( Fig . 4F , Fig . S4I ) . Taken together , these results establish ZC3H11A and TAF15 as regulators of alternative splicing for their respective regulons . In addition to RNA processing and splicing , we also observed a significant and independent association between TAF15 and translational control machinery . To confirm this observation , we performed ribosome footprinting ( Ribo - seq ; ( Ingolia et al . 2012 ) ) as well as matched RNA sequencing in control and TAF15 knockdown cells ( Fig . S5A - C ) . Ribo - seq , which captures active translation , allows us to measure changes in translational efficiency , defined as the ratio of ribosome - protected fragments to total RNA . Consistent with a direct role for TAF15 in translational control , TAF15 - bound RNA targets ( Van Nostrand et al . 2016 ) were strongly enriched among mRNAs that were translationally repressed in TAF15 knockdown cells ( Fig . 5A ) . To confirm this observation , we generated and compared protein abundance data in TAF15 KD and control cell lines using quantitative mass spectrometry . As expected , TAF15 targets showed a significant change in their protein abundance without a concomitant change in their mRNA levels ( Fig . 5A , B ) . Taken together , our findings demonstrate that TAF15 moonlights as an enhancer of mRNA translation for its target regulon . We also observed a strong association between TAF15 with regulators of RNA stability including LARP1 , SYNCRIP , and RBM10 . To further explore this association , we inhibited RNA Polymerase II - mediated transcription with α - amanitin and performed RNA - seq in control and TAF15 knockdown cells in order to estimate changes in mRNA decay upon TAF15 knockdown ( Fig . S5D - F ) ( Lugowski , Nicholson , and Rissland 2018 ) . We then analyzed the changes in mRNA 8 decay among the TAF15 target mRNAs with iPAGE ( Goodarzi , Elemento , and Tavazoie 2009 ) and GSEA ( Korotkevich et al . 2021 ) . Both tools demonstrated the enrichment of TAF15 - bound RNA targets among those with a shorter half - life in TAF15 knockdown cells ( Fig . 5C ) . To independently verify this observation , we used RT - qPCR to compare mRNA stability of several TAF15 mRNA targets , such as UBE2J2 and GUK1 , in TAF15 - KD versus control cells ( Fig . 5C , D ) . For all tested targets , we observed significantly lower mRNA stability upon TAF15 knockdown , thus supporting our hypothesis of TAF15 involvement in mRNA stability control . Our goal in this section was to showcase how a single RBP , in this case , TAF15 , can play multiple independent regulatory functions based on the context of its interactions with each regulon . To further explore this notion , we asked whether the three sets of TAF15 target RNAs , corresponding to TAF15 role in splicing , translation , and stability , are in fact distinct and form independent regulons ( Fig . 5E ) . We observed that the translation and stability regulons partially but significantly overlap ; this is concordant with the known interdependence of these two biological processes ( Radhakrishnan and Green 2016 ) . On the other hand , translation versus splicing and splicing versus stability comparisons show only a small number of targets at their intersections ( 18 out of 741 and 40 out of 1890 genes , respectively ; Fig . 5E ) . Overall , in K562 cells , TAF15 controls splicing of 155 RNAs , translation of 919 RNAs , and stability of 2068 RNAs ; 320 of these RNAs fall into two regulons and only 13 are present in all three pathways . Therefore , the majority of TAF15 mRNA targets are exclusive to each regulon . This further highlights the notion that TAF15 participates in three independent regulatory pathways , each with its own distinct target regulon . RNA - binding proteins QKI and ZNF800 are involved in the regulation of transcription While RNA - binding proteins are often thought to strictly regulate post - transcriptional processes , our integrated RBP interaction map revealed several RNA - binding proteins that are also strongly associated with transcriptional control . Chief among these , we noted ZNF800 and QKI . ZNF800 is a zinc finger protein whose molecular functions are poorly studied , yet it is implicated in diseases such as lung cancer ( Zhuo et al . 2020 ) . In contrast , QKI is a well - studied RBP involved in many RNA - related processes and is known to play a major part in neuronal gene regulation and neuron myelination ( Chen , Liu , et al . 2021 ; Chen , Yin , et al . 2021 ; Zhou et al . 2021 ; Shin et al . 2021 ; Åberg et al . 2006 ) . To assess the potential impact of modulations in ZNF800 and QKI levels on transcriptional activity , we used ATAC - seq to measure changes in chromatin accessibility at or near their DNA binding sites . Based on our proximity labeling results , ZNF800’s protein neighborhood functions in DNA methylation , transcription by RNA polymerase I , rRNA processing , and chromatin remodeling ( Fig . 6A ) . On the other hand , QKI’s neighborhood is associated with histone methylation , RNA splicing , transcription by RNA polymerase II and chromatin organization . To validate the previously unknown role for ZNF800 in chromatin remodeling and confirm recently discovered chromatin - associated QKI functions ( Ren et al . 2021 ) , we performed ATAC - seq on control K562 9 and CRISPRi - generated knockdown cells ( Fig . S6A - D ) ( 87 % and 76 % knockdown , respectively ) ( Buenrostro et al . 2015 ) . We observed a significant and widespread increase in chromatin accessibility across thousands of regions when these RBPs were silenced ( 2660 out of 2724 significantly differential regions were upregulated for QKI knockdown , and 1399 out of 1417 significantly differential regions were upregulated in ZNF800 knockdown ; Fig , 6B ) . Among the differentially accessible peaks , the majority are located in close proximity ( < 1 Kb ) of gene promoter regions ( Fig . 6B ) . To further demonstrate that ZNF800 and QKI are chromatin - associated RBPs , we performed ChIP - qPCR on several of their gene targets . Namely , we tested the binding of ZNF800 to the promoter sequences of RPS15 and RPL10A , and the binding of QKI to the promoters of PRC1 and LTBR . As expected , these target sequences were significantly enriched in ChIP samples compared to controls , which demonstrates the localization of ZNF800 and QKI to promoter regions of these identified target genes ( Fig . 6C ; Fig . S6E , F ) . In addition to ChIP - qPCR validation , we have tested an overall agreement between the differential ATAC - seq peaks changing upon RBP knockdowns and the published ChIP - exo data ( Lai et al . 2021 ) . As expected , ZNF800 and QKI ChIP - exo signal was significantly enriched in differential ATAC - seq peaks compared to the rest of the peaks ( U test P < 10 - 16 for ZNF800 , Fisher’s exact test odds ratio = 40 , P < 10 - 16 for QKI , see Methods ) . To test whether the observed changes in chromatin accessibility lead to changes in mRNA expression , we performed RNA - seq in control and QKI - or ZNF800 - knockdown cells ( Fig . S6A , C ) . As expected , we observed significantly elevated expression of the genes with increased chromatin accessibility in the ATAC - seq data ( Fig . 6D ) . Together , these observations point to the role of ZNF800 and QKI as transcriptional repressors . Next , we sought to explore whether the role that ZNF800 and QKI play in transcription inhibition depends on their direct binding to RNA . We tested whether the RNA binding targets of ZNF800 and QKI ( based on eCLIP data ) correspond to the ATAC - seq peaks that become upregulated upon RBP knockdown . We observed that the genes encoding the RNA binding targets of ZNF800 and QKI contained regions that were significantly more accessible upon the RBP knockdown compared to the other genes ( Fig . 6E ) . This data supports the hypothesis that ZNF800 and QKI achieve their regulatory functions through direct co - transcriptional binding of chromatin - associated RNA . We have discovered a direct and previously unknown role for QKI and ZNF800 in transcriptional control , even though they were previously thought to be involved in post - transcriptional regulation rather than transcriptional control . Our data suggest that RBP - RNA interactions can often influence transcriptional activity . This further highlights the multimodality and multifunctionality of RNA - binding proteins and the use of the Integrated RBP Regulatory Map for unraveling complex regulatory grammars . 10 DISCUSSION The traditional model of transcriptional control , called the " transcriptional regulatory code " ( Harbison et al . 2004 ) involves cis - acting elements such as enhancers and transcription factor binding sites ( TFBSs ) and trans - acting transcription factors ( TFs ) that bind to these elements in a combinatorial and coordinated manner to create complex regulatory circuits . However , there is no equivalent conceptual framework for studying the combinatorial post - transcriptional control of gene expression . Given that a few hundred RBPs control all aspects of the RNA life cycle , from processing and export to translation and decay , the " one RBP - one function " paradigm does not provide enough complexity to cover all the post - transcriptional regulatory processes that occur in a cell . It is not surprising , then , that RBPs are highly multifunctional and also exhibit a complex and context - specific RNA binding grammar . Many research initiatives aim to map RBP - bound transcripts as units of post - transcriptional gene expression control . The ENCODE consortium , for example , has conducted a large - scale effort to map protein - DNA and protein - RNA interactions using ChIP - seq and eCLIP , respectively ( Van Nostrand et al . 2020 ) . Other groups have also generated similar data modalities , providing a wealth of resources for generating biological networks focused on nucleic acid interactions . However , not all interactions are functional , and not all functions can be generalized across all interactions . This is particularly true for RNA - binding proteins , which often bind thousands of RNAs and have multifaceted and context - dependent regulatory functions across these targets ( Fish et al . 2019 , 2021 ) . Therefore , it is an oversimplification to consider an RBP regulon as the unit of post - transcriptional control . Instead of viewing post - transcriptional regulation through the lens of individual RBPs and their bound target RNAs , we propose that the field should instead adopt a more precise definition of RBP regulons that accounts for their context - specificity . To address this issue , we propose the concept of " regulatory modules " as the foundational units of post - transcriptional control , i . e . , collections of RNA - binding proteins that work together for a specific function and a distinct target regulon . This approach allows us to capture the many - to - many relationship between RNA - binding proteins and their regulatory functions . To properly characterize regulatory modules , we must consider both direct and epistatic genetic interactions . The combinatorial action of RBPs may very well be spatially or temporally separate . Therefore , here , we used proximity labeling techniques ( BioID labeling and eCLIP ) to identify direct physical interactions between RBPs or between RBPs and RNAs , and transcriptome - wide gene expression measurements ( Perturb - seq ) to identify genetic interactions . Perturb - seq ( Adamson et al . 2016 ) combines the CRISPR - interference technology ( Gilbert et al . 2014 ) to target RBPs and single - cell RNA sequencing to capture changes in the transcriptomic state of the cell in response to RBP knockdowns ( Fig . S3E - G ) . This rich data allowed us to model the genetic interactions manifold , which describes the transcriptional states a cell can occupy upon perturbation ( Norman et al . 2019 ) . 11 To capture the protein neighborhood of each RBP , we used BioID labeling - based pulldown followed by mass spectrometry ( D . I . Kim et al . 2016 ) . Proximity - based covalent biotin labeling techniques improve upon classic antibody - based pulldown methods by relying on the strong biotin - streptavidin interaction , which allows for harsh washes and therefore tends to have low levels of nonspecific binding ( P . Li et al . 2017 ) ( Roux et al . 2018 ) . Biotin labeling techniques are well - suited for surveying the spatial proximity between proteins within a narrow diameter ( Gingras , Abe , and Raught 2019 ) . To date , only a few large - scale datasets of dozens or hundreds of bait proteins have been generated ( Antonicka et al . 2020 ; Go et al . 2021 ; Youn et al . 2018 ) . In this study , we extended these efforts by applying proximity - dependent biotinylation ( BioID ) analysis to 50 human RBPs with a well - controlled and rigorous design . We validated the expression of individual fusion proteins by Western blotting ( Fig . S3A , B ) and found that including matched pulldown controls for every fusion protein significantly improved the quality of our data , as pulldown mass spectrometry profiles were generally more similar to their matched negative controls than to other pulldown profiles ( Fig . S3C ) . In sum , our Integrated RBP Regulatory Map reveals that multi - functional RBPs playing different and even divergent roles depending on their specific context are the rule , rather than the exception . Therefore , studying the role of RBPs in gene expression regulation requires a substantially improved understanding of higher - order combinatorial interactions between these proteins . We believe that this study takes a step towards building a systematic and integrative framework for tackling this problem . DATA AND CODE AVAILABILITY All the sequencing data is available at Gene Expression Omnibus ( GEO ) , identifier GSE225809 . All of the original code is available at https : / / github . com / goodarzilab / RBP _ modules . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors thank Artemii Bakulin and Heather Karner for helpful discussions . A . N . was supported by DoD PRCRP Horizon Award W81XWH - 19 - 1 - 0594 . D . M . was supported by an MD fellowship from the Boehringer Ingelheim Fonds . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS M . K . , F . M . , and H . G . designed the study . M . K . and J . Y . performed PerturbSeq experiments . M . K , A . N , F . T . , A . D . , R . B . , M . D . , F . M . performed proximity labeling experiments . M . K , F . T . , A . D . and D . M . performed western blotting experiments . A . B . and I . K . performed a re - analysis of ENCODE eCLIP data . M . K . , A . B . and I . K . performed the dataset integration . M . K . , A . B . and I . K . performed the RBP functional annotation . M . K . performed CRISPRi knockdown experiments . M . K . 12 and B . C . performed RNA - seq experiments . M . K . , H . M . and R . C . performed ATAC - seq experiments . K . G . and H . G . performed ChIP - qPCR experiments . D . M . and H . G . performed qPCR experiments . T . J . and B . C . performed α - amanitin treatment experiments . A . N . performed ribosome profiling experiments . M . K . , A . B . , S . M . , V . S . and H . G . performed data analysis . S . Z . performed CLIP - seq experiments . M . K . , A . B . , I . K . and H . G . wrote the manuscript with input from all authors . DECLARATION OF INTEREST The authors declare no competing interests . STAR METHODS Cell culture All cells were cultured in a 37°C 5 % CO2 humidified incubator . The 293T cells ( ATCC CRL - 3216 ) were cultured in DMEM high - glucose medium supplemented with 10 % FBS , glucose ( 4 . 5 g / L ) , L - glutamine ( 4 mM ) , sodium pyruvate ( 1 mM ) , penicillin ( 100 units / mL ) , streptomycin ( 100 μg / mL ) and amphotericin B ( 1 μg / mL ) ( Gibco ) . The K562 cell line was cultured in RPMI - 1640 medium supplemented with 10 % FBS , glucose ( 2 g / L ) , L - glutamine ( 2 mM ) , 25 mM HEPES , penicillin ( 100 units / mL ) , streptomycin ( 100 μg / mL ) and amphotericin B ( 1 μg / mL ) ( Gibco ) . All cell lines were routinely screened for mycoplasma with a PCR - based assay . Western blotting Cell lysates were prepared by lysing cells in ice - cold RIPA buffer ( 25 mM Tris - HCl pH 7 . 6 , 0 . 15 M NaCl , 1 % IGEPAL CA - 630 , 1 % sodium deoxycholate , 0 . 1 % SDS ) containing 1X protease inhibitors ( Thermo Scientific ) . Lysate was cleared by centrifugation at 20 , 000 x g for 10 min at 4°C . Samples were denatured for 10 min at 70°C in 1X LDS loading buffer ( Invitrogen ) and 50 mM DTT . Proteins were separated by SDS - PAGE using 4 - 12 % Bis - Tris NuPAGE gels , transferred to nitrocellulose ( Millipore ) , blocked using 5 % BSA , and probed using target - specific antibodies . Bound antibodies were detected using dye - conjugated secondary antibodies ( Licor ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions . Antibodies : HA ( BioLegend 901533 ) , eIF3I ( BioLegend 646701 ) , beta - tubulin ( Proteintech 10094 - 1 - AP ) , GAPDH ( Proteintech 10494 - 1 - AP ) . RNA isolation Total RNA for RNA - seq and RT - qPCR was isolated using the Zymo QuickRNA isolation kit with in - column DNase treatment per the manufacturer’s protocol . 13 RNA treatment with α - amanitin K562 and K562 TAF15 knockdown cell lines were seeded at 1M / 1mL density in 2 replicates . Cells were infected with 10 μg / mL α - amanitin ( Sigma - Aldrich A2263 ) for 8 - 9 h prior to total RNA extractions . Total RNA for downstream RNA - seq was isolated using Zymo QuickRNA Microprep isolation kit with in - column DNase treatment per the manufacturer’s protocol . RNA - seq RNA - seq libraries were prepared using SMARTer Stranded Total RNA - Seq Kit v2 - Pico Input Mammalian ( Takara ) . CRISPRi - mediated gene knockdown K562 cells expressing dCas9 - KRAB fusion protein were constructed by lentiviral delivery of pMH0006 ( Addgene # 135448 ) and FACS isolation of BFP - positive cells . The lentiviral constructs were co - transfected with pCMV - dR8 . 91 and pMD2 . D plasmids using TransIT - Lenti ( Mirus ) into 293T cells , following the manufacturer’s protocol . The virus was harvested 48 hours post - transfection and passed through a 0 . 45 µm filter . Target cells were then transduced overnight with the filtered virus in the presence of 8 µg / mL polybrene ( Millipore ) . Guide RNA sequences for CRISPRi - mediated gene knockdown were cloned into pCRISPRia - v2 ( Addgene # 84832 ) via BstXI - BlpI sites . After transduction with sgRNA lentivirus , K562 cells were selected with 2 µg / mL puromycin ( Gibco ) . Knockdown of target genes was assessed by RT - qPCR using PerfeCTa SYBR Green SuperMix ( QuantaBio ) per the manufacturer’s instructions . HPRT1 was used as endogenous control . BioID2 - RBP fusion cell line generation 50 RBPs were selected based on the 2 criteria : ( i ) ENCODE eCLIP data availability for a given RBP , ( ii ) presence of a given RBP in the ORFeome entry clone library ( X . Yang et al . 2011 ) . In order to construct the cell lines stably expressing BioID2 - RBP fusion proteins , we first cloned in an open reading frame of BioID2 enzyme ( D . I . Kim et al . 2016 ) , followed by a linker ( YPAFLYKVVYGGGGSGGGGSGGGGS ) and attR - flanked ccdB counterselection marker for Gateway cloning , into the pWPI backbone ( Addgene # 12254 ) . We then used Gateway LR Clonase II Enzyme mix ( Thermo Fisher ) to clone the open reading frames of the RBPs of interest ( from ORFeome entry clone library ( X . Yang et al . 2011 ) ) into the destination vector . The lentiviral constructs were co - transfected with pCMV - dR8 . 91 and pMD2 . D plasmids using NanoFect ( ALSTEM ) into 293T cells , following manufacturer’s protocol . The virus was harvested 48 hours post - transfection and passed through a 0 . 45 μm filter . K562 cells were then transduced for 2 hours while centrifuging ( 800 RPM ) with the filtered virus in the presence of 8 μg / mL polybrene 14 ( Millipore ) . Cells were selected with 20 μg / mL blasticidin for 5 days ( Gibco ) . The expression of the fusion protein was validated by western blotting . Biotin treatment and pulldown The pulldown was performed as described in ( D . I . Kim et al . 2016 ) . Cells were incubated with biotin - depleted media ( biotin - free RPMI - 1640 medium , supplemented with 10 % dialyzed FBS , glucose ( 2 g / L ) , L - glutamine ( 2 mM ) , 25 mM HEPES , penicillin ( 100 units / mL ) , streptomycin ( 100 μg / mL ) and amphotericin B ( 1 μg / mL ) for 72 h before analysis . For BioID2 pulldown , 12 × 10 6 cells per replicate were incubated with 50 μM biotin for 24 h . For the negative control samples , 12 × 10 6 cells per replicate were incubated with DMSO . After three times of PBS wash , the cells were lysed in 1 ml of lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris , pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 mM EDTA , 1 mM EGTA , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 1 % Sodium deoxycholate , 0 . 1 % SDS , 1 × Complete protease inhibitor ( Halt Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail ; Life Technologies ) , and 250 units benzonase ( EMD millipore ) . The lysates were passed through a 25G needle 10 times and cleared 10 min at 14 , 000 g at + 4°C . The protein concentration was measured with BCA Protein Assay Kit ( Thermo Scientific ) ; the lysate was diluted to a concentration of 2 μg / mL . 500 μl of lysate was incubated with 125 μl of Dynabeads ( MyOne Streptavidin C1 ; Life Technologies ) overnight with rotation at + 4°C . Beads were collected using a magnetic stand and washed twice with 2 % ( wt / vol ) SDS , twice with wash buffer containing 50 mM Tris , pH 7 . 5 , 500 mM NaCl , 1 mM EDTA , 1 mM EGTA , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 0 . 1 % SDS , twice with wash buffer containing 50 mM Tris , pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 mM EDTA , 1 mM EGTA , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 0 . 1 % SDS , then boiled for 5 min in 50 μl of elution buffer containing 2 % SDS , 100mM DTT , Tris - HCl pH 7 . 5 . The supernatant was collected and saved for mass spectrometry analysis . Mass spectrometry analysis Eluted BioID samples were reduced by the addition of 100 mM DTT and boiling at 95˚C for 10 min , before being subjected to Filter Aided Sample Preparation ( FASP ) ( Wisniewski et al . , Anal . Biochem . , 2011 ) to generate tryptic peptides , as described previously ( Dermit et al , Dev Cell , 2020 ) . Briefly , samples were diluted 7 - fold in UA buffer ( 8M urea , 100 mM Tris HCl pH 8 . 5 ) , transferred to Vivacon 500 Hydrosart centrifugal filters with a molecular cut - off of 30kDa ( Sartorius ) , and concentrated by centrifugation at 14 , 000 g for 15 min . Filters were then washed twice by addition of 0 . 2 mL of UA buffer to the filter tops and re - concentrating . Reduced cysteine residues were then alkylated by addition of 100µL of 50 mM iodoacetamide dissolved in UA buffer , and incubation at room temperature in the dark for 30 min . The iodoacetamide solution was then removed by centrifugation at 14 , 000 g for 10 min , and samples were washed twice with 0 . 2 mL of UA buffer as before . Urea was then removed from samples by performing three washes with 0 . 2 mL of ABC buffer ( 0 . 04 M ammonium bicarbonate ) . Filters were then transferred to fresh collection tubes , and proteins were digested by addition of 0 . 3 µg of MS grade Trypsin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) 15 dissolved in 50 µL of ABC buffer , and overnight incubation in a thermo - mixer at 37˚C with gentle shaking ( 600 rpm ) . The resulting peptides were eluted from the filters by centrifugation at 14 , 000 g for 10 min . Residual remaining peptides were further eluted by addition of 100 µL ABC to the filter tops and centrifugation . This was repeated once and the combined eluates were then dried by vacuum centrifugation ( no heating ) and reconstitution in 2 % Acetonitrile ( ACN ) , 0 . 2 % Trifluoroacetic acid ( TFA ) , followed by desalting using C18 StageTips ( Rappsilber , et al . , Nat Protoc . 2007 ) . The desalted peptides were dried again by vacuum centrifugation ( 45˚C ) and re - suspended in A * buffer ( 2 % ACN , 0 . 5 % Acetic acid , 0 . 1 % TFA in water ) before LC - MS / MS analysis . 1 / 3rd of each sample was analyzed on a Q - Exactive plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled with a nanoflow ultimate 3000 RSL nano HPLC platform ( Thermo Fisher ) . Samples were resolved at a flow rate of 250 nL / min on an Easy - Spray 50 cm x 75 μm RSLC C18 column with 2 µm particle size ( Thermo Fisher ) , using a 123 minutes gradient of 3 % to 35 % of buffer - B ( 0 . 1 % formic acid in ACN ) against buffer - A ( 0 . 1 % formic acid in water ) , and the separated peptides were infused into the mass spectrometer by electrospray ( 1 . 95 kV spray voltage , 255˚C capillary temperature ) . The mass spectrometer was operated in data - dependent positive mode , with 1 MS scan followed by 15 MS / MS scans ( top 15 method ) . The scans were acquired in the mass analyser at 375 - 1500 m / z range , with a resolution of 70 , 000 for the MS and 17 , 500 for the MS / MS scans . A 30 - second dynamic exclusion of fragmented peaks was applied to limit repeated fragmentation of the same ions . Perturb - seq 68 RBPs were chosen for Perturb - seq analysis based on the clustering analysis of ENCODE eCLIP dataset and DeepBind dataset ( Alipanahi et al . 2015 ) . Perturb - seq experiment was performed as previously described ( Datlinger et al . 2017 ) . Briefly , a library of 205 sgRNAs ( 5 non - targeting sgRNAs and 200 sgRNAs targeting 100 genes , 2 sgRNAs per gene ) was ordered as a pooled oligonucleotide library from Twist Bioscience with the following design : [ ATCTTGTGGAAAGGACGAAACACCG ] - [ Protospacer Sequence ] - [ GTTTTAGAGCTAGAAATAGCAAGTTAAAATAAGGC ] The library was PCR - amplified using Q5 Hot Start High - Fidelity 2X Master Mix ( NEB ) with the primers with the following sequences : 5’ - ATCTTGTGGAAAGGAC - 3’ and 5’ - GCCTTATTTTAACTTGCTA - 3’ . To clone libraries into CROPseq - Guide - Puro vector ( Addgene 86708 ) , the starting vector was digested with BsmBI following the protocol outlined in ( Sanjana , Shalem , and Zhang 2014 ) . The library was cloned into the digested backbone using Gibson Assembly method ( Thomas , Maynard , and Gill 2015 ) . The reaction product was transformed into Takara Stellar competent cells according to manufacturer recommendations , grown overnight in 100 mL LB with ampicilin and purified using ZymoPURE II Plasmid Midiprep Kit . K562 cells were infected with the plasmid library at a low multiplicity of infection to minimize double infection . The infected cells were selected with 2 µg / mL puromycin for 3 days . Live cells were isolated on a flow 16 cytometer ( FACSAria II ) by propidium iodide staining . Approximately 5000 live cells were captured by 10X Chromium Controller using Chromium Single Cell 3’ Reagent Kits v2 . Sample preparation was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol . Samples were sequenced on a NovaSeq 6000 using the following configuration : Read 1 : 28 , i7 index : 8 , i5 index : 0 , Read 2 : 98 . To facilitate sgRNA assignment , sgRNA - containing transcripts were additionally amplified by PCR reactions by modifying a previously published approach ( Hill et al . 2018 ) . The following primers were used for amplification : 5 ' - AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACAC - 3 ' and 5 ' - CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATTACGACAGGTGACTGGAGTTCAGACGTGTGCTCTTCC GATCTggactatcatatgcttaccgtaacttgaaag - 3 ' . PCR product was cleaned up by 1 . 0x SPRI beads ( SPRIselect ; BECKMAN COULTER ; Cat . No . B23317 ) . Samples were sequenced using paired - end 150 bp sequencing on an Illumina MiSeq sequencer . Ribosome profiling Ribosome profiling was performed as previously described ( McGlincy and Ingolia 2017 ) . Briefly , approximately 10x10 6 cells were lysed in ice - cold polysome buffer ( 20 mM Tris pH 7 . 6 , 150 mM NaCl , 5 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM DTT , 100 µg / mL cycloheximide ) supplemented with 1 % v / v Triton X - 100 and 25 U / mL Turbo DNase ( Invitrogen ) . The lysates were triturated through a 27G needle and cleared for 10 min at 21 , 000 x g at 4°C . The RNA concentration in the lysates was determined with the Qubit RNA HS kit ( Thermo ) . Lysate corresponding to 30 µg RNA was diluted to 200 µl in polysome buffer and digested with 1 . 5 µl RNaseI ( Epicentre ) for 45 min at room temperature . The RNaseI was then quenched by 10 µl SUPERaseIN ( Thermo ) . Monosomes were isolated using MicroSpin S - 400 HR ( Cytiva ) columns , pre - equilibrated with 3 mL polysome buffer per column . 100 µl digested lysate was loaded per column ( two columns were used per 200 µl sample ) and centrifuged 2 min at 600 x g . The RNA from the flow - through was isolated using the Zymo RNA Clean and Concentrator - 25 kit . In parallel , total RNA from undigested lysates was isolated using the same kit . Ribosome - protected footprints ( RPFs ) were gel - purified from 15 % TBE - Urea gels as 17 - 35 nt fragments . RPFs were then end - repaired using T4 PNK ( NEB ) and pre - adenylated barcoded linkers were ligated to the RPFs using T4 Rnl2 ( tr ) K227Q ( NEB ) . Unligated linkers were removed from the reaction by yeast 5’ - deadenylase ( NEB ) and RecJ nuclease ( NEB ) treatment . RPFs ligated to barcoded linkers were pooled , and rRNA - depletion was performed using riboPOOLs ( siTOOLs ) as per the manufacturer’s recommendations . Linker - ligated RPFs were reverse transcribed with ProtoScript II RT ( NEB ) and gel - purified from 15 % TBE - Urea gels . cDNA was then circularized with CircLigase II ( Epicentre ) and used for library PCR . First , a small - scale library PCR was run supplemented with 1X SYBR Green and 1X ROX ( Thermo ) in a qPCR instrument . Then , a larger scale library PCR was run in a conventional PCR instrument , performing a number of cycles that resulted in ½ maximum signal intensity during qPCR . Library PCR was gel - purified 17 from 8 % TBE gels and sequenced on a SE50 run on Illumina HiSeq4000 instrument at UCSF Center for Advanced Technologies . ATAC - seq The assay for transposase - accessible chromatin using sequencing ( ATAC - seq ) was performed according to the optimized Omni - ATAC protocol ( Corces et al . 2017 ; Grandi et al . 2022 ) . Briefly , samples containing 50 , 000 cells as input were pelleted , lysed , washed , and re - pelleted using the lysis and wash buffers specified in the Omni - ATAC protocol . A transposition mix containing Tn5 was then added to the samples , and the transposition reaction was carried out for 30 minutes at 37 °C in a thermomixer with 1000 rpm mixing . After transposition , the transposed DNA was purified using the DNA Clean & Concentrator - 5 Kit ( Zymo Research , cat . no . D4014 ) . The samples underwent two PCR steps . First , a pre - amplification was performed for 3 cycles to attach unique barcoded adapters to the transposed DNA sample . The concentration of each pre - amplified sample was quantified via qPCR using the NEBNext Library Quant Kit ( New England Biolabs , cat . no . E7630 ) . Afterward , samples underwent a second PCR amplification step to obtain the desired DNA concentration of 8 nM in 20 ul . DNA cleanup and qPCR quantification were performed again , and final libraries were diluted down to exactly 8 nM using sterile water . Samples were sequenced using paired - end 75 - bp sequencing on an Illumina NextSeq sequencer . ChIP - qPCR ChIP - qPCR was performed as described in ( Rossi , Lai , and Pugh 2018 ) . Human chronic myelogenous leukemia K562 cells were grown at 37 °C and 5 % CO2 in RPMI - 1640 medium supplemented with 10 % FBS , glucose ( 2 g / L ) , L - glutamine ( 2 mM ) , 25 mM HEPES , penicillin ( 100 units / mL ) , streptomycin ( 100 μg / mL ) and amphotericin B ( 1 μg / mL ) ( Gibco ) . 20 million cells per sample were washed with PBS ( in duplicate ) , pelleted , and cross - linked with 1 % paraformaldehyde for 10 minutes at room temperature . Glycine at a final concentration of 125mM was added to the samples and incubated at room temperature for 5 minutes to quench the paraformaldehyde . Samples were washed with PBS , pelleted , flash - frozen , and stored at - 80 . Samples were thawed , lysed in 200 µl Membrane Lysis Buffer ( 10 mM Tris - HCl pH 8 . 0 , 10 mM NaCl , 0 . 5 % IGEPAL CA - 630 , 1X protease inhibitors ) , and incubated on ice for 10 minutes . Samples were centrifuged at 4°C at 2500 g for 5 minutes , resuspended in 200 µl Nuclei Lysis Buffer ( 50 mM Tris pH 8 . 0 , 10 mM EDTA , 0 . 32 % SDS , 1X protease inhibitors ) , and incubated on ice for 10 minutes . 120 µl of IP Dilution Buffer ( 20 mM Tris - HCl pH 8 . 0 , 2 mM EDTA , 150 mM NaCl , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 1X protease inhibitors ) was added to the samples , and the samples were sonicated using the Bioruptor UCD - 200 sonicator for 7 minutes with 30 second on / off intervals for a total of 3 times . Samples were centrifuged at 4°C at 21000 g for 5 minutes to clear the lysate , and the supernatant containing the chromatin was stored at - 80 . 18 230 µl IP Dilution Buffer was added to 270 µl chromatin along with 3 µg ZNF800 or QKI antibody or same species IgG , and the samples were incubated overnight at 4°C . The next day , the ChIP samples were spun downat 4°C at 16000 g for 5 minutes and the supernatant was transferred onto 20 µl of washed Protein A / G beads ( Pierce ) . Samples were incubated for 2 hours at 4°C . The ChIP material was washed once with 500 µl of cold FA lysis low salt buffer ( 50 mM Hepes - KOH pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl , 2 mM EDTA , 1 % Triton - X 100 , 0 . 1 % sodium deoxycholate ) , twice with cold NaCl high salt buffer ( 50 mM Hepes - KOH pH 7 . 5 , 500 mM NaCl , 2 mM EDTA , 1 % Triton - X 100 , 0 . 1 % sodium deoxycholate ) , once with cold LiCL buffer ( 100 mM Tris - HCl pH 8 . 0 , 500 mM LiCl , 1 % IGEPAL CA - 630 , 1 % sodium deoxycholate ) , and twice with cold 10 mM Tris 1 mM EDTA pH 8 . 0 . Samples were eluted in 300 µl of Proteinase K reaction mix ( 20 mM Tris pH 8 , 300 mM NaCl , 10 mM EDTA , 5 mM EGTA , 1 % SDS , 60 µg Proteinase K ) and incubated at 65°C for 1 hour . The supernatant was transferred to phase lock tubes ( VWR ) , purified via phenol - chloroform extraction , and eluted in 30 µl 10 mM Tris pH 8 . 0 . qPCR was performed using PerfeCTa SYBR Green SuperMix ( QuantaBio ) per the manufacturer’s instructions . HPRT1 was used as endogenous control . Crosslinking and Immunoprecipitation K562 cells were harvested and crosslinked with ultraviolet radiation ( 400 mJ / cm2 ) . Cell lysates were then treated with high ( 1 : 3000 RNase A and 1 : 100 RNase I ) and low dose ( 1 : 15000 RNase A and 1 : 500 RNase I ) of RNase A and RNase I separately and combined after treatment . Antibodies to TAF15 ( Thermo MA3 - 078 ) or ZC3H11A ( Abcam ab241612 ) was first conjugated to protein A / G beads ( Pierce ) and then added to cell lysates to immunoprecipitate protein - RNA complex . This was followed by on beads dephosphorylation , polyadenylation and IRDye® 800CW DBCO Infrared Dye ( LI - COR ) end labeling of the immunoprecipitated RNA fragments . RNA - protein complex was then resolved by SDS - PAGE and visualized on nitrocellulose membrane . Membranes were then cut and treated with proteinase K to release RNA . We then used Takara smarter small RNA sequencing kit reagents with a custom UMI - oligo dT primer ( CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATNNNNNNNNGTGACTGGAGTTCAGACGTGTGCTCTTCC GATCTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT ) to synthesize cDNA . Sequencing libraries were then prepared with SeqAmp DNA Polymerase ( Takara ) and sequenced on an illumina Hiseq 4000 sequencer . Computational Tools Reanalysis of enhanced CLIP ENCODE data To reliably identify RNA targets of RBPs in K562 cells , we started with the raw eCLIP FASTQ files of ' released ' K562 experiments for 120 RBPs that were available in the ENCODE database . 19 The analysis was performed as follows : ( 1 ) the reads were preprocessed in the same way as in ( Van Nostrand et al . 2016 ) including adapter trimming with cutadapt ( v1 . 18 ) ( Martin 2011 ) , ( 2 ) preprocessed reads were mapped to the hg38 genome assembly with GENCODE v31 comprehensive annotation using hisat2 ( v . 2 . 1 . 0 ) ( D . Kim et al . 2019 ) , ( 3 ) the aligned reads were deduplicated using the barcodecollapsepe . py script ( https : / / github . com / YeoLab / eclip / tree / master / bin ) as in ( Van Nostrand et al . 2016 ) , ( 4 ) properly paired and uniquely mapped second reads were extracted using samtools ( v . 1 . 9 , with - f 131 - q 60 parameters ) ( H . Li et al . 2009 ) , ( 5 ) gene - level read counts were obtained with plastid ( v . 0 . 4 . 8 ) by counting 5 ' ends of the reads ( Dunn and Weissman 2016 ) , ( 6 ) analysis of specific enrichment against size - matched control experiments was performed with edgeR ( v . 3 . 18 . 1 ) for each RBP separately , considering only genes passing 2 cpm in at least 2 of 3 samples ( Robinson , McCarthy , and Smyth 2010 ) . Reliable RNA targets of each RBP were defined as those passing 5 % FDR and log 2 ( Fold Change ) > 0 . 5 , see Supplementary Table S8 . eCLIP target scores ( TSs ) used in datasets integration were estimated as - log10 ( P ) * sign ( logFC ) for every " RBP - gene " pair separately . Gene set enrichment analysis of RBP RNA targets A joint set of 22471 genes detected at 2 cpm in at least two samples of one eCLIP experiment was used as the background for further analysis . RBPs preferences to bind RNAs of a particular type were assessed using a one - sided Fisher’s exact test . The following types of RNAs were selected based upon GENCODE annotation : miRNA , lncRNA , protein _ coding , snRNA , snoRNA , rRNA . For each RBP separately , the p - values were adjusted for multiple testing using FDR correction for the number of tested RNA types . Visualization of the eCLIP , RNA - seq , and ATAC - seq profiles generated using bedtools genomecov ( v . 2 . 27 . 1 ) was performed with svist4get ( v . 1 . 2 . 24 ) ( Quinlan and Hall 2010 ; Egorov et al . 2019 ) . Functional annotation of RBPs To annotate the RBPs based upon preys identified in BioID experiments , target scores ( TSs ) were estimated as - log10 ( P ) * sign ( log - FoldChange ) for every bait - prey pair separately . Next , for each prey , TSs were converted to Z - scores by estimating mean and average across baits . The preys were ranked by Z - scores and Fgsea R package ( v . 1 . 12 . 0 ) was applied to perform gene set enrichment analysis with 100000 permutations and three GO terms annotation sets ( BP , MF , and CC , each taken separately ) ( Korotkevich et al . 2021 ) . The annotation sets were generated with the go . gsets function of gage R package ( v . 2 . 36 . 0 ) ( Luo et al . 2009 ) . Lists of 2865 Entrez ids of preys were used in fgsea analysis for each RBP of the total set of fifty . GO terms with NES > 2 for at least one RBP were considered when plotting Figure 3 and Figure S3 ( related GO terms were merged manually ) , negative NES were zeroed for clarity and easier interpretability of the 20 consequent clusterization , see complete data in Table S3 ) . Ward . D2 clusterization along with cosine distance ( 1 - cosine similarity ) were used to generate the heatmaps using the heatmap . 2 function of the gplots R package ( v . 3 . 1 . 1 ) ( Warnes et al . 2009 ) . To check the consistency between predicted and known RBP annotations , the same procedure was performed excluding the Z - scoring step to avoid penalizing common generic GO terms e . g . “organelle” , “cell” , etc . The resulting GSEA p - values and NESs were used to calculate the < RBP , GO term > scores as - log10 ( P ) * sign ( log - FoldChange ) for each RBP and GO term separately . RBPs’ “true” annotations were extracted from the same GO BP , CC , or MF annotation set as used in GSEA . Finally , all data were merged to generate the ROC curve with PRROC ( v . 1 . 3 . 1 ) roc . curve function ( Grau , Grosse , and Keilwagen 2015 ) . Dataset integration The functional similarity of RBPs was estimated by joint analysis of eCLIP , BioID , and Perturb - seq data ( Figure 1 , Figure S1 ) . First , TS Z - scores were calculated for every gene across RBPs separately for each type of experimental data ( eCLIP , BioID , or Perturb - seq ) in the same way as preys of the BioID data , see above and Figure S1 ( 1 ) . Next , cosine distance was computed for all 7140 pairs of different RBPs followed by ranking and calculation of empirical p - values defined as a fraction of RBP pairs with the cosine distance less than the score of the tested pair , see Figure S1 ( 2 ) . The empirical p - values were aggregated with logitp function from the metap R package ( v . 1 . 4 ) , see Figure S1 ( 3 ) and S1 ( 4 ) , raw ( non - aggregated ) p - values were used for the RBP pairs assessed in a single type of experiment ( George and Mudholkar 1983 ) . Heatmap . 2 function of the gplots R package ( v . 3 . 1 . 1 ) with cosine distance and Ward’s ( ward . D2 ) clusterization was used to generate the integration heatmap shown in Figure 2 . STRING - based RBP interaction heatmap was generated using protein links’ combined scores ( STRING v . 11 . 5 ) and the same RBP clusterization received from the integration procedure ( Szklarczyk et al . 2018 ) . To test the overlap between STRING and integrated RBP interactions , we performed one - sided Fisher’s exact test on 2x2 contingency tables built by thresholding integrated distances below certain quantile and comparing to those with STRING score over 700 ( high confidence interactions according to STRING , Figure S2E ) . Only 3403 RBP pairs with the estimated STRING score , ranging from 150 to 999 , among 7140 total pairs were used as the superset . To estimate and compare RBP module sizes that can be assembled using the integrated distances or the STRING annotation , RBP - centered modules were obtained for different distance quantiles by filtering all the RBP pairs with the integrated or STRING distance passing the threshold corresponding to the selected quantile ( Figure S2E ) . For each quantile , we generated 120 RBP - centered modules , one module per RBP , by identifying all the RBPs passing the integrated or STRING distance threshold . Module sizes have been calculated as the number of interacting RBPs plus 1 ( including the RBP of origin ) . For STRING , the distances were calculated as 1000 - STRING score , all 7140 RBP pairs were included in this analysis . 21 Alternative splicing events analysis RNA - seq data was processed as follows : ( 1 ) to fulfill MISO requirements ( see below ) , the reads obtained with different sequencing lengths were truncated to 75bps with cutadapt ( v . 2 . 10 ) - l option , ( 2 ) the truncated reads were mapped to the human hg38 genome assembly with GENCODE v38 comprehensive gene annotation using STAR ( v . 2 . 7 . 9 ) with options - - outFilterScoreMinOverLread and - - outFilterMatchNminOverLread both set to 0 . 25 ( Dobin et al . 2013 ) , ( 3 ) non - unique alignment were filtered and the replicates were merged , ( 4 ) the insert size distribution was estimated for each merged bam file separately using pe _ utils – compute - insert - len from MISO ( v . 0 . 5 . 4 ) , constitutive exons were retrieved using exon _ utils with - - get - const - exons and - - min - exon - size 1000 ( Katz et al . 2010 ) , ( 5 ) alternative splicing events were identified using miso - - run with - - read - len set to 75 and - - paired - end set to the previously estimated insert size parameters . Finally , only cases with non - zero numbers of exclusion and inclusion reads and sum of these reads > = 10 in at least one sample are left and shown in Figure 4 . Ribosome profiling analysis To process the reads , the Ribo - seq reads were first trimmed using cutadapt ( v2 . 3 ) to remove the linker sequence AGATCGGAAGAGCAC . The fastx _ barcode _ splitter script from the Fastx toolkit was then used to split the samples based on their barcodes . Since the reads contain unique molecular identifiers ( UMIs ) , they were collapsed to retain only unique reads . The UMIs were then removed from the beginning and end of each read ( 2 and 5 Ns , respectively ) and appended to the name of each read . Bowtie2 ( v2 . 3 . 5 ) was then used to remove reads that map to ribosomal RNAs and tRNAs , and the retained reads were then aligned to mRNAs ( we used the isoform with the longest coding sequence for each gene as the representative ) . Subsequent to alignment , umitools ( v0 . 3 . 3 ) was used to deduplicate reads . The quality check and downstream processing of the processed reads was performed using Ribolog v0 . 0 . 0 . 9 ( Navickas et al . 2021 ) . To distinguish stalling peaks from stochastic sequencing artifacts , we followed a multi - step procedure . We calculated P - site offsets and identified the codon at the ribosomal A - site for each RPF read using the riboWaltz package . A loess smoother was used to de - noise codon - wise RPF counts . The loess span parameter varied depending on the transcript length and allowed borrowing information from approximately 5 codons on either side of the A - site . We calculated an excess ratio at each codon position by dividing the loess - smoothed count by the transcript’s background translation level ( median of no - zero loess - smoothed counts ) . After median normalization of the corrected counts and removal of transcripts with 0 counts , the ribosome occupancy testing was performed using logistic regression in Ribolog . 22 Perturb - seq analysis Cell Ranger ( version 3 . 0 . 1 , 10X Genomics ) with default parameters was used to align reads and generate digital expression matrices from single - cell sequencing data . To assign cell genotypes , a bwa reference ( H . Li and Durbin 2009 ) database was created containing all guide sequences present in the library using bwa index command . The barcode - enrichment libraries were mapped to this database to establish the guide identities ; to detect the cell barcodes , the barcode correction scheme used in Cell Ranger was used ( the mapping of uncorrected to corrected barcodes was extracted from Cell Ranger analysis run of the whole transcriptome libraries ; this mapping was then applied to the reads of barcode - enrichment libraries ) . UMI correction was performed by merging the UMIs within the hamming distance of 1 from each other . For each UMI , the guide assignment was done by choosing the guide sequence most represented among the reads containing the given UMI . To make the final assignment of a guide to cell barcodes , we only considered the barcodes that were represented by at least 5 different UMIs , with > 80 % UMIs representing the same guide . Data filtering was performed using scanpy package ( F . A . Wolf , Angerer , and Theis 2018 ) . Data were denoised using a modification of scvi autoencoder ( Gayoso et al . 2022 ) with loss function penalizing for the similarity between cells having different RBPs knocked down . The distance between transcriptome profiles of individual RBP knockdowns was calculated by applying the t - test to individual gene counts across the cells that were assigned the respective guide sequence . MS data analysis ( BioID2 mass spectrometry data ) Data were quantified and queried against a Uniprot human database ( January 2013 ) using MaxQuant MaxLFQ command ( Cox et al . 2014 ) . Data normalization was performed in Perseus ( Tyanova et al . 2016 ) ( version 1 . 6 . 2 . 1 ) . For batch correction , Brent Pedersen’s implementation ( Pedersen n . d . ) of ComBat function from sva package ( Leek et al . 2012 ) was used . The protein abundances in “experiment” ( biotin + ) and “control” ( biotin - ) samples were compared using t - test for each protein individually . ATAC - seq analysis ENCODE ATAC - seq pipeline ( Lee et al . 2016 ) with default parameters was used for sequencing data processing and analysis . The differentially accessible peaks were identified with the DESeq2 package ( Love , Huber , and Anders 2014 ) and annotated with the ChIPseeker package ( Yu , Wang , and He 2015 ) . To perform a comparison against published ChIP - Seq data , the processed ChIP - exo results were downloaded from GEO ( GSE151287 ) ( Lai et al . 2021 ) The data consisted of bed files containing 33 and 181 QKI peaks ( two replicates ) and a bigWig file with ZNF800 ChIP - exo signal ( no ChIP - exo peaks were reported for ZNF800 ) . In total , 234564 and 23 222350 ATAC - seq peaks for QKI and ZNF800 , respectively , had coverage of at least 10 reads in more than one replicate and were used in the following tests . For QKI , the bed files with ChIP - exo peaks were merged , transferred to the hg38 genome assembly with UCSC liftOver and the numbers of differentially accessible ( or not differentially accessible ) QKI - KD ATAC - seq peaks that intersect ( or do not intersect ) ChIP - exo peaks were calculated using bedtools intersect ( v . 2 . 26 . 0 ) ( Hinrichs et al . 2006 ; Quinlan and Hall 2010 ) followed by a one - sided ( ' greater ' ) Fisher’s exact test on 2x2 contingency table . For ZNF800 , bigWig files were converted to bed using UCSC bigWigToWig ( v . 377 ) and wig2bed from BEDOPS ( v . 2 . 4 . 38 ) ( Kent et al . 2010 ; Neph et al . 2012 ) , followed by UCSC liftOver to the hg38 genome assembly . The resulting regions were intersected with differentially accessible and not differentially accessible ZNF800 - KD ATAC - seq peaks using bedtools intersect followed by comparison of ChIP - exo signal distribution in these two sets using non - parametric Mann - Whitney U test . MS data analysis ( TAF15 KD proteomic quantification ) Quantitative analysis of the TMT experiments was performed simultaneously to protein identification using Proteome Discoverer 2 . 5 software . The precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm , 0 . 6 Da , respectively ) , enzyme was Trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and Uniprot Human proteome FASTA file and common contaminant FASTA file used in SEQUEST searches . The impurity correction factors obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientific for each kit was included in the search and quantification . The following settings were used to search the data ; dynamic modifications ; Oxidation / + 15 . 995Da ( M ) , Deamidated / + 0 . 984 Da ( N , Q ) , Acetylation / + 42 . 011 Da ( N - terminus ) and static modifications of TMT6plex / + 229 . 163 Da ( N - Terminus , K ) , MMTS / + 45 . 988 Da ( C ) . Scaffold Q + ( version Scaffold _ 5 . 0 . 1 , Proteome Software Inc . , Portland , OR ) was used to quantitate TMT Based Quantitation peptide and protein identifications . Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 78 . 0 % probability to achieve an FDR less than 1 . 0 % by the Percolator posterior error probability calculation ( Käll , Storey , and Noble 2008 ) . Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 5 . 0 % probability to achieve an FDR less than 1 . 0 % and contained at least 1 identified peptides . Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm ( Nesvizhskii et al . 2003 ) . Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS / MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony . Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters . Channels were corrected by the matrix [ 0 . 000 , 0 . 000 , 0 . 931 , 0 . 0689 , 0 . 000 ] ; [ 0 . 000 , 0 . 000 , 0 . 933 , 0 . 0672 , 0 . 000 ] ; [ 0 . 000 , 0 . 00750 , 0 . 931 , 0 . 0619 , 0 . 000 ] ; [ 0 . 000 , 0 . 0113 , 0 . 929 , 0 . 0593 , 0 . 000 ] ; [ 0 . 000 , 0 . 0121 , 0 . 934 , 0 . 0532 , 0 . 000934 ] ; [ 0 . 000 , 0 . 0148 , 0 . 923 , 0 . 0499 , 0 . 0120 ] ; [ 0 . 000 , 0 . 0251 , 0 . 931 , 0 . 0438 , 0 . 000 ] ; [ 0 . 000 , 0 . 0206 , 0 . 936 , 0 . 0431 , 0 . 000 ] ; [ 0 . 000 , 0 . 0291 , 0 . 937 , 0 . 0337 , 0 . 000 ] ; [ 0 . 000 , 0 . 0776 , 0 . 892 , 0 . 0303 , 0 . 000 ] in all samples according to 24 the algorithm described in i - Tracker ( Shadforth et al . 2005 ) . Normalization was performed iteratively ( across samples and spectra ) on intensities , as described in Statistical Analysis of Relative Labeled Mass Spectrometry Data from Complex Samples Using ANOVA ( Oberg et al . 2008 ) . Means were used for averaging . Spectra data were log - transformed , pruned of those matched to multiple proteins , and weighted by an adaptive intensity weighting algorithm . Of 22889 spectra in the experiment at the given thresholds , 20372 ( 89 % ) were included in quantitation . Differentially expressed proteins were determined by applying T - Test with unadjusted significance level p < 0 . 05 corrected by Benjamini - Hochberg . 25 FIGURES Figure 1 . Workflow overview : generating an integrated regulatory interaction map of RNA - binding proteins ( A ) Framework for functional annotation of RBPs . Layers 1 - 2 : individual RBPs assemble into large groups , termed " regulatory modules " . Layer 3 : functional complexes consist of RBPs , recruited from the same regulatory module . Layer 4 : a functional complex implements a particular functional role on a defined group of RNA targets . ( B - D ) The results of BioID2 , Perturb - seq and publicly available ENCODE eCLIP assays that were independently processed and normalized across RBPs ( E ) . The resulting Z - scores were used to estimate the cosine distance between all pairs of the tested RBPs and to calculate empirical p - values for RBP - RBP similarities . For each pair of RBPs , the p - values from three assays were aggregated as in ( Mudholkar , George , and ROCHESTER UNIV NY DEPT OF STATISTICS 1977 ) to obtain a single measure of similarity between RBPs across the feature spaces from the three modalities . The resulting matrix of pairwise similarities was defined as an Integrated Regulatory Interaction Map that simultaneously captures physical and functional interactions between RBPs . 26 Figure 2 . Post - transcriptional regulatory modules revealed by integrative analysis of RBP - RBP interactions . ( A ) Integrated RBP Regulatory Map : the heatmap of integrated distances between RBPs combining multiple sources of information for each RBP is shown in the middle . Each row and column represents an RBP , the integrated distances between RBPs are shown by color . RBPs are clustered based on their integrated distance using hierarchical clustering ; the dendrogram is shown on the left . The presence of RBPs in the three source datasets is shown on the left with a colored map ( green : eCLIP , blue : BioID , brown : Perturb - seq ) . Examples of known regulatory modules are highlighted in red and labeled ; the RBPs with known functions that contribute to the module’s annotation are listed . For two exemplary regulatory modules , zoomed - in heatmaps are included . These selected heatmaps deconvolve the integrated distance into the distances between RBPs derived from individual datasets . Different color schemes were used for different source datasets : blue for BioID , orange for Perturb - seq , and green for eCLIP . The proteins discussed in the 27 text are highlighted in red . The exemplary combinatorial interactions between regulatory modules are marked in yellow and shown separately in ( B ) . ( B ) A slice of the Integrated RBP Regulatory Map showing combinatorial interactions between key regulatory modules . All the areas that are highlighted in yellow in ( A ) are shown . The individual regulatory modules are annotated . Two example associations are highlighted with orange dashed boxes : ( 1 ) association of the rRNA maturation factors ABCF1 , GEMIN5 , SDAD1 , DDX51 , and PHF6 with splicing machinery and ( 2 ) association of DHX30 , DDX6 , NCBP2 , DDX21 , and RPS11 and the regulators of translation and mitochondrial RNA metabolism . ( C ) Swarm plots showing the RBP partners of XRCC6 ( top ) , PPIL4 ( middle ) and LIN28B ( bottom ) . Each point represents a single RBP ; the points are sorted based on the integrated distance of the given RBP to the query RBP . Each swarm plot is annotated with the common function of the lowest distance interacting partners . The three RBPs with the lowest distance ( three top interacting partners ) are labeled . Among them , those annotated with the common function are labeled in purple , and the rest are labeled with gray . ( D ) Swarm plots showing the RBP partners of DGCR8 ( top ) , ZNF800 ( center ) and TAF15 ( bottom ) based on eCLIP , BioID , and Perturb - seq . Right : swarm plots showing the RBP partners of query RBPs based on the integrated distance , as in ( C ) . The top interacting RBPs identified by the integrated or individual distances are labeled . Left : swarm plots showing the RBP partners of query RBP based on the individual source datasets . The swarm plots corresponding to individual datasets are color - coded in the same way as in ( A ) . Each swarm plot is annotated with the common function of the lowest distance interacting partners and the three RBPs with the lowest distance are labeled as in ( C ) . For DGCR8 , two RBP partners , TAF15 and AKAP8L , are additionally highlighted in gray and labeled on the left , representing the effect of the distance integration procedure that recapitulates known DGCR8 involvement in the regulation of gene expression discussed in the text . 28 Figure 3 . BioID - mediated proximity labeling defines RBP neighborhoods and enables functional annotation of RBPs . ( A ) Overview of our pathway annotation workflow for RBPs . The example provided shows the test for the association of ZNF800 and GO : 0006361 ( transcription initiation from RNA polymerase I promoter ) . Proximity - labeled proteins were ranked by their z - scores in the ZNF800 - BioID dataset , where a higher score implies enrichment relative to control . Experiments were performed in biological triplicates using unlabeled 29 samples as controls ( three case vs . three control design ) . Gene - set enrichment analyses were performed on the resulting ranked list across all RBPs . Each enrichment analysis resulted with p - value and NES score for a given pair of RBP and a pathway . ( B ) A heatmap showing the associations between RBPs and pathways as inferred from proximity labeling data . Columns correspond to the RBPs , rows correspond to individual gene ontology terms ( Biological Processes ; BP ) , and the color denotes the GSEA normalized enrichment score ( NES ) . The associations showing FDR < 0 . 05 are marked with a red asterisk . The green heatmap in the header shows the RBP binding preferences to particular RNA types , as determined based on eCLIP RNA targets . Some known functions of RBPs are highlighted by red boxes and zoomed - in on the right . 30 Figure 4 . ZC3H11A and TAF15 control multiple independent regulons through distinct regulatory programs ( A ) Violin plots showing the normalized enrichment scores ( NES ) resulting from gene set enrichment analysis of proximity labeling data . Left subpanel : NES scores across all the GO - BP terms for ZC3H11A and TAF15 proteins . The five highest scoring pathways are highlighted with color . Right subpanel : NES scores across all studied RBPs for the pathways GO : 0000387 , GO : 0045727 , and GO : 0048255 . ZC3H11A and TAF15 are highlighted with colored triangles . Dashed lines : quartiles ; solid red line : 0 . 9 quantile . ( B ) Scatterplot showing changes in alternative splicing events ( ASE ) usage upon ZC3H11A knockdown as estimated by MISO . Individual subplots cover different classes of alternative splicing events : Skipped Exon 31 ( SE ) , Retained Intron ( RI ) , Alternative 3 ' Splice Site ( A3SS ) , Alternative 5 ' Splice Site ( A5SS ) , and Mutually Exclusive Exon ( MXE ) . Dashed lines indicate the following filters : Bayes factor > = 10 and the absolute value of isoforms levels difference > = 0 . 2 . The ASEs passing these filters are shown in red . ( C ) Relative levels of two skipped exons from the transcripts WARS1 ( left ) and ASPM ( right ) were measured by RT - qPCR in control K562 and ZC3H11A - KD cells ; n = 3 biological replicates . P from t - test performed on log - transformed isoform expression ratios . ( D ) Scatterplot showing changes in alternative splicing events in TAF15 knockdown cells , as in ( B ) . ( E ) Relative levels of two retained introns from the transcripts CDC37 ( left ) and ZWINT ( right ) were measured by RT - qPCR in control K562 and ZC3H11A - KD cells ; n = 3 biological replicates . P from t - test performed on log - transformed isoform expression ratios . ( F ) Left : Sashimi plot illustrating the changes in intron retention event usage in ZWINT transcript upon TAF15 knockdown . Right : Genomic view of the ZWINT retained intron , RNA - seq profiles from WT and TAF15 - KD cells and TAF15 CLIP - seq peaks are shown at the bottom . Y axis : counts per million ( CPM ) . The region corresponding to the alternative splicing event is framed . 32 Figure 5 . TAF15 is directly involved in RNA translation and stability regulation ( A ) Left : enrichment analysis of TAF15 mRNA targets among the differentially translated genes ( in TAF15 - KD cell line compared to WT cell line ) . The differential ribosome occupancy ( RO ) measurements in TAF15 - KD cells were estimated from Ribo - seq . The genes were sorted based on the RO change ( along the x - axis ) , and the enrichment of TAF15 mRNA targets , inferred from eCLIP data , was calculated using iPAGE ( top subpanel ) and with GSEA ( bottom subpanel , ES stands for the enrichment score ) . Two example targets , HMGB2 and RPL35 , are highlighted . Right : levels of HMGB2 and RPL35 were measured by mass 33 spectrometry in control K562 and TAF15 - KD cells . N = 5 biological replicates . P from one - sided Wilcoxon rank sum test . ( B ) Genomic view of HMGB2 ( left ) and RPL35 ( right ) . RNA - seq and Ribo - seq WT and TAF15 - KD profiles as well as TAF15 CLIP - seq peaks are shown below . Y axis : counts per million ( CPM ) . ( C ) Left : enrichment analysis of TAF15 mRNA targets among the differentially stabilized transcripts ( in TAF15 - KD cell line compared to WT cell line ) measured by α - amanitin treatment . The transcripts were sorted based on stability change ( log2FCs ) . The enrichment of TAF15 RNA targets , inferred from eCLIP data , was calculated with iPAGE ( top and middle subpanel ) and with GSEA ( bottom subpanel ) . Two example targets , UBE2J2 and GUK1 , are highlighted . Right : relative stability of UBE2J2 and GUK1 mRNAs were measured as mRNA to pre - mRNA abundances ratio using qPCR in control K562 and TAF15 - KD cells . N = 4 biological replicates . P from one - sided Wilcoxon rank sum test . ( D ) Genomic view of UBE2J2 ( top ) and GUK1 ( bottom ) . RNA - seq WT and TAF15 - KD profiles as well as TAF15 CLIP - seq peaks are shown below . Y axis : counts per million ( CPM ) . ( E ) Venn diagram of TAF15 RNA regulons . Shown are the numbers of genes that exhibit significant changes in splicing ( 155 genes with Bayes factor > = 10 ) , translation ( 919 genes with FDR < 0 . 05 ) , or stability ( 2 , 068 genes with FDR < 0 . 05 ) upon TAF15 knockdown , as captured by RNA - seq , Ribo - seq , and RNA - seq with α - amanitin , respectively . Asterisks reflect the significance obtained from pairwise one - sided Fisher’s exact tests ( odds ratio = 2 and P < 10 - 15 for translation and stability , odds ratio = 1 . 5 and P < 0 . 05 for translation and splicing ) . 34 Figure 6 . ZNF800 and QKI control gene expression at transcriptional and post - transcriptional levels independently . ( A ) Violin plots showing the normalized enrichment scores ( NES ) resulting from gene set enrichment analysis of proximity labeling data . Left subpanel : NES scores across all the GO - BP terms for ZNF800 and QKI proteins . The 5 highest scoring pathways are highlighted with color . Right subpanel : NES scores across all the studied RBPs for GO : 0016571 , GO : 0016575 and GO : 0042254 GO terms . ZNF800 and QKI are highlighted with colored triangles . Dashed lines : quartiles ; solid red line : 0 . 9 quantile . ( B ) Volcano plots showing differential chromatin accessibility between WT K562 cells and ZNF800 - KD ( left ) or QKI - KD ( right ) cells . Each point denotes a single ATAC - seq peak ; peaks passing 0 . 1 FDR are colored red . The distribution of peaks among various genomic regions is shown on the right of each volcano plot . 35 ( C ) Genomic view of RPS15 ( left ) and LTBR ( right ) promoter regions . ATAC - seq profiles of WT cells along with ZNF800 - KD ( left ) or QKI - KD ( right ) are shown . Binding of ZNF800 to the RPS15 promoter region and binding of QKI to the LTBR promoter region were measured by ChIP - qPCR in K562 cells and are illustrated on the right of each profile plot . ( D ) Box plots showing the distributions of expression fold changes in WT cells compared to either ZNF800 - KD cells ( left ) or QKI - KD cells ( right ) , as measured by RNA - seq . The distributions for the genes showing significant promoter accessibility changes upon the respective knockdown and for the rest of the genes are shown separately . P calculated by one - sided Wilcoxon rank sum test . ( E ) Box plots showing the distributions of chromatin accessibility fold changes in WT cells compared to either ZNF800 - KD cells ( left ) or QKI - KD cells ( right ) , as measured by ATAC - seq . The distributions for ZNF800 - or QKI - RNA targets ( as defined by eCLIP ) and the rest of the genes are shown separately . The top most highly accessible ATAC - seq peak was considered for each gene . P calculated by one - sided Wilcoxon rank sum test . 36 REFERENCES Åberg , Karolina , Peter Saetre , Niclas Jareborg , and Elena Jazin . 2006 . “Human QKI , a Potential Regulator of mRNA Expression of Human Oligodendrocyte - Related Genes Involved in Schizophrenia . ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103 ( 19 ) : 7482 – 87 . Adamson , Britt , Thomas M . Norman , Marco Jost , Min Y . Cho , James K . Nuñez , Yuwen Chen , Jacqueline E . Villalta , et al . 2016 . “A Multiplexed Single - Cell CRISPR Screening Platform Enables Systematic Dissection of the Unfolded Protein Response . ” Cell 167 ( 7 ) : 1867 – 82 . e21 . Alipanahi , Babak , Andrew Delong , Matthew T . Weirauch , and Brendan J . Frey . 2015 . “Predicting the Sequence Specificities of DNA - and RNA - Binding Proteins by Deep Learning . ” Nature Biotechnology 33 ( 8 ) : 831 – 38 . Antonicka , Hana , Zhen - Yuan Lin , Alexandre Janer , Mari J . Aaltonen , Woranontee Weraarpachai , Anne - Claude Gingras , and Eric A . Shoubridge . 2020 . “A High - Density Human Mitochondrial Proximity Interaction Network . ” Cell Metabolism . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cmet . 2020 . 07 . 017 . Antonicka , Hana , and Eric A . Shoubridge . 2015 . “Mitochondrial RNA Granules Are Centers for Posttranscriptional RNA Processing and Ribosome Biogenesis . ” Cell Reports 10 ( 6 ) : 920 – 32 . Ballarino , M . , L . Jobert , D . Dembélé , P . de la Grange , D . Auboeuf , and L . Tora . 2013 . “TAF15 Is Important for Cellular Proliferation and Regulates the Expression of a Subset of Cell Cycle Genes through miRNAs . ” Oncogene 32 ( 39 ) : 4646 – 55 . Barak , Tanyeri , Emma Ristori , A . Gulhan Ercan - Sencicek , Danielle F . Miyagishima , Carol Nelson - Williams , Weilai Dong , Sheng Chih Jin , et al . 2021 . “PPIL4 Is Essential for Brain Angiogenesis and Implicated in Intracranial Aneurysms in Humans . ” Nature Medicine 27 ( 12 ) : 2165 – 75 . Basak , Anindita , Mathias Munschauer , Caleb A . Lareau , Kara E . Montbleau , Jacob C . Ulirsch , Christina R . Hartigan , Monica Schenone , et al . 2020 . “Control of Human Hemoglobin Switching by LIN28B - Mediated Regulation of BCL11A Translation . ” Nature Genetics . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41588 - 019 - 0568 - 7 . Box , Joseph K . , Nicolas Paquet , Mark N . Adams , Didier Boucher , Emma Bolderson , Kenneth J . O’Byrne , and Derek J . Richard . 2016 . “Nucleophosmin : From Structure and Function to Disease Development . ” BMC Molecular Biology 17 ( 1 ) : 19 . Buenrostro , Jason D . , Beijing Wu , Howard Y . Chang , and William J . Greenleaf . 2015 . “ATAC - Seq : A Method for Assaying Chromatin Accessibility Genome - Wide . ” Current Protocols in Molecular Biology / Edited by Frederick M . Ausubel . . . [ et Al . ] 109 ( January ) : 21 . 29 . 1 – 21 . 29 . 9 . Chen , Xinyun , Ying Liu , Chen Xu , Lina Ba , Zhuo Liu , Xiuya Li , Jie Huang , et al . 2021 . “QKI Is a Critical Pre - mRNA Alternative Splicing Regulator of Cardiac Myofibrillogenesis and Contractile Function . ” Nature Communications 12 ( 1 ) : 89 . Chen , Xinyun , Jianwen Yin , Dayan Cao , Deyong Xiao , Zhongjun Zhou , Ying Liu , and Weinian Shou . 2021 . “The Emerging Roles of the RNA Binding Protein QKI in Cardiovascular Development and Function . ” Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology 9 ( June ) : 668659 . Cho , Nathan H . , Keith C . Cheveralls , Andreas - David Brunner , Kibeom Kim , André C . Michaelis , Preethi Raghavan , Hirofumi Kobayashi , et al . 2022 . “OpenCell : Endogenous Tagging for the Cartography of Human Cellular Organization . ” Science 375 ( 6585 ) : eabi6983 . Corces , M . Ryan , Alexandro E . Trevino , Emily G . Hamilton , Peyton G . Greenside , Nicholas A . Sinnott - Armstrong , Sam Vesuna , Ansuman T . Satpathy , et al . 2017 . “An Improved ATAC - Seq Protocol Reduces Background and Enables Interrogation of Frozen Tissues . ” Nature Methods 14 ( 10 ) : 959 – 62 . Corley , Meredith , Margaret C . Burns , and Gene W . Yeo . 2020 . “How RNA - Binding Proteins Interact with RNA : Molecules and Mechanisms . ” Molecular Cell 78 ( 1 ) : 9 – 29 . Cox , Jürgen , Marco Y . Hein , Christian A . Luber , Igor Paron , Nagarjuna Nagaraj , and Matthias Mann . 2014 . “Accurate Proteome - Wide Label - Free Quantification by Delayed Normalization and Maximal Peptide Ratio Extraction , Termed MaxLFQ . ” Molecular & Cellular Proteomics : MCP 13 ( 9 ) : 2513 – 26 . Datlinger , Paul , André F . Rendeiro , Christian Schmidl , Thomas Krausgruber , Peter Traxler , Johanna Klughammer , Linda C . Schuster , Amelie Kuchler , Donat Alpar , and Christoph Bock . 2017 . “Pooled CRISPR Screening with Single - Cell Transcriptome Readout . ” Nature Methods 37 14 ( 3 ) : 297 – 301 . DeJong , Caitlin S . , Darwin S . Dichmann , Cameron R . T . Exner , Yuxiao Xu , and Richard M . Harland . 2021 . “The Atypical RNA - Binding Protein Taf15 Regulates Dorsoanterior Neural Development through Diverse Mechanisms in Xenopus Tropicalis . ” Development 148 ( 15 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1242 / dev . 191619 . Deng , Liping , Ruotong Ren , Zunpeng Liu , Moshi Song , Jingyi Li , Zeming Wu , Xiaoqing Ren , et al . 2019 . “Stabilizing Heterochromatin by DGCR8 Alleviates Senescence and Osteoarthritis . ” Nature Communications 10 ( 1 ) : 3329 . Dobin , Alexander , Carrie A . Davis , Felix Schlesinger , Jorg Drenkow , Chris Zaleski , Sonali Jha , Philippe Batut , Mark Chaisson , and Thomas R . Gingeras . 2013 . “STAR : Ultrafast Universal RNA - Seq Aligner . ” Bioinformatics 29 ( 1 ) : 15 – 21 . Dunn , Joshua G . , and Jonathan S . Weissman . 2016 . “Plastid : Nucleotide - Resolution Analysis of next - Generation Sequencing and Genomics Data . ” BMC Genomics 17 ( 1 ) : 958 . Egorov , Artyom A . , Ekaterina A . Sakharova , Aleksandra S . Anisimova , Sergey E . Dmitriev , Vadim N . Gladyshev , and Ivan V . Kulakovskiy . 2019 . “svist4get : A Simple Visualization Tool for Genomic Tracks from Sequencing Experiments . ” BMC Bioinformatics 20 ( 1 ) : 113 . Escobar - Hoyos , Luisa F . , Alex Penson , Ram Kannan , Hana Cho , Chun - Hao Pan , Rohit K . Singh , Lisa H . Apken , et al . 2020 . “Altered RNA Splicing by Mutant p53 Activates Oncogenic RAS Signaling in Pancreatic Cancer . ” Cancer Cell 38 ( 2 ) : 198 – 211 . e8 . Fazal , Furqan M . , Shuo Han , Kevin R . Parker , Pornchai Kaewsapsak , Jin Xu , Alistair N . Boettiger , Howard Y . Chang , and Alice Y . Ting . 2019 . “Atlas of Subcellular RNA Localization Revealed by APEX - Seq . ” Cell 178 ( 2 ) : 473 – 90 . e26 . Fiesel , Fabienne C . , and Philipp J . Kahle . 2011 . “TDP - 43 and FUS / TLS : Cellular Functions and Implications for Neurodegeneration . ” The FEBS Journal 278 ( 19 ) : 3550 – 68 . Fish , Lisa , Matvei Khoroshkin , Albertas Navickas , Kristle Garcia , Bruce Culbertson , Benjamin Hänisch , Steven Zhang , et al . 2021 . “A Prometastatic Splicing Program Regulated by SNRPA1 Interactions with Structured RNA Elements . ” Science 372 ( 6543 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . abc7531 . Fish , Lisa , Albertas Navickas , Bruce Culbertson , Yichen Xu , Hoang C . B . Nguyen , Steven Zhang , Myles Hochman , et al . 2019 . “Nuclear TARBP2 Drives Oncogenic Dysregulation of RNA Splicing and Decay . ” Molecular Cell 75 ( 5 ) : 967 – 81 . e9 . Fish , Lisa , Nora Pencheva , Hani Goodarzi , Hien Tran , Mitsukuni Yoshida , and Sohail F . Tavazoie . 2016 . “Muscleblind - like 1 Suppresses Breast Cancer Metastatic Colonization and Stabilizes Metastasis Suppressor Transcripts . ” Genes & Development 30 ( 4 ) : 386 – 98 . Folco , Eric G . , Chung - Sheng Lee , Kobina Dufu , Tomohiro Yamazaki , and Robin Reed . 2012 . “The Proteins PDIP3 and ZC11A Associate with the Human TREX Complex in an ATP - Dependent Manner and Function in mRNA Export . ” PloS One 7 ( 8 ) : e43804 . Gayoso , Adam , Romain Lopez , Galen Xing , Pierre Boyeau , Valeh Valiollah Pour Amiri , Justin Hong , Katherine Wu , et al . 2022 . “A Python Library for Probabilistic Analysis of Single - Cell Omics Data . ” Nature Biotechnology 40 ( 2 ) : 163 – 66 . George , E . O . , and G . S . Mudholkar . 1983 . “On the Convolution of Logistic Random Variables . ” Metrika 30 ( 1 ) : 1 – 13 . Georges , Amedee des , Vidya Dhote , Lauriane Kuhn , Christopher U . T . Hellen , Tatyana V . Pestova , Joachim Frank , and Yaser Hashem . 2015 . “Structure of Mammalian eIF3 in the Context of the 43S Preinitiation Complex . ” Nature 525 ( 7570 ) : 491 – 95 . Gerstberger , Stefanie , Markus Hafner , and Thomas Tuschl . 2014 . “A Census of Human RNA - Binding Proteins . ” Nature Reviews . Genetics 15 ( 12 ) : 829 – 45 . Gilbert , Luke A . , Max A . Horlbeck , Britt Adamson , Jacqueline E . Villalta , Yuwen Chen , Evan H . Whitehead , Carla Guimaraes , et al . 2014 . “Genome - Scale CRISPR - Mediated Control of Gene Repression and Activation . ” Cell 159 ( 3 ) : 647 – 61 . Gingras , Anne - Claude , Kento T . Abe , and Brian Raught . 2019 . “Getting to Know the Neighborhood : Using Proximity - Dependent Biotinylation to Characterize Protein Complexes and Map Organelles . ” Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 48 ( February ) : 44 – 54 . Glisovic , Tina , Jennifer L . Bachorik , Jeongsik Yong , and Gideon Dreyfuss . 2008 . “RNA - Binding Proteins and Post - Transcriptional Gene Regulation . ” FEBS Letters 582 ( 14 ) : 1977 – 86 . Go , Christopher D . , James D . R . Knight , Archita Rajasekharan , Bhavisha Rathod , Geoffrey G . Hesketh , Kento T . Abe , Ji - Young Youn , et al . 2021 . “A Proximity - Dependent Biotinylation Map 38 of a Human Cell . ” Nature 595 ( 7865 ) : 120 – 24 . Goodarzi , Hani , Olivier Elemento , and Saeed Tavazoie . 2009 . “Revealing Global Regulatory Perturbations across Human Cancers . ” Molecular Cell 36 ( 5 ) : 900 – 911 . Grandi , Fiorella C . , Hailey Modi , Lucas Kampman , and M . Ryan Corces . 2022 . “Chromatin Accessibility Profiling by ATAC - Seq . ” Nature Protocols , April . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41596 - 022 - 00692 - 9 . Grau , Jan , Ivo Grosse , and Jens Keilwagen . 2015 . “PRROC : Computing and Visualizing Precision - Recall and Receiver Operating Characteristic Curves in R . ” Bioinformatics 31 ( 15 ) : 2595 – 97 . Harbison , Christopher T . , D . Benjamin Gordon , Tong Ihn Lee , Nicola J . Rinaldi , Kenzie D . Macisaac , Timothy W . Danford , Nancy M . Hannett , et al . 2004 . “Transcriptional Regulatory Code of a Eukaryotic Genome . ” Nature 431 ( 7004 ) : 99 – 104 . Hill , Andrew J . , José L . McFaline - Figueroa , Lea M . Starita , Molly J . Gasperini , Kenneth A . Matreyek , Jonathan Packer , Dana Jackson , Jay Shendure , and Cole Trapnell . 2018 . “On the Design of CRISPR - Based Single - Cell Molecular Screens . ” Nature Methods 15 ( 4 ) : 271 – 74 . Hinrichs , A . S . , D . Karolchik , R . Baertsch , G . P . Barber , G . Bejerano , H . Clawson , M . Diekhans , et al . 2006 . “The UCSC Genome Browser Database : Update 2006 . ” Nucleic Acids Research 34 ( Database issue ) : D590 – 98 . Ibrahim , Fadia , Manolis Maragkakis , Panagiotis Alexiou , Margaret A . Maronski , Marc A . Dichter , and Zissimos Mourelatos . 2013 . “Identification of in Vivo , Conserved , TAF15 RNA Binding Sites Reveals the Impact of TAF15 on the Neuronal Transcriptome . ” Cell Reports 3 ( 2 ) : 301 – 8 . Ingolia , Nicholas T . , Gloria A . Brar , Silvia Rouskin , Anna M . McGeachy , and Jonathan S . Weissman . 2012 . “The Ribosome Profiling Strategy for Monitoring Translation in Vivo by Deep Sequencing of Ribosome - Protected mRNA Fragments . ” Nature Protocols 7 ( 8 ) : 1534 – 50 . Jobert , Laure , Manuela Argentini , and László Tora . 2009 . “PRMT1 Mediated Methylation of TAF15 Is Required for Its Positive Gene Regulatory Function . ” Experimental Cell Research 315 ( 7 ) : 1273 – 86 . Käll , Lukas , John D . Storey , and William Stafford Noble . 2008 . “Non - Parametric Estimation of Posterior Error Probabilities Associated with Peptides Identified by Tandem Mass Spectrometry . ” Bioinformatics 24 ( 16 ) : i42 – 48 . Kapeli , Katannya , Gabriel A . Pratt , Anthony Q . Vu , Kasey R . Hutt , Fernando J . Martinez , Balaji Sundararaman , Ranjan Batra , et al . 2016 . “Distinct and Shared Functions of ALS - Associated Proteins TDP - 43 , FUS and TAF15 Revealed by Multisystem Analyses . ” Nature Communications 7 ( July ) : 12143 . Katz , Yarden , Eric T . Wang , Edoardo M . Airoldi , and Christopher B . Burge . 2010 . “Analysis and Design of RNA Sequencing Experiments for Identifying Isoform Regulation . ” Nature Methods . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1528 . Kent , W . J . , A . S . Zweig , G . Barber , A . S . Hinrichs , and D . Karolchik . 2010 . “BigWig and BigBed : Enabling Browsing of Large Distributed Datasets . ” Bioinformatics 26 ( 17 ) : 2204 – 7 . Kim , Daehwan , Joseph M . Paggi , Chanhee Park , Christopher Bennett , and Steven L . Salzberg . 2019 . “Graph - Based Genome Alignment and Genotyping with HISAT2 and HISAT - Genotype . ” Nature Biotechnology 37 ( 8 ) : 907 – 15 . Kim , Dae In , Samuel C . Jensen , Kyle A . Noble , Birendra Kc , Kenneth H . Roux , Khatereh Motamedchaboki , and Kyle J . Roux . 2016 . “An Improved Smaller Biotin Ligase for BioID Proximity Labeling . ” Molecular Biology of the Cell 27 ( 8 ) : 1188 – 96 . Korotkevich , Gennady , Vladimir Sukhov , Nikolay Budin , Boris Shpak , Maxim N . Artyomov , and Alexey Sergushichev . 2021 . “Fast Gene Set Enrichment Analysis . ” bioRxiv . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 060012 . Kugel , Jennifer F . , and James A . Goodrich . 2009 . “In New Company : U1 snRNA Associates with TAF15 . ” EMBO Reports . Lai , William K . M . , Luca Mariani , Gerson Rothschild , Edwin R . Smith , Bryan J . Venters , Thomas R . Blanda , Prashant K . Kuntala , et al . 2021 . “A ChIP - Exo Screen of 887 Protein Capture Reagents Program Transcription Factor Antibodies in Human Cells . ” Genome Research 31 ( 9 ) : 1663 – 79 . Lee , Jin , Grey Christoforo , Grey Christoforo , C . S . Foo , Chris Probert , Anshul Kundaje , Nathan 39 Boley , kohpangwei , Daniel Kim , and Mike Dacre . 2016 . Kundajelab / atac _ dnase _ pipelines : 0 . 3 . 0 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5281 / zenodo . 156534 . Leek , Jeffrey T . , W . Evan Johnson , Hilary S . Parker , Andrew E . Jaffe , and John D . Storey . 2012 . “The Sva Package for Removing Batch Effects and Other Unwanted Variation in High - Throughput Experiments . ” Bioinformatics 28 ( 6 ) : 882 – 83 . Licatalosi , Donny D . , Aldo Mele , John J . Fak , Jernej Ule , Melis Kayikci , Sung Wook Chi , Tyson A . Clark , et al . 2008 . “HITS - CLIP Yields Genome - Wide Insights into Brain Alternative RNA Processing . ” Nature 456 ( 7221 ) : 464 – 69 . Li , Heng , and Richard Durbin . 2009 . “Fast and Accurate Short Read Alignment with Burrows - Wheeler Transform . ” Bioinformatics 25 ( 14 ) : 1754 – 60 . Li , Heng , Bob Handsaker , Alec Wysoker , Tim Fennell , Jue Ruan , Nils Homer , Gabor Marth , Goncalo Abecasis , Richard Durbin , and 1000 Genome Project Data Processing Subgroup . 2009 . “The Sequence Alignment / Map Format and SAMtools . ” Bioinformatics 25 ( 16 ) : 2078 – 79 . Lin , Xiaoyan , Jill W . Miller , Ami Mankodi , Rahul N . Kanadia , Yuan Yuan , Richard T . Moxley , Maurice S . Swanson , and Charles A . Thornton . 2006 . “Failure of MBNL1 - Dependent Post - Natal Splicing Transitions in Myotonic Dystrophy . ” Human Molecular Genetics 15 ( 13 ) : 2087 – 97 . Li , Peipei , Jingjing Li , Li Wang , and Li - Jun Di . 2017 . “Proximity Labeling of Interacting Proteins : Application of BioID as a Discovery Tool . ” Proteomics 17 ( 20 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / pmic . 201700002 . Love , Michael I . , Wolfgang Huber , and Simon Anders . 2014 . “Moderated Estimation of Fold Change and Dispersion for RNA - Seq Data with DESeq2 . ” Genome Biology 15 ( 12 ) : 550 . Lugowski , Andrew , Beth Nicholson , and Olivia S . Rissland . 2018 . “Determining mRNA Half - Lives on a Transcriptome - Wide Scale . ” Methods 137 ( March ) : 90 – 98 . Luo , Weijun , Michael S . Friedman , Kerby Shedden , Kurt D . Hankenson , and Peter J . Woolf . 2009 . “GAGE : Generally Applicable Gene Set Enrichment for Pathway Analysis . ” BMC Bioinformatics 10 ( May ) : 161 . Mallory , Michael J . , Sean P . McClory , Rakesh Chatrikhi , Matthew R . Gazzara , Robert J . Ontiveros , and Kristen W . Lynch . 2020 . “Reciprocal Regulation of hnRNP C and CELF2 through Translation and Transcription Tunes Splicing Activity in T Cells . ” Nucleic Acids Research 48 ( 10 ) : 5710 – 19 . Martin , Marcel . 2011 . “Cutadapt Removes Adapter Sequences from High - Throughput Sequencing Reads . ” EMBnet . journal 17 ( 1 ) : 10 – 12 . McGlincy , Nicholas J . , and Nicholas T . Ingolia . 2017 . “Transcriptome - Wide Measurement of Translation by Ribosome Profiling . ” Methods . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ymeth . 2017 . 05 . 028 . Moore , D . A . 2016 . “FUS , RNA and the Nucleolus . ” core . ac . uk . 2016 . https : / / core . ac . uk / download / pdf / 74226236 . pdf . Mudholkar , Govind S . , E . O . George , and ROCHESTER UNIV NY DEPT OF STATISTICS . 1977 . “The Logit Statistic for Combining Probabilities - an Overview . ” ROCHESTER UNIV NY DEPT OF STATISTICS . https : / / apps . dtic . mil / sti / citations / ADA049993 . Mukhopadhyay , Amitabha , Lalit Sehgal , Arunabha Bose , Anushree Gulvady , Parijat Senapati , Rahul Thorat , Srikanta Basu , et al . 2016 . “14 - 3 - 3γ Prevents Centrosome Amplification and Neoplastic Progression . ” Scientific Reports 6 ( June ) : 26580 . Müller - McNicoll , Michaela , Valentina Botti , Antonio M . de Jesus Domingues , Holger Brandl , Oliver D . Schwich , Michaela C . Steiner , Tomaz Curk , Ina Poser , Kathi Zarnack , and Karla M . Neugebauer . 2016 . “SR Proteins Are NXF1 Adaptors That Link Alternative RNA Processing to mRNA Export . ” Genes & Development 30 ( 5 ) : 553 – 66 . Nachmani , Daphna , Anne H . Bothmer , Silvia Grisendi , Aldo Mele , Dietmar Bothmer , Jonathan D . Lee , Emanuele Monteleone , et al . 2019 . “Germline NPM1 Mutations Lead to Altered rRNA 2’ - O - Methylation and Cause Dyskeratosis Congenita . ” Nature Genetics 51 ( 10 ) : 1518 – 29 . Navickas , Albertas , Hosseinali Asgharian , Juliane Winkler , Lisa Fish , Kristle Garcia , Daniel Markett , Martin Dodel , et al . 2021 . “An mRNA Processing Pathway Suppresses Metastasis by Governing Translational Control from the Nucleus . ” bioRxiv . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2021 . 10 . 04 . 463118 . Neph , Shane , M . Scott Kuehn , Alex P . Reynolds , Eric Haugen , Robert E . Thurman , Audra K . Johnson , Eric Rynes , et al . 2012 . “BEDOPS : High - Performance Genomic Feature 40 Operations . ” Bioinformatics 28 ( 14 ) : 1919 – 20 . Nesvizhskii , Alexey I . , Andrew Keller , Eugene Kolker , and Ruedi Aebersold . 2003 . “A Statistical Model for Identifying Proteins by Tandem Mass Spectrometry . ” Analytical Chemistry 75 ( 17 ) : 4646 – 58 . Norman , Thomas M . , Max A . Horlbeck , Joseph M . Replogle , Alex Y . Ge , Albert Xu , Marco Jost , Luke A . Gilbert , and Jonathan S . Weissman . 2019 . “Exploring Genetic Interaction Manifolds Constructed from Rich Single - Cell Phenotypes . ” Science 365 ( 6455 ) : 786 – 93 . Oberg , Ann L . , Douglas W . Mahoney , Jeanette E . Eckel - Passow , Christopher J . Malone , Russell D . Wolfinger , Elizabeth G . Hill , Leslie T . Cooper , et al . 2008 . “Statistical Analysis of Relative Labeled Mass Spectrometry Data from Complex Samples Using ANOVA . ” Journal of Proteome Research 7 ( 1 ) : 225 – 33 . Pedersen , Brent . n . d . Combat . py : Python / Numpy / Pandas / Patsy Version of ComBat for Removing Batch Effects . Github . Accessed May 10 , 2022 . https : / / github . com / brentp / combat . py . Popow , Johannes , Anne - Marie Alleaume , Tomaz Curk , Thomas Schwarzl , Sven Sauer , and Matthias W . Hentze . 2015 . “FASTKD2 Is an RNA - Binding Protein Required for Mitochondrial RNA Processing and Translation . ” RNA 21 ( 11 ) : 1873 – 84 . Quinlan , Aaron R . , and Ira M . Hall . 2010 . “BEDTools : A Flexible Suite of Utilities for Comparing Genomic Features . ” Bioinformatics 26 ( 6 ) : 841 – 42 . Radhakrishnan , Aditya , and Rachel Green . 2016 . “Connections Underlying Translation and mRNA Stability . ” Journal of Molecular Biology 428 ( 18 ) : 3558 – 64 . Ren , Yue , Yue Huo , Weiqian Li , Manman He , Siqi Liu , Jiabin Yang , Hongmei Zhao , et al . 2021 . “A Global Screening Identifies Chromatin - Enriched RNA - Binding Proteins and the Transcriptional Regulatory Activity of QKI5 during Monocytic Differentiation . ” Genome Biology 22 ( 1 ) : 290 . Replogle , Joseph M . , Reuben A . Saunders , Angela N . Pogson , Jeffrey A . Hussmann , Alexander Lenail , Alina Guna , Lauren Mascibroda , et al . 2022 . “Mapping Information - Rich Genotype - Phenotype Landscapes with Genome - Scale Perturb - Seq . ” Cell 185 ( 14 ) : 2559 – 75 . e28 . Robinson , Mark D . , Davis J . McCarthy , and Gordon K . Smyth . 2010 . “edgeR : A Bioconductor Package for Differential Expression Analysis of Digital Gene Expression Data . ” Bioinformatics 26 ( 1 ) : 139 – 40 . Rogelj , Boris , Laura E . Easton , Gireesh K . Bogu , Lawrence W . Stanton , Gregor Rot , Tomaž Curk , Blaž Zupan , et al . 2012 . “Widespread Binding of FUS along Nascent RNA Regulates Alternative Splicing in the Brain . ” Scientific Reports 2 ( August ) : 603 . Rossi , Matthew J . , William K . M . Lai , and B . Franklin Pugh . 2018 . “Simplified ChIP - Exo Assays . ” Nature Communications 9 ( 1 ) : 2842 . Roux , Kyle J . , Dae In Kim , Brian Burke , and Danielle G . May . 2018 . “BioID : A Screen for Protein - Protein Interactions . ” Current Protocols in Protein Science / Editorial Board , John E . Coligan . . . [ et Al . ] 91 ( February ) : 19 . 23 . 1 – 19 . 23 . 15 . Ruan , Xuelei , Jian Zheng , Xiaobai Liu , Yunhui Liu , Libo Liu , Jun Ma , Qianru He , et al . 2020 . “lncRNA LINC00665 Stabilized by TAF15 Impeded the Malignant Biological Behaviors of Glioma Cells via STAU1 - Mediated mRNA Degradation . ” Molecular Therapy . Nucleic Acids 20 ( June ) : 823 – 40 . Sanjana , Neville E . , Ophir Shalem , and Feng Zhang . 2014 . “Improved Vectors and Genome - Wide Libraries for CRISPR Screening . ” Nature Methods 11 ( 8 ) : 783 – 84 . Schwich , Oliver Daniel , Nicole Blümel , Mario Keller , Marius Wegener , Samarth Thonta Setty , Melinda Elaine Brunstein , Ina Poser , et al . 2021 . “SRSF3 and SRSF7 Modulate 3’UTR Length through Suppression or Activation of Proximal Polyadenylation Sites and Regulation of CFIm Levels . ” Genome Biology 22 ( 1 ) : 82 . Shadforth , Ian P . , Tom P . J . Dunkley , Kathryn S . Lilley , and Conrad Bessant . 2005 . “I - Tracker : For Quantitative Proteomics Using iTRAQ . ” BMC Genomics 6 ( October ) : 145 . Shao , Zhengping , Ryan A . Flynn , Jennifer L . Crowe , Yimeng Zhu , Jialiang Liang , Wenxia Jiang , Fardin Aryan , et al . 2020 . “DNA - PKcs Has KU - Dependent Function in rRNA Processing and Haematopoiesis . ” Nature 579 ( 7798 ) : 291 – 96 . Shin , Seula , Hao Zhou , Chenxi He , Yanjun Wei , Yunfei Wang , Takashi Shingu , Ailiang Zeng , et al . 2021 . “Qki Activates Srebp2 - Mediated Cholesterol Biosynthesis for Maintenance of Eye Lens 41 Transparency . ” Nature Communications 12 ( 1 ) : 3005 . Shiohama , Aiko , Takashi Sasaki , Setsuko Noda , Shinsei Minoshima , and Nobuyoshi Shimizu . 2007 . “Nucleolar Localization of DGCR8 and Identification of Eleven DGCR8 - Associated Proteins . ” Experimental Cell Research 313 ( 20 ) : 4196 – 4207 . Szklarczyk , Damian , Annika L . Gable , David Lyon , Alexander Junge , Stefan Wyder , Jaime Huerta - Cepas , Milan Simonovic , et al . 2018 . “STRING v11 : Protein – protein Association Networks with Increased Coverage , Supporting Functional Discovery in Genome - Wide Experimental Datasets . ” Nucleic Acids Research 47 ( D1 ) : D607 – 13 . Thomas , Steven , Nathaniel D . Maynard , and John Gill . 2015 . “DNA Library Construction Using Gibson Assembly® . ” Nature Methods 12 ( 11 ) : i – ii . Twyffels , Laure , Cyril Gueydan , and Véronique Kruys . 2011 . “Shuttling SR Proteins : More than Splicing Factors . ” The FEBS Journal 278 ( 18 ) : 3246 – 55 . Tyanova , Stefka , Tikira Temu , Pavel Sinitcyn , Arthur Carlson , Marco Y . Hein , Tamar Geiger , Matthias Mann , and Jürgen Cox . 2016 . “The Perseus Computational Platform for Comprehensive Analysis of ( prote ) omics Data . ” Nature Methods 13 ( 9 ) : 731 – 40 . Van Nostrand , Eric L . , Peter Freese , Gabriel A . Pratt , Xiaofeng Wang , Xintao Wei , Rui Xiao , Steven M . Blue , et al . 2020 . “A Large - Scale Binding and Functional Map of Human RNA - Binding Proteins . ” Nature 583 ( 7818 ) : 711 – 19 . Van Nostrand , Eric L . , Gabriel A . Pratt , Alexander A . Shishkin , Chelsea Gelboin - Burkhart , Mark Y . Fang , Balaji Sundararaman , Steven M . Blue , et al . 2016 . “Robust Transcriptome - Wide Discovery of RNA - Binding Protein Binding Sites with Enhanced CLIP ( eCLIP ) . ” Nature Methods 13 ( 6 ) : 508 – 14 . Warnes , Gregory R . , Ben Bolker , Lodewijk Bonebakker , Robert Gentleman , Wolfgang Huber , Andy Liaw , Thomas Lumley , et al . 2009 . “Gplots : Various R Programming Tools for Plotting Data . ” R Package Version 2 ( 4 ) : 1 . Wolf , Ashley R . , and Vamsi K . Mootha . 2014 . “Functional Genomic Analysis of Human Mitochondrial RNA Processing . ” Cell Reports 7 ( 3 ) : 918 – 31 . Wolf , F . Alexander , Philipp Angerer , and Fabian J . Theis . 2018 . “SCANPY : Large - Scale Single - Cell Gene Expression Data Analysis . ” Genome Biology 19 ( 1 ) : 15 . Yang , Ruiqing , Sergei A . Gaidamakov , Jingwei Xie , Joowon Lee , Luigi Martino , Guennadi Kozlov , Amanda K . Crawford , et al . 2011 . “La - Related Protein 4 Binds poly ( A ) , Interacts with the poly ( A ) - Binding Protein MLLE Domain via a Variant PAM2w Motif , and Can Promote mRNA Stability . ” Molecular and Cellular Biology 31 ( 3 ) : 542 – 56 . Yang , Xiaoping , Jesse S . Boehm , Xinping Yang , Kourosh Salehi - Ashtiani , Tong Hao , Yun Shen , Rakela Lubonja , et al . 2011 . “A Public Genome - Scale Lentiviral Expression Library of Human ORFs . ” Nature Methods 8 ( 8 ) : 659 – 61 . Younis , Shady , Wael Kamel , Tina Falkeborn , Hao Wang , Di Yu , Robert Daniels , Magnus Essand , Jorma Hinkula , Göran Akusjärvi , and Leif Andersson . 2018 . “Multiple Nuclear - Replicating Viruses Require the Stress - Induced Protein ZC3H11A for Efficient Growth . ” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 115 ( 16 ) : E3808 – 16 . Youn , Ji - Young , Wade H . Dunham , Seo Jung Hong , James D . R . Knight , Mikhail Bashkurov , Ginny I . Chen , Halil Bagci , et al . 2018 . “High - Density Proximity Mapping Reveals the Subcellular Organization of mRNA - Associated Granules and Bodies . ” Molecular Cell 69 ( 3 ) : 517 – 32 . e11 . Yu , Guangchuang , Li - Gen Wang , and Qing - Yu He . 2015 . “ChIPseeker : An R / Bioconductor Package for ChIP Peak Annotation , Comparison and Visualization . ” Bioinformatics 31 ( 14 ) : 2382 – 83 . Zhou , Xin , Seula Shin , Chenxi He , Qiang Zhang , Matthew N . Rasband , Jiangong Ren , Congxin Dai , et al . 2021 . “Qki Regulates Myelinogenesis through Srebp2 - Dependent Cholesterol Biosynthesis . ” eLife 10 ( May ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 60467 . Zhuo , Enqing , Changqing Cai , Wenzhe Liu , Kunsong Li , and Wenzhen Zhao . 2020 . “Downregulated microRNA ‑ 140 ‑ 5p Expression Regulates Apoptosis , Migration and Invasion of Lung Cancer Cells by Targeting Zinc Finger Protein 800 . ” Oncology Letters 20 ( 6 ) : 1 – 1 . 42