How Software Practitioners Use Informal Local Meetups to Share Software Engineering Knowledge Claire Ingram Anders Drachen claire . ingram @ york . ac . uk anders . drachen @ york . ac . uk Department of Computer Science , University of York York , UK ABSTRACT Informal technology ‘meetups’ have become an important aspect of the software development community , engaging many thousands of practitioners on a regular basis . However , although local technology meetups are well - attended by developers , little is known about their motivations for participating , the type or usefulness of information that they acquire , and how local meetups might differ from and complement other available communication channels for software engineering information . We interviewed the leaders of technology - oriented Meetup groups , and collected quantitative information via a survey distributed to participants in technology - oriented groups . Our findings suggest that participants in these groups are primarily experienced software practitioners , who use Meetup for staying abreast of new developments , building local networks and achieving transfer of rich tacit knowledge with peers to improve their practice . We also suggest that face to face meetings are useful forums for exchanging tacit knowledge and contextual information needed for software engineering practice . CCS CONCEPTS • Information systems → Collaborative and social comput - ing systems and tools ; Social networking sites ; • Social and pro - fessional topics → Informal education ; • Software and its engi - neering → Collaboration in software development . KEYWORDS Informal networks , Meetup , developer communities , knowledge sharing , tacit knowledge ACM Reference Format : Claire Ingram and Anders Drachen . 2020 . How Software Practitioners Use Informal Local Meetups to Share Software Engineering Knowledge . In ICSE 2020 : The 42nd International Conference on Software Engineering , 23 - 29 May 2020 , Seoul , South Korea . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 13 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3377811 . 3380333 1 INTRODUCTION In recent years informal technology meetups have become an im - portant aspect of the software development [ 11 , 62 ] and technology ICSE 2020 , 23 - 29 May 2020 , Seoul , Republic of Korea © 2020 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 7121 - 6 / 20 / 05 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3377811 . 3380333 startup [ 43 ] communities [ 9 , 22 , 46 ] . In the UK , some economic analysts have even begun to use data about technology - oriented meetups as an indicator of the health of the local technology sector ( for example , see [ 7 , 16 – 18 , 22 , 40 , 62 , 64 ] ) . Many platforms exist to facilitate local technology meetings , collectively termed Event - Based Social Networks ( EBSNs ) [ 37 ] . For example , Meetup . com 1 is estimated to support more than 3 , 500 local groups in the UK alone , attended by 1 . 6 million members across 263 locations [ 62 ] , while EventBrite . com hosted 3 . 9 million events in 170 countries worldwide in 2018 2 . Many of these groups are devoted to technol - ogy topics and attended regularly by large numbers of experienced practitioners . Despite this , little is known about participants’ mo - tivations for engaging in software - oriented local meetings , what kind of information they obtain and how the growth of such com - munities might affect software engineering practices . Previous studies in the field of knowledge management have sug - gested that software development is heavily reliant on ‘synthetic’ knowledge [ 5 , 6 , 50 , 67 ] . Such knowledge is primarily oriented around problem - solving , and tied to practical ‘know - how’ and un - derstanding of specific applications [ 71 ] . It is usually tacitly held and accumulated through experience and ‘learning by doing’ [ 5 , 6 , 50 ] . Tacit knowledge is not generally secret , and in fact is easily seen through observing experienced practitioners [ 23 , 68 ] . It is inextrica - bly tied to specific applications [ 39 ] as well as a particular person’s own working context and mental models [ 45 ] , and is often taken for granted - making it difficult to codify and therefore to share outside of local contexts [ 12 , 23 , 34 , 45 , 49 , 70 ] . Synchronous , face to face conversations permit rich contextual information to be shared alongside technical information , which in turn aids the surfacing , exposure and transfer of tacit knowledge . Theoretically , therefore , local meetups should be particularly helpful for software engineers as they create such opportunities for face to face discussion . Our current research aims to understand more about how and why software practitioners participate in local meetings , how face to face meetups complement the existing communications channels available to developers to share knowledge , and whether the re - gional , informal , face - to - face nature of local meetups allows for ex - change of knowledge not otherwise easy to obtain . The research fo - cuses specifically on the local groups facilitated by the Meetup . com platform , the best known EBSN for publicising local technology clubs and meetings . We collected information from the leaders and participants of technology - oriented meetup groups in a variety of 1 www . meetup . com / 2 https : / / www . eventbrite . com / blog / press / 161 2020 IEEE / ACM 42nd International Conference on Software Engineering ( ICSE ) This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution International 4 . 0 License . ICSE 2020 , 23 - 29 May 2020 , Seoul , South Korea Ingram and Drachen locations , using mixed methods research techniques to produce rich qualitative data and triangulate it with quantitative survey data . The rest of this paper is laid out as follows . In Section 2 we summarise what is known about communication channels exploited already by software developers for sharing relevant information . Section 3 introduces our research questions . In Section 4 we explain the research design . Section 5 presents our findings while Section 6 discusses the implications . Section 7 outlines the limitations of our study and Section 8 presents conclusions . 2 BACKGROUND In this section we survey some previous literature on communi - cation and knowledge gathering to support software engineering practice , and survey what little previous work has been conducted on meetups . 2 . 1 Event - Based Social Networks There has been some limited previous study of EBSNs , social media networks which exist to facilitate meetups , although none has fo - cused on technology - oriented meetups or their potential for knowl - edge exchange . Ricken et al examined Meetup group organisers’ attitudes towards leadership [ 53 ] and whether this could be linked to group survival . Liu et al . studied data from Meetup and Gowalla [ 37 ] , noting strong correlation between users’ online and offline net - works and interactions . Macedo et al . examined recommender sys - tems for recommending Meetup groups to users [ 38 ] while Sander & Seminar collected information about Meetup participants in gen - eral ( not restricted to technology - oriented groups ) , noting that participants tended to be highly qualified [ 55 ] . 2 . 2 Knowledge bases Much previous work has been conducted on knowledge exchange in various industries . The ‘knowledge base’ theory of knowledge exchange [ 4 – 6 ] char - acterises the type of knowledge required for a particular activity , the actors involved in transferring and developing it , motivations for knowledge creation , and learning styles [ 70 ] . Knowledge man - agement researchers suggest that different industrial sectors rely on different types of ‘knowledge base’ [ 5 , 6 , 70 ] . Three types have been identified previously . Analytic knowledge [ 4 , 5 ] underpins scientific advancements . This type of knowledge is highly codified and formally described , and its meaning is close to universal across cultural and regional contexts [ 39 , 44 ] so it is readily exchanged globally [ 44 ] . Symbolic knowledge underpins creative and / or intan - gible products , ideas and experiences , such as art , design and music [ 4 ] . It is interpreted within a particular cultural context , tied to a specific region [ 26 , 39 , 70 ] , so knowledge exchange is dependent on geographical co - location . Synthetic knowledge [ 4 , 5 ] is focused on practical problem - solving . Knowledge is applied and highly spe - cialised , and tends to be tacit , experience - based , difficult to transfer , and connected to a specific problem , challenge or application [ 39 ] . Knowledge is accumulated through experience and ‘learning by doing’ [ 4 – 6 , 50 , 71 ] . The tacit and highly applied nature of synthetic knowledge makes it difficult to codify and therefore to share outside of local contexts [ 49 , 70 ] . Previous research has suggested that engineering and software development activities are heavily dependent on synthetic knowl - edge [ 5 , 50 , 67 ] , which primarily addresses problem - solving . Accord - ing to this model , software engineers should therefore gain benefit from meeting in informal and face - to - face settings , because this creates opportunities to surface , expose and transfer tacitly - held , experience - based , problem - solving knowledge . 2 . 3 Communication channels for problem - solving When encountering intractable technical problems during develop - ment , software developers exploit a variety of channels to find a solution . This commonly means tracking down some very specific information or experience , acquired either by searching through archives of online material or by identifying a person who holds exactly the right experience . Accessing a large number of people maximises the chances of finding such a person . Common practices include asking ( and answering ) very specific questions [ 1 ] on inter - active platforms with large audiences such as Twitter [ 61 ] , or Stack Overflow [ 66 ] . The knowledge base model implies that speaking directly with a knowledgeable person is theoretically an ideal solution for acquir - ing problem - solving synthetic knowledge . Conversation allows a developer to focus in swiftly on the key information they are cur - rently lacking , and to ask questions to obtain an explanation tailored to their needs . This would suggest that local meetups should be an ideal medium for obtaining the type of problem - solving knowledge that underpins software development . Local meetings could also be useful for building up a personal network of contacts , who might be able to help with solving problems when they arise in the future . 2 . 4 Staying up to date There are other reasons why meetups might be useful to software engineers . New tools , techniques , frameworks and innovations emerge quickly in the software domain [ 61 ] and practitioners need to ensure that their skills do not become obsolete and that they are benefiting from lessons learned by others . Twitter is known to be an important platform for this ; news , technical updates and technical discussions are some of the most important categories of tweets for software - oriented users [ 10 , 57 , 61 , 65 , 73 ] . News aggregation websites are valuable for knowledge sharing [ 35 ] . Software developers have two separate goals here : staying up to date with new technologies ( e . g . , via Hacker News [ 3 , 73 ] ) ; and learning and improving as a developer ( e . g . , through blog posts or forums such as Reddit [ 3 ] ) . There can be an almost overwhelming amount of information ; prioritising it and reducing the noise can be difficult [ 58 , 61 ] . We suggest that local meetups could provide an accessible way to filter out the noise , relying on group discussions to work out what information is likely to be most relevant and important . 2 . 5 Networking Much of the software development industry is project - oriented . Firms are frequently required to assemble new teams , only to dis - band the teams once a new product is released . The ability to quickly recruit and assemble new teams is therefore key and project - based 162 How Software Practitioners Use Informal Local Meetups to Share Software Engineering Knowledge ICSE 2020 , 23 - 29 May 2020 , Seoul , South Korea industries like this rely heavily on the presence of local pools of actors with the relevant experience and skills [ 8 , 14 , 20 , 27 , 48 , 56 , 63 , 69 ] . From the point of view of the individual practitioner , building out a local network can be important for hearing about opportunities . Going further and engaging actively in local networks as an or - ganiser or presenter at a local meetup allows a practitioner to build a personal reputation for their specialist knowledge and previous achievements , which increases the chances they will be recruited to interesting future projects . There is already evidence that devel - opers use other channels such as Twitter [ 10 , 61 , 65 ] and Reddit [ 3 ] to promote their own work and build a reputation , or to share information about jobs [ 65 ] . Building up knowledge about potential collaborators and part - ners in this way has been defined as a type of knowledge coined Know - who . It can be compared to other types of knowledge such as : Know - what ( information and factual knowledge ) ; Know - why ( social and physical principles and laws ) ; and Know - how ( applied skills and capabilities ) [ 39 ] . We suggest that local meetings can provide a rich environment for acquiring tacit information about individuals , firms and job opportunities in the local region , through informal conversations that can cover information which may never be formally written down . 2 . 6 The Meetup platform Meetup is a platform for finding and building local communities . As of mid - 2019 Meetup has over 44 million members worldwide who can opt to participate in one or more of the 330 , 000 groups which the platform hosts . Meetup facilitates over 84 , 000 events every week globally . Although other , similar platforms exist , our research focuses on Meetup . com , as arguably the largest and best - known platform for facilitating local meetings [ 53 , 55 ] . 3 RESEARCH QUESTIONS Based on the literature review summarised above , we developed research questions to be addressed . Before collecting data , the lead author attended eight different technology meetup communities as a participant , in cities both inside and outside our selected study regions , and targetting groups with varied topics , formats and sizes . This enabled observations of : typical meeting format ; participants’ interests ; variations across different groups and regions ; and groups’ relationships with their local area . These observations influenced the framing of our research questions . Very little is known about why software professionals choose to give up spare time to attend meetups , so our first question aims to address this . RQ1 : What motivates software professionals to participate in technology meetups ? Secondly , little is known about how meetups might affect the practice of professionals who choose to engage , so our second question tackles this subject . RQ2 : How do software professionals make use of information they receive from meetups ? Our literature review identified four potential motivations for meetup participation : solving problems ; building contacts for future help ; acquiring relevant technology news ; and acquiring relevant regional news . Previous research illustrates how developers use various social media and online tools to satisfy many of these moti - vations . However , it’s not clear how face to face local meetups might complement these online activities , or whether developers use lo - cal meetings and online tools for different information - seeking purposes . Our final research question aims to address this . RQ3 : Do informal local meetings allow software professionals to access resources ( e . g . , new knowledge or contacts ) that are difficult to access through other means ? 4 RESEARCH METHOD It’s prohibitively time consuming to attempt to gather data to an - swer our research questions on a worldwide scale . Instead , we have focused on a single country ( UK ) , employing a mixed methods approach . Our research design is based on the concurrent trian - gulation design for mixed methods research , as described in [ 15 ] . This research design sees two concurrent but separately conducted stages of data collection and analysis : a qualitative stage of collec - tion and analysis ; and a separate quantitative stage . After data for each stage has been collected and analysed separately , the two types are compared and combined to produce an integrated conclusion . Stage one of the research involved qualitative techniques ( inter - views ) to collect data from Meetup group leaders and / or founders . Interviews are a useful tool for collecting rich information which often cannot be obtained using quantitative measures [ 25 ] . This also allows us to validate some of the ideas extracted from previous literature as well as to search for newly emerging concepts . Stage two of the research involved using quantitative techniques ( survey ) to collect data from Meetup group participants . The pop - ulation of people participating in ( as opposed to leading ) meetup groups is very large , meaning that a survey is a reasonable choice . Although the two stages are conducted independently , concepts and vocabulary emerging from the interviews did influence the design of the survey . Finally , data and conclusions from the two stages were compared . 4 . 1 Selecting regions Location is likely to be an important factor affecting how Meetup group members interact with their local community , because re - gions differ in terms of - for example - regional specialisms , relative populations of large , medium , small or micro - businesses and sur - vival rates for technology - oriented firms . Differences like these could result in very different patterns of participation in different locales . We want to reduce the possibility that we inadvertently introduce a bias into our study through selection of location , and therefore we selected five separate locations for our study , which together present a diverse set of regions . To select these regions , we built on previous research conducted by the UK - based inno - vation charity NESTA 3 , which has analysed economic data ( and statistics from Meetup ) to identify almost 50 regional clusters in the UK which are strong in creative industries like software develop - ment [ 16 ] . Using the same data , NESTA researchers divided these clusters into five different cluster types , giving examples of each . We selected five of these example cities , each one representing a 3 https : / / www . nesta . org . uk / 163 ICSE 2020 , 23 - 29 May 2020 , Seoul , South Korea Ingram and Drachen different type of cluster . The cluster types [ 18 ] ( and our selected example cities ) are as follows : • Creative districts are dominated by a diverse range of creative micro - businesses with few high - growth firms . We selected as an example Brighton , in the south east of England • Creative conurbations have high survival rates for creative and technical firms , relying on high - growth firms for job creation more than other types of clusters . As an example , we selected Peterborough , which is in the UK’s east midlands • Creative capitals feature large and medium creative firms and a relatively high proportion of high growth businesses . We selected Glasgow as an example , the largest city in Scotland • Creative challengers are relatively young clusters , with di - verse business ecosystems and some high growth firms . We selected Newcastle in the north east of England • Incipient clusters are recently emerging clusters , with as yet relatively low business survival rates . We use Liverpool , a city in the north west of England , as an example The selected cities vary in size and in industrial specialism as well as location . Selection of a diverse range of cities to form our dataset allows us to avoid introducing regional biases into our analysis of meeting networking patterns . 4 . 2 Identifying the population We obtained a list of local Meetup groups for each city . Data was extracted between May and June 2019 using Meetup’s API con - sole 4 . For each selected city , we obtained a list of all groups located within 25 miles , limiting the search to groups classified with the topic ‘Technology’ . We also extracted data about these groups’ re - cent activities , including the number of meetings that each group had successfully hosted in the previous 12 months and the total number of Meetup members for each group . This initial list in - cluded 255 technology groups in total . Our study focuses on active meetup groups , so we eliminated all those groups which had not successfully held an event in the prior twelve months . If a group had scheduled an event and subsequently cancelled it we did not count this as having successfully held an event . The new list of active groups totaled 152 groups across all five regions . We wished to study Meetup communities specifically relevant to software professionals and we therefore eliminated groups from our list which are not . To achieve this , we looked at each group’s published topic classifications , read their descriptions and scanned the agenda of recent meetings . Groups were eliminated only in cases where we could not find evidence that their interests included aspects of software development , and we could not find evidence that meetings included content relevant to software development . The following groups were excluded : Brighton SalesForce User Group ; YouTube Creators in Liverpool ; Glasgow ServiceNow FoCus Community Meetup ; Brighton Podcasting Meetup Group ; T - shaped Talks ( Brighton ) ; Glasgow Coworking ; The Happy Startup School - Brighton ; Cambridge Social Media Club ; and # ShakeItHUB Design and Marketing . The new list consisted of 143 active groups , which formed our total population of active Meetup groups relevant to software pro - fessionals . The complete list of all groups in our study population is 4 https : / / secure . meetup . com / meetup _ api / console / included in Appendix D [ 28 ] . Group interests were varied , including groups holding mixers designed to stimulate new ideas for software products , and groups for CTOs and technology startups , as well as groups dedicated to business analysis , general software devel - opment , agile projects , mobile and web technologies , blockchain , bitcoin , cyber - security , SEO , ecommerce and testing . The most pop - ular topics were : programming and general software development ( 45 groups specialised in these ) ; data science , AI and / or machine learning ( 18 groups ) ; and aspects of cloud computing ( 11 groups ) . We are interested in how individual software development prac - titioners engage with their local community , and so our unit of analysis for this study is the individual practitioner . 4 . 3 Interviews To understand the motivations and perceptions of Meetup group organisers , we conducted semi - structured interviews . This format encourages interviewees to freely share their thoughts , while re - searchers can follow up interesting emerging topics [ 25 ] . We ran - domly selected one third of the active groups in each city , contacted the group leaders and invited them to participate in an interview . In total we contacted 48 group organisers . Twelve group organisers responded and agreed to be interviewed ( a response rate of 25 % ) . In total we interviewed the leaders of 8 % of the total population . The interview guide for the semi - structured interviews is included in Appendix A [ 28 ] . At the conclusion of the 12 interviews , we felt that saturation had been found , with each new interviewee largely confirming previous observations . All interviewees worked in the fields relevant to the Meetup groups they ran . Groups spanned a range of topics and group sizes , broadly reflective of the overall population . At the start of each interview , we explained our research goal and obtained permission to record and transcribe it . Five interviews were conducted as video conference calls , and seven as voice calls . One researcher conducted all the interviews . Interview duration varied from 25 minutes to 1 hour 5 minutes . Our interview guide focused on four main topics : ( 1 ) how the interviewee came to be in - volved in the group and what their goals were in creating / running it ; ( 2 ) why meeting face to face was useful for those goals ; ( 3 ) whether and how they had used information gathered from Meetups ; ( 4 ) major challenges involved in running a meetup group . Interview recordings were transcribed and coded using NVivo software . Ini - tial open coding was conducted using a priori codes shown in Appendix C [ 28 ] . A priori codes were derived following literature survey and informal discussions with participants at meetups both inside and outside our target cities . We attached a priori codes to relevant information in the transcripts . During analysis new con - cepts emerged which were not accounted for by a priori codes , and these were added to the code book as emergent codes ( also listed in Appendix C ) . These codes were then studied and grouped into further categories , which are reflected in Sections 5 and 6 . 4 . 4 Survey We designed a survey to distribute to group members . This allowed us to triangulate findings from interviews , as well as collect inputs from a wide body of participants . We included a description of the aims of the research project , and then asked respondents to indicate 164 How Software Practitioners Use Informal Local Meetups to Share Software Engineering Knowledge ICSE 2020 , 23 - 29 May 2020 , Seoul , South Korea their agreement with statements which were derived from the combined literature review and interview analysis . These included : motivations for participating ; what they liked about a face to face meeting ; and what they thought worked well in meetings . There were 30 statements to consider , and answer options ranged from strongly disagree to strongly agree , in a 5 - point Likert scale . We also asked respondents to indicate whether and how they had used information they had learned at a meetup , or whether and why they had got in touch with someone they met at a technology - oriented meetup . Finally , we captured the location where they attended meetups , whether they worked in a relevant role and how much experience they had . The estimated time to complete the survey was 5 - 10 minutes . The full survey is included in Appendix B [ 28 ] . Thesurveywasdistributed toparticipantsof15randomly - selected Meetup groups drawn from our population , which had not previ - ously been contacted with an interview request . The survey was promoted through public discussion boards on a group’s Meetup homepage , or through a group’s dedicated Facebook page , Twitter account or Slack channel . We also promoted the survey link gen - erally on Twitter , in city - specific Slack channels , and city - specific subreddits on Reddit , making clear each time that we were search - ing for people who attended technology - oriented meetups in a specific city . Questions capturing the region where a person at - tended technology meetups were used to screen out responses from outside our target areas . In total we received 87 responses . In cleaning the data , we subse - quently removed 13 responses . One respondent selected an option indicating they had never attended a meetup in any of our target cities . One respondent had not accepted to enter their responses into our research program ( a mandatory requirement for our sur - vey ) . And 10 respondents returned completely blank questionnaires , recording no data . Our final total therefore was 74 . 5 FINDINGS In this section we present the results of interviews with group organisers and survey of group participants . 5 . 1 Characteristics of the respondents Here we characterise the respondents to our survey . We asked survey respondents about the relationship between their current work and their attendance at the meetup . Sixty - seven respondents stated that they currently work in technology ( 90 . 5 % ) . One respondent was a student studying technology , two people are not working in technology but thought that the topic was useful for their own career development , and four declined to answer the question . Next , we asked how long have they been working in technology ? Survey results suggest that meetup participants are distributed across different experience levels , with 36 . 4 % of survey respondents having 10 years or fewer of industrial experience , and a similar proportion ( 33 . 7 % ) having 11 - 20 years of experience . Overall , a majority ( 58 % ) of respondents claim at least 10 years of experience working in technology , and 24 % more than 20 years of experience . Based on our survey sample , we suggest that meetup communities tend to be relatively experienced , but that early careers participants form a sizeable minority . 5 . 2 What motivates software professionals to participate ? ( RQ1 ) We asked our interviewees to describe their motivations for found - ing a new group , or becoming part of the leadership team . We also asked them what they believed motivated their group members to come along . And , separately , we asked survey respondents what motivated them to get involved as group participants . 5 . 2 . 1 What motivates group organisers ? The interviews with group organisers revealed varied reasons for leading Meetup groups , and naturally most group leaders had more than one reason . A common theme was a desire to make friends with technical interests . The importance of a social atmosphere for meeting people with similar roles became a major theme throughout the research , raised by most interviewees in various forms and by many survey respondents . We discuss this further in Section 6 . ‘They posted a thing on GitHub , which was like “Developers near you” , or something . And there was like . . . 3 accounts on GitHub which were near [ . . . ] . So I was like , “Oh . . . This is amazing ! ” So we got chatting on Twitter . And I was like , “Yeah , we should start a meetup” . ’ Three interviewees had consciously used Meetup to find people after moving into their region : ‘But , moving away and then coming back , I was like “How do I meet people again ? ” So that was a good way of introducing myself and my skills to people . So yeah , that’s probably . . . . I’ve probably used it to make friends and a network as much as anything else , yeah . ’ Three other interviewees had founded groups after attending meetings in other regions and realising there was nothing similar near to home . Although none of the interviewees worked specifically in re - cruitment , four group founders mentioned that they had started a meetup community partially to help with recruitment to their team or firm . In one case the group founder saw the community as an important and welcoming forum for encouraging young practition - ers or career changers to enter their specialist field , which has a shortage of qualified personnel . Personal passion for technology is an important motivating fac - tor . For example , two of the interviewees had got involved in their respective meetup communities partly to evangelise about their favourite aspect of technology : ‘That’s my own personal plan , to try and encourage open source technologies . ’ Two separate interviewees explained that they wanted to explore an exciting and interesting new technology themselves : ‘It’s cool , interesting new tech . So , a couple of us were like , “Oh , we should get together , and sort of have a meetup about that” . Because it’s way for us to explore it , or tell other people about it . And so we started . . . yeah , we started that meetup which was the kind of start of finding a community . ’ Three of our interviewees were partially motivated by a deliber - ate desire to stretch themselves , particularly to improve confidence at public speaking . Assuming the group can be successfully built up , running a community can be a useful tool for building a reputation , which can be very helpful for long - term career goals . ‘And it’s building your own brand , really . It comes back to that [ . . . ] so people knew what I was doing . ’ The effort involved in building up a successful group should not be underestimated ; 5 interviewees expressed that sometimes the effort involved could be discouraging . Having a personal passion for the topic , or for the community itself , was an important motivator 165 ICSE 2020 , 23 - 29 May 2020 , Seoul , South Korea Ingram and Drachen Figure 1 : Stacked bar chart illustrating motivations to join to technology - oriented Meetup group for many of the group leaders ; without this , it’s clearly difficult to push a new group through the challenging first few years . The two biggest issues for our group leaders were the difficulty of provid - ing a constant flow of new content and / or speakers ; and finding a venue that has the right facilities , and is accessible , affordable and reachable . Each of these issues was raised by 9 of the 12 intervie - wees . Being region - specific , the presence or absence of certain key local facilities suitable for meetup communities might adversely affect specific locales . For example , almost all the interviewees from one region raised the recent closure of a specific space which had previously been readily available for evening meetups . Across all our regions , many groups are reliant on a local sponsor which is prepared to offer their own space , or funding for one . Other dif - ficulties also mentioned by group leaders included unpredictable attendance ( there’s usually no penalty for failing to attend ) which was mentioned by 6 interviewees , as well as the difficulties involved in : converting occasional participants into a regular community ( 5 interviewees ) ; promoting the group ( 5 interviewees ) ; ensuring high quality content without sales pitches ( 5 interviewees ) ; get - ting the meeting start time right ( 3 interviewees ) ; finding a diverse range of speakers , particularly women speakers ( 2 interviewees ) ; and encouraging debates and organic discussions around a talk ( 2 interviewees ) . 5 . 2 . 2 What motivates participants ? Survey participants were asked to rate their agreement with some statements about potential moti - vations , using a five - point Likert scale ( Strongly disagree , disagree , neither agree nor disagree , agree and strongly agree ) . In Figure 1 we present the results , showing percentages of re - spondents answering with a particular category . We did not force re - sponses for these questions and so some respondents have skipped occasional statements without giving an answer . Consequently re - sults do not total 100 % for all statements . Although most of our suggested reasons to participate get some agreement , the theme of learning new things , developing new skills and staying up to date are ranked by respondents at the top of the list with the highest levels of strong or moderate agreement , along with building out a network . Survey respondents were offered an optional text field to add additional comments explaining their motivations . Comments fell into the following categories : • Socialising in a friendly setting ( 8 people explicitly men - tioned this ) • Getting exposure to new people and new ideas , discussions leading to idea generation ( 5 people ) • Keeping up to date ( 5 people ) • Teaching others , welcoming newcomers and sharing knowl - edge ( 5 people ) • Looking for new work or contracts , improving employment opportunities ( 3 people ) • Getting practice at presenting ( 2 people ) One respondent mentioned the usefulness of the informed feedback that can be obtained at a meetup , and that the meetup provided a friendly space to share ideas . Another respondent emphasised that understanding other people’s work helped them reflect on their own practice . We return to these themes in Section 5 . 4 . 5 . 3 How do software professionals use information from meetups ? ( RQ2 ) Our second research question considers how software professionals use the information they gather at meetups . To answer this question we asked interviewees and survey respondents : • Have you ever contacted anyone after meeting them at a meetup ? • Haveyoueverappliedthingsthatyou’velearnedatatechnology - oriented meetup ? 5 . 3 . 1 Contacting people after a meetup . Figure 2 shows responses received from the survey respondents when asked if they had ever 166 How Software Practitioners Use Informal Local Meetups to Share Software Engineering Knowledge ICSE 2020 , 23 - 29 May 2020 , Seoul , South Korea contacted anyone as a result of a meetup . Respondents could select as many reasons as they liked ( except for ‘no’ , which was an exclu - sive option ) . A few respondents declined to answer . Just over 75 % of all survey respondents have contacted someone after meeting them at a meetup . This is consistent with other studies of Meetup ( although not restricted to technology groups ) , which also found high rates of interaction after meetings [ 55 ] . As one interviewee explained , having met someone already makes it easier to get in touch : ‘It gives you that kind of personal contact , where you know you can reach out to people once you’ve met them and you’ve got that rapport , you can reach out direct to them . ’ Figure 2 : Bar chart showing percentage of respondents who have contacted someone after a meetup In Section 2 we discussed how local meetings could be a useful forum to find contacts who might be able to offer problem - solving help . This is based on the implications of the knowledge base model , which asserts that software development is mainly underpinned by problem - solving , synthetic knowledge . There is an element of seek - ing help for problem - solving : 28 % of respondents have contacted someone they met at a meetup to ask for help with a technical prob - lem . However , this is the least common of our suggested reasons for contacting someone . There is also an element of looking for or disseminating infor - mation about local jobs . Several interviewees gave examples of meeting people at a meetup and subsequently working with them , either through hearing about a job opportunity , or by disseminating information about vacancies themselves . One interviewee wrote recommendations for particularly impressive friends acquired from meetups . Survey respondents were able to provide more information via an optional text box . Comments fell into the following categories : • For social reasons , to make a friend ( 8 people - over 10 % of the total population of survey respondents ) • To offer help ( 5 people ) • To discuss future meetup events ( 5 people ) • To connect on social media ( 3 people ) • To follow up on work related contact ( 4 people ) • To discuss other events ( 2 people ) • To ask for additional information following an interesting talk or discussion ( 2 people ) Socialising is a strong message again ; we return to this in Section 6 . 5 . 3 . 2 Obtaining new knowledge from a meetup . Figure 3 shows responses received from the survey respondents when asked if they had ever applied some new knowledge to their work after a meetup . Respondents were offered some choices and could select more than one ( except for ‘no’ , which was an exclusive option ) , or they could skip the question . They were also offered an optional field for other suggestions . Figure 3 : Bar chart showing percentage of respondents who have applied knowledge they learned from a meetup A majority of respondents have acquired knowledge about new technologies or news that prompted them to take further action ( 80 % ) , or learned something that resulted in improvements to their practice ( 69 % ) . Respondents also suggested other ways in which they had used new information from meetups . These included : • Disseminating new information to other communities ( 3 people ) • Improving their own communications ( 2 people ) • Generating new ideas or initiating strategic side projects ( 2 people ) • Making sales or obtaining work ( 1 person ) • Personal career development ( 1 person ) Almost all interviewees also stated that they learned something new at most meetings : ‘So in terms of things that I’ve applied , yes there are tips that I’ve picked up from every one that I’ve been to . And I’ll then go back and revisit some work I’ve done at work and see how I can work that new tip into it , to make it better . ’ Conversations with interviewees suggest that meetups are ca - pable of fielding discussions that can produce rich , contextualized information that draws on relevant practical experience ( the rel - atively experienced audience is a benefit here ) . One interviewee provided an example of improving practice following a meetup : It’s just different ways of doing things , you know , like elaborating requirements [ . . . ] Based on conversations at [ the meetup ] , we’ve seen how people have reduced the , kind of , wasted effort in developing the wrong requirements . So , as I say , we’ve taken those on board and adapted things and had success with them [ . . . ] And we may well not have gone down that route had we not had that discussion at [ the meetup ] . ’ 167 ICSE 2020 , 23 - 29 May 2020 , Seoul , South Korea Ingram and Drachen 5 . 4 Do meetups allow software professionals to access resources that are difficult to access through other means ? ( RQ3 ) Interview participants were asked to reflect on why meeting face to face was a good format for satisfying the motivations they had iden - tified earlier , and whether they thought in person conversations offered something they didn’t get via other channels . Survey par - ticipants were asked to rate their agreement with some statements about meeting face to face , using a five - point Likert scale . Each statement was optional , meaning that respondents were not forced to provide a rating for every statement . They were also offered an optional free text field to provide more details . In Figure 4 we show the results . Several interviewees pointed out the importance of having a diverse range of people in the room to participate in a conversation , which improved creativity and the quality of ideas . ‘If you’re just having a conversation , I think people come up with ideas , just off , kind of , waffling on for a bit . Oh , you know – I’ve thought about this , you’ve thought about that . And then also I think there’s something in having a collaborative answer to a question [ . . . ] If you’ve got lots of different people having that same conversation , you’ll also come up with different ideas and different suggestions . [ . . . ] there’s definite value in everyone coming to the table with different experience , different way of doing things to be able to help people . So having that face to face , you wouldn’t get that in any digital , I don’t think . ’ Another interviewer commented : ‘It’s how we get more interesting stuff coming out of anywhere , sort of thing . Like , you end up with better ideas , and different ideas and newer ideas , the more kind of perspectives you have on things . ’ Survey respondents agreed with interviewees ; 70 % of respon - dents agreed that meeting in person was good for generating new ideas . This principle has also been thoroughly evidenced in previous research . People tend to generate ideas from the pool of informa - tion or knowledge to which they have access ; presenting a wider pool of knowledge can therefore stimulate new directions [ 47 , 60 ] . Numerous previous studies have found evidence that bringing in a more diverse range of perspectives results in better innovation . For example , more heterogeneous SME management teams [ 30 , 51 ] , diverse knowledge bases [ 21 ] and divergent thinking [ 19 ] have all been linked to firm growth . Similarly , collaborating with more partners which are different to ourselves or to each other can re - sult in more innovative products [ 13 , 31 ] or increased innovation output [ 24 , 33 ] . A meetup provides an excellent potential forum for this type of exchange , because face to face interactions permit rich , context - ranging conversations upon which idea generation often depends . Eighty - nine percent of respondents agreed that conversation in person was a faster way to obtain information . One respondent added a comment to explain that this is because because the searcher is often not even asking the correct question . This suggests that their mental model of the problem and its context contains some errors . Previous research has suggested that software engineers need to be able to indulge in discussion with social interaction to resolve misunderstandings like these , and establish a common frame of reference [ 32 ] . This point is further supported by comments from interviewees : ‘Just to be able to have a conversation about it , rather than , you know , just a very tunnelled , back and forth online . Because , you know , conversations lead from one point to another , they’re a lot broader [ . . . ] you can then expand that , because then in that conversation people might talk about how that’s related to something else and it gives you new ideas for your future projects . ’ ‘Tunnelled’ conversations are a feature of technical discussions via mediums such as Twitter or Stack Exchange , where developers are frequently searching for a very specific piece of information [ 1 ] . The time - consuming and asynchronous nature of written com - munications tends to mean that conversations are to the point and disinclined to range around a topic ( and are sometimes constrained in length , as on Twitter ) . They are also likely to pause or stop abruptly . Reflecting on this contrast , one interviewee said : ‘Most people that I’ve met online , there’s nothing that commits them to a community . They . . they come and go . Yeah . . . face to face meetups . . . also the expectation to meet semi - regularly , it’s something that fosters relationships , I think . ’ Survey respondents also generally agreed that they could hear information not otherwise available . Interviewees touched on the fact that talking to others with similar roles about their experience and their work allowed them to share tacit knowledge which is not normally written down ( the same point was made by three survey respondents ) . For example , one interviewee said : ‘having that interactivity is important so you can say , “I don’t understand that bit” and you can actually have a discussion that leads to , you know , better understanding for everyone [ . . . ] you definitely get to hear more things . . . and maybe that’s a reason why it’s useful to have the people there [ . . . ] Because you’ll get little bits of information and people share kind of . . . their . . . I suppose , their experiences with things . And some of that is stuff that they wouldn’t necessarily write down . It’s about asking the right question and then : “Oh , yeah ! But there’s this , and this , and you need to watch out for this thing , yeah , and I had this problem using this bit of software . . . ” And it’s not something you’d necessarily think to write down , to begin with , but you definitely get that kind of cross pollination . Yeah . More folk learning , or something . ’ Several interviewees suggested that many practitioners might exchange tidbits in person that they would not want to broadcast more widely : ‘I think no one’s ever going to give their top secret , super duper secrets away on a blog . Because they want it to become a one - to - one conversation . ’ Talking in person allows participants to build credibility and a rapport before parting with valuable information . A common theme which was echoed by many interviewers was an emphasis on hearing ‘narratives’ , ‘stories’ or experiences from people with a similar job : ‘I’d like to do more of the story telling a bit . It grabs people’s attention a little bit more and helps it relate to them . ’ Multiple organisers pointed out that ‘story’ type speakers , talking through a project or case study , can provide useful material : ‘You also learn stuff , you learn good stuff while you’re there . You learn from the sessions . You hear other people’s stories [ . . . ] from the angle of an engineer : this is how we set it up , this is how we overcome challenges . That’s the stuff that I want [ . . . ] real - world stuff , [ . . . ] stuff that everyone’s experienced , and the challenges that they’d overcome and that he engineered and that sort of stuff . That’s the stuff that people want to hear . ’ Previous work studying communities of practice has identified story - telling and narrative as an important aspect of learning [ 12 ] . Presenting a story ( e . g . , recounting how some new technology 168 How Software Practitioners Use Informal Local Meetups to Share Software Engineering Knowledge ICSE 2020 , 23 - 29 May 2020 , Seoul , South Korea Figure 4 : Stacked bar chart showing what respondents liked about meeting face to face was deployed as part of a solution , a common topic for a meetup presentation ) can be useful for imparting technical information which is at the same embedded in rich contextual detail about the specifics of the problem domain , team dynamics , or new things that had to be learned . ‘Reminding ourselves how we do things’ allows us to focus on important details and distinctions that we often miss [ 68 ] ; listening to others talk about work similar to our own is a way of doing this . Two interviewees additionally pointed out that it was important to ensure presentations contained quality information and were not sales pitches for the presenter : ‘ . . . you’re asking people to try and take their own personal time [ . . . ] they don’t want to sit and hear a sales pitch , really . Especially if it’s a product that doesn’t help them , or , you know , doesn’t help them in their job [ . . . ] they might not have any say on what sort of product the company uses or anything . . . they just want to hear about the tech , really , I find . ’ Storytelling can be a useful tool for surfacing and exposing con - text information and therefore some tacit knowledge . One intervie - wee gave an example of how and why context can be shared - by talking to peers working on similar tasks in very different environ - ments and organisations : ‘A lot of the challenges that we face are actually quite similar , so , it’s really interesting to ask a question “how do you do this” to people who work in such different environments [ . . . ] Someone described it as kind of sharing war stories . ’ Most participants are experienced and well - versed in the background already : ‘Most of the people that attend have read all the [ . . . ] guides and the blog posts and things like that . And they’ll know the theory very well . But as I say , just sometimes , how do you implement things [ . . . ] in reality , often [ there may be ] compromises , and how do you tackle that ? [ . . . ] The reality is often very different . And so it’s just about how do people get round that kind of problem in their organisation ? ’ In this context , one of the most important roles for these types of stories and experience reports was to provide reassurance ; more than 66 % of all survey respondents agreed that it was reassuring to hear about others’ work . Several interviewees also raised this : ‘So a lot of the time , it might just be either reassuring things that I know , and saying , “Yep , okay , that’s really a thing . ” And knowing that what you’re doing is right , and everyone else is doing that as well . And it means that , you know , if you’re all heading in the same direction , you must all be right . ’ One interviewee pointed to the isolation that some professionals can experience , especially if they are the only specialist in the firm . Meetups can become an important mechanism for combating this , by providing friendly contacts who have similar jobs . ‘Sometimes blog posts and such are all well and good , but you want to hear . . . you want to question perhaps more than most people do . There’s probably only a couple of occasions where I’ve read a blog post and actually hit the “reply” button underneath and actually asked a question , and suchlike . Whereas , you know , I think I’ve learned a lot more in terms of you know having . . . sitting down and having a face to face conversation where you can drill in to what they’re saying a little bit more , and kind of challenge , so . . . yeah , I think that kind of resource , of people outside your immediate environment , is very useful . ’ The question of whether face to face meetups offer informa - tion which is not available elsewhere is a complex question . We suggest that they do , and it complements other channels of com - munication widely used by developers . Bringing people together increases the chances of interesting ideas arising ; the nature of in - person conversation facilitates this because it ranges around topics easily . Meeting people repeatedly allows trust to develop , and for practitioners to pool their shared experience and draw on it jointly . In - depth discussions and storytelling increase the chances of tacitly - held contextual knowledge being surfaced and eventually transferred . 6 DISCUSSION In Section 2 . 3 , after considering the knowledge base model , we sug - gested that developers often require some very specific knowledge to solve technical problems , and meetups could potentially be an ideal form for obtaining this . 169 ICSE 2020 , 23 - 29 May 2020 , Seoul , South Korea Ingram and Drachen Getting help with problems is an element of a meetup for many . For example , 28 % of survey respondents contacted someone to ask for help following a meetup , while 32 % agreed it was a motivation to attend . Despite this , problem - solving was one of the least important motivations for participating , and was also the least common reason for contacting someone . On the other hand , building up a network is important ; 75 % of respondents have contacted someone following a meetup , and 73 % agreed that building out a network was an important motivation . One survey respondent commented that networks were important , but were not for technical problems . Instead , the network was a channel for hearing about or publicising job vacancies , and for obtaining connections that might lead to new customers , suppliers or publicity opportunities . Meetups create new opportunities for face to face interaction . Face to face interactions are almost unique in supporting ‘social presence’ [ 2 , 59 ] which can’t be conveyed through other media [ 2 , 32 ] . Previous research suggests that synthetic knowledge [ 5 , 6 , 50 , 67 ] is often tied to location because it is developed through ex - perience , closely tied to specific applications and environments and relies on the holder’s own mental models [ 12 , 23 , 34 , 39 , 45 , 49 , 70 ] . Tacit knowledge is most easily shared when co - located [ 45 ] . Our in - terviewees provided several examples of tacit , practice - based infor - mation they had acquired from meetups , including : reducing waste through better elaboration of requirements ; identifying and pre - senting key information to senior people ; improving business anal - ysis and requirements elicitation through emphasising open - ended questioning ; and how to work effectively in agile teams that have different structures or roles . Meetups support rich , wide - ranging conversations that enable developers to hear multiple perspectives embedded in contextual data , identify where they hold inaccurate mental models , and to re - evaluate and extend them based on new information . This type of knowledge exchange is more likely to lead to general practice improvements rather than resolving technical issues ( which does happen more commonly than problem - solving - see Figure 3 ) . We suggest that our initial assumption that software engineer - ing face to face meetings primarily facilitate exchange of technical problem - solving knowledge is not accurate . Previous research sug - gests that developers do focus in on very specific questions to solve problems [ 1 ] , but that they use other media ( e . g . , social media such as Twitter [ 61 ] or Slack , or forums such as Reddit or Stack Exchange [ 66 ] ) for this purpose . We observe that , depending on the nature of the problem , technical and problem - solving knowl - edge can commonly be codified using well - defined vocabulary for specific computing platforms , operating systems and languages which enables a developer to obtain extremely specific answers to queries by broadcasting to a large potential audience via online tools . In fact , some researchers have suggested that Twitter ( and similar archives of questions and answers ) has an important role for making this type of problem - solving and implicit knowledge visible [ 72 ] . Our research does support the notion that meetups are , for many participants , a good forum for sharing their experience - based knowledge , and that they are able to share this knowledge because they are co - located and able to discuss in depth . However , the knowledge they share and acquire is mostly not about technical problem - solving . Face to face interactions also make it easier to develop trust [ 29 ] . Trustworthiness can be formed based on ‘rational’ assessments of a person , such as their reliability , qualifications [ 36 , 42 , 52 ] or competence [ 41 ] . Or it may be formed based on emotional and social ties between individuals [ 42 , 52 ] . Trust between co - workers can be increased when personal information is shared [ 54 ] . Comments made by interviewees and survey respondents would appear to support this : many interviewees emphasised the importance of friendships and socialising alongside technical contacts : I guess the reason I originally signed up was more social than anything else . Increase my circle of geek friends ! [ . . . ] a lot of the friends I do have are in IT , but they’re not necessarily geeks , or someone who wants to pursue it outside of work . ’ Furthermore , more than 10 % of the survey respondents wrote this as a motivation for participating , and a similar number as a reason for contacting someone after a meetup . Many emphasised strongly the value of developing a rapport that is both friendly and also technical ; the community socialises together but also shares knowledge which they then ( often ) take away and put into practice . In Section 2 . 4 we suggested that meetings could be means of staying up to date . There’s evidence that this is true . Over 70 % of survey respondents agreed that staying up to date was one of the most important reasons to attend ( along with developing new skills and learning new things ) . 80 % of respondents heard about new products or technologies at a meetup that they followed up on subsequently . And almost 65 % of respondents agreed that meetup communities could help them identify the most important industry developments ( see Figure 4 ) . In Section 2 . 5 we suggested that local meetings might be a forum for developers to uncover local information ( e . g . about jobs ) and to build up a personal reputation . Over 50 % of respondents agreed that building one’s reputation was an important motivation , and several group leaders mentioned this as a motivation to start a group , but this is not as important for most participants as other factors . Uncovering tacit information seems to be more important . Interviewees provided examples of complex and applied knowledge about software engineering practice that they had collected , includ - ing simply hearing the challenges that others faced in their daily work , while 66 % of survey respondents agreed that hearing news was a useful feature of local meeting . 7 LIMITATIONS We employed a mixture of research methods to answer our research questions . We believe that we achieved saturation ; interview data and survey results largely corroborated each other . However , all interview and survey participants were self - selected individuals within the respective target populations and it’s possible that indi - viduals who did not accept our invitations to participate may have supplied different perspectives , which is a possible source of bias . Our study only examines positive factors which motivate par - ticipants and group leaders to participate ; it does not examine motivations or experiences of software engineering profession - als who choose not to engage with meetups . The framing of our research questions was influenced by informal discussions with meetup group participants both before and during the study , who 170 How Software Practitioners Use Informal Local Meetups to Share Software Engineering Knowledge ICSE 2020 , 23 - 29 May 2020 , Seoul , South Korea experience positive ‘pull’ to participate in meetings , and simply stop attending if they do not find value in the experience . The most likely additional sources of bias are : obtaining results from a single locations ( results would disproportionately reflect regional concerns ) ; or obtaining results from groups which are not diverse in terms of interests or size . To mitigate this , we tried to ensure that interviewees reflected diverse range of locations , topics , and group sizes . Interviewees did represent a broad and balanced spread of technology topics and group sizes . However , they were less diverse in terms of location . Newcastle yielded many more interview acceptances than other locations , producing six interviewees . Therefore it’s possible that interview conclusions are influenced disproportionately by concerns and experiences from the Newcastle area . We mitigate this risk by triangulating with interviews from other locations and with survey data . Survey responses were received from all five locations , although fewer than expected from Liverpool . We received approximately 1 survey response for every 3 technology - oriented Meetup groups in the Liverpool area . In other locations we received an average of 1 survey response for every 1 . 5 Meetup groups . We recruited our study population via a single platform ( Meetup . com ) which may reduce the generalization of our results . Despite this , many of our interviewees have participated in multiple com - munities , and their comments referenced this other experience . We have explicitly excluded inactive groups from our analysis , so our study does not reflect the experiences or challenges of groups which are dormant or have struggled . Examining how and why emergent meetup communities disappear could form a useful topic for future work . Finally , we deliberately selected locations which have been previously identified as technology hubs . Selecting more rural regions where developers are distributed across smaller urban centres may reveal different data . 8 CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER WORK In this paper we examined the rapidly growing phenomenon of meetup communities of software developers . Whilst similar com - munities have existed for many years ( e . g . , Linux user groups ) , there has been significant recent growth in group number and specialisa - tion . We collected data to answer some initial research questions aimed at improving our understanding of these communities and what they offer to software developers . Technology meetups are dominated by relatively experienced professionals , motivated by the desire to learn new things , develop new skills , stay up to date and build a local network . Almost all our respondents and intervie - wees claimed that they had obtained new information at a meetup which they followed up later ( new tools and technologies , and tips for improving practice ) and three quarters had contacted someone following a meetup . Face to face local meetings deliver information that experienced practitioners clearly find valuable . Conversing in person - particularly if meeting up regularly - al - lows trust to develop and makes it easier to share information that might be too valuable to publish online . Face to face conversations support surfacing and transfer of tacit information rich with contex - tual details , which might not seem worth writing down but which is useful to peers , such as approaches to solving daily challenges . Meeting peers with similar challenges to oneself provides many practitioners with reassurance about their own practice , and that the challenges they experience are common elsewhere . Meeting face to face also allows participants to draw on a much larger pool of ideas . We started our study using an existing model of knowledge exchange which posited that software development , like engineer - ing , is underpinned by synthetic knowledge , which is focused on problem - solving , is application - specific , tacitly - held , difficult to surface and share , and built up through experience . We suggested that meetups should be ideal forums for surfacing and sharing such information . Our findings , combined with previous research , suggest that software developers actively seek two types of infor - mation : technical information for low - level problem - solving , which they acquire through broadcasting specific requests for help to online communities ; and more rich , context - specific information that spans a range of software engineering skills ( such as run - ning agile teams or requirements engineering ) , which they acquire through participating in discussions and face - to - face talks with other experienced professionals , in forums such as local meetups . This suggests that the model of software engineering as under - pinned by ‘synthetic’ problem - solving knowledge may need to be refined . Problem - solving that requires co - location is more likely to be open - ended , addressing complex problems , rather than closed and technical problems . This information is useful for larger firms for faciliating internal knowledge - sharing ; such firms may wish to consider their knowl - edge sharing goals and offer both online and in - person knowledge sharing opportunities for best results . It’s also useful for firms with small technical teams . Our research suggests that software profes - sionals feel their practice benefits from conversations with local peers , implying that smaller firms should consider how to support staff in meetup communities , perhaps from providing space for local groups , or examining how information can be shared safely for acquiring useful feedback . The work outlined in this paper is preliminary only and reveals numerous areas for further study . Future work is needed to un - derstand better the knowledge exchange mechanisms at meetups , and whether assumptions and lessons derived from one region are easily ported to other cities . This study only examines the positive factors that encourage participants to attend meetups ; we have not examined the motivations and perspectives of practitioners who choose not to engage . It also not well understood yet the role that an active and lively meetup community can play in a regional technology sector - for example , by helping to growing a region’s local skills pool , mentoring and supporting practitioners in key regional specialisms , or creating fertile ground for new startups . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work is funded by the Digital Creativity Labs jointly funded by EPSRC / AHRC / InnovateUK under grant EP / M023265 / 1 . We extend our sincere thanks to all our interviewees and survey respondents for their time and inputs . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Lada A . Adamic , Jun Zhang , Eytan Bakshy , and Mark S . Ackerman . 2008 . Knowl - edge sharing and Yahoo answers : everyone knows something . In WWW ’08 : Proc . of the 17th Intl . Conf . on World Wide Web . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 665 – 674 . 171 ICSE 2020 , 23 - 29 May 2020 , Seoul , South Korea Ingram and Drachen [ 2 ] Hayward P . Andres . 2002 . A comparison of face - to - face and virtual software development teams . Team Performance Management : An International Journal 8 , 1 / 2 ( 2002 ) , 39 – 48 . [ 3 ] MaurícioAniche , ChristophTreude , IgorSteinmacher , IgorWiese , GustavoPinto , Margaret - Anne Storey , and Marco Aurélio Gerosa . 2018 . How Modern News Aggregators Help Development Communities Shape and Share Knowledge . In 2018 40th International Conference on Software Engineering ( ICSE ) . IEEE / ACM , 499 – 510 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3180155 . 3180180 [ 4 ] Bjøørn Asheim . 2007 . Differentiated Knowledge Bases and Varieties of Regional Innovation Systems . Innovation : The European Journal of Social Science Research 20 ( 2007 ) , 223 – 241 . Issue 3 . [ 5 ] BjørnT . AsheimandLarsCoenen . 2005 . Knowledgebasesandregionalinnovation systems : Comparing Nordic clusters . Research Policy 34 ( 2005 ) , 1173 – 1190 . [ 6 ] BjørnT . Asheim , LarsCoenen , JerkerMoodysson , andJ . Vang . 2007 . Constructing knowledge - basedregionaladvantage : implicationsforregionalinnovationpolicy . International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Innovation Management 7 ( 2007 ) , 140 – 155 . [ 7 ] Innovation Mapping Team at NESTA . 2019 . Innovation mapping now . Technical Report . Tech City and NESTA , Technical report [ online ] https : / / www . nesta . org . uk / report / innovation - mapping - now / . [ 8 ] WilliamT . BielbyandDeniseD . Bielby . 1999 . Organizationalmediationofproject - based labor markets : talent agencies and the careers of screenwriters . American Sociological Review 64 ( 1999 ) , 64 – 85 . [ 9 ] The Meetup Blog . 2015 . Tech Meetups on the rise across America [ Online ] http : / / blog . meetup . com / tech - meetups - across - america / . [ 10 ] Gargi Bougie , Jamie Starke , Margaret - Anne Storey , and Daniel M . German . 2011 . Towards Understanding Twitter Use in Software Engineering : Preliminary Find - ings , Ongoing Challenges and Future Questions . In Proceedings of the 2nd In - ternational Workshop on Web 2 . 0 for Software Engineering . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 31 – 36 . [ 11 ] Mary Brandel . 2016 . How to make tech meetups work for you . Technical Report . Computerworld [ Online ] https : / / www . computerworld . com / article / 3064219 / how - to - make - tech - meetups - work - for - you . html . [ 12 ] John Seely Brown and Paul Duguid . 1991 . Organizational Learning and Communities - of - Practice : Toward a Unified View of Working , Learning , and Innovation . Organization Science 2 , 1 ( 1991 ) , 40 – 57 . [ 13 ] Yannis Caloghirou , Ioanna Kastelli , and Aggelos Tsakanikas . 2004 . Internal capabilities and external knowledge sources : complements or substitutes for innovative performance ? Technovation 24 ( 2004 ) , 29 – 39 . [ 14 ] Richard E . Caves . 2000 . Creative Industries : Contracts Between Art and Commerce . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA . [ 15 ] John W . Creswell and Vicki L . Plano Clark . 2017 . Designing and conducting mixed methods research . Sage , Thousand Oaks , CA . [ 16 ] Juan Mateos Garcia and Hasan Bakhshi . 2016 . The Geography of Creativity in the UK . Technical Report . NESTA and Creative England , [ Online ] https : / / www . nesta . org . uk / report / the - geography - of - creativity - in - the - uk / . [ 17 ] Juan Mateos Garcia and James Gardiner . 2016 . From detecting to engaging : An analysis of emerging tech topics using Meetup data . Technical Report . NESTA , 27 July [ Online ] https : / / www . nesta . org . uk / blog / from - detecting - to - engaging - an - analysis - of - emerging - tech - topics - using - meetup - data / . [ 18 ] Juan Mateos Garcia , Joel Klinger , and Konstantinos Stathoulopoulos . 2018 . Cre - ative Nation : How the creative industries are powering the UK’s nations and re - gions . Technical Report . NESTA and the Creative Industries Council , [ Online ] https : / / www . nesta . org . uk / report / creative - nation / . [ 19 ] Michael M . Gielnik , Michael Frese , Johanna M . Graf , and Anna Kampschulte . 2012 . Creativity in the opportunity identification process and the moderating effect of diversity of information . Journal of Business Venturing 27 , 5 ( 2012 ) , 559 – 576 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2011 . 10 . 003 [ 20 ] G . Grabher . 2002 . The project ecology of advertising : tasks , talents , and teams . Regional Studies 36 ( 2002 ) , 245 – 262 . [ 21 ] Markus Grillitsch , Torben Schubert , and Martin Srholec . 2019 . Knowledge base combinations and firm growth . Research Policy 48 , 1 ( 2019 ) , 234 – 247 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2018 . 08 . [ 22 ] Tristan Handy . 2014 . Who’s Meeting Up ? Using Data to Find the Hottest Startup Cities in the World . Technical Report . [ 23 ] Andrea Hemetsberger and Christian Reinhardt . 2006 . Learning and Knowledge - building in Open - source Communities : A Social - experiential Approach . Manage - ment Learning 37 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 187 – 214 . [ 24 ] Nola Hewitt - Dundas and Stephen Roper . 2018 . Exploring market failures in open innovations . International Small Business Journal : Researching Entrepreneurship 36 , 1 ( 2018 ) , 23 – 40 . [ 25 ] Siw Elisabeth Hove and Bente Anda . 2005 . Experiences from conducting semi - structured interviews in empirical software engineering research . In 11th IEEE International Software Metrics Symposium ( METRICS’05 ) . 10 pp . – 23 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / METRICS . 2005 . 24 [ 26 ] Jeremy R . L . Howells . 2002 . Tacit Knowledge , Innovation and Economic Geogra - phy . Urban Studies 39 , 5 - 6 ( 2002 ) , 871 – 884 . [ 27 ] Oliver Ibert . 2004 . Projects and firms as discordant complements . Organizational learning within the Munich software ecology . Research Policy 33 ( 2004 ) , 1529 – 1546 . [ 28 ] Claire Ingram and Anders Drachen . 2020 . Appendices for : ‘How Software Practi - tionersUseInformalLocalMeetupstoShareSoftwareEngineeringKnowledge’ . Tech - nical Report . University of York , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 6084 / m9 . figshare . 11569434 DOI : 10 . 6084 / m9 . figshare . 11569434 . [ 29 ] Prasert Kanawattanachai and Youngjin Yoo . 2002 . Dynamic nature of trust in virtualteams . TheJournalofStrategicInformationSystems 11 , 3 – 4 ( 2002 ) , 187 – 21 . [ 30 ] Oksana Koryak , Andy Lockett , James Hayton , Nicos Nicolaou , and Kevin Mole . 2018 . Disentangling the antecedents of ambidexterity : Exploration and exploita - tion . Research Policy 47 , 2 ( 2018 ) , 413 – 427 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2018 . 01 . [ 31 ] Masaaki Kotabe and K . Scott Swan . 1995 . The Role of Strategic Alliances in High - Technology New Product Development . Strategic Management Journal 16 , 8 ( 1995 ) , 621 – 636 . [ 32 ] Christine T . Kydd and Diane L . Ferry . 1994 . Managerial use of videoconferencing . Information and Management 27 , 6 ( 1994 ) , 369 – 75 . [ 33 ] KeldLaursenandAmmonSalter . 2006 . Openforinnovation : TheRoleofOpenness inExplainingInnovationPerformanceAmongUKManufacturingFirms . Strategic Management Journal 27 ( 2006 ) , 131 – 150 . [ 34 ] Jean Lave . 1991 . Situating Learning in Communities of Practice . In Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition , Lauren B . Resnick , J . M . Levine , and S . D . Teasley ( Eds . ) . American Psychological Association , Washington D . C . , Chapter 4 , 63 – 82 . [ 35 ] Angela M Lee and Hsiang Iris Chyi . 2015 . The rise of online news aggregators : Consumption and competition . International Journal on Media Management 17 , 1 ( 2015 ) , 3 – 24 . [ 36 ] J . David Lewis and Andrew Weigert . 1985 . Trust as a social reality . Social Forces 63 , 4 ( 1985 ) . [ 37 ] Xingjie Liu , Qi He , Yuanyuan Tian , Wang - Chien Lee , John McPherson , and Jiawei Han . 2012 . Event - based social networks : linking the online and offline social worlds . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining . 1032 – 1040 . [ 38 ] AugustoQ . Macedo , LeandroB . Marinho , andRodrygoL . T . Santos . 2015 . Context - Aware Event Recommendation in Event - based Social Networks . In Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems . [ 39 ] Roman Martin and Jerker Moodysson . 2011 . Comparing knowledge bases : on the geography and organization of knowledge sourcing in the regional innovation system of Scania , Sweden . European Urban and Regional Studies 20 , 2 ( 2011 ) , 170 – 187 . [ 40 ] Juan Mateos - Garcia . 2015 . Using Meetup data to explore the UK digital tech landscape . Technical Report . NESTA , 12 May , [ Online ] https : / / www . nesta . org . uk / blog / using - meetup - data - to - explore - the - uk - digital - tech - landscape / . [ 41 ] Roger C . Mayer , James H . Davis , and F . David Schoorman . 1995 . An integration model of organizational trust . The Academy of Management Review 20 , 3 ( 1995 ) , 709 – 734 . [ 42 ] Daniel J . McAllister . 1995 . Affect - and cognition - based trust as foundations for interpersonal cooperation in organizations . Academy of Management Journal 38 , 1 ( 1995 ) , 24 – 59 . [ 43 ] Paul Miller and Kirsten Bound . 2011 . The Startup Factories . Technical Report . NESTA : Making Innovation Flourish , Discussion paper [ online ] https : / / www . nesta . org . uk / report / the - startup - factories / . [ 44 ] JerkerMoodyssonandOlaJonsson . 2007 . Knowledgecollaborationandproximity : The spatial organization of biotech innovation projects . European Urban and Regional Studies 14 ( 2007 ) , 115 – 131 . [ 45 ] Ikujiro Nonaka and Noboru Konno . 1998 . The Concept of “Ba” : Building a Foundation for Knowledge Creation . California Management Review 40 , 3 ( 1998 ) , 40 – 54 . [ 46 ] Nadina Osmani . 2018 . How many tech meetups exist in the UK ? Technical Report . 11 December , Tech Nation [ Online ] https : / / technation . io / news / report - 2018 - tech - meetups / . [ 47 ] Paul B . Paulus and Vincent R . Brown . 2007 . Toward More Creative and Inno - vative Group Idea Generation : A Cognitive - Social - Motivational Perspective of Brainstorming . Social and Personality Psychology Compass 1 , 1 ( 2007 ) , 248 – 265 . [ 48 ] Fabrizio Perretti and Giacomo Negro . 2007 . Mixing genres , matching people : a study in innovation and team composition in Hollywood . Journal of Organiza - tional Behavior 28 ( 2007 ) , 563 – 586 . [ 49 ] Oliver Plum and Robert Hassink . 2011 . Comparing knowledge networking in different knowledge bases in Germany . Papers in Regional Science 90 , 2 ( 2011 ) , 355 – 371 . [ 50 ] OliverPlumandRobertHassink . 2014 . Knowledgebases , innovativenessandcom - petitiveness in creative industries : the case of Hamburg’s video game developers . Regional Studies , Regional Science 1 , 1 ( 2014 ) , 248 – 268 . [ 51 ] Aimilia Protogerou , Yannis Caloghirou , and Nicholas S . Vonortas . 2017 . Determi - nants of young firms’ innovative performance : Empirical evidence from Europe . Research Policy 46 , 7 ( 2017 ) , 1312 – 1326 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2017 . 05 . [ 52 ] John K . Rempel , John G . Holmes , and Mark P . Zanna . 1985 . Trust in close relationships . Journal of Personality & Social Psychology 49 ( 1985 ) , 95 – 112 . Issue 172 How Software Practitioners Use Informal Local Meetups to Share Software Engineering Knowledge ICSE 2020 , 23 - 29 May 2020 , Seoul , South Korea 1 . [ 53 ] Stephen Ricken , Louise Barkhuus , and Quentin Jones . 2017 . Going Online to Meet Offline : Organizational Practices of Social Activities through Meetup . In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Communities and Technologies . ACM , Troyes , France . [ 54 ] Catherine M . Ridings , David Gefen , and Bay Arinze . 2002 . Some antecedents and effects of trust in virtual communities . Journal of Strategic Information Systems 11 ( 2002 ) , 271 – 295 . [ 55 ] Thomas H . Sander . 2005 . E - associations ? using technology to connect citizens : The case of Meetup . com . In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the American Political Science Association . Washington D . C . [ 56 ] Allen J . Scott . 2000 . The Cultural Economy of Cities ; Essays on the Geography of Image - Producing Industries . Sage , London . 239 – 52 pages . [ 57 ] Abhishek Sharma , Yuan Tian , and David Lo . 2015 . What’s Hot in Software Engineering Twitter Space ? . In In Proceedings of the International Conference on Software Maintenance and Evolution . IEEE Computer Society , Washington , DC , USA , 541 – 545 . [ 58 ] AbhishekSharma , YuanTian , AgusSulistya , DavidLo , andAikoFallasYamashita . 2018 . Harnessing Twitter to support serendipitous learning of developers . In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Software Analysis , Evolution and Reengineering . IEEE Computer Society , Washington , DC , USA , 387 – 391 . [ 59 ] John Short , Ederyn Williams , and Bruce Christie . 1976 . The Social Psychology of Telecommunication . John Wiley , New York , N . Y . [ 60 ] Pao Siangliulue , Kenneth C . Arnold , Krzysztof Z . Gajos , and Steven P . Dow . 2015 . Toward Collaborative Ideation at Scale : Leveraging Ideas from Others to Generate More Creative and Diverse Ideas . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & # 38 ; Social Computing ( Vancouver , BC , Canada ) ( CSCW ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 937 – 945 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675239 [ 61 ] Leif Singer , Fernando Figueira Filho , and Margaret - Anne Storey . 2014 . Software Engineering at the Speed of Light : How Developers Stay Current Using Twitter . In In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Software Engineering . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 211 – 221 . [ 62 ] Henri Egle Sorotos . 2018 . Meetups : the hidden underwiring of UK tech . Technical Report . TechNation , June11 , [ online ] https : / / technation . io / news / tech - meetups / . [ 63 ] Jörg Sydow and Udo Staber . 2002 . The institutional embeddedness of project networks : the case of content production in German television . Regional Studies 36 ( 2002 ) , 215 – 227 . [ 64 ] TechCity and NESTA . 2016 . Tech Nation 2016 : Transforming UK Industries . Tech - nical Report . Tech City and NESTA , [ online ] https : / / technation . io / insights / tech - nation - 2016 / . [ 65 ] Yuan Tian , Palakorn Achananuparp , Ibrahim Nelman Lubis , David Lo , and Ee - PengLim . 2012 . WhatDoesSoftwareEngineeringCommunityMicroblogAbout ? . In In Proceedings of the 9thWorking Conference on Mining Software Repositories . IEEE Press , Piscataway , NJ , USA , 247 – 250 . [ 66 ] Christoph Treude , Ohad Barzilay , and Margaret - Anne Storey . 2011 . How Do Programmers Ask and Answer Questions on the Web ? . In In Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Software Engineering ( NIER track ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 804 – 807 . [ 67 ] Michaela Trippl , Franz Tödtling , and Lukas Lengauer . 2009 . Knowledge Sourcing Beyond Buzz and Pipelines : Evidence from the Vienna Software Sector . Economic Geography 85 ( 2009 ) , 443 – 462 . [ 68 ] Haridimos Tsoukas . 2003 . Do We Really Understand Tacit Knowledge ? In The Blackwell Handbook of Organizational Learning and Knowledge Management , E . - S . Mark and M . A . Lyles ( Eds . ) . Blackwell Publishing , Oxford , 410 – 27 . [ 69 ] MathijsDeVaan , RonBoschma , andKoenFrenken . 2013 . Clusteringandfirmper - formance in project - based industries : the case of the global video game industry , 1972 – 2007 . Journal of Economic Geography 13 ( 2013 ) , 965 – 991 . [ 70 ] Erwin van Tuijl and Luís Carvalho . 2014 . Knowledge sourcing , knowledge bases , and the spatial organisation of car design . Environment and Planning A 46 ( 2014 ) , 1966 – 1982 . [ 71 ] ErwinvanTuijl , KoenDittrich , andJanvanderBorg . 2016 . UpgradingofSymbolic and Synthetic Knowledge Bases : Evidence from the Chinese Automotive and Construction Industries . Industry and Innovation 23 , 3 ( 2016 ) , 276 – 293 . [ 72 ] XiaofengWang , IlonaKuzmickaja , Klaas - JanStol , PekkaAbrahamsson , andBrian Fitzgerald . 2014 . Microblogging in Open Source Software Development : The Case of Drupal and Twitter . IEEE Software 31 , 4 ( 2014 ) , 72 – 80 . [ 73 ] YuWu , Jessica Kropczynski , Patrick C . Shih , and John M . Carroll . 2014 . Exploring the Ecosystem of Software Developers on GitHub and Other Platforms . In In ProceedingsoftheCompanionPublicationofthe17thACMConferenceonComputerSupportedCooperativeWork & Social Computing . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 265 – 268 . 173