JCB : Tools The Rockefeller University Press $ 30 . 00 J . Cell Biol . Vol . 196 No . 6 801 – 810 www . jcb . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201112098 JCB 801 Correspondence to Kyle J . Roux : Kyle . Roux @ sanfordhealth . org Abbreviations used in this paper : BAT , biotin acceptor tag ; bioAMP , biotinoyl - 5  - AMP ; BioID , proximity - dependent biotin identification ; BirA * , BirA - R118G ; INM , inner nuclear membrane ; LaA , lamin - A ; LAP , lamina - associated polypep - tide ; LBR , lamin B receptor ; NE , nuclear envelope ; NPC , nuclear pore complex ; SLAP75 , soluble lamin - associated protein of 75 kD ; WT , wild type . Introduction The elucidation of protein – protein interactions represents a sig - nificant barrier to the understanding of complex biological pro - cesses . In recent years it has become increasingly clear that the functions of many proteins can only be fully understood in the context of networks of interactions . Furthermore , the description of such networks provides keys to our understanding of disease processes ( for an example see Sang et al . , 2011 ) . Biochemical and genetic techniques , including affinity - capture complex puri - fication and yeast two - hybrid strategies have provided powerful tools in the search for new molecular associations . However , these methods also display fundamental limitations . For high - throughput genetic approaches , protein interactions are com - monly assessed in a cellular environment different to that in which they would normally occur , often lacking the proper ma - chinery for post - translational modifications and the normal com - plement of associated binding partners , including molecular chaperones . This can lead to incomplete or erroneous datasets . Biochemical approaches suffer loss of candidates through pro - tein insolubility and transient or weak interactions . As a conse - quence of these limitations many proteins remain refractory to conventional methods used to screen for protein interactions . These issues are more relevant than ever , as we collectively look to the daunting task of unraveling the protein “interactome” . Here we describe an approach to screen for proximate proteins in a relatively natural cellular environment . We took as our guide the DamID method devised by van Steensel and Henikoff ( 2000 ) to detect DNA – protein interactions . DamID takes advantage of the prokaryotic Dam methylase , which is fused to a potential DNA - binding protein . When expressed in eukaryotic cells , the fusion protein will uniquely methylate DNA sequences with which it comes in to contact , thereby leaving a chemical trace of its interactions . Our method to identify neighboring and potentially interacting proteins is based on the use of a promiscuous prokaryotic biotin protein ligase . Analo - gous to DamID , the biotin ligase is fused to a protein of interest , W e have developed a new technique for proximity - dependent labeling of proteins in eukaryotic cells . Named BioID for proximity - dependent biotin identification , this approach is based on fusion of a promiscuous Escherichia coli biotin protein ligase to a targeting protein . BioID features proximity - dependent biotinylation of proteins that are near - neighbors of the fusion protein . Biotinylated proteins may be isolated by affinity capture and identified by mass spectrometry . We apply BioID to lamin - A ( LaA ) , a well - characterized intermediate filament protein that is a constituent of the nuclear lamina , an important structural element of the nuclear envelope ( NE ) . We identify multiple proteins that associate with and / or are proximate to LaA in vivo . The most abundant of these include known interactors of LaA that are localized to the NE , as well as a new NE - associated protein named SLAP75 . Our results suggest BioID is a useful and generally applicable method to screen for both interacting and neighboring proteins in their native cel - lular environment . A promiscuous biotin ligase fusion protein identifies proximal and interacting proteins in mammalian cells Kyle J . Roux , 1 , 2 Dae In Kim , 1 , 2 Manfred Raida , 3 and Brian Burke 4 1 Sanford Children’s Health Research Center , Sanford Research / University of South Dakota , Sioux Falls , SD 57104 2 Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology , University of Florida College of Medicine , Gainesville , FL 32610 3 Experimental Therapeutics Centre , Nanos , Singapore 138669 4 Institute of Medical Biology , Immunos , Singapore 138648 © 2012 Roux et al . This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike – No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the pub - lication date ( see http : / / www . rupress . org / terms ) . After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported license , as described at http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 / ) . T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y JCB • VOLUME 196 • NUMBER 6 • 2012 802 Taken together , these findings demonstrate that BioID is an effective method to screen for proximate and interacting proteins . This relatively simple and rapid technique has broad applicabil - ity to monitor protein behavior in live cells , providing a number of advantages over existing methods . Results BioID We sought to generate a method for labeling proteins in a proximity - dependent manner in mammalian cells . With the DamID method as a guide , we envisioned a system based on the fusion of a protein of interest to an enzyme that could selectively modify vicinal proteins in vivo ( Fig . 1 a ) . There are two require - ments for such a system . The first and most obvious is that the fusion protein must be targeted appropriately when expressed in cells . The second is that the modification itself must facilitate isolation of the specifically labeled proteins . Because it is rela - tively uncommon in vivo and amenable to selective isolation , bio - tinylation was the most obvious modification on which to focus . BirA is a 35 - kD DNA - binding biotin protein ligase in Escherichia coli that regulates the biotinylation of a subunit of acetyl - CoA carboxylase and acts as a transcriptional repressor for the biotin biosynthetic operon ( Chapman - Smith and Cronan , 1999 ) . BirA has been harnessed for experimental applications , including use in eukaryotic cells . The BirA acceptor - peptide system takes advantage of the extreme specificity of BirA in bioti - nylating its substrate peptide ( Beckett et al . , 1999 ) . With this sys - tem , a minimal recognition sequence , a biotin acceptor tag ( BAT ) , is fused to a protein of interest and coexpressed with BirA . This leads to the biotinylation of the BAT sequence permitting one - step high affinity ( K d = 10  14 M ; Green , 1963 ) avidin / streptavidin - mediated purification of the tagged protein . Because biotinylation is a rare modification , in mammalian cells it is restricted primarily to only a few carboxylases ( Chapman - Smith and Cronan , 1999 ) ; BAT - independent binding is minimal . Biotinylation by BirA is a two - step process . The first of these combines biotin and ATP to form biotinoyl - 5  - AMP ( bioAMP ; Lane et al . , 1964 ) . This acti - vated biotin is held within the BirA active site until it reacts with a specific lysine residue of the BAT sequence in the second step . For our purposes , the problem with BirA lies with its stringent selectivity for its endogenous substrate . What we desired was a far more promiscuous biotin ligase . This requirement led us to certain BirA mutants that prematurely release the highly reactive yet labile bioAMP ( Kwon and Beckett , 2000 ; Streaker and Beckett , 2006 ) . One such BirA mutant ( R118G , hereafter called BirA * ) , which is defective in both self - association and DNA binding ( Kwon et al . , 2000 ) , displays an affinity for bioAMP two orders of magnitude less than that of the wild - type enzyme ( BirA - WT ; Kwon and Beckett , 2000 ) . In E . coli , BirA * expression results in promiscu - ous protein biotinylation because free bioAMP will readily react with primary amines . More significantly however , it has been demonstrated in vitro that BirA * will promiscuously biotinylate proteins in a proximity - dependent fashion ( Choi - Rhee et al . , 2004 ; Cronan , 2005 ) . We explored the possibility that BirA * would promiscu - ously biotinylate proteins in live mammalian cells . To this end and then introduced into mammalian ( or other ) cells where it will biotinylate vicinal proteins upon supplementation of the culture medium with biotin . Biotinylated proteins can then be selectively isolated and identified by conventional methods , most notably mass spectrometry . We have applied this strategy , which we call BioID , to identify candidate proteins that are proximate to and / or interact with human lamin A ( LaA ) , a well - characterized component of the nuclear envelope ( NE ) , a spe - cialized extension of the endoplasmic reticulum that surrounds the nuclear contents during interphase . LaA is an intermediate filament protein and member of the A - type lamin family that is encoded by the LMNA gene ( Gerace and Huber , 2012 ) . Together with B - type lamins , the A - type lamins are constituents of the nuclear lamina , a filamen - tous protein meshwork that is intimately associated with the in - ner nuclear membrane ( INM ) , the membranous portion of the NE that faces the interior of the nucleus . This association is me - diated , at least in part , by multiple interactions with integral INM proteins . In addition , nuclear pore complexes ( NPCs ) , large multi - protein channels that span the nuclear membranes and which mediate nucleocytoplasmic trafficking of macromolecules , are anchored to the nuclear lamina ( Aaronson and Blobel , 1975 ; Dwyer and Blobel , 1976 ) . Although the bulk of the A - and B - type lamins are localized to the nuclear lamina , a nucleoplasmic population is thought to function in various aspects of nuclear metabolism , including transcription and replication ( Moir et al . , 2000 ; Goldman et al . , 2002 ) . In mammalian somatic cells , the nuclear lamina is roughly 15 – 20 nm thick and is considered to represent an important structural element of the NE ( Gerace and Huber , 2012 ) . Indeed , the role of the nuclear lamina as a determinant of both NE and global nuclear architecture has been highlighted by findings that mutations in the LMNA gene are linked to multiple human dis - eases including muscular dystrophy , lipodystrophy , and prema - ture aging syndromes ( Worman et al . , 2009 ; Worman , 2012 ) . Many of these disorders , known as laminopathies , are associated with often - times gross perturbations in nuclear and NE organi - zation . To better understand the etiology of the laminopathies , much effort has been focused on identifying lamin - interacting proteins . However , both A - and B - type lamins are highly insol - uble and consequently it has proven extremely difficult to define their molecular associations using conventional approaches . For these reasons we felt that LaA represented an ideal candidate with which to evaluate the utility of BioID as a general proximity - based approach to screen for potential protein – protein inter - actions . At the same time BioID introduces a new strategy with which to further explore LaA function . Our development and use of BioID to identify LaA - proximal proteins has revealed a number of abundant candidates among which are known interactors of LaA . These include integral pro - teins of the INM as well as NPC components . Less abundant can - didates fall into functional categories that include transcription , chromatin regulation , RNA processing , and DNA repair . An un - characterized protein was also among the more prominent candi - dates revealed by LaA BioID . We demonstrate that this protein , which we have named SLAP75 , is a novel constituent of the NE that appears to be expressed in a cell type – specific fashion . 803 Screening for protein – protein interactions with BioID • Roux et al . Application of BioID to the nuclear lamina We next wished to determine whether BirA * could be used as a tool to identify vicinal proteins in vivo . To this end we fused myc - BirA * to the N terminus of human LaA , a well - characterized constituent of the nuclear lamina . During interphase LaA has a relatively restricted distribution within the cell . It is detected for the most part at the NE with a subpopulation found throughout the nucleoplasm ( Goldman et al . , 2002 ) . To provide consistent and controllable expression levels , we generated HEK293 cells that stably and inducibly express myc - BirA * LaA ( Fig . 1 b ) . In these cells , myc - BirA * LaA localizes predominantly to the nuclear envelope , similar to both endogenous LaA and LaA harboring an N - terminal GFP tag , a modification that does not appear to alter the function of LaA ( Broers et al . , 1999 ; Shumaker et al . , 2006 ) . Biotinylation of endogenous proteins in cells expressing myc - BirA * LaA , either in the presence or absence of exogenous biotin , was monitored on Western blots probed with streptavidin - HRP . As is the case with myc - BirA * alone , the presence of 50 µM biotin in the culture medium strongly stimulates biotinylation of a wide range of endogenous proteins , in addition to we generated myc epitope - tagged , humanized BirA - WT and BirA * for transient expression in HeLa cells . Western blot analysis using streptavidin - HRP revealed modest levels of biotinylated proteins with BirA * as compared with BirA - WT ( Fig . 2 a ) . Addition of 50 µM biotin to tissue culture medium , however , results in a massive stimulation of promiscuous biotinylation by BirA * but not BirA - WT ( Fig . 2 a ) . By fluorescence microscopy the distribution of biotinylated proteins appears similar to that of myc - BirA * itself , which is predominantly nuclear with a subpopulation found in the cytoplasm ( Fig . 2 b ) . These results indicate that BirA * promiscuously biotinylates proteins in mammalian cells . Furthermore , the level of that biotinylation is primarily regulated by the concentration of available free biotin . In conventional tissue culture media formulations fetal calf serum is the source of biotin . Our results indicate that the con - centrations of biotin in standard complete media are insufficient to fuel significant biotinylation by BirA * . This has also been demonstrated for BAT biotinylation by BirA - WT ( Nesbeth et al . , 2006 ; Kulman et al . , 2007 ) , suggesting that it is not a BirA * - specific phenomenon . Figure 1 . Model for application of BioID method . ( a ) Expression of a promiscuous biotin – ligase fusion protein in live cells leads to the selective biotinylation of proteins proximate to that fusion protein . After stringent cell lysis and protein de - naturation , biotinylated proteins are affinity puri - fied . These candidate proteins can be identified by mass spectrometry or immunoblot analysis . ( b ) In our application of BioID to LaA to identify candidate proteins we used HEK293 cells stably expressing inducible mycBirA * LaA . 24 h before lysis , cells were induced to express mycBirA * LaA with doxycycline and to biotinylate endogenous proteins with 50 µM biotin . Cells were lysed under stringent conditions and biotinylated proteins col - lected on streptavidin - conjugated beads for subse - quent analysis and identification . JCB • VOLUME 196 • NUMBER 6 • 2012 804 for 24 h and then lysed the cells under stringent denaturing con - ditions using an SDS - containing buffer ( Fig . 1 b ) . Parental HEK293 cells , processed in parallel , were used as controls . For these experiments 4 . 0 × 10 7 cells ( four confluent 10 - cm dishes ) were analyzed . Biotinylated proteins were captured with strep - tavidin immobilized on paramagnetic beads , rigorously washed , and bound proteins analyzed by mass spectrometry . Proteins unique to the BioID - LaA ( myc - BirA * LaA ) pull - down ( Table S1 ) , and not detected with identical pull - downs from control cells ( Table S2 ) , were categorized based on localization and function ( Fig . 3 e ) . The relative abundance of the identified proteins within each category is given as a percentage of the total . The bulk of the proteins identified by BioID - LaA are known NE components , including a number of INM proteins . The most abundant of these are the  and  isoforms of lamina - associated polypeptide 2 ( LAP2 , TMPO ) and lamina - associated polypeptide 1 ( LAP1 , TOR1AIP ) . LAP1 has a documented association with LaA ( Foisner and Gerace , 1993 ) , as does LAP2  , a soluble LAP2 isoform that also appeared prominently in the dataset ( Dechat et al . , 2000 ) . Two other INM proteins , emerin ( EMD ; Lee et al . , 2001 ) and MAN1 ( LEMD3 ; Mansharamani and Wilson , 2005 ) identified by BioID - LaA are also known to interact with LaA . An additional INM protein detected in our screen was SAMP1 ( TMEM201 ) . Also known as NET5 , SAMP1 was originally identified in a proteomic analysis of rat liver nuclear membrane proteins ( Schirmer et al . , 2003 ) . A recent study ( Gudise et al . , 2011 ) suggests that SAMP1 is part of a protein network that in - cludes A - type lamins and LINC complexes . The latter are evo - lutionarily conserved protein assemblies that span the NE and couple nucleoskeletal and cytoskeletal structures ( Burke and Roux , 2009 ) . 12 proteins associated with nucleocytoplasmic transport were detected by BioID - LaA . The three most prominent of these , Nup153 , Nup50 , and ELYS have been localized to the nucleo - plasmic face of NPCs where they would be situated in the vicin - ity of the nuclear lamina ( Sukegawa and Blobel , 1993 ; Guan et al . , 2000 ; Walther et al . , 2001 ; Rasala et al . , 2008 ) . At least one of these , Nup153 , has previously been shown to interact directly myc - BirA * LaA itself ( Fig . 3 a ) . Microscopy using fluorescent strep - tavidin reveals that the bulk of these biotinylated proteins must reside at the NE and colocalize with myc - BirA * LaA ( Fig . 3 b ) . The implication is that proteins in the vicinity of myc - BirA * LaA are preferentially biotinylated . It should be noted that not only does the intracellular localization of these biotinylated proteins differ between myc - BirA * ( predominantly nucleoplasmic ) and myc - BirA * LaA ( predominantly at the NE ) , but their electro - phoretic mobilities and hence identities also differ as revealed by Western blot analysis ( Figs . 2 a and 3 a ) . These results suggest that BirA * can be targeted to a specific cellular location and will biotinylate endogenous proteins in a proximity - dependent manner . Temporal regulation of BioID The requirement for exogenous biotin suggested to us a means to modulate BirA * activity . To explore this further , HEK293 cells expressing myc - BirA * LaA were analyzed by Western blot at various times after addition of 50 µM biotin to their culture medium ( Fig . 3 c ) . Levels of biotinylated proteins increase in parallel with the duration of biotin exposure . This effect reaches saturation within 6 to 24 h with no obvious increase observed at later time points . A similar increase in biotinylation can also be observed by fluorescence microscopy ( Fig . 3 d ) . Both methods reveal a time - dependent accumulation of biotinylated proteins , the majority of which appear to be endogenous and which evi - dently colocalize with myc - BirA * LaA . These studies indicate that by controlling access to biotin we can temporally regulate biotinylation by BirA * . This opens up the future possibility of performing pulse – chase type experiments using this technique . Identification of vicinal proteins with BioID - LaA We next set out to test our hypothesis that proteins biotinylated by myc - BirA * LaA should be enriched with known interactors of LaA as well as with near neighbors within the nuclear lamina and INM , and to a lesser extent within the nucleoplasm . To accomplish this we induced myc - BirA * LaA expression in HEK293 cells in the presence of doxycycline and 50 µM biotin Figure 2 . BirA * promiscuously biotinylates en - dogenous proteins in mammalian cells . HeLa cells were analyzed 24 h after transient transfection with myc - BirA - WT or myc - BirA * ( R118G ) . After trans - fection , cells were cultured either with or without supplemental biotin ( 50 µM ) . ( a ) By Western blot analysis similar levels of the exogenous BirA ( asterisk ) are detected in all samples with anti - myc . Biotinylated proteins , including both exogenous BirA ( asterisk ) and endogenous proteins , were detected with HRP - streptavidin . Enhanced protein biotinylation is observed in the myc - BirA * samples as compared with the WT isoform . This difference is dramatically enhanced by the presence of excess biotin . ( b ) By fluorescence microscopy the BirA is predominantly nuclear as observed with anti - myc ( red ) . Biotinylated proteins were detected with fluorescently labeled streptavidin ( green ) . Considerable biotinylation is only observed in cells expressing myc - BirA * and supplemented with excess biotin . The biotin signal predominantly colocalizes with myc - BirA * . DNA is labeled with Hoechst ( blue ) . Bar , 4 µm . 805 Screening for protein – protein interactions with BioID • Roux et al . with NPCs . Taken together , these findings indicate that FAM169A is a novel NE component that must be enriched at the nuclear lam - ina or at the interface of the lamina and INM . We therefore pro - pose to name this protein , SLAP75 ( for soluble lamina - associated protein of 75 kD ) . Besides SLAP75 , only two other soluble proteins ( other than the lamins themselves ) , barrier to autointe - gration factor ( BAF ; Segura - Totten et al . , 2002 ) and germ cell - less ( GCL ; Holaska and Wilson , 2006 ) , have been shown to accumu - late at the nuclear lamina . Proteomic screens have identified scores of membrane proteins that are enriched at the nuclear periphery ( Schirmer et al . , 2003 ) . Our identification of an entirely new pe - ripheral membrane constituent of the NE highlights the use of BioID as a valuable complement to these earlier studies . Further - more , it confirms the use of BioID as an effective proximity - based tool to screen for neighboring and potentially interacting pro - teins . With this in mind , Table S1 lists 10 other uncharacterized proteins , including UPF0428 protein CXorf56 , UPF0414 trans - membrane protein C20orf30 , UPF0552 protein C15orf38 , and uncharacterized protein C9orf78 . We are currently in the pro - cess of determining whether any of these , like SLAP75 , repre - sent novel NE or LaA - associated proteins . Discussion We have devised a simple and rapid technique , BioID , which provides a means of identifying neighboring and potentially in - teracting proteins in vivo . The method takes advantage of BirA * , a highly promiscuous form of the E . coli BirA biotin protein ligase . BirA * may be targeted to specific subcellular locations by fusion to a “bait” protein . Nearby proteins , biotinylated by BirA * , can then be recovered in a single step on streptavidin - coated with LaA ( Al - Haboubi et al . , 2011 ) . A fourth NPC protein , Tpr , which is itself associated with Nup153 ( Hase and Cordes , 2003 ; Krull et al . , 2004 ) , also appeared in the BioID screen . The detec - tion of these NPC proteins by BioID - LaA is consistent with an NPC anchorage function for the nuclear lamina . Several additional classes of proteins were represented among the BioID - LaA candidates , albeit at lower levels . These included proteins associated with DNA repair , transcription , chromatin regulation , and RNA - processing . Proteins considered to be components of a nucleoskeleton were also detected , the most abundant of which was filamin A ( FLNA ; Castano et al . , 2010 ) . Identification of a novel NE constituent detected by BioID - LaA An uncharacterized protein of 75 kD , FAM169A ( KIAA0888 ) , featured prominently in the BioID - LaA dataset . FAM169A has no predicted transmembrane domain and lacks any sequence motifs that might provide clues to its function . To test the possi - bility that FAM169A is a novel NE constituent we examined the localization of the endogenous protein in HEK293 cells by immunofluorescence microscopy . Fig . 4 a clearly shows that FAM169A is concentrated at the NE . Differential permeabiliza - tion of HEK293 cells with digitonin versus Triton X - 100 indicates that FAM169A resides on the nuclear face of the NE ( Fig . S1 ) . We also introduced human HA epitope – tagged FAM169A into HeLa cells , which do not appear to express this protein . Consis - tent with the findings in HEK293 cells , recombinant FAM169A , detected using the anti - FAM169A antibody ( Fig . S2 ) , localizes predominantly to the NE ( Fig . 4 b ) , although in both cell types we could always observe what appeared to be a nucleoplasmic population . In neither cell line was there any obvious association Figure 3 . Proximity - dependent promiscuous biotinylation by BioID - LaA . HEK293 cells inducibly expressing myc - BirA * LaA , or parental controls , were analyzed 24 h after induction with or without excess biotin . ( a ) By immunoblot analysis the LaA fusion protein ( asterisk ) is detected with anti - myc . In control cells levels of endogenously biotinylated proteins are un - affected by the supplemental biotin ; however , the biotinylation of endogenous proteins by myc - BirA * LaA is dramatically en - hanced in the presence of excess biotin . ( b ) The myc - BirA * LaA ( red ) is detected at the nuclear rim and to a lesser extent in the nucleoplasm . Biotinylated proteins ( green ) colocalize with the LaA fusion protein . DNA is labeled with Hoechst ( blue ) . Bar , 5 µm . ( c ) To monitor the relative rate of biotinylation by BioID , myc - BirA * LaA HEK293 cells were provided with 50 µM biotin at different time points . The levels of myc - BirA * LaA ( asterisk in panel a ) are similar for all conditions ; however , the extent of biotinylation increases with duration of biotin supplementation until it is saturated by 24 h . ( d ) Similar results were observed by fluorescence microscopy . Myc - BirA * LaA was detected with anti - myc ( red ) and biotinylated proteins with fluorescently labeled streptavidin ( green ) . DNA was labeled with Hoechst ( blue ) . Bar , 25 µm . ( e ) The identity of the proteins biotinylated by BioID - LaA was determined by mass spectrometry of proteins isolated with streptavidin - coupled magnetic beads . The relative abundance ( percentage of total identified spectra adjusted for protein size , identified spectra per 10 3 amino acids ) and classification of proteins uniquely biotinylated by myc - BirA * LaA is depicted in the chart . Con - servatively estimated , 50 % of the detected proteins predomi - nantly reside at the nuclear lamina , INM , or nucleoplasmic face of the NPCs . JCB • VOLUME 196 • NUMBER 6 • 2012 806 or manipulate sufficient start material . The second limitation concerns solubility . Conditions required to solubilize many bait proteins may not be compatible with preserving interactions with partner proteins and vice versa . This becomes especially significant when considering weak interactions . In the case of lamin A , a highly insoluble protein , this has proved to be a seri - ous stumbling block in the reliable identification of interacting proteins . Recently , Kubben et al . ( 2010 ) have introduced a work - around for this problem . They have used chemical cross - linking to stabilize lamin complexes before solubilization and pull - down . Significantly , this approach detected many of the same putative LaA interactors that we have now identified using BioID - LaA . Cross - linking certainly represents a valuable enhancement to the pull - down strategy . However , as an added variable it may in turn introduce additional artifacts such as aggregation . We believe that BioID provides a useful complement to both of these more - established approaches in the characteriza - tion of potential protein – protein interactions and near - neighbor analyses . BioID uniquely combines two important attributes . The first of these is that it detects potential interactions in their normal cellular context . The second is that it sidesteps issues associated with bait or prey protein solubility . Because the key step of biotinylation occurs before solubilization it should de - tect both weak and transient interactions . Both of these features are highlighted in our BioID - LaA data where both soluble and membrane proteins were efficiently detected . As with any method there are limitations that must be ap - preciated . BioID relies on the expression of an exogenous pro - tein that is fused to BirA * , a protein slightly larger than GFP . Clearly , it is essential that the fusion protein displays the same targeting and assembly properties as the wild - type or endoge - nous molecule . This is an issue that must be addressed on a case - by - case basis . With respect to myc - BirA * LaA , the fusion protein appears to be targeted appropriately to the nuclear lamina beads and identified by mass spectrometry . The only requirement for BioID is the expression of a single fusion protein . Conse - quently , BioID should be applicable to map protein associations in essentially any accessible cell type , mammalian or otherwise . There are currently two strategies that are widely used to detect protein interactions . The first of these involves the yeast two - hybrid ( Y2H ) system and takes advantage of the ability of hybrid transcription factor domains to functionally associate , thereby driving expression of reporter genes . The second strat - egy is based upon coimmunoprecipitation or pull - down , fre - quently involving expression of single - or double - tagged bait proteins . Immunoprecipitated proteins are then identified by mass spectrometry . A significant attribute of the Y2H approach is that because it is based on a cDNA library screen , it is more likely to detect weak interactions or interactions between low abundance proteins . Furthermore , it is the method of choice where the focus is on proteins that may only be expressed in rare cell types . On the other hand , it is contingent upon proteins , or protein fragments maintaining their ability to fold correctly and to associate when removed from their normal cellular envi - ronment because by definition these interactions must take place within yeast , often in subcellular regions unlike that which they normally inhabit and without their normal complement of asso - ciated proteins and post - translational modifications . In many sit - uations this may present a significant problem , especially when membrane proteins enter the equation . The other side of the coin is that incorrectly folded “bait” or “prey” proteins , while failing to interact with their cognate partners , may display other spuri - ous interactions and hence give rise to false positives . The pull - down approach has provided valuable data in a variety of systems . However , it has two limitations . The first of these , which indeed it shares with BioID , is the problem of scale when dealing with low abundance proteins . Simply put , such pro - teins may not be detected where it proves impractical to prepare Figure 4 . SLAP75 is a novel peripheral mem - brane constituent of the NE identified with BioID - LaA . To determine if FAM169A / SLAP75 is a novel peripheral membrane constituent of the NE its subcellular localization was analyzed by immunofluorescence microcopy . ( a ) As de - tected with anti - SLAP75 ( red ) , the endogenous protein is colocalized with LaA ( green ) at the NE of HEK293 cells . ( b ) Although endogenous SLAP75 is not detected in HeLa cells ( not depicted ) , transiently expressed HA - SLAP75 ( red ) detected with anti - FAM169A / SLAP75 is localized to the NE , labeled with anti - Nup153 ( green ) . DNA was labeled with Hoechst ( blue ) . Bar , 10 µm . 807 Screening for protein – protein interactions with BioID • Roux et al . NONO were all detected as part of the BAF proteome ( Montes de Oca et al . , 2009 ) , i . e . , they associate either directly or indi - rectly with BAF , while BAF itself is known to associate directly with LaA ( Holaska et al . , 2003 ) . Consequently , the detection of these proteins by BioID - LaA could be a reflection of these re - ciprocal associations . However , BAF itself was not picked up in the BioID - LaA screen , potentially due to its small size ( 89 resi - dues ) and / or due to limited association in these cells . Mutations in LMNA and EMD , the gene encoding emerin , both give rise to Emery - Dreifuss muscular dystrophy ( EDMD2 , 3 , and EDMD1 , respectively ; Bione et al . , 1994 ; Bonne et al . , 1999 , 2000 ; Raffaele Di Barletta et al . , 2000 ) . LaA and emerin are known to interact ( Lee et al . , 2001 ) ; indeed , emerin was one of the more abundant proteins detected in the BioID - LaA screen . Defects in the genes encoding at least three other proteins , nesprin - 1 , nesprin - 2 , and FHL1 ( four - and - a - half LIM protein 1 ) are also known to cause EDMD ( EDMD4 – 6 , respectively ; Zhang et al . , 2007 ; Gueneau et al . , 2009 ) . Both nesprin - 1 and nesprin - 2 are LINC complex and NE components . FHL1 , although apparently nucleoplasmic and cytoplasmic ( there are three splice isoforms ) , was detected by BioID - LaA . This raises the possibility that these proteins may con - stitute an interaction network that if disrupted gives rise to the common phenotype of EDMD ( Simon and Wilson , 2011 ) . Some of the proteins identified by BioID - LaA are classified as either cytoplasmic or ER residents . The latter are all membrane proteins . It is possible that at least some of these could have ac - cess to the INM , although not concentrate there . Certainly there is precedent for this ( Torrisi and Bonatti , 1985 ; Torrisi et al . , 1987 ) . Alternatively , these cytoplasmic and ER proteins might become biotinylated during mitosis when the NE breaks down and lamins are dispersed throughout the cytoplasm . We are cur - rently investigating the application of BioID in synchronized cell populations that may shed light on these possibilities . It should be noted that ACE ( angiotensin - converting enzyme ) , a type - I mem - brane protein synthesized in the ER , was likely identified due to nonspecific binding , as there are no available primary amines for biotinylation in its cytoplasmic domain . Several cytoplasmically oriented NPC proteins , including Nup214 and Nup358 , were found to be biotinylated . As with the cytoplasmic and ER proteins , it is possible that this biotinylation occurs during mitosis . It is also possible that this might occur during nuclear import of myc - BirA * LaA . However , the fact that import receptors were not detected in the screen places a question mark over this . On the other hand , the large size of these nucleo - porins may have biased their identification by mass spectrometry . The significantly more abundantly represented nucleoplasmic NPC proteins such as Nup153 , Nup50 , ELYS , and TPR likely reflect the close association between the NPCs and the lamina ( Daigle et al . , 2001 ) . Certainly , Nup153 has already been shown to interact with LaA ( Al - Haboubi et al . , 2011 ) . These inter - actions could explain the altered distribution of NPCs observed in LMNA - deficient cells ( Sullivan et al . , 1999 ) . Probably the most important question that remains to be answered concerns the activity radius of BirA * because this will define the resolution of the BioID technique . At present we have no way of measuring how far on average bioAMP molecules will diffuse from the parent BirA * enzyme before reacting with where it shares the same solubility properties as both wild - type and GFP - tagged LaA . A more subtle issue may arise through biotinylation . Although we observed no evidence of a detrimen - tal effect , our studies have used the addition of excess biotin to cell culture media to enhance the biotinylation of vicinal pro - teins . The covalent attachment of biotin to primary amines , pre - dominantly lysines , leads to the loss of charge on these sites and at the same time could inhibit other secondary modifications . These effects might in turn alter the behaviors of both the fusion protein and neighboring proteins . The efficacy of BioID is obvi - ously contingent upon the ability to biotinylate neighboring pro - teins , which is in turn dependent on the number and availability of primary amines in these proteins . Consequently , the abun - dance of the biotinylated proteins should not be used to indicate the strength or abundance of an association . Similarly , the absence of biotinylation does not rule out interaction or proximity . Most importantly , BioID - mediated biotinylation cannot be used to validate an actual protein interaction , but instead should be used as a screen to identify candidates that can be subsequently investigated systematically or in a hypothesis - based manner . Given the mechanism of BioID , biotinylated proteins can be placed into three categories ; ( i ) direct interactions , either tran - sient or stable , ( ii ) indirect interactions , or ( iii ) vicinal proteins that do not interact directly or indirectly . Given these limita - tions , BioID in its current guise should only be used as a screen for potential interactors or vicinal proteins . Based on our mass spectrometry results we see clear evi - dence that BioID identifies well - characterized protein interactors of LaA , including a number of proteins detected by Kubben et al . ( 2010 ) using complex purification in combination with chemical cross - linking ( LAP1 , LAP2 isoforms , Emerin , and MAN1 ) . It is clear that most ( if not all ) of the more abundant proteins identi - fied with BioID - LaA , amounting to more than 50 % of those detected , largely reside in close proximity to the INM . These could fall into the transient , indirect , or vicinal categories . Further - more , BioID identified SLAP75 , a previously uncharacterized protein that is clearly enriched at the nuclear lamina . Other NE proteins in the dataset are lamins B1 and B2 and lamin B receptor ( LBR ) . The relatively low level of detection of B - type lamins could be a reflection of findings that A - and B - type lamins may be segregated into separate filament systems ( Shimi et al . , 2008 ) . LBR is not known to interact with A - type lamins and its appearance could be simply a consequence of indirect interactions and / or proximity . However , it was detected by Kubben et al . ( 2010 ) using their approach of LaA affinity - capture combined with chemical cross - linking . Also included in the list of identified proteins , albeit at re - duced levels , are many nuclear proteins associated with DNA repair , transcription , chromatin regulation , and RNA processing . These proteins are not predominantly enriched at the NE , raising the question of how they were biotinylated by BioID - LaA . We propose that these represent either a subpopulation of nuclear proteins that transiently associate with LaA at the NE and / or were biotinylated by nucleoplasmic BioID - LaA ( Goldman et al . , 2002 ) . Several of these proteins have what could be described as a circumstantial connection to LaA and might therefore be part of a LaA interaction network . PARP1 , MDC1 , NUMA , and JCB • VOLUME 196 • NUMBER 6 • 2012 808 proper directionality . pRetroX . Tight . puro is a puromycin selectable mamma - lian expression vector that contains a Tet - on – based tetracycline - inducible promoter to inducibly regulate expression . Cell culture and generation of stable cell lines pRetroX Tet - ON Advanced HEK293 cells ( Takara Bio Inc . ) that stably express the doxycycline - regulated transactivator protein were transiently trans - fected with pRetroX - Tight . puro myc - BirA * LaA with Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen ; Roux et al . , 2009 ) . Cells began selection with 0 . 5 µg / ml puro - mycin 48 h after transfection . Upon colony formation , subclones were isolated and screened by immunofluorescence after induction by the addition of 1 µg / ml doxycycline for 24 h . Immunofluorescence Cells were fixed with 3 % paraformaldehyde / PBS and permeabilized in 0 . 4 % Triton X - 100 / PBS ( Roux et al . , 2009 ) . Differential permeabilization was per - formed after paraformaldehyde fixation with 0 . 001 % digitonin at 4 ° C for 10 min ( Crisp et al . , 2006 ; Liu et al . , 2007 ; Roux et al . , 2009 ) . Mouse anti - myc ( 1 : 10 9E10 ; American Type Culture Collection ) and streptavidin - 568 ( 1 : 1 , 000 ; Invitrogen ) were used to identify myc fusion proteins and biotinyl - ated proteins , respectively . Other antibodies include rabbit anti - FAM169A / SLAP75 ( 1 : 200 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) , mouse anti - HA ( 1 : 200 12CA5 ; Covance ) , mouse anti - Nup153 ( 1 : 2 , SA1 ; Bodoor et al . , 1999 ) , and mouse anti - LaA ( 1 : 100 , XB10 ; Horton et al . , 1992 ) . Proteins were visualized with goat anti – mouse , goat anti – rabbit , or streptavadin coupled to Alexa Fluor 488 or - 568 ( 1 : 1 , 000 ; Invitrogen ) . DNA was detected with Hoechst dye 33258 . Cover - slips were mounted in 10 % Mowiol 4 - 88 . The majority of images were ob - tained at 25°C using either a Leica DMRB microscope ( 40x / 1 . 00 PL FLUOTAR oil PH3 and 63x / 1 . 32 HCL PL APO oil PH3 Leica objectives ) running IPLab / IVision software , or an Applied Precision DeltaVision Core system based on an Olympus IX71 microscope equipped with a 60x NA 1 . 42 lens . Image ac - quisition and processing was accomplished using DeltaVision Resolve3D and Softworx 4 . 1 . 0 software . Both microscope systems were equipped with Photo - metrics CoolSnap HQ cameras . Some conventional epifluorescence images of HA - SLAP75 – transfected HeLa cells were acquired using a Zeiss Axioimager . Z1 equipped with a 63x NA 1 . 4 lens and CoolSnap HQ camera . Western blotting Cells were lysed in Laemmli SDS - sample buffer , separated by SDS - PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose ( Liu et al . , 2007 ) . Immunoblotting was per - formed ( Liu et al . , 2007 ) with rabbit anti - myc ( 1 : 50 , 000 ; Abcam ) . Biotinyl - ated proteins were detected similarly with the following modifications . Membranes were blocked in 2 . 5 % bovine serum albumin in PBS with 0 . 4 % Triton X - 100 and incubated in the same buffer with HRP - conjugated strep - tavidin ( 1 : 40 , 000 ; Invitrogen ) . Affinity capture of biotinylated proteins Cells were incubated for 24 h in complete media supplemented with 1 µg / ml doxycycline and 50 µM biotin . After three PBS washes , cells ( for small - scale analysis , < 10 7 ; for large scale analysis , 4 × 10 7 ) were lysed at 25°C in 1 ml lysis buffer ( 50 mM Tris , pH 7 . 4 , 500 mM NaCl , 0 . 4 % SDS , 5 mM EDTA , 1 mM DTT , and 1x Complete protease inhibitor [ Roche ] ) and soni - cated . Triton X - 100 was added to 2 % final concentration . After further soni - cation , an equal volume of 4°C 50 mM Tris ( pH 7 . 4 ) was added before additional sonication ( subsequent steps at 4°C ) and centrifugation at 16 , 000 relative centrifugal force . Supernatants were incubated with 600 µl Dyna - beads ( MyOne Steptavadin C1 ; Invitrogen ) overnight . Beads were collected and washed twice for 8 min at 25°C ( all subsequent steps at 25°C ) in 1 ml wash buffer 1 ( 2 % SDS in dH 2 O ) . This was repeated once with wash buffer 2 ( 0 . 1 % deoxycholate , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 500 mM NaCl , 1 mM EDTA , and 50 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 5 ) , once with wash buffer 3 ( 250 mM LiCl , 0 . 5 % NP - 40 , 0 . 5 % deoxycholate , 1 mM EDTA , and 10 mM Tris , pH 8 . 1 ) and twice with wash buffer 4 ( 50 mM Tris , pH 7 . 4 , and 50 mM NaCl ) . 10 % of the sample was reserved for Western blot analysis . Bound proteins were removed from the magnetic beads with 50 µl of Laemmli SDS - sample buffer saturated with biotin at 98°C . For the larger scale preparation , 90 % of the sample to be analyzed by mass spectrometry was washed twice in 50 mM NH 4 HCO 3 . Protein identification by mass spectrometry For reduced scale experiments , proteins eluted from the streptavidin beads by SDS - sample buffer were reduced and alkylated and separated by 1D SDS - PAGE . Separated proteins were visualized by colloidal Coomassie blue staining . The whole gel lane was cut in 24 equal - sized gel bands , destained , and submitted to tryptic in - gel digestion , all using perforated microtiter plates ( Proxeon ) with exchange of solvents by low - speed centrifugation . Peptides were eluted into V - bottom polypropylene microtiter plates , freeze - dried , a primary amine . However , based on our results here , we can make some rough estimates . We can conservatively estimate that 50 % of the proteins detected by BioID - LaA predominantly reside in the INM , the nuclear lamina , or the nucleoplasmic face of NPCs . The nuclear lamina in mammalian somatic cells is generally agreed to be  15 – 20 nm thick ( Aaronson and Blobel , 1975 ; Dwyer and Blobel , 1976 ) and is closely apposed to the INM ( Gerace and Huber , 2012 ) . Nup153 and Nup50 appear to be associated with the nuclear ring of NPCs , as does the N - terminal region of TPR ( Guan et al . , 2000 ; Krull et al . , 2004 ) . This would place these nucleoporins at about the level of the nuclear lamina . Taken together , these findings suggest that roughly 50 % of detected proteins likely reside within  20 – 30 nm of the nearest LaA molecule , and could well be much closer . More accurate measurements are limited by the population of nucleo - plasmic mycBirA * LaA and the considerable mobility of most proteins over the 24 - h labeling period . A significant finding that lends additional credence to the utility of BioID is the observation that histones , which are lysine rich and highly abundant in the nucleus , constitute a dispropor - tionately small fraction of the identified proteins . This indicates that BioID is not generating widespread biotinylation , but is more selectively labeling only those proteins in immediate proximity to the fusion protein . This could also be inferred from our fluor - escence microscopy data where the streptavidin labeling is colo - calized with the myc - BirA * LaA and restricted largely to the NE . It should also be noted that low levels of histones are reported to be biotinylated in vivo ( Kuroishi et al . , 2011 ) . We detected bio - tinylated histones ( H1 . 3 / H1 . 4 and H1 . 0 ) in our control prepara - tions at levels substantially lower than the four endogenously biotinylated mammalian carboxylases ( Table S2 ) . In summary , we would suggest that BioID provides a power - ful new approach to probe protein interactions and proximity in a variety of cell types . It is a technique that should be accessible to a broad range of researchers comfortable working with con - ventional molecular and cell biology techniques , and does not require specialized equipment other than the proteomic analysis that has become a commonly available service . We will continue to explore the advantages intrinsic to the BioID system . This includes its application in various subcellular compartments and the ability to monitor interactions of proteins at different time points after their synthesis , or at different stages of the cell cycle by regulating biotin availability and / or fusion protein expression . And although current studies are limited to mammalian cells , we predict that BioID has applications in cells from a wide variety of species as well as in model organisms . Materials and methods Plasmids Humanized BirA ( Mechold et al . , 2005 ) was mutated to R118G by overlap extension PCR . Products for both the WT and R118G contain a 5  SalI site and at the 3  end , an XhoI , stop codon and AflII . These were digested with SalI and AflII and inserted into pcDNA3 . 1 C - terminal to a myc - epitope digested with XhoI and AflII . Human LaA was excised from pcDNA3 . 1 by XhoI and AflII and inserted in frame with the mycBirA * in pcDNA3 . 1 using the same restriction sites . The entire myc - BirA * LaA sequence was removed from pcDNA3 . 1 by NheI and AflII , bunted and inserted into pRetroX . Tight . puro that was digested with EcoRI and blunted . Clones were screened for 809 Screening for protein – protein interactions with BioID • Roux et al . A - and B - type lamins . Nucleus . 2 : 500 – 509 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4161 / nucl . 2 . 5 . 17913 Beckett , D . , E . Kovaleva , and P . J . Schatz . 1999 . A minimal peptide substrate in biotin holoenzyme synthetase - catalyzed biotinylation . Protein Sci . 8 : 921 – 929 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1110 / ps . 8 . 4 . 921 Bione , S . , E . Maestrini , S . Rivella , M . Mancini , S . Regis , G . Romeo , and D . Toniolo . 1994 . Identification of a novel X - linked gene responsible for Emery - Dreifuss muscular dystrophy . Nat . Genet . 8 : 323 – 327 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ng1294 - 323 Bodoor , K . , S . Shaikh , D . Salina , W . H . Raharjo , R . Bastos , M . Lohka , and B . Burke . 1999 . Sequential recruitment of NPC proteins to the nuclear pe - riphery at the end of mitosis . J . Cell Sci . 112 : 2253 – 2264 . Bonne , G . , M . R . Di Barletta , S . Varnous , H . M . Bécane , E . H . Hammouda , L . Merlini , F . Muntoni , C . R . Greenberg , F . Gary , J . A . Urtizberea , et al . 1999 . Mutations in the gene encoding lamin A / C cause autosomal dominant Emery - Dreifuss muscular dystrophy . Nat . Genet . 21 : 285 – 288 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 6799 Bonne , G . , E . Mercuri , A . Muchir , A . Urtizberea , H . M . Bécane , D . Recan , L . Merlini , M . Wehnert , R . Boor , U . Reuner , et al . 2000 . Clinical and molecu - lar genetic spectrum of autosomal dominant Emery - Dreifuss muscular dys - trophy due to mutations of the lamin A / C gene . Ann . Neurol . 48 : 170 – 180 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / 1531 - 8249 ( 200008 ) 48 : 2 < 170 : : AID - ANA6 > 3 . 0 . CO ; 2 - J Broers , J . L . , B . M . Machiels , G . J . van Eys , H . J . Kuijpers , E . M . Manders , R . van Driel , and F . C . Ramaekers . 1999 . Dynamics of the nuclear lamina as monitored by GFP - tagged A - type lamins . J . Cell Sci . 112 : 3463 – 3475 . Burke , B . , and K . J . Roux . 2009 . Nuclei take a position : managing nuclear location . Dev . Cell . 17 : 587 – 597 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2009 . 10 . 018 Castano , E . , V . V . Philimonenko , M . Kahle , J . Fukalová , A . Kalendová , S . Yildirim , R . Dzijak , H . Dingová - Krásna , and P . Hozák . 2010 . Actin complexes in the cell nucleus : new stones in an old field . Histochem . Cell Biol . 133 : 607 – 626 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00418 - 010 - 0701 - 2 Chapman - Smith , A . , and J . E . Cronan Jr . 1999 . Molecular biology of biotin at - tachment to proteins . J . Nutr . 129 ( 2S , Suppl ) : 477S – 484S . Choi - Rhee , E . , H . Schulman , and J . E . Cronan . 2004 . Promiscuous protein bioti - nylation by Escherichia coli biotin protein ligase . Protein Sci . 13 : 3043 – 3050 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1110 / ps . 04911804 Crisp , M . , Q . Liu , K . Roux , J . B . Rattner , C . Shanahan , B . Burke , P . D . Stahl , and D . Hodzic . 2006 . Coupling of the nucleus and cytoplasm : role of the LINC complex . J . Cell Biol . 172 : 41 – 53 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200509124 Cronan , J . E . 2005 . Targeted and proximity - dependent promiscuous protein biotinylation by a mutant Escherichia coli biotin protein ligase . J . Nutr . Biochem . 16 : 416 – 418 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jnutbio . 2005 . 03 . 017 Daigle , N . , J . Beaudouin , L . Hartnell , G . Imreh , E . Hallberg , J . Lippincott - Schwartz , and J . Ellenberg . 2001 . Nuclear pore complexes form immobile networks and have a very low turnover in live mammalian cells . J . Cell Biol . 154 : 71 – 84 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200101089 Dechat , T . , B . Korbei , O . A . Vaughan , S . Vlcek , C . J . Hutchison , and R . Foisner . 2000 . Lamina - associated polypeptide 2alpha binds intranuclear A - type lamins . J . Cell Sci . 113 : 3473 – 3484 . Dwyer , N . , and G . Blobel . 1976 . A modified procedure for the isolation of a pore complex - lamina fraction from rat liver nuclei . J . Cell Biol . 70 : 581 – 591 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 70 . 3 . 581 Foisner , R . , and L . Gerace . 1993 . Integral membrane proteins of the nuclear enve - lope interact with lamins and chromosomes , and binding is modulated by mitotic phosphorylation . Cell . 73 : 1267 – 1279 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 93 ) 90355 - T Gerace , L . , and M . D . Huber . 2012 . Nuclear lamina at the crossroads of the cyto - plasm and nucleus . J . Struct . Biol . 177 : 24 – 31 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2011 . 11 . 007 Goldman , R . D . , Y . Gruenbaum , R . D . Moir , D . K . Shumaker , and T . P . Spann . 2002 . Nuclear lamins : building blocks of nuclear architecture . Genes Dev . 16 : 533 – 547 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / gad . 960502 Green , N . M . 1963 . Avidin . 1 . The Use of ( 14 - C ) Biotin for Kinetic Studies and for Assay . Biochem . J . 89 : 585 – 591 . Guan , T . , R . H . Kehlenbach , E . C . Schirmer , A . Kehlenbach , F . Fan , B . E . Clurman , N . Arnheim , and L . Gerace . 2000 . Nup50 , a nucleoplasmically oriented nucleoporin with a role in nuclear protein export . Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 : 5619 – 5630 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1128 / MCB . 20 . 15 . 5619 - 5630 . 2000 Gudise , S . , R . A . Figueroa , R . Lindberg , V . Larsson , and E . Hallberg . 2011 . Samp1 is functionally associated with the LINC complex and A - type lamina net - works . J . Cell Sci . 124 : 2077 – 2085 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 078923 Gueneau , L . , A . T . Bertrand , J . P . Jais , M . A . Salih , T . Stojkovic , M . Wehnert , M . Hoeltzenbein , S . Spuler , S . Saitoh , A . Verschueren , et al . 2009 . Mutations of the FHL1 gene cause Emery - Dreifuss muscular dystrophy . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 85 : 338 – 353 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ajhg . 2009 . 07 . 015 dissolved in 0 . 1 % formic acid in water , and submitted to nano - flow HPLC coupled to a QTOF mass spectrometer ( 1260 nanoHPLC [ Agilent Technolo - gies ] and QTOF 6554 with ChipCube [ Agilent Technologies ] ) . Separation of peptides was performed on a 150 - mm × 75 - µm C18 Reprosil column in a chip ( Chip II ; Agilent Technologies ) . The applied gradient was from 8 % ace - tonitrile in water with 0 . 2 % formic acid to 35 % acetonitrile in water with 0 . 2 % formic acid over 35 min . The mass spectrometer calibration was main - tained by continuous submission of a calibrant solution and recalibration of the acquired spectra after the analytical run . The LC - MS / MS system was controlled by MassHunter Acquisition software ( Agilent Technologies ) , 4 MS spectra per second and 3 MS / MS spectra per second were collected . The MS to MS / MS switching was done data dependent with a threshold of 1 , 000 counts and a charge of 2 – 4 for the peptides . Raw data were con - verted into mzdata . xml using MassHunter Qualitative Analysis software ( Agi - lent Technologies ) and database search was performed using MASCOT 3 . 2 ( MatrixScience ) and human IPI database ( version 3 . 65 ) . Carboxymethylated Cys was set as fixed modification , oxidized Met , deamidation of Asn and Gln , pyroGlu formation of the N terminus and acetylation of the N terminus as variable modification . The resulting . dat files were loaded into SCAFFOLD Q + ( Proteome Software ) . The acceptance level for proteins was two identi - fied peptides with minimum 95 % probability each . Spectra of candidates were verified visually . For large - scale analysis , on bead tryptic digests were analyzed by 1D LC / MS / MS by the Sanford - Burnham Proteomic Facility ( La Jolla , CA ) . Tris ( 2 - carboxyethyl ) phosphine ( TCEP ) was added to 100 µl of beads suspen - sion mix and proteins were reduced at 37°C for 30 min . Iodoacetamide was added ( to 20 mM ) and proteins were alkylated at 37°C for 40 min in the dark . Mass spectrometry grade trypsin ( Promega ) was added (  1 : 50 ratio ) for overnight digestion at 37°C . Magnetic beads were removed by centrifu - gation . Formic acid was added to the peptide solution ( to 2 % ) before on - line analysis of peptides by high - resolution , high - accuracy LC - MS / MS , consisting of a Michrom HPLC , a 15 - cm Michrom Magic C18 column , a low - flow ADVANCED Michrom MS source , and a LTQ - Orbitrap XL ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) . A 120 - min gradient of 10 – 30 % B ( 0 . 1 % formic acid , 100 % aceto - nitrile ) was used to separate the peptides . The total LC time was 141 min . The LTQ - Orbitrap XL was set to scan precursors in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60 , 000 , followed by data - dependent MS / MS of the top four precursors . Raw LC - MS / MS data were submitted to Sorcerer Enterprise ( Sage - N Research Inc . ) for protein identification against the IPI human protein database , which contains semi - tryptic peptide sequences with the allowance of up to two missed cleavages and precursor mass tolerance of 50 . 0 ppm . A molecu - lar mass of 57 D was added to all cysteines to account for carboxyamido - methylation . Differential search included 16 D for methionine oxidation , and 226 D on N terminus and lysine for biotinylation . Search results were sorted , filtered , statically analyzed , and displayed using PeptideProphet and Protein - Prophet ( Institute for Systems Biology ) . The minimum trans - proteomic pipeline ( TPP ) probability score for proteins was set to 0 . 95 , to assure TPP error rate of lower than 0 . 01 . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 provides evidence that SLAP75 resides predominantly at the inner nuclear membrane . Fig . S2 provides evidence that anti - SLAP75 specifically detects exogenous but not endogenous SLAP75 in HeLa cells . Table S1 lists the identities and abundance of the proteins identified by BioID - LaA . Table S2 lists the identities and abundance of the proteins detected with control cells . Online supplemental material is available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / jcb . 201112098 / DC1 . We would like to thank Wenhong Zhu for assistance with mass spectrometry . B . Burke and M . Raida were supported by the Singapore Biomedical Research Council and the Singapore Agency for Science , Technology and Research ( A * STAR ) . Funding for this project was provided by startup funds to K . J . Roux from Sanford Research / USD and from Bankhead - Coley Cancer Research Program / State of Florida Department of Health NIR award 08BN - 05 to K . J . Roux . Submitted : 19 December 2011 Accepted : 10 February 2012 References Aaronson , R . P . , and G . Blobel . 1975 . Isolation of nuclear pore complexes in association with a lamina . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 72 : 1007 – 1011 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 72 . 3 . 1007 Al - Haboubi , T . , D . K . Shumaker , J . Köser , M . Wehnert , and B . Fahrenkrog . 2011 . Distinct association of the nuclear pore protein Nup153 with JCB • VOLUME 196 • NUMBER 6 • 2012 810 Sang , L . , J . J . Miller , K . C . Corbit , R . H . Giles , M . J . Brauer , E . A . Otto , L . M . Baye , X . Wen , S . J . Scales , M . Kwong , et al . 2011 . Mapping the NPHP - JBTS - MKS protein network reveals ciliopathy disease genes and pathways . Cell . 145 : 513 – 528 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 04 . 019 Schirmer , E . C . , L . Florens , T . Guan , J . R . Yates III , and L . Gerace . 2003 . Nuclear membrane proteins with potential disease links found by subtractive proteomics . Science . 301 : 1380 – 1382 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1088176 Segura - Totten , M . , A . K . Kowalski , R . Craigie , and K . L . Wilson . 2002 . Barrier - to - autointegration factor : major roles in chromatin deconden - sation and nuclear assembly . J . Cell Biol . 158 : 475 – 485 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200202019 Shimi , T . , K . Pfleghaar , S . Kojima , C . G . Pack , I . Solovei , A . E . Goldman , S . A . Adam , D . K . Shumaker , M . Kinjo , T . Cremer , and R . D . Goldman . 2008 . The A - and B - type nuclear lamin networks : microdomains involved in chromatin organization and transcription . Genes Dev . 22 : 3409 – 3421 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / gad . 1735208 Shumaker , D . K . , T . Dechat , A . Kohlmaier , S . A . Adam , M . R . Bozovsky , M . R . Erdos , M . Eriksson , A . E . Goldman , S . Khuon , F . S . Collins , et al . 2006 . Mutant nuclear lamin A leads to progressive alterations of epigenetic control in premature aging . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 103 : 8703 – 8708 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0602569103 Simon , D . N . , and K . L . Wilson . 2011 . The nucleoskeleton as a genome - associ - ated dynamic ‘network of networks’ . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 : 695 – 708 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm3207 Streaker , E . D . , and D . Beckett . 2006 . Nonenzymatic biotinylation of a biotin car - boxyl carrier protein : unusual reactivity of the physiological target lysine . Protein Sci . 15 : 1928 – 1935 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1110 / ps . 062187306 Sukegawa , J . , and G . Blobel . 1993 . A nuclear pore complex protein that con - tains zinc finger motifs , binds DNA , and faces the nucleoplasm . Cell . 72 : 29 – 38 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 93 ) 90047 - T Sullivan , T . , D . Escalante - Alcalde , H . Bhatt , M . Anver , N . Bhat , K . Nagashima , C . L . Stewart , and B . Burke . 1999 . Loss of A - type lamin expression compromises nuclear envelope integrity leading to muscular dystrophy . J . Cell Biol . 147 : 913 – 920 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 147 . 5 . 913 Torrisi , M . R . , and S . Bonatti . 1985 . Immunocytochemical study of the partition and distribution of Sindbis virus glycoproteins in freeze - fractured mem - branes of infected baby hamster kidney cells . J . Cell Biol . 101 : 1300 – 1306 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 101 . 4 . 1300 Torrisi , M . R . , L . V . Lotti , A . Pavan , G . Migliaccio , and S . Bonatti . 1987 . Free diffusion to and from the inner nuclear membrane of newly synthesized plasma membrane glycoproteins . J . Cell Biol . 104 : 733 – 737 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 104 . 3 . 733 van Steensel , B . , and S . Henikoff . 2000 . Identification of in vivo DNA tar - gets of chromatin proteins using tethered dam methyltransferase . Nat . Biotechnol . 18 : 424 – 428 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 74487 Walther , T . C . , M . Fornerod , H . Pickersgill , M . Goldberg , T . D . Allen , and I . W . Mattaj . 2001 . The nucleoporin Nup153 is required for nuclear pore basket formation , nuclear pore complex anchoring and import of a subset of nuclear proteins . EMBO J . 20 : 5703 – 5714 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / emboj / 20 . 20 . 5703 Worman , H . J . 2012 . Nuclear lamins and laminopathies . J . Pathol . 226 : 316 – 325 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1002 / path . 2999 Worman , H . J . , L . G . Fong , A . Muchir , and S . G . Young . 2009 . Laminopathies and the long strange trip from basic cell biology to therapy . J . Clin . Invest . 119 : 1825 – 1836 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1172 / JCI37679 Zhang , Q . , C . Bethmann , N . F . Worth , J . D . Davies , C . Wasner , A . Feuer , C . D . Ragnauth , Q . Yi , J . A . Mellad , D . T . Warren , et al . 2007 . Nesprin - 1 and - 2 are involved in the pathogenesis of Emery Dreifuss muscular dystro - phy and are critical for nuclear envelope integrity . Hum . Mol . Genet . 16 : 2816 – 2833 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / hmg / ddm238 Hase , M . E . , and V . C . Cordes . 2003 . Direct interaction with nup153 mediates binding of Tpr to the periphery of the nuclear pore complex . Mol . Biol . Cell . 14 : 1923 – 1940 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E02 - 09 - 0620 Holaska , J . M . , and K . L . Wilson . 2006 . Multiple roles for emerin : implications for Emery - Dreifuss muscular dystrophy . Anat . Rec . A Discov . Mol . Cell . Evol . Biol . 288 : 676 – 680 . Holaska , J . M . , K . K . Lee , A . K . Kowalski , and K . L . Wilson . 2003 . Transcriptional repressor germ cell - less ( GCL ) and barrier to autointegration factor ( BAF ) compete for binding to emerin in vitro . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 6969 – 6975 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M208811200 Horton , H . , I . McMorrow , and B . Burke . 1992 . Independent expression and as - sembly properties of heterologous lamins A and C in murine embryonal carcinomas . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 57 : 172 – 183 . Krull , S . , J . Thyberg , B . Björkroth , H . R . Rackwitz , and V . C . Cordes . 2004 . Nucleoporins as components of the nuclear pore complex core structure and Tpr as the architectural element of the nuclear basket . Mol . Biol . Cell . 15 : 4261 – 4277 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E04 - 03 - 0165 Kubben , N . , J . W . Voncken , J . Demmers , C . Calis , G . van Almen , Y . Pinto , and T . Misteli . 2010 . Identification of differential protein interactors of lamin A and progerin . Nucleus . 1 : 513 – 525 . Kulman , J . D . , M . Satake , and J . E . Harris . 2007 . A versatile system for site - specific enzymatic biotinylation and regulated expression of proteins in cultured mammalian cells . Protein Expr . Purif . 52 : 320 – 328 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . pep . 2006 . 09 . 011 Kuroishi , T . , L . Rios - Avila , V . Pestinger , S . S . Wijeratne , and J . Zempleni . 2011 . Biotinylation is a natural , albeit rare , modification of human histones . Mol . Genet . Metab . 104 : 537 – 545 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ymgme . 2011 . 08 . 030 Kwon , K . , and D . Beckett . 2000 . Function of a conserved sequence motif in biotin holoenzyme synthetases . Protein Sci . 9 : 1530 – 1539 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1110 / ps . 9 . 8 . 1530 Kwon , K . , E . D . Streaker , S . Ruparelia , and D . Beckett . 2000 . Multiple disor - dered loops function in corepressor - induced dimerization of the biotin re - pressor . J . Mol . Biol . 304 : 821 – 833 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1006 / jmbi . 2000 . 4249 Lane , M . D . , K . L . Rominger , D . L . Young , and F . Lynen . 1964 . The enzy - matic synthesis of holotranscarboxylase from apotranscarboxylase and ( + ) - biotin . II . Investigation of the reaction mechanism . J . Biol . Chem . 239 : 2865 – 2871 . Lee , K . K . , T . Haraguchi , R . S . Lee , T . Koujin , Y . Hiraoka , and K . L . Wilson . 2001 . Distinct functional domains in emerin bind lamin A and DNA - bridging protein BAF . J . Cell Sci . 114 : 4567 – 4573 . Liu , Q . , N . Pante , T . Misteli , M . Elsagga , M . Crisp , D . Hodzic , B . Burke , and K . J . Roux . 2007 . Functional association of Sun1 with nuclear pore complexes . J . Cell Biol . 178 : 785 – 798 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200704108 Mansharamani , M . , and K . L . Wilson . 2005 . Direct binding of nuclear membrane protein MAN1 to emerin in vitro and two modes of binding to barrier - to - autointegration factor . J . Biol . Chem . 280 : 13863 – 13870 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M413020200 Mechold , U . , C . Gilbert , and V . Ogryzko . 2005 . Codon optimization of the BirA enzyme gene leads to higher expression and an improved efficiency of biotinylation of target proteins in mammalian cells . J . Biotechnol . 116 : 245 – 249 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbiotec . 2004 . 12 . 003 Moir , R . D . , M . Yoon , S . Khuon , and R . D . Goldman . 2000 . Nuclear lamins A and B1 : different pathways of assembly during nuclear envelope formation in living cells . J . Cell Biol . 151 : 1155 – 1168 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 151 . 6 . 1155 Montes de Oca , R . , C . J . Shoemaker , M . Gucek , R . N . Cole , and K . L . Wilson . 2009 . Barrier - to - autointegration factor proteome reveals chromatin - regulatory partners . PLoS ONE . 4 : e7050 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0007050 Nesbeth , D . , S . L . Williams , L . Chan , T . Brain , N . K . Slater , F . Farzaneh , and D . Darling . 2006 . Metabolic biotinylation of lentiviral pseudotypes for scalable paramagnetic microparticle - dependent manipulation . Mol . Ther . 13 : 814 – 822 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ymthe . 2005 . 09 . 016 Raffaele Di Barletta , M . , E . Ricci , G . Galluzzi , P . Tonali , M . Mora , L . Morandi , A . Romorini , T . Voit , K . H . Orstavik , L . Merlini , et al . 2000 . Different mutations in the LMNA gene cause autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive Emery - Dreifuss muscular dystrophy . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 66 : 1407 – 1412 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 302869 Rasala , B . A . , C . Ramos , A . Harel , and D . J . Forbes . 2008 . Capture of AT - rich chromatin by ELYS recruits POM121 and NDC1 to initiate nuclear pore assembly . Mol . Biol . Cell . 19 : 3982 – 3996 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E08 - 01 - 0012 Roux , K . J . , M . L . Crisp , Q . Liu , D . Kim , S . Kozlov , C . L . Stewart , and B . Burke . 2009 . Nesprin 4 is an outer nuclear membrane protein that can induce kinesin - mediated cell polarization . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 106 : 2194 – 2199 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0808602106