Heparin interaction with a receptor on hyperglycemic dividing cells prevents intracellular hyaluronan synthesis and autophagy responses in models of type 1 diabetes Aimin Wang 1 , Nehru Viji Sankaranarayanan 2 , Masaki Yanagishita 3 , Douglas M . Templeton 4 , Umesh R . Desai 2 , Kazuyuki Sugahara 5 , Christina P . Wang 1 and Vincent C . Hascall 1 1 - Biomedical Engineering , Cleveland Clinic , Cleveland , OH , United States 2 - Department of Medicinal Chemistry and Institute for Structural Biology , Virginia Commonwealth University , Richmond , VA , United States 3 - Division of Biochemistry , Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences , Tokyo Medical and Dental University , Tokyo , Japan 4 - Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology , University of Toronto , Toronto , Canada 5 - Department of Pathobiochemistry , Faculty of Pharmacy , Meijo University , Nagoya , Japan Correspondence to Vincent C . Hascall : hascalv @ ccf . org http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . matbio . 2015 . 04 . 003 Edited by R . V . Iozzo Abstract Previous studies and ongoing research indicate the importance of an interaction between a putative receptor on dividing cells in hyperglycemia and the non - reducing end motifs of heparin stored in mast cell secretory granules and how this interaction prevents activation of hyaluronan synthesis in intracellular compartments and subsequent autophagy . This suggests a new role for endosomal heparanase in exposing this cryptic motif present in the initial large heparin chains on serglycin and in the highly sulfated ( NS ) domains of heparan sulfate . © 2015 Published by Elsevier B . V . This is an open access article under the CC BY - NC - ND license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - nd / 4 . 0 / ) . Inactive hyaluronan synthases normally migrate to the plasma membrane where they are inserted and activated . Then they alternately add cytosolic substrates , UDP - glucuronate ( UDP - GlcUA ) and UDP - N - acetyl - D - glucosamine ( UDP - GlcNAc ) , onto the reducing end of the elongating hyaluronan chain that is being extruded into the extracellular matrix [ 1 , 2 ] . Hyperglycemic mesangial cells stimulated to divide from G0 / G1 to S phase activate hyaluronan synthases by a PKC pathway in intracellular membrane compartments – endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) , Golgi and transport vesicles – in response to the elevated cytosolic UDP - substrate concentrations due to glucose stress . The abnormal deposition of the polyanionic hyaluronan macromolecules into the ER induces ER stress , autophagy and subsequent extrusion of an extracellular monocyte - adhesive hyaluronan matrix after completing cell division [ 1 , 3 , 4 ] . This mechanism occurs in kidneys of streptozoto - cin - induced type 1 diabetic rats . Mesangial cells in the hyperglycemic kidney glomeruli initiate cell division within the first week with subsequent autoph - agy and continuous accumulation of an extracellular hyaluronan matrix , Fig . 1 . This is accompanied by an influx of monocytes / macrophages that initiate pro - inflammatory and fibrotic responses that lead to nephropathy , proteinuria , weight loss and kidney failure by 6 weeks [ 4 , 5 ] . Previous studies showed that daily IP injection of a small amount of heparin in this diabetic rat model prevented the pathological responses and sustained kidney function for at least 8 weeks [ 6 , 7 ] . To address the mechanisms involved , hyperglycemic mesangial cells were treated with a low concentration ( 2 μ g / ml ) of heparin after initiating progression from G0 / G1 to S phase of cell division [ 5 ] . This prevented the activation of the hyaluronan synthases in the 0022 - 2836 / © 2015 Published by Elsevier B . V . This is an open access article under the CC BY - NC - ND license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - nd / 4 . 0 / ) . Matrix Biol . ( 2015 ) 48 , 36 – 41 Review intracellular membrane compartments and allowed the cells to complete cell division without the ER stress and autophagy responses . However , it also re - programmed the cells to address the high glucose stress after completing cell division by inducing a large hyaluronan synthesis response at the plasma membrane with subsequent extracellular extrusion of an extensive monocyte - adhesive hyaluronan matrix . This mechanism appears central to the glomerular responses in kidneys in heparin - treated diabetic rats [ 5 ] , Fig . 1 . Mesangial cells in glomeruli showed no autophagy responses over the 6 - week period studied . Within the first week , the glomeruli accumulated an extensive extracellular hyaluronan matrix around the mesangial cells at which time there were few macrophages present in the glomer - uli . By 6 weeks there were extensive numbers of macrophages in the glomeruli , and the hyaluronan matrix was reduced to near control levels . This provides evidence that the mesangial cells in the heparin - treated diabetic rats initiate and sustain a large synthesis of extracellular hyaluronan matrix to address the glucose stress while maintaining kidney function , and that the recruited macrophages in the glomeruli effectively remove the hyaluronan matrix without inducing mesangial cell inflammatory and fibrotic responses . Fluorotagged heparin was used to track the binding and subsequent entry of the heparin into the dividing hyperglycemic cells [ 5 ] . It bound onto the cell surface within 1 h after initiating cell division , was intracellular by 2 h , and localized in the ER , Golgi and nuclei by 4 h . Exposure of the cells to heparin for only 4 h was sufficient to prevent the intracellular hyaluronan and autophagy responses , and to reprogram the cells to synthesize the extracellular monocyte - adhesive hyaluronan matrix after completing division . These results provide strong evidence that a cell surface receptor is involved in order to bind , internalize and transport the large ( ~ 15 kDa ) , highly polyanionic heparin to these intracellular compartments . Further , heparin interaction with this receptor would initiate activation of the intracellular pathways that : 1 ) inhibit the PKC activation of the hyaluronan synthases in the intracellular compartment membranes , and 2 ) initi - ate the mechanism that induces the synthesis of the extensive extracellular hyaluronan matrix after com - pleting cell division . How does heparin do this ? Heparin is synthesized by mast cells as the proteoglycan serglycin , which contains ~ 15 long heparin chains ( ~ 100 kDa ) on a repetitive serine – glycine stretch in the core protein , Fig . 2 [ 8 ] . However , during or after its progression to the storage granules , the heparin chains are hydrolyzed into much smaller fragments ( ~ 15 kDa ) by heparanase . This is the anti - coagulant form of heparin that is in extensive clinical use . There is only one heparanase in our genome , and it hydrolyzes the original intact heparin chain in regions that expose non - reducing terminal , GlcNS , - O - S residues on many of the fragments , Fig . 2 , which is in good agreement with a previous report ( see Table 1 in ref . Fig . 1 . HA concentrations in glomeruli isolated from kidneys 1 – 6 weeks after initiating diabetes in rats treated without or with heparin ( IP ) are shown in the upper panel . Sections of glomeruli from 1 and 6 week kidneys of diabetic rats ( A – C ) and diabetic rats treated with heparin ( D – F ) were stained for hyaluronan ( green ) and macro - phages ( red ) ( A , B , D , E ) , and for markers of autophagy , LC3 ( green ) and cyclin D3 ( red ) ( C , F ) . Modified from figures in reference [ 5 ] . 37 Heparin interaction with a receptor on hyperglycem [ 9 ] ) . These structural features of the cleavage sites of heparanase are based on in vitro recombinant heparanase digestion of defined heparin and heparan sulfate oligosaccharides followed by anion - exchange HPLC that indicated the predominance of the GlcNS , 6 - O - S residues and GlcNS , 3 - O - S residues at the non - reducing termini of the fragments . These non - reducing termini appear to be critical for the effect of heparin on hyperglycemic dividing cells as de - scribed below . Heparanase is also directly involved in catabolism of heparan sulfate proteoglycans , Fig . 3A . Heparan sulfate chains are unique in that they have regions that are highly sulfated ( NS domains ) interspersed between unsulfated regions ( NA domains ) . Although it has been generally assumed that the overall helical shape of HS remains the same for both domains , detailed modeling studies † suggest that introduction of sulfate groups , as in NS domains , onto the unsulfated backbone , as in NA domains , introduces considerable changes in inter - glycosidic torsions ( N 20° ) [ 10 ] . These changes appear to be directly related to the sulfation pattern , e . g . , presence of GlcNS , 6 - O - S and / or GlcNS , 3 - O - S residues , and lead to formation of unique micro - domains at the NS / NA interface and within NS domains . It is well established that heparanase prefers sulfated regions , which suggests that the NS domains are in part designed to be effective substrates for the heparanase . Previous studies [ 11 ] showed that ovarian granulo - sa cells catabolize the cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycan syndecan by endocytosis into an endosomal compartment where the heparan sulfate chains are hydrolyzed to fragments of ~ 10 , 000 MW ( t1 / 2 – 30 min ) . These fragments are then cleaved further and transported to lysosomes for complete degradation ( t1 / 2 – 4 h ) , Fig . 3A . Other studies [ 12 – 15 ] showed that cell surface heparan sulfate proteogly - cans on confluent mesangial cells are catabolized by a similar mechanism with one exception . Endosomal fragmentation occurs within the first hour after internalization of syndecan with transport of some of the heparan sulfate fragments to lysosomes within 4 h . However , a significant proportion of the heparan sulfate fragments are recycled into the medium with a t1 / 2 of b 1 h after entry into the cell , Fig . 3A . These fragments and the intact heparan sulfate chains isolated by proteolysis from the cell surface were tested for their ability to bind to growth arrested ( G0 / G1 ) rat mesangial cells ( RMCs ) in medium with a normal glucose concentration . The fragments have a signifi - cant antimitogenic effect while the intact chains are much less effective ( ~ 10 fold less than the fragments ) . Growth arrested RMCs possess a high - affinity , as yet unidentified receptor , that can bind and internalize heparin ( ~ 6 . 6 × 10 6 sites per cell with a K d = 1 . 6 × 10 − 8 M ) [ 15 ] . This study also showed that heparin bound to growth arrested smooth muscle A10 cells similarly and inhibited cell division . In contrast , confluent RMCs have fewer heparin - binding sites with 5 – 10 fold lower binding affinity , providing evidence that this putative receptor is primarily on G0 / Fig . 2 . The model showing the FGF and antithrombin binding motifs of heparin / heparan sulfate and the enzymes that modify the backbone structure was provided by Jeff Esko . The site that heparanase could hydrolyze to expose a GlcN - S on the non - reducing end is indicated . The model for serglycin [ 8 ] is shown . The heparanase cleavage of the serglycin chains provides the heparin fragments that accumulate in the secretory granules of mast cells . 38 Heparin interaction with a receptor on hyperglycem G1 cells . These results provide evidence that the exposure of the non - reducing terminal GlcNS , 6 - O - S or GlcNS , 3 - O - S by the heparanase is part of the ligand motif recognized by the receptor , Fig . 4 . Hyaluronan glycocalyces on keratinocytes , and likely on many cells , catabolize hyaluronan by a very similar mechanism — cell surface hyaluronidase 2 digests the hyaluronan into ~ 20 , 000 MW fragments that are transported to an endosome compartment ( t1 / 2 – 15 min ) followed by transport to lysosomes for complete degradation ( t1 / 2 – 3 h ) , Fig . 3B [ 1 ] . Cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycans can also be internalized during this process . Therefore , heparanase is likely located in the same or a similar endosomal compartment that catabolizes hyaluronan . Bacterial heparitinase eliminases digest heparin to mainly Δ - disaccharides and some resistant tri - and tetrasaccharides [ 16 ] while leaving the non - reducing terminal trisaccharide structure with GlcNS - O - S at the non - reducing end intact , Fig . 4 . This trisaccha - ride retains the ability to prevent the intracellular hyaluronan synthesis and autophagy responses , and to induce the formation of the extensive monocyte - adhesive extracellular hyaluronan matrix after completing cell division ( data not shown ) . This provides compelling evidence that the putative receptor recognizes a non - reducing terminal GlcNS - O - S trisaccharide motif on the heparin that was exposed by the heparanase . Proposed Model — heparanase exposes non - reducing terminal cryptic sites in heparin and heparan sulfate that are ligands for a specific receptor present on dividing cells . Heparin interaction with this receptor on hyperglycemic cells progressing from G0 / G1 to S phase : 1 ) initiates intracellular responses that prevent activation of hyaluronan synthases in intracellular compartments by inhibiting the PKC pathway involved during cell division , and 2 ) re - programs the cell to increase synthesis of hyaluronan at the plasma membrane after completing cell division in order to prevent increases in cytosolic UDP - glucose and UDP - GlcNAc levels from continued hyperglycemic glucose stress . After completing divi - sion monocytes / macrophages are recruited to remove this monocyte - adhesive matrix in heparin treated diabetic rats . The receptor involved recognizes a Fig . 3 . A . The model , reproduced from [ 11 ] , shows how the cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycan syndecan on ovarian granulosa cells is catabolized through an endosomal pathway . The modification ( red ) shows the ability of this pathway to recycle heparan sulfate fragments outside the cell as occurs in kidney mesangial cells [ 13 , 14 ] . B . The model , reproduced from [ 1 ] , shows how cell surface hyaluronan is catabolized on many cells . 39 Heparin interaction with a receptor on hyperglycem motif on the non - reducing terminal GlcNS - O - S trisac - charide region exposed by heparanase in endosomal compartments involved in forming storage granules in mast cells and in the pathway for catabolizing cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycans . Notably , it has been reported that cell surface localization of hepar - anase on macrophages can regulate degradation of extracellular matrix heparan sulfate [ 17 ] , which could provide bio - active heparan sulfate fragments that participate in cell responses of dividing cells . In addition tokidneymesangial cells [ 5 ] , bonemarrow stromal cells [ 18 ] that divide in hyperglycemic medium also initiate the intracellular hyaluronan synthesis and subsequent autophagy responses , which heparin prevented . Further , both daughter cells divert to adipogenesis with production of a monocyte - adhesive extracellular hyaluronan matrix . This appears to occur in the diabetic mouse model in which adipocytes in adipose tissue have a surrounding extracellular hyalur - onan matrix with embedded macrophages [ 19 ] . Con - sistent with these results , the adipose tissue from obese mice in this model has limited numbers of osteogenic stem cells compared to adipose tissue from control mice [ 20 ] . This latter study showed that adipose from a type 2 diabetic mouse model also had depleted numbers of stem cells , which suggests that the mechanisms outlined above contribute to diabetic complications . In addition , a previous study with dividing aortic smooth muscle cells also showed accumulation of intracellular hyaluronan that was thought to be related to uptake of pericellular hyalur - onan matrix [ 21 ] . However , this response is consistent with our model because the standard conditions used for this model include growth in hyperglycemic medium . Therefore , we predict that this pathological mechanism will occur in most hyperglycemic dividing cells in vitro and often in vivo , and that it will be a central mechanism involved in many diabetic pathologies and obesity . Finally , understanding the complex cellular mecha - nisms by which heparin prevents it may help identify therapeutical directions to address diabetic pathologies . Acknowledgments This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants P01 HL 107147 ( VCH ) and P01 HL 107152 ( URD ) . Received 3 March 2015 ; Received in revised form 11 April 2015 ; Accepted 11 April 2015 Available online 16 April 2015 Keywords : Heparin ; Heparan sulfate ; Hyaluronan ; Heparanase ; Heparitinase † For details on modeling of NS / NA domains , contact Umesh R . Desai urdesai @ vcu . edu . References [ 1 ] HascallVC , WangA , TammiM , OikariS , TammiR , PassiA , etal . The dynamic metabolism of hyaluronan regulates the cytosolic concentration of UDP - GlcNAc . Matrix Biol 2014 ; 35 : 14 – 7 . Fig . 4 . The model shows how bacterial heparitinase eliminases can digest heparin fragments to release the non - reducing terminal trisaccharide . 40 Heparin interaction with a receptor on hyperglycem [ 2 ] Vigetti D , Viola M , Karousou E , De Luca G , Passi A . Metabolic control of hyaluronan synthases . Matrix Biol 2014 ; 35 : 8 – 13 . [ 3 ] Ren J , Hascall VC , Wang A . Cyclin D3 mediates synthesis of a hyaluronan matrix that is adhesive for monocytes in mesangial cells stimulated to divide in hyperglycemic medium . J Biol Chem 2009 ; 284 : 16621 – 32 . [ 4 ] WangA , delaMotteC , LauerM , HascallV . Hyaluronanmatrices in pathobiological processes . FEBS J 2011 ; 278 : 1412 – 8 . [ 5 ] Wang A , Ren J , Wang CP , Hascall VC . Heparin prevents intracellular hyaluronan synthesis and autophagy responses in hyperglycemic dividing mesangial cells and activates synthesis of an extensive extracellular monocyte - adhesive hyaluronan matrix after completing cell division . J Biol Chem 2014 ; 289 : 9418 – 29 . [ 6 ] Gambaro G , Cavazzana AO , Luzi P , Piccoli A , Borsatti A , Crepaldi G , et al . Glycosaminoglycans prevent morpholog - ical renal alterations and albuminuria in diabetic rats . Kidney Int 1992 ; 42 : 285 – 91 . [ 7 ] Gambaro G , Venturini AP , Noonan DM , Fries W , Re G , Garbisa S , et al . Treatment with a glycosaminoglycan formulation ameliorates experimental diabetic nephropathy . Kidney Int 1994 ; 46 : 797 – 806 . [ 8 ] Wight TN , Heinegard DK , Hascall VC . Proteoglycans : structure and function . In : Hay E , Olsen B , et al , editors . Cell biology of the extracellular matrix . 2nd ed . Plenum Press ; 1991 . p . 45 – 78 . [ 9 ] Okada Y , Yamada S , Toyoshima M , Dong J , Nakajima M , Sugahara K . Structural recognition by recombinant human heparanase that plays critical roles in tumor metastasis . Hierarchical sulfate groups with different effects and the essential target disulfated trisaccharide sequence . J Biol Chem 2002 ; 277 : 42488 – 95 . [ 10 ] Sankaranarayanan NV , Desai UR . Toward a robust compu - tational screening strategy for identifying glycosaminoglycan sequences that display high specificity for target proteins . Glycobiology 2014 ; 24 : 1323 – 33 . [ 11 ] Yanagishita M , Hascall VC . Cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycans . J Biol Chem 1992 ; 267 : 9451 – 4 . [ 12 ] Miralem T , Wang A , Templeton DM . Heparin inhibits mitogen - activated protein kinase - dependent and - independent c - fos induction in mesangial cells . J Biol Chem 1996 ; 271 : 17100 – 6 . [ 13 ] Wang A , Fan MY , Templeton DM . Growth modulation and proteoglycan turnover in cultured mesangial cells . J Cell Physiol 1994 ; 159 : 295 – 310 . [ 14 ] Wang A , Miralem T , Templeton DM . Heparan sulfate chains with antimitogenic properties arise from mesangial cell - surface proteoglycans . Metabolism 1999 ; 48 : 1 – 11 . [ 15 ] Wang A , Templeton DM . Inhibition of mitogenesis and c - fos induction in mesangial cells by heparin and heparan sulfates . Kidney Int 1996 ; 49 : 437 – 48 . [ 16 ] Yamada S , Yoshida K , Sugiura M , Sugahara K , Khoo KH , Morris HR , et al . Structural studies on the bacterial lyase - resistant tetrasaccharides derived from the antithrombin III - binding site of porcine intestinal heparin . J Biol Chem 1993 ; 268 : 4780 – 7 . [ 17 ] SasakiN , HigashiN , TakaT , NakajimaM , IrimuraT . Cellsurface localization of heparanase on macrophages regulates degrada - tion of extracellular matrix heparan sulfate . J Immunol 2004 ; 172 : 3830 – 5 . [ 18 ] Wang A , Midura RJ , Vasanji A , Wang AJ , Hascall VC . Hyperglycemia diverts dividing osteoblastic precursor cells to an adipogenic pathway and induces synthesis of a hyalur - onan matrix that is adhesive for monocytes . J Biol Chem 2014 ; 289 : 11410 – 20 . [ 19 ] Han CY , Subramanian S , Chan CK , Omer M , Chiba T , Wight TN , et al . Adipocyte - derived serum amyloid A3 and hyalur - onan play a role in monocyte recruitment and adhesion . Diabetes 2007 ; 56 : 2260 – 73 . [ 20 ] Rennert RC , Sorkin M , Januszyk M , Duscher D , Kosaraju R , Chung MT , et al . Diabetes impairs the angiogenic potential of adipose - derived stem cells by selectively depleting cellular subpopulations . Stem Cell Res Ther 2014 ; 5 : 79 . [ 21 ] EvankoSP , WightTN . Intracellularlocalizationofhyaluronanin proliferating cells . J Histochem Cytochem 1999 ; 47 : 1331 – 42 . 41 Heparin interaction with a receptor on hyperglycem