Cytoplasmic actin forms striking arrays of filaments , which can be readily visualized by conventional light microscopy methods in most cell types . The mechanical , trans­ port and scaffolding roles of the actin cyto­ skeleton are well known , and cytoplasmic actin polymerization plays a part in processes such as cell motility , adhesion , cytokinesis and morphogenesis . At first glance , the situation seems completely different in the cell nucleus , where conventional actin fila­ ments had not been detected and therefore remained enigmatic . Phalloidin , the most commonly used drug for visualizing cellular actin filaments , does not usually stain the nucleus , but this could be explained by the low abundance of actin in this compartment compared with the cytoplasm . By contrast , antibodies raised against special forms of actin that are mainly monomeric stain the nucleus very strongly 1 , which suggests that nuclear actin is mainly monomeric or adopts specific conformations . In this Progress article , we first briefly summarize evidence indicating that a pool of nuclear actin is monomeric , before discussing recent data showing that poly­ merized actin structures are present in the nucleus of eukaryotic cells . Many actin filament­binding proteins are being linked to gene expression , and new probes have permitted the first actual visualizations of polymeric actin in the somatic cell nucleus . Nuclear roles of monomeric actin Despite the fact that actin has been linked to crucial gene expression processes for decades 2 , 3 , the mechanistic details of nuclear actin functions have remained largely unclear . Actin has a role in promoting transcription by all three eukaryotic RNA polymerases , it is a component of many chromatin remodelling complexes and it also participates in pre­mRNA processing and export ( reviewed in REFS 4 – 6 ) . In addi­ tion , actin regulates the activity of specific transcription factors 7 . Thus , actin seems to influence the whole gene transcription pathway , from gene activation to export of the mature mRNA . Although very little biochemical data exist for the interaction of nuclear actin with specific proteins , some experiments seem to support the conclu­ sion that nuclear actin is mainly monomeric . Actin interacts with a subset of hetero genous nuclear ribonucleoproteins ( hnRNPs ) to promote the recruitment of histone acetyl­ transferases ( HATs ) to active genes . The actin in these complexes also binds to deoxyribo­ nuclease I ( DNAseI ) 8 – 10 , and this interaction is a hallmark for the detection of monomeric actin . Another transcription­associated actin monome r­binding protein is positive elon­ gation factor b ( pTEFb ) , which helps RNA poly merase II ( Pol II ) to escape pausing 11 . In the inositol­requiring 80 ( INO80 ) chro­ matin remodelling complex , the actin­related proteins ARP4 and ARP8 negatively influ­ ence actin polymerization in vitro , and they help to keep actin in its monomeric form within the complex 12 . In addition , the barbed end of actin , from which polymerization occurs , is not accessible for polymerization within the INO80 chromatin remodeller 13 . These data , as well as additional evidence , have evoked models suggesting that nuclear actin mainly operates as a monomer 4 , pos­ sibly acting as an inter action platform for the recruitment of different gene expression complexes to facilitate transcription . Thus , although scaffolding roles for monomeric actin have been proposed in many studies over the years , more detailed mechanistic insight as well as in vivo analysis are required to better understand the precise nuclear functions of these interactions . Towards polymeric nuclear actin Although evidence for the functional requirement of both monomeric and poly­ meric nuclear actin in mammalian cells is available , the existence and role of polymer­ ized actin in the nucleus was largely elusive and controversial . Early but indirect clues that polymeric nuclear actin existed came from the fact that many nuclear actin­ dependent processes are disrupted by drugs that interfere with actin polymerization or the motor activity of actin­dependent myosins . These processes include transcrip­ tion 14 , 15 and the intra­nuclear movement of chromosomal loci 16 – 18 or promyelocytic leukaemia ( PML ) bodies ( punctate structures that contain PML protein ) 19 . Many myosin motor proteins have been linked to various nuclear tasks , such as Pol I transcription and chromatin modifications 15 , 20 . In addition , the derepression of inflammatory response genes downstream of Toll­like receptors ( TLRs ) involves the actin filament­binding protein coronin 2A , which acts as a com­ ponent of the nuclear receptor co­receptor complex ( NCoR ) . Binding of coronin 2A to oligomeric actin seems to mediate TLR­ induced NCoR turnover 21 . The presence of proteins that interact with actin filaments in transcription complexes , in combination with the cellular effects of drugs that inhibit actin polymerization , suggest a requirement for polymerized nuclear actin . To be or not to be assembled : progressing into nuclear actin filaments Robert Grosse and Maria K . Vartiainen Abstract | The paradigm states that cytoplasmic actin operates as filaments and nuclear actin is mainly monomeric , acting as a scaffold in transcription complexes . However , why should a powerful function of actin , namely polymerization , not be used in the nucleus ? Recent progress in the field forces us to rethink this issue , as many actin filament assembly proteins have been linked to nuclear functions and new experimental approaches have provided the first direct visualizations of polymerized nuclear actin . PROGRESS NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 14 | NOVEMBER 2013 | 693 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Further support for this comes from the nuclear presence of actin­filament assembly proteins and their links to basic transcriptional processes . For example , the actin nucleation complex ARP2 / 3 and its activators Wiskott – Aldrich syndro me pro­ tein ( WASP ) and neural WASP ( NWASP ) are found in the nucleus , and biochemica l assays for actin assembly and Pol II activit y using nuclear extracts support the notion that they may be involved in Pol II­mediated transcription 22 , 23 . In addi­ tion , the F­actin­severing protein cofilin has been linked to the elongation phase of Pol II function , during which it might facilitate the association of actin with the elongat­ ing polymerase 24 . Locally controlled actin polymerization and depolymerization may therefore be required for transcription . Finally , exciting evidence for nuclear F­actin structures came from the observa­ tion that a sponge­like actin meshwork is required to stabilize the mechanical integrity of the giant Xenopus laevis oocyte nucleus , which maintains very high actin concentrations in contrast to somatic cell nuclei 25 . Although the structural details of this actin network have been debated 26 , a recent study revealed the nuclear presence of many actin filament­binding proteins , such as supervillin and filamin A , in the X . laevis oocyte 27 . This strongly suggests that the meshwork is indeed formed from canonical actin filaments . Interestingly , reactivation of the pluripotency gene oct4 , after the transfer of a C2C12 cell nucleus into a X . laevis oocyte at the germinal vesi­ cle stage , seems to be mediated by nuclear actin polymerization that is regulated by formin­binding protein­like 1 ( also known as TOCA1 ) , which supports actin assembly by NWASP 28 . Together , these studies planted a seed and argued in favour for the potential exist­ ence of polymeric actin structures also in mammalian somatic cell nuclei . Visualizing nuclear actin Approaches to monitor actin assembly in living cells usually involve the expression of isolated actin­binding domains ( ABDs ) from various species , which , when fused to fluorescent proteins such as GFP , allow actin polymers to be visualized . For example , a 25 kDa ABD from a crosslinking protein of Dictyostelium discoideum was used to visualize contractile actin networks in the nucleoplasmic region after nuclear envelope breakdown in starfish oocytes 29 . In addi­ tion , common F­actin­binding peptides isolated from the dystrophin homologue utrophin have been extensively character­ ized and used to study cytoplasmic and oocyte F­actin structures 28 , 30 – 32 . However , although actin is the most abundant protein in the cytoplasm of somatic cells , its nuclear concentration is low ; hence , the labelling of cytoplasmic actin filaments obscures poten­ tial signals from the nuclear compartment . Two recent studies have overcome this prob­ lem by using ABDs fused to nuclear localiza­ tion sequences ( NLS ) ( BOX 1 ) . In one case , an utrophin truncation mutant ( Utr230 ) was generated to reduce the inherent actin bundling activity of this protein . The expres­ sion of nuclear targeted Utr230 – enhanced GFP – NLS in mammalian cells revealed the presence of punctate nuclear actin struc­ tures of submicron length . Interestingly , signals detected with this probe emanated from the interchromatin space 33 , suggesting that these actin filament structures are not directly involved in chromatin interactions or functions . In another study , the F­actin marker that is currently used most frequently by researchers — Lifeact — was fused to a NLS to restrict the detection of actin filaments to the nucleus 34 . When expressed in human cells at low levels , Lifeact – GFP – NLS displayed a homogenous and diffuse nuclear signal . However , within 20 seconds after serum stimulation , transient but distinct actin filament formation was observed , and this required the activity of nuclear formins ( which have essential roles in remodelling the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons 35 ) . This suggests that nuclear actin assembly is signal­operated and can be rapidly reorganized . Thus , actin polymeriza­ tion in the nucleus seems to be dynamic and tightly regulated . Using phalloidin labelling , this study also demonstrates , for the first time , the existence of a native actin filament struc­ ture in fibroblast nuclei that forms in response to serum 34 ( FIG . 1 ) . Important questions now are how do these two studies fit together and what are the possible functions of these filaments ? It seems likely that nuclear filaments are short under steady state conditions 33 , but that they form higher­ordered structures upon serum stimulation or nuclear formin activa­ tion 34 . These organized structures could in principle serve for short­term intranuclear transport processes . Another possibility is that other signals or stimuli may promote intranuclear actin filament structures over longer time periods or in subnuclear regions . Clearly , these issues remain to be investigated . In addition , the existence of nuclear F­actin punctae , as detected using Utr230 – enhanced GFP – NLS , may require further confirmation using phalloidin staining in untransfected cells or the co­expression of both the utrophin and Lifeact probes , if possible . It is also con­ ceivable that the actin structures visualized by these two probes represent two different pools of nuclear actin with different functions , generated by different actin nucleation factors ( FIG . 2 ) . Moreover , it must also be remem­ bered that so far these probes have only been used in light microscopy experiments and have thus been hampered by the resolution limit of this technique . It is likely that super­ resolutio n microscopy or the adaptation of the new probes for other imaging techniques , such as electron microscopy , will be key for studying the organization and functions of nuclear actin filaments in various cells and tissues in the coming years . Regulation of nuclear actin With the emergence of polymerized nuclear actin , the next obvious question is how are actin dynamics regulated in the nucleus ? Box 1 | Probes for visualizing monomeric and polymeric nuclear actin Monomeric actin RPEL1 motif . MAL ( megakaryocytic acute leukaemia ) , a transcriptional activator of serum response factor ( SRF ) , contains an RPEL domain composed of three RPEL repeats , which bind actin monomers 45 . When fused to a nuclear localization signal ( NLS ) , RPEL1 concentrates to nuclear speckles 33 . Polymeric actin Lifeact . This 17‑amino acid long peptide is derived from the budding yeast protein Abp140 , which binds actin monomers and filaments 46 . When targeted to the nucleus , Lifeact – NLS recognizes linear nuclear actin filaments that are induced by serum stimulation and the activation of the diaphanous‑related formin mDia but shows a diffuse localization in unstimulated cells 34 . Utr230 . Tandem calponin homology domains of the actin‑binding protein utrophin are frequently used to study actin dynamics in the cytoplasm 31 , but the targeting of this construct to the nucleus may result in ectopic nuclear actin polymerization or filament stabilization . To circumvent this problem , a truncated version , Utr230 , was generated that highlights the appearance of discrete nuclear actin punctae of submicron length . These actin punctae did not colocalize with RNA polymerase I ( Pol I ) , Pol II or Pol III and are excluded from chromatin‑rich regions 33 . P R O G R E S S 694 | NOVEMBER 2013 | VOLUME 14 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Phalloidin Lamin A / C DAPI Lamin A / C Phalloidin 10 µ m Nuclei contain many ( if not most ) types of actin­binding protein that are found in the cytoplasm . Thus , being equipped with this toolkit , actin treadmilling ( whereby one end of a filament grows while the other end dis assembles into monomers ) could , in principle , also take place in the nuclear compartment . The key nuclear actin regula­ tors include actin­filament nucleating factors ( the ARP2 / 3 complex , formins and junction­ mediating and regulatory protein ( JMY ) ) , the regulators of actin monomer pools ( cofilin , profilin and thymosin β4 ) , as well as several actin capping proteins ( such as tro­ pomodulin and gelsolin­like capping protein ( CAPG ) ) 36 – 38 . However , the experimental evi­ dence that these proteins indeed control actin dynamics in the nucleus is still questionable , mainly due to the difficulty in assessing their nuclear­specific functions . Moreover , the relative contributions of different actin regulators may vary between cell types and experimental settings . For example , serum­ stimulated actin assembly rates in nuclear extracts were decreased using siRNAs against the diaphanous­related formins mDia1 and mDia2 , whereas inhibition of the ARP2 / 3 complex or the formin FHOD1 ( FH1 and FH2 domain­containing protein 1 ) had no effect on actin assembly 34 . Also , a recent study identifying actin­filament binding proteins from X . laevis oocyte extracts , using a biochemical phalloidin affinity matrix , did not find nuclear ARP2 / 3 , but instead inverted formin 2 ( REF . 27 ) . How nuclear formin activity is regulated , and by which signals , remains elusive . As the ARP2 / 3 complex has been linked to Pol II function 23 , it is possible that it regulates nuclear actin poly merization only locally at the transcribed genes or in other special circumstances . Future work will be necessary to reveal whether the same upstream signalling components that control the activities of actin regulators in the cyto­ plasm also operate in the nucleus . The new actin filament probes 33 , 34 will likely have a crucial role in these studies , by allowing , for example , RNAi screening experiments for regulators of specific nuclear actin pools . Cytoplasmic actin dynamics are likely to have an effect on nuclear actin function . This is due to the fact that actin constantly and rapidly shuttles in and out of the nucleus , and therefore nuclear and cytoplasmic actin pools are in constant communication . As actin is transported through the nuclear pore complexes as monomers , the level of actin monomers seems to limit the transport rate in both directions . Therefore , the actin polymer­ ization status or other actin­binding events in either the nucleus or cytoplasm can affect the shuttling speed of monomers and hence modulate the levels and polymerization prop­ erties of nuclear actin 39 . For example , DNA replication stress , which induces enhanced nuclear localization of actin and its regula­ tors RAC and IQGAP1 ( IQ motif­containing GTPase­activating protein 1 ) , results in faster shuttling of actin due to its decreased cellular retention 40 . The new nuclear actin probes will also aid in studies that examine changes in nuclear actin levels and its regulation . For example , nuclear staining by the Utr230 probe has already highlighted how nuclear actin level s are altered by the siRNA­mediated depletion of the nuclear transport factors of actin , exportin 6 and importin 9 ( REF . 33 ) . The nuclear lamina may specifically regu­ late nuclear actin dynamics . In addition to the extensive connections of the lamina with cytoplasmic actin networks through LINC ( linker of nucleoskeleton and cytoskeleton ) complexes 41 , A­type and B­type lamins 42 as well as emerin have been reported to directly interact with nuclear actin . The interaction of emerin with nuclear actin is especially intriguing , as emerin interacts with the pointed ends of actin filaments and can pro­ mote actin polymerization in vitro 43 . Recent results indicated that lamin A / C and emerin operate together to control actin dynamic s by regulating the MAL ( megakaryocytic acute leukaemia ; also known as MKL1 or MRTFA ) – serum response factor ( SRF ) circuit , in which MAL is an actin­regulated co­activator of the SRF transcription factor that regulates the expression of cytoskeletal genes ( FIG . 2 ) . MAL binds actin monomers through its RPEL domain , and actin bind­ ing regulates the cellular localization of MAL by preventing its nuclear import and enhancing its export . Additionally , only actin­free MAL can activate SRF­mediated transcription 7 . MAL therefore acts as an actin monomer sensor , which at low actin monomer concentrations accumulates in the nucleus to activate SRF . The nuclear translocation of MAL is impaired in cells deficient in lamin A / C or in cells expressing a laminopathy­causing LMNA ­mutant . This defect was due to altered actin dynamics and could be rescued by the ectopic expression of emerin , which was mislocalized in the mutant cells . Importantly , the actin­binding activity of emerin was required for rescue , further confirming that the defect observed in lamin A / C­deficient cells was the result of altered nuclear actin dynamics 44 . This sug­ gests that structural changes in the nuclear lamina impair the activity of tissue­specific transcription factors ( such as SRF via the MAL – SRF pathway ) and implies a role for emerin as a key regulator of nuclear actin dynamics . In the future , it will be interesting to study whether nuclear envelope proteins contribute to or alter the formation of either Utr230­ or Lifeact­stainable nuclear actin polymers . Future directions During the past few years , considerable progress has been made in the nuclear actin field , with possibly one of the most important developments being the visualization of poly­ meric nuclear actin . However , many questions still remain . In the cytoplasm , actin filaments form many types of higher­order structur e , from bundles to branched networks , which all function in different cell biological processes . It is entirely reasonable that the recently detected nuclear actin polymers 33 , 34 also represen t different actin pools that are regulate d by different mechanisms ( FIG . 2 ) . Figure 1 | Seeing is believing : visualization of polymeric nuclear actin . Confocal fluorescence microscopy images showing serum - stimulated NIH3T3 cells stained for lamin A / C ( red ) , DNA ( DAPI ; blue ) and actin filaments ( phalloidin ; green ) . Nuclear actin filaments are visible . The image on the left shows phalloidin - staining only ( in black and white for the best contrast ) . The image in the middle is a merge of lamin A / C staining and DAPI staining . The image on the right is a merge of lamin A / C staining and phalloidin staining . Images courtesy of C . Baarlink , University of Marburg , Germany . P R O G R E S S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 14 | NOVEMBER 2013 | 695 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology c F - actin network ( treadmill - competent pool ) Chromatin or RNA – Pol II - associated pool d F - actin punctae ( treadmill - competent pool ) mDia mDia Emerin M A L M A L E X P 6 I P O 9 G - actin a ? ? ARP2 / 3 complex Nucleus Cytoplasm ? G - actin NWASP M A L S R E SRF b The nuclear presence of numerous actin regu­ lators suggests that it is indeed plausible to build many different types of polymeric actin structure in the nucleus . Their formation could then be regulated through different sig­ nalling pathways and could vary between dif­ ferent cell types and tissues ; these parameters would also apply to their nuclear functions . The functional significance of the different polymeric actin assemblies in the nucleus still remains enigmatic , but it is tempting to speculate that the different polymer struc­ tures fulfil distinct tasks . For example , the short actin polymers detected with the Utr230 probe could contribute to the viscoelasticity of the nucleoplasm 33 . Formin­nucleated fila­ ments , being longer in length , could have a role in regulating intranuclear transport , chromatin state and gene expression , beyond their established role in regulating SRF activ­ ity 34 . What type of actin polymers emerin 44 contributes to in the nucleus still needs to be clarified . Equally unclear is the structure and function of the actin polymers that may be nucleated by the nuclear ARP2 / 3 complex and its activators 5 , 23 . Another interesting issue is the role of actin in regulating general transcription as a component of , for example , the Pol II and chromatin remodelling complexes , and its impact on specific transcription factors , such as SRF . In the case of SRF , actin monomers clearly have a negative effect on SRF­target gene expression 7 , whereas , in general , actin has a positive role in transcription 39 . However , although actin seems to function as a mono­ mer in chromatin remodelling complexes 13 , the ‘functional’ form of actin in the Pol II complex is still unclear , although some studies have suggested a requirement for polymer­ ized actin in transcription 14 , 15 . Detailed bio­ chemical analyses of the interactions between nuclear actin and the transcription machin­ ery , as well as the identification of direct bind­ ing events , are required to resolve these issues . Figure 2 | Schematic of the possible regulation of nuclear actin dynamics and nuclear actin filament assembly . Nuclear actin can exist in several different forms . a | Actin monomers shuttle in and out of the nucleus , and this process is controlled by importin 9 ( IPO9 ) and exportin 6 ( EXP6 ) . b | Actin monomers can also bind to chromatin remodelling complexes and transcription complexes , for example , through interactions with actin - related proteins ( ARPs ) and positive elongation factor b ( pTEFb ) ( not shown ) , which may keep actin monomeric in these complexes . ARP2 / 3 and neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( NWASP ) are also associated with RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) in the nucleus . The dashed lines indicate that there is little or very slow exchange between free nuclear G - actin and actin bound to chromatin , which remains stably associated . c | Monomeric actin can also assemble into long actin filaments , which form an F - actin network , in the nucleus . This process is stimulated by serum , which by unknown mechanisms activates mDia formins , such as mDia2 , that are actively shuttling in and out of the nuclear compartment . The resulting decrease in actin monomers causes the serum response factor ( SRF ) co - activator MAL to be retained in the nucleus , as MAL requires monomeric actin binding for its export . This results in SRF - mediated transcriptional activation . d | Actin can also form nuclear F - actin punctae , but how they assemble from monomeric actin and their relationship with the other nuclear F - actin structures is still unclear ( as indicated by the question mark ) . It is nevertheless unlikely that these F - actin punctae would have a role in the chromatin - related activities of actin . Another protein that may contribute to nuclear actin assembly is the inner nuclear membrane protein emerin , which also contributes to MAL - SRF regu - lation . However , the exact nuclear actin pool that is regulated by emerin remains to be determined , as indicated by the question mark . Certain nuclear actin pools may be competent for nucleocytoplasmic shuttling and / or may be involved in nuclear actin treadmilling , whereas others may be stably associated with chromatin or RNA – Pol II transcription complexes . P R O G R E S S 696 | NOVEMBER 2013 | VOLUME 14 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Robert Grosse is at the Biochemical - Pharmacological Center ( BPC ) , Institute of Pharmacology , University of Marburg , 35043 Germany . Maria K . Vartiainen is at the Institute of Biotechnology , Program in Cell and Molecular Biology , University of Helsinki , Viikinkaari 9 , 00014 Helsinki , Finland . e - mails : robert . grosse @ staff . uni - marburg . de ; maria . vartiainen @ helsinki . fi doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3681 Published online 3 October 2013 1 . Schoenenberger , C . A . et al . Conformation - specific antibodies reveal distinct actin structures in the nucleus and the cytoplasm . J . Struct . Biol . 152 , 157 – 168 ( 2005 ) . 2 . Scheer , U . , Hinssen , H . , Franke , W . W . & Jockusch , B . M . Microinjection of actin - binding proteins and actin antibodies demonstrates involvement of nuclear actin in transcription of lampbrush chromosomes . Cell 39 , 111 – 122 ( 1984 ) . 3 . Egly , J . M . , Miyamoto , N . G . , Moncollin , V . & Chambon , P . Is actin a transcription initiation factor for RNA polymerase B ? EMBO J . 3 , 2363 – 2371 ( 1984 ) . 4 . Percipalle , P . Co - transcriptional nuclear actin dynamics . Nucleus 4 , 43 – 52 ( 2013 ) . 5 . Miyamoto , K . & Gurdon , J . B . Transcriptional regulation and nuclear reprogramming : roles of nuclear actin and actin - binding proteins . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 70 , 3289 – 3302 ( 2012 ) . 6 . de Lanerolle , P . & Serebryannyy , L . Nuclear actin and myosins : life without filaments . Nature Cell Biol . 13 , 1282 – 1288 ( 2011 ) . 7 . Vartiainen , M . K . , Guettler , S . , Larijani , B . & Treisman , R . Nuclear actin regulates dynamic subcellular localization and activity of the SRF cofactor MAL . Science 316 , 1749 – 1752 ( 2007 ) . 8 . Obrdlik , A . et al . The histone acetyltransferase PCAF associates with actin and hnRNP U for RNA polymerase II transcription . Mol . Cell . Biol . 28 , 6342 – 6357 ( 2008 ) . 9 . Percipalle , P . et al . Nuclear actin is associated with a specific subset of hnRNP A / B - type proteins . Nucleic Acid . Res . 30 , 1725 – 1734 ( 2002 ) . 10 . Percipalle , P . et al . An actin - ribonucleoprotein interaction is involved in transcription by RNA polymerase II . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 6475 – 6480 ( 2003 ) . 11 . Qi , T . et al . G - actin participates in RNA polymerase II - dependent transcription elongation by recruiting positive transcription elongation factor b ( P - TEFb ) . J . Biol . Chem . 286 , 15171 – 15181 ( 2011 ) . 12 . Fenn , S . et al . Structural biochemistry of nuclear actin - related proteins 4 and 8 reveals their interaction with actin . EMBO J . 30 , 2153 – 2166 ( 2011 ) . 13 . Kapoor , P . , Chen , M . , Winkler , D . D . , Luger , K . & Shen , X . Evidence for monomeric actin function in INO80 chromatin remodeling . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 20 , 426 – 432 ( 2013 ) . 14 . McDonald , D . , Carrero , G . , Andrin , C . , de Vries , G . & Hendzel , M . J . Nucleoplasmic β - actin exists in a dynamic equilibrium between low - mobility polymeric species and rapidly diffusing populations . J . Cell Biol . 172 , 541 – 552 ( 2006 ) . 15 . Ye , J . , Zhao , J . , Hoffmann - Rohrer , U . & Grummt , I . Nuclear myosin I acts in concert with polymeric actin to drive RNA polymerase I transcription . Genes Dev . 22 , 322 – 330 ( 2008 ) . 16 . Hu , Q . et al . Enhancing nuclear receptor - induced transcription requires nuclear motor and LSD1 - dependent gene networking in interchromatin granules . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 19199 – 19204 ( 2008 ) . 17 . Dundr , M . et al . Actin - dependent intranuclear repositioning of an active gene locus in vivo . J . Cell Biol . 179 , 1095 – 1103 ( 2007 ) . 18 . Chuang , C . H . et al . Long - range directional movement of an interphase chromosome site . Curr . Biol . 16 , 825 – 831 ( 2006 ) . 19 . Muratani , M . et al . Metabolic - energy - dependent movement of PML bodies within the mammalian cell nucleus . Nature Cell Biol . 4 , 106 – 110 ( 2002 ) . 20 . Sarshad , A . et al . Nuclear myosin 1c facilitates the chromatin modifications required to activate rRNA gene transcription and cell cycle progression . PLoS Genet . 9 , e1003397 ( 2013 ) . 21 . Huang , W . et al . Coronin 2A mediates actin - dependent de - repression of inflammatory response genes . Nature 470 , 414 – 418 ( 2011 ) . 22 . Wu , X . et al . Regulation of RNA - polymerase II - dependent transcription by N - WASP and its nuclear - binding partners . Nature Cell Biol . 8 , 756 – 763 ( 2006 ) . 23 . Yoo , Y . , Wu , X . & Guan , J . L . A novel role of the actin - nucleating Arp2 / 3 complex in the regulation of RNA polymerase II - dependent transcription . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 7616 – 7623 ( 2007 ) . 24 . Obrdlik , A . & Percipalle , P . The F - actin severing protein cofilin - 1 is required for RNA polymerase II transcription elongation Nucleus 2 , 72 – 79 ( 2011 ) . 25 . Bohnsack , M . T . , Stuven , T . , Kuhn , C . , Cordes , V . C . & Gorlich , D . A selective block of nuclear actin export stabilizes the giant nuclei of Xenopus oocytes . Nature Cell Biol . 8 , 257 – 263 ( 2006 ) . 26 . Gall , J . G . Exporting actin . Nature Cell Biol . 8 , 205 – 207 ( 2006 ) . 27 . Samwer , M . et al . The nuclear F - actin interactome of Xenopus oocytes reveals an actin - bundling kinesin that is essential for meiotic cytokinesis . EMBO J . 32 , 1886 – 1902 ( 2013 ) . 28 . Miyamoto , K . , Pasque , V . , Jullien , J . & Gurdon , J . B . Nuclear actin polymerization is required for transcriptional reprogramming of Oct4 by oocytes . Genes Dev . 25 , 946 – 958 ( 2011 ) . 29 . Lenart , P . et al . A contractile nuclear actin network drives chromosome congression in oocytes . Nature 436 , 812 – 818 ( 2005 ) . 30 . Winder , S . J . et al . Utrophin actin binding domain : analysis of actin binding and cellular targeting . J . Cell Sci . 108 , 63 – 71 ( 1995 ) . 31 . Burkel , B . M . , von Dassow , G . & Bement , W . M . Versatile fluorescent probes for actin filaments based on the actin - binding domain of utrophin . Cell . Motil . Cytoskeleton 64 , 822 – 832 ( 2007 ) . 32 . Schuh , M . An actin - dependent mechanism for long - range vesicle transport . Nature Cell Biol . 13 , 1431 – 1436 ( 2011 ) . 33 . Belin , B . J . , Cimini , B . A . , Blackburn , E . H . & Mullins , R . D . Visualization of actin filaments and monomers in somatic cell nuclei . Mol . Biol . Cell 24 , 982 – 994 ( 2013 ) . 34 . Baarlink , C . , Wang , H . & Grosse , R . Nuclear actin network assembly by formins regulates the SRF coactivator MAL . Science 340 , 864 – 867 ( 2013 ) . 35 . Chesarone , M . A . , DuPage , A . G . & Goode , B . L . Unleashing formins to remodel the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 , 62 – 74 ( 2010 ) . 36 . Vartiainen , M . K . Nuclear actin dynamics — from form to function . FEBS Lett . 582 , 2033 – 2040 ( 2008 ) . 37 . Weston , L . , Coutts , A . S . & La Thangue , N . B . Actin nucleators in the nucleus : an emerging theme . J . Cell Sci . 125 , 3519 – 3527 ( 2012 ) . 38 . Archer , S . K . , Claudianos , C . & Campbell , H . D . Evolution of the gelsolin family of actin - binding proteins as novel transcriptional coactivators . Bioessays 27 , 388 – 396 ( 2005 ) . 39 . Dopie , J . , Skarp , K . P . , Kaisa Rajakyla , E . , Tanhuanpaa , K . & Vartiainen , M . K . Active maintenance of nuclear actin by importin 9 supports transcription . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 544 – 552 ( 2012 ) . 40 . Johnson , M . A . , Sharma , M . , Mok , M . T . & Henderson , B . R . Stimulation of in vivo nuclear transport dynamics of actin and its co - factors IQGAP1 and Rac1 in response to DNA replication stress . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1833 , 2334 – 2347 ( 2013 ) . 41 . Mejat , A . & Misteli , T . LINC complexes in health and disease . Nucleus 1 , 40 – 52 ( 2010 ) . 42 . Simon , D . N . , Zastrow , M . S . & Wilson , K . L . Direct actin binding to A - and B - type lamin tails and actin filament bundling by the lamin A tail . Nucleus 1 , 264 – 272 ( 2010 ) . 43 . Holaska , J . M . , Kowalski , A . K . & Wilson , K . L . Emerin caps the pointed end of actin filaments : evidence for an actin cortical network at the nuclear inner membrane . PLoS Biol . 2 , E231 ( 2004 ) . 44 . Ho , C . Y . , Jaalouk , D . E . , Vartiainen , M . K . & Lammerding , J . Lamin A / C and emerin regulate MKL1 – SRF activity by modulating actin dynamics . Nature 497 , 507 – 511 ( 2013 ) . 45 . Guettler , S . , Vartiainen , M . K . , Miralles , F . , Larijani , B . & Treisman , R . RPEL motifs link the serum response factor cofactor MAL but not myocardin to Rho signaling via actin binding . Mol . Cell . Biol . 28 , 732 – 742 ( 2008 ) . 46 . Riedl , J . et al . Lifeact : a versatile marker to visualize F - actin . Nature Methods 5 , 605 – 607 ( 2008 ) . Acknowledgements The authors thank members of their laboratories for discus - sions and C . Baarlink for the image in figure 1 . The work in the laboratory of M . K . V is funded by the European Research Council ( ERC ) Starting grant , Academy of Finland and Sigrid Juselius foundation . Work in the laboratory of R . G . is partly funded by the Deutsche Forschnungsgemeinschaft ( GR 2111 / 2 and SFB 593 ) . P R O G R E S S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 14 | NOVEMBER 2013 | 697 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved