Review Seasonal and hormonal modulation of neurotransmitter systems in the song control circuit Gregory F . Ball a , * , Jacques Balthazart b a Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences , Johns Hopkins University , 3400 N . Charles Street , Baltimore , MD 21218 , USA b University of Liege , GIGA Neurosciences , 1 avenue de l’Hoˆpital ( Bat . B36 ) , B - 4000 Lie ` ge , Belgium Contents 1 . Introduction : birdsongs , steroid hormones and the chemical neuroanatomy of the song system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82 2 . Hormonal control of song . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83 3 . Seasonal changes in the song control system and their endocrine control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83 4 . Seasonal and hormone - induced changes in neurophysiological measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85 5 . Seasonal changes in markers of transmitter activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86 6 . Brain areas outside of the song system and neurotransmitter systems related to the seasonal control of song behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87 7 . Experimental manipulations of the noradrenergic system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89 8 . Experimental manipulations of the dopamine system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90 9 . Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91 Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92 1 . Introduction : birdsongs , steroid hormones and the chemical neuroanatomy of the song system Birdsongs are stereotypic , species - typical acoustic signals ( Ball and Hulse , 1998 ; Catchpole and Slater , 2008 ) . In many species these signals are complex in structure and sound almost melodic . Hence this is why this class of signals is referred to as ‘‘song’’ . Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 39 ( 2010 ) 82 – 95 A R T I C L E I N F O Article history : Received 25 June 2009 Received in revised form 18 August 2009 Accepted 19 August 2009 Available online 25 August 2009 Keywords : Singing behavior Song control system Testosterone Norepinephrine DSP - 4 Catecholamines Seasonal changes A B S T R A C T In the years following the discovery of the song system , it was realized that this specialized circuit controlling learned vocalizations in songbirds ( a ) constitutes a speciﬁc target for sex steroid hormone action and expresses androgen and ( for some nuclei ) estrogen receptors , ( b ) exhibits a chemical neuroanatomical pattern consisting in a differential expression of various neuropeptides and neurotransmitters receptors as compared to surrounding structures and ( c ) shows pronounced seasonal variations in volume and physiology based , at least in the case of HVC , on a seasonal change in neuron recruitment and survival . During the past 30 years numerous studies have investigated how seasonal changes , transduced largely but not exclusively through changes in sex steroid concentrations , affect singing frequency and quality by modulating the structure and activity of the song control circuit . These studies showed that testosterone or its metabolite estradiol , control seasonal variation in singing quality by a direct action on song control nuclei . These studies also gave rise to the hypothesis that the probability of song production in response to a given stimulus ( i . e . its motivation ) is controlled through effects on the medial preoptic area and on catecholaminergic cell groups that project to song control nuclei . Selective pharmacological manipulations conﬁrmed that the noradrenergic system indeed plays a role in the control of singing behavior . More experimental work is , however , needed to identify speciﬁc genes related to neurotransmission that are regulated by steroids in functionally deﬁned brain areas to enhance different aspects of song behavior . (cid:2) 2009 Published by Elsevier B . V . * Corresponding author . Tel . : + 1 410 516 7910 ; fax : + 1 410 516 4478 . E - mail address : gball @ jhu . edu ( G . F . Ball ) . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / jchemneu 0891 - 0618 / $ – see front matter (cid:2) 2009 Published by Elsevier B . V . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jchemneu . 2009 . 08 . 005 Biologists tend to deﬁne a particular acoustic signal as a ‘‘song’’ rather than a ‘‘call’’ based on its function ( Ball and Hulse , 1998 ; Catchpole and Slater , 2008 ) . The primary functions of song are mate attraction and territorial defense ( Collins , 2004 ) . Especially among temperate zone species , where most studies have focused on males , the importance of these two functions of song are readily apparent . However , females also sing in many species ( Riebel , 2003 ) . Females also will use song for territorial defense and to attract males , sometimes for extra - pair copulations ( Collins , 2004 ) . Male song is often produced as part of a sequence of courtship behaviors . Courtship behaviors are periodic in nature and are linked to the occurrence of reproduction . Therefore one of the earliest observations about song is that it is often tightly linked to the reproductive phase of the annual cycle . There is much species variation in these patterns of course ( Catchpole and Slater , 2008 ) but in general one often encounters positive correlations between high rates of singing and reproductive activity . From a mechanistic point of view this correlation between song and reproduction immediately suggests that song is hormonally regulated ( Arnold , 1975 ; Ball , 1999 ; Nottebohm , 1980 ) . One key function of sex steroid hormones is to orchestrate suites of morphological , physiological and behavioral traits so that reproduction occurs at the appropriate time . It was established over 30 years ago that gonadal steroid hormones markedly regulate song behavior ( Arnold , 1975 ; Pro¨ve , 1974 ) . After the discovery of the song system in 1976 ( Nottebohm et al . , 1976 ) , it was almost simultaneously reported that the specialized song circuit control - ling song is a target of sex steroid hormone action ( Arnold et al . , 1976 ) . These ﬁndings set the stage for the remarkable observation that not only song behavior changes seasonally but that there are marked seasonal changes in the volume and morphology of key brain areas in the song system ( Nottebohm , 1981 ) . The goal of this review therefore is to discuss how steroid hormones , often changing in a seasonal context , regulate neurochemical systems implicated in the control of song behavior . Because the song system is so important in the control of song behavior our treatment of this topic will by necessity consider the chemical neuroanatomy of this system with particular reference to systems regulated by steroid hormones . Most studies completed to date have investigated the steroid regulation of catecholamine transmitters , in particular norepinephrine ( NE ) and dopamine ( DA ) . Therefore work on these two systems will be a particular focus of this review . 2 . Hormonal control of song Correlational studies implicating gonadal function in the control of song behavior literally go back to the earliest ﬁeld studies in wild birds . As noted in the previous section many naturalists were aware of the seasonal nature of song ( e . g . , White , 1789 ) but it was not until more recent times that systematic correlations were established between song and the onset of egg laying ( e . g . , Catchpole , 1983 ; Slagsvold , 1977 ) . These studies set the stage for more experimental studiesthat linked gonadal steroid hormones with song production . A basic principle of behavioral endocrinology is that one can establish a causal relationship between a hormone and a behavior with the use of three criteria : ( 1 ) removal of the source of the hormone ( in the case of testosterone , the testis ) should lead to a decline in the production of the behavior ; ( 2 ) reinstatement of plasma concentrations of the hormone via exogenous administration should also reinstate high rates of behavioral production ; and ( 3 ) behavioral frequency , at least at the population level , should be positively correlated with natural variation in the plasma concentration of the hormone ( Harding , 2008 ; Silver , 1978 ) . Studies of the hormonal control of birdsong have been performed with these criteria in mind . In many temperate zone seasonally breeding songbird species the rate of male song has been found to be positively correlated not only with gonadal size or egg laying but with the vernal increase in plasma testosterone that is induced in part by increasing photoperiods . As illustrated in Fig . 1F in Corsican blue tits ( Cyanistes [ formerly Parus ] caeruleus ) , plasma testosterone concentrations ( as determined by serial blood sampling and subsequent measurement via radio - immunoassay ) increases dramatically in mid to late March just prior to an equally dramatic increase in the rate of male song that is almost coincident with the onset of female egg laying in the sampled population ( Caro et al . , 2005a , 2006 ) . Similar positive correlations between testosterone and song have been established for several temperate zone species , even those with multiple broods in a given season such as the House sparrow ( Passer domesticus ) where males go from periods of high to low rates of song in correlation with plasma testosterone concentrations ( Hegner and Wingﬁeld , 1986 ; see Harding , 2008 for a review ) . These sorts of correlational studies set the stage for more experimental studies that could investigate the criteria of removal and replacement . In their pioneering studies , Pro¨ve and Arnold independently performed castration followed by testosterone replacement in male zebra ﬁnches ( Taeniopygia guttata ) and found that testosterone does indeed facilitate male - typical song produc - tion ( Arnold , 1975 ; Pro¨ve , 1974 ) . Subsequently work by Harding et al . ( 1983 ) established that both androgenic and estrogenic metabolites of testosterone are needed to activate in a complete manner all aspects of male song in ﬁnches . In several species it has been established that males will sing at times of low circulating testosterone in the fall , especially if they defend territories in the winter ( e . g . , northern mockingbirds Mimus polyglottus ; Logan and Wingﬁeld , 1990 ) . This would suggest that stimulus factors alone ( i . e . a challenging male ) could elicit song even the absence of increases in circulating testosterone concentrations . However , studies of song sparrows ( Melospiza melodia ) that defend winter territories in the Western North America indicate that concentra - tions of an adrenal androgen precursor dehydroepiandrosterone ( DHEA ) increase in these birds in the winter ( Soma et al . , 2008 for a review ) . DHEA can then be further metabolized in the brain into androgenic and estrogenic metabolites and activate song at a time when gonadal testosterone secretion is low to undetectable ( Soma et al . , 2008 ) . It has indeed been demonstrated that winter aggression displayed by song sparrows under basal circulating concentrations of testosterone is inhibited by treatment with an aromatase inhibitor ( Soma et al . , 2000a , b ) . Most studies of the hormonal control of song have focused on the steroid hormones . However , there is evidence that the indoleaminehormone melatonin can also regulate song . Melatonin is secreted by the pineal gland in a diurnal pattern such that melatonin concentrations are high at night and low during the day ( Gwinner and Hau , 2000 ) . In male zebra ﬁnches it has been reported that melatonin administered just before the onset of darkness reduces overall song length as well as the lengths of motifs and even notes ( Jansen et al . , 2005 ) . Thus this hormone seems to play a role in the temporal organization of song . 3 . Seasonal changes in the song control system and their endocrine control The seasonal nature of song gave rise to studies of possible seasonal changes in the morphology of the song system shortly after the song system was ﬁrst described in 1976 ( Nottebohm , 1981 ) . The basic phenomenon is that there are marked changes in the apparent volume ofkey song nucleisuch as HVC ( formerlyHigh Vocal Center , now used as a proper name ; see Reiner et al . , 2004 ) , the Robust nucleus of the Arcopallium ( RA ) and area X ( see ﬁgure in the general introduction by Ball and Balthazart of this issue for a G . F . Ball , J . Balthazart / Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 39 ( 2010 ) 82 – 95 83 detailed representation of this circuit ) . Nottebohm collected brains from male canaries ( Serinus canaria ) in the spring and the fall and performed a standard neurohistological procedure , the Nissl stain , that stains for cell bodies ( Nottebohm , 1981 ) . Based on this stain he was able to identify the boundaries of various song nuclei and then reconstructed the nucleus volumes . He found that males in the spring had HVC and RA volumes 99 and 76 percents bigger than those of males collected in the fall ( Nottebohm , 1981 ) . This observation has now beenreplicated in a widevariety of seasonally breeding songbird species ( Ball , 1999 ; Ball et al . , 2002 ; Brenowitz , 2008 ; Tramontin and Brenowitz , 2000 for reviews ; see Fig . 1A – D for examples derived from our research on blue tits ) even those such as the rufous - collared sparrow ( Zonotrichia capensis ) that live in the tropics but exhibit periodic breeding ( Small and Moore , 2009 ) . Because ( a ) seasonal changes in the song control system generally paralleled changes in singing activity which appear to be controlled by sex steroids and ( b ) in vivo autoradiographic studies demonstrated the presence of steroid binding sites in song control nuclei soon after their discovery ( Arnold et al . , 1976 ) , it was initially assumed that the seasonal plasticity of song control nuclei is controlled by a direct action of steroids in these nuclei . This was shown to be true to a large extent and the presence of sex steroid receptors in these nuclei was subsequently conﬁrmed with the use of a variety of techniques ( see Ball and Balthazart , 2002 for a review ) . The effects of steroids on seasonal neuroplasticity in the song system appear to involve both androgenic and estrogenic metabolites of testosterone ( Sartor et al . , 2005 ; Soma et al . , 2004 ; Tramontin et al . , 2003 ) . Several nuclei in the song system have now been shown to express androgen receptors ( AR ) based both on Fig . 1 . The volume of song control nuclei changes markedly during the annual cycle in most songbird species living in the temperate and arctic zones . This phenomenon is illustratedherewithdatacollectedinbluetits ( Cyanistes [ formerly Parus ] caeruleus ) . PhotomicrographsofsectionsthroughbluetitbrainscollectedinBelgiumandstainedfor NisslmaterialillustratingthechangesinHVC ( usedasapropername : AandB ) andRA ( nucleusrobustusarcopallialis : CandD ) sizebetweenthewinter ( fullyregressedstage in December : A and C ) and Spring ( maximal development during the reproductive season in April : B and D ) . A : arcopallium , N : nidopallium , VL : ventriculus lateralis . The arrowsinpanelCindicatedthedorsal ( D ) andmedial ( M ) directions . Magniﬁcationbar : 250 m m . ThesechangesinHVCandRAvolumeweresystematicallyquantiﬁedduring anextendedlongitudinalstudyofonebluetitpopulationsinMuro , Corsica , France ( panelE ) andcomparedtotheseasonalchangesinplasmatestosteroneconcentrationand singing activity ( F ) . Interestingly , although testosterone is known to increase HVC and RA volume in a variety of songbird species , the vernal increase in the volume of these nuclei took place before the seasonal increase in plasma testosterone concentration and before the peak in singing activity associated with the egg laying period . A – D : unpublished data ; E and F redrawn from data in Caro et al . ( 2005b , 2006 ) . G . F . Ball , J . Balthazart / Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 39 ( 2010 ) 82 – 95 84 studies investigating the corresponding mRNA and protein ( see Ball et al . , 2002 ; Schlinger and Brenowitz , 2002 for review ) . Nucleus HVC also expresses estrogen receptor of the alpha subtype as well as AR in several species ( see Introduction by Ball and Balthazart this issue for a diagram of these patterns ) . Androgenic and estrogenic metabolites of testosterone can act directly in HVC and then inducechanges in two forebrain nuclei they project to ( RA and X ) via transynaptic effects ( Brenowitz and Lent , 2002 ; see Brenowitz , 2008 for a review ) . However , the interrelationships among circulating testosterone concentrations , singing activity and volume of song control nuclei can be complex . Indeed , it has been observed that changes in song control nuclei volumesdo not always appear to be drivenby preceding changes in high plasma steroid concentrations ( see Ball et al . , 2004 for a review ) . For example , a marked increase in HVC and RA volumes was observed not only in gonadally intact , but also in castrated American tree sparrows ( Spizella arborea ) exposed for 3 weeks to long day lengths characteristic of the breeding season ( Bernard et al . , 1997 ) . Growth of song control nuclei can thus take place in the absence of a major increase in plasma testosterone concentra - tions . Field studies have also revealed discrepancies between the seasonal changes in plasma testosterone concentrations and variations of the song control nuclei volumes . During a study of two populations of song sparrows in the state of Washington ( USA ) , it was shown that at the onset of the breeding season HVC and RA volumes were already fully recrudesced when plasma testosterone concentrations were only 10 % of their maximal values ( Tramontin et al . , 2001 ) . Similarly , studies of blue tits in Corsica indicated that most of the vernal increase in the volume of HVC and RA takes place between December and February , that is well before the seasonal increase in plasma testosterone concentration and before the peak in singing activity associated with the egg laying period in April ( Fig . 1E and F ; Caro et al . , 2005b ) . These changes in the song system morphology are not obviously driven by changes in plasma testosterone but this does not necessarily mean that they are steroid - independent . Changes in the circulating concen - trations of the androgen precursor DHEA , which can be subse - quently transformed into active sex steroids in the brain , provide a hypothetical mechanism that might mediate these volumetric changes of the song system ( Soma et al . , 2002 ) . It is also the case that all the behavioral effects of steroids on seasonal changes in song behavior are not explained solely via actions on the song system ( Ball et al . , 2008 ) . Two aspects of song behavior change with season , one is the motivation to sing , in the non - breeding season in many species males exhibit little interest in singing , the second is the quality of song . Several studies of white - crowned sparrows ( Zonotrichia leucophyrs ) have convin - cingly shown that there is a robust seasonal change in song stereotypy ( Smith et al . , 1995 , 1997 ) . The effects of steroids on song stereotypy are probably mediated via changes in the song control system per se perhaps in combination with steroid effects on a peripheral structure such as the primary vocal production organ , the syrinx . This possibility cannot be excluded given that the syrinx is also a steroid - sensitive structure ( Luine et al . , 1980 ; Wade et al . , 2002 ) . In contrast , birds with lesions to the song system are still motivated to sing ( Nottebohm et al . , 1976 ) . The facilitation of high rates of singing in the spring is probably mediated via steroid action in other steroid - sensitive brain regions such as the preoptic region ( see Ball et al . , 2008 for a review ) , the lateral septum ( Goodson , 1998 ; Goodson et al . , 1999 ) or mesencephalic catecho - laminergic cell groups ( Maney and Ball , 2003 ; Maney et al . , 2001 ; Riters and Alger , 2004 ) ( see also below for additional discussion ) . Studies in white - crowned sparrows of the time course of the effects of steroids on seasonal changes in song rate and song quality are consistent with this notion ( Meitzen et al . , 2009a ) . Melatonin , the other hormone that has been documented to have an effect on song behavior also has effects on song system adult neuroplasticity . European starlings will exhibit seasonal changes in song nuclei such as HVC even when castrated and in the absence of increases in circulating testosterone ( Bentley et al . , 1999 ) . These photoperiod - induced changes in HVC volume can be blocked by implants of melatonin ( Bentley et al . , 1999 ) . This study was non - physiological in that melatonin was constantly main - tained at high concentrations unlike the normal situation when it is usually only high at night . A study in House sparrows , however , compared long and short durations of melatonin and found that in animals experiencing long durations of melatonin ( associated with long nights and short days ) the song nuclei were small as compared to birds experiencing short lengths of high melatonin ( Cassone et al . , 2008 ) . HVC and other song nuclei exhibit high densities of melatonin receptors in starlings ( Bentley and Ball , 2000 ) , house sparrows ( Whitﬁeld - Rucker and Cassone , 1996 ) and zebra ﬁnches ( Gahr and Kosar , 1996 ; Jansen et al . , 2005 ) . We still do not understand well though the link between the behavioral effects of song and the effects on the song system . 4 . Seasonal and hormone - induced changes in neurophysiological measures The marked seasonal changes in the volume of song nuclei just described serve as an indicator of sorts that important changes in the cellular and physiological properties of the song nuclei are occurring on a seasonal basis . Interestingly , the cellular basis of these changes in volume varies among the three nuclei where the most prominent changes are generally described ( see Brenowitz , 2008 for a review ) . For example , in HVC based on studies of song sparrows and white - crowned sparrows there is a change in cell number associated with the seasonal change in volume ( Smith et al . , 1997 ; Tramontin et al . , 1998 ) . The new neurons incorporated into HVC seem to be exclusively cells that project to RA ( Alvarez - Buylla et al . , 1988 ; Scharff et al . , 2000 ; Scotto - Lomassese et al . , 2007 ) . In RA the volume changes seem to be based on changes in cell size and other morphological attributes such as dendritic spine length ( Brenowitz , 2008 ; Tramontin and Brenowitz , 2000 ) . Similarly , in area X although there is evidence for adult neurogenesis in this nucleus there is no evidence that the seasonal changes in volume involve a change in cell number but rather changes in other cellular attributes ( Brenowitz , 2008 ) . Overall , these changes certainly suggest that one should expect prominent changes in neurotransmitter action and therefore related physio - logical activity . Relatively few studies have described seasonal variation in electrophysiological measures in the song system . One of the ﬁrst electrophysiological studies considering the possibility of such changes investigated male and female canaries on long or short days employing in vivo extracellular recording methods ( Del Negro and Edeline , 2002 ) . In this study the authors hypothesized that they were recording from inter - neurons ( because of the high spiking rate and shorter action potential duration ) and that these cells were more common in long day birds than short day birds ( Del Negro and Edeline , 2002 ) . They therefore hypothesized that inter - neurons increase in number under long days conditions ; we now know that at least in zebra ﬁnches that new neurons do not become inter - neurons in HVC ( Scotto - Lomassese et al . , 2007 ) . However , the authors speculated that increases in hormone concentrations due to long day stimulation may be changing electrophysiological properties of HVC cells ( Del Negro and Edeline , 2002 ) . This is the conclusion reached by recent electro - physiological studies in white - crowned sparrows albeit the changes are most pronounced in RA . In a comparison of brain slices taken from Gambell’s white - crowned sparrows either G . F . Ball , J . Balthazart / Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 39 ( 2010 ) 82 – 95 85 maintained on long days with exogenous testosterone ( indicative of the breeding season ) or maintained on short days a higher spontaneous ﬁring rate was revealed in RA in the birds in breeding condition than the birds on short days ( Fig . 2 ) ( Park et al . , 2005 ) . Follow - up studies using a similar experimental paradigm indicate that cells in HVC do not exhibit changes as a function of photoperiod and testosterone treatment whereas RA cells exhibit a change in a number of electrophysiological properties including capacitance and membrane time constants ( Meitzen et al . , 2009b ) . These effects of testosterone on RA spiking rate are mediated by androgenic and estrogenic metabolites of testosterone ( see Fig . 2 ) ( Meitzen et al . , 2007 ) . The actions of these steroids appear to be primarily transynaptic in nature in that testosterone and its estrogenic metabolite act in HVC presumably via the release of a neurotrophin in RA ( Meitzen et al . , 2007 ; Wissman and Brenowitz , 2009 ) . 5 . Seasonal changes in markers of transmitter activity In the ﬁrst 10 – 15 years after the discovery of the song system basic information on the chemical neuroanatomy of the system started to accumulate ( see Ball , 1990 for a review of these early studies ) . Not surprisingly many of the early studies concerned so - called classical transmitter systems such as acetylcholine and the biogenic amines that were historically the ﬁrst transmitter systems to be characterized in any species ( e . g . , Lewis et al . , 1981 ; Ryan and Arnold , 1981 ) . Subsequently , neuropeptide systems were described and then most recently amino acid transmitter systems ( e . g . , Ball et al . , 1988 ; Grisham and Arnold , 1994 ; Wada et al . , 2004 ) . One interesting trend that emerged from these studies is that the song system is ‘‘special’’ . What this means is that when various markers of a given neurotransmitter system were mapped in the avian brain , the key forebrain nuclei most Fig . 2 . Steroids and photoperiod modulate electrical activity in the nucleus robustus arcopallialis ( RA ) of the song control system . ( A ) Spontaneous ﬁring rate recorded in nucleus RA of male white - crowned sparrows ( Zonotrichia Leucophrys gambelii ) that were exposed to either short days ( SD ) or long days ( LD ) and systemically treated with testosterone ( T ) , 5 a - dihydrotestosterone ( DHT ) , estradiol - 17 b ( E2 ) or a combination of DHT and E2 . T increases the ﬁring rate in LD but not in SD ; only DHT + E2 is able to increase ﬁring rate in SD . B . Spontaneous ﬁring rate recorded in nucleus RA of male white - crowned sparrows decreases in LD birds treated with T that are also injected systemicallywithanaromataseinhibitor ( ATD : 1 - 4 - 6 - androstatrien - 3 , 17 - dione ) . ItisnotincreasedbyTinSDbirdsbutincreasesifTiscombinedwithE2 . AromatizationofT isthusnecessaryforincreasingtheﬁringrateandthisenzymaticconversionisregulatedbyphotoperiod ( takesplaceinLDbutnotinSD ) . ( C ) StereotaxicinfusionofDHTand E2inSDbirdsincreasestheﬁringrateinRAiftheinfusionsiteislocatednearHVCbutnotiflocatednearRA . TogetherthesedataindicatethattheﬁringrateofRAiscontrolled byandrogenandestrogenactioninHVC . AndrogenactioninRAalsoplaysapermissiverolenotillustratedhere . RedrawnfromdatainMeitzenetal . ( 2007 ) , Parketal . ( 2005 ) . G . F . Ball , J . Balthazart / Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 39 ( 2010 ) 82 – 95 86 commonly studied could be delineated by their high or low expression in relation to the surrounding tissue ( e . g . , Bernard and Ball , 1995 ; Bernard et al . , 1993 ; see ﬁgure in introduction by Ball and Balthazart this issue ) . The ability to delineate nuclei based on a cellular marker such as a receptor or enzyme that could be related to a transmitter system led to the question as to whether seasonal changes in nucleus morphology based on boundaries deﬁned with traditional Nissl stains , the speciﬁc neuronal marker Hu ( Tra - montin and Brenowitz , 2000 ) or the androgen receptor ( Soma et al . , 1999 ) would also be detected if one investigated such changes using markers of nuclear boundaries based on a protein related to neurotransmission . An early study comparing seasonal changes in HVC volume of canaries detected a change when Nissl stains were employed but not when immunoreactivity for estrogen receptor alpha was employed ( Gahr , 1990 , 1997 ) . However , subsequent studies using other sets of markers did not detect such discrepancies ( e . g . , Bernard and Ball , 1995 ; see Ball and Balthazart , 1997 ; Bottjer and Johnson , 1997b ; Brenowitz and Smith , 1997 for discussion ) . As illustrated in Fig . 3 , in seasonally breeding male starlings , seasonal changes in the density of a 2 - adrenergic receptors were identiﬁed within HVC and RA ( Riters et al . , 2002 ) . These changes mirrored both seasonal changes in testosterone concentrations and changes in HVC and RA volume . Alpha 2 - adrenergic receptors were least dense in spring when song is important for a male to attract a female . In contrast , during molt , in fall , and in winter , nuclei were smallest , and a 2 - adrenergic receptors were densest when males were likely not singing ( during molt : Eens , 1997 ) , or when song is not directly sung to attract mates for immediate reproduction ( Eens , 1997 ; Feare , 1984 ) . T - dependent seasonal decreases in NE within the song system might result in an up - regulation of a 2 - adrenergic receptors in fall , and a down - regulation of receptors in spring , a pattern that would be consistent with the seasonal changes in density observed in starlings . These data suggest that changes in a 2 - adrenergic receptors might reﬂect differential NE involvement in female - directed spring song compared to undirected fall song , with NE possibly regulating the attention a male directs towards a potential mate during female - directed song , as proposed previously in zebra ﬁnches ( Barclay et al . , 1996 ) . 6 . Brain areas outside of the song system and neurotransmitter systems related to the seasonal control of song behavior There are two important aspects of song behavior that change with season . One is a change in the motivation to sing at high rates , the other is song quality . Song rate does not seem to be controlled by the song system itself given that birds with HVC lesions still try to sing even though they cannot produce song ( Nottebohm et al . , 1976 ) . The timing of testosterone effects on song system morphology suggests that these effects are related to song quality rather than rate ( Meitzen et al . , 2009a ) . At least three brain sites outside of the song control system proper have been identiﬁed as candidates as to where steroids could act to modify song production : the medial preoptic nucleus that regulates appetitive aspects of male sexual behavior in a variety of species ( Balthazart et al . , 1998 ; Balthazart and Ball , 2007 ; Panzica et al . , 1996 ) including starlings ( Riters and Ball , 1999 ; Riters et al . , 2000 ) , the catecholaminergic nuclei of the mesencephalon and pons that send afferent projections to the song control nuclei ( Appeltants et al . , 2000 , 2002 ) , and the lateral septum ( Goodson , 1998 ; Goodson et al . , 1999 ) . The anatomical connections between these brain areas and the neural circuit that controls singing are still poorly understood . No direct projection between the POM and the song control nuclei has , for example , been described to this date . Given the large number of tract - tracing studies that were previously carried out , it appears probable that such connections should have been detected if they exist . Available evidence suggests however one indirect link between these structures . It has been shown that in Japanese quail , the aromatase - immunoreactive cells of the POM massively project to the periaquaductal central gray ( PAG ; also called mesencephalic central gray ) ( Absil et al . , 2001 ) . In canaries , dopaminergic cells of the central gray are known to be the major source of catechola - minergic inputs to HVC ( Appeltants et al . , 2000 ) and RA ( Appeltants et al . , 2002 ) . Studies in starlings indicate that projections from the POM to central gray are also present that are similar to what has been described in quail ( Riters and Alger , 2004 ) . The same study also identiﬁed bi - directional projections between the POM and another catecholaminergic cell group , the ventral tegmental area ( VTA ) ( Riters and Alger , 2004 ) . These projections could therefore represent the anatomical substrate that coordinates the actions of POM and of song control nuclei on song production . As noted in the introductory paper in this issue ( Ball and Balthazart , this issue ) catecholamines and their synthetic enzymes are present at high concentrations in brain nuclei that control song ( Appeltants et al . , 2001 ; Barclay and Harding , 1988 , 1990 ; Bottjer , 1993 ; Mello et al . , 1998 ; Sakaguchi and Saito , 1989 ; Soha et al . , 1996 ) . The boundaries of several song control nuclei can be deﬁned by high densities of a 2 - adrenergic as noted previously ( Ball , 1994 ; Ball et al . , 1994 ) as well as dopaminergic ( Casto and Ball , 1994 ) ( see Lubikova and Kostal , this issue ) receptors . This prominent catecholaminergic innervation of the song control nuclei is modulated by steroids . This is demonstrated by immunocyto - chemical studies of tyrosine hydroxylase in canaries ( including sex differences detected in HVC and RA : Appeltants et al . , 2001 ; increases in TH immunoreactivity following treatment with exogenous testosterone : Appeltants et al . , 2003 ) , by the presence of a steroid modulation of NE and DA baseline levels and turnover ( Barclay and Harding , 1988 , 1990 ) , and by the observation noted previously that the density of a 2 noradrenergic receptors in HVC and RA varies seasonally in starlings ( Riters et al . , 2002 ) . This steroid modulation of catecholaminergic inputs represents one possible way that steroids may inﬂuence song learning ( Marler et al . , 1988 ; Soha et al . , 1996 ) and production ( Bottjer and Johnson , 1997a ; Harding et al . , 1983 ; Schlinger , 1997 ) . Indeed functional interactions between steroids and catecholamines have been reported in many vertebrate species , and catecholamines are involved in the control of a variety of steroid - regulated reproduc - tive behaviors ( Balthazart and Ball , 1989 ; Barclay et al . , 1991 , 1996 ; Blaustein and Olster , 1989 ; Blaustein et al . , 1995 ; Dominguez and Hull , 2005 ) . It has thus been speculated that steroids may inﬂuence song control nuclei and singing activity at least in part by a direct action at the level of catecholaminergic structures . It has indeed been demonstrated that several catecholaminer - gic cell groups express nuclear receptors for sex steroids ( in songbirds : Maney et al . , 2001 ; in mammals : Batailler et al . , 1992 ; Sar , 1984 ) and these cell groups could therefore represent alternative sites where steroids could act in the brain to control aspects of singing behavior . It is in this context interesting to note that a recent study demonstrated that in female white - throated sparrows ( Zonotrichia albicollis ) , estradiol modulates the catecho - laminergic innervation of the auditory forebrain as well as its possible sources in the brainstem . This modulation of catechola - minergic activity presumably represents an important part of the mechanisms through which the steroid affects auditory discrimi - nation in these females ( LeBlanc et al . , 2007 ) . One way to assess the potential involvement of a brain area in a behavior of interest is to establish whether engaging in the behavior is associated with immediate early gene expression in the brain area of interest ( Curran and Morgan , 1995 ) . This approach G . F . Ball , J . Balthazart / Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 39 ( 2010 ) 82 – 95 87 Fig . 3 . Theexpressionof a 2adrenergicreceptorschangesseasonallyinthesongcontrolnucleiofthemalestarlingbrainandthesechangesarecontrolledbythephotoperiod . ( A ) Autoradiograms of sagittal sections through male starling brains ( Sturnus vulgaris ) illustrating the higher density of a 2 - adrenergic binding sites ( labeled with tritiated RX821002 as ligand ) in the song controlnuclei HVC , RA , areaX and lMAN ( lateral magnocellularnucleus ofthe anterior nidopallium ) as compared tosurrounding tissue and theseasonalchangesinthisbinding . Threekeystagesoftheannualcycleareillustrated : Januarywhenbirdsarephotosensitivebutnotyetphotostimulated , Aprilwhenbirds aremaximallyphotostimulatedandJulywhenbirdshavebecomephotorefractory . MSt : medialstriatum ( formerlylobusparolfactorius ) . ( B ) Seasonalvariationinthevolume of HVC and RA as deﬁned by a 2 - adrenergic binding sites ( top row ) and seasonal variation in the density of these binding sites ( bottom row ) as measured by quantitative autoradiography with tritiated RX821002 as a ligand . As observed previously in Nissl stained sections , the volumes of HVC and RA are maximal during the reproductive seasonbetweenMarchandMay . Theseasonalincreaseinvolumeis , however , associatedwithadecreaseinthedensityofbindingsitesperunitsurface . ( C ) Similarestimates of the mean volumes of HVC and RA can be obtained in starlings by measuring the size of the nuclei in sections stained for Nissl material and in sections processed by autoradiography of a 2 - adrenergicreceptorswithtritiatedpara - amino - clonidine asaligand . Birds hadbeen exposedfor5 monthsto11L : 13D , arelativelyshortphotoperiod that keeps birds photosensitive or to 16L : 8D , a long photoperiod that makes birds photorefractory after a few weeks . Photorefractory birds have smaller HVC than photosensitive subjects . Decreases in HVC or RA volumes are associated with increases in the density ofbinding sitesalthough these changes are not statisticallysigniﬁcant . Redrawn from data in Riters et al . ( 2002 ) ( panels A and B ) and Bernard and Ball ( 1995 ) ( panels C and D ) . G . F . Ball , J . Balthazart / Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 39 ( 2010 ) 82 – 95 88 has been particularly successful in relation to the study of neural circuits regulating song production and perception ( Ball and Gentner , 1998 ; Mello , 2002 ) . In order to establish the potential involvement of DA expressing areas in the control of song behavior the expression of the protein product of the immediate early gene c - fos was studied in song sparrows experiencing a territorial challenge ( Maney and Ball , 2003 ) . Free - living male song sparrows were subjected to simulated territorial intrusion ( STI ) , which stimulates territorial singing . Control birds received an ‘‘intrusion’’ consisting of an empty cage together with a recording of heterospeciﬁc song . The resulting fos - like immunoreactivity ( FLI ) was quantiﬁed in two dopaminergic regions of the brainstem that project to the song system : the ventral tegmental area ( VTA ) and the periaquaductal central gray ( PAG ) . Males subjected to STI exhibited more FLI in both of these regions than control males . In addition , FLI in both nuclei was correlated positively with the number of songs sung in response to STI . These results suggest a role for VTA and PAG , and thus possibly catecholamines , in the regulation of territorial song in songbirds ( Maney and Ball , 2003 ) . In a subsequent study the protein product of the immediate early gene zenk that is also driven by the motor production of song ( Jarvis and Nottebohm , 1997 ) was investigated in these areas in singing male zebra ﬁnches . It was found that TH positive cells in the PAG expressed a higher rate of ZENK expression in singing as compared to non - singing males ( Lynch et al . , 2008 ) . ZENK expression was also up - regulated the VTA in singing males but not speciﬁcally in TH positive cells . A related study examined variation in TH immunoreactivity in male European starlings singing in a breeding or a non - breeding context ( Heimovics and Riters , 2008 ) . Here variation in TH immunoreactivity in the VTA correlated positively with song in a breeding context but not in a non - breeding context ; no such correlation was found in the PAG ( Heimovics and Riters , 2008 ) . Despite these small discrepancies among the latter two studies overall these studies thus implicate TH positive cells in the PAG ( some of which are known to project to forebrain song control nuclei ) as well as cells in the VTA ( but perhaps not those that project to the song nuclei because connectivity of these cells was not investigated in the Heimovics and Riters , 2008 study ) in the motivational control of song production . Immediate early genes have also been used to demonstrate functional relationships between TH - immunoreactive cells groups and singing activity in zebra ﬁnches . For example it has been shown recently that Fos activity is signiﬁcantly correlated with courtship singing in a subpopulation of TH - ir neurons in the caudal VTA ( Goodson et al . , 2009 ) . It was also found that the number of TH - ir neurons in this caudal VTA population was signiﬁcantly larger in birds that were observed to court and sing during behavioral tests than in behaviorally inactive subjects . TH - ir neurons activity in the PAG also related to singing activity in that the degree TH - Fos colocalization correlated in a signiﬁcant manner with the number of songs produced in the ﬁnal test before perfusion ( Goodson et al . , 2009 ) . Collectively , these data strongly indicate the presence in several species of positive correlations between immediate early gene expression in dopaminergic cells groups and singing behavior . Because these TH - ir cell groups are steroid - sensitive , they represent one likely hypothesized target of steroid hormone action related to the seasonal modulation of singing motivation . The lateral septum and its vasotocinergic innervation represent an additional brain area implicated in the control of the seasonal modulation of singing behavior . The avian septum expresses receptors for androgens and estrogens ( Arnold et al . , 1976 ; Panzica et al . , 1992 ; Voigt et al . , 2007 ) and thus represents a possible steroid target in the control of behavior . It has been demonstrated that bilateral electrolytic lesions of the septum block directed courtship singing behavior in colonial zebra ﬁnches but facilitates multi - purpose agonistic singing ( dawn chorus ) in territorial ﬁeld sparrows ( Spizella pusilla ) , this differential effect seems to be related to the social system of the species considered ( Goodson et al . , 1999 ) . The septum is also characterized by a very dense sexually dimorphic vasotocinergic innervation . In canaries as in quail or chicken , the VT - ir cell group located in the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis and lateral septum is denser in males than in females ( Asteetal . , 1997 ; Voorhuisetal . , 1988 ) . Inthecanary , thisdifference is however less extreme than in quail so that both sexes have VT - ir neurons in the BST . They are simply present to a greater degree in males than in females ( Kiss et al . , 1987 ; Voorhuis et al . , 1988 ) . In zebra ﬁnches , no sex difference was originally identiﬁed in the VT - ir structureswithinthelateralseptumandbednucleusstriaterminalis but this negative result was associated with a high degree of individual variability ( Voorhuis and de Kloet , 1992 ) . A subsequent study was able to detect a higher density of VT - irstructures in these nuclei in males as compared to females ( Kimura et al . , 1999 ) . Because the VT innervation of the brain is modulated by steroids , it was postulated that this peptide could play a role in the seasonal variation of reproductive behavior and of singing in particular . In support of this hypothesis systemic injections of a VT analog affected ( increased or decreased depending on the season ) singing in canaries ( Voorhuis et al . , 1991 ) and infusion of VT into the third ventricle of female white - crowned sparrows ( Zonotrichia leu - cophrys gambelii ) dramatically increased the number of songs and other vocalization during the 40 min following infusion ( Maney et al . , 1997 ) . Also VT injections directly into the septum facilitated aggressive singing in male ﬁeld sparrows ( Goodson , 1998 ) . There is therefore an array of data indicating that the septum and its vasotocinergic innervation play a signiﬁcant role in the control of singing behavior . The septum could thus contribute to the seasonal variation in singing activity . In the canary brain for example , castration reduces and testosterone treatment enhances the VT immunoreactivity in the lateral septum ( Voorhuis et al . , 1988 ) . Testosterone treatment also increases VT expression in various parts of the junco ( Junco hyemalis ) brain , including the lateral septum ( Plumari et al . , 2004 ) . It is likely that a similar effect of testosterone should be observed in the spring and that the vernal increase in testosterone concentra - tions should induce an increase in singing rates through the increased vasotocinergic innervation of the septum . The links between the septum and the song control system that could mediate the septal modulation of singing activity have not been deﬁnitively identiﬁed . In quail and chickens , the septum is bi - directionally connected to the POM ( Balthazart et al . , 1994 ; Montagnese et al . , 2004 ) and this connection could therefore represent one of the pathways through which the septum might modulate singing behavior . The septum is also connected to the lateral hypothalamus in chickens and in rats ( Deller et al . , 1994 ; Montagnese et al . , 2004 ) and , in zebra ﬁnches , a part of this area projects in turn to the thalamic nucleus dorsomedialis posterior , an afferent of the forebrain vocal circuitry ( Foster et al . , 1997 ) . This is thus another potential way that effects in the septum could modulate some aspects of song behavior . However , more research is required to clarify this issue . 7 . Experimental manipulations of the noradrenergic system The function of catecholaminergic afferent inputs to the song system has not been studied in great detail . In zebra ﬁnches , systemic injections of DSP - 4 , a speciﬁc noradrenergic neurotoxin that preferentially destroys catecholaminergic innervation of telencephalic regions ( Fritschy and Grzanna , 1989 ; Zaczek et al . , 1990 ) decreases male courtship behavior including female - directed G . F . Ball , J . Balthazart / Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 39 ( 2010 ) 82 – 95 89 singing ( Barclayetal . , 1991 , 1996 ) . Thiseffectappearstoresultfrom attentiondeﬁcitsratherthanfromimpairmentsofthemotoraspects of song becausein DSP - 4treatedbirds the latency to initiate singing was increased but once song begun it was quite normal . As noted previously , immediate early genes such as zenk are expressed in the avian song system in a motor - driven fashion , in that such expression is even observed in deafened birds when they sing ( Jarvis and Nottebohm , 1997 ) . In male zebra ﬁnches , this immediate early gene expression induced by song is context dependent ( Jarvis et al . , 1998 ) . Males singing songs directed at females exhibit very low induction of the immediate early gene ZENK in area X whereas ZENK induction is high in males that sing the same amount of song but produce song either in isolation or in the presence of other males ( Jarvis et al . , 1998 ) . Similar ﬁndings have been reported based on studies of electrophysiological activity ; multi - unit activity in area X is much lower when the birds are engaging in directed song than when they are singing in social isolation ( Hessler and Doupe , 1999a , b ) . These ﬁndings suggest that this anterior forebrain circuit may modulate song output in adulthood , but not be directly responsible for the motor output . We administered the noradrenergic neurotoxin DSP - 4 to male zebra ﬁnches prior to singing either directed or undirected song and found that those who sang song directed at females had high levels of ZENK protein expression characteristic of males singing undirected song ( Castelino and Ball , 2005 ) ( see Fig . 4 ) . These data implicate the noradrenergic system in regulating social context effects on song system activity . These studies suggest that NE is involved in the control of differences between songs expressed by males within and outside of the context of reproduction . In a reproductive context , male song directed towards females is critical for mate attraction ( Catchpole and Slater , 2008 ) . Outside the context of reproduction , males often sing less and do not direct song towards females , or use song for purposes of dominance or territory maintenance ( Catchpole and Slater , 2008 ; Wiley et al . , 1993 ) . NE levels within some song nuclei are positively correlated with courtship singing in male zebra ﬁnches ( Barclay et al . , 1991 ) , and selective neurotoxic lesions of noradrenergic neurons produce speciﬁc behavioral deﬁcits in male courtship song displays ( Barclay et al . , 1991 , 1996 ) , indicating a role for NE in song sung within a reproductive context . Estrogenic T metabolites , known speciﬁcally to increase female - directed court - ship song in male zebra ﬁnches ( Walters et al . , 1991 ) , increase NE turnover in the song system ( Barclay and Harding , 1988 , 1990 ) , suggesting that the role of NE in song relates to T activity . In contrast to zebra ﬁnches , a species that does not restrict breeding to a particular season , many temperate zone songbirds display seasonal variation in T concentrations , song behavior , and reproductive activities ( Ball , 1999 ; Wingﬁeld and Farner , 1993 ) . Changes in T are associated with changes in the context in which males will sing . During both the breeding and non - breeding seasons , when T is high and low respectively , song can be observed during inter - male aggression and in males singing alone ; however only during the breeding season is male song observed to play a direct role in mate attraction ( Ball , 1999 ; Catchpole and Slater , 1995 , 2008 ; Eens , 1997 ; Wingﬁeld and Farner , 1993 ) . The studies in zebra ﬁnches discussed above suggest that NE plays a role in the control of courtship song and that T ( or its metabolite , estradiol ) mediates this relationship . If this relationship exists , then in seasonally breeding birds , differences might be expectedinNEorNEreceptorsinbirdsduringthebreedingseasonas compared to outside of the breeding season . In agreement with this idea , T regulates concentration of NE and the density of its receptors inspeciﬁcbrainareasofatleastoneseasonallybreedingbird ( anon - songbird , the Japanese quail ( Balthazart and Ball , 1989 ; Balthazart etal . , 1992 ) . These datasuggestspeciﬁcally thatseasonal changes in T might be associated with variation in noradrenergic transmission within the brains of seasonally breeding birds . 8 . Experimental manipulations of the dopamine system Pharmacological studies employing peripheral injections of DA selective blockers in starlings ( Schroeder and Riters , 2006 ) and zebra ﬁnches ( Rauceo et al . , 2008 ) suggest that DA does stimulate song behavior . The central site of action of these effects is unknown . These studies primarily assessed song rate . Therefore , as discussed previously these effects may well be on brain areas outside the traditional song circuit . The effects may be on brain areas more generally involved in the motivation to engage in courtship behaviors including song and project to the song system either directly or indirectly . Immediate early gene studies have suggested that brain areas in the ‘‘social behavior network’’ ( Goodson , 2005 ) that receive dopaminergic projections such as the lateral septum do exhibit gene expression positively correlated with song production ( Heimovics and Riters , 2005 , 2006 , 2007 ) . Interestingly , a recent study of D1 and D2 dopamine receptor densities in starlings singing in a non - breeding and breeding context suggest that D1 receptors densities both in areas such as Fig . 4 . The noradrenergic neurotoxin DSP - 4 decreases the noradrenergic innervation of song control nuclei and correlatively increases the activation of area X during directed but not undirected song . ( A ) The injection of DSP - 4 ( N - ( 2 - chloroethyl ) - N - ethyl - 2 - bromobenzylamine hydrochloride ) signiﬁcantly decreased the density of dopamine b - hydroxylase - immunoreactive ( DBH - ir ) ﬁbers in the 4 song control nuclei that were investigated . Fibers density was estimated by semi - automated image analysis measuring the area ( in mm 2 ) covered by immunoreactive material is a ﬁxed area ( 0 . 52 mm (cid:2) 0 . 52 mm for HVC and lMAN , 0 . 78 mm (cid:2) 0 . 78 mm for RA and 1 . 66 mm (cid:2) 1 . 24 mm for area X ) . ( B ) A marked increase in the number of cells expressing the immediate early gene Zenk wasobserved , followingDSP - 4lesion , inareaX , butnotinothersongcontrolnuclei , of birds that were expressing song directed at males or females but not in birds singingundirectedsong . Zenk expressionwasquantiﬁedbycountingthenumberof Zenk - immunoreactive ( Zenk - ir ) cells in a ﬁxed area ( 1 . 66 mm (cid:2) 1 . 24 mm ) within area X . Redrawn from data in Castelino and Ball ( 2005 ) . G . F . Ball , J . Balthazart / Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 39 ( 2010 ) 82 – 95 90 the PAG that project to song nuclei and areas in the social behavior network such as the lateral septum are negatively correlated with song produced in a breeding context ( Heimovics et al . , 2009 ) . These authors suggest that these comparatively lower densities may be in response to an up - regulation of DA release in a breeding context . The dynamics of DA release in relation to song behavior has not been studied in a comprehensive manner . However , there is evidence that DA release in area X is lower in male zebra ﬁnches singing undirected song as compared to directed song ( Sasaki et al . , 2006 ) and VTA neurons that project to this are more active in these birds ( Huang and Hessler , 2008 ) ( see Lubikova and Kostal , this issue ) . Thus DA as well as NE has been implicated in the regulation of context dependent courtship song in zebra ﬁnches . 9 . Conclusions Testosterone acting via its estrogenic and androgenic metabo - lites serves as a powerful transcription factor for a multitude of genes that are regulated by androgen or estrogen receptors . It has been recognized for about50 years that the brain is a key target site where androgens and estrogens can act to modify many aspects of neural function including behavior ( McEwen and Pfaff , 1973 ) . The basic notion is that steroids can induce changes in gene transcription in select brain sites that will lead to changes in neurotransmission such that : ( 1 ) the perception of stimuli related to behavioral activation , ( 2 ) the central processing of these stimuli to make a decision about engaging in a particular behavior , and / or ( 3 ) the motor control of behavior itself will change . These hormone - induced changes are not mutually exclusive and they will ultimately inﬂuence the probability of behavioral activation . This basic research agenda to explain the regulation of behavior by steroid hormones has been clear in its broad outlines for many years ( e . g . , McEwen et al . , 1984 ) . It has perhaps been most successfully applied to invertebrate models where speciﬁc genes regulated by steroids have been identiﬁed ( Truman , 2005 ) . Among vertebrates , studies of the lordosis circuit developed by Pfaff and colleagues has been one of the best examples illustrating how speciﬁc actions of estrogens at deﬁned brain sites can be linked to behavior ( Pfaff et al . , 2008 ) . However , even in this case there is still much to be learned ( Pfaff et al . , 2008 ) . Studies of electric and sonic ﬁsh have also provided fertile ground for the demonstration the effectiveness steroid – gene – brain research agenda ( Bass and Zakon , 2005 ) . For example , two different sodium channel genes and an accessory protein called beta subunit appear to be regulated by androgens and contribute to the male - typical signature of the electric organ discharge ( Bass and Zakon , 2005 ) . Given our detailed knowledge of the functional neuroanatomy of the birdsong circuit ( Zeigler and Marler , 2008 ) and its clear regulation by steroids this system offers perhaps one of the best opportunities to fulﬁll the steroid – gene – brain research agenda . As noted previously in this review , the characterization of steroid receptor expression within the song system and in areas that project to these nuclei as well as the discovery of seasonal regulation of the song nuclei ( Nottebohm , 1981 ) and the study of the cellular basis of these changes ( Brenowitz , 2008 ) have set the stage for more detailed studies . But what about linking steroid action in speciﬁc brain areas and on speciﬁc genes to behavioral activation ? As summarized in this review and in Fig . 5 some Fig . 5 . Schematicrepresentationofthemultiplesitesoftestosteroneactioninthebrainthatarepresumablyinvolvedinthecontrolofsingingandofthepotentialimplication ofcatecholaminergiccellgroupsinthiscontrol . AndrogenreceptorsarepresentinbothHVCandRAandtestosteronecanactdirectlyonthesenuclei , presumablytomodulate song qualityand stereotypy . Partof the morphological andphysiological changes seenin RA and areaX result fromeffects oftestosterone on HVC , which then modulates RA and area X activity in a trans - synaptic manner . Testosterone can also act on the medial preoptic nucleus ( POM ) , which modulates singing motivation potentially through it projectionsontheventraltegmentalarea ( VTA ) , which , liketheperiaqueductalcentralgray ( PAG ) , sendsdopaminergicprojectionstobothHVCandRA . AVTandPAGexpress androgenreceptorsandcouldthusalsobeasiteofdirectactionoftestosteroneonsingingbehavior . Androgenreceptorsarealsopresentinthenoradrenergiclocuscoerulus , which also projects to the song control nuclei ( not shown ) . Testosterone - induced changes in noradrenergic activity as thus also likely involved in song control . G . F . Ball , J . Balthazart / Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 39 ( 2010 ) 82 – 95 91 progress has been made in this arena . One important conceptual clariﬁcation is that steroids have at least two important and separable effects on song . One is to regulate the motivation to sing and the other is to effect song quality ( Ball et al . , 2008 ) . The hypothesis that steroids acting within the song system seem to contribute to the quality of performance was ﬁrst established by correlational studies linking hormone - induced changes in volume to measures of song performance such as stereotypy ( Smith et al . , 1997 ; Smith et al . , 1995 ) . Follow - up studies on steroid - induced changes in electrical activity within HVC is a promising avenue to pursue that might link speciﬁc gene changes to these changes in the quality of song production . However , at present that degree of resolution has not been ascertained . The idea that studies of the hormonal induction of changes in the probability of singing ( i . e . its motivation ) should involve the investigation of nuclei outside the song system developed when it was discovered that lesions to the POM or septum resulted in a marked decrease in song rate ( Goodson , 1998 ; Goodson et al . , 1999 ; Riters and Ball , 1999 ) . These studies , plus anatomical studies linking projections from the POM to steroid - sensitive catecholaminergic cell groups that project to the song nuclei contributed to the establishment of a chemical neuroanatomical hypothesis for the steroid regulation of song motivation . Namely that steroid hormones act on sites in the POM – brainstem – song system circuit to regulate seasonal variation in song motivation ( see Fig . 5 ) . As summarized in this review article a diverse set of data ( muchofitinvolvingthe assessmentof immediateearly gene expression in singing and non - singing birds ) have been collected that are consistent with this hypothesis . However , critical additional data need to be collected . For example , key cell types in dopaminergic nuclei projecting to HVC may not be the TH positive cells themselves but other cells in the nucleus . For example , studies utilizing the immediate early gene zenk found that cells varying gene expression in the VTA and the substantia nigra in correlation with directed versus undirected singing in zebra ﬁnches tended to be GABAergic inter - neurons rather than TH positive cells that synthesize dopamine ( Hara et al . , 2007 ) . These studies would suggest steroid hormone gene targets different than those directly related to dopaminergic action for the modulation of neurotransmission related to this particular song behavior . With the emergence of genetic tools available speciﬁcally for songbirds ( Replogle et al . , 2008 ; Wada et al . , 2006 ) a new age should be dawning in the hormonal regulation of gene action . However , merely identifying genes regulated by steroids will not be sufﬁcient . Gene expression should be studied and manipulated in a region speciﬁc manner . Steroid hormones can modulate the song system at multiple levels ( Arnold , 1990 ) . Little work has been done to understand the effects of steroids on song in nXIIts , ICo and the syrinx as compared to HVC . This sort of systems level analysis would require a stereotaxic strategy to limit the effects of any manipulation to the nucleus in question . However , a combination of a molecular and systems level approach could be a very powerful one in advancing the steroid – genes – brain research agenda . Ethical statement This manuscript is a review of previously published data from our and other laboratories . Work from our laboratories described in this text was reviewed and approved by the local Animal care committees ( in Johns Hopkins University and University of Liege ) . All experimental procedures were in agreement with the Belgian laws on ‘‘Protection and Welfare of Animals’’ and on the ‘‘Protection of experimental animals’’ and the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals . Acknowledgments The preparation of this review and the experimental work described in it was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health ( NS 35467 ) to GFB and JB and the Belgian FRFC ( 2 . 4537 . 09 ) to JB . We thank James L . Goodson ( Indiana University ) and Kiran Soma ( University of British Columbia ) for advice and a number of useful suggestions on an earlier version of this manuscript . References Absil , P . , Riters , L . V . , Balthazart , J . , 2001 . Preoptic aromatase cells project to the mesencephalic central gray in the male Japanese quail ( Coturnix japonica ) . Horm . Behav . 40 , 369 – 383 . Alvarez - Buylla , A . , Theelen , M . , Nottebohm , F . , 1988 . Birth of projection neurons in the higher vocal center of the canary forebrain before , during , and after song learning . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 85 , 8722 – 8726 . Appeltants , D . , Absil , P . , Balthazart , J . , Ball , G . F . , 2000 . Identiﬁcation of the origin of catecholaminergic inputs to HVc in canaries by retrograde tract tracing com - bined with tyrosine hydroxylase immunocytochemistry . J . Chem . Neuroanat . 18 , 117 – 133 . Appeltants , D . , Ball , G . F . , Balthazart , J . , 2001 . The distribution of tyrosine hydro - xylase in the canary brain : demonstration of a speciﬁc and sexually dimorphic catecholaminergic innervation of the telencephalic song control nuclei . Cell Tissue Res . 304 ( 2 ) , 237 – 259 . Appeltants , D . , Ball , G . F . , Balthazart , J . , 2002 . The origin of catecholaminergic inputs to the song control nucleus RA in canaries . Neuroreport 13 ( 5 ) , 649 – 653 . Appeltants , D . , Ball , G . F . , Balthazart , J . , 2003 . Song activation by testosterone is associated withan increased catecholaminergicinnervation ofthe songcontrol system in female canaries . Neuroscience 121 ( 3 ) , 801 – 814 . Arnold , A . P . , 1975 . The effects of castration on song development in zebra ﬁnches ( Poephila guttata ) . J . Exp . Zool . 191 , 261 – 278 . Arnold , A . P . , 1990 . The passerine bird song system as a model in neuroendocrine research . J . Exp . Zool . 4 ( Suppl . ) , 22 – 30 . Arnold , A . P . , Nottebohm , F . , Pfaff , D . W . , 1976 . Hormone concentrating cells in vocal control areas of the brain of the zebra ﬁnch ( Poephila guttata ) . J . Comp . Neurol . 165 , 487 – 512 . Aste , N . , Viglietti - Panzica , C . , Balthazart , J . , Panzica , G . C . , 1997 . Testosterone mod - ulation of peptidergic pathways in the septo - preoptic region of male Japanese quail . Poult . Avian Biol . Rev . 8 , 77 – 93 . Ball , G . F . , 1990 . Chemicalneuroanatomicalstudiesofthesteroid - sensitivesongbird vocal control system , a comparative approach . In : Balthazart , J . ( Ed . ) , Hor - mones , Brain and Behaviour in Vertebrates . 1 . Sexual Differentiation , Neuroa - natomical Aspects , Neurotransmitters and Neuropeptides . Karger , Basel , Comp . Physiol , vol . 8 , pp . 148 – 167 . Ball , G . F . , 1994 . Neurochemical specializations associated with vocal learning and production in songbirds and budgerigars . Brain Behav . Evol . 44 , 234 – 246 . Ball , G . F . , 1999 . Neuroendocrine basis of seasonal changes in vocal behavior among songbirds . In : Hauser , M . , Konishi , M . ( Eds . ) , The Design of Animal Commu - nication . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , pp . 213 – 253 . Ball , G . F . , Auger , C . J . , Bernard , D . J . , Charlier , T . D . , Sartor , J . J . , Riters , L . V . , Balthazart , J . , 2004 . Seasonal Plasticity in the song control system . Multiple brain sites of steroid hormone action and the importance of variation in song behavior . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 1016 , 586 – 610 . Ball , G . F . , Balthazart , J . , 1997 . Letter to the Editor . TINS 20 , 344 . Ball , G . F . , Balthazart , J . , 2002 . Neuroendocrine mechanisms regulating reproductive cycles and reproductive behavior in birds . In : Pfaff , D . W . , Arnold , A . P . , Etgen , A . M . , Fahrbach , S . E . , Rubin , R . T . ( Eds . ) , Hormones , BrainandBehavior . Academic Press , San Diego , CA , pp . 649 – 798 . Ball , G . F . , Balthazart , J . , this issue . Introduction to the chemical neuroanatomy of birdsong . J . Chem . Neuroanat . Ball , G . F . , Casto , J . M . , Bernard , D . J . , 1994 . Sexdifferencesinthevolumeofaviansong control nuclei : comparative studies and the issue of brain nucleus delineation . Psychoneuroendocrinology 19 , 485 – 504 . Ball , G . F . , Faris , P . L . , Hartman , B . K . , Wingﬁeld , J . C . , 1988 . Immunohistochemical localization of neuropeptides in the vocal control regions of two songbird species . J . Comp . Neurol . 268 , 171 – 180 . Ball , G . F . , Gentner , T . Q . , 1998 . They’re playing our song : gene expression and birdsong perception . Neuron 21 , 271 – 274 . Ball , G . F . , Hulse , S . H . , 1998 . Bird song . Am . Psychol . 53 , 37 – 58 . Ball , G . F . , Riters , L . V . , Balthazart , J . , 2002 . Neuroendocrinology of song behavior and avian brain plasticity : multiple sites of action of sex steroid hormones . Front . Neuroendocrinol . 23 , 137 – 178 . Ball , G . F . , Riters , L . V . , MacDougall - Shackleton , S . A . , Balthazart , J . , 2008 . Sex differ - encesinbrainandbehaviorandtheneuroendocrinecontrolofthemotivationtosing . In : Zeigler , H . P . , Marler , P . ( Eds . ) , Neuroscience of Birdsong . Cambridge , Cambridge , pp . 320 – 331 . Balthazart , J . , Absil , P . , Ge´rard , M . , Appeltants , D . , Ball , G . F . , 1998 . Appetitive and consummatory male sexual behavior in Japanese quail are differentially regu - lated by subregions of the preoptic medial nucleus . J . Neurosci . 18 , 6512 – 6527 . Balthazart , J . , Ball , G . F . , 1989 . Effects of the noradrenergic neurotoxin DSP - 4 on luteinizing hormone levels , catecholamine concentrations , alpha2 - adrenergic G . F . Ball , J . Balthazart / Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 39 ( 2010 ) 82 – 95 92 receptorbinding , andaromataseactivityinthebrainoftheJapanesequail . Brain Res . 492 , 163 – 175 . Balthazart , J . , Ball , G . F . , 2007 . Topography in the preoptic region : differential regulation of appetitive and consummatory male sexual behaviors . Front . Neuroendocrinol . 28 ( 4 ) , 161 – 178 . Balthazart , J . , Dupiereux , V . , Aste , N . , Viglietti - Panzica , C . , Barrese , M . , Panzica , G . C . , 1994 . Afferent and efferent connections of the sexually dimorphic medial preoptic nucleus of the male quail revealed by in vitro transport of DiI . Cell Tissue Res . 276 , 455 – 475 . Balthazart , J . , Foidart , A . , Sante , P . , Hendrick , J . C . , 1992 . Effectsofalpha - methyl - para - tyrosine on monoamine levels in the Japanese quail : sex differences and testosterone effects . Brain Res . Bull . 28 , 275 – 288 . Barclay , S . R . , Harding , C . F . , 1988 . Androstenedionemodulationofmonoaminelevels and turnover in hypothalamic and vocal control nuclei in the male zebra ﬁnch : steroid effects on brain monoamines . Brain Res . 459 , 333 – 343 . Barclay , S . R . , Harding , C . F . , 1990 . Differential modulation of monoamine levels and turnover rates by estrogen and / or androgen in hypothalamic and vocal control nuclei of male zebra ﬁnches . Brain Res . 523 , 251 – 262 . Barclay , S . R . , Harding , C . F . , Waterman , S . A . , 1991 . Correlations between catechola - mine levels and sexual behavior in male zebra ﬁnches . Pharmacol . Biochem . Behav . 41 , 195 – 201 . Barclay , S . R . , Harding , C . F . , Waterman , S . A . , 1996 . CentralDSP - 4treatmentdecreases norepinephrinelevelsandcourtshipbehaviorinmalezebraﬁnches . Pharmacol . Biochem . Behav . 53 , 213 – 220 . Bass , A . H . , Zakon , H . H . , 2005 . Sonic and electric ﬁsh : at the crossroads of neu - roethology and behavioral neuroendocrinology . Horm . Behav . 48 ( 4 ) , 360 – 372 . Batailler , M . , Blache , D . , Thibault , J . , Tillet , Y . , 1992 . Immunohistochemical coloca - lization of tyrosine hydroxylase and estradiol receptors in the sheep arcuate nucleus . Neurosci . Lett . 146 , 125 – 130 . Bentley , G . E . , Ball , G . F . , 2000 . Photoperiod - dependent and - independent regulation of melatonin receptors in the forebrain of songbirds . J . Neuroendocrinol . 12 , 745 – 752 . Bentley , G . E . , Van’tHof , T . J . , Ball , G . F . , 1999 . Seasonalneuroplasticityinthesongbird telencephalon : a role for melatonin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 96 , 4674 – 4679 . Bernard , D . J . , Ball , G . F . , 1995 . Two histological markers reveal a similar photoper - iodic difference in the volume of the high vocal center in male European starlings . J . Comp . Neurol . 360 , 726 – 734 . Bernard , D . J . , Casto , J . M . , Ball , G . F . , 1993 . Sexual dimorphism in the volume of song control nuclei in European starlings : assessment by a Nissl stain and auto - radiography for muscarinic cholinergic receptors . J . Comp . Neurol . 334 , 559 – 570 . Bernard , D . J . , Wilson , F . E . , Ball , G . F . , 1997 . Testis - dependent and - independent effects of photoperiod on volumes of song control nuclei in American tree sparrows ( Spizella arborea ) . Brain Res . 760 , 163 – 169 . Blaustein , J . D . , Olster , D . H . , 1989 . Gonadal steroid hormone receptors and social behaviors . In : Balthazart , J . ( Ed . ) , Advances in Comparative and Environmental Physiology , 3rd ed . , vol . 3 . Springer Verlag , Berlin , pp . 31 – 104 . Blaustein , J . D . , Tetel , M . J . , Meredith , J . M . , 1995 . Neurobiological regulation of hor - monalresponsebyprogestinandestrogenreceptors . In : Micevych , P . E . , Hammer , R . P . J . ( Eds . ) , Neurobiological Effects of Sex Steroid Hormones . Cambridge Uni - versity Press , Cambridge , pp . 324 – 349 . Bottjer , S . W . , 1993 . The distribution of tyrosine hydroxylase immunoreactivity in the brains of male and female zebra ﬁnches . J . Neurobiol . 24 , 51 – 69 . Bottjer , S . W . , Johnson , F . , 1997a . Circuits , hormones , andlearning : vocalbehaviorin songbirds . J . Neurobiol . 33 , 602 – 618 . Bottjer , S . W . , Johnson , F . , 1997b . Letter to the Editor . TINS 20 , 344 – 345 . Brenowitz , E . A . , 2008 . Plasticityofthesongcontrolsysteminadultbirds . In : Zeigler , H . P . , Marler , P . ( Eds . ) , Neuroscience of Birdsong . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , pp . 332 – 349 . Brenowitz , E . A . , Lent , K . , 2002 . Act locally and think globally : intracerebral testos - terone implants induce seasonal - like growth of adult avian song control circuits . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 99 ( 19 ) , 12421 – 12426 . Brenowitz , E . A . , Smith , G . T . , 1997 . Letter to the Editor . TINS 20 , 340 – 345 . Caro , S . P . , Balthazart , J . , Thomas , D . W . , Lacroix , A . , Chastel , O . , Lambrechts , M . M . , 2005a . Endocrine correlates of the breeding asynchrony between two corsican populations of blue tits ( Parus caeruleus ) . Gen . Comp . Endocrinol . 140 ( 1 ) , 52 – 60 . Caro , S . P . , Lambrechts , M . M . , Balthazart , J . , 2005b . Early seasonal development of brain song control nuclei in male blue tits . Neurosci . Lett . 386 ( 3 ) , 139 – 144 . Caro , S . P . , Lambrechts , M . M . , Chastel , O . , Sharp , P . J . , Thomas , D . W . , Balthazart , J . , 2006 . Simultaneous pituitary – gonadal recrudescence in two Corsican popula - tions of male blue tits with asynchronous breeding dates . Horm . Behav . 50 ( 3 ) , 347 – 360 . Cassone , V . M . , Bartell , P . A . , Earnest , B . J . , Kumar , V . , 2008 . Duration of melatonin regulates seasonal changes in song control nuclei of the house sparrow , Passer domesticus : independence from gonads and circadian entrainment . J . Biol . Rhythms 23 ( 1 ) , 49 – 58 . Castelino , C . B . , Ball , G . F . , 2005 . A role for norepinephrine in the regulation of context - dependent ZENK expression in male zebra ﬁnches ( Taeniopygia gut - tata ) . Eur . J . Neurosci . 21 ( 7 ) , 1962 – 1972 . Casto , J . M . , Ball , G . F . , 1994 . Characterization and localization of D1 dopamine receptors in the sexually dimorphic vocal control nucleus , area X , and the basal ganglia of European starlings . J . Neurobiol . 25 , 767 – 780 . Catchpole , C . K . , 1983 . Variation in the song of the great reed warbler Acrocephalus arundinaceus inrelationtomateattractionandterritorialdefence . Anim . Behav . 31 , 1217 – 1225 . Catchpole , C . K . , Slater , P . J . B . , 1995 . Bird song : Biological Themes and Variations . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge / New York . Catchpole , C . K . , Slater , P . J . B . , 2008 . Bird song . Biological Themes and Variations . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK . Collins , S . , 2004 . Vocal ﬁghting and ﬂirting : the functions of birdsong . In : Marler , P . , Slabbekoorn , H . ( Eds . ) , Nature’s Lusic , The Science of Birdsong . Elsevier , Amsterdam , pp . 39 – 79 . Curran , T . , Morgan , J . I . , 1995 . Fos : an immediate - early transcription factor in neurons . J . Neurobiol . 26 ( 3 ) , 403 – 412 . Del Negro , C . , Edeline , J . M . , 2002 . Sex and season inﬂuence the proportion of thin spike cells in the canary HVc . Neuroreport 13 ( 16 ) , 2005 – 2009 . Deller , T . , Leranth , C . , Frotscher , M . , 1994 . Reciprocal connections of lateral septal neurons and neurons in the lateral hypothalamus in the rat : a combined phaseolus vulgaris - leucoagglutinin and Fluoro - Gold immunocytochemical study . Neurosci . Lett . 168 , 119 – 122 . Dominguez , J . M . , Hull , E . M . , 2005 . Dopamine , the medial preoptic area , and male sexual behavior . Physiol . Behav . 86 ( 3 ) , 356 – 368 . Eens , M . , 1997 . Understanding the complex song of the European starling : an integrated ethological approach . Adv . Study Anim . Behav . 26 , 355 – 434 . Feare , C . J . , 1984 . The Starling . Oxford Press , Oxford . Foster , E . F . , Mehta , R . P . , Bottjer , S . W . , 1997 . Axonal connections of the medial magnocellular nucleus of the anterior neostriatum in zebra ﬁnches . J . Comp . Neurol . 382 , 364 – 381 . Fritschy , J . - M . , Grzanna , R . , 1989 . Immunohistochemical analysis of the neurotoxic effects of DSP - 4 identiﬁes two populations of noradrenergic axon terminals . Neuroscience 30 , 181 – 197 . Gahr , M . , 1990 . Delineation of a brain nucleus : comparisons of cytochemical , hodological , and cytoarchitectural views of the song control nucleus HVC of the adult canary . J . Comp . Neurol . 294 , 30 – 36 . Gahr , M . , 1997 . How should brain nuclei be delineated ? Consequences for devel - opmental mechanisms and for correlations of area size , neuron numbers , and functions of brain nuclei . TINS 20 , 58 – 62 . Gahr , M . , Kosar , E . , 1996 . Identiﬁcation , distribution , and developmental changes of a melatonin binding site in the song control system of the zebra ﬁnch . J . Comp . Neurol . 367 , 308 – 318 . Goodson , J . L . , 1998 . Territorial aggression and dawn song are modulated by septal vasotocin and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide in male ﬁeld sparrows ( Spizella pusilla ) . Horm . Behav . 34 , 67 – 77 . Goodson , J . L . , 2005 . The vertebrate social behavior network : evolutionary themes and variations . Horm . Behav . 48 ( 1 ) , 11 – 22 . Goodson , J . L . , Eibach , R . , Sakata , J . , Adkins - Regan , E . , 1999 . Effect ofseptal lesions on male song and aggression in the colonial zebra ﬁnch ( Taeniopygia guttata ) and the territorial ﬁeld sparrow ( Spizella pusilla ) . Behav . Brain Res . 98 , 167 – 180 . Goodson , J . L . , Kabelik , D . , Kelly , A . M . , Rinaldi , J . , Klatt , J . D . , 2009 . Midbraindopamine neurons reﬂect afﬁliation phenotypes in ﬁnches and are tightly coupled to courtship . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 106 ( 21 ) , 8737 – 8742 . Grisham , W . , Arnold , A . P . , 1994 . Distribution of GABA - like immunoreactivity in the song system of the zebra ﬁnch . Brain Res . 651 ( 1 – 2 ) , 115 – 122 . Gwinner , E . , Hau , M . , 2000 . The pineal gland , circadian rhythms and photoperiod - ism . In : Whittow , G . C . ( Ed . ) , Sturkies Avian Physiology . 5th ed . Academic Press , San Diego , pp . 557 – 568 . Hara , E . , Kubikova , L . , Hessler , N . A . , Jarvis , E . D . , 2007 . Role of the midbrain dopa - minergicsysteminmodulationofvocalbrainactivationbysocialcontext . Eur . J . Neurosci . 25 ( 11 ) , 3406 – 3416 . Harding , C . F . , 2008 . Hormonal modulation of singing behavior : methodology and principles of hormone action . In : Zeigler , H . P . , Marler , P . ( Eds . ) , Neuroscience of Birdsong . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , pp . 305 – 319 . Harding , C . F . , Sheridan , K . , Walters , M . J . , 1983 . Hormonal speciﬁcity and activation of sexual behavior in male zebra ﬁnches . Horm . Behav . 17 , 111 – 133 . Hegner , R . E . , Wingﬁeld , J . C . , 1986 . Behavioral and endocrine correlates of multiple brooding in the semicolonial house sparrow Passer domesticus . I . Males . Horm . Behav . 20 ( 3 ) , 294 – 312 . Heimovics , S . A . , Cornil , C . A . , Ball , G . F . , Riters , L . V . , 2009 . D1 - like dopamine receptor density in nuclei involved in social behavior correlates with song inacontext - dependentfashioninmaleEuropeanstarlings . Neuroscience159 ( 3 ) , 962 – 973 . Heimovics , S . A . , Riters , L . V . , 2005 . Immediate early gene activity in song control nuclei and brain areas regulating motivation relates positively to singing behavior during , but not outside of , a breeding context . J . Neurobiol . 65 ( 3 ) , 207 – 224 . Heimovics , S . A . , Riters , L . V . , 2006 . Breeding - context - dependent relationships between song and cFOS labeling within social behavior brain regions in male European starlings ( Sturnus vulgaris ) . Horm . Behav . 50 ( 5 ) , 726 – 735 . Heimovics , S . A . , Riters , L . V . , 2007 . ZENK labeling within social behavior brain regions reveals breeding context - dependent patterns of neural activity asso - ciatedwithsonginmaleEuropeanstarlings ( Sturnusvulgaris ) . Behav . BrainRes . 176 ( 2 ) , 333 – 343 . Heimovics , S . A . , Riters , L . V . , 2008 . Evidence that dopamine within motivation and song control brain regions regulates birdsong context - dependently . Physiol . Behav . 95 ( 1 – 2 ) , 258 – 266 . Hessler , N . A . , Doupe , A . J . , 1999a . Singing - related neural activity in a dorsal fore - brain - basal ganglia circuit of adult zebra ﬁnches . J . Neurosci . 19 , 10461 – 10481 . Hessler , N . A . , Doupe , A . J . , 1999b . Social context modulates singing - related neural activity in the songbird forebrain . Nat . Neurosci . 2 , 209 – 211 . Huang , Y . C . , Hessler , N . A . , 2008 . Social modulation during songbird courtship potentiates midbrain dopaminergic neurons . PLoS One 3 ( 10 ) , e3281 . G . F . Ball , J . Balthazart / Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 39 ( 2010 ) 82 – 95 93 Jansen , R . , Metzdorf , R . , van der Roest , M . , Fusani , L . , ter Maat , A . , Gahr , M . , 2005 . Melatonin affects the temporal organization of the song of the zebra ﬁnch . FASEB J . 19 ( 7 ) , 848 – 850 . Jarvis , E . D . , Nottebohm , F . , 1997 . Motor - drivengeneexpression . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 94 , 4097 – 4102 . Jarvis , E . D . , Scharff , C . , Grossman , M . R . , Ramos , J . A . , Nottebohm , F . , 1998 . For whom the bird sings : context - dependent gene expression . Neuron 21 , 775 – 788 . Kimura , T . , Okanoya , K . , Wada , M . , 1999 . Effectoftestosteroneonthedistributionof vasotocin immunoreactivity in the brain of the zebra ﬁnch , Taeniopygia guttata castanotis . Life Sci . 65 , 1663 – 1670 . Kiss , J . Z . , Voorhuis , T . A . M . , van Eekelen , J . A . M . , de Kloet , E . R . , de Wied , D . , 1987 . Organization of vasotocin - immunoreactive cells and ﬁbers in the canary brain . J . Comp . Neurol . 263 , 347 – 364 . LeBlanc , M . M . , Goode , C . T . , MacDougall - Shackleton , E . A . , Maney , D . L . , 2007 . Estra - diol modulates brainstem catecholaminergic cell groups and projections to the auditory forebrain in a female songbird . Brain Res . 1171 , 93 – 103 . Lewis , J . W . , Ryan , S . M . , Arnold , A . P . , Butcher , L . L . , 1981 . Evidence for catecholamine projection to area X in the zebra ﬁnch . J . Comp . Neurol . 196 , 347 – 354 . Logan , C . A . , Wingﬁeld , J . C . , 1990 . Autumnal territorial aggression is independent of plasma testosterone in mockingbirds . Horm . Behav . 24 , 568 – 581 . Luine , V . , Nottebohm , F . , Harding , C . F . , McEwen , B . S . , 1980 . Androgen affects cholinergic enzymes in syringeal motor neurons and muscles . Brain Res . 192 , 89 – 107 . Lynch , K . S . , Diekamp , B . , Ball , G . F . , 2008 . Catecholaminergic cell groups and vocal communication in male songbirds . Physiol . Behav . 93 ( 4 – 5 ) , 870 – 876 . Maney , D . L . , Ball , G . F . , 2003 . Fos - like immunoreactivity in catecholaminergic brain nucleiafterterritorialbehaviorinfree - livingsongsparrows . J . Neurobiol . 56 ( 2 ) , 163 – 170 . Maney , D . L . , Bernard , D . J . , Ball , G . F . , 2001 . Gonadal steroid receptor mRNA in catecholaminergicnucleiofthecanarybrainstem . Neurosci . Lett . 311 , 189 – 192 . Maney , D . L . , Goode , C . T . , Wingﬁeld , J . C . , 1997 . Intraventricular infusion of arginine vasotocin induces singing in a female songbird . J . Neuroendocrinol . 9 ( 7 ) , 487 – 491 . Marler , P . , Peters , S . , Ball , G . F . , Dufty , A . M . , Wingﬁeld , J . C . , 1988 . The role of sex steroids in the acquisition and production of birdsong . Nature 336 , 770 – 772 . McEwen , B . S . , Biegon , A . , Fischette , C . T . , Luine , V . N . , Parsons , B . , Rainbow , T . C . , 1984 . Toward aneurochemical basis of steroid action . In : Martini , L . , Ganong , W . F . ( Eds . ) , Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology . Raven press , New York , pp . 153 – 176 . McEwen , B . S . , Pfaff , D . W . , 1973 . Chemical and physiological approaches to neu - roendocrine mechanisms : attempts at integration . Front . Neuroendocrinol . 0 , 267 – 335 . Meitzen , J . , Moore , I . T . , Lent , K . , Brenowitz , E . A . , Perkel , D . J . , 2007 . Steroid hormones act transsynaptically within the forebrain to regulate neuronal phenotype and song stereotypy . J . Neurosci . 27 ( 44 ) , 12045 – 12057 . Meitzen , J . , Thompson , C . K . , Choi , H . , Perkel , D . J . , Brenowitz , E . A . , 2009a . Timecourse of changes in Gambel’s white - crowned sparrow song behavior following tran - sitions in breeding condition . Horm . Behav . 55 ( 1 ) , 217 – 227 . Meitzen , J . , Weaver , A . L . , Brenowitz , E . A . , Perkel , D . J . , 2009b . Plastic and stable electrophysiological properties of adult avian forebrain song - control neurons across changing breeding conditions . J . Neurosci . 29 ( 20 ) , 6558 – 6567 . Mello , C . V . , 2002 . Mapping vocal communication pathways in birds with inducible gene expression . J . Comp . Physiol . A 188 , 943 – 959 . Mello , C . V . , Pinaud , R . , Ribeiro , S . , 1998 . Noradrenergic system of the zebra ﬁnch brain : immunocytochemical study of dopamine - beta - hydroxylase . J . Comp . Neurol . 400 , 207 – 228 . Montagnese , C . M . , Szekely , A . D . , Adam , A . , Csillag , A . , 2004 . Efferent connections of septalnucleiofthedomesticchick ( Gallusdomesticus ) : ananterogradepathway tracing study with a bearing on functional circuits . J . Comp . Neurol . 469 ( 3 ) , 437 – 456 . Nottebohm , F . , 1980 . Brainpathwaysforvocallearninginbirds : areviewoftheﬁrst 10 years . In : Sprague , J . M . , Epstein , A . N . ( Eds . ) , Progress in Psychobiology and Physiological Psychology , vol . 9 . Academic Press , New York , pp . 85 – 214 . Nottebohm , F . , 1981 . A brain for all seasons : cyclical anatomical changes in song - control nuclei of the canary brain . Science 214 , 1368 – 1370 . Nottebohm , F . , Stokes , T . M . , Leonard , C . M . , 1976 . Central control of song in the canary , Serinus canaries . J . Comp . Neurol . 165 , 457 – 486 . Panzica , G . C . , Aste , N . , Viglietti - Panzica , C . , Fasolo , A . , 1992 . Neuronal circuits controlling quail sexual behavior . Chemical neuroanatomy of the septo - pre - optic region . Poultry Sci . Rev . 4 , 249 – 259 . Panzica , G . C . , Viglietti - Panzica , C . , Balthazart , J . , 1996 . The sexually dimorphic medial preoptic nucleus of quail : a key brain area mediating steroid action on male sexual behavior . Front . Neuroendocrinol . 17 , 51 – 125 . Park , K . H . , Meitzen , J . , Moore , I . T . , Brenowitz , E . A . , Perkel , D . J . , 2005 . Seasonal - like plasticity of spontaneous ﬁring rate in a songbird pre - motor nucleus . J . Neu - robiol . 64 ( 2 ) , 181 – 191 . Pfaff , D . W . , Kow , L . M . , Loose , M . D . , Flanagan - Cato , L . M . , 2008 . Reverse engineering the lordosis behavior circuit . Horm . Behav . 54 ( 3 ) , 347 – 354 . Plumari , L . , Plateroti , S . , Deviche , P . , Panzica , G . C . , 2004 . Region - speciﬁctestosterone modulation of the vasotocin - immunoreactive system in male dark - eyed junco , Junco hyemalis . Brain Res . 999 ( 1 ) , 1 – 8 . Pro¨ve , E . , 1974 . Der Einﬂuss von Kastration und Testosteronsubstitution auf das Verhalten manlicher Zebraﬁnken . J . Ornithol . 115 , 338 – 347 . Rauceo , S . , Harding , C . F . , Maldonado , A . , Gaysinkaya , L . , Tulloch , I . , Rodriguez , E . , 2008 . Dopaminergic modulation of reproductive behavior and activity in male zebra ﬁnches . Behav . Brain Res . 187 ( 1 ) , 133 – 139 . Reiner , A . D . , Perkel , J . , Bruce , L . , Butler , A . , Csillag , A . , Kuenzel , W . , Medina , L . , Paxinos , G . , Shimizu , T . , Striedter , G . , Wild , M . , Ball , G . F . , Durand , S . , Gu¨ntu¨rku¨n , O . , Lee , D . W . , Mello , C . V . , White , S . A . , Hough , G . , Kubikova , L . , Smulders , T . V . , Wada , K . , Dugas - Ford , J . , Husband , S . , Yamamoto , K . , Yu , J . , Siang , C . , Jarvis , E . D . , 2004 . Revised nomenclature for avian telencephalon and some related brain - stem nuclei . J . Comp . Neurol . 473 , 377 – 414 . Replogle , K . , Arnold , A . P . , Ball , G . F . , Band , M . , Bensch , S . , Brenowitz , E . A . , Dong , S . , Drnevich , J . , Ferris , M . , George , J . M . , Gong , G . , Hasselquist , D . , Hernandez , A . G . , Kim , R . , Lewin , H . A . , Liu , L . , Lovell , P . V . , Mello , C . V . , Naurin , S . , Rodriguez - Zas , S . , Thimmapuram , J . , Wade , J . , Clayton , D . F . , 2008 . The songbird neurogenomics ( SoNG ) initiative : community - basedtoolsandstrategiesforstudyofbraingene function and evolution . BMC Genomics 9 , 131 . Riebel , K . , 2003 . The ‘‘mute’’ sex revisited : vocal production and perception in female songbirds . Adv . Study Anim . Behav . 33 , 49 – 86 . Riters , L . V . , Alger , S . J . , 2004 . Neuroanatomical evidence for indirect connections between the medial preoptic nucleus and the song control system : possible neural substrates for sexually motivated song . Cell Tissue Res . 316 ( 1 ) , 35 – 44 . Riters , L . V . , Ball , G . F . , 1999 . Lesions to the medial preoptic area affect singing in the male European starling ( Sturnus vulgaris ) . Horm . Behav . 36 , 276 – 286 . Riters , L . V . , Eens , M . , Pinxten , R . , Ball , G . F . , 2002 . Seasonalchangesinthedensitiesof a 2 - noradrenergicreceptorsareinverselyrelatedtochangesintestosteroneand the volumes of song control nuclei in male European starlings . J . Comp . Neurol . 444 , 63 – 74 . Riters , L . V . , Eens , M . , Pinxten , R . , Duffy , D . L . , Balthazart , J . , Ball , G . F . , 2000 . Seasonal changes in courtship song and the medial preoptic area in male European starlings ( Sturnus vulgaris ) . Horm . Behav . 38 , 250 – 261 . Ryan , S . , Arnold , A . P . , 1981 . Evidence for cholinergic participation in the control of bird song : acetylcholinesterase distribution and muscarinic receptor autora - diography in the zebra ﬁnch brain . J . Comp . Neurol . 202 , 211 – 219 . Sakaguchi , H . , Saito , N . , 1989 . Theacetylcholineandcatecholaminecontentsinsong controlnucleiofzebraﬁnchduringsongontogeny . Dev . BrainRes . 47 , 313 – 317 . Sar , M . , 1984 . Estradiolisconcentrated intyrosinehydroxylase - containingneurons of the hypothalamus . Science 223 , 938 – 940 . Sartor , J . J . , Balthazart , J . , Ball , G . F . , 2005 . Coordinated and dissociated effects of testosterone on singing behavior and song control nuclei in canaries ( Serinus canaria ) . Horm . Behav . 47 ( 4 ) , 467 – 476 . Sasaki , A . , Sotnikova , T . D . , Gainetdinov , R . R . , Jarvis , E . D . , 2006 . Social context - dependent singing - regulated dopamine . J . Neurosci . 26 ( 35 ) , 9010 – 9014 . Scharff , C . , Kirn , J . R . , Grossman , M . , Macklis , J . D . , Nottebohm , F . , 2000 . Targeted neuronal death affects replacement and vocal behavior in adult songbirds . Neuron 25 , 481 – 492 . Schlinger , B . A . , 1997 . Sex steroids and their actions on the birdsong system . J . Neurobiol . 33 , 619 – 631 . Schlinger , B . A . , Brenowitz , E . A . , 2002 . Neural and hormonal control of birdsong . In : Pfaff , D . W . , Arnold , A . P . , Etgen , A . M . , Fahrbach , S . E . , Rubin , R . T . ( Eds . ) , Hor - mones , Brain and Behavior . Academic Press , San Diego , pp . 799 – 839 . Schroeder , M . B . , Riters , L . V . , 2006 . Pharmacologicalmanipulationsofdopamine and opioids have differential effects on sexually motivated song in male European starlings . Physiol . Behav . 88 ( 4 – 5 ) , 575 – 584 . Scotto - Lomassese , S . , Rochefort , C . , Nshdejan , A . , Scharff , C . , 2007 . HVCinterneurons arenotrenewedinadultmalezebraﬁnches . Eur . J . Neurosci . 25 ( 6 ) , 1663 – 1668 . Silver , R . , 1978 . The parental behavior of ring doves . Am . Sci . 66 , 209 – 215 . Slagsvold , T . , 1977 . Bird song activity in relation to breeding cycle , spring weather , and environmental physiology . Ornis Scand . 8 , 197 – 222 . Small , T . W . , Moore , I . T . , 2009 . Seasonalneuroplasticityofthesongcontrolsystemin tropical , ﬂexibly , and opportunistically breeding birds . Gen . Comp . Endocrinol . 163 ( 1 – 2 ) , 135 – 141 . Smith , G . T . , Brenowitz , E . A . , Beecher , M . D . , Wingﬁeld , J . C . , 1997 . Seasonalchangesin testosterone , neuralattributesofsongcontrolnuclei , andsongstructureinwild songbirds . J . Neurosci . 17 , 6001 – 6010 . Smith , G . T . , Brenowitz , E . A . , Wingﬁeld , J . C . , Baptista , L . F . , 1995 . Seasonal changes in song nuclei and song behavior in Gambels white - crowned sparrows . J . Neuro - biol . 28 , 114 – 125 . Soha , J . A . , Shimizu , T . , Doupe , A . J . , 1996 . Development of the catecholaminergic innervation of the song system of the male zebra ﬁnch . J . Neurobiol . 29 , 473 – 489 . Soma , K . K . , Hartman , V . N . , Wingﬁeld , J . C . , Brenowitz , E . A . , 1999 . Seasonalchangesin androgen receptor immunoreactivity in the song nucleus HVc of a wild bird . J . Comp . Neurol . 409 , 224 – 236 . Soma , K . K . , Scotti , M . A . , Newman , A . E . , Charlier , T . D . , Demas , G . E . , 2008 . Novel mechanisms for neuroendocrine regulation of aggression . Front . Neuroendo - crinol . 29 ( 4 ) , 476 – 489 . Soma , K . K . , Sullivan , K . A . , Tramontin , A . D . , Saldanha , C . J . , Schlinger , B . A . , Wingﬁeld , J . C . , 2000a . Acute and chronic effects of an aromatase inhibitor on territorial aggressioninbreedingandnonbreedingmalesongsparrows . J . Comp . Physiol . A 186 , 759 – 769 . Soma , K . K . , Tramontin , A . D . , Featherstone , J . , Brenowitz , E . A . , 2004 . Estrogen con - tributes to seasonal plasticity of the adult avian song control system . J . Neu - robiol . 58 ( 3 ) , 413 – 422 . Soma , K . K . , Tramontin , A . D . , Wingﬁeld , J . C . , 2000b . Oestrogen regulates male aggression in the non - breeding season . Proc . Biol . Sci . 267 ( 1448 ) , 1089 – 1096 . Soma , K . K . , Wissman , A . M . , Brenowitz , E . A . , Wingﬁeld , J . C . , 2002 . Dehydroepian - drosterone ( DHEA ) increases territorial song and the size of an associated brain region in a male songbird . Horm . Behav . 41 ( 2 ) , 203 – 212 . Tramontin , A . D . , Brenowitz , E . A . , 2000 . Seasonal plasticity in the adult brain . TINS 23 , 251 – 258 . G . F . Ball , J . Balthazart / Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 39 ( 2010 ) 82 – 95 94 Tramontin , A . D . , Perﬁto , N . , Wingﬁeld , J . C . , Brenowitz , E . A . , 2001 . Seasonalgrowthof song control nuclei precedes seasonal reproductive development in wild adult song sparrows . Gen . Comp . Endocrinol . 122 ( 1 ) , 1 – 9 . Tramontin , A . D . , Smith , G . T . , Breuner , C . W . , Brenowitz , E . A . , 1998 . Seasonal plasti - city and sexual dimorphism in the avian song control system : stereological measurement of neuron density and number . J . Comp . Neurol . 396 , 186 – 192 . Tramontin , A . D . , Wingﬁeld , J . C . , Brenowitz , E . A . , 2003 . Androgens and estrogens induce seasonal - like growth of song nuclei in the adult songbird brain . J . Neurobiol . 57 ( 2 ) , 130 – 140 . Truman , J . W . , 2005 . Hormonal control of insect ecdysis : endocrine cascades for coordinating behavior with physiology . Vitam . Horm . 73 , 1 – 30 . Voigt , C . , Ball , G . F . , Balthazart , J . , 2007 . Sex differences in the expression of sex steroid receptors mRNA in the quail brain . In : Program No 209 . 21 . 2007 Neuroscience Meeting Planner . Society for Neuroscience , San Diego , CA CD - ROM . Voorhuis , T . A . M . , de Kloet , E . R . , 1992 . Immunoreactive vasotocin in the zebra ﬁnch brain ( Taeniopygia guttata ) . Dev . Brain Res . 69 , 1 – 10 . Voorhuis , T . A . M . , de Kloet , E . R . , de Wied , D . , 1991 . Effect of a vasotocin analog on singing behavior in the canary . Horm . Behav . 25 , 549 – 559 . Voorhuis , T . A . M . , Kiss , J . Z . , de Kloet , E . R . , de Wied , D . , 1988 . Testosterone - sensitive vasotocin - immunoreactive cells and ﬁbers in the canary brain . Brain Res . 442 , 139 – 146 . Wada , K . , Howard , J . T . , McConnell , P . , Whitney , O . , Lints , T . , Rivas , M . V . , Horita , H . , Patterson , M . A . , White , S . A . , Scharff , C . , Haesler , S . , Zhao , S . , Sakaguchi , H . , Hagiwara , M . , Shiraki , T . , Hirozane - Kishikawa , T . , Skene , P . , Hayashizaki , Y . , Carninci , P . , Jarvis , E . D . , 2006 . A molecular neuroethological approach for identifying and characterizing a cascade of behaviorally regulated genes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 103 ( 41 ) , 15212 – 15217 . Wada , K . , Sakaguchi , H . , Jarvis , E . D . , Hagiwara , M . , 2004 . Differential expression of glutamatereceptorsinavianneuralpathwaysforlearnedvocalization . J . Comp . Neurol . 476 ( 1 ) , 44 – 64 . Wade , J . , Buhlman , L . , Swender , D . , 2002 . Post - hatching hormonal modulation of a sexually dimorphic neuromuscular system controlling song in zebra ﬁnches . Brain Res . 929 ( 2 ) , 191 – 201 . Walters , M . J . , Collado , D . , Harding , C . F . , 1991 . Oestrogenic modulation of singing in male zebraﬁnches : differentialeffectson directed andundirected songs . Anim . Behav . 42 , 445 – 452 . White , G . F . , 1789 . The Natural History and Antiquities of Selbourne . Benjamin White & Son , London . Whitﬁeld - Rucker , M . G . , Cassone , V . M . , 1996 . Melatonin binding in the house sparrowsongcontrolsystem : sexualdimorphismandtheeffectofphotoperiod . Horm . Behav . 30 , 528 – 537 . Wiley , R . H . , Piper , W . H . , Archawaranon , M . , Thompson , E . W . , 1993 . Singing in relation to social dominance and testosterone in white - throated sparrows . Behaviour 127 , 175 – 190 . Wingﬁeld , J . C . , Farner , D . S . , 1993 . Endocrinology ofreproduction inwildspecies . In : Farner , D . S . , King , J . , Parkes , K . C . ( Eds . ) , Avian Biology , vol . 9 . Academic Press , New York , pp . 163 – 327 . Wissman , A . M . , Brenowitz , E . A . , 2009 . Theroleofneurotrophinsintheseasonal - like growth of the avian song control system . J . Neurosci . 29 ( 20 ) , 6461 – 6471 . Zaczek , R . , Fritschy , J . - M . , Culp , S . , De Souza , E . B . , Grzanna , R . , 1990 . Differential effects of DSP - 4 on noradrenaline axons in cerebral cortex and hypothalamus may reﬂect heterogeneity of noradrenaline uptake sites . Brain Res . 522 , 308 – 314 . Zeigler , H . P . , Marler , P . , 2008 . Neuroscience of Birdsong . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge . G . F . Ball , J . Balthazart / Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 39 ( 2010 ) 82 – 95 95