This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017 Lab Chip , 2017 , XX , X‐X | 1 Please do not adjust margins Please do not adjust margins Hybrid polymer microfluidic platform to mimic varying vascular compliance and topology M . L . Rathod , a J . Ahn , ab N . L . Jeon a and J . Lee * a Fig . S1 Actual images of the steps involved in the process flow to develop the hybrid microfluidic platform . Fig . S2 One way fluid structure interaction simulation model to evaluate channel deformation and wall shear stress due to fluid flow . A ) Side view of computational model illustrating inlet and outlet of the channel . B ) Iso view of computational model with three different PDMS formulations along the channel length . Fig . S3 Stress‐strain curves of three different PDMS formulations upto 10 % range of strain . Electronic Supplementary Material ( ESI ) for Lab on a Chip . This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017 ARTICLE Journal Name 2 | J . Name . , 2012 , 00 , 1‐3 This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 20xx Please do not adjust margins Please do not adjust margins To fabricate Y bifurcation channels teflon insulator coating , external diameter 450 microns and internal diameter 250 microns , was separated from the conducting core of an electrical wire . Next , a small opening was created in the hollow teflon coating ( Fig . S2 , Step 1 ) . Second step involved inserting optical fibres , diameter 250 microns , in the hollow teflon insulator coating from both the open ends , henceforth referred as wire 1 . An additional teflon insulator coating inserted with optical fibre was prepared , henceforth referred as wire 2 ( Fig . S2 , Step 2 ) . In the third step both the wires were joined . This was achieved by inserting wire 2 into wire 1 at the small opening created in step 1 ( Fig . S2 , Step 3 ) . Next , the Y bifurcation wire assembly was carefully inserted in the customised acrylic mould , filled with PDMS 10 : 1 base : curing agent ratio mixed and degassed , and later allowed to cure overnight at 45  Celsius in a convection oven ( Fig . S2 , Step 4 ) . Once cured , device was peeled from the mould and sealed at the ends to form a microfluidic platform consisting of Y bifurcation circular microchannel ( Fig . S2 , Step 5 ) . Fig . S5 Fabrication process flow for creating Y bifurcation microchannel . Scale bar , 250 microns Fig . S4 Wall surface for different cross section channels . A ) Circular cross section . B ) Rectangular cross section . C ) Square cross section