Contribution of Extracellular Matrix to the Mechanical Properties of the Heart Gregory M . Fomovsky , MS 1 , Stavros Thomopoulos , PhD 2 , and Jeffrey W . Holmes , MD PhD 3 1 Department of Biomedical Engineering , Columbia University , New York , NY 2 Departments of Orthopaedics and Biomedical Engineering , Washington University , St . Louis , MO 3 Departments of Biomedical Engineering and Medicine , Robert M . Berne Cardiovascular Research Center , University of Virginia , Charlottesville , VA Abstract Extracellular matrix ( ECM ) components play essential roles in development , remodeling , and signaling in the cardiovascular system . They are also important in determining the mechanics of blood vessels , valves , pericardium , and myocardium . The goal of this brief review is to summarize available information regarding the mechanical contributions of ECM in the myocardium . Fibrillar collagen , elastin , and proteoglycans all play crucial mechanical roles in many tissues in the body generally and in the cardiovascular system specifically . The myocardium contains all three components , but their mechanical contributions are relatively poorly understood . Most studies of ECM contributions to myocardial mechanics have focused on collagen , but quantitative prediction of mechanical properties of the myocardium , or changes in those properties with disease , from measured tissue structure is not yet possible . Circumstantial evidence suggests that the mechanics of cardiac elastin and proteoglycans merit further study . Work in other tissues used a combination of correlation , modification or digestion , and mathematical modeling to establish mechanical roles for specific ECM components ; this work can provide guidance for new experiments and modeling studies in myocardium . Keywords collagen ; constitutive model ; elastin ; proteoglycans ; residual stress 1 . Introduction Extracellular matrix ( ECM ) components play an essential role in development , remodeling , and signaling in the cardiovascular system . They are also important in determining the mechanics of blood vessels , valves , pericardium , and myocardium . The goal of this brief review is to summarize available information regarding the mechanical contributions of ECM in the myocardium . This information is derived from three types of studies . The first clue to the © 2009 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . Corresponding Author : Jeffrey W . Holmes , M . D . , Ph . D . , Department of Biomedical Engineering , Box 800759 , Health System , Charlottesville , VA 22908 , holmes @ virginia . edu , phone : ( 434 ) 243 - 6321 , fax : ( 434 ) 982 - 3870 . Publisher ' s Disclaimer : This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication . As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript . The manuscript will undergo copyediting , typesetting , and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form . Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content , and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain . NIH Public Access Author Manuscript J Mol Cell Cardiol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2011 March 1 . Published in final edited form as : J Mol Cell Cardiol . 2010 March ; 48 ( 3 ) : 490 – 496 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . yjmcc . 2009 . 08 . 003 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t mechanical importance of an ECM component is often a correlative study of a particular pathology ; for example , myocardial collagen content and ventricular stiffness both increase during pressure - overload hypertrophy , suggesting that myocardial collagen might be an important determinant of chamber stiffness . Manipulating a specific matrix component by enzymatic digestion , altering synthesis , or genetic manipulation can provide a more definitive test of that component’s mechanical contribution . Finally , mathematical models are often important in separating the mechanical roles of multiple components within a tissue . We set out to review the evidence from each type of study ( correlation , manipulation , modeling ) for the three ECM components known to be most important to the mechanics of other soft tissues : collagen , elastin , and proteoglycans . We found two things that may be somewhat surprising . First , despite hints that elastin and proteoglycans may be important in determining the mechanics of the myocardium , their contribution has received little attention . Second , the mechanical functions of all three components are much better understood in other soft tissues than in the heart . We decided , therefore , to organize this review into sections for each of these mechanically active ECM components , and to begin each section with an example from another tissue before proceeding to evidence in the heart . We have selected examples that illustrate both the level of understanding that should be set as a goal for future work in the myocardium and approaches that might be useful in achieving that understanding . 2 . Collagen 2 . 1 . Collagen in the Pericardium Pericardium is a thin sheet of tissue composed largely of collagen that surrounds the heart . Unlike myocardium , pericardium can be excised and tested easily , without complications from ischemia or contracture . Furthermore , it is so thin that its mechanics can be treated as two - dimensional , simplifying testing and analysis . Despite this experimental accessibility , it has taken 25 years of work to develop a quantitative understanding of how collagen determines the mechanical properties of pericardium . Two recent reports by Sacks and colleagues [ 1 , 2 ] reflect the current state of the art , providing inspiration and guidance for future studies of collagen and myocardial mechanics . A complete understanding of the structural basis for a tissue’s mechanical properties should allow quantitative prediction of those mechanical properties from measured structure . Sacks achieved this goal for pericardium in 2003 [ 1 ] . Using a light - scattering technique , he measured the distribution of collagen fiber orientations in samples of bovine pericardium . Then , he performed a single equibiaxial stretch test on each sample while measuring force in two perpendicular directions . Because equibiaxial stretch subjects every fiber in the plane of the tissue to exactly the same strain , regardless of orientation , these test data provided the stress - strain curve for the individual collagen fibers , assuming collagen fibers dominate the mechanics and their density is known . Finally , Sacks used measured orientation and fiber stress - strain properties to predict the mechanical response of each sample to a wide range of stretch combinations , and showed that the predictions matched test data extremely well . This model falls slightly short of the goal of predicting mechanics entirely from structure because it still required a single mechanical test per sample to determine the effective stress - strain curve for collagen fibers in that sample . There is ample evidence that the exponential stress - strain relationship of collagenous tissues reflects the combined effects of two microstructural events . Initially , collagen fibers uncoil or uncrimp , offering relatively little resistance to stretch ; once collagen fibers are straight , stretching them requires much greater force . Measuring the degree of coiling or crimping of collagen and knowing the mechanical properties of straightened fibers should therefore allow prediction of the stress - strain response from structural information alone . Sacks and colleagues recently used x - ray diffraction to track Fomovsky et al . Page 2 J Mol Cell Cardiol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2011 March 1 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t the periodicity of the collagen molecules within each fiber during mechanical testing and separate uncoiling from axial stretch [ 2 ] . 2 . 2 . Collagen in the Myocardium In contrast to the pericardium , collagen constitutes a relatively small fraction of myocardial mass . Nevertheless , the myocardial collagen network is essential to the mechanics of the heart [ 3 ] . In systole , myocytes bear most of the wall stress but the surrounding collagen weave and struts transmit force and help maintain myocyte alignment . In diastole , perimysial collagen fibers uncoil as the ventricle fills ; once these fibers straighten , they resist further expansion , accounting for the steep portion of the end - diastolic pressure - volume curve and protecting myocytes from overstretch ( Figure 1 ) . This picture of the mechanical role of fibrillar collagen in the heart arose largely through correlative studies [ 4 - 7 ] , complemented by studies that directly altered collagen content [ 8 - 13 ] . Accurate quantitative models relating collagen content and structure to myocardial mechanics are still lacking , and more work is needed to fully understand the mechanical impact of changes in collagen subtype ratios and collagen cross - linking . 2 . 2 . 1 . Correlative Approaches— Early studies of pressure - overload hypertrophy ( PO ) revealed that experimental pressure overload increases collagen content as well as myocardial mass [ 4 ] . Papillary muscles from PO hearts displayed elevated diastolic stiffness as well as contractile abnormalities ( reduced maximal shortening velocity , prolonged time to peak tension ) that could be due either to alterations in the contractile elements or to changes in the elastic elements of the muscle [ 4 ] . Continuing studies of cardiac hypertrophy produced data on myocyte hypertrophy , fibrosis , and mechanics across a broad array of diseases and experimental models ; for example , Villari et al . demonstrated a nonlinear relationship between chamber stiffness and collagen content in patients with aortic valve disease [ 5 ] . In 1993 , Weber and colleagues used these data from the literature to argue convincingly that increased diastolic stiffness correlates with ventricular fibrosis rather than with hypertrophy per se [ 6 ] . Comparisons between species provided additional support for the role of myocardial collagen in determining diastolic stiffness ; for example , Borg et al . compared rat and hamster hearts and found that differences in diastolic stiffness correlated with the extent of the collagen network [ 7 ] . Cardiac pathologies affect not only collagen content but also other factors that may impact mechanics , including collagen cross - linking , fiber structure , and subtype ratios . Correlative studies typically provide the first indication of the potential importance of these factors . Diastolic stiffness correlates with the level of collagen cross - linking in some animal models of pressure overload [ 14 ] and in patients with heart failure [ 15 ] , suggesting that collagen content and cross - linking are both important determinants of diastolic properties during hypertrophy and failure . In diabetic patients , high levels of advanced glycation end - products ( AGEs ) correlate with premature vascular and LV diastolic stiffening , suggesting that AGE - mediated collagen cross - linking can contribute to diastolic dysfunction ; agents that prevent or reduce AGE - mediated cross - linking have shown promise in normalizing diastolic mechanics in experimental models of diabetes [ 16 ] . Following myocardial infarction , collagen content , fiber structure , and cross - linking all change dramatically as necrotic myocardium is replaced by scar tissue ; correlation of these structural changes with changes in mechanical properties suggests that collagen fiber alignment and cross - linking can be as important as collagen content in determining mechanical properties of the healing scar [ 17 ] . Ratios of type I to type III collagen also change during hypertrophy [ 18 ] , failure [ 19 ] , and infarct healing [ 20 ] , but the mechanical consequences of these changes are unclear . Correlative approaches provide limited insight in these situations , because total collagen content and type I / III ratios vary simultaneously . Fomovsky et al . Page 3 J Mol Cell Cardiol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2011 March 1 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t 2 . 2 . 2 . Modification and Digestion— Once correlative studies suggested that collagen is a critical determinant of diastolic mechanics , researchers began degrading or altering collagen to test its role more directly . Some approached this problem by altering collagen turnover or deposition . Bing et al . , who reported increased collagen content and increased diastolic stiffness in rat papillary muscles during pressure overload ( PO ) , found that adding beta - amino proprionitrile ( BAPN ) to the rat chow prevented both the increase in collagen and the increase in stiffness [ 8 ] . Even in the absence of hemodynamic overload , 6 weeks of BAPN treatment decreased collagen content , collagen cross - linking , and diastolic chamber stiffness in pigs [ 9 ] . An alternate approach is to enzymatically degrade collagen in an acute experimental preparation and measure the resulting change in mechanical properties . Degrading collagen in an intact , perfused heart proved problematic . Collagenase treatment [ 10 ] and activation of endogenous proteases with 5 , 5 ′ - dithio - 2 - nitrobenzoic acid ( DTNB ) [ 11 ] both altered diastolic mechanics but also induced prominent edema , complicating interpretation of the data . Experiments in isolated papillary muscles and trabeculae were more successful . Activating endogenous matrix metalloproteases ( MMPs ) with plasmin decreased collagen content , stiffness , and viscous damping in control and PO cat RV papillary muscles [ 12 ] . Interestingly , the reverse experiment - degrading everything else and measuring the properties of the remaining collagen - proved even more instructive . Granzier and Irving used KCl / KI to remove actin , myosin , and most of the associated proteins from skinned cardiac trabeculae and found that diastolic properties changed little at long muscle lengths [ 13 ] . Combining these studies with mechanical tests on individual myocytes , they concluded that intracellular titin explains much of the passive stiffness of cardiac muscle at short sarcomere lengths , while collagen explains most of the stiffness at longer lengths , in the steep portion of the passive stress - strain curve ( Figure 1 ) . Studies on papillary muscles are experimentally convenient , but it is unclear how the results translate to the three - dimensional collagen network of the myocardium . The perimysial collagen network surrounds and connects sheets of myocardium several cells thick ; this sheet structure has been described and extensively studied by LeGrice and colleagues [ 21 ] . While the same group has attempted to relate the three - dimensional perimysial collagen structure to behavior in multi - axial shear tests [ 22 , 23 ] , they have not yet performed multi - dimensional versions of the digestion studies described above . 2 . 2 . 3 . Modeling— Mathematical and computational models typically represent the mechanical properties of myocardium using phenomenologic constitutive equations - equations that describe stress - strain behavior of the tissue without attempting to relate it to the underlying structure [ 24 ] . Such models provide little insight about the importance of individual structural components , and are not easily modified to reflect what is known about structural changes in disease . Models based on measured structure , like the model described for pericardium earlier in this article , are conceptually attractive . Their utility for modeling myocardium has been limited primarily by the fact that such models typically have a large number of parameters that are difficult to measure directly , complicating the search for unique parameter values when fitting data [ 23 ] . One interesting exception is the simple structural model proposed by MacKenna and colleagues [ 25 ] . They modeled perimysial collagen fibers as helical springs and found that relatively small differences in fiber diameter , tortuosity , and density predicted large enough changes in the mechanics of uncoiling to explain reported differences in passive stiffness between rat and dog myocardium . One of the difficulties in building a mathematical model based on tissue structure , and one of the reasons that structural models often end up including so many parameters , is that multiple components can each bear load directly and through interactions . Using existing tissue Fomovsky et al . Page 4 J Mol Cell Cardiol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2011 March 1 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t engineering techniques , it is now possible to consider assembling a physical model of a tissue , building it up one component at a time , using a stepwise approach to understand the role of each component and its interactions . We used fibroblast - populated collagen gels as a simple physical model of myocardial scar tissue to help us understand the importance of collagen fiber alignment in determining scar mechanical properties [ 26 , 27 ] . A combination of modeling and experiments revealed that fiber alignment could not fully explain the anisotropy observed in these simple gels , supporting the idea that fiber prestress and / or rotation must be taken into account to properly describe mechanical behavior [ 27 ] . Others used cross - linking by lysyl oxidase [ 28 ] or glycation [ 29 ] to stiffen collagen gels for use as tissue engineering scaffolds , simultaneously providing insight into the mechanical consequences of enzymatic and non - enzymatic collagen cross - linking . 3 . Elastin 3 . 1 . Elastin in Arteries Arteries are composed of layers of elastin , collagen , and smooth muscle and are lined with a layer of endothelial cells . Like pericardium , large arteries are an experimentally tractable system - they can be excised for mechanical testing and even cultured to study structural remodeling in response to altered mechanical loading . Arteries display a nonlinear stress - strain relationship , which arises from interaction of parallel elastin and collagen fibers in the arterial wall [ 30 ] . At low pressures , elastin bears most of the load and the artery is fairly compliant . At normal blood pressures , elastin allows the aorta to stretch and store blood as it is ejected by the heart during systole , then recoil during diastole to provide a relatively constant perfusion pressure and flow to the body . At higher pressures , load is transferred to collagen fibers , which gradually straighten and limit arterial expansion . This interplay between a rubber - like , distensible component ( elastin or similar proteins ) and stiff collagen fibers in the arteries is apparently common to all species with closed circulatory systems ; Shadwick [ 30 ] provides an excellent review of relevant studies with an emphasis on comparisons across species . The studies that established how elastin and collagen determine the mechanical properties of arteries employed a mix of correlation and digestion . In large arteries , elastin content decreases and collagen content increases with distance from the heart [ 31 ] ; the drop in elastin : collagen ratio correlates with reported increases in stiffness along the arterial tree [ 32 ] . Similarly , arterial stiffening with age correlates with a decreased elastin : collagen ratio due to fragmentation of elastin fibers and deposition of collagen [ 33 ] . Roach and Burton tested arteries before and after digestion of elastin ( with trypsin ) or collagen ( with formic acid ) and confirmed that elastin was responsible for the mechanical properties at low stresses , while collagen determined properties at high stresses [ 34 ] . Despite a clear understanding of the mechanical roles of elastin and collagen in arteries , quantitatively predicting arterial properties from measured structure has proved surprisingly difficult . This may foreshadow the difficulty of developing structural constitutive models for the heart , which is geometrically and structurally more complex than arteries . Nevertheless , new mathematical models of arterial growth and remodeling should inspire important new work in the heart . Humphrey and colleagues formulated mathematical models of the turnover of elastin , collagen , and smooth muscle during growth and remodeling of blood vessels [ 35 ] . Their models explain many of the observed features of arterial growth and remodeling . For example , unloaded arterial rings are under residual stress - tension in the outer wall and compression in the inner wall - and therefore spring open into an arc when this stress is relieved by transecting the wall . This residual stress is important to arterial function , because it helps reduce the stress concentration that would normally be present in the inner wall of an inflated tube . Humphrey and colleagues showed that the changes in residual stress observed during arterial growth and remodeling could arise through degradation of components deposited at Fomovsky et al . Page 5 J Mol Cell Cardiol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2011 March 1 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t previous stress levels and replacement with components deposited at a new stress . Similar models may prove very useful in understanding how turnover of myocardial collagen , muscle proteins , and other components impact cardiac mechanics during hypertrophy and remodeling . 3 . 2 . Elastin in the Heart The myocardium contains elastin , both in the walls of coronary blood vessels and in the interstitium , but it is unclear whether elastin contributes significantly to myocardial mechanics . Correlative approaches are limited because most pathologies known to alter elastin also alter collagen . We found no reports of definitive digestion experiments analogous to those reviewed above for arteries . Mathematical models of myocardium and the heart have not yet incorporated elastin . 3 . 2 . 1 . Correlative Approaches— Interstitial elastin fibers are disrupted by acute ischemia [ 36 ] and during pressure overload [ 37 ] and subsequent heart failure [ 38 ] ; cathepsin S may account for the elevated elastolytic activity in extracts from failing myocardium [ 38 ] . A decade ago , Tyagi et al . speculated that changes in the elastin : collagen ratio , rather than in collagen content alone , underlie the increased diastolic stiffness in pressure overload [ 39 ] . This would certainly be consistent with studies in aging arteries , but has not been explored fully in the heart . Correlative studies can be difficult to interpret if pathologies that alter myocardial elastin also alter collagen content , as is the case for ischemia , heart failure , and pressure overload . A definitive test will require selective alteration of myocardial elastin through digestion or genetic manipulation . 3 . 2 . 2 . Modification and Digestion— We found no reports of digestion experiments designed to isolate the mechanical contributions of myocardial elastin . Jobsis et al . recently proposed that the elastic fibers in the visceral pericardium may play an important role in elastic recoil and untwisting during early diastole [ 40 ] . They showed that disrupting the visceral pericardium affected passive mechanics and residual stress , but did not separate the contributions of epimysial elastin and collagen . Globally perturbing elastin expression also provides limited information about myocardial elastin , because effects on arteries dominate the phenotype . Elastin knockout mice are born with stiff , tortuous arteries and marked cardiac hypertrophy ; they die within 72 hours due to smooth muscle cell proliferation that occludes the aorta [ 41 ] . Mice with one elastin allele deleted have stiffer arteries , elevated blood pressure , mild cardiac hypertrophy , and a normal life span [ 42 ] . Cardiac function appears normal in these animals at birth [ 41 ] , and subsequent changes are believed to be secondary to decreased arterial compliance and hypertension [ 42 ] . The mild cardiac phenotype in elastin hemizygous mice suggests a limited role for elastin in myocardial mechanics ; experiments in animals with cardiac - restricted deletion of one or both elastin alleles could definitively address this question . The ability to manipulate elastin expression provides opportunities to test its role in normal and diseased myocardium , but also opportunities to envision new therapeutic roles . For example , Mizuno et al . proposed that elastin might be beneficial in reinforcing healing myocardial infarcts [ 43 ] . They employed transplanted vascular endothelial cells to express elastin in healing rat infarcts and found reduced infarct expansion , reduced left ventricular remodeling , and improved heart function . Fomovsky et al . Page 6 J Mol Cell Cardiol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2011 March 1 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t 4 . Proteoglycans 4 . 1 . Proteoglycans in Articular Cartilage Proteoglycans are equally important to collagen for determining the mechanical properties of articular cartilage ; a combination of correlation , digestion , and modeling revealed how these two components work together to absorb large compressive loads . During rapid loading , the force applied to articular cartilage is initially borne entirely by the fluid within it [ 44 ] . The proteoglycans provide charge and osmotic forces that limit fluid flow out of the cartilage , while the collagen fibers share the compressive load and prevent expansion of the tissue perpendicular to the applied load . Correlative studies provided the first clues to this dual role , revealing that collagen orientation and content correlate strongly with tensile properties while proteoglycan content correlates strongly with compressive viscoelastic properties . Tensile testing of articular cartilage from human cadaver knee joints demonstrated a correlation between collagen organization and tensile modulus [ 45 ] . Aligned collagen in surface zone cartilage had a significantly higher modulus than disorganized collagen in deep zone cartilage . A significant positive correlation between the tensile modulus and the ratio of collagen to proteoglycan content demonstrated the importance of collagen for the tensile properties of cartilage . A strong positive correlation between proteoglycan content and the equilibrium compressive modulus of cartilage suggested that the compressive properties of cartilage , on the other hand , are determined by the proteoglycan content [ 46 , 47 ] . These correlative studies are supported by studies where cartilage proteoglycan content was reduced either experimentally or pathologically . Osteoarthritis , a degenerative condition which results in a loss of proteoglycans , dramatically lowers the compressive modulus of human cartilage [ 48 ] . Animal models of osteoarthritis show similar changes [ 48 ] . As early as 1972 , enzymatic degradation was shown to significantly increase the compressibility of cartilage [ 49 ] . A more recent study showed that degradation of proteoglycans by either chondroitinase or hyaluronidase greatly reduced the shear modulus of cartilage [ 50 ] . The proteoglycan network typically swells the tissue and prestresses the collagen network by drawing in and retaining fluid ; degrading the proteoglycans lowered the prestress and loosened the collagen network , thus significantly reducing the shear stiffness of the solid matrix . Mathematical models provided a quantitative understanding of the contribution of proteoglycans to the mechanical properties of cartilage . The biphasic theory described cartilage in terms of interacting solid ( collagens and proteoglycans ) and fluid phases [ 44 ] . This theory was later expanded to include a third phase and to incorporate the effects of fixed charges [ 44 ] . In these multiphase models , proteoglycans control the flow of water in and out of cartilage , largely determining the ability of cartilage to resist compression . Dense negative charges on the proteoglycan side chains have two major effects : 1 ) attraction of counterions which lead to a Donnan osmotic pressure and 2 ) repulsion of side chains from each other leading to increased swelling pressure and resistance to compression . At the onset of compressive loading , all load is carried by the fluid phase of the tissue . With time , fluid flows out of the tissue and at equilibrium all load is carried by the solid matrix . As proteoglycans are lost , permeability and fluid flow increase , and the modulus of the tissue decreases . These mathematical models have allowed investigators to develop quantitative structure - function relationships for articular cartilage . The composition and structural organization of the solid and fluid phases can be used to accurately predict the mechanical behavior of the tissue under normal and pathologic conditions . Fomovsky et al . Page 7 J Mol Cell Cardiol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2011 March 1 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t 4 . 2 . Proteoglycans in the Heart Proteoglycans regulate cartilage mechanics by controlling the flow of water in and out of the tissue during loading . There is no evidence that proteoglycans play a similar role in myocardium , but it is intriguing to speculate ( Figure 1 ) . Fluid movement is likely more important to myocardial mechanics than generally acknowledged , and is poorly understood . Proteoglycans are present in the myocardium but are frequently ignored when examining the cardiac ECM . Azeloglu et al . recently demonstrated that proteoglycans are an important determinant of residual stress in arteries , where , as in myocardium , their presence had been largely ignored [ 51 ] . Analogous studies in the heart are certainly overdue . 4 . 2 . 1 . Correlative Approaches— While examining the collagen network of the heart , Borg et al . reported the presence of significant quantities of material presumed to be glycosaminoglycans in the myocardium [ 7 ] . This material leached from the tissue during normal histologic processing but could be retained by adding 1 % cetylpyridinium chloride during fixation . The fact that proteoglycans are lost during traditional fixation may explain why few classic studies of ECM changes in disease commented on proteoglycan content . More recently , proteoglycans are receiving attention for their potential signaling roles , a topic that is discussed elsewhere in this special issue and in recent reviews ( for example , see Bereczki and Santha [ 52 ] for a discussion of biglycan ) . Myocardial tissue volume changes are important to myocardial mechanics , but it is not yet clear what role proteoglycans play . The coronary vasculature interacts with the surrounding tissue , with perfusion increasing both myocardial volume and myocardial stiffness during mechanical testing [ 53 ] ; it is difficult to separate intravascular and extravascular volume changes during such experiments . Perfusion with solutions of varying osmolarities alters opening angle in left ventricular slices , indicating changes in residual stresses and strains that could significantly alter myocardial mechanics [ 54 ] . Although Lanir and colleagues attributed these changes in the opening angle to myocyte swelling and shrinkage that altered tension on the surrounding collagen network , Azeloglu showed that in arteries the inhomogeneous transmural distribution of proteoglycans , rather than cellular swelling , explained changes of opening angle with solution osmolarity [ 51 ] . Perhaps the best example of water content influencing cardiac mechanics occurs following myocardial infarction . The infarct becomes edematous within hours , and drugs that decrease inflammation and edema greatly increase the extent of infarct expansion and risk of rupture [ 17 ] ; the specific role of proteoglycans in post - infarction mechanics merits further study . 4 . 2 . 2 . Modification and Digestion— Transgenic models revealed a critical role for proteoglycans in development and collagen fibrillogenesis . Knockouts for versican [ 55 ] , aggrecan , [ 56 ] and perlecan [ 57 ] are lethal ; animals die prenatally or immediately postnatally and typically show cardiac as well as skeletal malformations . Knockouts for decorin [ 58 ] and byglycan [ 59 ] are viable but show abnormal collagen morphology in skin , tendon , and elsewhere in the musculoskeletal system . These animals do not display obvious cardiac abnormalities at baseline , but infarct healing is altered [ 60 - 62 ] , presumably because decorin and byglycan are required to form normal collagen fibrils in the healing scar . In humans , the mucopolysaccharidoses , a group of genetic disorders characterized by accumulation of proteoglycans and skeletal defects , also cause cardiac defects and cardiomyopathy . After enzyme replacement therapy , valve abnormalities persist but ventricular mechanics improve , suggesting that direct mechanical effects of accumulated GAGs may be important in the etiology of this cardiomyopathy [ 63 ] . Selective digestion of proteoglycans would be the best way to examine their mechanical role in the heart . As with the collagen digestion experiments reviewed earlier in this article , it will Fomovsky et al . Page 8 J Mol Cell Cardiol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2011 March 1 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t be challenging to dissolve proteoglycans selectively in the intact heart without inducing other changes that confound mechanical measurements . Isolated papillary muscles or trabeculae may prove the most useful experimental system for these studies . This experimental system also avoids another potential complication of residual stress and opening angle studies - because models predict that the transmural distribution of proteoglycans , rather than proteoglycan content , determines the opening angle , incomplete or nonuniform digestion could lead easily to erroneous conclusions [ 51 ] . 5 . Conclusions Fibrillar collagen , elastin , and proteoglycans all play crucial mechanical roles in many tissues in the body generally and in the cardiovascular system specifically . The myocardium contains all three components , but their mechanical contributions are relatively poorly understood . Most studies of ECM contributions to myocardial mechanics have focused on collagen , but quantitative prediction of mechanical properties of the myocardium , or changes in those properties with disease , from measured tissue structure is not yet possible . Circumstantial evidence suggests that the mechanics of cardiac elastin and proteoglycans merit further study . Table 1 lists our suggestions for experiments needed to clarify the role of ECM components in myocardial mechanics . These experiments are easy to propose but admittedly difficult to perform , because they require cardiac - specific manipulation of individual matrix components . The first priority is simply to definitively test the role of collagen types I and III , elastin , and proteoglycans by selectively manipulating each component . These experiments should be done in normal hearts as well in multiple disease models ( hemodynamic overload , infarct healing , etc . ) , since the relative importance of different components likely varies with remodeling . Once these experiments are performed , we suggest that the next priority should be developing quantitative models of cardiac ECM changes with remodeling , with attention to both shifts in composition and shifts in pre - stress on individual components . Acknowledgments Portions of this work were supported by R01 HL075639 ( Holmes ) and K01 EB004347 ( Thomopoulos ) from the National Institutes of Health . REFERENCES [ 1 ] . Sacks MS . Incorporation of experimentally - derived fiber orientation into a structural constitutive model for planar collagenous tissues . J Biomech Eng Apr ; 2003 125 ( 2 ) : 280 – 7 . [ PubMed : 12751291 ] [ 2 ] . Liao J , Yang L , Grashow J , Sacks MS . Molecular orientation of collagen in intact planar connective tissues under biaxial stretch . Acta Biomater Jan ; 2005 1 ( 1 ) : 45 – 54 . [ PubMed : 16701779 ] [ 3 ] . Weber KT . Cardiac interstitium in health and disease : the fibrillar collagen network . J Am Coll Cardiol Jun ; 1989 13 ( 7 ) : 1637 – 52 . [ PubMed : 2656824 ] [ 4 ] . Bing OH , Matsushita S , Fanburg BL , Levine HJ . Mechanical properties of rat cardiac muscle during experimental hypertrophy . Circ Res Feb ; 1971 28 ( 2 ) : 234 – 45 . [ PubMed : 4251783 ] [ 5 ] . Villari B , Campbell SE , Hess OM , Mall G , Vassalli G , Weber KT , et al . Influence of collagen network on left ventricular systolic and diastolic function in aortic valve disease . J Am Coll Cardiol Nov 1 ; 1993 22 ( 5 ) : 1477 – 84 . [ PubMed : 8227808 ] [ 6 ] . Weber KT , Brilla CG , Janicki JS . Myocardial fibrosis : functional significance and regulatory factors . Cardiovasc Res Mar ; 1993 27 ( 3 ) : 341 – 8 . [ PubMed : 8490934 ] [ 7 ] . Borg TK , Ranson WF , Moslehy FA , Caulfield JB . Structural basis of ventricular stiffness . Lab Invest Jan ; 1981 44 ( 1 ) : 49 – 54 . [ PubMed : 7453130 ] [ 8 ] . Bing OH , Fanburg BL , Brooks WW , Matsushita S . The effect of lathyrogen beta - amino proprionitrile ( BAPN ) on the mechanical properties of experimentally hypertrophied rat cardiac muscle . Circ Res Oct ; 1978 43 ( 4 ) : 632 – 7 . [ PubMed : 150954 ] Fomovsky et al . Page 9 J Mol Cell Cardiol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2011 March 1 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t [ 9 ] . Kato S , Spinale FG , Tanaka R , Johnson W , Cooper Gt , Zile MR . Inhibition of collagen cross - linking : effects on fibrillar collagen and ventricular diastolic function . Am J Physiol Sep ; 1995 269 ( 3 Pt 2 ) : H863 – 8 . [ PubMed : 7573529 ] [ 10 ] . MacKenna DA , Omens JH , McCulloch AD , Covell JW . Contribution of collagen matrix to passive left ventricular mechanics in isolated rat hearts . Am J Physiol Mar ; 1994 266 ( 3 Pt 2 ) : H1007 – 18 . [ PubMed : 8160804 ] [ 11 ] . Todaka K , Jiang T , Chapman JT , Gu A , Zhu SM , Herzog E , et al . Functional consequences of acute collagen degradation studied in crystalloid perfused rat hearts . Basic Res Cardiol Jun ; 1997 92 ( 3 ) : 147 – 58 . [ PubMed : 9226100 ] [ 12 ] . Stroud JD , Baicu CF , Barnes MA , Spinale FG , Zile MR . Viscoelastic properties of pressure overload hypertrophied myocardium : effect of serine protease treatment . Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol Jun ; 2002 282 ( 6 ) : H2324 – 35 . [ PubMed : 12003843 ] [ 13 ] . Granzier HL , Irving TC . Passive tension in cardiac muscle : contribution of collagen , titin , microtubules , and intermediate filaments . Biophys J Mar ; 1995 68 ( 3 ) : 1027 – 44 . [ PubMed : 7756523 ] [ 14 ] . Badenhorst D , Maseko M , Tsotetsi OJ , Naidoo A , Brooksbank R , Norton GR , et al . Cross - linking influences the impact of quantitative changes in myocardial collagen on cardiac stiffness and remodelling in hypertension in rats . Cardiovasc Res Mar ; 2003 57 ( 3 ) : 632 – 41 . [ PubMed : 12618225 ] [ 15 ] . Lopez B , Querejeta R , Gonzalez A , Beaumont J , Larman M , Diez J . Impact of treatment on myocardial lysyl oxidase expression and collagen cross - linking in patients with heart failure . Hypertension Feb ; 2009 53 ( 2 ) : 236 – 42 . [ PubMed : 19075089 ] [ 16 ] . Aronson D . Cross - linking of glycated collagen in the pathogenesis of arterial and myocardial stiffening of aging and diabetes . J Hypertens Jan ; 2003 21 ( 1 ) : 3 – 12 . [ PubMed : 12544424 ] [ 17 ] . Holmes JW , Borg TK , Covell JW . Structure and mechanics of healing myocardial infarcts . Annu Rev Biomed Eng 2005 ; 7 : 223 – 53 . [ PubMed : 16004571 ] [ 18 ] . Chapman D , Weber KT , Eghbali M . Regulation of fibrillar collagen types I and III and basement membrane type IV collagen gene expression in pressure overloaded rat myocardium . Circ Res Oct ; 1990 67 ( 4 ) : 787 – 94 . [ PubMed : 2145089 ] [ 19 ] . Pauschinger M , Knopf D , Petschauer S , Doerner A , Poller W , Schwimmbeck PL , et al . Dilated cardiomyopathy is associated with significant changes in collagen type I / III ratio . Circulation Jun 1 ; 1999 99 ( 21 ) : 2750 – 6 . [ PubMed : 10351968 ] [ 20 ] . Cleutjens JP , Verluyten MJ , Smiths JF , Daemen MJ . Collagen remodeling after myocardial infarction in the rat heart . Am J Pathol Aug ; 1995 147 ( 2 ) : 325 – 38 . [ PubMed : 7639329 ] [ 21 ] . Pope AJ , Sands GB , Smaill BH , LeGrice IJ . Three - dimensional transmural organization of perimysial collagen in the heart . Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol Sep ; 2008 295 ( 3 ) : H1243 – H52 . [ PubMed : 18641274 ] [ 22 ] . Dokos S , Smaill BH , Young AA , LeGrice IJ . Shear properties of passive ventricular myocardium . Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol Dec ; 2002 283 ( 6 ) : H2650 – 9 . [ PubMed : 12427603 ] [ 23 ] . Schmid H , O’Callaghan P , Nash MP , Lin W , LeGrice IJ , Smaill BH , et al . Myocardial material parameter estimation : a non - homogeneous finite element study from simple shear tests . Biomech Model Mechanobiol Jun ; 2008 7 ( 3 ) : 161 – 73 . [ PubMed : 17487519 ] [ 24 ] . Costa KD , Holmes JW , McCulloch AD . Modeling cardiac mechanical properties in three dimensions . Phil Trans R Soc Lond A 2001 ; 359 : 1233 – 50 . [ 25 ] . MacKenna DA , Vaplon SM , McCulloch AD . Microstructural model of perimysial collagen fibers for resting myocardial mechanics during ventricular filling . Am J Physiol Sep ; 1997 273 ( 3 Pt 2 ) : H1576 – 86 . [ PubMed : 9321852 ] [ 26 ] . Thomopoulos S , Fomovsky GM , Holmes JW . The development of structural and mechanical anisotropy in fibroblast populated collagen gels . J Biomech Eng Oct ; 2005 127 ( 5 ) : 742 – 50 . [ PubMed : 16248303 ] [ 27 ] . Thomopoulos S , Fomovsky GM , Chandran PL , Holmes JW . Collagen fiber alignment does not explain mechanical anisotropy in fibroblast populated collagen gels . J Biomech Eng Oct ; 2007 129 ( 5 ) : 642 – 50 . [ PubMed : 17887889 ] [ 28 ] . Elbjeirami WM , Yonter EO , Starcher BC , West JL . Enhancing mechanical properties of tissue - engineered constructs via lysyl oxidase crosslinking activity . J Biomed Mater Res A Sep 1 ; 2003 66 ( 3 ) : 513 – 21 . [ PubMed : 12918034 ] Fomovsky et al . Page 10 J Mol Cell Cardiol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2011 March 1 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t [ 29 ] . Girton TS , Oegema TR , Tranquillo RT . Exploiting glycation to stiffen and strengthen tissue equivalents for tissue engineering . J Biomed Mater Res Jul ; 1999 46 ( 1 ) : 87 – 92 . [ PubMed : 10357139 ] [ 30 ] . Shadwick RE . Mechanical design in arteries . J Exp Biol Dec ; 1999 202 ( Pt 23 ) : 3305 – 13 . [ PubMed : 10562513 ] [ 31 ] . Milnor , WR . Hemodynamics . Williams & Wilkins ; Baltimore : 1982 . [ 32 ] . Bergel DH . The dynamic elastic properties of the arterial wall . J Physiol May ; 1961 156 ( 3 ) : 458 – 69 . [ PubMed : 16992076 ] [ 33 ] . Izzo JL Jr . Mitchell GF . Aging and arterial structure - function relations . Adv Cardiol 2007 ; 44 : 19 – 34 . [ PubMed : 17075197 ] [ 34 ] . Roach MR , Burton AC . The reason for the shape of the distensibility curves of arteries . Can J Biochem Physiol Aug ; 1957 35 ( 8 ) : 681 – 90 . [ PubMed : 13460788 ] [ 35 ] . Gleason RL Jr . Humphrey JD . A 2D constrained mixture model for arterial adaptations to large changes in flow , pressure and axial stretch . Math Med Biol Dec ; 2005 22 ( 4 ) : 347 – 69 . [ PubMed : 16319121 ] [ 36 ] . Sato S , Ashraf M , Millard RW , Fujiwara H , Schwartz A . Connective tissue changes in early ischemia of porcine myocardium : an ultrastructural study . J Mol Cell Cardiol Apr ; 1983 15 ( 4 ) : 261 – 75 . [ PubMed : 6876183 ] [ 37 ] . Henderson BC , Sen U , Reynolds C , Moshal KS , Ovechkin A , Tyagi N , et al . Reversal of systemic hypertension - associated cardiac remodeling in chronic pressure overload myocardium by ciglitazone . Int J Biol Sci 2007 ; 3 ( 6 ) : 385 – 92 . [ PubMed : 17848984 ] [ 38 ] . Cheng XW , Obata K , Kuzuya M , Izawa H , Nakamura K , Asai E , et al . Elastolytic cathepsin induction / activation system exists in myocardium and is upregulated in hypertensive heart failure . Hypertension Nov ; 2006 48 ( 5 ) : 979 – 87 . [ PubMed : 16982960 ] [ 39 ] . Mujumdar VS , Tyagi SC . Temporal regulation of extracellular matrix components in transition from compensatory hypertrophy to decompensatory heart failure . J Hypertens Feb ; 1999 17 ( 2 ) : 261 – 70 . [ PubMed : 10067796 ] [ 40 ] . Jobsis PD , Ashikaga H , Wen H , Rothstein EC , Horvath KA , McVeigh ER , et al . The visceral pericardium : macromolecular structure and contribution to passive mechanical properties of the left ventricle . Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol Dec ; 2007 293 ( 6 ) : H3379 – 87 . [ PubMed : 17933976 ] [ 41 ] . Wagenseil JE , Ciliberto CH , Knutsen RH , Levy MA , Kovacs A , Mecham RP . Reduced Vessel Elasticity Alters Cardiovascular Structure and Function in Newborn Mice . Circ Res . Apr 16 ; 2009 [ 42 ] . Faury G , Pezet M , Knutsen RH , Boyle WA , Heximer SP , McLean SE , et al . Developmental adaptation of the mouse cardiovascular system to elastin haploinsufficiency . J Clin Invest Nov ; 2003 112 ( 9 ) : 1419 – 28 . [ PubMed : 14597767 ] [ 43 ] . Mizuno T , Yau TM , Weisel RD , Kiani CG , Li RK . Elastin stabilizes an infarct and preserves ventricular function . Circulation Aug 30 ; 2005 112 ( 9 Suppl ) : I81 – 8 . [ PubMed : 16159870 ] [ 44 ] . Mow , VC . ; Ratcliffe , A . Structure and Function of Articular Cartilage and Meniscus . In : Mow , VC . ; Hayes , WC . , editors . Basic Orthopaedic Biomechanics . Lippincott - Raven ; Philadelphia : 1997 . p . 113 - 77 . [ 45 ] . Akizuki S , Mow VC , Muller F , Pita JC , Howell DS , Manicourt DH . Tensile properties of human knee joint cartilage : I . Influence of ionic conditions , weight bearing , and fibrillation on the tensile modulus . J Orthop Res 1986 ; 4 ( 4 ) : 379 – 92 . [ PubMed : 3783297 ] [ 46 ] . Armstrong CG , Mow VC . Variations in the intrinsic mechanical properties of human articular cartilage with age , degeneration , and water content . J Bone Joint Surg Am Jan ; 1982 64 ( 1 ) : 88 – 94 . [ PubMed : 7054208 ] [ 47 ] . Kempson GE , Muir H , Swanson SA , Freeman MA . Correlations between stiffness and the chemical constituents of cartilage on the human femoral head . Biochim Biophys Acta Jul 21 ; 1970 215 ( 1 ) : 70 – 7 . [ PubMed : 4250263 ] [ 48 ] . Setton LA , Elliott DM , Mow VC . Altered mechanics of cartilage with osteoarthritis : human osteoarthritis and an experimental model of joint degeneration . Osteoarthritis Cartilage Jan ; 1999 7 ( 1 ) : 2 – 14 . [ PubMed : 10367011 ] [ 49 ] . Harris ED Jr . Parker HG , Radin EL , Krane SM . Effects of proteolytic enzymes on structural and mechanical properties of cartilage . Arthritis Rheum Sep - Oct ; 1972 15 ( 5 ) : 497 – 503 . [ PubMed : 4343998 ] Fomovsky et al . Page 11 J Mol Cell Cardiol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2011 March 1 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t [ 50 ] . Zhu W , Mow VC , Koob TJ , Eyre DR . Viscoelastic shear properties of articular cartilage and the effects of glycosidase treatments . J Orthop Res Nov ; 1993 11 ( 6 ) : 771 – 81 . [ PubMed : 8283321 ] [ 51 ] . Azeloglu EU , Albro MB , Thimmappa VA , Ateshian GA , Costa KD . Heterogeneous transmural proteoglycan distribution provides a mechanism for regulating residual stresses in the aorta . Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol Mar ; 2008 294 ( 3 ) : H1197 – 205 . [ PubMed : 18156194 ] [ 52 ] . Bereczki E , Santha M . The role of biglycan in the heart . Connect Tissue Res 2008 ; 49 ( 3 ) : 129 – 32 . [ PubMed : 18661327 ] [ 53 ] . May - Newman K , McCulloch AD . Homogenization modeling for the mechanics of perfused myocardium . Prog Biophys Mol Biol 1998 ; 69 ( 23 ) : 463 – 81 . [ PubMed : 9785951 ] [ 54 ] . Lanir Y , Hayam G , Abovsky M , Zlotnick AY , Uretzky G , Nevo E , et al . Effect of myocardial swelling on residual strain in the left ventricle of the rat . Am J Physiol May ; 1996 270 ( 5 Pt 2 ) : H1736 – 43 . [ PubMed : 8928881 ] [ 55 ] . Mjaatvedt CH , Yamamura H , Capehart AA , Turner D , Markwald RR . The Cspg2 gene , disrupted in the hdf mutant , is required for right cardiac chamber and endocardial cushion formation . Dev Biol Oct 1 ; 1998 202 ( 1 ) : 56 – 66 . [ PubMed : 9758703 ] [ 56 ] . Watanabe H , Kimata K , Line S , Strong D , Gao LY , Kozak CA , et al . Mouse cartilage matrix deficiency ( cmd ) caused by a 7 bp deletion in the aggrecan gene . Nat Genet Jun ; 1994 7 ( 2 ) : 154 – 7 . [ PubMed : 7920633 ] [ 57 ] . Costell M , Carmona R , Gustafsson E , Gonzalez - Iriarte M , Fassler R , Munoz - Chapuli R . Hyperplastic conotruncal endocardial cushions and transposition of great arteries in perlecan - null mice . Circ Res Jul 26 ; 2002 91 ( 2 ) : 158 – 64 . [ PubMed : 12142349 ] [ 58 ] . Danielson KG , Baribault H , Holmes DF , Graham H , Kadler KE , Iozzo RV . Targeted disruption of decorin leads to abnormal collagen fibril morphology and skin fragility . J Cell Biol Feb 10 ; 1997 136 ( 3 ) : 729 – 43 . [ PubMed : 9024701 ] [ 59 ] . Xu T , Bianco P , Fisher LW , Longenecker G , Smith E , Goldstein S , et al . Targeted disruption of the biglycan gene leads to an osteoporosis - like phenotype in mice . Nat Genet Sep ; 1998 20 ( 1 ) : 78 – 82 . [ PubMed : 9731537 ] [ 60 ] . Weis SM , Zimmerman SD , Shah M , Covell JW , Omens JH , Ross J Jr . et al . A role for decorin in the remodeling of myocardial infarction . Matrix Biol Jun ; 2005 24 ( 4 ) : 313 – 24 . [ PubMed : 15949932 ] [ 61 ] . Campbell PH , Hunt DL , Jones Y , Harwood F , Amiel D , Omens JH , et al . Effects of biglycan deficiency on myocardial infarct structure and mechanics . Mol Cell Biomech Mar ; 2008 5 ( 1 ) : 27 – 35 . [ PubMed : 18524244 ] [ 62 ] . Westermann D , Mersmann J , Melchior A , Freudenberger T , Petrik C , Schaefer L , et al . Biglycan is required for adaptive remodeling after myocardial infarction . Circulation Mar 11 ; 2008 117 ( 10 ) : 1269 – 76 . [ PubMed : 18299507 ] [ 63 ] . Braunlin EA , Berry JM , Whitley CB . Cardiac findings after enzyme replacement therapy for mucopolysaccharidosis type I . Am J Cardiol Aug 1 ; 2006 98 ( 3 ) : 416 – 8 . [ PubMed : 16860035 ] Fomovsky et al . Page 12 J Mol Cell Cardiol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2011 March 1 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Figure 1 . Contributions of ECM components to myocardial mechanics . A Schematic diagram shows myocytes connected by collagen struts , large perimysial collagen fibers aligned with the myocytes , and proteoglycans associated with the collagen . B During passive uniaxial stretch , titin in myocytes initially bears most of the force as perimysial collagen fibers uncoil ; once straightened , collagen resists further extension , protecting myocytes from overstretch . C The location and mechanical role of cardiac proteoglycans are unknown ; however , observed mechanical changes during edema could be explained by increased hydration of the proteoglycans pre - stressing the collagen network , as in cartilage . D The pre - stressed collagen network would resist deformation at much lower strains , shifting the uniaxial stress - strain curve to the left . Fomovsky et al . Page 13 J Mol Cell Cardiol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2011 March 1 . N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t N I H - PA A u t ho r M anu sc r i p t Fomovsky et al . Page 14 Table 1 Proposed Studies on the Mechanical Role of Cardiac ECM Components Question Proposed Study Guiding Examples Is collagen type I / III ratio an importantdeterminant of LV mechanics ? • Alter myocardial type I / III ratios while controlling for total collagen content . • Assess mechanics in vivo and in isolated papillary muscles . Is elastin an importantdeterminant of LV mechanics ? • Specifically manipulate myocardial but not vascular elastin content . • Assess mechanics in vivo and in isolated papillary muscles . Arteries [ 34 ] Doproteoglycansplay an important role in LV mechanics ? • Selectively degrade myocardial proteoglycans . • Assess mechanics and water content in vivo and in isolated papillary muscles . • Examine effects on residual stress . Cartilage [ 50 ] How does turnover of myocytes and ECMcomponentsgovern changes in mechanics with disease ? • Quantify content of major ECM components during overload , infarction . • Estimate tension / prestress in each ECM component from morphology in hearts fixed at different pressures . • Develop model of ECM / myocyte turnover and cardiac remodeling . Arteries [ 35 ] J Mol Cell Cardiol . Author manuscript ; available in PMC 2011 March 1 .