The EMBO Journal Vol . 17 No . 23 pp . 6932 – 6941 , 1998 WAVE , a novel WASP - family protein involved in actin reorganization induced by Rac Hiroaki Miki , Shiro Suetsugu and Tadaomi Takenawa 1 Department of Biochemistry , Institute of Medical Science , University of Tokyo , 4 - 6 - 1 Shirokanedai , Minato - ku , Tokyo 108 , Japan 1 Corresponding author e - mail : takenawa @ ims . u - tokyo . ac . jp Rac is a Rho - family small GTPase that induces the formation of membrane rufﬂes . However , it is poorly understood how Rac - induced reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton , which is essential for rufﬂe form - ation , is regulated . Here we identify a novel Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) - family protein , WASP family Verprolin - homologous protein ( WAVE ) , as a regulator of actin reorganization downstream of Rac . Ectopically expressed WAVE induces the form - ation of actin ﬁlament clusters that overlap with the expressed WAVE itself . In this actin clustering , proﬁlin , a monomeric actin - binding protein that has been sug - gested to be involved in actin polymerization , was shown to be essential . The expression of a dominant - active Rac mutant induces the translocation of endo - genous WAVE from the cytosol to membrane rufﬂing areas . Furthermore , the co - expression of a Δ VPH WAVE mutant that cannot induce actin reorganization speciﬁcally suppresses the rufﬂe formation induced by Rac , but has no effect on Cdc42 - induced actin - microspike formation , a phenomenon that is also known to be dependent on rapid actin reorganization . The Δ VPH WAVE also suppresses membrane - rufﬂing formation induced by platelet - derived growth factor in Swiss 3T3 cells . Taken together , we conclude that WAVE plays a critical role downstream of Rac in regulating the actin cytoskeleton required for mem - brane rufﬂing . Keywords : actin / proﬁlin / Rac / WASP / WAVE Introduction The actin cytoskeleton plays critical roles in cell morpho - logical changes and motility ( reviewed by Lauffenburger and Horwitz , 1996 ; Mitchison and Cramer , 1996 ) . Many actin - binding regulatory proteins have been identiﬁed and classiﬁed according to their effects on actin ﬁlaments , including globular actin ( G - actin ) - sequestering proteins , severing ( depolymerizing ) proteins , capping proteins and bundling ( gelating ) proteins . For their special roles in cells , however , these proteins do not function independently , but rather do so in harmony . Rho - family small GTPases such as Rho , Rac and Cdc42 are thought to be organizers of the actin cytoskeleton . Experiments using dominant - negative and active mutants 6932 © Oxford University Press have shown that Rho , Rac and Cdc42 regulate the forma - tion of stress ﬁbers , lamellipodia ( membrane rufﬂings ) and ﬁlopodia ( microspikes ) in mammalian cells , respectively ( Ridley and Hall , 1992 ; Ridley et al . , 1992 ; Kozma et al . , 1995 ; Nobes and Hall , 1995 ) . In all of these events , actin polymerization has been shown to be an essential step . Furthermore , a recent report clearly demonstrated that in the case of Rac ( but not in the case of Rho ) , newly polymerized actin ﬁlaments , visualized by injecting ﬂuor - escence - labeled monomeric actin into the cells , accumu - lated at membrane rufﬂes ( Machesky and Hall , 1997 ) , strongly suggesting that the accumulation of actin ﬁlaments itself is the driving force for the formation of the special structures induced by these GTPases . In this respect , downstream effector molecules that induce actin reorganization are thought to be crucial for the induction of morphological change . In the case of Cdc42 - induced ﬁlopodium formation , N - WASP appears to play such roles . N - WASP was originally discovered as a 65 - kDa protein that binds to the SH3 domains of the Grb2 adaptor protein ( Miki et al . , 1996 ) . However , N - WASP has also been found to associate directly with activated Cdc42 ( Miki et al . , 1998 ) and regulate the actin cytoskeleton through proﬁlin ( Suetsugu et al . , 1998 ) . In addition , we have shown that N - WASP is recruited to one pole of the surface of the infectious bacteria , Shigella ﬂexneri , through direct association with the Shigella VirG protein and plays critical roles in the formation of the actin comet tail ( Suzuki et al . , 1998 ) , by which Shigella swims in the cytoplasm of infected cells in a rocket - like manner . These results strongly suggest that N - WASP is an inducer of actin reorganization downstream of various stimuli . p140mDia , a mammalian homolog for Drosophila diaphanous protein , may also play similar roles down - stream of Rho ( Watanabe et al . , 1997 ) . p140mDia also binds directly to both activated Rho and proﬁlin . Indeed , the ectopic expression of p140mDia has been shown to reorganize the actin cytoskeleton . Although the in vivo role of p140mDia downstream of Rho has not yet been clearly assigned , it is quite possible that p140mDia may supply the source of actin ﬁlaments required for actin cytoskeletal reorganization that proceeds in parallel with stress - ﬁber formation . The N - WASP - related molecule WASP was originally identiﬁed as the gene product whose mutation is respons - ible for the human hereditary disease Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome , which is characterized by thrombocytopenia , eczema and immunodeﬁciency ( Derry et al . , 1994 ) . The ectopic expression of WASP has been shown to induce the formation of actin clusters around the nucleus in a Cdc42 - dependent manner ( Symons et al . , 1996 ) . At pre - sent , there remain many questions concerning the relation - ship between actin - cluster formation and the physiological function of WASP . However , it is accepted that WASP WAVE , a novel WASP - family protein Fig . 1 . Identiﬁcation of WAVE . ( A ) Alignment of VPH domain sequences . Highly conserved residues are shown in italics under the sequences . Database accession numbers ( NCBI ) are 695151 ( human WASP ) , 2116984 ( human N - WASP ) , 439289 ( Saccharomyces cerevisiae verprolin ) and 1665805 ( human WAVE ) . ( B ) Sequence of WAVE . A putative leucine - zipper motif , a highly basic region , a proline - rich region , a VPH domain and a highly acidic region are shown as underlined bold letters . also plays an essential role in actin reorganization down - stream of speciﬁc signals , a function required for the normal development and / or function of hematopoietic cells . In order to explore the mechanism of signal - induced actin regulation , we performed a database search for novel WASP - family proteins . As a result , we found a cDNA with an unknown function containing a putative reading frame showing structural similarity to WASP and N - WASP . Here , we report the functional analysis of this product protein , WAVE , and present evidence that WAVE is involved in the actin reorganization required for the formation of membrane rufﬂes induced by Rac . Results IdentiﬁcationofWAVE We performed a database search for novel WASP - like molecules . For this purpose , we selected the sequence of the Verprolin - homology ( VPH ) domain ( shown in Figure 1A ) , a sequence that is highly conserved between WASP and N - WASP , and is essential for both direct in vitro binding to actin and in vivo actin reorganization ( Miki and Takenawa , 1998 ) . As a result , one cDNA clone , KIAA0269 ( DDBJ / EMBL / GenBank accession number D87459 ; Nagase et al . , 1996 ) , was found to possess a similar VPH - domain - coding sequence . The predicted amino acid sequence of the product protein is shown in Figure 1B . The overall structure is similar to WASP - 6933 Fig . 2 . Ectopic expression of WAVE . Myc - tagged WAVE was expressed transiently in COS 7 cells , and the cells were stained with anti - myc antibody ( polyclonal ) and phalloidin . Bar , 10 μ m . family proteins in that it possesses a long proline - rich region , a VPH domain , a highly acidic region at the C - terminus and a highly basic region ( Derry et al . , 1994 ; Miki et al . , 1996 ) . Thus , we named this putative protein WASP - family Verprolin - homologous protein , WAVE . However , the sequence of the N - terminal half shows no similarity to either WASP or N - WASP . In the case of WASP and N - WASP , the N - terminal regions are known to be important for their regulation . For example , GBD / CRIB motifs that exist in the N - terminal half of both WASP and N - WASP have been shown to bind to activated Cdc42 , a critical regulator of the actin cytoskeleton ( Aspenstrom et al . , 1996 ; Symons et al . , 1996 ; Miki et al . , 1998 ) . Thus , WAVE is thought to be involved in actin reorganization , but to be regulated in a manner quite different from WASP and N - WASP . EctopicexpressionofWAVE In order to examine the physiological function of WAVE , we added a myc - tag to the molecule and then expressed the protein ectopically in COS 7 cells . The transfected cells were doubly stained with anti - myc antibody and phalloidin . As shown in Figure 2 , WAVE expression induced the formation of actin ﬁlament clusters that co - localized with the expressed WAVE itself . Such actin cytoskeletal reorganization was observed in more than 90 % of WAVE - expressing cells . The number of actin ﬁlaments that normally exist just beneath the plasma membrane tended to decrease , which may explain why some of the WAVE - expressing cells become rounded as shown in Figure 2 . WAVEinducesactinclusteringthroughproﬁlin As described above , WAVE has a proline - rich region containing several long poly - proline stretches . Long poly - proline stretches are known to be binding sites for H . Miki , S . Suetsugu and T . Takenawa Fig . 3 . Induction of actin clustering through proﬁlin . ( A ) Binding to proﬁlin . GST – fusion proteins of proﬁlin I and II were immobilized on beads and mixed with lysates of COS 7 cells expressing myc - tagged WAVE . The bound proteins were analyzed by Western blot with anti - myc antibody and anti - actin antibody . ( B ) Direct binding between WAVE and proﬁlin . WAVE protein was immunoprecipitated with anti - WAVE antibody ( characterized in the experiment shown in Figure 4 ) from WAVE - expressing COS 7 cell lysates and then subjected to Far Western blot assay using GST – proﬁlin I as the probe . The results using GST probe are also shown as negative control . ( C ) Inhibition of WAVE - induced actin clustering by the co - expression of mutant proﬁlin I . FLAG - tagged WAVE and myc - tagged proﬁlin I ( wild - type or mutant ) were transiently co - expressed in COS 7 cells . The cells were stained with anti - myc antibody ( polyclonal ) , anti - FLAG antibody ( monoclonal ) and phalloidin . Bar , 10 μ m . ( D ) Abolishon of the proﬁlin - binding ability by the deletion of the proline - rich region . Δ ProR WAVE protein was checked for proﬁlin - I - binding ability by the same method as in ( A ) . ( E ) Actin clustering by Δ ProR WAVE . Myc - tagged Δ ProR WAVE protein was expressed in COS 7 cells , and the cells were stained with anti - myc antibody ( polyclonal ) and phalloidin . Bar , 10 μ m . proﬁlin , a protein that has been strongly suggested to be involved in actin polymerization ( Pantaloni and Carlier , 1993 ; Theriot et al . , 1994 ) . In the case of N - WASP , we recently showed that proﬁlin associates directly with N - WASP and is essential for the actin - microspike forma - tion induced by Cdc42 and N - WASP ( Suetsugu et al . , 1998 ) . Indeed , glutathione S - transferase ( GST ) - fusion pro - teins of proﬁlin I and II were shown to bind to WAVE ( Figure 3A ) . In this case , proﬁlin I seemed to bind WAVE more strongly than proﬁlin II . By Far Western blot assay using GST – proﬁlin I probe , direct binding between WAVE and proﬁlin was also conﬁrmed ( Figure 3B ) . Next , we examined whether proﬁlin participates in the clustering of actin ﬁlaments induced by WAVE . We recently succeeded in constructing mutant proﬁlin I ( H115E ) , which lacks completely the ability to bind actin , preserving its ability to bind to other poly - proline - containing proteins , and inhibit N - WASP - induced actin - microspike formation ( Suetsugu et al . , 1998 ) . As shown in Figure 3C , the co - expression of mutant proﬁlin completely 6934 blocks the clustering of actin ﬁlaments induced by WAVE . In contrast , wild - type proﬁlin has no signiﬁcant effect . Overall , 80 – 90 % of cells expressing both WAVE and wild - type proﬁlin show actin - ﬁlament clustering , but we could not ﬁnd any single cell bearing actin clusters among cells expressing both WAVE and dominant - negative proﬁlin . This result strongly suggests that the actin clus - tering is caused by the ectopic polymerization of actin ﬁlaments induced by WAVE through proﬁlin . To determine whether direct binding between WAVE and proﬁlin is required for the actin clustering , we prepared a mutant WAVE that lacks the proline - rich region ( Δ ProR ) where the proﬁlin binding should occur . This mutant WAVE was found to lose the ability to bind proﬁlin ( Figure 3D ) . We then expressed Δ ProR WAVE in COS 7 cells and stained the cells with phalloidin . Unexpectedly , Δ Pro WAVE could also induce the formation of actin clusters where the expressed Δ ProR WAVE localized ( Figure 3E ) . Although the clustering pattern of Δ ProR WAVE seems to be a little bit different to that of wild - WAVE , a novel WASP - family protein Fig . 4 . Intracellular localization of endogenous WAVE . ( A ) Characterization of anti - WAVE antibody . Lysates of N1E - 115 neuroblastoma cells and COS 7 cells transfected with control vector alone or myc - tagged WAVE were subjected to SDS – PAGE and Western blot analysis using the puriﬁed anti - WAVE antibody described in this study . In order to further conﬁrm the speciﬁcity , the antibody was pre - incubated with GST or GST – C ( antigen ) proteins and then used for Western blotting against N1E - 115 cell lysate . ( B ) Localization of endogenous WAVE in N1E - 115 cells . N1E - 115 cells cultured on coverslips were serum starved for 12 h and then ﬁxed . The cells were stained with anti - WAVE antibody and then observed by confocal microscopy . The accumulation of WAVE at membrane rufﬂes is indicated by arrowheads . Bar , 10 μ m . ( C ) Colocalization of WAVE and actin ﬁlaments in areas of rufﬂing . N1E - 115 cells were stained with anti - WAVE antibody and phalloidin . The accumulation of WAVE and actin ﬁlaments at membrane rufﬂes is indicated by arrowheads . Bar , 10 μ m . ( D ) Localization of WAVE at membrane rufﬂes induced by active Rac . Myc - tagged Rac1G12V was expressed transiently in N1E - 115 cells which were then stained with anti - myc antibody ( monoclonal 9E10 ) , anti - WAVE antibody and phalloidin . The accumulation of WAVE at membrane rufﬂes is indicated by arrowheads . Bar , 10 μ m . type WAVE ( Figure 3E ) , clustering of actin ﬁlaments is clearly observed . Thus , in conclusion , proﬁlin is required for WAVE - induced actin clustering , but the direct binding between WAVE and proﬁlin is not required for the actin clustering induced by WAVE overexpression in COS 7 cells . AccumulationofendogenousWAVEinmembrane - rufﬂingarea We prepared anti - WAVE antibody using a recombinant protein comprising the C - terminal region of WAVE . The results of the characterization of this antibody are shown in Figure 4A . The antibody recognized an 80 - kDa protein in N1E - 115 cell lysates and ectopically expressed WAVE in COS 7 cells . We checked for the existence of WAVE in various culture cell lines by Western blotting , and found that neuronal cell lines such as N1E - 115 cells and PC12 cells contain larger amounts of WAVE than NIH 3T3 6935 cells , Swiss 3T3 cells , COS 7 cells or MDCK cells ( data not shown ) . This result is consistent with previously reported Northern hybridization analyses that showed the KIAA0269 mRNA level to be highest in brain ( Nagase et al . , 1996 ) . We then examined the intracellular localization of endogenous WAVE in N1E - 115 cells by confocal micro - scopy . In single - staining experiments , WAVE seems to exist in a dot - like pattern throughout the cytoplasm and also to be concentrated at membrane - rufﬂing areas ( indi - cated by arrowheads in Figure 4B ) . Preincubation of the antibody with antigen abolished the positive signal under the same experimental conditions ( data not shown ) , indic - ating that the staining pattern properly reﬂects the localiz - ation of endogenous WAVE . In order to conﬁrm the localization of WAVE at rufﬂing areas , we double - stained the cells with anti - WAVE antibody and phalloidin to visualize actin ﬁlaments . As a result , a clear colocalization H . Miki , S . Suetsugu and T . Takenawa Fig . 5 . In vivo complex formation between WAVE and active Rac . COS 7 cells were transfected with myc - tagged active Rac alone ( lane 1 ) , both myc - tagged active Rac and FLAG - tagged WAVE ( lane 2 ) , FLAG - tagged WAVE alone ( lane 3 ) , both myc - tagged active Cdc42 and FLAG - tagged WAVE ( lane 4 ) , or both myc - tagged negative Rac and FLAG - tagged WAVE ( lane 5 ) . The cells were harvested and the cleared lysates were immunoprecipitated with anti - WAVE antibody , and subjected to Western blot with anti - myc antibody and anti - FLAG antibody . of WAVE with actin ﬁlaments in rufﬂing areas was observed ( indicated by arrowheads in Figure 4C ) . It is well known that membrane rufﬂing is regulated by Rac ( Ridley et al . , 1992 ) , a small GTPase belonging to the Rho family . Thus , we transiently transfected N1E - 115 cells with a Rac1G12V dominant - active mutant . As reported previously , the expression of active Rac in N1E - 115 cells induced rufﬂing at the margin of the plasma membrane ( Leeuwen et al . , 1997 ) . In this case , WAVE clearly localized in the rufﬂing areas and the dot - like staining in the cytoplasm became weak ( Figure 4D ) , suggesting that Rac induced the translocation of signiﬁcant amounts of WAVE from the cytosol to the membrane rufﬂes . InvivoassociationbetweenWAVEandactivatedRac In order to examine the possible interactions between WAVE and Rac , we carried out co - immunoprecipitation analyses . When cell lysates expressing both WAVE and active Rac were immunoprecipitated with anti - WAVE antibody , the immunoprecipitates contained Rac ( Figure 5 ) . This positive signal is speciﬁc , since anti - WAVE immuno - precipitates from cells expressing only Rac or WAVE showed no anti - myc antibody - positive signal ( Figure 5 ) . Furthermore , neither Cdc42G12V dominant - active mutants nor Rac1T17N dominant - negative mutants co - precipitated with WAVE at all ( Figure 5 ) . As described above , WAVE does not possess GBD / CRIB motifs . Indeed , we could not detect any direct interaction between WAVE and Rac by conventional Far Western blot assay ( data not shown ) , strongly suggesting that the interaction between WAVE and activated Rac is indirect . Constructionof Δ VPHWAVEthatdoesnotinduce actinclustering The C - terminal region of WAVE is very similar structurally to WASP and N - WASP . In the case of N - WASP , this region binds directly to actin ( Miki et al . , 1996 ; Miki and Takenawa , 1998 ) . We also examined the C - terminal region 6936 Fig . 6 . Construction and characterizarization of Δ VPH WAVE . ( A ) Monomeric actin - binding ability of the C - terminal region of WAVE . The GST – C protein immobilized on beads was mixed with various concentrations of monomeric actin and the amount of bound actin was checked by Western blot with anti - actin antibody . The result using GST is also shown as negative control . ( B ) Actin depolymerization by GST – C protein . Actin was polymerized at 4 μ M and then mixed with various concentrations of GST – C protein for 30 min . The monomeric ( sup ) and ﬁlamentous ( ppt ) actin were separated by ultracentrifugation and subjected to SDS – PAGE . ( C ) Loss of the actin - binding ability by the deletion of the VPH domain . The VPH domain was deleted from the GST – C protein and then checked for its actin - binding ability by the same method as in ( A ) . The results using the original GST – C protein and GST itself are also shown as positive and negative controls , respectively . ( D ) Proﬁlin - binding ability of Δ VPH WAVE . GST – proﬁlin I protein immobilized on beads was mixed with myc - tagged Δ VPH - WAVE - expressing COS 7 cell lysates . The bound proteins were subjected to Western blot with anti - myc antibody . The result using wild - type WAVE is also shown as a positive control . ( E ) Inability of Δ VPH WAVE to induce actin clustering . Myc - tagged Δ VPH WAVE was transiently expressed in COS 7 cells and stained with anti - myc antibody ( polyclonal ) and phalloidin . Bar , 10 μ m . of WAVE using GST – fusion proteins ( GST – C protein ) . As shown in Figure 6A , GST – C protein binds directly to monomeric actin . A rough estimation of the binding constant from this result is in the range 8 – 80 nM . Under the same experimental conditions , no signiﬁcant binding occurred to control GST . Thus , this binding is thought to be a speciﬁc interaction . Next , we examined the effects of GST – C protein on actin polymerization . Actin was ﬁrst polymerized at a concentration of 4 μ M , and then various concentrations of GST – C proteins were added and incub - ated . The mixture was then ultracentrifuged to divide monomeric ( supernatant , sup ) and ﬁlamentous ( precipitate , ppt ) actin . As shown in Figure 6B , GST – C protein depolymerized actin ﬁlaments in a dose - dependent manner . Furthermore , GST – C protein did not precipitate with actin WAVE , a novel WASP - family protein ﬁlaments , indicating that this protein does not remain associated with actin ﬁlaments . These results are quite similar to those obtained using the corresponding region of N - WASP ( Miki et al . , 1996 ) , strongly suggesting that WAVE regulates the actin cytoskeketon in the same way as N - WASP . In order to examine the functional importance of WAVE downstream of Rac , we tried to make dominant - negative mutant WAVE . In the C - terminal actin - binding region , we focused on the VPH domain , which in N - WASP is indispensable for both the direct in vitro binding to actin and in vivo actin reorganization ( Miki and Takenawa , 1998 ) , and produced Δ VPH mutant WAVE lacking the 16 amino acids covering the VPH domain . Indeed , GST – C Δ VPH protein , which was made by deleting the VPH domain from GST – C protein , was found to lack actin - binding activity completely ( Figure 6C ) . In contrast , proﬁlin - binding activity , which was examined by incubat - ing Δ VPH WAVE ( a mutant WAVE lacking the VPH domain ) - expressing COS 7 cell lysates with immobilized GST – proﬁlin I , was not changed compared with wild - type WAVE ( Figure 6D ) . By immunoﬂuorescence microscopy , we conﬁrmed that this mutant lacks the actin - clustering activity in vivo ( Figure 6E ) . WAVEfunctionsdownstreamofRac Next we examined the effect of Δ VPH WAVE expression on Rac - induced membrane rufﬂing . As shown in Figure 7A , the expression of active Rac in COS 7 cells induced strong membrane rufﬂing that can be seen in the phalloidin - stained image ( actin ﬁlaments ; upper photos ) . The expressed active Rac itself also accumulated in the rufﬂing areas . When Δ VPH WAVE was co - expressed with active Rac , membrane - rufﬂing formation was inhibited and the localization of active Rac was more diffuse relative to Rac - expressing cells ( lower photos ) . In the co - expressing cells , the phalloidin - stained image is clearly changed compared with the original COS 7 cells , in that some circular - shaped structures that seem to represent macro - pinocytic vesicles ( Ridley et al . , 1992 ) are formed not only in Rac - expressing cells but also in Rac - and Δ VPH - expressing cells . This suggests that Δ VPH WAVE spe - ciﬁcally inhibits the membrane rufﬂing among various Rac - induced biological effects . The results of quantitative analysis are shown in Figure 8 . To conﬁrm that this dominant - negative effect is speciﬁc for Rac , we also performed co - expression analyses using the active Cdc42 mutant Cdc42G12V that induces the formation of actin microspikes through rapid reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton ( Kozma et al . , 1995 ; Nobes and Hall , 1995 ) . In this case , Δ VPH expression had no marked effect on the microspike formation activity of Cdc42 ( Figures 7B and 8 ) , clearly indicating that WAVE functions speciﬁcally downstream of Rac , but not Cdc42 . Under these experi - mental conditions , the expression of active Cdc42 seems not to induce signiﬁcant membrane - rufﬂing formation in COS 7 cells ( data not shown ) , as is normally seen in protein - or plasmid injection into Swiss 3T3 cells ( Kozma et al . , 1995 ; Nobes and Hall , 1995 ) . In order to examine the generality of this effect , we next performed the same co - expression analysis using N1E - 115 cells and found that , again , Δ VPH WAVE also inhibits membrane rufﬂing induced by Rac ( Figure 8 ) . 6937 Fig . 7 . Speciﬁc role of WAVE in actin reorganization downstream of Rac . ( A ) Effect of the co - expression of the Δ VPH WAVE on Rac - induced actin reorganization . FLAG - tagged Δ VPH WAVE was co - expressed transiently with myc - tagged active Rac in COS 7 cells . The cells were stained with anti - FLAG antibody ( monoclonal ) , anti - myc antibody ( polyclonal ) and phalloidin . The results using active Rac alone are also shown as control ( upper photos ) . Bar , 10 μ m . ( B ) Effect of the co - expression of the Δ VPH WAVE on Cdc42 - induced actin reorganization . FLAG - tagged Δ VPH WAVE was co - expressed transiently with myc - tagged active Cdc42 in COS 7 cells . The cells were stained with anti - FLAG antibody ( monoclonal ) , anti - myc antibody ( polyclonal ) and phalloidin . Bar , 10 μ m . ( C ) The induction of actin clustering by WAVE in a Rac - independent manner . FLAG - tagged wild - type WAVE was co - expressed transiently with myc - tagged dominant - negative Rac in COS 7 cells . The cells were stained with anti - FLAG antibody ( monoclonal ) , anti - myc antibody ( polyclonal ) and phalloidin . Bar , 10 μ m . The weakness of the inhibitory activity compared with COS 7 cells may reﬂect the amount of endogenous WAVE or may indicate the presence of another actin - reorganization mechanism downstream of Rac in N1E - 115 cells . Finally , we co - expressed both wild - type WAVE and dominant - negative Rac ( Rac1T17N ) . Even in this case , WAVE expression induced the formation of actin clusters where the expressed WAVE exists ( Figure 7C ) , also eliminating the possibility that WAVE functions upstream of Rac or in parallel with Rac . WAVEalsofunctionsingrowth - factor - induced membranerufﬂinginSwiss3T3ﬁbroblasts Rac - induced membrane rufﬂing has been studied in detail in Swiss 3T3 ﬁbroblasts . In Swiss 3T3 cells , growth factor , H . Miki , S . Suetsugu and T . Takenawa Fig . 8 . Quantitative analysis of the effect of Δ VPH WAVE expression . The percentage of cells forming microspikes among active Cdc42 - expressing cells , and cells forming rufﬂes among active Rac - expressing cells were quantitated in COS 7 cell cultures . Results using N1E - 115 cells are also shown . More than 100 cells were examined in each experiment . such as platelet - derived growth factor ( PDGF ) , stimulation induces membrane rufﬂing in an endogenous Rac - depend - ent manner ( Ridley et al . , 1992 ) . In order to examine the possible functional involvement of WAVE in this process , we expressed WAVE ( wild - type or Δ VPH mutant ) in Swiss 3T3 cells using recombinant retroviruses . As shown in Figure 9A , control green ﬂuorescent proteins ( GFPs ) are expressed in ~ 100 % of the virus - treated cells . We then expressed wild - type or Δ VPH mutant WAVE in the cells using the same method , and then stimulated the cells with PDGF for 10 min . The wild - type WAVE - expressing cells showed membrane rufﬂes induced by PDGF treatment ( Figure 9B ) , as in the original Swiss 3T3 cells . In Swiss 3T3 cells , the ectopic expression of wild - type WAVE did not induce the actin clustering that was seen in the case of COS 7 cells . We did not ascertain whether this discrepancy is due to the difference of the cell types used or to the difference in the amount of the expressed proteins . In contrast , cells expressing Δ VPH WAVE showed no membrane rufﬂing ( Figure 9B ) , clearly indicating that WAVE ( or some other closely related molecule ) in Swiss 3T3 cells does indeed function in membrane rufﬂing downstream of PDGF receptors . WAVEisessentialforneuriteextensioninN1E - 115 cells As described above , the amount of WAVE is richest in N1E - 115 cells and PC12 cells among various culture cell lines ( data not shown ) , both of which are of neuronal origin . This fact strongly suggests that WAVE has some important physiological role in neuronal cells . In N1E - 115 cells , Rac has been shown to be essential for neurite extension induced by serum starvation using dominant - negative mutant Rac ( Kozma et al . , 1997 ) . Thus , we also examined whether WAVE is required for the neurite extension by expressing Δ VPH WAVE . In serum - con - 6938 Fig . 9 . Inhibitory effect of Δ VPH WAVE on PDGF - induced membrane rufﬂings in Swiss 3T3 cells . ( A ) Efﬁciency of ectopic expression using retrovirus vector . Swiss 3T3 cells cultured on coverslips were infected with GFP - expressing recombinant retroviruses . After 48 h , the cells were ﬁxed and stained with phalloidin . Cells not infected with GFP viruses are also shown as negative control . Bar , 10 μ m . ( B ) Inhibition of PDGF - induced membrane rufﬂing by Δ VPH WAVE . Swiss 3T3 cells were infected with recombinant retroviruses expressing wild - type or Δ VPH WAVE . After serum starvation for 24 h , the cells were treated with or without 5 ng / ml PDGF for 10 min and then ﬁxed . Phalloidin - stained images are shown . The expression of each protein was conﬁrmed using anti - myc and anti - WAVE antibody ( data not shown ) . Strong membrane rufﬂes are indicated by arrowheads . Bar , 10 μ m . taining culture conditions , 80 – 90 % of cells showed a rounded morphology . The Δ VPH WAVE - expressing cells also remained round ( Figure 10A ) . When the culture medium was replaced with a serum - free one , most cells became ﬂattened and about half extended neurites ( Figure 10A and B ) . Under this condition , the Δ VPH - expressing cells also became ﬂattened ; however , neurite extension was severely impaired . Only 6 % of cells were determined to possess neurites , suggesting that WAVE is speciﬁcally required for neurite extension downstream of Rac . Discussion Here we identify WAVE as a third member of the WASP family of proteins . Based on the results presented above , WAVE , a novel WASP - family protein Fig . 10 . Inhibitory effect of Δ VPH WAVE on neurite extension in N1E - 115 cells . N1E - 115 cells cultured on coverslips were transfected with myc - tagged Δ VPH WAVE . The cells were serum starved for 48 h and then ﬁxed . Anti - myc ( monoclonal ) and phalloidin - stained images are shown in ( A ) . Δ VPH - WAVE - expressing cells are shown by arrowheads . Bar , 10 μ m . In ( B ) , cells were categorized into one of three types according to their morphology . Cells with one or more neurites longer than two times the cell diameter with rounded morphology are considered to be ‘neurite - bearing cells’ . Error bars represent differences from two independent experiments . Fifty cells were counted in each experiment . we conclude that WAVE induces actin reorganization downstream of Rac , a reaction required for the formation of membrane rufﬂes . We ﬁnd this quite interesting , since the two other WASP family proteins , WASP and N - WASP , have also been shown to induce actin reorganization , but they are regulated by Cdc42 , another Rho family small GTPase ( Symons et al . , 1996 ; Miki et al . , 1998 ) . DownstreamsignalingofRac There have been several reports concerning the possible mechanism of the actin reorganization induced by Rac . 6939 Very recently , Arber et al . ( 1998 ) and Yang et al . ( 1998 ) reported that LIM - kinase , a serine – threonine kinase that has two LIM motifs , plays a critical role in the actin reorganization downstream of Rac . In these reports , it is shown that LIM - kinase is activated by Rac and phosphoryl - ates coﬁlin , an actin - depolymerizing protein ( Nishida et al . , 1984 ) . This phosphorylation of coﬁlin shuts off the actin - depolymerizing activity and thus leads to the stabilization of the actin cytoskeleton . However , since actin polymerization is required for rufﬂing formation , this LIM - kinase – coﬁlin pathway alone does not explain the mechanism of the induction of membrane rufﬂing ( Rosenblatt and Mitchison , 1998 ) . Rac has been shown to associate constitutively with type I phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate ( PIP ) 5 - kinase , which phosphorylates PIP to produce phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PIP2 ) ( Tolias et al . , 1995 ; Rameh et al . , 1997 ) . PIP2 not only functions as a source of the important second messengers inositol 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate and diacyl - glycerol , but also binds directly to several actin - regulating proteins including proﬁlin , coﬁlin , gelsolin and α - actinin , and modulates their activities ( reviewed by Stossel , 1993 ) . Hartwig et al . ( 1995 ) showed that activated Rac induces the formation of PIP2 in platelets and that the addition of the PIP2 - binding peptide derived from gelsolin inhibits the actin polymerization induced by Rac , suggesting that Rac reorganizes the actin cytoskeleton through ﬁlament uncapping by replacing capping proteins such as gelsolin . Indeed , gelsolin was recently shown to be essential for Rac - induced membrane rufﬂing using dermal ﬁbroblasts without gelsolin obtained from gene - targeted mouse ( Azuma et al . , 1998 ) . However , there is another report demonstrating that the Rac - induced replacement of gelso - lin from actin ﬁlaments occurs in a manner independent of the elevation of PIP2 ( or related phospholipids , phos - phatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ) ( Arcaro , 1998 ) . In the same report , it was also shown that the uncapping of actin ﬁlaments is not sufﬁcient for the induction of actin polymerization . Thus , some other mechanism must regu - late actin reorganization after ﬁlament uncapping . In this event , WAVE may regulate proﬁlin that has been strongly suggested to be involved in actin polymerization ( Pantaloni and Carlier , 1993 ; Theriot et al . , 1994 ) . PIP2 might totally regulate Rac - induced actin reorganization by controlling the activity of many actin - regulating proteins , including gelsolin . In a sense , WAVE is the ﬁrst protein molecule whose positive role in actin reorganization downstream of Rac has been clearly demonstrated using dominant - negative mutant . ComparisonoftheRac – WAVEsystemwiththe Cdc42 – N - WASPsystem We reported previously that N - WASP is an essential factor in Cdc42 - induced ﬁlopodium formation ( Miki et al . , 1998 ) . In addition , we recently found that N - WASP induces the formation of actin microspikes through proﬁlin ( Suetsugu et al . , 1998 ) . In this case , the expression of dominant - negative proﬁlin clearly suppressed the actin - microspike formation induced by N - WASP . This is quite similar to the case of the WAVE - induced actin reorganization described above . Thus , we suppose that N - WASP and WAVE share a common function as an inducer of actin reorganization through proﬁlin . In experiments using a H . Miki , S . Suetsugu and T . Takenawa COS 7 - cell - overexpression system , the direct association between WAVE and proﬁlin was shown not to be required for WAVE - induced actin clustering . However , we can not rule out the importance of the direct binding based only on this result , since it is possible that the direct association may enhance the efﬁciency of actin reorganization under physiological non - overexpressing conditions . Indeed , in the case of N - WASP , an N - WASP mutant that has no proﬁlin - binding activity can still induce actin - microspike formation at the same rate as wild - type N - WASP , but the length of the microspikes produced by the mutant become shorter ( Suetsugu et al . , 1998 ) . N - WASP has been shown to bind directly to activated Cdc42 through its GBD / CRIB motif ( Miki et al . , 1998 ) . In contrast , WAVE does not possess a GBD / CRIB motif , and indeed has no direct binding ability to activated Rac in conventional Far Western blot assay ( data not shown ) . However , a recent report on PAK demonstrated that the intracellular localization of PAK is determined not by the direct binding with Cdc42 , that is , PAK mutants that can not bind to activated Cdc42 are recruited to focal com - plexes in a Cdc42 - dependent manner , as is wild - type PAK ( Zhao et al . , 1998 ) . Thus , it is not unusual that WAVE also translocates to the plasma membrane in a manner that does not require direct association with activated Rac . EvolutionalconservationofWASP - familyproteins WASP - family proteins have been strongly conserved throughout evolution . WASP - related proteins can be found even in yeast . The putative yeast WASP - homolog protein , Bee1 , has also been shown to participate in actin poly - merization in experiments using permeabilized yeast cells ( Lechler and Li , 1997 ; Li , 1997 ) . Although the mechanisms for the regulation of WASP - family proteins differ signiﬁ - cantly from yeast to mammals , they may share a common function as actin polymerization inducers . We believe that many more WASP - family proteins exist and hold critical clues as to actin cytoskeletal reorganization in response to various external stimuli . Materials and methods EctopicexpressioninCOS7andN1E - 115cells Wild - type , Δ VPH and Δ ProR mutant WAVE - expression plasmids were constructed in pEF - BOS ( myc - tagged and FLAG - tagged ) and pME ( FLAG - tagged ) plasmid vectors . Proﬁlin ( wild - type and H115E mutant ) expression plasmids were constructed in pEF - BOS ( myc - tagged ) . Cdc42G12V , Rac1G12V and Rac1T17N were also constructed in pEF - BOS ( myc - tagged and FLAG - tagged ) . Ten micrograms of recombinant plasmid was transfected into COS 7 cells ( 800 μ l of 5 (cid:2) 10 6 cells / ml ) by electroporation as described previously ( Miki et al . , 1996 ) . After 30 h , the cells were ﬁxed or harvested . For the transfection into N1E - 115 cells , 5 (cid:2) 10 4 cells were plated on 3 . 5 cm dishes with coverslips . After 12 h , 4 μ g plasmid DNA was introduced by Ca 2 (cid:3) - phosphate precipitation as described ( Shibasaki and McKeon , 1995 ) . Twenty hours after transfec - tion , the cells were ﬁxed . For the examination of neurite formation , the transfected cells ( plated at 2 (cid:2) 10 4 in 3 . 5 cm dishes ) were serum starved for 48 h and then ﬁxed . Retrovirus - mediatedtransfectionofSwiss3T3cells Recombinant retroviruses were produced as follows . The WAVE cDNAs ( wild - type and Δ VPH mutant ) were ligated in pMX plasmid vector . The recombinantplasmidsweretransfectedintoBOSC23packagingcellswithlipofectoaminereagent ( Gibco ) . The resulting supernatants containing retroviruses were collected and used to infect Swiss 3T3 cells . The infected Swiss 3T3 cells were kept for 48 h under serum - containing growth conditions and then starved for 24 h . 6940 Antibodies Polyclonal anti - WAVE antibody was prepared in rabbits immunized with the C - terminal region of human WAVE ( region C : amino acids 436 – 560 ) expressed in Escherichia coli . The serum was applied to an antigen - immobilized column and the bound antibody was eluted with glycine buffer ( pH 2 . 5 ) . Polyclonal anti - GST antibody was also prepared in rabbits immunized with the GST protein that is expressed in E . coli . Polyclonal anti - myc antibody was purchased from MBL . Monoclonal anti - myc antibody ( 9E10 ) was from Santa Cruz . Monoclonal anti - FLAG antibody ( M2 ) was from Kodak . Monoclonal anti - actin antibody ( MAB1501 ) was from CHEMICON . Secondary antibodies linked to alkaline phosphatase ( used for Western blotting ) were from Promega . Secondary antibodies linked to ﬂuorescein and Cy5 ( used for immuno - ﬂuorescence microscopy ) were from Capel and Amersham , respectively . Constructionof Δ VPHand Δ ProRmutantWAVE The Δ VPH mutant ( lacking amino acids 498 – 513 ) and the Δ ProR mutant ( lacking amino acids 275 – 435 ) were constructed by polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) . The nucleotide sequence of the PCR products was conﬁrmed by DNA sequencing of both strands . GST – fusionproteins GST – proﬁlin I and II ( human ) were prepared as described elsewhere ( Suetsugu et al . , 1998 ) . GST – C ( GST – C Δ VPH ) - expressing plasmids were constructed in pGEX plasmids ( Pharmacia ) by inserting PCR - ampliﬁed DNA fragments encoding each region . Expression and puriﬁca - tion of the GST – fusion proteins were carried out as described ( Miki et al . , 1994 ) . Bindingassay GST – fusion proteins were immobilized on 20 μ l glutathione beads and then mixed with various protein samples such as cell lysates . After incubation for 2 h with rotation , the beads were washed with phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) plus 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 and suspended in 20 μ l SDS sample buffer . In Far Western blot assay , the anti - WAVE immunoprecipitates were separated by SDS – PAGE and transferred to membranes . After blocking , the membranes were ﬁrst incubated with GST – proﬁlin I protein ( or control GST ) in PBS , and then with anti - GST antibody to detect the membrane - bound GST – proﬁlin I . Actinassay Actin was prepared from chick muscle according to a method described previously ( Miki et al . , 1996 ) . In the monomeric actin - binding assay , various concentrations of monomeric actin were mixed with immobilized GST – C protein in G - buffer ( 5 mM Tris pH 8 . 0 , 0 . 1 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 1 mM ATP and 10 mM 2 - mercaptoethanol ) plus 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 . Washing was also carried out in the same buffer . In the ﬁlamentous actin - binding assay , actin was ﬁrst polymerized at 4 μ M by adding 50 mM KCl , 1 mM ATP and 1 mM MgCl 2 , and incubating for 60 min at room temperature . Various concentrations of GST – C protein were then added . After incubation for 30 min at room temperature , the mixture was ultracentri - fuged at 100 000 g for 60 min . The resultant supernatant and precipitated fractions were separated and subjected to SDS – PAGE . Immunoﬂuorescencemicroscopicanalysis Cells cultured on coverslips were ﬁxed and stored in 3 . 7 % formaldehyde in PBS . For immunoﬂuorescence staining , cells were ﬁrst permeabilized with 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 for 5 min and then incubated with primary antibodies such as anti - myc , anti - FLAG and anti - WAVE antibodies for 60 min . After washing , they were incubated with secondary antibodies linked to ﬂuorescein or Cy5 ( Cy5 - conjugated antibody was used only in triple - staining experiments ) . In order to visualize actin ﬁlaments , rhodamine - conjugated phalloidin ( Molecular Probe ) was also added during the incubation with secondary antibodies . After 30 min incubation , coverslips were washed and mounted on slide glasses . They were observed with a confocal laser scanning microscope ( Bio - Rad , model MRC 1024 ) . Throughout this study , we conﬁrmed that no bleed - through occurred between different channels by comparing the results obtained by depleting one primary antibody . Acknowledgements WethankDrT . Kitamura ( UniversityofTokyo , Japan ) andDrD . Baltimore ( Massachusetts Institute of Technology , MA ) for providing us with the pMX plasmid vector and BOSC23 packaging cells , and for teaching us how to produce and use recombinant retroviruses . We are also grateful WAVE , a novel WASP - family protein to Dr N . Nomura ( Kazusa DNA Research Institute , Japan ) for the gift of KIAA0269 cDNA , Dr K . Maruyama ( Tokyo Medical and Dental University , Japan ) and Dr T . Yamamoto ( University of Tokyo , Japan ) for pME mammalian expression plasmid vector , and Dr S . Narumiya and Dr T . Ishizaki ( Kyoto University , Japan ) for N1E - 115 neuroblastoma cells . This study was supported in part by a Grant - in - Aid for Cancer Research from the Ministry of Education , Science and Culture of Japan , and by a Grant - in - Aid for Research for the Future Program from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science . References Arber , S . , Barbayannis , F . A . , Hanser , H . , Schneider , C . , Stanyon , C . A . , Bernard , O . and Caroni , P . ( 1998 ) Regulation of actin dynamics through phosphorylation of coﬁlin by LIM - kinase . Nature , 393 , 805 – 809 . Arcaro , A . ( 1998 ) The small GTP - binding protein Rac promotes the dissociation of gelsolin from actin ﬁlaments in neutrophils . J . Biol . Chem . , 273 , 805 – 813 . Aspenstrom , P . , Lindberg , U . and Hall , A . ( 1996 ) Two GTPases , Cdc42 and Rac , bind directly to a protein implicated in the immunodeﬁciency disorder Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome . Curr . Biol . , 6 , 70 – 75 . Azuma , T . , Witke , W . , Stossel , T . P . , Hartwig , J . H . and Kwiatkowski , D . J . ( 1998 ) Gelsolin is a downstream effector of rac for ﬁbroblast motility . EMBO J . , 17 , 1362 – 1370 . Derry , J . M . , Ochs , H . D . and Francke , U . ( 1994 ) Isolation of a novel gene mutated in Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome . Cell , 78 , 635 – 644 . Hartwig , J . H . , Bokoch , G . M . , Carpenter , C . L . , Janmey , P . A . , Taylor , L . A . , Toker , A . and Stossel , T . P . ( 1995 ) Thrombin receptor ligation and activated Rac uncap actin ﬁlament barbed ends through phosphoinositide synthesis in permeabilized human platelets . Cell , 82 , 643 – 653 . Kozma , R . , Ahmed , S . , Best , A . and Lim , L . ( 1995 ) The Ras - related protein Cdc42Hs and bradykinin promote formation of peripheral actin microspikes and ﬁlopodia in Swiss 3T3 ﬁbroblasts . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 15 , 1942 – 1952 . Kozma , R . , Sarner , S . , Ahmed , S . and Lim , L . ( 1997 ) Rho family GTPases and neuronal growth cone remodelling : relationship between increased complexity induced by Cdc42Hs , Rac1 and acetylcholine and collapse induced by RhoA and lysophosphatidic acid . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 17 , 1201 – 1211 . Lauffenburger , D . A . and Horwitz , A . F . ( 1996 ) Cell migration : a physically integrated molecular process . Cell , 84 , 359 – 369 . Lechler , T . and Li , R . ( 1997 ) In vitro reconstitution of cortical actin assembly sites in budding yeast . J . Cell Biol . , 138 , 95 – 103 . Leeuwen , F . N . , Kain , H . E . , Kammen , R . A . , Michiels , F . , Kranenburg , O . W . and Collard , J . G . ( 1997 ) The guanine nucleotide exchange factor Tiam1 affects neuronal morphology ; opposite roles for the small GTPases Rac and Rho . J . Cell Biol . , 139 , 797 – 807 . Li , R . ( 1997 ) Bee1 , a yeast protein with homology to Wiscott – Aldrich syndrome protein , is critical for the assembly of cortical actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . , 136 , 649 – 658 . Machesky , L . M . and Hall , A . ( 1997 ) Role of actin polymerization and adhesion to extracellular matrix in Rac - and Rho - induced cytoskeletal reorganization . J . Cell Biol . , 138 , 913 – 926 . Miki , H . and Takenawa , T . ( 1998 ) Direct binding of the verprolin - homology domain in N - WASP to actin is essential for cytoskeletal reorganization . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . , 243 , 73 – 78 . Miki , H . , Miura , K . , Matuoka , K . , Nakata , T . , Hirokawa , N . , Orita , S . , Kaibuchi , K . , Takai , Y . and Takenawa , T . ( 1994 ) Association of Ash / Grb - 2 with dynamin through the Src homology 3 domain . J . Biol . Chem . , 269 , 5489 – 5492 . Miki , H . , Miura , K . and Takenawa , T . ( 1996 ) N - WASP , a novel actin - depolymerizing protein , regulates the cortical cytoskeletal rearrangement in a PIP2 - dependent manner downstream of tyrosine kinases . EMBO J . , 15 , 5326 – 5335 . Miki , H . , Sasaki , T . , Takai , Y . and Takenawa , T . ( 1998 ) Induction of ﬁlopodium formation by a WASP - related actin - depolymerizing protein N - WASP . Nature , 391 , 93 – 96 . Mitchison , T . J . and Cramer , L . P . ( 1996 ) Actin - based cell motility and cell locomotion . Cell , 84 , 371 – 379 . Nagase , T . et al . ( 1996 ) Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentiﬁed human genes . VI . The coding sequences of 80 new genes ( KIAA0201 – KIAA0280 ) deduced by analysis of cDNA clones from cell line KG - 1 and brain . DNA Res . , 3 , 321 – 329 . Nishida , E . , Maekawa , S . and Sakai , H . ( 1984 ) Coﬁlin , a protein in porcine brain that binds to actin ﬁlaments and inhibits their interactions with myosin and tropomyosin . Biochemistry , 23 , 5307 – 5313 . 6941 Nobes , C . D . and Hall , A . ( 1995 ) Rho , rac and cdc42 GTPases regulate the assembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated with actin stress ﬁbers , lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia . Cell , 81 , 53 – 62 . Pantaloni , D . , Carlier , M . F . ( 1993 ) How proﬁlin promotes actin ﬁlament assembly in the presence of thymosin beta 4 . Cell , 75 , 1007 – 1014 . Rameh , L . E . , Tolias , K . F . , Duckworth , B . C . and Cantley , L . C . ( 1997 ) A new pathway for synthesis of phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . Nature , 390 , 192 – 196 . Ridley , A . J . and Hall , A . ( 1992 ) The small GTP - binding protein rho regulates the assembly of focal adhesions and actin stress ﬁbers in response to growth factors . Cell , 70 , 389 – 399 . Ridley , A . J . , Paterson , H . F . , Johnston , C . L . , Diekmann , D . and Hall , A . ( 1992 ) The small GTP - binding protein rac regulates growth factor - induced membrane rufﬂing . Cell , 70 , 401 – 410 . Rosenblatt , J . and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1998 ) Actin , coﬁlin and cognition . Nature , 393 , 739 – 740 . Shibasaki , F . and McKeon , F . ( 1995 ) Calcineurin functions in Ca ( 2 (cid:3) ) - activated cell death in mammalian cells . J . Cell Biol . , 131 , 735 – 743 . Stossel , T . P . ( 1993 ) On the crawling of animal cells . Science , 260 , 1086 – 1094 . Suetsugu , S . , Miki , H . and Takenawa , T . ( 1998 ) The essential role of proﬁlin in the assembly of actin for microspike formation . EMBO J . , 17 , 6516 – 6526 . Suzuki , T . , Miki , H . , Takenawa , T . and Sasakawa C . ( 1998 ) Neural Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein is implicated in the actin - based motility of Shigella ﬂexneri . EMBO J . , 17 , 2767 – 2776 . Symons , M . , Derry , J . M . , Karlak , B . , Jiang , S . , Lemahieu , V . , Mccormick , F . , Francke , U . and Abo , A . ( 1996 ) Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein , a novel effector for the GTPase CDC42Hs , is implicated in actin polymerization . Cell , 84 , 723 – 734 . Theriot , J . A . , Rosenblatt , J . , Portnoy , D . A . , Goldschmidt - Clermont , P . J . and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1994 ) Involvement of proﬁlin in the actin - based motility of L . monocytogenes in cells and in cell - free extracts . Cell , 76 , 505 – 517 . Tolias , K . F . , Cantley , L . C . and Carpenter , C . L . ( 1995 ) Rho family GTPases bind to phosphoinositide kinases . J . Biol . Chem . , 270 , 17656 – 17659 . Watanabe , N . et al . ( 1997 ) p140mDia , a mammalian homolog of Drosophila diaphanous , is a target protein for Rho small GTPase and is a ligand for proﬁlin . EMBO J . , 16 , 3044 – 3056 . Yang , N . , Higuchi , O . , Ohashi , K . , Nagata , K . , Wada , A . , Kangawa , K . , Nishida , E . and Mizuno , K . ( 1998 ) Coﬁlin phosphorylation by LIM - kinase 1 and its role in Rac - mediated actin reorganization . Nature , 393 , 809 – 812 . Zhao , Z . S . , Manser , E . , Chen , X . Q . , Chong , C . , Leung , T . and Lim , L . ( 1998 ) A conserved negative regulatory region in alphaPAK : inhibition of PAK kinases reveals their morphological roles downstream of Cdc42 and Rac1 . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 18 , 2153 – 2163 . Received April 17 , 1998 ; revised October 1 , 1998 ; accepted October 2 , 1998 Note added in proof Recently , Bear et al . identiﬁed a novel protein named SCAR ( suppressor of cAR ) in Dictyostelium [ J . Cell Biol . , 142 , 1325 – 1335 ( 1998 ) ] . The SCAR protein is probably the Dictyostelium homolog of WAVE . Indeed , they showed in the paper that the disruption of the SCAR gene resulted in defects in the accumulation of actin ﬁlaments at the leading edge in chemotactic movements .