The assembly of actin filament networks is important for the formation of many subcellular structures and the performance of numerous cellular functions 1 , 2 . Individual fila ments polymerize and depolymerize , filaments con - nect with each other to form branched networks or bun - dles of straight filaments , and filament networks and bundles interact with other molecules and membranes to form subcellular structures , such as muscle sarcomeres , filopodia , lamellipodia , lamella , ruffles , neuronal growth cones and dendritic spines . Dynamic actin filament net - works are required for numerous functions related to cell shape and movement , such as migration , contrac - tion , adhesion and protrusion . In addition , membrane trafficking and transport ( for example , endocyto sis and phagocytosis ) often involve actin assembly . Actin polymerization proceeds through three steps : nucleation , elongation and depolymerization . The actin filament has intrinsic polarity , with a fast growing barbed end ( known as the plus end ) and a slow grow - ing pointed end ( known as the minus end ) . The nuclea - tion step is rate limiting ; the spontaneous formation of new filaments from actin subunits is rare , and the rate depends on the concentration of actin subunits , which is generally low owing to the regulatory role of actin monomer - binding proteins such as profilin and thymo - sin β4 . Monomers bound to profilin can partici pate in barbed end elongation , but generally not in nucleation 3 . Thymosin β4 - bound monomers cannot participate in nucleation nor elongation , but monomers transfer readily onto profilin when the profilin – actin levels are depleted during bursts of polymerization 3 . Nucleation therefore needs to be accelerated in cells by nuclea - tion factors ( known as nucleators ) that stabilize or mimic small actin oligomers . Newly formed filaments elongate by the addition of ATP - bound actin subunits to their barbed end and , to a lesser extent , their pointed end . In cells , elongation can be further accelerated by elongation factors . ATP hydrolysis is catalysed by a conformational change of actin subunits in the fila - ment , and ADP - bound subunits dissociate mainly from the pointed end , either alone or aided by severing and depolymerizin g proteins . The barbed end of the actin filament has key roles in filament dynamics because of its fast kinetics and because it is often directed towards cellular structures such as cell membranes and sarcomere Z‑disks . Protein scaffolds and signalling proteins at the surface of these structures , such as BAR‑domain proteins 4 and small RHO - family GTPases 5 , direct the growth of the filament for efficient generation of force and movement . Biochemically , three mecha - nisms have been described to create free barbed ends for filament elongation . First , actin subunits can be induced to form a filament by nucleators such as the actin - related protein 2 / 3 ( ARP2 / 3 ) complex , formins and tandem 1 Department of Cell Biology and Physiology , Washington University , St . Louis , Missouri 63110 , USA . 2 Department of Physiology , Perelman School of Medicine , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania 19104 , USA . 3 Departments of Biology and Cell Biology , University of Virginia , Charlottesville , Virginia 22904 , USA . 4 Department of Biomedical Engineering and Center for Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics , University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , Michigan 48109 , USA . e‑mails : droberto @ mail . med . upenn . edu ; jcooper @ wustl . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3869 Published online 10 September 2014 Corrected online 19 September 2014 Capping protein regulators fine - tune actin assembly dynamics Marc Edwards 1 , Adam Zwolak 2 , Dorothy A . Schafer 3 , David Sept 4 , Roberto Dominguez 2 and John A . Cooper 1 Abstract | Capping protein ( CP ) binds the fast growing barbed end of the actin filament and regulates actin assembly by blocking the addition and loss of actin subunits . Recent studies provide new insights into how CP and barbed - end capping are regulated . Filament elongation factors , such as formins and ENA / VASP ( enabled / vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ) , indirectly regulate CP by competing with CP for binding to the barbed end , whereas other molecules , including V - 1 and phospholipids , directly bind to CP and sterically block its interaction with the filament . In addition , a diverse and unrelated group of proteins interact with CP through a conserved ‘capping protein interaction’ ( CPI ) motif . These proteins , including CARMIL ( capping protein , ARP2 / 3 and myosin I linker ) , CD2AP ( CD2‑associated protein ) and the WASH ( WASP and SCAR homologue ) complex subunit FAM21 , recruit CP to specific subcellular locations and modulate its actin‑capping activity via allosteric effects . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | OCTOBER 2014 | 677 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Adherens junction Nucleus Invadopodium , podosome Filopodia Lamellipodium ECM Pathogen F - actin Cellmembrane Endosomalﬁssion Phagocytosis CP Macropinocytosis Sarcomere Z - disks The sarcomere is the basic unit of the contractile apparatus of striated muscle . The Z‑disk is the structure at each end of the sarcomere to which the barbed ends of the actin‑based thin filaments are anchored . BAR - domain proteins BAR ( Bin – amphiphysin – Rvs ) domains of proteins bind to membranes , sensing and inducing curvature . They have roles in membrane trafficking . Thin filaments The sarcomere contains thin filaments composed of actin and thick filaments composed of myosin . Their interaction and sliding causes contraction of the sarcomere and hence the muscle . WH2 - motif proteins 6 – 8 . Second , filaments can be severed by proteins such as cofilin and ADF 9 , 10 . Third , proteins that cap barbed ends can be induced to dissociate 11 , 12 . In cells , the relative importance of these mechanisms is an open issue and an important topic of active research . Newly formed barbed ends can either grow under the control of elongation factors or be stabilized by capping proteins that limit subunit addition or dissociation . The heterodimeric actin capping protein , referred to here as CP , is an essential factor that restricts actin fila - ment elongation by binding to free actin filament barbed ends . CP was isolated from Acanthamoeba castellanii and named ‘capping protein’ ( REF . 13 ) . Other names for CP orthologues include CapZ and β - actinin in skeletal muscle 14 , 15 , and cap34 / 32 in Dictyostelium discoideum 16 . Several other proteins , including gelsolin - family mem - bers 17 , 18 , adducins 19 and epidermal growth factor recep - tor kinase substrate 8 ( EPS8 ) 20 , 21 , also possess barbed - end capping activity . CP is the most ubiquitous and abundant barbed - end capper ; other cappers have more specialized roles , with restricted cell and tissue expression patterns and distinct modes of regulation . Recent biochemical and cell biological studies have identified several mole - cules that bind to CP and influence its capping activity 11 . The physiological relevance of the interactions of these molecules with CP in cells is an important open ques - tion and a topic of active investigation . Potential roles , which are not exclusive of each other , are to recruit or target active CP , inhibit its capping activity and uncap filaments 11 . One class of CP regulators contains the ‘c apping - protei n interaction’ ( CPI ) motif , which is necessary and sufficient for binding CP . These CP regulators are a diverse set of unrelated , multidomain protein scaf - folds , includin g CARMIL ( capping protein , ARP2 / 3 and myosi n I linker ) , CD2AP ( CD2 - associated pro - tein ) , CKIP1 ( CK2 - interacting protein 1 ; also known as PLEKHO1 ) , FAM21 and CapZIP ( CapZ - interacting protein ) 22 , 23 . CARMIL proteins have a second CP - binding motif termed ‘CARMIL - specific interaction’ ( CSI ) motif 23 . In this Review , we discuss recent advances in our understanding of regulators that modulate the actin - capping activity of CP , including through indirect control by elongation factors such as formins and ENA / VASP proteins , which compete with CP for bind - ing to the barbed end ; direct regulation by proteins such as V - 1 ( also known as myotrophin ) , which sterically prevent CP binding to the filament ; or allosteric inhibi - tion of CP by CPI motif - containing proteins that directly bind to CP and decrease its affinity for the barbed end . CP and actin dynamics — the basics CP is found in nearly all eukaryotic organisms , includ - ing humans , fungi and plants , and in almost all cells and tissues 11 . In most settings , CP is a crucial determinant of actin behaviour and interactions of actin filament barbed ends 11 . In the sarcomere of striated muscle cells , CP is an essential component of the Z - disk ( leading to its other name CapZ ) , where it caps the barbed ends of actin - based thin filaments 24 – 26 . In non - muscle cells , CP is important for the assembly of cortical actin and for cases of actin - based motility 11 , 12 , such as the formation of membran e protrusion s at the leading edge of migrating cells . CP is required for the ARP2 / 3 complex - mediated assembly of dendritic actin filament networks , as shown in reconstitution assays of actin - based motility with purified proteins in vitro and studies of the assembly of cortical actin networks at the leading edge of motile cells 27 , 28 . According to the dendritic nucleation model for ARP2 / 3 complex - based assembly , activation of the ARP2 / 3 complex leads to the generation of a branched filament network through the formation of new daugh - ter filaments on the sides of mother filaments ( FIG . 1 ) . The barbed ends of the daughter filaments that have been nucleated by the ARP2 / 3 complex grow for some time and then become capped by CP 1 , 29 . In this model , filament capping is proposed to ensure that the net - work consists of short filaments with a high density of branches , which is thought to provide the mechanical stiffness needed for the efficient generation of force by barbed - end growth near the membrane 30 , 31 . Capping by CP may also indirectly control branch density 32 , 33 . Furthermore , another proposed role for capping is to prevent the growth of non - productive barbed ends when they become disconnected from cell membranes , which Figure 1 | Capping protein regulates actin filament dynamics during several cellular processes . As predicted by the dendritic nucleation model , capping protein ( CP ) regulates actin‑related protein 2 / 3 ( ARP2 / 3 ) complex‑dependent actin assembly at various cellular membranes , including lamellipodial protrusions , adherens junctions , and at sites of podosome and invadopodium formation , phagocytosis and macropinocytosis . CP is also associated with endosomal compartments that undergo fission and fusion . Recent evidence suggests that CP also regulates the assembly of actin filaments in filopodia 143 , which can arise from dendritic actin networks 144 . Recently , CP was observed at the tips of actin bundles in hair cell stereocilia , and the levels of CP correlated inversely with barbed - end growth 145 . ECM , extracellular matrix . R E V I E W S 678 | OCTOBER 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved CPI CSI CBR a Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Human CARMIL1 973 ELPSEEGKKLEHFTKLRPKRNKKQQPTQAAVCAANIVSQDGEQNGLMGRVDEGVDEFFTKKV 1 , 034 Human CARMIL2 972 DLP - LAGQPLRHPTRARPRPRRQHHHRPPPGGPQVPPALPQEGNGLSARVDEGVEEFFSKRL 1 , 032 Human CARMIL3 963 ELP - THGYKLRHQTQGRPRPPR - - TTPPGPGRPSMPAPGTRQENGMATRLDEGLEDFFSRRV 1 , 021 Chicken CARMIL1 973 ELPSEEGRKLEHFTKLRPKRNKKQQPSQAAVSAG - - VPPDGEQNGLMGRVDEGVDEFFTKKV 1 , 032 Zebraﬁsh CARMIL3 951 TLP - TQGSPLRHVTHVRPRPPR - - RHR - - - - AAHAPFETHCSENGGVSLLDDGLPDFYTKRV 1 , 005 Drosophila . melanogaster CARMIL 987 ELP - SASFQLQHLVKGRPKRAKTRAPTRPLVTTECAGGSREIGEGLEHFFRPGSVTPTTLTP 1 , 047 Caenorhabditis elegans CARMIL 808 DLP - PKPSVLSHLQKARPRKRGGASSILNSSLSEDVMMTSKSSGGPENGDLADLIEEVDEVE 868 Monosiga brevicolis CARMIL 1 , 258 ELPTEGGR - LEHITKGRIKAPKNAGMRRRPVPNR - - GVPNSVENSPEGTMDAGLDDFFEKKA 1 , 316 Acanthamoeba castellanii CARMIL 1 , 085 TELEAAESNLTHMTKDRPMGPQRRRPQRKPQRRPMMSTAD * - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 , 121 Dictyostelium discoideum CARMIL 1 , 018 - - - - SDSAELTHVTASRPHIASKRKP - - - PTRRPRPPTEN * - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 , 050 Human CIN85 467 DSVVSSTEKLSHPTTSRPKATGRRPP - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 492 Human CD2AP 478 DDI - ASSENLLHLTANRPKMPGRRLP - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 502 Human CKIP1 141 EVTVEEDSYLAHPTRDRAKIQHSRRP - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 166 Human FAM21 995 DLP - AQADTLHSANKSRVKMRGKRRP - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 , 019 Human CAPZIP 145 DQP - PEGSHLPCYNKVRTRGSIKRRP - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 169 LXHXTXXRPKXXXXXXP Amino acids Consensus sequence b CP β CP α CPI CSI Cortical actin Actin filaments that are located close to the plasma membrane . These filaments control the shape and movement of the plasma membrane , and they are often highly dynamic . ‘reserves’ the available pool of actin subunits for filament elongation at productive locations near membranes 34 , 35 . The biochemical properties of CP were previously reviewed 11 . CP is a ~ 64 kDa heterodimer of structurally related α - and β - subunits . The subunits are extensively inter twined in the mushroom - shaped structure of the heterodimer 36 ( BOX 1 ; FIG . 2a ) , such that the heterodimer acts as a single protein in terms of its physical proper - ties , including stability and denaturation 37 . In vitro , CP binds to barbed ends with 1 : 1 stoichiometry , block - ing the addition and loss of actin subunits . The binding affinity is in the subnanomolar range , and the half - time for dissociatio n is ~ 30 minutes 38 – 40 . Structural and biochemical studies have led to a cap - ping model in which CP interacts with the barbed end through two main surfaces 36 , 39 , 41 , 42 . One surface ( termed site 1 ) consists of a basic patch on the flat top of the mushroom - shaped CP heterodimer and is proposed to interact with an acidic patch at the interface between the two terminal actin subunits at the barbed end ( FIG . 2a ) . The second surface ( termed site 2 ) comprises the hydro - phobic side of an amphipathic α - helix at the carboxyl ter - minus of the CP β - subunit , known as the β - tentacle . The β - tentacle is proposed to bind to the hydro phobic cleft of the last actin subunit of the filament 39 , 42 . Ensemble exper - iments suggest that the interaction proceeds in two steps , Box 1 | Allosteric regulation of CP by the capping protein - binding motifs — CPI and CSI A diverse group of unrelated proteins , which includes CARMIL ( capping protein , ARP2 / 3 and myosin I linker ) , CD2AP ( CD2‑associated protein ) , CKIP1 ( CK2‑interacting protein 1 ) , CapZIP ( CapZ‑interacting protein ) and the CD2AP homologue CIN85 , contain a conserved ‘capping protein interaction’ ( CPI ) motif , which binds directly to capping protein ( CP ) at a site distinct from its actin‑binding surface 23 . The CPI motif is defined by the consensus sequence LXHXTXXRPKXXXXXXP ( where X indicates any amino acid ) 22 ( see the figure , part a ; sequence conservation decreases from dark to light blue shading ) . Peptides containing this sequence , from CARMIL1 and CD2AP , inhibit actin capping and uncap barbed ends 22 , 23 , 86 , 137 . Structures of complexes of CP with the CPI motifs of CARMIL1 ( REFS 23 , 77 , 94 ) , CD2AP 23 , 77 and CKIP1 ( REF . 77 ) revealed a conserved mode of interaction . In the co‑crystal structures , the CPI motif , which in the unbound state is intrinsically disordered 138 , adopts a stable extended conformation that is wrapped around the CP stalk , which is opposite the barbed end - binding site . The positively charged core region of the CPI motif binds an acidic groove formed by the amino‑terminal helical bundle of the CP β ‑subunit , which comprises half of the stalk region . The co‑crystal structure of a longer , 115‑amino acid long fragment of CARMIL ( human CARMIL1 residues 964—1078 ) bound to CP ( which consists of α - and β ‑subunits that are intertwined in the mushroom‑ shaped structure of the heterodimer ) has been solved ( see the figure , part b ) . The structure revealed additional interactions that are mediated by an ~ 14 - amino acid long region carboxyl - terminally to the CPI motif 23 . This additional interacting region was named the CARMIL - specific interaction ( CSI ) motif 23 because it is absent from other allosteric CP regulatory proteins . The CSI motif binds CP on the opposite side of the stalk from the CPI motif . Together , the CPI ( residues 968 – 1004 ) and CSI ( residues 1021 – 1035 ) motifs of CARMIL constitute the capping protein‑binding region ( CBR ) 23 . In support of an allosteric mechanism 23 , 77 , 139 , nuclear magnetic resonance ( NMR ) studies showed that CBR binding induces large chemical shift changes in the basic patch of CP ( site 1 ; see FIG . 2 ) that binds the barbed end 138 . Moreover , CP mutations that impair barbed‑end binding do not affect CBR binding to CP 139 . Additional evidence for an allosteric mechanism is that binding of the CPI motif to CP induces dissociation of V‑1 , which interacts with the basic patch of CP 88 , 77 . Furthermore , computational studies revealed changes on the barbed end - binding surface of CP upon CBR binding 139 , 140 . An important point relevant to cellular function is that the CBR – CP complex has weak capping activity 86 , 137 . The affinity of CP for the barbed end may have physiological relevance despite the ~ 100 - fold decrease in affinity , when one considers the concentrations of the reactants in the cytoplasm . The potential physiological role for regulation of capping by the CBR is supported by the observation that the CARMIL – CP complex at the barbed end in vitro 141 and CP bound at barbed ends in cells 28 have similar lifetimes ( ~ 10 . 5 seconds ) and ( ~ 30 seconds ) , respectively . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | OCTOBER 2014 | 679 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology V - 1 V - 1 Formin c Steric inhibition b Competition with elongation factors a No inhibition d Allosteric inhibition 180° Site 1 Site 2 Barbed end CP Actinﬁlament Site 1 Site 2 CSI CPI 180° 180° 180° with site 1 forming a first , mostly electrostatic contact , followed by the hydrophobic contact of site 2 ( REF . 39 ) . The two sites may have some degree of independence , which suggests that CP can adopt a state in which only one of the sites is occupied . The nature of differentially bound states may be important for understanding how CP regulators functio n in cells . Several molecules affect the interaction of CP with the barbed end of the actin filament via various mechanism s ( see below ) . Indirect regulators of CP Indirect regulators of CP bind to the filament barbed end and not to CP . Their interactions with actin anatgonize CP binding to the barbed end . Formins . Formins generate F - actin networks that con - sist of long filament bundles such as actin cables , filo - podia and cytokinetic rings for processes as varied as cell motility , cytokinesis , polarized cell growth , vesicle transport and tissue morphogenesis 43 . Formins nucleate Figure 2 | Modes of capping protein inhibition . a | No inhibition of barbed - end capping . Capping protein ( CP ) binds to the barbed end of an actin filament via electrostatic interactions at site 1 ( basic patch ) and hydrophobic interactions with the β ‑tentacle ( site 2 ) 39 . CP is depicted as a heterodimer composed of an α - subunit ( green ) and β - subunit ( purple ) , and the actin filament barbed end is depicted in blue . Regions of CP that contact actin are depicted in yellow . b | Competition with elongation factors . Formins ( depicted here ) and ENA / VASP ( enabled / vasodilator‑stimulated phosphoprotein ) proteins compete with CP for binding to the barbed end of the actin filament . Binding of elongation factors to the barbed end indirectly regulates capping , because their binding to actin prevents the binding of CP . c | Steric inhibition . V - 1 binds to the actin - binding surface of CP ( site 1 ) , thereby sterically blocking the interaction of CP with the barbed end . d | Allosteric inhibition . Several proteins interact with CP through the ‘capping protein interaction’ ( CPI ) motif and , in the case of CARMIL , the ‘CARMIL‑specific interaction’ ( CSI ) motif . They bind CP in the stalk region of the heterodimer and induce a conformational change that promotes dissociation of CP from the barbed end . The arrows indicate association and dissociation . R E V I E W S 680 | OCTOBER 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved unbranched actin filaments and promote processive fila - ment elongation by recruiting profilin – actin complexes for incorporation at barbed ends . Formins remain asso - ciated with barbed ends and prevent the binding of CP 44 ( FIG . 2b ) . These effects on F - actin are due to the activities of two formin - homology domains , FH1 and FH2 , which interact with profilin – actin and barbed ends , respec - tively . In addition to the FH1 and FH2 domains , form - ins contain other regulatory domains that are involved in membrane association 45 , 46 , activation by RHO - family GTPases 47 , 48 , autoinhibition 49 and dimerization . Often , a singl e cell contains several different formins that are char - acterized by widely different anti - capping and filamen t elongation properties 43 , 50 – 53 . ENA / VASP proteins . ENA / VASP proteins share a tri - partite domain organization , consisting of ENA / VASP homology 1 ( EVH1 ) and EVH2 domains at the amino terminus and C - terminus , respectively , and a central Pro - rich region . The EVH1 domain targets ENA / VASP proteins to focal adhesions , filopodia and lamelli - podia through interactions with proteins that contain the consensus sequence FPPPP 54 . The EVH2 domain comprises a globular ( or monomeric ) actin - binding site ( GAB ) and an F - actin - binding site ( FAB ) , as well as a C - terminal coiled - coil ( CC ) region that mediates tetramerization 55 , 56 . ENA / VASP proteins have been implicated in variou s cellular processes , including cell migration , axon guid - ance and the movement of the bacterial pathogen Listeria monocytogenes 54 . In cells , overexpression of ENA / VASP promotes L . monocytogenes motility but negatively regu - lates whole cell migration by affecting lamellipodial protrusion and network branch density 57 . In contrast to formins , ENA / VASP proteins lack nucleation activity 58 . However , like formins , they interact at or near barbed ends and antagonize filament capping by CP , presum - ably by steric hindrance , while also promoting processive filament elongation when clustered on glass microscope slide surfaces 57 , 59 – 62 . Both the GAB and FAB domains are required for ENA / VASP to associate with the barbed end and compete with CP 61 , and the central Pro - rich sequence binds profilin – actin , like formins 61 , 63 , 64 . Profilin increases the elongation rate of ENA / VASP - associated filaments modestly if at all 58 , 59 , 61 , 62 , 65 , but the presence of the Pro - rich region may facilitate the recruitment of profili n – actin , which is the predominant source of mon - omers for filament elongation in cells . Indeed , structural and biochemical studies show that profilin – actin can bind simultaneously to the Pro - rich and GAB domains of ENA / VASP , with an affinity greater than that of either profilin or actin alone , which could facilitate the direct addition of actin subunits to the barbed end 64 . Steric regulators Steric regulators bind CP directly , thereby antagonizing or weakening its interaction with the barbed end . V - 1 . V - 1 is a 13 - kDa protein that consists of three and a half ankyrin repeats 66 . Originally identified as a protei n that is upregulated in the cerebellum during mouse development 67 , 68 , V - 1 was independently linked to car - diac hypertrophy and thus also named myo trophin 69 – 72 . V - 1 also interacts with the transcription factor nuclear factor - κB ( NF - κB ) and co - translocates to the nucleus with p65 , which is involved in inducing cardiac hypertrophy 73 , 74 . V - 1 binds CP with high affinity ( with a dissocia - tion constant of ( K d ) ~ 40 nM ) and inhibits its barbed - end capping activity 75 . Biochemical studies found that V - 1 could not remove CP when it was already bound to the barbed end and only inhibited barbed - end cappin g when mixed with CP before exposure to actin filaments 67 , 75 . Structural approaches , including nuclear magnetic resonance ( NMR ) spectroscopy 76 and X - ray crystallography 77 , showed that V - 1 interacts with site 1 of CP through a concave surface that is formed by the short inner helices of the ankyrin repeats and the vari - able interrepeat loops 42 ( FIG . 2c ) . Consistent with the proposed steric mechanism of CP regulation by V - 1 , point mutations in the basic patch of CP disrupt both V - 1 binding and barbed - end capping 76 . The same con - cave surface on V - 1 is involved in the interaction with NF - κB 73 , 75 , which suggests that binding of V - 1 to CP and NF - κB are mutually exclusive , thus providing a potential cross - regulatory mechanism that links actin assembly with transcriptional responses induced by V - 1 . Polyphosphoinositides . Several cytoskeletal proteins are regulated by lipids , especially anionic phospho lipids such as polyphosphoinositides 78 , 79 . CP is one such pro - tein that interacts with and is inhibited by anionic phos - pholipids 38 , 80 – 82 . Phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ) , either in the form of micelles or when diluted with neutral lipids in liposomes , binds and inhib - its CP 80 . This polyphosphoinositide seems to weaken the interactions between the α - and β - subunits of CP and to selectively interact with the α - subunit 80 . PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 - mediated inhibition may require CP binding to a cluster of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 molecules in the membrane . Computational and biochemical approaches , com - bined with mutagenesis studies , indicated that anionic phospholipids bind to the basic patch on CP , similar to V - 1 ( REFS 81 , 82 ) . Free barbed ends formed rapidly when PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 was added to capped actin filaments in ensemble polymerization assays , suggesting that PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 might cause the dissociation of CP from the barbed end ( uncapping ) 80 , 81 . However , a study using total internal reflection fluorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy to visualize actin filaments failed to observe un capping , which suggests that PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 functions via a steric mechanism similar to that of V - 1 ( REF . 82 ) ( FIG . 2c ) . The authors of this study suggested that the appear - ance of free barbed ends in the ensemble assays might have resulted from filament breakage during mixing . However , one would expect the same effect in experi - ments with V - 1 , which was not the case . Additional experiments should help resolve this controversy . One possible explanation for the different CP - inhibiting mechanisms of PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 and V - 1 is that the basic patch may be partially accessible to PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 but not V - 1 when CP is bound at the R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | OCTOBER 2014 | 681 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Chimp ChimpHuman ChimpHuman HumanCow Cow Cow Dog Dog Dog Mouse Medaka Mouse Lizard Lizard LizardTurkeyChicken Xenopus spp . ZebraﬁshChoanoﬂagellate Sea squirt ( a ) Sea squirt ( b ) Lancelet Mosquito Drosophila spp . Honey bee Acanthamoeba spp . Dictyostelium spp . Caenorhabditis elegans Caenorhabditis briggsae Turkey Chicken Chicken TurkeyMouse Xenopus spp . Xenopus spp . Medaka Medaka Zebraﬁsh Vertebrate 3 Vertebrate 2 Vertebrate 1 Invertebrate 0 . 1 Macropinocytosis Engulfment of extracellular fluid by ruffling and folding back of the plasma membrane . Highly dependent on dynamic actin assembly . barbed end . This explanation is more likely if , as dis - cussed above , site 1 dissociates from the barbed end independently of site 2 , facilitating binding of small , but not large , molecules to site 1 . The physiological relevance of the interaction of CP with phospholipids is largely unknown . In plant cells , phosphatidic acid signalling is inhibited when CP levels are decreased 83 . Moreover , in yeast , CP point mutations that affect PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 binding also altered actin bind - ing , so that definitive conclusions could not be drawn 81 . Further work is needed to clarify the functional role and physiological significance of CP – phospholipid interactions . Allosteric inhibition by CARMIL proteins CARMIL proteins directly interact with CP via their CP - binding region ( CBR ) , which includes CPI and CSI motifs ( BOX 1 ) . This interaction has an allosteric effect on the actin - binding site of CP , which lowers its affinity for the barbed end and promotes the dissociation of CP from the barbed end ( FIG . 2d ) . Acan125 , the first identified CARMIL , was discov - ered in A . castellanii in a biochemical search for bindin g partners of the SH3 ( SRC homology 3 ) domain of myosin 1C 84 . Subsequent work uncovered the D . discoi­ deum homologue p116 ( REF . 85 ) . p116 co - purified with CP and the ARP2 / 3 complex , which led to it being renamed CARMIL 85 . In D . discoideum , CARMIL local - ized to regions of dynamic actin assembly , and a hap - loid knockout strain exhibited multiple phenotypes , consistent with altered actin dynamics , including loss of macropinocytosis . Amoeba species have single genes for CARMIL , whereas vertebrates contain three genes encoding CARMIL ( BOX 2 ) . Mouse CARMIL1 was the first verte - brate CARMIL protein to be characterized 86 . On the basis of the rapid appearance of free barbed ends when added to CP - capped filaments , it was concluded that CARMIL1 uncapped actin filaments 86 . The CARMIL1 – CP complex retained a low level of capping activity , and the two proteins colocalized in cultured cells . The CBR of CARMIL1 interacts with CP through a site distinct from its actin - binding site , which suggests that CARMIL1 may function to localize the capping activity of CP in cells , not merely inhibit it . CARMIL proteins and actin dynamics . CARMIL1 has an important role in regulating actin dynamics at the plasma membrane . It colocalizes with dynamic actin in lamellipodia , ruffles , macropinosomes and the leading edge of lamella in migrating cultured cells 86 , 87 . CARMIL1 seems to be less abundant at retracting edges relative to the amount at leading edges 88 , which suggests selec - tive targeting to advancing membranes . Depletion of CARMIL1 in cultured cells leads to the loss of lamelli - podia , ruffles and macropinosomes 86 , 87 , but it has only a modest effect on cell migration in a wound healing model 86 , 87 , 89 . This result is consistent with several studies showing that lamellipodia are dispensable for migra - tion under these conditions 89 . Increased expression of CARMIL1 enhances lamellipodia formation 86 , and high - level expression causes the formation of abnormal spikes and club - shaped protrusions that contain lamellipodial molecular markers 87 . The ability of CARMIL1 to interact with CP has physiological relevance for dynamic actin assembly . Expression of a mutant in which two of the conserved residues in the CPI motif , Lys987 and Arg989 , had been changed to Ala , failed to restore lamellipodia , ruffling and macropinocytosis in human cells depleted of endo genous CARMIL1 ( REF . 89 ) . However , this mutant partially res - cued defects in cell migration in a wound - healing model . Similar results were obtained when a CP mutant with a 123 - amino acid internal deletion that removed the CPI and CSI motifs was expressed in CARMIL1 - depleted cells ; however , cell migration was not restored in this case 86 . The deleted region also included a novel mem - brane - targeting motif , termed the basic hydropathy ( BH ) motif , which corresponds to mouse CARMIL1 residues Arg1068 to Arg1079 . The BH motif was identified by bio - informatics analysis , and a synthetic peptide correspond - ing to this motif bound to acidic phospholipid vesicles with low affinity in the micromolar range 90 . The deletion of the BH motif may account for the discrepancy in the phenotypic rescue results in the two studies . Less is known about CARMIL2 , but its function and localization are distinct from those of CARMIL1 in human cultured cells that express both isoforms 87 . Box 2 | Updated phylogenetic analysis of the CARMIL family Vertebrates have three genes that encode CARMIL ( capping protein , ARP2 / 3 and myosin I linker ) ; primitive eukaryotes , amoebozoans and invertebrates have a single gene encoding CARMIL ; and fungi , plants and apicomplexans lack a CARMIL‑encoding gene ( see the figure ) . The sea squirt is the earliest chordate with two genes that encode CARMIL , probably resulting from a gene duplication event preceding the large genomic expansion before the appearance of vertebrates 142 . Individually , the three vertebrate genes that encode CARMIL are highly conserved through evolution 87 , 137 . Although the three isoforms have similar lengths and domain organizations , sequences of the isoforms differ substantially from one another . The isoforms are defined and distinguished from each other by a small set of residues , which suggests that each isoform has specific functions in cells . The scale bar indicates evolutionary distance . R E V I E W S 682 | OCTOBER 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Vimentin A protein that forms intermediate filaments in cells . Found in a wide range of cell types . Like CARMIL1 , CARMIL2 contains conserved CPI and CSI motifs , which inhibit CP in vitro ( T . Kim and J . A . C , unpublished observations ) . In a wound - healing model of cultured cells , depletion of CARMIL2 led to a nearly complete loss of lamellipodia , ruffling and macro pinocytosis , similar to the effects observed in CARMIL1 - depleted cells 87 . The functions of the two isoforms may be either distinct or overlapping , but both are necessary for dynamic actin assembly . One striking feature of CARMIL2 is its colocaliza - tion with the vimentin intermediate filament network 87 , which is not observed for CARMIL1 ( TABLE 1 ) . Vimentin has been implicated in actin - based protrusions near the cell edge 91 . The localization of CARMIL2 with vimentin raises the possibility that CARMIL2 is a molecular link between vimentin filaments and dynamic actin assembly . Furthermore , when plated at low density , CARMIL2 - depleted cells display a multipolar shape characterized by the extension of leading edges in several directions 87 . Live - cell imaging revealed that CARMIL2 - depleted cells randomly extend new processes without retract - ing or redirecting existing ones , which results in loss of coordinated movement . Such behaviour could result from loss of intrinsic polarity . Indeed , in CARMIL2 - depleted cells the microtubule - organizing centre and the Golgi complex are generally found on the side of the nucleus away from the leading edge , whereas in control cells they are located at the opposite side . CARMIL2 - depleted cells also exhibit decreased levels of myosin IIB 87 , the depletion of which produces a similar multipolar morphology in single cells 92 . These observa - tions raise the possibility that the effects of CARMIL2 - depletion on cell morphology and migration involve decreased myosi n IIB expression levels . The most convincing evidence that CARMIL1 and CARMIL2 have distinct , non - overlapping functions is that the expression of CARMIL1 did not rescu e the pheno typic effects of CARMIL2 depletion and vice versa 87 . It is important to emphasize that whereas CARMIL1 and CARMIL2 are likely to have a similar inhibitory effect on CP and similar effects on actin filament dynamics , they may exert specific spatial and temporal control on distinct pools of actin filaments , consistent with their distinct subcellular localizations 87 . Very little is known about CARMIL3 . The primary amino acid sequence of CARMIL3 is more similar to that of CARMIL1 than CARMIL2 . One study found that Leu - rich repeat containing 16B ( LRRC16B ; which is the human gene encoding CARMIL3 ) is an oncofeta l gene , because its overexpression led to increased prolifera tion and tumorigenicity of transformed cells 93 . CARMIL domains and structure . The structures of N - terminal fragments of mouse CARMIL1 were characterized by X - ray crystallography ( amino acids 1 – 668 ) and small - angle X - ray scattering ( SAXS ) ( amino acids 1 – 878 ) 94 ( FIG . 3 ) . The crystal structure revealed the presence of a non - canonical pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domain at the N terminus ( FIG . 3 ) . The PH domain is integrated with an N - terminal amphip - athic α - helix ( N - helix ) that is 10 amino acids in length and a C - terminal motif that consists of a β - strand and an α - helix , which was named the linker region because it connects the PH and LRR domains ( see below ) . The PH domain contributes to membrane localization ; this domain preferentially binds to phosphatidylserine and monophosphorylated lipids rather than to signalling lipids such as PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P 2 ( FIG . 3b ) . Table 1 | Diverse functions and binding partners of CPI family members Protein Subcellular localization Functions Binding partners CARMIL1 Leading edge ( plasma membrane ) 86 – 88 , 94 Migration 86 , 87 , ruffling , macropinocytosis 87 , 89 Myosin I 84 , 85 , 98 , 146 , 147 , CP 85 , 86 , 137 , 141 , 148 , phospholipids 90 , 94 , trio 87 , 149 CARMIL2 Vimentin intermediate filaments 87 Motility , polarity 87 , T cell activation 150 CP 150 CARMIL3 Unknown Unknown Unknown CD2AP Slit diaphragm , leading edge ( plasma membrane ) 126 , 151 T cell activation 119 , 152 , glomerular filtration 153 , lamellipodial formation 154 CD2 ( REF . 119 ) , b‑CBL , c‑CBL 124 , 155 , 155 , 156 , p130 CAS ( REF . 157 ) , cortactin 154 , 158 , nephrin 151 , podocin 159 , RAB4 ( REF . 155 ) , AP‑2 ( REF . 160 ) , PI3K 161 , dendrin 162 , ARAP3 , p115 RHO GEF , HIP1R , STAP1 ( REF . 163 ) , ASAP1 ( REFS 163 , 164 ) , RAC1 ( REF . 165 ) , α - actinin 4 ( REF . 150 ) , actin 150 , CP 152 , 166 CKIP1 Plasma membrane , nucleus 104 , 167 Cell morphology 101 , 103 , muscle differentiation 167 , 168 , apoptosis 104 , tumour growth 109 , 169 , bone formation 108 , T cell activation 170 , cytokine signalling 105 CK2 ( REF . 99 ) , CARMA1 ( REF . 170 ) , HDAC4 ( REF . 171 ) , RPT6 ( REF . 172 ) , SMURF1 ( REFS 108 , 172 ) , CP 101 , c - Jun 104 , IFP35 , NMI 105 , PI3K , ATM 173 , phospholipids 103 CAPZIP Plasma membrane 127 Unknown MAPKAP‑K2 , MAPKAP‑K3 ( REF . 127 ) FAM21 Recycling endosomes 112 , 118 Endosomal sorting 112 , 174 CP 115 , VPS35 ( REFS 116 , 117 , 175 ) , FKBP15 ( REF . 116 ) , WASH complex 112 , phospholipids 115 AP‑2 , adaptor protein 2 ; ARAP3 , ARF‑GAP with RHO‑GAP domain , ankyrin repeat and PH domain 3 ; ASAP1 , ARF‑GTPase‑activating protein 1 ; ATM , ataxia‑ telangiectasi a mutated ; CAPZIP , CapZ‑interacting protein ; CARMA1 , caspase recruitment domain‑containing membrane‑associated guanylate kinase protein 1 ; CARMIL , capping protein , ARP2 / 3 and myosin I linker ; CD2AP , CD2‑associated protein ; CAS , CRK‑associated substrate ; CK2 , casein kinase ; CKIP1 , CK2‑interacting protein 1 ; CP , capping protein ; FKBP15 , FK506‑binding protein 15 ; GEF , guanine nucleotide exchange factor ; HDAC4 , histone deacetylase 4 ; HIP1R , Huntingtin‑ interacting protein 1 related ; IFP35 , interferon‑induced 35 kDa protein ; MAPKAP‑K , MAPK‑activated protein kinase ; NMI , N‑myc‑interactor ; RPT6 , regulatory particle triphosphatase 6 ; SMURF1 , SMAD ubiquitylation regulatory factor 1 ; STAP1 , signal‑transducing adaptor protein 1 ; VPS35 , vacuolar protein sorting‑associated protein 35 ; WASH , WASP and SCAR homologue . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | OCTOBER 2014 | 683 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology CARMIL CD2AP 1 , 371 639 1 , 320 416 409 PS , membrane phospholipids b a CPI CSI CPI CSI PXXP motif Myosin I CapZIP * * * * * * Dimerization CP RAC1 , ASAP1 , b - CBL , c - CBL , AP - 2 , PI3K , ARAP3 , p115 RHO GEF , HIP1R , STAP1 Nephrin , podocin , RAB4 , F - actin Cortactin Oligomerization CKIP1 Dimerization Autoinhibition Nuclear localization Phospholipids , CK2 , AKT , CARMA1 ATM , IFP35 c - Jun , SMURF1 , RPT6 FAM21 VPS35 , FKBP15 , phospholipids WASH complex LF [ D / E ] 3 – 10 - LF motif PH domainN - helix N - cap N - cap C - cap LRRdomain C - cap Linker Linker HD domain CBR Pro - rich domain HD CC LRR PH PH SH3 FXDXFmotif ? The presence of a membrane - binding PH domain in CARMIL1 suggested a mechanism for CP regula - tion at the interface between filament barbed ends and the plasma membrane . CARMIL1 proteins are localized at cellular membranes , and deletion of the PH domain impaired but did not abrogate plasma membrane localiza - tion 94 . The membrane - binding BH motif 90 ( see above ) and association with binding partners such as myosin I may help target CARMIL1 to the plasma membrane . Following the linker region is the LRR domain , which consists of 16 repeats with an overall planar horseshoe shape that is characteristic of this fold ( FIG . 3 ) . The LRR consensus sequence ( LXXLXLXX [ N / C ] XL ; where X indi - cates any amino acid ) includes a β - strand on the concave inner side of the horseshoe that is connected by an ‘ascend - ing loop’ to an α - helix on the convex surface . Adjacent repeats are connected to each other by ‘descending loops’ . The LRR domain is a classic protein – protein interaction fold , and the inner side of the horseshoe and ascending loops frequently mediate such interactions 95 . No binding partner of the LRR domain of CARMIL proteins has been identified , but its large size offers a platform for multiple interactions to be discovered . The hydrophobic core of the LRR domain is protected from solvent exposure at both ends by N - cap and C - cap helix – loop – helix motifs . Similar caps , albeit with different folds , are commonly observed in LRR domains , and they stabilize this domain 96 . Following the C - cap , residues 689 – 878 comprise the helical dimerization ( HD ) domain . The crystal structure did not include the HD domain , but low - resolution struc - tural analysis by SAXS and biochemical analysis indicated that the HD domain mediates antiparallel homodimeri - zation 94 ( FIG . 3a ) . In cells , homodimerization , but not hetero dimerization , was observed for human CARMIL1 and CARMIL2 ( REF . 87 ) . Dimerization may enhance the interactions of CARMIL1 with CP and with membranes , as suggested by the low - resolution SAXS analysis of the CARMIL1 dimer that positions the two PH domains such that they can simultaneously interact with the plasma membrane 94 . Figure 3 | CPI motif - containing proteins . a | Model of CARMIL ( capping protein , ARP2 / 3 and myosin I linker ) domain organization and structure . The crystal structure of CARMIL1 residues 1 – 668 is shown as a dimer . Dimerization is mediated by the helical dimerization ( HD ) domain . CARMIL1 domains consist of the N‑helix , the non‑ canonical pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domain , the linker region and the LRR domain . The N‑helix is a 10‑amino acid α ‑helix structurally integrated with the PH domain but not part of the canonical PH domain fold . The hydrophobic core of the LRR domain contains the N‑cap and C‑cap helix – loop – helix motifs . The capping protein ( CP ) ‑ binding motifs ‘capping protein interaction’ ( CPI ) and ‘CARMIL‑specific interaction’ ( CSI ) are located carboxyl‑ terminally of the HD domain and constitute the capping protein‑binding region ( CBR ) . The C‑terminal region of mouse CARMIL1 is Pro‑rich . b | Common and diverse motifs of the CPI family of proteins . CARMIL , CD2‑associated protein ( CD2AP ) CK2‑interacting protein 1 ( CKIP1 ) , CapZ‑interacting protein ( CAPZIP ) and FAM21 are shown . Binding partners for CPI motif - containing proteins are indicated , with downward arrows oriented towards the domain with which each interacts . Regulatory interactions ( dimerization and autoinhibition ) and nuclear localization are indicated by upward arrows . Amino acid residue numbering corresponds to human isoforms . The question mark indicates that the proposed interaction is uncertain . The asterisks indicate phosphorylation sites in CapZIP . AP‑2 , adaptor protein 2 ; ARAP3 , ARF‑GAP with RHO‑GAP domain , ankyrin repeat and PH domain 3 ; ASAP1 , ARF GTPase‑activating protein 1 ; ATM , ataxia‑telangiectasia mutated ; CARMA1 , caspase recruitment domain‑ containing membrane - associated guanylate kinase protein 1 ; CC , coiled‑coil ; CK2 , casein kinase 2 ; FKBP15 , FK506‑binding protein 15 ; GEF , guanine exchange factor ; HIP1R , Huntingtin‑interacting protein 1 related ; IFP35 , interferon‑induced 35 kDa protein ; PS , phosphatidylserine ; PtdIns , phosphatidylinositol ; RPT6 , regulatory particle triphosphatase 6 ; STAP1 , signal‑transducing adaptor protein 1 ; SMURF1 , SMAD ubiquitylation regulatory factor 1 ; SH3 , SRC homology 3 ; VPS35 , vacuolar protein sorting‑associated protein 35 ; WASH , WASP and SCAR homologue . R E V I E W S 684 | OCTOBER 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology CPI Nephrin Podocin MAPKAP - K2 , MAPKAP - K3 Sortingendosome CK2CARMA1 , RPT6 , SMURF1 , c - Jun , IFP35 , PI3K NF - κ B HDAC4 Cortactin CapZIP P Cell membrane Actin CPI Nucleus CARMIL CP WASH complex FAM21 FAM21 CKIP1 CD2AP Retromer A protein complex of endosomes that is involved in membrane receptor recycling . The CP - binding motifs CPI and CSI are located ~ 100 amino acids C - terminally of the HD domain . The C - terminal region of mouse CARMIL1 ( Lys1079 to Val1371 ) is Pro - rich , with six canonical SH3 domain - binding motifs ( PXXP ) ( FIG . 3b ) . The SH3 domain of myosin I isoforms has been shown to bind this sequence in amoeba and human cells 85 , 87 , 97 , 98 ; however , the functional significance of this interaction remains to be explored . Other SH3 domain - containing proteins that bind this region of CARMIL are likely to emerge . In amoebae , the Pro - rich region is upstream of the CPI motif , and the CSI motif is absent ( BOX 1 ) . Other allosteric CPI motif proteins In addition to CARMIL proteins , several other proteins contain CPI motifs , which enables them to bind to and allosterically regulate CP . These proteins are involved in diverse cellular functions that are mediated by other domains . Although these functions are distinct , they highlight common themes for CP regulation , includin g membrane interactions , dimerization , SH3 - domain interaction s and autoinhibition . CKIP1 . CKIP1 is a 46 - kDa molecular scaffold that has been identified as a binding partner of the α - subunit of casein kinase 2 ( CK2 ) 99 ( BOX 1 ; FIG . 3b ) . CKIP1 con - tains a CPI motif through which it interacts with CP 100 . Overexpression of CKIP1 induced cell spreading and increased cellular levels of β - actin and the amount of transverse actin filaments 100 . Studies using a CKIP1 mutant that lacks the CPI - motif showed that these effects depend on the ability of CKIP1 to bind CP 101 . CKIP1 can interact with CP and CK2 simultaneously , and the capping activity of CP is more potently inhibited within the ternary complex . CK2 phosphorylates Ser9 of the CP α - subunit in vitro and in vivo 100 ; this raises the pos - sibility that CKIP1 mediates phosphorylation of CP by CK2 , which might be another mechanism to regulate the cappin g activity of CP . CKIP1 shuttles between the plasma membrane and the nucleus 102 , 103 , and it interacts with numerous other proteins , including c - Jun 104 , AKT 105 , ataxia - telangiectasi a mutated ( ATM ) 106 , interferon - induced 35 - kDa p rotein – N - myc - interactor ( IFP35 – NMI ) 107 and SMAD ubiquityl - ation regulatory factor 1 ( SMURF1 ) 108 ( FIG . 3b ; TABLE 1 ) . On the basis of these interactions , CKIP1 may con - tribute to signalling pathways that are involved in cell growth , cytoskeleton organization , apoptosis , muscle differentiatio n , immune responses and bone formation 109 . Except for the CPI motif , CKIP1 is unrelated to CARMIL . However , CKIP1 shares several common structural and functional features with CARMIL : CKIP1 forms dimers 103 , 107 ( mediated by a C - terminal puta - tive Leu zipper domain ) , and it contains an N - terminal PH domain that mediates plasma membrane localiza - tion , preferentially binds to monophosphorylated lipids and phosphatidylserine 99 , 103 and which has also been implicated in protein – protein interactions 103 , 105 ( FIG . 3b ) . FAM21 . FAM21 is one of the subunits of the heteropen - tameric WASH ( WASP and SCAR homologue ) complex , which links ARP2 / 3 complex - dependent actin polymeriza - tion to endosome - to - Golgi transport 110 – 113 and endosome - to - plasma membrane sorting of integrins 114 ( BOX 1 ; FIG . 4 ) . CP is recruited to the WASH complex through a C - terminal CPI motif in FAM21 ( REFS 115 , 116 ) ( FIG . 3b ) , and this interaction inhibits the capping activity of CP 115 . FAM21 contains an N - terminal globular domain and a C - terminal tail that contains several repeats of a novel ‘L - F’ motif 117 . The L - F repeat facilitates the interaction and recruitment of FAM21 and WASH complex to retromer through a direct interaction with the retromer subunit vacuolar protein sorting - associated protein 35 ( VPS35 ) . In D . discoideum , FAM21 has been implicated in recy - cling the WASH complex to acidic lysosomes 118 . This study suggested that recycling involves dynamic actin assembly and depends on the interaction of FAM21 with CP , on the basis of the phenotype of FAM21 mutants deficien t for binding CP . Figure 4 | Cellular functions of CPI motif - containing proteins . Diverse actin‑dependent processes are regulated by proteins that contain the ‘capping protein interaction’ ( CPI ) motif . These proteins target capping protein ( CP ) to different cellular membranes and modulate actin assembly . CARMIL ( capping protein , ARP2 / 3 and myosin I linker ) and CKIP1 ( CK2‑interacting protein 1 ) directly bind the plasma membrane through their pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domain ( not shown ) . Interacting partners for CKIP1 are shown . CARMIL may also localize to membranes through interactions with some myosin I isoforms . CD2‑associated protein ( CD2AP ) is enriched at the slit‑diaphragm in kidney podocytes , where it interacts with cortactin , nephrin and podocin and helps maintain slit diaphragm integrity . FAM21 is a component of the WASH ( WASP and SCAR homologue ) complex , which is associated with sorting and recycling endosomes . CapZ‑interacting protein ( CapZIP ) is localized at the membrane , and its CP - binding activity can be modulated by MAPK‑activated protein kinase 2 ( MAPKAP‑K2 ) ‑ or MAPKAP‑K3‑mediated phosphorylation . CARMA1 , caspase recruitment domain‑containing membrane‑ associate d guanylate kinase protein 1 ; CK2 , casein kinase 2 ; HDAC4 , histone deacetylase 4 ; IFP35 , interferon‑induced 35 kDa protein ; NF‑ κ B , nuclear factor - κ B ; RPT6 , regulatory particle triphosphatase 6 ; SMURF1 , SMAD ubiquitylation regulatory factor 1 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | OCTOBER 2014 | 685 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved CD2AP . CD2AP is a multifunctional scaffold that links actin assembly to the formation of the immunological synapse 119 and the kidney podocyte slit diaphragm 120 , 121 . CD2AP has also been termed p130 Cas ligand with multiple SH3 domains ( CMS ) 122 and mesenchyme - to - epitheliu m transition protein with SH3 domains ( METS - 1 ) 123 . In addition , CIN85 ( CBL - interacting protein of 85 kDa ) is a close homologue of CD2AP ( BOX 1 ) . CD2AP binds tightly to CP and cortactin , which was discovered by affinity pulldown combined with mass spectrometry analysis 22 . Mapping and characterizing the interaction by surface plasmon resonance led to identification of the CPI motif , and actin - capping assays revealed that the CPI motif was sufficient to inhibit CP 22 . CD2AP and CIN85 contain three SH3 domains , a Pro - rich region that contains the CPI motif and a C - terminal coiled - coil domain ( FIG . 3b ) . The SH3 domains interact with CD2 , apoptosis - linked gene 2 - interacting protein X ( ALIX ) and c - CBL 124 , 125 . In cells , CD2AP localizes to the plasma membrane and recruits both CP and cortactin , contributing to actin assembly 126 ( TABLE 1 ) . CapZIP . CapZIP was identified in immune and muscle cells as a CP - associated protein and a substrate of sev - eral stress - activated protein kinases 127 . CapZIP contains a CPI motif 23 and a putative coiled - coil sequence ; it is also rich in Pro residues ( BOX 1 ; FIG . 3b ) . Certain cellula r stresses result in the phosphorylation of CapZIP by MAPK and dissociation of CP from CapZIP 127 , which suggests phosphorylation - based regulation of CP by this CPI motif - containing protein . Summary and outlook The actin - capping activity of CP is a major factor con - trolling the availability of free barbed ends in cells , which is crucial for actin assembly . Competition between CP and indirect regulators , such as formins and ENA / VASP proteins , for binding to the barbed end helps shape the organization and dynamics of cellular actin networks . Other proteins regulate barbed end capping by binding to CP and inhibiting its interaction with the barbed end via steric or allosteric mechanisms . Allosteric regulators use the CPI motif for inter - action with CP , but constitute otherwise a large and diverse group of proteins that is characterized by the presence of several protein – protein and protein – mem - brane interaction modules . The diverse functions of CPI motif - containing proteins parallel the broad range of cellular functions that are driven by actin assembly , which suggests a crucial role for CP as a ubiquitous regu - lator of actin filament dynamics . Despite their diversity , CPI motif - containing proteins share some common features . Most are localized at the interface between filament barbed ends and cellular membranes . In many cases , by targeting or inhibiting the capping activity of CP , these proteins promote actin assembly that drives changes in cell shape and causes membranes to move and deform ( FIG . 4 ) . Their common ability to bind CP and membranes suggests that cells use CPI motif - containin g proteins to target the capping activity of CP to specific subcellular locations at specific times ; that is , they may function as general spatiotemporal regulators of capping activity . Importantly , in most cases studied so far , CP – CPI motif - containing protein complexes retain residual capping activity that is likely to be physiologically rel - evant in cells , given the high density of filaments and abundance of CP and its regulators . Other mechanisms whereby CP and barbed end capping are regulated are likely to emerge . An interest - ing example is twinfilin , which consists of two actin - depolymerizing factor homology ( ADF - H ) domains and a C - terminal extension that is 35 amino acids in length 128 . Twinfilin can cap barbed ends on its own 129 , and it also interacts with CP through its C - terminal extension 130 – 132 and with actin monomers through its ADF - H domains 130 , 133 , 134 . This protein has been impli - cated in the regulation of motile and morphological pro - cesses 129 , 135 , 136 , but how its diverse biochemical activities are integrated with the regulation of barbed - end capping remains to be determined . Looking ahead , many unresolved questions remain , including the physiological relevance of CP regulators and the potential existence of crosstalk among these pro - teins . In addition , whether and how CP regulators alter actin dynamics , filament architecture and the interaction of actin filaments with membranes requires further inves - tigation . High - resolution light and electron microscopy , live - cell imaging , and biochemical and structural analysis should help uncover the structures of filament networks and the molecular mechanisms of CP regulators . 1 . Pollard , T . D . & Cooper , J . A . Actin , a central player in cell shape and movement . Science 326 , 1208 – 1212 ( 2009 ) . 2 . Blanchoin , L . , Boujemaa - Paterski , R . , Sykes , C . & Plastino , J . Actin dynamics , architecture , and mechanics in cell motility . Physiol . Rev . 94 , 235 – 263 ( 2014 ) . 3 . Xue , B . & Robinson , R . C . Guardians of the actin monomer . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 92 , 316 – 332 ( 2013 ) . 4 . Suetsugu , S . & Gautreau , A . Synergistic BAR – NPF interactions in actin - driven membrane remodeling . Trends Cell Biol . 22 , 141 – 150 ( 2012 ) . 5 . Hall , A . Rho family GTPases . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 40 , 1378 – 1382 ( 2012 ) . 6 . Dominguez , R . Structural insights into de novo actin polymerization . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 20 , 217 – 225 ( 2010 ) . 7 . Chesarone , M . , Gould , C . J . , Moseley , J . B . & Goode , B . L . Displacement of formins from growing barbed ends by bud14 is critical for actin cable architecture and function . Dev . Cell 16 , 292 – 302 ( 2009 ) . 8 . Dominguez , R . & Namgoong , S . in Comprehensive Biophysics ( ed . Egelman , E . H . ) 31 – 47 ( Elsevier , 2012 ) . 9 . Bernstein , B . W . & Bamburg , J . R . ADF / cofilin : a functional node in cell biology . Trends Cell Biol . 20 , 187 – 195 ( 2010 ) . 10 . Poukkula , M . , Kremneva , E . , Serlachius , M . & Lappalainen , P . Actin - depolymerizing factor homology domain : a conserved fold performing diverse roles in cytoskeletal dynamics . Cytoskeleton 68 , 471 – 490 ( 2011 ) . 11 . Cooper , J . A . & Sept , D . New insights into mechanism and regulation of actin capping protein . Int . Rev . Cell . Mol . Biol . 267 , 183 – 206 ( 2008 ) . 12 . Mejillano , M . R . et al . Lamellipodial versus filopodial mode of the actin nanomachinery : pivotal role of the filament barbed end . Cell 118 , 363 – 373 ( 2004 ) . Shows that loss of CP in migrating cultured cells leads to loss of ARP2 / 3‑based lamellipodia and increased numbers of filopodia . 13 . Isenberg , G . , Aebi , U . & Pollard , T . D . An actin - binding protein from Acanthamoeba regulates actin filament polymerization and interactions . Nature 288 , 455 – 459 ( 1980 ) . Discovers CP by biochemical purification from A . castellanii . 14 . Casella , J . F . , Craig , S . W . , Maack , D . J . & Brown , A . E . Cap Z ( 36 / 32 ) , a barbed end actin - capping protein , is a component of the Z - line of skeletal muscle . J . Cell Biol . 105 , 371 – 379 ( 1987 ) . 15 . Maruyama , K . et al . β - actinin is equivalent to Cap Z protein . J . Biol . Chem . 265 , 8712 – 8715 ( 1990 ) . 16 . Schleicher , M . , Gerisch , G . & Isenberg , G . New actin - binding proteins from Dictyostelium discoideum . EMBO J . 3 , 2095 – 2100 ( 1984 ) . R E V I E W S 686 | OCTOBER 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 17 . Nag , S . , Larsson , M . , Robinson , R . C . & Burtnick , L . D . Gelsolin : the tail of a molecular gymnast . Cytoskeleton 70 , 360 – 384 ( 2013 ) . 18 . Li , G . H . , Arora , P . D . , Chen , Y . , McCulloch , C . A . & Liu , P . Multifunctional roles of gelsolin in health and diseases . Med . Res . Rev . 32 , 999 – 1025 ( 2012 ) . 19 . Fowler , V . M . The human erythrocyte plasma membrane : a Rosetta Stone for decoding membrane - cytoskeleton structure . Curr . Top . Membr . 72 , 39 – 88 ( 2013 ) . 20 . Higgs , H . N . There goes the neighbourhood : Eps8 joins the barbed - end crowd . Nature Cell Biol . 6 , 1147 – 1149 ( 2004 ) . 21 . Bisi , S . et al . Membrane and actin dynamics interplay at lamellipodia leading edge . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 25 , 565 – 573 ( 2013 ) . 22 . Bruck , S . et al . Identification of a novel inhibitory actin - capping protein binding motif in CD2 - associated protein . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 19196 – 19203 ( 2006 ) . Identifies the CPI motif by analysis of CD2AP . 23 . Hernandez - Valladares , M . et al . Structural characterization of a capping protein interaction motif defines a family of actin filament regulators . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 17 , 497 – 503 ( 2010 ) . The structural and biochemical analysis of complexes of CPI and CSI motifs with CP . 24 . Hart , M . C . & Cooper , J . A . Vertebrate isoforms of actin capping protein β have distinct functions In vivo . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 1287 – 1298 ( 1999 ) . 25 . Schafer , D . A . Inhibition of CapZ during myofibrillogenesis alters assembly of actin filaments . J . Cell Biol . 128 , 61 – 70 ( 1995 ) . 26 . Schafer , D . A . , Korshunova , Y . O . , Schroer , T . A . & Cooper , J . A . Differential localization and sequence analysis of capping protein β - subunit isoforms of vertebrates . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 453 – 465 ( 1994 ) . 27 . Ydenberg , C . A . , Smith , B . A . , Breitsprecher , D . , Gelles , J . & Goode , B . L . Cease - fire at the leading edge : new perspectives on actin filament branching , debranching , and cross - linking . Cytoskeleton 68 , 596 – 602 ( 2011 ) . 28 . Miyoshi , T . et al . Actin turnover - dependent fast dissociation of capping protein in the dendritic nucleation actin network : evidence of frequent filament severing . J . Cell Biol . 175 , 947 – 955 ( 2006 ) . 29 . Iwasa , J . H . & Mullins , R . D . Spatial and temporal relationships between actin - filament nucleation , capping , and disassembly . Curr . Biol . 17 , 395 – 406 ( 2007 ) . 30 . Akin , O . & Mullins , R . D . Capping protein increases the rate of actin - based motility by promoting filament nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Cell 133 , 841 – 851 ( 2008 ) . 31 . Pollard , T . D . & Borisy , G . G . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin filaments . Cell 112 , 453 – 465 ( 2003 ) . 32 . Schaub , S . , Meister , J . J . & Verkhovsky , A . B . Analysis of actin filament network organization in lamellipodia by comparing experimental and simulated images . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 1491 – 1500 ( 2007 ) . 33 . Vinzenz , M . et al . Actin branching in the initiation and maintenance of lamellipodia . J . Cell Sci . 125 , 2775 – 2785 ( 2012 ) . 34 . Bugyi , B . & Carlier , M . F . Control of actin filament treadmilling in cell motility . Annu . Rev . Biophys . 39 , 449 – 470 ( 2010 ) . 35 . Lai , F . P . et al . Arp2 / 3 complex interactions and actin network turnover in lamellipodia . EMBO J . 27 , 982 – 992 ( 2008 ) . 36 . Yamashita , A . , Maeda , K . & Maeda , Y . Crystal structure of CapZ : structural basis for actin filament barbed end capping . EMBO J . 22 , 1529 – 1538 ( 2003 ) . Reveals the crystal structure of CP and proposes a model for barbed‑end capping . 37 . Sizonenko , G . I . , Karpova , T . S . , Gattermeir , D . J . & Cooper , J . A . Mutational analysis of capping protein function in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Biol . Cell 7 , 1 – 15 ( 1996 ) . 38 . Schafer , D . A . , Jennings , P . B . & Cooper , J . A . Dynamics of capping protein and actin assembly in vitro : uncapping barbed ends by polyphosphoinositides . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 169 – 179 ( 1996 ) . Reports dynamic uncapping of CP by polyphosphoinositides . 39 . Kim , T . , Cooper , J . A . & Sept , D . The interaction of capping protein with the barbed end of the actin filament . J . Mol . Biol . 404 , 794 – 802 ( 2010 ) . 40 . Wear , M . A . , Yamashita , A . , Kim , K . , Maeda , Y . & Cooper , J . A . How capping protein binds the barbed end of the actin filament . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1531 – 1537 ( 2003 ) . 41 . Narita , A . & Maeda , Y . Molecular determination by electron microscopy of the actin filament end structure . J . Mol . Biol . 365 , 480 – 501 ( 2007 ) . 42 . Narita , A . , Takeda , S . , Yamashita , A . & Maeda , Y . Structural basis of actin filament capping at the barbed - end : a cryo - electron microscopy study . EMBO J . 25 , 5626 – 5633 ( 2006 ) . 43 . Breitsprecher , D . & Goode , B . L . Formins at a glance . J . Cell Sci . 126 , 1 – 7 ( 2013 ) . 44 . Zigmond , S . H . et al . Formin leaky cap allows elongation in the presence of tight capping proteins . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1820 – 1823 ( 2003 ) . 45 . Ramalingam , N . et al . Phospholipids regulate localization and activity of mDia1 formin . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 89 , 723 – 732 ( 2010 ) . 46 . Gorelik , R . , Yang , C . , Kameswaran , V . , Dominguez , R . & Svitkina , T . Mechanisms of plasma membrane targeting of formin mDia2 through its amino terminal domains . Mol . Biol . Cell 22 , 189 – 201 ( 2011 ) . 47 . Watanabe , N . et al . p140mDia , a mammalian homolog of Drosophila diaphanous , is a target protein for Rho small GTPase and is a ligand for profilin . EMBO J . 16 , 3044 – 3056 ( 1997 ) . 48 . Evangelista , M . et al . Bni1p , a yeast formin linking cdc42p and the actin cytoskeleton during polarized morphogenesis . Science 276 , 118 – 122 ( 1997 ) . 49 . Li , F . & Higgs , H . N . The mouse formin mDia1 is a potent actin nucleation factor regulated by autoinhibition . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1335 – 1340 ( 2003 ) . 50 . Chesarone , M . A . , Dupage , A . G . & Goode , B . L . Unleashing formins to remodel the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 , 62 – 74 ( 2010 ) . 51 . Bartolini , F . , Ramalingam , N . & Gundersen , G . G . Actin - capping protein promotes microtubule stability by antagonizing the actin activity of mDia1 . Mol . Biol . Cell 23 , 4032 – 4040 ( 2012 ) . 52 . Paul , A . S . & Pollard , T . D . Review of the mechanism of processive actin filament elongation by formins . Cell . Motil . Cytoskeleton 66 , 606 – 617 ( 2009 ) . 53 . Goode , B . L . & Eck , M . J . Mechanism and function of formins in the control of actin assembly . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 76 , 593 – 627 ( 2007 ) . 54 . Drees , F . & Gertler , F . B . Ena / VASP : proteins at the tip of the nervous system . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 18 , 53 – 59 ( 2008 ) . 55 . Walders - Harbeck , B . , Khaitlina , S . Y . , Hinssen , H . , Jockusch , B . M . & Illenberger , S . The vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein promotes actin polymerisation through direct binding to monomeric actin . FEBS Lett . 529 , 275 – 280 ( 2002 ) . 56 . Chereau , D . & Dominguez , R . Understanding the role of the G - actin - binding domain of Ena / VASP in actin assembly . J . Struct . Biol . 155 , 195 – 201 ( 2006 ) . 57 . Bear , J . E . et al . Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins and actin filament capping regulates fibroblast motility . Cell 109 , 509 – 521 ( 2002 ) . 58 . Barzik , M . et al . Ena / VASP proteins enhance actin polymerization in the presence of barbed end capping proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 28653 – 28662 ( 2005 ) . Shows that ENA / VASP proteins promote elongation in the presence of CP . 59 . Breitsprecher , D . et al . Clustering of VASP actively drives processive , WH2 domain - mediated actin filament elongation . EMBO J . 27 , 2943 – 2954 ( 2008 ) . 60 . Breitsprecher , D . et al . Molecular mechanism of Ena / VASP - mediated actin - filament elongation . EMBO J . 30 , 456 – 467 ( 2011 ) . 61 . Hansen , S . D . & Mullins , R . D . VASP is a processive actin polymerase that requires monomeric actin for barbed end association . J . Cell Biol . 191 , 571 – 584 ( 2010 ) . 62 . Winkelman , J . D . , Bilancia , C . G . , Peifer , M . & Kovar , D . R . Ena / VASP Enabled is a highly processive actin polymerase tailored to self - assemble parallel - bundled F - actin networks with Fascin . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 111 , 4121 – 4126 ( 2014 ) . 63 . Mahoney , N . M . , Janmey , P . A . & Almo , S . C . Structure of the profilin – poly - l - proline complex involved in morphogenesis and cytoskeletal regulation . Nature Struct . Biol . 4 , 953 – 960 ( 1997 ) . 64 . Ferron , F . , Rebowski , G . , Lee , S . H . & Dominguez , R . Structural basis for the recruitment of profilin – actin complexes during filament elongation by Ena / VASP . EMBO J . 26 , 4597 – 4606 ( 2007 ) . 65 . Pasic , L . , Kotova , T . & Schafer , D . A . Ena / VASP proteins capture actin filament barbed ends . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 9814 – 9819 ( 2008 ) . 66 . Yang , Y . , Nanduri , S . , Sen , S . & Qin , J . The structural basis of ankyrin - like repeat function as revealed by the solution structure of myotrophin . Structure 6 , 619 – 626 ( 1998 ) . 67 . Taoka , M . et al . V - 1 , a protein expressed transiently during murine cerebellar development , regulates actin polymerization via interaction with capping protein . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 5864 – 5870 ( 2003 ) . Reports that V‑1 interacts with CP . 68 . Taoka , M . et al . Murine cerebellar neurons express a novel gene encoding a protein related to cell cycle control and cell fate determination proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 9946 – 9951 ( 1994 ) . 69 . Sen , S . et al . Myotrophin : purification of a novel peptide from spontaneously hypertensive rat heart that influences myocardial growth . J . Biol . Chem . 265 , 16635 – 16643 ( 1990 ) . 70 . Sil , P . , Misono , K . & Sen , S . Myotrophin in human cardiomyopathic heart . Circ . Res . 73 , 98 – 108 ( 1993 ) . 71 . Sil , P . , Mukherjee , D . & Sen , S . Quantification of myotrophin from spontaneously hypertensive and normal rat hearts . Circ . Res . 76 , 1020 – 1027 ( 1995 ) . 72 . Gupta , S . , Purcell , N . H . , Lin , A . & Sen , S . Activation of nuclear factor - κ B is necessary for myotrophin - induced cardiac hypertrophy . J . Cell Biol . 159 , 1019 – 1028 ( 2002 ) . 73 . Das , B . et al . Nuclear co - translocation of myotrophin and p65 stimulates myocyte growth . Regulation by myotrophin hairpin loops . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 27947 – 27956 ( 2008 ) . 74 . Gupta , S . , Maitra , R . , Young , D . , Gupta , A . & Sen , S . Silencing the myotrophin gene by RNA interference leads to the regression of cardiac hypertrophy . Am . J . Physiol . Heart Circ . Physiol . 297 , H627 – H636 ( 2009 ) . 75 . Bhattacharya , N . , Ghosh , S . , Sept , D . & Cooper , J . A . Binding of myotrophin / V - 1 to actin - capping protein : implications for how capping protein binds to the filament barbed end . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 31021 – 31030 ( 2006 ) . 76 . Zwolak , A . , Fujiwara , I . , Hammer , J . A . & Tjandra , N . Structural basis for capping protein sequestration by myotrophin ( V - 1 ) . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 25767 – 25781 ( 2010 ) . Reveals the mechanism of V‑1 interaction with CP . 77 . Takeda , S . et al . Two distinct mechanisms for actin capping protein regulation — steric and allosteric inhibition . PLoS Biol . 8 , e1000416 ( 2010 ) . Identified contrasting steric and allosteric mechanisms to regulate CP . 78 . Yin , H . L . & Janmey , P . A . Phosphoinositide regulation of the actin cytoskeleton . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 65 , 761 – 789 ( 2003 ) . 79 . Saarikangas , J . , Zhao , H . & Lappalainen , P . Regulation of the actin cytoskeleton - plasma membrane interplay by phosphoinositides . Physiol . Rev . 90 , 259 – 289 ( 2010 ) . 80 . Heiss , S . G . & Cooper , J . A . Regulation of CapZ , an actin capping protein of chicken muscle , by anionic phospholipids . Biochemistry 30 , 8753 – 8758 ( 1991 ) . 81 . Kim , K . et al . Structure / function analysis of the interaction of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate with actin - capping protein : implications for how capping protein binds the actin filament . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 5871 – 5879 ( 2007 ) . 82 . Kuhn , J . R . & Pollard , T . D . Single molecule kinetic analysis of actin filament capping . Polyphosphoinositides do not dissociate capping proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 28014 – 28024 ( 2007 ) . 83 . Li , J . et al . Capping protein modulates the dynamic behavior of actin filaments in response to phosphatidic acid in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 24 , 3742 – 3754 ( 2012 ) . 84 . Xu , P . , Zot , A . S . & Zot , H . G . Identification of Acan125 as a myosin - I - binding protein present with myosin - I on cellular organelles of Acanthamoeba . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 25316 – 25319 ( 1995 ) . Discovers Acan125 , the first CARMIL , in A . castellanii . 85 . Jung , G . , Remmert , K . , Wu , X . , Volosky , J . M . & Hammer , J . A . The Dictyostelium CARMIL protein links capping protein and the Arp2 / 3 complex to type I myosins through their SH3 domains . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 1479 – 1497 ( 2001 ) . Characterizes D . discoideum CARMIL interactions and mutant phenotypes . 86 . Yang , C . et al . Mammalian CARMIL inhibits actin filament capping by capping protein . Dev . Cell 9 , 209 – 221 ( 2005 ) . Shows that mammalian CARMIL inhibits CP and causes uncapping . Also shows that the CARMIL1 – CP complex retains capping activity , which suggests an allosteric mechanism . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | OCTOBER 2014 | 687 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 87 . Liang , Y . , Niederstrasser , H . , Edwards , M . , Jackson , C . E . & Cooper , J . A . Distinct roles for CARMIL isoforms in cell migration . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 5290 – 5305 ( 2009 ) . Reports that CARMIL1 and CARMIL2 have distinct functions in vertebrate cells . 88 . Fujiwara , I . , Remmert , K . , Piszczek , G . & Hammer , J . A . Capping protein regulatory cycle driven by CARMIL and V - 1 may promote actin network assembly at protruding edges . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 111 , E1970 – E1979 ( 2014 ) . 89 . Edwards , M . , Liang , Y . , Kim , T . & Cooper , J . A . Physiological role of the interaction between CARMIL1 and capping protein . Mol . Biol . Cell 24 , 3047 – 3055 ( 2013 ) . Shows the physiological relevance of the CARMIL1 – CP interaction . 90 . Brzeska , H . , Guag , J . , Remmert , K . , Chacko , S . & Korn , E . D . An experimentally based computer search identifies unstructured membrane - binding sites in proteins : application to class I myosins , PAKS , and CARMIL . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 5738 – 5747 ( 2010 ) . 91 . Helfand , B . T . et al . Vimentin organization modulates the formation of lamellipodia . Mol . Biol . Cell 22 , 1274 – 1289 ( 2011 ) . 92 . Cote , J . F . & Vuori , K . GEF what ? Dock180 and related proteins help Rac to polarize cells in new ways . Trends Cell Biol . 17 , 383 – 393 ( 2007 ) . 93 . Hsu , C . C . et al . Identifying LRRC16B as an oncofetal gene with transforming enhancing capability using a combined bioinformatics and experimental approach . Oncogene 30 , 654 – 667 ( 2011 ) . 94 . Zwolak , A . et al . CARMIL leading edge localization depends on a non - canonical PH domain and dimerization . Nature Commun . 4 , 2523 ( 2013 ) . Determines the structure of a large N‑terminal fragment of CARMIL , and identifies and characterizes the PH and HD domains . 95 . Kobe , B . & Kajava , A . V . The leucine - rich repeat as a protein recognition motif . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 11 , 725 – 732 ( 2001 ) . 96 . Bella , J . , Hindle , K . L . , McEwan , P . A . & Lovell , S . C . The leucine - rich repeat structure . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 65 , 2307 – 2333 ( 2008 ) . 97 . Lee , W . L . , Ostap , E . M . , Zot , H . G . & Pollard , T . D . Organization and ligand binding properties of the tail of Acanthamoeba myosin - IA . Identification of an actin - binding site in the basic ( tail homology - 1 ) domain . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 35159 – 35171 ( 1999 ) . 98 . Zot , H . G . , Bhaskara , V . & Liu , L . Acan125 binding to the SH3 domain of acanthamoeba myosin - IC . Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 375 , 161 – 164 ( 2000 ) . 99 . Bosc , D . G . et al . Identification and characterization of CKIP - 1 , a novel pleckstrin homology domain - containing protein that interacts with protein kinase CK2 . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 14295 – 14306 ( 2000 ) . 100 . Canton , D . A . et al . The pleckstrin homology domain - containing protein CKIP - 1 is involved in regulation of cell morphology and the actin cytoskeleton and interaction with actin capping protein . Mol . Cell . Biol . 25 , 3519 – 3534 ( 2005 ) . 101 . Canton , D . A . , Olsten , M . E . , Niederstrasser , H . , Cooper , J . A . & Litchfield , D . W . The role of CKIP - 1 in cell morphology depends on its interaction with actin - capping protein . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 36347 – 36359 ( 2006 ) . Reports that the interaction of CKIP1 with CP is physiologically relevant in cells . 102 . Nie , J . et al . CKIP - 1 : a scaffold protein and potential therapeutic target integrating multiple signaling pathways and physiological functions . Ageing Res . Rev . 12 , 276 – 281 ( 2013 ) . 103 . Olsten , M . E . , Canton , D . A . , Zhang , C . , Walton , P . A . & Litchfield , D . W . The Pleckstrin homology domain of CK2 interacting protein - 1 is required for interactions and recruitment of protein kinase CK2 to the plasma membrane . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 42114 – 42127 ( 2004 ) . 104 . Zhang , L . et al . Role for the pleckstrin homology domain - containing protein CKIP - 1 in AP - 1 regulation and apoptosis . EMBO J . 24 , 766 – 778 ( 2005 ) . 105 . Tokuda , E . et al . Casein kinase 2 - interacting protein - 1 , a novel Akt pleckstrin homology domain - interacting protein , down - regulates PI3K / Akt signaling and suppresses tumor growth in vivo . Cancer Res . 67 , 9666 – 9676 ( 2007 ) . 106 . Zhang , L . et al . CKIP - 1 recruits nuclear ATM partially to the plasma membrane through interaction with ATM . Cell . Signal . 18 , 1386 – 1395 ( 2006 ) . 107 . Zhang , L . et al . The PH domain containing protein CKIP - 1 binds to IFP35 and Nmi and is involved in cytokine signaling . Cell . Signal . 19 , 932 – 944 ( 2007 ) . 108 . Lu , K . et al . Targeting WW domains linker of HECT - type ubiquitin ligase Smurf1 for activation by CKIP - 1 . Nature Cell Biol . 10 , 994 – 1002 ( 2008 ) . 109 . Nie , J . et al . CKIP - 1 acts as a colonic tumor suppressor by repressing oncogenic Smurf1 synthesis and promoting Smurf1 autodegradation . Oncogene 33 , 3677 – 3687 ( 2013 ) . 110 . Derivery , E . et al . The Arp2 / 3 activator WASH controls the fission of endosomes through a large multiprotein complex . Dev . Cell 17 , 712 – 723 ( 2009 ) . 111 . Duleh , S . N . & Welch , M . D . WASH and the Arp2 / 3 complex regulate endosome shape and trafficking . Cytoskeleton 67 , 193 – 206 ( 2010 ) . 112 . Gomez , T . S . & Billadeau , D . D . A FAM21 - containing WASH complex regulates retromer - dependent sorting . Dev . Cell 17 , 699 – 711 ( 2009 ) . 113 . Gomez , T . S . , Gorman , J . A . , de Narvajas , A . A . , Koenig , A . O . & Billadeau , D . D . Trafficking defects in WASH - knockout fibroblasts originate from collapsed endosomal and lysosomal networks . Mol . Biol . Cell 23 , 3215 – 3228 ( 2012 ) . 114 . Zech , T . et al . The Arp2 / 3 activator WASH regulates α 5 β 1 - integrin - mediated invasive migration . J . Cell Sci . 124 , 3753 – 3759 ( 2011 ) . 115 . Jia , D . et al . WASH and WAVE actin regulators of the Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) family are controlled by analogous structurally related complexes . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 10442 – 10447 ( 2010 ) . Shows that FAM21 interacts with CP in the WASH complex . 116 . Harbour , M . E . , Breusegem , S . Y . & Seaman , M . N . Recruitment of the endosomal WASH complex is mediated by the extended ‘tail’ of Fam21 binding to the retromer protein Vps35 . Biochem . J . 442 , 209 – 220 ( 2012 ) . 117 . Jia , D . , Gomez , T . S . , Billadeau , D . D . & Rosen , M . K . Multiple repeat elements within the FAM21 tail link the WASH actin regulatory complex to the retromer . Mol . Biol . Cell 23 , 2352 – 2361 ( 2012 ) . 118 . Park , L . et al . Cyclical action of the WASH complex : FAM21 and capping protein drive WASH recycling , not initial recruitment . Dev . Cell 24 , 169 – 181 ( 2013 ) . Identifies the trafficking function of FAM21 and CP in the WASH complex . 119 . Dustin , M . L . et al . A novel adaptor protein orchestrates receptor patterning and cytoskeletal polarity in T - cell contacts . Cell 94 , 667 – 677 ( 1998 ) . 120 . Shih , N . Congenital nephrotic syndrome in mice lacking CD2 - associated protein . Science 286 , 312 – 315 ( 1999 ) . 121 . Yaddanapudi , S . et al . CD2AP in mouse and human podocytes controls a proteolytic program that regulates cytoskeletal structure and cellular survival . J . Clin . Invest . 121 , 3965 – 3980 ( 2011 ) . 122 . Kirsch , K . H . , Georgescu , M . - M . , Ishimaru , S . & Hanafusa , H . CMS : An adapter molecule involved in cytoskeletal rearrangements . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 6211 – 6216 ( 1999 ) . 123 . Gaidos , G . , Soni , S . , Oswald , D . J . , Toselli , P . A . & Kirsch , K . H . Structure and function analysis of the CMS / CIN85 protein family identifies actin - bundling properties and heterotypic - complex formation . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 2366 – 2377 ( 2007 ) . 124 . Kirsch , K . H . et al . The adapter type protein CMS / CD2AP binds to the proto - oncogenic protein c - Cbl through a tyrosine phosphorylation - regulated Src homology 3 domain interaction . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 4957 – 4963 ( 2001 ) . 125 . Roldan , J . L . , Blackledge , M . , van Nuland , N . A . & Azuaga , A . I . Solution structure , dynamics and thermodynamics of the three SH3 domains of CD2AP . J . Biomol . NMR 50 , 103 – 117 ( 2011 ) . 126 . Zhao , J . et al . CD2AP links cortactin and capping protein at the cell periphery to facilitate formation of lamellipodia . Mol . Cell . Biol . 33 , 38 – 47 ( 2013 ) . Reports that CD2AP recruits CP and cortactin to the plasma membrane . 127 . Eyers , C . E . et al . The phosphorylation of CapZ - interacting protein ( CapZIP ) by stress - activated protein kinases triggers its dissociation from CapZ . Biochem . J . 389 , 127 – 135 ( 2005 ) . Shows that phosphorylation of CapZIP inhibits its interaction with CP . 128 . Palmgren , S . , Vartiainen , M . & Lappalainen , P . Twinfilin , a molecular mailman for actin monomers . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 881 – 886 ( 2002 ) . 129 . Helfer , E . et al . Mammalian twinfilin sequesters ADP - G - actin and caps filament barbed ends : implications in motility . EMBO J . 25 , 1184 – 1195 ( 2006 ) . 130 . Palmgren , S . , Ojala , P . J . , Wear , M . A . , Cooper , J . A . & Lappalainen , P . Interactions with PIP2 , ADP - actin monomers , and capping protein regulate the activity and localization of yeast twinfilin . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 251 – 260 ( 2001 ) . 131 . Vartiainen , M . K . , Sarkkinen , E . M . , Matilainen , T . , Salminen , M . & Lappalainen , P . Mammals have two twinfilin isoforms whose subcellular localizations and tissue distributions are differentially regulated . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 34347 – 34355 ( 2003 ) . 132 . Falck , S . et al . Biological role and structural mechanism of twinfilin - capping protein interaction . EMBO J . 23 , 3010 – 3019 ( 2004 ) . 133 . Nevalainen , E . M . , Skwarek - Maruszewska , A . , Braun , A . , Moser , M . & Lappalainen , P . Two biochemically distinct and tissue - specific twinfilin isoforms are generated from the mouse Twf2 gene by alternative promoter usage . Biochem . J . 417 , 593 – 600 ( 2009 ) . 134 . Ojala , P . J . et al . The two ADF - H domains of twinfilin play functionally distinct roles in interactions with actin monomers . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 3811 – 3821 ( 2002 ) . 135 . Goode , B . L . , Drubin , D . G . & Lappalainen , P . Regulation of the cortical actin cytoskeleton in budding yeast by twinfilin , a ubiquitous actin monomer - sequestering protein . J . Cell Biol . 142 , 723 – 733 ( 1998 ) . 136 . Wahlstrom , G . et al . Twinfilin is required for actin - dependent developmental processes in Drosophila . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 787 – 796 ( 2001 ) . 137 . Uruno , T . , Remmert , K . & Hammer , J . A . CARMIL is a potent capping protein antagonist : identification of a conserved CARMIL domain that inhibits the activity of capping protein and uncaps capped actin filaments . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 10635 – 10650 ( 2006 ) . Shows that CARMIL inhibits CP and uncaps actin filaments , and that full‑length CARMIL is autoinhibited . 138 . Zwolak , A . , Uruno , T . , Piszczek , G . , Hammer , J . A . & Tjandra , N . Molecular basis for barbed end uncapping by CARMIL homology domain 3 of mouse CARMIL - 1 . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 29014 – 29026 ( 2010 ) . 139 . Kim , T . , Ravilious , G . E . , Sept , D . & Cooper , J . A . Mechanism for CARMIL protein inhibition of heterodimeric actin - capping protein . J . Biol . Chem . 287 , 15251 – 15262 ( 2012 ) . Reports the allosteric mechanism for CARMIL‑mediated inhibition of CP . 140 . Takeda , S . et al . Actin capping protein and its inhibitor CARMIL : how intrinsically disordered regions function . Phys . Biol . 8 , 035005 ( 2011 ) . 141 . Fujiwara , I . , Remmert , K . & Hammer , J . A . Direct observation of the uncapping of capping protein - capped actin filaments by CARMIL homology domain 3 . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 2707 – 2720 ( 2010 ) . Uses single‑molecule imaging to show uncapping by CARMIL . 142 . Abbasi , A . A . Piecemeal or big bangs : correlating the vertebrate evolution with proposed models of gene expansion events . Nature Rev . Genet . 11 , 166 ( 2010 ) . 143 . Sinnar , S . A . , Antoku , S . , Saffin , J . M . , Cooper , J . A . & Halpain , S . Capping protein is essential for cell migration in vivo and for filopodial morphology and dynamics . Mol . Biol . Cell 25 , 2152 – 2160 ( 2014 ) . 144 . Svitkina , T . M . et al . Mechanism of filopodia initiation by reorganization of a dendritic network . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 409 – 421 ( 2003 ) . 145 . Avenarius , M . R . et al . Correlation of actin crosslinker and capper expression levels with stereocilia growth phases . Mol . Cell Proteom . 13 , 606 – 620 ( 2014 ) . 146 . Tang , V . W . & Brieher , W . M . FSGS3 / CD2AP is a barbed - end capping protein that stabilizes actin and strengthens adherens junctions . J . Cell Biol . 203 , 815 – 833 ( 2013 ) . 147 . Cassimeris , L . , Safer , D . , Nachmias , V . T . & Zigmond , S . H . Thymosin β 4 sequesters the majority of G - actin in resting human polymorphonuclear leukoctyes . J . Cell Biol . 119 , 1261 – 1270 ( 1992 ) . 148 . Remmert , K . et al . CARMIL is a bona fide capping protein interactant . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 3068 – 3077 ( 2004 ) . Shows that CARMIL purified from cells contains CP and that it exists as a dimer . 149 . Cao , L . G . Mechanism of the formation of contractile ring in dividing cultured animal cells . I . Recruitment of preexisting actin filaments into the cleavage furrow . J . Cell Biol . 110 , 1089 – 1095 ( 1990 ) . R E V I E W S 688 | OCTOBER 2014 | VOLUME 15 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 150 . Liang , Y . et al . The lymphoid lineage - specific actin - uncapping protein Rltpr is essential for costimulation via CD28 and the development of regulatory T cells . Nature Immunol . 14 , 858 – 866 ( 2013 ) . 151 . Shih , N . Y . et al . CD2AP localizes to the slit diaphragm and binds to nephrin via a novel C - terminal domain . Am . J . Pathol . 159 , 2303 – 2308 ( 2001 ) . 152 . Eichinger , L . , Noegel , A . A . & Schleicher , M . Domain structure in actin - binding proteins : expression and functional characterization of truncated severin . J . Cell Biol . 112 , 665 – 676 ( 1991 ) . 153 . Lehtonen , S . et al . In vivo interaction of the adapter protein CD2 - associated protein with the type 2 polycystic kidney disease protein , polycystin - 2 . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 32888 – 32893 ( 2000 ) . 154 . Drenckhahn , D . et al . Three different actin filament assemblies occur in every hair cell : each contains a specific actin crosslinking protein . J . Cell Biol . 112 , 641 – 651 ( 1991 ) . 155 . Cormont , M . et al . CD2AP / CMS regulates endosome morphology and traffic to the degradative pathway through its interaction with Rab4 and c - Cbl . Traffic 4 , 97 – 112 ( 2003 ) . 156 . Take , H . et al . Cloning and characterization of a novel adaptor protein , CIN85 , that interacts with c - Cbl . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 268 , 321 – 328 ( 2000 ) . 157 . Gout , I . et al . Negative regulation of PI 3 - kinase by Ruk , a novel adaptor protein . EMBO J . 19 , 4015 – 4025 ( 2000 ) . 158 . Lynch , D . K . et al . A Cortactin - CD2 - associated protein ( CD2AP ) complex provides a novel link between epidermal growth factor receptor endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 21805 – 21813 ( 2003 ) . 159 . Schwarz , K . et al . Podocin , a raft - associated component of the glomerular slit diaphragm , interacts with CD2AP and nephrin . J . Clin . Invest . 108 , 1621 – 1629 ( 2001 ) . 160 . Brett , T . J . , Traub , L . M . & Fremont , D . H . Accessory protein recruitment motifs in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Structure 10 , 797 – 809 ( 2002 ) . 161 . Huber , T . B . et al . Nephrin and CD2AP associate with phosphoinositide 3 - OH kinase and stimulate AKT - dependent signaling . Mol . Cell . Biol . 23 , 4917 – 4928 ( 2003 ) . 162 . Asanuma , K . , Campbell , K . N . , Kim , K . , Faul , C . & Mundel , P . Nuclear relocation of the nephrin and CD2AP - binding protein dendrin promotes apoptosis of podocytes . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 10134 – 10139 ( 2007 ) . 163 . Kowanetz , K . et al . CIN85 associates with multiple effectors controlling intracellular trafficking of epidermal growth factor receptors . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 3155 – 3166 ( 2004 ) . 164 . Liu , Y . , Yerushalmi , G . M . , Grigera , P . R . & Parsons , J . T . Mislocalization or reduced expression of Arf GTPase - activating protein ASAP1 inhibits cell spreading and migration by influencing Arf1 GTPase cycling . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 8884 – 8892 ( 2005 ) . 165 . Dominguez , R . Actin - binding proteins — a unifying hypothesis . Trends Biochem . Sci . 29 , 572 – 578 ( 2004 ) . 166 . Frost , A . , De Camilli , P . & Unger , V . M . F - BAR proteins join the BAR family fold . Structure 15 , 751 – 753 ( 2007 ) . 167 . Safi , A . et al . Role for the pleckstrin homology domain - containing protein CKIP - 1 in phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase - regulated muscle differentiation . Mol . Cell . Biol . 24 , 1245 – 1255 ( 2004 ) . 168 . Baas , D . et al . CKIP - 1 regulates mammalian and zebrafish myoblast fusion . J . Cell Sci . 125 , 3790 – 3800 ( 2012 ) . 169 . Franck , Z . Microinjection of villin into cultured cells induces rapid and long - lasting changes in cell morphology but does not inhibit cytokinesis , cell motility , or membrane ruffling . J . Cell Biol . 111 , 2475 – 2485 ( 1990 ) . 170 . Sakamoto , T . et al . CKIP - 1 is an intrinsic negative regulator of T - cell activation through an interaction with CARMA1 . PLoS ONE 9 , e85762 ( 2014 ) . 171 . Ling , S . et al . CKIP - 1 inhibits cardiac hypertrophy by regulating class II histone deacetylase phosphorylation through recruiting PP2A . Circulation 126 , 3028 – 3040 ( 2012 ) . 172 . van Duijn , T . J . , Anthony , E . C . , Hensbergen , P . J . , Deelder , A . M . & Hordijk , P . L . Rac1 recruits the adapter protein CMS / CD2AP to cell - cell contacts . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 20137 – 20146 ( 2010 ) . 173 . Fukui , Y . Structure and function of the cytoskeleton of a Dictyostelium myosin - defective mutant . J . Cell Biol . 110 , 367 – 378 ( 1990 ) . 174 . de Arruda , M . V . , Watson , S . , Lin , C . S . , Leavitt , J . & Matsudaira , P . Fimbrin is a homologue of the cytoplasmic phosphoprotein plastin and has domains homologous with calmodulin and actin gelation proteins . J . Cell Biol . 111 , 1069 – 1079 ( 1990 ) . 175 . Helfer , E . et al . Endosomal recruitment of the WASH complex : active sequences and mutations impairing interaction with the retromer . Biol . Cell 105 , 191 – 207 ( 2013 ) . Acknowledgements The authors thank members of their laboratories for com - ments on the manuscript and contributions to the work dis - cussed in this article . They also thank R . Cheney and R . Insall for comments on the manuscript . Work in the authors’ labo - ratories and the writing of this manuscript was supported by National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) grants GM038542 and GM095509 ( to J . A . C . ) and GM073791 and MH087950 ( to R . D . ) . M . E . was supported by NIH training grant 5T90DA02287104 . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing interests . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 15 | OCTOBER 2014 | 689 © 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved