THE DEVELOPMENT OF COGNITIVE FLEXIBILITY AND LANGUAGE ABILITIES Gedeon O . Dea´k DEPARTMENT OF COGNITIVE SCIENCE , UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA , SAN DIEGO , 9500 GILMAN DR . , LA JOLLA , CA 92093 - 0515 I . WHAT IS FLEXIBLE COGNITION ? A . PAST AND CURRENT STUDIES OF FLEXIBLE COGNITION B . FLEXIBLE COGNITION : A DEFINITION C . THE DEVELOPMENTAL ECOLOGY OF FLEXIBLE COGNITION II . DEVELOPING TOWARD . . . ? ADULTS’ FLEXIBLE COGNITIVE PROCESSING OF MEANINGS AND MESSAGES A . DISCOURSE AND SHARED MEANING : FLEXIBLE FORMATION OF MEANING B . FORMING AND SHIFTING CONCEPTUAL MAPPINGS C . NEUROPSYCHOLOGY OF FLEXIBILITY IN ADULT LANGUAGE PROCESSING III . TOWARD A MODEL OF FLEXIBLE REPRESENTATION IN LANGUAGE PROCESSING IV . CHILDREN’S FLEXIBLE THINKING ABOUT MEANINGS AND MESSAGES A . DEVELOPMENT OF FLEXIBLE NAMING B . DEVELOPMENT OF DISCOURSE FLEXIBILITY : SHIFTING IMPLICATIONS AND INSTRUCTIONS C . FLEXIBLE USE OF VERBAL CONTEXT TO INFER WORD MEANINGS D . COMMON FACTORS IN CHILDREN’S FLEXIBLE COGNITIVE PROCESSING OF MESSAGES AND MEANINGS V . QUESTIONS AND CONCLUSIONS A . HOW DO LOGICAL AND METACOGNITIVE ABILITIES INFLUENCE FLEXIBILITY ? B . HOW DOES INHIBITION INFLUENCE THE DEVELOPMENT OF FLEXIBILITY ? C . IS LANGUAGE CENTRAL TO FLEXIBLE COGNITION ? D . METHODOLOGICAL PROBLEM : FILLING THE GAPS E . CONCLUSIONS REFERENCES 271 ADVANCES IN CHILD DEVELOPMENT Copyright 2003 , Elsevier Science ( USA ) . AND BEHAVIOR , VOL . 31 All rights reserved . 0065 - 2407 / 03 $ 35 . 00 A hallmark of human intelligence is ﬂexible cognition : adapting inference to unfamiliar or unexpected situations , creatively combining concepts , and modifying familiar knowledge and habits to produce novel representational syntheses or action sequences . Language enhances and permits expression of ﬂexible cognition . It permits the encoding and making public of innovative representations of present , absent , and imagined events , entities , and rela - tions ; and of mental states , ideas , and intentions . The potential for open - ended innovative conceptualization in natural language is demonstrated by this excerpt from a poem by Marianne Moore ( 1887 – 1972 ) : ‘‘I remember a swan under the willows in Oxford , with ﬂamingo - colored , maple - leaﬂike feet . It reconnoitered like a battle - ship . Disbelief and conscious fastidiousness were ingredients in its disinclination to move . ’’ ( ‘‘Critics and Connoisseurs , ’’ 1924 ) The swan is imbued with a military mode of perception . Its feet are likened to animal and plant , as perspective shifts from color to shape . Anthropomorphized mental states are likened to ingredients ( a culinary metaphor ) ; ingredient itself is a metaphor for cause . Such innovative conceptual blending , epitomized in poetry and other creative activities , reveals a species - speciﬁc cognitive ability : the activation and communication of ﬂexibly selected , combined , and modiﬁed representations . Even those of us who are not poets can grasp an uncanny synthesis such as Moore’s ( e . g . , we can imagine a swan ‘‘reconnoitering like a battleship’’ ) . This ability , to make sense of unexpected combinations , reveals our normative pre - paredness to adapt—and understand—innovative representations of entities and events in our shared environment . The importance of this ability in human thought cannot be overstated : it is critical for mediating social interactions and sharing perspectives , for forming representations of unseen possible worlds based on heard or read descriptions , and for building socially coordinated action plans . How does the ability to understand , evaluate , and produce innovative messages develop ? To understand this critical function of natural language and its development , we must consider some fundamental representational skills that might or might not be restricted to language . For example , ﬂexible language processing requires selecting and encoding information from a dynamically changing environment , based on contextual demands that must be periodically evaluated and updated . As MacWhinney ( 1987 ) puts it , ‘‘In order to learn a language , a child must have available a rich representational system and ﬂexible ways of deciding between representations . The child [ must ] 272 Gedeon O . Dea´k represent [ an ] intricate set of roles , positional patterns , cues , and conditions . . . . [ therefore ] language [ must ] . . . utilize virtually every aspect of higher cognition’’ ( pp . 249 – 250 ) These aspects , or skills , are of course , developing concurrently with language . This makes for a very challenging problem : to learn how children’s language skill relies on , and reﬂects , ﬂexible thinking . That is , how do children’s minds allow them to ﬂexibly construct representations of others’ intended meanings , and ﬂexibly manipulate verbal structures to express dynamically changing mental representations ? Part of the challenge comes from the fact that ﬂexible cognition and language are codependent but not monogamous , so to speak . Learning language depends not only on ﬂexible representation but on other , elusive skills of attending to and processing linguistic and nonlinguistic cues . Moreover , it depends upon an elaborate social environment , and children’s proclivities to make sense of this environment . At the same time , ﬂexible cognition takes clients other than language : it is deployed in action systems including tool use , social interaction , spatial navigation , planning , and creative thought . Thus , ﬂexible cognition and language learning are partly independent , and we do not know whether , and to what extent , they have been specialized for one another . This opens some fascinating questions . For example , do cognitive processes become more ﬂexible as language is acquired ? Does language learning facilitate or limit developmental changes in cognitive ﬂexibility ? Does cognitive ﬂexibility emerge ﬁrst in language use , and get recruited by other action systems ? In this chapter I attempt to lay the groundwork for answering these questions by reviewing how children learn to ﬂexibly process utterances and produce discourse - appropriate speech acts . In Section I , I deﬁne ﬂexible cognition in a way that takes into account ecological and functional concerns of language and thought . In Section II , I brieﬂy describe ﬂexible language processing in adults . This suggests a new metaphorical construct , the Multi - Aspectual Representational Medium , or MARM ( described in Section III ) . Finally , in Section IV , I review empirical and theoretical work on children’s developing ability to ﬂexibly comprehend and produce language based on dynamic changes in their internal representational medium . I . What is Flexible Cognition ? A . PAST AND CURRENT STUDIES OF FLEXIBLE COGNITION Before deﬁning ﬂexible cognition it is useful to survey past ideas and treatments of ﬂexibility . It is notable that no historical approach considered Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 273 the development of ﬂexible cognition , which has been studied in earnest only since the 1990s . Also , historical approaches have not considered how language reﬂects or facilitates ﬂexible cognition . Though a full historical review is beyond the current scope , four inﬂuential historical traditions are summarized here , with a focus on the limitations that have motivated the framework described in Section III . Early studies in the Gestaltist tradition examined adults’ ﬂexible inferences about object functions ( Duncker , 1945 ; Meier , 1931 ) , and found that adults have trouble combining and using objects in innovative ways to solve problems ( see also Finke , Ward , & Smith , 1992 ) . In some situations , for example , prior knowledge of conventional object uses impedes innovative problem solving . This work thoroughly ignored language processes ( but see Glucksberg & Danks , 1968 ) as well as developmental questions . German and Defeyter ( 2000 ) , however , found that functional ﬁxedness in one problem increased from 5 to 7 years , ostensibly as children learned the conventional uses of stimulus objects . This ﬁnding adds to the intrigue of functional ﬁxedness eﬀects , but their relation to other aspects of cognitive ﬂexibility remains unclear . This is partly because functional ﬁxedness problems are quite elaborate and diﬃcult , and it is partly because the old Gestalt accounts are diﬃcult to assimilate into cognitive science conceptual frameworks . A second long - lived tradition deﬁnes ﬂexible thinking as a component of creativity , and treats both as traits that vary across individuals ( Guilford , 1967 ; Runco , 1993 ; Torrance , 1988 ) . This camp once sought to deﬁne and measure ﬂexibility as an independent , stable trait , but had only modest success ( see Hocevar & Michael , 1979 ; Johnson & Fishkin , 1999 ) . Early studies found a weak but reliable correlation between older children’s verbal abilities and creative ﬂexibility ( O’Bryan & MacArthur , 1969 ) , but those ﬁndings were hard to interpret , and since then little empirical or theoretical progress has been made . Two other traditions hold more promise for understanding ﬂexible cognition , its development , and its role in language learning and use . One , cognitive neuroscience , has begun to study brain bases of executive functions , some of which ( e . g . , selective attention ; active inhibition ) are relevant to ﬂexible cognition ( Roberts , Robbins , & Weiskrantz , 1998 ) . Flexible cognition seems to rely on lateral frontal cortical structures ( Damasio , 1985 ; Grattan & Eslinger , 1991 ; Pandya & Yeterian , 1998 ) , and interactions among frontal , parietal , and temporal areas and basal ganglia ( Robbins , 1998 ) . Other data implicate right frontal and temporal areas in ﬂexible interpretation of meaning in discourse ( Beeman , 1998 ; Fiore & Schooler , 1998 ; Stemmer & Joanette , 1998 ) . Recent evidence also links children’s ﬂexible interpretation of changing or unexpected messages to dorsolateral prefrontal areas ( Diamond , 1998 ) . Frontal cortex probably 274 Gedeon O . Dea´k plays a critical role in the development of ﬂexible cognition and language processing , though it is likely that a variety of brain regions and neurotransmitter systems contribute materially to ﬂexibility . The second tradition addresses ﬂexible thinking experimentally , using task - switching methods ( Allport , Styles , & Hsieh , 1994 ; Meiran , Chorev , & Sapir , 2000 ; Monsell & Driver , 2000 ) . Participants switch from one task to another , making diﬀerent judgments about the same stimuli ( e . g . , reading words vs . naming colors in the Stroop task ) . Flexibility is measured as changes in response time ( RT ) across a task switch ; a temporary RT increase is called a switch cost . This work considers processes of attention allocation , inhibition , forward and backwards priming , and task set ( see Gilbert & Shallice , 2002 ; Meyer & Kieras , 1997 ) . A few studies with children have used simpliﬁed task - switch designs , but error rate rather than RT is the measure of ﬂexibility . The constructs used to explain adults’ task - switch costs could be generalized to children’s task - switch costs , 1 though no encompassing treatment has been published . In Section III , I will propose a generalized theoretical framework that can accommodate both children’s and adults’ task - switching data . B . FLEXIBLE COGNITION : A DEFINITION Flexible cognition entails the dynamic activation and modiﬁcation of cognitive processes in response to changing task demands . As task demands and context factors ( e . g . , instructions ) change , the cognitive system can adapt by shifting attention , selecting information to guide and select upcoming responses , forming plans , and generating new activation states to feed back into the system ( e . g . , goals , self - correction ) . If these processes result in representations and actions that are well - adapted to the altered task and context , the agent can be considered ﬂexible . I deﬁne ﬂexible cognition as the dynamic construction and modiﬁcation of representations and responses based on information ( i . e . , similarities , cues , relations ) selected from the linguistic and nonlinguistic environment . That is , when there is a range of plausible ways to understand and respond to a problem , ﬂexible thinkers select patterns that limit this range . The selected information must change over time as a function of shifting task 1 For example , processes investigated in task - switching studies include switch costs , task - set inhibition , proactive interference , paradoxical order eﬀects , and preparatory facilitation ( Allport , Styles , & Hsieh , 1994 ; Gilbert & Shallice , 2002 ; Mayr & Keele , 2000 ; Meyer & Kieras , 1997 ; Monsell , Yeung , & Azuma , 2000 ) , all of which can describe ﬂexibility of children in linguistic and nonlinguistic tasks ( most of the adult task - switching studies are only superﬁcially linguistic ) . Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 275 demands . That is , as new problems and circumstances are imposed by the environment , the cognitive focus should shift to new , pertinent information . Flexibility is tested when changing task demands are to some degree unpredictable or novel ( so the agent cannot rely on automated responses ) , and the conﬂict between alternative responses or representations is not trivial . Because ﬂexibility is a higher - order ( i . e . , derivative ) property of cognition , assessment requires relatively complex paradigms and measures . Traditional cognitive psychology paradigms treat responses as independent ( e . g . , averaging RT across all trials ) . But to assess ﬂexibility , we must consider the temporal and sequential context of past events and cognitive states . For example , Ceci and Bronfenbrenner ( 1985 ) studied changes in children’s clock - checking rate as a deadline ( i . e . , taking cupcakes out of the oven ) approached . Most 10 - and 14 - year - olds check the clock ( i . e . , select task - relevant information ) fairly often at the start of the session ( possibly to calibrate an internal ‘‘clock’’ ) , check less often until the deadline approaches , and then again check more frequently . This function of changing clock - checking rate indicates cognitive ﬂexibility . Flexible clock - checkers adopt a covert , dynamic action plan to govern their responses over time , as their representation of task demands ( based on activation states of an internal clock ) changes . This deﬁnition excludes some adaptive behavior from cognitive ﬂexibility . Making diﬀerent responses in diﬀerent situations is not necessarily a sign of ﬂexibility if each response is learned separately and elicited in such simple and diﬀerent contexts that cue selection is trivial . Thus , learning several S – R pairings is not tantamount to ﬂexibility , though it is a prerequisite ( because ﬂexibility requires selection from among a number of viable responses ) . However , a demand to switch or re - learn S – R associations ( e . g . , from red ! left to red ! right ) could test ﬂexibility . Most tests of ﬂexibility build a response set for several trials , to generate response competition , and then change task demands and assess subsequent performance accuracy or eﬃciency . We also distinguish ﬂexibility from variability of behavior over time . Children’s responses naturally vary over trials or responses ( Siegler , 1996 ) , but ﬂexibility implies more constrained , goal - directed or task - relevant ( i . e . , adaptive ) changes in selected patterns and responses . Thus , randomly switching responses would not count as ﬂexibility , by my deﬁnition . Finally , a common ambiguous result involves evidence that two or more samples randomly drawn from a population produce diﬀerent responses to diﬀerent tasks . This does not demonstrate ﬂexibility ; it merely implies it . Cognitive ﬂexibility is a within - subjects variable : changing responses with changing task demands . This imposes challenges for testing ﬂexibility in young children who , unlike young adults , will not indeﬁnitely respond to pointless , 276 Gedeon O . Dea´k repetitive questions about boring stimuli . One can therefore collect only a very limited number of data points on ﬂexibility from a single child , by administering several age - appropriate tasks within subjects . The deﬁnition above allows us to separate two often conﬂated concepts : ﬂexible cognition and explicit or self - conscious reasoning ( e . g . , Karmiloﬀ - Smith , 1992 ) . It is an empirical question whether ﬂexible cognition requires controlled , explicit , or metacognitive representation , and , conversely , whether metacognitive access or control necessarily facilitates ﬂexible thinking . There is little evidence of either dependency . Certainly , ﬂexible cognition is most apparent when it is reﬂected on and reported , but it is just as clear that adults can be myopically inﬂexible in spite of metacognitive access and verbal self - reﬂection . Also , college students can be inﬂexible even when attempting to respond accuracy and eﬃciency to changing problems ( Luchins , 1942 ) , and reﬂecting on their failure to solve the problems ( e . g . , Duncker , 1945 ) . Even when adults are made aware of demands of a novel task and the relevant information , they do not necessarily arrive at ﬂexible , adaptive solutions ( Meier , 1931 ) . When they do ﬁnd a solution , they cannot explain how ( Finke , Ward , & Smith , 1992 ; Meier , 1937 ) . For these reasons we assume that conscious or metacognitive thought and ﬂexible cognition are at least partly dissociated . C . THE DEVELOPMENTAL ECOLOGY OF FLEXIBLE COGNITION Not all cognition is ﬂexible . Familiar , predictable tasks or problems ( e . g . , social formulas like greetings ; navigating the everyday route to work ) are best tackled with practiced , even automatic , cognitive processes and responses . In contrast , unexpected or unfamiliar tasks require ﬂexible cognition : task analysis , selecting task - relevant information , forming appropriate representations , and preparing novel responses . This opposition between the need for eﬃcient response to familiar problems and the need for ﬂexible response to novel problems poses challenges to anyone , and poses special challenges to young children . Young children are rapidly acquiring conceptual knowledge , learning routines ( perceptual , motor , cognitive , language , and social ) , mastering tasks in complex environments ( e . g . , school ) , and acquiring skills to activate and manipulate mental states and representations . As all these develop , children engage in increasingly varied settings ( e . g . , preschool ; elementary school ) that demand ﬂexibility . Starting day care or preschool , for example , means learning to interact with many new people whose actions , including utterances , are unpredictable . It also means learning about many materials and events , and engaging in varied tasks that are at least somewhat novel . Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 277 Thus , ﬂexible cognition in young children lies at the intersection of settings of increasing variability , and an expanding cognitive and conceptual repertoire . Language is the primary system that mediates this interchange . When preschool children encounter novel tasks they are typically in rich social contexts ( e . g . , play group , day care , on errands with parents ) that are mediated by language . They incorporate conversation , questioning , description , explanation , narrative , and play . Verbal acts , coordinated with novel events and tasks , serve as the medium by which these unfolding events and tasks are mapped onto shared , rich representations . This suggests a critical developmental distinction : whereas in older children generating endogenous task - shifting signals is a critical skill , in preschool children many cues about task demands are explicitly verbal ( e . g . , from parents ) . Preschoolers are expected , insofar as their burgeoning language skills allow , to respond to adults’ suggestions , statements , and instructions . Similarly , preschoolers tend to narrate ( i . e . , verbally externalize ) their plans and intentions to shift representations ( e . g . , in pretend play ) or responses . During preschool , then , cognitive ﬂexibility is integrally tied to overt language ( Vygotsky , 1978 ) . Changes in ﬂexibility , therefore , couch the development of language skills from 2 to 5 years . 2 For this reason , it is noteworthy that preschool children can be strikingly inﬂexible across changing tasks . In one sense this is unsurprising : ﬂexible cognition involves many cognitive processes that are developing from 2 to 5 years . Some of these have been hypothesized to underlie the development of ﬂexible cognition . One is the developing ability to inhibit prior thoughts or responses , plus memory for alternate responses and messages ( Diamond , 1998 ) . Another hypothesis is that cognitive control gradually expands to allow conscious mediation of more and more complex contingencies , and consequent improvement in task switching ( Zelazo & Frye , 1997 ) . A third proposal is that ﬂexibility develops with the ability to notice , analyze , and select task cues , and changes in task cues ( Dea´k , 2000b ) . These hypotheses are evaluated in Section IV . For now , it is important to note that these hypotheses require careful evaluation because evidence of 2 Not all language processing entails ﬂexible cognition , per the foregoing deﬁnition . For example , rote speech acts ( e . g . , greetings ; politeness routines ) , and some well - practiced verbal cues and responses are excluded . Also excluded are processes that rest heavily on automated retrieval or association ( e . g . , accessing familiar , unambiguous root words ; morphosyntactic generalizations like gender and / or case agreement ; phonetic adjustments like vowel harmony ) would be excluded . Language processing that relies on ﬂexible cognition includes making sense of unfamiliar narratives , engaging in informal discourse ( e . g . , cocktail party banter ; business negotiations ; mealtime conversation ) , or following unpredictable instructions in novel settings . 278 Gedeon O . Dea´k developing ﬂexibility is inherently ambiguous . Though some authors ( e . g . , Dempster , 1992 ; Houde´ , 2000 ) ascribe development to a single mechanism , the capacity to inhibit prior representations , the underspeciﬁcation of this claim is easily demonstrated . Consider the ﬁnding that children younger than 36 months , when sorting pictures of animals into ‘‘animals that ﬂy’’ and ‘‘animals that walk , ’’ tend to place several successive pictures of items from both categories into the same box ( Zelazo & Reznick , 1991 ) . Such perseveration ( i . e . , inappropriate repetition of a prior response ) is common in 2 - to 4 - year - olds in certain kinds of tasks . It is commonly assumed that perseveration reﬂects a failure to inhibit primed responses . It could , however , instead be due to weak activation of the new association , or failure to remember the current task cue . Alternatively , it might stem from failure of control over complex response choice , or failure to notice changing task cues , or failure to notice that successive questions / tasks are diﬀerent . There are other possibilities , of course ; the point is that we cannot just conclude that ﬂexibility develops with cognitive inhibition . The more general diﬃculty here is that inﬂexibility is polymorphous ( Dea´k , 2000b ) : it is not even always manifested as perseveration . In the Ceci and Bronfenbrenner’s ( 1985 ) study , for example , some children failed to take the cupcakes out , but others never reduced clock - checking . In general , there are four possible relations between forms and causes of inﬂexibility : ( a ) one form of inﬂexibility with a single cause ; ( b ) one form with multiple causes ( cognitive , linguistic , or both ) ; ( c ) multiple forms of inﬂexibility with a single cause ( e . g . , not understanding a task prompt might cause one child to perseverate but another to haphazardly switch responses ) ; ( d ) multiple forms with multiple causes . The evidence reviewed in Section IV suggests the ﬁrst two and probably the third are incorrect . In short , there seem to be multiple causes and eﬀects of cognitive inﬂexibility . These might change as thought and language develop . To determine this , it is useful to begin with the normative developmental ‘‘end - point’’ : How is ﬂexible cognition manifested in typical adults , and , in particular , how is it reﬂected in adults’ language ? II . Developing Toward . . . ? Adults’ Flexible Cognitive Processing of Meanings and Messages To understand children’s developing ﬂexibility in language processing and production , we need to understand the mature phenotype : adults’ ﬂexible processing and production of messages and meanings . In this section , I brieﬂy summarize evidence of ﬂexible cognition in the language of neurologically intact adults . Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 279 A . DISCOURSE AND SHARED MEANING : FLEXIBLE FORMATION OF MEANING Generic kind terms ( e . g . , object nouns ) were historically assumed to have dictionary - like meanings . It is clear , though , that word meanings are partly context - speciﬁc , and are ﬂexibly activated by adults . Aspects of word meaning are activated according to task and context factors such as proximal words and phrases ( Anderson & Ortony , 1975 ; Barclay et al . , 1974 ) . For instance , typicality and similarity ratings of common nouns change with adjectival context ( Medin & Shoben , 1988 ) . Adults rate blue bird and black bird as more similar than blue bird and green bird , but rate blue eyes and black eyes as less similar than blue eyes and green eyes . Typicality ratings also can shift based on overt task demands ( e . g . , instructions to take a foreign perspective ) or goals ( Barsalou , 1989 ) . Similarly , some aspects of word meaning are primed only in certain sentence contexts ( e . g . , an incidental property of roof such as ‘‘ can be walked on ’’ is evoked only by sentences about construction or repair ; Barsalou , 1982 , 1983 ) . Activation of word meanings is thus best characterized as a dynamic system : semantic knowledge is selected and modiﬁed by recent experiences , cognitive activity , and the context of received messages . Discourse provides important contextual cues for ﬂexibly constructing meaning . Fluent speakers can choose from many descriptions of an entity or event ( Brown , 1958 ; Cruse , 1977 ) that highlight diﬀerent attributes ( e . g . , collie , dog , mutt , animal , pet , Lassie , girl ) . Descriptions , or locutions , often are chosen based on perspectives that are collaboratively formed and modiﬁed during discourse ( e . g . , Brennan & Clark , 1996 ; Clark , 1997 ; Garrod & Anderson , 1987 ) . I assume that establishing and modifying shared meaning and reference in discourse requires dynamic updating of semantic representations from an indeﬁnitely large space of possible mappings . Competent speakers select locutions that encode and highlight aspects of mental models shared by listeners at the current point in conversation . Although adults sometimes fail to establish a shared perspective , we do not assume that this necessarily stems from cognitive inﬂexibility ; it can , for example , result from speakers’ emotional investment in diﬀerent perspectives ( Danet , 1980 ) . Yet we do assume that young children’s conversational disjunctions ( e . g . , toddlers’ ‘‘parallel monologues’’ ) are due to some kind of cognitive inﬂexibility . This points to a need to know how development of discourse ability is related to changes in ﬂexible cognition—for example , what cognitive processes contribute to social dysﬂuencies ( i . e . , inﬂexibility ) in adult discourse ( Garrod & Anderson , 1987 ) ? Although there is no comprehensive answer to this , there is 280 Gedeon O . Dea´k neuropsychological evidence that right frontal and temporal cortical regions are critical for adults’ discourse ﬂexibility ( Brownell & Martino , 1998 ) . These regions also are implicated in processes of inhibiting and switching attention , and in updating working memory for larger units of meaning ( e . g . , multiple utterances , as in discourse ) . Perhaps the latter processes are critical to discourse ﬂuency and ﬂexibility ; certainly they are immature in preschool children . Nevertheless , 2 - and 3 - year - olds can sometimes use pragmatic and discourse information to select and shift descriptions of a referent ( e . g . , Clark , 1997 ; O’Neill , 1996 ) . Thus , whatever component cognitive processes are necessary for discourse ﬂexibility , they are not categorically absent in preschool children . B . FORMING AND SHIFTING CONCEPTUAL MAPPINGS Evidence of discourse and context speciﬁcity in naming and comprehen - sion is compatible with the cognitive semantics approach , wherein utterances are conceptualized as encodings of abstract , dynamic cognitive models , or mappings . I brieﬂy describe this approach because it is unfamiliar to many developmentalists , despite its potential to enhance our understanding of child language and its relation to ﬂexible cognition and conceptual development . Fauconnier ( 1997 ) describes a mapping as a ‘‘correspondence between two sets that assigns to each element in the ﬁrst , a counterpart in the second’’ ( p . 1 ) . For example , one waitress might say to another , ‘‘The ham sandwich at 12 wants a soda’’ ( Lakoﬀ , 1987 ) , wherein ham sandwich designates a particular customer by reference to his or her order , 12 is a ﬁxed designator of a table or station , and a soda stands for a more elaborate locution ( i . e . , ‘‘a glass of soda’’ ) . Far more elaborate , dynamic mappings than this can emerge in everyday discourse . We seldom notice these mappings , so ﬂuidly do we construct , consult , and update them , but they support modiﬁable representation of multiple referents , links , and relations . For this reason , having conversations both depends on and exempliﬁes cognitive ﬂexibility . Successive ‘‘turns’’ require updating these mappings , and the shifts cannot be solipsistic : they are designed for sharing , and rely on common ground as well as conventional abstract meaning schemas , heuristics for eﬃcient transmission of information , and negotiation of preferred locutions ( e . g . , Schober , 1993 ) . A critical point is that the real - time social context of conceptual shifts means that states of the conceptual mapping scheme cannot be prestored or selected from a look - up table ; they are true products of ﬂexible thought . Also , they are not unique products of conversation ; they also emerge , for example , when we hear ( or read ) and comprehend a story , lecture , or argument . When reading a mystery novel , for instance , we make certain Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 281 inferences ( e . g . , who the culprit is ) and the writer exploits this by setting up likely suspects , then , much later , revealing information that forces us to update or modify our extant model . The writer thereby ‘‘plays with’’ the audience’s cognitive ﬂexibility . This highlights a more general conclusion : narrative , written or spoken , presumes the audience’s capacity for conceptual ﬂexibility . C . NEUROPSYCHOLOGY OF FLEXIBILITY IN ADULT LANGUAGE PROCESSING Adults’ capacity for ﬂexible language processing can be compromised by certain brain insults , and this evidence might shed light on limitations of ﬂexibility in children’s language . Aphasiology oﬀers intriguing cases of reduced ﬂexibility in naming and reference . Deﬁcient naming , or anomia , is common in aphasia following damage to inferior left temporal and frontal cortex . Perseverative naming errors—repeating a word inappropriately over a short time—are not uncommon ( Albert & Sandson , 1986 ; Hirsh , 1998 ; Papagno & Basso , 1996 ) . One explanation is that normal inhibition of activated words is impaired , so previously - retrieved words produce response interference ( Vitkovitch & Humphreys , 1991 ) . An alternative is that activation of appropriate lexical items is reduced , so prior lexemes compete more vigorously with current lexemes ( Cohen & Dehaene , 1998 ) . However , no successful single - process account of these errors has emerged , in part because anomic errors are polymorphous . Perseverative naming seems to be inﬂuenced by exogenous factors like stimulus type ( e . g . , words , nonwords , pictures ) and semantic content ( Tranel , Damasio , & Damasio , 1997 ) , similarity ( e . g . , of stimulus features , phonology , or meaning ) , concurrent cognitive demands , and distracting information . They also are inﬂuenced by endogenous factors such as patient age , lesion site , age - at - lesion and recovery time , and interactive factors like familiarity or age - of - acquisition . These ﬁndings might be relevant to children’s perseverative errors , which are often attributed to inhibitory failure . Findings from aphasic adults , however , suggest that children’s perseverative naming might be due to compromised understanding of the current appropriate lexical item . The relevance of aphasic naming errors to children’s errors is indicated by evidence that speech errors in anomic adults and young children are disproportionately perseverative , over a similar time - course , whereas typical adults’ errors include many anticipatory errors ( Dell , Burger , & Svec , 1997 ; Gershkoﬀ - Stowe , 2002 ; Stemberger , 1989 ) . Injuries to other cortical regions cause another type of language inﬂexibility . Pragmatic ﬂexibility , like inferring the meanings of jokes and metaphors , relies on right hemisphere processing ( Beeman , 1998 ; Brownell 282 Gedeon O . Dea´k et al . , 1983 ; Brownell et al . , 1990 ; Stemmer & Joanette , 1998 ) . Right hemisphere patients often make rigid , over - literal , and over - simplistic interpretations of jokes , stories , and indirect messages ( Dennis , 1991 ; Grattan & Eslinger , 1990 ) . For example , right - lesion patients may select anomalous punch lines for a joke , but cannot tell which anomalous punch lines are funny ( Brownell & Martino , 1998 ) . Young children also fail to grasp nonliteral , idiomatic or metaphoric word usage , and often do not ‘‘get’’ jokes . This parallel is complicated by a number of population diﬀerences ( e . g . , young children have less elaborate conceptual knowledge , less ability to infer others’ belief states , and less working memory capacity ) . Nevertheless , this evidence suggests a prevalent role of right temporal and bilateral frontal cortex in ﬂexible inference about complex , socially contextualized , and nonliteral message meanings . III . Toward a Model of Flexible Representation in Language Processing Having deﬁned ﬂexible cognition and discussed its ecological role in early childhood , and sketched its manifestations in adult language , we can consider evidence of children’s ﬂexible cognition . To render such evidence interpretable , though , it will be helpful to have a theoretical framework that can encompass children’s and adults’ ﬂexible cognitive processes in language comprehension and production . I will therefore brieﬂy digress to sketch such a framework . Though it cannot yet yield detailed predictions , it will hopefully aid in integrating diverse ﬁndings and accounts of what develops in children’s ﬂexible language processing . Flexible language processing critically depends on selective activation and suppression of linguistic forms and meanings . Flexibility also depends on synthesizing language cues , task demands , contextual factors , and internal cognitive states . These claims are based on the following assumptions : i . Meaningful descriptions ( e . g . , locutions ) in speech encode a subset of information about the world . Locutions are chosen to share attention with other people by pointing out speciﬁc ( real , remembered , or imagined ) aspects of the world . Over successive utterances in discourse , denoted aspects of the world , and locutions that refer to them , change in unpredictable ways . Some open - ended , responsive cognitive process is needed to update underlying conceptual models and their mappings to successive utterances and locutions . ii . Conceptual knowledge is dynamic , not static ( as , e . g . , ﬁxed property lists ) . Conceptual knowledge is activated partly based on the context of Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 283 setting , task , and recent cognitive activity . Languages use a variety of syntactic , semantic , and discourse devices to reﬂect and inﬂuence the activation of speciﬁc conceptual information . iii . Dynamic , context - dependent processes of meaning activation and suppression are critical for understanding and producing messages . The same processes might also be central to ﬂexible inferences about other types of information ( e . g . , face representation , Schyns & Oliva , 1999 ; tool use , Finke , Ward , & Smith , 1992 ; Meier , 1931 ; social judgment , Smith , Fazio , & Cejka , 1996 ) . That is , there is no empirical basis for assuming that ﬂexible meaning processing is a domain - specialized ability . Representations are deﬁned as dynamically emergent activation states that are accessible to processing and that constrain covert and overt responses . They are seldom prepackaged or immutable , though in the service of cognitive economy some representational content , including linguistic units ( e . g . , morphological and syntactic dependencies ; ‘‘canned’’ lexical responses ) is rigid in its form and / or conditions of activation . A metaphor for dynamic , ﬂexible representation in language processing is an amorphous mass within a ﬂuid medium , akin to a ‘‘Lava Lamp . ’’ Representations are akin to amorphous regions of higher energy within a ﬂuid N - dimensional activation space . As these regions shift within the space , some surface or part of the region will approach the ‘‘top’’ of the medium ( or lamp ) . This is analogous to a threshold level of activation ( or energy state ) that can trigger a response ( e . g . , lexical access ) . I call the space a Multiple - Aspect Representational Medium or MARM , and the representation a Multiple - Aspect Representation or MAR . It is multi - aspectual rather than multidimensional because aspects can be continuous dimensions , discrete features , nonlinear traits , or logically complex variables ( e . g . , hierarchical classes , thematic associates , roles ) : essentially any meaningful distinction that can be drawn about possible referents . Both MARM and MAR are dynamic . The shape of the MAR changes in response to input ( metaphorically conceived as thermal energy currents ) in the MARM ( unlike a lava lamp , however , these currents are not restricted to one region of origin ) . These currents expand or contract diﬀerent ‘‘planes’’ ( i . e . , representations of stimulus aspects ) of the MAR . New planes can unfold as learning or attention activates a new distinction , feature , or perspective . Planes also collapse , as distracting or uninformative aspects are suppressed or neglected . Finally , a plane can be rareﬁed or expanded by selective suppression of , or attention to , the aspect ( see Smith & Heise , 1992 ) . It is assumed that unfolding or collapsing a MAR plane takes time ( i . e . , switch costs ) . The nature of these processes must be established empirically—for example , a relatively stable MAR ( i . e . , one that 284 Gedeon O . Dea´k has not shifted for some time ) might require more input energy or time to shift . Input currents in a MARM are heterogeneous : they can be generated by perceived sensory data , linguistic messages , or internal activation states ( e . g . , a goal ) . But like thermal currents , input sources are both imprecise and subject to interaction and interference . Thus , if a verbal instruction fails to change the MAR , it might be that the current was not powerful enough to travel through the MARM to expand the relevant plane of the MAR , or that the relevant plane was collapsed ( e . g . , by suppression ) so it was inaccessible to the input current , or that other currents dissipated the input current before it could inﬂuence the MAR . These possibilities correspond , respectively , to failure to encode or comprehend a message , inability to apply the instruction to the relevant aspect of the stimulus , and interference from competing , salient cues . The main claims of this metaphor are consistent with empirical evidence reviewed above . It is therefore more defensible than traditional metaphors for conceptual knowledge ( e . g . , ﬁling cabinet ; dictionary ; conceptual net - work ) , but ( I hope ) more accessible than a mathematical description . It diﬀers slightly from other dynamic systems metaphors . In Thelen and Smith ( 1994 ) , for example , representational states are described as activation points in multidimensional space . This does not aptly capture the fact that multiple aspects of a represented entity each can be simultaneously described as a multidimensional vector , and it is an array of aspect - vectors that changes dynamically . This vector array is changing within a similarly dynamic space of representational possibilities which , though large , is not unconstrained ( a point captured by Smith & Heise , 1992 ) . Also , the MARM can take many kinds of input , including linguistic information , task cues , the perceptual array , and internal , self - generated inputs ( e . g . , top – down construal of task demands ) . Internally generated input eventually greatly inﬂuences children’s cognitive and linguistic ﬂexibility ( Dea´k , 2000a ; Dea´k & Bauer , 1996 ; Donaldson , 1978 ; Karmiloﬀ - Smith , 1992 ; Siegal , 1991 ; Zelazo & Frye , 1996 ) , though it plays little role in previous dynamic system accounts ( e . g . , Thelen & Smith , 1994 ) . In sum , the Lava Lamp metaphor captures the human ability to ﬂexibly update complex representations in response to task - speciﬁc inputs and contextual contingencies . IV . Children’s Flexible Thinking About Meanings and Messages Young children are believed to be qualitatively less cognitively ﬂexible than are older children and adults . In this section , I explore that claim with Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 285 regard to children’s language . A guiding concern is how children’s language is ﬂexible or inﬂexible . Normal language errors—retrieving the wrong word , say , or misconstruing an idiom—can reveal developmental limitations of ﬂexibility that recur with some types of brain injuries ( Brownell & Martino , 1998 ; Cohen & Dehaene , 1998 ; Grattan & Eslinger , 1990 ; Milner & Petrides , 1984 ) . Young children are , however , seen as qualitatively inﬂexible , or globally restricted from applying processes described in Section I . B . We need to sharpen that claim . Is the diﬀerence between children and adults , particularly in linguistic ﬂexibility , qualitative or quantitative ? What factors ( e . g . , age , verbal knowledge ) predict a developmental shift toward adult - like ﬂexibility ? How many causes of inﬂexibility are there ? For example , is children’s naming perseveration truly like aphasiac adults’ ( Vitkovitch & Humphreys , 1991 ) ? Do children’s rule - switching errors ( Zelazo , Frye , & Rapus , 1996 ) reﬂect the same processing challenges as adults’ RT switch costs ( Allport , Styles , & Hsieh , 1994 ) ? In laboratory studies of 2 - to 5 - year - olds , cognitive inﬂexibility often is manifested as perseveration . In fact , perseveration is typically the only form of inﬂexibility studied , and , in many tasks , the only possible mani - festation . It is thus ironic that perseveration is often assumed to stem from immature inhibitory processes ( Dempster , 1992 ; Harnishfeger , 1995 ; Houde´ , 2000 ) . An underlying assumption is that maturation of cognitive inhibitory mechanisms allows older children to suppress prior responses , whereas younger children are compelled to repeat them . It is questionable , though , that inhibitory failure explains children’s inﬂexible responses to changing verbal tasks . To evaluate this claim we must examine children’s response to a wider range of ﬂexible language processing tasks . In Section IV . A , I review evidence of children’s ability to ﬂexibly select and re - select locutions to describe diﬀerent aspects of a referent . In Section IV . B , I review evidence of children’s ability to adapt to changing discourse messages , especially changes in verbal rules . In Section IV . C , I review data on children’s ability to ﬂexibly select linguistic cues to infer novel word meanings . Finally , in Section IV . D , I consider whether these diverse language skills reveal general age - related changes in ﬂexible cognitive processing . A . DEVELOPMENT OF FLEXIBLE NAMING Piaget ( 1954 ) claimed preschool children are centrated : they think about a single dimension or aspect of reality at one time ( i . e . , cannot form MARs ) . In its weak form this claim is supported by some ﬁndings ( e . g . , Siegler , 1981 ) . Other ﬁndings , however , show that young children form , modify , and maintain multifaceted representations of entities and situations . In what 286 Gedeon O . Dea´k ways , then , are young children inﬂexible in conceptual representation and naming ? Consider children’s naming errors . Toddlers tend to perseverate ; to inappropriately focus on one identity or aspect of a referent . This might show Piagetian centration , but it might also be a strategic response to any diﬃculty of the naming task ( e . g . , retrieving a word that is not too familiar ; uncertainty about referent’s identity ; a hard - to - articulate name ) . Moreover , as explained previously , toddlers’ perseverative naming could stem from either inhibitory or excitory problems . The basic problem of retrieving a word for the current referent rather than a previous one might be distinct from problems of higher - order language ﬂexibility ( e . g . , interpreting an idiom in light of the speaker’s ideological slant , as suggested by prior elliptical comments ) . The latter require conceptual ﬂexibility . The most basic form of this is the selection of labels to highlight speciﬁc aspects of complex referents . As children’s vocabularies grow , they can produce diﬀerent locutions to describe diﬀerent aspects of an event , entity , individual , or category . Maybe , though , young children cannot ﬂexibly shift the aspects they represent , and therefore cannot ﬂexibly produce alternate labels for a referent . For example , Siegel , Saltz , and Roskind ( 1967 ) reported that children younger than 8 years believe that a ‘‘father’’ cannot also be a ‘‘doctor . ’’ Similarly , Markman and Wachtel ( 1988 ) and Merriman and Bowman ( 1989 ) suggested that children have a default ‘‘one word per object’’ assumption ( i . e . , each thing takes one category label ) , so that , for example , they prefer to map a novel word onto an unlabeled rather than a nameable referent . Similarly , the appearance – reality test poses two questions ( e . g . , ‘‘what does this look like ? ’’ & ‘‘what is it really ? ’’ ) about objects that can be classiﬁed by function or by appearance , like an apple - shaped candle . Three - and 4 - year - olds tend to answer both questions with the same label ( e . g . , candle ) , suggesting a rigid focus on one aspect ( Flavell , Flavell , & Green , 1983 ; Flavell , Green , & Flavell , 1986 ) . Such evidence suggests that preschool children are inﬂexible in their conceptual representations of an entity . Other ﬁndings , however , show that children as young as 2 years can represent multiple aspects of a complex referent , and produce locutions for these . Evidence for this conclusion ( Clark & Svaib , 1997 ; Dea´k & Maratsos , 1998 ; Dea´k , Yen , & Pettit , 2001 ; Sapp , Lee , & Muir , 1999 ) has been reviewed elsewhere ( Clark , 1997 ; Dea´k , 2000b ) . Most pertinent are ﬁndings that 2 - to 4 - year - olds respond to a series of pragmatically and semantically sensible questions about a complex object by producing several diﬀerent , appropriate labels . They are limited in this by the breadth of their lexicon , not by their conceptual inﬂexibility . Children can shift perspective , and labels , within a few seconds ( depending on discourse and event context ) ; Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 287 there is no evidence that they do so much slower than adults . Also , they do not simply generate and discard a series of labels , keeping only one active at a time : when asked to verify label pairs , 3 - and 4 - year - olds accept appropriate pairs but reject most ‘‘foil’’ pairs ( where one word is replaced by a same - category associate ) . Neither training , nor familiarity with the speciﬁc label pair , is necessary . The following exchange ( from Dea´k & Maratsos , 1998 ; Experiment 1 ) , involving a novelty pen that looks like an ear of corn , exempliﬁes children’s facility : Experimenter : ‘‘What do you think that is ? ’’ Child ( 3 ; 5 female ) : ‘‘Pen . ’’ Experimenter : ‘‘What else could that be ? Anything else ? ’’ Child : ‘‘Corn . ’’ Experimenter : ‘‘Corn . And what is corn ? Is corn a kind of animal ? ’’ Child : [ shakes head ] ‘‘Food . ’’ [ Child then aﬃrms each label pair , and reject several foil pairs such as ‘‘eraser and corn’’ ] This capacity is not isolated to novelty items . Dea´k and Maratsos found , contrary to Siegel , Saltz , and Roskind’s ( 1967 ) claims , that 3 - year - olds readily , consistently accept several appropriate labels for a character in a brief vignette ( e . g . , ‘‘woman , ’’ ‘‘doctor , ’’ ‘‘mother , ’’ and ‘‘person’’ ) . The results indicate that Siegel , Saltz , and Roskind results were attributable to procedural artifacts . Such evidence falsiﬁes three untenable claims about semantic inﬂexibility in preschoolers : . Preschool children cannot simultaneously keep active more than one category representation for a referent ( Flavell , Green , & Flavell , 1986 ) . . Preschool children produce or accept only one word for a complex entity ( Markman , 1994 ) —or , more speciﬁcally , do not allow both function and appearance labels for a representational object ( e . g . , dog puppet ; Merriman , Jarvis , & Marazita , 1995 ) . . Preschool children assume that a referent entity has only one label until they receive speciﬁc input or training is provided to demonstrate otherwise ( Markman , 1994 ) . Several other possible limits on semantic ﬂexibility are untested and therefore plausible : . Preschool children are somewhat slower or less consistent than older children in shifting a MAR to focus on ( and name ) diﬀerent aspects of a referent . . Preschool children are somewhat slower or less consistent than older children in activating diﬀerent words to describe a complex entity . That 288 Gedeon O . Dea´k is , after the representation has shifted , the selection of a new description is sluggish . Two ﬁnal hypotheses about limits on representational ﬂexibility have empirical support : . Preschool children attempt to simplify the task of learning a novel word . Strategies seem to include temporarily ignoring or inhibiting known words for a referent , or ignoring the novel label , while working out respective meanings ( Dea´k , Yen , & Pettit , 2001 ) . Some results ( Dea´k , 2001 ; Hughes - Wagner & Dea´k , 1999 ; Liittschwager & Markman , 1994 ; Rice et al . , 1997 ) suggest this increases with ‘‘cognitive load’’ ( i . e . , number of to - be - learned items ; memory demands ) . When children learn novel words or infer complex semantic relations , they tend to adopt simpliﬁed schemes for mapping the words onto aspects of candidate referents . If only a few of each child’s naming responses are assessed , this tendency will make the child appear to accept only one word per referent ; this is , however , misleading . . Children younger than 4 or 5 years have trouble determining which aspect of a complex referent is indicated by each of several labels . Their diﬃculty may lie in mapping the predicate of each question to a speciﬁc stimulus aspect , and then to a corresponding label . For example , 3 - year - olds can label a dinosaur - shaped crayon ‘‘dinosaur , ’’ ‘‘animal , ’’ and ‘‘crayon , ’’ but cannot judge whether each word names ‘‘how it looks’’ or ‘‘what you do with it’’ ( Dea´k , Yen , & Pettit , 2001 ) . More strikingly , 3 - and 4 - year - olds who perseverate in the appearance – reality test also perseverate when answering two questions ( e . g . , ‘‘What is this ? ’’ and ‘‘What does it have ? ’’ ) about nondeceptive items ( e . g . , picture of an ape holding cookies ; Dea´k , Ray , & Brenneman , 2003 ) . Thus , perseverative naming as in the appearance – reality test stems from nonspeciﬁcity of predicate $ word mapping , not from inability to represent dual identities ( Flavell , Green , & Flavell , 1986 ; Gopnik & Astington , 1988 ) . In sum , preschool children can select and interpret alternative labels for a given referent ( though of course this ability will continue to develop ) . The process is temporarily obscured in diﬃcult learning tasks , and there is another factor involved : discourse knowledge . When young children are asked a series of diﬀerent questions , and they do not understand what each question is ‘‘about , ’’ they are willing to use a strategy that adults would not consider : repeating the same answer . Adults seem to strongly expect diﬀerent questions to imply diﬀerent aspects of reality , and thus require diﬀerent responses ; preschool children do not hold this expectation . Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 289 B . DEVELOPMENT OF DISCOURSE FLEXIBILITY : SHIFTING IMPLICATIONS AND INSTRUCTIONS We have seen that some basic skills of ﬂexible representation and locution - selection are observable in 2 - and 3 - year - olds . Yet young children seem rather inﬂexible conversational partners . Why ? Certainly there is massive growth of the lexicon , and of background knowledge that contributes to common ground . But beyond this , does representational ﬂexibility change categorically with age , as Piaget and others suggested ? What is missing in preschool children from the more sophisticated adult capacity to respond ﬂexibly to discourse or narrative ? One thing that does not change categorically from childhood to adulthood is the basic problem of discourse and narrative processing . A demand of everyday communication is ﬂexible selection or representation of descriptive terms for topics of ongoing discourse and narrative ( e . g . , Brennan & Clark , 1996 ; Garrod & Anderson , 1987 ; Schober , 1993 ) . Consider , for example , the demand to construct and modify conceptual maps from narrative . The mapping ﬂexibility that novelists or dramatists presume of adults is ‘‘scaled down’’ for children : whereas adult readers can represent a story told in reverse ( e . g . , Time’s Arrow by Martin Amis ) or with shifting perspectives ( Mrs . Dalloway by Virginia Woolf ) , children’s books tend to have a linear story line and fewer ( and better marked ) shifts . Still , many enduring children’s stories compel their audience to represent a shifting sequence of mappings ( albeit fairly simple , explicit ones ) . In some stories , a series of parallel mappings changes predictably . For example , in the toddler’s book Are You My Mother ? by P . D . Eastman ( Eastman , 1960 ) , a baby bird searches for its mother and encounters a series of ( implausible ) candidate mother - objects . The young audience must represent a series of mappings , to assess the plausibility that each candidate could be the mother . Many stories for preschoolers incorporate shifting conceptual mappings that are imageable and concrete ( and often supported by redundant perceptual information ; i . e . , pictures ) . There are many intriguing questions about the role of narrative in children’s ﬂexible language skills . What succession of representations is activated when children ﬁrst hear a story ; when they hear it multiple times ? Does hearing many stories contribute to the ability to ﬂexibly form novel conceptual mappings from narrative ? At present , little evidence addresses these questions . There is evidence that preschool children have trouble integrating unexpected information with mappings constructed from nar - rative . Campbell and Bowe ( 1983 ) read 3 - to 5 - year - olds brief stories in which the nondominant meaning of a homonym ( e . g . , / haˆr / ¼ rabbit ) was strongly implied by context ( e . g . , ‘‘The hare ran across the road’’ ) . Afterwards , when 290 Gedeon O . Dea´k asked to draw a picture of the / haˆr / , many children depicted the dominant meaning ( e . g . , strands of hair ) though it was completely inconsistent with the narrative . So something must develop in children’s ﬂexible construction of mappings from narrative . Though there is little data on this , there is evidence that as children become better readers , they can integrate information and judge consistency across more remote sentences ( Schmidt & Paris , 1983 ) . There are , however , related data on children’s ﬂexible construction of meaning in discourse . This also improves considerably across the preschool years , possibly in parallel with narrative processing . In discourse , pre - schoolers often fail to notice that a message is uninterpretable or ambiguous ( Cosgrove & Patterson , 1977 ; Markman , 1979 ; Revelle , Wellman , & Karabenick , 1985 ) , fail to understand jokes , metaphors , and nonliteral idioms ( Chukovsky , 1968 ; Gombert , 1992 ) , and produce ambiguous referential messages ( Glucksberg , Krauss , & Weisberg , 1966 ) . Apparently , 2 - to 5 - year - olds do not use discourse context to resolve or represent ambiguity about possible meanings of a message . Given that preschool children can produce multiple labels for an entity , the problem is not one of producing multiple mappings , but of generating multiple meanings in response to complex linguistic messages ( i . e . , utterances with complex meanings ) . This diﬃculty is not trivial or artifactual : in training studies ( Sonnenschein & Whitehurst , 1983 ) , children younger than 6 years do not learn to detect ambiguous messages . Nor is the diﬃculty one of syntactic or lexical competence , both of which are fairly advanced by 4 – 5 years . One possible explanation rests in the limited ability of children younger than 6 – 7 years to detect indeterminacy ( e . g . , Fabricius , Sophian , & Wellman , 1987 ) . Dea´k , Ray , and Brenneman ( 2003 ) found that individual diﬀerences in this ability predict children’s ﬂexible response to appearance – reality questions . In the Indeterminacy Detection task , children are shown situations with indeterminate outcomes ( e . g . , what color chip would be pulled next from a box containing chips of many colors ) or with determinate outcomes ( e . g . , all chips of one color ) . Children are asked to judge whether they could know the outcome ‘‘for sure’’ or whether they ‘‘have to guess . ’’ Children who can judge whether a situation has a deﬁnite outcome or is unpredictable also select diﬀerent labels for diﬀerent aspects ( i . e . , ‘‘looks like . . . ’’ and ‘‘is really . . . ’’ ) of deceptive objects . Although such correlational data are ambiguous , one interpretation is that children’s growing awareness of possibility —the potential for alternative mental models to be consistent with given infor - mation about a question or problem—facilitates the activation and selection of multiple aspects ( i . e . , MARs ) that cover multiple possible mappings . Nonverbal tasks show an age - related increase , between 4 and 7 years , in ability to notice multiple possible clues and answers to a problem ( e . g . , Vurpillot , 1968 ) . In discourse or narrative , however , premature resolution of Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 291 a message’s possible meanings would make children relatively quick to judgment and rigid in their mappings ( i . e . , interpretations ) . This account , which suggests that a higher - order logical skill ( i . e . , noticing indeterminancy ) facilitates the development of linguistic ﬂexibility is , however , speculative and in need of converging evidence . 1 . Flexibility in Responding to Rules and Instructions The ability to respond ﬂexibly to changing and unpredictable messages , such as instructions or rules , improves substantially with age . Luria ( 1959 ) outlined a progression of skill in responding ﬂexibly to verbal messages . When asked to retrieve a speciﬁc familiar object , 1 - year - olds fail if a diﬀerent , salient object is closer . Also , after making a response several times , they persist when a diﬀerent response is mandated by the task ( Diamond , 1998 ) . When given a simple rule ‘‘If [ X occurs ] , do [ action1 ] , ’’ 2 - year - olds tend to produce the action before X occurs . When given a salient but rule - invalid response signal , as in ‘‘Simon Says’’ ( Reed , Pien , & Rothbart , 1984 ) , 2 - and 3 - year - olds often impulsively produce the response . Also , in simple switch tasks involving bi - conditional rules ( e . g . , ‘‘When X happens , do [ action1 ] ; when Y happens , do [ action2 ] ’’ ) , 2 - year - olds often fail to switch ( Zelazo & Reznick , 1991 ) . Switching between conditional rules for alternate responses ( see below ) , or switching from familiar to novel responses ( e . g . , ‘‘say ‘night’ when you see a picture of the sun’’ ; Gerstadt , Hong , & Diamond , 1994 ) , is diﬃcult until 4 or 5 years of age . These ﬁndings seem to show a clear progression in ﬂexible message - processing skill , but the forces behind this progression remain to be speciﬁed . Empirical work has focused on children’s ﬂexible response to changing conditional rules . The Dimensional Change Card - Sort test ( DCCS ) , reﬁned by Zelazo and colleagues ( e . g . , Zelazo , Reznick , & Pin˜on , 1995 ) , distills the rule - change problem . In this task children hear an unambiguous rule for choosing one of several responses ( e . g . , ‘‘blue things go in this box , and red things go in that box’’ ) . After several trials a new rule is given , demanding a response switch ( e . g . , ‘‘cars go in this box , and ﬂowers go in that box’’ ) . 3 Usually each rule is easy ; the question of 3 The DCCS has been likened to a simpliﬁed Wisconsin Card - Sorting Test ( Milner & Petrides , 1984 ) , but there are signiﬁcant diﬀerences : in the DCCS only 1 – 2 rules are used ( and only two stimuli ) , yielding a much smaller problem space . Each rule is explicitly stated , making it a deductive , not inductive , test . Therefore , although both the DCCS and WCST test response switching , only the WCST assesses response - set learning rate or changes in learning rate ( Lezak , 1995 , Chapter 15 ) , dependent variables that might diﬀerentiate adult frontal patients with diﬀerent syndromes ( Daigneault , Braun , & Whitaker , 1992 ; Taylor , Saint - Cyr , & Lang , 1986 ) . Also , perseveration in the DCCS is less informative than perseveration in the WCST because any post - switch error in the former is , by default , coded as perseverative . 292 Gedeon O . Dea´k interest is whether the rule change carries a switch cost . The DCCS is schematized in Figure 1 , using lighter and darker - colored moons and stars as stimuli , for purposes of illustration . Table I summarizes results from several studies of preschoolers’ DCCS performance . Between 3 and 4 years , the probability a child will switch responses according to the post - switch rule , rather than staying with the pre - switch rule , increases signiﬁcantly . Because children who perseverate seem to grasp both rules , Zelazo and Frye ( 1996 ) describe this as a dissociation of knowledge and action selection . Several other ﬁndings are notable . First , the age diﬀerence holds up when pre - testing is used to eliminate children who do not understand either the task or the shape and color words . This eliminates some mundane explanations of children’s errors . Second , the rules are almost always ‘‘sort by shape’’ and ‘‘sort by color , ’’ applied to two simple , familiar shapes and colors combined in two low - dimensional stimuli ( e . g . , simple drawings of a red car and a blue ﬂower , or , as in Figure 1 , of a light - colored Fig . 1 . Schematic illustration of the DCCS test : the pre - switch task includes an instruction and a sorting phase ; the latter typically lasts from 1 to 6 trials . The post - switch task , which immediately follows , includes a re - instruction phase and a post - switch sorting phase . See text for additional information . Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 293 moon and a darker star ) . These are shown repeatedly across trials . In this task perseveration might stem from : ( a ) interference from a speciﬁc value ( e . g . , child cannot stop attending to red when it occurs ) , ( b ) a value – location association ( e . g . , once red things are associated with the right box , the child avoids putting them in the left one ) , ( c ) a value – location – motor response contingency ( e . g . , after placing red things on the right , it is hard to put them on the left ) , ( d ) selective attention to one dimension ( e . g . , after attending to color , it is hard to attend to shape ) , or ( e ) persistence of the ﬁrst abstract rule ( e . g . , after adopting a color - sorting rule , it is hard to adopt a shape - sorting rule ) . The source of 3 - year - olds’ errors is therefore ambiguous . Recent studies have reduced this ambiguity . Jacques et al . ( 1999 ) showed that children who perseverate on the DCCS judge that a perseverating puppet is correct but a rule - switching puppet is incorrect ; conversely , children who ﬂexibly switch rules make the opposite judgment ( i . e . , perseverating puppet is wrong ) . Also , Zelazo , Frye , and Rapus ( 1996 , Experiment 3 ) showed that 3 - year - olds perseverate just as much when making a verbal ( nonsorting ) response . Thus , motor responses are not critical . Perner and Lang ( 2002 ) found 3 - year - olds can make a within - dimension rule switch that requires reversing a value $ location association , and Towse et al . ( 2000 ) found that using new boxes in the post - switch trials did not improve ﬂexibility . Thus , perseveration is not based on interference from prior motor responses or locations ( eliminating ( b ) and ( c ) ) . Also , 3 - year - olds can , in some tasks , switch responses ( eliminating ( a ) ) . It seems instead that their diﬃculty lies in updating the current rule , or switching attention to a new , relevant dimension . TABLE I Summary of Reported Studies of the DCCS : Percentages of Children Who Perseverated on the Pre - switch Rule During the Post - switch Phase , by Age ( 3 - vs . 4 - year - olds ) Percentage of perseverative children Study 3 - year - olds 4 - year - olds Frye et al . ( 1995 ) Exp . 1 ( n ¼ 40 ) 87 % 68 % Frye et al . ( 1995 ) Exp . 2 ( n ¼ 40 ) 1 67 % 27 % Zelazo et al . ( 1996 ) Exp . 1 ( n ¼ 30 ) 60 % 10 % Mean 71 % 35 % Note : Summarizes only those published experiments that report numbers of 3 - and 4 - year - olds who made 75 – 100 % post - switch responses by a given rule ( pre - switch : perseverative ; post - switch : flexible ) . 1 Mean of two DCCS tests ( given within - subjects ) . 294 Gedeon O . Dea´k Other evidence sheds light on the nature of children’s switching errors , and the dissociation between knowledge and sorting response ( Zelazo & Frye , 1996 ) . For example , 2 . 5 - year - olds show a similar dissociation in a simpler test of sorting cards into two categories ( e . g . , animals that ﬂy vs . animals that walk ) . Sorting yields more errors than verbally verifying the relevant category each item ( e . g . , answering ‘‘yes’’ or ‘‘no’’ when asked ‘‘Does this one walk ? ’’ Zelazo & Reznick , 1991 ; Zelazo , Reznick , & Pin˜on , 1995 ) . Stimuli in this paradigm are more diverse than DCCS stimuli , suggesting that repetition of speciﬁc items is not necessary for perseveration , though it should be noted that two - thirds of children’s errors were perseverative , which is exactly what we would expect if children were responding by chance . Are 2 . 5 - year - olds’ errors in Zelazo and Reznick’s ( 1991 ) classiﬁcation task due to the same factors as 3 - year - olds’ DCCS errors ? In an important regard the classiﬁcation task is diﬀerent : it requires a simpler binary distinction , not a contingent choice between bi - conditional rules . That is , children’s failure in the DCCS is in switching from one category - based response to another , or in updating the aspect implicated by the latest rule . Zelazo and Frye ( 1996 ) suggest that this added complexity accounts for the higher age of mastery . However , the age diﬀerence might be due to an added discourse demand . The DCCS requires knowing that social rules often are mutually exclusive , so a new rule replaces older ones . That knowledge is likely acquired in semiformal social contexts like preschool ; thus , older preschoolers are more likely than younger ones to have this discourse knowledge and use it in a rule - switching situation . In the following subsections ( IV . B . 1 . a – c ) , I will elaborate on some alternative accounts . a . Evaluating Rule - following Flexibility : Symbolic and Lexical Mapping . Why do children make perseverative errors if , in both the DCCS and the classiﬁcation task ( Zelazo & Reznick , 1991 ) , they know enough to solve each problem ? One possibility is an unrecognized mapping demand : the ‘‘right’’ response , in both sorting tasks , is arbitrary in a way that is rather odd to children . Nothing in the stimulus array or prior knowledge stipulates , for instance , putting blue things in a box on the left , or putting ‘‘animals that ﬂy’’ into a box on the right . This arbitrary mapping is akin to algebra or predicate logic ( e . g . , ‘‘Let all red things be X’’ ) . Children might respond to such seemingly arbitrary mappings without understanding that they are merely conventional , and can be invalidated or switched by agreement or by a verbal signal . By contrast , mappings with which preschool children are more familiar—namely , word - referent map - pings—also are abstract and arbitrary , but do not change spontaneously . Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 295 This is , perhaps , why knowledge tests in the DCCS and the classiﬁcation test ( e . g . , ‘‘Is this a ﬂying thing ? ’’ ) are easier : they only require retrieval of a known ( static , not arbitrarily changing ) fact or designator of the referent . Another idea concerns rule meaning rather than mappings . Maybe children perseverate if they cannot select the aspect designated by the predicate of the current rule ( e . g . , ‘‘In the shape game . . . ’’ ) . That is , some children might have trouble selecting blue - ness or red - ness ( rather than dog - ness ) based on the aspect labeled in the rule ( i . e . , ‘‘ shape game’’ ) . There is very little data on children’s understanding of dimension words like ‘‘shape’’ and ‘‘color’’ : Shatz and Backscheider ( 2001 ) reported that some toddlers map dimension words onto appropriate value words ( e . g . , ‘‘red’’ ) , but perhaps many 3 - year - olds still have a tenuous grasp of the dimension labels . Munakata and Yerys ( 2001 ) suggested that this is why some 3 - year - olds do not diﬀerentiate successive rules . They modiﬁed the DCCS knowledge question ( e . g . , ‘‘Where does the _ _ _ _ _ go in the shape game ? ’’ ) so items were described by both aspects ( e . g . , ‘‘red car’’ ) of a picture . As a result , 3 - year - olds did poorly answering knowledge questions . It seems they cannot use the aspect named in the rule to choose the correct word from a complex locution ( e . g . , ‘‘red car’’ ) . Other indirect evidence comes from a variant of the DCCS with three rules ( Narasimham & Dea´k , 2001 ) : pilot testing revealed it was indeed harder for preschool children to use the abstract dimension labels ‘‘shape , ’’ ‘‘size , ’’ and ‘‘color’’ to classify complex items ( e . g . , a small red bird ) , even when the value labels ( e . g . , ‘‘small’’ ) were familiar . This seemed to reﬂect uncertainty about the meaning of the rules . This could also explain Towse et al . ’s ( 2000 ) ﬁnding that 3 - year - olds’ perseveration diminished when the post - switch rule was demonstrated ( like the pre - switch rule ) , and Bohlmann’s ( 2001 ) ﬁnding that 1 – 2 trials of feedback in the post - switch phase eliminated 3 - year - olds’ perseveration . b . Evaluating Rule - following Flexibility : Complexity . The dominant account of children’s rule - following ﬂexibility ( Zelazo & Frye , 1996 ) is based on the degree of rule complexity a child can represent and use . Two - year - olds do not ﬂexibly shift responses using a binary ( or 1 (cid:3) level ) rule contingency ( see Figure 2 ) . Three - year - olds do not ﬂexibly choose a 2 (cid:3) level rule to select subordinate contingent responses ( e . g . , DCCS ) . Thus , from 2 to 4 years , children acquire controlled ﬂexibility to make progressively more complex rule - based responses . Challenges to the Cognitive Complexity and Control , or CCC , theory ( Zelazo & Frye , 1996 ) have focused on whether contingency complexity is indeed the critical limiting factor in children’s ﬂexibility , and whether 296 Gedeon O . Dea´k analyses of rule complexity are adequate ( e . g . , Perner , Stummer , & Lang , 1999 ) . It is possible that Zelazo and Frye underestimate the complexity of the DCCS because an additional , implicit pragmatic rule or principle is needed to respond ﬂexibly or consistently in diﬀerent verbal or questioning situations : on every trial , use the last rule to select a response , until a diﬀerent rule is given . Figure 2 adds this principle to the apex of the hierarchy . This should guide responses to each item , regardless of prior responses and the number of rule switch or time since a rule switch . The principle is presumed ( but not stated ) in , besides the DCCS , many formal problem - solving activities ( e . g . , school work ) , though not all social situations impose it ; for example , free play in preschool is guided by the principle choose from allowable activities and switch at will until instructed to stop . Adults do not typically explicate these principles , so children may choose the wrong one . If , in the DCCS , children use a principle like make the most familiar response until corrected , which works perfectly well in many social situations , they will perseverate . This suggests children’s perseveration might stem from incorrect interpretation of the pragmatics of rule - following tasks , instead of ( or in addition to ) limits on controllable rule complexity . Though there is limited evidence for this hypothesis , Perner and Lang ( 2002 ) gave 3 - and 4 - year - old children a standard DCCS , as well as three easier switching tasks . Three - year - olds produced the usual pattern of perseveration only in the standard DCCS , and only when it was given ﬁrst . In contrast , they ﬂexibly Fig . 2 . Illustration of levels of complexity of the contingencies ( rules ) in the DCCS , after Zelazo and Frye ( 1996 ) . I have added an overarching principle / rule concerning expectations for adapting successive responses to verbal instructions . Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 297 switched rules for giving cards to cartoon characters , based on stated preferences . For instance , changing the rules from Mickey Mouse likes red things and Donald Duck likes black things to Mickey likes circles and Donald likes squares elicited near - ceiling performance . This task is as complex as the DCCS , so complexity was not governing performance . More strikingly , when 3 - year - olds did any such easier task ﬁrst , they then generalized the rule - switching strategy to the DCCS . This suggests that perseveration follows adoption of the wrong implicit pragmatic principle , and a ‘‘task set’’ for adopting the correct principle will yield nonperseverative performance . Another problem for the CCC is that complexity limits do not seem to generalize across linguistic reasoning tasks . The syntax and morphology of a language , for instance , form complex contingency systems wherein multiple variables must be considered to produce or interpret utterances ( Maratsos , 1998 ) . Two - and 3 - year - olds accurately sift through multiple , ambiguous variables ( e . g . , deﬁniteness , case , noun class , number , tense , aspect , etc . ) and learn , without explicit help , to assign ambiguous constituents to roles in a sentence , to inﬂect constituents correctly , etc . ( e . g . , MacWhinney , 1978 ) . Such variables are denoted , across languages , by diverse , hard - to - analyze , unpredictable markers . Yet for most markers in most languages , 3 - year - olds can track and adapt to several unpredictably changing variables at once , and in real time ( i . e . , quickly ) . For instance , MacWhinney , Ple´h , and Bates ( 1985 ) found that Hungarian 2 - to 3 - year - olds use case and animacy cues to assign nouns in transitive sentences to subject or object slots . Each child did this accurately over many sentences that varied unpredictably ( and repeated constituents , thus requiring ﬂexibility ) . Other studies have shown that English - speaking 2 - year - olds take into account syntactic , semantic , and conceptual contingencies to interpret sentences ; for instance , they use deﬁniteness and animacy to infer the referent of a novel noun ( Katz , Baker , & Macnamara , 1974 ) . Also , 2 - year - olds consider object location and listeners’ knowledge when deciding how much descriptive and deictic information is needed to request an object from an adult ( O’Neill , 1996 ) . Detailed analysis of such examples reveals the diﬃculty of objectively formalizing the complexity of diﬀerent linguistic contingencies , but it is clear that 2 - and 3 - year - olds , in everyday discourse , interpret messages with respect to combinations of linguistic cues that exceed complexity limits proposed by Zelazo and Frye ( 1996 ) . Another question concerns branching complexity ( i . e . , rule breadth , not depth ) and ﬂexibility across changing rules . In the DCCS , stimuli , questions , and responses are simple and repetitive . Dea ´ k ( 2000b ) speculated that this reduces 3 - year - olds’ ﬂexibility , because they are ‘‘lulled , ’’ during pre - switch trials , into believing that they have deduced the right response for each card , and thereafter stop analyzing verbal input ( i . e . , instructions ) . When the new 298 Gedeon O . Dea´k rule is stated , children’s certainty in ‘‘known’’ responses ( plus the extensive similarity of post - and pre - switch trials ) outweighs the new instruction and corresponding opposite responses . For older children , in contrast , the most recent rule principle allows the new instruction to prevail . Perhaps making the test more diﬃcult and less predictable would push 3 - year - olds from comfortable , practiced , conﬁdent responses toward reliance on a verbal rule . That is , children might rely on verbal cues ( e . g . , rules ) when other salient cues become less predictable . This leads to a counterintuitive prediction : perseveration should decrease in more complex and variable tasks . Narasimham and Dea´k ( 2001 ) tested this in a modiﬁed card - sorting test . The 3DCCS varies three aspects of the stimuli , so cards are sorted by three diﬀerent rules . This allows two rule shifts , rather than one , and increases the number of 1 (cid:3) level contingencies from four ( in the DCCS ) to nine ( due to increased branching of the contingency tree at the 1 and 2 (cid:3) levels ) . Thus , though the 3DCCS is unaltered in complexity as deﬁned by Zelazo and Frye ( i . e . , branching depth ) , it has more variable and diverse stimuli as well as greater rule cardinality . In the 3DCCS , children sort cards showing an animal ( dog , bird , or ﬁsh ) in one of three colors ( red , blue , or yellow ) and sizes ( ‘‘little , ’’ ‘‘middle , ’’ ‘‘big’’ ) . Six cards are randomly chosen so that each value is depicted twice , in diﬀerent combinations . These are sorted into one of four boxes , each deﬁned by a unique sample card ( e . g . , small yellow dog , medium red bird , large blue ﬁsh , and long black snake [ distractor ] ) . Children sort each test card three times using three diﬀerent rules : shape , color , and size . The procedure is illustrated in Figure 3 . Results from the 3DCCS are compatible with data from the DCCS . As shown in Figure 4 , 3 - year - olds make fewer correct responses overall than 4 - year - olds , and 3 - year - olds’ rule compliance declines more sharply after the ﬁrst block . Four - year - olds are more likely to follow both post - switch rules , demonstrating an age - related increase in ﬂexibility using a more variable test with the same contingency depth as the DCCS . However , children produced a wider range of response patterns in the 3DCCS than in the DCCS . Some children ( 25 % ) followed one of the two post - switch rules ; others ( 10 % ) changed their responses rather indiscriminately . Also , whereas in the DCCS most children follow one rule ( pre - or post - switch ) on all post - switch trials , in the 3DCCS they were not so consistent : 20 % changed their selected aspect at least once within a block . Thus , a more variable test revealed that the dichotomy of ﬂexible versus perseverative children ( deﬁned as up to 17 % errors or at least 83 % ) is not so sharp as it appears in the DCCS ( see Table II ) . So increasing number and diversity of rules and stimuli does not eliminate age diﬀerences , but it reveals a general problem with our focus on perseveration : in many popular tasks such as the DCCS , the only possible error is perseveration . Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 299 In sum , much evidence is consistent with the CCC theory , but a few ﬁndings ( e . g . , Perner & Lang , 2002 ) are not , and there are serious concerns that the theory cannot predict children’s competency in language processing tasks that do not involve rules , but nevertheless require knowledge of complex contingencies among syntactic , morphological , and semantic cues . c . Rule - following Complexity : Inhibitory Accounts . The most promi - nent alternative to the CCC focuses on general inhibitory capacity ( Dempster , 1992 ; Houde´ , 2000 ) . Immaturity of prefrontal cortex ( which persists until adulthood ) is believed to prevent eﬃcient inhibition of prior responses or representations , thus increasing perseveration . This account is appealing and parsimonious . If correct , it reduces preschoolers’ inﬂexibility to a single cognitive process . Unfortunately , the account is so vague that it is unfalsiﬁable without much elaboration . Also , perseveration is not Fig . 3 . Schematic illustration of the Three - Dimensions Change Card - Sort test ( 3DCCS ) . The pre - switch task is followed by two post - switch tasks , each with a diﬀerent rule , and six diverse sorting stimuli per rule . On each trial children must choose between four boxes , one of which shows a shape match , one with a color match , one with a size match , and one with a distractor . See text for additional information . 300 Gedeon O . Dea´k necessarily caused by inhibitory failure . We must specify exactly what perseverative children fail to inhibit , what neural processes are involved , and what tests could falsify a claim that every case of perseveration is due to inhibitory failure . Consider the claim for a prefrontal cortical mechanism . No study has showed an increased rate , or biological milestone , in maturation of prefrontal cortex between 3 and 4 years . This would be important to demonstrate to support the claim that improvement in rule - switching ﬂexibility is a result of maturation of frontal cortex - controlled inhibitory Fig . 4 . Mean number of correct responses ( out of 6 ) to the ﬁrst , second , and third rules in the 3DCCS , by age ( n ¼ 61 ) . Bars show standard errors . TABLE II Number of Flexible , Partly Flexible , and Perseverative 3 - year - olds ( n ¼ 16 ) and 4 - year - olds ( n ¼ 26 ) in the 3DCCS Response patterns Age Flexible Partly flexible Perseverative 3 - year - olds 2 ( 12 % ) 6 ( 38 % ) 8 ( 50 % ) 4 - year - olds 14 ( 54 % ) 6 ( 23 % ) 6 ( 23 % ) Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 301 processes . Also , no study supports a general inhibitory trait that predicts age and individual diﬀerences in children’s ﬂexibility . A study by Carlson and Moses ( 2001 ) found little coherence across tests of inhibition in preschool children . Across 10 tasks , all hypothesized to require cognitive inhibition of responses to rules or requests , the mean simple correlation was r ¼ . 28 . The mean , with age , gender , and verbal IQ partialled out , was r ¼ . 16 . Thus , no unitary underlying trait was evident , and more homogeneous subsets of tasks , characterized by conﬂict between competing responses to instructions ( e . g . , DCCS ) , were not much more cohesive : their mean partial correlation averaged only r ¼ . 22 . The idea that a general inhibitory trait can account for age and individual diﬀerences in ﬂexibility thus remains unconﬁrmed . Perhaps , however , a better speciﬁed inhibitory account is viable . Diamond ( 1998 ) argued that holding several relations in mind ( e . g . , lower - order response contingencies ) , while inhibiting highly activated responses , is diﬃcult for children younger than 6 years , due to immaturity of a region of prefrontal cortex . That region is implicated in nonhuman primates’ performance on tests of working memory - plus - inhibition ( e . g . , delayed nonmatch to sample ; Diamond & Taylor , 1996 ) . These demands are at levels in the DCCS that challenge typically developing 3 - year - olds ; the same demands are presumed greater in another test , the Stroop Day / Night ( Gerstadt , Hong , & Diamond , 1994 ) , that challenges older children . In that test , children must inhibit a learned verbal association : they are instructed to say ‘‘day’’ when shown a picture of the moon , and ‘‘night’’ when shown a picture of the sun . Note , however , that the Stroop task has not been shown to have objectively greater inhibition - plus - memory demands . Regardless , Diamond et al . ( 1997 ) found that children with mild , treated phenylketonuria ( PKU ) , which impairs the prefrontal system , perform worse than same - age controls on these tests . For example , children with PKU as old as 5 years showed increased error rates in the DCCS . Diamond’s theory provides much - needed sharpening of the general inhibitory account , but it cannot explain all available data . At issue is the claim that memory for rules or verbal input is a second demand that makes the DCCS , delayed nonmatch to sample , and Stroop tests diﬃcult for preschool children . However , Dea´k , Ray , and Brenneman ( 2003 ) found that several verbal capacities , but not verbal working memory span , predicted preschoolers’ perseverative appearance – reality errors . Also , Zelazo , Reznick , and Pinon ˜ ( 1995 ) found little or no eﬀect of working memory load on children’s rule - following ﬂexibility . Finally , Perner and Lang’s ( 2002 ) ﬁnding that 3 - year - olds fail the DCCS but succeed at other rule - switching tasks with similar inhibition and memory demands cannot easily be explained by Diamond’s theory . 302 Gedeon O . Dea´k Thus , the role of working memory in ﬂexible rule - following remains hypothetical . Diamond is probably correct that some process of encoding and retrieving representations of rules or instructions is critical to ﬂexibility . Inability to remember rules would surely impair ﬂexible rule switching . Also , switching from one rule to another sometimes will require suppression of familiar responses . In some sense , then , Diamond’s theory is probably correct , but there is little evidence that individual and age diﬀerences in working memory and inhibitory capacity can account for the diﬀerence between children who perseverate and those who are ﬂexible . d . Rule - following Complexity : Summary . These accounts do not exhaust the range of possible accounts of age and individual diﬀerences in ﬂexible response to rules and instructions . For example , Dea´k ( 2000b ) emphasizes the role of growing understanding of pragmatic cues to task demands and changes in the development of ﬂexibility . But this account is not necessarily incompatible with either the CCC or an inhibition - plus - memory account . For example , a pragmatic cues account shares with CCC an emphasis on correctly representing task demands , though it diﬀers from CCC by incorporating the child’s knowledge of discourse conventions . Each account also can be accommodated by the MARM metaphor . For example , complexity can be coded as the number of aspects that remain active in the MAR . Working memory can be coded as the number of aspects that remain suﬃciently active to be available for response or description . Pragmatic cues draw children’s attention to the input currents intended by the adult . Rule - switching paradigms have yielded important data on the develop - ment of children’s linguistic ﬂexibility . Yet they represent a limited range of language tasks . Though caregivers sometimes give young children explicit instructions or rules , they probably avoid giving series of chang - ing instructions . Also , caregivers might tolerate a fairly high rate of noncompliance , and repeat rules or give assistance ( e . g . , feedback ) as needed . Thus , it is unclear how results from rule - switching tests extend to everyday language processing . This limitation must be addressed with naturalistic studies of adult – children communication . For now , however , we can compare results from tests of rule - switching to results from other tests of linguistic ﬂexibility . One of these , inferring word meanings , is considered next . C . FLEXIBLE USE OF VERBAL CONTEXT TO INFER WORD MEANINGS 1 . Age - related Changes in Flexible Induction of Word Meanings In a few short years , children learn the meanings of thousands of words and locutions . The extensive literature on children’s word learning and Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 303 vocabulary development ( Bloom , 2000 ; Dea´k , 2000a ) has only begun to address how children can ﬂexibly respond to changing cues to the meanings of the unfamiliar words they hear . That is , though many studies have tested children’s use of various cues to infer a word’s possible meaning , few have tested how children adapt their representation of possible meanings as they hear new , unpredictable cues and messages . Yet ﬂexible cue selection is critical because everyday discourse carries many kinds of cues to meaning , and these change from utterance to utterance . Even the same utterance can carry opposite meanings in two contexts ( e . g . , ‘‘Well , that was a great movie ! ’’ ) . As in this case , prosody may be the critical cue ; often , though , it will not . The next utterance’s meaning might rest on a diﬀerent combination of syntactic , lexical , semantic , discourse , and paralinguistic cues . Even this does not exhaust the complexity of the problem : listeners must also consider physical , social , emotional , and cognitive contextual variables ( e . g . , nearby objects ; speaker’s interests ; recent notable events ) . In short , the meanings of messages hinge on a changing , unpredictable series of diverse , shifting linguistic , paralinguistic , and nonlinguistic cues . So far I have described the general problem , but preschool children face a particularly concentrated version : to build a lexicon from the unfamiliar words that liberally pepper the utterances they hear . For this they have available a wide spectrum of cues to words’ meanings ; yet their grasp of these cues is profoundly limited . Therefore , they are faced with the need to infer more meaning from less useable information . The dual challenge to preschoolers , then , is to use an unpredictable array of cues to interpret the meanings of changing messages with unknown words , and to learn the words as well . This challenge could be exacerbated by cognitive inﬂexibility , as in rule - switching tasks ( Section IV . B ) . However , the outcome of the challenge is near - complete ﬂuency , and a sizeable lexicon , by the fourth birthday . This is a paradox : preschoolers are inﬂexible in rule - switching tasks , but they learn very many words from a shifting , uncertain platform of linguistic cues . Perhaps young children are more ﬂexible when inferring meanings from probabilistic , unpredictable cues than when following simple , deterministic rules . How can we make sense of this apparent paradox ? I have studied how preschool children meet the practical demand to infer meanings and learn words by ﬂexibly miming an unstable cue - lode . A starting assumption is that the most useful information about a novel word meaning is in its predicate—the phrases and words that surround it and form a coherent message meaning . Novel words are hard to interpret from nonverbal or syntactic cues alone ( Dea´k , 2000b ) , but the predicate context of a novel word typically carries enough semantic , syntactic , and morphological information to powerfully constrain its likely meaning ( Dea´k , 2000a , b ; Goodman , 304 Gedeon O . Dea´k McDonough , & Brown , 1998 ) . It is therefore critical that children pull information about word meaning from the predicate context . Predicates are , however , changeable and unpredictable . Especially when children hear several unfamiliar words within a situation or conversation , they must adapt to each word’s speciﬁc predicate context . This might be particularly important in settings with low - frequency referents ( e . g . , zoos ; museums ) , or during special activities ( e . g . , preschool ﬁeld trips ) . But more centrally , children might hear multiple unfamiliar words in conversation ( see Beals & Tabors , 1995 , on word learning at mealtimes ) , when hearing a new story , or when accompanying parents on errands . The Flexible Induction of Meaning ( FIM ) test requires children to infer the meanings of novel words by using changing predicate cues to ﬂexibly shift attention among aspects of the referent . In the FIM - Ob children infer meanings of words for object properties ( Dea´k , 2000b ) . In a newer version , designated FIM - An ( for animates ; Narasimham & Dea´k , 2001 ) , children infer meanings of novel words for properties of strange creatures . The logic of the test is as follows : . Sets of items are presented several times . Each set includes a standard and four comparison items that share diﬀerent properties with the standard . In FIM - Ob , comparison objects have novel ( i . e . , not readily nameable ) body shapes , materials , and aﬃxed parts that diﬀer from set to set . In each set one comparison object has the same shape as the standard , one is made of the same material , one has same aﬃxed part , and a fourth is a dissimilar distractor . An example is shown in Figure 5 . Fig . 5 . Example of set from the FIM - Ob test ( Dea´k , 2000b ) , including standard object and four comparison objects ( same - shape , same - material , same - part , and distractor ) . Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 305 . Each time a given set is presented the standard is described , somewhat ambiguously ( like real word - learning situations ) , by a novel word modiﬁed by a predicate cue . The predicate implies a speciﬁc referent meaning . In the FIM - Ob , each word follows one of three predicates : ‘‘looks like a . . . ’’ ( or ‘‘is a’’ ) , ‘‘is made of , ’’ or ‘‘has a . ’’ These imply the novel shape , material , or part , respectively . . After hearing a predicate - word declarative ( e . g . , ‘‘This one is made of plexar’’ ) , the child is asked to generalize the word to one of the comparison items ( e . g . , ‘‘Find another one that is made of [ novel word ] ’’ ) . Inductive responses are classiﬁed as predicate - appropriate ( e . g . , judging the same - material object to be ‘‘ [ also ] made of plexar’’ ) or predicate - inappropriate . . Each set is presented several times with a diﬀerent predicate and novel word . For example , the ﬁrst time a set is shown the child might hear that the standard ‘‘is made of stylar , ’’ and , on subsequent trials , that it ‘‘has a graggle , ’’ and ‘‘looks like an introm . ’’ Flexibility is related to predicate - appropriate responses , particularly in later trials ( i . e . , general - izing the second and third words for a set to the properties implied by those predicates ) . A useful dependent measure is the number of predicate - appropriate switches : number of post - switch ( i . e . , second or third trial ) choices of previously unselected , predicate - appropriate objects as referents . Because children choose from several comparison items over several trials , for each of several sets , this paradigm can reveal more varied ﬂexible and inﬂexible response patterns than can other tests of ﬂexibility ( e . g . , DCCS ) . This allows testing ( described below ) of simple generalizations like ‘‘3 - year - olds perseverate ; 4 - year - olds don’t . ’’ Also , unlike the DCCS , FIM tests inductive ﬂexibility : cues are not deterministic rules but predicate cues with probabilistic implications relative to some physical array . Nevertheless , 5 - and 6 - year - olds make mostly appropriate responses in the FIM - Ob ( Dea´k , 2000b ) . Thus , the predicate cues are suﬃciently informative . The FIM also permits control of temporal and sequential parameters relevant to response set , interference , and ﬂexibility . For example , predicate order might be relevant because even if children grasp each predicate meaning , some are easier than others . Predicates that speciﬁcally imply a single available aspect or property have high implicature speciﬁcity and permit easy mapping . Predicates that are weakly associated with a single aspect are , at worst , equally associated with two or more aspects , thus have low implicature speciﬁcity , and are harder to map . Baseline task diﬃculty is a critical factor to consider because it is ecologically important ( i . e . , when we switch from one task to another , it is rare that the tasks are equally 306 Gedeon O . Dea´k interesting , easy , and motivating to us ) , because the diﬃculty of any given task is likely to change with age , and because diﬃculty might interact with order . For instance , switching to an easier versus a harder task impacts adults’ task - switching costs ( Monsell , Yeung , & Azuma , 2000 ) . In the FIM , ﬂexibility might be greater when switching to an easy versus a hard predicate . When children’s ﬁrst inference about a set is based on an easy predicate , they make more perseverative errors on subsequent trials than when the ﬁrst predicate is diﬃcult . In the FIM - Ob , ‘‘is made of’’ speciﬁcally implies material kind , whereas the less - speciﬁc predicate ‘‘looks like a’’ ( or ‘‘is a’’ ) is ambiguous to preschool children . When the ﬁrst word follows ‘‘is made of , ’’ 3 - to 6 - year - olds usually generalize it to a same - material object . In post - switch trials , though , when generalizing words following ‘‘looks like a , ’’ 3 - and 4 - year - olds often perseverate by selecting the same - material object again ( Dea´k , 2000b ) . Figure 6 shows the mean number of predicate - appropriate responses in the ﬁrst , second , and third trials , contingent on the initial predicate . The decline of appropriate responses in later blocks , especially in 3 - year - olds , reﬂects perseveration on initial responses . This , in turn , depends partly on whether the ﬁrst inference was supported by highly speciﬁc predicate – aspect implication . Selecting a strongly cue - implied aspect interferes with 3 - year - olds’ later responses to the same stimulus array . Predicate order does not , however , fully explain the development of ﬂexible induction of word meaning . Increasing sensitivity to the implications of various predicate cues , and awareness that successive word meanings should be independently inferred , also contribute . To better show this , children’s appropriate switches ( Dea´k , 2000b , Experiments 1 – 2 ) were weighted by a predicate order diﬃculty coeﬃcient . 4 Weighted means are shown in Figure 7 . Appropriate switches increased with age , from 2 . 9 ( out of 12 ) at 3 years to 5 . 9 at 4 years . Four - year - olds , but not 3 - year - olds , made more predicate - appropriate switches than expected by chance . It is critical to note , however , that 3 - year - olds make more appropriate responses than expected in the ﬁrst block , suggesting that they can draw the implications of these predicates , but cannot reliably do so in the face of conﬂicting prior responses . The shift from inﬂexible responding at 3 years 4 The speciﬁc weighting procedure was to take , for each group , the ratio of mean ﬁrst - block appropriate responses to a given predicate by the mean for all three predicates . Only ﬁrst block responses are used because they are not complicated by switching . These ratios deviate from 1 . 0 to the extent that the predicates diﬀer in speciﬁcity ( e . g . , an easy predicate receives a weight above 1 . 0 ) . The reciprocal of the weight is multiplied by the number of correct switches produced by a child in response to that predicate in a later block . In this way , correct switches to an easier predicate receive less ‘‘credit’’ than correct switches to a harder predicate . Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 307 to partly ﬂexible responding at 4 years and fully ﬂexible responding at 5 or 6 years is only moderated , but not dependent , on predicate order . Nevertheless , predicate speciﬁcity is a critical factor in word learning . The FIM - Ob was designed in part to pit this claim against the shape bias Fig . 6 . Mean appropriate inferences about the ﬁrst , second , and third words for an object , based on ﬁrst predicate and child’s age ( from Dea´k , 2000b , Experiments 1 – 2 aggregated ) . Bars show standard errors . Fig . 7 . Mean predicate - appropriate response switches ( weighted to reﬂect cue order diﬃculty ) in blocks 2 and 3 ( from Dea´k , 2000b , Experiments 1 – 2 ) . Bars show standard errors . 308 Gedeon O . Dea´k hypothesis—the idea that children learn to map object count nouns onto shape rather than other properties like color or size ( see Smith , 1999 , for review ) . Dea´k ( 2000b ) found that predicate implications , and children’s adaptation to predicates , overrides simple associations between aspects ( shape ) and a syntactic class ( count noun ) . Three - and 4 - year - olds did not selectively extend nouns predicated by ‘‘looks like a’’ or ‘‘is a’’ to same - shape objects , and 4 - year - olds selectively generalized count nouns pre - dicated by ‘‘has a’’ to small parts rather than objects with the same body shape . It was not that shapes were subtle or uninteresting—in a pre - test , children judged the same - shape objects to be more similar than the other comparison objects to the standards . 5 Nor was it that a same - shape interpretation of words predicated by ‘‘looks like a . . . ’’ was conceptually implausible , because 5 - and 6 - year - olds overwhelmingly made this interpre - tation . Finally , there is no syntactic ambiguity—‘‘looks like a’’ and ‘‘is a’’ must modify count nouns ( if the noun phrase is a single lexeme ) . The best interpretation , then , is that because the predicate ‘‘looks like a . . . ’’ is semantically ambiguous ( i . e . , has nonspeciﬁc implications ) , children with less semantic knowledge either cannot or will not use this cue to guide their response—in fact , its ambiguity seems to dissuade them from choosing the most perceptually salient match ! Dea´k ( 2000b ) concluded that a shape bias might emerge when children generalize words for simpliﬁed drawings or objects that emphasize shape ( Dea´k & Bauer , 1996 ) , but in general , young children will ﬂexibly choose from a variety of aspects as meanings of novel words , based on the speciﬁc meaning context of a word , not on rigid associations between properties and syntactic categories . The data from the FIM , however , show a restriction on younger children’s ﬂexibility in inferring multiple word meanings within a situation . Though early word learning is often described as precocious , even 4 - year - olds had trouble using predicate cues when the inferred referents of pre - viously learned words were present . This was true even if the later predicate cues were interpretable , and if children were given preliminary practice with those predicate cues . Children’s errors show a blind spot in their lexical problem solving : they do not require word meanings to be consistent with the semantic implications of the immediate linguistic context . The other meaningful elements within an utterance that modify a word should be the ﬁnal arbiters of its meaning—not , for example , what one happens to be thinking about when the word is uttered . Yet 3 - and 4 - year - olds in the FIM sometimes map a new word onto the same referent of a previous word . This shows a baﬄing ‘‘leakage’’ of implication across utterances , and thus 5 The fact that standard and same - shape objects diﬀered by one part , incidentally , did not seem to reduce shape - based choices ; see Dea´k ( 2000b ) for details . Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 309 ignorance of the relative importance of diﬀerent kinds of cues ( i . e . , local predicates vs . past utterances ) for determining word meaning , as well as ignorance that diﬀerent words for a referent typically refer to diﬀerent aspects ( excepting the rare true synonym ) . Thus , in situations that test these conﬂicts , some preschool children do not demonstrate practical knowledge of these basic characteristics of word meanings . 2 . Individual Diﬀerences in Children’s Flexible Induction of Meaning In addition to age diﬀerences , the FIM reveals individual diﬀerences in preschool children’s ﬂexibility . Even among children who make more predicate - appropriate switches than expected by chance , some children shift their responses to all three predicates ; others shift for only one of the two predicates . If the former is deﬁned by at least 80 % appropriate responses to each predicate ( 25 % is expected by chance ) , no 3 - year - old , 28 % of 4 - year - olds , and 73 % of 6 - year - olds meet this higher criterion ( i . e . , fully ﬂexible ) . Partial ﬂexibility—deﬁned by at least 80 % appropriate responses to only two predicates—shows a notable pattern : children are most likely to perseverate in post - switch responses to ‘‘looks like a’’ words , and never perseverate in post - switch responses to ‘‘is made of’’ words . Thus , children on the cusp of ﬂexible word learning are heavily dependent on predicate speciﬁcity . Among inﬂexible children , some ( about 25 – 30 % ) consistently persever - ate , seldom if ever switching responses after the ﬁrst . Half of these children perseverate on single aspect ; for example always choosing the same - material objects . The chosen aspect is usually that implied by the ﬁrst predicate ( indicating that even these children pay some attention to predicate context ) , unless the ﬁrst predicate is ‘‘looks like a . ’’ The remaining children persistently focus on a speciﬁc item from each set , with no apparent pattern across sets . Perhaps these children do not notice the predicate cue , or do not know whether it should override salient perceptual similarities . Other inﬂexible 3 - to 6 - year - olds ( about 16 % of sample ) , mostly 3 - year - olds , are indiscriminate : they switch some responses over trials , but not based on predicate cues . Perhaps these children notice a change between successive questions ( e . g . , a diﬀerent novel word ) , and expect diﬀerent words to have diﬀerent meanings , but fail to notice or draw the implication of each predicate cue . Perhaps they then switch responses in hopes of receiving feedback from the adult ( Speer , 1984 ) . I have described these results to show that perseveration is not the inevitable alternative to ﬂexibility . Also , perseveration is probabilistic ( i . e . , the same child might perseverate from task A to B , but not C ) and mediated by factors like task order ( see also Perner & Lang , 2002 ) . This is revealed only by more complex tests than the DCCS or the Stroop . Perseveration 310 Gedeon O . Dea´k also stems from diﬀerent kinds of interference ( e . g . , attributes or speciﬁc items ) . Conversely , ﬂexibility also is graded and context dependent . Understanding patterns of meaning ( e . g . , in the lexicon ) , and various meaning cues , is important for adaptation to changing contexts of meaning . Children who do not notice changing meaning cues ( e . g . , predicates ) , or do not know their implications , will be inﬂexible . They might perseverate ( at least in some inferences ) , or select meanings haphazardly . How children construe meaning cues , and the importance of changes in these cues across utterances , determines their ﬂexibility in inferring meaning . Other , poorly understood factors determine how inﬂexibility is manifested . In the FIM at least three variables shift from trial to trial : object array , words , and predicate cues . If children do not expect diﬀerent words to have diﬀerent meanings , and diﬀerent predicates to imply diﬀerent stimulus aspects , there is no reason why they should not perseverate . It does not mean that they are incapable of inhibiting prior responses ; it is at least as plausible that they do not recognize the demand to suppress those responses . In contrast , if children realize that the question is changing across trials , but fail to focus on the relevant information ( i . e . , predicate cue ) , they might respond indiscriminately . Even if these claims are true , they do not presuppose that individual diﬀerences in ability to ﬂexibly induce meaning are stable within a child . That is , are some 3 - and 4 - year - olds consistently more ﬂexible in inferring meaning ? To address this , Narasimham and Dea´k ( 2001 ) administered both the FIM - Ob and the FIM - Al to a group of 3 - and 4 - year - olds . The partial correlation between appropriate switches in the two tests was r ¼ . 53 , indicating that they tap the same skills ( though the FIM - Al was slightly harder than the FIM - Ob ) . 3 . Age and Individual Diﬀerences in Flexibility : Relation to Inhibition Perhaps all these data can be explained more simply : maybe some preschool children lack the inhibitory capacity to de - select prior responses , and this explains perseveration in the FIM . This is inconsistent , however , with a control test ( Dea´k , 2000b , Experiment 3 ) that used stimuli analogous to FIM - Ob sets , except critical attributes and words were familiar ( e . g . , a square made of paper with an aﬃxed button ) . Children were asked , for instance , to ﬁnd another object ‘‘made of paper’’ or ( on another trial ) one that ‘‘has a button . ’’ Here the demand to use predicate cues is reduced ( because property labels are familiar ) , but the demand to inhibit prior responses is held constant . Three - and 4 - year - olds performed very well in this test , indicating that they can inhibit prior responses when redundant cues are available . This further suggests that a central inhibitory capacity cannot account for age and individual diﬀerences in children’s ﬂexibility . Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 311 Young children’s perseveration in the FIM still must be explained . Recent work ( Dea´k & Narasimham , under review ) tested the relation among perseveration , inhibition , and ﬂexibility in the FIM - Ob . To test whether perseveration stems from inability to inhibit prior responses , we varied response set activation strength by manipulating the delay between responses or between blocks , and by changing the number of successive questions with a single predicate cue . In one study , a group of 3 - year - olds were given the FIM - Ob with a 90 - sec delay between blocks ( trials were blocked by predicate ) . During the delay , children were primed for the next predicate ( e . g . , if ‘‘has a’’ was next , object parts were pointed out and described using that phrase ) . If inhibitory capacity is important , the delay and priming should reduce proactive interference and thereby reduce perseveration . Yet perseveration was no less common in this group than in the original , no - delay sample ( Dea´k , 2000b ) . In a second study , one group of 3 - and 4 - year - olds received a random mix of predicates in each block of trials , and another group had trials blocked by set ( i . e . , all three questions about a set were given in succession ) . If inhibitory ability determines ﬂexibility , mixing predicates should reduce perseveration because there is no chance to build a response set . Conversely , blocking by sets should increase perseveration because there is no chance for release from proactive interference between responses . Alternately , rapid predicate switching in both conditions might increase indiscriminate responding . Yet neither condition inﬂuenced children’s response patterns : the previously described age diﬀerence in ﬂexibility was replicated , but none of the groups diﬀered from each other , or from the original sample , in mean number of appropriate switches . Thus , switching rate and interval between successive problems does not seem to aﬀect ﬂexibility , at least within the parameters studied . In a third study , 3 - and 4 - year - olds assigned to high - or low - interference groups did six familiar - attribute trials ( as in Dea´k , 2000b , Experiment 3 , described above ) before the FIM - Ob . In the high - interference group , all six trials used the same predicate as the ﬁrst FIM - Ob test block , so children completed 12 ( six easy ; six hard ) trials with one predicate before switching . The low - interference group’s familiar - attribute trials used all three predicates , so they switched predicates several times before starting the ﬁrst test block . If response interference causes perseveration , repetition of one type of response should increase perseveration . However , there was no diﬀerence between the two groups . Also , there was no correlation between any measure of ﬂexibility in the FIM and any measure of ﬂexibility in the Stroop Day / Night test—another strike against the idea that diﬀerences in ﬂexibility depend on a general inhibitory trait . 312 Gedeon O . Dea´k These ﬁndings suggest perseveration does not change with the number of pre - switch trials ( see also Zelazo , Frye , & Rapus , 1996 ) , number of intervening trials , or number of task switches . Perhaps , then , perseveration in 3 - to 5 - year - olds is not sensitive to interference from prior responses , as mediated by repetition of one type of response , or by delay since the last response . This narrows the possible roles of cognitive inhibition in ﬂexible induction of meaning . 4 . Age and Individual Diﬀerences in Flexibility : Verbal Knowledge and Memory Perhaps children’s ﬂexibility in inferring word meanings follows their comprehension of predicate cues . Several ﬁndings make this an unlikely explanation for all FIM ﬁndings . First , 3 - year - olds make more predicate - appropriate responses than expected by chance in the ﬁrst block , but not in later blocks ( Dea´k , 2000b ) ; this diﬀerence disappears with age . Second , in an unpublished study ( Dea´k , 1995 ) , 3 - year - olds produced words for object shapes , materials , and parts , in response to questions that used the FIM - Ob predicates . Children were asked ‘‘What does this look like ? ’’ and ‘‘What is this made of ? ’’ about a wooden star , paper rectangle , metal disk , glass cube , cloth letter A , sponge heart , Play - Doh ball , and a plastic triangle . They were asked ‘‘What does this look like ? ’’ and ‘‘What does this have ? ’’ about a toy teacup , dinosaur , ﬁre truck , raccoon , telephone , rabbit , biplane , and snail . Predicate - appropriate answers were shape or object kind labels for ‘‘looks like’’ questions ( mean ¼ 14 . 7 of 16 labels ) , material kind terms for ‘‘made of’’ ( mean ¼ 3 . 5 of 8 responses ) and part labels for ‘‘has a’’ ( mean ¼ 7 . 3 of 8 responses ) . This conﬁrms that even 3 - year - olds have reasonably accurate knowledge of these predicate meanings . Third , Yen ( 1997 ) showed children objects such as a large star covered with smaller stars and with a medium - sized wooden star in the center , and asked , on diﬀerent trials , which other object ‘‘looks like a star , ’’ ‘‘is made of star , ’’ and ‘‘has a star . ’’ The comparison objects were , for example , a large star covered with circles , a square covered with small stars , or a triangle with a medium - sized star attached . Thus , the word is familiar but totally ambiguous , so the predicate is the only useful cue . Three - year - olds made mostly predicate - appropriate responses , suggesting that they can use the predicate in ambiguous situations . Though most preschoolers at least marginally comprehend the predicates , some added processing demands might reduce children’s application of this knowledge . Perhaps , as Bishop ( 1997 ) suggests , working memory demands ( e . g . , novel words ; complex stimulus array ) impair performance especially when sentences are complex and delivered quickly . In the original FIM protocol , however , sentences were spoken slowly , enunciated clearly , and Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 313 repeated . Also , they were syntactically simple . Thus , I suspect working memory is not a major factor in age and individual diﬀerences , but this has not been tested directly . Rather , FIM - Ob test ﬂexibility seems to depend on children’s tendency to consistently attend to predicate cues and notice when they switch , and their understanding that the local predicate should ‘‘trump’’ other response cues . 5 . Summary : Children’s Flexible Induction of Word Meanings Children’s ability to ﬂexibly use predicate information to constrain inferences of word meanings undergoes substantial development from 3 to 6 years . Many obvious possible causes of development can be ruled out ; see Table III for a summary of ﬁndings . A fascinating question is whether this development is reiterated when language skills are transferred to the modality of written language . Making inferences from text is a critical reading skill by which many new words are learned . Individual diﬀerences in ﬂexible induction of ( spoken ) word meanings might predict later diﬀerences in children’s ability to infer meaning from text ( see Yuill & Oakhill , 1991 ) . On the one hand , variance in preschool children’s inductive ﬂexibility might reﬂect age - speciﬁc attainments , for example , awareness of the ‘‘operating principles’’ of language . That is , ﬂexible children assume that diﬀerent novel words have distinct meanings . They notice when speakers signal a change to a new predicate—akin to a clear topic change . This sets the stage for ﬂexible selection of cues to meaning . Because these principles are already familiar when children begin reading , diﬀerent processes might account for ﬂexible induction in reading . On the other hand , Olson ( 1977 ) suggests that ability to decontextualize messages , and use text meaning per se to draw inferences , is crucial for acquiring written language . This ability also can be seen as essential in using the predicate , rather than distal context ( e . g . , prior responses ) , to infer meaning . D . COMMON FACTORS IN CHILDREN’S FLEXIBLE COGNITIVE PROCESSING OF MESSAGES AND MEANINGS The empirical results reviewed here suggest a complex developmental pattern . The DCCS tests rule - use ﬂexibility ; the FIM tests word learning ﬂexibility . Each uses unique stimuli , cues , and procedures . Nevertheless , they show roughly parallel results : signiﬁcant improvement from 3 to 4 years , many perseverative errors in younger preschoolers , and no impact of factors like number of pre - switch trials and number of rule switches . Before concluding that we have found a general developmental phenomenon in ﬂexible language processing , however , recall that 3 - year - olds perform 314 Gedeon O . Dea´k ﬂexibly in some analogous tasks ( Dea´k , 2000b , Experiment 3 ; Perner & Lang , 2002 ) . The picture is not clear and simple . Perhaps a broader survey of cognitive changes during the preschool years will provide some clues . In general , preschool children are rapidly getting better at solving problems by selecting task - relevant aspects of complex stimuli . In many cases , knowing what is ‘‘task - relevant’’ depends on semantic and pragmatic sensitivity to task content . Children by 2 and 3 years can produce MARs , but cannot reliably use explicit instructions as input to shift the active aspect of the MAR . The problem seems to lie in choosing the aspect implied by a speciﬁc request , by virtue of the semantic content per se . Thus , TABLE III Summary of Questions and Findings about Preschool Children’s Flexible Induction of Word Meanings Question Result Can children use predicate cues ( e . g . , ‘‘has a . . . ’’ ; ‘‘is made of . . . ’’ ) to flexibly infer novel word meanings ? About one - third of 3 - year - olds are above chance ; most perseverate or switch responses indiscriminately . a Two - thirds of 4 - year - olds are above change in post - switch responses ; a minority still perseverate . a Is there independent evidence of this age difference ? Yes , in children’s judgments about the breakability or location of unusual ‘‘hybrid’’ objects , based on different predicates . b Is the FIM test too confusing or tedious for children ? No : In a control task using objects with familiar attributes and labels , performance is near ceiling . c Do children perseverate because they cannot ignore pre - viously chosen objects ? No : See previous entry . c Do 3 - year - old children under - stand the predicate cues ? Most are above chance in mapping the FIM - Ob predicates to the appropriate aspects . d Is training on the task necessary or important ? Brief training on the predicate meanings has no effect on performance . a Effects of between question delay , number of successive same - predicate trials , or num - ber of predicate switches ? There is no evidence that any of these factors significantly affect performance . e Is a child’s performance stable or predictable across word - learning tasks ? Preschoolers’ performance on two versions of the FIM task has a partial correlation of r ¼ . 53 . Performance on the Stroop Day / Night task does not correlate with the FIM . e Note : a Dea´k ( 2000b , Experiments 1 – 2 ) ; b Kalish & Gelman ( 1992 ) ; c Dea´k ( 2000b , Experiment 3 ) ; d Unpublished studies ( see text ) ; e Dea´k & Narasimham ( under review ) . Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 315 though 3 - year - olds can produce several words for an object , they cannot judge whether these words specify ‘‘what it looks like’’ or ‘‘what it does’’ ( Dea´k , Yen , & Pettit , 2001 ) . Similarly , 4 - year - olds , but not 3 - year - olds , ﬂexibly select aspects ( e . g . , ‘‘fur’’ or ‘‘bowl’’ ) from novel compounds ( e . g . , ‘‘fur bowl’’ ) according to speciﬁc aspects implied by the question ( e . g , ‘‘Will it break ? ’’ vs . ‘‘Does it go in the kitchen ? ’’ ) ( Kalish & Gelman , 1992 ) . This skill—to use speciﬁc semantics of questions to choose an answer— cannot be deﬁcient because it is ecologically irrelevant . In preschoolers’ everyday settings ( e . g . , home , school , laboratory ) , tasks and events are described by command , instruction , and description . Older children are expected to organize their actions in accordance with the ‘‘text’’ of instructions . The importance of message interpretation skills suggests that 2 - and 3 - year - olds’ inﬂexibility is due to some rather pervasive cognitive limitation . One possibility is that message interpretation and responsiveness requires an ‘‘uncertainty stance’’ : tolerance for ( and expectation of ) indeterminacy of upcoming messages , and assumption that some cues , which change unpredictably , can resolve this ambiguity . The most informative cues to the current utterance’s meaning are not homogeneously distributed over time . All else being equal , cues to an unfamiliar term’s meaning are concentrated in the same utterance as the term . The fact that , for instance , we talked about an object’s material a few minutes ago is no guarantee that the next unfamiliar word also will refer to material . Yet many 3 - year - olds do not know the scope or ‘‘sphere of inﬂuence’’ of diﬀerent linguistic cues—for example , a novel word’s predicate context ‘‘trumps’’ prior responses . In ﬂexible rule use , children’s problem might be inferring the operative principle for rule selection . For instance , ‘‘Where does this go in the shape game ? ’’ presents a conﬂict between the current predicate cue’s ( i . e . , ‘‘shape game’’ ) implication ( e . g . , dogs go in the left box ) , and a previously practiced implication and response . In both cases , selecting the current message meaning is critical . Thus , in quite diﬀerent tests , ﬂexibility requires knowing which linguistic cues should govern inferences about meaning . V . Questions and Conclusions Available data on children’s ﬂexible language processing contradict outdated and simplistic views of its development . These data also highlight diﬃcult questions . Outlining the most pressing of these is important for guiding future empirical eﬀorts . These are summarized overleaf . 316 Gedeon O . Dea´k A . HOW DO LOGICAL AND METACOGNITIVE ABILITIES INFLUENCE FLEXIBILITY ? I have hypothesized that ﬂexibility requires sensitivity to the independent indeterminacy of the meaning of each question or utterance in a series . Existing empirical evidence for this dependency is , however , only correla - tional . Experimental tests that manipulate or train children’s awareness of indeterminacy would be informative . B . HOW DOES INHIBITION INFLUENCE THE DEVELOPMENT OF FLEXIBILITY ? Inhibitory processes probably play an important role in children’s rapidly developing ability to respond ﬂexibly to changing messages and meanings . Available data and theory do not , however , provide a coherent or falsiﬁable account that adds teeth to this vague supposition . I suspect our concepts of cognitive inhibition are too primitive to advance much further , and a radical reconceptualization of the construct must precede any substantive progress . The best approach using the available construct of cognitive inhibition is to specify the kind of information that might interfere with children’s response switching . This can reveal developmental changes ; for instance , children 3 years and older are seldom confounded by changing stimulus locations , whereas 1 - and 2 - year - olds are susceptible to location - based interference ( Zelazo , Reznick , & Spinazzola , 1998 ) . C . IS LANGUAGE CENTRAL TO FLEXIBLE COGNITION ? The MARM metaphor implies a general , multimodal representational process that is reﬂected in ﬂexible language processing , and in nonlinguistic perception and action systems . For example , from 3 to 6 years there is improvement in the ﬂexible deployment of encoding and recall strategies ( Ceci & Howe , 1978 ; Miller et al . , 1986 ) , spatial inference ( e . g . , Fabricius , Sophian , & Wellman , 1987 ; Hermer - Vazquez , 1997 ) , graphical representa - tion ( Picard & Vinter , 1999 ) , and mental state inferences ( Wellman , 1990 ) . This parallel development might result from domain - general representational changes , for example in metarepresentation ( Karmiloﬀ - Smith , 1992 ) , but it is also possible that language plays a unique role in cognitive ﬂexibility . Language reﬂects and facilitates our most pervasive , open - ended manifestations of cognitive ﬂexibility . The basic function of language is fast , ﬂexible production and reconstruction of a practically unlimited range of selectively sculpted mental representations . No other behavior system in nature matches this potential for ﬂexible representation . Though laboratory Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 317 tests of ﬂexible cognition ( e . g . , task - switching ) typically ignore the role of symbolic knowledge , virtually all of these tasks use instructions to orient participants to the task , and abstract symbols to cue task switches . Perhaps , then , basic symbol mapping knowledge is needed for cognitive ﬂexibility ( Deacon , 1997 ) . One candidate is the expectation that messages are unpredictable in meaning , and that some linguistic cues determine a message’s meaning , even if the listener does not endorse or fully understand it . This is critical knowledge shared by no cognitive system , to our knowledge , outside of humans above the age of 2 years . This knowledge might facilitate ﬂexibility in processing problems that are not primarily linguistic . For example , children’s ability to produce complex descriptions of speciﬁc locations predicts their ability to ﬂexibly use spatial cues to infer object location ( Hermer - Vazquez , 1997 ) . Even adults , in functional ﬁxedness paradigms , often need detailed cues labels or verbal ‘‘hints’’ to eventually solve the problems ( Glucksberg & Danks , 1968 ; Meier , 1937 ) . Though such evidence does not resolve ‘‘chicken - or - egg’’ questions about the evolution of ﬂexible cognition and language , it suggests that develop - ment of ability to produce and understand complex , speciﬁc locutions is linked to the development of ability to choose between conceptual distinctions in complex , ambiguous situations or arrays . Perhaps knowing or inducing labels for diﬀerent aspects of a stimulus provides a conceptual toehold for switching attention among aspects of reality . D . METHODOLOGICAL PROBLEM : FILLING THE GAPS Flexibility in any system , linguistic or otherwise , is diﬃcult to study in a controlled manner . Meaningful series of responses must be elicited , and critical dependent measures concern change over time . Thus , some of the challenges of microgenetic methods ( Siegler & Crowley , 1991 ) , such as fairly dense observations , also characterize rich tests of ﬂexibility . A practical challenge is that child participants , unlike most adults , do not cheerfully tolerate long series of boring test questions or problems . This limits the number of responses and task switches obtainable from children within a session . Another challenge of comparing ﬂexibility across a wide age range is that preferred dependent measures change with age . One possibility is to use RTs to measure switch costs in young children , but this introduces new challenges . For instance , young children’s response times are quite variable , so if each child contributes only a few switch cost data points , large samples must be tested to detect reliable group diﬀerences . A related problem is that the distribution of preschoolers’ response times has a very long tail , yet most of the long responses seem valid : children may stay attentive , oriented , and ‘‘on - task , ’’ and take as long as 30 sec to respond to an FIM trial ! Because long 318 Gedeon O . Dea´k responses cannot be discarded as anomalous , they present a sticky analytic problem . More generally , changes with age in the nature of switch costs reveal a critical aspect of the development of ﬂexibility . In simple tasks , children’s switch costs are manifested as a high rate of perseverative errors , whereas adults show a modest , transitory increase in RT . What does this indicate about changes in inhibition , executive control , and strategic responses to imputed principles of a task ? For example , why are adults’ task switch costs limited to 1 – 2 post - switch trials ( Monsell , Yeung , & Azuma , 2000 ) , whereas preschool children’s perseveration persists for many post - switch trials ( Zelazo , Frye , & Rapus , 1996 ) ? No data are available to answer this question . E . CONCLUSIONS Cognitive ﬂexibility allows humans to adapt successive inferences or responses to changing task demands , by selecting task - relevant information that may change unpredictably . It is a higher - order cognitive ability , because it concerns controlled changes in cognitive activity over time , problems , or tasks . Cognitive ﬂexibility is required for everyday language processing , because most of us do not inhabit fully predictable and familiar linguistic environments , or use only learned scripts and sequences to produce and understand words , utterances , and discourse . A generalized description of cognitive ﬂexibility is the metaphorical Multi - Aspectual Representational Medium , wherein activation of diﬀerent aspects of representations ( e . g . , of a physical array , sequence of events , or mental state ) dynamically shifts in response to varied , changing task - relevant input forces . This input is often in the medium of natural language . In investigating the development of cognitive ﬂexibility as reﬂected in , and inﬂuenced by , language use , a persistent challenge is that age - related changes in ﬂexibility coincide with multiple changes in brain , cognitive , and language development . Nevertheless , some interim conclusions can be drawn . From 2 to 6 years , and even from 3 to 5 years , there is substantial increase in ability to adapt descriptive locutions to changing ( linguistic ) task cues , and ability to adapt to changing meanings of successive verbal messages . This applies to a variety of speech acts ( e . g . , declarative utterances in narrative , instructions or rules , descriptive sentences , questions ) , and to practical problems of following adults’ instructions , and inferring the meanings of ambiguous words or the referents of complex locutions . There is no evidence that this developmental change is the direct result of maturation of a central , executive capacity to inhibit active responses , whereby activation grows over repeated responses and decays over time or intervening activity . Young children are not mechanically unable to inhibit prior responses ( Dea´k , 2000b , Experiment 3 ; Perner & Lang , 2001 ) , nor are Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 319 they unable to switch labels , on short order , for a given referent ( e . g . , Dea´k & Maratsos , 1998 ) . Of course , inhibitory ability might contribute to the development of ﬂexibility , but this hypothesis has little support . In contrast , there is recent evidence that children’s awareness of changing verbal information ( e . g . , predicates ) , and ability to selectively map alternative locutions to diﬀerent predicates or questions , is a factor in the development of ﬂexible language use . A more speculative hypothesis is that sensitivity to indeterminacy of messages ( e . g . , questions ; unfamiliar words ) contributes to ﬂexibility in language processing . These speculations are rich grounds for future research eﬀorts . Finally , it is worth noting that available evidence explores ﬂexibility in three age groups : 2 - to 6 - year - olds , young adults , and elderly adults . Although there is some evidence pertaining to cognitive ﬂexibility in older children ( Ceci & Howe , 1978 ; Cepeda , Kramer & Gonzalez de Sather , 2001 ) , such evidence is so scant that few inferences can be drawn about development in the vast gulf between kindergarten and college . We are therefore far from being able to describe and explain typical and atypical life - span changes in ﬂexible linguistic and nonlinguistic cognitive processing . Investigating this will , in part , depend on methods and tests that can compare cognitive ﬂexibility across wide age ranges . ACKNOWLEDGMENT Preparation of this chapter was supported by NSF award BCS - 0092027 . Address correspondences to the author at deak @ cogsci . ucsd . edu . REFERENCES Albert , M . L . , & Sandson , J . ( 1986 ) . Perseveration in aphasia . Cortex , 22 , 103 – 115 . Allport , A . , Styles , E . A . , & Hsieh , S . ( 1994 ) . Shifting intentional set : Exploring the dynamic control of tasks . In C . Umilta & M . Moscovitch ( Eds . ) , Attention and performance XV ( pp . 421 – 452 ) . Cambridge : MIT Press . Anderson , R . C . , & Ortony , A . ( 1975 ) . On putting apples into bottles—A problem of polysemy . Cognitive Psychology , 7 , 167 – 180 . Barclay , J . , Bransford , J . D . , Franks , J . , McCarrell , N . , & Nitsch , K . ( 1974 ) . Comprehension and semantic ﬂexibility . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 13 , 471 – 481 . Barsalou , L . W . ( 1982 ) . Context - independent and context - dependent information in concepts . Memory & Cognition , 10 , 82 – 93 . Barsalou , L . W . ( 1983 ) . Ad hoc categories . Memory & Cognition , 11 , 211 – 227 . Barsalou , L . W . ( 1989 ) . Intraconcept similarity and its implications for interconcept similarity . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 101 – 140 ) . Cambridge : C . U . P . 320 Gedeon O . Dea´k Beals , D . E . , & Tabors , P . O . ( 1995 ) . Arboretum , bureaucratic and carbohydrates : Preschoolers’ exposure to rare vocabulary at home . First Language , 15 , 57 – 76 . Beeman , M . ( 1998 ) . Coarse semantic coding and discourse comprehension . In M . Beeman & C . Chiarello ( Eds . ) , Right hemisphere language comprehension ( pp . 255 – 284 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . Bishop , D . V . ( 1997 ) . Uncommon understanding : Development and disorders of language comprehension in children . Hove , UK : Taylor & Francis . Bloom , P . ( 2000 ) . How children learn the meaning of words . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Bohlmann , N . ( 2001 ) . The eﬀects of feedback on perseverative errors in problem solving with 3 - to 5 - year - old children . Unpublished MA thesis , San Diego State University , San Diego , CA . Brennan , S . E . , & Clark , H . H . ( 1996 ) . Conceptual pacts and lexical choice in conversation . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 22 , 1482 – 1493 . Brown , R . ( 1958 ) . How shall a thing be called ? Psychological Review , 65 , 14 – 21 . Brownell , H . , & Martino , G . ( 1998 ) . Deﬁcits in inference and social cognition : The eﬀects of right hemisphere brain damage on discourse . In M . Beeman & C . Chiarello ( Eds . ) , Right hemisphere language comprehension ( pp . 309 – 328 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . Brownell , H . , Michelow , D . , Powelson , J . , & Gardner , H . ( 1983 ) . Surprise but not coherence : Sensitivity to verbal humor in right hemisphere patients . Brain and Language , 18 , 20 – 27 . Brownell , H . H . , Simpson , T . L . , Bihrle , A . M . , Potter , H . H . , & Gardner , H . ( 1990 ) . Appreciation of metaphoric alternative word meaning by left and right brain - damaged patients . Neuropsychologia , 28 , 375 – 383 . Campbell , R . N . , & Bowe , T . B . ( 1983 ) . Text and context in early language comprehension . In M . Donaldson , R . Grieve , & C . Pratt ( Eds . ) , Early childhood development and education ( pp . 115 – 126 ) . Oxford : Basil Blackwell . Carlson , S . M . , & Moses , L . J . ( 2001 ) . Individual diﬀerences in inhibitory control and children’s theory of mind . Child Development , 72 , 1032 – 1053 . Ceci , S . J . , & Bronfenbrenner , U . ( 1985 ) . ‘‘Don’t forget to take the cupcakes out of the oven’’ : Prospective memory , strategic time - monitoring , and context . Child Development , 56 , 152 – 164 . Ceci , S . J . , & Howe , M . J . A . ( 1978 ) . Age - related diﬀerences in free recall as a function of retrieval ﬂexibility . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 26 , 432 – 442 . Cepeda , N . J . , Kramer , A . F . , & Gonzalez de Sather , J . C . ( 2001 ) . Changes in executive control across the life span : Examination of task - switching performance . Developmental Psychology , 37 , 715 – 730 . Chukovsky , K . ( 1968 ) . From two to ﬁve ( Rev . ed . , M . Morton , Trans . ) . Berkeley : University of California Press . Clark , E . V . ( 1997 ) . Conceptual perspective and lexical choice in acquisition . Cognition ( Vol . 64 , pp . 1 – 37 ) . Clark , E . V . , & Svaib , T . A . ( 1997 ) . Speaker perspective and reference in young children . First Language ( Vol . 17 , pp . 57 – 74 ) . Cohen , L . , & Dehaene , S . ( 1998 ) . Competition between past and present : Assessment and interpretation of verbal perseverations . Brain , 121 , 1641 – 1659 . Cosgrove , J . M . , & Patterson , C . J . ( 1977 ) . Plans and the development of listener skills . Developmental Psychology , 13 , 557 – 564 . Cruse , D . ( 1977 ) . The pragmatics of lexical speciﬁcity . Journal of Linguistics , 13 , 153 – 164 . Daigneault , S . , Braun , C . , & Whitaker , H . ( 1992 ) . Early eﬀects of normal aging on persever - ative and non - perseverative prefrontal measures . Developmental Neuropsychology , 8 , 99 – 114 . Damasio , A . R . ( 1985 ) . The frontal lobes . In K . Heilman & E . Valenstein ( Eds . ) , Clinical neuropsychology ( pp . 339 – 376 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 321 Danet , B . ( 1980 ) . ‘Baby’ or ‘fetus’ ? Language and the construction of reality in a manslaughter trial . Semiotica , 32 , 187 – 219 . Deacon , T . W . ( 1997 ) . The symbolic species : The co - evolution of language and the brain . New York : Norton . Dea´k , G . O . ( 1995 ) . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , University of Minnesota , Twin Cities . Dea´k , G . O . ( 2000a ) . Chasing the fox of word learning : Why ‘‘constraints’’ fail to capture it . Developmental Review , 20 , 29 – 80 . Dea´k , G . O . ( 2000b ) . The growth of ﬂexible problem solving : Preschool children use changing verbal cues to infer multiple word meanings . Journal of Cognition and Development , 1 , 157 – 192 . Dea´k , G . , & Bauer , P . J . ( 1996 ) . The dynamics of preschoolers’ categorization choices . Child Development , 67 , 740 – 767 . Dea´k , G . O . , & Maratsos , M . ( 1998 ) . On having complex representations of things : Prescho - olers use multiple words for objects and people . Developmental Psychology , 34 , 224 – 240 . Dea´k , G . O . , & Narasimham , G . ( under review ) . Is perseveration caused by inhibition failure ? Evidence from preschool children’s ﬂexible inferences about word meanings . Dea´k , G . O . , Ray , S . D . , & Brenneman , K . ( 2003 ) . Children’s perseverative appearance – reality errors are related to emerging language skills . Child Development . Dea´k , G . O . , Ray , S . D . , & Pick , A . D . ( 2003 ) . Flexibility in preschoolers’ object classiﬁcation : Eﬀects of age , task diﬃculty , and rule reminders . Unpublished manuscript . Dea´k , G . O . , Yen , L . , & Pettit , J . ( 2001 ) . By any other name : When will preschoolers produce multiple labels for a referent ? Journal of Child Language , 28 , 787 – 804 . Dell , G . S . , Burger , L . K . , & Svec , W . R . ( 1997 ) . Language production and serial order : A functional analysis and a model . Psychological Review , 104 , 123 – 147 . Dempster , F . N . ( 1992 ) . The rise and fall of the inhibitory mechanism : Toward a uniﬁed theory of cognitive development and aging . Developmental Review , 12 , 45 – 75 . Dennis , M . ( 1991 ) . Frontal lobe function in childhood and adolescence : A heuristic for assessing attention regulation , executive control , and the intentional states important for social discourse . Developmental Neuropsychology , 7 , 327 – 358 . Diamond , A . ( 1998 ) . Evidence of the importance of dopamine for prefrontal cortex functions early in life . In A . Roberts , T . Robbins , & L . Weiskrantz ( Eds . ) , The prefrontal cortex ( pp . 144 – 164 ) . Oxford : University Press . Diamond , A . , & Taylor , C . ( 1996 ) . Development of an aspect of executive control : Development of the abilities to remember what I said and to ‘‘Do as I say , not as I do . ’’ Developmental Psychobiology , 29 , 315 – 334 . Diamond , A . , Prevor , M . B . , Callender , G . , & Druin , D . P . ( 1997 ) . Prefrontal cortex cognitive deﬁcits in children treated early and continuously for PKU . Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development , 62 ( 4 , Serial No . 252 ) . Donaldson , M . ( 1978 ) . Children’s minds . Glasgow : Fontana . Duncker , K . ( 1945 ) . On problem solving . Psychological Monographs , 58 ( 5 , Whole No . 270 ) . Eastman , P . D . ( 1960 ) . Are you my mother ? New York : Random House . Fabricius , W . V . , Sophian , C . , & Wellman , H . M . ( 1987 ) . Young children’s sensitivity to logical necessity in their inferential search behavior . Child Development , 58 , 409 – 423 . Fauconnier , G . ( 1997 ) . Mappings in thought and language . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Finke , R . A . , Ward , T . B . , & Smith , S . M . ( 1992 ) . Creative cognition : Theory , research , and applications . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Fiore , S . M . , & Schooler , J . W . ( 1998 ) . Right hemisphere contributions to creative problem solving : Converging evidence for divergent thinking . In M . Beeman & C . Chiarello ( Eds . ) , Right hemisphere language comprehension ( pp . 349 – 371 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . 322 Gedeon O . Dea´k Flavell , J . H . , Flavell , E . R . , & Green , F . L . ( 1983 ) . Development of the appearance - reality distinction . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 95 – 120 . Flavell , J . H . , Green , F . L . , & Flavell , E . R . ( 1986 ) . Development of knowledge about the appearance - reality distinction . Monographs of the Society for Research on Child Development , 51 ( 1 , serial no . 212 ) . Frye , D . , Zelazo , P . D . , & Palfai , T . ( 1995 ) . Theory of mind and rule - based reasoning . Cognitive Development , 10 , 483 – 527 . Garrod , S . , & Anderson , A . ( 1987 ) . Saying what you mean in dialogue : A study in conceptual and semantic co - ordination . Cognition , 27 , 181 – 218 . German , T . P . , & Defeyter , M . ( 2000 ) . Immunity to ‘functional ﬁxedness’ in young children . Psychonomic Bulletin and Review , 7 , 707 – 712 . Gershkoﬀ - Stowe , L . ( 2002 ) . Object naming , vocabulary growth , and the development of word retrieval abilities . Journal of Memory and Language , 46 , 665 – 687 . Gerstadt , C . L . , Hong , Y . , & Diamond , A . ( 1994 ) . The relationship between cognition and action : Performance of children 3½ – 7 years old on a Stroop - like day - night task . Cognition , 53 , 129 – 153 . Gilbert , S . J . , & Shallice , T . ( 2000 ) . Task switching : A PDP model . Cognition , 44 , 297 – 337 . Glucksberg , S . , & Danks , J . H . ( 1968 ) . Eﬀects of discriminative labels and of nonsense labels upon availability of novel function . Journal of Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior , 7 , 72 – 76 . Glucksberg , S . , Krauss , R . M . , & Weisberg , R . ( 1966 ) . Referential communication in nursery school children : Method and some preliminary ﬁndings . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 3 , 333 – 342 . Gombert , J . E . ( 1992 ) . Metalinguistic development . Chicago : University of Chicago . Goodman , J . C . , McDonough , L . , & Brown , N . B . ( 1998 ) . The role of semantic context and memory in the acquisition of novel nouns . Child Development , 69 , 1330 – 1344 . Gopnik , A . , & Astington , J . W . ( 1988 ) . Children’s understanding of representational change and its relation to the understanding of false belief and the appearance - reality distinction . Child Development , 59 , 26 – 37 . Grattan , L . M . , & Eslinger , P . J . ( 1990 ) . Higher cognition and social behavior : Cognitive ﬂexibility and empathy after brain injury . Neuropsychology , 3 , 175 – 185 . Grattan , L . M . , & Eslinger , P . J . ( 1991 ) . Frontal lobe damage in children : A comparative review . Developmental Neuropsychology , 7 , 283 – 326 . Guilford , J . P . ( 1967 ) . The nature of human intelligence . New York : McGraw - Hill . Harnishfeger , K . K . ( 1995 ) . The development of cognitive inhibition : Theories , deﬁnitions , and research evidence . In F . N . Dempster & C . J . Brainerd ( Eds . ) , Interference and inhibition in cognition ( pp . 175 – 204 ) . San Diego : Academic Press . Hermer - Vazquez , L . ( 1997 ) . Cognitive ﬂexibility as it emerges over evolution and human develop - ment : The case of spatial reorientation . Unpublished doctoral thesis , Cornell University . Hirsh , K . W . ( 1998 ) . Perseveration and activation in aphasic speech production . Cognitive Neuropsychology , 15 , 377 – 388 . Hocevar , D . , & Michael , W . ( 1979 ) . The eﬀects of scoring formulas on the discriminant validity of tests of divergent thinking . Educational & Psychological Measurement , 39 , 917 – 921 . Houde´ , O . ( 2000 ) . Inhibition and cognitive development : Object , number , categorization , and reasoning . Cognitive Development , 15 , 63 – 73 . Hughes - Wagner , J . , & Dea´k , G . ( 1999 , April ) . Learning semantic relations between novel words . Presented at the Society for Research on Child Development meeting , Albuquerque , NM . Jacques , S . , Zelazo , P . D . , Kirkham , N . , & Semecesen , T . ( 1999 ) . Rule selection versus rule execution in preschoolers : An error - detection approach . Developmental Psychology , 35 , 770 – 780 . Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 323 Johnson , A . S . , & Fishkin , A . S . ( 1999 ) . Assessment of cognitive and aﬀective behaviors related to creativity . In A . Fishkin , B . Cramond , & P . Olszewski - Kubilius ( Eds . ) , Investigating creativity in youth ( pp . 265 – 306 ) . Cresskill , NJ : Hampton . Kalish , C . W . , & Gelman , S . A . ( 1992 ) . On wooden pillows : Multiple classiﬁcation and children’s category - based inductions . Child Development , 63 , 1536 – 1557 . Karmiloﬀ - Smith , A . ( 1992 ) . Beyond modularity : A developmental perspective on cognitive science . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Katz , N . , Baker , E . , & Macnamara , J . ( 1974 ) . What’s in a name ? A study of how children learn common and proper names . Child Development , 45 , 469 – 473 . Lakoﬀ , G . ( 1987 ) . Women , ﬁre , and dangerous things . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago . Lezak , M . D . ( 1995 ) . Neuropsychological assessment ( 3rd ed . ) . London : Oxford University Press . Liittschwager , J . , & Markman , E . M . ( 1994 ) . 16 - and 24 - month - olds’ use of mutual exclusivity as a default assumption in second - label learning . Developmental Psychology , 6 , 955 – 968 . Luchins , A . S . ( 1942 ) . Mechanization in problem solving : The eﬀect of Einstellung . Psychological Monographs , 54 ( 6 , Whole No . 248 ) . Luria , A . R . ( 1959 ) . The directive function of speech in development and dissolution . Word , 341 – 452 . MacWhinney , B . ( 1978 ) . The acquisition of morphophonology . Monographs of the Society for Research on Child Development , 43 ( 1 – 2 , serial no . 174 ) . MacWhinney , B . ( 1987 ) . The competition model . In B . MacWhinney ( Ed . ) , Mechanisms of language acquisition ( pp . 249 – 308 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . MacWhinney , B . , Ple´h , C . , & Bates , E . ( 1985 ) . The development of sentence interpretation in Hungarian . Cognitive Psychology , 17 , 178 – 209 . Maratsos , M . ( 1998 ) . The acquisition of grammar . In D . Kuhn & R . Siegler ( Volume Eds . ) , W . Damon ( Series Ed . ) , Handbook of child psychology ( 5th ed . ) : Volume 2 : Cognition , perception , and language ( pp . 421 – 466 ) . New York : Wiley . Markman , E . M . ( 1979 ) . Realizing that you don’t understand : Elementary school children’s awareness of inconsistencies . Child Development , 50 , 643 – 655 . Markman , E . M . ( 1994 ) . Constraints on word meaning in early language acquisition . Lingua , 92 , 199 – 227 . Markman , E . M . , & Wachtel , G . F . ( 1988 ) . Children’s use of mutual exclusivity to constrain the meanings of words . Cognitive Psychology , 20 , 121 – 157 . Mayr , U . , & Keele , S . W . ( 2000 ) . Changing internal constraints on action : The role of backward inhibition . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 129 , 4 – 26 . Medin , D . L . , & Shoben , E . J . ( 1988 ) . Context and structure in conceptual combination . Cognitive Psychology , 20 , 158 – 190 . Meier , N . R . ( 1931 ) . Reasoning in humans . Journal of Comparative Psychology , 12 , 181 – 194 . Meier , N . R . ( 1937 ) . Reasoning in rats and human beings . Psychological Review , 44 , 365 – 378 . Meiran , N . , Chorev , Z . , & Sapir , A . ( 2000 ) . Component processes in task switching . Cognitive Psychology , 41 , 211 – 253 . Merriman , W . E . , & Bowman , L . L . ( 1989 ) . The mutual exclusivity bias in children’s word learning . Monographs of the Society for Research on Child Development , 54 ( 3 – 4 , serial no . 220 ) . Merriman , W . E . , Jarvis , L . H . , & Marazita , J . M . ( 1995 ) . How shall a deceptive thing be called ? Journal of Child Language , 22 , 129 – 149 . Meyer , D . E . , & Kieras , D . ( 1997 ) . A computational theory of executive cognitive processes and multiple - task performance : Part I , Basic mechanisms . Psychological Review , 104 , 3 – 65 . Miller , P . H . , Haynes , V . , DeMarie - Dreblow , D . , & Woody - Ramsey , J . ( 1986 ) . Children’s strategies for gathering information in three tasks . Child Development , 57 , 1429 – 1439 . 324 Gedeon O . Dea´k Milner , B . , & Petrides , M . ( 1984 ) . Behavioural eﬀects of frontal - lobe lesions in man . Trends in Neuroscience , 403 – 407 . Monsell , S . , & Driver , J . ( Eds . ) ( 2000 ) . Control of cognitive processes : Attention and performance XVIII . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Monsell , S . , Yeung , N . , & Azuma , R . ( 2000 ) . Reconﬁguration of task - set : Is it easier to switch to the weaker task ? Psychological Research , 63 , 250 – 264 . Munakata , Y . , & Yerys , B . ( 2001 , October ) . Perseveration in card sorting : Do children know more or less than we think ? Paper presented at the second Cognitive Development Society meeting , Virginia Beach , VA . Narasimham , G . , & Dea´k , G . O . ( 2001 , October ) . Inductive and deductive ﬂexibility in 3 - and 4 - year - old children : Eﬀects of task and complexity . Poster presented at the Cognitive Development Society meeting , Virginia Beach , VA . O’Bryan , K . G . , & MacArthur , R . S . ( 1969 ) . Reversibility , intelligence , and creativity in nine - year - old boys . Child Development , 40 , 33 – 45 . Olson , D . R . ( 1977 ) . From utterance to text : The bias of language in speech and writing . Harvard Educational Review , 47 , 257 – 281 . O’Neill , D . K . ( 1996 ) . Two - year - old children’s sensitivity to a parent’s knowledge state when making requests . Child Development , 67 , 659 – 677 . Pandya , D . N . , & Yeterian , E . H . ( 1998 ) . Comparison of prefrontal architecture and connections . In A . Roberts , T . Robbins , & L . Weiskrantz ( Eds . ) , The prefrontal cortex ( pp . 51 – 66 ) . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Papagno , C . , & Basso , A . ( 1996 ) . Perseveration in two aphasic patients . Cortex , 32 , 67 – 82 . Perner , J . , & Lang , B . ( 2002 ) . What causes 3 - year - olds’ diﬃculty on the Dimensional Change Card Sorting task ? Infant and Child Development , 11 , 93 – 105 . Perner , J . , Stummer , S . , & Lang , B . ( 1999 ) . Executive functions and theory of mind : Cognitive complexity or functional dependence ? In P . D . Zelazo , J . Astington , & D . Olson ( Eds . ) , Developing theories of intention : Social understanding and self - control ( pp . 133 – 152 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . Piaget , J . ( 1954 ) . The construction of reality in the child . New York : Ballantine . Picard , D . , & Vinter , A . ( 1999 ) . Representational ﬂexibility in children’s drawings : Eﬀects of age and verbal instructions . British Journal of Developmental Psychology , 17 , 605 – 622 . Reed , M . A . , Pien , D . L . , & Rothbart , M . K . ( 1984 ) . Inhibitory self - control in preschool children . Merrill - Palmer Quarterly , 30 , 131 – 147 . Revelle , G . L . , Wellman , H . M . , & Karabenick , J . D . ( 1985 ) . Comprehension monitoring in preschool children . Child Development , 56 , 654 – 663 . Rice , C . , Koinis , D . , Sullivan , K . , Tager - Flusberg , H . , & Winner , E . ( 1997 ) . When 3 - year - olds pass the appearance - reality test . Developmental Psychology , 33 , 54 – 61 . Robbins , T . W . ( 1998 ) . Dissociating executive functions of the prefrontal cortex . In A . Roberts , T . Robbins , & L . Weiskrantz ( Eds . ) , The prefrontal cortex ( pp . 117 – 130 ) . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Roberts , A . , Robbins , T . , & Weiskrantz , L . ( Eds . ) ( 1998 ) . The prefrontal cortex . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Runco , M . ( 1993 ) . Cognitive and psychometric issues in creativity research . In S . Isaksen , M . Murdock , R . Firestein , & D . Treﬃnger ( Eds . ) , Understanding and recognizing creativity : The emergence of a discipline ( pp . 331 – 368 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Sapp , F . , Lee , K . , & Muir , D . ( 2000 ) . Three - year - olds’ diﬃculty with the appearance - reality distinction : Is it real or is it apparent ? Developmental Psychology , 36 , 547 – 560 . Schmidt , C . R . , & Paris , S . G . ( 1983 ) . Children’s use of successive clues to generate and monitor inferences . Child Development , 54 , 742 – 759 . Schober , M . F . ( 1993 ) . Spatial perspective - taking in conversation . Cognition , 47 , 1 – 24 . Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 325 Schyns , P . G . , & Oliva , A . ( 1999 ) . Dr . Angry and Mr . Smile : When categorization ﬂexibly modiﬁes the perception of faces in rapid visual presentations . Cognition , 69 , 243 – 265 . Shatz , M . , & Backscheider , A . ( 2001 , December ) . The development of non - object categories in 2 - year - olds . Presented at the Early Language Acquisition Conference , Lyon . Siegal , M . ( 1991 ) . Knowing children : Experiments in conversation and cognition . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Siegel , I . E . , Saltz , E . , & Roskind , W . ( 1967 ) . Variables determining concept conservation in children . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 74 , 471 – 475 . Siegler , R . S . ( 1981 ) . Developmental sequences within and between concepts . Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development , 46 ( 2 , Serial No . 189 ) . Siegler , R . S . ( 1996 ) . Emerging minds . Oxford : University Press . Siegler , R . S . , & Crowley , K . ( 1991 ) . The microgenetic method : A direct means for studying cognitive development . American Psychologist , 46 , 606 – 620 . Smith , E . R . , Fazio , R . H . , & Cejka , M . ( 1996 ) . Accessible attitudes inﬂuence categorization of multiply categorizable objects . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 71 , 888 – 898 . Smith , L . B . ( 1999 ) . Children’s noun learning : How general learning processes make specialized learning mechanisms . In B . MacWhinney ( Ed . ) , The emergence of language ( pp . 207 – 303 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Smith , L . B . , & Heise , D . ( 1992 ) . Perceptual similarity and conceptual structure . In B . Burns , ( Ed . ) , Advances in Psychology—percepts , concepts , and categories : The representation and processing of information ( Vol . 93 , pp . 233 – 272 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier . Sonnenschein , S . , & Whitehurst , G . J . ( 1983 ) . Training referential communication skills : The limits of success . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 35 , 426 – 436 . Speer , J . R . ( 1984 ) . Two practical strategies young children use to interpret vague instructions . Child Development , 55 , 1811 – 1819 . Stemberger , J . P . ( 1989 ) . Speech errors in early child language production . Journal of Memory and Language , 28 , 164 – 188 . Stemmer , B . , & Joanette , Y . ( 1998 ) . The interpretation of narrative discourse of brain - damaged individuals within the framework of a multilevel discourse model . In M . Beeman & C . Chiarello ( Eds . ) , Right hemisphere language comprehension ( pp . 329 – 348 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Taylor , A . E . , Saint - Cyr , J . A . , & Lang , A . E . ( 1986 ) . Frontal lobe dysfunction in Parkinson’s disease . Brain , 109 , 845 – 883 . Thelen , E . , & Smith , L . B . ( 1994 ) . A dynamic systems approach to the development of cognition and action . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Torrance , E . P . ( 1988 ) . The nature of creativity as manifest in its testing . In R . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , The nature of creativity : Contemporary psychological perspectives ( pp . 43 – 75 ) . Cambridge University Press . Towse , J . N . , Redbond , J . , Houston - Price , C . , & Cook , S . ( 2000 ) . Understanding the dimensional change card sort : Perspectives from task success and failure . Cognitive Development , 15 , 347 – 365 . Tranel , D . , Damasio , H . , & Damasio , A . R . ( 1997 ) . On the neurology of naming . In H . Goodglass & A . Wingﬁeld ( Eds . ) , Anomia : Neuroanatomica and cognitive correlates ( pp . 65 – 90 ) . San Diego : Academic Press . Vitkovitch , M . , & Humphreys , G . ( 1991 ) . Perseverant responding in speeded picture naming : It’s in the links . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 17 , 664 – 680 . Vurpillot , E . ( 1968 ) . The development of scanning strategies and their relation to visual diﬀerentiation . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 6 , 622 – 650 . 326 Gedeon O . Dea´k Vygotsky , L . ( 1978 ) . Mind in society . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Wellman , H . M . ( 1990 ) . Children’s theories of mind . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Yen , L . ( 1997 ) . Unpublished study , Vanderbilt University . Yuill , N . , & Oakhill , J . ( 1991 ) . Children’s problems in text comprehension . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Zelazo , P . D . , & Frye , D . ( 1996 ) . Cognitive complexity and control : A theory of the development of deliberate reasoning and intentional control . In M . Stamenov ( Ed . ) , Language structure , discourse , and the access to consciousness . ( pp . 113 – 153 ) Amsterdam : John Benjamins . Zelazo , P . D . , Frye , D . , & Rapus , T . ( 1996 ) . An age - related dissociation between knowing rules and using them . Cognitive Development , 11 , 37 – 63 . Zelazo , P . D . , & Reznick , S . J . ( 1991 ) . Age - related asynchrony of knowledge and action . Child Development , 62 , 719 – 735 . Zelazo , P . D . , Reznick , J . S . , & Pin˜on , D . E . ( 1995 ) . Response control and the execution of verbal rules . Developmental Psychology , 31 , 508 – 517 . Zelazo , P . D . , Reznick , J . S . , & Spinazzola , J . ( 1998 ) . Representational ﬂexibility and response control in a multistep multilocation task . Developmental Psychology , 34 , 203 – 214 . Cognitive Flexibility and Language Abilities 327