Co - designing Social Robots With Cognitively Impaired Citizens Abstract This Work - in - Progress paper describes current work and future challenges of co - designing social robots with cognitively impaired residents . The project has in time of writing ran more than two years , which allows the reporting of both technical outcomes and methodological challenges . Author Keywords Social Robot ; Participatory Design ; Co - design ACM Classification Keywords D . 2 . 10 Design : Methodologies ; I . 2 . 9 Robotics ; K . 4 . 2 Social Issues : Assistive technologies for persons with disabilities Project introduction Since 2015 we have been working in collaboration with a regional , Danish center for adults with acquired brain damages . The center provides full - time care for 24 adult citizens with acquired brain damages across the wide spectrum of cognitive impairments . The overarching theme for our collaboration is designing for diversity and project ideas primarily emerge from informal talks and interactions with residents and staff and as spin - offs from completed or ongoing projects . The projects are usually technical co - design projects , such as the co - design of a digitally linked , system of devices for the collection , distribution and the re - experience of memories [ 10 ] for residents and their families . If people acquire a brain damage the municipal system categorizes them based on severity and ability to return back to a normal state ( before the state of impairment ) . Being moved to this center means that it is not deemed possible to return to a ‘normal’ life . At this center there are various companies offering technical solutions to the institution , yet many of these technical solutions are highly generic and with little to no understanding of the unique conditions of being cognitively and physically Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the Owner / Author . NordiCHI ' 18 , September 29 - October 3 , 2018 , Oslo , Norway © 2018 Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 6437 - 9 / 18 / 09 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3240167 . 3240253 Kasper Rodil Dept . Architecture & Media Technology , Aalborg University Aalborg , Denmark kr @ create . aau . dk Matthias Rehm Dept . Architecture & Media Technology , Aalborg University Aalborg , Denmark matthias @ create . aau . dk Antonia Lina Krummheuer Dept . of Communication and Psychology , Aalborg University Aalborg , Denmark antonia @ hum . aau . dk impaired . A majority of these products are tailored to rehabilitation and do not address emerging and more personal challenges for the individual . Citizens who are now permanent residents due to their conditions are facing a myriad of everyday challenges relating to self - worth , self - control , privacy and independence . One example is remembering activities planned ( such as physiotherapy ) , which results in the residents having to ask staff members several times a day or staff members having to remind the residents time and time again . Challenges , which the residents were easily able to overcome prior to acquiring a brain damage , but are now among other contributing factors for depression and frustration . From talking with staff and residents , we were provoked by premade , off - the - shelf products , which are negligent of the unique challenges residents have , and staff pointed out to us that resources for handling smaller personal problems were not possible to allocate resources for or to solve within current practices and expertise . It is firmly rooted in our design belief - system to enable people , who are socio - technically unnoticed , to respond to their own challenges . From this set of optics , the notion of the " collective designer " [ 3 ] accurately describes our standpoints in design , as we take a humanistic stance , are recognizing design as ways to exert politics and see design matters like in this project ( and in others ) as a collaborative process of learning and constructing . During the time we started discussing with staff how to approach these at the time undefined everyday problems , we participated in a common gathering of the residents at the institution . Our contribution was a show and tell about our work with social robots . This triggered a strong interest among the residents who asked us for possibilities on participating in a robot project . Thus , the decision was taken to tackle the challenge of everyday reminding and guiding problems using social robotics as a technical domain for implementation and Participatory Design ( PD ) as the underlying design methodology [ 12 ] . Seven residents and several staff members joined our project , which was formally initiated in 2016 . The project has the structure as seen on Figure 1 with intermittent stages of evaluation , re - design and dissemination . The project has now reached phase five ( implementation of robotic prototypes ) . Figure 2 , Figure 3 and Figure 4 show the process from ideation to materialization of one robot for one resident . This particular robot will assist one resident in remembering and allow her to input own appointments to a local , calendar robot . According to the International Journal of Social Robotics , " Social Robotics is the study of robots that are able to interact and communicate between themselves , with humans , and with the environment , within the social and cultural structure attached to its role . " [ 6 ] . While the institutional care sector is one of the envisioned application domains in a large part of the research literature on social robots , development often starts with a ( general ) robotic system for which an application context is assumed and where these assumptions often rely on stereotypes [ 5 ] . In our work , we try to reverse this approach , i . e . we start with the practice the robot should be employed in , and then develop a specific robotic system for this purpose . Thus from a political and emancipatory perspective the project was initiated with the following vision . To create a toolbox for developing individualized solutions that match the need of each specific citizen . The seven residents represent seven individual projects influenced by the unique capabilities and needs of the residents . Figure 1 : In this image , the six project phases are illustrated . While seemingly linear and straightforward , the reality is that more than a year of iterations on design and construction have been necessary to reach a first prototype . One participant is forced to communicate with a spelling plate , is partly paralyzed and intubated . Another resident has almost full physical functionality , but cannot remember more than a couple minutes back , thus has a short attention span and has due to a bike accident at a young age been staying at various neuro - centers in close to half his lifetime . By creating the possibility for experimenting with the task of building real and functional robots , we aim at increasing resident independence and quality of life , while at the same time strengthening social competences and supporting the feeling of being in control over one’s own life . Participatory Design and Social robots Surveying the literature from the past provide little guidance in terms of empirical knowledge about the specific configuration of social robots in co - design projects with cognitively impaired . The limited amount of literature ( especially in PD projects ) surrounding robots ( in a wide sense ) often presents robots as imagined technical solutions from design sessions ( see for example [ 4 ] ) , but unreported in terms of actual implementation and formal evaluation . In cases where robots are implemented from a PD methodological approach [ 12 ] they are often embedded in more traditional settings ( such as industrial context ) or as PD workshops surrounding robots , which are already proprietary off - the - shelf products ( see for example [ 13 ] ) . Having a bottom - up process framed by the expertise and life situations of the residents in opposition to merely evaluative social robot projects ( see [ 8 ] ) is very time consuming – not only in de facto design workshops . We have spent a large amount of time together with the residents on matters not immediately related to design outcomes ( for instance by socializing while dining or playing games together ) . It has been clear ( in line with [ 8 ] , [ 9 ] ) that it has enabled us to better understand the situation of the impaired residents and situated practices of the supporting staff . With growing interest we have read related PD work [ 2 ] reporting on the Neighborhood Networks project where robots are technical means to facilitate a community - based rhetoric on how to engage critically with the surrounding urban environment . We have been able to confirm the co - designed robots in our described project to also become ways for residents to communicate critically about their lifeworld through their design ( see for example page four ) . In this project we have been inspired by the work by [ 1 ] , [ 11 ] on the importance for technologies in an assisted living context to be aesthetic and not to infer further stigma by their visual characteristics . Thus we have from the beginning added an industrial designer to the team of technology - and design process - minded researchers . And we have experienced how visual aesthetics have been valorized and expressed time and time again . Future work to discuss with the NordiCHI community We will present some of our first findings from approaching cognitively impaired citizens ' everyday problems with PD as our design methodology and social robotics as the technical domain of application . These findings present us with some challenges we seek to co - explore with relevant research communities before we engage in loops of formal evaluation and re - design ( there are still some robots left to manufacture ) . Figure 2 : From top to bottom : The first photo is from exploring the use context and the concept of social robots together with staff and resident . The second photo shows one of the prototypes from one of the many prototyping sessions . The last photo shows a refined mid - fi prototype from a later session . Enabling cognitively impaired citizens to be expressive and critically engage their own life - worlds by designing social robots All seven prototypes show clear signs of being personal , visual and functional statements about the life - world of the resident . One of the co - designers is a young man who spent almost half his lifetime at neuro - centers , has at maximum one minute of recall and is very limited in forming long - term memory . In his apartment , he has a board hanging where staff pins his appointments so he can be reminded of his future activities . He decided that he needed a Mechanical Reminder ( MR ) , as he called it . To provide some of the many examples from just this one case , he time and time again told us that the board is a constant negative reminder of his accident ( was mentioned by a majority of the co - designers ) , his time spent in institutions and what he no longer can do . He explained among many other things , that the MR should be a robot - guy standing in the corner and have a firm , but friendly voice . When we asked him why this deliberate choice , he said that he is surrounded by women all the time and that he needs a voice that can separate itself from the ‘wall of female voices’ . And he expressed that it should not be commanding , as he has been commanded around much of his life . The MR should have a Hawaii shirt on decorated with family photos and pictures of his favorite flowers . While it has been clear all along that aesthetics matter to the residents in form of critical engagement , we are faced with a challenge . Developing just one robot is extremely time consuming and each robot represents the opinions , experiences etc . of the resident . On the other hand transferring design outcomes ( or subsets thereof ) to other contexts is rooted in PD ( as it largely builds on Participatory Action Research and the concept of Transferability ) . It is a challenge how to gauge which elements in a robot design are transferrable , and which are de facto personalized accounts ( besides the obvious ones expressed clearly enough for us to understand the underlying reasons for ) . The Challenge of continuity We agree with [ 7 ] , when they write that people with aphasia ( as a language disorder ) " need not to be a barrier to participating in design . " Our role as PD ' ers just becomes the more important as we can no longer rely on language as the most convincing parameter , but to an even higher extent have to use our materials , the knowledge of staff and seek the capacities being barred from flowing with language . One of the methodological challenges of working with co - designers with short attention spans is , as also experienced with the young man mentioned above - he had little idea of who we were . One of the authors have been meeting with him frequently for more than a year , but when they met it would feel like the first time for the co - designer . They agreed that for every time they met , the author should give a summary and show some photos of past sessions . After a very short while , the author would have to repeat , ask or remind yet again about what was just decided . And it is in this case as in many other cases when there are cognitive impairments – that the counterpart quickly loses energy and becomes fatigued . This process is challenged further by the fact that the neuro - center management constantly appoints new staff due to meeting hours and ruling practices . From a methodological perspective there is no continuous flow of collaboration and recall in this Figure 3 : These images illustrate the manufacturing phase . From top to bottom : the first photo shows a 3D model based on a paper prototype . The second photo shows the model being 3D printed . The last photo shows the 3D print applied with some layers of paint . particular design process . Lack of continuity poses fundamental challenges to the PD methodology as we cannot rely on trust being formed over time and the traditional design life cycle of refining and iterating is challenged . This problem occupies much of our current focus and are at the moment seeking a better understanding of what this means to the practice of design and co - construction of knowledge and technology alike . References 1 . Shiri Azenkot , Catherine Feng , and Maya Cakmak . 2016 . Enabling Building Service Robots to Guide Blind People : A Participatory Design Approach . In Proc The Eleventh ACM / IEEE International Conference on Human Robot Interaction . USA : IEEE Press , 3 - 10 . 2 . Carl DiSalvo , Illah Nourbakhsh , David Holstius , Ayça Akin , and Marti Louw . 2008 . The Neighborhood Networks project : a case study of critical engagement and creative expression through participatory design . In Proc 10th PDC . NY : ACM , 41 - 50 . 3 . Pelle Ehn and Richard Badham . 2002 . Participatory design and the collective designer . In Proc PDC’02 . 4 . Allison Farber , Allison Druin , Gene Chipman , Dawn Julian , and Sheila Somashekher . 2002 . How Young Can Our Technology Design Partners Be ? . In Proc PDC 2002 , 272 - 277 . 5 . Susanne Frennert and Britt Östlund . 2014 . Seven matters of concern of social robots and older people . In International Journal of Social Robotics 6 , 2 : 299 - 310 . 6 . International Journal of Social Robotics . Retrieved 09 - 02 - 2018 from http : / / www . springer . com / engineering / control / journ al / 12369 7 . Julia Galliers , Stephanie Wilson , Abi Roper , Naomi Cocks , Jane Marshall , Sam Muscroft , and Tim Pring . 2012 . Words Are Not Enough : Empowering People with Aphasia in the Design Process . In Proc 12th PDC . NY , USA : ACM , 51 - 60 . 8 . Hee R . Lee , Selma Šabanović , Wan - Ling Chang , Shinichi Nagata , Jennifer Piatt , Casey Bennett , and David Hakken . 2017 . Steps Toward Participatory Design of Social Robots : Mutual Learning with Older Adults with Depression . In Proc ACM / IEEE International Conference on Human - Robot Interaction . NY , USA : ACM , 244 - 253 . 9 . Stephen Lindsay , Katie Brittain , Daniel Jackson , Cassim Ladha , Karim Ladha , and Patrick Olivier . 2012 . Empathy , Participatory Design and People with Dementia . In Proc SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . NY , USA : ACM , 521 - 530 . 10 . Kasper Rodil , Emil B . Nielsen , and Jonathan B . Nielsen . 2018 . Sharing Memories : Co - Designing Assistive Technology with Aphasic Adults and Support Staff . In International Journal of Sociotechnology and Knowledge Development 10 , 1 : 21 - 36 . doi : 10 . 4018 / IJSKD . 2018010102 11 . Kristen Shinohara and Jacob O . Wobbrock . 2011 . In the Shadow of Misperception : Assistive Technology Use and Social Interactions . In Proc SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . NY , USA : ACM , 705 - 714 12 . Clay Spinuzzi . 2005 . The Methodology of Participatory Design . In Technical Communication 52 , 2 : 163 - 174 . 13 . Steve Walker , Simon Bell , Adrian Jackson , and Daniel Heery . 2012 . Imagine real avatars and flying shepherds : involvement and engagement in innovative ICT . In Proc 12th PDC . NY , USA : ACM , 101 - 108 Figure 4 : From top to bottom : The first photo shows the assembly of gear to enable setting the time and date for an activity . Second photo shows the implementation of the timer module . The last photo shows the assembled and implemented robot head . Pressing the teeth sets the day . Activities , in the form of wooden encased RFID tags with icons engraved , are placed in the mouth and processed .