Assessing Student Knowledge Transfer During Group Work Randolph Hutchison Department of Health Sciences Furman University Greenville , SC USA Randolph . hutchison @ furman . edu Courtney Faber , Lisa Benson and Adam Kirn Department of Engineering and Science Education Clemson University Clemson , SC USA John D . DesJardins Department of Bioengineering Clemson University Clemson , SC USA Abstract — Successful group work requires that students transfer relevant prior knowledge to solve problems . This paper establishes a method to assess dynamic knowledge transfer in a group setting through analysis of a group project in a biomechanics class . Transcripts of student - student and student - instructor interactions were coded for evidence of target tools ( students identifying relevant problem features ) , source tools ( students activating prior knowledge ) , answers ( stopping points ) , external inputs ( resources and prompts from individuals or the instructor ) , and workbench explanations ( student explanations of connections between source tools and target tools ) . Knowledge transfer was identified when a source tool and a target tool were coded within a phrase . The frequencies of codes were quantified to provide an overall picture of knowledge transfer for each group member throughout the project . Analysis for one group ( a sophomore and junior bioengineering student , and a freshman engineering student ) revealed that the junior was the largest contributor in the group , followed by the sophomore and freshman . The group mentioned source tools most frequently , followed by external inputs and target tools . The analysis provided evidence of knowledge transfer within the group through their identification of target tools and use of prior knowledge to explain their observations . Keywords— knowledge transfer ; group work ; prior knowledge I . I NTRODUCTION Studies have proposed advantages to teamwork or group work - based methodologies with university students [ 1 ] . From work in group environments , students are able to acquire skills they will need in future jobs such as , leadership , communication , problem - solving , and time management [ 2 – 5 ] . Positive effects have also been shown in terms of students’ academic performance , motivation , and attitudes toward learning [ 6 ] , [ 7 ] , especially for students who find group activities to be more interesting and engaging compared to traditional teaching [ 8 ] . While previous work has examined the effect of group work on cognitive performance and attitudinal changes , there have been few studies seeking to understand how group work influences students ' use of prior knowledge when solving problems . Traditional studies of knowledge transfer , or the application of prior knowledge to novel situations , have examined students in sequestered problem solving environments with students being expected to arrive at an expert ' s solution [ 9 – 16 ] . Results of these traditional transfer studies often show limited evidence of students ' abilities to reach such solutions , resulting in failure to transfer . There has been an emphasis in the literature to move away from traditional transfer methodologies towards student - centered models . Student - centered transfer identifies what prior knowledge students are transferring [ 17 – 21 ] rather than if students can obtain an expert solution . Educators can use this student - centered approach to understand what students are transferring to problems , and take this information to further develop students ' learning [ 22 ] . While various research studies have sought to improve group cognitive products and problem solving performance [ 23 ] , [ 24 ] it is still unclear what prior knowledge students are transferring while working in groups [ 25 ] . An important factor in team success is students ' ability to transfer relevant prior knowledge to aspects of the team project . This study seeks to understand what student interactions with resources , group members , and problem features may facilitate knowledge transfer . In order to address this need , a coding scheme was developed to assess the knowledge that students dynamically transfer into a group problem solving scenario , and what prompts transfer to occur . 978 - 1 - 4673 - 5261 - 1 / 13 / $ 31 . 00 ©2013 IEEE II . T HEORETICAL F RAMEWORK Two models of transfer were adapted to this work : preparation for future learning [ 21 ] , and dynamic transfer [ 26 ] . Unlike traditional models of transfer , Bransford and Schwartz [ 21 ] suggest an alternative perspective in which transfer is thought of as “preparation for future learning” ( PFL ) . PFL shifts the focus from sequestered problem solving to understanding people ' s ability to learn when surrounded by resources . PFL was used as a basis to design a biomechanics course . This design was selected to encourage students’ application of prior knowledge to a self - selected final project . The PFL framework allows us to examine students’ learning trajectories and learning goals [ 21 ] . Rebello and colleagues [ 26 ] utilized the PFL framework to analyze how physics students worked with an instructor to solve physics problems and applied prior knowledge to problem features . Rebello ' s work uses a student - centered approach that examines what students do transfer into a learning environment , allowing for identification of what connections students have made to prior knowledge and how these connections are used [ 17 – 19 ] , [ 21 ] , [ 26 ] . This model for examining transfer is referred to by Rebello as dynamic transfer [ 26 ] . Using a dynamic transfer approach allows the researcher to identify mediating factors [ 26 ] that might provide insight into interventions to promote productive transfer . This method relies on the identification of similarities by the learner instead of similarities perceived by the researcher [ 19 ] . Rebello’s coding scheme [ 26 ] was adapted for this work to assess the dynamic transfer of knowledge by group members working through a problem . III . R ESEARCH M ETHODS Audio recordings were collected during the final group project of a course entitled “Movement Science in Biomechanics , ” to determine how students utilized their prior knowledge in relation to the problem features . The students were instructed to use audio recording devices during any group work inside and outside of the classroom . These recordings were then transcribed and coded based on the dynamic transfer theoretical framework previously mentioned . A . Course Description Movement Science in Biomechanics was designed for undergraduate engineering students as part of a five - week study abroad program during May and June of 2010 in Brussels , Belgium . This five - week program incorporated six credit hours of instruction divided between a technical elective ( Movement Science in Biomechanics ) and a humanities course based on the culture and history of Belgium and the surrounding area . Two members of the research team taught the Movement Science in Biomechanics course . Twelve students attended this class for three hours a day , three days a week , usually between the hours of 9 : 00 am and 4 : 00 pm . Based on elements of the PFL theoretical framework [ 21 ] , this course applied principles and concepts of biomechanics , including statics , dynamics , and physics , to human motion analysis . Students were expected to utilize various bioinstrumentation tools to collect human motion and loading data , and apply biomechanics concepts to quantify and characterize these motions and loads . This active learning course was designed to give students the freedom to apply their prior knowledge , and make connections to new material concerning movement science and biomechanics . Throughout the course , students constructed and executed experimental designs based on conceptual information learned in class through problem - based scenarios . Students designed their final project around a research question developed within groups and approved by the instructor to synthesize learning objectives in the syllabus . These learning objectives included : • Characterize the centers of mass and ranges of motion for the human body segments and their limitations in certain pathologies . • Determine displacement , velocity , and accelerations from experimental measurements of human motion . • Compute net forces , moments , power , and energy on joints based on reaction force measurements . • Relate human motion to muscle recruitment using electromyography ( EMG ) . • Formulate design objectives and design experiments to measure and calculate different aspects of human motion . • Evaluate experimental results and apply to current human motion pathologies . • Defend conclusions in discussion based on experimental results and applicable human motion theories / principles . • Develop a presentation culminating human motion principles learned during the class and apply to a current bioengineering issue . B . Population of Students For the purpose of anonymity , pseudonyms were used for all of the students in this study . Twelve students from Clemson University participated in Movement Science in Biomechanics ( 5 females and 7 males ) . Within the class , the majors included : 9 bioengineering students , 1 mechanical engineering student , 1 chemical engineering student and 1 general engineering student . Analysis of one of the four groups ( “Frisbee group” ) is presented in this paper , whose members included Frank ( a junior student who had completed two semesters of physics and statics , and two years in bioengineering ) , Andy ( a sophomore student who had completed two semesters of physics , one semester of statics , and one year in bioengineering , ) and Nancy ( a freshman student who had completed one semester of physics and one year of a general engineering program ) . Frank was also on an Ultimate Frisbee team . This group compared kinematic and muscle activity parameters for a backhand , forehand flick , and overhead “huck” Frisbee throw . Data for wrist and elbow motion were collected via EMG and electro - goniometry . C . Coding Scheme Audio transcripts were coded and analyzed using R Qualitative Data Analysis ( RQDA ) , a qualitative data analysis software program [ 27 ] . A codebook was established and constant comparative analysis was used to ensure consistent coding . Reliability of the knowledge transfer coding scheme was established by two researchers independently coding and comparing representative samples of audio transcripts . Agreement was considered when codes were identified by both raters within the same phrase . Inter - rater reliability was found to be 81 % for this study , within acceptable qualitative research limits [ 28 ] . In this work , problem features identified by students were coded as target tools ( Tt ) , while prior knowledge was coded as source tools ( St ) . Connections between source tools and target tools are identified as instances of transfer , when occurring in the same phrase . Source tools are activated by students to make sense of the new problem scenario [ 26 ] , [ 29 ] , [ 30 ] . As seen in Fig . 1 , students may not be able to independently make connections between source tools and target tools preventing them from moving forward when facing a problem , thus arriving at a stopping point . They may then seek external inputs ( Ei ) from another group member or the instructor , who can point out relevant target tools and / or source tools to help students transfer , or make appropriate connections between prior knowledge and problem features ( prompts ) . These interactions are important to understand how students utilize external resources when they are unable to transfer . Student explanations of connections between source tools and target tools are coded as a workbench ( W ) . This workbench explanation can lead to an answer ( A ) , which is defined as a “stopping point in the reasoning process” [ 26 ] . Answers do not necessarily require a workbench explanation , and can take the form of a statement or question . Even stating “I don’t know” would mark a stopping point in the reasoning process and could prompt the student to seek external input to move forward . Students may find themselves at a stopping point at any time while working through a problem . Additionally , Redish observes that students can explain their work in common sense terms based on their “fabricated” experiences , in contrast to “propagated” knowledge that learned from an authoritative source such as an instructor , textbook or a prior class [ 31 ] . When evidence was present in the data , source tools were coded either as “fabricated” or “propagated” [ 32 ] . Certain source tools utilized both “fabricated” knowledge and “propagated , ” and were co - coded as such . Fig . 1 . Elements of the coding scheme showing how external inputs can prompt transfer through activation of target tools and / or source tools , leading to a workbench explanation and answer . IV . R ESULTS A . Quantification of codes Although this case study is qualitative in nature , quantification of the codes within groups provides an overall idea of the contributions made by each member during their final project and the relative frequency at which the codes appeared in the group’s transcript . Instances of codes for the Frisbee group are shown in Fig . 2 . It is evident that Frank is the largest contributor in the group across all categories , with Nancy and Andy evenly sharing the remainder of the contributions . The team mentioned source tools the most frequently , followed by target tools and external input prompts . This would indicate that they were discussing more of their prior knowledge than particular problem features during their work on their final project . This scenario would play out if they were discussing a particular target tool , such as the wrist motion during a particular Frisbee throw , and determining the appropriate source tools that would adequately describe that motion , for example angular displacement , velocity , or acceleration . As can be expected during group work , group members prompt each other to notice target tools or use a particular source tool as part of a workbench explanation . For this group , the members had a fairly even distribution of prompts although Frank had the most prompts and the instructor had the least . Out of all of the coding categories , the instructor had the most contributions coded as external input - prompts followed by target tools and source tools . This would indicate that the instructor pointed out source tools or target tools to the group and prompted them less frequently with workbench explanations or answers . Also of note is that source tools were coded more often as “propagated” ( coming from an authoritative source such as a textbook from another course ) . With that said , the group also had 125 instances of source tools coded as “fabricated” from their experiences during the class or outside of class . Specific instances are expanded upon in the qualitative analysis . Fig . 2 . Contribution of group members and instructor for the Frisbee throw group , demonstrated through instances of codes . B . Qualitative results Qualitative analysis of the transcripts was used to get a more comprehensive view of how the students interacted with each other and their instructor . From the transcripts , it was evident that the students typically identified several problem features ( target tools ) and then would discuss how their prior knowledge ( source tools ) explained what was happening . The students debated over source tools that would be appropriate to explain the motion of the wrist while throwing a Frisbee . Using data from electronic goniometers , students generated graphs to represent wrist motion in different planes ( flexion - extension and radial - ulnar ) . Students used the generated graphs as target tools to grapple with and understand this wrist motion . Concepts of radial - ulnar and flexion - extension motion are “propagated” source tools because they were learned in class lectures . In contrast , descriptions of motion based on previous Frisbee throwing experiences are “fabricated” source tools , for example a forehand flick and “huck” ( overhand throw ) . During their data analysis , students began to comprehend that , although the motion of the Frisbee is in one plane , the wrist has two components of motion for the throw to occur . The following excerpt is an example of the students’ discussion of what motion is occurring at the wrist during a forehand flick Frisbee throw . Codes noted at the beginning of phrases are represented throughout the entire phrase . Otherwise the codes are denoted immediately following the words of interest . Abbreviations of codes are provided in Table I . T ABLE I . C ODE ABBREVIATIONS , USED TO REPRESENT CODES THROUGHOUT THE TRANSCRIPT EXCERPTS Code Abbreviations Code Abbreviation Source Tool St Target Tool Tt Workbench W Answer A External Input Ei Frank : ( Ei , W ) “So the thing is that I think with this one , this is going to sound really weird , but I think the radial ulnar ( St , Tt ) and the flexion extension ( St , Tt ) were on the same plane ( St , Tt ) which I know sounds impossible . ” Andy : ( Ei ) “That’s impossible . ” Frank : ( Ei , W ) “But I think what it is , is the radial ulnar ( St , Tt ) , … you turn your hand ( Tt ) and now it’s flexion extension ( St , Tt ) . ” Andy : “Ohhh . ” Frank : ( Ei , A ) “I think they’re in the same plane ( St , Tt ) ; they’re just not in the same …” Andy : ( Ei ) “…so you’re saying you’re starting out radial ulnar ( St ) and then you completely…” Frank : ( Ei , W ) “…Yeah . Yeah . Because if you look at this right here the peak for the ah , elbow ( St , Tt ) starts happening right here . The peak for the radial ulnar ( St , Tt ) starts happening right here and the peak for the flexion extension ( St , Tt ) happens right there . It’s like there’s one after another … ( Ei , St ) Yeah , but it’s like elbow starts , wrist starts and that starts…” Andy : ( Ei , W ) “…No , no . For this graph ( Tt ) proves you wrong because it’s showing that both of them , you’re still , you’re moving both at the same time ( St ) meaning that…” Frank : ( Ei , Tt ) “…only for a very short period of time though . ” This is an example of complex connections that Andy and Frank make , peeling back layer by layer to identify crucial ties between source tools and target tools . Before they can understand the data ( graphs ) , they are reenacting a slow motion " flick " and what that means in terms of wrist flexion - extension , wrist radial - ulnar and elbow flexion extension motions . They are determining if there is enough significant contribution to include the elbow in their calculations . Frank argues there is definitely extension but Andy argues that because it is not in the same plane , it should not be included . Nancy , a freshman general engineering student , stays more to periphery asking questions , and observing the discussion between Andy and Frank . At a stopping point in their reasoning process , they consult the instructor to gain a better understanding of the connections between the source tools of slow motion reenactment , “propagated” planes of motion and the target tools of the graphical data . Frank : ( St ) “…calculating velocity ( Ei ) so [ instructor ] , is it possible with ( St , Tt ) the method you’ve been using with the [ electronic goniometers ] , to calculate tangential velocity ? ( A , W ) Is it possible to stay on the flick throw ( St ) to consider the contribution of both flexion extension ( St , Tt ) and radial ulnar ( St , Tt ) because they’re not both on the same side – the elbow - wrist plane ( St , Tt ) … . This is the change in the angle ( St , Tt ) . So looking at this you can actually tell that the flexion - extension ( St ) is the yellow ( Tt ) . It’s actually contributing because this right here ( Tt ) is …” Instructor : ( W ) “…and then it’s flipping through ( Tt ) . So vector analysis ( St ) … ( Ei , A ) So you’re flicking ( St ) . So really your plane ( St , Tt ) is like this , right ? ” Andy : ( Ei ) “Yes . ” Instructor : ( Ei , St , Tt ) “So which is like you’re basically doing some of this and some of this [ demonstrates wrist motion ] . ” Andy : ( Ei , A , W ) “You’re doing mostly [ demonstrates wrist motion ] , because it’s like a little of both . ” Instructor : ( Ei , W ) “So the way you define an omega ( St ) …so call this like an X , Y [ axes ] ( St ) right ? So this is your omega X , this is omega Y and so ( St ) … if you could tilt it you really have some arbitrary omega ( St ) . If you could you would have really just a rotation about the one point , right ( St , Tt ) ? So in other words , like I’m doing some of this and I’m doing some of this [ demonstrates wrist motion ] . ” Andy : ( Ei , A , St , Tt ) “And the resultant in that [ plane ] . ” Instructor : ( Ei , A ) “And the resultant ( St ) , right . So basically what I want to do is find the resultant of this ( St , Tt ) . ” Andy : ( Ei ) “Okay . ” Instructor : ( Ei , A ) “So what I would do is take the two values ( Tt ) and um , you can do a vector sum ( St ) of that . ” The instructor provides the missing source tool of “vector analysis” as a way of explaining how two different planes of motion ( flexion - extension , radial - ulnar ) can contribute to a “resultant” . Although these are concepts students have studied in previous courses , such as physics and statics , they were unable to transfer this knowledge to the context of the wrist flicking motion . This is the type of discussion that is important according to the preparation for future learning framework upon which the course design was based [ 21 ] . Instruction is designed such that the same concepts are applied in contrasting cases ( flick , backhand , overhead throws ) so that students can learn to connect the same source tools ( prior knowledge ) to different target tools ( problem features ) . V . D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSIONS Defining knowledge transfer as the ability to apply prior knowledge to new situations , and achieve a defined answer has led to more evidence of failure than success . This study utilized a revised definition of knowledge transfer that focuses on what knowledge students transfer into a new situation rather than if they transfer knowledge based on a prescribed expert solution . The long - term goal of this research is to understand what student interactions with resources , group members , and problem features may facilitate knowledge transfer in a group setting . To that end , a coding scheme was developed to assess the knowledge that students dynamically transfer into a group problem solving scenario , and what prompts transfer to occur . The coding scheme , based on Rebello’s dynamic transfer framework [ 26 ] , successfully allowed for assessment of individual group members’ interactions with each other and external resources . The methodology presented here also allows for the assessment of both prior knowledge activation ( source tools ) and problem feature ( target tool ) identification by individual students within the group . This methodology stands apart from other transfer methodologies in that students guide the instructor through problems forcing the researcher to take an actor - oriented approach [ 19 ] . Additionally , we have examined how students prompt each other to solve a problem in a more typical student group setting instead of how an individual solves a problem in a clinical or teaching interview [ 26 ] . This study focused on the interactions observed within a single group working on their final project in a biomechanics course . Recordings of the group’s meetings were transcribed and coded using the coding scheme presented , identifying source tools , target tools , external inputs , workbench processes , and stopping points . Quantification of the codes revealed that the group discussed their prior knowledge ( source tools ) more than they discussed problem features ( target tools ) or external input prompts . This quantification also showed that group members contributed in different ways . While the quantification of the codes only provided a limited view of the interactions that occurred within the group , it gave a useful overview of the interactions providing a general idea of the group dynamics . It can be assumed that different members of a group would contribute in different ways , and results confirm this assumption . This coding scheme provided evidence of which group members discussed their prior knowledge , mentioned problem features , and / or provided prompts . As the quantification of codes does not take into account underlying reasoning behind the statements , qualitative analysis was used to gain a more detailed understanding of how student interactions with resources , group members , and problem features may facilitate knowledge transfer . Qualitative analysis revealed that the students often negotiated within their group about how their prior knowledge fit with the problem features they had identified . This analysis also showed that the students consulted their instructor , asking for guidance , when they were unable to move forward in order to gain a piece of knowledge they were missing . The students were able to transfer the information provided by the instructor to the problem statement . This allowed the students to continue working towards an answer . These are important evaluations that inform how a student will contribute to a group and what prior knowledge students activate in each other . As they work through a problem scenario , this analysis provides insight into how students utilize resources in a group environment to get beyond an intermediate stopping point , facilitating knowledge transfer . VI . I MPLICATIONS FOR I NSTRUCTION From an instructor standpoint , the time to transcribe , code , and analyze each group to understand all the intricacies of these connections of knowledge and use of resources is typically not feasible . But if used as formative assessment , the instructor can evaluate in real time the source tools of the student in relation to the problem features they may be struggling with . Instead of providing assistance at the first opportunity , the instructor can evaluate how the student utilizes resources by their requests for guidance and also determine how their external input contributes to their connections between concepts . Based on this methodology , an rubric could be designed to assess group interaction and connection of knowledge . Instructors often want feedback on the use of external inputs such as new technology and how it may hamper or enhance instruction . It is important for the instructor to evaluate meaningful interactions with the technology being used by identifying activated source tools and target tools in the problem solving process . As can be seen from the students’ use of electronic goniometers , technology can be evaluated based on how it prompts students and instructors use of source and target tools . Utilizing this methodology allows assessment of how students make connections to new scenarios while working in a group setting . Breaking down these complex interactions into understandable terms and concepts will provide evidence to inform pedagogy in ways that help students make the connections intended by instructors . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] A . A . Gokhale , “Collaborative Learning Enhances Critical Thinking , ” Journal of Technology Education , vol . 7 , no . 1 , 1995 . [ 2 ] M . K . Bolton , “The Role Of Coaching in Student Teams : A ‘Just - in - Time’ Approach To Learning , ” Journal of Management Education , vol . 23 , no . 3 , pp . 233 – 250 , Jun . 1999 . [ 3 ] A . P . Christoforou , A . S . Yigit , M . D . Al - ansary , F . Ali , A . A . Aly , H . Lababidi , and I . S . Nashawi , “Improving Engineering Education at Kuwait University through Continuous Assessment , ” International Journal of Engineering Education , vol . 19 , no . 6 , pp . 818 – 827 , 2003 . [ 4 ] R . Fruchter , “Dimensions of Teamwork Education , ” International Journal of Engineering Education , vol . 17 , no . 4 and 5 , pp . 426 – 430 , 2001 . [ 5 ] T . Kalliath and M . Laiken , “Use of Teams in Management Education , ” Journal of Management Education , vol . 30 , no . 6 , pp . 747 – 750 , Dec . 2006 . [ 6 ] T . Gatfield , “Examining Student Satisfaction with Group Projects and Peer Assessment Examining Student Satisfaction with Group Projects and Peer Assessment , ” Assessment and Evaluationi n Higher Education , vol . 24 , no . 4 , pp . 365 – 377 , 2006 . [ 7 ] C . M . Anson , L . E . Bernold , C . Crossland , J . Spurlin , M . A . Mcdermott , and M . Weiss , “Empowerment to Learn in Engineering(cid:31) : Preparation for an Urgently - Needed Paradigm Shift , ” Global Journal of Engineering Education , vol . 7 , no . 2 , pp . 145 – 156 , 2003 . [ 8 ] D . R . Bacon , K . a . Stewart , and W . S . Silver , “Lessons from the Best and Worst Student Team Experiences : How a Teacher can make the Difference , ” Journal of Management Education , vol . 23 , no . 5 , pp . 467 – 488 , Oct . 1999 . [ 9 ] M . Bassok , “Transfer of domain - specific problem - solving procedures . , ” Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , vol . 16 , no . 3 , pp . 522 – 533 , 1990 . [ 10 ] A . L . Brown and M . J . Kane , “Preschool Children can Learn to Transfer : Learning to Learn and Learning from Example , ” Cognitive Psychology , vol . 20 , no . 4 , pp . 493 – 523 , 1988 . [ 11 ] R . S . Lockhart , M . Lamon , and M . L . Gick , “Conceptual Transfer in Simple Insight Problems , ” Memory and Cognition , vol . 16 , no . 1 , pp . 36 – 44 , 1988 . [ 12 ] R . E . Nisbett , G . T . Fong , D . R . Lehman , and P . W . Cheng , “Teaching Reasoning , ” Science , vol . 238 , no . 4827 , pp . 625 – 31 , Oct . 1987 . [ 13 ] G . a Perfetto , J . D . Bransford , and J . J . Franks , “Constraints on Access in a Problem Solving Context , ” Memory & cognition , vol . 11 , no . 1 , pp . 24 – 31 , Jan . 1983 . [ 14 ] S . K . Reed , G . W . Ernst , and R . Banerji , “The role of analogy in transfer between similar problem states , ” Cognitive Psychology , vol . 6 , no . 3 , pp . 436 – 450 , Jul . 1974 . [ 15 ] E . L . Thorndike and R . S . Woodworth , “The influence of improvement in one mental function upon the efficiency of other functions . II . The estimation of magnitudes , ” Psychological Review , vol . 8 , pp . 553 – 564 , 1901 . [ 16 ] M . Wertheimer , Productive Thinking . 1959 . [ 17 ] H . Hoffding and M . E . Lowndes , Outlines of Psychology . Macmillan and co . , 1891 . [ 18 ] J . G . Greeno , D . R . Smith , and J . L . Moore , “Transfer of situated learning , ” in Transfer on Trial : Intelligence , Cognition , and Instruction , D . Detterman and R . Sternberg , Eds . 1993 , pp . 99 – 167 . [ 19 ] J . Lobato , “How Design Experiments Can Inform a Rethinking of Transfer andViceVersa , ” Educational Researcher , vol . 32 , no . 1 , pp . 17 – 20 , Jan . 2003 . [ 20 ] N . S . Rebello , L . Cui , A . G . Bennett , D . A . Zollman , and D . J . Ozimek , “Transfer of Learning in Problem Solving in the Context of Mathematics and Physics , ” pp . 1 – 36 , 1995 . [ 21 ] J . Bransford and D . Schwartz , “Rethinking transfer : A simple proposal with multiple implications , ” Review of research in education , vol . 24 , pp . 61 – 100 , 1999 . [ 22 ] L . S . Vygotsky , “The Development of Scientific Concepts in Childhood , ” in Thought and Language . Studies in Communication . , E . Lev Hanfmann and G . Vakar , Eds . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , 1962 , pp . 82 – 118 . [ 23 ] D . L . Schwartz , “The Emergence of Abstract in Dyad Representations Problem Solving , ” The Journal of Learning Sciences , vol . 4 , no . 3 , pp . 321 – 354 , 2013 . [ 24 ] J . A . Marin - Garcia and J . Lloret , “Improving Teamwork with University Engineering Students . The Effect of an Assessment Method to Prevent Shirking . , ” WSEAS Transactions on Advances in Engineering Education , vol . 5 , no . 1 , pp . 1 – 11 , 2008 . [ 25 ] H . S . Broudy , “Types of Knowledge and Purposes of Education , ” in Schooling and the Acquisition of Knowledge , 1977 , pp . 1 – 17 . [ 26 ] N . Rebello , D . Zollman , A . Allbaugh , P . V . Engelhardt , K . E . Gray , Z . Hrepic , and S . F . Itz - Ortiz , “Dynamic transfer : A perspective from physics education research , ” in Transfer of Learning from a Modern Multidisciplinary Perspective , no . 785 , J . P . Mestre , Ed . Greenwich , CT : Information Age Publishing Inc . , 2005 , pp . 217 – 250 . [ 27 ] R . Huang , “RQDA : R - based Qualitative Data Analysis . ” 2010 . [ 28 ] K . L . Gwet , Handbook of Inter - Rater Reliability : The Definitive Guide to Measuring the Extent of Agreement Among Multiple Raters . Advanced Analytics Press , 2012 . [ 29 ] P . V . Engelhardt , E . G . Corpuz , D . J . Ozimek , and N . S . Rebello , “The Teaching Experiment — What it is and what it isn’t , ” in AIP Conference Proceedings , 2004 , vol . 720 , no . 1 , pp . 157 – 160 . [ 30 ] A . R . Allbaugh , “The Problem - Context Dependence of Students’ Application of Newton ' s Second Law , ” Kansas State University , 1988 . [ 31 ] E . F . Redish , “A Theoretical Framework for Physics Education Research(cid:31) : Modeling Student Thinking , ” in The Proceedings of the Enrico Fermi Summer School in Physics , Course CLVI , 2004 . [ 32 ] D . Hammer and A . Elby , “On the Form of Personal Epistemology , ” in Personal Epistemolgy : The Psychology of Beliefs about Knowledge and Knowing ( pp . 169 – 190 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . , B . K . Hofer and P . R . Pintrich , Eds . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum , 2002 , pp . 169 – 190 .