Amusing Ourselves to Death Neil Postman - Foreword - We were keeping our eye on 1984 . When the year came and the prophecy didn ' t , thoughtful Americans sang softly in praise of themselves . The roots of liberal democracy had held . Wherever else the terror had happened , we , at least , had not been visited by Orwellian nightmares . But we had forgotten that alongside Orwell ' s dark vision , there was another - slightly older , slightly less well known , equally chilling : Aldous Huxley ' s Brave New World . Contrary to common belief even among the educated , Huxley and Orwell did not prophesy the same thing . Orwell warns that we will be overcome by an externally imposed oppression . But in Huxley ' s vision , no Big Brother is required to deprive people of their autonomy , maturity and history . As he saw it , people will come to love their oppression , to adore the technologies that undo their capacities to think . What Orwell feared were those who would ban books . What Huxley feared was that there would be no reason to ban a book , for there would be no one who wanted to read one . Orwell feared those who would deprive us of information . Huxley feared those who would give us so much that we would be reduced to passivity and egoism . Orwell feared that the truth would be concealed from us . Huxley feared the truth would be drowned in a sea of irrelevance . Orwell feared we would become a captive culture . Huxley feared we would become a trivial culture , preoccupied with some equivalent of the feelies , the orgy porgy , and the centrifugal bumblepuppy . As Huxley remarked in Brave New World Revisited , the civil libertarians and rationalists who are ever on the alert to oppose tyranny " failed to take into account man ' s almost infinite appetite for distractions " . In 1984 , Huxley added , people are controlled by inflicting pain . In Brave New World , they are controlled by inflicting pleasure . In short , Orwell feared that what we hate will ruin us . Huxley feared that what we love will ruin us . This book is about the possibility that Huxley , not Orwell , was right .