Mapping of Science by Combined Co - Citation and Word Analysis . I . Structural Aspects Robert Ft . Braam , Henk F . Moed , and Anthony F . J . van Raan Center for Science and Technology Studies ( CWTS ) , University of Leiden , Wassenaarseweg 52 , P . O . Box 9555 , 2300 RI3 Leiden , The Netherlands The claim that co - citation analysis is a useful tool to map subject - matter specialties of scientific research in a given period , is examined . A method has been devel - oped using quantitative analysis of content - words re - lated to publications in order to : ( 1 ) study coherence of research topics within sets of publications citing clus - ters , i . e . , ( part of ) the “current work” of a specialty ; ( 2 ) to study differences in research topics between sets of publications citing different clusters ; and ( 3 ) to evalu - ate recall of “current work” publications concerning the specialties identified by co - citation analysis . Empirical support is found for the claim that co - citation analysis identifies indeed subject - matter specialties . However , different clusters may identify the same specialty , and results are far from complete concerning the identified “current work . ” These results are in accordance with the opinion of some experts in the fields . Low recall of co - citation analysis concerning the “current work” of specialties is shown to be related to the way in which researchers build their work on earlier publications : the “missed” publications equally build on very recent ear - lier work , but are less “consensual” and / or less “atten - tive” in their referencing practice . Evaluation of national research performance using co - citation analysis ap - pears to be biased by this “incompleteness . ” Introduction Co - citation analysis is one of the major quantitative techniques in science studies to map the structure and dynamics of scientific research . This technique is claimed to be capable of identifying “research foci” and their relations , in particular at the level of research spe - cialties ( Small & Griffith , 1974 ; Griffith et al . , 1974 ; Small , 1977 ; Garfield et al . , 1977 ; Small & Crane , 1979 ) . This study is part of a project financed by the Ministry of Edu - cation and Sciences , through the Netherlands Advisory Council for Science Policy ( RAWB ) . Received February 24 , 1989 ; revised October 4 , 1989 ; accepted Oc - tober 10 , 1989 . 6 1991 by John Wiley & Sons , Inc . However , the validity and the practical usefulness of co - citation analysis for science - policy purposes is sub - ject of recent studies and debates ( ABRC , 1986 ; Healey et al . , 1986 ; Hicks , 1987 ; Franklin , 1988 ; Hicks , 1988 ) . In this article we focus on the capability of co - citation analysis to map structural aspects of scien - tific research on the level of research specialties . For a discussion of dynamical aspects we refer to a re - lated publication in this issue of JASIS ( Braam et al . , “Mapping II” ) . According to Price’s theory of knowledge growth , scientific researchers constitute a “research front” by focusing their attention , as expressed by their refer - ences , to a small select part of the most recent litera - ture ( De Solla Price , 1965 ; Cozzens , 1985 ) . Thus , a network of citation relations is created with relatively “high density areas” related to “research fronts . ” Price supposed that most papers are included in research front - subjects ( De Solla Price , 1965 ) . Co - citation analysis is in fact an attempt to identify such “high density areas” in a citation network by clus - tering highly co - cited documents , thus indicating the existence of these research fronts . The citing literature of co - citation clusters , then , is considered to correspond to the group of publications that can be described as a subject - matter - specialty’s published current work ( Small & Griffith , 1974 ; Griffith et al . , 1974 ) . The clus - ter of co - cited documents is considered to represent the knowledge base of the specialty : the key concepts , methods , or experiments that researchers build on ( Small , 1977 , and 1978 ) . The question has been raised whether in this way the entire specialty , or only a subgroup of publications of the specialty is identified ( e . g . , Sullivan et al . , 1977 ) . Small , who introduced the co - citation technique ( Small , 1973 ) , claims that the citing authors of a cluster consti - tute a highly relevant subgroup of the current prac - tioners of a specialty ( Small , 1977 ) . According to Rip ( 1988 ) , only subgroups with “shared legitimatory tac - tics” are traced . In a recent review article on biblio - JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE . 42 ( 4 ) : 233 - 251 , 1991 CCC 0002 - 8231 / 91 / 040233 - 19 $ 04 . 00 metric indicators King ( 1987 ) , sums up a number of objections against co - citation analysis : loss of relevant papers , inclusion of nonrelevant papers , overrepresenta - tion of theoretical articles , time lag ( between emer - gence of new specialties and capturing of them in a co - citation map ) , and subjectivity inherent in the set - ting of threshold levels , while these threshold levels strongly affect size and content of clusters . Further - more , interpretation of the results is considered prob - lematic : is indeed the cognitive structure of specialties of parts of these displayed , or the social structure of research ( Callon et al . , 1983 ; Rip & Courtial , 1984 ; Rip , 1988 ) ? Others are much more sceptic , and maintain that clusters are mainly artifacts of the applied tech - nique having no further identifiable significance ( e . g . , Oberski , 1988 ) . The co - citation cluster structure is constructed as follows . From the reference lists of a set of publications published within a given period , for instance a year , documents are selected that are cited more than a specified number of times ( the citation threshold ) . Out of these cited documents , pairs are selected that co - oc - cur relatively frequently in the reference lists of publi - cations in the dataset , i . e . , these pairs measure up to some specified co - citation strength threshold . Next , a special clustering routine , “single - linkage clustering , ” aggregates clusters of cited documents by sequentially linking together all selected pairs of cited documents that have at least one cited document in common . Next , for each cluster all publications are identified that cite one or more of the clustered cited documents . We developed a combination of co - citation and word analysis in order to evaluate the nature and magnitude of some of the problems mentioned above and possibly improve the co - citation mapping technique . In this combined approach , words originating from publications citing to documents in co - citation clusters , * Frequency analysis of words from the titles or , later on , words from citation passages in citing publications , have been used by Small and his co - workers to characterize subject matter , in particu - lar concept consensus , related to individual cited documents ( Griffith & Small , 1974 ; Small , 1986 ) . Such word - profiles , how - ever , have never been used to describe the content ( research top - ics ) involved in the whole set of publications citing a cluster , i . e . , the research topics involved in the “current work” of a specialty related to a co - citation cluster . For this latter purpose a sentence ( in English ) is used , based on frequently recurring phrases in the titles of citing documents ( e . g . , Small & Crane , 1979 ) . Such proce - dure , however , requires detailed insight into the scientific content of the field , and is not very suited to analyze in a quantitative fash - ion the cognitive coherence within and difference between clus - ters , or completeness of clustering results . For such purpose , it seems better to use word - profiles , in this case aggregated lists of all nonunique words that occur in the set of publications citing docu - ments in co - citation clusters . ‘Indexing terms , classification codes , and title and abstract words are structural elements of a scientific article that are similar in the following two senses ( Mullins et al . , 1988 ) . First , all these words ( or phrases ) are related to the content of a scientific paper . They serve the purpose of summarizing , abstracting , or classifying are analyzed in a quantitative fashion . Analysis of con - tent words of those publications enables one to describe research topics involved in sets of publications citing documents in co - citation clusters , and to study the co - herence within and difference between these sets of publications . Moreover , this combined analysis offers a possibility to evaluate completeness of the results of co - citation analysis , i . e . , to determine the “recall” of this clustering technique . * The approach is , in principle , suited to analyze all types of words ( or phrases ) related to publications , e . g . , title words , abstract words , author names , addresses , and also words attributed to these publications such as indexing terms and classification codes . + Underlying this combined approach is the basic no - tion that a scientific specialty can be regarded as “a co - herent set of subject - related research problems and concepts upon which attention is focussed by a number of scientific researchers , ” irrespective the social and in - tellectual background of the researchers involved . * If different researchers work on the same set of subject - related research problems and concepts , one would ex - pect that they use , to a relatively large extent , the same words for important concepts and problems in their specialty . To the extent that these researchers also con - centrate their references on a small , selected part of recent earlier literature , i . e . , to the extent that they par - ticipate in a “research front” ( De Solla Price , 1965 ) , and as far as publications are representative carriers of both words and references , results of techniques based on references , in this case co - citation analysis , should con - verge in some way with results based on the analysis of words . Such congruence , if present , indicates that “sharing a focus on a set of subject - related problems and concepts” goes together with “sharing a focus on intel - lectual base literature . ” Presence of such congruence , however , is not a necessity , and it remains to be seen , a papers content concerning subject matter . Second , these words are seen as identification markers that refer to the paper itself , rather than to its author ( s ) . Thus , all these words may be suited to describe research topics involved in sets of scientific papers , and to analyze cognitive coherence within and resemblance between sets of publications , e . g . , sets of publications citing co - citation clusters . $ This specialty concept is based on the notion of science as essentially a problem - solving activity ( Laudan , 1977 ) . The claim that co - citation analysis identifies “specialist communities” in the paradigmatic sense ( Kuhn , 1970 , postscript ; Small & Greenlee , 1980 ) is a stronger claim than the claim we are investigating in this study : the claim that co - citation clusters identify coherent research topics ( problems , related concepts , and methods ) involved in the set of publications citing these clusters . Nor is it assumed in this study that definition of problems and delimitation of cognitive and methodological resources finds place entirely within a “specialist community” ( Callon et al . , 1983 ) . The question we try to answer is , whether or not groups of publications citing co - citation clusters are coherent concerning research topics studied , whether different clusters identify different research topics , and whether all publica - tions in a dataset , relevant to the research topics identified by co - citation clusters , also cite clustered documents . 234 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE - - May 1991 for example , whether all researchers working on a par - ticular set of subject - related research problems indeed do share such an intellectual focus on base literature . In the analysis presented in this article , the degree of convergence between these two aspects will be assessed empirically . Furthermore , in case of discrepancies , ex - planations will be suggested . Our working hypothesis holds that content words do reflect the research topics , i . e . , studied problems and related concepts , involved in publications adequately , and the results of co - citation analysis will be discussed from this perspective . As such , we evaluate ( claims of ) co - citation analysis on the basis of an analysis of content words . Although the Science Citation Index is the most im - portant source of citation data , it is a limited source concerning “content” words , as only words from the ti - tles of publications are available . This constraint is par - tially overcome by using information from different on - line databases in a combined fashion ( Moed , 1988 ; Braam et al . , 1988a ) . We say partially , as the success of such combination of databases is restricted by possible differences between these databases in coverage of the literature of the fields under study . In the present study , indexing terms and classification codes have been extracted from the on - line versions of Chemical Abstracts ( CA ) and Biological Abstracts ( BIOSIS ) which were combined with data from the on - line version of ISI’s Science Citation Index ( SciSearch ) , using dedicated software ( Moed , 1988 ) . For related ear - lier work on this combined approach we refer to our pre - vious publications ( Braam et al , 1987 , 1988a and 1988b ) . Central issues of investigation discussed in this ar - ticle are ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) Is there sufficient amount of “cognitive coher - ence” within , and “cognitive difference” between , research topics involved in sets of publications cit - ing co - citation clusters to justify the claim that in - deed different research specialties are identified ? If so , how complete then is the co - citation map ? In particular , what is the maximum number of identi - fiable different research specialties in a specific dataset relative to the total number of specialties included in this dataset ( recall of specialties ) ? How capable is co - citation analysis in covering at least a major share of the publications in the data - set that are relevant to the identified research top - ics ( recall of sources relevant to these topics ) ? Does a higher - order clustering represent an “im - age” of higher - order structural hierarchies such as research ( sub ) fields , etcetera ? The correlation of co - citation clusters with professional field classifi - cation codes is analysed to this end , because these field classification codes reflect a hierarchical level higher than the level of specialties . Does “incompleteness” concerning source publica - tions relevant to identified research topics affect policy - relevant aspects of the results ? In particu - lar , we address the question whether co - citation analysis provides reliable results of output evalua - tions on a national level . ( 6 ) Are the results of co - citation analysis recognizable and acceptable for researchers in the fields in - volved ? In our opinion , legitimate practicle appli - cations , particularly concerning science policy , of such quantitative techniques as co - citation analy - sis presuppose the recognized usefulness of results by researchers in the field ( s ) concerned . Results of this combined co - citation and word analysis were therefore also discussed with some experts in the field . Empirical results of two case - studies will be pre - sented and discussed in relation to the above mentioned problems concerning interpretation and application for science policy purposes . Further , conclusions will be drawn in this respect regarding the fruitfulness of combining co - citation and word analysis . Data We constructed datasets for agriculture - related bio - chemistry ( Chemical Abstracts , 3400 source publica - tions , 1985 ) and for chemoreception research ( BIOSIS , 1384 publications , October 1985 to June 1986 ) . The first dataset represents ( a larger part of ) a research field , the second a level between field and specialty . In addition to bibliographic details , data on the cog - nitive content of the source publications involved have been collected , in particular indexing terms ( controlled vocabulary as well as free terms ) and field / subject clas - sification codes . Publications on agriculture - related biochemistry were selected on the basis of a set of about one hundred journals covering the field , and by using field classifica - tion codes , in this case eight relevant sections in Chem - icaZAbstracts ( CA ) . The distribution of publications in the dataset over the different sections is included at the bottom of Figure 3 . Chemoreception publications were selected using a periodically published professional bib - liography ( Van der Starre , 1985 and 1986 ) , excluding contributions to conferences and workshops . Selection from Biological Abstracts of publications for this bibli - ography is based on a set of keywords and classification codes . Citation data played no role in either selection of data . For both datasets , reference lists of selected source publications were , as far as available , subtracted from SCISEARCH ( the online version of the Science Citation Index ) . The different datasets were then combined us - ing dedicated software ( Moed , 1988 ) . The new com - bined datasets cover 89 % of the CA source publications and 75 % of the original Chemoreception references , 3021 and 1033 publications respectively . Methods Co - Citation Cluster Analysis In co - citation analysis , citation and co - citation strength thresholds are used to discriminate between JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE - May 1991 235 significant and insignificant ( co - ) cited documents . Op - timal choice of these thresholds has been studied ear - lier ( Braam et al . , 1988a ) . Co - citation analysis has been performed for several combinations of thresholds and results were compared . As a first approach , the combi - nation of thresholds generating the largest number of co - citation clusters has been used . It was assumed that in this way the number of different research topics re - lated to clusters would be maximized . Several enhancements recently implemented in the IS1 clustering algorithm , such as fractional citation counting , variable level clustering , and iterative cluster - ing of clusters ( Small & Sweeney , 1985 , Small et al . , 1985 ) , have not been applied by us . These alterations are mainly of importance when analyzing multidisci - plinary data , in order to account for differences across fields in citation rates ( Small & Garfield , 1986 ) , while our datasets do not exceed the level of fields . Presentation of the clustering results in a map is a problem in itself . We applied , for the moment , a graph theoretical approach to draw a map of clusters and their interrelations . The individual clusters are depicted by circles and the interrelations between clusters are indi - cated by lines between the circles . Hence , the exact po - sition on the map and the distance between the clusters are not meaningful . Description of Research Topics of Current Work by Word Analysis : Construction of Word - Profiles An indication of the research topics involved in in - dividual publications can be given by constructing a publication “word - profile , ” i . e . , a list of content words related to a publication . If publications sharing citations to documents within the same co - citation cluster indeed represent the cur - rent work of a research specialty , then these ( citing ) publications are cognitively related and , as a conse - quence , are expected to contain , and to be indexed with , primarily the same content - related words . Thus , topics involved in a particular research specialty can be indicated by aggregating and listing these words , to - gether with their frequency of occurrence , for the set of citing publications of each cluster . In this way a cluster “word - profile” can be constructed that represents the research topics involved in the current work of a spe - cialty indicated by the cluster . For the present study we applied a frequency analysis of indexing terms and clas - sification codes occuring in publications citing the vari - ous clusters ( Fig . 1 ) . It should be noted that these words are associated with the citing publications and not with the cited docu - ments , i . e . , these words are associated with the “current research” in a specialty rather than with its “intellec - tual base . ” In order to exclude isolated aspects of research , only words occurring in more than one citing publication per cluster have been listed for each cluster . Further , we distinguish between “central” and “peripheral” citing publications ( Fig . 1 ) . Source publications citing exclu - sively to one cluster are called “central , ” since they probably better represent the specific character of top - ics involved in the clusters . Source publications citing to several different clusters , are called “peripheral sources . ” These peripheral publications emphasize simi - larity between clusters , as their terms are included in the word - profiles of several different clusters . In order to maximize differences between clusters , only index - ing terms from central publications are analyzed . In order to improve the interpretability of co - citation maps , cluster word - profiles can be printed in the co - citation map near the clusters they belong to ( see for example the map presented in Figure 4 ) . Evaluation of Coherence Within and Difference between Sets of Publications Citing Clusters Analysis of Word - Profile Similarities . Using word - profiles to describe research topics involved in ( sets of ) publications , a quantitative analysis of coherence within and difference between publication groups be - comes possible . For this purpose we make use of the concept of similarity , as it is developed in informa - tion retrieval . Similarity measures yield an indication of the rele - vance of an object ( a document , in this case a publica - tion word - profile ) to a given standard ( the query , in this case a cluster word - profile ) . When both object and query are represented as collections of “weighted” terms ( in our case word - profiles ) , several conventional information retrieval similarity measures can be used to establish this relevance ( Jones & Furnas , 1987 ) . One of these similarity measures , the cosine formula , also used in co - citation analysis , has been used in this study . The similarity between an object ( 0 ) and a query ( Q ) is then defined as Sim ( O , Q ) = z WO4 * WQi ) , n n ( 1 ) \ I % OWWz * j / z W’ ( QiN’ k = l W ( Oi ) = weight of object term i , in the boolean case ( W ( Oi ) = 0 or 1 ; W ( Qi ) = weight of query term i , in the boolean case W ( Qi ) = 0 or 1 ; n = total number of terms . In the Boolean case , the cosine formula expresses the relative number of terms in the intersection of the set of terms associated with the query , and the set of terms associated with the object . The cosine formula normalizes for the length of the word - profiles of both object and query . Thus , objects with long word - profiles 236 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE - May 1991 TERM FREQ Tl 3 T3 2 T4 2 T5 2 T2 1 / I \ Tl Tl Tl T2 T3 T4 T3 T5 T5 T4 TERM FREQ Tl 2 T4 2 T6 2 T7 2 T8 2 T2 1 At \ T2 T4 Tl Tl T7 T3 T6 T6 T2 T8 T6 T7 T4 T8 Words occurring in ‘central’ publications citing documents of only one specific co - citation cluster Words occurring in publications citing clustered documents A AA AbAAA - - Publications Sl s2 53 citing clusJered documents CLUSTER 1 CLUSTER 2 Co - citation Clusters l Publications citing exclusively to documents of one cluster are called ‘central’ . publications citing documents of more than one cluster are called ‘peripheral’ . FIG . 1 . Method to describe research topics involved in publica - tions citing documents in co - citation clusters . can be “penalized” for their “representational richness” if this does not correspond to a richness in the query’s representation ( Jones & Furnas , 1987 ) . The similarity of each individual publication word - profile to the aggregated whole ( cluster word - profile ) is used to measure the “coherence” within a cluster , i . e . , the extent to which the publications citing to a cluster share research topics . This coherence is computed for each cluster as the average value of the similarity to the aggregated whole , applying the cosine formula for the boolean case , for all source publications citing the cluster Coh ( Ck ) = t : Sim ( O , Q ) ( 2 ) I Ck = coherence within a co - citation cluster with index number k ; m = number of publications ( objects ) citing to clus - ter k ; This coherence attains a maximum value of 1 when all source publications have exactly the same terms , and reaches a minimal value close to 0 when all source pub - lications have exclusively different terms . In order to obtain a minimal value of zero , terms with a frequency of one should first be excluded from the query word - profile ( in this way isolated aspects of research are ex - cluded ) . This procedure is only of importance if very few citing publications are involved in clusters . For large numbers of publications , it will not make much difference whether or not terms with a frequency of 1 are included in the query word - profile . The amount of similarity between clusters can be established , using formula ( 2 ) , in the following three ways . First , by comparing terms of sources citing cluster 1 ( objects ) with terms representing cluster 2 ( query ) . This procedure is not symmetric , i . e . , similarity of clus - ter 1 as defined by its objects to cluster 2 as defined by the query may be different from the similarity of cluster 2 as defined by its objects to cluster 1 as defined by its query . Such procedure is suited to analyze for example whether publications citing a particular cluster are on the average more similar , and thus most relevant , to the research topics related to this cluster than to research topics related to other clusters not cited by these publi - JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE - - May 1991 237 cations . Second , to establish a measure of similarity be - tween two clusters , is to regard both clusters as queries and compute a similarity value for cluster 1 as a query with cluster 2 as a query . This procedure results in a symmetric similarity measure . Third , to establish a simi - larity measure between clusters would be to compute similarity values , using formula ( l ) , for all objects ( cit - ing publications ) of cluster 1 to all objects of cluster 2 , and to calculate an average value of these object - object similarities over all possible cases ( Formula 2 , with m equal to the number of all possible object - object combi - nations ) . This procedure also results in a symmetric similarity value . To evaluate whether different clusters represent also different topics , it seems most suited use the second way , i . e . , to represent both clusters as queries , and to compute the similarity between them . This way , we ob - tain an indication of the similarity between topics in - volved in the clusters , apart from their respective coherence . The difference , then , between two clusters is the complement of their similarity : Dif ( Cl , C2 ) = 1 - Sim ( Ql , Q2 ) ( 3 ) with Sim ( Ql , Q2 ) being the similarity between queries for cluster 1 and cluster 2 . In order to examine whether the amount of coher - ence within clusters is sufficient to justify , in a quanti - tative sense , the claim that clusters indeed represent research specialties ( i . e . , a set of cognitively related publications ) , this value should be related to a value for publications outside clusters . We proceed as follows . If selection of publications would be random , publications involved in a cluster are not expected to be more simi - lar to the “topics” involved in the cluster than any other publication outside the cluster ( assuming exclusion of isolated aspects , i . e . , terms with a frequency of 1 , from these cluster “topics” ) . Thus , a comparison of the aver - age similarity to cluster “topics” for publications citing a cluster with publications not citing that cluster might be applied to evaluate the importance of the computed coherence . The magnitude and significance of the difference between the two above averages indicate whether the amount of coherence is sufficient to justify the claim that clusters represent research specialties . The average strength of pairwise co - citation rela - tions within clusters is another , and completely inde - pendent from the above measure , indication of the coherence of sources in a cluster . Mean values of the strength within clusters have been computed excluding pairs with zero strength . Pairs of co - cited publications not reaching the specified co - citation threshold , inter - relate clusters in as far as their elements occur ( in other pairs ) in clusters . The strength of these interrelations is computed as the mean strength of such pairs for each combination of clusters , and indicates resemblance be - tween them in cognitive content . Comparison of these two different , and independent , measures of coherence within and resemblance between clusters is useful , in order to see whether citing practices and use of words are indeed related characteristics of research specialties . Discussion of Results with an Expert in the Field . For both areas studied , results were discussed with an expert with a broad overview of the particular ( sub ) - field . Maps of interrelated clusters were sent to these experts , together with information describing research topics involved in publications citing clusters , ( word - profiles of indexing terms , classification codes ) , and some additional information on sources and addresses ( journal titles and country names or full addresses ) of the publications involved . For each cluster , coherence of cognitive information was discussed as well as recog - nizability of research topics known by the expert , and interpretation of interrelations between clusters . Fur - thermore , the expert was asked to name , if possible , the research topics involved in the clusters and to give com - ments on each topic . The main questions asked were : ( 1 ) Are the word - profiles used to describe the cogni - tive content of clusters coherent ? ( 2 ) Do clusters represent specific research topics ? ( 3 ) Do these topics differ reasonably well among each other ? ( 4 ) Do interrelated clusters represent specific research areas ( i . e . , cognitively interrelated research topics ) ? ( 5 ) Is the information used to describe the cognitive content of the clusters in this study adequate for this purpose ? Results of these discussions are presented in a later section . Evaluation of Completeness of Co - Citation Analysis , by Means of Word Analysis Completeness in Terms of the Number of Identified Topics . The question , to what extent co - citation clus - ters “cover” the ( sub ) field under study can not be an - swered without reference to some external “correct” overview of this field . As co - citation analysis is meant to create such overview , as an alternative view , the best one can do is to maximize the number of distinct identi - fiable topics . This second problem can be investigated by comparing results ( cluster word - profiles ) of co - citation clustering generated for different citation and co - citation threshold sets . For example , when low co - citation threshold values are used , topics may be identi - fied in clusters not present at higher threshold values . In this study we do not present any empirical results on this subject , but only indicate a possible way to explore such questions quantitatively . One could also compare results of alternative clus - tering procedures ( e . g . , “complete - linkage clustering” versus “single - linkage clustering” ) , or results based on clustering of different aspects of publications ( e . g . , ci - tations versus words ) . Word similarity analysis , then , could be used to investigate whether these different 238 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE - May 1991 procedures identify cluster topics not covered by co - citation clusters . Results of a comparison of clustering procedures based on different aspects , in a particular co - citations versus co - words , will be published else - where ( Braam et al . , 1989 ) . In the present study we investigate clustering results of co - citation analysis using a fixed co - citation strength threshold level and single - linkage clustering . The crite - rion for the threshold level was maximization of the number of clusters . Retrieval of Sources Relevant to Topics Involved in Clusters ( recall ) . Another type of completeness con - cerns the number of publications relevant to identified cluster topics , i . e . , relevancy of publications to research topics involved in the set of publications citing docu - ments in co - citation clusters . Possibly not all relevant publications cite the clusters involved . In the same manner as described above in an earlier section , word similarity between publications and cluster topics are computed for all publications in the database . It is then established how many source publications in the data - set have high cognitive resemblance to identified re - search topics , but are not citing the involved clusters . The critical similarity value is based on the distribution of similarity values for publications citing clusters . When similarity values occur for source publications not citing a specific cluster , that are higher than , say , the median of the similarity distribution for source pub - lications citing this cluster , then it seems reasonable to consider these former source publications as highly re - sembling the publications citing that cluster , and thus as relevant to these research topics . Another , and additional way to establish a measure of relevance to research topics for publications involved in the set of publications citing clusters , is the computa - tion of a type of Inclusion - index that expresses , in this particular case , the number of terms a source publica - tion has in common with the word - profile representing a “cluster topic” , relative to the total number of terms of the source publication * i W ( Oi ) * W ( Qi ) , = l Inc ( O , Q ) = 2 Wok ) ( 4 ) W ( Oi ) = weight of object term i , in the boolean case W ( Oi ) = 0 or 1 ; W ( Qi ) = weight of query term i , in the boolean case W ( Qi ) = 0 or 1 ; n = total number of terms . A source publication can have all its terms in com - mon with a “cluster topic” ( Inclusion - index = l . O ) , * Such inclusion index could also be used to inspect inclusion of research topics related to one cluster into topics related to other clusters . In this way , subspecialties can possibly be identified . though , due to a difference in number of terms , simi - larity according to the cosine formula ( Formula 1 ) is low . Such source publications can be seen as dealing with aspects of research topics involved in publications citing this particular ‘cluster , and , as a consequence , such publications should be considered relevant to these research topics . The retrieval effectiveness of co - citation analysis , can now be expressed by the ratio of the number of source publications citing clusters , and the total num - ber of source publications relevant to research topics involved in these clusters ( “recall of publications” ) . Analysis of Relative Contributions of Countries to Research Topics If co - citation analysis indeed enables us to display ( important aspects of ) the cognitive structure of scien - tific research , then it might be also useful in explor - ing the research activity of a country or institute in that particular field , subfield , or specialty . For instance , we could think of an analysis of “strengths and weak - nesses” of national performance by computing a coun - try’s or institute’s share in the publications involved in clusters ( Mombers et al . , 1985 ) . We compared the num - ber of contributions of countries to the citing literature of clusters , with those for all literature related to clus - ters , either by citations or by word similarity . In this way the effect of “incompleteness” of co - citation analysis on , for instance , ranking of countries can be revealed . Results and Discussion The Case of Agriculture - related Biochemical Research First , some comments will be made on the type of indexing terms used to describe research topics in - volved in sets of publications citing clusters . In an ear - lier study ( Braam et al . , 1987 ) we found that controlled terms discriminate better between interrelated clusters ( using Salton’s formula to compute the co - citation strength ) than between individual clusters , implying that these terms probably relate to a higher hierarchi - cal level than the level of individual clusters . Other terms , such as keywords , are perhaps more useful to describe the specific content of individual clusters . For this reason uncontrolled terms of Chemical Abstracts ( CA - keywords ) were also taken into account . These un - controlled terms originate from titles and abstracts , while the controlled terms originate from a subject thesaurus . Thus , CA - keywords are more text - specific then controlled terms . But , as both types of terms are selected by indexers of Chemical Abstracts , neither directly reflects the opinion and preferences of the au - thors themselves . CA - keywords are often arranged in phrases of four or more words . We did not use the full keyword - phrases , but counted word - pairs occurring JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE - May 1991 239 within these phrases in order to avoid very low frequen - cies . In addition to the above two types of indexing terms , we analyzed the distribution of CA - sections over the clusters . In the clustering routine the set of thresholds was chosen to yield a maximum number of 39 clusters within a sensible range of threshold values . For detailed information we refer to the above mentioned earlier publication . The numbers of publications related to these clusters are in the range of 2 - 12 cited documents , and 6 - 46 citing publications of which 2 - 29 publica - tions are “central . ” In Table 1 results are presented of cognitive - coherence analysis , i . e . , average similarity of individual publications to word - profiles representing re - search topics related to the clusters these publications are citing , both for controlled terms and keywords . Table 1 also displays the average value of the similarity to these same word - profiles for publications not citing any cluster . Average similarity for publicatons citing clusters ( coherence values summed over all clusters ) ap - pears to be quite high compared to average similarity to these word - profiles ( representing the involved research topics ) for publications that do not cite to any cluster . For example , keyword word - profiles of individual source publications citing clusters have an average simi - larity of 0 . 34 to the cluster’s word - profiles , against an average similarity of 0 . 10 for all other source publica - tions . Results presented in Table 1 offer empirical sup - port to the claim that clusters represent research specialties . Furthermore , it is shown that central sources , on the average , are somewhat more similar to cluster topics than peripheral sources ( Table 1 ) . This indicates that central sources are indeed more specific for the topics involved in clusters than peripheral sources . Also , we find a positive and significant corre - lation ( though weak for controlled terms ) between co - herence of clusters in terms of words and coherence in terms of citations , i . e . , average word - similarity versus average co - citation strength within clusters ( r = 0 . 7 at level 0 . 0001 for uncontrolled terms , and r = 0 . 3 at level 0 . 09 for controlled terms ) . This indicates that a relation exists between citing practices and the use of indexing terms ( words ) within research specialties . As far as relations between clusters concerns , one could ask whether different clusters with high word - similarity between their respective word - profiles repre - sent parts of one larger specialty . For example , as shown in Figure 2 , clusters with index number 11 , 13 , 30 , and 36 are strongly related by word - similarity for controlled terms , and the same holds for cluster 8 and cluster 15 . For a number of clusters there seems to be no conver - gence of citing practices and use of indexing terms with respect to relations between them , e . g . , cluster num - ber 33 has other , and much more , word - similarity rela - tions to other clusters than one would expect from its co - citation relations ( Fig . 2 ) . For each cluster , we com - pared the average similarity to the cluster’s word - profile of all source publications citing the cluster to the aver - age similarity for the same publications to the word - profiles of all other clusters . The conclusion is that , in most cases , source publications are , on the average , most similar , and consequently most relevant , to the topics involved in the clusters they cite . Differences ap - peared to be larger for keywords than for controlled terms , indicating a more specific character of keywords . A further important finding is a correlation , in par - ticular at the level of “super - clusters , ” between co - citation clusters and field - classification codes . Almost all clusters are dominated by one single classification code ( i . e . , this code covers 75 % or more of the source publications citing the cluster ) , while clusters interre - lated by co - citations share the same dominating code . For example , Figure 3 shows clusters with index num - ber 32 , 33 , 35 , and 38 are interrelated by co - citations , TABLE 1 . Average word similarity of source publications to topics involved in clusters for datasets on agriculture - related biochemistry and chemoreceotion research . Source Publications Citing to Co - citation Clusters Sources Not Citing to Central Sources Peripheral Sources Any Co - citation Cluster Dataset Words Used N” Mean Std N” Mean Std N” Mean Std Agriculture - Controlled related terms from biochemistry Chem . Abs . 414 0 . 36 0 . 14 64 0 . 25 0 . 10 2920 0 . 15 0 . 07 Keywords from Chem . Abs . 414 0 . 34 0 . 16 64 0 . 16 0 . 13 2920 0 . 10 0 . 07 Chemo - Supplemen - reception tary terms research from BIOSIS 167 0 . 44 0 . 17 54 0 . 43 0 . 15 1163 0 . 16 0 . 09 “N = number of source publications involved in analysis of word similarity . Mean = Average word similarity as measured by Salton’s cosine formula ( boolean case ) of source publications to topics involved in co - citation clusters . Std = standard deviation from the mean for word similarity . 240 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE - May 1991 Co - citation strength ( str ) word - profile similarity ( sim ) ( Salton’s cosine formula ) ( Salton’s cosine formula ) _ _ _ 0 . 00 e str < 0 . 30 . . . . . - _ . I . x , _ , ” 0 . 30 I sim < 0 . 50 > ki . < ~ , . ” i ( . il . “U 0 . 50 I sim < 0 . 75 ; ; . . . ~ ~ ~ ir ; ~ : . ~ ~ . : ~ r . ~ . . . ~ 0 . 75 < sim 5 1 . OO FIG . 2 . Strength and word - profile similarity ( controlled terms ) relations between co - citation clusters , for a dataset of agriculture - related biochemistry literature . and are also classified mainly ( except for 33 ) in the CA - Section “Plant Biochemistry . ” This indicates that a higher - order structural hierarchy , in this case subfields , is also represented by the cluster structure . In a discussion of the results with an expert , results were , in general , considered meaningful , both regard - ing the identification of research topics as well as their interrelations . Only a small number ( 13 % ) of the clus - ters was considered to be internally not cognitively co - herent . All other clusters represent , according to the expert , typical research topics , although the character varies from very specific to quite broad . Probably , of these broad topics few publications are included in our dataset . For some clusters ( 18 % of all clusters in the map ) , the absence or presence of interrelations with other clusters was considered to be incorrect , in other cases ( 13 % ) interrelations were considered to be only partially correct . Some interrelations were considered to be typically methodological by nature . The expert could easily identify the interrelated sets of clusters as representing different major research areas ( subfields ) , such as “Biotechnology oriented towards fermentation , ” “Biological regulation by hormones , ” and “Photosynthe - sis . ” A number of different clusters , interrelated by co - citation below the applied threshold , were considered to represent one and the same research topic ( e . g . , clus - ters with index numbers 17 , 24 , and 37 are in the experts opinion all on beta - adrenergic receptors , while cluster numbers 18 , 26 , and 28 are all on alpha - adrenergic re - ceptors ) . It was not clear to the expert why , in these cases , more clusters showed up . Other clusters , also in - terrelated by co - citations below the applied threshold , however , could be distinguished on cognitive grounds by a difference in emphasis on some aspects , in the re - JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE - - May 1991 241 7 f63 % 1 7 193 % ) / - 7 ( 100 ' CY 11 16 ( 100 % ) / 24y29 ) 11 ( 100 % ) 35 7 ( 63 % ) 11 ( 17 % ) / J ? q ( 92 % ) ' lfK @ % , 7 ( 56 % ) 7 ( 67 % ) 19 ( 100 % ) 10 ( 29 % ) 10 ( 17 % ) 0 25 0 19 0 39 7 ( 57 % ) 16 ( 36 % ) 7 ( 100 % ) 0 9 0 23 17 ( 75 % ) 0 1 5 ( 25 % ) 10 ( 58 % ) 10 ( 25 % ) 16 ( 25 % ) 11 ( 25 % ) @ - @ 7 ( 67 % ) 10 ( 33 % ) 7 ( 90 % ) a - - @ 7 ( 43 % ) 5 ( 29 % ) CA SECTIONS SHARE IN DATASET _ _ _ . 7 11 10 17 16 5 16 19 EMZYMES 29 % PLANT BIOCHEMISTRY 15 % MICROBIAL BIOCHEMISTRY 14 % FOOD AND FEED CHEMISTRY 12 % FERMENTATION AND BIO - INDUSTRIAL CHEMISTRY 9 % AGROCHEMICAL BIOREGULATIRS 9 % ANIMAL NUTRITION 6 % FERTILIZERS . SOILS , AND PLANl NUTRITION 6 % 10 ( 26 % ) 0 14 7 ( 100 % ) 0 34 7 ( 66 % ) 0 10 10 ( 57 % ) 5 143 % ) 0 27 _ _ _ . - - - - - - - . . - - - _ - . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ . - - - - . - - - . . _ _ _ . . _ _ . TOTAL 100 % FIG . 3 . ChemicalAbstracts sections covering 75 % or more of “central” publications citing co - citation clusters , for a dataset on agriculture - related biochemistry . search concerned , as indicated by some specific key - Merely 14 % ( 480 ) of all source publications in the words or controlled terms . dataset contain citations to clustered documents , i . e . , In the discussion of results , the expert used controlled 86 % ( 2920 ) of the sources do not contain citations to terms and keywords spontaneously in combination , so any cluster , and are thus “lost” in the analysis ! Just a it may be fruitful to use both types of terms also to - small part of this “loss” is caused by the fact that a gether in word - profile similarity analysis . number of publications contained in Chemical Ab - 242 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE - May 1991 structs are not present in the SC1 ( ll % ) , i . e . , a loss caused by a difference in scientific literature coverage between these two databases . In Table 2 results of word - similarity analysis are shown for the field of agriculture related biochemistry . Results for both controlled terms and word - pairs from keywords , clearly indicate that a large number ( 883 ) of the “lost” source publications ( containing no citations to any cluster ) still are cognitively related to the identi - fied topics involved in clusters . About half of these “lost” source publications ( 415 ) is even highly similar ( see third section ) to topics involved in one ( 32 % ) or more ( 13 % ) clusters , while the other half ( 468 ) is dealing with specific aspects relevant to the topics involved in one ( 15 % ) or more ( 40 % ) clusters . These figures are high compared to those for source publications related to clusters by citations . The number of source publica - tions that are central ( i . e . , exclusively related to one single cluster ) to the identified topics is about the same for both “citing” and “similar” sources . In Table 3 it is shown that the ISI - coverage for these “similar” sources is not much lower than the overall coverage . Our em - pirical results therefore indicate that co - citation analy - sis , though probably appropriate to identify important research topics , is indeed not appropriate to select all , or even a considerable amount , of the releva t sources in these topics . A further discussion is given in a later section . Now , if we add to the set of publications citing the co - citation clusters all the source publications not citing these clusters but having a high word - similarity to cluster topics , the above retrieval problem might be overcome . This is important in particular for evalu - ation purposes e . g . , the participation of a country in specific clusters . The effect of this addition of source publications to clusters on a country’s participation in clusters and its overall ranking is illustrated in Tables 4 and 6 . Both aspects are influenced , but it is remarkable that this effect is not equally distributed over the differ - ent countries . Thus , it can be concluded that results of co - citation analysis may offer a distorted picture of a country’s participation in research topics . The Case of Chemoreception Research Co - citation clustering has been performed for chemoreception research publications ( see second sec - tion ) using a threshold set for which , compared to other sets , a maximum number of 38 clusters occurred . The numbers of publications related to these clusters are in the range 2 - 18 for cited documents , and between 4 - 17 citing publications of which 10 or less are “central” to a cluster . In Figure 4 a map of chemoreception research is shown . Here , clusters are depicted by circles with an index number ( these index numbers only relate to our database ) . Co - citation strength within and between clusters is indicated by dots and by lines , respectively . Lines indicate co - citation relations below the applied strength threshold , dots indicate co - citation relations above this threshold . The words ( “supplementary terms” from BIOSIS ) we used to describe research topics , are listed near the clusters concerned . These words are document title words and added words . The latter are terms selected by analysts of BIOSIS ( Biosciences In - formation Service , Philadelphia ) in order to enhance and clearify the author’s meaning . Average wo . d - profile similarity within clusters ( co - herence ) is remarkably high for source publications cit - ing clusters , as compared to average similarity to cluster topics for source publications not citing any cluster ( Table 1 ) . This finding shows that co - citation analysis selects publications that are cognitively more related then expected from random selection of publications . As in the case of agriculture - related biochemical re - search , we also find a positive and significant , though again weak , correlation ( r = 0 . 45 at level 0 . 025 ) be - tween average word - similarity and average co - citation strength within clusters . Thus , also for this subfield of TABLE 2 . Types of relations between source publications and co - citation cluster , for datasets on agriculture - related biochemistry and chemoreception research . Source Publications Citing Source Publications with High Clusters ( and thus constituting Word - Similarity to Cluster cluster topics ) Topics , But Not Citing Cluster ? All Source Publications In Dataset Source Publica - tions Citing Clusters as Per - centage of All Publications Related to Clusters ( Recall ) Dataset All Centralb WJ ) All ( % ) Central w4 Total 6 ) All Central Agriculture - related biochemistry 480 ( 14 ) 414 ( W 883 ( 26 ) 399 ( 12 ) 3400 ( 100 ) 35 % 51 % Chemoreception research 221 ( 16 ) 167 ( 12 ) 99 ( 7 ) 54 ( 4 ) 1384 ( 100 ) 69 % 76 % “Similarity higher than average similarity within clusters or 100 % inclusion . ? jource publications related exclusively to one cluster . JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE - May 1991 243 TABLE 3 . ISI - coverage of source publications per type of relation to clusters , for datasets on agriculture - related biochemistry and chemoreception research . Dataset Source Publications Citing Clusters Source Publications Not Citing to , but Similar to Topics Involved in Clusters All Source Publications Agriculture - related biochemistry Chemoreception research 100 % 84 % 89 % 100 % 85 % 75 % science there seems to be a convergence of citing prac - tices and use of words for important concepts and prob - lems in the specialty . With respect to relations between clusters , we find that some clusters are strongly interrelated by co - citations and also have highly similar word - profiles ( e . g . , clusters 9 and 28 in Figure 5 ) . These clusters prob - ably represent parts of one larger research specialty . However , there are also cases where co - citation rela - tions between clusters are absent , although these clus - ters have highly similar word - profiles ( e . g . , clusters 9 and 26 in Figure 5 ) . In these cases there is no shared intellectual focus on earlier literature that corresponds to similarity in research problems . But according to the definition of specialties as “sets of related research problems and concepts studied by a number of re - searchers , ” these latter clusters should also be seen as parts of one larger specialty . Inspection of similarity relations between clusters ( measured by the mean similarity of source publications from one cluster to word - profiles of other clusters ) re - veals that not all sets of source publications that cite clusters are , on the average , most relevant to the re - search topics ( represented by word - profiles ) of the clus - ters they cite , but are more relevant to research topics of other clusters . In these cases different clusters proba - bly represent parts of the same specialty . An expert in the field considered nearly all ( 92 % ) of the clusters to be coherent , as far as the associated word - profiles are concerned . However , in the expert’s opinion , not all of these clusters represent identifiable research specialties . Twenty - five clusters ( 66 % ) were TABLE 4 . Presence in clusters for countrieqa for dataset on agriculture related biochemical research ( only first 20 countries shown ) . Country ( A ) Number of Clusters Cited All Central O - 9 Number of Clusters Cited Or Similar To . All Central Rank In Rank In Case ( A ) Case ( B ) All Central All Central USA 36 Japan 23 Great Britain 21 Fed Rep Ger 19 Canada 17 France 14 Sweden 14 India 11 Australia 10 Italy 7 USSR 7 Belgium 6 Switzerland 6 Netherlands 5 Hungary 5 Israel 5 South Africa 5 Poland 4 Denmark 3 South Korea 3 35 20 20 18 16 11 12 11 10 5 7 3 4 5 3 5 2 4 - 39 38 39 35 36 38 24 38 31 32 31 31 26 34 13 13 8 16 30 7 38 31 30 24 24 17 17 15 15 10 14 5 12 12 4 8 5 5 - 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 1 2 3 4 5 7 6 8 9 12 10 16 14 11 17 13 19 15 - 2 5 1 7 6 3 18 4 11 10 13 12 17 8 22 23 29 21 14 31 1 2 3 5 4 6 7 9 8 13 10 16 12 11 22 14 18 17 - “At least one publication of a country should cite a cluster or should be similar to research topics involved in a cluster . 244 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE - May 1991 TABLE 5 . Presence in clusters for countries , a for dataset on chemoreception research ( only first 15 countries shown ) . Country ( A ) Number of Clusters Cited All Central ( W Number of Clusters Cited Or Similar To . All Central Rank In Rank In Case ( A ) Case ( B ) All Central All Central USA 36 29 37 30 1 1 1 1 Japan 14 8 16 11 2 4 2 3 Fed Rep Ger 12 8 12 8 3 5 5 5 France 10 9 14 10 4 2 4 4 Great Britain 9 5 12 7 5 6 6 6 Canada 8 8 14 11 6 3 3 2 Australia 5 3 7 3 7 8 8 8 Sweden 5 3 7 3 8 9 9 13 Spain 4 2 5 3 9 12 10 12 Netherlands 4 4 4 4 10 7 13 7 India 3 1 8 3 11 14 7 9 Israel 3 2 3 3 12 10 14 10 Italy 2 2 4 3 13 11 12 11 Poland 2 0 3 1 14 20 15 20 Argentina 2 2 2 2 15 13 16 14 aAt least one publication of a country should cite a cluster or should be similar to research topics involved in a cluster . considered to represent research specialties , among which eighteen were considered different , so that - in the expert’s opinion - a number of clusters in fact repre - sent segments of the same research specialty . Clusters interrelated by co - citations ( below the applied co - citation strength threshold ) were in most cases con - sidered to be cognitively related as well . However , some clusters with similar word - profiles , and thus con - sidered to be cognitively related , are isolated as far as co - citations are concerned . In general , to the expert’s opinion , topics were too much fragmented . This split - up of specialties into different clusters possibly reflects TABLE 6 . Overall contribution of countries to clusters and influence of including source publications having word - similarity with clus - ter topics , for dataset on agriculture - related biochemical research ( only first 20 countries shown ) . Country Source Publica - Source Publica - tions Citing tions Similar to to Clusters Cluster Topics All Central All Central All Source Publications Related to Clusters All Central Rank for Citing Source Publications All Central Rank for Citing and “Similar” Source Publications All Central USA 240 174 915 145 1155 319 1 1 1 1 Japan 61 41 298 42 359 83 2 2 3 2 Great Britain 44 40 353 26 397 66 3 3 2 3 Fed Rep Ger 41 36 118 22 159 58 4 4 5 4 Canada 40 31 111 19 151 50 5 5 6 5 France 25 17 211 15 236 32 6 6 4 6 Sweden 21 15 27 6 48 21 7 8 15 8 India 20 16 123 11 143 27 8 7 7 7 Italy 11 7 84 8 95 15 9 12 8 11 Australia 10 10 47 8 57 18 10 9 11 9 Belgium 9 4 49 2 58 6 11 16 10 17 USSR 9 9 43 9 52 18 12 10 14 10 Switzerland 9 5 32 8 41 13 13 14 17 14 Israel 8 8 16 6 24 14 14 11 20 13 South Africa 7 2 3 3 10 5 15 19 27 19 Netherlands 6 6 66 9 72 15 16 13 9 12 Hungary 6 4 12 2 18 6 17 17 23 18 Poland 5 5 17 3 22 8 18 15 21 15 Denmark 3 - 38 - 41 - 19 16 - Czechoslovakia 3 3 33 4 36 7 20 18 18 16 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE - - May 1991 245 * bulb 4 dbcmy 3 r . 1 2 . “lbo & . 2 p . mm . - . mhobu $ r * 2 hrckowl . u 2 I & ! ’ 5 mic . 2 “auona 5 phram . 3 tR”S . 3 mlpl . nhtlm 2 cyd . 2 f . , , “ , . 2 maI” 2 P - 9 - w 2 “ . ““cllm 2 “““ . # ) l 2ewh 2 chanicd 3 hi & canpatabillty 2 - m 2 mk4 Jm - 2 mu 2 * m - y 2 In - . 2 pmulc 2 ma @ 2 d1 . cmy 2 ro . % qnl ( m 2 mpr * uN . 2Iypr 2 mapmu . 2 WI” . 2 . nMlnp 2 r * olf 20 6 . . o - 2 = . _ = . _ Jhdh = . f - 6 md . 6 argn 6 vwnamn . . . , 5 dlactory 2 kYI 2 pu . utory 4 , . I 2 ln . * mlull 2 - 2 bun . , ” 4 uln . 2 dt1ctwy 2 ldmbtiutlon 2 rludnn 3 tmhanw Joda 2 . - y 2 bulb 2 mcuu Podan 2 rmmd 2 “I l y * lml unuy \ : 1 1 7 ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . - . . . . . . . . . 2 Sill . ’ 2 folhlnp 2 m . luraIIon 10 2 " o " roqnhd ~ " m - 2 “ . “rtnal 2 “OwonS . . . . . 2 rq . “ . ‘aDo” % 5 df . Cmy 14 1 h , ha , . h a . . ( 15 ~ ~ ~ 27 \ 2r 1 : 32 0 m P 0 1 : clu6ier with index number 1 ( p : word - profile of ‘peripheral citing publications only ) 2 syn6wus : frequency of words ( added Keywords lrom BIOSIS ) occurring in source pubfiutions citing to dusters . alationsa3 ; co - cilations > Z ; co - citation srronglh so . 60 ( Salton’s cosine‘ formula ) 2 ch” 2 ch . mic . , 2 * mor . c . plon 2 nun , rum 2 n”“mnn 2 movmlnt 2 rerpons9s 2 UlrnOn 2 w . trbun . 2 vmue 26 0 m 6 cry + olrm . 5 . 99r99 & ln 5 Irrugi” . “ . 5 9rain 4 beeI . 1 cdwp ~ . 4 cusulibn 4 phramm . 4 phnomonn 3 mrcrpldd . 3 oab 2 USU”uml 2 Iauli”9 2b & 2 mrutor 2 wyza . ph”u . 2 ru . ty 2 l tcaui 2 uJrinm . nd . 2 qnth . d . 2 bilmliml 37 0 w FIG . 4 . Chemoreception literature co - citation clusters and related keywords . 246 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE - May 1991 Keywords : taste 3 aversion 2 conditioned 2 lithium 2 I Keywords : 1 aversion 5 rat 5 taste 5 / L conditioned 3 ] Classification Animal behavior 3 Cocitation strength : - 0 . 40 - 0 . 60 . 0 . 60 - 0 . 80 Word - profile similarity - 0 . 75 - 1 . 00 . . . . 0 . 30 - 0 . 50 FIG . 5 . Split up of a specialty : three different co - citation clusters indicating the same specialty . differences in intellectual focus expressed in references of publications relevant to the research topics involved in the specialty . The level of the applied co - citation strength threshold then indicates the importance of such difference in intellectual focus . On the other hand , this fragmentation may be largely the result of the maximization of the number of clusters that has been applied in our clustering algorithm . On a higher hierarchical level , groups of interrelated clusters corre - spond - in the opinion of the expert - to broad research themes , such as pheromone research on insects and on mammals , taste research , taste aversion as a tool in other research , research on olfactory bulb . One particular cluster , on food - technology research , was considered by the expert to be much too small in relation to the estimated share of publications on this topic in the dataset . This most probably is the result of infrequent referencing and / or absence of reference lists in articles on this topic . Clusters containing combinations of words consid - ered to be less coherent might , however , still indicate interesting , though unexpected , relations between re - search specialties ( e . g . , human taste research , and taste - mixture research on malacostraca ( “panulirus” ) , in cluster 15 , Figure 4 ) . Also , in the case of chemoreception research , results of the co - citation analysis are not “complete , ” as quite a number ( 99 ) of publications not citing any co - citation cluster are highly similar ( Table 2 ) to topics involved in one cluster ( 54 publications ) or more clusters ( 45 publi - cations ) ( see earlier section ) . Again , this can not be ex - plained by a lack of coverage of these publications by the ISI / SCI database ( Table 3 ) . The explanation is the same as for the foregoing case : many source publica - tions do ( cognitively ) belong to a specialty , but they do not have the citing characteristics that relate them to a specific co - citation cluster . The effect of adding these cognitively related but not citing source publications to JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE - May 1991 247 clusters , on the participation of countries to clusters and overall ranking is illustrated in Tables 5 and 7 . The influence of this effect , though less important than in the case of agriculture - related biochemistry , is not negligibly small . Thus , also in this case , co - citation re - sults offer a distorted picture of a country’s participa - tion to clusters , in particular for smaller countries . Co - Citation clusters , Research Fronts , and Research Specialties As shown in the foregoing sections , more publica - tions may be involved in a specialty than are citing into co - citation clusters . Subject - similarity between these publications was indicated by relatively high word - profile similarity . In as far as co - citation clusters iden - tify research fronts , one might raise the question whether differences exist between the source publica - tions in a specialty that do participate in the constitu - tion of these clusters , and those publications that do not . Co - citation analysis measures the extent to which researchers use the same earlier literature , i . e . , it builds on “intellectual focus” as a characteristic of the re - search front . Another characteristic of the research front , the “immediacy effect , ” is measured by Price’s Index : the percentage of 1 to 5 - year - old cited references ( De Solla Price , 1970 ) . Price’s Index is a measure of the extent to which researchers concentrate their references to the most recent earlier literature . As indicators of the research front , Price’s Index and co - citation analysis are independent of each other . Of course , both these in - dicators of the research front ( Price Index , and co - citation ) are , as indicators , independent of word usage in research publications which reflects in an indepen - dent fashion subject - matter of the research involved in current publications of a specialty . According to Cozzens , co - citation studies have shown that “immediacy” and “intellectual focus” are re - lated phenomena ( Cozzens , 1985 ) . If both Price’s Index and co - citation are good indicators of the research front , it is interesting to compare Price’s Index for the above two groups of source publications : one group consisting of publications citing into co - citation clus - ters , and another group of publications not citing these clusters but similar in subject - matter to the publications of the first group . In particular such comparison is in - teresting in relation to the value of Price’s Index for all other source publications in the dataset . In the present context , it is of interest that , for both agriculture - related biochemical research and chemore - ception research , source publications related to clusters by citations or word similarity , do have a significantly higher value for Price Index than all other sources ( dif - ferences among means were compared using Tukey’s studentized range test at 0 . 05 significance level ) . Be - tween them , “citing” source publications have a some - what higher value for this index than “similar” ( though not citing ) source publications in case of agriculture - related biochemical research , but in case of chemore - ception research these index values are not significantly different ( p = 0 . 05 ) . Thus , “citing” and “similar” source publications do share a focus on the most recent earlier literature , but consensus about what most recent earlier literature is important ( and “should be cited’ ) only ex - ists among the publications citing co - citation clusters . Further , analysis of the number of references included in publications reveals that source publications citing clusters contain significantly more references than all TABLE 7 . Overall contribution of countries to clusters and influence of including source publications having word - similarity with cluster topics , for dataset on chemoreception research ( only first 15 countries shown ) . Country Source Publica - Source Publica - tions Citing tions Similar to to Clusters Cluster Topics All Central Ail Central All Source Publications Related to Clusters All Central Rank for Citing Source Publications All Central Rank for Citing and “Similar” Source Publications All Central USA 173 93 40 18 213 111 1 1 1 1 Japan 24 16 7 5 31 21 2 3 3 3 Canada 20 16 14 6 34 22 3 2 2 2 Fed Rep Ger 16 10 1 1 17 11 4 5 6 5 Great Britain 14 8 5 3 19 11 5 6 5 6 France 12 10 8 4 20 14 6 4 4 4 Sweden 10 5 3 1 13 6 7 7 8 7 India 7 1 8 4 15 5 8 16 7 8 Spain 6 2 1 1 7 3 9 13 10 14 Australia 5 3 2 0 7 3 10 9 9 10 Netherlands 5 5 0 0 5 5 11 8 13 9 Israel 4 2 1 1 5 3 12 10 11 11 Italy 2 2 3 1 5 3 13 11 12 12 Mexico 2 2 1 1 3 3 14 12 15 13 Poland 2 0 1 1 3 1 15 20 16 20 248 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE - - May 1991 other source publications , including those source publi - cations similar to ( but not citing ) clusters . Thus it seems that part of the literature involved in a specialty is char - acterized by a ( partial ) consensus concerning what se - lect part of the most recent earlier literature is of importance . These publications contain also relatively more references and constitute a co - citation cluster . Another part of the specialty - literature consists of pub - lications not participating in this ( partial ) consensus , or at least not expressing such consensus in their refer - ences . These publications contain , on the average , less references . A schematic overview of these results is given in Figure 6 . Thus , according to our results , there seems to be a discrepancy between “intellectual focus on base litera - ture” and “immediacy” within scientific specialties . If , according to Cozzens ( Cozzens , 1985 ) , co - citation stud - ies confirm the relationship between immediacy and intellectual focus on base literature , this confirmation may be largely due to the fact that such studies analyze only the literature citing co - citation clusters , and disre - gard papers similar in content though not citing any of the documents in these clusters . Further , for example , validation of results of a co - citation study of the collagen specialty carried out by Small ( Small , 1977 ) was based on questionnaires sent only to authors citing one or more papers in the 1973 - collagen cluster . Thus , validation was based only on au - thors involved in the “consensus part” of the specialty . The question whether collagen research publications not citing the 1973 - cluster could provide significant information on the development of the specialty , was not examined in that study . It may therefore be interest - ing to examine in what part of a specialty the “critical processes” of knowledge growth in fact take place . Per - haps , the most interesting , or even “crucial” processes take place in the part of a specialty that is not captured publications constituting a co - citation cluster other publications on similar topics consensus on less consensus on intellectual intellectual base base literature , literature , and / or and attentive less attentive referencing referencing focus on most focus on ( slightly recent literature less ) most recent literature FIG . 6 . Publications in a subject - related research area . by co - citation analysis ! For example , possibly , in the “nonconsensus” part of a specialty fresh ideas are generated by researchers drawing on alternative basic concepts , methods , or experiments , expressed in “non - standard” literature ! An answer to these latter ques - tions , however , awaits further research . Conclusions Combining word - analysis and co - citation analysis offers a useful instrument to describe , evaluate , and compare results of co - citation analysis in a systematic and clear way , in particular concerning aspects related to the cognitive content of publications . It can now be more accurately established what topics are involved in clusters , and whether clusters are , in a quantitative sense , sufficiently ( internal ) coherent and ( external ) dif - ferent one from another in order to speak of “separate” research specialties . Moreover , it can now be estab - lished whether all sources relevant to identified re - search topics are indeed retrieved using co - citation analysis , and whether retrieval can be improved by adding to these topics all relevant source publications not citing the clusters involved but having high word - similarity with research topics related to these clusters . The question whether all topics covered by a dataset are identified by co - citation clusters can , only partially , be answered by comparing results for different sets of thresholds . Of course , research specialties lacking “focused” referencing can never be identified using co - citation analysis . Perhaps , such topics are covered by co - word analysis . For such comparison we refer to our forthcoming publication ( Braam et al . , 1989 ) . Our results suggest that co - citation analysis indeed displays research specialties , although these may be fragmented into several different clusters . However , we found that the analysis only partially reveals the litera - ture relevant to identified research topics involved in the current work of these specialties . Further , interrela - tions between clusters seem to correspond to cognitive relations on a higher level than specialties , such as fields defined by conventional subject classification ( CA section - codes ) . Thus , co - citation clusters are certainly not , at least not entirely , artifacts of an applied technique , but on the other hand they do not represent the entire pub - lished current work comprised in a specialty . Therefore , as a document retrieval tool , co - citation analysis is not appropriate to select all , or even a major part of the source publications relevant to these specialties ( low recall ) . It can be concluded from our results that the relative number of source publications citing clustered docu - ments , as compared to the total number of source publi - cations relevant to topics involved in clusters , is related to the degree of consensus concerning the intellectual base literature existing in a specialty , i . e . , consensus about what earlier publications are of importance . JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE - May 1991 249 However , an alternative explanation might be the following , taking into account the difference in the number of references per publication . In a number of publications much attention is paid to inclusion of these earlier important publications in the reference lists , whereas these are left out in the reference lists of other publications . In this latter case consensus on intellectual base literature may not be entirely absent , but no con - sensus exists on the need to refer to these publications . Nevertheless , according to our results , a discrepancy seems to be present within specialties between “imme - diacy” and “intellectual focus on base literature , ” indi - cating differences in the processes of knowledge growth within these specialties . It will be interesting to study in more detail these differences in processes of knowledge growth within specialties , in order to shed more light on the relationship between the concept of “research specialties” and Price’s concept of “research fronts . ” In particular , it is interesting to examine in which part of a specialty the “critical” processes ( e . g . , “discoveries” ) take place , because these processes might be taking place in the part not covered by co - citation analysis . Discussions with experts point in the same direction as our evaluation by word analysis : results may proba - bly be improved by aggregating highly similar clus - ters , and by adding to clusters all source publications relevant to topics involved in these clusters ( via word - similarity ) although not citing the clusters concerned . Support for such a strategy is also found in the fact that source publications , whether or not citing clusters , that are highly similar to topics involved in clusters , also have a high Price Index compared to other sources . This indicates a shared concentration on the most re - cent scientific literature ( De Solla Price , 1965 ) , al - though not a shared concentration on the same recent literature , and therefore only part of these publications also constitute co - citation clusters . Apparently , a num - ber of current researchers do not share consensus re - garding which recent earlier publications are of special importance or usefulness for the research in the spe - cialty , or at least they do not include these publications in the reference lists of their publications . Thus , in as far as co - citation clusters identify re - search specialties , it is clear that they do so only par - tially , and probably only cover the part where consensus exists about important or useful earlier contributions . The remaining part lacks such consensus , but still uses to a large extent the same words for problems and con - cepts in the research involved and is also interested in most recent literature . As researchers involved in this part of a research specialty cite in an unconventional , or uncommon way , they also constitute no separate co - citation cluster . This “lack of citations” to co - citation clusters in source publications that are otherwise relevant to re - search topics related to these clusters is not regularly distributed over countries . Therefore , the use of co - citation analysis does not offer a representative picture of participation in research topics by countries . Combi - nation of co - citation analysis with word analysis offers a possibility to improve the applicability of such results , since a more complete set of publications can be retrieved . It should be noted that such an additional word analy - sis can be used at any level of the co - citation strength . The applied strength level defines size and scope of a cluster , a low level indicating a broad , a high level a nar - row focus ( ISI / DIMDI , 1987 ) . According to our view , an additional word analysis should be used at any ap - plied strength level in order to see whether at that level size and scope of a cluster is sufficient to comprise co - herent and complete groups of current publications con - cerning the research topics indicated by these clusters . The question remains , also in case of combined co - citation and word analysis , whether this approach can cover all research topics in a dataset ; though results may be very complete for specific identified topics , there may still be topics that are not identified using co - citation clustering . Further work is needed to exam - ine whether there are more appropriate criteria to specify threshold levels used in the clustering process . For instance , it could be useful to vary the threshold level in order to maximize not only the number of clus - ters , but also their size and coherence . In addition , it might be interesting to compare results of co - citation analysis to other clustering routines , e . g . , routines based on complete linkage clustering , or clustering routines using other aspects of publications than co - cited refer - ences such as co - words . We agree with Mullins et al . ( 1988 ) that , in order to generate significant results in the field of “Mapping of science , ” it will be necessary to analyze different struc - tural aspects of publications in combination in a quanti - tative fashion in stead of the exclusive use of single aspects . In fact , the present study , combining co - citation and word analysis is an example of such approach . At the present we explore ( Braam et al . , 1989 ) the fruit - fulness of combining co - citation clustering , and co - word clustering . References ABRC ( Advisory Board for the Research Councils ) , The Royal So - ciety Policy Studies Unit , and the ESRC ( Economic and Social Research Council ) , ( 1986 ) . Evaluation of National Performance in Basic Research : a review of techniques for evaluating national performance in basic research , with case studies in genetics and solid state physics . In ABRC Science Policy Studies , ( pp . 137 - 139 ) . No . 1 , London : Department of Education and Science . Braam , R . R . , Moed , H . F . , & Van Raan , A . F . J . ( 1988a ) . Map - ping of Science : Critical Elaboration and New Approaches , a Case Study in Agricultural Related Biochemistry , In L . Egghe & R . Rousseau ( Eds . ) , Informetrics 87188 ( pp . 15 - 28 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier Science Publishers . And also , in a more extended ver - sion : Braam , R . R . , Moed , H . F . , & Van Raan , A . F . J . ( 1987 , November ) . Mapping of science : Critical elaboration and new ap - 250 JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE - - May 1991 proaches , a case study in agricultural Biochemistry . Research Re - port to the Netherlands Advisory Council for Science Policy ( RAWB ) , Leiden . Braam , R . R . , Moed , H . F . , & Van Raan , A . F . J . ( 1988b ) . Map - ping research specialties and their interrelations : a combined co - citation and word analysis of chemoreception literature . News Letter of the European Chemoreception Research Organization ( ECRO ) , 38 , 360 - 363 . Braam , R . R . , Moed , H . F . , & Van Raan , A . F . J . ( 1989 , November ) . Comparison of co - citation and co - word clustering . In A . F . J . Van Raan , Nederhof , A . J . , & Moed , H . F . ( Eds . ) , Science and technology indicators their use in science policy and their role in science studies : Select proceedings of the first international work - shop on science and technology indicators Leiden , The Netherlands , 14 - 16 November 1988 ( pp . 307 - 337 ) , DSWO Press , University of Leiden , The Netherlands . Braam , R . R . , Moed , H . F . , & Van Raan , A . F . J . ( 1990 ) . Mapping of Science by Combined Co - Citation and Word Analysis : II Dy - namical Aspects . JASIS , Ed . update . Callon , M . , Courtial , J . P . , Turner , W . A . , & Bauin , S . ( 1983 ) . From translations to problematic networks : A introduction to co - word analysis . Social Science Information , 22 , 191 - 235 . Cozzens , S . E . ( 1985 ) . Using the archive : Derek Price’s theory of differences among the sciences . Scientometrics , 7 431 - 441 . De Solla Price , D . J . ( 1965 ) . Networks of scientific papers . Sci - ence , 149 , 510 - 515 . De Solla Price , D . J . ( 1970 ) . Citation measures of hard science , soft science , technology , and non - science . In C . E . Nelson , & D . K . Pollack ( Eds ) , Communication among scientists and engineers ( pp . 1 - 12 ) . Lexington , Mass . : Heath Lexington . Franklin , J . J . ( 1988 ) . Testing and using quantitative methods in science policy contexts : A response to Hicks . Social Studies of Science , 18 , 365 - 374 . Garfield , E . , Malin , M . V . , & Small , H . ( 1978 ) . Citation data as science indicators . In Y . Elkana , J . Lederberg , R . K . Merton , A . Thackray , & H . Zuckerman ( Eds . ) , Toward a Metric of Science : The Advent of Science Indicators ( pp . 179 - 207 ) . New York : John Wiley & Sons . Griffith , B . C . , Small , H . G . , Stonehill , J . A . , & Dey , S . ( 1974 ) . The structure of scientific literatures II : Toward a macro - and micro - structure for science . Science Studies , 4 , 339 - 365 . Healey , P . , Rothman , H . , & Hoch , P . K . ( 1986 ) . An experiment in science mapping for research planning . Research Policy , 15 , 233 - 251 . Hicks , D . ( 1987 ) . Limitations of co - citation analysis as a tool for science policy . Social Studies of Science , 17 295 - 316 . Hicks , D . ( 1988 ) . Limitations and more limitations of co - citation analysis / bibliometric modeling : A reply to Franklin . Social Stud - ies of Science , 18 , 375 - 384 . ISI / DIMDI , ( 1987 , August ) . SCISEARCH - user manual English ver - sion , Edition 01 . 00 ( pp . 8 - 10 ) . Kiiln : DIMDI - Deutsches Institut fiir Medizinische Dokumentation . Jones , W . P . , & Furnas , G . W . ( 1987 ) . Pictures of Relevance : A Ge - ometric Analysis of Similarity Measures . Journal of the American Society for Information Science , 38 , 420 - 442 . King , J . ( 1987 ) . A review of bibliometric and other science indica - tors and their role in research evaluation . Journal of Information Science , 13 , 261 - 276 . Kuhn , T . S . ( 1970 ) . The Structure of scientific revolutions , Second Enlarged Edition . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Laudan , L . ( 1977 ) . Progress and its problems : Towards a theory of scientific growth . California : University of California Press . Moed , H . F . ( 1988 ) . The use of online databases for bibliometric analysis . In L . Egghe & R . Rousseau ( Eds . ) , Informetrics 8788 ( pp . 133 - 146 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier Science Publishers . Mombers , C . , Van Heeringen , A . , Van Venetit ? , R . , & Le Pair , C . ( 198 . 5 ) . Displaying strengths and weaknesses in national R & D performance through document citation . Scientometrics , 7 341 - 355 . Mullins , N . , Snizek , W . , & Oehler , K . ( 1988 ) . The structural analy - sis of a scientific paper . In A . F . J . Van Raan ( Ed . ) , Handbook of Quantitative Studies of Science & Technology ( pp . 85 - 101 ) . Am - sterdam : Elsevier Science Publishers . Oberski , J . E . J . ( 1988 ) . Some statistical aspects of co - citation clus - ter analysis and a judgement by physicists . In Van Raan A . F . J . , ( Ed . ) , Handbook of Quantitative Studies of Science & Technology ( pp . 431 - 462 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier Science Publishers . Rip , A . . I , & Courtial , J ( 1984 ) . Co - word maps of biotechnology : an example of cognitive scientometrics . Scientometrics , 6 , 381 - 400 . Rip , A . J . , ( 1988 ) . Mapping of Science : Possibilities and Limita - tions . In A . F . J . Van Raan , ( Ed . ) . Handbook of Quantitative Stud - ies of Science & Technology ( pp . 253 - 273 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier Science Publishers . Small , H . G . ( 1973 ) . Co - citation in the scientific literature : A new measure of the relationship between publications . Journal of the American Society of Information Science , 24 , 265 - 269 . Small , H . G . , & Griffith , B . C . ( 1974 ) . The structure of scientific literatures , I : Identifying and graphing specialties . Science Stud - ies , 4 , 17 - 40 . Small , H . G . A ( 1977 ) . Co - citation model of a scientific specialty : A longitudinal study of collagen research . Social Studies of Sci - ence , 7 139 - 166 . Small , H . G . ( 1978 ) . Cited documents as concept symbols . Social Studies of Science , 8 , 327 - 340 . Small , H . G . & Crane , D . ( 1979 ) . Specialties and disciplines in sci - ence and social science : An examination of their structure using citation indexes , Scientometrics , 1 , 445 - 461 . Small , H . . & Sweeney , E . ( 1985 ) . Clustering the science citation index using co - citations : I . A comparison of methods . Sciento - metrics , 7 393 - 409 . Small , H . , Sweeney , E . , & Greenlee , E . ( 1985 ) . Clustering the sci - ence citation index using co - citations : II . Mapping science . Sci - entometrics , 8 , 321 - 340 . Small , H . ( 1986 ) . The synthesis of specialty narratives from co - citation clusters . Journal of the American Society of information Science , 37 97 - 110 . Small , H . G . & Garfield , E . ( 1986 ) . The geograpphy of science : Disciplinary and national mappings . Journal of Information Sci - ence , II , 147 - 159 . Sullivan , D . , White , D . H . , & Barboni , E . J . ( 1977 ) . Co - citation analysis of science : An evaluation . Social Studies of Science , 7 223 - 240 . Van Der Starre , H . ( Ed . ) , ( 1985 , and 1986 ) . Chemoreception refer - ences , Vol . 1 , nr . 4 and Vol . 2 , nrs 1 and 2 . European Chemo - reception Research Organization ( ECRO ) . JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR INFORMATION SCIENCE - May 1991 251