101 Social Innovation within Prison Service Marie Kirstejn Aakjær The Danish School of Education & the Danish Prison Service marie . aakjaer @ kriminalforsorgen . dk Eva Brandt The Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts , School of Design eva . brandt @ kadk . dk ABSTRACT This paper report on a project in a maximum - security prison in Denmark , where a group of officers and inmates engaged in a participatory design project aimed at improving the quality of everyday life . A series of participatory design workshops had two overall objectives : 1 ) to increase levels of trust and confidence in the prison , and 2 ) to learn how to engage inmates better in their everyday life inside prison , e . g . through engaging them in collective matters . The process of co - inquiry and co - creation provided a new social infrastructure , which allowed inmates and prison officers to access new roles and social positions . Author Keywords Participatory design , Social innovation , infrastructuring , prison service ACM Classification Keywords Design , H5 . m INTRODUCTION The participatory design field has a long tradition of involving existing or new users ( and perhaps other stakeholders ) actively in the design process . In the beginning and currently non - designers are often engaged in projects focusing on information and communication technology design in relation to various work environments [ e . g . 9 , 16 , 4 ] . Over the years , the field has expanded to also involve people in designing technologies , products or services for everyday practices outside work [ e . g . 14 ] or in relation to ( architectural and urban ) planning [ e . g . 11 ] among others . The many different projects are connected through various practices of participation , which all are based on a participatory mind - set . In this paper we report from an action research [ 13 ] project that tries to embrace yet new territories of participation , namely how prison officers and inmates collaboratively can co - create solutions of how to improve the quality of everyday life and practices within the prison . We will particularly explore the notion of social infrastructures as an aid in social innovation within a prison context . First , social innovation and infrastructuring are described . Second , life in prison is introduced and is followed by examples of challenges for co - creation activities within this specific context and how we tried to overcome them . Last , we discuss some of the consequences that the project has initiated . The empirical material contains qualitative interviews , observations , notes and material produced at the workshops where the first author of this paper participated as one of two facilitators . SOCIAL INNOVATION AND INFRASTRUCTURING In prisons , the conditions surrounding inmates are very different from the conditions experienced by people who are there for work reasons . Simply put , the prison employees are in the prison voluntarily while the inmates are serving time to carry out their sentences and therefore cannot leave the prison . Thus the project is about social innovation within the premises that the prison provides , with the inherent asymmetry and difference in power , possibilities and needs . Drucker [ 6 ] defines social innovation as innovations driven by social needs instead of technological inventions , and thus , he argues , social innovations are the most common innovations . To Drucker’s definition of social innovation , Darsø [ 5 ] adds the important aspect of changes in human interactions , relations and practices , defining social innovation as changes in human infrastructures , for instance as changes in what she calls “frames and relations . ” Therefore , attention is drawn to the interactions and the human aspects in innovation . This resonates well with Björgvinsson et al . ’s notion of infrastructuring for social innovation [ 1 ] . Referring to Leigh Star’s description , Ehn states that : “An infrastructure , like [ … ] the Internet is not reinvented every time , but is ‘sunk into’ other social - material structures and only accessible by membership in a specific community - of - practice” [ 7 p . 5 ] . However , the concepts of infrastructure and social innovation remain rather unclear in the literature . In the context of a prison , we hope that the notion of infrastructure can help us describe the sustained process of alignment among various communities - of - practice , and allow us to develop the subtle interactions of participants , places and the specific ways of being and doing . Thus the aim is to provide a more detailed understanding to these notions . INTRODUCTION TO LIFE IN PRISON The prison milieu is characterised by a low degree of social capital [ 2 ] , asymmetric power relations and a significant division between inmates and prison officers . Both formal and informal power is omnipresent in the prison milieu . Most obvious is the formal power of officers over inmates . However , the informal power has just as much influence upon life in prisons . Typically inmates are introduced for and socialised to prison life by fellow inmates . Essential is the socialisation to maintain the gap between “us and them , ” where inmates are expected to be loyal to other inmates and keep a distance from prison staff . Kjær Minke [ 12 ] concluded from her Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . PDC ' 12 , August 12 - 16 2012 , Roskilde , Denmark Copyright 2012 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 1296 - 7 / 12 / 08 … $ 10 . 00 102 extensive Ph . D . study on prisons - culture that violating the rule of “us and them” in prison society has serious consequences for inmates , who will often have to serve time in solitary confinement . In the case presented here , the division between inmates and officers has been apparent , as has the extensive number of formal and informal rules . Formally , inmates are to comply with the rules of the prison and the strict regulations of everyday life and behaviour . This can be the specific time when inmates are allowed outside their cells , what areas to access or not , when to have social interaction and with whom , etc . The informal rules amongst inmates draw a subtle line regarding the boundaries of interaction with officers . Interaction between prison officers and inmates is limited to a few requisite actions and most inmates only talk to prison officers about the most critical matters , like filling in mandatory personal action plans for their serving of the sentence . Sharing personal information or matters of concern is avoided or kept to a minimum by both inmates and officers . As mentioned by Bødker et al . [ 3 ] it is very important to pay attention to power relations in participatory design processes both in relation to whom to invite to participate in , for instance , workshops and how to deal with power and conflicting interests within workshops . They argue that people from within the same levels in an organization provide the best results when participating in workshops . This was not an option in the prison project as the objectives were that inmates and officers jointly should 1 ) work towards increasing levels of trust and confidence in the prison , and 2 ) learning how to engage inmates better in their everyday life inside prison , e . g . through engaging them in collective matters . CO - DESIGNING A NEW SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE Participant constellation and becoming a group When recruiting people for the workshops , the asymmetry in formal power relations was dealt with by having more inmates than officers participating . In this way , the inmates’ position with the least formal power was strengthened . Informal power relations were considered as well . Over the last decade , the specific prison is , as is probably most other prisons , increasingly being sectionalised into special areas to meet the challenges of gang - related crime and to minimise harassment among inmates . Despite this trend , the project engaged a group of 11 - 13 participants : four officers and seven to nine inmates from four different sections of the prison . In the beginning it was difficult to recruit people as neither inmates nor officers believed that it was possible to co - create anything . The people who seemed least negative were encouraged to take part . Thus , the first success criterion was having people volunteering to participate in the process . Entering a shared space for interaction and dialogue is out of the ordinary practice inside prisons . Still creating an atmosphere of trust and confidence is crucial for the ability of the group to collaboratively inquire into the new , or to enter the space of the “not yet known . ” Hence , finding ways to build and maintain relations has been pivotal throughout the project . A series of small steps has been important within this environment . We will give a few examples . As support , initially a frame was to be set for the social interaction in the group . “Shut up and listen ! ” At the first workshop the main task was to define and agree upon what we called “the rules of the game” . To collaboratively define the boundaries of this new and unfamiliar “space , ” the group negotiated and defined a specific set of rules for how to interact with each other . “Shut up and listen while others are speaking , ” “Don’t be a downer , ” “Never give up” and “Speak your mind” are examples of some of the new rules that were written on pieces of papers and stuck on the wall in order to make them visible . Noteworthy is how they all are in opposition to existing informal rules . As such they indicate a desire to leave the existing pressure , either peer pressure or the pressure of the divide between “us and them” . In the following section , we will give an example of how acting in accordance with the new rules during the workshops can be seen as rehearsing and experiencing [ 10 ] a possible new social infrastructure within the prison . Inmates from four different sections in the prison participated in the project . Two were from a section of “well - functioning” inmates , where inmates with infants under the age of three years can serve their sentence . Two came from the “women’s section” and two were from a section of primarily “young ethnic men , ” generally known to be the more troublesome section . Finally , two inmates came from a “protected section , ” which is a section with mainly young White men who for different reasons cannot or do not wish to be part of other sections . This could be due to the “rule” that inmates who have collaborated with the authorities in solving a criminal incidence are by definition “snitches” and excluded from the community of inmates . As indicated , there is a kind of informal hierarchy among the inmates from the different sections . During workshops , participants were initially working in small groups from the same section ( e . g . two inmates and one officer ) . After some time , they were mixed across sections , to let them share experiences , exchange views and build trust , something that was only possible because of the rules of conduct that they had co - created together . For instance , an inmate from the protected section noticed with relief that despite his belonging to the “snitches department” “my ideas were not shot down and people would actually want to talk to me . ” As such the “rules of the game” provided an infrastructure for participants to meet in an open and respectful manner . An important rule to secure this was an agreement that what was said during workshops should not “leave the room . ” In this way , rumours and slander , which normally is a widespread reason for extensive stress and conflict in the prisons , was avoided . Another inmate said : “Just because we are doing time , we’re not what we are on the paper . We’re just as much – we want to do something good too . To me the step [ into the group ] was more important than what we created . ” The quote illustrates how the process facilitated a transition of identities , caused by a new set of rehearsed infrastructures and helped expand what we could call the “space of possibilities . ” 103 The good and the bad everyday within prison Gibb [ 8 ] describes persuasive behaviour and participatory behaviour as the two poles of group behaviour . To build a constructive group climate , and possibly change behaviour from persuasive behaviour characterised by fear , distrust and facade , to participatory , confident and open - minded behaviour , a visual collage technique [ 15 ] to evoke and elicit experiences was used . Inmates and officers in separate groups described the “good and the bad everyday in prison” by using pictures and words from magazines , and finally presented the findings to each other in plenum . Creating and presenting the collages created a “common ground” where the emotional elements of everyday life were accentuated . Starting from the well known by visualising personal experiences , both inmates and officers found that when sharing their experiences there were many similarities between what was perceived as good and bad experiences . Fig . 1 . Collages made by inmates and officers in seperate groups to describe the good and the bad in everyday life The presentations influenced how the participants regarded one another . For instance , an inmate said : “It felt good to get a few things that guards didn’t know out in the open . And it was good to hear something from them too . In a way we knew – but in a place like this everyone has a façade . [ . . . ] But again - we became human . We were not looked down upon . ” An officer said : “The good thing about it was that it gave us the possibility to see how our everydays are not that different . No matter if you’re an inmate or an officer . So we had an opportunity to identify with one another . We realized that maybe we are not that different after all . ” As illustrated , various participatory design techniques were used to slowly , step - by - step build more trust and confidence within the group and thus across inmates and officers as well as across inmates from different sections . Participating in the workshops simultaneously meant a break from the formal and informal rule of “us and them . ” Extending social infrastructures The idea of a newsletter written jointly by staff and inmates evolved after some time . It was chosen amongst a number of ideas as the one idea that the group found most important and one that could be realised with a minimum of extra resources and according to the existing precautionary measures . How the newsletter was created and structured , both in terms of form and content , reflects the new social infrastructures created in the group . It was defined by a series of principles : the newsletter should be produced and written by inmates and officers in collaboration ; the tone should be “sober” and not complicated ; information should be kept short and to the point . Every issue is structured the same way and also contains information from management , the priest or someone similar , and ends with a “speakers corner” open for everyone to contribute – however , no anonymous contributions can be made . At present , the newsletter has been published on a weekly basis for more than a year . The co - production and existence of the newsletter became a physical outcome and reification [ 17 ] of the participatory process . So far , the creation of the newsletter has affected processes of problem - solving as well as social positions and perceptions within the prison . One example is how the prison governor explicitly has mentioned the value of two - way communication in the newsletter and how it helped identify problems with and establishment of new procedures for booking visits . On the basis of feedback received through the newsletter , the governor was capable of improving the practice . Another example is from a new inmate belonging to the drug - free section K , which has a low status amongst prisoners . She used the newsletter in an attempt to alter the general perception of the section’s position amongst fellow inmates in other sections . She wrote : “At long last [ section ] K is now part of [ the newsletter’s ] editorial staff . We have been met with mixed feelings , scepticism , bad publicity , but also curiosity . This we wish to conjure away by a sober and sensible debate in this newsletter . Along with this we will tell about our everyday at department K , who we are and why we have chosen a drug - free department [ … ] . ” Identity and belonging to a community is a central part of life and it is not less regarding life in prison . In this sense , the newsletter , as an asynchronous medium , provides a possibility for having one’s voice heard and as such continues to frame a dialogue among various everyday practices , supported by the new social infrastructure . INFLUENCES FOR SOCIAL INNOVATION Yet , the newsletter does not seem to be the most important outcome of the project . The case illustrates how activities in the participatory design process constituted a frame for participants to rehearse and gain a concrete experience of new social infrastructures . The “rules of the game” did not just temporarily enable participants to act outside the restrictions of “us and them . ” As part of the overall mind - set of the process , the “rules of the game” contributed to the rehearsal and creation of a new social infrastructure . Following the initial workshops , a number of initiatives were taken . Most recently , officers and inmates in one department have collaboratively defined and decided common “rules of behaviour” for everyday interaction , with the aim of improving the quality of life for both inmates and officers . The rules in themselves might affect how people behave when conflicts occur and about the levels of conflict . The process of making the rules shows a significant change in relations between those who would normally define the rules ( officers ) and those , who would normally have to obey the rules ( inmates ) . It illustrates a significant change of mind - set and sense of meaning . The process of negotiation of meaning that takes place when officers decide to include inmates is an example of how staff make ( new ) sense of their work 104 task , roles , perspectives and possible ways of relating . A similar process takes place amongst inmates . Engaging inmates in e . g . setting the frame for everyday behavior not only decreases levels of conflict but improves the working environment for staff . Also , inmates are offered a possibility to change roles and identity from marginalized “clients” to being “co - creators” of the quality of everyday life and thereby gain a position as active “human beings . ” Returning to the definition of social innovation as changes in frames and relations , the above could be regarded as such . The new social infrastructure contributed to a positive shift in trust and confidence , in relations and identities , opening up new ways of thinking and behaving . Elements of a social infrastructure The notion of social infrastructures enables us to talk about the sum of elements in the process , contributing to changes in the interactions of participants and the specific ways of being and doing . Leigh Star wrote that infrastructures are “‘sunk into’ other social - material structures and only accessible by membership in a specific community - of - practice” [ 7 ] . Given the extreme mental milieu in a prison , with low levels of trust , strong asymmetry in power , and continual flow of new people entering and leaving the system , a social infrastructure is not build at once and structures are not persistent . Hence , a social infrastructure will always remain in the making . Our experience from the case illustrates how a social infrastructure in a prison context is build over time and should be regarded as an on - going process , where social infrastructures are co - created and actively “reinvented . ” Infrastructures are not to be viewed as “a substrate that other actions can run on top of , but rather an ongoing alignment between contexts” [ 1 p . 43 ] and ‘sunk into’ socio - material structures . The making of the newsletter or the “rules of behaviour” involves collaboration across mental boundaries of “us and them” within the structural and material elements in prison life . The elements that make up social infrastructures are a combination of the principles and values , participation , relations , community , language and artefacts . REFERENCES 1 . Björgvinsson , E . , Ehn , P . , Hillgren , P - A . ( 2010 ) . Participatory Design and ‘democratizing innovation’ . Proceedings of PDC 2010 . 2 . Bourdieu , P . ( 1986 ) . Handbook of theory and research for the sociology of education . Richardson , John G . New York : Greenwood Press . 3 . Bødker , S . , Greenbaum , J . , and Kyng , M . ( 1991 ) . Setting the Stage for Design as Action . In Greenbaum , J . , and Kyng , M . Design at Work : Cooperative Design of Computer Systems . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . , Publishers . 4 . Bødker , K . , Kensing , F . , and Simonsen , J . ( 2004 ) . Participatory IT Design . Designing for Business and Workplace Realities , Cambridge , Massachusetts : MIT Press . 5 . Darsø , Lotte ( 2011 ) . Innovationspædagogik . Kunsten at fremelske innovationskompetence . ( Teaching Innovation : the Art of creating innovation competence ) . Samfundslitteratur . 6 . Drucker , Peter ( 1985 ) . Innovation and Entrepreneurship . Pan Books . 7 . Ehn , P . ( 2008 ) . Participation in Design Things , Proceedings of PDC 2008 . 8 . Gibb , Jack R . ( 1964 ) . Climate for Trust Formation . In : Bradford , L . P . , Gibb , J . R . & Benne , K . D . ( 1964 ) . T - Group Theory and Laboratory Method ; Innovation in Re - education . John Wiley & Sons , Inc . 9 . Greenbaum , J . and Kyng , M . ( Eds . ) ( 1991 ) . Design at work , Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . 10 . Halse , J . , Brandt , E . , Clark , B , Binder , T . ( 2010 ) . Rehearsing the Future . The Danish Design School Press . 11 . Johansson , M . , Frost , P . , Brandt , E . , Binder , T . , Messeter , J . ( 2002 ) . Partner Engaged Design : New Challenges for Workplace Design . Full paper . The Participatory Design Conference ( PDC ' 02 ) , Malmö , June 2002 ( p . 162 - 172 ) . 12 . Kjær Minke , L . ( 2010 ) . Fængslets indre liv – med særlig fokus på fængselskultur og prisonisering blandt indsatte . Ph . d . dissertation . København : Det Juridiske Fakultet , Københavns Universitet . 13 . Reason , Peter & Bradbury , Hilary ( 2001 ) . Handbook of Action Research , Participatory Inquiry and Practice . SAGE Publications , London . 14 . Redhead , F . and Brereton , M . ( 2008 ) ‘Getting to the Nub of Neighbourhood Interaction’ . Proceedings of the Participatory Design Conference , Indiana , US , 270 – 273 . 15 . Sanders , E . B . - N . and William , C . T . ( 2001 ) ‘Harnessing People’s Creativity : Ideation and Expression through Visual Communication’ , In Langford , J . and McDonagh - Philp , D . ( Eds . ) Focus Groups : Supporting Effective Product Development , Taylor and Francis . 16 . Schuler , D . , and Namioka , A . ( Eds . ) ( 1993 ) Participatory Design : Principles and Practices , Hillsdale NJ USA : Erlbaum . 17 . Wenger , E . ( 1998 ) . Communities of Practice – Learning , Meaning and Identity . Cambridge University Press