Sensemaking in a Senseless World : 2018 Workshop Abstract Abstract Sensemaking is a common activity in the analysis of a large or complex amount of information . This active area of HCI research asks how DO people come to understand such difficult sets of information ? The information workplace is increasing dominated by high velocity , high volume , complex information streams . At the same time , understanding how sensemaking operates has become an urgent need in an era of increasingly unreliable news and information sources . While there has been a huge amount of work in this space , the research involved is scattered over a number of different domains with differing approaches . This workshop will focus on the most recent work in sensemaking , the activities , technologies and behaviors that people do when making sense of their complex information spaces . In the second part of the workshop we will work to synthesize a cross - disciplinary view of how sensemaking works in people , along with the human behaviors , biases , proclivities , and technologies required to support it . Author Keywords Sensemaking , information understanding , collaborative work . Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the Owner / Author . CHI ' 18 Extended Abstracts , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada © 2018 Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5621 - 3 / 18 / 04 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3170427 . 3170636 Daniel M . Russell Google , Inc . 1600 Amphitheatre Parkway Mountain View , CA 04043 drussell @ google . com Gregorio Convertino Informatica Corporation 2100 Seaport Blvd Redwood City , CA 94063 gconvertino @ gmail . com Aniket Kittur CMU - HCII 2504a Newell - Simon Hall 5000 Forbes Ave Pittsburgh PA 15213 nkittur @ cs . cmu . edu Peter Pirolli Institute for Human and Machine Cognition 40 South Alcaniz St . Pensacola , FL 32502 ppirolli @ ihmc . us Elizabeth Anne Watkins Columbia University 535 W . 111th St . # 54B New York , NY 10025 eaw2198 @ columbia . edu CHI 2018 Workshop CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada W19 , Page 1 ACM Classification Keywords H5 . 2 [ Information Interfaces and Presentation ] . H3 . 0 [ Information Retrieval ] Background Making sense of the world is a very common activity . It happens whenever you confront a new , complex problem , or a conflicting set of diverse information sources . At work , your boss asks , “Can you give a presentation next week on how wireless will affect our business ? ” Or perhaps you join a new committee and wonder “Who are these people ? ” “Who is in charge ? ” “What is our mission ? ” Perhaps you move to a new neighborhood , and try to make sense of the streets , schools , parks , shopping , and neighbors . Likewise , the imperative for citizens to make sense of competing and conflicting news sources is important . Each of these is a sensemaking task for a particular domain . The rise of AI , chatbots , and personal assistants have all focused on providing simple informational results , rather than helping with the hard work of connecting the dots and accomplishing complex tasks . The availability of data has continued to increase exponentially , but has led to few transformative novel paradigms for making sense of it . Recently , sensemaking has become an important factor in our ability to read and understand world events . Consider the spread of fake news as a kind of challenge to our ability to make sense of competing ( and often contradictory ) information . We see a fragmenting of attention , a lack of trust , and an inability of people to comprehend scientific information . In a world where there is a new rise of big data , the need for sensemaking is greater than ever . On the other hand , the tools that we have for making sense of information are no better—and in many cases are now worse—that they have ever been . For example , this past year searches on mobile phones overtook desktop searches , yet the limited real estate and fragmented use of mobile phones pose new challenges for sensemaking . The rise of AI , chatbots , and personal assistants have all focused on providing simple informational results , rather than helping with the hard work of connecting the dots and accomplishing complex tasks . The availability of data has continued to increase exponentially , but has led to few transformative and novel paradigms for making sense of it . These kinds of information sensemaking tasks presage a process of collecting , understanding , and organizing data . Often the information can be organized into a fairly simple structure , one that helps to solve the problem . But as we well know , the process is sometimes ill - defined , iterative and complex : information retrieval , organization and task redefinition all interact in sometimes subtle ways . All of these behaviors lead to the creation of sense ; that is , the process of sensemaking . Sensemaking can be a core professional task in itself , as it is for researchers , designers , or intelligence analysts . It arises when we change our place in the world or when the world changes around us . It arises when new problems , opportunities , or tasks present themselves , or when old ones resurface . It involves finding the important structure in a seemingly CHI 2018 Workshop CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada W19 , Page 2 unstructured situation . It is an activity with cognitive and social dimensions , and has informational , communicational , and computational aspects . Such an important activity deserves any support it can get from information technologies . Indeed , many major thrusts of HCI can be seen as contributing salient perspectives and technologies . Visualization aims to help people see structure in data or information ; information retrieval is needed to find . Combining all of these aspects of information use defines the behaviors of sensemaking—what people do to make sense of the information in their world . For example , a seminal early hypermedia work of Notecards [ 3 , 4 ] was aimed at helping work in design , research and intelligence analysis . Notecards provided tools for creating structures from initial data , then evolving those representational structures to better fit the task . Search tools and visualizations made examining the information space straightforward . In essence , Notecards was an early sensemaking system reflecting each of the key aspects of sensemaking behaviors—access to a relatively large amount of information , tools to structure and organize that information , visualizations to help see the structure of the content , and information retrieval mechanisms to provide search support . Another key role that tools and visualizations can play in support of collaborative sensemaking , is to help attenuate known cognitive biases and limitations of distributed teams making decisions . For example , an experiment on collaborative intelligence analysis via the CACHE system - a proof of concept prototype - showed that known biases such as anchoring and confirmation bias can be tamed via purposely designed collaborative visualizations that reinforce the visibility of nonconfirming evidence across remote intelligence analysts working on the same case [ 14 ] . Also in the context of distributed collaboration , but in the domain of emergency management planning , other research has shown that collaborative visualizations can be engineered to enhance the sharing and awareness of both content and process knowledge in groups . The research shows that the improvements in performance of distributed teams can be improved , in some respects , even beyond the performance of comparable face - to - face groups Sensemaking Today There has been a recent increase of focused interest in sensemaking , spurred by at least two forces . One has been the push of the information explosion from the WWW . As is evident , web - based tools have radically changed end - user ability to access large amounts of information ; this in turn fundamentally changes the ways in which people seeking to understand complex problems think about the issues . Consequently , both the Library & Information Science ( LIS ) and HCI communities have begun converging on projects to help people make sense of the information resources now available . The other force has been a pull from the post - 9 / 11 intelligence community , as the need to make sense of terrorism related intelligence data has become internationally urgent . As we have begun to realize , sensemaking extends far beyond individuals making sense of their information spaces . Groups also frequently need to work together to understand larger issues , combing information from many information sources , and bringing together a synthetic understanding that melds different points of CHI 2018 Workshop CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada W19 , Page 3 view . Group problem solving work in CSCW often involves support for sensemaking activities , and there are active research efforts in understanding what sensemaking groups currently do , and what tools might support them . [ 7 ] [ 8 ] What’s more , as data is increasingly harvested from multiple sources on an ad - hoc basis , the organization and interpretation of the data now needs to account for the quality of the data from each of the sources . When the quality or ( or noise in ) the data varies , it is possible to create helpful sensemaking tools that indicate data quality ? Data sensemakers often also find having to account for the provenance of data . That is , a representation of the data lineage to show what evidence is coming from what source , especially when the bias - per - source is expected to vary . In this workshop we will be asking about the current state of sensemaking with respect to the skills required and the tools needed to support sensmaking . We will consider : 1 ) Tools to retrieve information : e . g . , find a how - to video or recipe for a cake in Youtube ; discover the facts behind a political news via Twitter or search engines . 2 ) Tools for visualizing the information space : Such as tools for seeing the shifts of voter groups toward left or right over the years . For instance , could we easily find tools to transform data into stacked histograms , or whatever visualization is most appropriate . 3 ) Tools for individual decision - making : What tools and procedures can we use to evaluate alternative product to buy , alternative stocks to invest in , etc . 4 ) Tools for collaborative decision - making : Can we decide what vacation to have with friends , discover potential terrorists with other intelligent analysts , etc . While collaborative tools have great promise , the state of the art seems as yet underserved by our research . Workshop Goals The workshop will include research in areas such as : • how do people make sense of complex sets of information ? ( behavior studies and tool use ) • issues of representation creation , evolution and use over time • implicit and explicit aspects of sensemaking • group sensemaking : including different levels of social aggregation , from individual , to group , to large social contexts • both static and evolving problem environments • how sensemaking fits into other knowledge work ( information gathering , decision making ) • what is sensemaking today ? ( In particular , what other sensemaking schools of thought are there , and how can we mutually inform each others work ? ) From this meeting of the minds , the Sensemaking workshop has several desired outcomes : First , we will create working relationships between researchers whose work focuses on aspects of sensemaking . While we certainly hope to bring together those working within the HCI community , we would like to try to bring in some researchers from other disciplines as well , including Library & Information Science ( LIS ) [ 5 ] and Organizational Theory [ 6 ] and psychology ( e . g . , cognitive / problem solving research ) . CHI 2018 Workshop CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada W19 , Page 4 Our second outcome is to enrich our understanding of sensemaking activities . This includes striving for a shared understanding of the different notions of sensemaking , laying out and structuring the space of varieties of sensemaking ( e . g . , different levels of social aggregation , static vs . dynamic contexts ) , articulating their commonalities and differences . And our third goal is to draw from this is a greater understanding of design implications for improved sensemaking tools , systems and designs . There is a clearly emerging demand for tools for verifiability and trustability of facts shared on public media channels . For example , a new generation of tools is emerging to allow journalists to spot inaccurate or fake news by leveraging ML algorithms and visualizations . Can we take advantage of these tools in our everyday sensemaking tasks as well ? ORGANIZERS Daniel Russell has been working in the area of sensemaking since the early 1990s . His publication of The cost structure of sensemaking [ 2 ] in 1993 led to a stream of research in this area . Now a Senior Research Scientist at Google , he primarily studies how people formulate information needs and satisfy them with online research tools and databases . He has run three earlier CHI workshops on sensemaking , one of which led to a special edition publication of the journal Computer - Human Interaction [ 12 ] . Gregorio Covertino is a researcher at Informatica Corporation . He has been working on collaborative visualizations for sensemaking since 2003 with his PhD work on multi - role emergency management teams . In addition , he has worked on bias and visualizations for intelligence analysis teams at Xerox PARC . At Informatica , his most recent work is on enabling selfservice analytics by non - experts [ 13 ] and log analytics . [ 11 ] Niki Kittur is an Associate Professor and Cooper - Siegel Chair in the Human - Computer Interaction Institute at Carnegie Mellon University . His research explores a future that scales sensemaking beyond the limits of a single individual’s mind by : 1 ) distributing sensemaking among many people and machines ; 2 ) enabling people to build on the sensemaking that others have already done ; and 3 ) seamlessly integrating human and machine cognition to make sense of large information spaces . He is also a co - founder of DataSquid , a startup that supports sensemaking by bringing the power of intuitive touch and physics to data visualization . Peter Pirolli has been a long - time contributor to the sensemaking literature , establishing his contributions to this area with the seminal book Information Foraging Theory ( 2007 ) . His research involves a mix of cognitive science , artificial intelligence , and human - computer interaction , with applications in digital health , sensemaking , and information foraging . Elizabeth Anne Watkins primarily studies newsproducing organizations . News organizations combine the technical and complexity issues typical of bureaucratic systems with the creative , autonomous decision - making of journalists . As more industries face changing labor models , shifting to remote workers and building more of their computing needs on third - party platforms , journalists can serve as a critical earlywarning population , a canary - in - the - coal - mine look at the management of cybersecurity in the future of work . For us , sensemaking provides a framework to study how journalists who work in these organizations “make CHI 2018 Workshop CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada W19 , Page 5 sense” of cybersecurity . After analyzing interviews with a range of journalists with diverse priorities and obligations , and testing for an array of sensemaking frameworks , we found fragmented sensemaking to be pervasive . This is a hazardous condition for security in a networked organization , because such a framework correlates with misaligned and scattered behaviors . Website http : / / sensemakingworkshop2018 . com / is the go - to site for access to the papers , people , and schedules of the workshop . Pre - Workshop Plans This year we plan to hold a 1 - day workshop on sensemaking , following on the tradition of previous CHI workshops on this topic ( 2005 , 2007 , 2009 ) . Before the workshop , we’ll be collecting the position papers to be presented at CHI , starting up pre - workshop email discussions , bringing all participants to a common ground of understanding what varieties of sensemaking will be presented . Workshop Plans The workshop itself will be an exercise in group sensemaking in real - time ( a common application of sensemaking practice ) . Based on the pre - workshop papers , submissions , and research activities , we will break up into teams to find the central organizing theme and structure of the field . In the afternoon , we will synthesize the findings of each team and create a larger , more diverse and explanatory document that tells us how and where sensemaking research is being done . Post - Workshop Plans After all of the accepted workshop papers are presented , we plan on doing a sensemaking session about what was just presented—“making sense of sensemaking . ” The immediate output from this will be a poster to be presented at CHI 2018 . We’ll discuss other possible venues for publishing this collection of papers ( as a special journal issue , a collected volume , or as an e - book for future sensemakers to find and use easily ) . [ 13 ] Call For Participation We are seeking workshop papers on topics in the area of sensemaking for a workshop to be held at CHI 2018 in Montreal , CN . Making sense of information is central to HCI as people look to understand complex systems , domains and problems . Broadly , we take the topic of sensemaking to mean understanding of how people collect and organize information for analysis and synthesis , and the tools and processes they follow when doing this . Thus , sensemaking , per se , is everywhere in the systems we build and in the domains we study . Whenever people need to function well with data , making sense of the information is often a central task . We are interested in both individual and group sensemaking practices—from how one person figures out where to go when visiting Montreal , up to large , collaborative group sensemaking where teams of people assemble and interpret large , complex , interlocking sets of data . Representative tasks include the practice of people who deal with sensemaking hand - offs ( e . g . , in a medical setting ) or in analytical areas ( e . g . , making sense of financial data for forensic purposes ) . In particular , what are the tools , techniques and best practices of people who need to make sense of a large amount of complex information ? What issues of scale , complexity and coordination arise that are particular to making sense of a complex world ? CHI 2018 Workshop CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada W19 , Page 6 References 1 . Jeff Conklin , Selvin , A . , Simon B . Shum , Martin Sierhuis . 2001 . Facilitated hypertext for collective sensemaking : 15 years on from gIBIS . Proceedings of the twelfth ACM conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia . 2 . Daniel M . Russell , Mark J . Stefik , , Peter Pirolli , Stuart K . Card . 1993 The cost structure of sensemaking , Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , p . 269 - 276 , April 24 - 29 , 1993 , Amsterdam , The Netherlands . 3 . Frank G . Halasz , Reflections on NoteCards : seven issues for the next generation of hypermedia systems . 2001 . ACM Journal of Computer Documentation ( JCD ) , v 25 ( 3 ) 4 . Randall H . Trigg , Peggy M . Irish . 1987 . Hypertext habitats : experiences of writers in NoteCards . Proceedings of the ACM conference on Hypertext . 5 . Brenda Dervin Sense - Making theory and practice : An overview of user interests in knowledge seeking and use . Journal of Knowledge Management , 2 ( 2 ) , 36 - 46 . 1998 6 . Karl E . Weick 1995 . Sensemaking in organizations . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . 7 . Dorrit Billman , , Eric Bier . 2007 . Medical sensemaking with entity workspace . Proc . CHI Conference , p 229 - 232 , San Jose , CA 8 . Hahn , N . , Chang , J . , Kim , J . E . , & Kittur , A . 2016 . The Knowledge Accelerator : Big Picture Thinking in Small Pieces . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI 8 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( pp . 2258 - 2270 ) . ACM . 9 . Maoyuan Sun and Gregorio Convertino . 2016 . Interver : Drilling into Categorical - Numerical Relationships . In Proceedings of the International Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces ( AVI ' 16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 44 - 51 . 10 . Kurt Luther , Nathan Hahn , Steven P . Dow , and Aniket Kittur . 2015 . Crowdlines : Supporting Synthesis of Diverse Information Sources through Crowdsourced Outlines . In Third AAAI Conference on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing . 11 . Sun M . , Convertino G . , and Detweiler M . ( 2016 ) Designing A Unified Cloud Log Analytics Platform . In Proceedings of The 2016 International Conference on Collaboration Technologies and Systems ( CTS 2016 ) . 12 . Daniel M . Russell , Peter Pirolli , special issue on “Sensemaking” Human - Computer Interaction Journal , vol . 26 , n . 1 & 2 ( April , 2011 ) 13 . Gregorio Convertino , and Echenique A . ( 2017 ) . Self - Service Data Preparation and Analysis by Business Users : New Needs , Skills , and Tools . Case Study . In proceedings of CHI 2017 . 14 . Gregorio Convertino , Dorritt Billman , Peter Pirolli , Massar J . P . , Jeff Shrager . The CACHE Study : Group Effects in Computer - supported Collaborative Analysis . ACM conference : Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) . ( 2008 ) 15 . Gregorio Convertino , Mentis H . M . , Slavkovic A . , Rosson M . B . , and Carroll J . M . 2011 . Supporting common ground and awareness in emergency management planning : A design research project . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 18 ( 4 ) , Article 22 ( December 2011 ) . CHI 2018 Workshop CHI 2018 , April 21 – 26 , 2018 , Montréal , QC , Canada W19 , Page 7