THE HOT AND COOL OF DEATH AWARENESS AT WORK : MORTALITY CUES , AGING , AND SELF - PROTECTIVE AND PROSOCIAL MOTIVATIONS ADAM M . GRANT University of Pennsylvania KIMBERLY A . WADE - BENZONI Duke University Although death awareness is pervasive in organizations and can have powerful effects on employees’ experiences and behaviors , scholars have paid little attention to it . We develop a theoretical model of the nature , antecedents , and consequences of death awareness at work . We differentiate death anxiety and reflection as distinct states that strengthen self - protective versus prosocial motivations , examine how mortality cues and aging processes trigger these states , and explore their impact on withdrawal and generative behaviors . The idea of death , the fear of it , haunts the human animal like nothing else ; it is a mainspring of human activity—designed largely to avoid the fatality of death , to overcome it by denying in some way that it is the final destiny . . . . Of all things that move man , one of the principal ones is his terror of death ( Becker , 1973 : ix , 11 ) . The tragedies of September 11 had a dramatic effect on work experiences and behaviors , both for those who were directly involved ( Bacharach & Bamberger , 2007 ) and those who were not ( Johns , 2006 ) . For some employees the terrorist attacks resulted in crippling anxiety , leading to stress and absenteeism from work ( Byron & Peterson , 2002 ; Salgado , 2002 ) . For others the at - tacks inspired reflection about death and the meaning of life , motivating remarkable efforts to contribute to other people and society . Organi - zational scholars began to reflect on how they could best serve the public interest through their research and their students through their teach - ing ( Greenberg , Clair , & MacLean , 2007 ; Rynes & Shapiro , 2005 ; Starbuck , 2002 ) . Applications to helping professions soared as many employees changed careers in order to make a greater dif - ference in their communities and societies ( Wrzesniewski , 2002 ) . For example , in the month and a half following the events , applications to Teach For America tripled , and half of appli - cants polled attributed their decisions to pursue teaching to the events of September 11 ( Good - nough , 2002 ) . Similar trends occurred in other helping professions , such as firefighting and health care . For example , after narrowly escap - ing from the World Trade Center , actress Amy Ting reflected on death and the meaning of her life . She walked away from a successful film career to join the Air Force Medical Service : “Af - ter September 11 , my perspective on life changed . I have always wanted to help people , so I decided to go back to pursuing the medical field” ( Wrzesniewski , 2002 : 231 ; see also Pomeroy , 2002 ) . Although these reactions were particularly pronounced and widespread , they are not unique to September 11 . Employees are re - minded of their mortality by an array of events that occur both outside of and inside organiza - tions . Many employees , such as police officers , soldiers , firefighters , miners , and nuclear power plant employees , work in dangerous jobs that place their lives on the line . Some studies sug - gest that dangerous work leads to anxiety about We are grateful to former associate editor Linda Trevin˜o and four anonymous reviewers for their insights and recom - mendations . We also appreciate feedback from Jane Dutton and Alison Fragale , as well as discussions with Josh Ber - man , Tina Juillerat , Meagan Peters , Wendy Smith , Jim Walsh , and participants in the May Meaning Meeting ( espe - cially Sue Ashford and Andy Molinsky ) and the University of Michigan Management & Organizations half - baked brown bag series ( particularly Wayne Baker , John Paul Stephens , and Lynn Wooten ) . (cid:1) Academy of Management Review 2009 , Vol . 34 , No . 4 , 600 – 622 . 600 CopyrightoftheAcademyofManagement , allrightsreserved . Contentsmaynotbecopied , emailed , postedtoalistserv , orotherwisetransmittedwithoutthecopyright holder’s express written permission . Users may print , download , or email articles for individual use only . death , emotional exhaustion , and absenteeism ( Chisholm , Kasl , & Eskenazi , 1983 ; Jermier , Gaines , & McIntosh , 1989 ) , whereas others indi - cate that exposure to death in dangerous work motivates bonding and helping between co - workers ( Elder & Clipp , 1988 ) . Other employees , such as doctors , nurses , rescue workers , funeral employees , paramedics , and grief counselors , work in jobs that expose them vicariously to death ( Ashforth & Kreiner , 1999 ) . More generally , employees in all jobs are susceptible to ill - nesses and accidents that can serve as remind - ers of mortality ( e . g . , Dutton , Worline , Frost , & Lilius , 2006 ; Kivima¨ki , Vahtera , Elovaino , Lill - rank , & Kevin , 2002 ; Worrell , Davidson , Chandy , & Garrison , 1986 ) . By making employees aware of death , all of these events have the potential to motivate sub - stantial changes in their behaviors . Indeed , two decades of social psychological research has demonstrated that awareness of death has unique , surprisingly powerful effects on individ - uals’ motivations and behaviors ( Pyszczynski , Solomon , & Greenberg , 2003 ) . However , we know little about how death awareness arises in or - ganizations and why employees display diver - gent reactions when they experience it . Organi - zational scholars have been silent about the role of death awareness in work motivation ( Sievers , 1986 , 1993 ) and organizational life in general ( Reedy & Learmonth , 2008 ) . Understanding the role of death awareness in organizations is of particular theoretical and practical significance , given that workforces worldwide are aging rapidly . In the United States the median age of employees is now above forty ; the number of employees forty - five and older has increased by more than 35 percent in the past decade , and they now represent over 40 percent of the entire U . S . workforce ( Bureau of Labor Statistics , 2007 ; Fullerton , 1999 ) . Parallel trends have emerged in the European Union and Canada , where employees forty - five and older now make up over 37 percent and 40 percent of the workforce , respectively , reflecting sizable in - creases in the past decade ( Carone , 2005 ; Euro - pean Commission , 2007 ; Statistics Canada , 2006 ) . This dramatic aging of domestic and in - ternational workforces is attributable to in - creases in life expectancy , combined with de - clines in early retirement and birth rates . In light of these trends , organizational scholars agree that the aging workforce is one of the most critical theoretical and practical issues organi - zations face today ( Greller & Simpson , 1999 ; Hansson , DeKoekkoek , Neece , & Patterson , 1997 ; Kanfer & Ackerman , 2004 ; Warr , 2001 ) . Accordingly , organizational scholars have be - gun to devote systematic attention to the role of age in work motivation and behavior . Recently , Kanfer and Ackerman ( 2004 ) developed an ele - gant theoretical framework to explain how work motivation is influenced by age - related changes in cognitive ability , personality , self - concept , values , affect , and interests . Although their framework significantly advances existing knowledge about the role of age in work moti - vation , it does not address death awareness as a vital psychological change precipitated by ag - ing . Several decades of research in personality and life - span developmental psychology high - lights that as adults reach midlife , they become increasingly aware of their own mortality ( Erik - son , 1963 ; McAdams , de St . Aubin , & Logan , 1993 ; Stewart & Ostrove , 1998 ) . However , in spite of widespread agreement about the theoretical and practical importance of understanding the role of aging in work motivation , and despite evidence that death is increasingly salient and motivationally potent as employees age , calls to incorporate death into work motivation theories have gone unanswered ( Czarniawska - Joerges , 1995 ; Sievers , 1993 ) . In this article we seek to answer these calls with systematic theorizing about the nature , an - tecedents , and consequences of death aware - ness . We begin with a review of existing theory and research about psychological and behav - ioral reactions to death awareness , paying par - ticular attention to theories of terror manage - ment ( Greenberg , Solomon , & Pyszczynski , 1997 ) and generativity ( McAdams & de St . Aubin , 1992 ) . We build on this review to distinguish between two distinct forms of death aware - ness—death anxiety and death reflection—and examine how they differentially engage dis - crete “hot” experiential versus “cool” cognitive psychological processing systems , thereby strengthening either self - protective or prosocial motivations . Second , we turn from the nature of death awareness to its antecedents . We present a typology of mortality cues , examine how they trigger death anxiety and death reflection , and explore the role of aging processes in influenc - ing employees’ responses to these cues . Third , we examine the behavioral consequences of 2009 601 Grant and Wade - Benzoni death awareness . We explore how the effects of death anxiety and death reflection on work be - haviors are contingent on boundary preferences , work orientations , and the meaningfulness of work . And we conclude by discussing theoreti - cal contributions , future research directions , and practical implications . The contingency model of death awareness at work that we de - velop in this article is displayed in Figure 1 . THE NATURE OF DEATH AWARENESS We define death awareness as a psychologi - cal state—a mental experience triggered by ex - ternal events ( Chaplin , John , & Goldberg , 1988 ) —in which people are conscious of their mortality . Scholarly attention to death aware - ness was stimulated more than 300 years ago when Hobbes ( 1950 / 1651 ) noted that humans nat - urally fear death and attempt to avoid it by seeking peace . Although subsequent work in po - litical philosophy has elaborated on this basic assumption , the majority of scholarship on death in the social sciences and humanities is based on existential philosophy . Building on the work of Pascal , Kierkegaard , and Nietzsche , ex - istentialists such as Heidegger and Sartre called attention to the anxiety , dread , and fear that people experience when they become aware of their own mortality ( Appignanesi , 2006 ; Solomon , 2005 ) . Near the turn of the twentieth century , existentialism informed the theories of a number of key thinkers in psychology , includ - ing Allport , Dewey , Freud , James , and Wundt . However , as behaviorism began to dominate psychology , existentialism fell out of favor FIGURE 1 A Contingency Model of Death Awareness at Work 602 October Academy of Management Review ( Koole , Greenberg , & Pyszczynski , 2006 ; cf . Frankl , 1959 , and Yalom , 1980 ) . Cultural anthropologist Ernest Becker set the stage for empirical attention to how individuals respond to death awareness with three books on the denial of death , one of which won the Pu - litzer Prize ( Becker , 1973 ) . Becker argued that awareness of death is a uniquely human capa - bility and curse , and he focused on the role of cultural belief systems in buffering against ex - istential anxiety about impending death ( for a review see Liechty , 2002 ) . In the 1980s three so - cial psychologists discovered Becker’s work and began to design experiments to test and elabo - rate on his theories . Now , two decades later , terror management theory is among the most generative perspectives in social psychology . Researchers have conducted well over 250 stud - ies to test and extend terror management theory predictions about how individuals deal with the cognizance of their own mortality ( Greenberg , Koole , & Pyszczynski , 2004 ; Pyszczynski et al . , 2003 ) . Terror Management Theory : Death Awareness Increases Self - Protective Motivation The central premise of terror management theory is that people face a basic existential dilemma : they desire life but know that their own death is inevitable . To defend and protect themselves against existential anxiety , people create and cling to cultural world views— collective understandings of reality that ( 1 ) ren - der existence meaningful , coherent , and perma - nent ; ( 2 ) offer a set of standards for defining what is valuable ; and ( 3 ) confer either literal or symbolic immortality through religious institu - tions that assure an afterlife or social institu - tions that allow them to feel that they are con - nected to something larger , more powerful , and more permanent than themselves ( Pyszczynski , Greenberg , & Solomon , 1999 ; Wade - Benzoni , 2006 ) . People defend against existential anxiety through self - protective responses—connecting with and contributing to people and groups who share their world views and showing hostility toward people and groups with alternative world views that challenge the legitimacy of their own . A large body of research has supported these core propositions by manipulating death aware - ness with a range of situational cues , including writing about one’s own death , answering ques - tions about what will happen while dying or after death , watching videos of deadly automo - bile accidents , walking past a cemetery , and being subliminally exposed to death - related words . For example , studies have shown that death awareness increases preferences for charismatic leaders ( Cohen , Solomon , Maxfield , Pyszczynski , & Greenberg , 2004 ) , strengthened support for former President Bush and aggres - sive counterterrorism policies ( Landau et al . , 2004 ) , increases donations to national but not international charities ( Jonas , Schimel , Green - berg , & Pyszczynski , 2002 ) , increases punish - ment of criminal offenders who threaten one’s world view ( Arndt , Lieberman , Cook , & Solomon , 2005 ) , enhances optimism about unlikely victo - ries over opponents in soccer matches ( Dechesne , Greenberg , Arndt , & Schimel , 2000 ) , boosts overconfidence about future financial worth ( Kasser & Sheldon , 2000 ) , amplifies dis - plays of physical strength among athletes but not among individuals who do not value strength ( Peters , Greenberg , Williams , & Schnei - der , 2005 ) , and even motivates individuals to allocate large quantities of hot sauce to world - view - threatening outgroup members who do not like spicy foods ( McGregor et al . , 1998 ) . Re - searchers have even demonstrated that people express more nationalistic views—and believe charities are more important—when surveyed while walking past a funeral home ( Jonas et al . , 2002 ) . Several studies have further shown that these efforts to defend cultural world views and per - sonal worth serve the anxiety - buffering function of protecting people against fears of their own mortality . For example , researchers have found that , after inducing death awareness , giving in - dividuals positive feedback reduces self - re - ported death anxiety and objective measures of physiological arousal ( for a review see Pysz - czynski , Greenberg , Solomon , Arndt , & Schimel , 2004 ) . Perhaps most important , research sug - gests that these effects of death awareness may be unique ; they do not occur in response to other forms of anxiety , such as worries about future plans and success , fears of public speaking , concerns about intense physical pain or failing a test , and actual poor performance on intelli - gence tests ( Pyszczynski et al . , 1999 ) . Although scholars have questioned whether the theory comprehensively explains the origins of motives 2009 603 Grant and Wade - Benzoni for self - esteem and meaning ( e . g . , Heine , Proulx , & Vohs , 2006 ; Leary , 2004 , 2007 ; Navarette & Fessler , 2005 ; Ryan & Deci , 2004 ) , terror manage - ment research provides strong empirical evi - dence that death awareness has a broad array of unique psychological and behavioral effects on individuals . In sum , the core theme cutting across terror management research is that death awareness strengthens self - protective motivation —a desire to defend one’s identity and image ( Ashford , Blatt , & VandeWalle , 2003 ; Larrick , 1993 ; Leary , 2007 ) . Generativity Theories : Death Awareness Increases Prosocial Motivation Personality and life - span developmental psy - chologists have offered a different perspective on death awareness . In his classic epigenetic theory of development , psychologist Erik Erik - son ( 1963 , 1982 ) proposed that people progress through eight psychological stages of life , each of which involves a developmental crisis . He dedicated the last two of his eight stages of life to issues related to death . He proposed that in the final stage of life people become increas - ingly aware of death , which leads to a crisis between ego integrity and despair . Those who overcome this crisis experience ego integrity , finding coherence and meaning in their lives and accepting death . Those who succumb to this crisis experience despair , continuing to fear and dread death . Erikson proposed that , before reaching this stage , in the penultimate stage of life—which occurs throughout middle adult - hood—people grapple with the notion that their lives are finite . They undergo a midlife crisis between generativity and stagnation—contrib - uting to the next generation versus ceasing to be a productive member of society . He proposed that people who prevail over this crisis become generative by performing socially valuable work and mentoring members of younger gen - erations . People who fall victim to this crisis , however , become stagnant by withdrawing from socially valuable work and mentoring activities . Erikson’s conceptualization of generativity has itself been generative , motivating several de - cades of research on the antecedents and conse - quences of generativity . Research supports the core hypothesis that generativity increases around midlife ( Keyes & Ryff , 1998 ; McAdams et al . , 1993 ; Peterson & Klohnen , 1995 ; Stewart & Os - trove , 1998 ; Stewart , Ostrove , & Helson , 2001 ; Vail - lant & Milofsky , 1980 ) . Survey data and narrative analyses of life stories suggest that generativity emerges most prominently around midlife , result - ing from the strengthening of two motives by death awareness : the desire to make lasting con - tributions and the desire to feel connected with others ( McAdams & de St . Aubin , 1992 , 1998 ) . As Kotre explains , death awareness strengthens the “desire to invest one’s substance in forms of life and work that will outlive the self” ( 1984 : 16 ) . The desire to make lasting , self - transcendent contribu - tions is an agentic desire that motivates individ - uals to buffer against death by extending their contributions into the future , striving for symbolic immortality ( Wade - Benzoni , 2006 ) . The desire to feel connected with others is a communal desire that motivates individuals to buffer against death by linking their actions and identities to enduring relationships , groups , organizations , and institu - tions ( Peterson & Stewart , 1996 ) . As sociologist Morrie Schwartz explained it , “Death ends a life , not a relationship” ( Albom , 1997 : 174 ) . By strengthening these agentic and communal motives to meaningfully contribute and connect , death awareness can lead individuals to take per - sonal responsibility for promoting the welfare of other people and the next generation by seeking out work as teachers , mentors , leaders , organizers , and inventors ( McAdams & de St . Aubin , 1992 ) . Consistent with this perspective , experimental re - search indicates that death awareness can lead individuals with self - serving values to endorse more prosocial values ( Joireman & Duell , 2005 ) . As an illustration , Jonas Salk , the inventor of the polio vaccine , described the goal of his life as “to be a good ancestor” ( Weiner , 2008 : 110 ) . Similarly , con - sider the case of R . Buckminster Fuller , the inven - tor , engineer , mathematician , architect , and pub - lic intellectual often described as the “DaVinci of the twentieth century . ” In 1922 his four - year - old daughter , Alexandra , died from complications of polio and spinal meningitis . Devastated , he went to the shore of frozen Lake Michigan to commit suicide . Contemplating his death led him to re - consider the meaning of his life , and instead of committing suicide , he decided to embark on an experiment to learn what a single person can ac - complish at work to change the world and benefit all of humanity . This led him to work tirelessly and persistently to make lasting contributions to society ( e . g . , Edmondson , 1987 ; Sieden , 1989 ) . Thus , the core theme cutting across generativity re - 604 October Academy of Management Review search is that death awareness strengthens proso - cial motivation —a desire to give , contribute , help , benefit , make a difference , or protect and promote the welfare of other people ( Grant , 2007 , 2008 ) . Reconciling Terror Management and Generativity : Death Anxiety versus Death Reflection Terror management and generativity theories appear to offer competing predictions about how individuals respond to death awareness . From a terror management perspective , death awareness strengthens self - protective motiva - tion ; from a generativity perspective , death awareness strengthens prosocial motivation . We reconcile these two theoretical perspectives by calling attention to two different forms death awareness can take . A significant limitation of both terror management and generativity theo - ries is that they fail to differentiate between the two fundamentally distinct forms of death awareness ( Cozzolino , Staples , Meyers , & Sam - boceti , 2004 ; Lykins , Segerstrom , Averill , Evans , & Kemeny , 2007 ) . We integrate initial work on death awareness by Cozzolino et al . ( 2004 ) and Lykins et al . ( 2007 ) with theory and research on information processing systems ( Metcalfe & Mischel , 1999 ) to distinguish two discrete psy - chological pathways through which individuals can be conscious of mortality . Death anxiety describes an emotional state of death awareness in which individuals experi - ence fear , panic , and dread about their own mor - tality ( Cozzolino et al . , 2004 ; Russac , Gatliff , Reece , & Spottswood , 2007 ) . Death anxiety is pro - cessed psychologically in what is known as the “hot” or experiential system , which is character - ized by immediate , emotional , intuitive , vis - ceral , and impulsive reactions based on heuris - tic processing ( Metcalfe & Mischel , 1999 ; see also Epstein , 1994 , and Haidt , 2001 ) . These hot psychological processes form the basis of the self - protective reactions depicted in terror man - agement theory and research . Indeed , Simon et al . ( 1997 ) presented empirical evidence that ter - ror management responses occur in the hot ex - periential system . When individuals are re - minded of their mortality after being primed or instructed to share their natural , emotional re - actions , they show strong self - protective reac - tions . Initially , they deny their personal vulner - ability by asserting their health and noting that death is far off ( Arndt , Greenberg , Solomon , Pyszczynski , & Simon , 1997 ; Simon et al . , 1997 ) . They then avoid the paralyzing existential terror that death awareness can provoke by marshal - ing distal defense mechanisms , seeking to pro - tect themselves by affiliating with value - congruent groups and criticizing value - incongruent groups ( Greenberg et al . , 1997 ; Pyszczynski et al . , 2004 ) . This evidence suggests that individuals process death anxiety in a hot experiential system to protect the self . Death anxiety can thus be thought of as an affect - driven ( Weiss & Cropanzano , 1996 ; Zajonc , 1980 ) or reactive ( Grant & Ashford , 2008 ) state in which visceral emotional responses drive the process - ing of mortality cues . Death reflection describes a cognitive state of death awareness , one in which individuals put their lives in context , contemplate their meaning and purpose , and review how others will look upon them after they have passed ( Cozzolino et al . , 2004 ; Ring , 1984 ; Ring & Elsaesser Valarino , 1998 ) . Death reflection is processed psychologi - cally in what is known as the “cool” or cognitive system , which is characterized by deliberate , analytical , rational reactions based on system - atic processing that is subject to intentional con - trol ( Metcalfe & Mischel , 1999 ; see also Bazer - man , Tenbrunsel , & Wade - Benzoni , 1998 ; Epstein , 1994 ; Haidt , 2001 ) . These cool psycholog - ical processes form the basis of the self - transcendent reactions depicted in generativity theory and research . Indeed , Simon et al . ( 1997 ) found that when primed or instructed to think about their own deaths in a rational , analytical mode , individuals did not display self - protective reactions , and Cozzolino et al . ( 2004 ) found that when asked to engage in death reflection , indi - viduals engaged in the prosocial , self - transcen - dent behavior of sharing raffle tickets and gift certificates . Similarly , studies of near - death experiences have shown that as individuals reflect on death , they become increasingly interested in helping others and often change their careers in this direction , as when an accountant becomes a nurse after contemplating death ( Ring & El - saesser Valarino , 1998 ) . Illustrating this point , a woman described how seeing her four - year - old son narrowly survive being hit by a car led her to reflect on death and motivated her to become an emergency medical technician in order to help others survive accidents : “I felt sure he was 2009 605 Grant and Wade - Benzoni dying , and I didn’t know of anything I could do to help him or to preserve his life . . . . [ it ] was a real turning point . . . . I served an ambulance service for 10 years and have saved more than one life” ( McAdams et al . , 1993 : 228 ) . Moreover , McAdams and de St . Aubin ( 1992 , 1998 ) reported extensive evidence from longitudi - nal survey and narrative interview studies indi - cating that individuals make deliberate choices and commitments to become generative and self - transcendent . This evidence suggests that indi - viduals process death reflection in a cool cogni - tive system that they deliberately control so as to find ways to contribute to others and have a last - ing impact . Death reflection can thus be thought of as a cognition - driven ( Weiss & Cropanzano , 1996 ) or proactive ( Grant & Ashford , 2008 ) state in which thoughts and anticipatory plans about the future drive responses to mortality cues . Together , these arguments and illustrative examples suggest the following proposition . Proposition 1 : Death anxiety and death reflection represent distinct forms of death awareness with dis - crete motivational consequences : ( a ) death anxiety engages the hot experiential processing system , strengthening self - protective motiva - tion , whereas ( b ) death reflection en - gages the cool cognitive processing system , strengthening prosocial moti - vation . This understanding of death anxiety and death reflection as two distinct forms of death awareness provides the basis of the contin - gency model of death awareness that we de - velop in this article . To further unpack the dif - ferences between these two states of death awareness , our preceding discussion suggests that they can be differentiated in terms of three dimensions : emotionality , duration , and focus of attention . In terms of emotionality , death anxiety is characterized by extreme , vivid emotions , such as fear , panic , and dread , while death reflection is characterized by less emotional - ity and calmer , more controlled thoughts . This contrast in emotionality has important impli - cations for understanding how the two states differ in terms of duration . Because death anx - iety engages the hot experiential system , like other emotional states focusing on specific events , it tends to be a short - lived response triggered by situational cues , lasting in many circumstances for moments , hours , or days ( Lykins et al . , 2007 ) . However , death anxiety can also linger for weeks and months ( e . g . , Russac et al . , 2007 ) , at which point it is pro - cessed more like a diffuse mood state than a specific emotion ( e . g . , Weiss & Cropanzano , 1996 ) . On the other hand , because death reflec - tion is subject to greater intentional , effortful cognitive control , it can involve an extended contemplation and deliberation process that extends for many months or even years ( Lykins et al . , 2007 ) . Thus , death anxiety is likely to produce faster , more intense psychological re - sponses , whereas death reflection is likely to produce slower , less intense responses . Fi - nally , in terms of focus of attention , death anx - iety emphasizes protecting the self against negative outcomes , while death reflection em - phasizes promoting positive outcomes for oth - ers . THE EMERGENCE OF DEATH AWARENESS AT WORK Having developed the distinction between death anxiety and death reflection , we now turn to the antecedents of these two forms of death awareness . When and how does death become salient to employees at work ? Research sug - gests that death awareness is triggered by events—experiences or episodes that occur in a bounded time period and place ( e . g . , Weick & Roberts , 1993 ) —that serve as “mortality cues” by making death salient . To capture the range of events that can make employees aware of death , we present a typology of mortality cues , which we derived from a review of the terror management theory literature describing an ar - ray of situational forces that increase death awareness , as well as from research in organi - zational studies referring to death . Our typology focuses on three core situational dimensions along which mortality cues vary : source , self - relevance , and exposure . Source , the first dimension , captures the ori - gin of the cue—internal or external . Internal mortality cues are events that originate within the workplace , and external mortality cues are events that originate outside the workplace . Self - relevance , the second dimension , captures how the individual is connected to the mortality 606 October Academy of Management Review cue—personally or vicariously . Personal mortal - ity cues are events that trigger death awareness by exposing employees to direct threats to their own lives , and vicarious mortality cues are events that trigger death awareness by expos - ing employees to others who are dead or in danger . Exposure , the third dimension , captures the frequency and duration of the cue—chronic or acute . Chronic mortality cues are recurring , lasting events , and acute mortality cues are short - lived , intermittent events . Figure 2 repre - sents these three core dimensions of mortality cues in a 2 (cid:1) 2 (cid:1) 2 diagram , provides examples of each type , and describes their predicted im - pacts on death anxiety and death reflection , which we detail below . FIGURE 2 A Typology of Mortality Cues Chronic Acute Internal External Internal External Personal Definition : Extended workplace events that threaten employees’ own lives Definition : Extended outside events that threaten employees’ own lives Definition : Time - bounded workplace events that threaten employees’ own lives Definition : Time - bounded outside events that threaten employees’ own lives Example : Dangerous jobs , where firefighters , police officers , soldiers , ambulance drivers , astronauts , pilots , mine workers , infectious disease specialists , and intelligence agents are responsible for tasks that directly place their lives on the line ( Jermier , Gaines , & McIntosh , 1989 ) Example : Prolonged personal illness or disease ( Baldridge & Veiga , 2001 ) Example : Workplace accidents ( Hofmann & Stetzer , 1998 ; Perrow , 1984 ; Weick & Roberts , 1993 ) Example : Crises affecting the self , such as natural disasters , automobile accidents , and terrorist attacks ( Pearson & Clair , 1998 ) Impact : Low death anxiety , high death reflection Impact : Low death anxiety , moderate death reflection Impact : High death anxiety , low death reflection Impact : Moderate death anxiety , low death reflection Vicarious Definition : Extended workplace events that place employees in contact with others dead or in danger Definition : Extended outside events that threaten the lives of others in physical or emotional proximity to employees Definition : Time - bounded workplace events that threaten the lives of others in physical or emotional proximity to employees Definition : Time - bounded outside events that threaten the lives of others in physical or emotional proximity to employees Example : Dirty work and necessary evils , as experienced by physicians , nurses , hospice workers , paramedics , soldiers , executioners , firefighters , police officers , disaster and rescue workers , trauma and crisis counselors , and funeral workers ( Ashforth & Kreiner , 1999 ; Clark & LaBeff , 1982 ; Molinsky & Margolis , 2005 ) Example : Aging or ill parents ( Goodstein , 1995 ; Ingram & Simons , 1995 ) Example : Executive death ( Worrell , Davidson , Chandy , & Garrison , 1986 ) Example : Crises affecting other people or organizations , such as terrorist attacks and natural disasters ( Pearson & Clair , 1998 ) Impact : Low death anxiety , moderate death reflection Impact : Low death anxiety , moderate death reflection Impact : Moderate death anxiety , low death reflection Impact : Moderate death anxiety , low death reflection 2009 607 Grant and Wade - Benzoni The Effects of Mortality Cues on Death Anxiety and Death Reflection Source . We first propose that internal mortal - ity cues are more likely than external mortality cues to increase both death anxiety and death reflection at work . We base this prediction on evidence of the encoding specificity principle in memory theory and research , which demon - strates that memory is context dependent : indi - viduals are most likely to recall events in the domains in which they occurred ( Baddeley , 1982 ) . For example , employees will be most likely to think of death at work when they are exposed to mortality cues at work , whether through performing a dangerous task , having contact with others in danger or death , or en - countering accidents and disasters in the work - place . Accordingly , when mortality cues origi - nate within the workplace , they will be more accessible to employees while working and , thus , have greater potential to elicit both death anxiety and death reflection . Proposition 2 : Internal mortality cues are more likely than external mortal - ity cues to increase ( a ) death anxiety and ( b ) death reflection at work . Self - relevance . Next , we propose that per - sonal mortality cues are more likely than vicar - ious mortality cues to increase both death anx - iety and death reflection at work . As discussed previously , terror management research reveals that individuals often dismiss vicarious mortal - ity cues by asserting their own health , longevity , or immunity to the triggering events ( Arndt et al . , 1997 ; Simon et al . , 1997 ) . In contrast , personal mortality cues are more difficult to disregard since employees are confronted with direct evi - dence that their lives are at risk . For example , physicians and nurses treating sick patients can more easily distance themselves from death than police officers and rescue workers who are risking their own lives . When employees per - form dangerous jobs or are injured in accidents or disasters , they will find it difficult to deny the threats that they have experienced . As such , personal mortality cues have greater potential to elicit both death anxiety and death reflection than vicarious mortality cues . Proposition 3 : Personal mortality cues are more likely than vicarious mortal - ity cues to increase ( a ) death anxiety and ( b ) death reflection at work . The Moderating Role of Exposure We further propose that these effects of inter - nal and personal mortality cues on death anxi - ety and death reflection are moderated by expo - sure . More specifically , we propose that whether mortality cues trigger death anxiety or death reflection is a function of exposure . When em - ployees face acute exposure to mortality cues , these cues will be more likely to elicit death anxiety and less likely to elicit death reflection ( Lykins et al . , 2007 ) . In the face of acute cues , such as accidents , natural disasters , and terror - ist attacks , employees are often overwhelmed by fear of the unknown ( Pyszczynski et al . , 2003 ) . We predict the opposite , however , when employ - ees are chronically exposed to mortality cues ; these cues will be less likely to elicit death anxiety and more likely to elicit death reflection . We propose that chronic exposure increases awareness of death but enables employees to process mortality cues with reflection in the cool cognitive system , instead of with anxiety in the hot experiential system . Why would chronic ex - posure to mortality cues change the nature of death awareness from anxiety to reflection , rather than reducing the salience of death alto - gether ? Although one might expect that chronic exposure would enable employees to ignore mortality cues or disengage cognitive process - ing , theory and research on social cognition re - veals that chronic exposure to information tends to increase the accessibility of that information ( Higgins , 1996 ; Schwarz , 1999 ) . Such increases in accessibility under chronic exposure are partic - ularly common when the information is self - threatening ( Wenzlaff & Wegner , 2000 ) , which is a defining feature of mortality cues ( Baumeister , 1991 ) . Because mortality cues are self - threaten - ing events , they are extremely difficult to ignore or suppress ( Arndt et al . , 1997 ; Wenzlaff & Weg - ner , 2000 ) . Thus , under chronic exposure , em - ployees will still be conscious of mortality , but they will process it differently : instead of react - ing emotionally with anxiety , they will respond cognitively with reflection . Indeed , research on coping with harm doing , trauma , and death suggests that , over time , ex - posure facilitates a process of emotional habit - uation , or desensitizing , through which mortal - 608 October Academy of Management Review ity becomes less terrifying and paralyzing ( Ashforth & Kreiner , 1999 ; Molinsky & Margolis , 2005 ; Palmer , 1983 ; Regehr , Goldberg , & Hughes , 2002 ) . Through exposure , employees gain access to supportive occupational ideologies and col - leagues and are able to learn cognitive strate - gies for coping with death , thus rendering mor - tality less terrifying and unpredictable . As a manager of morticians remarked , “A group of funeral directors . . . could sit around in the res - taurant talking about the most gory details and it doesn’t bother them a bit” ( Ashforth , Kreiner , Clark , & Fugate , 2007 : 149 ) . In other words , chronic exposure to mortality cues enables employees to shut down the hot experiential system that governs death anxiety , processing death instead in the cool cognitive system , where they are able to think and reflect about mortality in a deliberate , rational , con - trolled fashion . By facilitating emotional habit - uation and desensitization , chronic exposure softens employees’ visceral anxiety reactions , enabling them to engage the cool cognitive sys - tem to reflect on the meaning of life and their potential contributions . For example , firefight - ers often enter their jobs seeking excitement , danger , and job security and benefits ( Smith , 1988 ) . However , through chronic exposure to death , they often come to think of saving lives as a central source of meaning . As one firefighter explained it , “I can look back and say , ‘I helped put out a fire . I helped save somebody . ’ It shows something I did on this earth” ( Terkel , 1972 : 589 ) . Thus , we expect that mortality cues elicit high death anxiety and low reflection for employees with acute exposure and—reversing the pat - tern—low death anxiety and high reflection for employees with chronic exposure . From a dy - namic viewpoint , this prediction implies that as employees have repeated exposures to acute mortality cues , they may experience these cues as chronic , thereby experiencing less death anx - iety and greater reflection ( see Lykins et al . , 2007 ) . Proposition 4 : Exposure moderates the effect of mortality cues on death awareness such that ( a ) acute expo - sure increases death anxiety and de - creases death reflection while ( b ) chronic exposure decreases death anxiety and increases death reflec - tion . The Moderating Role of Aging Processes Thus far , our analysis has focused on how situational variations in the source of , self - relevance of , and exposure to mortality cues will influence death anxiety and death reflection . We now consider the impact of aging processes , which play a fundamental role in shaping whether employees react to mortality cues with death anxiety or death reflection . As noted pre - viously , workforces worldwide are aging rap - idly , and organizational scholars have begun to call for theory and research to explain how ag - ing affects employees’ experiences and behav - iors ( e . g . , Kanfer & Ackerman , 2004 ; Warr , 2001 ) . However , little theory and research has explored the linkages between aging and death aware - ness . We propose that as employees age , mortality cues are decreasingly likely to trigger death anxiety and increasingly likely to trigger death reflection . It is not a coincidence that the vast majority of support for the predictions of terror management theory has been provided by ex - periments involving college students , for whom mortality cues tend to elicit death anxiety ( Max - field et al . , 2007 ) , whereas the bulk of research on generativity has focused on adults at midlife and beyond , for whom mortality cues tend to elicit death reflection ( McAdams & de St . Aubin , 1998 ) . Indeed , Maxfield et al . ( 2007 ) found that younger adults , but not older adults , displayed the anxiety - driven self - protective reactions to death awareness predicted by terror manage - ment theory . Consistent with these findings , several studies suggest that death anxiety peaks when individuals are in their twenties and declines in a relatively linear fashion there - after ( Cicirelli , 2002 ; Fortner & Neimeyer , 1999 ; Gesser , Wong , & Reker , 1988 ) , and that , over extended periods of death exposure , individu - als’ psychological reactions shift away from anxiety and toward reflection ( Lykins et al . , 2007 ) . Accordingly , we expect that as employees age , they are increasingly likely to respond to mortality cues with death reflection rather than death anxiety . Research identifies two interre - lated mechanisms through which aging shifts reactions to mortality cues away from anxiety and toward reflection . First , aging gives rise to a process of selective optimization and compensa - tion , in which individuals adapt to age - related 2009 609 Grant and Wade - Benzoni changes by prioritizing interests , choosing meaningful and realistic goals , adjusting stan - dards , and finding new methods to complete tasks and accomplish goals ( Baltes & Carstensen , 1996 ; Kanfer & Ackerman , 2004 ) . Several decades ago Ku¨bler - Ross ( 1969 ) argued that as they gain exposure to death , individuals move through stages of denial , anger , bargain - ing , and depression , toward eventual accep - tance . Indeed , recent research suggests that in - dividuals are increasingly likely to reflect on death as they age , which leads them to select value - congruent , personally significant goals that reduce death anxiety ( Lykins et al . , 2007 ) , typically by becoming generative through con - tributing to other people or to future generations ( McAdams & de St . Aubin , 1992 ; Midlarsky & Hannah , 1989 ) . As they age , rather than fearing death , individuals find value in reflecting on “time passed” and getting the most out of “time left” ( Carstensen , Isaacowitz , & Charles , 1999 ; Kanfer & Ackerman , 2004 ) . Second , aging enhances employees’ capacity for self - control , which has been shown to de - crease death anxiety ( Gailliot , Schmeichel , & Baumeister , 2006 ) . Research on personality de - velopment reveals that as they age , individuals show dominant trends toward becoming in - creasingly emotionally stable and conscien - tious ( Caspi , Roberts , & Shiner , 2005 ) , two traits that play a central role in self - control and will - power ( Metcalfe & Mischel , 1999 ; Olson , 2005 ) . Accordingly , aging equips employees with a heightened capacity for controlling thoughts and feelings that allow them to override the visceral , impulsive , emotional death anxiety re - actions triggered by the hot experiential system and to activate the deliberate , rational , analyti - cal processing guided by the cool cognitive sys - tem . Thus , we propose that employees’ re - sponses to mortality cues are age dependent such that aging decreases death anxiety reac - tions and increases death reflection reactions . It is important to note that these predictions apply to both chronological and symbolic aging processes . As employees age chronologically , they are increasingly likely to experience ob - servable physical and psychological changes that promote death reflection , such as graying hair and losses in vision , hearing , and memory . However , organizational life is replete with sym - bolic signals that draw attention to aging and can thus promote increased death reflection . Ad - vancing career stages , achievement of higher levels of organizational and occupational ten - ure , and retirement planning programs are ex - amples of symbolic aging processes that can strengthen employees’ tendencies to reflect on death by serving as reminders of time passed and by highlighting that time left is finite and decreasing . In some organizational and occupa - tional settings , these symbols may be particu - larly salient , as in the case of air traffic control - lers , who face a mandatory retirement age of fifty - six ( Kanfer & Ackerman , 2004 ) . We expect that these types of symbolic aging processes , not only chronological aging processes , can trig - ger death reflection . Proposition 5 : Aging processes moder - ate the effect of mortality cues on death awareness such that as employ - ees age chronologically and symboli - cally , they tend to respond to mortality cues with ( a ) decreasing death anxiety and ( b ) increasing death reflection . BEHAVIORAL CONSEQUENCES OF DEATH AWARENESS AT WORK Now that we have explained how mortality cues and aging processes interact to influence death anxiety and death reflection , we can ex - amine the consequences of these two psycho - logical states for work behavior , an important issue that has rarely been addressed in organi - zational scholarship ( Sievers , 1986 , 1993 ) . We fo - cus on two core classes of work behavior : with - drawal behaviors , which involve behavioral disengagement from work through absenteeism , tardiness , and turnover ( Harrison , Newman , & Roth , 2006 ) , and generative behaviors , which are actions taken to make meaningful , lasting con - tributions that benefit other people and groups ( McAdams & de St . Aubin , 1992 ) . We focus on these behaviors not only because they can have destructive versus constructive implications for job performance but also because they have been linked directly to aging processes ( Ng & Feldman , 2008 ) and to different psychological states that closely parallel our distinction be - tween death anxiety triggering self - protective motivation and death reflection triggering prosocial motivation . More specifically , re - searchers have found that withdrawal behav - iors are often driven by stress and negative 610 October Academy of Management Review emotions ( e . g . , Podsakoff , LePine , & LePine , 2007 ; Spector & Fox , 2002 ) , whereas generative behav - iors are often driven by the desire to help others ( e . g . , Grant , 2008 ; McAdams & de St . Aubin , 1992 ; Rioux & Penner , 2001 ; Spector & Fox , 2002 ) . In the following sections we develop propositions that explain how both individual and contextual con - tingencies moderate the effects of death anxiety on withdrawal behaviors and death reflection on generative behaviors in the work domain . Death Anxiety and Stress - Related Withdrawal Behaviors at Work We expect that , in general , death anxiety is likely to increase withdrawal behaviors at work . The logic behind this prediction is provided by theory and research on stress , which suggests that death anxiety is a cause of stress and strain , and stress and strain can result in feel - ings of emotional exhaustion . The consequence of stress and strain caused by death anxiety can be short - term withdrawal behaviors , such as ab - senteeism and tardiness , since employees lack the emotional energy to attend work or find themselves distracted from work - related thoughts ( Byron & Peterson , 2002 ) . In the case of particularly intense or long - lasting levels of death anxiety that employees find emotionally overwhelming , the consequence can be the longer - term withdrawal behavior of turnover , as employees seek to protect themselves by transi - tioning to jobs with less exposure to mortality cues ( e . g . , Zaccaro & Stone , 1988 ) . The proposed linkages among death anxiety , stress , and withdrawal behaviors are supported by several studies . With respect to the effect of death anxiety on stress , a naturally occurring quasi - experiment showed that the deadly Three Mile Island nuclear accident predicated higher levels of employee tension ( Chisholm et al . , 1983 ) . Similarly , a study of physical danger in police work linked objective hazards to fear of death , which was associated with higher emo - tional exhaustion and disaffection with the or - ganization ( Jermier et al . , 1989 ) , and a study of New York city firefighters showed that involve - ment in the traumatic September 11 events was associated with higher levels of depression and stress ( Bacharach & Bamberger , 2007 ) . Because few researchers have explicitly mea - sured death anxiety , there is little direct evi - dence that death anxiety causes withdrawal be - haviors . However , several studies provide indirect evidence of this effect by linking acute mortality cues to withdrawal behaviors through stress processes . One study showed that the death of a family member predicted higher lev - els of sickness absenteeism among municipal employees in the following year ( Kivima¨ki et al . , 2002 ) . Another study showed that employees’ re - ports of strain from the acute events of Septem - ber 11 predicted higher levels of absenteeism in subsequent weeks ( Byron & Peterson , 2002 ) . And a third study showed that employees who per - ceived high levels of danger in their jobs were likely to report strong intentions to quit ( Zaccaro & Stone , 1988 ) . Accordingly , we propose that death anxiety , particularly when it is intense or long - lasting , will lead employees to protect themselves from stress by withdrawing from work . Proposition 6 : Death anxiety increases stress - related withdrawal behaviors of absenteeism , tardiness , and turn - over . However , there are conditions under which death anxiety is more versus less likely to in - crease withdrawal behaviors . Our earlier prop - ositions suggested that employees will experi - ence greater death anxiety at work when mortality cues are internal rather than external to the workplace . This suggests that internal mortality cues are generally likely to cause death anxiety at work and , therefore , stress and withdrawal behaviors . But when mortality cues are external , different employees may display different patterns of responses . Work - family re - search indicates that employees differ in their boundary preferences : “integrators” prefer to blur the boundary between work and other life domains , whereas “segmenters” prefer to sepa - rate work from other domains of life ( Edwards & Rothbard , 1999 ; Rothbard , Phillips , & Dumas , 2005 ) . Because integrators choose not to com - partmentalize their lives , external mortality cues are likely to spill over and influence their thoughts and feelings about death at work , pre - cipitating higher death anxiety , which will lead to more withdrawal behaviors . Segmenters , on the other hand , are motivated to draw sharp boundaries between work and other life domains . For segmenters , then , work may provide a respite from external mortality cues , promoting task focus and reducing the ten - 2009 611 Grant and Wade - Benzoni dency to display such withdrawal behaviors as absenteeism , tardiness , and turnover . Indeed , terror management research has shown that some individuals seek to escape death anxiety by fleeing from the source of the anxiety and focusing intensely on another domain ( McGre - gor , Gailliot , Vasquez , & Nash , 2007 ; McGregor & Marigold , 2003 ) . This is a pattern that we expect to see among segmenters : their motivation to compartmentalize their lives will lead them to respond to external mortality cues by increasing their focus on work tasks , which will reduce the stress and distraction of death anxiety and thereby prevent withdrawal behaviors . Thus , in the event of external mortality cues , death anx - iety is more likely to influence withdrawal be - haviors among integrators than segmenters . Proposition 7 : When mortality cues are external to the workplace , work boundary preferences moderate the effect of death anxiety on withdrawal behaviors such that segmenters en - gage in fewer withdrawal behaviors than integrators . Death Reflection and Generative Behaviors at Work As noted previously , death reflection is likely to trigger prosocial motivation , which has been linked to higher levels of generative behaviors , such as helping , mentoring , and effort and ini - tiative in tasks that benefit others ( Grant , 2008 ; Rioux & Penner , 2001 ) . However , rather than dis - playing generative behaviors at work , employ - ees can choose to express their prosocial moti - vations in generative behaviors outside the domain of work ( McAdams & de St . Aubin , 1992 ) . In this section we consider the individual and contextual contingencies that shape whether death reflection drives employees to express prosocial motivation in generative behaviors within or outside the domain of work . From the perspectives of theories of resource allocation ( Becker , 1965 ; Hobfoll , 2002 ) and value congruence ( Cable & Edwards , 2004 ; Schwartz , 1992 ) , when employees reflect on death , they become increasingly aware that time is finite and turn to their values in order to make deci - sions about how to allocate their resources . In - deed , recent research shows that death reflec - tion motivates individuals to turn to their values for cues about how to prioritize tasks , goals , and activities ( Lykins et al . , 2007 ) . For example , Ap - ple founder Steve Jobs explained that being di - agnosed with cancer led him to pursue more value - congruent projects : “I have looked in the mirror every morning and asked myself : ‘If today were the last day of my life , would I want to do what I am about to do today ? ’ . . . Remembering that I’ll be dead soon is the most important tool I’ve ever encountered to help me make the big choices in life” ( Jobs , 2005 ) . We expect that whether death reflection drives employees to express their prosocial mo - tivation in generative behaviors within or out - side the domain of work depends on their orien - tations toward work , which capture the values they attach to work ( Wrzesniewski , Dutton , & Debebe , 2003 ) . Psychologists and sociologists have argued that employees typically hold one of three orientations toward work—job , career , or calling ( Bellah , Madsen , Sullivan , Swidler , & Tipton , 1985 ; Schwartz , 1986 ) . Job - oriented em - ployees see work as a means to fulfill the values of supporting oneself , one’s family , and one’s leisure time . Career - oriented employees see work as a means to fulfill the values of status , promotions , achievement , and challenge . Call - ing - oriented employees see work as an end in and of itself , as an intrinsic source of personal meaning , and as a means to fulfil the value of helping others . We draw on theories of resource allocation and value congruence to propose that these work orientations play a critical role in influenc - ing employees’ behavioral reactions to death reflection . By enhancing the salience of mortal - ity , death reflection increases employees’ awareness that time is finite , motivating them to make decisions about where to allocate their energy and attention ( Becker , 1965 ; Hobfoll , 2002 ) . Theories of value congruence explain these responses with reference to values : to de - termine where to allocate scarce resources , em - ployees turn to their values , or guiding princi - ples , for information about how to prioritize their options ( Cable & Edwards , 2004 ; Schwartz , 1992 ; Vroom , 1964 ) . Indeed , terror management re - search indicates that when death is salient , in - dividuals invest more time and energy in activ - ities that are reflective of their personal values and identities ( McGregor , Zanna , Holmes , & Spencer , 2001 ) . 612 October Academy of Management Review The moderating role of work orientations . We propose that work orientations provide a set of principles to guide the decision about how to allocate time and energy . Research on work ori - entations shows that job - oriented employees tend not to define their identities strongly in terms of work ( Wrzesniewski & Dutton , 2001 ; Wrzesniewski , McCauley , Rozin , & Schwartz , 1997 ) . Accordingly , we expect that employees with job orientations will choose to express their prosocial motivations outside the work domain , since they do not expect to find meaning in work ( Wrzesniewski et al . , 1997 ) . Thus , death reflec - tion will motivate job - oriented employees to pursue generative activities outside of work , such as childrearing and volunteering , and to invest less time and energy in the work domain . For instance , consider a funeral home director who explains that she has a job orientation to - ward work : “I didn’t want to go into the funeral businesses . . . . I had some choices , some chances to do other things , but , well , it’s a family business . . . . It’s not something that I picked” ( Bowe , Bowe , & Streeter , 2000 : 663 , 668 ) . She de - scribes how chronic mortality exposure in her job leads to death reflection , which motivates her to spend more time with her family : “I know that seeing so much death firsthand . . . I appreciate life more because I do this . . . because I know it could all end like that . . . . I appreciate family and get - togethers more doing this” ( Bowe et al . , 2000 : 668 ) . Employees with career and calling orienta - tions , on the other hand , will choose to express their prosocial motivations in the work domain . These employees invest their identities more strongly in work than job - oriented employees , thereby attaching more meaning and impor - tance to work as a life domain ( Wrzesniewski et al . , 1997 ) . For career - oriented employees , work is a central source of status and prestige ( Wrzesniewski et al . , 1997 ) . Moreover , research on near - death experiences shows that death re - flection can broaden individuals’ focus of atten - tion beyond their own narrow career goals to - ward a consideration of helping others and doing good ( Cozzolino et al . , 2004 ; Lykins et al . , 2007 ) . These findings suggest that death reflec - tion will motivate career - oriented employees to engage in higher levels of generative behavior in order to simultaneously achieve their agentic and communal goals of improving their own reputation and contributing to other people . For calling - oriented employees , work is a po - tential source of meaning , identity expression , and social contribution . We expect that death reflection will motivate calling - oriented em - ployees to express their prosocial motivations at work by engaging in generative behaviors . If they recognize opportunities to help and mentor others , they will be likely to take initiative in crafting their jobs to provide more help and mentoring ( Wrzesniewski & Dutton , 2001 ) . They also will be likely to display high levels of effort and persistence in tasks that benefit others ( Grant , 2007 ) . For example , psychologists have discovered surges in objective contributions as creative workers , such as artists , composers , and writers , reach retirement age in their 60s , 70s , and even 80s ( Simonton , 1988 ) . One expla - nation for this pattern is the “swan - song” phe - nomenon : reflecting on death strengthens the motivation of calling - oriented individuals to leave behind a meaningful contribution . In a study of nearly 2 , 000 works of composition by 172 classical composers , Simonton ( 1989 ) found that last works had higher objective popularity and expert ratings of aesthetic significance , even af - ter controlling for age and eminence : As people approach their last years , they may undergo a life assessment , a reflection on where they have been and on how little time remains to travel , and so may feel that the limited future must be exploited to the utmost . . . . For creative individuals , the outcome of this life review may be a significant reshaping of the content and form of those works selected as the career’s coda , rendering them qualitatively distinct from other works . Last - works effects hinge not on the cre - ator’s chronological or even career age but rather on the perceived proximity of death ( Simonton , 1989 : 42 ) . Together , these arguments and examples sug - gest that death reflection will increase the gen - erative behaviors of calling - oriented and ca - reer - oriented employees while it will decrease the generative behaviors of job - oriented em - ployees in the work domain . Proposition 8 : Work orientations mod - erate the effect of death reflection on generative behaviors in the work do - main such that death reflection ( a ) in - creases work generativity for career - oriented and calling - oriented employees and ( b ) decreases work generativity for job - oriented employees . 2009 613 Grant and Wade - Benzoni The moderating role of job design . For both calling - oriented and career - oriented employees , the targets of their generative behaviors are likely to depend on the opportunities provided in their job designs . If employees are responsi - ble for meaningful work that is high in task significance and helping opportunities ( Grant , 2007 ; Hackman & Oldham , 1980 ) , they will be likely to express generativity in their current jobs . However , if employees cannot find high levels of task significance or helping and men - toring opportunities in their current jobs , they will be likely to consider two options for ex - pressing generativity . One option is to engage in generative job crafting , altering their tasks and relationships to expand the amount of help and mentoring that they provide to others ( Grant , 2007 ; Wrzesniewski & Dutton , 2001 ) . If their current jobs provide autonomy for job craft - ing , employees are likely to take advantage of these opportunities . However , if employees lack the autonomy to engage in job crafting , they may eventually change jobs , moving into a ser - vice occupation that enables them to express their prosocial motivations more effectively in generative behaviors ( e . g . , Ring & Elsaesser Val - arino , 1998 ) . For example , reflecting on death after the events of September 11 strengthened one man’s prosocial motivation , leading him to become a firefighter : “I was on the fence about joining because of the time it would take , then after 9 / 11 , all I wanted to do was help” ( Wrzesniewski , 2002 : 231 ) . These arguments suggest that death reflec - tion will be more likely to motivate career - oriented and calling - oriented employees to ex - press greater generativity in their current jobs when those jobs are meaningful or provide au - tonomy for job crafting . But death reflection will be more likely to motivate these employees to change to more generative jobs when their cur - rent jobs lack meaningfulness or autonomy for job crafting . Proposition 9 : Job design interacts with work orientations to moderate the effect of death reflection on gener - ative behaviors such that career - oriented and calling - oriented employ - ees will express generativity within their current jobs when those jobs are high in meaningfulness or autonomy for job crafting , but they will express generativity by seeking new jobs when their current jobs lack meaning - fulness or autonomy for job crafting . DISCUSSION We have developed a theoretical framework to expand existing knowledge about death awareness in organizations . Our discussion of the nature , antecedents , contingencies , and be - havioral consequences of death awareness at work offers valuable implications for organiza - tional theory and research . Theoretical Contributions We have focused on challenging conventional wisdom about death awareness in three key ways . First , we suggest that death awareness is a heterogeneous rather than homogeneous phe - nomenon . Whereas terror management and gen - erativity theorists have traditionally treated death awareness as a unitary psychological state , we have articulated how death awareness can take the form of either anxiety , processed in the hot experiential system , or reflection , pro - cessed in the cool cognitive system . Second , we suggest that death awareness and work motiva - tion are interdependent rather than indepen - dent phenomena . Whereas organizational scholars have rarely considered death aware - ness as an influence on motivation ( Sievers , 1993 ) , we have proposed that death awareness can exert surprisingly powerful effects on work motivation . Third , we highlight the upsides as well as the more obvious downsides of death awareness in organizations . Whereas scholars and practitioners alike often have regarded death awareness as a solely destructive phe - nomenon , we have called attention to conditions under which death awareness can be beneficial in organizations , offering a more thorough , bal - anced view of the effects of death on organiza - tional life . Our propositions suggest that death awareness is more likely to have constructive effects when it takes the form of reflection rather than anxiety , particularly when employees have calling orientations toward work . In addition to offering these general contributions , our theoret - ical model advances existing knowledge in sev - eral specific areas . 614 October Academy of Management Review Work motivation and behaviors . Our article advances work motivation theory and research by calling attention to death awareness as an underexplored influence on employee motiva - tion . In examining how situations influence work motivation , scholars have traditionally fo - cused on intentionally designed features of or - ganizational contexts , such as job designs , goals , and rewards ( Katzell & Thompson , 1990 ) . We complement these perspectives by accentu - ating the importance of mortality cues and ag - ing processes that trigger awareness of one’s own mortality in shaping work motivation . Moreover , existing motivation theory and re - search has not considered death anxiety as a trigger of self - protective motivation or death re - flection as a trigger of prosocial motivation . By doing so , our article suggests that death anxiety generates a prevention - focused mindset in which employees seek to defend their identities and world views , whereas death reflection gen - erates a promotion - focused mindset in which employees seek to contribute to other people and future generations . These propositions highlight the importance of death awareness as an antecedent of prevention versus promotion regulatory focus—an issue not considered in ex - isting theory and research on regulatory focus ( Brockner & Higgins , 2001 ) . In addition , researchers have not previously examined the role that aging processes play in shaping whether mortality cues trigger death anxiety and self - protective motivation or death reflection and prosocial motivation ( see Kanfer & Ackerman , 2004 ) . Our propositions suggest that aging is likely to shift employees’ reactions to mortality cues away from death anxiety and self - protective motivation and toward death re - flection and prosocial motivation . This implies that by promoting death reflection and prosocial motivation , aging should play an important role in stimulating generative behaviors . Finally , re - searchers have yet to link death awareness to withdrawal and generative behaviors . Our re - search identifies death anxiety and death re - flection as new influences on withdrawal and generative behaviors . Threats , aging , and meaning . Our proposi - tions extend existing knowledge about threats , aging , and meaning . First , although organiza - tional scholars have long recognized the impor - tance of threatening events in employees’ expe - riences and behaviors ( Pearson & Clair , 1998 ) , few typologies exist to categorize and classify the content of these threatening events . Our ty - pology of mortality cues introduces three key dimensions along which threatening events can vary : exposure ( chronic versus acute ) , source ( in - ternal versus external ) , and self - relevance ( per - sonal versus vicarious ) . Second , whereas existing models suggest that threatening events lead to a restricted , nar - rowed focus of attention ( Staw , Sandelands , & Dutton , 1981 ) , we suggest that aging processes place an important boundary condition on threat - rigidity effects . For aging employees , mortality cues may actually broaden the focus of attention by triggering the process of death reflection . These propositions provide new in - sights into the role of aging in work motivation . As mentioned previously , recent models of ag - ing and work motivation have not accounted for death awareness ( Kanfer & Ackerman , 2004 ) . Our model takes steps toward filling this gap by specifying how aging influences employees’ psychological responses to mortality cues and how these death anxiety versus death reflection reactions , in turn , are likely to influence behav - iors . Third , we highlight a paradoxical effect of mortality cues on meaning . Baumeister ( 1991 ) noted that death awareness threatens mean - ing by reducing the predictability and control - lability of life , eradicating the potential for future meaning , signaling that one’s existence is likely to be forgotten , and undermining the value of one’s accomplishments . Although mortality cues initially threaten meaning , by triggering states of death anxiety and death reflection , they drive employees to seek out meaning through protecting themselves or contributing to others . Thus , by threatening meaning , mortality cues stimulate self - protec - tive and prosocial motivations that enable em - ployees to restore and renew their feelings of meaning . Accordingly , we suggest that mor - tality cues serve to threaten meaning in the short run but to enhance meaning in the longer term . These ideas fill a gap in the meaning literature ( e . g . , Podolny , Khurana , & Hill - Popper , 2005 ; Pratt & Ashforth , 2003 ; Wrzes - niewski et al . , 2003 ) by illuminating a counter - intuitive , time - contingent effect of mortality cues on meaning . 2009 615 Grant and Wade - Benzoni Future Directions We believe that the most critical starting point is to establish the construct validity of the two death awareness states . We recommend that re - searchers develop and validate scales to mea - sure death awareness at work . In doing so it is particularly important to assess the discrimi - nant validity of the death anxiety and death reflection scales . We hope that researchers will develop multimethod instruments so that both convergent and discriminant validity can be tested with a multitrait - multimethod matrix ( Campbell & Fiske , 1959 ) . However , because death anxiety is often short - lived , we recom - mend that researchers utilize experience - sampling ( Beal & Weiss , 2003 ) and daily diary ( Kahneman , Krueger , Schkade , Schwarz , & Stone , 2004 ) methodologies , which are designed to capture brief , momentary psychological states and assess their temporal duration . In addition , because of its “hot” nature , death anx - iety may be difficult to measure accurately with self - reports . To transcend this limitation , we rec - ommend that researchers consider linguistic analyses of expressive writing , which are well suited to the assessment of the intense emotions that can accompany death anxiety ( e . g . , Cohn , Mehl , & Pennebaker , 2004 ) . After establishing construct validity , we rec - ommend that researchers turn to questions of predictive or consequential validity . We believe it is important to study the effects of death awareness before considering its antecedents , since many researchers may not be concerned about how death awareness emerges until we have evidence that it matters . To link death awareness to behavioral outcomes , we recom - mend that researchers use experimental meth - odologies to manipulate death anxiety and death reflection ( e . g . , Cozzolino et al . , 2004 ) . Be - cause of the ethical challenges of manipulating death awareness in organizations , quasi - experiments may be the ideal methodology for establishing external validity , for they allow re - searchers to study the impact of naturally occur - ring mortality cues on employees’ psychological states and behaviors ( Cook & Campbell , 1979 ; Grant & Wall , in press ) . For example , research - ers may enter organizations in the wake of trau - mas , accidents , illnesses , and disasters to study the psychological and behavioral responses of individuals who were exposed to these events in different ways . In addition to providing theoret - ical insights into the consequences of death awareness , quasi - experiments may open doors for researchers to help employees cope with these tragic events . Finally , we hope to see re - searchers turn to an examination of the anteced - ents of death awareness . For example , rela - tively little is known about the work events that trigger death awareness states or the frequency of death awareness in the workplace . In addition to empirically testing our proposi - tions , researchers may explore further questions stimulated by our discussion . Scholars have long observed that cultures vary in their ap - proaches to coping with death ( e . g . , Phillips & Feldman , 1973 ; Sims & Baumann , 1972 ) . It is worthwhile to examine whether differences in organizational cultures , norms , values , and be - liefs about death moderate employees’ reac - tions to death awareness ( see Arndt , Solomon , Kasser , & Sheldon , 2004 ; Kasser & Sheldon , 2000 ; Wade - Benzoni , 2006 ) . It is also critical for re - searchers to examine the dynamic relationship between death anxiety and death reflection . Al - though emotions and cognitions can act to - gether ( Damasio , 1994 ) , in the case of death anx - iety and death reflection , the two states are unlikely to co - occur , for two reasons . First , through reciprocal processes , each form of death awareness can reduce the likelihood that the other will emerge . Terror management research - ers have suggested that death anxiety moti - vates individuals to avoid existential terror by avoiding death - related thoughts , which may prevent death reflection ( Pyszczynski et al . , 2003 ) . Generativity researchers have suggested that death reflection facilitates proactive plan - ning and marshaling of cognitive , emotional , and behavioral coping strategies for meaning making , and these reduce death anxiety ( Cozzo - lino et al . , 2004 ; McAdams & de St . Aubin , 1992 ) . Second , these bodies of literature also suggest that the two states can trigger each other , but when they do so , a “phase shift” occurs in which the triggering state is replaced by the new state . For example , reflecting on death may lead some individuals to experience anxiety , which will activate the experiential system and shut down the cognitive system , preventing further reflec - tion from occurring . Conversely , when experi - encing death anxiety , some individuals may be - gin to rationalize ; this reflection may activate the cognitive system and shut down the experi - 616 October Academy of Management Review ential system , preventing further anxiety from occurring . Ultimately , the dynamic relationship between anxiety and reflection may depend on the tem - poral dimension of exposure . Death anxiety , be - cause it is processed in the experiential system , is likely to be short - lived and acute in nature . When it occurs repeatedly over time , our propo - sitions imply that employees may habituate , which will allow them to transform death awareness into reflection rather than anxiety . Death reflection may arise as a consequence of one or more acute events that initially trigger anxiety and / or through intrinsic age - related pro - cesses . We hope to see researchers explore these issues in further depth . Practical Implications Because organizations typically provide few guidelines for responding to death , managers are often overwhelmed by uncertainty , discom - fort , and doubt about how to deal with mortality cues ( e . g . , Dutton et al . , 2006 ; Sa´nchez , Korbin , & Viscarra , 1995 ) . Our model may assist managers in understanding and managing mortality cues . Our propositions suggest that when mortality cues are present , managers stand to benefit from supporting reflection rather than from sweeping the event under the rug . Younger em - ployees tend to react to mortality cues with anx - iety , which can prompt withdrawal behaviors , such as absenteeism , tardiness , and turnover . Moreover , the attempt to suppress death anxiety can lead to dysfunctional rebound effects , in which death anxiety becomes increasingly sa - lient and the hot experiential system distracts attention away from work tasks ( Gailliot et al . , 2006 ) . By structuring forums for thinking about or discussing death - related events , managers may shift younger employees’ reactions away from anxiety and toward reflection , encouraging gen - erative behavior among those who are calling oriented and career oriented . If managers seek to facilitate generative behavior among job - oriented employees , it may be particularly im - portant to offer monetary rewards for taking ini - tiative and mentoring others . This may motivate job - oriented employees to invest more time in generative behaviors , with similar effects on ca - reer - oriented employees as well . Our model thus has important implications for promoting safety and preventing errors and ac - cidents—a topic of substantial importance in organizational theory and practice ( e . g . , Hof - mann & Stetzer , 1998 ; Weick , Sutcliffe , & Obst - feld , 2005 ) . In organizations in which safety and physical danger are chronically salient con - cerns , if employees are unwilling to comply with safety practices , managers may consider struc - turing occasions for death reflection . This may motivate employees with calling orientations to engage in generative behaviors to promote safety for others , and it may motivate employees with career orientations to engage in generative behaviors to build a reputation and leave a leg - acy . To motivate employees with job orienta - tions to engage in safety - related generative be - haviors , managers may be more dependent on incentive compensation practices linking mone - tary rewards to safety performance . Conclusion We anticipate that some scholars may object to the intellectualization of such a philosophi - cally profound , emotionally potent topic . They may fear that systematic theory development and positivistic empirical methods will do vio - lence to its richness . We submit , however , that as scholars seek to understand and explain or - ganizational life , it is important to consider the role of death awareness as a central feature of the human condition . REFERENCES Albom , M . 1997 . Tuesdays with Morrie . New York : Doubleday . Appignanesi , R . 2006 . Introducing existentialism ( 3rd ed . ) . Cambridge : Icon Books . Arndt , J . , Greenberg , J . , Solomon , S . , Pyszczynski , T . , & Simon , L . 1997 . Suppression , accessibility of death - related thoughts , and cultural worldview defense : Ex - ploring the psychodynamics of terror management . Jour - nal of Personality and Social Psychology , 73 : 5 – 18 . Arndt , J . , Lieberman , J . D . , Cook , A . , & Solomon , S . 2005 . Terror management in the courtroom : Exploring the effects of mortality salience on legal decision making . Psychol - ogy , Public Policy , and Law , 11 : 407 – 438 . Arndt , J . , Solomon , S . , Kasser , T . , & Sheldon , K . M . 2004 . The urge to splurge : A terror management account of mate - rialism and consumer behavior . Journal of Consumer Psychology , 14 : 198 – 212 . Ashford , S . J . , Blatt , R . , & VandeWalle , D . 2003 . Reflections on the looking glass : A review of research on feedback - seeking behavior in organizations . Journal of Manage - ment , 29 : 769 – 799 . 2009 617 Grant and Wade - Benzoni Ashforth , B . E . , & Kreiner , G . E . 1999 . “How can you do it ? ” : Dirty work and the challenge of constructing a positive identity . Academy of Management Review , 24 : 413 – 434 . Ashforth , B . E . , Kreiner , G . E . , Clark , M . A . , & Fugate , M . 2007 . Normalizing dirty work : Managerial tactics for counter - ing occupational taint . Academy of Management Jour - nal , 50 : 149 – 174 . Bacharach , S . B . , & Bamberger , P . A . 2007 . 9 / 11 and New York City firefighters’ post hoc unit support and control cli - mates : A context theory of the consequences of involve - ment in traumatic work - related events . Academy of Management Journal , 50 : 849 – 868 . Baddeley , A . D . 1982 . Domains of recollection . Psychological Review , 89 : 708 – 729 . Baldridge , D . C . , & Veiga , J . F . 2001 . Toward a greater under - standing of the willingness to request an accommoda - tion : Can requesters’ beliefs disable the Americans with Disabilities Act ? Academy of Management Review , 26 : 85 – 99 . Baltes , M . M . , & Carstensen , L . L . 1996 . The process of suc - cessful ageing . Ageing and Society , 16 : 397 – 422 . Baumeister , R . F . 1991 . Meanings of life . New York : Guilford Press . Bazerman , M . H . , Tenbrunsel , A . E . , & Wade - Benzoni , K . 1998 . Negotiating with yourself and losing : Making decisions with competing internal preferences . Academy of Man - agement Review , 23 : 225 – 241 . Beal , D . J . , & Weiss , H . M . 2003 . Methods of ecological mo - mentary assessment in organizational research . Orga - nizational Research Methods , 6 : 440 – 464 . Becker , E . 1973 . The denial of death . New York : Free Press . Becker , G . S . 1965 . A theory of the allocation of time . Eco - nomic Journal , 75 : 493 – 517 . Bellah , R . N . , Madsen , R . , Sullivan , W . M . , Swidler , A . , & Tipton , S . M . 1985 . Habits of the heart . New York : Harper & Row . Bowe , J . , Bowe , M . B . , & Streeter , S . ( Eds . ) . 2000 . GiG : Ameri - cans talk about their jobs . New York : Three Rivers Press . Brockner , J . , & Higgins , E . T . 2001 . Regulatory focus theory : Its implications for the study of emotions in the workplace . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Pro - cesses , 86 : 35 – 66 . Bureau of Labor Statistics . 2007 . Occupational outlook hand - book ( 2006 – 2007 ed . ) . Washington , DC : U . S . Department of Labor . Byron , K . , & Peterson , S . 2002 . The impact of a large scale traumatic event on individual and organizational out - comes : Exploring employee and company reactions to September 11 , 2001 . Journal of Organizational Behavior , 23 : 895 – 910 . Cable , D . M . , & Edwards , J . R . 2004 . Complementary and supplementary fit : A theoretical and empirical integra - tion . Journal of Applied Psychology , 89 : 822 – 834 . Campbell , D . T . , & Fiske , D . W . 1959 . Convergent and dis - criminant validation by the multitrait - multimethod ma - trix . Psychological Bulletin , 56 : 81 – 105 . Carone , G . 2005 . Long - term labour force projections for the 25 EU member states : A set of data for assessing the eco - nomic impact of ageing . European Commission Eco - nomic Paper No . 235 , European Commission , Brussels . Carstensen , L . L . , Isaacowitz , D . M . , & Charles , S . T . 1999 . Taking time seriously : A theory of socioemotional selec - tivity . American Psychologist , 54 : 165 – 181 . Caspi , A . , Roberts , B . W . , & Shiner , R . L . 2005 . Personality development : Stability and change . Annual Review of Psychology , 56 : 453 – 484 . Chaplin , W . F . , John , O . P . , & Goldberg , L . R . 1988 . Concep - tions of states and traits : Dimensional attributes with ideals as prototypes . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 54 : 541 – 557 . Chisholm , R . F . , Kasl , S . V . , & Eskenazi , B . 1983 . The nature and predictors of job related tension in a crisis situation : Reactions of nuclear workers to the Three Mile Island accident . Academy of Management Journal , 83 : 385 – 405 . Cicirelli , V . G . 2002 . Fear of death in older adults : Predictions from terror management theory . Journals of Gerontol - ogy . Series B : Psychological Sciences and Social Sci - ences , 57B : 358 – 366 . Clark , R . E . , & LaBeff , E . E . 1982 . Death telling : Managing the delivery of bad news . Journal of Health and Social Be - havior , 23 : 366 – 380 . Cohen , F . , Solomon , S . , Maxfield , M . , Pyszczynski , T . , & Greenberg , J . 2004 . Fatal attraction : The effects of mor - tality salience on evaluations of charismatic , task - oriented , and relationship - oriented leaders . Psycholog - ical Science , 15 : 846 – 851 . Cohn , M . A . , Mehl , M . R . , & Pennebaker , J . W . 2004 . Linguistic markers of psychological change surrounding Septem - ber 11 , 2001 . Psychological Science , 15 : 687 – 693 . Cook , T . D . , & Campbell , D . T . 1979 . Quasi - experimentation : Design and analysis issues for field settings . Chicago : Rand McNally . Cozzolino , P . J . , Staples , A . D . , Meyers , L . S . , & Samboceti , J . 2004 . Greed , death , and values : From terror manage - ment to transcendence management theory . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 30 : 278 – 292 . Czarniawska - Joerges , B . 1995 . Work , death , and life itself : Essays on management and organization . Academy of Management Review , 20 : 754 – 757 . Damasio , A . R . 1994 . Descartes’ error : Emotion , reason , and the human brain . New York : Putnam . Dechesne , M . , Greenberg , J . , Arndt , J . , & Schmiel , J . 2000 . Terror management and the vicissitudes of sports fan affiliation : The effects of mortality salience on optimism and fan identification . European Journal of Social Psy - chology , 30 : 813 – 835 . Dutton , J . E . , Worline , M . C . , Frost , P . J . , & Lilius , J . 2006 . Explaining compassion organizing . Administrative Sci - ence Quarterly , 51 : 59 – 96 . Edmondson , A . C . 1987 . A Fuller explanation : The synergetic geometry of R . Buckminster Fuller . Boston : Birkhauser . Edwards , J . R . , & Rothbard , N . P . 1999 . Work and family stress and well - being : An examination of person - environment 618 October Academy of Management Review fit in the work and family domains . Organizational Be - havior and Human Decision Processes , 77 : 85 – 129 . Elder , G . H . , & Clipp , E . C . 1988 . Wartime losses and social bonding : Influence across 40 years in men’s lives . Psy - chiatry , 51 : 177 – 198 . Epstein , S . 1994 . Integration of the cognitive and the psy - chodynamic unconscious . American Psychologist , 49 : 709 – 724 . Erikson , E . H . 1963 . Childhood and society ( 2nd ed . ) . New York : Norton . Erikson , E . H . 1982 . The life cycle completed . New York : Nor - ton . European Commission . 2007 . Eurostat database . http : / / epp . eurostat . ec . europa . eu , accessed December 29 , 2007 . Fortner , B . V . , & Neimeyer , R . A . 1999 . Death anxiety in older adults : A quantitative review . Death Studies , 23 : 387 – 411 . Frankl , V . 1959 . Man’s search for meaning . New York : Pocket Books . Fullerton , H . N . 1999 . Labor force projections to 2008 : Steady growth and changing composition . Monthly Labor Re - view , 122 : 19 – 32 . Gailliot , M . , Schmeichel , B . J . , & Baumeister , R . F . 2006 . Self - regulatory processes defend against the threat of death : Effects of self - control depletion and trait self - control on thoughts and fears of dying . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 91 : 49 – 62 . Gesser , G . , Wong , P . T . , & Reker , G . T . 1988 . Death attitudes across the life span : The development and validation of the Death Attitude Profile ( DAP ) . Omega : Journal of Death and Dying , 18 : 113 – 128 . Goodnough , A . 2002 . More applicants answer the call for teaching jobs . New York Times , February 11 : 1 . Goodstein , J . 1995 . Employer involvement in eldercare : An organizational adaptation perspective . Academy of Management Journal , 38 : 1657 – 1671 . Grant , A . M . 2007 . Relational job design and the motivation to make a prosocial difference . Academy of Manage - ment Review , 32 : 393 – 417 . Grant , A . M . 2008 . Does intrinsic motivation fuel the prosocial fire ? Motivational synergy in predicting persistence , performance , and productivity . Journal of Applied Psy - chology , 93 : 48 – 58 . Grant , A . M . , & Ashford , S . J . 2008 . The dynamics of proactiv - ity at work . Research in Organizational Behavior , 28 : 3 – 34 . Grant , A . M . , & Wall , T . D . In press . The neglected science and art of quasi - experimentation : Why - to , when - to , and how - to advice for organizational researchers . Organiza - tional Research Methods , Greenberg , D . N . , Clair , J . A . , & MacLean , T . L . 2007 . Enacting the role of management professor : Lessons from Athena , Prometheus , and Asclepius . Academy of Management Learning & Education , 6 : 439 – 457 . Greenberg , J . , Koole , S . L . , & Pyszczynski , T . ( Eds . ) . 2004 . Handbook of experimental existential psychology . New York : Guilford Press . Greenberg , J . , Solomon , S . , & Pyszczynski , T . 1997 . Terror management theory of self - esteem and cultural world - views : Empirical assessments and conceptual refine - ments . Advances in Experimental Social Psychology , 29 : 61 – 139 . Greller , M . M . , & Simpson , P . 1999 . In search of late career : A review of contemporary social science research appli - cable to the understanding of late career . Human Re - source Management Review , 9 : 309 – 347 . Hackman , J . R . , & Oldham , G . R . 1980 . Work redesign . Read - ing , MA : Addison - Wesley . Haidt , J . 2001 . The emotional dog and its rational tail : A social intuitionist approach to moral judgment . Psycho - logical Review , 108 : 814 – 834 . Hansson , R . O . , DeKoekkoek , P . D . , Neece , W . M . , & Patterson , D . W . 1997 . Successful aging at work . Annual review , 1992 – 1996 : The older worker and transitions to retire - ment . Journal of Vocational Behavior , 51 : 202 – 233 . Harrison , D . A . , Newman , D . A . , & Roth , P . L . 2006 . How important are job attitudes ? Meta - analytic comparisons of integrative behavioral outcomes and time sequences . Academy of Management Journal , 49 : 305 – 325 . Heine , S . J . , Proulx , T . , & Vohs , K . D . 2006 . Meaning mainte - nance model : On the coherence of human motivations . Personality and Social Psychology Review , 10 : 88 – 110 . Higgins , E . T . 1996 . Knowledge activation : Accessibility , ap - plicability , and salience . In E . T . Higgins & A . W . Kruglanski ( Eds . ) , Social psychology : Handbook of basic principles : 133 – 168 . New York : Guilford Press . Hobbes , T . 1950 . ( First published in 1651 . ) Leviathan . New York : Dutton . Hobfoll , S . E . 2002 . Social and psychological resources and adaptation . Review of General Psychology , 6 : 307 – 324 . Hofmann , D . A . , & Stetzer , A . 1998 . The role of safety climate and communication in accident interpretation : Implica - tions for learning from negative events . Academy of Management Journal , 41 : 644 – 657 . Ingram , P . , & Simons , T . 1995 . Institutional and resource dependence determinants of responsiveness to work - family issues . Academy of Management Journal , 38 : 1466 – 1482 . Jermier , J . M . , Gaines , J . , & McIntosh , N . J . 1989 . Reactions to physically dangerous work : A conceptual and empirical analysis . Journal of Organizational Behavior , 10 : 15 – 33 . Jobs , S . 2005 . Stanford commencement address . http : / / news . stanford . edu / news / 2005 / june15 / jobs - 061505 . html , accessed December 29 , 2007 . Johns , G . 2006 . The essential impact of context on organiza - tional behavior . Academy of Management Review , 31 : 386 – 408 . Joireman , J . , & Duell , B . 2005 . Mother Teresa versus Ebenezer Scrooge : Mortality salience leads proselfs to endorse self - transcendent values ( unless proselfs are reas - sured ) . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 31 : 307 – 320 . 2009 619 Grant and Wade - Benzoni Jonas , E . , Schimel , J . , Greenberg , J . , & Pyszczynski , T . 2002 . The Scrooge effect : Evidence that mortality salience in - creases prosocial attitudes and behavior . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 28 : 1342 – 1353 . Kahneman , D . , Krueger , A . B . , Schkade , D . A . , Schwarz , N . , & Stone , A . A . 2004 . A survey method for characterizing daily life experience : The day reconstruction method . Science , 306 : 1776 – 1780 . Kanfer , R . , & Ackerman , P . L . 2004 . Aging , adult development , and work motivation . Academy of Management Review , 29 : 440 – 458 . Kasser , T . , & Sheldon , K . M . 2000 . Of wealth and death : Materialism , mortality salience , and consumption be - havior . Psychological Science , 11 : 348 – 351 . Katzell , R . A . , & Thompson , D . E . 1990 . Work motivation : Theory and practice . American Psychologist , 45 : 144 – 153 . Keyes , C . L . M . , & Ryff , C . D . 1998 . Generativity in adult lives : Social structural contours and quality of life conse - quences . In D . P . McAdams & E . de St . Aubin ( Eds . ) , Generativity and adult development : 227 – 263 . Washing - ton , DC : American Psychological Association . Kivima¨ki , M . , Vahtera , J . , Elovainio , M . , Lillrank , B . , & Kevin , M . V . 2002 . Death or illness of a family member , violence , interpersonal conflict , and financial difficulties as pre - dictors of sickness absence : Longitudinal cohort study on psychological and behavioral links . Psychosomatic Medicine , 64 : 817 – 825 . Koole , S . L . , Greenberg , J . , & Pyszczynski , T . 2006 . Introducing science to the psychology of the soul : Experimental ex - istential psychology . Current Directions in Psychologi - cal Science , 15 : 212 – 216 . Kotre , J . 1984 . Outliving the self : Generativity and the inter - pretation of lives . Baltimore : Johns Hopkins University Press . Ku¨bler - Ross , E . 1969 . On death and dying . New York : Simon and Schuster . Landau , M . J . , Solomon , S . , Greenberg , J . , Cohen , F . , Pysz - czynski , T . , Arndt , J . , Miller , C . H . , Ogilvie , D . M . , & Cook , A . 2004 . Deliver us from evil : The effects of mortality salience and reminders of 9 / 11 on support for President George W . Bush . Personality and Social Psychology Bul - letin , 30 : 1136 – 1150 . Larrick , R . P . 1993 . Motivational factors in decision theories : The role of self - perception . Psychological Bulletin , 113 : 440 – 450 . Leary , M . R . 2004 . The function of self - esteem in terror man - agement theory and sociometer theory : Comment on Pyszczynski et al . 2004 . Psychological Bulletin , 130 : 478 – 482 . Leary , M . R . 2007 . Motivational and emotional aspects of the self . Annual Review of Psychology , 58 : 317 – 344 . Liechty , D . ( Ed . ) . 2002 . Death and denial : Interdisciplinary perspectives on the legacy of Ernest Becker . Westport , CT : Praeger . Lykins , E . L . B . , Segerstrom , S . C . , Averill , A . J . , Evans , D . R . , & Kemeny , M . E . 2007 . Goal shifts following reminders of mortality : Reconciling posttraumatic growth and terror management theory . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 33 : 1088 – 1099 . Maxfield , M . , Pyszczynski , T . , Kluck , B . , Cox , C . R . , Green - berg , J . , Solomon , S . , & Weise , D . 2007 . Age - related dif - ferences in responses to thoughts of one’s own death : Mortality salience and judgments of moral transgres - sions . Psychology and Aging , 22 : 341 – 353 . McAdams , D . P . , & de St . Aubin , E . 1992 . A theory of gener - ativity and its assessment through self - report , behav - ioral acts , and narrative themes in autobiography . Jour - nal of Personality and Social Psychology , 62 : 1003 – 1015 . McAdams , D . P . , & de St . Aubin , E . 1998 . Generativity and adult development : How and why we care for the next generation . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . McAdams , D . P . , de St . Aubin , E . , & Logan , R . L . 1993 . Gener - ativity among young , midlife , and older adults . Psychol - ogy and Aging , 8 : 221 – 230 . McGregor , H . A . , Lieberman , J . D . , Greenberg , J . , Solomon , S . , Arndt , J . , Simon , L . , & Pyszczynski , T . 1998 . Terror man - agement and aggression : Evidence that mortality sa - lience motivates aggression against worldview - threat - ening others . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 74 : 590 – 605 . McGregor , I . , Gailliot , M . T . , Vasquez , N . A . , & Nash , K . A . 2007 . Ideological and personal zeal reactions to threat among people with high self - esteem : Motivated promo - tion focus . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 33 : 1587 – 1599 . McGregor , I . , & Marigold , D . C . 2003 . Defensive zeal and the uncertain self : What makes you so sure ? Journal of Per - sonality and Social Psychology , 85 : 838 – 852 . McGregor , I . , Zanna , M . P . , Holmes , J . G . , & Spencer , S . J . 2001 . Compensatory conviction in the face of personal uncer - tainty : Going to extremes and being oneself . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 80 : 472 – 488 . Metcalfe , J . , & Mischel , W . 1999 . A hot / cool - system analysis of delay of gratification : Dynamics of willpower . Psycho - logical Review , 106 : 3 – 19 . Midlarsky , E . , & Hannah , M . E . 1989 . The generous elderly : Naturalistic studies of donations across the life span . Psychology and Aging , 4 : 346 – 351 . Molinsky , A . , & Margolis , J . 2005 . Necessary evils and inter - personal sensitivity in organizations . Academy of Man - agement Review , 30 : 245 – 268 . Navarette , C . D . , & Fessler , D . M . T . 2005 . Normative bias and adaptive challenges : A relational approach to coali - tional psychology and a critique of terror management theory . Evolutionary Psychology , 3 : 297 – 325 . Ng , T . W . H . , & Feldman , D . C . 2008 . The relationship of age to ten dimensions of job performance . Journal of Applied Psychology , 93 : 392 – 423 . Olson , K . R . 2005 . Engagement and self - control : Superordi - nate dimensions of Big Five traits . Personality and Indi - vidual Differences , 38 : 1689 – 1700 . Palmer , C . E . 1983 . A note about paramedics’ strategies for 620 October Academy of Management Review dealing with death and dying . Journal of Occupational Psychology , 56 : 83 – 86 . Pearson , C . M . , & Clair , J . A . 1998 . Reframing crisis manage - ment . Academy of Management Review , 23 : 59 – 76 . Perrow , C . 1984 . Normal accidents : Living with high - risk technologies . New York : Basic Books . Peters , H . J . , Greenberg , J . , Williams , J . M . , & Schneider , N . R . 2005 . Applying terror management theory to perfor - mance : Can reminding individuals of their mortality increase strength output ? Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology , 27 : 111 – 116 . Peterson , B . E . , & Klohnen , E . C . 1995 . Realization of gener - ativity in two samples of women at midlife . Psychology and Aging , 10 : 20 – 29 . Peterson , B . E . , & Stewart , A . J . 1996 . Antecedents and con - texts of generativity motivation at midlife . Psychology and Aging , 11 : 21 – 33 . Phillips , D . P . , & Feldman , K . A . 1973 . A dip in deaths before ceremonial occasions : Some new relationships between social integration and mortality . American Sociological Review , 38 : 678 – 696 . Podolny , J . M . , Khurana , R . , & Hill - Popper , M . 2005 . Revisiting the meaning of leadership . Research in Organizational Behavior , 26 : 1 – 36 . Podsakoff , N . , LePine , J . A . , & LePine , M . A . 2007 . Differential challenge stressor - hindrance stressor relationships with job attitudes , turnover intentions , turnover , and withdrawal behavior : A meta - analysis . Journal of Ap - plied Psychology , 92 : 438 – 454 . Pomeroy , G . W . 2002 . WTC attack survivor graduates from tech school : Heads to Dover as physical therapy appren - tice . http : / / airforcemedicine . afms . mil / sg _ newswire / jun _ 02 / AmyTing . htm , accessed May 23 , 2008 . Pratt , M . G . & Ashforth , B . E . 2003 . Fostering meaningfulness in working and at work . In K . Cameron , J . E . Dutton , & R . E . Quinn ( Eds . ) , Positive organizational scholarship : Foundations of a new discipline : 308 – 327 . San Francisco : Berrett - Koehler . Pyszczynski , T . , Greenberg , J . , & Solomon , S . 1999 . A dual - process model of defense against conscious and uncon - scious death - related thoughts : An extension of terror management theory . Psychological Review , 106 : 835 – 845 . Pyszczynski , T . , Greenberg , J . , Solomon , S . , Arndt , J . , & Schimel , J . 2004 . Why do people need self - esteem ? A theoretical and empirical review . Psychological Bulle - tin , 130 : 435 – 468 . Pyszczynski , T . , Solomon , S . , & Greenberg , J . 2003 . In the wake of 9 / 11 : The psychology of terror . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . Reedy , P . C . , & Learmonth , M . 2008 . Death , organization , and identity . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Academy of Management , Anaheim , CA . Regehr , C . , Goldberg , G . , & Hughes , J . 2002 . Exposure to human tragedy , empathy , and trauma in ambulance paramedics . American Journal of Orthopsychiatry , 72 : 505 – 513 . Ring , K . 1984 . Heading toward Omega : In search of the mean - ing of the near - death experience . New York : Morrow . Ring , K . , & Elsaesser Valarino , E . 1998 . Lessons from the light : What we can learn from the near - death experience . New York : Plenum Press . Rioux , S . M . , & Penner , L . A . 2001 . The causes of organiza - tional citizenship behavior : A motivational analysis . Journal of Applied Psychology , 86 : 1306 – 1314 . Rothbard , N . P . , Phillips , K . W . , & Dumas , T . L . 2005 . Manag - ing multiple roles : Work - family policies and individu - als’ desires for segmentation . Organization Science , 16 : 243 – 258 . Russac , R . J . , Gatliff , C . , Reece , M . , & Spottswood , D . 2007 . Death anxiety across the adult years : An examination of age and gender effects . Death Studies , 31 : 549 – 561 . Ryan , R . M . , & Deci , E . L . 2004 . Avoiding death or engaging life as accounts of meaning and culture : Comment on Pyszczynski et al . 2004 . Psychological Bulletin , 130 : 473 – 477 . Rynes , S . L . , & Shapiro , D . L . 2005 . Public policy and the public interest : What if we mattered more ? Academy of Management Journal , 48 : 925 – 928 . Salgado , S . R . 2002 . Next door to disaster : How participant observation changed the observer . Journal of Manage - ment Inquiry , 11 : 221 – 229 . Sa´nchez , J . I . , Korbin , W . P . , & Viscarra , D . M . 1995 . Corporate support in the aftermath of a natural disaster : Effects on employee strains . Academy of Management Journal , 38 : 504 – 521 . Schwartz , B . 1986 . The battle for human nature : Science , morality , and modern life . New York : Norton . Schwartz , S . H . 1992 . Universals in the content and structure of values : Theoretical advances and empirical tests in 20 countries . Advances in Experimental Social Psychol - ogy , 25 : 1 – 65 . Schwarz , N . 1999 . Self - reports : How the questions shape the answers . American Psychologist , 54 : 93 – 105 . Sieden , L . S . 1989 . Buckminster Fuller’s universe : His life and work . Cambridge : Perseus . Sievers , B . 1986 . Beyond the surrogate of motivation . Orga - nization Studies , 7 : 335 – 351 . Sievers , B . 1993 . Work , death , and life itself : Essays on man - agement and organization . Berlin : de Gruyter . Simon , L . , Greenberg , J . , Harmon - Jones , E . , Solomon , S . , Pyszczynski , T . , & Arndt , J . 1997 . Terror management and cognitive - experiential self - theory : Evidence that terror management occurs in the experiential system . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 72 : 1132 – 1146 . Simonton , D . K . 1988 . Age and outstanding achievement : What do we know after a century of research ? Psycho - logical Bulletin , 104 : 251 – 267 . Simonton , D . K . 1989 . The swan - song phenomenon : Last - works effects for 172 classical composers . Psychology and Aging , 4 : 42 – 47 . Sims , J . , & Baumann , D . 1972 . The tornado threat : Coping styles in the North and South . Science , 176 : 1386 – 1392 . 2009 621 Grant and Wade - Benzoni Smith , D . 1988 . Firefighters : Their lives in their own words . New York : Doubleday . Solomon , R . C . ( Ed . ) . 2005 . Existentialism ( 2nd ed . ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Spector , P . E . , & Fox , S . 2002 . An emotion - centered model of voluntary work behavior : Some parallels between coun - terproductive work behavior and organizational citizen - ship behavior . Human Resource Management Review , 12 : 269 – 292 . Starbuck , W . H . 2002 . Guest editor’s introduction : Broken images of disaster . Journal of Management Inquiry , 11 : 213 – 220 . Statistics Canada . 2006 . Age composition of labour force , Canada , 1976 and 2004 . http : / / www . statcan . ca / english / freepub / 89 - 519 - XIE / 2006001 / charts / chart3 _ 2 _ 1 . htm , ac - cessed December 29 , 2007 . Staw , B . M . , Sandelands , L . E . , & Dutton , J . E . 1981 . Threat - rigidity effects in organizational behavior : A multilevel analysis . Administrative Science Quarterly , 26 : 501 – 524 . Stewart , A . J . , & Ostrove , J . M . 1998 . Women’s personality in middle age : Gender , history , and midcourse corrections . American Psychologist , 53 : 1185 – 1194 . Stewart , A . J . , Ostrove , J . M . , & Helson , R . 2001 . Middle aging in women : Patterns of personality change from the 30s to the 50s . Journal of Adult Development , 8 : 23 – 37 . Terkel , S . 1972 . Working . New York : Pantheon . Vaillant , G . E . , & Milofsky , E . 1980 . The natural history of male psychological health . IX : Empirical evidence for Erikson’s model of the life cycle . American Journal of Psychiatry , 137 : 1348 – 1359 . Vroom , V . H . 1964 . Work and motivation . New York : Wiley . Wade - Benzoni , K . A . 2006 . Legacies , immortality , and the future : The psychology of intergenerational altruism . In A . E . Tenbrunsel ( Ed . ) , Research on managing groups and teams . Volume 8 : Ethics in groups : 247 – 270 . Bingley , UK : Emerald Group . Warr , P . 2001 . Age and work behaviour : Physical attributes , cognitive abilities , knowledge , personality traits , and motives . International Review of Industrial and Organi - zational Psychology , 16 : 1 – 36 . Weick , K . E . , & Roberts , K . 1993 . Collective mind in organi - zations : Heedful interrelating on flight decks . Adminis - trative Science Quarterly , 38 : 357 – 381 . Weick , K . E . , Sutcliffe , K . M . , & Obstfeld , D . 2005 . Organizing and the process of sensemaking . Organization Science , 16 : 409 – 421 . Weiner , E . 2008 . The geography of bliss : One grump’s search for the happiest places in the world . New York : Twelve . Weiss , H . M . , & Cropanzano , R . 1996 . Affective events theory : A theoretical discussion of the structure , causes and consequences of affective experiences at work . Re - search in Organizational Behavior , 18 : 1 – 74 . Wenzlaff , R . M . , & Wegner , D . M . 2000 . Thought suppression . Annual Review of Psychology , 51 : 59 – 91 . Worrell , D . L . , Davidson , W . N . , Chandy , P . R . , & Garrison , S . L . 1986 . Management turnover through deaths of key executives : Effects on investor wealth . Academy of Man - agement Journal , 29 : 674 – 694 . Wrzesniewski , A . 2002 . “It’s not just a job” : Shifting meanings of work in the wake of 9 / 11 . Journal of Management Inquiry , 11 : 230 – 234 . Wrzesniewski , A . , & Dutton , J . E . 2001 . Crafting a job : Revi - sioning employees as active crafters of their work . Acad - emy of Management Review , 26 : 179 – 201 . Wrzesniewski , A . , Dutton , J . E . , & Debebe , G . 2003 . Interper - sonal sensemaking and the meaning of work . Research in Organizational Behavior , 25 : 93 – 135 . Wrzesniewski , A . , McCauley , C . R . , Rozin , P . , & Schwartz , B . 1997 . Jobs , careers , and callings : People’s relations to their work . Journal of Research in Personality , 31 : 21 – 33 . Yalom , I . 1980 . Existential psychotherapy . New York : Basic Books . Zaccaro , S . J . , & Stone , E . F . 1988 . Incremental validity of an empirically based measure of job characteristics . Jour - nal of Applied Psychology , 73 : 245 – 252 . Zajonc , R . B . 1980 . Feeling and thinking : Preferences need no inferences . American Psychologist , 35 : 151 – 175 . Adam M . Grant ( grantad @ wharton . upenn . edu ) is associate professor of management at The Wharton School , University of Pennsylvania . He received his Ph . D . from the University of Michigan . His research focuses on job design , work motivation , and prosocial and proactive behaviors . Kimberly A . Wade - Benzoni ( kbenzoni @ duke . edu ) is an associate professor of manage - ment and Center of Leadership and Ethics Scholar at the Fuqua School of Business , Duke University . She received her Ph . D . from the Kellogg School of Management , Northwestern University . Her research focuses on intergenerational behavior , ethics , social entrepreneurship , environmental issues , interrelationships between societal and organizational interests , and negotiation . 622 October Academy of Management Review