Review Understanding Living Clathrin - Coated Pits Joshua Z . Rappoport 1 , Sanford M . Simon 1 and Alexandre Benmerah 2 1 The Laboratory of Cellular Biophysics , The Rockefeller University , 1230 York Avenue , Box 304 , New York , New York 10021 , USA 2 Department of Infectious Diseases , Institut Cochin ( INSERM U567 , CNRS UMR 8104 , Universite ` Paris 5 ) , 27 rue du Faubourg St Jacques , 75014 Paris , France * Corresponding authors : A . Benmerah , benmerah @ cochin . inserm . fr ; S . Simon , Simon @ Rockefeller . edu Most knowledge of clathrin - mediated endocytosis has been gained by biochemical fractionation and in vitro assays . Recently , the study of endocytosis has extended into the living cell . The tracking of individual clathrin - coated pits and vesicles ( CCPs and CCVs ) has provided new insight into understanding the dynamic nature of CCPs . The use of total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy ( TIR - FM ) , also termed evanescent field micro - scopy , has enabled the direct observation of events occur - ring within a restricted area of the cell adjacent to and including the adherent plasma membrane . TIR - FM is now actively being pursued in the study of endocytic processes . The direct observation of CCP - associated proteins includ - ing clathrin itself , dynamin and , most recently , AP - 2 has considerably challenged old models , confirming some points but raising very interesting new questions . Key words : AP - 2 , clathrin - coated pits and vesicles , clathrin , endocytosis , evanescent field fluorescence microscopy , time - lapse , total internal reflection ( TIR ) Received 7 January 2004 , revised and accepted 25 February 2004 Since the original description of clathrin by Barbara Pearse ( 1 ) , biochemical assays have characterized many of the steps and participating proteins in the processes of coat formation , pit invagination , vesicle fission and uncoating . Multiple acces - sory and adaptor proteins have been characterized , as have novel protein – protein and protein - lipid binding domains and interactions between the endocytic apparatus and cytoskele - tal elements . Assays such as yeast - two - hybrid and coimmu - noprecipitation have permitted the identification of binding partners and the domains through which interactions occur . Additionally , in vitro analysis of purified coat components and accessory proteins has provided insight into the processes regulating clathrin lattice polymerization and lipid deforma - tion . More recently , the advent of Aequorea victoria green - fluorescent protein ( GFP ) has illuminated nearly all aspects of the living cell previously hidden to real - time analysis ( 2 ) . The purpose of this review is to describe and evaluate data gathered in studies of clathrin - coated pit and vesicle ( CCP and CCV , respectively ) formation in living cells , and to place this new information in the context of what was observed using other methods . The study of clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis and analysis of the relevant molecular machinery are rapidly emerging as a paradigm for the benefits of real - time live - cell imaging . A unifying model for CCP / CCV formation organized around the known functions of three historical actors , clathrin , the AP - 2 complex and dynamin , has been detailed in several recent review articles ( 3 – 5 ) . In this model , the clathrin adaptor complex AP - 2 plays a central role in CCP formation and function , being responsible for the assembly of clathrin triskelia onto the cytosolic leaflet of the plasma membrane and selection of cargo receptors that will be internalized by the forming vesicles . The formed pits progressively invagi - nate and are finally released into the cytosol as a free CCV , a step proposed to require the GTPase activity of dynamin ( Figure 1 ) . New partners of these historical actors have been added to this initial framework that interact with cargo , clathrin , dynamin and / or AP - 2 . These can be broadly sepa - rated into three categories : those containing EH protein – protein interaction domains ( Eps15 and Eps15R ) and those containing either ENTH ( epsin , Hip1 and Hip1R ) or ANTH ( AP180 , CALM ) phosphoinositide binding domains . Current data suggests that Eps15 , epsin and CALM are involved the recruitment of AP - 2 onto the plasma mem - brane ( 6 , 7 ) . Similarly , dynamin - interacting proteins includ - ing intersectin , amphiphysin and endophilin have been implicated in the targeting of dynamin to CCPs and as important cofactors in dynamin function in CCV formation . Amphiphysin and endophilin are believed to be involved in the invagination process and endophilin may play a direct role in the fission reaction through its lipid modifying activ - ity ( 6 , 8 ) . The ability of proteins to induce curvature in lipid bilayers in vitro has been demonstrated for epsin , amphi - physin , endophilin and dynamin , suggesting that the capa - city for function as an adaptor and in the processes of invagination , and potentially fission , are not mutually exclu - sive . Several CCP - associated proteins ( Intersectin , Hip1 and Hip1R , dynamin ) appear to play a role in regulating actin polymerization , which may be required for the last step of vesicle fission and / or to push the nascent CCV into the cytosol ( 7 , 9 ) . Following internalization , the uncoating reaction , which recycles clathrin coat components into the Traffic 2004 ; 5 : 327 – 337 Copyright # Blackwell Munksgaard 2004 Blackwell Munksgaard doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2004 . 00187 . x 327 cytosol , is thought to proceed rapidly in a process cata - lyzed by Hsc70 and auxilin ( 4 , 5 ) . Some models for clathrin - mediated endocytosis predict that CCPs form stochastically at the plasma membrane , requiring only a local concentration of PIP2 , which binds to AP - 2 , epsin and CALM , and a putative AP - 2 anchoring protein likely to correspond to synaptotagmin in neuronal cells . An alternate view , which will be pursued further below , holds that certain areas of the plasma membrane serve as nucleation sites for the iterative formation and internalization of nascent CCVs . This review covers the relatively recent use of techniques such as siRNA and fluorescence imaging that has allowed the study of clathrin - mediated endocytosis in living cells . In many cases the results are consistent with observations made from biochemical and in vitro assays . However , they have led to suggestions of alternative hypotheses to explain the prior observations . These results emphasize that our understand - ing of the process as a whole , as well as the particular role of each individual protein , still has many surprises in store for us . Functional Studies Using siRNA The respective roles of AP - 2 and clathrin in CCP / CCV formation were recently revisited using small interfering RNA to knock - down expression of the relevant proteins . The data obtained by two different groups clearly confirm a central role for AP - 2 in the assembly of CCPs at the plasma membrane ( 10 , 11 ) . Indeed , the almost complete knock - down of AP - 2 resulted in a drastic diminution of the number of CCPs ( < 10 % of control cells ) . These studies also confirmed that AP - 2 complexes are likely recruited before clathrin on the plasma membrane because AP - 2 shows similar punctate plasma membrane localization in the absence of clathrin . Other CCP markers such as epsin and CALM were similarly present on the membrane fol - lowing AP - 2 knock - down , suggesting that they are recruited prior to , or independently of , AP - 2 complexes . Finally , these studies revealed some interesting new observations regarding the respective involvement of AP - 2 in the internalization of different sets of receptors distin - guished by their tyrosine - based endocytic signal subtype . The overall internalization process was greatly impaired in clathrin - deficient cells , suggesting that clathrin assembly on preformed AP - 2 patches is required for vesicle for - mation . However , interesting differences were detected concerning the affects of AP - 2 knock - down on the internalization of different types of receptor – ligand pairs . Internalization of the transferrin receptor ( Tf - R ) and of a low - density lipoprotein receptor ( LDL - R ) chimera were both completely blocked in clathrin knock - down cells . In contrast , internalization of the LDL - R chimera was not Figure1 : Models for CCP / CCV assembly . Previously proposed model for CCP / CCV formation ( Top ) assumed that AP - 2 complexes are first recruited on the plasma - membrane , forming a nucleation site for further assembly of AP - 2 and clathrin ( 1 ) . Cargoes are then incorporated intheseformingCCPsthatprogressivelyinvaginate ( 2 , 3 ) toformafreeCCV ( 5 ) throughtheactionofdynaminandactinpolymerization ( 4 ) . Thislinear model in which each CCP will be transformed in a vesicle was recently challenged by studies that have followed the dynamic of CCP - associated proteinsinlivecellsbyclassicalorTIRtime - lapsedfluorescencemicroscopy . Fromthesestudiesanewmodelcouldbeproposedinwhichplasma membrane associated AP - 2 complexes form stable platforms for clathrin assembly and cargo selection . From these platforms , clathrin lattices and cargoes are transferred onto and into forming vesicles that rapidly move laterally and then move in towards the cytosol through actin polymerization . Rappoport et al . 328 Traffic 2004 ; 5 : 327 – 337 perturbed at all in AP - 2 depleted cells , whereas Tf - R was almost completely blocked . The hypotheses suggested by the authors of these studies contained several interesting points . First , AP - 2 is not required for the overall clathrin - dependent internalization pathway , suggesting the role of additional clathrin - dependent adaptors ( recently discussed in ( 12 ) ) . Second , it seems that the (cid:1) 10 % remaining CCPs still present in the absence of AP - 2 are able to form functional vesicles that are sufficient to support normal internalization of certain cargoes . This latter point suggests the existence of an AP - 2 - independent clathrin - dependent internalization pathway that would account for the internalization of receptors such as the LDL - R family and of others yet to be defined . The unexpected results of these siRNA studies suggest the existence of diverse , parallel , and possibly interconnected , clathrin - dependent internalization pathways . As discussed below , live cell imaging studies have begun to similarly suggest an apparent heterogeneity within the clathrin - decorated structures observable in the plasma membrane region under epifluorescence or TIR - FM microscopy . Following the Dynamics of Clathrin The first study reporting clathrin dynamics at the plasma membrane ( 13 ) challenged several points of the above - described model . In this study , a GFP - tagged clathrin - light chain was used to label clathrin triskelia ( Figure 2 ) . Initial con - trol experiments demonstrated that the GFP fusion efficiently associated with endogenous clathrin heavy chain showed an intracellular staining pattern identical to that of endogenous clathrinandthatexpressiondidnotperturbclathrin - dependent endocytosis of transferrin . Employing classical time - lapse fluorescence in areas of the cell devoid of significant out - of - focus fluorophore emission , Keen and colleagues were able to track plasma membrane - associated accumulation of the GFP chimera in real time . In these conditions , most of the CCPs were static and the dynamic ones ( 1 / 3 of total spots ) showed a half - life of20 – 80s depending on the cell line , values compatible with previous estimations ( see in ( 13 ) for details ) . The majority of the spots disappeared abruptly or moved laterally , arising from preexisting spots , and then disappeared . A minority of the spots was observed to move laterally on the plasma membrane without subsequent disappearance . Figure2 : Fluorescent - tagged CCP associated proteins . b 2 BD : b 2 - adaptin ear binding domain ; CC : coiled - coil ; EH : Eps15 homology ; ENTH : Epsin N - Terminal domain Homology ; PRD : Proline Rich Domain ; PTB : Phospho - Tyrosine Binding domain . Living Clathrin - Coated Pits Traffic 2004 ; 5 : 327 – 337 329 The rapid vanishing of plasma membrane associated clathrin spots ( CS ) was interpreted as the direct observation of CCV formation and transport deeper in the cytosol , leaving the focal plane , and / or loss of their clathrin coat ( uncoating reac - tion ) . The most striking result was that CCPs seemed to form in restricted areas of the plasma membrane since CS seemed to reappear preferentially in regions from which spots disappeared few seconds before . Similar observations were obtained following clathrin dynamics in dendrites , sug - gesting that CCV formation in these compartments may be similar to that in non - neuronal cells ( 14 ) . These results were really not expected from some of the different models for clathrin - mediated endocytosis and suggest that only some restricted regions of the plasma membrane are competent to form CCPs . To date , no convincing molecular explanation for this phenomenon has been provided , even if a role for actin cytoskeleton is invoked . Improving in Vivo Analysis Using TIR - FM There were two experimental limitations to this otherwise significant , seminal work . First , it was necessary to assume that clathrin spots that disappeared corresponded to events of endocytosis , but direct proof of this assertion is still lacking ( see below ) . Second , it could not resolve whether the fluorescent spots were actually associated with the plasma membrane or in the cytosol . It was not possible to distinguish between CCPs , CCVs , clathrin - coated regions of endosomes ( or endosomal - derived vesicles ) or TGN - derived CCVs ( Figure 3 ) . This specific problem has recently been reduced using the technique of TIR - FM . This microscopic methodology makes use of laser - based illumination that is restricted to the most basal volume of the sample ( typically cited as 50 – 150nm ) including the extracellular milieu between the coverslip , the adherent plasma membrane of the cell and a thin layer of adjacent cytosol ( 15 – 17 ) . Since the size of a CCV is (cid:1) 100nm , it should be possible to observe forming CCPs and CCVs . Indeed , as soon as the vesicles begin to move into the cell , their fluorescence should ‘blink out’ as they exit the evanescent field . However , given that the decay of the evanescent field is exponential , and not absolute , brighter objects deeper than the commonly cited d ( depth at which the field falls to 1 / e ( e is defined as the inverse natural log of 1 : ln ( e ) ¼ ( 1 ) ) ) can in fact be observed by TIR - FM . Interestingly , several studies have used TIR - FM to evaluate the behaviors associated with other endocytic structures within the evanescent field , including endosomes ( early , recycling and late ) and lysosomes ( 18 – 20 ) . That endosomes could be clearly observed by TIR - FM suggested that they could be responsible for some of the clathrin spots ( see below ) . Observing clathrin light - chain derived constructs ( labeled with either GFP and dsRed ) by TIR - FM has greatly improved the analysis of the behaviors of plasma membrane - associated clathrin by eliminating nearly all the intracellular ( e . g . trans - Golgi network ) clathrin - labeled structures . These studies have confirmed the results obtained by classical FM and the existence of three populations of clathrin spots , the static ( 70 – 80 % ) , the disappearing ( 10 – 20 % ) and the ones that move laterally parallel to the plane of the plasma mem - brane ( 2 – 8 % ) ( 20 – 22 ) . Furthermore , the use of combined classical and TIR - FM can allow the monitoring of CCVs as they disengage from the plasma membrane and move deeper into the cytosol , providing the opportunity to monitor endocytosis as well as uncoating ( 23 ) . Are Disappearing Spots Truly CCVs ? Formal proof that a CS that disappears is a nascent cargo - containing CCV is still lacking . One critical piece of evidence would be the identification of endocytic cargo inside disap - pearing clathrin puncta . Unfortunately , it is not as yet pos - sible to gain a great deal of insight into the process of endocytosis through the use of fluorescent ligands such as LDL or Tf in TIR - FM studies . This is because imaging while a ligand is in the extracellular milieu between the coverslip and the plasma membrane causes a very strong ‘background haze’ due to its location near the origin of the evanescent field . In addition , the use of fluorescent - tagged receptors has remained unsuccessful due to the presence of labeled protein both in post - Golgi exocytic vesicles in the TIR field , as well as in diffuse fluorescence in the plasma membrane . The ability to track fluorescent ligands and receptors would additionally allow the analysis of which receptors are tar - geted to preformed CCPs and which induce clathrin poly - merization de novo . This would help address the issue of heterogeneity within the process of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Newer technologies such as photo - activatable GFP ( 24 ) may help surmount these obstacles . In addi - tion , the imaging of fluorescent - tagged viruses by TIR - FM should be a useful tool in both the study of viral entry and in the elucidation of endocytic processes ( 25 ) . Finally , recent work by our lab and others has demonstrated the benefits of quantum dot labeling of proteins for use in live Figure3 : Clathrin coats potentially ‘visible’ by TIR - FM . The evanescent field allows the excitation of a 100 – 150nm regionadjacent to the coverslip that includes the plasma membrane and a thin layer of cytosol . Within this region could be theoretically observed CCPs , invaginated CCPs and plasma membrane - derived CCPs but also other organelle - derived CCVs ( AP - 1 positive ) and clathrin - coated areas on sortingendosomes ( Hrs positive ) . Rappoport et al . 330 Traffic 2004 ; 5 : 327 – 337 cell imaging studies , although the direct application of this technology to the study of endocytosis is really just begin - ning ( ( 26 ) and reviewed in ( 27 ) ) . Static colocalization of tagged clathrin in puncta with receptors ( e . g . Tf - R ) , ligands ( e . g . Alexa488 - Tf ) and other endocytic proteins ( e . g . AP - 2 ) provides circumstantial evi - dence that clathrin concentrations present in the TIR field represent stages in the life of a clathrin - coated endocytic vesicle . Simultaneous observation of clathrin together with other GFP - tagged markers ( dynamins , actin , and clathrin adaptor proteins , see below ) has provided better evidence that disappearing spots are CCVs . It was found that a dsRed - tagged version of clathrin - light chain was useful for these kinds of studies . This is of great benefit as in many cases dsRed induces inappropriate aggregation of tagged proteins . The ability to successfully express and image a red - tagged clathrin has permitted the simultan - eous imaging of other proteins tagged with GFP without fluorophore emission bleed - through becoming a major concern ( as it is with the simultaneous imaging of CFP and YFP ) . Whereas previous cellular analyses were limited to fixed cells imaged either by immunofluorescence or immuno - gold transmission electron microscopy , live cell imaging studies have allowed questions to be addressed on a molecular level , in real - time . The results of these dynamic colocalization studies have provided several interesting new observations regarding the spatial – temporal regula - tion of the machinery of endocytosis . For example , while the fluorescence associated with dynamin1 , the neuronal specific isoform , was shown to increase dramatically at the sites of clathrin spots just before they disappear ( 21 , 23 ) , the ubiquitously expressed isoform dynamin2 was shown to exactly follow clathrin ( 21 ) . Although the studies conducted to date on living cells cotransfected with dyna - min1 and clathrin have involved heterologous expression in non - neuronal cell lines , similar observations were made when dynamin1 - EGFP was imaged in stimulated PC12 neuro - endocrine cells ( 28 ) . The presence of dynamin at the sites of endocytosis was in agreement with the pro - posed models for dynamin function in CCV formation and the difference observed between the two isoforms may reflect differences in CCV formation in the brain vs . the rest of the body . In addition , actin accumulation was observed at clathrin spots while they were disappearing ( 23 ) , evidence in favor of models in which actin polymer - ization provides a force pushing the forming vesicle away from the plasma membrane . This hypothesis has been supported by the observation that in cells treated with Latrunculin , a drug that depolymerizes actin filaments , the number of disappearing CS decreases ( 14 , 29 ) . How - ever , both the microscopy and separate biochemical analy - ses suggest that the Latrunculin effect is not complete , rather only an (cid:1) 40 % decrease in the number of disappear - ing spots was observed ( 30 ) . Thus , as further discussed below , the potential direct and / or indirect roles for cyto - skeletal elements in clathrin - mediated endocytosis have yet to be fully elucidated . Other studies that inhibited clathrin spot internalization have provided further evidence that disappearing CS represent endocytosis . Depletion of cholesterol using methyl - b - cyclodextrin inhibited CCV formation and increased the proportion of flat CCPs ( 31 , 32 ) . The fact that the proportion of disappearing clathrin spots was drastically reduced in the same conditions ( 32 ) further suggest that they cor - respond to forming CCVs . Finally , a recent report where the FK506 binding domain was used in conjunction with dimeric FK506 ( FK1012 - A ) to functionally inhibit GFP - tagged clathrin light chain has demonstrated by TIR - FM and more conventional measures of endocytosis ( radio - iodinated ligand uptake ) that these methodologies represent suitable means to study endocytosis in living cells on a microscopic basis ( 29 ) . Thus , the use of live - cell imaging by TIR - FM has permitted a new perspective on the study of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Live Cell TIR - FM of AP - 2 One benefit of live - cell imaging is the ability to identify and then track individual puncta throughout their lifetimes in order to characterize differences among various popula - tions . In the proposed linear models of CCV formation , AP - 2 is present all along the CCV formation process . These models suggest that AP - 2 plays its adaptor function beginning with the early steps of CCP assembly and then is incorporated in the budding vesicle . The presence of AP - 2 in CCVs was mainly assumed on the basis that AP - 2 was always found coenriched with clathrin in CCV preparation from brain homogenates . However , recent studies have challenged this point . First , AP - 2 complexes were not strictly required for CCV formation in an in vitro assay following CCV formation from purified plasma membrane fragments ( 33 ) . Furthermore , siRNA experiments indi - cated that following reduction of AP - 2 , a proportion of CCPs ( (cid:1) 10 % ) are still present on the plasma membrane and efficient endocytosis of LDL still occurs ( see above ) . These results have been complemented by observations obtained through real - time imaging of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . We recently generated a GFP - tagged a - adaptin construct ( 34 ) and used a previously characterized GFP - tagged b 2 - adaptin ( 35 ) to investigate the dynamics of AP - 2 in live cells . The a - adaptin fusion was correctly targeted to CCPs upon transient transfection , colocalizing with endo - genous AP - 2 and clathrin at the plasma membrane . Its expression did not perturb the localization of a - adaptin ear domain binding proteins such as Eps15 , epsin and CALM , which were all found to colocalize with GFP - a - adaptin in plasma membrane - associated puncta . Expression of the construct did not perturb overall bulk clathrin - dependent endocytosis of Tf or LDL , as directly followed by uptake Living Clathrin - Coated Pits Traffic 2004 ; 5 : 327 – 337 331 experiments , or GFP - a - adaptin colocalized with endogen - ous cell surface Tf - Rs , suggesting that CCPs containing this fusion protein are still able to concentrate cargoes . Similar conclusions were obtained independently by Lois Greene and colleagues , who generated an a - adaptin construct with GFP appended to the carboxy terminal ear domain ( 36 ) . Additionally , Juergen Knoblich has reported that a - adaptin with GFP on the amino terminus localizes to Drosophila CCPs and is able to rescue a - adaptin - deficient flies ( personal communication ) . Although these results indicated that tagging a - adaptin with GFP is not deleterious to the function of the protein , as discussed below , the potential for effects of overexpression of exogenous proteins on endocytic processes is a continual concern to studies analyzing GFP - tagged proteins . Simultaneous dual color TIR - FM imaging performed fol - lowing dsRed - clathrin and GFP - a - adaptin showed that GFP - a - adaptin ( and therefore presumably the AP - 2 com - plex ) was present in most , but not all , plasma membrane - associated clathrin puncta ( Figure 4 ) . However , somewhat surprisingly , GFP - a - adaptin was clearly excluded from both disappearing and laterally mobile CS , while being present in nearly all static CS . Furthermore , these observations were verified in experiments analyzing cells expressing dsRed - clathrin and b 2 - adaptin - GFP ( 34 ) and most recently in our lab using the a - adaptin - GFP construct generated by L . Greene and colleagues ( unpublished results , Figure 5 ) . The absence of GFP - tagged a - adaptin markers for AP - 2 from laterally moving CS was also confirmed following a currently uncharacterized a - adaptin construct with GFP appended to the ear domain ( 20 ) . However , in this study it was claimed that a - adaptin - GFP is present in disappear - ing CS . The reasons for this apparent discrepancy remain to be found ( e . g . cell lines , constructs , expression para - meters ) ( see Remaining Controls below ) . The observation that AP - 2 is absent from disappearing CS has led to a new hypothesis for the overall process of CCV formation . These data suggest that , contrary to predic - tions , AP - 2 complexes may be absent from CCVs and may actually form stable platforms at the plasma mem - brane that serve to coordinate the assembly of clathrin lattices and accumulation of cargoes into the budding vesicles ( Figure 1 ) . The observation that AP - 2 can be released from clathrin coats independently of clathrin itself ( 37 ) similarly suggests that clathrin and AP - 2 are not inexorably linked spatially and temporally . The model Figure4 : Imaging clathrin and AP - 2 in living cells . HeLa cells were transfected with dsRed - clathrin and GFP - a - adaptin and observed by TIR - FM . Arrows point to clathrin spots that are devoid of AP - 2 . Stereoview of a clathrin - coated area of the plasma membrane of unroofed fibroblasts showing partial budding of flat clathrin lattice ( kind gift of J . Heuser , see [ 38 ] for details ) . The bottom image can be viewed in 3 - D using red / blue anaglyph glasses . Rappoport et al . 332 Traffic 2004 ; 5 : 327 – 337 presented in Figure 1 fits with data showing that disappear - ing clathrin spots may emerge from static clathrin / AP - 2 puncta at some point before internalization ( 13 ) . Add - itionally , this model is consistent with the classical electron microscopy images obtained by J . Heuser ( Figure 4 ) show - ing that budding vesicles often emerge from the periphery of flat clathrin lattices ( ( 38 ) , and personal communication ) . A conclusion that the disappearing population of clathrin spots does not contain AP - 2 immediately prior to interna - lization implies the active and static clathrin populations may represent separate entities . Finally , in the case of cargo , the fact that activated GPCR / b - arrestin complexes are recruited to static preexisting CS ( 39 , 40 ) suggests that at least in this case they can correspond to preexisting platforms for cargo selection . Although these latter steps would proceed by an unknown mechanism , they bear some resemblance to sorting events in endosomes mediated by Hrs - dependent endo - somal flat clathrin - coats , also called bilayered clathrin - coats ( reviewed in ( 41 ) ) . It has been shown that activated growth factor receptors are specifically accumulated within the bilayered clathrin coats before being transferred into vesicles that bud inward from the endosomal lumen ( Figure 3 ) . The mechanisms responsible for the transfer of the cargo to the nascent vesicle could be similar in these two very different events , topologically speaking . The parallel between them is also striking , concerning the formation of the vesicles ; it has been observed that vesicles budding inside the endosomal lumen emerge at the periphery of the flat clathrin coat ( 42 – 44 ) . How can these data be reconciled with the enrichment of AP - 2 in CCV preparation ? Most of the AP - 2 found in CCV preparation could be due to broken CCPs and / or artificially assembled clathrin cages . Finally , the forming of stable platforms at the plasma membrane by AP - 2 complexes could provide a plausible molecular clue to how clathrin spots appear to form in restricted areas of the plasma membrane ( 13 ) . However , the term ‘stable’ only accounts for the overall structure , i . e . a clathrin - coated region of the plasma membrane , not for individual molecules since FRAP ( Fluorescence Recovery After Photobleaching ) stud - ies showed that plasma membrane - associated AP - 2 and clathrin both rapidly exchange with cytosolic pools ( 36 , 45 ) . These latter very interesting results suggest that CCPs are stable overall structures undergoing constant remodeling . They also have interesting consequences for the mechan - ism of the uncoating reaction ( see discussion in ( 45 ) for details ) . Alternatively , it is possible that only the GFP - fusion proteins of a - adaptin are excluded from the nascent clathrin - coated vesicle . If AP - 2 is excluded , are there alternative adaptor ( s ) for active clathrin spots ? What links clathrin lattices to the receptors and cell adhesion molecules present in the vesicle Figure5 : AP - 2 is absent from disappearing and LM - CS . HeLa cells were transiently transfected with dsRed - clathrin and a - adaptin - GFP constructs and observed by TIR - FM 40h later . Spots # 1 and 2 denote disappearing and laterally mobile CS , respectively . Living Clathrin - Coated Pits Traffic 2004 ; 5 : 327 – 337 333 membrane ? A number of the recently identified accessory proteins are potential candidates since they are able to bind both phospholipids and clathrin , a prerequisite for adaptor function . This list includes epsin , CALM , amphiphysin , Hip1R , ARH and Dab2 . Hip1R was already shown to follow clathrin and disappear in the same time ( 46 ) . The presence of Hip1R , as well as dab2 and ARH , in disappearing CS has been recently confirmed using TIR - FM ( 20 ) . In that context , it will also be interesting to follow Eps15 and Eps15R that only bind AP - 2 and not clathrin ( 47 – 49 ) , as , according to our hypotheses , these two should be only present in static spots . Laterally Moving Spots ? Another advantage of sensitive techniques such as TIR - FM that permit the analysis of individual events , structures and potentially molecules is the ability to focus on minority populations . The benefits of this were recently demon - strated by the characterization of laterally motile clathrin spots ( LM - CS ) . Although the population of spots observed to move laterally parallel to the plasma membrane repre - sents the minority ( 2 – 8 % depending on the cell type ) of CS observed by TIR - FM , three independent analyses have con - firmed their existence and frequency ( 13 , 20 , 22 ) . These spots often seem to originate from preexisting static CS , where they form as relatively dimmer concentrations that move quite fast in linear trajectories often toward another preexisting static CS . The linear trajectories ( (cid:1) 2 . 5 m m ) and the speed ( 0 . 5 – 1 m m / s ) of these motile spots are compatible with their movement along microtubules . Both simulta - neous imaging with microtubule markers and the complete elimination of this population of CS by nocodazole treat - ment confirmed this hypothesis ( 22 ) . What do these LM - CS correspond to ? These structures could correspond to the microtubule - dependent transport of pre - formed flat clathrin lattices from one CCP to another and / or nascent CCVs moving along microtubules prior to uncoating . But plasma membrane - associated clathrin adaptors such as AP - 2 , ARH , dab2 and Hip1R were not found in the LM - CS , suggesting that they are not derived from plasma membrane CCPs ( 20 , 34 ) . Finally , they could correspond to clathrin - coated buds on endosomes localized very close to the plasma membrane ( Figure 3 ) . Indeed , the movement of LM - CS along microtubules ( 22 ) is in agreement with their endosomal origin since microtubules are involved in the movement and fusion of these organelles in vivo ( 50 ) . Several different types of clathrin coats have been characterized on both early and late endosomes with AP - 1 ( 51 ) , AP - 3 ( 52 ) and Hrs as adaptors ( 53 ) . Since both early and late endosomes could be observed by TIR - FM ( 18 – 20 ) , each of these coats could then account for a proportion or for all of the observed LM - CS . One striking observation is that when b 2 - adaptin GFP con - struct is expressed at very high levels , it can localize to LM - CS ( ( 20 ) and our unpublished observations ) . These results were quite surprising since GFP - tagged a - adaptin constructs were clearly excluded from this population of CS ( 20 , 34 ) . However , as overexpressed b 2 - adaptin was shown to be misincorporated into AP - 1 complexes ( 54 , 55 ) , it was suggested that LM - CS do correspond to AP - 1 - containing endosomal clathrin - coated buds ( 20 ) . However , direct evidence to confirm this hypothesis is still lacking . Arf inhibition with brefeldin A treatment does not abolish LM - CS ( manuscript in preparation ) , which suggests that even if some do correspond to AP - 1 clathrin coats on endosomes , they do not behave as their TGN counter - parts . It may be that the LM - CS are of heterogeneous origins . Indeed , our preliminary results using a well - characterized GFP - tagged Hrs construct ( 43 ) indicate that only (cid:1) 1 / 3 of LM - CS correspond to bilayered clathrin - coated endosomes ( manuscript in preparation ) . Are all LM - CS of endosomal origin ? Can some be ascribed to other compartments such as TGN - derived transport intermediates ? At present , a systematic analysis of the identity of LM - CS is lacking . Even if all of the sources of LM - CS in the plasma membrane region are inventoried , there is no guarantee we will understand their function ( s ) . If some of these structures do correspond to endosomes , this would still not necessarily explain the apparent fusion and separation of mobile and static spots . An alternate hypothesis is that microtubules immediately adjacent to the plasma membrane connect CCPs and therefore forming CCVs to clathrin - coated early endosomes . Although this hypothesis is hard to envisage and it will be even harder to directly test . Remaining Controls One major limitation to this type of analysis is the potential effects of GFP tagging and / or overexpression . It has been shown that overexpression of some endocytic proteins actually reduces endocytosis rates ( 56 , 57 ) . Additionally , it has recently been observed that cells expressing very high amounts of b 2 - adaptin demonstrate mislocalization and misincorporation in AP - 1 complexes ( see above ) . In the future , it will be useful to demonstrate that all the fusion proteins employed in these studies fully retain wild type functionality . This is a critical point for the a - adaptin chimeras . They are part of a multimeric protein complex , and different constructs have seemed to generate differ - ent results . In this precise case , the generation of stable cell lines would be required to check very important points such as the impact of fusing the GFP at the N - terminus on PIP2 binding ( 58 ) and the impact of fusing the GFP on the ear domain on the binding of all the accessory proteins such as Eps15 , epsin or CALM ( 59 ) . The use of stable cell lines would also allow more detailed analysis of the result - ing AP - 2 complexes . This may allow the determination of Rappoport et al . 334 Traffic 2004 ; 5 : 327 – 337 whether GFP - tagged a - adaptin chimeras effectively incorp - orate into complexes , replacing a proportion or all of the endogenous protein . The use of well - characterized stable cell lines would defi - nitively eliminate the possibility that upon transient over - expression , monomers of GFP - tagged adaptin constructs could exist , even temporarily , outside of AP - 2 complexes , therefore being responsible for some of the observed results . Indeed , in the case of greatly overexpressed GFP - b 2 , this could explain its colocalization with all clathrin spots , since b 2 - adaptin does contain an efficient clathrin - binding site ( 60 ) that could account for its general incorp - oration in all clathrin coats ( static , disappearing , laterally moving CS ) . In addition , stable cell lines could be useful for complementation experiments after knock - down of endogenous a - adaptin using siRNA . However , the high degree of conservation among mammalian a - adaptins will make it difficult . Another possibility will be to complement Drosophila and / or Dictyostelium strains containing muta - tions or deletion in the corresponding genes . Finally , it is important to mention a few caveats regarding the acquisition and analysis of live cell microscopy data . As in any case where multiple fluorophores are simultan - eously visualized , one must take great care to ensure that bleed - through from the emission of one fluorophore into the recording channel for the second fluorophore does not produce misleading results . Each of the organic fluoro - phores emits over a broad region of the spectra and it is difficult to resolve them clearly . There is the further com - plication from fluorophores , such as dsRed , which mature over time , changing their emission spectra . For example , early in the expression of a dsRed tagged protein , much of the emission will be observed in the GFP channel . Add - itionally , the intertwined issues of exposure time , frame rate and illumination are of great concern to all who would image apparent acts of endocytosis . On one hand , one must make sure that enough excitation and emission is employed so that streams of data are temporally robust enough for analysis of the dynamic behaviors of individual puncta ( in our experience 100 – 300ms per frame in stream - ing mode ) . Most importantly , though , photobleaching will occur and it is imperative that the investigator remain constantly vigilant to the potential pitfall of misscoring events of internalization . Conclusions The dynamic analysis of CCP - associated proteins will be a very useful tool to develop for better understanding the rules of CCP and CCV formation , as it has been the case for many complex cellular processes ( reviewed in ( 61 ) ) . The initial studies have already confirmed some points of existing models ( e . g . the involvement of dynamin in vesi - cle formation ) . They have also brought some definitive answers to old questions , such as the demonstration that activated receptors are recruited to preexisting CCPs , and have raised some very interesting new ones , such as the origins of the apparent heterogeneity within the popula - tions of clathrin - positive structures in close proximity to the plasma membrane . These recent results demonstrate the power of direct observation and confirm that experi - ments performed on live cells can provide unexpected clues to better understand how things work in vivo . Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank J . Heuser for his helpful comments , point of view onCCP / CCV formationandkindgiftofthewonderfulpictureinFigure4 ; S . Schmid for very helpful comments on the manuscript ; J . Knoblich for sharing unpublished observations ; all the different people who generously donated the various GFP - and dsRed - tagged constructs without which our studies would not have been possible ; and the different reviewers of our previous articles , whose comments greatly helped us in the organization of this manuscript . The work in the laboratories of the authors was supported by grants from ‘Association de Recherche contre le Cancer’ ( No . 47 – 27 ( A . B ) ) , NSF BES - 0110070 and BES - 0119468 ( S . M . S ) , and NIH 1 F32G069200 - 01 ( J . Z . R ) . References 1 . Pearse BM . Clathrin : a unique protein associated with intracellular transfer of membrane by coated vesicles . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1976 ; 73 : 1255 – 1259 . 2 . Lippincott - Schwartz J , Patterson GH . Development and use of fluor - escent protein markers in living cells . Science 2003 ; 300 : 87 – 91 . 3 . Kirchhausen T . Adaptors for clathrin - mediated traffic . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 1999 ; 15 : 705 – 732 . 4 . Brodsky FM , Chen CY , Knuehl C , Towler MC . Wakeham DE . Biological basket weaving : formation and function of clathrin - coated vesicles . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2001 ; 17 : 517 – 568 . 5 . Conner SD , Schmid SL . Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature 2003 ; 422 : 37 – 44 . 6 . Slepnev VI , De Camilli P . Accessory factors in clathrin - dependent synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Nat Rev Neurosci 2000 ; 1 : 161 – 172 . 7 . Legendre - Guillemin V , Wasiak S , Hussain NK , Angers A , McPherson PS . ENTH / ANTH proteins and clathrin - mediated membrane budding . J Cell Sci 2004 ; 117 : 9 – 18 . 8 . Takei K , Haucke V . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis : membrane factors pull the trigger . Trends Cell Biol 2001 ; 11 : 385 – 391 . 9 . Schafer DA . Coupling actin dynamics and membrane dynamics during endocytosis . Curr Opin Cell Biol 2002 ; 14 : 76 – 81 . 10 . Motley A , Bright NA , Seaman MN , Robinson MS . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis in AP - 2 - depleted cells . J Cell Biol 2003 ; 162 : 909 – 918 . 11 . Hinrichsen L , Harborth J , Andrees L , Weber K , Ungewickell EJ . Effect of clathrin heavy chain - and alpha - adaptin - specific small inhibitory RNAs on endocytic accessory proteins and receptor trafficking in HeLa cells . J Biol Chem 2003 ; 278 : 45160 – 45170 . 12 . Traub LM . Sorting it out : AP - 2 and alternate clathrin adaptors in endo - cytic cargo selection . J Cell Biol 2003 ; 163 : 203 – 208 . 13 . Gaidarov I , Santini F , Warren RA , Keen JH . Spatial control of coated - pit dynamics in living cells . Nat Cell Biol 1999 ; 1 : 1 – 7 . 14 . Blanpied TA , Scott DB , Ehlers MD . Dynamics and regulation of clathrin coats at specialized endocytic zones of dendrites and spines . Neuron 2002 ; 36 : 435 – 449 . Living Clathrin - Coated Pits Traffic 2004 ; 5 : 327 – 337 335 15 . Axelrod D . Total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy in cell biology . Traffic 2001 ; 2 : 764 – 774 . 16 . Steyer JA , Almers W . A real - time view of life within 100 nm of the plasma membrane . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2001 ; 2 : 268 – 275 . 17 . Toomre D , Manstein DJ . Lighting up the cell surface with evanescent wave microscopy . Trends Cell Biol 2001 ; 11 : 298 – 303 . 18 . Jaiswal JK , Andrews NW , Simon SM . Membrane proximal lysosomes are the major vesicles responsible for calcium - dependent exocytosis in nonsecretory cells . J Cell Biol 2002 ; 159 : 625 – 635 . 19 . Lampson MA , Schmoranzer J , Zeigerer A , Simon SM , McGraw TE . Insulin - regulated release from the endosomal recycling compartment is regulated by budding of specialized vesicles . Mol Biol Cell 2001 ; 12 : 3489 – 3501 . 20 . Keyel PA , Watkins SC , Traub LM . Endocytic adaptor molecules reveal an endosomal population of clathrin by total internal reflection fluores - cence microscopy . J Biol Chem 2004 : in press . 21 . Rappoport JZ , Simon SM . Real - time analysis of clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis during cell migration . J Cell Sci 2003 ; 116 : 847 – 855 . 22 . Rappoport JZ , Taha BW , Simon SM . Movement of plasma - membrane - associated clathrin spots along the microtubule cytoskeleton . Traffic 2003 ; 4 : 460 – 467 . 23 . Merrifield CJ , Feldman ME , Wan L , Almers W . Imaging actin and dynamin recruitment during invagination of single clathrin - coated pits . Nat Cell Biol 2002 ; 4 : 691 – 698 . 24 . Patterson GH , Lippincott - Schwartz J . A photoactivatable GFP for selective photolabeling of proteins and cells . Science 2002 ; 297 : 1873 – 1877 . 25 . Lakadamyali M , Rust MJ , Babcock HP , Zhuang X . Visualizing infection of individual influenza viruses . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003 ; 100 : 9280 – 9285 . 26 . Lidke DS , Nagy P , Heintzmann R , Arndt - Jovin DJ , Post JN , Grecco HE , Jares - Erijman EA , Jovin TM . Quantum dot ligands provide new insights into erbB / HER receptor - mediated signal transduction . Nat Biotechnol 2004 ; 22 : 198 – 203 . 27 . Jaiswal JK , Mattoussi H , Mauro JM , Simon SM . Long - term multiple color imaging of live cells using quantum dot bioconjugates . Nat Bio - technol 2003 ; 21 : 47 – 51 . 28 . Tsuboi T , Terakawa S , Scalettar BA , Fantus C , Roder J , Jeromin A . Sweeping model of dynamin activity . Visualization of coupling between exocytosis and endocytosis under an evanescent wave microscope with green fluorescent proteins . J Biol Chem 2002 ; 277 : 15957 – 15961 . 29 . Moskowitz HS , Heuser J , McGraw TE , Ryan TA . Targeted chemical disruption of clathrin function in living cells . Mol Biol Cell 2003 ; 14 : 4437 – 4447 . 30 . Fujimoto LM , Roth R , Heuser JE , Schmid SL . Actin assembly plays a variable , but not obligatory role in receptor - mediated endocytosis in mammalian cells . Traffic 2000 ; 1 : 161 – 171 . 31 . Rodal SK , Skretting G , Garred O , Vilhardt F , van Deurs B , Sandvig K . Extraction of cholesterol with methyl - beta - cyclodextrin perturbs formation of clathrin - coated endocytic vesicles . Mol Biol Cell 1999 ; 10 : 961 – 974 . 32 . Subtil A , Gaidarov I , Kobylarz K , Lampson MA , Keen JH , McGraw TE . Acute cholesterol depletion inhibits clathrin - coated pit budding . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999 ; 96 : 6775 – 6780 . 33 . Miwako I , Schroter T , Schmid SL . Clathrin - and dynamin - dependent coated vesicle formation from isolated plasma membranes . Traffic 2003 ; 4 : 376 – 389 . 34 . Rappoport JZ , Taha BW , Lemeer S , Benmerah A , Simon SM . The AP - 2 complex is excluded from the dynamic population of plasma membrane associated clathrin . J Biol Chem 2003 ; 278 : 47357 – 47360 . 35 . Laporte SA , Oakley RH , Zhang J , Holt JA , Ferguson SS , Caron MG , Barak LS . The beta2 - adrenergic receptor / betaarrestin complex recruits the clathrin adaptor AP - 2 during endocytosis . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999 ; 96 : 3712 – 3717 . 36 . Wu X , Zhao X , Puertollano R , Bonifacino JS , Eisenberg E , Greene LE . Adaptor and clathrin exchange at the plasma membrane and trans - Golgi network . Mol Biol Cell 2003 ; 14 : 516 – 528 . 37 . Hannan LA , Newmyer SL , Schmid SL . ATP - and cytosol - dependent release of adaptor proteins from clathrin - coated vesicles : a dual role for Hsc70 . Mol Biol Cell 1998 ; 9 : 2217 – 2229 . 38 . Heuser JE , Anderson RG . Hypertonic media inhibit receptor - mediated endocytosis by blocking clathrin - coated pit formation . J Cell Biol 1989 ; 108 : 389 – 400 . 39 . Scott MG , Benmerah A , Muntaner O , Marullo S . Recruitment of activated G protein - coupled receptors to pre - existing clathrin - coated pits in living cells . J Biol Chem 2002 ; 277 : 3552 – 3559 . 40 . Santini F , Gaidarov I , Keen JH . G protein - coupled receptor / arrestin3 modulation of the endocytic machinery . J Cell Biol 2002 ; 156 : 665 – 676 . 41 . Clague MJ , Urbe S . Hrs function : viruses provide the clue . Trends Cell Biol 2003 ; 13 : 603 – 606 . 42 . Sachse M , Urbe S , Oorschot V , Strous GJ , Klumperman J . Bilayered clathrin coats on endosomal vacuoles are involved in protein sorting toward lysosomes . Mol Biol Cell 2002 ; 13 : 1313 – 1328 . 43 . Urbe S , Sachse M , Row PE , Preisinger C , Barr FA , Strous G , Klumperman J , Clague MJ . The UIM domain of Hrs couples receptor sorting to vesicle formation . J Cell Sci 2003 ; 116 : 4169 – 4179 . 44 . Murk JL , Humbel BM , Ziese U , Griffith JM , Posthuma G , Slot JW , Koster AJ , Verkleij AJ , Geuze HJ , Kleijmeer MJ . Endosomal compart - mentalization in three dimensions : implications for membrane fusion . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003 ; 100 : 13332 – 13337 . 45 . Wu X , Zhao X , Baylor L , Kaushal S , Eisenberg E , Greene LE . Clathrin exchange during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J Cell Biol 2001 ; 155 : 291 – 300 . 46 . Engqvist - Goldstein AE , Warren RA , Kessels MM , Keen JH , Heuser J , Drubin DG . The actin - binding protein Hip1R associates with clathrin during early stages of endocytosis and promotes clathrin assembly in vitro . J Cell Biol 2001 ; 154 : 1209 – 1223 . 47 . Benmerah A , Gagnon J , Begue B , Megarbane B , Dautry - Varsat A , Cerf - Bensussan N . The tyrosine kinase substrate eps15 is constitutively associated with the plasma membrane adaptor AP - 2 . J Cell Biol 1995 ; 131 : 1831 – 1838 . 48 . IannoloG , SalciniAE , GaidarovI , GoodmanOBJr , , BaulidaJ , CarpenterG , Pelicci PG , Di Fiore PP , Keen JH . Mapping of the molecular determinants involved in the interaction between eps15 and AP - 2 . Cancer Res 1997 ; 57 : 240 – 245 . 49 . Coda L , Salcini AE , Confalonieri S , Pelicci G , Sorkina T , Sorkin A , Pelicci PG , Di Fiore PP . Eps15R is a tyrosine kinase substrate with characteristics of a docking protein possibly involved in coated pits - mediated internalization . J Biol Chem 1998 ; 273 : 3003 – 3012 . 50 . Nielsen E , Severin F , Backer JM , Hyman AA , Zerial M . Rab5 regulates motility of early endosomes on microtubules . Nat Cell Biol 1999 ; 1 : 376 – 382 . 51 . Stoorvogel W , Oorschot V , Geuze HJ . A novel class of clathrin - coated vesicles budding from endosomes . J Cell Biol 1996 ; 132 : 21 – 33 . 52 . Dell’Angelica EC , Klumperman J , Stoorvogel W , Bonifacino JS . Association of the AP - 3 adaptor complex with clathrin . Science 1998 ; 280 : 431 – 434 . 53 . Raiborg C , Bache KG , Mehlum A , Stang E , Stenmark H . Hrs recruits clathrin to early endosomes . EMBO J 2001 ; 20 : 5008 – 5021 . 54 . Clairmont KB , Boll W , Ericsson M , Kirchhausen T . A role for the hinge / ear domain of the beta chains in the incorporation of AP complexes into clathrin - coated pits and coated vesicles . Cell Mol Life Sci 1997 ; 53 : 611 – 619 . 55 . Huang F , Jiang X , Sorkin A . Tyrosine phosphorylation of the beta2 subunit of clathrin adaptor complex AP - 2 reveals the role of a di - leucine motif in the epidermal growth factor receptor trafficking . J Biol Chem 2003 ; 278 : 43411 – 43417 . Rappoport et al . 336 Traffic 2004 ; 5 : 327 – 337 56 . Tebar F , Bohlander SK , Sorkin A . Clathrin assembly lymphoid myeloid leukemia ( CALM ) protein : localization in endocytic – coated pits , interac - tions with clathrin , and the impact of overexpression on clathrin - mediated traffic . Mol Biol Cell 1999 ; 10 : 2687 – 2702 . 57 . Ford MG , Mills IG , Peter BJ , Vallis Y , Praefcke GJ , Evans PR , McMahon HT . Curvature of clathrin - coated pits driven by epsin . Nature 2002 ; 419 : 361 – 366 . 58 . Gaidarov I , Keen JH . Phosphoinositide – AP - 2 interactions required for targeting to plasma membrane clathrin - coated pits . J Cell Biol 1999 ; 146 : 755 – 764 . 59 . Owen DJ , Vallis Y , Noble ME , Hunter JB , Dafforn TR , Evans PR , McMahon HT . A structural explanation for the binding of multiple ligands by the alpha - adaptin appendage domain . Cell 1999 ; 97 : 805 – 815 . 60 . Gallusser A , Kirchhausen T . The beta 1 and beta 2 subunits of the AP complexes are the clathrin coat assembly components . EMBO J 1993 ; 12 : 5237 – 5244 . 61 . Lippincott - Schwartz J , Altan - Bonnet N , Patterson GH . Photobleaching and photoactivation : following protein dynamics in living cells . Nat Cell Biol 2003 ; 5 ; S7 – S14 . Living Clathrin - Coated Pits Traffic 2004 ; 5 : 327 – 337 337