CHECk : A Tool to Inform and Encourage Ethical Practice in Participatory Design with Children Abstract When working with children in participatory design activities ethical questions arise that are not always considered in a standard ethics review . This paper highlights five challenges around the ethics of the value of design and the ethics of the children’s participation and presents a new tool , CHECk that deals with three of these challenges by virtue of two checklists that are designed to challenge researchers in CCI and HCI to critically consider the reasons for involving children in design projects and to examine how best to describe design activities in order that children can better consent to participate . Author Keywords Ethics , Children , Participatory Design ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous General Terms Design , Human Factors Copyright is held by the author / owner ( s ) . CHI 2013 Extended Abstracts , April 27 – May 2 , 2013 , Paris , France . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 1952 - 2 / 13 / 04 . Janet C Read ChiCI Group . UCLan Preston , PR1 2HE UK jcread @ uclan . ac . uk Matthew Horton ChiCI Group . UCLan Preston , PR1 2HE UK mplhorton @ uclan . ac . uk Gavin Sim ChiCI Group . UCLan Preston , PR1 2HE UK grsim @ uclan . ac . uk Peggy Gregory ChiCI Group . UCLan Preston , PR1 2HE UK ajgregory @ uclan . ac . uk Dan Fitton ChiCI Group . UCLan Preston , PR1 2HE UK dbfitton @ uclan . ac . uk Brendan Cassidy ChiCI Group . UCLan Preston , PR1 2HE UK bcassidy1 @ uclan . ac . uk Work - in - Progress : Evaluation and Design Methods CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 187 Introduction Ever since it was promoted by innovators in HCI [ 1 , 2 ] including children in the design of new technologies , either as informants or design partners has been highlighted as beneficial in order to better understand users , to gather design ideas and to test out new concepts . These design activities are much less research focused than similar work in psychology and sociology for example , and the ethical practices and ethical concerns around such design studies are not well served by traditional ethics approaches where the emphasis tends to be on selection of subjects and protection of personal data rather than , for example , on aspects like ownership of ideas . We take the definition of research ethics from [ 3 ] . This paper describes a tool that is used by the Child Computer Interaction ( ChiCI ) group at UCLan , UK to ensure that , in their work with children as informants and designers of technology , the children’s participation in design is reflectively motivated . Background The ChiCI group has been designing and evaluating technologies with children for around ten years [ 4 ] . In the earliest days the work was mainly about positioning children as testers of technologies . In these early studies ethics focused on concerns about gathering and storing personal data , the use of photographs , the use of logging equipment and inclusion / consent aspects . More recently much of the focus of the group has shifted towards greater child participation including design work with children and teenagers and longitudinal studies where the team repeatedly goes back to one group for information and confirmation of ideas [ 5 , 6 ] . Moving away from traditional ‘experimental research studies’ the members of the ChiCI group have begun to question the way children participate in design studies . In 2005 the group produced an early internal document that highlighted Access , Behaviour , Consent and Dissemination as being four core areas for ethical consideration and , in 2011 , an audit of practice against these headings highlighted that the group had not made an equal effort in all of these aspects and thus , the ethical procedures were considered ready for revision [ 7 ] . Real Project - Real Challenge The example used in this paper is of a study to design a fun tablet PC based serious game , to teach effective hygiene related hand - washing , for children living in an orphanage in Uganda in Africa . The challenge in considering ethics was to go beyond the statutory ethics requirements from the University and add another layer of ethical behavior that indicated a personal responsibility to do more than the minimum . The process began with a set of questions relating to the project in question ; these were : Q1 . The ethics of making a PC game for these children in Uganda , Africa , its point , or value of such a thing Q2 . The ethics of having the children in the UK participate in this project Q3 . Ethics around having the children create many ideas only for the design team to not use them all Q4 . Ethics about whether or not the children knew what would happen to their ideas and thus could consent to let us have them Q5 . Ethics about feedback and letting the children know what happened next Work - in - Progress : Evaluation and Design Methods CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 188 These questions suggested a set of five challenges for the revision of ethics to the extent that we were seeking a new code or tool that would help the research team to : C1 . Examine critically the appropriateness of the technical solution being proposed C2 . Examine to what extent the UK children could sensibly inform such a design C3 . Determine a fair method for using , and including , children’s ideas C4 . Ensure that children were fully aware of what the project was about and what their involvement was C5 . Determine an appropriate method for feedback to the children C1 and C2 were determined to be associated with the values surrounding the activity and these were considered to be important to be examined some time ahead of any design activity ; the others were more about the event . Examining Values Value centred design explains itself as ‘frontloaded ethics’ [ 8 , 9 ] and promotes an early look at the values that are incorporated in design . As written by Friedman [ 10 ] , ‘ Human values and ethical considerations no longer stand apart from the HCI community but are fundamentally part of our practice . This shift reflects , at least in part , the increasing impact and visibility that computer technologies have had on human lives’ . Whilst accepting that technology conveys and supports values , designers are also called to be ‘value conscious’ [ 11 ] and to deliberately clarify their ethical objectives in design by considering whose values are being considered . The IDC ( Interaction Design and Children ) community has begun to take on a discussion around values , albeit in a more techno - centric way with one example being a review paper that examines research values across several years of IDC research that concludes with a call for authors to be more explicit about the values that drive their work [ 12 ] . Central to value conscious and value centred design is the need to examine our own values – one of the core values driving IDC research is indeed the inclusion of children in design ( and research ) activities – the IDC community believes this is good practice , but very few studies examine the worth of participation to the participators [ 12 ] . CHECk1 CHECk1 is a value checklist for use prior to a design study . Six questions ask : 1 . What are we aiming to design and build ? 2 . Why ( this product ) ? 3 . What platform / technologies are we planning to use ? 4 . Why ( this platform / technology ) ? 5 . Which children will we design with ? 6 . Why ( with these children ) ? These questions challenge the designer to consider the appropriateness of the technical solution and the appropriateness of children being involved . The WHY questions are designed to generate two answers that look at the value to both the participants ( the children ) and the research / design team - the first of these we tag the ‘excuse for use’ - this is the ‘good’ or the ‘worthy’ answer and the intention is to frame this in a Work - in - Progress : Evaluation and Design Methods CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 189 positive sense ; the second WHY is about ourselves – the ‘honest version’ - that might typically describe the ‘guilty’ or rather ‘less altruistic’ explanation for the work . It is acknowledged that in an ideal world these two may be the same but typically life is less straightforward than that . In the specific case of the design for the children in the Ugandan orphanage , our answers are given here : Product = A serious game around effective washing of hands to provide a fun learning experience for children in a remote area of Uganda .  Why ? EXCUSE - it is critically important for children , especially in remote areas , to learn how to effectively wash their hands  Why ? HONEST – hand washing is easy for UK children to understand and can be broken up into a simple but fun learning activity Platform = Android tablets  Why ? EXCUSE - it will engage children ( this would be their first exposure to this technology ) and has low power needs nad can be taken to Uganda relatively easily  Why ? HONEST - we want to showcase the work of our technology group Children = UK schoolchildren  Why ? EXCUSE - children in the UK can offer clear insights that will be great for the overseas children and put fun aspects into the design and will learn and benefit from the experience  Why ? HONEST - we want to get a paper on the process of designing serious games with UK children Following this process , each of the values around the work would be considered , especially those exposed in the HONEST positions . One key requirement is that the HONEST and EXCUSE positions are not in conflict . On completing CHECk1 , the researchers were surprised at their own honesty but also at the extent to which they could come up with ‘excuses’ . The completion of the questions provoked debate and discussion , which was highly beneficial in understanding motivations for the work . Examining Participation C4 in the list of challenges ( and to some extent C3 and C5 ) highlighted participation . During a design activity , children need to know what they are doing so they can consent and participate appropriately , intellectual property and the use of the children’s ideas ( and the traceability of ideas in the event of there being some financial or other reward from the work ) needs explanation , and children should be instructed about how their contributions will be disseminated . Our understanding is that in design studies , children engage at a relatively high level of Hart’s ladder of participation [ 13 ] and thus are more social actors than simply informants . This encouraged us to take on ethical symmetry as an approach [ 14 ] which is where children are not considered as especially different to adults in terms of participation – rather that in ALL participatory work due consideration be given to ethical balances and to informed consent – thus , for this work we were mainly concerned , not with there being parental or school based consent ( i . e . consent by adults ) , but to there being full consent from the children . In the IDC community , studies have sought to Work - in - Progress : Evaluation and Design Methods CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 190 report methods and approaches that ensure participation is informed and valued [ 15 ] . CHECk2 To provoke this consideration , CHECk2 has a series of questions – the first of these answers should feed from CHECk1 : 1 . Why are we doing this project ? 2 . What do we tell ( the children ) ? 3 . Who is funding the project ? 4 . What do we tell ( the children ) ? 5 . What might happen in the long term ? 6 . What do we tell ( the children ) ? 7 . What might we publish ? 8 . What do we tell ( the children ) ? In completing CHECk2 the intention was to look before and beyond the design activity in order to better frame , for the children , the landscape of the work in order that they could better consent to participate . The second aspect of information that had to be conveyed to the children was about the designs the children were contributing . In a participatory design session children typically produce sketches and ideas that are then investigated by the design team and from which ideas are taken and brought together . The bringing together of ideas is not especially studied ( there are exceptions like [ 16 ] ) and it can be hard to always map where an eventual product might come from – thus attribution of credit for ideas is difficult . That said , it seems wrong not to explore with child participants this facet of participatory design – there is a possibility that their great idea could make a fortune ! In the specific case of the design for the children in Uganda , the corresponding answers are given here : 1 . WHY ? Publicity for the group , to promote hand washing to the target children , to provide a platform for future study of IT skills for the children in the orphanage ( as we were entering into a long term relationship with them ) , to test out serious games design with children , to get publishable research 2 . What to tell ? About one of our team going to Uganda to meet these children and to introduce some technologies to their school , to talk about our belief that children can help design fun things 3 . FUNDING ? The University 4 . What to tell ? The University is funding the research ( but we have to first explain what a university is and then what research is and why it costs money ) 5 . LONG TERM ? The game product may potentially make us money , it could be sold , it could save lives 6 . What to tell ? The product could make money 7 . PUBLISH ? We might write about the design work , the product or the project 8 . What to tell ? Universities do research . Part of research is to write about what we learn – if we do we call it publishing – this work may be published . In our case study we determined to tell the children as much as possible about the use of their contributions . In completing this checklist , the researchers found that every time they trimmed an answer from the first response to the ‘what do we tell’ response , they were Work - in - Progress : Evaluation and Design Methods CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 191 aware that this had to be justified . This prompted the research team to ask why certain aspects were omitted or trimmed and also to seek ways to explain complex aspects to the children . Conclusions The process of questioning our own motivations and values has lead us to develop two checklists for design work with children that we believe will have wide use in the HCI and CCI communities . Having used the tools in a design activity we report that CHECk1 pushes us to the extremes of honesty - a necessary first step if we are to be subsequently honest with children , and CHECk2 challenges us to make our research understood to children . In terms of communicating the purpose and practicalities of research to children we consider that CHECk2 ensures that key aspects are covered . Still to consider is transparency in the process of eliciting design ideas from the contributions of children and the development of means to ensure dissemination of results to participating children . References [ 1 ] Druin , A . , et al . KidPad : A design collboration between children , technologists , and educators . in CHI 1997 . 1997 . ACM Press . [ 2 ] Scaife , M . , et al . Designing For or Designing With ? Informant Design for Interactive Learning Environments . in CHI ' 97 . 1997 . Atlanta : ACM Press . [ 3 ] ESRC , Research Ethics Framework , 2010 : UK . p . 36 . [ 4 ] Read , J . C . , et al . The ChiCI Group . in CHI2006 . 2006 . Montreal , Ca : ACM Press . [ 5 ] Mazzone , E . , J . C . Read , and R . Beale . Understanding children ' s contributions during informant design . in BCS - HCI ' 08 . 2008 . BCS . [ 6 ] Read , J . C . , et al . Understanding and designing cool technologies for teenagers . in CHI2011 . 2011 . Vancouver , CA : ACM Press . [ 7 ] Read , J . C . and M . Fredrikson , What do we Take ? What do we Keep ? What do we Tell ? Ethical Concerns in the Design of Inclusive Socially Connected Technology for Children , in Ethicomp 20112011 : Sheffield , UK . [ 8 ] van den Hoven , J . , Design for values and values for design . Informtaion age , 2005 : p . 4 - 7 . [ 9 ] van den Hoven , J . , Moral methodology and information technology , in The handbook of information and computer ethics , K . E . Himma and H . T . Tavani , Editors . 2008 , Wiley : New York . p . 49 - 69 . [ 10 ] Friedman , B . , Value Sesnitive Design , in Berkshire Encyclopedia of HUman Computer Interaction , W . S . Bainbridge , Editor 2004 , Berkshire Publishing Group : Great Barringham . [ 11 ] Manders - Huits , N . , What Values in Design ? The clhallenge of incorporating moral values in design . Science and Engineering Ethics , 2011 . 17 : p . 271 - 287 . [ 12 ] Yarosh , S . , et al . , Examining Values : An Analysis of Nine Years of IDC Research , in IDC 20112011 , ACM Press : Ann Arbor , MI . [ 13 ] Hart , R . A . , Children ' s Participation : from tokenism to citizenship , 1992 , UNICEF International Child Development Centre : Florence . [ 14 ] Christensen , P . and A . Prout , Working with ethical symmetry in social research with children . Childhood , 2002 . 9 ( 4 ) : p . 477 - 497 . [ 15 ] Horton , M . , et al . , School Friendly Participatory Research Activities with Children , in CHI2012 . 2012 . ACM Press : Texas , US . [ 16 ] Guha , M . L . , et al . Mixing Ideas : A New Technique for Working with Young Children as Design Partners . in IDC 2004 . 2004 . College Park . Maryland : ACM Press . Work - in - Progress : Evaluation and Design Methods CHI 2013 : Changing Perspectives , Paris , France 192