Abstract — This study explores how a robot’s physical or virtual presence affects unconscious human perception of the robot as a social partner . Subjects collaborated on simple book - moving tasks with either a physically present humanoid robot or a video - displayed robot . Each task examined a single aspect of interaction : greetings , cooperation , trust , and personal space . Subjects readily greeted and cooperated with the robot in both conditions . However , subjects were more likely to fulfill an unusual instruction and to afford greater personal space to the robot in the physical condition than in the video - displayed condition . The same tendencies occurred when the virtual robot was supplemented by disambiguating 3 - D information . I . I NTRODUCTION MAGINE a team of human and robotic astronauts , cooperatively repairing a spacecraft . Each member of the team contributes a set of uniquely specialized capabilities , and each must rely on the others’ expertise . Are there aspects of the robotic astronaut’s design which can facilitate the human astronauts’ sense of trust and respect for the robot ? If the robotic astronaut must work remotely from its human teammates , will its remote presence affect the cooperative interaction ? This sort of scenario , where humans must work closely with robots in sometimes social situations , is becoming increasingly relevant in today ' s world [ 1 ] - [ 3 ] . In this paper we ask , what aspects of a robot or agent’s design affect human willingness to interact with the robot ? How does physical embodiment , as opposed to virtual presence , affect human perception of social engagement with an artificial agent ? Previous work using questionnaires has shown that embodied robots are consistently perceived as more engaging than a character on a video display , and sometimes as engaging as a human [ 4 ] , [ 5 ] . In Kidd and Breazeal’s [ 6 ] block - moving task , subjects were instructed by an agent , which showed only its eyes to the subjects . The eyes belonged either to a human , a robot , or a cartoon robot . All three visual presentations were accompanied by the same vocal instructions . Subjects’ perceptions of engagement with the agent were measured using a questionnaire based on a previous , presence - measuring questionnaire [ 7 ] , which subjects completed after the task . W . A . Bainbridge , J . Hart , E . S . Kim , and B . Scassellati are with the Social Robotics Laboratory , Department of Computer Science , Yale University , New Haven , CT 06520 USA ( phone : 240 - 277 - 7895 ; e - mail : wilma . bainbridge @ yale . edu , justin . hart @ yale . edu , eliskim @ cs . yale . edu , scaz @ cs . yale . edu ) . We suggest that while a post - hoc questionnaire captures a subject’s explicit reflections on her perceptions , her interaction - immediate behavior might be a more direct measurement for her unconscious perceptions of social engagement . Reeves and Nass [ 8 ] showed that when computer - users evaluated a computer’s performance , and typed the evaluation on the same computer being evaluated , they were significantly less negative than if they typed on a different computer , indicating some unconscious consideration for a computer ' s " feelings . " The study of presence is relevant to many aspects of robotics [ 9 ] . Other studies have focused on the effects of physical presence on human learning of a robotic tool . For instance , when humans learn to operate a robotic arm , under three distinct conditions—learning from interaction with the robotic arm itself , from live video feed of the robotic arm , or from a graphical animation of the robotic arm—people learn equally well from the animated and physical arm , and they learn even better from the live video feed [ 10 ] . Our present study takes a more socially - relevant approach to studying robotic presence , and incorporates both implicit and explicit subjects ' reactions to the robot . Other studies have used such a combination to examine comfort in human - robot interaction [ 11 ] , [ 12 ] . For this study , we choose to specifically examine social interactions requiring trust and respect because they are fundamental to many other social interactions including cooperation , which is a major application field for robotics . II . M ETHODOLOGY Experimental Design The present experiment was designed to investigate conscious and unconscious effects of the physical versus video - displayed presence of a robot in a human - robot interaction task . The interactive task involved a humanoid robot’s use of pointing gestures to direct subjects to move books to various places in an office environment that could allow for social interpretation . 1 ) Experimental Groups : Sixty - five undergraduates , graduate students , and university administrative staff participated as subjects in this experiment . None of the subjects had ever met Nico [ 13 ] , the robot used for this experiment , and their fields of study were diverse , ranging from physics to history . When asked about their experience with robotics on a scale from one to seven ( one meaning The effect of presence on human - robot interaction Wilma A . Bainbridge , Justin Hart , Elizabeth S . Kim , and Brian Scassellati I Proceedings of the 17th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication , Technische Universität München , Munich , Germany , August 1 - 3 , 2008 978 - 1 - 4244 - 2213 - 5 / 08 / $ 25 . 00 ©2008 IEEE 701 Authorized licensed use limited to : IEEE Xplore . Downloaded on October 15 , 2008 at 18 : 40 from IEEE Xplore . Restrictions apply . unfamiliar ) , the mean score was 1 . 9 , and no subject answered above five . The subjects for this experiment were divided into three groups : one group interacted directly with the robot ( the physical condition ) , one group interacted with a live video feed of the robot on a flat - panel LCD monitor ( the virtual condition ) , and a third group interacted with the same live video feed of the robot , but also were presented with a second monitor showing an overhead view of the office task environment and robot ( the augmented - virtual condition ) . This third condition was examined after the first two , and aimed to disambiguate the targets of pointing gestures in the virtual condition by providing additional three - dimensional information . Twenty - two subjects participated in the physical condition , 22 subjects in the virtual condition , and 21 subjects in the augmented - virtual condition . Due to technical problems which disrupted task completion , such as network or robot failure , the data for two subjects for the physical condition , two subjects for the virtual condition , and two subjects for the augmented - virtual condition were discarded , leaving 20 measurable subject data points in the physical condition , 20 in the virtual condition , and 19 in the augmented - virtual condition . Genders were balanced in all three conditions . 2 ) Environment Setup : The office environment , an 8 ' x 8 ' space containing two desks , two bookshelves , and a garbage can , was enclosed within walls made from movable partitions . During the physical condition , the office environment was constructed around the robot’s physical platform , whereas in the virtual and augmented - virtual conditions , the office environment was set up within a nearby office , distant enough to provide isolation from the confusing sound of the physical robot’s moving parts . For all three conditions , the furniture and layout within the office environment were arranged identically . Fig . 1 shows a floor - plan representation of the office environment . Each subject was initially seated at a small workstation facing the " west " wall . The robot ( or the LCD monitor on which the robot appeared ) was situated on a desk to the subject ' s right . The robot / monitor was easily visible while the subject performed tasks at the computer workstation . The room also contained two bookcases , one placed directly behind the robot / monitor on the north wall ( BC1 ) and one located behind the workstation at the southeast corner ( BC2 ) . Both bookcases were easily accessible . Three piles of books were placed in the office environment : next to the computer ( BP1 ) , on the southeast bookcase ( BP2 ) , and in front of the robot ( BP3 ) . A garbage can was placed beside the second bookshelf ( BC2 ) . Two cameras were used for data collection . A digital camcorder was placed at the northeast corner of the room to film the overall experiment . A second camera was mounted on the ceiling , to allow measurement of the distance between the subject and the robot . A microphone was also placed in the room so that the experimenter could hear any utterances from the subject . Subjects consented beforehand to being filmed for the experiment . Two further cameras were used for the interaction in the virtual and augmented - virtual conditions with the video - displayed robot . One webcam was used to record the robot ' s actions for video - feed to the subject , and a second camera was placed directly above the video - display monitor in the laboratory setup to record the robot ' s point of view . 3 ) The Robot Nico : The robot used throughout this experiment was an anthropomorphic upper - torso robot designed with the proportions of a one - year old child , named Nico [ 14 ] . Although Nico’s construction is not concealed , Nico has a friendly , non - threatening face . The robot wore a ( child ' s ) sweatshirt and baseball cap during the interactions ( see Fig . 2 ) . Nico’s head has a total of seven degrees of Fig . 2 . The upper - torso robot Nico inside the laboratory setup . Fig . 1 . Schematic drawing of the experimental setup . BP denotes each book pile . 702 Authorized licensed use limited to : IEEE Xplore . Downloaded on October 15 , 2008 at 18 : 40 from IEEE Xplore . Restrictions apply . freedom ( DOFs ) including separate yaw and simultaneous pitch for both eyes [ 15 ] . The arms have six DOFs each , two at the shoulder , elbow and wrist respectively . All arm and head joint angles are constrained to represent the abilities of a one - year - old child . Each eye is equipped with two miniature CCD cameras , one for foveal and one for peripheral vision . A set of non - verbal scripted behaviors were designed for the robot . These behaviors included task - based functional behaviors ( such as pointing to particular locations in the room ) , interactive behaviors ( such as a shoulder shrug to indicate a lack of useful response ) , and " idle " behaviors designed to acclimate subjects to the robot ' s movement and to make the interaction more natural without indicating any task - relevant information . These idle gestures included : looking around , “cracking” its neck , and swinging its arms . The robot was controlled through a custom - built remote interface that allowed an experimenter to observe the testing environment directly through the robot ' s cameras ( mounted in its eyes ) or from a small camera located above the video - displayed robot . The experimenters controlled the robot in a Wizard - of - Oz style so that the robot could be easily controlled and periodically make eye contact with the subject . The experimenters could trigger any of the scripted behavior sequences by a single button press , or could indicate a directed behavior ( such as looking at a target or pointing toward a target ) by indicating a point within the robot ' s camera image . The transformations between visual coordinates and arm - centered or head - centered coordinates were hand - tuned to ensure accuracy to any of the common locations identified in the interaction script ( below ) . 4 ) The Video Display : For the virtual and augmented - virtual conditions , a video feed of the robot was displayed on a 20 - inch LCD computer monitor , in portrait orientation , so that its length and width approximated Nico ' s dimensions . Video of Nico ' s actions was sent from Nico’s physical environment using network video streaming software . The environment was set up so that there was the same amount of space for maneuvering in front of Nico in all three conditions . For the augmented - virtual condition , a second monitor of the same dimensions was placed to the right of the monitor with the robot , on the same table . It presented a bird ' s - eye view of the robot inside office environment . Each of the robot ' s pre - scripted motions were accompanied by pre - recorded , overhead video of Nico’s gestures within the office environment , providing a view that clarified which objects were indicated by its pointing gestures . A . Interaction Script 1 ) Introduction to the environment : The experimenter first told each subject that he or she was helping the laboratory “examine how humans work in office environments and how artificial intelligence can help . ” The experimenter indicated Nico , introducing it as , “Nico , an artificial intelligence project belonging to the lab” avoiding reference to its physical or virtual presence . The experimenter then asked the subject to sit in a chair facing the computer desk ( see Fig . 1 ) . Subjects were shown a desktop instant messaging client on the computer and informed that they might be asked to perform additional tasks , which would be assigned by an instant message from the experimenter . Any instant messages sent by the subject received a response rephrasing the instructions . 2 ) Task 1 , Greeting : As the experimenter introduced the subject to Nico , ensuring that the subject was looking at Nico , Nico waved at the subject . The subject’s response to Nico ' s wave was noted . The experimenter left the room , and the subject was given three minutes to work on a dummy task . 3 ) Dummy task : Each subject was given a “dummy task” on the office computer , in which she had to proofread an error - ridden piece of text about general robotics . This dummy task was employed to acclimate the subject to Nico and to prevent the subject from actively considering the exact purposes of each task . During this time , Nico performed a sequence of idle gestures to acclimate the subject to its presence and to appear more lifelike . The sequence of idle gestures was identical for subjects in all conditions . 4 ) Task 2 , Simple task cooperation : After three minutes , the experimenter contacted the subject with the following instant message : “ We have a task for you to do . Could you please move the objects as Nico indicates to you ? Do not worry about the proofreading task . Thank you . ” After the subject looked up from reading this message , Nico pointed to the first pile of books ( BP1 ) in the room and then pointed to a bookshelf ( BC2 ) , upon which the subject should place the books . For every task , Nico performed a gesture a second time if the subject did not follow it the first time . After the second attempt , Nico moved onto the next gesture . The subject’s response time and action were noted . In the software controlling Nico , whenever an action for the robot was executed , a timer was simultaneously triggered . After the subject had finished completing Nico ' s command , a button was pressed which stopped the timer and returned the response time . Complete response time of a task was computed as the sum of the response time for grasping the books and the response time for releasing the books , including the times for a repeat of a gesture when needed . . 5 ) Task 3 , Unusual task cooperation : Nico next pointed to the second pile of books ( BP2 ) in the room , and then to the garbage can . Throwing out the books was an unusual request , as it involves destruction in some sense . The subject’s response action and time were noted . 6 ) Task 4 , Proximity task cooperation : After the subject had moved the second pile of books , Nico pointed to the third pile of books ( BP3 ) . Then , Nico looked up and pointed behind itself to a bookcase ( BC1 ) . This task examined the amount of “personal space” the subject allowed Nico when placing books on the bookshelf behind the robot . Usually , a 703 Authorized licensed use limited to : IEEE Xplore . Downloaded on October 15 , 2008 at 18 : 40 from IEEE Xplore . Restrictions apply . human will walk around another person rather than reach over him [ 16 ] . The subject’s response time and choice of allowed personal space ( over or around ) were noted using the overhead camera . After this series of tasks , the experimenter returned to the office environment , thanked the subject , and asked her to move into a second room to answer the Interactive Experiences Questionnaire . B . Interactive Experiences Questionnaire The survey for this study was adapted from Kidd and Breazeal ' s Interactive Experiences Questionnaire [ 6 ] , with permission . The original Interactive Experiences Questionnaire by Lombard and Ditton [ 7 ] was developed as a standardized survey for testing presence , specifically for feelings of presence with film . The questionnaire was adapted by Kidd and Breazeal [ 6 ] to measure the perceived presence in three characters : a human , a robot , and a cartoon robot . Our study uses the Kidd and Breazeal questionnaire , except with mention of only one character ( Nico ) and no questions about vocal interaction . Our questionnaire also incorporated new study - specific open - ended questions , such as , " What did you think when instructed by Nico to put books in the garbage can ? " Our questionnaire was developed to gain information about subjects’ perceptions and feelings in relation to their interaction with Nico . Many questions ask about the “realness” of Nico and examine how engaging the interaction was . Each question is answered with a score ranging from 1 to 7 . The questionnaire is divided into four sections : 1 ) General impressions , including questions such as “How engaging was the interaction , ” and “How often did you feel that Nico was really alive and interacting with you ? ” 2 ) Characteristics of the interactions , which asks subjects to rate characteristics such as Personal versus Impersonal , and rate sentences such as “He / she makes me feel comfortable , as if I am with a friend . ” 3 ) Overall impressions , which includes open - ended questions such as “What was missing from Nico that would make it seem more alive ? ” 4 ) Biographical information , which includes questions about the frequency of computer use and experience with programming and robotics . C . Data Collection Data were collected from three main sources : 1 ) video recordings of the interaction , 2 ) recorded response times , and 3 ) subjects’ written responses to the Interactive Experiences Questionnaire . The dummy task served solely as distraction from the real intention of the study , and each subject’s proofreading progress was not analyzed . III . R ESULTS The following are the results for each task , and a comparison between the two experimental groups . See Fig . 3 and Table I . 1 ) Task 1 , Greeting : After Nico waved , ten subjects in the physical condition responded with a greeting , ten subjects in the virtual condition responded , and six subjects in the augmented - virtual condition responded , resulting in no significant difference . Greeting responses varied , ranging from verbal responses ( e . g . , “Hello . ” ) directed toward Nico , to waving at Nico . 2 ) Task 2 , Simple task cooperation : All 20 subjects in the physical condition correctly interpreted Nico’s pointing gestures and moved a pile of books from one location , pointed out by Nico , to another . In the virtual condition , 18 subjects correctly interpreted Nico’s pointing gestures , while two subjects never responded to any of Nico’s gestures , despite having been introduced to Nico and having been instructed , via instant - message , to expect instructions from Nico , in accordance with our interaction script . 18 subjects in the augmented - virtual condition also correctly interpreted Nico ' s pointing gestures . We treated the moving of books , regardless of which specific book pile and which specific destination , as successful completion of the simple task . The average simple task response time was 20 . 5s . for the physical condition , 27 . 09s . for the virtual condition , and 19 . 73s for the augmented - virtual condition . An analysis of variance indicated a significant difference in these three sets of response times , F ( 2 , 33 ) = 3 . 321 , p < . 05 , possibly caused by the difficulty in interpreting 3 - D gestures in the virtual condition . 3 ) Task 3 , Unusual task cooperation : In all three conditions , subjects expressed hesitation or confusion at the request to place the books in the garbage can . Many subjects giggled or glanced multiple times from the robot to the garbage can during the instructions . Twelve subjects in the physical condition placed the books in the garbage can , while only two subjects in the virtual condition and three subjects in the augmented - virtual condition placed the books in the garbage can . This represents a significantly higher tendency for those in the physical condition compared to the virtual condition to throw out the books , t ( 38 ) = 3 . 794 , 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1 Greeted Nico Simple task Threw out books Reached around Nico Percentage of Subjects Robot Video display Full - view video display Fig . 3 . Graph of the percentage of subjects who displayed specific behaviors for each task for the three conditions . For the unusual ( book disposal ) task , only subjects who made physical contact with or attended to the garbage can are shown in this graph . Error bars indicate standard error . 704 Authorized licensed use limited to : IEEE Xplore . Downloaded on October 15 , 2008 at 18 : 40 from IEEE Xplore . Restrictions apply . p < . 001 . Even with disambiguating 3 - D information , the physical condition still showed this higher tendency compared to the augmented - virtual condition , t ( 37 ) = 3 . 101 , p < . 005 . Even when we consider only those subjects who attended to or made physical contact with the garbage can ( 18 subjects in the physical condition , 12 in the virtual condition , and 12 in the augmented - virtual condition ) , indicating a correct interpretation of Nico ' s gesture , a significantly higher number of subjects put the book in the garbage can in the physical condition , compared to the virtual condition , t ( 28 ) = 2 . 982 , p < . 01 , and compared to the augmented - virtual condition , t ( 28 ) = 2 . 366 , p < . 05 . The average response times were 17 . 8s for the physical condition , 42 . 18s for the virtual condition , and 19 . 2s for the augmented - virtual condition . There was a significant difference in the response times of the three conditions , F ( 2 , 33 ) = 10 . 18 , p < . 001 . 4 ) Task 4 , Proximity task cooperation : In the physical condition , 17 subjects walked around Nico when placing the books on the shelf behind it . Three from the same group reached over Nico . In contrast , in the virtual presence condition , only five subjects walked around Nico , while 11 reached over ( and four did not approach Nico , possibly because they did not understand the gesture ) . Similarly in the augmented - virtual condition , eight subjects walked around Nico , while 11 reached over . This represents a significantly higher tendency to walk around Nico in the physical condition rather than the virtual condition , t ( 34 ) = 3 . 819 , p < . 001 , and the augmented - virtual condition , t ( 37 ) = 3 . 04 , p < . 005 . For the physical condition , the average response time was 26 . 1s , for the virtual condition , it was 32 . 09s , and for the augmented - virtual condition , it was 24 . 2s , with no significant difference . 5 ) Questionnaire results : Many questionnaire items addressed the subject’s perception of Nico as a social creature . Table I shows all questionnaire results that differed significantly between the physical and virtual conditions . The virtual data also includes the augmented - virtual condition data , as the important comparison is between the type of presence of Nico ( physical or virtual ) . Subjects found the interaction with the physical robot very natural , while video display subjects thought of Nico as negative , homogeneous and varied . The questionnaire also asked subjects , “What did you think when instructed by Nico to put books in the garbage can ? ” Subjects’ responses mirrored the data . Subjects in the physical condition sometimes found the request unusual , but these subjects still complied . For example , one physical condition subject stated , “I did not really think about it too much . He seemed to know what to do , so I just obeyed . ” No physical condition subject mentioned understanding the command but not following it . Subjects in the virtual and augmented - virtual conditions also expressed confusion at the request , but often did not follow it . For example , one video - displayed robot subject stated , " I put them on the shelf . The garbage can is for trash . " A subject in the augmented - virtual condition stated , " I thought that may have been where he was pointing , but it seemed unlikely you would want me to throw away books , so I shifted it to that area of the desk . " IV . D ISCUSSION Subjects were excited to interact with both the physical robot and the video - displayed robot . There was no significant difference in greeting reciprocation among the three conditions ; subjects waved to both the actual robot and the video - displayed robot . The simple task was able to establish the book - moving paradigm for the experiment . Although subjects in the virtual group at first had difficulty understanding which pile of books to move , most subjects ( 90 % ) moved a pile of books to another location with Nico’s instruction . The augmented - virtual condition improved upon the ambiguity in the pointing gestures of a virtual robot . Most subjects indicated they were confused by the garbage can placement task , as it is an unusual request . However , many subjects in the physical condition still placed books in the garbage can . Even restricting consideration to those subjects who recognized the garbage can gesture , significantly more subjects in the physical condition threw out the books . This could indicate that physical presence afforded higher trust in Nico’s credibility , making subjects more willing to follow through with an unusual request from Nico . Many subjects in the virtual condition had difficulty accurately completing each task , taking much longer than the physical condition subjects . The addition of 3 - D information in the augmented - virtual condition lowered subjects ' response times , rectifying the ambiguity of the virtual condition ' s gestures . However , there were no significant differences in the response actions between the virtual and augmented - virtual conditions . This indicates that even when a subject can correctly interpret the location target of a pointing gesture , the absence of physical presence still affects the subject ' s interaction with the robot . The questionnaire data also show that subjects in the physical condition found the interaction significantly more engaging . In the open - ended question about the garbage can TABLE I S IGNIFICANT Q UESTIONNAIRE D ATA Robot Average Virtual & Augmented - virtual Average p How natural was the interaction ? 4 . 2 3 . 2 0 . 006 Homogeneous 3 . 11 4 . 17 0 . 030 Negative 1 . 42 2 . 28 0 . 004 Varied 2 . 63 3 . 89 0 . 017 n = 59 , results of a two - tailed t - test , α < . 05 . The higher average for each set is bolded . Each question was answered on a scale from 1 to 7 . 705 Authorized licensed use limited to : IEEE Xplore . Downloaded on October 15 , 2008 at 18 : 40 from IEEE Xplore . Restrictions apply . task , many subjects in the physical condition responded with less concern about the unusual nature of the task than did virtual and augmented - virtual participants . For example , one subject in the physical condition wrote , “I was mostly amused . It didn’t seem logical to throw the book away , ” Yet this subject still ultimately threw out the book . Subjects in the virtual and augmented - virtual conditions tended to view Nico as more negative , and their questionnaire responses reflected a resistance to throwing out the books , with responses such as , " It was confusing because it ' s not typical to be directed to put things in the trash . It ' s not usually possible in most contexts " . This combination of immediate , behavioral data and post - interaction , explicitly reflective data indicates that subjects afford greater trust to the physical versus video - displayed robot . The proximity task may reflect the amount of respect subjects afford to the robot . Almost all subjects in the physical condition walked around Nico to place the book , instead of reaching over Nico . These results seem to indicate that subjects consider personal space when interacting with Nico . In the virtual and augmented - virtual conditions , almost all subjects reached over Nico to place the book . Although this is the shortest distance to the shelf , this is rarely a gesture a person would ever perform over another , as it clearly encroaches on both peoples’ personal spaces . Some subjects even grabbed the robot ' s monitor in the virtual and augmented - virtual conditions , which would have been a clear violation of personal space if done to another person . Both setups allowed identical amounts of space to maneuver in front of the robot . However , subjects clearly gave greater space to the physically present robot . Whether or not this can be interpreted as a matter of personal respect , it has implications for the design of human - robot interactions . V . C ONCLUSION Overall , it appears that the level of a robot’s presence affects some variables in human - robot interaction that should be important to consider when creating a human - robotic social interaction . The clearest way to examine presence is in the physical sense : interacting with a robot in the same room versus interacting with a video - displayed robot . Changes in physical presence impact social aspects of presence as well . Although subjects enjoyed interacting with both the physical robot and the video - displayed robot , they clearly gave the physically present robot more personal space . Personal space could be interpreted as a variable of respect ; as humans give personal space to those they are unfamiliar with but respect as human . Subjects in the physical condition were also more compliant when directed to place a book in the garbage can , which suggests greater trust afforded in the case of physical presence . Along with this , subjects rated the interaction with the physical robot more positively than the video - displayed robot , suggesting generally better human interactions with a physically present robot . Ultimately presence is a crucial variable to consider when developing human - robot interactions , because of its effects on many dimensions of any interaction , including trust and respect . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] Sidner , C . L . , Lee , C . , Kidd , C . , Lesh , N . , Rich , C . 2005 . Explorations in engagement for humans and robots . Artificial Intelligence 166 ( 1 - 2 ) , 140 - 164 . [ 2 ] Rehnmark , F . , Bluethmann , W . , Mehling , J . , Ambrose , R . O . , Diftler , M . , Chu , M . , and Necessary , R . 2005 . Robonaut : The ' Short List ' of Technology Hurdles . Computer 38 ( 1 ) , 28 - 37 . [ 3 ] Goetz , J . and Kiesler , S . 2002 . Cooperation with a robotic assistant . Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( 2002 ) , 578 - 579 . [ 4 ] Burgoon , J . K . , Bonito , J . A . , Bengtsson , B . , Cederberg , C . , Lundeberg , M . , and Allspach , L . 2000 . Interactivity in human - computer interaction : a study of credibility , understanding , and influence . Computers in Human Behavior 16 ( 6 ) , 553 - 574 . [ 5 ] Jung , Y . and Lee , K . M . 2004 . Effects of physical embodiment on social presence of social robots . Presence 2004 : The Seventh International Workshop on Presence , Spain . [ 6 ] Kidd , C . D . and Breazeal , C . 2004 . Effect of a Robot on Human Perceptions . Proceedings of 2004 IEEE / RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robotics and Systems , Japan . [ 7 ] Lombard , M . , Ditton , T . B . , Crane , D . , Davis , B . , Gil - Egui , G . , Horvath , K . , and Rossman , J . 2000 . Measuring presence : A literature - based approach to the development of a standardized paper - and - pencil instrument . Presence 2000 : The Third International Workshop on Presence , Netherlands . [ 8 ] Reeves , B . and Nass , C . 1996 . The Media Equation : How People Treat Computers , Video - displayed , and New Media Like Real People and Places . Center for the Study of Language and Information . [ 9 ] Ijsselsteijn , W . and Harper , B . 2001 . Virtually There ? A Vision on Presence Research . Presence - 1st 2000 - 31014 Ec Public Deliverable . [ 10 ] Tzafestas , C . S . , Palaiologou , N . , and Alifragis , M . 2006 . Virtual and remote robotic laboratory : Comparitive experimental evaluation . IEEE Transactions on Education 49 ( 3 ) , 360 - 369 . [ 11 ] Powers , A . , Kiesler , S . , Fussell , S . , and Torrey , C . 2007 . Comparing a computer agent with a humanoid robot . Proceedings of 2004 ACM / IEEE International Conference on Human - robot Interaction , Washington D . C . , 145 - 152 . [ 12 ] Yamato , J . , Brooks , R . , Shinozawa , K . , and Naya , F . 2003 . Human - Robot Dynamic Social Interaction . NTT Technical Review 1 ( 6 ) , 37 - 43 . [ 13 ] Crick , C . and Scassellati , B . 2006 . Synchronization in social tasks : Robotic drumming . Proceedings of 2006 IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication , UK . [ 14 ] Sun , G . and Scassellati , B . 2004 . Reaching through Learned Forward Model . Proceedings of 2004 IEEE - RAS / RSJ International Conference on Humanoid Robots , CA . [ 15 ] Michel , P . , Gold , K . , and Scassellati , B . 2004 . Motion - Based Robotic Self - Recognition . Proceedings of 2004 IEEE / RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , Japan . [ 16 ] Hall , E . T . 1966 . The Hidden Dimension . Anchor Books . [ 17 ] Berlyne , D . E . 1958 . The Influence of Complexity and Novelty in Visual Figures on Orienting Responses . Journal of Experimental Psychology 55 , 289 - 296 . 706 Authorized licensed use limited to : IEEE Xplore . Downloaded on October 15 , 2008 at 18 : 40 from IEEE Xplore . Restrictions apply .