www . elsevier . com / locate / destud 0142 - 694X $ - see front matter Design Studies 24 ( 2003 ) 507 – 522 doi : 10 . 1016 / S0142 - 694X ( 03 ) 00039 - 5 507  2003 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved Printed in Great Britain Theory construction in design research : criteria : approaches , and methods Ken Friedman , Department of Organisation and Leadership , Norwegian School of Management , Postboks 4676 , Soﬁenberg , 0506 Oslo , Norway Design involves solving problems , creating something new , or transforming less desirable situations to preferred situations . To do this , designers must know how things work and why . Understanding how things work and why requires us to analyze and explain . This is the purpose of theory . The article outlines a framework for theory construction in design . This framework will clarify the meaning of theory and theorizing . It will explain the nature and uses of theory as a general concept . It will propose necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for theory construction in design . Finally , it will outline potential areas for future inquiry in design theory . (cid:1) c 2003 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . Keywords : design research , design science , design theory , philosophy of design , theory construction T here comes a moment in the evolution of every ﬁeld or discipline when central intellectual issues come into focus as the ﬁeld and the discipline on which it rests shift from a rough , ambiguous terri - tory to an arena of reasoned inquiry . At such a time , scholars , scientists , researchers , and their students begin to focus articulate attention on such issues as research methods , methodology ( the comparative study of methods ) , philosophy , philosophy of science , and related issues in the metanarrative through which a research ﬁeld takes shape . In many ﬁelds today , this also entails the articulate study of theory construction . 1 Deﬁnitions : design , research , theory To establish a foundation for theory construction in design research , it will help to establish deﬁnitions as they are used in this article . Most deﬁnitions of design share three attributes . First , the word design 1 Simon , H TheSciencesofthe Artiﬁcial , 2nd edn MIT Press , Cambridge , MA ( 1982 ) 2 Simon , H TheSciencesofthe Artiﬁcial , 3rd edn MIT Press , Cambridge , MA ( 1998 ) 3 Merriam - Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary 10th edn , Merriam - Webster , Inc , Springﬁeld , MA ( 1993 ) 4 Webster’s Revised Unabridged Dictionary ( G & C . Merriam Co . 1913 , edited by N Porter ) ARTFL ( Project for American and French Research on the Treasury of the French Language ) Chicago : Divisions of the Humanities , University of Chicago ( 2002 ) http : / / humanit ies . uchicago . edu / forms—unres t / webster . form . html Date accessed : 2002 January 18 5 Merriam - Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary online edition , Encyc - lopedia Britannica , Inc . , Chicago ( 2002 ) http : / / www . britannica . com / Date accessed : 2002January 21 6 Cambridge Dictionaries online , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK ( 1999 ) htt p : / / www . cup . cam . ac . uk / elt / dictio nary / Date accessed : 1999 Nov - ember 21 7 Friedman , K ‘Creating design knowledge : from research into practice’ in E W L Norman and P H Roberts ( eds ) , Design and Technology Educational Research and Development : The Emerging International Research Agenda , Department of Design and Technology , Loughborough University , Loughborough ( 2001 ) pp 31 – 69 8 Fuller , B Utopia or Oblivion . The Prospects for Humanity Bantam Books , New York ( 1969 ) 9 Link Lexical FreeNet : Con - nected thesaurus , The Link Group at Carnegie Mellon Uni - versity , Pittsburgh ( 1999 ) http : / / www . link . cs . cmu . edu / Date accessed : 1999 November 21 10 SimpsonJAand WeinerE SC ( eds ) OxfordEnglishDiction - ary Online edn 1989 , Clarendon Press . Oxford University Press , Oxford ( 2002 ) http : / / dictionary . oed . com / Date accessed : 2002 January 18 11 Brown , L ( ed . ) The New Shorter Oxford English Diction - ary Clarendon Press and Univer - sity Press , Oxford , UK ( 1993 ) 12 Parks R ( Ed ) The Wordsmyth Educational Diction - ary – Thesaurus [ WEDT ] Wordsmyth Collaboratory , Chicago ( 2002 ) 508 Design Studies Vol 24 No . 6 November 2003 refers to a process . Second , the process is goal - oriented . Third , The goal of design is solving problems , meeting needs , improving situations , or cre - ating something new or useful . Herbert Simon 1 ( p 129 ) , 2 ( p 112 ) deﬁnes design as the process by which we ‘ [ devise ] courses of action aimed at changing existing situations into preferred ones . ’ Since this deﬁnition covers most forms of design , it is a useful starting point . Merriam - Webster’s 3 ( p 343 ) deﬁnes design as : ‘1a : to conceive and plan out in the mind , b : to have as a purpose : intend , c : to devise for a speciﬁc function or end 2 archaic : to indicate with a distinctive mark , sign or name , 3a : to make a drawing , pattern or sketch of , b : to draw the plans for , c : to create , fashion , execute or construct according to plan : devise , con - trive…’ ( See also : 4 ( pp 397 – 8 ) ; 5 ( unpaged ) ; 6 ( unpaged ) ; 7 ( pp 36 – 40 ) ; 8 ( p 319 ) ; 9 ( unpaged ) ; 10 ( unpaged ) ; 11 ( p 645 ) ; 12 ( unpaged ) . ) A taxonomy of design knowledge domains 13 , 14 ( pp 5 - 16 ) , 7 describes the frames within which a designer must act . Each domain requires a broad range of skills , knowledge , and awareness . Design is the entire process across the full range of domains required for any given outcome . The ﬁeld organized around design can be seen as a profession , a discipline , and a ﬁeld . The profession of design involves the professional practice of design . The discipline of design involves inquiry into the plural domains of design . The ﬁeld of design embraces the profession , the discipline , and a shifting and often ambiguous range of related cognate ﬁelds and areas of inquiry . Theorizing involves the discipline . The foundation of design theory rests on the fact that design is by nature an interdisciplinary , integrative discipline . The nature of design as an integrative discipline places it at the intersection of several large ﬁelds . In one dimension , design is a ﬁeld of thinking and pure research . In another , it is a ﬁeld of practice and applied research . When applications are used to solve speciﬁc problems in a speciﬁc setting , it is a ﬁeld of clinical research . One model of the design ﬁeld represents six general domains . These domains are ( 1 ) natural sciences , ( 2 ) humanities and liberal arts , ( 3 ) social and behavioral sciences , ( 4 ) human professions and services , ( 5 ) creative and applied arts , and ( 6 ) technology and engineering 7 ( p 40 ) . Design may involve any or all of these domains , in differing aspects and proportions . These depend on the nature of the project at hand or the problem to be solved . With this as a background , we are prepared to examine how—and why—theory construction is important to design , the design process , the ﬁeld of design , the discipline , and the profession . Let us return to the deﬁnition of design as the process by which we http : / / www . wordsmyth . net / Date accessed : 2002 February 2 13 Friedman , K Strategic design taxonomy . Oslo Business School , Oslo , Norway ( 1992 ) 14 Friedman , K D ‘Design knowledge ; context , content and continuity’ in D Durling and K Friedman ( eds ) Doctoral Edu - cationin Design . Foundationsfor the Future . Proceedings of the La Clusaz Conference , July 8 – 12 , 2000 , Staffordshire Univer - sity Press , Staffordshire UK ( 2000 ) pp 8 – 12 15 Fuller , B Critical Path St Martin’s Press , New York ( 1981 ) 509 Theory construction in design research ‘ [ devise ] courses of action aimed at changing existing situations into pre - ferred ones . ’ Those who cannot change existing situations into preferred ones fail in the process of design . There are many causes of design failure . These include lack of will , ability , or method . Designers also fail due to context or client , lack of proper training or a failure to understand the design process . Fuller 15 ( pp 229 – 31 ) describes design as the difference between class - one evolution and class - two evolution . Class - two evolution involves ‘all those events that seem to be resultant upon human initiative - taking or political reforms that adjust to the change wrought by the progressive introduction of environment - altering artifacts’ 15 ( p 229 ) . One argument for the importance of design is the increasing number of areas that are now subject to human initiative . The vast range of techno - logies that surround us mediate most of the human world and inﬂuence our daily lives . These include the artifacts of information technology , mass media , telecommunication , chemistry , pharmacology , chemical engineer - ing , and mechanical engineering , along with the designed processes of nearly every service industry and public good now available other than public access to nature . Within the next few years , these areas will come to include the artifacts of biotechnology , nanotechnology , and other advanced hybrid technologies . The artiﬁcial world increasingly affects the natural world in class - two evol - ution , and the world can grow worse as well as better . Design now plays a role in the general evolution of the environment , and the design process takes on new meaning . As designers take on increasingly important tasks , design has greater effects and wider scope than ever before . While the success of evolutionary artifacts and craft traditions suggests that many human beings are able to do a competent job of design , design failures are nevertheless common . The most common reasons include lack of method and absence of systematic and comprehensive understanding . These involve gaps in knowledge and preparation . It is here that research and theory play a role . 1 . 1 Deﬁning research The noun research means , ‘1 : careful or diligent search , 2 : studious inquiry or examination ; especially : investigation or experimentation aimed at the discovery and interpretation of facts , revision of accepted theories or laws in the light of new facts , or practical application of such new or revised theories or laws , 3 : the collecting of information about a particular subject’ 3 510 Design Studies Vol 24 No . 6 November 2003 ( p 1002 ) ( See also : 4 ( p 1224 ) ; 5 ( unpaged ) ; 6 ( unpaged ) ; 9 ( unpaged ) ; 10 ( unpaged ) ; 11 ( p 2558 ) ; 12 ( unpaged ) . ) The transitive verb means ‘to search or investigate exhaustively’ or ‘to do research for’ something , and the intransitive verb means , ‘to engage in research 3 ( p 1002 ) ( see also sources above ) . The word research is closely linked to the word and concept of search . The preﬁx ‘re’ came to this word from outside English . Rather than indicat - ing the past as some have mistakenly suggested , it emphasizes and streng - thens the core concept of search . The key meanings are ‘to look into or over carefully or thoroughly in an effort to ﬁnd or discover something , to read thoroughly , to look at as if to discover or penetrate intention or nature , to uncover , ﬁnd , or come to know by inquiry or scrutiny , to make painstak - ing investigation or examination’ 3 ( p 1059 ) . Many aspects of design involve search and research together . Basic research involves a search for general principles . These principles are abstracted and generalized to cover a variety of situations and cases . Basic research generates theory on several levels . This may involve macro level theories covering wide areas or ﬁelds , midlevel theories covering speciﬁc ranges of issues or micro level theories focused on narrow ques - tions . General principles often have broad application beyond their ﬁeld of origin , and their generative nature sometimes gives them surprising power . Applied research adapts the ﬁndings of basic research to classes of prob - lems . It may also involve developing and testing theories for these classes of problems . Applied research tends to be midlevel or micro level research . At the same time , applied research may develop or generate questions that become the subject of basic research . Clinical research involves speciﬁc cases . Clinical research applies the ﬁnd - ings of basic research and applied research to speciﬁc situations . It may also generate and test new questions , and it may test the ﬁndings of basic and applied research in a clinical situation . Clinical research may also develop or generate questions that become the subject of basic research or applied research . Any of the three frames of research may generate questions for the other frames . Each may test the theories and ﬁndings of other kinds of research . Clinical research generally involves speciﬁc forms of professional engage - ment . In the ﬂow of daily activity , most design practice is restricted to clinical research . There isn’t time for anything else . Precisely because this 16 Bernsen , J Design . The Problems Comes First . Danish Design Council , Copenhagen , Denmark ( 1986 ) 511 Theory construction in design research is the case , senior designers increasingly need a sense of research issues with the background and experience to distinguish among classes and kinds of problems , likely alternative solutions , and a sense of the areas where creative intervention can make a difference . In today’s complex environment , a designer must identify problems , select appropriate goals , and realize solutions . Because so much design work takes place in teams , a senior designer may also be expected to assemble and lead a team to develop and implement solutions . Designers work on several levels . The designer is an analyst who discovers problems or who works with a problem in the light of a brief . The designer is a synthesist who helps to solve problems and a generalist who understands the range of talents that must be engaged to realize solutions . The designer is a leader who organizes teams when one range of talents is not enough . Moreover , the designer is a critic whose post - solution analysis considers whether the right problem has been solved . Each of these tasks may involve working with research questions . All of them involve interpreting or applying some aspect or element that research discloses . Because a designer is a thinker whose job it is to move from thought to action , the designer uses capacities of mind to solve problems for clients in an appropriate and empathic way . In cases where the client is not the customer or end - user of the designer’s work , the designer may also work to meet customer needs , testing design outcomes and following through on solutions . This provides the ﬁrst beneﬁt of research training for the professional designer . Design practice is inevitably located in a speciﬁc , clinical situ - ation . A broad understanding of general principles based on research gives the practicing designer a background stock of knowledge on which to draw . This stock of knowledge includes principles , facts , and theories . No single individual can master this comprehensive background stock of knowledge . Rather , this constitutes the knowledge of the ﬁeld . This knowledge is embodied in the minds and working practices of millions of people . These people , their minds , and their practices , are distributed in the social and organizational memory of tens of thousands of organizations . Even if one person could in theory master any major fraction of the general stock of knowledge , there would be little point in doing so . The general and comprehensive stock of design knowledge can never be used completely in any practical context . Good design solutions are always based on and embedded in speciﬁc problems . In Jens Bernsen’s 16 memorable phrase , the problem comes ﬁrst in design . Each problem implies partially new sol - 17 Bunge , M The Dictionary of Philosophy . Prometheus Books , Amherst , New York ( 1999 ) 512 Design Studies Vol 24 No . 6 November 2003 utions located in a speciﬁc context . The continual interaction of design problems and design solutions generates the problematics and knowledge stock of the ﬁeld in tandem . Developing a comprehensive background through practice takes many years . In contrast , a solid foundation of design knowledge anchored in broad research traditions gives each practitioner the access to the cumulat - ive results of many other minds and the overall experience of a far larger ﬁeld . In addition to those who shape research at the clinical edge of practice , there are other forms of research that serve the ﬁeld and other kinds of researchers develop them . Research is a way of asking questions . All forms of research ask questions , basic , applied , and clinical . The different forms and levels of research ask questions in different ways . Research asks questions in a systematic way . The systems vary by ﬁeld and purpose . There are many kinds of research : hermeneutic , naturalistic inquiry , statistical , analytical , mathematical , physical , historical , sociologi - cal , ethnographic , ethnological , biological , medical , chemical and many more . They draw on many methods and traditions . Each has its own foun - dations and values . All involve some form of systematic inquiry , and all involve a formal level of theorizing and inquiry beyond the speciﬁc research at hand . Research is the ‘methodical search for knowledge . Original research tackles new problems or checks previous ﬁndings . Rigorous research is the mark of science , technology , and the ‘living’ branches of the humanities’ 17 ( p 251 ) . Exploration , investigation , and inquiry are partial synonyms for research . Because design knowledge grows in part from practice , design knowledge and design research overlap . The practice of design is one foundation of design knowledge . Even though design knowledge arises in part from prac - tice , however , it is not practice but systematic and methodical inquiry into practice—and other issues—that constitute design research , as distinct from practice itself . The elements of design knowledge begin in many sources , and practice is only one of them . Critical thinking and systemic inquiry form the foundation of theory . Research offers us the tools that allow critical thinking and systemic inquiry to bring answers out of the ﬁeld of action . It is theory and the 18 Merriam - Webster’s Collegi - ate Dictionary 9th edn , Merriam - Webster , Inc . , Springﬁeld , MA ( 1990 ) 513 Theory construction in design research models that theory provides through which we link what we know to what we do . 1 . 2 Deﬁning theory In its most basic form , a theory is a model . It is an illustration describing how something works by showing its elements in relationship to one another . Some models show the elements in a dynamic relationship by describing process or action . Others , such as taxonomy , describe relation - ships without describing process or action . The dynamic demonstration of working elements in action as part of a structure or the demonstration of relationship is what distinguishes a model from a simple catalogue . Merriam - Webster 18 ( p 1223 ) deﬁnes theory as , ‘1 : the analysis of a set of facts in their relation to one another , 2 : abstract thought : speculation , 3 : the general or abstract principles of a body of fact , a science or an art , 4a : a belief , policy , or procedure proposed or followed as the basis of action , b : an ideal or hypothetical set of facts , principles or circumstances—often used in the phrase ‘in theory , ’ 5 : a plausible or scientiﬁcally accepted gen - eral principle or body of principles offered to explain phenomena , 6a : a hypothesis assumed for the sake of argument or investigation , b : an unproved assumption : conjecture , c : a body of theorems presenting a con - cise systematic view of a subject . ’ The distinction between a science and a craft is systematic thought organized in theory . Craft involves doing . Some craft involves experimen - tation . Theory allows us to frame and organize our observations . Theory permits us to question what we see and do . It helps us to develop generaliz - able answers that can be put to use by human beings in other times and places . This is a central issue in design . To ‘ [ devise ] courses of action aimed at changing existing situations into preferred ones’ on a predictable basis means understanding ‘things : how they are and how they work , ’ which is Simon’s 1 ( p 129 ) explanation of science . One form of design practice is allied to art and craft . It is intuitive . It sometimes produces desired results . On occasion , the intuitive practice of design produces unpredictable desir - able results that can be seized retrospectively as the useable result of muddling through . Far more often , however , muddling through produces failures of two kinds . The ﬁrst kind of failure involves proposals that fail in the early stages of conception or development . This is a good time for failure , since failure in conception or development eliminates potentially wasteful efforts . The second kind of failure involves completed attempts at solutions in which the designers believe that they have solved the prob - 19 Deming , WE TheNewEco - nomics for Industry , Govern - ment , Education Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Center forAdvanced EngineeringStudy , Cambridge , MA ( 1993 ) 20 Deming , W E Out of the Crisis . Quality , Productivity and Competitive Position Cambridge University Press , Cambridge ( 1986 ) 21 Mautner , T A Dictionary of Philosophy Blackwell , Oxford ( 1996 ) 22 McNeil D H ‘Reframing sys - temic paradigms for the art of learning’ , Conference of the American Society for Cybernet - ics ( 1993 ) 514 Design Studies Vol 24 No . 6 November 2003 lem even though they have not done so . This is far more costly in every sense . One of the central aspects of this kind of failure is the fact that some designers never learn that they have actually failed to meet client needs , customer needs , or end - user needs . This is because designers often end their involvement with the project before the failures arise and the clients of most failures do not return to the original designer for repair work . Another face of design practice involves efforts to render the outcomes of design predictable . Predictability is created by the effective response to problems , and it has similarities to science , engineering , and technology . The basis of Simon’s concept of design science is the idea of applicable theories of how to devise courses of action aimed at changing existing situations into preferred ones . This science is geared to industrial pro - duction , including production in the digital industries of the knowledge economy . Industry now meets the vast majority of the world’s physical needs , and industrial productivity is a necessity in a world with billions of people . Industrial production—and , therefore , design—touches nearly everything we do , use or consume . Nevertheless , the designers who plan and create industrial artifacts are not artisans . They are involved in the industrial pro - cess . Therefore , the design process is necessarily in transition from art and craft practice to a form of technical and social science focused on how to do things to accomplish goals . To meet the challenges of the design process requires understanding the actions that lead from existing situations to pre - ferred ones . This means understanding the principles of predicting and measuring outcomes based on what W . Edwards Deming 19 ( pp 94 – 118 ) terms profound knowledge . This knowledge is comprised of ‘four parts , all related to each other : appreciation for a system ; knowledge about vari - ation ; theory of knowledge ; psychology’ 19 ( p 96 ) . According to Deming 20 ( p 19 ) , ‘Experience will answer a question , and a question comes from theory . ’ Theory can be described in many ways . Some theories are complex and sophisticated . Others are simple . Mautner 21 ( p 426 ) deﬁnes theory as ‘a set of propositions which provides principles of analysis or explanation of a subject matter . Even a single proposition can be called a theory . ’ This often depends on the nature of the subject . McNeil 22 ( p 8 ) proposes eleven characteristics of any general theory . ( 1 ) A theory has a constitutive core of concepts mutually interrelated with one another . ( 2 ) A theory has a mutually productive , generative connection 23 Francois , C International encyclopedia of systems and cybernetics . K . G . Saur , Munich , Germany ( 1997 ) 24 Warﬁeld J N ‘Generic plan - ning’ Knowledge in Society Vol 3 No 4 ( 1990 ) 25 Warﬁeld , J N A Science of Generic Design : Managing Com - plexity through Systems Design Iowa State University Press , Ames , IA ( 1994 ) 26 Dictionary of Ideas , Brockh - ampton Press , London ( 1994 ) 515 Theory construction in design research between central concepts and the peripheral concepts where theory verges onto practice . ( 3 ) The core concepts of a theory are stated in algorithmic compression , parsimonious statements from which the phenomena in the theory can be reproduced . ( 4 ) A theory has an irreducible core of concepts , a set of concepts in which no central concept can be removed without altering the scope and productivity of the theory or perhaps destroying it entirely . ( 5 ) Two or more of the core concepts in a theory must be comp - lementary to each other . ( 6 ) The central concepts of a theory must be well deﬁned and must harmonize as much as possible with similar concepts of enlightened discourse . ( 7 ) The central concepts of a theory must be expressed at a uniform level of discourse . Different levels of discourse must be distinguished and used consistently . ( 8 ) More general theories ( higher - level theories ) must relate to less general theories ( lower - level theories ) and to special cases through a principle of correspondence . This principle conﬁrms and guarantees the consistency of the more particular theories and their applications . ( 9 ) Explicitly or implicitly , a theory describes dynamic ﬂows with contours that trace relatively closed loops as well as relatively open links . ( 10 ) A theory states invariant entities in its assumptions or formulas that provide standards for measurement . ( 11 ) Theories describe phenomena in the context of a conceptual space . This implicitly establishes a relationship between the observer and the phenom - ena observed . The ability to theorize design enables the designer to move from an endless succession of unique cases to broad explanatory principles that can help to solve many kinds of problems . Warﬁeld 23 ( p 100 ) describes the generic aspect of design as ‘that part of the process of design that is indifferent to what is being designed , being applicable whatever the target may be . ’ He contrasts this with the speciﬁc aspect of design , ‘that part of the design process that is particular to the target class . ’ Warﬁeld 24 , 25 identiﬁes 32 basic postulates of the generic design process , which he groups under six categories : the human being , language , reasoning through relationships , archival representation , the design situation , and the design process . This generic design process is inevitably theory - rich . Theory is not entirely abstract , any more than science is abstract . Quite the contrary : sound theory requires engagement with empirical reality . The Dictionary of Ideas 26 ( p 507 ) deﬁnes theory as ‘a set of ideas , concepts , principles or methods used to explain a wide set of observed facts . ’ A designer who cannot observe facts cannot theorize them . Design requires humility in the face of empirical facts . Design based on the idea of individ - ual genius or artistic imagination involves the externalization of internal - ized images . This involves a priori ideas and images . The designer comes 27 Weick , K E ‘Theory con - struction as disciplined imagin - ation’ Academy of Management Review Vol 14 No 4 ( 1989 ) 516 – 531 28 Sutherland , J W Systems : Analysis , Administration and Architecture Van Nostrand , New York ( 1975 ) 29 Whetten , D A ‘What consti - tutes a theoretical contribution’ Academy of Management Review Vol 14 No 4 ( 1989 ) 490 – 495 516 Design Studies Vol 24 No . 6 November 2003 ﬁrst in this model of the design process . In contrast , solving problems demands robust engagement with the problem itself . The problem comes ﬁrst . The problem sets the premise by establishing the boundary conditions of a solution . At the same time , the problem opens a forum for the imagination and expertise of the designer . Social science depends on what C . Wright Mills described as ‘the sociological imagination . ’ Mathematical invention involves a journey of psychological discovery through what Jacques Hada - mard termed ‘the mathematician’s mind . ’ Across the many ﬁelds of the natural and social sciences , progress comes when individuals and groups apply their genius to the understanding of how the world works and why . Understanding why things come to be , why they perish , and why they are as they are involves discipline and imagination both . Thus , Weick 27 describes theory building as ‘an act of disciplined imagination . ’ 2 How theory works Sutherland 28 ( p 9 ) describes theory as ‘an ordered set of assertions about a generic behavior or structure assumed to hold throughout a signiﬁcantly broad range of speciﬁc instances . ’ To understand the nature of a behavior and organize an ordered set of assertions that describe it in a valid and veriﬁable way requires the characteristics described by McNeil 22 ( p 8 ) . Weick 27 addresses the question of shaping a theory that fulﬁlls these cri - teria—or similar criteria—while functioning at a sufﬁciently rich and non - trivial level to be useful . A body of writings equivalent to the rich literature of inquiry on theory construction in the natural and social sciences has yet to be developed in design studies . This is understandable in a discipline that is quite new compared with information science , physics or sociology , let alone philosophy , mathematics or geometry . This is also understandable in a ﬁeld where the graduate programs , doctoral seminars , and research conferences that constitute the forums of theory development are just now beginning to blossom . Having deﬁned theory , we must ask , ‘What constitutes a theoretical contri - bution ? ’ David A . Whetten ( 1989 ) explored this question in an article of the same title . Whetten 29 begins by identifying the four elements of any theory . These four elements answer six questions : ( 1 ) ‘what , ’ ( 2 ) ‘how , ’ ( 3 ) ‘why , ’ and ( 4 ) ‘who - where - when . ’ The ‘what’ element articulates the factors that must be considered part of an explanation of the phenomena under study . Whetten identiﬁes two criteria as central to judging the value of a ‘what . ’ 30 Friedman K ‘What design - ers need to know for the twenty - ﬁrst century’ Lecture delivered at the Norwegian Industrial Design Society , Institute for Industrial Design , Oslo College of Archi - tecture , Oslo 31 Parsons T and Shils E A ( eds ) Toward a General Theory of Action . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA ( 1951 ) 517 Theory construction in design research These are comprehensiveness and parsimony . Are all the elements ident - iﬁed ? Are there enough elements to account for all issues without a sur - plus ? Whetten 29 ( p 490 ) describes ‘sensitivity to the competing virtues of parsimony and comprehensiveness’ as the mark of a good theorist . The ‘how’ of a theory shows how the factors identiﬁed in the ‘what’ are related . Whetten 29 ( p 491 ) describes this as a process of using metaphorical arrows to connect the boxes in a model . This delineates the patterns that show elements of a phenomenon in their dynamic relationship to one another 30 . This description often reveals causality , and it builds a foun - dation for the explanatory power of the model represented by a theory 30 . The ‘why’ element involves the underlying ‘dynamics that justify the selec - tion of factors and the proposed causal relationships… ( t ) his rationale con - stitutes the theory’s assumptions—the theoretical glue that welds the model together… What and how describe . Only why explains’ 29 ( p 491 ) . Finally , the ‘who , where , and when’ of a theory substantiate theory with empirical data while setting limits on its uses and applications . According to Whetten , there are several ways to make signiﬁcant contri - butions to theory . Discovering or amending new items in the ‘what’ of an existing theory will generally make only a marginal improvement , but the ability to identify the ways in which the structural relationships of a theory change under the inﬂuence of new elements is often the beginning of new perspectives . New explanations—changes in the ‘why’ of a theory—offer the most fruitful , and most difﬁcult avenue of theory development . As an editor of a leading journal , Whetten 29 ( pp 494 – 5 ) asks seven key questions of theoretical contributions . Of these , three apply to theory - construction in general : ( 1 ) what’s new ? ( 2 ) so what ? ( 3 ) why so ? Two of the remaining four questions involve the internal qualities of the contribution as a paper , ( 4 ) well done ? and ( 5 ) done well ? The last two deal with context and the ﬁeld within which the contribution is offered ; ( 6 ) why now ? , and ( 7 ) who cares ? Theories in any ﬁeld develop in a pattern of increasingly sophisticated types . Parsons and Shils 31 ( pp 49 – 51 ) describe several levels of theoretical sys - tems . They state that ‘in one sense , every carefully deﬁned and logically integrated conceptual scheme constitutes a ‘system , ’ and in the sense , scientiﬁc theory of any kind consists of systems’ ( p 49 ) . They go beyond this , to ask three questions about theoretical systems . The ﬁrst question 32 Webster , J and Watson , R T ‘Analyzing the past to prepare for the future : writing a literature review’ Management Information Science Quarterly Vol 26 No 2 ( 2002 ) xiii – xxiii 33 Varian , H R H ‘How to build an economic model in your spare time’ in M Szenberg ( ed . ) Passion and Craft . Economists at Work , University of Michigan Press , Ann Arbor , MI ( 1997 ) 518 Design Studies Vol 24 No . 6 November 2003 involves generality and complexity . The second involves what they call ‘closure , ’ the degree to which a system is self - consistent , and the degree to which the assertions of any one part of the theory are supported or contradicted by the other parts . The third question involves what they label ‘the level of systematization . ’ This involves the degree to which theory moves toward general scientiﬁc goals . Parsons and Shils 31 ( p 50 ) propose four different levels of systematization for theories , moving from the most primitive to the most advanced . These are ( 1 ) ad hoc classiﬁcation systems , ( 2 ) systems of categories , ( 3 ) theoreti - cal systems , and ( 4 ) empirical – theoretical systems . This implies a schema of increasingly useful kinds of theories based on the relations among the parts of a theoretical system . In Parsons’s and Shils’s schema , theoretical development implies a ‘hierarchy from ad hoc classiﬁcation systems ( in which categories are used to summarize empirical observations ) , to taxonomies ( in which the relationships between the categ - ories can be described ) , to conceptual frameworks ( in which propositions summarize explanations and predictions ) , to theoretical systems ( in which laws are contained within axiomatic or formal theories ) ’ 32 ( p xiii ) . While it is useful to distinguish between taxonomy and theory , it is fair to say that at some points , taxonomy is a kind of theory because it offers a model of existing data and demonstrates the relationships between and among facts . Theories that describe structures offer models without moving parts . In this sense , theories are models that resemble maps or model houses . Theories that describe processes , activities , or systems generally require dynamic descriptions . In this sense , theories are models that resemble model engines or model train sets , and they must describe motion to demonstrate the properties of the systems they resemble . Hal Varian 33 discusses the challenges of theory construction and some helpful approaches to representing aspects of reality in robust yet simple ways . Rather than starting with literature or seeking general features , he advocates seeking useful data on interesting issues . Moving from interest - ing issues , Varian proposes creating models that exhibit the characteristics of the issues , repeating the process until one has the simplest possible model that demonstrates the phenomena under consideration . ‘Keep at it till it gets simple , ’ he writes 33 ( p 1 ) . ‘The whole point of a model is to give a simpliﬁed representation of reality . Einstein once said 34 Glaser , B G Advances in the Methodology of Grounded Theory . Theoretical Sensitivity The Sociology Press , Mill Valley , CA ( 1978 ) 35 Glaser , B G Basics of Grounded Theory Analysis . Emergence versus Forcing The Sociology Press , Mill Valley , CA ( 1992 ) 36 Glaser , B G and Strauss , A A The Discovery of Grounded Theory . Strategies forQualitative Research Aldine Publishing , Chicago , IL ( 1967 ) 37 Strauss , A A Qualitative Analysis for Social Scientists Cambridge University Press , Cambridge ( 1991 ) 38 Strauss , A A and Corbin , J Basics of Qualitative Research . Grounded Theory Procedures and Techniques Sage , London ( 1990 ) 39 Strauss , A A and Corbin , J G ‘Grounded theory method - ology : an overview’ in N K Denzin and Y S Lincoln ( eds ) Handbook of Qualitative Research , Sage , Newbury Park , CA ( 1994 ) 40 Polanyi , M The Tacit Dimension Doubleday and Com - pany , Garden City , NY ( 1966 ) 519 Theory construction in design research ‘Everything should be as simple as possible but no simpler . ’ A model is supposed to reveal the essence of what is going on : your model should be reduced to just those pieces that are required to make it work . ’ The point of modeling—and of theory construction—is showing how things work . 3 Theory construction problems in design research Until recently , the ﬁeld of design has been an adjunct to art and craft . With the transformation of design into an industrial discipline come responsi - bilities that the ﬁeld of design studies has only recently begun to address . Design is now becoming a generalizable discipline that may as readily be applied to processes , interfaces between media or information artifacts as to tools , clothing , furniture , or advertisements . To understand design as a discipline that can function within any of these frames means developing a general theory of design . This general theory should support application theories and operational programs . Moving from a general theory of design to the task of solving problems involves a signiﬁcantly different mode of conceptualization and explicit knowledge management than adapting the tacit knowledge of individual design experience . So far , most design theories involve clinical situations or micro - level grounded theories developed through induction . This is necessary , but it is not sufﬁcient for the kinds of progress we need . In the social sciences , grounded theory has developed into a robust and sophisticated system for generating theory across levels . These theories ultimately lead to larger ranges of understanding , and the literature of grounded theory is rich in discussions of theory construction and theoretical sensitivity 34 – 39 . One of the deep problems in design research is the failure to develop grounded theory out of practice . Instead , designers often confuse practice with research . Instead of developing theory from practice through articu - lation and inductive inquiry , some designers simply argue that practice is research and practice - based research is , in itself , a form of theory construc - tion . Design theory is not identical with the tacit knowledge of design practice . While tacit knowledge is important to all ﬁelds of practice , con - fusing tacit knowledge with general design knowledge involves a cate - gory confusion . Michael Polanyi , who wrote the classic study of tacit knowledge 40 , disting - uishes between tacit knowledge and theory construction . Where tacit knowledge is embodied and experiential knowledge , theory requires more . 41 Polanyi , M Personal Knowl - edge University of Chicago Press , Chicago , IL ( 1974 ) 42 Blumer , H Symbolic Inter - actionism . Perspective and Method Prentice - Hall , Engle - wood Cliffs , NJ ( 1969 ) 43 Baugh , K The Methodology of Herbert Blumer . Critical Interpretation and Repair Cam - bridge University Press , Cam - bridge ( 1990 ) 44 Van den Hoonard , W C Working with Sensitizing Con - cepts . Analytical Field Research Sage , Thousand Oaks , CA ( 1997 ) 520 Design Studies Vol 24 No . 6 November 2003 ‘It seems to me , ’ he writes , ‘that we have sound reason for . . . considering theoretical knowledge more objective than immediate experience . . . . . A theory is something other than myself . It may be set out on paper as a system , of rules , and it is the more truly a theory the more completely it can be put down in such terms’ 41 ( p 4 ) . Polanyi’s 41 ( pp 3 – 9 ) discussion of the Copernican Revolution addresses some of the signiﬁcant themes also seen in Varian 33 , Deming 19 , 20 , and McNeil 22 . These address such concepts as descriptive richness , theory as a guide to discovery , and modeling . As a guide to theory construction , this is also linked to Herbert Blumer’s idea of sensitizing concepts 42 – 44 . All of these possibilities require explicit knowledge , rendered articulate for shared communication and reﬂection . Explicit and articulate statements are the basis of all theoretical activities , all theorizing , and all theory construction . This true of interpretive and hermeneutical traditions , psychological , historical , and sociological tra - ditions , and it is as true of these as of quantitative research in chemistry , descriptive biology or research engineering , logistics , and axiomatic math - ematics . The languages are different . However , only explicit articulation permits us to contrast theories and to share them . Only explicit articulation allows us to test , consider , or reﬂect on the theories we develop . For this reason , the misguided effort to link the reﬂective practice of design to design knowledge , and the misguided effort to propose tacit knowledge or direct making as a method of theory construction must inevitably be dead ends . All knowledge , all science , all practice relies on a rich cycle of knowledge management that moves from tacit knowledge to explicit and back again . So far , design with its craft tradition has relied far more on tacit knowledge . It is now time to consider the explicit ways in which design theory can be built—and to recognize that without a body of theory - based knowledge , the design profession will not be prepared to meet the challenges that face designers in today’s complex world . 4 Future directions The goal of this article has been to examine criteria , approaches , and methods for theory construction in design research . To do this , I began with a foundation of deﬁnitions , using these to build a range of appli - cable concepts . There is not enough room in one article to go beyond the general consider - 45 Nelson H and Stolterman E ‘Design as being in service . ’ in D Durling and K Friedman ( eds ) Doctoral Education in Design . Foundations for the Future . Proceedings of the La Clusaz Conference , July 8 - 12 , 2000 . Staffordshire University Press , Staffordshire , UK ( 2000 ) pp . 23 – 33 . 521 Theory construction in design research ation of methods to a speciﬁc description of how to develop theory and build speciﬁc theories . This is a task for a future article . Many avenues deserve exploration in the future . These include linking theory building to the perspectives of design science , proposing models of theory construction from other perspectives , generating theory from the practice of leading contemporary designers , and developing such basic tools as a bibliography of resources for theory construction and developing theoretical imagination and sensitivity . Theory - rich design can be playful as well as disciplined . Theory - based design can be as playful and artistic as craft - based design , but only theory - based design is suited to the large - scale social and economic needs of the industrial age . This systemic , theory - driven approach offers a level of robust understand - ing that becomes one foundation of effective practice . To reach from know - ing to doing requires practice . To reach from doing to knowing requires the articulation and critical inquiry that leads a practitioner to reﬂective insight . W . Edwards Deming’s experience in the applied industrial setting and the direct clinical setting conﬁrms the value of theory to practice . ‘Experience alone , without theory , teaches . . . nothing about what to do to improve quality and competitive position , nor how to do it’ writes Deming 20 ( p 19 ) in his critique of contemporary manufacturing . ‘If experi - ence alone would be a teacher , then one may well ask why are we in this predicament ? Experience will answer a question , and a question comes from theory . ’ It is not experience , but our interpretation and understanding of experience that leads to knowledge . Knowledge emerges from critical inquiry . System - atic or scientiﬁc knowledge arises from the theories that allow us to ques - tion and learn from the world around us . One of the attributes that dis - tinguish the practice of a profession from the practice of an art is systematic knowledge . In exploring the dimensions of design as service , Nelson and Stolterman 45 distinguish it from art and science both . My view is that art and science both contribute to design . The paradigm of service unites them . To serve successfully demands an ability to cause change toward desired goals . This , in turn , involves the ability to discern desirable goals and to create predictable—or reasonable—changes to reach them . Theory is a tool that allows us to conceptualize and realize this aspect of design . Research is the collection of methods that enable us to use the tool . 522 Design Studies Vol 24 No . 6 November 2003 Some designers assert that theory - based design , with its emphasis on pro - found knowledge and intellectual achievement , robs design of its artistic depth . I disagree . I believe that a study of design based on profound knowl - edge embraces the empirical world of people and problems in a deeper way than purely self - generated artistry can do . The world’s population recently exceeded six billion people for the ﬁrst time . Many people in today’s world live under such constrained conditions that their needs for food , clothing , shelter , and material comfort are entirely unmet . For the rest , most needs can only be met by industrial production . Only when we are able to develop a comprehensive , sustainable industrial practice at cost - effective scale and scope will we be able to meet their needs . Design will never achieve this goal until it rests on all three legs of science , observation , theorizing , and experimenting to sort useful theories from the rest . To do this , design practice—and design research— require theory .