78 Copyright © 2010 , IGI Global . Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited . Chapter 5 The Constitution of the Activity Domain The purpose of the activity domain construct is to capture the essence of the coordination of human activity . As indicated by the mammoth hunting example , this essence is assumed to be invariant to the various forms activities take in time and place . The same basic constitution of activity applies to the collection of edible roots at the dawn of humankind as to the production of sophisticated products and services by global enterprises of today . The invariance of the fundamental features of the activity domain implies that its constitution can ultimately be traced back to the phylogenetic evolution of the human species . We have developed the faculty of cognizing constituting elements of activities , and this faculty is inherent in all healthy human beings . In everyday life , we constantly encounter things that can be characterized as activity domains . When I go to the barber shop to get my hair done , when I buy a new car from the car dealer , when I contact the electric company to complain about my latest bill ; in all these instances I interact with an activity domain . Usually we speak about these domains as organizations , companies , offices , and the like , which are the perceivable manifestations of the underlying activity domain constitution . This constitution is equally applicable to any forms of organized work , such as teams , groups , business units , companies , enterprises , or any other constellation of organized work settings . Thus , in ADT the activity domain is regarded as the “kernel” construct in organizational contexts ; as the DNA of the firm , so to speak . DOI : 10 . 4018 / 978 - 1 - 60566 - 192 - 6 . ch005 79 The Constitution of the Activity Domain The constitution of the activity domain is illustrated in the conceptual model in Figure 1 : The basic features of the activity domain are as follows : The • activity domain is a work setting ( team , group , business unit , etc . ) whose existence is mo - tivated by its capability to produce some outcome . The outcome may be a product or a service that is capable of fulfilling some need in other domains . For example , the motivation for the ex - istence of a hospital is to cure ill people , or , in the case of private hospitals to make a profit for shareholders . The outcome is achieved through the actions of socially organized • actors , who transform a work object into the outcome . In the hospital example , the work object is ill people , and the outcome is , hopefully , cured people . This is valid for both types of hospitals . However , although the work object is the same , the different motives of public and private hospitals will have a direct influence on the constitution of the domain . For example , in private hospitals , the first priority is to make sure that the patient can pay the bill . In order to transform the work object , • actors enact resources consisting of means and skills . Enactment refers to the fact that the potential capabilities of means become resources only when the actors have drawn these into the social fabric of the activity domain and collectively learnt how Figure 1 . A conceptual model of the activity domain produces is a prerequisite for outcome needs work object activity domain has in resources actors characterized as enact 28 more pages are available in the full version of this document , which may be purchased using the " Add to Cart " button on the product ' s webpage : www . igi - global . com / chapter / constitution - activity - domain / 39673 ? camid = 4v1 This title is available in InfoSci - Books , Business - Technology - Solution , InfoSci - Intelligent Technologies , Science , Engineering , and Information Technology , InfoSci - Computer Science and Information Technology , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Select . Recommend this product to your librarian : www . igi - global . com / e - resources / library - recommendation / ? id = 1 Related Content Modeling of Friction Stir Welding of AL7075 Using Neural Networks Sasidhar Muttineni and Pandu R . Vundavilli ( 2012 ) . International Journal of Applied Evolutionary Computation ( pp . 66 - 79 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / modeling - friction - stir - welding - al7075 / 64214 ? camid = 4v1a An Examination of the Application Scenarios of Enterprise Wikis Dada Lin ( 2012 ) . International Journal of Knowledge and Systems Science ( pp . 42 - 51 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / examination - application - scenarios - enterprise - wikis / 69962 ? camid = 4v1a Modeling Multi - State Equipment Degradation with Non - Homogeneous Continuous - Time Hidden Semi - Markov Process Ramin Moghaddass , Ming J . Zuo and Xiaomin Zhao ( 2013 ) . Diagnostics and Prognostics of Engineering Systems : Methods and Techniques ( pp . 151 - 181 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / modeling - multi - state - equipment - degradation / 69677 ? camid = 4v1a A Self - Organizing Neural Network to Approach Novelty Detection Marcelo Keese Albertini and Rodrigo Fernandes de Mello ( 2010 ) . Intelligent Systems for Automated Learning and Adaptation : Emerging Trends and Applications ( pp . 49 - 71 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / self - organizing - neural - network - approach / 38450 ? camid = 4v1a