Review On human pluripotent stem cell control : The rise of 3D bioengineering and mechanobiology Yue Shao a , 1 , Jianming Sang a , 1 , Jianping Fu a , b , * a Department of Mechanical Engineering , University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , MI 48109 , USA b Department of Biomedical Engineering , University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , MI 48109 , USA a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 4 December 2014 Accepted 28 January 2015 Available online Keywords : Human pluripotent stem cells Mechanobiology Bioengineering Regenerative medicine Development Human disease modeling a b s t r a c t Human pluripotent stem cells ( hPSCs ) provide promising resources for regenerating tissues and organs and modeling development and diseases in vitro . To ful ﬁ ll their promise , the fate , function , and organization of hPSCs need to be precisely regulated in a three - dimensional ( 3D ) environment to mimic cellular structures and functions of native tissues and organs . In the past decade , innovations in 3D culture systems with functional biomaterials have enabled ef ﬁ cient and versatile control of hPSC fate at the cellular level . However , we are just at the beginning of bringing hPSC - based regeneration and development and disease modeling to the tissue and organ levels . In this review , we summarize existing bioengineered culture platforms for controlling hPSC fate and function by regulating inductive mechanical and biochemical cues coexisting in the synthetic cell microenvironment . We highlight recent excitements in developing 3D hPSC - based in vitro tissue and organ models with in vivo - like cellular structures , interactions , and functions . We further discuss an emerging multifaceted mechanotransductive signaling network e with transcriptional coactivators YAP and TAZ at the center stage e that regulate fates and behaviors of mammalian cells , including hPSCs . Future development of 3D biomaterial systems should incorporate dynamically modulated mechanical and chemical properties targeting speci ﬁ c intracellular signaling events leading to desirable hPSC fate patterning and functional tissue formation in 3D . © 2015 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction Starting from fertilization , embryonic development comprises a complex process that unfolds the complete form of human life . During earlyembryonic development , each single cell in the morula holds equal totipotency e the capability to divide and differentiate into all differentiated cells in a living organism [ 1 ] . Derived from the inner cell mass of human blastocyst , which comes right after the morula stage , human embryonic stem cells ( hESCs ) inherit most of the totipotency and maintain the potential for unlimited self - renewal and differentiation into all types of somatic cells in vitro [ 2 ] . Interestingly , although the pluripotency of cells decreases as the embryo develops and the organism ages , it does not completely disappear . Instead , many kinds of adult stem cells exist in the human body throughout the life span , serving as resources for replenishing dying cells and regenerating damaged tissues [ 3 ] . Although considered as an irreversible process e as an analogy to a rock spontaneously rolling downhill e the transition from pluripotent cells to terminally differentiated cells has recently been found to be reversible through a “ reprogramming ” process under certain “ driving forces ” , such as nuclear transfer [ 4 ] , transcription - level interference [ 5 ] , and treatments with small molecules [ 6 ] . Such human induced pluripotent stem cells ( hiPSCs ) , together with hESCs , are termed human pluripotent stem cells ( hPSCs ) , holding great promise for studying human development and disease , regeneration of tissues and organs , and constructing patient - speci ﬁ c disease models for drug and toxicology screening [ 7 , 8 ] . The fate and organization of cells in the human body are tightly regulated in the three - dimensional ( 3D ) cell microenvironment through intricate interactions with neighboring cells , the sur - rounding extracellular matrix ( ECM ) , and soluble biochemical cues [ 9 , 10 ] . Thus , to recapitulate in vivo - like cellular structures , prop - erties , and organizations using hPSCs , it is critical to control and modulate the 3D cell microenvironment mimicking tissue - and * Corresponding author . Department of Mechanical Engineering , University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , MI 48109 , USA . E - mail address : jpfu @ umich . edu ( J . Fu ) . 1 These authors contributed equally to this work . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Biomaterials journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / biomaterials http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . biomaterials . 2015 . 01 . 078 0142 - 9612 / © 2015 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . Biomaterials 52 ( 2015 ) 26 e 43 organ - speci ﬁ c niches . Since the end of last century , biologists , biomaterials scientists , and bioengineers have been endeavoring to develop ef ﬁ cient strategies for maintaining hPSC culture and directing hPSC differentiation and their spatiotemporal organiza - tion by modulating the physiochemical culture environment [ 11 e 15 ] . So far , a majority of achievements for hPSC culture have been witnessed through development of various two - dimensional ( 2D ) systems , using either tissue culture plastics ( TCPs ) or synthetic biomaterial surfaces . These 2D culture platforms have enabled drastic advancements in controlling long - term clonal growth and multilineage differentiations of hPSCs [ 11 ] , and they have been shown effective in inducing early developmental structures such as neural rosettes [ 16 ] . However , 2D hPSC culture platforms are intrinsically limited for delivering full promise of hPSCs , given the 3D nature of human tis - sues and organs . Compared to 2D platforms imposing unnatural geometric constraints on cells , 3D culture systems using functional biomaterials create a more physiologically - relevant cell microenvi - ronment . Supporting this notion , it has been shown that 3D bioma - terial systems can improve survival and regenerative potential of hESC - derived multipotent stem cells and human adult stem cells after in vivo implantation [ 17 e 19 ] . 3D hPSC cultures are also needed for modeling human diseases related to abnormal ECM remodeling during development and aging [ 20 ] , a process dif ﬁ cult if not impos - sible to recapitulate in a 2D environment . Furthermore , 3D spatio - temporal patterning and organization of cytosystems is one of the most prominent features of embryonic development , tissue morphogenesis , and organogenesis and is also key to proper func - tionalities of human tissues and organs . Such dynamic cellular patterning and organization can only be simulated in a 3D environ - ment using functional biomaterials of appropriate properties [ 21 ] . Fundamental understanding of cell e biomaterial interactions in a 3D environment is critical for guiding rational designs of bio - materials for bioengineered control of cell fate . Interestingly , recent studies of human stem and adult cells have revealed potent roles of mechanical aspects of cell e biomaterial interactions in regulating cell fate , through mechanotransductive signaling mechanisms intricately connected to classical cellular pathways important for cell fate control [ 22 ] . In particular , a signaling network centering around two transcriptional coactivators YAP and TAZ has emerged recently for its important role in growth control and fate regulation of human stem cells , including hPSCs [ 23 e 25 ] . The goal of this review , therefore , is to present an overview of existing biomaterial systems for fate control of hPSCs in both 2D and 3D environments , in accompany with a summary of the current understanding of cell signaling pathways , which are potentially mechanosensitive , in hPSC fate and function control . We ﬁ rst summarize existing 2D and 3D culture platforms for regulating hPSC behaviors , laying a foundation of hPSC fate and function regulation by inductive microenvironmental cues . We then discuss recent excitement on using 3D biomaterial systems with hPSCs for generating microtissues and organoids with in vivo - like tissue structures and functions . We further discuss current understanding of YAP / TAZ - mediated intracellular signaling in controlling stem cell fates and highlight mechanotransductive mechanisms acting upstream of YAP / TAZ through Rho GTPases , cytoskeleton tension , and F - actin mechanics . We offer some speculations on future op - portunities to develop large - scale , multifunctional hPSC culture systems that integrate multiparametric control of 3D microenvi - ronmental cues and high - throughput , automated cellular process - ing and analysis techniques . 2 . Engineering hPSC fate and function : from 2D to 3D 2 . 1 . 2D hPSC culture platforms 2 . 1 . 1 . 2D culture platforms for hPSC self - renewal Maintaining long - term hPSC culture without losing their pluripotency is a prerequisite for hPSC - based applications . Conventionally , mitotically inactive mouse ﬁ broblasts ( MEFs ) are used as feeder cells to support hPSC self - renewal ( Fig . 1A ) . How - ever , mouse feeder cells may raise potential issues owing to immunogenicity and microbial or viral transmission [ 26 ] . In addi - tion , feeder - based cultures suffer from batch - to - batch variations and cytogenetic aberrations due to repeated enzymatic treatments , posing a challenge for controllable and repeatable hPSC culture . As an attempt to eliminate feeder cells from hPSC culture , Kim et al . recently developed a strategy using porous polymeric membranes to physically separate hPSCs from feeder cells ( Fig . 1B ) [ 27 ] . In their culture system , MEFs were seeded to the bottom surface of the porous membrane before hPSCs were cultured on its top surface . This setup allowed continual interactions between hPSCs and MEFs as well as an ef ﬁ cient separation mechanism without enzymatic treatments , resulting in reduced contamination from MEFs , as Fig . 1 . 2D culture platforms for hPSC self - renewal and expansion . ( A ) Culturing hESCs directly on feeder cell layer . Adapted with permission from Ref . [ 169 ] . Copyright 2011 , InTech . ( B ) Culturing hESCs on feeder cell layer separated by a porous membrane . Adapted with permission from Ref . [ 27 ] . Copyright 2007 , Wiley - VCH . ( C ) Feeder - free 2D culture of hPSCs using substrates coated with natural ECM ( left ) , synthetic hydrogel with bioactive motifs from natural ECM ( middle ) , fullysynthetic hydrogel ( right ) . ( D ) Feeder - free culture of hPSCs using 2D culture dishes treated with oxygen plasma or UV zone . Adapted with permission from Ref . [ 34 ] . Copyright 2011 , United States National Academy of Sciences . Y . Shao et al . / Biomaterials 52 ( 2015 ) 26 e 43 27 evidenced by signi ﬁ cantly decreased mouse vimentin gene expression in hPSCs . To fully address issues associated with feeder cells , most recent efforts have been directed toward developing feeder - free , chemi - cally fully - de ﬁ ned 2D culture platforms ( Fig . 1C ) [ 28 ] . A noteworthy achievement was accomplished by functionalizing 2D culture sur - faces with either naturally derived proteins or synthetic polymers . For example , the ﬁ rst feeder - free culture system , as reported by Xu et al . [ 29 ] , applied Matrigel ( secreted by Engelbreth - Holm - Swarm ( EHS ) sarcoma cells and composed of ECM proteins such as lami - nin , collagen IV , and heparin sulfate proteoglycan ) to coat 2D cul - ture surfaces to support hPSC self - renewal in conjunction with MEF conditioned medium ( MEF - CM ) . hPSCs on Matrigel in MEF - CM can maintain a normal karyotype and an undifferentiated and plurip - otent state for > 130 population doublings ( > 180 days ) . Alternatively , researchers have taken resort to synthetic poly - meric materials for feeder - free hPSC culture ( Fig . 1C ) . The ﬁ rst successful strategy is to incorporate active components of natural ECM proteins into synthetic polymers , to mimic native ECM func - tions and thus support adhesion and self - renewal of hPSCs . For example , bioactive peptide sequences including RGD , DGEA , P15 , IKVAV , KRSR , and GROGER are commonly used to construct ECM - mimicking biomaterials [ 13 ] , among which RGD is the most pop - ular one . Another powerful strategy is to develop completely syn - thetic polymers without using any animal - derived component , rendering a fully - de ﬁ ned surface biochemistry for hPSC culture . This method was demonstrated recently for supporting long - term self - renewal of hPSCs using synthetic polymers such as amino - propylmethacrylamide ( APMAAm ) [ 30 ] , poly ( methyl vinyl ether - alt - maleic anhydride ) ( PMVE - alt - MA ) [ 31 ] , and poly [ 2 - ( meth - acryloyloxy ) ethyl dimethyl - ( 3 - sulfopropyl ) ammonium hydroxide ] ( PMEDSAH ) [ 28 ] . There were some other studies using high - throughput screening techniques to identify optimal combina - tions of different synthetic polymeric materials and natural ECM proteins to promote hPSC self - renewal [ 31 , 32 ] . In addition to surface functionalization using ECM proteins or synthetic polymers , physical methods have also been adopted for developing novel 2D substrates for hPSC culture ( Fig . 1D ) . Using oxygen plasma - etched tissue culture polystyrene ( PE - TCP ) surface , Mahlstedt et al . successfully cultured hPSCs in MEF - CM for > 10 passages with the cells maintaining a stable karyotype and pluripotency markers ( Oct4 , SSEA - 4 , and TRA1 - 60 ) [ 33 ] . Recently , Saha et al . applied UV ozone radiation to modify TCP surfaces , and such modi ﬁ ed TCPs were shown to out - perform feeder - based hPSC culture in terms of supporting hPSC self - renewal [ 34 ] . Long - term culture ( > 10 passages for 2 months ) of hPSCs on UV ozone - modi ﬁ ed TCPs provided undifferentiated hPSCs with a normal karyotype and robust expression of pluripotency markers ( SSEA - 4 , Sox2 and Nanog ) as well as the ability to form teratomas in vivo . 2 . 1 . 2 . 2D platforms for directed differentiation of hPSCs During embryonic development , cell growth , differentiation , and morphogenesis are spatiotemporally regulated by an intricate and dynamic gene regulatory network as well as local environ - mental signals . Knowledge of such dynamic gene regulatory network and environmental signals , especially those related to growth factors and cytokines , have been well documented through decades of studies in developmental biology . In the past decade , soluble factors such as retinoic acid ( RA ) , basic ﬁ broblast growth factor ( bFGF ) , bone morphogenetic factor 4 ( BMP4 ) , activin A , wnt3a , and vascular endothelial growth factors ( VEGFs ) , have been extensively applied in 2D cultures for directed differentiation of hPSCs into different lineages such as epidermal , neural , cardiac , and vascular cells . For informative discussions about different soluble factors and their effects on in vitro hPSC differentiation , the readers are referred to an excellent recent review by Hazeltine et al . [ 11 ] . In contrast to soluble factors , ECM proteins constitute the ﬁ rst known family of insoluble factors in the cell microenvironment that can directly regulate the fate and function of hPSCs . Different ECM molecules such as vitronectin , ﬁ bronectin , laminin , and collagen have been demonstrated to support hPSC adhesion , proliferation , and differentiation in conventional 2D cultures . Detailed discus - sions of biological activities of ECM proteins and their roles in controlling hPSC fate and function can be found in excellent reviews published elsewhere [ 12 , 35 ] . Herein , we focus on discussing the emerging theme of controlling extracellular insoluble biophysical signals for regulation of hPSC differentiation ( Fig . 2 ) [ 13 , 14 , 36 ] . As a measurement of the resistance to deformation , mechanical stiffness of the embryo varies in space and over time during development , generating a distinct pattern of tissue stiffness throughout the human body [ 37 , 38 ] . The interesting idea of using tissue - mimicking matrix stiffness to regulate hPSC differentiation Fig . 2 . 2D culture platforms for directing hPSC differentiation via modulating substrate physical properties . ( A ) Promoting neural differentiation of hPSCs using soft elastomeric substrates . Upon neural induction , hPSCs cultured on soft substrates committed highly ef ﬁ cient speci ﬁ cation ( ~ 90 % ) towards neuroepithelial lineage ( Pax6 þ , top left ) , while those cultured on stiff substrates exhibited a mixture of neuroepithelial and neural crest ( AP2 þ ) differentiations ( top right ) . Upon further induction of caudalization and ventralization , soft substrates yielded a much larger amount of motor neurons ( b - III - tubulin , Tuj þ ) than stiff substrates did . Adapted with permission from Ref . [ 46 ] . Copyright 2014 , Nature Publishing Group . ( B ) Regulating hESC self - renewal and differentiation via substrate nanotopography . While hESCs cultured on smooth glass substrates exhibited strong self - renewal ( Oct4 þ , red ) ( left panel ) , those cultured on nanorough glass surfaces demonstrated enhanced differentiation ( right panel ) . Adapted with permission from Ref . [ 53 ] . Copyright 2012 , American Society of Chemistry . ( C ) Using geometric con ﬁ nements to recapitulate cell fate patterning during early embryonic development . When culturing hESC colonies on circular islands and applying external BMP4 stimulation , cells on the outmost ring committed trophectodermal lineage ( Cdx2 þ ) , while the inner most cells exhibited ectodermal differentiation ( Sox2 þ ) , with a mesendodermal ring ( Bra þ ) between them . Adapted with permissions respectively from Ref . [ 58 ] . Copyright 2014 , Nature Publishing Group . ( For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁ gure legend , the reader is referred to the web version of this article . ) Y . Shao et al . / Biomaterials 52 ( 2015 ) 26 e 43 28 can be originated back to the seminal work by Engler et al . , which demonstrated that brain - like soft polyacrylamide ( PA ) hydrogel substrates enhanced neurogenesis of human mesenchymal stem cells ( hMSCs ) , while PA substrates with muscle - and bone - mimicking stiffness promoted cardiogenesis and osteogenesis , respectively [ 37 ] . Using microfabricated elastomeric poly - dimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) micropost arrays with different post spring constants e a physical analogy of varying substrate stiffness , Fu et al . also demonstrated that substrate stiffness could serve as an extracellular switch to direct hMSC differentiation between osteogenesis and adipogenesis [ 39 ] . The idea of controlling stem cell differentiation by modulating matrix mechanics has also been recently extended to other types of adult stem cells . Holst et al . , for example , showed that only tropoelastin substrates with interme - diate elasticity enhanced expansion of human hematopoietic stem cells ( hHSCs ) [ 40 ] . Gilbert et al . reported that instead of rigid sub - strates such as TCPs , applying softer hydrogels with stiffness close to native muscle elasticity promoted self - renewal of skeletal mus - cle stem cells ( MuSCs ) in vitro [ 41 ] . A very recent study from the same group reported that subjecting the MuSC population from aged mice to transient inhibition of p38 - mediated mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) pathway in conjunction with culturing the cells on soft hydrogel substrates rapidly expanded MuSC population and more interestingly , rejuvenated its potential for regeneration and strengthening damaged muscles after serial transplantation in aged mice [ 42 ] . Effect of matrix rigidity on hPSC behaviors has not been exam - ined explicitly until recently . Different groups including our own have lately investigated whether the survival , self - renewal , and differentiation of hPSCs are regulated by substrate rigidity . For example , we utilized the PDMS micropost array system to show that substrate rigidity plays a signi ﬁ cant role in regulating plurip - otency of hPSCs , as a signi ﬁ cantly higher percentage of hPSCs after culture on rigid PDMS microposts coated with vitronectin for 24 h remained as undifferentiated Oct4 þ cells compared to cells on soft PDMS microposts [ 43 ] . Similarly , the study by Musah et al . using a modi ﬁ ed PA gel system functionalized with adhesive peptide GKKQRFRHRNRKG derived from vitronectin also showed that only rigid PA gels but not soft ones maintained hPSC proliferation and pluripotency [ 44 ] . Interestingly , another study by Keung et al . using Matrigel coated PA gels showed that substrate rigidity had no sig - ni ﬁ cant effect on proliferation or expression of pluripotency markers for hPSCs after culture for 3 d under a self - renewal me - dium condition . By using a neurogenic culture protocol , Keung et al . further demonstrated that soft PA substrates promoted neuro - epithelial differentiation of hPSCs [ 45 ] . A more convincing recent study from our group further utilized soft PDMS micropost arrays to accelerate neural induction and caudalization of hPSCs ( Fig . 2A ) . Excitingly , the purity and yield of functional motor neurons derived from caudalized , hPSC - derived neural progenitor cells obtained from soft PDMS micropost arrays were improved four - and twelve - fold , respectively , compared to coverslips or rigid PDMS micropost arrays [ 46 ] . Mechanistic studies revealed a multi - targeted mecha - notransductive process involving Smad phosphorylation and nucleocytoplasmic shuttling , regulated by rigidity - dependent Hippo - YAP activities and actomyosin cytoskeleton ( CSK ) integrity and contractility [ 46 ] . Together , these studies reveal a functional synergy between biophysical and biochemical cues in the cell microenvironment providing a localized autonomous control of hPSC fate and function . Different observations between our group and Musah et al . and Keung et al . on the rigidity effect on hPSC pluripotency maintenance suggest that rigidity sensing by hPSCs may critically depend on the speci ﬁ c cell adhesion molecules employed by hPSCs to bind surrounding ECM proteins . Different observations from these studies also support the importance in recognizing differences in molecular - scale material properties ( such as porosity , surface chemistry , molecular backbone ﬂ exibility , and binding properties of immobilized adhesive ligands ) when comparing different synthetic substrates and hydrogel systems . Recent studies using synthetic hydrogels have supported that certain molecular - scale variations in material properties can have profound effects on hPSC behaviors [ 32 ] . Another exciting new trend is to develop novel hydrogel sys - tems with temporally modulated mechanical stiffness to modulate stem cell behaviors . In recent studies , dynamic substrate stiffening was shown to either switch hMSCs from adipogenesis to osteo - genesis [ 47 ] or promote their cardiogenic differentiation [ 48 ] . In addition to biomimicry of tissue mechanical stiffness , researchers have also developed different bioengineering strategies to recapitulate in vivo ECM micro / nanoscale topography and ar - chitecture onto 2D culture surfaces . A notable study by Dalby et al . showed that synthetic substrates with disordered nanoscale topographical features enhanced osteogenesis of hMSCs [ 49 ] . Substrates with highly aligned textures ( e . g . , microengineered grooves and electrospun ﬁ ber arrays ) were utilized to enhance neuronal differentiation of murine ESCs as well as neural progen - itor cells [ 50 , 51 ] . Substrates composed of nanotubes were also applied for stem cell culture , with results demonstrating that hMSC osteogenesis was promoted on nanotubes with greater diameters [ 52 ] . By using reactive ion etching - generated nanorough coverslips , our group demonstrated nanoroughness - dependent adhesion , spreading , and self - renewal of hPSCs ( Fig . 2B ) [ 53 ] . Cell shape is another important cell property dynamically regulated during embryonic development . Indeed , numerous studies have supported cell shape as a potent biophysical regulator of stem cell fate and function . In one of the earliest studies , McBeath et al . applied microcontact printing to coat ﬂ at PDMS surfaces with distinct patterns of adhesive ECM islands and reported that single hMSCs con ﬁ ned to small ECM islands selectively underwent adi - pogenesis , whereas single hMSCs on large ECM islands were biased toward osteogenesis [ 54 ] . More recent studies further revealed that in addition to cell shape , cell geometry could also in ﬂ uence hMSC differentiation . hMSCs of elongated morphology preferred osteo - genesis , whereas those with a low aspect ratio morphology were biased toward adipogenesis [ 55 ] . Similarly , Lee et al . observed on soft PA substrates that a con ﬁ ned cell shape would promote hMSC adipogenesis , whereas a spread , branching cell morphology pro - moted hMSC neurogenic differentiation [ 56 ] . Direct investigation on the effect of cell shape on hPSC fate and function is not as straightforward as those reported for adult stem cells , given the rapid proliferative nature of hPSCs . Peerani et al . patterned hPSC colonies onto adhesive ECM islands with de ﬁ ned colony diameters , with results showing that larger hPSC colonies with a high cell density promoted pluripotency maintenance through a niche size - dependent spatial gradient of BMP - mediated Smad1 signaling , which was generated through antagonistic in - teractions between hPSCs and hPSC - derived extraembryonic endoderm [ 57 ] . Another study by Chambers et al . showed that cell seeding density had a direct effect on neuroepithelial ( high seeding density ) vs . neural crest ( low seeding density ) differentiation of hPSCs [ 16 ] . Very recently , using patterned adhesive ECM islands , Warm ﬂ ash et al . recapitulated spatial cell fate patterning during early embryonic development by leveraging the self - organization of differentiating hPSCs ( Fig . 2C ) [ 58 ] . In their study , when cultured on circular adhesive islands , hPSCs exhibited patterned pluripotency marker expression , with greater expression in cells closer to colony border . Upon further induction by extracellular BMP4 , hPSCs spontaneously self - organized into “ germ - layer - like ” structures , with a trophectoderm - like ring ( Cdx2 þ ) on the outmost edge , a mesendodermal layer ( i . e . , endodermal / mesodermal Y . Shao et al . / Biomaterials 52 ( 2015 ) 26 e 43 29 mixture ; Sox17 þ / Brachyury , Bra þ ) next to it , and an inner circular ectodermal layer ( Sox2 þ ) . The authors further reported that spatial patterning of hPSC fate and corresponding Smad signaling were de ﬁ ned relative to the outer boundary of cell colony with a ﬁ xed length scale . 2 . 2 . 3D hPSC culture platforms 2D hPSC culture platforms have been proven effective in sup - porting long - term self - renewal and large - scale expansion of hPSCs as well as directed hPSC differentiation toward speci ﬁ c lineages . However , it is arguable that a 3D culture system mimicking in vivo architecture and biological roles of the ECM may allow recapitu - lation of embryonic development in vitro to a degree of complexity not achievable in a 2D culture system . Recently , there are signi ﬁ cant efforts in developing innovative 3D biomaterial systems for hPSC culture and modeling human development and disease in vitro [ 15 ] . Here we limit our discussions to methods using embryoid body ( EB ) and 3D biomaterial scaffolds for 3D hPSC culture . For detailed discussions about biomaterial properties and their speci ﬁ c , inde - pendent effects on expansion of undifferentiated hPSCs , directed hPSC differentiation , and in vivo transplantation of differentiated hPSCs , the readers are referred to an excellent recent review by Kraehenbuehl et al . [ 59 ] . 2 . 2 . 1 . Embryoid body - based 3D culture Embryoid bodies ( EBs ) are 3D hPSC aggregates ( Fig . 3A ) . As formation and differentiation of EBs recapitulate many hallmarks of early embryonic development , EB - based hPSC culture has been used extensively for studying hPSC fate regulation [ 15 ] . For example , in EBs , it is common to observe regional expression of embryonic markers speci ﬁ c to the three germ lineages - mesoderm , ectoderm , and endoderm . Compared to 2D adherent culture , EB - based hPSC culture is inherently more scalable for biofabrication of hPSCs . Additionally , 3D structure of EBs with accompanying intricate cell e cell and cell - ECM interactions enables patterned and structured cell differentiation and morphogenesis , yielding micro - tissues similar to native tissue structures . Such microtissues are promising for regenerative medicine , development and disease studies , and in vitro drug and toxicology screening . In the past years , there are signi ﬁ cant progresses using micro / nanoengineering tools to control EB size or to incorporate into EBs polymeric microparticles ( MPs ) loaded with growth factors . Such functional MPs can be dynamically and remotely controlled for growth factor release . Bauwens et al . , for example , used micro - contact printing to pattern Matrigel islands onto TCPs to generate EBs with a uniform size [ 60 ] . Using such a strategy , Bauwens et al . showed that neural vs . cardiac differentiation of hPSCs in EBs depended on EB size . Such micropatterning technique was also recently applied for controlling EB size for large - scale hPSC pro - duction using bioreactors [ 61 ] . Instead of using micropatterning , Mohr et al . developed 3D microwell structures of different sizes ( with a lateral dimension of 100 e 500 m m and a height of 120 m m ) to control EB size [ 62 ] . The highest percentage of contracting EBs undergoing cardiogenesis was observed in microwells of an intermediate size ( 300 m m ) . More recently , Hwang et al . applied a similar strategy to generate EBs of de ﬁ ned sizes and observed a functional role of the non - canonical Wnt pathway in regulating EB size - dependent hPSC differentia - tion . Speci ﬁ cally , EBs of larger sizes ( 450 m m in diameter ) prefer - entially underwent cardiogenic differentiation , whereas EBs of smaller sizes ( 150 m m in diameter ) exhibited enhanced endothelial differentiation ( Fig . 3B ) [ 63 ] . Alternatively , researchers have attempted to control hPSC dif - ferentiation in EBs via modulating local extracellular biochemical signals . To this end , Bratt - Leal et al . incorporated polymeric MPs composed of biomaterials such as agarose , poly ( lactic acid - co - glycolic acid ) ( PLGA ) , and gelatin and loaded with soluble factors such as RA and BMP4 into EBs ( Fig . 3C ) [ 64 ] . In response to these functional MPs , hPSCs maintained their viability and exhibited distinct gene and protein expressionpatterns depending on speci ﬁ c soluble factors and their dosages loaded in MPs . 2 . 2 . 2 . Hydrogel - based 3D encapsulation culture Various hydrogels based on native ECM molecules including Matrigel , collagen , chitosan , hyaluronic acid ( HA ) , and alginate and synthetic hydrogels derived from polymers such as polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) , polyester ( PLA ) , PLGA , and poly ( glycerol sebacate ) ( PGS ) have been used for 3D hPSC culture [ 65 , 66 ] . While natural hydrogels can retain biological activities of native ECM molecules , they suffer from batch - to - batch viability and poor ability for biochemical modi ﬁ cation . In addition , clinical application may be limited for natural hydrogels by the risk of immunogenicity and disease transfer . In contrast , synthetic hydrogels are fully de ﬁ ned in chemistry and more amenable for biochemical functionalization ( for example , with growth factors , ECM adhesive motifs , and Fig . 3 . 3D embryoidbody ( EB ) cultureplatforms for regulatinghPSC fates . ( A ) Microtome ( top ) and immuno ﬂ uorescence ( bottom ) micrographs of an embryoidbody ( EB ) , which was formed by ESC aggregates . Adapted with permission from Ref . [ 170 ] . Copyright 2001 , The Rockefeller University Press . ( B ) Controlling EB fate in 3D bycontrolling its size . It has been demonstrated that smaller EBs ( top panel ) exhibited lower cardiogenic differentiation but stronger endothelial differentiation , while larger EBs ( bottom panel ) preferred cardio - genesis over endothelial differentiation . Cardiogenic and endothelial differentiations were visualized by sarcomeric a - actitin staining ( left panel , red ) and CD31 ( right panel , red ) , respectively . Adapted with permission from Ref . [ 63 ] . Copyright 2009 , United States National Academy of Sciences . ( C ) Regulating hPSC differentiation within EBs by incorporating soluble factor - loaded polymeric microparticles ( MPs ) . ( top panel ) Incorporating MPs during EB formation within microwell arrays . MPs were ﬂ uorescently labeled ( red ) for visualization . ( bottom panel ) BMP4 - loaded gelatin ( left ) and heparin ( right ) MPs ( red ) resulted in different patterns of early mesodermal induction ( visualized by GFP Brachyury - T reporter , green ) within EBs . Adapted with permission from Refs . [ 64 ] and [ 85 ] . Copyright 2011 and 2013 , Elsevier . ( For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁ gure legend , the reader is referred to the web version of this article . ) Y . Shao et al . / Biomaterials 52 ( 2015 ) 26 e 43 30 speci ﬁ c molecules agonistic or antagonistic to cell surface re - ceptors ) , biophysical modulations ( e . g . , mechanical stiffness , pore size , and 3D architecture ) , and mimicking key degradation char - acteristics [ 65 , 66 ] . Synthetic hydrogels also have a lower risk for immunogenic reactions . So far , attempts of using 3D hydrogels for maintaining and expansion of hPSCs have utilized both naturally derived and syn - thetic hydrogels . Gerechet et al . , for example , developed a meth - acrylated HA hydrogel system to promote self - renewal of hPSCs [ 67 ] . hPSCs encapsulated in 3D HA scaffold maintained an undif - ferentiated state till soluble factors inductive for hPSC differentia - tion were added to culture . Li et al . reported another 3D scaffold composed of chitosan and alginate to support hPSC self - renewal for > 21 days [ 68 ] . Similarly , Stenberg et al . developed a 3D agarose system for culturing spherical hPSC colonies [ 69 ] . This 3D agarose culture platform promoted EB formation and signi ﬁ cantly enhanced hPSC growth . In another more recent study , Siti - Ismail et al . successfully cultured hPSCs encapsulated in alginate hydro - gels for > 260 days in a feeder - free environment without any enzymatic treatment , mechanical expansion , or manipulation [ 70 ] . In addition to natural hydrogels , synthetic polymers with multi - functionalities have also been developed for promoting hPSC self - renewal in 3D culture . A notable example was demonstrated by Lei et al . using a fully - de ﬁ ned hydrogel system composed of poly ( N - isopropylacrylamide ) - co - poly ( ethylene glycol ) ( PNIPAAm - PEG ) , which is liquid at a low temperature ( < 4 (cid:2) C ) but can solidify into an elastic hydrogel at > 37 (cid:2) C [ 71 ] . This thermoreversible hydrogel system provided a simple yet ef ﬁ cient system for hPSC culture , passaging , harvesting , and differentiation . Excitingly , hPSCs cultured in this system showed a signi ﬁ cantly greater growth rate compared to those reported for other hydrogel systems . After culturing for 60 passages ( ~ 280 days ) , an overall hPSC expansion about 1072 - fold was achieved , with about 95 % of cells remaining Oct4 þ and maintaining differentiation potential toward speci ﬁ c adult lineages under inductive conditions . Studies of directed differentiation of human stem cells including hPSCs in 3D culture have only emerged in recent years ( Fig . 4 ) [ 72 ] . By embedding murine MSCs ( mMSCs ) in alginate hydrogels of different mechanical stiffness , Huebsch et al . observed that consistent with 2D culture studies , soft matrix promoted adipogenesis . Intermediate stiffness ( 11 e 30 KPa ) instead of very high stiffness ( 100 KPa ) , however , was observed for maximal osteogenesis ( Fig . 4A ) [ 73 ] . Integrin - mediated cell adhesion and cellular traction force were suggested to play an important role in rigidity - dependent mMSC differentiation in 3D . Another important property of hydrogels , biodegradability , has also been harnessed to regulate stem cell fate in 3D . The Anseth group reported a metalloproteinase ( MMP ) degradable PEG - hydrogel for 3D culture of hMSCs [ 74 ] . Interestingly , hMSCs encapsulated in MMP - degradable PEG - hydrogels and cultured in osteogenic , chondrogenic , or adipogenic differentiation medium expressed increased levels of speci ﬁ c differentiation markers as compared to cells in hydrogels that were not cell - degradable . Khetan et al . developed another HA - based hydrogel that sup - ported MMP - mediated degradation but lost such biodegradability after UV - initiated covalent crosslinking [ 75 ] . Using this system , Khetan et al . observed that matrix degradation , instead of ECM mechanics or cell morphology , directed osteogenic vs . adipogenic fates of hMSCs in 3D ( Fig . 4B ) . In another recent work , Kloxin et al . reported a strategy to generate 3D photodegradable hydrogels with dynamically tunable physical and chemical properties [ 76 ] . Using this photodegradable hydrogel to cleave RGD ligands during the early stage of hMSC differentiation , Kloxin et al . determined that binding of integrin receptors with RGD ligands was required for integrin a v b 3 expression , and downregulation of a v b 3 pro - moted chondrogenic differentiation of hMSCs in 3D ( Fig . 4C ) . More recent studies from Kloxin , Anseth and colleagues further demonstrated simultaneous orthogonal modulation of hydrogel degradation and biochemical modi ﬁ cations in 3D hydrogels [ 65 , 77 ] . In another study by Lim et al . , an interesting approach for dynamic modulation of both mechanical and electrical cues was devised to expose hMSCs with a continuous electric ﬁ eld to enhance chondrogenesis [ 78 ] . Levenberg et al . reported the ﬁ rst study to use biodegradable PLLA / PLGA scaffolds for promoting hPSC growth and differentiation and formation of 3D structures [ 72 ] . Differentiation and organiza - tion of hPSCs were in ﬂ uenced by the scaffold and directed by growth factors known to regulate hPSC differentiation into the three germ layers . Importantly , differentiating hPSCs under the in ﬂ uence of different growth factors formed 3D structures with Fig . 4 . Modulating 3D hydrogel biomaterial properties for controlling MSC fates in 3D : A lesson for 3D hPSC engineering . ( A ) Matrix stiffness - dependent differentiation of mMSCs within 3D hydrogels . Soft hydrogel enhanced adipogenesis ( red , lipid droplet staining ) , while hydrogel of intermediate stiffness ~ 25 KPa induced optimal osteogenesis ( blue , ALP staining ) . Reproduced with permission from Ref . [ 73 ] . Copyright 2010 , Nature Publishing Group . ( B ) Controlling hydrogel - encapsulated hMSC fates by gel crosslinking and degradation . It has been demonstrated that while MMP - degradable MeMaHA hydrogel promoted branching morphology ( top left ) and osteogenesis ( bottom left , ALP staining , blue ) of hMSCs embedded within a 3D microenvironment , UV - crosslinking that rendered it non - degradable could apply spatial con ﬁ nement to cells ( top right ) and switch the inductive potential to enhance adipogenesis ( bottom right , lipid droplet staining , red ) . Adapted with permission from Ref . [ 75 ] . Copyright 2013 , Nature Publishing Group . ( C ) Regulating the adhesion and chondrogenesis of hMSCs within 3D hydrogel by photo - mediated biochemical modi ﬁ cations . By cleaving cell adhesive peptides RGDS from the PEG - based hydrogel at early stage of hMSC differentiation , it was found that the downregulated surface integrin ( top panel , green ) could promote the chondrogenesis ( red ) over the self - renewal ( green ) of hMSCs ( bottom panel ) . Adapted with permission from Ref . [ 76 ] . Copyright 2009 , American Association for the Advancement of Science . ( For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁ gure legend , the reader is referred to the web version of this article . ) Y . Shao et al . / Biomaterials 52 ( 2015 ) 26 e 43 31 characteristics of developing neural tissues , cartilage , liver , and blood vessel , underscoring the importance of 3D culture for development and disease studies using hPSCs . More recent studies further suggested that 3D culture provided a more favorable environment for directed hPSC differentiation compared to EB - based methods . For example , by embedding EBs in 3D collagen gels instead of culturing on 2D surfaces , Baharvand et al . demon - strated enhanced induction of hepatocytes with proper morpho - logical , gene expression , and metabolic characteristics [ 79 ] . In a separate study , Ferreira et al . achieved signi ﬁ cant improvement over EB - based cultures by developing a bioactive dextran - based hydrogel system containing RGD peptides and microencapsulated VEGF 165 to enhance hPSC differentiation toward vascular cells [ 80 ] . The concept of “ switchable hydrogel ” was recently applied to introduce dynamic regulation of 3D hPSC culture , as the conditions required for self - renewal vs . differentiation of hPSCs are very different , and a single system that ef ﬁ ciently achieves both out - comes will be desirable for basic biological studies of hPSCs [ 81 ] . To this end , Dixon et al . developed a combined alginate - collagen hydrogel , which could switch from alginate - dominated to collagen - dominated chemistry after a chelation treatment and removal of alginate from the hydrogel . Using this switchable hydrogel , Dixon et al . demonstrated a transition from self - renewal permissive - environment to differentiation - permissive environ - ment for hPSCs , mimicking dynamic environmental change during early embryonic development . Excitingly , adjusting timing of the switch could preferentially steer hPSC differentiation to mimic lineage commitment during gastrulation to ectoderm ( early switch ) or mesoderm / endoderm ( late switch ) . It should be noted that even though 3D hydrogel encapsulation culture may mimic more closely native 3D tissue environment , there are some limitations that require carefully consideration . Generating perfusable vasculature networks in 3D hydrogels is still nontrivial , without which 3D tissue constructs are limited to a millimeter size range due to diffusion limitation [ 59 ] . Currently , there is also a lack of fundamental understanding of cell e biomaterial interactions in a 3D environment , limiting ratio - nale designs of 3D hydrogel systems for hPSC culture . In addition , retrieval of hPSCs and their derivatives from 3D culture where hPSCs are encapsulated in non - degradable hydrogels can be a practical concern for hPSC - based applications . 3 . Engineering 3D microtissues and organoids in vitro : leveraging imposed or spontaneous cellular organization Under appropriate conditions , the intrinsic developmental po - tential of hPSCs allow the cells to grow , differentiate , and self - organize into complex structures , with emergent functionalities and architectures similar to those in vivo tissues and organs . Indeed , there is an exciting new trend of developing 3D hPSC culture sys - tems for generating functional microtissues and organoids , for studying embryonic development and organogenesis and applica - tions in drug and toxicology screening [ 82 , 83 ] . This emerging trend offers promising opportunities for cell biologists , bioengineers , and materials scientists to collaborate closely to develop novel 3D biomaterial systems to control hPSC fate , function , and organiza - tion mimicking in vivo tissues and organs . 3 . 1 . Manipulating hPSC differentiation in EBs using controlled biochemical stimulation As a common 3D culture method for hPSCs , EB usually results in heterogeneous and disorganized differentiation of hPSCs , owing to diffusion limitation and resulting inhomogeneous distribution of soluble factors in the EB . To address this , the McDevitt group synthesized MPs with degradable biomaterials ( e . g . , PLGA , agarose , and gelatin ) and loaded them with potent soluble factors , before incorporating the MPs uniformly into EBs [ 15 , 64 , 84 , 85 ] . Soluble factors could be released gradually to the extracellular space within the EB and thus create a uniform biochemical environment not limited by diffusion . By using PLGA MPs loaded with RA , homo - geneous and organized cell differentiation appeared in the EB , wherein a cystic morphology was formed with a FoxA2 þ exterior envelop surrounding a Oct4 þ epiblast - like layer ( Fig . 5A ) [ 84 ] . In addition to using functionalized degradable MPs to control biochemical stimulation in EBs , Fung et al . employed an asym - metric micro ﬂ uidic channel to achieve spatial delivery of soluble signals to EBs and thus regulate hPSC differentiation in 3D ( Fig . 5B ) [ 86 ] . In a micro ﬂ uidic device with an asymmetric Y - shaped chan - nel , two separate streams of medium containing different chemical factors were simultaneously delivered to the two halves of EBs immobilized in the channel . Using this method , asymmetric hPSC states in EBs was successfully demonstrated , with one half under - going neural differentiation while the other maintaining an un - differentiated state . 3 . 2 . Microtissue fusion for building hybrid constructs Two juxtaposed cell aggregates can fuse into one owing to actively regulated cell e cell adhesive interactions and cell migra - tion . As a bottom - up approach , this phenomenon has been explored to create different structured microtissues as well as heterotypic spheroid co - cultures . Bratt - Leal et al . , for example , applied microtissue fusion to integrate one murine ESC EB incor - porated with morphogen - loaded MPs with another blank EB using a gravitation - based mechanism ( Fig . 5C ) [ 85 ] . By releasing BMP4 locally from herapin - gelatin MPs in one half of fused EBs , the au - thors demonstrated local mesoderm induction within fused EB . Microtissue fusion can also be achieved by magnetic force - driven tissue assembly [ 87 ] . By incorporating magnetic MPs into murine ESC aggregates , Bratt - Leal et al . demonstrated facile ma - nipulations of murine ESC aggregates , leading to fabrication of hybrid structures in an additive manner ( Fig . 5D ) [ 88 ] . Using a patterned magnetic ﬁ eld , Bratt - Leal et al . further demonstrated versatile , patterned organizations of murine ESC aggregates at a macroscopic scale . However , applications of these methods for building functional microtissues and organoids from hPSCs still need to be explored in the future . 3 . 3 . Physically structuring hPSC - derived tissues for functional maturation There is exciting recent progress in controlling organizations of hPSCs or hPSC - derived cells in 3D for human microtissue fabrica - tion and functional maturation via imposed external physical constraints . Here we focus our discussion on some illustrative ex - amples of building human cardiac tissues in vitro using hPSC - derived cardiomyocytes ( hPSC - CMs ) in conjunction with exter - nally assisted physical structuring . In the method developed by Schaaf et al . , two silicone posts were inserted into each well of a 24 - well plate ﬁ lled with hPSC - CMs and ECM proteins [ 89 ] . hPSC - CMs actively interacted with ECM proteins to self - assemble into microtissues with the two ends of the microtissues anchored to silicone posts . Spontaneous contraction of hPSC - CM tissues was restricted in a uniaxial fashion by the two silicone posts and thus resulted in uniaxially elongated microtissue morphology ( Fig . 6A ) . Interestingly , such hPSC - CM microtissue displayed highly ordered cellular alignment and intracellular structural features as well as electrophysiological activities com - parable to mature human myocardium . More recently , Cvetkovic Y . Shao et al . / Biomaterials 52 ( 2015 ) 26 e 43 32 et al . further demonstrated applications of such bioengineered cardiac tissues as soft robotic devices [ 90 ] . Several other hPSC - derived cardiac microtissues were devel - oped using a similar method . For example , in the “ cardiac - patch ” developed by Zhang et al . , a 3D ﬁ brin - based network structure was fabricated to locally con ﬁ ne hPSC - CMs within each segment of the network , resulting in locally aligned CMs in a biomaterial network of macroscopic scale ( Fig . 6B ) [ 91 ] . hPSC - CMs in the 3D cardiac - patch exhibited signi ﬁ cantly higher conduction velocities , longer sarcomeres , and enhanced expression of genes associated with cardiac contractile function , including cTnT , a MHC , CASQ2 , and SERCA2 , as compared to hPSC - CMs cultured as 2D monolayers . Moreover , 3D cardiac - patches exhibited signi ﬁ cant positive ino - tropy with isoproterenol treatment , demonstrating highly advanced levels of hPSC - CM maturation . In a more recent study by Nunes et al . , a miniaturized “ biowire ” cardiac tissue model was developed through self - assembly of hPSC - CM microtissues around a single surgical suture template [ 92 ] . Mixed with stromal cells in type I collagen gel , hPSC - CMs sponta - neously assembled and wrapped around the linear suture template , resulting in robust myo ﬁ brillar alignment as well as enhanced contractile phenotype , mimicking features seen in human heart ( Fig . 6C ) . The small thickness of the “ biowire ” cardiac tissue also allowed ef ﬁ cient nutrient diffusion into the tissue . More impor - tantly , the “ biowire ” cardiac tissue could be conveniently stimu - lated electrically . Such electrical stimulation led to markedly increased myo ﬁ bril ultrastructural organization , elevated conduction velocity , and improved electrophysiological and Ca 2 þ handling properties of the “ biowire ” cardiac tissue compared to nonstimulated controls . In another study , Thavandiran et al . developed both dog - bone and circular shaped templates to form highly aligned hPSC - CM microtissues ( Fig . 6D ) [ 93 ] . Self - assembly of aligned 3D hPSC - CM tissues in the templates , accompanied with paced electrical stimulations , promoted gene expression associated with cardiac maturation and in vivo - like electrical signal propagation . Thavandiran et al . further applied this hPSC - CM microtissue platform to establish a tachycardiac model of arrhythmogenesis , underscoring translational potential of such 3D hPSC - CM microtissues for in vitro patient - speci ﬁ c disease modeling . In a more recent study , using a template with similar geometries and resident muscle stem cells , Juhas et al . demon - strated that engineered muscle tissue exhibited improved vascular integration and functional maturation in vivo after transplantation into mice [ 94 ] . Recently , Ma et al . fabricated a 3D parallel ﬁ lamentous array using two - photon initiated polymerization ( TPIP ) for a UV curable organic - inorganic hybrid polymer , as linear geometric templates for guiding assembly and alignment of hPSC - CMs [ 95 ] . Using iPSCs derived from patients with long QT syndrome type 3 , Ma et al . generated disease - speci ﬁ c 3D cardiac tissues and studied their contractility malfunction associated with electrophysiological consequences of LQT3 syndrome and susceptibility to drug - speci ﬁ c cardiotoxicity . Fig . 5 . Engineering the 3D cell organizationwithin hPSC aggregates . ( A ) Inducing cystic morphology and visceral endoderm envelop - epiblast bilayer ( FoxA2 / Oct4 ) structures within EBs by incorporating PLGA MPs loaded with RA ( right panel ) , which could not be recapitulated by simply culturing EBs within RA - supplemented medium ( left panel ) . Adapted with permission from Ref . [ 84 ] . Copyright 2009 , Elsevier . ( B ) Controlled heterogeneous differentiation within EBs by delivering asymmetric extracellular soluble cues using asymmetric micro ﬂ uidic channels ( top panel ) . When delivering L15 medium to one half of the EB and L15 supplemented with RA to the other half , a heterogeneous pattern of cell differentiation appeared within the EB , as visualized by the differential expression of cell proliferation marker ( Ki67 , red ) and neuro ﬁ lament marker ( NF160 , green ) within different halves of the EB ( bottom panel ) . Adapted with permission from Ref . [ 86 ] . Copyright 2010 , Royal Society of Chemistry . ( C ) By fusing an ESC aggregate incorporated with BMP4 - loaded heparin MPs ( red ) with a blank ESC aggregate , it created a hybrid microtissue expressing highly localized early mesoderm induction ( green ) co - localized with the MPs . Adapted with permission from Ref . [ 85 ] . Copyright 2013 , Elsevier . ( D ) By incorporating magnetic microparticles into the ESC aggregates , it could achieve direct manipulation of those aggregates using speci ﬁ cally designed magnetic ﬁ eld ( left ) . Through magnetic manipulation and fusion at single aggregate resolution , it could assemble a hybrid microtissue containing multiple parts of different properties ( right , schematized using different colors ) . Adapted with permission fromRef . [ 88 ] . Copyright 2011 , Royal Society of Chemistry . ( Forinterpretation of the references to color in this ﬁ gure legend , the reader is referred to the web version of this article . ) Y . Shao et al . / Biomaterials 52 ( 2015 ) 26 e 43 33 It should be noted that in addition to templating microtissue structures using pre - de ﬁ ned physical constraints , mechanical conditioning has also been demonstrated useful for developing mature 3D cardiac tissues from hPSC - CMs [ 96 , 97 ] . For example , both static and cyclic stretches were shown to promote CM and matrix ﬁ ber alignment and enhance myo ﬁ brillogenesis , sarcomeric banding , and CM hypertrophy and proliferation in 3D cardiac tis - sues ( Fig . 6E ) [ 96 ] . Co - culture with endothelial cells in mechanically conditioned 3D cardiac tissues further promoted formation of vessel - like structures [ 96 ] . Importantly , when transplanted onto hearts of athymic rats , such hPSC - CM microtissues survived and formed grafts closely apposed to host myocardium containing hu - man microvessels perfused by host coronary circulation [ 96 ] . 3D bioprinting has shown great promise for biofabrication of arti ﬁ cial tissues and organs . Using special printing ink ( or “ mod - ules ” ) ( Fig . 6F ) [ 98 ] , 3D bioprinting was successfully applied for template - free fabrication of 3D tissues with complex structures mimicking native tissues such as aortic vascular vessels . It is fore - seeable that 3D bioprinting will become a powerful approach in the near future for rapid prototyping and generation of hPSC - derived arti ﬁ cial tissues . 3 . 4 . Spontaneous cell patterning and organization in 3D organoids Given their developmental potential , human stem cells including hPSCs can spontaneously develop into organized cyto - systems in 3D culture mimicking human tissues and organs via autonomous spatiotemporal cell patterning and organization . In recent years , researchers have achieved signi ﬁ cant progress exploring intrinsic developmental potential of hPSCs for generating novel 3D organoids with cell structures and functions comparable to native tissues and organs . Sasai and colleagues made a seminal contribution to this ﬁ eld by generating the ﬁ rst organized neural cytosystems in vitro . Using serum - free culture of EB - like aggregates ( SFEB ) , Sasai and col - leagues recapitulated 3D optic cup morphogenesis during eye development using hESCs ( Fig . 7A ) [ 99 ] . In another work from Sasai and colleagues , hESCs were inducted toward neuroepithelial line - ages using the SFEB method , and cortical tissues exhibiting distinct zones along the apical - basal direction ( e . g . , ventricular , early and late cortical plate , and Cajal - Retzius cell zones ) were generated ( Fig . 7B ) [ 100 ] . Interestingly , layer - speci ﬁ c differentiation of neural cells in such cortical tissue organoids followed a temporally Fig . 6 . Engineering 3D cell organization and functinal maturation within hPSC - derived microtissues . ( A ) Fabrication of a free - standing uniaxial cardiac tissue by using geometrical restraints applied by two elastomeric posts . During the gelation and spontaneous contraction of cardiomyocyte - laden hydrogel , it embedded the elastomeric posts and formed a strip of microtissue in between . As templated by the anisotropic hydrogel formation and remodeling process , cardiomyocytes embedded within the microtissue preferentially aligned with the longitudinal axis . Adapted with permission from Ref . [ 89 ] . Copyright 2011 , Public Libraryof Science . ( B ) Fabrication of a 3D cardiac - patch using 3D molded hydrogel networks . Due to the geometric con ﬁ nement , embedded hPSC - derived cardiomyocytes preferentially aligned with each ligand of the network . Adapted with permission from Ref . [ 91 ] . Copyright 2013 , Elsevier . ( C ) Acardiac biowire model , wherein a linear suture template was used to geometricallytemplatethe formation of miniaturized cardiac tissue around it . Due to the geometric guidance of the linear template , embedded cardiomyocytes preferentially aligned with the axis of the wire . Adapted with permission from Ref . [ 92 ] . Copyright 2013 , Nature Publishing Group . ( D ) A microscale cardiac tissue model fabricated by speci ﬁ cally designed micromolds . By culturing and forming the microtissue within a dog - bone shaped micromold , a thin wire of tissue was generated and anchored at both ends , creating an anisotropic tension and ECM remodeling . Simulations ( left ) and exper - imental results ( right panel ) both indicated strong alignments of cardiomyocytes and sarcomeric ﬁ laments within the microtissue . Adapted with permission from Ref . [ 93 ] . Copyright 2013 , United States National Academy of Sciences . ( E ) External directional stresses , either static or cyclic , could also be used to condition the alignment and maturation of hPSC - derived cardiomyocytes within a microtissue . Adapted with permission from Ref . [ 96 ] . Copyright 2011 , American Heart Associations . ( F ) Using 3D bioprinting based on micromolded build blocks , e . g . , spherical ( top left ) and ﬁ lamentous ( bottom left ) microtissues , it could fabricate in vitro tissue models at a larger length scale with more complex internaland external structures , such as the branching morphology ( topright ) and multi - layerarchitecture ( bottom right ) mimickingvascular vessels . Adapted with permission from Ref . [ 98 ] . Copyright 2009 , Elsevier . Y . Shao et al . / Biomaterials 52 ( 2015 ) 26 e 43 34 controlled pattern mimicking corticogenesis in vivo . Recently , Mariani et al . extended the SFEB method to hiPSCs and generated human cortical organoids mimicking developing human telen - cephalon [ 101 ] . In another recent exciting study , Knoblich and colleagues suc - cessfully applied 3D hPSC culture to generate cerebral organoids with distinct brain regions ( Fig . 7C ) [ 102 ] . By embedding neuro - ectoderm obtained from EB culture into Matrigel droplets and improving nutrient exchange , early corticogenesis and subsequent patterning of forebrain , midbrain , and hindbrain regions were observed in cerebral organoids . Such regional speci ﬁ cation of neural tissues was accompanied by generation and organization of mature cortical neuron subtypes . Importantly , using hiPSCs derived from patients of microcephaly , Knoblich and colleagues successfully modeled critical pathological phenotypes of micro - cephaly in cerebral organoid . In a separate work , using genetically engineered human neural progenitor cells ( hNPCs ) , Choi et al . applied a 3D Matrigel - based culture system to establish an in vitro Alzheimer ' s disease model [ 20 ] , which successfully recapitulated excessive accumulation of amyloid - b peptides observed often in the Alzheimer ' s disease that can lead to neuro ﬁ brillary tangles with hyperphosphorylated tau . This in vitro Alzheimer ' s disease further revealed a role of glycogen synthase kinase 3 ( GSK3 ) in mediating tau phosphorylation . In a related study , another Alzheimer ' s dis - ease model established using 3D culture was reported by Zhang et al . using neuroepithelial cells derived from hiPSCs [ 103 ] . 3D organotypic culture methods have also been successfully applied to generate organoids with mesodermal and endodermal origins . By inducing hESCs toward primitive streak - intermediate mesodermal lineage , Little and colleagues generated self - organized human kidney organoids that exhibited ureteric buds , metanephric mesenchyme , and nephron formation ( Fig . 7D ) [ 104 ] . In another work from Gerecht and colleagues , hPSC - derived microvascular network was demonstrated through co - differentiation with vascular endothelial cells and pericytes and subsequent encapsulation in HA - based hydrogel ( Fig . 7E ) [ 105 ] . A relevant work to engineer functional human blood vessels in 3D culture using hiPSC - derived endothelial cells and mesenchymal precursor cells was recently reported by Samuel et al . [ 106 ] . Following endodermal commitment , Spence et al . recently gener - ated human intestinal organoids ( HIOs ) from hPSCs using a Matrigel - based culture system ( Fig . 7F ) [ 107 ] . Through temporally controlling growth factors to dictate sequential de ﬁ nitive endo - derm , posterior endoderm , and hindgut speci ﬁ cation and morphogenesis , Spence et al . created in vitro intestines containing villus - like structures and crypt - like proliferative zones . Such Fig . 7 . Generationof 3D organoids fromhPSCs . ( A ) Ahuman opticcup model generatedfromhESCs . Adaptedwithpermission fromRef . [ 99 ] . Copyright 2012 , CellPress . ( B ) Ahuman cortical tissue model derived from hESCs , showing self - organized multi - layer cortical tissue structures . Adapted with permission from Ref . [ 100 ] . Copyright 2008 , Cell Press . ( C ) Generation of human cerebral organoids from hESCs and iPSCs . Adapted with permission from Ref . [ 102 ] . Copyright 2013 , Nature Publishing Group . ( D ) Creation of human kidney organoids using hESCs . It shows ureteric epithelial ( UE ) structures ( Pax2 þ ) surrounded by early nephrons as illustrated by CDH6 þ cells . Adapted with permission from Ref . [ 104 ] . Copyright 2014 , Nature Publishing Group . ( E ) Induction of early vascular cells and formation of 3D vascular network from hPSCs in a synthetic matrix . The phase image of the vascular network and a close - up image of the vascular vessel cross - section were shown here . Adapted with permission from Ref . [ 105 ] . Copyright 2013 , United States National Academyof Sciences . ( F ) A human intestine organoid model established fromhPSCs showingthe formation of hindgut - like spheroid with lumen . Adaptedwith permission from Ref . [ 107 ] . Copyright 2011 , Nature Publishing Group . ( G ) 3D human liver buds generated by co - culturing hiPSC - derived hepatic endoderm cells ( iPSC - HEs , green ) , hMSCs ( black ) and human umbilical endothelial cells ( HUVECs , red ) . Adapted with permission from Ref . [ 109 ] . Copyright 2013 , NaturePublishing Group . ( For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁ gure legend , the reader is referred to the web version of this article . ) Y . Shao et al . / Biomaterials 52 ( 2015 ) 26 e 43 35 human intestininal organoids was further utilized for studying the roles of Wnt3a and FGF4 in intestine development and NEUROG3 ( a pro - endocrine transcription factor ) in human enteroendocrine cell development and disease . More recently , Watson et al . successfully implanted human intestinal organoids generated from hPSCs in vitro into mice , and observed signi ﬁ cant maturation of HIO to form human adult - like small intestinal tissue with vasculature integration with the mouse host . This work supports the feasibility of using human intestinal organoids to study human small intestine maturation and relevant adult intestinal diseases [ 108 ] . In a sepa - rate study , Takebe et al . recreated human liver buds in vitro by leveraging 3D self - organization of hiPSC - derive immature hepatic cells and human endothelial and mesenchymal stem cells under coculture ( Fig . 7G ) [ 109 ] . Interestingly , such in vitro engineered human liver buds matured and functioned just like adult human liver after transplantation and could even rescue drug - induce lethal liver failure mouse models . Together , recent developments of different human organoids using 3D biomaterial - based culture methods highlight the great potential of hPSCs in conjunction with conductive 3D culture environment for fundamental organ development studies , critical for identifying therapeutic targets for treating complex develop - mental or degenerative diseases . For more detailed discussion on 3D organotypic cultures using both murine and human stem cells as well as cancer cells , the readers are referred to excellent recent reviews by Shamir and Ewald [ 82 ] and Lancaster and Knoblich [ 83 ] . 4 . Harnessing mechanobiology for bioengineered 3D hPSC culture 4 . 1 . Mechanobiology joins forces for 3D hPSC engineering Recent progress on engineering hPSC fate , function , and orga - nization in 3D biomaterial systems is exciting and promising . However , future development of 3D hPSC culture is critically hinged on a few important unaddressed issues . First , the extent to which human organoids derived from 3D hPSC culture resemble in vivo tissue development and function remains to be fully char - acterized . Second , cell fate patterning and morphogenic process in existing 3D hPSC culture models lack engineering control in situ , signi ﬁ cantly limiting human organoid models for development studies and other translational applications . Retrospectively speaking , these limitations may have come from the philosophy of biomimicry that guides development of current 3D hPSC culture . Although it is suf ﬁ cient to dictate early hPSC lineage commitment by recapitulating vital in vivo developmental regulatory mechanisms , e . g . , temporal patterning of soluble factors in a 3D space , pure biomimicry based on current knowledge of development may risk not incorporating critical yet unidenti ﬁ ed factors that ﬁ ne tune cell fate patterning and tissue function maturation . Although critical for developmental patterning , local gradients of multiple growth factors are also technically chal - lenging to model and precisely control in vitro in 3D . Additional regulatory mechanisms other than soluble factors are needed to improve current 3D hPSC culture . Interestingly , intricate mechanosensitive behaviors of human stem and adult cells have been well documented . Although it remains unclear to what extent such mechanosensitivity of human cells has direct impact on human development , mounting evidence has supported the functional role of mechanical signals in the cell microenvironment in controlling cell behaviors through a mecha - nosensitive signaling network converging on regulatory pathways downstream of soluble growth factors vital for development [ 22 ] . Given that mechanical properties of biomaterials are amenable for engineering control [ 110 ] , mechanobiology of human stem cells , especially hPSCs , should provide an important leverage for future development and engineering of 3D hPSC culture . Although mechanobiology of hPSCs is still in its infancy , cellular mechanisms underlying hPSC mechano - sensing and - transduction are beginning to be understood [ 111 ] . Here , we provide an overview of a multifaceted mechanotransductive signaling network in hu - man stem cells , including hPSCs , with transcriptional coactivators YAP and TAZ taking the center stage ( Fig . 8 ) . Speci ﬁ cally , we discuss current understanding of YAP / TAZ - mediated intracellular signaling in controlling stem cell fate and highlight mechanotransductive Hippo - dependent and - independent mechanisms acting upstream of YAP / TAZ . We discuss recent studies unraveling intricate con - nections between YAP / TAZ activity and Smad , Wnt , GPCR , and MAPK / JNK signaling and their implications in hPSC mechanobiol - ogy . We further examine functional links between two major intracellular mechanotransductive components , Rho GTPase and the actomyosin cytoskeleton ( CSK ) , and the Hippo / YAP pathway . It should be noted that existing knowledge of hPSC biology and mechanobiology has been mainly established using 2D cell culture . Signaling events in 3D hPSC culture have not yet been explicitly examined , which will likely be in ﬂ uenced by dimensionality and different from 2D cell culture . However , we reckon that a comprehensive picture of mechanosensitive signaling in human stem cells should provide important insights into hPSC mecha - nobiology and hPSC - biomaterial interactions that are critical for future engineering control of hPSC fate , function , and organization in 3D . 4 . 2 . YAP and TAZ integrate a universal signaling network to control stem cell fate YAP ( Yes - associated protein ) is an evolutionarily conserved transcriptional coactivator found in both Drosophila ( Yorkie , Yki ) and mammals ( YAP ) [ 112 ] . TAZ ( transcriptional coactivator with PDZ - binding motif ) is a paralog of YAP [ 113 ] . In human , YAP and TAZ share 45 % amino acid identity [ 113 ] , and together , they serve as vital transcriptional coactivators shuttling between the cytoplasm and the nucleus to control transcriptional activity through binding transcription factors such as TEAD , RUNX , and p73 [ 23 ] . Recently , YAP / TAZ have been identi ﬁ ed as universal regulators of organ size during development [ 114 ] , by controlling a multitude of cell behaviors such as proliferation , apoptosis , and differentiation [ 23 ] . There is also a signi ﬁ cant interest in the role of YAP / TAZ in human cancer , development , and tissue / organ regeneration . Comprehen - sive reviews on YAP / TAZ in cancer and stem cells have been pub - lished recently [ 23 , 24 ] . Here , we focus on YAP / TAZ - mediated signaling network that has been shown or implicated in regulation of human stem cells , especially hPSCs , and highlight mechano - sensitive properties of this signaling network . 4 . 2 . 1 . YAP / TAZ regulation by canonical Hippo signaling Hippo signaling is the ﬁ rst pathway identi ﬁ ed upstream of YAP / TAZ activity regulation [ 23 , 114 ] . In the Hippo pathway , YAP ( mainly on Ser127 ) and TAZ ( mainly on Ser89 ) are phosphory - lated by large - tumor suppressor proteins ( Lats1 / 2 ) [ 114 ] . Subse - quent binding of phosphorylated YAP / TAZ to scaffold protein 14 - 3 - 3 in the cytoplasm prevent YAP / TAZ from transcriptional ac - tivities [ 113 ] . Further phosphorylation on YAP Ser381 by Lats1 / 2 and CK1 primes YAP degradation through E3 ubiquitin ligase b - TRCP [ 115 ] . Upstream of kinase activity of Lats1 / 2 is the sterile 20 - like proteins MST1 / 2 [ 116 ] , whose kinase activity are controlled by NF2 [ 117 ] , an ERM family protein normally associated with the cortical cytoskeleton and plasma membrane and deactivated by phosphorylation on Ser581 . Other than MST1 / 2 , Lats1 / 2 can also be activated through binding scaffold proteins MOBKL1A / B Y . Shao et al . / Biomaterials 52 ( 2015 ) 26 e 43 36 ( Mob1 ) [ 118 ] , making the upstream kinase MST1 / 2 functionally redundant in some cases . The highly conserved Hippo pathway has been demonstrated in control of YAP / TAZ activity both in vitro and in vivo among different species . Recently , studies from our group [ 46 ] and the Kiessling group [ 119 ] revealed that YAP / TAZ regulated through Hippo signaling played a signi ﬁ cant role in promoting neuroepithelial induction of hPSCs on soft substrates . YAP phosphorylation on Ser127 was Fig . 8 . ( A ) Schematic of a multifaceted signaling network mediated by YAP and TAZ in control of the fate and function of human stem cells as well as adult cells . In brief , the inactivation of YAP / TAZ could take place through three different principles : ( 1 ) phosphorylation inactivation of YAP / TAZ by Hippo signaling proteins and the resultant cytoplasmic retention of phosphorylated YAP / TAZ through binding to 14 - 3 - 3 proteins ; ( 2 ) phosphorylation - independent cytoplasmic retention of YAP / TAZ through binding to adaptor proteins ( or protein complexes ) in the cytosol ; such non - phosphorylation sequestration could further be coupled to phosphorylation mechanisms and then subsequent proteosomal degradation ; ( 3 ) association of YAP / TAZ to plasma membrane - residing proteins . The regulation on YAP / TAZ could further crosstalk with and affect the Smad signaling , Wnt signaling , GPCR signaling , IGF , FGF , and EGF signaling . ( B ) Schematic of the mechanotransduction pathways acting upstream of regulatory mechanisms for YAP / TAZ . The extra - cellular signals , such as soluble growth factors as well as insoluble biophysical and biochemical cues , are mainly sensed and transduced through Rho GTPases , actomyosin contractility , and F - actin mechanics , which together form a tripartite mechanotransduction core and converge onto the regulatory mechanisms upstream of YAP / TAZ . Y . Shao et al . / Biomaterials 52 ( 2015 ) 26 e 43 37 signi ﬁ cantly increased in hPSCs on soft substrates , leading to pre - dominant cytoplasmic retention and deactivation of YAP . Silencing of Lats1 expression in hPSCs using small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) suppressed YAP phosphorylation on ser127 . More importantly , soft substrates did not promote neural induction of Lats1 knockdown hPSCs , further supporting that Lats - mediated phosphorylation of YAP might relay mechanical signals exerted by substrate rigidity . Hippo - independent regulation of YAP / TAZ activity has also been reported very recently . For example , by silencing Lats1 / 2 in hMSCs and adult epithelial cells , Dupont et al . observed that transcrip - tional activity and subcellular localization of YAP / TAZ remained sensitive to changes of substrate rigidity [ 120 ] . Recent studies of YAP / TAZ regulation have further revealed a multifaceted signaling network that controls YAP / TAZ activity independent of Hippo signaling in many contexts , as we discuss below . 4 . 2 . 2 . YAP / TAZ regulation by Hippo - independent cytoskeletal and membrane association Identi ﬁ ed ﬁ rstly as YAP - associated proteins , angiomotin ( Amot ) and angiomotin - like proteins ( Amot1 / 2 ) can interact directly with YAP / TAZ in the cytoplasm to promote their cytoplasmic retention [ 121 , 122 ] . Interestingly , angiomotin can also negatively regulate Hippo refractory , non - phosphorylatable TAZ mutant ( TAZ S89A ) , suggesting regulation of TAZ by angiomotin a parallel process in - dependent of Hippo signaling [ 121 ] . Recently , the 130 - kDa isoform of Amot ( Amot130 ) has been shown to bind F - actin and YAP competitively [ 123 ] , suggesting integrity of F - actin as an upstream regulator inhibiting angiomotin - mediated cytoplasmic YAP reten - tion . Interestingly , stability of angiomotin binding to F - actin can be regulated by Lats1 / 2 through phosphorylation of angiomotin , leading to its cytoplasmic accumulation and reduced association with the actin CSK , converging on YAP / TAZ inactivation [ 123 , 124 ] . In addition , Lats1 has recently been identi ﬁ ed as an actin binding protein , suggesting its involvement in non - canonical Hippo signaling through sequestration to F - actin [ 125 ] . Regulation of YAP / TAZ through angiomotin family proteins and Lats1 in the non - canonical Hippo and Hippo - independent mechanisms has been so far mostly examined in human adult epithelial cells and em - bryonic kidney cells . Their speci ﬁ c effects in hPSCs remain to be elucidated in the future . Our recent study showed that disrupted F - actin for hPSCs on soft substrates promoted YAP / TAZ cytoplasmic retention [ 46 ] , which is consistent with sequestration of YAP / TAZ - inactivating proteins on the actin cytoskeleton . This observation implies that Hippo - independent mechanisms may function in parallel with Hippo / YAP signaling to regulate YAP / TAZ activity in hPSCs . Although it has been found involved in Hippo signaling through the activation of NF2 , cell e cell contacts have also been identi ﬁ ed as a Hippo - independent mediator of YAP / TAZ activity in human epidermal stem cells [ 126 ] . Speci ﬁ cally , phosphorylated YAP can be associated with a - catenin residing in adherence junctions ( AJs ) , preventing them from interacting with protein phosphatases such as PP2A phosphatase that could reactivate YAP . This cell e cell con - tact mediated YAP / TAZ activity plays an important role in cell density - sensing in the skin . Interestingly , ZO - 1 / 2 proteins localized in apical tight junctions ( TJs ) could also directly interact with YAP / TAZ to inhibit their transcriptional activities [ 127 , 128 ] . Together , cell e cell contacts and their associated proteins provide another novel regulation mechanism to control YAP / TAZ activity . However , this control mechanism still needs to be examined in hPSCs in the future . 4 . 2 . 3 . Crosstalk of YAP / TAZ and Smad signaling Smad signaling mediated by TGF - b receptors ( Smad 2 / 3 signaling ) and BMP receptors ( Smad 1 / 5 / 8 signaling ) has been well documented for its importance in hPSC biology [ 129 ] . Binding of TGF - b ligands such as activin and nodal and BMP ligands such as BMP4 result in phosphorylation of intracellular Smad 2 / 3 and Smad 1 / 5 / 8 , respectively . Phosphorylated Smads in turn bind Smad 4 , and Smad complexes then translocate to the nucleus to serve as tran - scription factors for transcriptional control of hPSC fate . Smad signaling is a multifunctional pathway and has been extensively reviewed elsewhere [ 130 ] . Here , we focus on the functional cross - talk recently discovered between Smad signaling and YAP / TAZ regulation . In their seminal work , Varelas et al . discovered that TAZ was required for nuclear shuttling of Smad 2 / 3 that is needed for hPSC self - renewal [ 131 ] . Silencing of TAZ expression or inhibition of TAZ function blocked nuclear accumulation of Smad 2 / 3 and abrogated transcriptional activity mediated by TGF - b signaling . Detailed ex - amination further revealed that TAZ could directly bind Smads , with speci ﬁ cally high af ﬁ nity to Smad 2 / 3 . The role of TAZ ( or YAP ) in mediating Smad 1 / 5 / 8 nuclear translocation is less clear and requires further study , as TAZ knockdown by siRNA in this work did not necessarily have speci ﬁ c relation to BMP signaling . Our own recent work con ﬁ rmed such crosstalk of YAP / TAZ and Smad signaling in hPSCs , wherein concomitant cytoplasmic accu - mulations of YAP / TAZ and Smads were observed in hPSCs cultured on soft substrates [ 46 ] . Smad 1 / 5 / 8 phosphorylation was further downregulated upon YAP / TAZ deactivation on soft substrates , suggesting other mechanotransductive mechanisms ( e . g . , rigidity - dependent endocytosis and downregulation of BMP receptors on cell surface [ 132 ] ) acting in parallel to control Smads phosphory - lation in the cytoplasm . 4 . 2 . 4 . Crosstalk of YAP / TAZ and Wnt / GSK3 b / b - catenin signaling GSK3 b / b - catenin signaling is known for its role in hPSC fate regulation via b - catenin nuclear translocation and association with transcription factor TCF for activation of relevant gene activities [ 133 e 136 ] . GSK3 b controls the activity and stability of b - catenin through a destruction complex GSK3 b forms together with Axin and APC . This destruction complex binds cytoplasmic b - catenin and mediates its phosphorylation and inactivation and subsequent ubiquitination and degradation [ 137 ] . GSK3 b / b - catenin functions downstream of multiple signaling events , such as IGF and FGF signaling [ 136 , 138 , 139 ] and Wnt signaling , which act through PI3K / Akt - mediated phosphorylation and inactivation of GSK3 b and membrane sequestration of protein Axin , respectively . Recent studies have revealed crosstalk of GSK3 b / b - catenin and YAP / TAZ in human adult cells [ 140 e 142 ] . Piccolo and colleagues , for example , demonstrated that the b - catenin destruction complex could directly bind YAP / TAZ and mediate their cytoplasmic reten - tion [ 140 , 141 ] . Upon Wnt ligation or silencing of destruction com - plex proteins APC and Axin , TAZ was released from the b - catenin destruction complex and translocated to the nucleus . Importantly , cytoplasmic retention of TAZ required binding of b - catenin to the destruction complex in priori , supporting dependence of YAP / TAZ activity on cytoplasmic b - catenin level and environmental Wnt signal . In hMSCs , Piccolo and colleagues demonstrated that cyto - plasmic b - catenin and binding of TAZ to the destruction complex were both required for adipogenesis [ 141 ] . In addition , cytoplasmic YAP / TAZ , via binding to the b - catenin destruction box , could facil - itate b - catenin degradation and thus exert negative regulation on Wnt activation [ 140 ] . Another recent work from Camargo and colleagues demon - strated another functional link between YAP and Wnt / GSK3 b / b - catenin signaling through binding of YAP to Dishevelled ( Dvl ) downstream of Wnt ligation and upstream of GSK3 b - mediated destruction complex [ 143 ] . Binding of cytoplasmic YAP to Dvl did not require phosphorylation on YAP and was found to mainly Y . Shao et al . / Biomaterials 52 ( 2015 ) 26 e 43 38 attenuate Wnt signaling by inhibiting recruitment of Dvl to Frizzled after Wnt ligation and therefore compromising b - catenin - depen - dent regeneration by intestinal stem cells . Interestingly , another recent study by Varelas et al . demonstrated that TAZ could also bind to and thus inhibit CK1 - mediated phosphorylation of Dvl and therefore prevent Dvl from being involved in Wnt / b - catenin signaling [ 144 ] . Although in theory YAP / TAZ and Frizzled compet - itively bind Dvl , it is unclear whether and under which condition Frizzled might out - compete YAP / TAZ and thus activate Wnt by releasing YAP / TAZ from Dvl . So far , the interaction between YAP / TAZ and Wnt / GSK3 b signaling in hPSCs has not yet been explored . 4 . 2 . 5 . Crosstalk of YAP / TAZ and GPCR signaling Serum - borne factors such as lysophosphatidic acid ( LPA ) and sphingosine - 1 - phosphate ( S1P ) are known for their effects on cell behaviors through GPCR ( G - protein coupled receptor ) signaling [ 145 ] . Recently , a few important works have revealed functional connection between GPCR signaling and YAP / TAZ activity in human adult cells and hPSCs . Guan and colleagues , for example , demon - strated that GPCR signaling through G a 12 / 13 , which is stimulated by LPA and S1P , could promote YAP / TAZ activity by inhibiting Lats - mediated YAP / TAZ phosphorylation . They also showed that GPCR signaling through G a s , as stimulated by epinephrine , could nega - tively regulate YAP / TAZ activity by inducing their phosphorylation [ 145 , 146 ] . Activation of YAP / TAZ by G a 12 / 13 further involved Rho GTPases , as treatment with C3 toxin , which antagonizes Rho GTPases , attenuated this effect . Inactivation of YAP / TAZ by G a s involved PKA , which could restrict RhoA activity through increased RhoA - RhoGDI ( Rho - GDP dissociation inhibitor ) binding [ 147 ] . Another recent work by Kim et al . suggested that PKA signaling downstream of GPCR could directly promote YAP inactivation through phosphorylation on Ser381 , rendering it independent of Rho [ 148 ] . Together , these studies suggest that GPCR signaling plays an important role in YAP / TAZ regulation , inwhich Rho GTPases may serve as a critical mediator . Our own recent study supported that YAP / TAZ in hPSCs were indeed responsive to LPA stimulation and GPCR signaling [ 46 ] . LPA stimulation attenuated YAP / TAZ cytoplasmic retention for hPSCs on soft substrates . It remains unclear , however , which mechanism mediates crosstalk of YAP / TAZ and GPCR signaling in hPSCs . 4 . 2 . 6 . Crosstalk of YAP / TAZ and EGF / MAPK / JNK signaling MAPK / JNK signaling , which can be activated by either soluble factors such as EGF ligation or mechanical forces , is another pathway important for regulating hPSC fate [ 149 ] . Recently , Irvine and colleagues demonstrated a novel crosstalk mechanism be - tween YAP / TAZ and EGF / JNK signaling involving Ajuba family proteins containing LIM domains , such as LIMD1 . Speci ﬁ cally , activated MAPK / JNK could promote phosphorylation of Ajuba family proteins , e . g . , LIMD1 and WTIP , which could in turn bind Lats1 / 2 and thus sequester Lats kinases from the canonical Hippo signaling for YAP / TAZ inactivation [ 150 , 151 ] . MAPK / JNK signaling has been shown recently mechanosensitive in human adult cells [ 149 ] and Drosophila [ 152 ] . Together , it rises as an interesting question whether MAPK / JNK signaling and its crosstalk with YAP / TAZ has any direct role in hPSC mechanobiology . 4 . 2 . 7 . Mechanosensitive regulation of YAP / TAZ : Roles of Rho GTPase , cytoskeleton integrity and tension Mechanobiology studies in adult mammalian cells have identi ﬁ ed the roles of two major intracellular mechanotransductive components , Rho GTPase and the actin CSK , in regulating mecha - nosensitive cell behaviors . Importantly , recent studies ( including ourown ) havestartedtounravelmechanotransductivemechanisms in hPSCs acting upstream of YAP / TAZ through Rho GTPases and CSK integrity and tension ( Fig . 8B ) . Rho GTPases , especially RhoA , Rac and cdc42 , undergo activa - tion through binding GTP , and are inactivated after associated GTP is hydrolyzed to GDP . The functional roles of Rho GTPases in mechanotransduction have been well documented in adult mammalian cells [ 153 ] . For example , increased Rho - GTP level was observed in adult mammalian cells on rigid substrates [ 154 ] , possibly through FAK / p190RhoGEF signaling . Ligation of ECM pro - teins such as vitronectin , ﬁ bronectin and collagen also activates RhoA . Importantly , RhoA directly mediates ROCK / MLCK signaling to control CSK tension , which positively feeds back onto and further enhances RhoA activity in adult mammalian cells [ 36 , 111 , 155 ] . There is no direct functional link reported between RhoA and YAP / TAZ activity . However , RhoA - dependent ROCK / MLCK - mediated CSK tension is indeed functionally connected to YAP / TAZ activity in mammalian cells , including hPSCs , as we will discuss below . In addition to RhoA , Rac and cdc42 activities are also mecha - noresponsive . Importantly , previous studies have implicated direct roles of Rac and cdc42 in regulating YAP / TAZ activity . Speci ﬁ cally , Rac and cdc42 could activate PAK through phos - phorylation on Ser518 , which in turn inactivated NF2 to inhibit canonical Hippo signaling [ 156 ] . Importantly , mutual inhibitory activities between RhoA / ROCK / MLCK and Rac signaling provide another level of complexity to Rho GTPase - mediated mechano - transduction [ 157 ] . For example , hyper - activation of RhoA with reduced Rac activity was identi ﬁ ed responsible for dissociation - induced apoptosis of single hPSCs [ 158 ] . Formation of E - cad - herin - mediated cell e cell contacts could rescue survival of disso - ciated single hPSCs by suppressing RhoA / ROCK activity [ 159 ] , possibly through Rac activation . Given the role of Rac in stabilizing b - catenin in adherence junctions ( AJs ) ( through inhibiting binding of b - catenin to IQGAP ) [ 160 ] , it is possible that Rac activation , in hPSCs , may inhibit formation of the GSK3 b / Axin / APC / b - catenin destruction complex that prevents nuclear localization and tran - scriptional activation of YAP / TAZ . The functional roles of CSK integrity and tension in regulating YAP / TAZ activity were ﬁ rst observed in adult mammalian cells and Drosophila [ 24 , 120 ] . Prominent F - actin stress ﬁ bers are commonly associated with nuclear localization and activation of YAP / TAZ in adult mammalian cells on rigid substrates or without geometric con ﬁ nements ; while disorganized and diffusive F - actin structures are usually correlated with cytoplasmic localization and functional inactivation of YAP / TAZ in cells on soft substrates or con ﬁ ned in small adhesive islands . In addition , inhibition of actin polymeri - zation using small - molecule drugs such as Latrunculin A and Cytochalasin D prevented nuclear accumulation of YAP / TAZ and abolished YAP / TAZ transcriptional activity [ 161 ] . Furthermore , through knocking down expression of proteins involved in F - actin severing and capping ( e . g . , co ﬁ lin , gelsolin and cap Z ) , Aragona et al . demonstrated that ectopically reinforced actin CSK could override effects of extracellular physical cues such as cell con ﬂ u - ence , geometric con ﬁ nement , and substrate softness in functional inactivation of YAP / TAZ [ 162 ] . The results reported by Aragona et al . support that mechanosensitive YAP / TAZ activity may be regulated through F - actin dynamics and CSK integrity , which integrate signals from upstream mechanoresponsive Rho GTPase activities . Another interesting possibility is that mechanosensitive CSK integrity may help sequester proteins on F - actin that can interfere with YAP / TAZ ( such as Angiomotin and Lats1 / 2 ) to pre - vent their nuclear translocation and transcriptional activation . Indeed , Lats1 has recently been identi ﬁ ed as an actin - depolymerizing factor [ 125 ] , supporting Hippo - independent regulation of Lats1 in controlling YAP / TAZ via F - actin dynamics and CSK integrity . Y . Shao et al . / Biomaterials 52 ( 2015 ) 26 e 43 39 It should be noted that all above observations were obtained through pharmacological treatments and speci ﬁ c knockdown or ectopic overexpression targeting the actin CSK . It remains un - clear whether mechanoresponsive F - actin dynamics and CSK integrity can regulate YAP / TAZ activity under physiological con - ditions . Endogenous mechanosensitive mechanisms mammalian cells employ to regulate F - actin dynamics and CSK integrity are still under intensive study . For example , do extracellular physical cues really modulate activities ( mainly through phosphorylation ) of actin severing and capping proteins such as co ﬁ lin , gelsolinm and cap Z endogenously , or there exist other unidenti ﬁ ed endogenous mechanosensitive mechanisms acting in parallel ? For example , mechanical tension in F - actin stress ﬁ bers could suppress binding of co ﬁ lin to F - actin and thus the actin - severing property of co ﬁ lin , potentially regulating CSK integrity without modulating the phosphorylation states of co ﬁ lin [ 163 ] . In our recent observation , during their response to changes of substrate rigidity , hPSCs would modulate the actin CSK with concomitant changes of YAP / TAZ activity [ 46 ] . This observation certainly cor - roborates the signi ﬁ cance of F - actin and the CSK in regulating YAP / TAZ activity . Cell mechano - sensing and - transduction involves a modulated delicate force balance between endogenous CSK tension and external mechanical forces transmitted across cell - ECM adhesions [ 155 ] . Recent evidence obtained from adult mammalian cells has implicated an important role of such external - internal force bal - ance in mediating YAP / TAZ activity through key pathways dis - cussed in the aforementioned YAP / TAZ signaling network , including EGF / JNK signaling [ 149 ] ( Fig . 8 ) . As another example , Palecek and colleagues applied external cyclic stretch to hPSCs and observed upregulated transcription of TGF - b signaling ligands ( such as Activin , nodal , TGF - b ) and phosphorylation of Smads , which could cooperate with TAZ to maintain hPSC pluripotency [ 164 ] . In addition , mechanical force could also promote the stability of actin stress ﬁ bers through unique catch - bonds between F - actin and anchoring cell - ECM adhesion proteins [ 165 ] as well as that between actin monomers [ 166 ] , and thus might promote F - actin - association of Angiomotin and Lats1 / 2 and attenuate their effects in cytoplasmic retention of YAP / TAZ . CSK tension is also necessary for maintaining the integrity of AJs [ 167 ] , loss of which results in release of b - catenin to the cytosol for formation of the GSK3 b / Axin / APC / b - catenin destruction complex that prevents YAP / TAZ from nuclear translocation . Together , mechanotransductive signaling pathways centering on YAP / TAZ activity have emerged as a master regulatory mecha - nism controlling mechanosensitive and - responsive cell behaviors . It will be exciting to fully examine , in hPSCs , the functional role of YAP / TAZ and different upstream mechanotransductive pathways that relay external mechanical signals to YAP / TAZ activity . Studying mechanosensitive properties of hPSCs is critical for understanding hPSC - biomaterial interactions and will chart a path for future in - vestigations to unravel their full complexity , which will improve our understanding of hPSC biology and facilitate future developments of functional 3D biomaterials for large - scale culture of hPSCs . 5 . Large - scale and integrated 3D hPSC engineering : challenges and opportunities In the near future , scaling up fabrication of hPSCs and rapidly producing high - purity and - yield functional somatic cells from hPSCs are critically needed for meeting future demands of their biomedical and clinical applications . For example , about 10 9 func - tional CMs are needed for regeneration of one third of the left ventricle for replacing the damaged tissue after myocardial infarction [ 168 ] . Large - scale generation of functional human tissue and organ models in vitro with functionally mature hPSC - derived cells is also required for drug and toxicology screening for future precise , personalized medicine . Here , we speculate that a few key aspects of large - scale production and integration of 3D biomaterial systems for hPSC engineering need to be fully examined and un - derstood before the promises of hPSCs for biomedical and clinical applications can be fully ful ﬁ lled : ( 1 ) Automated and well - controlled dynamic culture conditions for ef ﬁ cient hPSC expan - sion and differentiation . Such conditions include both soluble components as well as 3D scaffold properties ( mechanical rigidity , pore size , 3D architecture , and degradation characteristics ) that can be modulated precisely in space and time ; ( 2 ) Extracellular biochemical and physical cues within 3D hPSC constructs conduc - tive for establishing in vivo - mimicking tissue organization and function ; ( 3 ) Large - scale culture and convenient harvesting of hPSCs and hPSC - derived cells or tissue and organ models ; and ( 4 ) Integration of mass - production of hPSCs , hPSC - derived cells , and tissue and organ models with inline quality monitoring and in situ conditioning , characterization , and sample processing and analysis . These critical issues and challenges for large - scale and integrated 3D hPSC engineering provide opportunities for stem cell biologists , bioengineers , and materials scientists to collaborate closely to develop novel biomaterial systems critically needed for future fundamental biology and translational medicine applications . 6 . Concluding remarks Given their unlimited potential for self - renewal and differenti - ation into any type of human somatic cells , hPSCs constitute a very promising cell source for human tissue and organ regeneration , in vitro modeling of human diseases , as well as screening for patient - speci ﬁ c therapeutic options and drug responses . In the last 15 years , bioengineered 3D hPSC culture platforms have greatly improved their robustness , ef ﬁ ciency , and versatility for controlling hPSC fate and function in vitro , via precisely controlling biochemical and biophysical cues within the 3D cell microenvironment , even down to the single cell resolution . In addition , recent exciting re - searches using novel bioengineering methods have achieved hPSC patterning and organization in 3D microtissue constructs and organoids , serving as in vitro biomimicry recapitulating the struc - tural blueprint of human tissues and organs and thus simulating their functional maturation and native responses to various phys - iological and pharmaceutical stimuli . Although still at its beginning , engineering functions and behaviors of hPSCs or hPSC - derived tissues and organs in 3D with appropriate in vivo - like multiscale structures have opened unlimited opportunities as well as posing signi ﬁ cant challenges for future tissue - and organ - scale regenera - tive therapies and in vitro disease modeling . The emerging ﬁ eld of hPSC mechanobiology brings a new perspective researchers can leverage to regulate and ﬁ ne tune hPSC fate and function in vitro through multiple converging signaling pathways initiated by both soluble growth factors and insoluble biophysical cues . The multifaceted mechanotransductive signaling network centering on YAP / TAZ , which has been primarily estab - lished in adult mammalian cells , presents an exciting opportunity for bioengineering control of hPSC fate in 3D as well as for rational designs of 3D biomaterial systems with conductive properties tar - geting speci ﬁ c intracellular signaling events leading to desirable hPSC fate and function . Last but not the least , combined with recently developed high - throughput hPSC assays , which provide well - controlled mass pro - duction , multiplexed and combinational screening , and in situ high spatiotemporal resolution characterization and analysis , highly integrated multiparametric functional 3D bioreactors will emerge Y . Shao et al . / Biomaterials 52 ( 2015 ) 26 e 43 40 for future large - scale biofabrications for hPSC - based regeneration therapies and human disease studies . Acknowledgments We acknowledge valuable comments and suggestions on the manuscript from members of the Integrated Biosystems and Biomechanics Laboratory . Research in Dr . Fu ' s laboratory is sup - ported by the National Science Foundation ( CMMI 1129611 , CBET 1149401 , ECCS 1231826 , and CBET 1263889 ) , the National Institutes of Health ( R21 HL114011 , R21 EB017078 , and R01 HL119542 ) , the American Heart Association ( 12SDG12180025 ) , and the Depart - ment of Mechanical Engineering at the University of Michigan , Ann Arbor . Finally , we extend our apologies to all our colleagues in the ﬁ eld whose work we are unable to discuss formally because of space constraints . References [ 1 ] Mitalipov S , Wolf D . Totipotency , pluripotency and nuclear reprogramming . Adv Biochem Eng Biotechnol 2009 ; 114 : 185 e 99 . [ 2 ] Thomson JA , Itskovitz - Eldor J , Shapiro SS , Waknitz MA , Swiergiel JJ , Marshall VS , et al . Embryonic stem cell lines derived from human blastocysts . Science 1998 ; 282 : 1145 e 7 . [ 3 ] Young HE , Black AC . Adult stem cells . Anat Rec Part A 2004 ; 276A : 75 e 102 . [ 4 ] Tachibana M , Amato P , Sparman M , Gutierrez NM , Tippner - Hedges R , Ma H , et al . Human embryonic stem cells derived by somatic cell nuclear transfer . Cell 2013 ; 153 : 1228 e 38 . [ 5 ] Takahashi K , Tanabe K , Ohnuki M , Narita M , Ichisaka T , Tomoda K , et al . Induction of pluripotent stem cells from adult human ﬁ broblasts by de ﬁ ned factors . Cell 2007 ; 131 : 861 e 72 . [ 6 ] Hou PP , Li YQ , Zhang X , Liu C , Guan JY , Li HG , et al . Pluripotent stem cells induced from mouse somatic cells by small - molecule compounds . Science 2013 ; 341 : 651 e 4 . [ 7 ] Grskovic M , Javaherian A , Strulovici B , Daley GQ . Induced pluripotent stem cells e opportunities for disease modelling and drug discovery . Nat Rev Drug Discov 2011 ; 10 : 915 e 29 . [ 8 ] Robinton D , Daley G . The promise of induced pluripotent stem cells in research and therapy . Nature 2012 ; 481 : 295 e 305 . [ 9 ] Discher DE , Mooney DJ , Zandstra PW . Growth factors , matrices , and forces combine and control stem cells . Science 2009 ; 324 : 1673 e 7 . [ 10 ] Miller C , Davidson L . The interplay between cell signalling and mechanics in developmental processes . Nat Rev Genet 2013 ; 14 : 733 e 44 . [ 11 ] Hazeltine L , Selekman J , Palecek S . Engineering the human pluripotent stem cell microenvironment to direct cell fate . Biotechnol Adv 2013 ; 31 : 1002 e 19 . [ 12 ] Higuchi A , Ling Q - D , Hsu S - T , Umezawa A . Biomimetic cell culture proteins as extracellular matrices for stem cell differentiation . Chem Rev 2012 ; 112 : 4507 e 40 . [ 13 ] Higuchi A , Ling Q - D , Chang Y , Hsu S - T , Umezawa A . Physical cues of bio - materials guide stem cell differentiation fate . Chem Rev 2013 ; 113 : 3297 e 328 . [ 14 ] Sun YB , Chen CS , Fu JP . Forcing stem cells to behave : a biophysical perspective of the cellular microenvironment . Annu Rev Biophys 2012 ; 41 : 519 e 42 . [ 15 ] Kinney M , Hookway T , Wang Y , McDevitt T . Engineering three - dimensional stem cell morphogenesis for the development of tissue models and scalable regenerative therapeutics . Ann Biomed Eng 2013 ; 42 : 352 e 67 . [ 16 ] Chambers S , Fasano C , Papapetrou E , Tomishima M , Sadelain M , Studer L . Highly ef ﬁ cient neural conversion of human ES and iPS cells by dual inhi - bition of Smad signaling . Nat Biotechnol 2009 ; 27 : 275 e 80 . [ 17 ] Hwang NS , Varghese S , Lee HJ , Zhang ZJ , Ye ZH , Bae J , et al . In vivo commitment and functional tissue regeneration using human embryonic stem cell - derived mesenchymal cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008 ; 105 : 20641 e 6 . [ 18 ] Bauer M , Kang L , Qiu Y , Wu J , Peng M , Chen H , et al . Adult cardiac progenitor cell aggregates exhibit survival bene ﬁ t both in vitro and in vivo . PLoS One 2012 ; 7 : e50491 . [ 19 ] Li YQ , Liu W , Liu F , Zeng Y , Zuo SM , Feng SY , et al . Primed 3D injectable microniches enabling low - dosage cell therapy for critical limb ischemia . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2014 ; 111 : 13511 e 6 . [ 20 ] Choi S , Kim Y , Hebisch M , Sliwinski C , Lee S , D ' Avanzo C , et al . A three - dimensional human neural cell culture model of Alzheimer ' s disease . Nature 2014 ; 515 : 274 e 8 . [ 21 ] Nawroth J , Parker K . Design standards for engineered tissues . Biotechnol Adv 2013 ; 31 : 632 e 7 . [ 22 ] Dave PC , Dingal P , Discher DE . Combining insoluble and soluble factors to steer stem cell fate . Nat Mater 2014 ; 13 : 532 e 7 . [ 23 ] Mo JS , Park HW , Guan KL . The Hippo signaling pathway in stem cell biology and cancer . EMBO Rep 2014 ; 15 : 642 e 56 . [ 24 ] Piccolo S , Dupont S , Cordenonsi M . The biology of YAP / TAZ : Hippo signaling and beyond . Physiol Rev 2014 ; 94 : 1287 e 312 . [ 25 ] Sun YB , Fu JP . Harnessing mechanobiology of human pluripotent stem cells for regenerative medicine . ACS Chem Neurosci 2014 ; 5 : 621 e 3 . [ 26 ] Yang K , Lee J , Cho SW . Engineering biomaterials for feeder - free maintenance of human pluripotent stem cells . Int J Stem Cells 2012 ; 5 : 1 e 5 . [ 27 ] Kim S , Ahn SE , Lee JH , Lim D - S , Kim K - S , Chung H - M , et al . A novel culture technique for human embryonic stem cells using porous membranes . Stem Cells 2007 ; 25 : 2601 e 9 . [ 28 ] Villa - Diaz LG , Nandivada H , Ding J , Nogueira - De - Souza NC , Krebsbach PH , O ' Shea KS , et al . Synthetic polymer coatings for long - term growth of human embryonic stem cells . Nat Biotechnol 2010 ; 28 : 581 e 3 . [ 29 ] Xu C , Inokuma M , Denham J , Golds K , Kundu P , Gold J , et al . Feeder - free growth of undifferentiated human embryonic stem cells . Nat Biotechnol 2001 ; 19 : 971 e 4 . [ 30 ] Irwin EE , Gupta R , Dashti DC , Healy KE . Engineered polymer - media in - terfaces for the long - term self - renewal of human embryonic stem cells . Biomaterials 2011 ; 32 : 6912 e 9 . [ 31 ] Brafman DA , Chang CW , Fernandez A , Willert K , Varghese S , Chien S . Long - term human pluripotent stem cell self - renewal on synthetic polymer sur - faces . Biomaterials 2010 ; 31 : 9135 e 44 . [ 32 ] Mei Y , Saha K , Bogatyrev S , Yang J , Hook A , Kalcioglu Z , et al . Combinatorial development of biomaterials for clonal growth of human pluripotent stem cells . Nat Mater 2010 ; 9 : 768 e 78 . [ 33 ] Mahlstedt MM , Anderson D , Sharp JS , McGilvray R , Munoz MDB , Buttery LD , et al . Maintenance of pluripotency in human embryonic stem cells cultured on a synthetic substrate in conditioned medium . Biotechnol Bioeng 2010 ; 105 : 130 e 40 . [ 34 ] Saha K , Mei Y , Reisterer CM , Pyzocha NK , Yang J , Muffat J , et al . Surface - engineered substrates for improved human pluripotent stem cell culture under fully de ﬁ ned conditions . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011 ; 108 : 18714 e 9 . [ 35 ] Villa - Diaz L , Ross A , Lahann J , Krebsbach P . Concise review : the evolution of human pluripotent stem cell culture : from feeder cells to synthetic coatings . Stem Cells 2013 ; 31 : 1 e 7 . [ 36 ] Eyckmans J , Boudou T , Yu X , Chen C . A hitchhiker ' s guide to mechanobiology . Dev Cell 2011 ; 21 : 35 e 47 . [ 37 ] Engler A , Sen S , Sweeney H , Discher D . Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage speci ﬁ cation . Cell 2006 ; 126 : 677 e 89 . [ 38 ] Zhou JA , Kim HY , Wang JHC , Davidson LA . Macroscopic stiffening of em - bryonic tissues via microtubules , RhoGEF and the assembly of contractile bundles of actomyosin . Development 2010 ; 137 : 2785 e 94 . [ 39 ] Fu J , Wang Y - K , Yang M , Desai R , Yu X , Liu Z , et al . Mechanical regulation of cell function with geometrically modulated elastomeric substrates . Nat Methods 2010 ; 7 : 733 e 6 . [ 40 ] Holst J , Watson S , Lord M , Eamegdool S , Bax D , Nivison - Smith L , et al . Sub - strate elasticity provides mechanical signals for the expansion of hemopoi - etic stem and progenitor cells . Nat Biotechnol 2010 ; 28 : 1123 e 8 . [ 41 ] Gilbert PM , Havenstrite KL , Magnusson KEG , Sacco A , Leonardi NA , Kraft P , et al . Substrate elasticity regulates skeletal muscle stem cell self - renewal in culture . Science 2010 ; 329 : 1078 e 81 . [ 42 ] Cosgrove BD , Gilbert PM , Porpiglia E , Mourkioti F , Lee SP , Corbel SY , et al . Rejuvenation of the muscle stem cell population restores strength to injured aged muscles . Nat Med 2014 ; 20 : 255 e 64 . [ 43 ] Sun YB , Villa - Diaz LG , Lam RHW , Chen WQ , Krebsbach PH , Fu JP . Mechanics regulates fate decisions of human embryonic stem cells . PLoS One 2012 ; 7 : e37178 . [ 44 ] Musah S , Morin SA , Wrighton PJ , Zwick DB , Jin S , Kiessling LL . Glycosami - noglycan - binding hydrogels enable mechanical control of human pluripo - tent stem cell self - renewal . ACS Nano 2012 ; 6 : 10168 e 77 . [ 45 ] Keung AJ , Asuri P , Kumar S , Schaffer DV . Soft microenvironments promote the early neurogenic differentiation but not self - renewal of human plurip - otent stem cells . Integr Biol 2012 ; 4 : 1049 e 58 . [ 46 ] Sun YB , Aw Yong KM , Villa - Diaz LG , Zhang XL , Chen WQ , Philson R , et al . Hippo / YAP - mediated rigidity - dependent motor neuron differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells . Nat Mater 2014 ; 13 : 599 e 604 . [ 47 ] Guvendiren M , Burdick J . Stiffening hydrogels to probe short - and long - term cellular responses to dynamic mechanics . Nat Commun 2012 ; 3 : 792 . [ 48 ] Young JL , Engler AJ . Hydrogels with time - dependent material properties enhance cardiomyocyte differentiation in vitro . Biomaterials 2011 ; 32 : 1002 e 9 . [ 49 ] Dalby M , Gadegaard N , Tare R , Andar A , Riehle M , Herzyk P , et al . The control of human mesenchymal cell differentiation using nanoscale symmetry and disorder . Nat Mater 2007 ; 6 : 997 e 1003 . [ 50 ] Xie J , Willerth S , Li X , Macewan M , Rader A , Sakiyama - Elbert S , et al . The differentiation of embryonic stem cells seeded on electrospun nano ﬁ bers into neural lineages . Biomaterials 2009 ; 30 : 354 e 62 . [ 51 ] Recknor J , Sakaguchi D , Mallapragada S . Directed growth and selective dif - ferentiation of neural progenitor cells on micropatterned polymer sub - strates . Biomaterials 2006 ; 27 : 4098 e 108 . [ 52 ] Oh S , Brammer K , Li Y , Teng D , Engler A , Chien S , et al . Stem cell fate dictated solely by altered nanotube dimension . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009 ; 106 : 2130 e 5 . [ 53 ] Chen W , Villa - Diaz L , Sun Y , Weng S , Kim J , Lam R , et al . Nanotopography in ﬂ uences adhesion , spreading , and self - renewal of human embryonic stem cells . ACS Nano 2012 ; 6 : 4094 e 103 . Y . Shao et al . / Biomaterials 52 ( 2015 ) 26 e 43 41 [ 54 ] McBeath R , Pirone DM , Nelson CM , Bhadriraju K , Chen CS . Cell shape , cyto - skeletal tension , and RhoA regulate stem cell lineage commitment . Dev Cell 2004 ; 6 : 483 e 95 . [ 55 ] Kilian K , Bugarija B , Lahn B , Mrksich M . Geometric cues for directing the differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010 ; 107 : 4872 e 7 . [ 56 ] Lee J , Abdeen AA , Zhang D , Kilian KA . Directing stem cell fate on hydrogel substrates by controlling cell geometry , matrix mechanics and adhesion ligand composition . Biomaterials 2013 ; 34 : 8140 e 8 . [ 57 ] Peerani R , Rao BM , Bauwens C , Yin T , Wood GA , Nagy A , et al . Niche - medi - ated control of human embryonic stem cell self - renewal and differentiation . EMBO J 2007 ; 26 : 4744 e 55 . [ 58 ] Warm ﬂ ash A , Sorre B , Etoc F , Siggia ED , Brivanlou AH . A method to reca - pitulate early embryonic spatial patterning in human embryonic stem cells . Nat Methods 2014 ; 11 : 847 e 54 . [ 59 ] Kraehenbuehl T , Langer R , Ferreira L . Three - dimensional biomaterials for the study of human pluripotent stem cells . Nat Methods 2011 ; 8 : 731 e 6 . [ 60 ] Bauwens CL , Peerani R , Niebruegge S , Woodhouse KA , Kumacheva E , Husain M , et al . Control of human embryonic stem cell colony and aggregate size heterogeneity in ﬂ uences differentiation trajectories . Stem Cells 2008 ; 26 : 2300 e 10 . [ 61 ] Ungrin M , Joshi C , Nica A , Bauwens C , Zandstra P . Reproducible , ultra high - throughput formation of multicellular organization from single cell suspension - derived human embryonic stem cell aggregates . PLoS One 2008 ; 3 : e1565 . [ 62 ] Mohr J , de Pablo J , Palecek S . 3D microwell culture of human embryonic stem cells . Biomaterials 2006 ; 27 : 6032 e 42 . [ 63 ] Hwang YS , Chung BG , Ortmann D , Hattori N , Moeller HC , Khademhosseini A . Microwell - mediated control of embryoid body size regulates embryonic stem cell fate via differential expression of wnt5a and wnt11 . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009 ; 106 : 16978 e 83 . [ 64 ] Bratt - Leal AM , Carpenedo RL , Ungrin MD , Zandstra PW , McDevitt TC . Incorporation of biomaterials in multicellular aggregates modulates plurip - otent stem cell differentiation . Biomaterials 2011 ; 32 : 48 e 56 . [ 65 ] Kirschner CM , Anseth KS . Hydrogels in healthcare : from static to dynamic material microenvironments . Acta Mater 2013 ; 61 : 931 e 44 . [ 66 ] Kharkar P , Kiick K , Kloxin A . Designing degradable hydrogels for orthogonal control of cell microenvironments . Chem Soc Rev 2013 ; 42 : 7335 e 72 . [ 67 ] Gerecht S , Burdick J , Ferreira LS , Townsend AS , Langer R , Vunjak - Novakovic G . Hyaluronic acid hydrogel for controlled self - renewal and dif - ferentiation of human embryonic stem cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007 ; 104 : 11298 e 303 . [ 68 ] Li ZS , Leung M , Hopper R , Ellenbogen R , Zhang MQ . Feeder - free self - renewal of human embryonic stem cells in 3D porous natural polymer scaffolds . Biomaterials 2010 ; 31 : 404 e 12 . [ 69 ] Stenberg J , Elovsson M , Strehl R , Kilmare E , Hyllner J , Lindahl A . Sustained embryoid body formation and culture in a non - laborious three dimensional culture system for human embryonic stem cells . Cytotechnology 2011 ; 63 : 227 e 37 . [ 70 ] Siti - Ismail N , Bishop AE , Polak JM , Mantalaris A . The bene ﬁ t of human em - bryonic stem cell encapsulation for prolonged feeder - free maintenance . Biomaterials 2008 ; 29 : 3946 e 52 . [ 71 ] Lei Y , Schaffer D . A fully de ﬁ ned and scalable 3D culture system for human pluripotent stem cell expansion and differentiation . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013 ; 110 : E5039 e 48 . [ 72 ] Levenberg S , Huang N , Lavik E , Rogers A , Itskovitz - Eldor J , Langer R . Differ - entiation of human embryonic stem cells on three - dimensional polymer scaffolds . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003 ; 100 : 12741 e 6 . [ 73 ] Huebsch N , Arany P , Mao A , Shvartsman D , Ali O , Bencherif S , et al . Har - nessing traction - mediated manipulation of the cell / matrix interface to con - trol stem - cell fate . Nat Mater 2010 ; 9 : 518 e 26 . [ 74 ] Anderson S , Lin C - C , Kuntzler D , Anseth K . The performance of human mesenchymal stem cells encapsulated in cell - degradable polymer - peptide hydrogels . Biomaterials 2011 ; 32 : 3564 e 74 . [ 75 ] Khetan S , Guvendiren M , Legant W , Cohen D , Chen C , Burdick J . Degradation - mediated cellular traction directs stem cell fate in covalently crosslinked three - dimensional hydrogels . Nat Mater 2013 ; 12 : 458 e 65 . [ 76 ] Kloxin AM , Kasko AM , Salinas CN , Anseth KS . Photodegradable hydrogels for dynamic tuning of physical and chemical properties . Science 2009 ; 324 : 59 e 63 . [ 77 ] DeForest C , Anseth K . Cytocompatible click - based hydrogels with dynami - cally tunable properties through orthogonal photoconjugation and photo - cleavage reactions . Nat Chem 2011 ; 3 : 925 e 31 . [ 78 ] Lim HL , Chuang JC , Tuan T , Aung A , Arya G , Varghese S . Dynamic electro - mechanical hydrogel matrices for stem cell culture . Adv Funct Mater 2011 ; 21 : 55 e 63 . [ 79 ] Baharvand H , Hashemi SM , Ashtian SK , Farrokhi A . Differentiation of human embryonic stem cells into hepatocytes in 2D and 3D culture systems in vitro . Int J Dev Biol 2006 ; 50 : 645 e 52 . [ 80 ] Ferreira LS , Gerecht S , Fuller J , Shieh HF , Vunjak - Novakovic G , Langer R . Bioactive hydrogel scaffolds for controllable vascular differentiation of hu - man embryonic stem cells . Biomaterials 2007 ; 28 : 2706 e 17 . [ 81 ] Dixon JE , Shah DA , Rogers C , Hall S , Weston N , Parmenter CDJ , et al . Com - bined hydrogels that switch human pluripotent stem cells from self - renewal to differentiation . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2014 ; 111 : 5580 e 5 . [ 82 ] ShamirE , EwaldA . Three - dimensionalorganotypicculture : experimentalmodels ofmammalian biology and disease . NatRev MolCell Biol 2014 ; 15 : 647 e 64 . [ 83 ] Lancaster M , Knoblich J . Organogenesis in a dish : modeling development and disease using organoid technologies . Science 2014 ; 345 : 1247125 . [ 84 ] Carpenedo RL , Bratt - Leal AM , Marklein RA , Seaman SA , Bowen NJ , McDonald JF , et al . Homogeneous and organized differentiation within embryoid bodies induced by microsphere - mediated delivery of small mol - ecules . Biomaterials 2009 ; 30 : 2507 e 15 . [ 85 ] Bratt - Leal AM , Nguyen AH , Hammersmith KA , Singh A , McDevitt TC . A microparticle approach to morphogen delivery within pluripotent stem cell aggregates . Biomaterials 2013 ; 34 : 7227 e 35 . [ 86 ] Fung W - T , Beyzavi A , Abgrall P , Nguyen N - T , Li H - Y . Micro ﬂ uidic platform for controlling the differentiation of embryoid bodies . Lab Chip 2009 ; 9 : 2591 e 5 . [ 87 ] Kim J , Choi J - H , Kim M , Rhee W , Son B , Jung H - K , et al . High - throughput generation of spheroids using magnetic nanoparticles for three - dimensional cell culture . Biomaterials 2013 ; 34 : 8555 e 63 . [ 88 ] Bratt - Leal AM , Kepple KL , Carpenedo RL , Cooke MT , McDevitt TC . Magnetic manipulation and spatial patterning of multi - cellular stem cell aggregates . Integr Biol 2011 ; 3 : 1224 e 32 . [ 89 ] Schaaf S , Shibamiya A , Mewe M , Eder A , St € ohr A , Hirt M , et al . Human engineered heart tissue as a versatile tool in basic research and preclinical toxicology . PLoS One 2011 ; 6 : e26397 . [ 90 ] Cvetkovic C , Raman R , Chan V , Williams BJ , Tolish M , Bajaj P , et al . Three - dimensionally printed biological machines powered by skeletal muscle . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2014 ; 111 : 10125 e 30 . [ 91 ] Zhang D , Shadrin IY , Lam J , Xian H - Q , Snodgrass HR , Bursac N . Tissue - engi - neered cardiac patch for advanced functional maturation of human ESC - derived cardiomyocytes . Biomaterials 2013 ; 34 : 5813 e 20 . [ 92 ] Sara SN , Jason WM , Jie L , Roozbeh A - S , Yun X , Boyang Z , et al . Biowire : a platform for maturation of human pluripotent stem cell - derived car - diomyocytes . Nat Methods 2013 ; 10 : 781 e 7 . [ 93 ] Thavandiran N , Dubois N , Mikryukov A , Mass (cid:2) e S , Beca B , Simmons C , et al . Design and formulation of functional pluripotent stem cell - derived cardiac microtissues . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013 ; 110 : E4698 e 707 . [ 94 ] Juhas M , Engelmayr GC , Fontanella AN , Palmer GM , Bursac N . Biomimetic engineered muscle with capacity for vascular integration and functional maturation in vivo . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2014 ; 111 : 5508 e 13 . [ 95 ] Ma Z , Koo S , Finnegan M , Loskill P , Huebsch N , Marks N , et al . Three - dimensional ﬁ lamentous human diseased cardiac tissue model . Biomaterials 2013 ; 35 : 1367 e 77 . [ 96 ] Tulloch N , Muskheli V , Razumova M , Korte F , Regnier M , Hauch K , et al . Growth of engineered human myocardium with mechanical loading and vascular coculture . Circ Res 2011 ; 109 : 47 e 59 . [ 97 ] Yang X , Pabon L , Murry C . Engineering adolescence : maturation of human pluripotent stem cell - derived cardiomyocytes . Circ Res 2014 ; 114 : 511 e 23 . [ 98 ] Norotte C , Marga FS , Niklason LE , Forgacs G . Scaffold - free vascular tissue engineering using bioprinting . Biomaterials 2009 ; 30 : 5910 e 7 . [ 99 ] Nakano T , Ando S , Takata N , Kawada M , Muguruma K , Sekiguchi K , et al . Self - formation of optic cups and storable strati ﬁ ed neural retina from human ESCs . Cell Stem Cell 2012 ; 10 : 771 e 85 . [ 100 ] Eiraku M , Watanabe K , Matsuo - Takasaki M , Kawada M , Yonemura S , Matsumura M , et al . Self - organized formation of polarized cortical tissues from ESCs and its active manipulation by extrinsic signals . Cell Stem Cell 2008 ; 3 : 519 e 32 . [ 101 ] Mariani J , Simonini M , Palejev D , Tomasini L , Coppola G , Szekely A , et al . Modeling human cortical development in vitro using induced pluripotent stem cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012 ; 109 : 12770 e 5 . [ 102 ] Lancaster M , Renner M , Martin C - A , Wenzel D , Bicknell L , Hurles M , et al . Cerebral organoids model human brain development and microcephaly . Nature 2013 ; 501 : 373 e 9 . [ 103 ] Zhang D , Pekkanen - Mattila M , Shahsavani M , Falk A , Teixeira A , Herland AA . 3D Alzheimer ' s disease culture model and the induction of p21 - activated ki - nase mediatedsensinginiPSCderived neurons . Biomaterials 2014 ; 35 : 1420 e 8 . [ 104 ] Takasato M , Er PX , Becroft M , Vanslambrouck JM , Stanley EG , Elefanty AG , et al . Directing human embryonic stem cell differentiation towards a renal lineage generates a self - organizing kidney . Nat Cell Biol 2014 ; 16 : 118 e 26 . [ 105 ] Kusuma S , Shen Y - I , Hanjaya - Putra D , Mali P , Cheng L , Gerecht S . Self - organized vascular networks from human pluripotent stem cells in a syn - thetic matrix . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013 ; 110 : 12601 e 6 . [ 106 ] Samuel R , Daheron L , Liao S , Vardam T , Kamoun W , Batista A , et al . Gener - ation of functionally competent and durable engineered blood vessels from human induced pluripotent stem cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013 ; 110 : 12774 e 9 . [ 107 ] Spence J , Mayhew C , Rankin S , Kuhar M , Vallance J , Tolle K , et al . Directed differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells into intestinal tissue in vitro . Nature 2011 ; 470 : 105 e 9 . [ 108 ] Watson C , Mahe M , Múnera J , Howell J , Sundaram N , Poling H , et al . An in vivo model of human small intestine using pluripotent stem cells . Nat Med 2014 ; 20 : 1310 e 4 . [ 109 ] Takebe T , Sekine K , Enomura M , Koike H , Kimura M , Ogaeri T , et al . Vascu - larized and functional human liver from an iPSC - derived organ bud trans - plant . Nature 2013 ; 499 : 481 e 4 . [ 110 ] Shao Y , Fu JP . Integrated micro / nanoengineered functional biomaterials for cell mechanics and mechanobiology : a materials perspective . Adv Mater 2014 ; 26 : 1494 e 533 . Y . Shao et al . / Biomaterials 52 ( 2015 ) 26 e 43 42 [ 111 ] Sun YB , Fu JP . Mechanobiology : a new frontier for human pluripotent stem cells . Integr Biol 2013 ; 5 : 450 e 7 . [ 112 ] Sudol M . Yes - associated protein ( Yap65 ) is a proline - rich phosphoprotein that binds to the SH3 domain of the Yes proto - oncogene product . Oncogene 1994 ; 9 : 2145 e 52 . [ 113 ] Kanai F , Marignani PA , Sarbassova D , Yagi R , Hall RA , Donowitz M , et al . TAZ : a novel transcriptional co - activator regulated by interactions with 14 - 3 - 3 and PDZ domain proteins . EMBO J 2000 ; 19 : 6778 e 91 . [ 114 ] Dong JX , Feldmann G , Huang JB , Wu S , Zhang NL , Comerford SA , et al . Elucidation of a universal size - control mechanism in Drosophila and mam - mals . Cell 2007 ; 130 : 1120 e 33 . [ 115 ] Zhao B , Li L , Tumaneng K , Wang CY , Guan KL . A coordinated phosphorylation by Lats and CK1 regulates YAP stability through SCF b - TrCP . Gene Dev 2010 ; 24 : 72 e 85 . [ 116 ] Chan EH , Nousiainen M , Chalamalasetty RB , Schafer A , Nigg EA , Sillje HHW . The STE20 - like kinase Mst2 activates the human large tumor suppressor kinase Lats1 . Oncogene 2005 ; 24 : 2076 e 86 . [ 117 ] Yin F , Yu J , Zheng Y , Chen Q , Zhang N , Pan D . Spatial organization of Hippo signaling at the plasma membrane mediated by the tumor suppressor Merlin / NF2 . Cell 2013 ; 154 : 1342 e 55 . [ 118 ] Hergovich A , Schmitz D , Hemmings BA . The human tumour suppressor Lats1 is activated by human MOB1 at the membrane . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2006 ; 345 : 50 e 8 . [ 119 ] Musah S , Wrighton PJ , Zaltsman Y , Zhong XF , Zorn S , Parlato MB , et al . Substratum - induced differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells reveals the coactivator YAP is a potent regulator of neuronal speci ﬁ cation . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2014 ; 111 : 13805 e 10 . [ 120 ] Dupont S , Morsut L , Aragona M , Enzo E , Giulitti S , Cordenonsi M , et al . Role of YAP / TAZ in mechanotransduction . Nature 2011 ; 474 : 179 e 83 . [ 121 ] Chan SW , Lim CJ , Chong YF , Pobbati AV , Huang CX , Hong WJ . Hippo pathway - independent restriction of TAZ and YAP by Angiomotin . J Biol Chem 2011 ; 286 : 7018 e 26 . [ 122 ] Zhao B , Li L , Lu Q , Wang LH , Liu CY , Lei QY , et al . Angiomotin is a novel Hippo pathway component that inhibits YAP oncoprotein . Gene Dev 2011 ; 25 : 51 e 63 . [ 123 ] Mana - Capelli S , Paramasivam M , Dutta S , McCollum D . Angiomotins link F - actin architecture to Hippo pathway signaling . Mol Biol Cell 2014 ; 25 : 1676 e 85 . [ 124 ] Adler JJ , Johnson DE , Heller BL , Bringman LR , Ranahan WP , Conwell MD , et al . Serum deprivation inhibits the transcriptional co - activator YAP and cell growth via phosphorylation of the 130 - kDa isoform of Angiomotin by the Lats1 / 2 protein kinases . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013 ; 110 : 17368 e 73 . [ 125 ] Visser - Grieve S , Zhou ZH , She YM , Huang H , Cyr TD , Xu T , et al . Lats1 tumor suppressor is a novel actin - binding protein and negative regulator of actin polymerization . Cell Res 2011 ; 21 : 1513 e 6 . [ 126 ] Schlegelmilch K , Mohseni M , Kirak O , Pruszak J , Rodriguez JR , Zhou DW , et al . Yap1 acts downstream of a - catenin to control epidermal proliferation . Cell 2011 ; 144 : 782 e 95 . [ 127 ] Remue E , Meerschaert K , Oka T , Boucherie C , Vandekerckhove J , Sudol M , et al . TAZ interacts with zonula occludens - 1 and - 2 proteins in a PDZ - 1 dependent manner . FEBS Lett 2010 ; 584 : 4175 e 80 . [ 128 ] Oka T , Schmitt AP , Sudol M . Opposing roles of Angiomotin - like - 1 and zona occludens - 2 on pro - apoptotic function of YAP . Oncogene 2012 ; 31 : 128 e 34 . [ 129 ] Singh AM , Reynolds D , Cliff T , Ohtsuka S , Mattheyses AL , Sun YH , et al . Signaling network crosstalk in human pluripotent cells : a Smad2 / 3 - regulated switch that controls the balance between self - renewal and dif - ferentiation . Cell Stem Cell 2012 ; 10 : 312 e 26 . [ 130 ] Schmierer B , Hill CS . TGF b - Smad signal transduction : molecular speci ﬁ city and functional ﬂ exibility . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2007 ; 8 : 970 e 82 . [ 131 ] Varelas X , Sakuma R , Samavarchi - Tehrani P , Peerani R , Rao BM , Dembowy J , et al . TAZ controls Smad nucleocytoplasmic shuttling and regulates human embryonic stem - cell self - renewal . Nat Cell Biol 2008 ; 10 : 837 e 48 . [ 132 ] Du J , Chen X , Liang X , Zhang G , Xu J , He L , et al . Integrin activation and internalization on soft ECM as a mechanism of induction of stem cell dif - ferentiation by ECM elasticity . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011 ; 108 : 9466 e 71 . [ 133 ] Sato N , Meijer L , Skaltsounis L , Greengard P , Brivanlou AH . Maintenance of pluripotency in human and mouse embryonic stem cells through activation of Wnt signaling by a pharmacological GSK - 3 - speci ﬁ c inhibitor . Nat Med 2004 ; 10 : 55 e 63 . [ 134 ] Blauwkamp TA , Nigam S , Ardehali R , Weissman IL , Nusse R . Endogenous Wnt signalling in human embryonic stem cells generates an equilibrium of distinct lineage - speci ﬁ ed progenitors . Nat Commun 2012 ; 3 . [ 135 ] Davidson KC , Adams AM , Goodson JM , McDonald CE , Potter JC , Berndt JD , et al . Wnt / b - catenin signaling promotes differentiation , not self - renewal , of human embryonic stem cells and is repressed by Oct4 . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012 ; 109 : 4485 e 90 . [ 136 ] Xin M , Kim Y , Sutherland LB , Qi XX , McAnally J , Schwartz RJ , et al . Regulation of insulin - like growth factor signaling by YAP governs cardiomyocyte pro - liferation and embryonic heart size . Sci Signal 2011 ; 4 : ra70 . [ 137 ] MacDonald BT , Tamai K , He X . Wnt / b - catenin signaling : components , mechanisms , and diseases . Dev Cell 2009 ; 17 : 9 e 26 . [ 138 ] Bendall SC , Stewart MH , Menendez P , George D , Vijayaragavan K , Werbo - wetski - OgilvieT , etal . IGFandFGFcooperativelyestablishtheregulatorystem cell niche of pluripotent human cells in vitro . Nature 2007 ; 448 . 1015 e U3 . [ 139 ] Ding VMY , Ling L , Natarajan S , Yap MGS , Cool SM , Choo ABH . FGF - 2 modu - lates Wnt signaling in undifferentiated hESC and iPS cells through activated PI3 - K / GSK3 b signaling . J Cell Physiol 2010 ; 225 : 417 e 28 . [ 140 ] Azzolin L , Panciera T , Soligo S , Enzo E , Bicciato S , Dupont S , et al . YAP / TAZ incorporation in the b - catenin destruction complex orchestrates the Wnt response . Cell 2014 ; 158 : 157 e 70 . [ 141 ] Azzolin L , Zanconato F , Bresolin S , Forcato M , Basso G , Bicciato S , et al . Role of TAZ as mediator of Wnt signaling . Cell 2012 ; 151 : 1443 e 56 . [ 142 ] Heallen T , Zhang M , Wang J , Bonilla - Claudio M , Klysik E , Johnson RL , et al . Hippo pathway inhibits Wnt signaling to restrain cardiomyocyte prolifera - tion and heart size . Science 2011 ; 332 : 458 e 61 . [ 143 ] Barry ER , Morikawa T , Butler BL , Shrestha K , de la Rosa R , Yan KS , et al . Restriction of intestinal stem cell expansion and the regenerative response by YAP . Nature 2013 ; 493 : 106 e 10 . [ 144 ] Varelas X , Miller BW , Sopko R , Song SY , Gregorieff A , Fellouse FA , et al . The Hippo pathway regulates Wnt / b - catenin signaling . Dev Cell 2010 ; 18 : 579 e 91 . [ 145 ] Yu FX , Zhao B , Panupinthu N , Jewell JL , Lian I , Wang LH , et al . Regulation of the Hippo - YAP pathway by G - protein - coupled receptor signaling . Cell 2012 ; 150 : 780 e 91 . [ 146 ] Yu FX , Zhang YF , Park HW , Jewell JL , Chen Q , Deng YT , et al . Protein kinase A activates the Hippo pathway to modulate cell proliferation and differentia - tion . Gene Dev 2013 ; 27 : 1223 e 32 . [ 147 ] Tkachenko E , Sabouri - Ghomi M , Pertz O , Kim C , Gutierrez E , Machacek M , et al . Protein kinase A governs a RhoA - RhoGDI protrusion - retraction pace - maker in migrating cells . Nat Cell Biol 2011 ; 13 : 660 e 7 . [ 148 ] Kim M , Kim M , Lee S , Kuninaka S , Saya H , Lee H , et al . cAMP / PKA signalling reinforces the Lats - YAP pathway to fully suppress YAP in response to actin cytoskeletal changes . EMBO J 2013 ; 32 : 1543 e 55 . [ 149 ] Codelia VA , Sun GP , Irvine KD . Regulation of YAP by mechanical strain through JNK and Hippo signaling . Curr Biol 2014 ; 24 : 2012 e 7 . [ 150 ] Reddy BVVG , Irvine KD . Regulation of Hippo signaling by EGFR - MAPK signaling through Ajuba family proteins . Dev Cell 2013 ; 24 : 459 e 71 . [ 151 ] Sun GP , Irvine KD . Ajuba family proteins link JNK to Hippo signaling . Sci Signal 2013 ; 6 . [ 152 ] Rauskolb C , Sun SG , Sun GP , Pan YW , Irvine KD . Cytoskeletal tension inhibits Hippo signaling through an Ajuba - Warts complex . Cell 2014 ; 158 : 143 e 56 . [ 153 ] Tenney R , Discher D . Stem cells , microenvironment mechanics , and growth factor activation . Curr Opin Cell Biol 2009 ; 21 : 630 e 5 . [ 154 ] Paszek M , Zahir N , Johnson K , Lakins J , Rozenberg G , Gefen A , et al . Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype . Cancer Cell 2005 ; 8 : 241 e 54 . [ 155 ] Wozniak MA , Chen CS . Mechanotransduction in development : a growing role for contractility . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2009 ; 10 : 34 e 43 . [ 156 ] Thaxton C , Lopera J , Bott M , Baldwin ME , Kalidas P , Fernandez - Valle C . Phosphorylation of the NF2 tumor suppressor in schwann cells is mediated by Cdc42 - PAK and requires paxillin binding . Mol Cell Neurosci 2007 ; 34 : 231 e 42 . [ 157 ] Even - Ram S , Doyle AD , Conti MA , Matsumoto K , Adelstein RS , Yamada KM . Myosin IIa regulates cell motility and actomyosin - microtubule crosstalk . Nat Cell Biol 2007 ; 9 : 299 e 309 . [ 158 ] Ohgushi M , Matsumura M , Eiraku M , Murakami K , Aramaki T , Nishiyama A , et al . Molecular pathway and cell state responsible for dissociation - induced apoptosis in human pluripotent stem cells . Cell Stem Cell 2010 ; 7 : 225 e 39 . [ 159 ] Xu Y , Zhu XW , Hahm HS , Wei WG , Hao EG , Hayek A , et al . Revealing a core signaling regulatory mechanism for pluripotent stem cell survival and self - renewal by small molecules . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010 ; 107 : 8129 e 34 . [ 160 ] Kuroda S , Fukata M , Nakagawa M , Fujii K , Nakamura T , Ookubo T , et al . Role of IQGAP1 , a target of the small GTPases Cdc42 and Rac1 , in regulation of E - cadherin - mediated cell - cell adhesion . Science 1998 ; 281 : 832 e 5 . [ 161 ] Wada KI , Itoga K , Okano T , Yonemura S , Sasaki H . Hippo pathway regulation by cell morphology and stress ﬁ bers . Development 2011 ; 138 : 3907 e 14 . [ 162 ] Aragona M , Panciera T , Manfrin A , Giulitti S , Michielin F , Elvassore N , et al . A mechanical checkpoint controls multicellular growth through YAP / TAZ regulation by actin - processing factors . Cell 2013 ; 154 : 1047 e 59 . [ 163 ] Hayakawa K , Tatsumi H , Sokabe M . Actin ﬁ laments function as a tension sensor by tension - dependent binding of co ﬁ lin to the ﬁ lament . J Cell Biol 2011 ; 195 : 721 e 7 . [ 164 ] Saha S , Ji L , de Pablo J , Palecek S . TGF b / Activin / Nodal pathway in inhibition of human embryonic stem cell differentiation by mechanical strain . Biophys J 2008 ; 94 : 4123 e 33 . [ 165 ] Thomas WE , Vogel V , Sokurenko E . Biophysics of catch bonds . Annu Rev Biophys 2008 ; 37 : 399 e 416 . [ 166 ] Lee CY , Lou JZ , Wen KK , McKane M , Eskin SG , Ono S , et al . Actin depoly - merization under force is governed by lysine 113 : Glutamic acid 195 - medi - ated catch - slip bonds . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013 ; 110 : 5022 e 7 . [ 167 ] Engl W , Arasi B , Yap LL , Thiery JP , Viasnoff V . Actin dynamics modulate mechanosensitive immobilization of E - cadherin at adherens junctions . Nat Cell Biol 2014 ; 16 : 584 e 91 . [ 168 ] Zweigerdt R . Large scale production of stem cells and their derivatives . Eng Stem Cells 2009 ; 114 : 201 e 35 . [ 169 ] Meregalli M , Farini A , Torrente Y . Stem cell therapy for neuromuscular dis - eases . Stem Cell Clin Res 2011 ; 17 . [ 170 ] Li X , Chen Y , Sch (cid:2) eele S , Arman E , Haffner - Krausz R , Ekblom P , et al . Fibroblast growthfactorsignalingandbasementmembraneassemblyareconnectedduringepithelialmorphogenesisoftheembryoidbody . J Cell Biol 2001 ; 153 : 811 e 22 . Y . Shao et al . / Biomaterials 52 ( 2015 ) 26 e 43 43