© 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | 1437 IntroDuctIon Development of the protocol Cells and tissues constantly experience mechanical forces gener - ated by both endogenous and exogenous sources . It is by now well known that these mechanical forces can trigger signaling events that are critical to the proper functioning of living cells and tissues 1 – 4 . Several methods have been established to apply mechanical forces to a living cell , including micropipette aspira - tion 5 , atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) 6 – 8 , optical tweezers 9 – 11 , optical stretchers 12 , magnetic - gradient tweezers 13 , and MTC 14 – 16 . Each of these techniques has its own strengths and is most appropriate in applying and quantifying mechanical responses in certain conditions . MTC was originally developed to apply local shear forces to living cells via magnetic beads and to probe mechanical responses by quantifying the remnant magnetic fields ( magnetic fields generated by the magnetized magnetic beads themselves after the external magnetic field is turned off ) of the magnetic beads 14 . Later , MTC was combined with light microscopy in order to apply shear forces in one dimension while probing the mechanical responses by optical recording of mag - netic bead displacements 17 . In comparison with other existing methods , MTC can be used to apply forces with a wide range of force frequencies ( the rate of force application ) ( 0 – 1 , 000 Hz ) and to simultaneously probe many ( > 100 ) cells , making it unique as a mechanical technique . More than a decade ago , a 3D - MTC was developed in order to allow the application of forces in all three dimensions and the quantification of the resulting mechanical responses 18 . This technique was used , for instance , to reveal that actin bundles are critical to establishing the mechanical anisotropic behavior of an elongated cell ( i . e . , the mechanical properties are dependent on the direction of the applied force ) 18 . 3D - MTC was originally designed to be used in combination with conventional wide - field fluorescence microscopy , which limited its imaging spatial resolu - tion because of out - of - focus fluorescence . To overcome this limi - tation and to substantially advance the applications of 3D - MTC using fluorescence microscopy , we developed an approach to interface and synchronize 3D - MTC with confocal fluorescence microscopy 19 . This allows for the quantification of dynamic struc - tural changes in single cells in response to the applied forces . Here we describe a protocol for combining confocal fluorescence microscopy with a mechanical stimulation probe ( Fig . 1 ) . The development of super - resolved fluorescence microscopy such as STED 20 , 21 and single - fluorophore microscopy ( photoac - tivated localization microscopy ( PALM ) ) 22 or stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy ( STORM 23 ) ) has revolutionized light microscopy for observing dynamic processes occurring in a living cell . The diffraction - limited focal region , i . e . , the spatial resolu - tion of ensemble fluorophores in STED or of a single fluorophore in PALM , in theory has no lower limit . Although in practice the current optimal spatial resolution of either STED or PALM is ~ 20 – 70 nm 24 , 25 , it is still three - to tenfold better than the resolution ( ~ 200 nm ) of conventional light microscopy set by Abbe’s limit . Spatial resolution enhancement may help identify molecule – mol - ecule ( such as protein – protein ) structural interactions that would be impossible to determine with conventional fluorescence micro - scopy . For example , STED was used to discover that the Drosophila coiled - coil domain protein Bruchpilot in donut - shaped structures is centered at active zones of neuromuscular synapses 26 , which was not possible using conventional confocal fluorescence micro - scopy . A recent paper 27 by Hell and colleagues reported a new Interfacing 3D magnetic twisting cytometry with confocal fluorescence microscopy to image force responses in living cells Yuejin Zhang 1 , 2 , 5 , Fuxiang Wei 1 , 5 , Yeh - Chuin Poh 3 , 4 , Qiong Jia 1 , Junjian Chen 1 , Junwei Chen 1 , Junyu Luo 1 , Wenting Yao 1 , Wenwen Zhou 1 , Wei Huang 1 , Fang Yang 1 , Yao Zhang 1 & Ning Wang 1 , 3 1 Laboratory for Cellular Biomechanics and Regenerative Medicine , School of Life Science and Technology , Huazhong University of Science and Technology , Wuhan , China . 2 School of Information Engineering , East China Jiaotong University , Nanchang , China . 3 Department of Mechanical Science and Engineering , College of Engineering , University of Illinois at Urbana – Champaign , Urbana , Illinios , USA . 4 Present address : Semma Therapeutics , Cambridge , Massachusetts , USA . 5 These authors contributed equally to this work . Correspondence should be addressed to N . W . ( nwangrw @ illinois . edu ) . Published online 22 June 2017 ; doi : 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2017 . 042 cells and tissues can undergo a variety of biological and structural changes in response to mechanical forces . only a few existing techniques are available for quantification of structural changes at high resolution in response to forces applied along different directions . 3D - magnetic twisting cytometry ( 3D - Mtc ) is a technique for applying local mechanical stresses to living cells . Here we describe a protocol for interfacing 3D - Mtc with confocal fluorescence microscopy . In 3D - Mtc , ferromagnetic beads are bound to the cell surface via surface receptors , followed by their magnetization in any desired direction . a magnetic twisting field in a different direction is then applied to generate rotational shear stresses in any desired direction . this protocol describes how to combine magnetic - field - induced mechanical stimulation with confocal fluorescence microscopy and provides an optional extension for super - resolution imaging using stimulated emission depletion ( steD ) nanoscopy . this technology allows for rapid real - time acquisition of a living cell’s mechanical responses to forces via specific receptors and for quantifying structural and biochemical changes in the same cell using confocal fluorescence microscopy or steD . the integrated 3D - Mtc – microscopy platform takes ~ 20 d to construct , and the experimental procedures require ~ 4 d when carried out by a life sciences graduate student . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol 1438 | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | nature protocols © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . method of MINFLUX that combines STED with PALM / STORM , minimizes the number of fluorescence molecules needed for high - resolution imaging , and can thereby localize single molecules to ~ 1 - nm precision . Hundreds of laboratories have access to wide - field or confocal fluorescence microscopy , and dozens of laboratories have built their own 1D - MTC device or have purchased commercial 1D - MTC devices . This protocol can be used by these laboratories to inter - face 1D - MTC with wide - field and / or confocal fluorescence microscopy . Some laboratories are in the process of building or obtaining 3D - MTC devices . As the ability to apply forces in any direction is important in studies of mechanotransduction and mechanobiology , we anticipate that our protocol will find broad adoption in the near future . In addition , we introduce an extension of the protocol to combine 3D - MTC with STED nanos - copy ( Box 1 ) . Overview of the procedure Here we outline the use of 3D - MTC to study the spatial and temporal mechano - chemical response within the cell nucleus . Magnetic beads coated with integrin - binding peptides are added to a tissue culture dish to allow the beads to firmly attach to the cell surface . After placing the dish on the microscope , a brief and strong magnetic impulse ( 2 , 500 Gauss , < 0 . 5 ms ) is applied to magnetize the beads . Next , a twisting torque is applied to the magnetic beads by applying a homogeneous sinusoidal mag - netic field perpendicular to the magnetic moment of the beads ( Fig . 2 ) . This magnetic torque causes the bead to rotate , thus deforming the cells . The cell shear modulus ( stiffness ) can be computed by quantifying the embedded area of the bead and the displacement of the bead ( Fig . 3 ) . We have developed a new user - friendly software source code that is responsible for controlling all the required operations of Box 1 | ( Optional ) super - resolution imaging using STED nanoscopy ● tIMInG 1 h The steps described in this box are optional steps that can be followed when 3D - MTC is interfaced with STED nanoscopy . 1 . Excite the GFP - H2B with the 488 - nm laser at 40 - m W laser power and detect the emission fluorescence using the HyD detector between 498 and 560 nm . 2 . Use a 592 - nm STED laser at 810 - mW laser power to stimulate emission depletion . The actual depletion laser power at the objective lens is ~ 64 . 8 mW . Use a 100× oil - immersion objective for imaging ( the useable field - of - view is 152 × 152 µ m ) .  crItIcal step We use a 100× oil - immersion objective to obtain high - resolution time - lapse images of cytoplasmic or nuclear structures before , during , and after force application to determine force - induced displacements ( and the computed strains ) . 3 . Perform a two - tailed Student’s t - test for statistical analyses , with Bonferonni correction when appropriate . All self - written C + + and MATLAB software is freely available to all interested researchers ( at https : / / pan . baidu . com / s / 1hrJIgss / ; https : / / pan . baidu . com / s / 1qXCGozy / ) . X Magnetic bead Cell Substrate z y x Nucleus 3D - MTC PC CL OL HyD Confocal PC 592 514 496 488 476 458 AOTF STEDlaser Argonlaser 3D - MTC Coil SCB - 68 - A SCB - 68 - B DAQCard - 6052E - A Ext trigger DAQCard - 6713 DAQCard - 6052E - B D1 M1 D2 D3 D4 D6 D12 D11 D10 D9 D8 D5 D7 PP Optional Optional Figure 1 | Schematic of the 3D - MTC and confocal fluorescence microscope interface . ( Left ) Schematic of the 3D magnetic twisting cytometer ( 3D - MTC ) , which produces homogeneous magnetic fields along the x - , y - , and z - axis independently ( arrows represent bead rotation directions ) ( see supplementary Fig . 2 for detailed dimensions ) . The cell is at the center and located in the focal plane of the microscope ( Leica SP8 confocal microscope ) . ( Right ) The 3D - MTC PC communicates with the confocal PC to manage image acquisition by the DAQCard - 6713 . The 3D - MTC specifies the frequency and amplitude of the sinusoidal wave signal from the connecting box SCB - 68 - A to drive the twisting coils through the voltage control current source and to generate the requested signals as the multifunction input for the DAQCard - 6052E - A in order to synchronize image acquisition by means of an external trigger . The coils of the 3D - MTC are positioned on the microscope stage . The current flowing in the coils is simultaneously fed back as output from the connecting box SCB - 68 - B and acquired by the DAQCard - 6052E - B . For fluorescence , the Leica SP8 confocal system supplies excitation beams at 458 nm ( cyan ) , 476 nm ( light blue ) , 488 nm ( dark green ) , 496 nm ( light green ) , and 514 nm ( yellow ) wavelengths , filtered from an argon laser head using an acousto - optical tunable filter ( AOTF ) . Dashed boxes are the STED laser head ( 592 nm , orange ; optional ) . These beams are fiber - coupled and delivered to the confocal tip - tilt piezo mirror ( M1 ) after being combined by dichroic mirror D1 . A STED doughnut is formed by a binary phase plate ( PP ) . The scanned fluorescence signal is collected by the hybrid detector ( HyD ) . CL , condenser lens ( Leica S28 , NA = 0 . 55 ) ; D1 – D12 , dichroic mirrors ; Ext , external ; OL , oil - immersion objective lens ( Leica , model no . HCX PL APO , 100× , NA = 1 . 40 ) . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | 1439 the system . The software was developed in the C + + programming language , can be downloaded free of charge from http : / / pan . baidu . com / s / 1hrJIgss / , and is named ‘Viewer _ BeadsTracking _ Sine _ Square . zip’ . The confocal microscope manages the commu - nication between the frame grabber and the camera , and allows setting of the parameters for image acquisition and storage . The system is easily customized according to the required experi - mental conditions . Images were acquired with a hybrid detector ( HyD ; http : / / www . leica - microsystems . com / products / confocal - microscopes / details / product / leica - hyd / ) , which was also responsible for transferring the image data . As all our codes are open to the scientific community , we anticipate that it would take only ~ 20 d for others to create a similar interface in order to integrate the hardware . After data filtering , the maximum displacement of a magnetic bead without twisting fields is ~ 5 nm and the maximum displace - ment amplitude in the Fourier domain is only ~ 1 nmThe noise is extremely small relative to the stress - induced bead displace - ment on the cell , which ranges from ~ 30 to 600 nm , depending on cell types various plating conditions , and substrate stiffness . Although different twisting frequencies might generate noise in the bead position , this noise is very low ( the signal - to - noise ratio ( SNR ) is between 6 : 1 and 120 : 1 ) . This means that the noise from the microscope stage or other sources can be effectively ignored during the course of the experiment . After the magnetic beads are magnetized and twisted , one can obtain synchronized bead displacements that are also sinusoidal ( Fig . 3c ) , and , using the cell stiffness calculation based on bead displacements , one could obtain cell stiffness values ( Fig . 3d ) . As discussed earlier , care should be taken to avoid recording potential loosely bound beads or nonmagnetized beads . One could also quantify GFP - labeled histone 2B ( H2B ) displacement , which synchronizes with the stress applied via integrins ( Fig . 4 ) . H2B is one of the core histones , in which a segment of DNA wraps around to form nucleosomes . Therefore , GFP - H2B can be used as a marker for chromatin . Alternatively , GFP - labeled H2A , H3 , H4 , or H1 can also be used as markers of chromatin . We also provide optional steps for interfacing 3D - MTC with STED microscopy ( Box 1 ) . From the displacement maps , strain maps can be computed ( shear strains and 2D bulk strains ) in response to force directionality ( Fig . 5 ) . Comparison with alternative methods Another way to probe single - cell mechanics is AFM . AFM uses a flexible cantilever with a sharp tip to approach the cell surface to apply forces to the cell . AFM can apply higher stresses ( i . e . , higher force per unit of area ) than MTC , but it can probe only one cell at a time . Moreover , because the cantilever is immersed in the cell culture medium , it is not suitable for high - frequency ( > 10 Hz ) force application because of the dampening effects of the medium on the cantilever movement . Alternatively , aspiration techniques work by sucking the cell into a micropipette and are most useful for cells in suspension . Finally , an optical trap can be used to apply forces to single cells . The strength of the optical trap depends Magnetizing along z axis Twisting along x axis Strong magnetic field ( 2 , 500 Gauss for 0 . 5 ms ) Weak and sinusoidal magnetic field ( 1 – 75 Gauss at 0 . 001 – 1 , 000 Hz ) Rotation Coil Nonmagnetized Flexible / rigid substrate ( 0 . 1 – 10 6 kPa ) Ligand - coated bead a y z x Nonmagnetized Magnetizing along z axis Twisting along y axis Flexible / rigid substrate ( 0 . 1 – 10 6 kPa ) Strong magnetic field ( 2 , 500 Gauss for 0 . 5 ms ) Weak and sinusoidal magnetic field ( 1 – 75 Gauss at 0 . 001 – 1 , 000 Hz ) Ligand - coated bead Rotation Coil b y z x Figure 2 | Schematic showing application of stress with 3D - MTC . The ligand - coated bead ( black dot ) is bound to the cell ( orange color ; nucleus is green ) , and a strong magnetic pulse ( 2 , 500 Gauss ) is applied along the z ( middle panels ) axis to magnetize the ferromagnetic bead ( note that two pulse signals are shown inside the coils in each panel to show that the pulses are everywhere inside the coil pair ) , then the weak sinusoidal magnetic field was applied in different directions , generating shear stresses to rotate the bead in the desired direction . ( a ) The bead rotates in the x – z plane ( torque is in the y direction ) . ( b ) The bead rotates in the y – z plane ( torque is in the x direction ) . Note that to simulate complex loading patterns in a living tissue , complex magnetic twisting fields and hence very complex stress patterns can be generated after the magnetic bead is magnetized in a certain direction . More than one twisting field ( e . g . , two or even three twisting fields ) can be turned on simultaneously at different magnitudes and different frequencies to force the bead to rotate spirally in x – y – z dimensions 18 . Rem iuscilla core facipit veniamc onulla facil ex ea feu feugait lut velit nim doloree tuerit – 20 – 15 – 10 – 5 0 5 10 15 20 – 600 – 400 – 200 0 200 400 600 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 S t r e ss ( P a ) D i s p l a c e m en t ( n m ) Time ( s ) Bead - 0 ° Bead - 90 ° Stress 0 200 400 600 0 90 C e ll s t i ff ne ss ( P a ) Stress angle ( ° ) * * * y x � a b c d + Figure 3 | Calculation of cell stiffness from magnetic bead displacements . ( a ) The bright - field image of an adherent and elongated B16 - F1 melanoma cell . A 4 - µ m RGD - coated magnetic bead was bound to the cell surface via integrins . Scale bar , 5 µ m . ( b ) The BeadsTracking software puts a ‘ + ’ symbol at the center of the bead mass and tracks its movement in response to applied stresses . ( c ) The traces of bead displacements as a function of sinusoidal stress inputs . The displacements are an average of 7 cycles of the sinusoidal force to filter out noises . Note that the displacements were synchronous with the input stress and there was little phase lag between the input stress and the displacements , suggesting that this cell was mostly elastic . ( d ) Computed cell stiffness ( complex modulus ) . Mean ± s . e . m . ; n = 6 cells ; * * * P < 0 . 001 . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol 1440 | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | nature protocols © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . on the power of the laser . Most laboratories use optical traps to generate forces between 100 and 300 pNs . As the application of higher forces relies on increased laser intensity , this can easily result in local heating problems and thereby can potentially dam - age the sample . Each of the above mechanical probes ( including 3D - MTC ) has its own strengths and limitations , depending on what kind of biological questions one wants to address . 3D - MTC can probe and quantify hundreds of magnetic beads in a culture dish in one run of the twisting field , making it much more efficient and time - saving than AFM or optical tweezers , which can measure only one cell at a time . Importantly , cell stiff - ness within a wide range of frequencies ( up to 1 , 000 Hz ) can be measured using 3D - MTC 28 , 29 . This is a unique feature that is not easy to achieve with either AFM or optical tweezers . When interfaced with confocal fluorescence microscopy ( and optional STED nanoscopy ) ( Supplementary Fig . 1 ) , 3D - MTC can be used to quantify cellular responses to forces applied at the cell surface via specific receptors . Our system is complementary to another recently published method wherein optical tweez - ers were integrated with STED nanoscopy 30 but can cover wide loading frequency ranges and complex forcing patterns in all three dimensions for living cell applications . Acousto - optical or electro - optical deflectors have been used for 2D force application at high forcing rates 31 . Although these alternative techniques have an advantage over the 3D - MTC technique in that they are able to precisely place the probe at a prespecified location on the cell surface , these optical probes can test only one cell at a time and it is challenging to precisely control the magnitude of applied forces in the z direction . An optical device for trapping and rotating single molecules in 3D has also been developed 32 . Such an optical device could in principle be used to manipulate the z direction in living cells at high forcing frequency , but to our knowledge this has not been reported . Advantages and limitations Combining 3D - MTC with confocal fluorescence microscopy has several advantages over conventional wide - field microscopy approaches . Our approach supports a wide range of stress magni - tudes ( 0 – 25 Pa ) , waveforms ( step function , sinusoidal , and so on ) , and frequencies ( 0 – 1 , 000 Hz ) , as well as 3D force directionality in living cells with improved displacement and deformation quanti - fication over conventional wide - field fluorescence microscopy 18 . The average shear stress on endothelial cells in blood vessels is ~ 1 Pa , which can increase by several fold during exercise , and can reach even higher at some sites of blood vessels in cardiovas - cular diseases . A step - function waveform can simulate a sudden force impact in vivo ( e . g . , head injury and concussion in a football match ) and a sinusoidal waveform can simulate force patterns of the heart and of the respiratory system . A human heart beats at ~ 1 Hz at rest and ~ 3 Hz during exercise . Some maneuvers , such as jumping or running , can generate high - impact forces on the human body up to many dozens of Hz . 3D - MTC is useful in that it can cover ranges of these parameters in physiology and in diseases . We have so far interfaced 3D - MTC only with a Leica SP8 confocal microscope . We therefore recommend users of different 10 0 . 25 8 4 0 – 4 – 8 0 . 20 0 . 15 0 . 10 0 . 05 0 Displacement Stress angle = 0 ° Stress angle = 90 ° µ m 0 . 25 0 . 20 0 . 15 0 . 10 0 . 05 0 µ m % 8 4 0 – 4 – 8 % 2 1 0 – 1 – 2 % 2 1 0 – 1 – 2 % Bulk strain Shear strain Displacement Bulk strain Shear strain 5 – 5 – 10 – 10 – 5 5 10 0 0 y ( µ m ) 10 5 – 5 – 10 0 y ( µ m ) 10 5 – 5 – 10 0 y ( µ m ) 10 5 – 5 – 10 0 y ( µ m ) 10 5 – 5 – 10 0 y ( µ m ) 10 5 – 5 – 10 0 y ( µ m ) x ( µ m ) – 10 – 5 5 10 0 x ( µ m ) – 10 – 5 5 10 0 x ( µ m ) – 10 – 5 5 10 0 x ( µ m ) – 10 – 5 5 10 0 x ( µ m ) – 10 – 5 5 10 0 x ( µ m ) a b Figure 5 | Anisotropic strains of H2B depend on loading directions . The same cell as in Figure 4 is shown . The bulk ( 2D dilatational and compressive ) strains or shear strains were computed from the displacement maps in Figure 4 using the method described previously 49 . The stress was applied at 15 Pa at 0 . 1 Hz for ~ 100 s at a 0° stress angle and for ~ 100 s at a 90° stress angle . ( a ) The strain maps when the stress angle was 0° ( relative to the cell’s long axis ) . ( b ) The strain maps when the stress angle was 90° . The pink arrows represents the direction of bead center displacement . Magnetizing along z axis Magnetizing along z axis Twisting along y axis Twisting along x axis H2B fluorescence Displacement H2B fluorescence Displacement y x y x � = 0 ° � = 90 ° y x 0 . 25 ( 15 Pa at 0 . 1 Hz ) ( 15 Pa at 0 . 1 Hz ) 0 . 20 0 . 10 0 µ m 0 . 25 0 . 20 0 . 10 0 µ m Bright - field H2B fluorescence Displacement 0 . 25 0 . 20 0 . 10 0 µ m Bright - field NonmagnetizedBright - field a b c Figure 4 | Nuclear H2B displacements under stress . From left to right : bright - field images of the cell , GFP - H2B fluorescence images , and displacement map images of the same murine melanoma B16 cell . The nucleus is outlined with a dashed line . The thick white arrows point to the bead , the pink arrows indicate direction of bead center displacement , and the color bar indicates the displacement magnitude . ( a ) No applied stress ( nonmagnetized beads ) . ( b ) After magnetizing in the z axis and applying a 15 Pa rotational stress ( 0 . 1 Hz ) along the y axis . ( c ) After magnetizing in the z axis and applying a 15 Pa rotational stress ( 0 . 1 Hz ) along the x - axis . The white square in each displacement map is enlarged and presented on the right ( fourth image in each row ) to show the differences in displacement between each stress angle ( b , c ) . It is apparent that stress angles ( loading directions ) are important in generating major differences in GFP - H2B displacement . The thin white arrow in the right - most image in a ( 150 nm ) provides a scale bar for the magnitude of the red arrows in the right - most panels of b and c . Image acquisition time is 1 s per image . Scale bars , 5 µ m . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | 1441 systems to review the software development kit ( SDK ) from their microscope manufacturer . It is important to note that the coils are heavy and thus limit the speed of the z - height scanning when they are placed on the stage of the confocal microscope . In addition , confocal microscopy using an oil - immersion objective limits the accessible z - range to ~ 100 µm . Using high - numerical - aperture ( high - NA ) oil / water - immersion objectives could also create a large heat - sink that dominates the local temperature in the sample . It should be noted that heat production by the coils can result in overheating of the setup when the coils operate at high frequencies ( > 100 Hz ) with strong magnetic fields ( > 50 Gauss ) . This might limit the continuous magnetic field application to ~ 10 min , and in such cases the magnetic field must be turned off for a few minutes to allow for coil cooling before another round of magnetic field application can be started . 3D - MTC has an automatic temperature control - ler that applies a flow of 37 °C air to mitigate potential local heating problems . A limit of our system is the frame transfer time between the HyD and the confocal computer . When the frame transfer rate is below the sampling rate ( for acquisition of a 512 pixel × 512 - pixel image , the maximum sampling rate is 1 image per s ) , it will not be possible to track the movement of the magnetic bead . To reduce the acquisition time , we have developed a strategy for image acquisition : For reconstructing a period , software is written that calculates the frame rate allowed by the frame trans - fer time and the minimum number of periods , n , in order to achieve the number of requested frames , m , per period , and the proper trigger , together with the time shift of each period . Using this strategy , we find that the acquisition time is reduced by a factor equal to ( m − n ) / m , as multiple points for the period are acquired , with no missing data . The magnetic bead generates rotation , resulting in x , y , and z displacements . To measure the z displacement , one must take multiple z - scans , and then calculate the obtained Z - deformation . This is doable , but it means that one must apply forces for many more cycles compared with when just one z - height scan is used . Currently , we only take images at one focal plane or one Z - height , in order to obtain rapid real - time images of deformation induced by the magnetic bead . Therefore , the deformation analysis that we performed to obtain the strain maps is an underestimate of the actual deformation . In the Procedure , we describe how to use cultured Chinese hamster ovary ( CHO ) DG44 or B16 - F1 cells . Because these cells are generally very spread out , the observed z displacement is much less than the x or y displacements . However , if rounder cells are used , the z displacement can be very substantial and must be taken into account for calculating the total ( x – y – z ) displacement and the resulting strains . This is not incorporated into the current protocol and could be included in the future . With 3D - MTC , the cell stiffness that is measured via an indi - vidual magnetic bead on a particular cell varies from cell to cell . As the position of the bead on a specific part of the cell cannot be precisely controlled , different stiffness values will be reported because of , for instance , the heterogeneity of a living cell . AFM on different positions on the cell surface has revealed such regional differences in cell stiffness 33 – 35 . Other contributions to cell - to - cell variation in measured cell stiffness include variation in cell – matrix adhesion , differences in cell spreading and / or tractional forces , and differences in the cell cycle stage . Some of these dif - ferences can be mitigated or minimized by carefully controlling the chemical environment of the cell , cell adhesion , plating time , and spreading areas ( e . g . , use micropatterned surfaces ) . In this study , we have extended the protocol only by integration of 3D - MTC with STED , as we do not have access to the PALM or STORM techniques . It will be interesting to see whether 3D - MTC can be integrated with PALM / STORM or with the new MINFLUX method in the future . However , to obtain super resolution using PALM / STORM , only a sparse set of fluorophores is excited at a given time in order to determine their accurate position . To gather sufficient data , the long calculation times associated with this approach may complicate the rapid real - time capture of the displacements in response to the mechanical signal . Applications of the method Experimental findings from several laboratories over the past two decades have shown that 3D - MTC is robust , reliable , fast , and convenient for quantifying cell stiffness changes . Cell stiffness can be quantified in individual cells both before and after add - ing a soluble chemical factor ( e . g . , a growth factor , a cytokine , or a drug ) to the culture dish 36 – 41 . 3D - MTC can be interfaced with confocal fluorescence microscopy ( or STED ) , as discussed in this protocol . This allows for the quantification of cell stiffness , strain mapping in response to force directionality , and improve - ment of the resolution of deformation mapping in a living cell . The 3D - MTC technology can be combined with other single - cell assays , such as fluorescence resonance energy transfer or fluo - rescence in situ hybridization ( FISH ) . The combined platform can quantify intracellular enzymatic activities ( such as those of Src and Rac 42 – 44 ) , measure the dissociation of intranuclear pro - tein – protein complexes 45 , and assess changes in gene expression 19 in response to forces applied via integrins . Experimental design We present a detailed procedure for accurately validating the system , in order to standardize its calibration procedure and to obtain quantitative and reproducible data . Interfacing and synchronizing the confocal fluorescence microscope with the state - of - art biophysical technologies that can apply precisely con - trolled mechanical stimuli will greatly enhance the capacity of the integrated system in imaging , quantifying , and understanding the complex physiological responses and behaviors in a living cell . 3D - MTC and confocal fluorescence microscopy hardware . The hardware needed to perform 3D - MTC with a confocal fluorescence microscope ( Fig . 1 ) includes an inverted confocal microscope with a HyD photon counter , an antivibration table , a magnetic field generator , a 3D - MTC , a 3D - MTC personal computer ( PC ) , and a confocal PC ( Supplementary Fig . 1 ) . The Leica HyD com - bines the advantages of photomultiplier tube and avalanche photodiodes as described in http : / / www . leica - microsystems . com / products / confocal - microscopes / details / product / leica - hyd / . The software ( file name : ‘Viewer _ BeadsTracking _ Sine _ Square . zip’ ; can be downloaded from http : / / pan . baidu . com / s / 1hrJIgss / ) that is installed in the 3D - MTC PC controls the operations of the entire system , using high - level functions to communicate with the confocal PC to manage image acquisition . It also communicates with the DAQCard - 6713 ( NI PCI - 6713 analog output board with © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol 1442 | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | nature protocols © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . NI - DAQ 8 analog outputs ) signal generation board . This speci - fies the frequency and amplitude of the sinusoidal wave signal generated by the SCB - 68 - A connecting box , which is used to drive the twisting coils through the voltage - controlled current source ( Fig . 1 , right ) . The signal generation board is also responsible for generating the signals requested via the SCB - 68 - A connecting box and sending them to the DAQCard - 6052E ( National Instruments ( NI ) PCI - 6052E multifunction I / O with NI - DAQ ) - A , in order to synchronize image acquisition by means of an external trigger . The signal detection and data processing systems are the core of the system , which includes main functions such as data acqui - sition , receiving and sending control instruction , data storage , data transmission , data processing , and implementation of the user – machine interaction . The software of the synchronous system controls the execution of the synchronization module . The HyD is connected to the objective and is controlled by the confocal PC . The DAQCard - 6713 is used to satisfy the timing constraints of the system , as a computer operating system cannot guarantee the real - time execution of the firmware . Additional advantages are that this setup is low cost and easy to implement . The DAQCard - 6713 board generates the sinusoidal analog voltage signal to induce the oscillatory magnetic field ( 0 . 001 – 1 , 000 Hz , 1 – 75 Gauss ) . The HyD uses the digital trigger signal to acquire images at a specified time . A DAQCard - 6052E - A board captures the sinusoidal wave and the corresponding trigger signal . From the values set in the DAQCard - 6713 timer registration , software calculates the exact wave frequencies and trigger periods . Then a set of signals from the SCB - 68 - A connecting box is generated by the DAQCard - 6713 through the 3D - MTC after the coils of the 3D - MTC are positioned on the microscope stage . The coils are fed with voltages to generate magnetic fields at different intensities . The current flowing through the coils is simultaneously acquired by the DAQCard - 6052E - B from the SCB - 68 - B . All the above pro - cedures are performed automatically without user intervention . The experimental setup shows beam paths and critical compo - nents . For fluorescence imaging , the laser system supplies exci - tation beams ( at 514 , 496 , 488 , 476 , and 458 nm , respectively , filtered from an argon laser using an acousto - optical tunable filter ( AOTF ) ) ( Fig . 1 , right ) . A STED depletion laser ( 592 nm ) can optionally be added and used to improve lateral spatial resolution . 3D - MTC has an automatic temperature controller that applies a low flow rate of 37 °C air to mitigate the potential local heating problem . Development of image acquisition software in the 3D - MTC PC with the Leica SDK . The Leica SDK provides the user interface and contains functional modules for software development . In the SDK , the interface , the binary code , the related device drivers , and the configuration resources all ensure that experimenters can control HyD image acquisition by using other programming languages and software platforms . The SDK includes drivers , a dynamic link library , a static input database , interface declara - tions ( these are names of various components of the SDK ) , and debugging software . The installed HyD image SDK includes Bin , C + + , Include , Lib , Samples , Docs , and the Proxy bin file folder . To install the SDK of the Leica system into the PC , one must include the header files in the development system for providing the inter - face declaration , importing the static input database , and copying the dynamic link library to the executing program directory . Interfacing 3D - MTC with confocal microscopy . A confocal PC is used to link the 3D - MTC - PC to the HyD photon counter . The static input database helps to link the dynamic link library during compiling . The client application program uses the SDK to con - trol the process of HyD image acquisition by calling the relevant functions through the interface declaration , compiling through the static input database , and importing the real functions through the dynamic link library , and then completing all the operations . The confocal microscope embedded in the 3D - MTC is com - posed of three pairs of coils : x , y , and z directions ( Supplementary Fig . 2 ) . One of z - direction coils is positioned below the micro - scope’s stage and the objective lens is located inside the z coils . Each of the coil pairs can generate magnetizing and twisting fields independently . Each of the coils is wound as a Helmholtz coil with 180 turns and generates an inductive strength of 1 . 43 mH . The magnetic field strength of the coil at the center plane is ~ 1 . 82 mT / A . The coils have a 16 - F capacitor that is used to store energy for magnetization , and the highest voltage of the capacitor can reach ~ 2 . 4 kV . When the coils are charged with magnetization , the coils generate a 0 . 5 - ms pulse magnetic field to magnetize the magnetic beads ; the strength of the magnetic field is 2 , 500 Gauss , resulting in the permanent magnetization of the beads . The magnetic coils can guarantee a bandwidth of ~ 1 kHz , and the maximum twisting field is 75 Gauss , which is large enough to exert physiologically rel - evant local stresses on the cell surface through the magnetic bead but still small enough to prevent re - magnetization of the bead . BeadsTracking program . The following task is executed auto - matically without user intervention . The first approximation value of the x coordinate of the center of the magnetic beads can be defined as follows : x x I I k k k n k k n = = = ∑ ∑ 1 1 where x k and I k are the x coordinate value and the inversion saturation , respectively , with n pixels window of the k th pixel value in the window containing n pixels ; the results of x are of subpixels . The bright - field image is converted to a gray image . We use the color scale to distinguish the image gray values and convert the black pixes to dark blue and the white pixels to red ; hence , the black bead is dark blue . The threshold is adjusted to determine the position of the center of mass of the magnetic beads . The MATLAB program is used to track the bead displace - ment . The maximum pixel saturation can be calculated as I max = 2 N −1 , where N = the number of bits in the image file , and a typical value is 8 or 16 bits . Once the first approximation of the x coordinate of the center is found , the moving window center will move to this point ; the new window position calculation is continued by the same algorithm , and the x coordinate of the center of the magnetic beads is calculated . The iterative process is repeated , until the window no longer moves or the algorithm has reached the maximum number of iterations allowed in the iterative process ( usually three iterations ) . The magnetic bead tracking software interfaces with the magnetic bead image on screen . The magnetic bead with a ‘ + ’ symbol is the bead recog - nized by the screening identification algorithm ( Fig . 3b ) . This recognized bead can be differentiated from other magnetic beads © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | 1443 that do not have the ‘ + ’ symbol , which is either because the diam - eter is smaller than the set value or because the distance between these beads and the recognized bead is less than the diameter of a single magnetic bead , and thus , they cannot be selected . The BeadsTracking program is used to control the HyD and to collect the original image . The software program can automati - cally locate and record the positions of the coordinates ( x , y ) of the magnetic beads in text format ; the contents of the output text file include experiment running time , current amplitudes , and frequencies of the twisting field . The user sets the parameters using the magnetic bead tracking software . Parameters such as the magnetic bead center , the back - ground pixel threshold , and the distance between the beads are calculated . Under normal circumstances , the minimum distance between the magnetic beads should not be less than the diameter of a single magnetic bead . In other words , two or more beads that aggregate together will not be tracked by the BeadsTracking soft - ware . This way , the potential errors that would otherwise occur as a result of two or more too closely associated beads ( because of their remnant magnetic fields and the magnetic forces between the two beads ) and interfere with effects of the external twisting field can be eliminated or substantially reduced . In a typical magnetic twisting experiment , using a 10× objective , the BeadsTracking software can keep track of 100 – 300 magnetic beads simultaneously ( depending on cell plating density and how many beads one would like to have on a cell ) . When a 10× objec - tive is used , each pixel is ~ 636 nm . The diameter of a magnetic bead is ~ 4 . 5 µ m and it can span ~ 7 pixels . With a 10× objective , the field of view of the microscope for bright - field imaging is 1 , 520 µ m by 1 , 520 µm . We used a low - magnification 10× objec - tive to find the cell of interest ( one that has a magnetic bead on its surface ) . The 10× lens can be also used to obtain mechanical stiffness values of a larger number of cells ( ~ 100 – 150 cells per field of view ) . During the process of rotation , the center of the magnetic bead undergoes lateral translation in the x – y plane and a typical trans - lation magnitude is between 30 and 600 nm , which is ~ 0 . 05 – 1 pixels . Hence , the subpixel algorithm for bead location with a high SNR ( > 3 ; the background noise is < 5 nm ) records the coordinate values of each magnetic bead . MATLAB program for Bead tracking analysis . MATLAB soft - ware ( file name : ‘Matlab _ BeadsTracking _ analysis _ Program . zip’ ; can be found at http : / / pan . baidu . com / s / 1qXCGozy / ) is used to read the magnetic bead position coordinates file and to filter out unusually large translations of the bead center ( for example , from a loosely bound or unattached bead ) . The lateral translation of the magnetic bead is used to calculate the cell stiffness , as described previously 46 . In short , the MATLAB code eliminates the drift error caused by the microscope stage and then calculates the cell stiff - ness . The lateral magnetic bead translation is converted to the cell complex modulus ( a quantitative measure of the stiffness of the material , taking into account both elastic and viscous contribu - tions ; its unit is Pa ) . MaterIals REAGENTS Ferromagnetic beads ( Fe 3 O 4 , ~ 4 . 5 µ m in diameter ; Spherotech , cat . no . CFM - 40 - 10 ) Histone 2B - GFP ( H2B ) plasmid ( Life Technologies , cat . no . C10594 ) DMSO , filter - sterilized ( Sigma - Aldrich , cat . no . D2438 ) FBS ( Invitrogen , cat . no . 10099141 ) Glass - bottom dishes ( 35 mm ; Cell E & G , cat . no . GBD00001 - 200 ) HEPES buffer ( 100 mM ; Gibco , cat . no . 15630080 ) Cells of interest . Here we describe how to use the murine melanoma cell line B16 - F1 ( ATCC , cat . no . CRL - 6323 ) and the Chinese hamster ovary ( CHO ) DG44 cell line ( provided by A . S . Belmont , University of Illinois at Urbana – Champaign ) ! cautIon The cell lines used in one’s research should be regularly checked to ensure that they are authentic and that they are not infected with mycoplasma  crItIcal Cell choice is partially dictated by the need to use cells that can be transfected . Ham’s F12 medium without thymidine and hypoxanthine ( HyClone , special order ) Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen , cat . no . 11668019 ) Opti - MEM medium ( Gibco , cat . no . 51985042 ) TrypLE ( Invitrogen , cat . no . 12604021 ) Penicillin – streptomycin ( Gibco , cat . no . 15140122 ) l - Glutamine ( Gibco , cat . no . 25030081 ) MEM medium ( HyClone , cat . no . 12571063 ) PBS ( HyClone , cat . no . 10010023 ) 95 % ( vol / vol ) ethanol ( Sinopharm , cat . no . 100091680 ) 75 % ( vol / vol ) ethanol ( Sinopharm , cat . no . 80176964 ) Sodium bicarbonate ( NaHCO 3 ; Sigma - Aldrich , cat . no . S5761 ) Sodium carbonate ( Na 2 CO 3 ; Sigma - Aldrich , cat . no . S2127 ) RGD ( Arg - Gly - Asp ) - containing peptide ( PEPTITE - 2000 ( ref . 47 ) ; Sigma - Aldrich , cat . no . R4658 ) EQUIPMENT 10× 0 . 22 Numerical aperture ( NA ) air objective ( Leica , cat . no . 15506285 ) 63× 1 . 4 NA oil - immersion objective ( Leica , cat . no . 15506350 ) • •••••• • •••••••••••• • • 100× 1 . 4 NA oil - immersion objective ( Leica , cat . no . 11506328 ) HyD photon counter ( Leica , cat . no . 158001401 ) Confocal microscope ( with optional STED instrument ; Leica , model no . SP8 ) MATLAB v 8 . 01 ( MathWorks , https : / / cn . mathworks . com / downloads / web _ downloads / 4097760 ) 3D - MTC device ( commercially available via special order from EOL Eberhard 18 ) A Dell TM T3500 PC ( 32 - bit operating system , with support for C + + ) . This connects to the 3D - MTC and a confocal PC with the confocal microscope ( and ( optional ) STED instrument ) . Note that any workstation better than or similar to the Dell TM3500 can be used . Multifunction I / O and data acquisition board ( DAQCard - 6052E - A board ; PCI 6052E - B ; NI , model no . 777745 - 01 ) Multifunction input data collection board ( PCI 6713 ; NI , model no . 777741 - 01 ) Shielded cables ( SH68 - 68 - EP ; NI , model no . 184749 - 02 ) Connecting box ( SCB - 68 - A ; NI , model no . 776844 - 01 ) Connecting box ( SCB - 68 - B ; NI , model no . 776844 - 01 ) BNC ( Bayonet Neill - Concelman ) shielded cables ( 3 - m cables ; PAN , model no . 2110020002 ) REAGENT SETUP Magnetic beads Place dry beads in 95 % ( vol / vol ) ethanol at a concentration of 5 mg / ml for sterilization and then store them at 4 °C for years .  crItIcal Immerse the magnetic beads in 75 % ( vol / vol ) alcohol for 8 h and then wash and dilute them in PBS or culture medium before use . Carbonate buffer Resuspend 159 mg of Na 2 CO 3 and 293 mg of NaHCO 3 in 80 ml of dH 2 O ( 0 . 05 M ; pH 9 . 4 ) . The buffer can be stored at 4 °C for up to 6 months . RGD solution ( 5 mg / ml ) Dissolve 0 . 5 mg of RGD in 100 µ l of DMSO . This solution can be stored at 4 °C for 6 months . ••• • • • • • •••• © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol 1444 | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | nature protocols © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . Culture medium for B16 - F1 cells Supplement MEM medium with 10 % ( vol / vol ) FBS , 0 . 1 mM penicillin – streptomycin , and 2 mM l - glutamine . This medium can be stored at 4 °C for 2 months . Transfection medium for B16 - F1 cells Supplement B16 - F1 medium with 2 mM l - glutamine and 10 % ( vol / vol ) FBS . This medium can be stored at 4 °C for 2 months . Culture medium for CHO DG44 cells Supplement Ham’s F12 medium ( without thymidine and hypoxanthine ) with 10 % ( vol / vol ) FBS , 0 . 1 mM penicillin – streptomycin , and 2 mM l - glutamine . ( HEPES buffer can be added to create a CO 2 - independent medium for long - duration ( a few hours ) experiments . ) proceDureconnection of the 3D - Mtc to confocal microscope ● tIMInG 20 d 1 | Install the connecting box ( NI , model no . PCI 6052E - B ) and the multifunction input data collection board ( NI , model no . PCI 6713 ) in the Dell TM T3500 PC ; install their drivers . ? trouBlesHootInG 2 | Use two shielded cables ( NI , model no . SH68 - 68 - EP ) to connect the cards with two connecting boxes ( NI , model nos . SCB - 68 - A and SCB - 68 - B ) separately . ? trouBlesHootInG 3 | Use six BNC shielded cables to connect the 3D - MTC to the SCB - 68 - A connecting box ( three input and three output connectors ) . 4 | Connect the Leica SP8 confocal microscope with the 3D - MTC PC through the NI SCB - 68 - B board using the multifunction input NI PCI DAQCard - 6052E - A board . 5 | Magnetize and twist the magnetic beads using a microscope insert with three pairs of independently controlled coils . The z - axis coil diameter is 51 mm , and the x - and y - axis coil diameters are 41 mm . ? trouBlesHootInG 6 | Control the magnetizing and twisting fields using the Dell TM T3500 PC . ? trouBlesHootInG coating of magnetic beads with rGD ( or other ligands ) ● tIMInG 1 d  crItIcal Steps 79 are performed in a sterile laminar flow hood . 7 | Transfer 200 µ l of magnetic beads ( see Reagent Setup ) to a 1 . 5 - ml microcentrifuge tube . 8 | Wash the beads by adding 1 . 5 ml of PBS , resuspend the beads , and centrifuge them at 1 , 500 g for 1 . 5 min at 25 °C in a microcentrifuge . Aspirate the supernatant . 9 | Resuspend the beads in 1 ml of carbonate buffer and add 10 µ l of the RGD ( 5 mg / ml stock concentration ) solution . 10 | Mix the beads with the RGD solution in a shaker at 4 °C under continuous rotation at 0 . 5 Hz overnight .  pause poInt The beads can be used immediately or stored at 4 °C for up to 2 weeks . cell culture and transfection ● tIMInG 3 d  crItIcal Perform Steps 11 – 15 in a sterile laminar flow hood . 11 | Culture B16 - F1 cells ( ~ 300 , 000 cells ) on a glass - bottom culture dish ( 35 - mm dish ) in transfection medium .  crItIcal step For CHO DG44 cells , most steps are similar to those for B16 - F1 cells but use the cell culture medium for CHO cells as described in the Reagent Setup . 12 | Dilute 1 µ g of the H2B plasmid in 200 µ l of Opti - MEM I medium in a 1 . 5 - ml microcentrifuge tube and mix thoroughly . 13 | Add 6 µ l of Lipofectamine 2000 to 200 µ l of Opti - MEM I medium in a 1 . 5 - ml microcentrifuge tube , and incubate for 5 min at room temperature ( 25 °C ) . 14 | Mix the Lipofectamine 2000 solution ( from Step 13 ) with the H2B plasmid solution ( from Step 12 ) , and incubate for 20 min at room temperature . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | 1445 15 | Add 400 µ l of Lipofectamine – H2B plasmid solution to the B16 - F1 cells . 16 | Incubate the cells at 37 °C in 0 . 5 % CO 2 for 24 – 48 h ( depending on transfection effectiveness of fluorescent probes ) before use . 3D - Mtc experiment ● tIMInG 1 h 17 | On the day of the experiment ( 24 – 48 h after transfection of fluorescent probes ) , aspirate 90 % of the culture from the culture dish , but leave some medium to protect the cells from drying out . 18 | Gently pipette out 20 µl of the bead - containing buffer from Step 9 and add the beads ( 20 µg ) to the center of the dish ; make sure that the beads are scattered more or less uniformly in the center of the dish . 19 | Return the cell dish to the incubator and leave it there for at least 20 min to allow for sufficient time for integrin clustering and focal adhesion formation around the beads . 20 | Remove the cells from the incubator and rinse them once with PBS in order to remove loosely bound or nonattached beads .  crItIcal step Avoid disturbing cells in the center of the dish . Add and remove PBS gently from the side of the dish . ? trouBlesHootInG 21 | Add CO 2 - independent medium to the dish to maintain the pH of the cell culture while imaging . 22 | Place the dish in the 3D - MTC stage close to the coils . Then place the stage on the inverted microscope . 23 | Find a single cell that shows high GFP - H2B expression ( as transfection effectiveness varies from cell to cell , only the cells that express enough H2B - GFP ( defined as fluorescence intensity that is bright enough for viewing when 17 % fluorescence excitation power is used ) should be used for quantification of force - induced deformation ) . 24 | Magnetize the magnetic beads with a strong ( 2 , 500 Gauss at 0 . 5 ms ) magnetic pulse . 25 | Turn on a weak and long ( 1 – 75 Gauss for various durations ) sinusoidal ( or another waveform such as a step - function or a ramp function , depending on the particular biological questions to be addressed ) twisting field in an orthogonal direction to the magnetizing field . The magnetic beads are ferromagnetic and maintain their magnetic moment after being magnetized , similar to a compass . When a twisting field is applied , this field interacts with the bead magnetic moment to generate a rotational movement to produce shear stresses between the bead and the cell surface ( Fig . 2 ) . ? trouBlesHootInG 26 | Use the magnetic bead position tracking software ( BeadsTracking ) to track the bead positioning through a center - of - mass algorithm . This software also presets a forcing frequency according to the experimental requirements ( Fig . 3a , b ) . In addition , the twisting field amplitude and duration can also be preset . The software is able to preset many cycles of the twisting field at various frequencies in such a manner that the twisting magnetic field can go from low frequency ( 0 . 001 Hz ) to high frequency ( 1 , 000 Hz ) and vice versa . ? trouBlesHootInG 27 | Capture the necessary bright - field or fluorescence images while the force is being applied . use of the MatlaB program for stiffness analysis ● tIMInG 1 d 28 | Run the ‘Bead _ mito _ finer . m’ software in MATLAB . Specify the address of your data : pathname = ‘location of your data’ . ? trouBlesHootInG 29 | Specify the parameters , including ‘bead _ diameter’ ( bead size ) , ‘c’ ( magnetic constant of the bead ) , ‘H’ ( magnetic field ) , ‘gauss _ per _ volt’ ( 3D - MTC parameter ) , and ‘µm _ per _ pixel’ . ? trouBlesHootInG 30 | Click the ‘Run’ tab , select ‘add to the path’ , and load the images . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol 1446 | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | nature protocols © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . 31 | Select the beads that you want in the image by clicking them with the left mouse key ( adds red markings to the selected beads ) . 32 | After selecting the beads , double - click with the left mouse key somewhere randomly or press the space bar , and the program will run automatically . 33 | Go to the folder of the original images and open the Excel file named ‘Cell _ XXX _ select _ beads’ . This Excel file contains three sheets , called G * , G ′ , and G ′′ . Basically , G * = G ′ + i G ′′ . As defined here , G * is the apparent complex modulus , which takes the unit of Pa / nm , G ′ is the storage modulus ( the real part of G * ) , and G ′′ is the loss modulus ( the imaginary part of G * ) ( see ‘Cell stiffness measurement’ ( Steps 37 – 44 ) ) . 34 | Multiply G * , G ′ , or G ′′ by a conversion factor for quantifying the exact stress to determine the complex shear modulus , storage shear modulus , or loss shear modulus value : the conversion factor = R / ( 6 * β ) , where R is the bead radius ( µm ) , and β depends on the bead embedment 29 . 35 | Through the measured conversion coefficient , each magnetic bead movement is converted to a nanometer displacement . When the band - pass filter is used , set the cutoff frequencies to 0 . 44 f T and 1 . 78 f T ( f T is the characteristic frequency of the band - pass filter ) . The band - pass filter can efficiently eliminate the noise of the microscope drift and the motion produced by the cell itself . ? trouBlesHootInG 36 | Calculate the modulus measured with each magnetic bead at the specified twisting frequency . cell stiffness measurement ● tIMInG 2 h 37 | Immerse the beads in a viscous standard , apply a constant magnetic twisting field , and measure the bead rotation / displacement , in order to calibrate the bead magnetic moment constant . Calculate the applied stress ( in Pa ) from the applied twisting magnetic field ( in Gauss ) . Multiply the bead constant ( in Pa / Gauss ) by the applied twisting field . For example , a 25 Gauss applies 15 Pa of stress to the cell if the bead constant is 0 . 6 Pa / Gauss . 38 | Under the microscope , locate a cell with a single bead bound to its apical surface . 39 | Apply an oscillatory stress of 0 . 1 Hz using the 3D - MTC , as shown in Figure 2 . 40 | Use the 3D - MTC software to track the displacement coordinates of the magnetic bead and save them in a text file . 41 | Calculate the cell complex shear modulus ( cell stiffness ) by quantifying the magnetic bead displacement and the bead – cell contact area . For equations for quantifying cell stiffness , see the supplementary Method . 42 | Select the beads whose displacement waves are synchronized to the input sinusoidal signals . Select only these beads in order to filter out spontaneous movements of the beads or microscope stage shifts .  crItIcal step Do not select beads with displacements < 5 nm ( possibly because the beads are not magnetized ) or loosely bound beads for analysis . To increase the SNR , average the peak amplitude of the displacement over 5 – 7 consecutive cycles of force for each cell . 43 | Calculate the apparent complex shear modulus using the equation G * = T / d . For each bead , calculate the elastic shear modulus G ′ ( the real part of G * ) and the dissipative shear modulus G ′′ ( the imaginary part of G * ) based on the phase lag . The measured apparent modulus is expressed as units of torque per unit of bead volume per unit of bead displacement ( Pa / nm ) . 44 | Find the β value from a published report 46 . The finite element analysis model is used to convert the apparent cell modulus ( Pa / nm ) to the cell complex modulus ( Pa ) ( or cell stiffness ) based on the bead - to - cell - surface contact area 46 . The bead – cell contact area can be estimated by staining with any focal adhesion protein ( e . g . , vinculin or talin ) . Then one can use the estimated bead embedment area to determine the value of β from ref . 46 ( Fig . 3 ) . assessment of the snr ● tIMInG 1 h 45 | Set twisting frequencies at 0 . 3 , 0 . 5 , 3 , 10 , 100 , and 1 , 000 Hz respectively ; each frequency lasts 3 – 15 cycles . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | 1447 46 | Averaging the twist - induced synchronized signals at a certain frequency equal to or greater than 3 cycles can increase the SNRs by averaging out nonsynchronized noises . For example , a magnetic bead was stressed at 15 Pa and 0 . 1 Hz ; the bead displacements were quantified after averaging the synchronized displacements over 7 cycles ( Fig . 3c ) and the cell stiffness ( complex modulus ) was computed ( Fig . 3d ) ; these data show that the cell appears to be stiffer along the long axis of the cell ( Fig . 3d ) , consistent with the data from a published report 18 . 47 | Focus the objective lens on the magnetic bead and perform fine - tuning of z - axis steps to increase the accuracy of the bead displacement quantification . 48 | Alter the twisting duration at a fixed frequency ( e . g . , at 0 . 1 Hz ) . Set the number of twisting cycles to 4 , 8 , 16 , 32 , or 64 , in order to compare the SNR at various numbers of cycles . Displacement and strain map analysis ● tIMInG 12 h 49 | Record multiple fluorescence images of molecules ( e . g . , GFP - H2B ) of a live cell at various time points during a cyclic force application . 50 | Input the file names of the fluorescence images and compute the displacement maps with software ( file name : ‘Mito _ amp _ clean . m’ ) that uses an image correlation method 48 . 51 | Compute the strain ( both bulk and shear strain ) maps from the fluorescence images with software ( file name : ‘fttc _ mito _ NUC _ arrowmap _ gradient . m’ ) that computes strains using derivatives of displacements 49 . ? trouBlesHootInG Troubleshooting advice can be found in table 1 . taBle 1 | Troubleshooting table . step problem possible reason solution 1 No response from the system The system is not compatible Use a 32 - bit operating system that supports C + + 1 , 2 The system is unable to initialize Incorrect driver versions have been installed Make sure that the driver versions match the operating system 5 The objective lens cannot fit into the coils The inner diameter of the coil is too small Fit the lens to the center of the coils ; the coils should be large enough ( > 5 cm in diameter ) to allow the microscope lens to fit in and to move freely 6 No response to magnetization The system is not compatible Run the system on a 32 - bit operating system that supports C + + 20 The beads do not adhere to the cells The beads are not properly coated with cell receptor ligands The magnetic beads should be immersed in 75 % ( vol / vol ) alcohol for 8 h before use to allow proper coating 25 , 26 The magnetic beads are not displaced The beads are not magnetized and / or the signal amplitude of the twisting waveform is too low Magnetize the beads first and / or set the proper signal amplitude for the twisting waveform 28 Cannot find file ( an error message in MATLAB ) The path is incorrect Use the absolute path location of the file 29 Cannot track the beads ( an error message in MATLAB ) The bead parameters are set incorrectly Set the bead type according to the actual situation 35 The drift is too large The antivibration table is not working well ( no air in the tank or air leaks out ) Fix the antivibration table . Redo the experiments © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol 1448 | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | nature protocols © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . ● tIMInG Steps 1 – 6 , connection of the 3D - MTC to the confocal microscope ( and optional STED system ) : 20 d Steps 7 – 10 , coating of magnetic beads with RGD ( or other ligands ) : 1 d Steps 11 – 16 , cell culture and transfection : 3 d Steps 17 – 27 , 3D - MTC experiment : 1 h Steps 28 – 36 , use of the MATLAB program for stiffness analysis : 1 d Steps 37 – 44 , cell stiffness measurement : 2 h Steps 45 – 48 , determination of the SNR : 1 h Steps 49 – 51 , displacement and strain map analysis : 12 h Box 1 , ( Optional ) super - resolution imaging : 1 h antIcIpateD results cell stiffness measurement The 3D - MTC can be used to apply force stimulation via integrins at the cell surface , and one can quantify intranuclear structural deformation . For example , an Arg - Gly - Asp ( RGD ) - peptide - coated magnetic bead was bound to cell adhesion molecule integrins on the cell surface and a stress of 15 Pa was applied at 0 . 1 Hz to the living cell , which was transfected with H2B - GFP as a marker for DNA ( Fig . 4 ) . When no stress was applied , the spontaneous displacement of GFP - H2B was very small ( Fig . 4a ; for a displacement map quantification method , see supplementary Fig . 3 ) . Displacement maps are generated by comparing the x – y coordinates of fluorescent signals of H2B in the two images of the same nucleus at two different time points . When stress was applied along the long axis of the cell ( magnetizing along z axis and twisting along the y axis ) , a displacement map that was synchronous ( i . e . , the displacement signals have the same frequency and waveform as the input stress ) with the input stress was obtained by averaging 7 cycles of the signals ( Fig . 4b ) . By contrast , as a stress of the same amplitude and frequency was applied along the short axis of the same cell ( magnetizing along z axis and twisting along the x axis ) , a different displacement map was generated ( see the enlarged image , which shows displacements in different directions ; Fig . 4c ) . From these displacement maps , one could calculate strain maps of the 2D bulk strains ( tensile and compressive strains ) and of the shear strains ( Fig . 5 ) . When a force is applied to a cell , it can cause strains ( computed from derivatives of displacements ) on cellular structures . Some structures are stretched ( tensile strains ) and some are compressed ( compressive strains ) , whereas some are sheared ( shear strains ) . It appears that the peak bulk strains were 4 times higher than the peak shear strains ( ~ 8 % versus ~ 2 % ) ( note that the scale in the bulk strain maps is different from that in the shear strain maps ) . From the bulk strain maps , one can also see that some parts of the chromatins are compressed ( blue color ) , whereas some are stretched ( red color ) . Importantly , when the stress angle was 90° , i . e . , when the stress was applied along the short axis of the cell , the GFP - H2B strains were higher than those when the stress was 0° ( compare Fig . 5a with Fig . 5b ; note that Fig . 5b shows more red and yellow than Fig 5a , suggesting higher strains ) . These data suggest that the actin bundles along the long axis of the cell determine the anisotropic response of the cell 18 and as a result the nuclear chromatin strains were smaller , consistent with what we found recently 19 . At a given applied stress amplitude , anisotropic displacement maps , cell stiffness , and strain maps of the nucleus were also quantified when the stress angles were varied at finer steps—i . e . , at 0° , 36 . 9° , 45° , 53 . 1° , and 90° relative to the long axis of the same cell ( supplementary Figs . 4 and 5 ) . These findings indicate the versatility of the 3D - MTC in providing mechanical stimulation at the cell surface and its ability to easily and precisely vary force directions . combining the 3D - Mtc with super - resolution imaging To examine the utility of 3D - MTC in greater detail , we compared the displacement map of the GFP - H2B in the nucleus of the same living cell generated via 3D - MTC with confocal microscopy to that generated by STED nanoscopy . In addition to the increased GFP - H2B spatial resolution provided by STED nanoscopy , the displacement map of the same area in the same cell was also improved when the same stress was applied ( compare supplementary Fig . 6 ) . We used the full width half maximum of the point spread function to calculate the spatial resolution . The resulting spatial resolution of H2B using confocal microscopy is 251 nm , whereas it is increased to 118 nm with STED nanoscopy , slightly below the 70 - nm resolution set by Leica for fixed samples . A STED microscope uses the continuous wave ( CW ) phase pattern and a 592 - nm excitation laser ; the scanning method is beam scanning . We used our STED nanoscope with a beam scanning speed of 1 , 000 Hz throughout the experiments . We obtained better spatial resolution at a higher power of the depletion laser ( 90 % ) , as compared with a lower power ( 30 % ) ( supplementary Fig . 7 ) , without observing detectable bleaching for short periods of exposure ( supplementary Fig . 8 ) . However , continuous imaging for many minutes of the same region can result in bleaching and should be avoided . We also examined the potential impact of the high - intensity - focused STED depletion beam on the magnetized bead . In the absence of the magnetic twisting field , when the STED depletion laser beam was turned on we observed no optical manipulation of the magnetized bead or displacement of the fluorescent H2B ( supplementary Fig . 9 ) . A module diagram of the system is depicted in supplementary Figure 10 . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol nature protocols | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | 1449 In summary , we anticipate that this interfaced system and its protocol will be useful to the fields of high - resolution imaging and mechanobiology , where structural alterations and biochemical changes can be quantified at nanoscale resolution in response to physiologically relevant forces . Note : Any Supplementary Information and Source Data files are available in the online version of the paper . acknowleDGMents We thank Y . Tan , S . Zhang , and H . Yi for technical assistance . This work was supported by the US National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) grant GM072744 , Ministry of Science and Technology of China grant 2016YFA0101100 , and the Fundamental Research Fund for the Central Universities ( No . 2017KFQWJX002 ) from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology . autHor contrIButIons N . W . conceived the project . N . W . , Yuejin Z . , and F . W . designed the experiments and analyzed the data . Y . - C . P . developed some analytical tools . Yuejin Z . , F . W . , Q . J . , Junjian C . , Junwei C . , J . L . , W . Y . , W . Z . , W . H . , F . Y . , and Yao Z . carried out the experiments . N . W . , Yuejin Z . , and F . W . wrote the manuscript . All authors discussed the results and implications and commented on the manuscript at all stages . coMpetInG FInancIal Interests The authors declare no competing financial interests . Reprints and permissions information is available online at http : / / www . nature . com / reprints / index . html . Publisher’s note : Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . 1 . Discher , D . E . , Mooney , D . J . & Zandstra , P . W . Growth factors , matrices , and forces combine and control stem cells . Science 324 , 1673 – 1677 ( 2009 ) . 2 . Wang , N . , Tytell , J . D . & Ingber , D . E . Mechanotransduction at a distance : mechanically coupling the extracellular matrix with the nucleus . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 1 , 75 – 82 ( 2009 ) . 3 . Wozniak , M . A . & Chen , C . S . Mechanotransduction in development : a growing role for contractility . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 1 , 34 – 43 ( 2009 ) . 4 . Humphrey , J . D . , Dufresne , E . R . & Schwartz , M . A . Mechanotransduction and extracellular matrix homeostasis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 , 802 – 812 ( 2014 ) . 5 . Evans , E . A . & Hochmuth , R . M . Membrane viscoelasticity . Biophys . J . 1 , 1 – 11 ( 1976 ) . 6 . Henderson , E . , Haydon , P . G . & Sakaguchi , D . S . Actin filament dynamics in living glial cells imaged by atomic force microscopy . Science 5078 , 1944 – 1946 ( 1992 ) . 7 . Hoh , J . H . & Schoenenberger , C . A . Surface morphology and mechanical properties of MDCK monolayers by atomic force microscopy . J . Cell Sci . 107 , 1105 – 1114 ( 1994 ) . 8 . Matzke , R . , Jacobson , K . & Radmacher , M . Direct , high - resolution measurement of furrow stiffening during division of adherent cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 , 607 – 610 ( 2001 ) . 9 . Ashkin , A . , Dziedzic , J . M . & Yamane , T . Optical trapping and manipulation of single cells using infrared laser beams . Nature 6150 , 769 – 771 ( 1987 ) . 10 . Block , S . M . , Goldstein , L . S . & Schnapp , B . J . Bead movement by single kinesin molecules studied with optical tweezers . Nature 6299 , 348 – 352 ( 1990 ) . 11 . Dai , J . & Sheetz , M . P . Mechanical properties of neuronal growth cone membranes studied by tether formation with laser optical tweezers . Biophys . J . 3 , 988 – 996 ( 1995 ) . 12 . Guck , J . et al . The optical stretcher : a novel laser tool to micromanipulate cells . Biophys . J . 2 , 767 – 784 ( 2001 ) . 13 . Bausch , A . R . , Ziemann , F . , Boulbitch , A . A . , Jacobson , K . & Sackmann , E . Local measurements of viscoelastic parameters of adherent cell surfaces by magnetic bead microrheometry . Biophys . J . 4 , 2038 – 2049 ( 1998 ) . 14 . Wang , N . , Butler , J . P . & Ingber , D . E . Mechanotransduction across the cell surface and through the cytoskeleton . Science 5111 , 1124 – 1127 ( 1993 ) . 15 . Wang , N . & Ingber , D . E . Control of cytoskeletal mechanics by extracellular matrix , cell shape , and mechanical tension . Biophys . J . 66 , 1281 – 1289 ( 1994 ) . 16 . Wang , N . & Ingber , D . E . Probing transmembrane mechanical coupling and cytomechanics using magnetic twisting cytometry . Biochem . Cell Biol . 73 , 327 – 335 ( 1995 ) . 17 . Fabry , B . et al . Signal transduction in smooth muscle selected contribution : time course and heterogeneity of contractile responses in cultured human airway mouse melanoma B16 cells . J . Appl . Physiol . 2 , 986 – 994 ( 2001 ) . 18 . Hu , S . et al . Mechanical anisotropy of adherent cells probed by a three dimensional magnetic twisting device . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 287 , C1184 – C1191 ( 2004 ) . 19 . Tajik , A . et al . Transcription upregulation via force - induced direct stretching of chromatin . Nat . Mater . 15 , 1287 – 1296 ( 2016 ) . 20 . Hell , S . W . & Wichmann , J . Breaking the diffraction resolution limit by stimulated emission : stimulated emission depletion microscopy . Opt . Lett . 19 , 780 – 782 ( 1994 ) . 21 . Klar , T . A . , Jakobs , S . , Dyba , M . , Egner , A . & Hell , S . W . Fluorescence microscopy with diffraction resolution barrier broken by stimulated emission . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 8206 – 8210 ( 2000 ) . 22 . Betzig , E . et al . Imaging intracellular fluorescent proteins at nanometer resolution . Science 313 , 1642 – 1645 ( 2006 ) . 23 . Rust , M . J . , Bates , M . & Zhuang , X . Sub - diffraction - limit imaging by stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy ( STORM ) . Nat . Methods 3 , 793 – 796 ( 2006 ) . 24 . Sahl , S . J . , Leutenegger , M . , Hilbert , M . , Hell , S . W . & Eggeling , C . Fast molecular tracking maps nanoscale dynamics of plasma membrane lipids . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 6829 – 6834 ( 2010 ) . 25 . Patterson , G . , Davidson , M . , Manley , S . & Lippincott - Schwartz , J . Superresolution imaging using single - molecule localization . Annu . Rev . Phys . Chem . 61 , 345 – 367 ( 2010 ) . 26 . Kittel , R . J . et al . Bruchpilot promotes active zone assembly , Ca2 + channel clustering , and vesicle release . Science 312 , 1051 – 1054 ( 2006 ) . 27 . Balzarotti , F . et al . Nanometer resolution imaging and tracking of fluorescent molecules with minimal photon fluxes . Science . 355 , 606 – 612 ( 2017 ) . 28 . Fabry , B . et al . Scaling the microrheology of living cells . Phys . Rev . Lett . 87 , 148102 ( 2001 ) . 29 . Chowdhury , F . et al . Is cell rheology governed by nonequilibrium - to - equilibrium transition of noncovalent bonds ? Biophys . J . 95 , 5719 – 5727 ( 2008 ) . 30 . Heller , I . et al . STED nanoscopy combined with optical tweezers reveals protein dynamics on densely covered DNA . Nat . Methods 10 , 910 – 916 ( 2013 ) . 31 . Neuman , K . C . & Block , S . M . Optical trapping . Rev . Sci . Instrum . 75 , 2787 – 809 ( 2004 ) . 32 . Gutiérrez - Medina , B . , Andreasson , J . O . , Greenleaf , W . J . , Laporta , A . & Block , S . M . An optical apparatus for rotation and trapping . Methods Enzymol . 475 , 377 – 404 ( 2010 ) . 33 . Shroff , S . G . , Saner , D . R . & Lal , R . Dynamic micromechanical properties of cultured rat atrial myocytes measured by atomic force microscopy . Am . J . Physiol . 269 , C286 – C292 ( 1995 ) . 34 . Raman , A . et al . Mapping nanomechanical properties of live cells using multi - harmonic atomic force microscopy . Nat . Nanotechnol . 6 , 809 – 814 ( 2011 ) . 35 . Cartagena , A . & Raman , A . Local viscoelastic properties of live cells investigated using dynamic and quasi - static atomic force microscopy methods . Biophys . J . 106 , 1033 – 1043 ( 2014 ) . 36 . Hubmayr , R . D . et al . Pharmacological activation changes stiffness of cultured human airway smooth muscle cells . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 271 , C1660 – C1668 ( 1996 ) . 37 . Pourati , J . et al . Is cytoskeletal tension a major determinant of cell deformability in adherent endothelial cells ? Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 274 , C1283 – C1289 ( 1998 ) . 38 . Wang , N . et al . Cell prestress . I . Stiffness and prestress are closely associated in adherent contractile cells . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 282 , C606 – C616 ( 2002 ) . 39 . Puig - de - Morales , M . et al . Cytoskeletal mechanics in adherent human airway smooth muscle cells : probe specificity and scaling of protein - protein dynamics . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 287 , C643 – C654 ( 2004 ) . 40 . An , S . S . , Fabry , B . , Trepat , X . , Wang , N . & Fredberg , J . J . Do biophysical properties of the airway smooth muscle in culture predict airway hyperresponsiveness ? Am . J . Respir . Cell Mol . Biol . 35 , 55 – 64 ( 2006 ) . © 201 7 M a c m ill a n P ub li s h e r s L i m i t e d , p a r t o f S p r i ng e r N a t u r e . A ll r i g h t s r ese r ve d . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . protocol 1450 | VOL . 12 NO . 7 | 2017 | nature protocols 41 . Berntsen , P . et al . Biomechanical effects of environmental and engineered particles on human airway smooth muscle cells . J . R . Soc . Interface 7 , S331 – S340 ( 2010 ) . 42 . Na , S . et al . Rapid signal transduction in living cells is a unique feature of mechanotransduction . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 6626 – 6631 ( 2008 ) . 43 . Na , S . & Wang , N . Application of fluorescence resonance energy transfer and magnetic twisting cytometry to quantify mechanochemical signaling activities in a living cell . Sci . Signal . 1 , pl1 ( 2008 ) . 44 . Poh , Y . C . et al . Rapid activation of Rac GTPase in living cells by force is independent of Src . PLoS One 4 , e7886 ( 2009 ) . 45 . Poh , Y . C . et al . Dynamic force - induced direct dissociation of protein complexes in a nuclear body in living cells . Nat . Commun . 3 , 866 ( 2012 ) . 46 . Mijailovich , S . M . , Kojic , M . , Zivkovic , M . , Fabry , B . & Fredberg , J . J . A finite element model of cell deformation during magnetic bead twisting . J . Appl . Physiol . 93 , 1429 – 1436 ( 2002 ) . 47 . Craig , W . S . , Cheng , S . , Mullen , D . G . , Blevitt , J . & Pierschbacher , M . D . Concept and progress in the development of RGD - containing peptide pharmaceuticals . Biopolymers 37 , 157 – 175 ( 1995 ) . 48 . Tolić - Nørrelykke , I . M . , Butler , J . P . , Chen , J . & Wang , N . Spatial and temporal traction response in human airway smooth muscle cells . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 283 , C1254 – C1266 ( 2002 ) . 49 . Hu , S . , Chen , J . , Butler , J . P . & Wang , N . Prestress mediates force propagation into the nucleus . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 329 , 423 – 428 ( 2005 ) .