Integrating the Fuzzy Front End of New Product Development Anil Khurana • Stephen R . Rosenthal The failure to integrate a product strategy , a well - planned portfolio , and a facilitating organization structure with clearly identified customer needs , a well - defined product concept , and a project plan can severely hamper new product development . An examination of eleven companies aims at improving the effectiveness of the front - end process . M any companies formulate product strate - gies , routinely choose among new product concepts , and plan new product develop - ment projects . Yet , when asked where the greatest weakness in product innovation is , the managers at these companies indicate the fiazzy front end . ' They recite some femiliar symptoms of front - end failure : • New products are abruptly canceled in midstream because they don ' t " match the company strategy . " • " Top priority " new product projects suffer because key people are " too busy " to spend the required time on them . • New products are freciuently introduced later than announced because the product concept has become a moving target . Times have changed since 1983 when Donald Schon described product development as a " game " in which " general managers distance themselves from the uncer - tainties inherent in product development and . . . tech - nical personnel protect themselves against the loss of corporate commitment . " - Since then , new produa de - velopment has become a core business activity that needs to be closely tied to the business strategy and a process that mtist be managed through analysis and decision making . ' Now , general managers cannot dis - tance themselves from the uncertainties of produa de - velopment , nor can technical personnel protect them - selves against corporate commitment . As enhanced capabilities for concurrent engineer - ing , rapid prototyping , and smoothly frinctioning sup - plier partnerships have helped reduce product design and development times , management attention has hegtin to shifi : to the cross - functional front - end strate - gic , conceptual , and planning activities that typically precede the detailed design and development of a new product . ' Here , new product ideas gain the shape , justification , plans , and support leading to their ap - proval and subsequent execution . Yet , despite wide - spread recognition of the front ends importance , there has been limited systematic examination directed at improving its effectiveness . Our exploratory study of front - end activity in ele - ven companies highlights best practice based on our assessment of seven critical activities . We begin by taking a systems view of the front - end process based on existing academic and practitioner literature . After discussing how companies should manage the front end as part of a normative model of the process , we Anil Khurana is assistant professor of operations management and Stephen R . Rosenthal is professor of operations management and director of the Manufacturing Roundtable at the School of Management , Boston University . SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW / WIN I ' HR 1997 KHURANA & ROSENTHAL 103 use data from case studies to identify challenges and solutions . ^ Next , we describe an approach for creat - ing a successful process and present a checklist and diagnostic for front - end practice . What Is the " Front End " ? Prior research has focused on the success factors for new product development ( NPD ) . While many of these factors relate to design execution and project management issues , some penain to the front end . ' ' Consistent with Roberts ' s model , we classified the front - end - related success factors identified in prior re - search into foundation and project - specific elements . ^ The distinction is important because the two require different skills and levels of effort . Also , without ade - quate foundation elements , product and project suc - cess becomes a matter of luck . Project - specific activi - " he product concept should be clear so thot managers can sense whether the newly defined opportunity seems worth exploring . ties focus on the individual project and require the project teams effort to ensure a useRiI product defini - tion and project plan . These include a product con - cept statement and evaluation , product definition , and project planning . Foundation elements , on the other hand , cut across projects and form the basis for project - specific activities . Thus they typicidly require enterprisewide support , senior management partici - pation , and a cross - functional effort . Foundation Elements Witliout a c ! e ; ir product strategy , a well - planned port - folio of new products , and an organization structure that facilitates produa development via ongoing com - munications and cross - Rmctional sharing of responsi - bilities , front - end decisions become ineffective . ' ' Achiev - ing these preconditions provides a foiindation for streams of successfiil new products . Key product strategy elements include the formu - larion and communication of a strategic vision , a product ' platform strategy , and a product - line strategy to support the go / no - go decision for a new product . ' ' Previous research suggests that familiarity with the product strategy enables appropriate decisions on NPD timing and target markets and also an assess - ment of the fit between the product and the core com - petence of the business unit . ' " In addition to a product vision , business units need to plan their portfolio of new product development activities , which goes beyond the traditional market - ing view of having a product for every segment , mar - ket , and price point . Portfolio planning should map all new product initiatives across the business to bal - ance risk and potential return , short and long time horizons , or mature and emerging markets . At the same time , the portfolio plan should enstire consis - tency with the product and business strategy . " It well done , it fecilitates the allocation of scarce resources to new product development projects . An essential precondition is establishing the orga - nization structure for new product development . De - cisions on structure , communication networks , and roles are made at a business - unit level . Research has highlighted several requirements for the product de - velopment organization and its Riiictioning , ' ' such as using a matrix or project form , orgtUiizing NPD around core business / product teams rather than traditional functions , using design and communication tools in - cluding information systems , and establishing con - trols and incentives as rewards . " Project - Specific Elements Product - specific front - end activities help clarify the product concept , define product and market require - ments , and develop plans , schedules , and estimates of rhe projects resource requirements . However , they stop far short of creating detailed designs and specifi - cations for the product and its components . The product concept is a preliminary identifica - tion of customer needs , market segments , competi - tive situations , business prospects , and alignment with existing business and technology plans . Research sug - gests that the product concept should be clear so that managers can sense whether the newly defined op - portunity seems worth exploring . ' ' Managers need to understand customer needs and identify the potential 104 KHURANA & ROSENTHAL SLOAN MANAGBMENT REVIEW / WINTER 1997 Figure 1 A Model of the New Product Development Front End ^ Front End Foundation Elements New Product Development Execution Product and Portfolio Strategy Product Development Organization : Structure , Roles , Incentives , and Norms Pre - Phase Zero : Prelimiiiarv Opportunity Identification . Market and Technology Analysis Phase Zero : Product Concept and Definition Phase Dne : Product Definition and Project Planning Specification and Design Prototype Test and Validation Volume Manufacturing Market Launch Go / No - Go Decision technologies and applications to satisfy them . " For tangible products , the product concept is usually il - lustrated with a sketch or three - dimensional model . Because such concepts are relatively inexpensive to produce , managers often create several before select - ing one to fully design and develop . Early targets — measured in product cost , product performance , proj - ect cost , and time to market — set the stage for gen - erating various product concepts . The product definition , an elaboration of the prod - uct concept , " ' incorporates judgnients about the target market , competitive offerings , and the time and re - sources for bringing the new product to market . The definition activity includes identification of customer and user needs , technologies , and regulatory require - ments . These lead to a choice of product teatuies and ftinctions , target market segments , and design priori - ties . Research on the implementation of the front end indicates that an explicit , stable product definition and an understanding of the trade - offs among cus - tomer requirements , technology , and resource / cost constraints are important factors for success . " Project planning includes project priorities and tasks , a master schedule , projected resource require - ^ ments , and other supporting information . Here , it is critical to communicate the project priorities , pro - vide adequate resources , and anticipate contingen - cies . And , despite progress in new product develop - ment practices , typical systems do not adequately ad - dress these critical issues . " The Front - End Process We take a process view of the front end because earli - er studies and our preliminary research suggested that the individual activities , while logically interrelated , often are treated independently . ' ' ' Accordingly , we present a systems view of the front end { see Figure 1 ) . This process description is consistent with growing empirical evidence of the need to simultaneously con - sider overall product strategy ( foundation elements ) with project - relevant input such as product ideas , mar - ket analysis , and technology options . " " Thus under - standing the interrelationships between the activities is as important as the activities themselves . Product strategy and portfolio plans should drive the complete new product development effort , in conjimction with the capabilities and competencies of the product development organization , with its inherent assumptions about roles , communications , and culture . These elements are thus preconditions or foundations for the explicit activities in new prod - uct development . Many companies implement a for - mal phase - review management system to define and guide the explicit project - specific activities ; this re - SL . OAN MANA ( . hMLN | - Ri - VILW / WlNlER 1997 KHUKANA & ROSENIKAI . 105 Table 1 Front - End Activities Foundation Elements Project - Specific Elements Typical Practices Product strategy formulation and articulation Product portfolio planning Product development organizational structure Product concept Product definition Value chain considerations in product definition Front - end project definition and planning Degree of Implementation High Clear and vi / ell communicated by a responsible individual or group . Explicit and thorough . Clear and well communicated . Detailed customer and teclinologv choices and features with clear priorities Complete and generally unchanging . Upstream and downstream issues considered : part of routine core team responsibilities . Explicit and thorough . Medium Partly exists , but no individual or group is consistently responsible - Implicit at best . Clear in theory but not always in practice . Detailed customer and technology choices and features , unclear priorities . Complete but unstable . Many issues considered : project manager responsible for ensuring all such issues are covered . Done but not rigorous . Low Unclear or nonexistent - Notdone or considered . Ambiguous . Haphazardly done . Incomplete at go / no - go decision . Product development means product only ; supply chain issues rarely brought up . Casual . view process involves the process itself , roles that make it work , and primary deliverables . - ' • Phases of the Front - End Process . G ) mp ; uiies gen - emlJy begin work on new product oppormnities ( often allied " pre - phase zero " ) when they first recognize , in a semiformal way , an opportunity . " If the newly defined opportunity is worth exploring , the company assigns a small group , sometimes Including suppliers , to work together on the prociuct concept and definition { phase zero ) . In phase one , the company assesses the business and technical feasibility of the new product , confirms the product definition , and plans the NPD project . Thus tlie development team identifies the new product , its dev ' elopment , and the business rationale for proceed - ing . The front end is complete at the end of this phase when the team presents the business case and the busi - ness unit either commits to funding . stafFing , and launch of the project or kills the project . • Front - End Roles . A core team ( including the proj - ect leader ) and an executive review committee of se - nior ftinctional managers responsible for making the go / no - go decision typically conducts the process weVe described . During phase one , if not sooner , companies assign individuals from all Rmaional areas as mem - bers of the core team for the product de \ ' elopment project . Normally , if a company approves the projea at the end of phase one , a flill complement ot pc ^ ) ple to design , develop , test , manufacture , and lauiich the new product supplements the core team . Previous studies have indicated that team structure varies in composition , size , and leadership . - ' Ofren , the core team includes selected suppliers as partners ; their knowledge of technology , costs , and design and man - ufiicturing lead times can contribute to product defi - nition and project planning . • Primary Front - End Deliverables . The front - end ac - tivities result in the produa concept ( clear and aligned with ctistomer needs ) , the product definition { explicit and stable ) , and the project plan ( priorities , resource plans , and project schedules ) . ' * Front - End Challenges and Solutions To understand tlie front - end processes and praaices at fifteen business units in eleven U . S . , Japanese , and Eu - 106 KHU ' RANA & ROSE ^ rTHAL SLOAN MANAGEMEMT REVIEW / WINTER 1997 Table 1 ( Continued ) Implementation Foundation Product strategy Elements Product vision Technology plaiuiing Project - Specific Elements Product portfolio planning Evaluation ot risk and diversification Cruss - project understanding Link to resource planning Product development organizational structure Cross - functional project organization Clear roles Established comrrtunication structures Leadership by executive reviews Product concept Clear concept Understand management vision for product Identify customer needs Product definition Complete and explicit definition Stable : avoid unnecessary cbange Anticipate mafket and technology evolution Value chain considerations Early supplier involvement Downstream issues — logistics , service Service and logistics representalive on team Front - end project definition and planning Clear project priorities Aggregate NPD project planning Contingency planning NolB ' Letters reler xa the eleven cumpanies m Ihe research Degree of Implementation in Companies Studied High D , F , G , J F , J F . G . J C . D , F , G CF A . F , J F , J Medium B . E . H . I . K A , D , E , G , K A , C , D , H , I , K A , B , I , J A , D , G , I , J C , D , G , H A , C , D . G , H , K Low A , C B , C , H , I B , E E . H . K B , H , K B , E , 1 , K B , E , I ropean companies , we interviewed more than seventy - five managers ( for oiu " tesearch approach , see the Ap - pendix ) . Our study focused on incremental innova - tions — the majority of NPD efforts . Accordingly , our findings deal with improving the performance of exist - ing products or extending them to new applications . rather than with developing radically new products . We have grouped the typical practices that charac - terize the foundation elements and project - specific ac - tivities into three implementation clusters — high , medium , and low ( see Table 1 ) . This analysis of our data also supports our earlier literature - based classifica - tion of the three foundation elements and the three project - specific activities . Our analysis does recognize an additional activity : adding value - chain considera - tions to the front - end process . We found significant gaps in how the case study companies implemented the seven front - end ele - ments , even for those companies that claimed to have the front - end product generation processes we de - scribed earlier ( see labie I ) . Even the companies that prepared their own detailed prtxress descriptions gen - erally didn ' t avoid problems that they could have re - solved at the front end . In fiict , only companies F and , possibly , G and J could claim to have most of the ca - pabilities for an effective front end . SLO / \ N MANAGEMEN - f t997 KHURANA & ROSENTHAI , 107 Foundation Elements at the Case Study Companies Next we discuss in detail how the case study sites tnan - iiged tlie fotuidation elements ui oaicr to provide iasights for companies tmng to improve dicir NPD eflorts . • Product Strategy . Our research suggests that despite their intentions , very few companies have clear prod - uct strategies to guide their decisions on new product opportunities . In our sample of eleven companies , we rated only two as outstanding { F and G ) and two as satisfector ) ' ( D and J ) , while the remaining seven were seriously lacking . We identified several deficiencies in formulating and artictilating a product strategy and the connections between product strategy and the core NPD activities ( see Figtire 1 ) : • There were product development teams and ptodua managers , hut no one was in charge of formtilating a product strategy , even at the senior management level . • Several of the companies made new product devel - opment decisions based on project - specific criteria rather than considerations of strategic fit . • Business strategy was not specific to markets and prodticts . • R & D , largely insulated from the product develop - ment group , funded projects based on superior tech - nology rather than on dieir potential to satisfy par - ticular product requirements . Ihe outstiinding companies in our sample had coun - tered these deficiencies . The power of a clear product strat ^ was evident at company F , where we studied the founh in a series of eight planned sequential prod - uct launches based on a common platform . - ^ The company had designed this platform to meet explicit customer , market , and technology guidelines , with which each successive release was consistent . The vi - sion of the husiness , prcxiuct , projcxt , and technology enabled successive product development teams for this platform to consistently deliver a product that met every target . • Product Portfolio Planning . More than a third of the companies studied did not plan a product devel - opment portfolio . Even when they did , planning at all but two of die research sites , F and J , was sporadic and incomplete . This n ^ lea can be traced to a combi - nation of vague product strategy , measurement diffi - culties in establishing risk / return profiles , and am - biguotis overall responsibilit ) ' . While company H traditionally lacked a clear prod - uct strategy , senior managers had begun to realize that they were in a mature , threatened business . In re - sponse , they made their flinctional maniigers aware of basic portfolio planning , with encouraging results . Their portfolio now includes a combination of differ - ent products with both established and new technolo - gies , instead of traditional projects with incremental improvements to the familiar product line . I he com - pany also enhanced the role of the executive review committee , known as the product approval commit - tee , to include assessment of the match between a new " Regardless of the methods a ^ compony uses for new \ product portfolio planning , it needs to be part of an integrated front - end process . product concept and the existing product portfolio in risk , time horizons , and markets . In contrast , compiUiy F — which is very success - fiil in its business — constantly monitored the pa - rameters of its product development portfolio , such as time horizon , risk , expected returns , required in - vestments , and needed capabilities . Senior managers and project and product managers continually dis - cussed the nature of the development portfolio and additions to make . R ^ ardless of the methods a company tjses for new product portfolio plajining , it needs to be pan of an integrated front - end process . Our research suggests that there is ofi : en a discontinuit ) ' between portfolio planning and the front end of the traditional prcxress . For example , if a project is killed at the front end be - cause of technological infeasibility , the resulting gap in the development portfolio will become apparent only if front - end activities and portfolio planning are linked . * Product Development Organization Structure . We focus here on three roles ac the front end — the project leader , the core team , and the executive re - view group — and on related communication struc - ttires . ^ ' ' At the companies that measured best along this dimension ( F , G , and J ) , the project leader was re - sponsible for promoting the interests of the project and 108 KHURANA & ROSINTHAL SI . OAN MANAGF . MKNT RKVirw / WlNTKR 1997 the core team right fi : om the start . This role included lobbying for support and resources { being an " ambas - sador " ) and coordinating technical or design issues . ' These project leaders initiated such communication early during the product / project definition and plan - ning stages . At company F , project managers estab - lished communication channels , role definitions , and cross - functional mechanisms for the development team , as part of the product and project definition . All the companies in our sample , except for compa - nies B and E , had a cross - functional core team do the analytic work of product definition and project plan - ning . However , the role of the team varied among the companies and development projects . Company As first autonomoLis product development team was suc - cessful because four amhitious , creative team members communicated well . However , subsequent teams were not as successful because the core team members were unclear about their responsibility in creating the prod - uct concept and definition . In contrast , teams at com - pany F operated more systematically and sticcessfully . A small core team including the idea chaiTipion , a se - nior manager , and a potential project leader met early on and negotiated key roles and responsibilities . This nucleus group then recruited the fiill team and enstired that all members agreed on the definition oi roles and responsibilities . This structure of team roles and re - sponsibilities was part of the product concept state - ment and was formally acknowledged in the product definition and project planning documents . Establish - ing the core team early , clearly defining roles and re - sponsibilities for the team , and facilitating supporting communications played a major role in company Fs success both in new prodtict development process and die market itself . Product success appears to be strongly associated with establishment of a cross - functional executive re - view committee . Only companies F and J had such a review . Company As review committee focused on teclinic ; il issues , with the result that executives failed to have a holistic perspective . In contrast , the com - mittee at company F used each phase review to devel - op strategic and operational skills and establish norms for communication and consensus building . It also guided the core team while making critical choices and trade - offs or making decisions that might have an impact on the business unit ' s strategy beyond that particular product . At both companies F and j , the executive group worked like a business team rather tlian functional representatives , consistently developed stablishing the core team early , • ^ clearly defining roles and _ responsibilities for the team , and facilitating supporting communications played a major role in company F ' s success . product strategy and engaged in new product portfo - lio planning , and formulated explicit project priori - ties ( time , cost , and quality ) . For an effective front - end process , the roles of die project leader , the core team , and the executive review committee must complement each other . Explicitly defining these roles by answering the following ques - tions will make the front end less " fiizzy " : • Should the core team resolve product definition and project planning issues or refer them to an exec - utive committee ? • Who is responsible for ensuring that product defini - tion and concept testing are balanced between thor - oughness and speed ? • Who should ensuie that resources are allocated to a project , as specified in the project plan ? • Who should identify emerging technologies for in - clusion in Riture product platforms ? • Who has the authority to ensure that products de - veloped by several business units or a unit ; ind one or more " parmers " are aligned along product / component interfaces , development schedules , market foctis , and technology commitments ? Project - Specific Activities at Case Study Companies Now we concentrate on project - specific activities at the front end : clarifying the product concept , stabi - lizing the product definition , considering the value chain in the product definition , and defining and planning the front - end project . • Product Concept . Our research revealed that clari - fying the product concept at the front end was surpris - Si . oAN MANAGEMENT Rr . vira / WINTER 1997 KHURANA & ROSF . NI MAI 109 ingly diffictilt . Only fotir companies ( C , D , F , and G ) had succeeded in consistently developing clear , explicit , and precise descriptions of the product concept . At several companies , the concept was unclear because senior managers did not communicate their expecta - tion of the products core benefits , choice of market segments , and pricing to the development team . One company resolved this gap between manage - ment ' s vision of the product concept and the teams underst ; inding of it by setting specific criteria for the features appropriate to the product . It created a data - base for new prociua feamres — b ; ised on variotis in - ptits fi ^ om field service , special customers , R & D , mar - keting , and customer feedback . It then assessed these inputs in phases zero and one , b ; ised on senior man - agements vision of the product , engineering feasibili - ty , market needs , resource requirements , price targets , and schedule — ; ind cLxssified them into " red , " " green , " and " yellow " items . The company would never pur - sue red items in the current program ( but could con - sider them for the next - generation product ) . Green items were necessary for the current product ; the com - pany chose them based on need , feasibility , and other O nly four companies hod succeeded in consistently developing cleor , explicit , ond precise descriptions of the product concept . constraints . Yellow items needed more evaluation , so the company postponed them for subsequent re - lease . At se \ ' eral aise study sites , the product concept was unclear because the companies did not clearly under - stand customer needs . When sucb problems recur , as we found at comp ; inies H and K , products lack what Clark and Fujimoto call " external integrity . " ' ' To make custonier expectations and product features more con - sistent , sophisticated companies ( such as companies G and F ) try to look beyond the customers " voice " to " aaion , " by using techniques such as videotapes of customers ' use of existing products . • Product Definition . All the companies in our study realized the pivotal importance of the early product definition . Yet most had failed to generate clear , stable definitions . While rapid shifi ; s in technology and mar - kets make it impossible for some companies to freeze the product definition , most of the companies stud - ied acknowledged the difficulties this caused in the execution stages of product development projects and the high associated costs . In fact , only managers at companies G and F felt that the ) ' had developed ap - proaches for de ; iling with instability and change . For technology - driven companies ( especially com - pany H ) , delays in product definition entailed the risk of an unstable , expanding definition in which de - sign engineers continued to add unneeded complexi - ty . Managers at companies G and F made a concerted effort to freeze the product definition early on . For them , the challenge was to balance the requisite fiex - ibility with the avoidable uncertainty ' . Gompany F discovered a creative solution for keep - ing up with and capniring market information while minimizing changes in the product definition — what we call the " missed elevator " approach . 1 he pro - gram manager realized that technological or feature enhancements for any product wouid never end . He required the product definition to include new fea - tures and feasible solutions to customer needs , as long as they could definitely be achieved by the planned milestone for that product release . If a customer need or technology - driven feature " missed the elevator , " it wotild go into the next product release or " elevator . " This approach to managing product development by having multireleiise platform planning ma \ ' become the next form of product development iind manage - ment . Not only does it help achieve a balance be - tween stability and flexibility , but it also leverages technological strengths and org - anization ; il resources . ^ ' ' Thus more companies now include , in their front - end deliberations , the definition of multiple - release products , in which each release intentionally involves only a moderate level of new technology develop - ment . • Value Ghain Gonsiderations . While NPD research has highlighted the suppliers ' role in new product de - velopment , we found that some companies have a broader value chain perspective at the product con - cept and definition stages . " ' This becomes necessary as product designs and market delivery systems are 110 KHURANA & ROSENTHAL SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW / WINTKR 1997 more competitive and complex . And customers do not buy only the tangible product but a package that includes the product itself , the company , the brand image , the sales interaction , the delivery process , the after - sales service , and the follow - up relationship . C ustomers do not buy only the tongible product but a packoge that includes the product itself , the company , the brand image , the sales interaction , the delivery process , the after - sales service , and the follow - up relationship . The development team should envision and plan for this package at the front end ; otherwise it may Ig - nore downstream requirements and not design prod - ucts for ease of distribution , installation , or repairs . We found that these practices , while familiar at the execution stage , are less aggressively and creatively pursued at the front end . Of the eleven companies in die study , only four ( A , D , F , aiid J ) were adequate along this dimension . We observed several failures and some creative solutions . Gompany A , a special industrial products manufacturer , faced new mainte - nance problems and poor telecommunications sup - port in providing field service . As a result , field ser - vice engineers became regular members of the core development team at the front end . At company D , the new product development team consulted with so - called " customer supply specialists . " As another example , Hewlett - Packard ' s printer di - vision had thousands of stock - keeping units ( SKUs ) for its products being shipped to different parts of the world . HP resolved this problem of excess variety with " design for postponement " ; it redesigned the product so that only the core printer SKU was stocked in re - gional distribution warehouses . It stocked attach - ments such as power packs , power cables , connectors , and even instruction manuals in different languages at the distribution points and assembled the final package for shipment only after it received a firm shipment order . In feet , it designed the packaging it - self so that it cotild easily insert and assemble ali the attachments . The result was enhanced flexibility and reduced inventory costs , along with the needed prod - uct variety . ^ ' For all subsequent product development efforts , HP has routinely included downstream con - siderations at the front end . • Front - End Projert Definition and Planning . At this part of the front end , we observed confusion about project priorities , incomplete resource planning , and inadequate contingency planning . Our discus - sions with core team members and project leaders led tis to believe that fuzzy project priorities were the sin - gle most important reason for NPD delays , product overengineering , and product - strategy mismatches . For example , company A initiated its mid - range prod - uct as a cheap - technology , low - performance version of its high - end product . Yet management had always visualized a cheap - technology , high - performance produa . Finally , when the product came on the mar - ket several months behind schedule , it exceeded its performance targets but no longer met its unit - cost goals . At another company , managers solved this com - mon problem by comparing — at the fi ^ ont end — three kinds of project priorities for any new product development project : scope ( product functionality ) , schedule ( timing ) , and resources ( cost ) . Senior manage - ment , the core team , and die ( as yet unappointed ) proj - ect leader at the pre - phase zero stage decided the rela - tive ranking of the three priorities for the projects duration and communicated it to all project partici - pants . Gompanies must anticipate resource requirements , train people to acquire the necessary capabilities , and then ensure needs - availability matching based on project priorities . Executives repeatedly told us that they had too few people to staff dieir many NPD proj - ects . At company J , managers used a capacity matrix to assess and assign sUifF . Senior managers selected the best projects , set goals , and reserved resources . Gom - pany F , which also used a form of capacity matrix , faced a complicated challenge of resource planning . Like every organization , it had a core group of irre - placeable people who were in great demand for every project . When planning a next - generation product , the managers realized that the team member they wanted was heading a current project . To avoid such SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW / WINTI ' R 1997 KHURANA & ROSENTHAL 111 probiems in the future , management resoived to both train more people tor such assignments and also plan eariy for staffing and sicilis requirements . Companies can manage the tislcs oi new product deveiopmcnt with thorough contingency pianning — generating multipie product concepts , developing alternative technologies in parallel and , in some in - stances , even creating competing designs for products or subsystems . ' - Yet , surprisingly , we found that most companies { including company F ) focused contin - gency pians mostly on regulatory issues such as safety or environmental requirements . Apparently , project planners assumed that they would find technology solutions without considering cost and qualit ) ' . When the timing oi a new product introduction is impor - tant , reasonabie back - up plans are needed to avoid delayed market launch . One approach is to build in contingent product features in case the planned ones do not work . Taking risk management seriously and linking product definition activities with project plan - ning can iead to appropriate contingency pians . Recognizing Interrelationships Next we discLiss severai critiail interrelationships among individual success Factors and approaches for manag - ing them . " Our examples are from company F , which had the mo . st effective front end of the cases studied . • Companies should consider product strateg ) ' and the product development portfolio at the stan of the project - specific front end . Company F held a kick - oft meeting even before it had refined the concept and assembled the full core team . Attendees includ - ed senior managers , che idea champion , and some core team members . While much discussion focused on the basic product concept , it also included how the concept filled a gap in the btisiness strategj ' and how it related to and compaied widi other products and on - going projects . As a restilt , subsequent problems of mismatches between che product and the product strategy or shortage of project staffing were rare . • Companies should have a clear product strategy to enable a stable product definition . Everyone at com - pany F accepted the notion that product strategy should guide technology choices and selected produa features . Thus the company used its miiltireleiise prod - uct strategy ct ) simplify the definition : its adoption oi the " missed elevator " approach simultaneously encour - aged stable technology and feature choices chat were governed by a long - term vision over several produce re - leases , while facilitating new relcises on time . • C ' ompanies should integrate porcfoHo planning and NPD project planning . C > ompany F had estab - lished two discinct but formally linked planning pro - cesses . The scracegic planning process involved man - agers from various functions and considered product strategy , product development portfolios , and overall resources . Thus portfolio planning yielded long - cerm commicments that the managers could invoke when planning scaff requirements and project priorities for a specific new product concept . 1 hey implemented two important practices when planning individual S uccess depends on how companies integrate dimensions ond elements of product development . projects : escablishmenc of schedules and allocacion of scaff and budgecs , and specification of inputs such as technology from other business groups . First , chq ^ made the strategic business plan available co all core ceam members and considered che product defini - tion in che concexc of che stracegic business plan . Second , senior managers oversaw che core ceams de - cisions and actions . For example , the project manag - er may be a part of the strategic business planning process or may report to someone who is . A Well - Engineered Front - End Process How can a company improve ies fronc - end practices to achieve success in new product developmenc ? Is ic enough to improve the activities we have described ? We surest chat best practice in new produce devel - opment goes beyond simply adopting these activi - ties . Success depends on how companies integrate dimensions and elements of product development . - " Our research higlilighted certain challenges in inte - grLicion of the front end be ) ' ond the obvious need for cross - functional eftorc . First , because projecc - specific activities build on foundacion activicies , companies I I 2 KHL ' R . ' VNA & ROSKNTHAI . SLOAN MANAGEMENT REviEw / WiN ' reR 1997 should ensure chac che foundacion elemencs are aligned wich che product developmenc process and projecc - specific activities . Second , they should ensure consis - cency between scrategic and operacional activities . The challenge is to make scrat ^ explicic e n o i ^ to guide day - to - day choices for new product development . We found che incegracion of chese cwo factors was rare but extremely potent . At the companies studied , we ob - served several kinds of integration problems : • Senior manors somecimes delegaced the formulation of a produce scracegy to product and R & D managers . • The product development staff often nivide deci - sions that affected otiier products and business unit strategy . ( While the core team faces technical uncer - tainty about the product and manufacturing and dis - tribution processes , resolving cross - project issues or providing guidelines should be senior management responsibilities . ) • Managers in various functions and organizational levels rarely ensured consistency and links among R & D activities , product strategy , and current produa development . ( Huge R & D investments can be wasted by pursuing superior technology capability unneces - sary to the organizations espoused business strategy . ) • Managers frequently took on product development projects without committing adequate resources . ( Of - ten there is a misconception that product develop - ment staff working on multiple projects improves ef - ficiency . The restilt is long delays in product launch and lost revenues . With ongoing downsizing in many companies , this kind of neglect is becoming chron - ic / ' ^ Senior managers need to help product and R & D managers understand a projects relative importance . ) • Senior managers did litde to meastire and reward cross - functional teamwork . ( Front - end participants need to know that management values their contribtitions . ) Balancing Front - End Explicitness and Flexibility Management of the front end also requires a balance between getting things right and being flexible during Table 2 Checklist for Diagnosing the Front End Formality of Front - End Process 1 . 2 . 3 , 4 . 5 . 6 , 7 . 8 , 9 . 10 . n . Customer and market information is used early on to set scope for product ( target markets , customer seg - ments , features , price ) . Core team jointly reviews product concept and senior management formally approves . Early concept and other feasibiiity prototypes are planned , tested , and completed at front end so that there are no surprises iater . Product definition is explicitly developed and docu - mented . Major supplier and tooling considerations are explic - it at front end . Manufacturing , distribution , and logistics require - ments are planned : product concept is modified to reflect process and logistics constraints . Need for new technology for products is clearly stated . Project targets { time , cost , quality ) and relative priorities are clear . Resource requirements are formaily defined . Roles and responsibilities for tasks and communi - cations tor core team are clear and well executed . Roles for executive review team are clear and well executed ( review criteria , decision responsibility , ongoing interaction with core team ) . D D n n • • n • n D Integration of Activities 1 . 2 , 3 . 4 . 5 , 6 . 7 , 8 . 9 . 10 , There is a clear vision of product lines and platforms for specific markets . R & D and NPD have matching agendas and plans . Balance is sought and achieved among multiple NPD projects belonging to different platforms / product lines ( e . g . , risks , novelty ) . Project priorities are consistent with product strate - gy , portfolio plans , and resource availability . Resource allocations consider multiple project requirements and their relative priorities and pre - existing project commitments . Early identification of technical and organizational interfaces is done for systems products so that development can proceed smoothly . Core front - end team includes representatives from manufacturing , logistics , and after - sales service . apart from engineering and marketing . Staffing policies and project - specific staffing are consistent with the product strategy . Need for new innovations is anticipated so that extensive innovation is not required during the product development process . If there is uncertainty on any dimensions — e . g . , technology or markets — organization has care - fully planned alternative approach . • D D n n c D D D n SLOAN MANAGEMI - . N ! REVIEW / WINII - K . 1997 KHURANA & ROSENTHAL 113 Figure 2 The Front - End Capabilitv Map Full 10 Integration 8 Degree of Process Partial Integration Integration Little Integration - 1 4 Intuitive Explicit in Part Degree of Formality 8 10 Explicit NPD execution . Other front - end elements and activ - ities should also be balanced . There is a natural ten - sion between planning to reduce risk and responding to inherent uncertainties . For example , we suggest that product strategy and portfolio planning be ex - plicit , yet we recognize that some subsequent shifts in the product definition are inevitable , forcing contin - gent actions . Furthermore , postponing the final deci - sions at the front end by continuing the development of parallel concepts or solutions may reduce uncer - tainty . ' " While our research did not focus on this issue , we believe that there must be a biilance between front - end planned activities and ongoing iteration dur - ing the NPD projeCT , between making " final " decisions eariy and intentionally keeping open parallel alterna - tives , and between establishing product development targets through luialysis iUid working by instinct alone . ' " Diagnosing Front - End Activities Based on our study findings , we propose that compa - nies evaluate their front end on degree of formality and the integration of aaivities . The dimensions — formalit ) ' and process integration — can be measured on a checklist ( see lable 2 ) . The items arc derived from previous research and our case study findings on the need for formality and integration at the front end . The diagnostic statements evaluate the explicit - ness and form ; iJit \ ' of front - end practices . The state - ments on integration document how well these and other front - end activities are integrated . A senior business unit manager such as the vice president of R & D , chief technology officer , or direc - tor of new product development should assess busi - ness practices and then calculate the score of the busi - ness unit , counting a check for any item as one point . The sum of the scores on the formality statements gives the formality score ; the sum of the integration statements , the integration score . The manager can then map the score on each dimension on the front - end capability map ( see Figure 2 ) . The mapping indicates how well ( or poorly ) a busi - ness unit is doing along the two dimensions of for - mality and integration . Our research indicates that world - class companies score eight or more on both dimensions . C ^ omp ; mies tliat score three or less on ei - ther dimension have a deficient front end and are like - ly to have major problems with their product develop - ment efforts . Senior management neecis to find ways to improve these efforts ; the checklist is a first step to understanding where and what to improve . What is more difficult is to understand how . In the next sec - tion , we discuss how companies and biLsiness units plan a transition to a better - m : uiaged front end . Managing the Transition All the companies we sttidied were moving toward a more explicit , integrated front end . They were trying to build complementary capabilities to support the critical go / no - go decisions and development plans for new product concepts . Yet each was taking a dif - ferent path at a different rate . Stages of Evolution We see three stages in the prcxiucrt development front end , not including the snige in which a company has no formal front end — tbe pre - emeip : nt stage . ^ " ^ ITie next stiiges are " awareness , " " islands of aipabilit ) ; " and " inte - grated capbility " { see Figure 3 ) . The triggers to reach the awareness stiige from the pre - emei ^ nt stage are typically growth , additional produci line complexity or competi - tive pressures for either more product innovation or lower produa development costs . In any case , at the awareness stage , companies rea ) gru2e the significance of the front end but have linle capability associated with it . 1 bey score jxKirly on both the formality and integration di - mensions , as did companies B , E . and H in our . s ; miple . • Islands of Capability ( Stage Two ) . Our study sug - 1 H KUDKAN . A & ROSI - NTHAL SLOAN MAN . ' VIIEMENT RfviEw / WiNTrR 1997 Figure 3 Stages in the Transition to a Mature Front End gests that most leading product innovators are at the islands of capability stage , includ - ing companies A , C , D , 1 , J , and K . These companies realize the potential of having a well - managed front end and have some of the required capabilities , but inconsistently . Missing are many elements of front - end pro - cess integration . Companies find it easier to improve the formality of this process than to address the subtle gaps in int ^ ; ration . How can companies evolve from " aware - ness " to " islands of capability " ? That de - pends on what the business unit has iilready achieved and what capabilities it needs , given its industry and company . We identi - fied two broad approaches to achieving stage two . First , those companies that have barely begun managed as a single process . Stage three companies ex - Full 10 Integration 8 Degree of Process Partial Integration Integration Little Integration 10 Intuitive Explicit in Part Explicit Degree of Formality to understand the importance of the front end — for example , company H — should recognize that prod - uct development is a senior management responsibili - ty . Managers should carry out several structured activi - ties , such as the diagnostic test . Second , those com - panies that recognize the importance of the frx ) nt end — such as companies B and E — should formally and systematically conduct various front - end activi - ties . Those activities include having an explicit product definition , estimating technology requirements early , and planning resources . • Integrated Capability ( Stage Three ) . Front - end product development integration , the hallmark of stage three , is quite rare . We believe that most companies S tage three companies execute NPD projects better and faster than their competitors and are more likely to introduce a winning product . ecute NPD projects better and faster than their com - petitors and are more likely to introduce a winning product . One am honesdy say of these companies that " well begun is more than half done . " How can companies make a transition from " is - lands of capability " to " integrated capability " ? Some stage two companies have much of the required for - mality but not necessarily the degree of integration to yield substantial benefits . Most stage two companies should focus on understanding the various dimen - sions of integration . Among our sample , we identi - fied three clusters of companies that required some - what different approaches to get to stage three . These three clusters represent generic front - end states and problems that many companies face . While companies in the first cluster , A and K , have passed stage one , they still have a long way to go . They need to focus closely on senior management in - volvement in creating a product vision . Improvements in front - end formality and integration , while not easy , will be easier if the product development group can understand its purpose better . Companies C and D make up the second cluster . These companies will realize improvements from re - finements in the front - end process . They need to make their front - end activities more explicit and , in don ' t understand diat this stage is significant in terms of required capabilities , and achieving it takes concert - ed effort . At the few companies with this degree of particular , understand how to better manage their process integration — companies F , G , and , to some technology and resource requirements . Once they extent , J — analysis and decisions have been both ex - progress on these dimensions , they can focus more plicit and rigorous , and all front - end activities are I on cross - flinctional and integration problems . SLOAN MANAGEMtNr REVIEW / WINTLR 1997 KHURANA & Rt ) SF . NlHAI . 1 15 The third cluster of companies , I and J , were the most advanced among the stage two companies . Front - end explicitness is not their main problem . Instead , their challenge is to work on cross - project is - sues and technological uncertainties . By having close ties among strategic planners and project personnel , they will uiiderstmid the links among projects and an - ticipate matches or mismatches between future mar - ket needs and current technology and product plans . They need to establish closer connections between their R & D and product development groups so that they am anticipate ovenill technological progress ; md produa - specific technological uncertainty . • Sustaining Stage Three . Clearly , reaching stage three is not easy ; even those companies that have achieved it continue to require improvements . Changes in com - petition , technologies , tools , and organizational struc - tures and relationships may need changes in at least some front - end praaices . * ' How can companies F and G improve ? We found that these companies had minor deficiencies at their front ends ( by using the diagnostic test in Table 2 ) . Yet , the companies have potential for improvement . For example , knowing what to finalize and approve in product concept and definition , and what to keep flexible and open to change is important . Achieving a proper balance calls for more than just personal in - tuition and tacit understanding . Making explicit the connections between product requirements and in - ternal technology development remains an elusive capability . And maintaining continuous links among business - unit vision , product strategy , technology , and new products is an ongoing challenge . Managers at stage three companies need to evaluate and apply innovations such as dcveltjping careflilly planned prod - uct architectures and platforms or adapting a front - end process — such as Coopers - — to deal with the dy - namics of current technological , market , and organi - zational realities . " * Conclusion Most companies have unnecessarily fijzzy front - end systems . The best way ro integrate the front - end pro - cess is to use an overall systems perspective and thor - oughly assess the current state of the front end . Fixing what appears to be broken requires the ability to see the interrelatedness of issues and the development of a coherent agenda . We caution against oversimplification : not all com - panies shotild adopt the same front - end solution , and most will need to adopt more than one . For example , we foimd that companies used executive reviews in different ways with mixed success ; some case study companies changed the role of the executive review group for different products . In general , company size , decision - making style , operating culture , and frequen - cy of new product introduction are some factors that are critical to a preferred front - end solution . We dis - course companies from importing a particular pro - cess or procedure that has worked well for others un - less their contexts are clearly similar . * ' Managing to become less flizzy means integrating seemingly disparate but related strategic and opera - tional activities , typically crossing functional bound - aries . The solution must be balanced with the emerg - ing realities of business and the environment . With proper diagnosis , consensus , and commitment , com - panies can enhance product development perfor - mance over the long term . • Appendix We conducted our research between April 1994 and April 1995 . ^ Of the sixteen companies invited to par - ticipate , eleven accepted . We chose companies biised on whether they had a product - generation process and if they had NPD processes for one to eight years . Our final sample includes seven U . S . and four Japa - nese companies ( all Fortune 500 companies or their equivalent in Japan ) in various industries ranging from consumer packaged goods to electronics to industri ; il products ( see Table A for more information on the specific industries ) . There are seven U . S . , six Japanese , and two Euro ^ xan business units ( we interviewed man - agers at multiple business units at two companies ) . Business - unit size ranged from $ 300 million to $ 2 . 5 billion in annual sales , and 600 to 20 , 000 employees ; company sizes ranged from $ 2 billion to $ 55 billion , and 20 , 000 to 300 , 000 employees . Further , we chissi - fied the companies as " active " or " neLitral " ; the aaive sites participated very closely in the research , and we had open access to them . At die neutral sites ( compa - nies B , E , G , and K ) , we had only one opportunity to 1 16 KHL . IRANA & ROSl - NTHAL SLOAN MANAUF - MtNT RKVIHW / WINTER 1997 Table A Business Unit Code A B C D E F G H 1 J K Descriptions of Sample Companies Ownership United States Japan United States , Germany United States United States United States Japan United States Japan United States , Europe Japan Core Businesses Equipment for publishing industry OEM for systems devices ( e . g . . printers , PCs , software drivers ) and major electronic components Specialized health - care equipment Consumer packaged goods Pharmaceuticals Medical products Super , mainframe , and mid - range computers Office equipment Variety of electronics products from micro devices to printers to notebook computers Ourable white goods , such as washers and cooking products Production technologies and equipment business unit of major electronics company Level of Analysis ( Multiple products and / or NPO process ) NPO process and two specific product projects NPD process NPD process NPO process NPD process NPO process and two specific product projects NPD process NPO process and four specific product projects NPD process at corporate level and in three separate business units and one specific product project NPO process in two separate business units and three specific product projects NPO process get the data directly , i . e . , only one visit or series of in - terviews . Naturally , the data from these companies are less detailed , although we obtained the essential infor - mation . We adopted an exploratory and " action - oriented " approach because we iterated among data collection , analysis , and feedback . We conducted our research at three to four company sites , analyzed data , presented partial restilts to a group of participants at " dis . semina - tion " workshops , wrote reports for their review , revised our knowledge base and conceptual models , and went on to the next case sites . Thus , implicitly and by de - sign , we adopted the grounded theory approach . We spent more than 200 hours interviewing more than seventy - five managers . On average , for each active site , we spent between eight and forty hours interview - ing from three to twenty - five managers ; for each neu - tral site , we spent eight to fifteen hours interviewing up to eight managers . We held four days of dissemination workshops with more than twenty - five different man - agers from several research companies . We interviewed managers ( ranging from ftinctional managers to com - pany president ) from marketing , R & D , software de - velopment , engineering , manufacturing , field service , finance , accounting , stmtegic planning , product man - agement , NPD process owners , and corporate / busi - ness - unit general man ^ ement . For most of the case sites , we used secondary data collection in an effort to understand the industry and company background . We then adapted our basic re - search and interview questions to match the compa - ny profile . Thus most of the interviews were largely unstructured to support our exploration of the rela - tively undefined nature of the front end of product development . The basic unit of analysis for our cases was the pro - cess of the front end of new product development . However , due to access , confidentiality , time , and con - trasts , we used several approaches to understand and evaluate the process . As Table A shows , our interviews took two different forms : ( 1 ) a study of individual NPD projects ( multiple projects at each company ) and ( 2 ) an in - depth study of business tinit practices with regard to the process adopted for the front end of new SLOAN MANACtMtNT RtiviEw / WiN II - K 1997 KHURANA & ROSKNTHAI - 117 product development . ( We included multiple business units at two companies because these business units were in widely different markets or technologies , or be - cause they were perceived to have distinctive front - end NPD practices . ) d . In addition to ilie eleven cases directly involved in this research , we also draw on and Lite examples froni prior knowledge of sn ' eral cases of new product development projects that the second author re - searched in 198 ' J CO lWl , Sec : S . R . RosL ' iuhal . l - ffective Pmduct Desi ^ i and Deivlopruent ( Homewuod , Illinois : Business One Irwin , 1992 ) . b . B . Glaser and A . SEraiiss , The Discoveiy ofGvowided Ti ) eory : Strate ^ es for Qiuditdtit ' e Reseanh ( C ^ hicago : Aldiiie I ' ublisliers . I % 7 ) : and K . M . Risenhaidt . " Building Theoiy ftom Lase Research , " Academy of Management Review , volume 14 , number 4 , 1989 , pp . 532 - 550 . References This research w , is spoiuored and supponed by the Boston University Manufacturing Rotrndtahlt . School of Management , and a research gram from Seiko Epson Corporation , Japan . The authors ackriow - ledge the cooperation of she U . S . , Japanese , and European compa - nies that participated . They also thank Professors finichiro Nakane and Hiroshi Katayama of Waseda University , Japan , < md ac - knowledge the help of Paul Callaghan . doctoral student at Boston University , in data collection . 1 . The notioti ol the Riz / y fuitif end and iis inipurtance was first in - troduced in : P , G . Smith and D . G . Reinertsen . Developing Products in Half the 7»Mc ( New York : Van Nosirand Rcinhold , 1991 ) . See also : A . Khuranj iiiul S . R . Ro . senthal . " Discovering the Shortcomings in the Front ' Hnd " of New Producr Development : Findings from Cross - Industry Case Studies " ( Boston : Bost ( »ti University School of Manage - ment , Manufacturing Roundtahle working paper , 1996 ) ; K . B . C ; iark and S . C . Wheelwright . Leading Producr Development ( New York : Free Press . 1995 ) ; S . R . Rosenthal , Effective Pjvdmt Design and Da ' elopiiieiii { Huincmyod , Illinois : Business One irwin . 1992 ) ; A . K . Gupta and [ 5 . L . Wilenion . " Accderaiing the Development of ' Fechnologv - Based New Products , " Califomia Management Revieiv , volume il . Winter 1990 , pp . 24 - 44 ; and R . t ; . Cooper and F . , | Kleinschmidt , ' New Products : What Separates Winners from \ . me \ s . \ " Journal of Product Inmvation Management , volume 4 . September 1987 . pp . I h9 - 184 . 2 . See D . A . Schon , The Reflective Practitioner : How Professiomk Think in Action ( New York : Basic Books . 1983 ) . p . 266 . 3 . H . K . Bowen . K . B . Clark , C : . A . Holtoway . atid S . C . Wheelwright . " Development Projects : The Etigine of Renewal , " Harvard Business Review , volume 72 , Sepieinbei - CXtober 1994 , pp . 110 - 120 . For a business process view , see : r Davenpon , Process Innovation : Reengineering Work through infomM - ftflw ( Boston : Harvard Bu . siness School I ' ress . 1993 ) , chapter II . 4 . See Cooper and Kleinschniidt ( 1987 ) ; Gupta and Wilemon ( 1990 ) : Smith and Reinert . sen ( 1991 ) ; Rosentha ) ( 1992 ) ; and Claik and Wheelwright ( 1995 ) . For a study on factors explaining " good " product definition , see : C - Bacon , S . Beckman . D . Moweiy . and R . Wilson . " Managing Product Definition in High - Techno logy Indtistrics : A Pilot Study . " California Management Review , volume 36 , Spring 1994 , pp , 32 - 56 . Of the ke \ - ( actors for NPD success identified by Bacon et al . and other reseairhers . several pertain to froru - cnd issues : produa - core competence fit . . senior nianager respotisibility for NPD planning , dear understand - ing of user needs , explicit description t ) f prtniuct concept and definition . carefiil planning , specifying contingency plans , and resource planning . Foi purposes of description and understanding , we divide Bacon et al . ' s interpretation of protiuct defmition into puxiuct strar ^ . pnxhict defi - nition , and piojecT definition , primarily because tliese activities involve different analytical and implementation approaches . See , also : W . E , Souder . Managing New Prodiici Innovations ( Ladngton . Massachu - setts : Lexington Books . 1987 ) ; Booz Alleti & Hamilton , " New Product Develojiineni in the 198Us " ( New York . - Booz Allen & Hamilton . 1982 ) ; and R . Rothwell , C . Freeman . A , Horsley . V . ' l . P Jervis , A . B , Rohertscm . and J . Townsend . " Sappho Updated — Project Sappho Phase II . " Research Polity , volume 3 , number 3 . 1974 , pp . 258 - 291 . 5 . We firsi identifed a series of operational problems encountered in new product development and linked them to acTi \ ities and practices at the from end . Foe rhat analysis , see : KJiurana ajid R < «enthal ( 1996 ) . 6 . Bacoti et al . ( 1994 ) ; and Gupta and Wilenion ( 1990 ) . Wliile there has been limited research on the front end . re . searchers who study new prcKliut devduptnent often indtide some NPD suc - ces . s fectors that pertain to the front end . See , fnr example : Smith and Reinertsen ( 1991 ) ; Rothwdletal . ( 1974 ) ; and R . G . Couper and E . J . KIcinschinidt . " Deteiniinatiis of riiiieline . ss in i ' rodiict Development . " Joumal of Product Imioimioti Management , volume 1 1 , November 1994 . pp . . ^ 81 - 396 . 7 . Roberts and FiLsfeld call a set of fotindation - type activities " critical fiinctions for enhanced innovation . " They poriray pioject - specific ac - tivities as a six - stage process starting with preprojea activities . See ; E . B . Roberts and A . R . Fusfeld , " SEaffing the Innovative Technology - Based Organization . " Sloan Management Revietv . volume 22 , Spring 1981 . pp . 19 - 34 . 8 . M . McCirath . Product Strategy for High - Technology Companies ( ^ wn Ridge . Illinois : Iwin . 1995 ) . 9 . These are the top three Icveis of the strategic hietarchy presented by McGrath ( 1995 ) . McGrath describes product strategy in a four - level hierarch ) - starring wich strategic vision and then proceeding to prod - ucr - platfbiiri strategy , product - line strateg ) ' . and , finally , individual projects . 10 . Bacon etal . ( 1994 ) . 11 . McGrath ( 1995 ) : and R . G . Coofier and F . J . Kleinschmidt . " New Product Performance : Keys tu Success . Profitability , and Cycle Time Reducrion , " yo«mrf / o / Marketing Management , \ n \ \ \ mt 11 , September 1995 . pp . 315 - 337 . 12 . McGrath ( 1995 ) ; Cooper and Kleinschmidt ( 1995 ) ; D . C Ancona and D . F . tialdwdi . " Beyond Boundary Spanning : Managing External Dependence in Product Development Teams , " Joumal of High - Technology Management Research , volume 1 . number 2 , 1990 , pp . 119 - 135 ; and 118 & L RuSFNTHAl SLOAN MANAGEMENT RKVIF - W / WINTI - . R 1997 D . G . Ancona and D . E . Caldwell . " Bridging the Boundary : External Process and Performance in Organizational Teams . " Administrative Science Qiuirtcrly . volume 37 , December 1992 . pp . 634 - 665 . 13 - Selected research on these issues includes : K . B . Clark and T , Fujimoto . Product Development Performance ( Boston : Harvard Business School Press , 1991 ) ; and K . Imai . 1 . Nonaka . and H . Takeuchi , " Managing the New Product Development Process : How Japanese Companies L ^ arn and Unlearn , in R . Hayes , K . Clark , and P . Lorenz , eds . . The Uneasy Alliance : Managing the Productivity - Technology Dilemma ( Boston : Harvard Business School Press . 1985 ) . pp . 337 - 375 ; L Dwyer and R . Mellon " Oi ^ anizational Environment . New Produa Process Activities , and Project Omcames , , ' ' Joumal of Product Innova - tion Management , volume 8 , March 1991 , pp . 39 - 48 ; and D , Dou ^ eny , " Interpretive Barriers to Successftil PKxiua Innovations in Latgc Eirms , " Organization Science , volume 3 . May ! 992 , pp . 179 - 202 . 14 . Cooper and Kleinschmidt ( 1995 ) . 15 . The crearion of product concepts is discussed in : CM . Crawford , New Products Management , 3rd edition ( Hotnewood . Illinois : Irwin . 1991 ) . Customer requirements should drive all product design and develop - ment , including the creation of product concepts . There is a growing body of information on how such requirements ought to be obtained and translated into product requirements . One familiar technique for translating customer requirements into product attributes is quality function deployment ( QED ) . See : J . R . Hauser and D . Clausing ( 1988 ) . " The House of Quality . " Harvard Business Revietv , volume 66 , May ' ] une 1988 , pp . 63 - 73 ; and G . L Urban and J . R . HatLser . Design and Marketing of New Products , 2nd edition ( Englewood Cliffs . New Jersey : Prentice - Hall ; 1993 ) . 16 . Bacon etal . ( 1994 ) . 17 - Bacon etal . ( 1994 ) ; and K . M . Eisenhardt and B , Tabrizi . " Accderating Adaptive Processes : Product Innovation in the Global Computer Industry . " Administrative Science Quarterly , volume 40 . March 1995 , pp . 84 - 110 . 18 . R . H . Hayes , S . C . Wheelwright , and K . B . Clark , Dynamic Manufacturing ( New York : Free Press , 1988 ) ; DwyerandMdlor ( 1991 ) ; and R , Cooper . " Third - Generation New Product Processes . " Joumal of Product Innovation Management , voWiinc 1 I . January 1994 . pp . 3 - 14 . 19 . See Rosenthal ( 1992 ) ; Smith and Reinertsen ( 1991 ) ; Cooper ( 1994 ) ; and R . G . Cooper , " Stage - Gate Systems : A New Tool for Managing New Products , " Bidsiness Horizons , volume 33 . May - June 1990 . pp . 44 - 54 . 20 . Bacon etal . ( 1994 ) ; and Cooper and Kleinschmidt ( 1995 ) . 21 . For a description of pha . se review systems , see : Cooper ( 1990 ) ; and Rosenthal ( 1992 ) , chapter 2 . See also : M . E . McCirarh . M . T . Anthotiy . and A . R . Shapiro , Product Devebprnent Success through Product and Cycle - Time Excellence ( Bostoti : Btittenvorth - Heinemann , 1992 ) . 22 . An alternative approach that is emerging in the best companies is based on platform planning and emphasizes that product opportuni - ties are related to the development of product platforms . See : McGtath ( 1995 ) ; and M . H . Meyer , P . Tertzakian . and J . M . Utterback , " Metrics for Manaj ^ ng Research and Development " ( Cambridge : MIT Sloan School of Man - agement , working paper 3817 . 1995 ) . 23 . S . C . " Wheelwright and K . B . Clark , Revolutionizing Product Developmenti ^ ew York : Free Press , 1992 ) . Several product developmenc researchers have raised the issue of roles , ' e . g . . project tnanagers ( Wheelwright and Clark , 1992 ) . and core team and executive reviews ( McGrath et al . . 1992 ) . However , our interest is in looking at how these roles influence the front end of new product development and what challenges arise as a result of the interactions among these roles , 24 . ln . some companies that do platform planning in a serious way , one can visualize the development of a platform concept or architec - ture also as a fi ^ ont - end deliverable . 25 . Meyer etal . ( 1995 ) . 26 . Wheelwright and Clark ( 1992 ) . 27 . Ancona and Caldwell ( 1990 ) ; and Ancona and Caldwell ( 1992 ) . 28 . Clark and Fujimoto suggest that in such ca . ses . there is often " little or no attention to integrating a dear sense of ctLstomer expectations into the work of the product development organization as a whole . " See : K . B . Clark and T . Fujimoto . " Tlie Power of Produa Integrity , " Harvard Business Review , voltime 68 , November - December 1990 , pp . 107 - 118 . 29 . Though not all platforms or pmduct lines c ; in plan for multiple re - leases at frequent intervals , proactive planning of product releases a few years ahead is desirable . For example , Sony docs not necessarily plan multiple rdeases but achieves die same objective by freezing the product design early on . It tlieti begins work on the next product model concur - rently to incorporate changes in customer needs or technology . See : Meyer etal . ( 1995 ) ; McGrath ( 1995 ) ; and S . Sanderson - Walsh and M . Uzumcri . " Managing Product Families ; The Case of the Sony Walkman , " Research Policy , volume 24 , September 1995 , pp . 761 - 782 ; and P . R . Nayak and J . P . Deschamps , Ptvduct Juggernauts ( Boston : Harvard Business School Press . 1995 ) . 30 . See . for example : R . R . Kaniath and J . K . Liker , " A Second l . ook at Japanese Produa De - vdopment , " Harvard Business Revietv , volume 72 , November - December 1994 , pp . 154 - 170 . 31 . K . A . Howard , " Postponement of Padcaging and Produa Differentia - tion Lowers logistics Co . ' its . " in A . K . Chakravarty . ed . . Globalization of Techmlo ^ , Manufacturing , and Service Operahons { New Orleans : Tulane University , Goldring Institute , A . B . Freeman School of Business , Proceedings of Symjiosium , 7 - 8 January 1994 ) . 32 . Apparendy . such rc - dundancj ' is at the heart of Toyota ' s develop - ment success . See : A . Ward . J . K . Liker , J . J . Cristiano . and D . K . Sobck II . " The Second Toyota Paradox : How Delaying Decisions Can Make Better Cars Faster , " Sloan Mamigenmn Ra ' iav , volume 36 . Spring 1995 . pp . 43 - 61 . In the context of design , simultaneously working on multiple subsys - tem / component alternatives generally leads to a faster product devel - opment cycle . We suggest that the same is true for planned and antici - pated redundancy in the face of technological or other risks . 33 . Other interrelationships that have been mentioned in previous re - search , e . g . . Bacon et al . ( 1994 ) . and used at several case study sites in - dude : the need for strategic alignment between product development efforts atid overall business strategy - , the direct links between product definition and project planning , the close associarion of project plan - ning ; md stafUng policies , and the need to modify the roles and re - sponsibilities of key organizational members as a Rinaion of project complexity and size . Sl - OAN MANAGEMUNT REVIhW / WlNTtR 1997 KHURANA & ROSENTHAl . 119 34 . P . Lawrence and J . l . orsch , Organizations and E / ivironments ( Honiewood , Illinois : Irwin , l % 9 ) ; and •Clark and Fujimoro ( 1991 ) . 35 . D . Dougherty and E . H . Bowman , " The Eficcrs of Ortjanizarional Downsizing on Product Innovation . " California Mamigenient Review , volume 37 , Summer 1995 , pp . 28 - 44 . 36 . Ward ecal . ( 1995 ) ; and M . Iansiti , " Shooting the Rapids , " California Management Revieto , volume 38 , Fall 199S , pp . 1 - 22 . 37 . This notion of balance also rcHeas our agreement with an aniclc on balancing instinctive and Rilly analytical decision making . See : A . Langlcy , " Between ' Paralysis by Ajialysis ' and ' Extinction by Iastina ' . " Sloan Management Review , volume ^ 6 , Spring 1995 , pp . 63 - 76 . 38 . In the " prc - emcrgent " stage , a company has no formal front end , nor does it perceive the need for one ; none of the companies we stud - ied fell into this cat ^ ory . This situation is common either in start - up companies in which a few principals make produa development deci - sions informally , or in business units where structured product inno - vation is not yet the hasis for competition . NPD activities for such or - ganizations arc tightly integrated , but often a few senior managers do this tacitly . 39 . See , fot example : S . L . Goldman , R . N . Nagel , and K . PreLss , Agile Competitors atid Virtual Organizations : Stimcgies for Etniching the Customer ( New Yotk : Van Nostrand Reiiihold , 1995 ) . 40 . See Meyer etal . { l995 ) ; McGraih ( 1995 ) ; and Sanderson - Walsh and Uzumcri ( 1995 ) . For a pnsposed new model of the stage - gate system , see : Cooper ( 1994 ) . 41 . A full description of why a company should adopt more than one front - end solution , and what these solutions might look like , is be - yond GUI scope . While we do not yet have a Rill map of " compatible contexts , " some of the contingencies we have discovered are ; radical - ness of product , maturity of industry , experience of the business unit with formal ( ronr - eiid processes , small or large firm , and entrepreneur - ial or conservative firm . We are currently writing a paper that more ftilly develops this perspecdve . Reprint 3828 120 KHURANA & ROSENTHAL SLOAN MANAGLMLNT REVILW / WIN ' IHR 1997