Narges Mahyar Postdoctoral Researcher Design Lab , UC San Diego nmahyar @ ucsd . edu Projects , papers , and more : http : / / nmahyar . ucsd . edu Social Computing to Enhance Public Engagement 1 in Urban Design at Scale Planning problems are wicked 2 Rittel and Webber , 1973 ` ‣ Unstructured : difﬁcult to sort out causes and effects ‣ Cross - cutting : have many overlapping stakeholders ‣ Relentless : can’t be solved , once and for all Issues in Blacksberg 3 Virginia Tech president focuses on growth 4 By Tonia Moxley tonia . moxley @ roanoke . com 381 - 1675 , Jul 5 , 2015 ‣ Housing for up to 5 , 000 additional students ‣ Problems and advantages of student housing ‣ Preserving neighborhoods and quality life ‣ Achieving genuine participation in planning ‣ Satisfying the public that they are being heard ‣ Improving the ﬁnal decisions ‣ Incorporating a broad spectrum of the public Conventional methods are counterproductive JE Innes & DE Booher , 2004 Coronado Bridge in San Diego 6 Chicano Park takeover , 35 years of struggle 7 By the time the San Diego - Coronado Bridge opened in the summer of 1969 , the development of Interstate 5 had left 5 , 000 homes and businesses destroyed in Barrio Logan . Then the California Highway Patrol announced plans to build a substation below the bridge in 1970 . Why is engaging the public important ? ‣ Local knowledge ‣ Buy in ‣ Impact social good 8 Best practices are workshops and design charrettes 9 “An impossible problem in an absurdly short time” 10 Why design charrettes are hard ? Condon , 2007 I build & study human - centered collaborative tools 11 Mahyar et al , VIS 2015 Mahyar et al , ISS 2016 , Honorable mention award , Outstanding award Mahyar et al , InfoVis 2012 , Top 4 VAST papers Mahyar et al , HICSS 2013 Mahyar & Tory , VAST 2014 , Best paper award Collocated Online Mahyar et al , CHI 2018 Design for San Diego ( D4SD ) Novices Experts 12 UD Co - Spaces : A Table - Centred Multi - Display Environment for Public Engagement in Urban Design Charrettes N . Mahyar , K . J . Burke , J . Xiang , S . Meng , K . S . Booth , C . L . Girling , and R . W . Kellett , Interactive Surfaces and Spaces ( ISS ) , 2016 [ Honorable Mention Award ] , ISS 2016 [ Outstanding Paper Award ] , CELA 2017 13 Consultation Implementation Goals setting Alternative generation Alternative visualization Alternative evaluation Alternative measurement Preferred alternative development Girling , C . , Kellett , R . , and Johnstone , S . , 2006 Urban design processes lack of tool support Problem : lack of tool support during design charrettes ‣ Integrating data and visualizations of information ‣ Employing interactive modes to engage people ‣ Employing social and peer learning 14 Sheppard , 2012 , Moser , 2010 , Holden 2008 , Davis , 2008 , Al - Kodmany 2000 URP : tangible workbench for urban planning and design 15 John Underkoffler & Hiroshi Ishii , CHI , 1999 Design of digital technology to avoid marginalizing people ▸ The importance of providing the right information at the right time in understandable formats . 16 Al - Kodmany 2000 , Al - Kodmany 2001 Research questions ‣ How to use collaboration technology & visualization techniques to ‣ engage diverse stakeholders , ‣ foster collaboration and co - creation , ‣ increase understanding of impacts of choices ? 17 6 years human - centered design and development process 18 2012 2010 2016 This was a long - term interdisciplinary project that started before I arrived at UBC . 1st version : tabletop tool 2nd version : wall display 3rd version : handheld UD Co - Spaces ( Urban Design Collaborative Spaces ) 19 My role 20 ‣ Lack of engagement with metrics on the wall ‣ Lack of interactivity and customization to engage ppl ‣ Lack of personal spaces ‣ Difﬁculty interacting in parallel with the 3D view Method ▸ Analysis of version 2 deployment in the wild ▸ Interview with urban planners & facilitators ▸ Design & development of version 3 ▸ Heuristic evaluation with 3 urban planners ▸ Formal evaluation ( comparative study ) 21 System design & considerations ▸ Adding personal spaces ▸ Increasing interaction with wall display ▸ Building interactive visualizations ▸ Providing accessible and understandable information 22 Comparative study 23 Design context ▸ Design a neighborhood center within a hypothetical existing single family neighborhood in the suburbs of Vancouver . ▸ Main Goal : ▸ Increasing the walkability of the neighborhood 24 Study procedure ▸ 40 participants ( groups of 5 - 6 , 17 male , 23 female ) ▸ Total time : 140 min ( ~ 45 min for design activity ) ▸ Pre & post survey ▸ Focus group ▸ Video recorded sessions 25 Findings : Tabletop surface increased equity of participation “Having this tabletop got every stakeholder involved so they can make changes themselves , see those changes right away , [ which ] promotes collaboration” 26 Muti - display environment catalyzed discussions “I deﬁnitely really liked how everything was synced , specially with regards to 3D , iPad and table itself ” 27 Visualization dashboard increased analytical ability “Having indicators in real time deﬁnitely altered how we approached the project , we could see the larger impact . . . it was almost like stepping out and saying , okay , what did we actually do and what is the impact . ” 28 Main contributions ‣ UD Co - Spaces was superior than paper - based ‣ Engaging collaborative environment ‣ Alternative generation and measurement ‣ Making information and visualization accessible 29 Contributions beyond urban deign domain ‣ Potential of touch - based interactions ‣ Increase interactions , engagement & learning ‣ Transition novices to experts 30 31 How can we scale it up to engage a broader range of stakeholders ? 32 CommunityCrit : Inviting the Public to Improve and Evaluate Urban Design Ideas through Micro - Activities Narges Mahyar , Michael R . James , Michelle M . Ng , Reginald A . Wu , Steven P . Dow , ACM Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI 2018 ) . Face to face methods have many limitations ▸ Engaging representative stakeholders ▸ Hearing out people’s comments ▸ Recording / disseminating comments 33 Urban design tools require time investment and expertise 34 S . Steiniger , M . E . Poorazizi , C . AM Bliss - Taylor , E . Mohammadi , and A . JS Hunter . 2012 . Online civic technologies often limited to opinion polling ▸ WikiSurvey ▸ Placespaeck 35 WikiSurvey : M . J . Salganik and K . EC Levy . 2015 . Research question ▸ How can we create a system for activities beyond opinion polling that ▸ captures quality feedback ▸ in a short amount of time ? 36 System design & considerations ▸ Providing a quick & ﬂexible workﬂow ▸ Designing understandable questions ▸ Providing social interactions ▸ Sending people directly into quick activities 37 http : / / cc . ucsd . edu 38 Design case : El Nudillo a key intersection in San Diego 39 1 ) Pick an idea 40 2 ) Do or skip activities 3 ) Submit a new idea 41 4 ) View my / all contributions Method ▸ Partnership with a local planning team ▸ Design and development of the tool ▸ Deployment in the wild ▸ Interview with community members ▸ Think aloud ▸ Interview with urban planners ▸ Experts’ feedback on people’s contributions 42 Case Study : Park - to - Park Project 43 Proposed Current 44 bb 45 bob 46 “If there’s a lot of beautiful plans , allow us to be the ones to plan it ! ” 47 Workshop participants willingness to use an online tool ▸ Willingness ( 21 / 21 ) ▸ Technological means ( 21 / 21 ) ▸ “We have always been overlooked , so my community would be very interested in an online tool” 48 Workshop ideas 49 CommunityCrit ideas 50 Empowered community members to provide input “I don’t have time to go to workshops so it provides opportunity to give feedback” . ( P6 ) “I liked only having to answer 5 questions . I have conducted lengthy surveys myself and thought them to be excessive to the point of endangering the quality of data collection ( respondents get bored , distracted , only want the " reward " etc . ) ” ( P2 ) 51 Urban planners saw value in public outreach “Provides more tools for community outreach and for people to participate , and will give us a chance to present ideas that came out of CommunityCrit back to the public during the next workshop and facilitating a discussion around them . ” ( E2 ) 52 CommunityCrit Public Workshop Contributions : Scaling & diversifying public participation 53 Remaining problems ▸ Supporting the broader urban design process ▸ Authoring interface for supporting multiple projects ▸ Increasing participation ▸ Addressing marginalized perspectives ▸ Making sense of people’s input 54 Problem : difficulty of surfacing the key themes 55 Early design to surface the key themes in comments 56 Short - term : building novel tools to advance digital civics ▸ Sensemaking of complex civic data ▸ Tools for consensus building and decision making ▸ Visual storytelling 57 Extending my work in other sociotechnical problems 58 Mahyar et al , VIS 2015 Mahyar et al , ISS 2016 , Honorable mention award , Outstanding award Mahyar et al , InfoVis 2012 , Top 4 VAST papers Mahyar et al , HICSS 2013 Mahyar & Tory , VAST 2014 , Best paper award Collocated Online Mahyar et al , CHI 2018 Design for San Diego ( D4SD ) Novices Experts Mahyar , 2008 https : / / d4sd . org 59 Long - term : learning science , health informatics ▸ Design of learning analytics systems ▸ Broadening learning analytics for non - specialist users ▸ Support tools in both online and physical environments ▸ Use of multi - touch displays to engage novices 60 Visualization design for non - specialist users 61 Infographics to increase everyday people’s engagement 62 How can art make HCI reach beyond specialist audiences ? How can new programs at the interception of Art and Technology address real world problems ? Thank you ! 63 Social Computing to Enrich and Scale Public Engagement UD Co _ Spaces Enriched public engagement , increased public’s engagement , enabled alternative visualization and measurement in a short amount of time . 64 CommunityCrit Scaled & diversiﬁed public participation , democratized access and empowered public to contribute meaningfully in a short amount of time . Narges Mahyar ( nmahyar @ ucsd . edu , http : / / nmahyar . ucsd . edu )