Models for Longitudinal Data : A Generalized Estimating Equation Approach Scott L . Zeger ; Kung - Yee Liang ; Paul S . Albert Biometrics , Vol . 44 , No . 4 . ( Dec . , 1988 ) , pp . 1049 - 1060 . Stable URL : http : / / links . jstor . org / sici ? sici = 0006 - 341X % 28198812 % 2944 % 3A4 % 3C1049 % 3AMFLDAG % 3E2 . 0 . CO % 3B2 - R Biometrics is currently published by International Biometric Society . Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use , available at http : / / www . jstor . org / about / terms . html . JSTOR ' s Terms and Conditions of Use provides , in part , that unless you have obtained prior permission , you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles , and you may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal , non - commercial use . Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work . Publisher contact information may be obtained at http : / / www . jstor . org / journals / ibs . html . Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed page of such transmission . JSTOR is an independent not - for - profit organization dedicated to and preserving a digital archive of scholarly journals . For more information regarding JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . http : / / www . jstor . org Tue May 8 03 : 40 : 45 2007 BIOMETRICS 44 , 1049 - 1060 December 1988 Models for Longitudinal Data : A Generalized Estimating Equation Approach Scott L . Zeger , Kung - Yee Liang , and Paul S . Albert Department of Biostatistics , The Johns Hopkins University , 6 15 North Wolfe Street , Baltimore , Maryland 2 1205 , U . S . A . This article discusses extensions of generalized linear models for the analysis of longitudinal data . Two approaches are considered : subject - specific ( SS ) models in which heterogeneity in regression parameters is explicitly modelled ; and population - averaged ( PA ) models in which the aggregate response for the population is the focus . We use a generalized estimating equation approach to fit both classes of models for discrete and continuous outcomes . When the subject - specific parameters are assumed to follow a Gaussian distribution , simple relationships between the PA and SS parameters are available . The methods are illustrated with an analysis of data on mother ' s smoking and children ' s respiratory disease . 1 . Introduction This article considers statistical methods for longitudinal data where the broad scientific objective is to describe an outcome , y , , , for subject i at time t as a function of covariates , x , , . Longitudinal data are characterized by the fact that repeated observations for a subject tend to be correlated . This correlation presents additional opportunities and challenges for analysis . With independent observations , generalized linear models ( GLMs ) ( McCullagh and Nelder , 1983 ) and quasi - likelihood ( Wedderburn , 1974 ; McCullagh , 1983 ) have recently unified regression methods for a variety of discrete and continuous variables . Linear , logistic , and Poisson regression as well as some parametric survival analysis models are special cases . The objective of this article is to discuss approaches to the analysis of dependent , longitudinal data with similarly diverse types of outcome variables . The GLM can be extended for time - dependent data in a variety of ways . Zeger and Qaqish ( 1988 ) and Kaufmann ( 1987 ) discuss generalized linear models for the con - ditional distribution of an outcome given its past . Alternatively , the parameters in a GLM can be assumed to vary across time as a stochastic process and / or across subjects according to a mixing distribution . We focus on the case where there is heterogeneity across subjects . There are two distinct approaches to longitudinal data analysis in this case . First , the heterogeneity can be explicitly modelled ; we will refer to this as the " subject - specific " ( SS ) approach . The mixed model is an example where the subject - specific effects are assumed to follow a parametric distribution across the population . Mixed linear models ( Laird and Ware , 1982 ; Ware , 1985 ) for continuous longitudinal data are in common use . Mixed generalized linear models for non - Gaussian outcomes have recently become a research Key words : Generalized estimating equations ; Generalized linear models ; Longitudinal data ; Quasi - likelihood ; Random effects . 1050 Biometries , December 1 988 focus . See Stiratelli , Laird , and Ware ( 1984 ) , Anderson and Aitkin ( 1985 ) , and Gilmour , Anderson , and Rae ( 1985 ) for applications to binomial data . Second , the population - averaged response can be modelled as a function of covariates without explicitly accounting for subject to subject heterogeneity . The regression coefficients have interpretation for the population rather than for any individual and hence we will use the term " population - averaged " ( PA ) model in this case . Liang and Zeger ( 1986 ) , Zeger and Liang ( 1986 ) , Stram , Wei , and Ware ( 1988 ) , and Moulton ( unpublished Ph . D . dissertation , The Johns Hopkins University , 1986 ) have previously discussed examples of PA models . This article first contrasts SS and PA models in more detail , indicating their respective domains of application . The mixed GLM is used as a basis for discussion . A generalized estimating equations approach ( Liang and Zeger , 1986 ) useful for fitting both SS and PA models is then discussed in Section 3 . This approach is an extension of quasi - likelihood to the analysis of dependent data . The methodology is illustrated with an analysis of respiratory infection data from the Harvard Study of Air Pollution and Health ( Ware et al . , 1984 ) . 2 . Subject - Specific and Population - Averaged Models This section distinguishes between SS and PA models for longitudinal data , indicating their domains of application . While extra nomenclature can be a nuisance , we believe it is useful in this case to differentiate two distinct extensions of GLMs for longitudinal data analysis . We begin with the mixed generalized linear model , an example of a subject - specific model . Let y , , be an outcome random variable and x , , a p x 1 vector of fixed covariates at time t for subject i , where t = 1 , . . . , n , and i = 1 , . . . , K . Let z , , be a q x 1 vector of covariates ( typically a subset of x , , ) associated with a q x 1 random effect , b , , and let u , , = E ( y , , I b , ) . Under the mixed GLM , the responses for subject i are assumed to satisfy where b , is an independent observation from a mixture distribution , F . The functions h and g are refened to as the " link " and " variance " functions , respectively . The objective of analysis is to estimate the fixed effects coefficients , j3 , parameters of F , and possibly the scale parameter . 4 . An example is the logistic Gaussian mixed model studied by Stiratelli et al . ( 1984 ) , in which it is assumed that logit ( u , , ) = xAj3 i - z : b , , var ( y , , I b , ) = u , , ( l - u , , ) , and b , is an independent Gaussian random vector with mean 0 and covariance D , i . e . , b , - G ( O , D ) . For discussion , suppose x , , = z , , - ( 1 , t ) ' and let b , = ( bo , , bl , ) ' and j3 = ( Po , PI ) ' . Then in the logistic mixed model , the log - odds of a positive response for subject i at time t is the linear function of time ( Po + bo , ) + ( PI + b , , ) t . Thus , exp ( P1 + b ] , ) is the odds ratio of a positive response at time t + 1 relative to time t for subject i . Since E ( b , ) = 0 , the parameter pl describes on average how an individual ' s probability of positive response depends on time . In the population - averaged approach to longitudinal analysis , the marginal expectation , p , , = E ( y , , ) , is the focus . That is , we assume h * ( p , , ) = x : ij3 * and var ( y , , ) = g * ( p , O . 4 for some link function h * and variance function g * . Here , j3 * describes how the population - averaged response rather than one subject ' s response depends on the covariates . In the logistic case with x , , = ( 1 , t j ' , PT is the change on a logit scale in the fraction of positive responses per unit time , rather than the typical change for an individual subject . Models for Longitudinal Data The principal distinction between SS and PA models is whether the regression coefficients describe an individual ' s or the average population response to changing x . A secondary distinction is in the nature of the assumed time dependence . PA models only describe the covariance among repeated observations for a subject ; SS models explain the source of this covariance . In PA models , the covariance matrix must be positive - definite but is otherwise unrestricted . In SS models , the time dependence arises solely from the shared subject effects , b , , in the conditional mean . The covariance matrix is thus fully determined by the choices of g ( u , , ) and F . For example , in a logistic model with Gaussian random intercept , only positive correlation is possible . SS models are desirable when the response for an individual rather than for the population is the focus - for example , in studies of growth curves . Effective use of SS models is limited , however , by the information available per subject . In many longitudinal studies , each subject has few observations and it is not possible to estimate separate regression coefficients , j3 + b , . Assuming the b , ' s follow a particular distribution , as is done in the mixed model , is a vehicle for borrowing strength across subjects to estimate @ , the typical SS parameter . However , inferences about j3 may depend on the assumed form of the distribution of the b , ' s , which cannot be checked without extensive data per subject . PA models are most effectively used in population studies such as in epidemiology . Here the difference in the population - averaged response between two groups with different risk factors is more the focus than is the change in an individual ' s response . For example , if x , , indicates whether subject i smokes at time t , and y , , is the presence / absence of respiratory infection , the PA model estimates the difference in infection rates between smokers and nonsmokers ; the SS model estimates the expected change in an individual ' s probability of infection given a change in smoking status . An advantage of PA models is that the population - averaged response for a given covariate value , x , , , is directly estimable from observations without assumptions about the hetero - geneity across individuals in the parameters . PA parameters are in this sense one step closer to the data than SS parameters . On the other hand , PA parameters depend on the degree of heterogeneity in the population ( F ) . The same process in two populations with different degrees of heterogeneity will lead to different PA parameter values . Under the mixed GLM in ( 2 . I ) , Note that p , , depends only on x , , and on F . When h is a nonlinear function and we assume h ( u , , ) = xLj3 + zLb , , it is usually not true that h ( , u , , ) = x , : @ . Trivially , if there is no heterogeneity , i . e . , b , = 0 for all i , then PA and SS models are the same and h ( u , , ) - h ( p , , ) = xi @ . Also , if h is the identity link , h ( p , , ) = p , , = xA @ . But in general , the link function that transforms u , , into a linear function of x , , does not also do the same for p , , . This is illustrated in Figure 1 , where we have assumed logit ( u , , ) = q , , + b , , b , - G ( 0 , D ) , and display the marginal mean , p , , , as a function of q , , for several values of D . Note the dependence of the marginal expectation on the random effects variance . There is attenua - tion of the effect of the covariates , as is well known in the context of errors - in - variables regression ( e . g . , Stefanski , 1985 ) . For mixed models with identity link , the distinction between subject - specific and popu - lation - averaged models is less important . In addition , inferences about the regression coefficients are robust to misspecification of the model for time dependence , a principal 1052 Biometries , December 1988 rl - Linear P r e d i c t o r Figure 1 . E ( Y ) vs 7 , where Y satisfies logit [ E ( Y I b ) ] = 7 + b and h - G ( 0 , D ) . difference between the PA and SS approaches in linear models . To develop these points , briefly consider the linear mixed model ( Laird and Ware , 1982 ) , which in vector notation is given by where Z l = YI = ( Y I I , . . . 7Yllil ) ' , ( ~ 11 , . . . 7 Xiti , ) ' , ( ~ 11 , . . . , Zlli , ) ' , El = ( cl17 . . . , Erll , ) ' ) and where E ( b , ) = 0 , cov ( b , ) = D , cov ( e , ) = a21 , and cov ( bl , el ) = 0 . For simplicity of notation , we assume XI = Z , ; extension to the general case is automatic . Note that the subject - specific coefficient for the ith individual is B + b , . Since E ( b , ) = 0 , , 63 has interpretation as the typical SS parameter . Alternatively , ( 2 . 3 ) can be expressed as E ( Y , ) = X , B , COV ( Y ~ ) a21 + X , DX , ' V , . ( 2 . 4 ) = = Here , B has the interpretation as the rate of change in the population - averaged Y with X . The random effects in the linear mixed model do not alter the marginal expectation of Y , only the marginal covariance matrix . Hence , B has both a SS and PA interpretation . The second point about the linear case is that consistent inferences about 8 can be obtained by least squares given only correct specification of the marginal expectation of Y 1053 Models for Longitudinal Data and the usual regularity conditions . The least squares estimating equations for 6 have the form Note that even when V , is misspecified , E [ U ( B ) ] = 0 and hence the root of ( 2 . 5 ) is consistent . In addition , the robust variance estimate ( White , 1982 ; Royall , 1986 ) , is also consistent given only that E ( Y , ) = XI @ . Thus , for large K , consistent inferences require correct specification of only the first moment . In the linear case , the specification of the first moment is the same in subject - specific and in population - averaged models . Hence , this distinction is less important . 3 . Generalized Estimating Equations for PA and SS Models In this section , we describe an estimating equation approach for fitting either PA or SS models to longitudinal data . To introduce the method , we briefly discuss PA models . See Liang and Zeger ( 1986 ) and Zeger and Liang ( 1986 ) for details . We then focus on the SS case . 3 . 1 Estimating Regression Coeficients To model the marginal expectation , p , , , we assume h * ( p , , ) = xl \ B * and var ( y , , ) = g * ( p , , ) 4 . Let p , = E ( Y , ) = { h * - I ( x : , / 3 * ) , . . . , h * - ' ( x ; , , / 3 * ) ) ' and A , = diag ( g * ( pil ) , . . . , g * ( p , , , ) ) . For independent observations , cov ( Y , ) = A , . 4 . As we expect correlation among repeated observations for a subject , let R , ( a ) be a " working " correlation matrix perhaps depending on an s X 1 vector of unknown parameters , a . We estimate a * by solving the " generalized estimating equation " ( GEE ) dpf u ( 8 * ) = C + V , l ( a ) ( ~ , - p , ) = 0 , , = I da where V , ( a ) = Liang and Zeger ( 1986 ) show that j * , the solution of ( 3 . l ) , A , " ~ R , ( ~ ) A : ' ~ . is consistent and asymptotically ( K + a ) Gaussian given only correct specification of the mean and the usual regularity conditions . A robust variance estimate Vj * = M c l M I M i l , ( 3 . 2 ) where K d * ' M - h $ r ; l - - = d @ * da * and ; , a is also consistent even when cov ( Y , ) # V , . The GEE can also be used to fit the mixed generalized linear model , as has previously been discussed by Gilmour et al . ( 1985 ) for a probit model of binomial responses in the animal breeding context . Below , we consider the GLM class of outcomes , give consistent 1054 Biometrics , December 1988 variance estimates , and establish connections between PA and SS parameters when the random effects distribution is Gaussian . To use the GEE approach for the mixed GLM , we calculate the marginal moments , p , and V , , from the conditional moments and the random effects distribution , F . We then solve the GEE ( 3 . 1 ) as discussed in Liang and Zeger ( 1986 ) . Given the conditional moments in ( 2 . 1 ) and a distribution , F , for the random effects , the marginal expectation , p , , has the form of ( 2 . 2 ) . The marginal covariance matrix is V , = cov [ E ( Yi I b , ) ] + E [ cov ( Y , I b , ) ] ( 3 . 3 ) with s , t element where ui , = h - ' ( x , ; + z , ; b , ) and I ( s = t ) is the indicator function with value 1 if s = t and 0 otherwise . Having evaluated pi and V , for each subject , we solve the GEE given in ( 3 . 1 ) for 8 . Note that the GEE is a function of F , which is assumed to be known at a given iteration . If F is the Gaussian distribution with mean 0 and covariance matrix D , the expression for the marginal mean simplifies or is easily approximated for the standard link functions . For the identity link [ h ( u ) = u ] , we have trivially p , , = E ( yil ) = x , ; @ . For the log link [ h ( u ) = log ( u ) ] , pi , = exp ( x , ' , + zl ~ Dzi , / 2 ) . That is , the random effect leads to a simple offset , zl ; Dzi , / 2 , in the marginal mean . When h ( u ) = W1 ( u ) , the probit link , pi , = ( P ( a , ( D ) . x , ; B ) , where a , ( D ) = I Dz ~ , z , ; + I and q is the dimension of b , . This expression for a , ( D ) is a generalized form of the parameter s in Gilmour et al . ( 1985 ) . For the logit link , an exact closed - form expression for the marginal mean is unavailable . However , using a cumulative Gaussian approximation to the logistic function ( Johnson and Kotz , 1970 , p . 6 ) leads to the expression logit ( p , , ) = al ( D ) . xi , B , where al ( D ) = I c2Dz , , z , ' , + I 1 - q ' 2 and c = 16 a l ( l . 5 ~ ) . Figure 2 shows the quality of this approximation for different values of D when q = 1 . Note that the mixed models on the logit and probit scales lead to a rescaling of the linear predictor in the expression for the marginal mean ; however , the same link function can be used for both the conditional and marginal expectations . Ideally , simple formulae would exist for V , = cov ( Yi ) as well . This is not the case except for the linear link . However , only an approximation for Vi is necessary to obtain consistent and nearly efficient inferences for B using the GEE approach when the number of subjects , K , is large relative to the number of observations per subject , n , , and F is given ( Liang and Zeger , 1986 ) . Expanding the link function in a Taylor series about b , = 0 gives the approximation where L , = diagidh - ' ( u ) / d u , u = x , ; 8 , t = 1 , . . . , n , ) . The quality of a similar approximation has been studied for the probit link by Gilmour et al . ( 1985 ) . 1055 Models for Longitudinal Data n - Linear P r e d i c t o r Figure 2 . logit [ E ( Y ) ] vs q , where Y satisfies logit [ E ( Y I b ) ] = q + b and b - G ( 0 , D ) . Notice that the logit of the marginal mean is nearly linear . Using q , as an approximation to V , , we have that conditional on F , & ( b - 8 ) is asymptotically multivariate Gaussian with mean 0 ( if an exact expression for pi , is used and small bias otherwise ) and with variance that can be consistently estimated by It is important to emphasize that the distributional result assumes F is given . In mixed models with nonlinear links , estimates for 8 and for parameters of F ( D in the Gaussian case ) are not even asymptotically orthogonal as they are in linear models . In general , inferences about 8 depend in a complicated way on those for F . There are important exceptions , however , when b , is Gaussian . For the log link , changing D changes only an offset in the marginal mean . For X ' s approximately orthogonal to the intercept , changing D has little effect on their coefficients and the conditional inferences are satisfactory . For the probit and logit links , D need not be known for testing the null hypothesis / 3 , = 0 . To see this , note that for any D , h [ E ( yll ) ] = xABal , ( D ) , where h is the logit or probit function . The standard error of bJ is also proportional to al , ( D ) . Hence , the ratio of bJ to its standard error is approximately independent of D . 1056 Biometries , December 1988 3 . 2 Estimating D and 6 The approximation ( 3 . 4 ) can be used to obtain a rough estimate of the random effects variance , D . We have V , = L , Z , DZ , ' L , + ~ A , so that D = ( z : z , ) - lz : L , ( v , - ~ A , ) L ; ~ z , ( z : z , ) - I We use the moment estimator The scale parameter is estimated from the diagonal terms of the covariance matrix . Note that E ( ylt - PI , l2 = 6 g ( ~ , i ) + ( L , , ) 2 ~ ADzri , which leads to the moment estimator To calculate b and ( D , 4 ) simultaneously , we iterate solving equations ( 3 . 1 ) and ( 3 . 5 ) . This algorithm has been found to converge except when the linear approximation becomes inaccurate , for example , when the probability of response in logistic regression becomes too large or small and / or when D becomes large . Because of the approximations involved for nonlinear links , we currently use D and 4 as rough estimators and examine the sensitivity of , 6 to changes in D and 4 in the neighborhood of D , 6 . Further work on estimating D and 6 for specific link functions is required . 4 . Example : Children ' s Respiratory Disease and Mother ' s Smoking We illustrate the GEE approach with an analysis of data from the Harvard Study of Air Pollution and Health ( Ware et al . , 1984 ) . Data are available for 537 children from Steubenville , Ohio , each of whom was examined annually from age 7 to age 10 . Whether the child had respiratory infection in the year prior to each exam was reported by the mother . Mother ' s smoking status [ regular smoker ( I ) or not ( O ) ] , a time - independent variable , was determined at the first interview . The subset of data used here was obtained from and previously analyzed by Laird , Beck , and Ware ( unpublished technical report , Department of Biostatistics , Harvard University , 1986 ) . Only subjects with complete records were available ; however , the previous analysis found little difference when all subjects were included . Our objective is to illustrate the GEE method , demonstrating the connections between PA and SS models . To fit a PA model , the marginal probability of respiratory infection , pit , is assumed to satisfy l ~ g i t ( ~ , ~ ) ( 4 . 1 ) = P , * + M S PT + AGE 0 : + ( AGE . MS ) PT , where MS = 1 if mother smoked and 0 if not , and AGE is in years since the 9th birthday . Note that whether a child had infection the previous year is not explicitly included in the model . The purpose is to compare the rate of respiratory disease for children whose mothers smoke to the rate for children whose mothers do not smoke . 1057 Models for Longitudinal Data Table 1 presents the coefficients and robust 2 - statistics for the PA model based on the following three working assumptions about the correlation : R = I ( repeated observations uncorrelated ) ; R , A = a , j # k ( exchangeable correlation ) ; R , L = a ( [ j - k 1 ) ( stationary correlation ) . In practice , we choose R based on empirical estimates of the correlation . We use three different correlation assumptions here only to demonstrate that both the estimates and 2 - statistics show little dependence on the choice of R , despite the presence of substantial correlation among these data . In the exchangeable working model ( R , a = a , j # k ) , & = . 346 . In the stationary case , the correlations for lags of 1 , 2 , and 3 years were estimated to be . 40 , . 3 1 , and . 3 1 , respectively . Either of these alternatives appears reasonable . The yearly rate of respiratory infection for 9 - year - olds ( AGE = 0 ) with nonsmoking mothers is approximately 15 % . The PA model indicates that the rate decreases with age by about 2 % per year . The rate of illness for children of smoking mothers is about 1 . 35 as high as in those with nonsmoking mothers with approximate 95 % interval ( . 92 , 1 . 96 ) . As the 2 - statistic for pT is 1 . 58 , the evidence from these data only moderately supports the smoking - respiratory illness relationship . Table 2 compares the robust 2 - statistics with those obtained if we assume repeated observations are uncorrelated both in estimating 8 and in calculating its variance - that is , if we assume the independence working model is correct . The consistent statistic , Z , , is smaller for both time - independent covariates ( intercept , mother ' s smoking ) and larger for the time - dependent covariates ( age , age - smoking interaction ) . Positive correlation within Table 1 Coeflcients and robust Z - statistics ( p * / s . e . , j * ) for the population - averaged model of equation ( 4 . 1 ) for three different assumptions about the correlation amonx repeated observations for a subject Uncorrelated Exchangeable " Stationaryh Coefficient P * Z P * Z P * Z Intercept - 1 . 90 - 16 . 0 - 1 . 90 - 15 . 8 - 1 . 90 - 15 . 8 Mother ' s smoking ( MS = 0 if no ) , 313 1 . 7 . 303 1 . 6 . 298 1 . 6 AGE - . I40 - 2 . 4 - . I37 - 2 . 4 - . I39 - 2 . 4 M S . AGE , 0699 . 79 . 0657 . 75 . 0704 . 80 Table 2 Comparison of robust Z - statistics from independence working model and naive Z - statistics in which the independence was assumed in calculating both the coeflcients and their standard errors Naive Robust Z - statistic Z - statistic Coefficient Z , ZR ( Z . V - ZR ) / Z , , Intercept - 2 1 . 4 - 15 . 8 . 26 Mother ' s smoking ( M s ) 2 . 3 1 . 6 . 30 AGE - 2 . 0 - 2 . 4 - . 20 M S . AGE . 64 . 79 - . 23 1058 Biometries , December 1988 subjects makes estimates of differences among subjects less precise than they would be with independent observations . In contrast , within - subject changes can be estimated more precisely , as is indicated in Table 2 . Note that ignoring the correlation leads to incorrectly interpreting the data as strong evidence for a mother ' s smoking effect . Now consider the subject - specific model . We describe the probability of respiratory infection for an individual , uit = E ( yi , I bi ) , as a function of the covariates assuming logit ( u , , ) = Po + M S P1 + AGE P , + ( AGE . MS ) P , + boi , ( 4 . 2 ) where we assume bo , - G ( 0 , D ) . Here , the coefficients are log - odds ratios for a single child . That is , the M S coefficient , PI , indicates how one child ' s risk would change if his mother changed smoking status rather than how the average risk over the population differs , as is the case for PA coefficients . For illustration , only the intercept in the linear predictor is assumed to vary across subjects . Inferences about mother ' s smoking when both the intercept and age coefficients are random are qualitatively similar . Table 3 presents coefficients and robust 2 - statistics for a range of values of D . The approximate variance , given in equation ( 3 . 5 ) , was used in the estimating equation . Note that the subject - specific parameters are greater in absolute value than the population - averaged analogues ( D = 0 ) and increase with the variance , D , of the random effect . The random effects variability shrinks the fixed effects parameters toward 0 in the logistic model . This is well known in the context of errors - in - variables ( e . g . , Stefanski , 1985 ) . The degree of shrinkage depends on the study design ( z , , ' ~ ) , but in this simple case can be approximated by ai ( D ) . For example , the M S coefficients for various D ' s can be compared with a , ( D ) p , ( 0 ) , where pl ( 0 ) is the M S coefficient when D = 0 ( see Table 3 ) . Note that this approximation is within 2 % for all values of D . Hence , a reasonable estimate of SS parameters can in this case be obtained from the PA model results . Tests for the null hypothesis that mother ' s smoking does not affect children ' s respiratory disease can be based on the MS 2 - statistic in Table 3 . It does not change even as D changes from 0 to 4 . 0 . Hence , this inference is approximately independent of the random effects variance . On the other hand , the absolute magnitude of the SS coefficient changes substan - tially as a function of D . Unfortunately , there is little information about D in these data . The algorithm suggested above fails to converge because the linear approximation to the logit link function is not adequate for small respiratory disease propensity and large D . In their unpublished technical report , Laird et al . have found the profile likelihood for D to be flat when a Gaussian random effect is assumed . They give a point estimate of 4 . 4 and an approximate interval of ( 3 , 6 . 5 ) . In this range , the mother ' s smoking coefficient varies from . 45 to . 56 . Table 3 Coeficients and robust Z - statistics from subject - specific model with a Gaussian random intercept with variance D D 0 . 5 1 4 . 0 Coefficient $ Z 4 Z 4 Z l ? Z Intercept ( Po ) - 1 . 91 - 16 - 2 . 1 - 16 - 2 . 2 - 17 - 2 . 9 - 16 M5 ' ( PI . 3 13 1 . 6 . 344 1 . 7 . 368 1 . 7 . 488 1 . 6 AGE ( Pz ) - . I4 - 2 . 4 - . I5 - 2 . 5 - . I6 - 2 . 5 - . 22 - 2 . 5 MS . AGE ( P3 ) . 070 . 79 . 074 . 78 . 079 . 77 . I1 . 78 ai ( D ) 1 . OO 1 . 08 1 . 16 1 . 54 1059 Models for Longitudinal Data In summary , the PA model indicates that the rate of children ' s respiratory disease is approximately 35 % greater for children of smoking mothers . The SS modelling indicates that a child ' s risk if his or her mother stopped smoking would decrease by between 35 % and 63 % as the random effect variance ranges from 0 to 4 . 0 . Note that the assumption D = 4 . 0 corresponds to a substantial amount of heterogeneity in children ' s propensity for respiratory disease . Under a Gaussian assumption , it implies that 95 % of children have a probability of infection in a given year in the interval . 0001 to . 75 . Finally , either the PA or SS model leads to the interpretation of these data as mild evidence for the relationship of mother ' s smoking and children ' s respiratory infection . 5 . Discussion In this paper , we have distinguished between population - averaged and subject - specific models for longitudinal data . The GEE approach can be used for both types of models . PA models describe how the average response across subjects changes with the covariates . Only the link function need be correctly specified to make consistent inferences about PA coefficients . The SS mixed models use the information contained in the population - averaged response as well as a distributional assumption about the heterogeneity among subjects to estimate subject - specific coefficients . Both the link function and the random effects distribution must be correctly specified for consistent inferences in this case . Estimates of SS parameters and of the random effects distribution are asymptotically correlated except for the linear link . Hence , the precision of , 6 depends on that of ( D in the Gaussian case ) , which is more dificult to estimate from longitudinal data especially with nonlinear links and few observations per subject . When SS parameters are of primary interest , we believe care must be exercised in their interpretation . The methods described here are closely related to previous work in two other contexts . Gail , Wieand , and Piantadosi ( 1984 ) examined the bias in estimates of treatment effect when a balanced covariate is omitted in the generalized linear model setting . They found that the bias is zero only for the identity and log links . The notion of omitting balanced covariates is conceptually similar to that of ignoring random effects . Our results agree with theirs regarding the identity and log links . In addition , we have established simple relation - ships between @ and @ * for other link functions . Second , the random effects problem is related to errors - in - variables regression as discussed for binary regression by Carroll et al . ( 1984 ) and for generalized linear models by Stefanski ( 1985 ) . In the mixed model , the coefficients are random ; in errors - in - variables the covariates are random . While this distinction leads to different results , there is substantial overlap . We gratefully acknowledge partial support from NIMH Grant RO 1 MH40859 - 0 1 , and NIH Grants 1 - R29 - AI25529 - 0 1 and 1 - R29 - GM3926 1 - 0 1 . We thank the associate editor and referees , whose comments substantially improved an earlier draft . On discute , dans cet article , d ' extensions des modkles liniaires giniralisis , pour I ' analyse de donnies longitudinales . On considkre deux approches : les modkles spicifiques au sujet ( SS ) , dans lesquels I ' hitiroginiiti dans les paramktres de rigression , est modilisie explicitement ; et les modkles moyen - nant sur une population ( PA ) dans lesquels , on s ' intiresse h la riponse globale dans la population . On utilise , une approche giniralisie des iquations d ' estimation , pour ajuster les deux classes de modkles pour des risultats discrets ou continus . Quand on suppose , que les paramktres spicifiques au sujet , suivent une distribution Gaussienne , on dispose de relations simples , entre les paramktres PA et SS . On illustre , les mithodes avec une analyse de donnies sur le tabagisme des mkres et les maladies respiratoires des enfants . 1060 Biornetrics , December 1 988 REFERENCES Anderson , D . A . and Aitkin , M . ( 1 985 ) . Variance component models with binary response : Interviewer variability . Journal of ' tlle Royal Statistical Socic ' ty , Series R 47 , 203 - 2 10 . Carroll , R . J . , Spiegelman , C . H . . Lan , K . K . G . , Bailey , K . T . , and Abbott , R . D . ( 1984 ) . On errors - in - variables for binary regression models . Rior ? ietrika 71 , 19 - 25 . Gail , M . A . , Wieand , S . , and Piantadosi , S . ( 1984 ) . Biased estimates of treatment effect in randomized experiments with non - linear regressions and omitted covariates . Riornetrika 71 , 43 1 - 444 . Gilmour , A . R . , Anderson , R . D . , and Rae , A . L . ( 1985 ) . The analysis of binomial data by a generalized linear mixed model . Biometrika 72 , 593 - 599 . Johnson , N . L . and Kotz , S . ( 1 970 ) . Distribtltions in Stutistics , Continuota C ' rl ~ variatcj Distrihlrtion . ~ , Vol . 2 . Boston : Houghton - Mifflin . Kaufmann , H . ( 1987 ) . Regression models for nonstationary categorical time series : Asyniptotic estiniation theory . Annals ofStati . rtics 15 , 79 - 98 . Laird , N . M . and Ware , J . H . ( 1982 ) . Random - effects niodels for longitudinal data . Riotn ~ trics 38 , 963 - 974 . Liang , K . - Y . and Zeger , S . L . ( 1986 ) . Longitudinal data analysis using generalized linear models . Biometrika 73 , 13 - 22 . McCullagh , P . ( 1983 ) . Quasi - likelihood functions . Annals cjfStatistic . c 11 , 59 - 67 . McCullagh , P . and Nelder , J . A . ( 1983 ) . Generalized Linear Models . London : Chapman and Hall . Royal ] , R . M . ( 1986 ) . Model robust inference using maximum likelihood estimators . Intprnritional Statistical Review 54 , 22 1 - 226 . Stefanski . L . A . ( 1985 ) . The effects of measurement error on naranieter estiniation . Riotnrtriku 72 . 583 - 592 . Stiratelli , R . , Laird , N . M . , and Ware , J . H . ( 1984 ) . Random - effects models for serial observations with binary responses . Biometries 40 , 96 1 - 97 1 . Stram , D . O . , Wei , L . J . , and Ware , J . H . ( 1988 ) . Analysis of repeated ordered categorical outcomes with possibly missing observations and time - dependent covariates . Journal of the Arnericun Statistical Association 83 , 63 1 - 637 . Ware , J . H . ( 1985 ) . Linear models for the analysis of serial measurements in longitudinal studies . American Statistician 39 , 95 - 10 1 . Ware , J . H . , Dockery , D . W . , Spiro , A . , 111 , Speizer , F . E . , and Fenis , B . G . , Jr . ( 1984 ) . Passive smoking , gas cooking and respiratory health in children living in six cities . American Rcvic ~ ' of Respiratory Disease 129 , 366 - 374 . Wedderburn , R . W . M . ( 1974 ) . Quasi - likelihood functions , generalized linear models , and the Gauss - Newton method . Riornetrika 61 , 439 - 447 . White , H . ( 1982 ) . Maximum likelihood estimation of misspecified models . Econotnctrikii 50 , 1 - 25 . Zeger , S . L . and Liang , K . - Y . ( 1 986 ) . Longitudinal data analysis for discrete and continuous outcomes . Biometries 42 , 12 1 - 130 . Zeger , S . L . and Qaqish , B . ( 1988 ) . Markov regression models for time series : A quasi - likelihood approach . Biometries 44 , 10 19 - 103 1 . Received November 1986 ; revised Juljl 1987 and March 1988 .