MARKETING SCIENCE Vol . 36 , No . 1 , January – February 2017 , pp . 1 – 20 http : / / pubsonline . informs . org / journal / mksc / ISSN 0732 - 2399 ( print ) , ISSN 1526 - 548X ( online ) Idea Generation , Creativity , and Prototypicality Olivier Toubia , a Oded Netzer a a Columbia Business School , New York , New York 10027 Contact : ot2107 @ gsb . columbia . edu ( OT ) ; onetzer @ gsb . columbia . edu ( ON ) Received : July 14 , 2014 Accepted : January 15 , 2016 Published Online in Articles in Advance : August 17 , 2016 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / mksc . 2016 . 0994 Copyright : © 2017 INFORMS Abstract . We explore the use of big data tools to shed new light on the idea generation process , automatically “read” ideas to identify promising ones , and help people be more creative . The literature suggests that creativity results from the optimal balance between novelty and familiarity , which can be measured based on the combinations of words in an idea . We build semantic networks where nodes represent word stems in a particular idea generation topic , and edge weights capture the degree of novelty versus familiarity of word stem combinations ( i . e . , the weight of an edge that connects two word stems measures their scaled co - occurrence in the relevant language ) . Each idea contains a set of word stems , which form a semantic subnetwork . The edge weight distribution in that subnetwork reﬂects how the idea balances novelty with familiarity . Based on the “beauty in averageness” eﬀect , we hypothesize that ideas with semantic subnetworks that have a more prototypical edge weight distribution are judged as more creative . We show this eﬀect in eight studies involving over 4 , 000 ideas across multiple domains . Practically , we demonstrate how our research can be used to automatically identify promising ideas and recommend words to users on the ﬂy to help them improve their ideas . History : Fred Feinberg served as the senior editor and Gerard Tellis served as associate editor for this article . Supplemental Material : Data and the online appendix are available at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1287 / mksc . 2016 . 0994 . Keywords : creativity • innovation • idea generation • data mining • text mining 1 . Introduction “Big data” tools and methods have heavily focused on improving the eﬀectiveness of advertising or other marketing vehicles . In this paper , we explore whether and how big data tools may be leveraged in other marketing - related domains . In particular , we focus on idea generation , which is a critical aspect of product development , innovation , and advertising . We explore whether , and how , big data tools may be leveraged to shed new light on the idea generation process , auto - matically “read” ideas to identify promising ones , and help people be more creative . We adopt a cognitive view of idea generation accord - ing to which generating ideas involves retrieving knowledge from long - term memory ( Finke et al . 1992 ) . This memory retrieval stage of the idea generation pro - cess , in which people select the “ingredients” that will be combined to form a new idea , lends itself well to sys - tematic , computer - based analysis . This raises the ques - tion of whether and how the judged creativity of an idea may be linked to its “ingredients , ” i . e . , to the set of words present in the idea . To answer this question , we rely on the creativity literature that suggests that cre - ativity lies in the optimal balance between novelty and familiarity . This raises three new questions : ( i ) How exactly should novelty and familiarity be deﬁned in the context of idea generation ? ( ii ) How may nov - elty and familiarity be measured ? ( iii ) What constitutes an optimal balance between novelty and familiarity ? To answer the ﬁrst question , we rely on a literature that has established the associative nature of creativ - ity , i . e . , creativity relies on associations . Therefore , it is appropriate to relate novelty to uncommon associa - tions of words and familiarity to common associations . For example , consider a recipe for a new dish . Novelty does not necessarily come from choosing novel ingre - dients for the recipe , but rather from choosing ingre - dients that do not often appear together—both chicken and chocolate are very common and familiar ingredi - ents in recipes , but the combination of these two ingre - dients is novel . Because we focus on the association between words to represent novelty and familiarity , we turn to the rich literature in knowledge discovery and co - word analysis to answer the second question ( e . g . , Callon et al . 1986 ) . Using standard text - mining tools , we orga - nize the word stems related to a given idea generation topic into a semantic network . Nodes in this network represent word stems , and the weight of an edge that connects two word stems measures their scaled 1 Toubia and Netzer : Idea Generation , Creativity , and Prototypicality 2 Marketing Science 36 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 – 20 , ©2017 INFORMS co - occurrence . A high edge weight means that the two corresponding word stems appear frequently with one another , i . e . , their combination is familiar . Conversely , a low edge weight means that the two corresponding word stems appear infrequently with one another , i . e . , their combination is novel . The subset of word stems involved in an idea form a semantic subnetwork . The edge weights in this subnetwork reﬂect a distribution between familiar ( i . e . , strongly connected ) and novel ( i . e . , weakly connected ) combinations of word stems ; that is , the balance between novelty and familiarity is captured by the distribution of edge weights in the subnetwork . Finally , we answer the third question based on the “beauty in averageness” eﬀect , which postulates that prototypes , or averages , have inherent qualities and properties that robustly make them more appealing . This leads us to our hypothesis that ideas with seman - tic subnetworks that have a more prototypical edge weight distribution tend to be judged as more creative . It is important to note that prototypicality of the edge weight distribution does not mean that word stems used in the idea are prototypical or common , but rather that the structure of the semantic relation - ships among these word stems is prototypical . Note that we deﬁne an “idea” as a document made of words that attempts to add value given a particular idea gen - eration topic . Each word is associated with a unique word stem , and each stem may be associated with one or many words ( e . g . , the words “adventure , ” “adven - tures , ” and “adventurous” all belong to the word stem “adventur” ) . We test and validate our hypothesis across eight studies , involving over 4 , 000 ideas generated by over 2 , 000 people . While we focus on judged creativity as our primary measure of quality , we show that the eﬀect also holds with alternative measures of idea quality , coming from consumers or industry experts . Five of our studies were run in collaboration with companies that were interested in ideas for new products or ser - vices , or that host idea generation communities . Partic - ipants in our studies varied from Amazon Mechanical Turk to commercial online panels to members of an idea generation community . The idea generation topics varied from smartphone apps to oral care to insurance products . Our last study provides a proof of concept that our ﬁndings may be used to construct automatic tools to assist people in the memory retrieval step of the idea generation process . In particular , we show that it is possible to build tools that text mine ideas in real time and automatically recommend words or “ingre - dients” to help people improve their ideas . The rest of this paper is organized as follows . In Sec - tion 2 , we review some relevant literature and jus - tify our main hypothesis . In Section 3 , we introduce the various steps of our empirical approach , including constructing semantic networks , quantifying the pro - totypicality of edge weight distributions , and generat - ing and evaluating ideas . In Section 4 , we report the results of our studies . Section 5 concludes and oﬀers suggestions for future research . 2 . Theoretical Development 2 . 1 . Idea Generation Our research is based on a cognitive view of idea gen - eration , which is based on the premise that one must rely on some type of stored information when devel - oping new ideas ( e . g . , Goldenberg and Mazursky 2002 , Simonton 2003 ) . Indeed , it is well established that gen - erating ideas involves retrieving knowledge from long - term memory ( e . g . , Nĳstad and Stroebe 2006 , Nĳstad et al . 2003 ) . In particular , the Geneplore model of Finke et al . ( 1992 ) suggests that the generation of creative ideas involves two phases that are performed iteratively : a generative phase in which mental representations called preinventive structures are constructed , and an exploratory phase in which these structures are inter - preted , modiﬁed , and combined in meaningful ways . Put simply , the Geneplore model realizes that new ideas are not constructed in a vacuum , but rather that some basic ingredients or starting points ( preinven - tive structures ) are necessary . Burroughs et al . ( 2008 , p . 1017 ) deﬁne preinventive structures as “symbolic patterns , exemplars , mental models , or unique verbal combinations that are precursors to creative thought . ” Preinventive structures are typically constructed by retrieving relevant concepts from long - term memory ( Finke et al . 1992 , Perkins 1981 ) . Moreau and Dahl ( 2005 ) provide the vivid illustration of a consumer needing to cook dinner . In that case a set of ingredients ( e . g . , peanut butter , spaghetti noodles , carrots , etc . ) will form a preinventive structure that will form the basis for a solution . The type of preinventive structures retrieved dur - ing the generative phase of the idea generation pro - cess will obviously have an eﬀect on the quality of the ideas developed . As Ward ( 1995 , p . 170 ) notes , “Any time a person develops a new idea , it will be based to some extent on recalled information ; however , the exact manner or form in which information is recalled may aﬀect the likelihood of a creative outcome . ” How - ever , very little is known regarding the relationship between the characteristics of the preinventive struc - tures retrieved during the generative phase of the idea generation process and the quality of the ideas devel - oped , i . e . , between the set of words that form the “ingredients” of an idea and the quality of that idea . In this paper , we explore this relationship by draw - ing on research from various ﬁelds including psy - chology , text mining , and network analysis . Studying this relationship is not only interesting theoretically ; it Toubia and Netzer : Idea Generation , Creativity , and Prototypicality Marketing Science 36 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 – 20 , ©2017 INFORMS 3 also has practical implications . Indeed , the generative phase of the idea generation process relies on retrieval from long - term memory , which can be at least partially automated or assisted by computers . Therefore , under - standing the relationship between the set of words in an idea and its judged creativity opens the door for automated tools that not only identify promising ideas but also help people ﬁnd the right “ingredients” to include or add into their ideas . 2 . 2 . Balancing Novelty with Familiarity The study of creativity in various domains , from sci - entiﬁc discovery ( e . g . , Uzzi et al . 2013 ) to linguistics ( e . g . , Giora 2003 ) , has pointed to the robust conclu - sion that creativity results from the optimal balance between novelty and familiarity . For example , Uzzi et al . ( 2013 ) link the impact of scientiﬁc papers ( as measured by the number of citations ) to the network of journals cited in these papers ( i . e . , how frequently the journals cited in a paper tend to be cited with one another ) . They ﬁnd that papers are more likely to have high impact if they combine novelty and conven - tionality , i . e . , if they cite papers from journals that are commonly cited together on average , with some very unusual combinations . In a context even closer to ours , Ward ( 1995 , p . 166 ) notes that “truly useful creativity may reﬂect a balance between novelty and a connection to previous ideas . ” Therefore , based on the creativity literature we can argue that an optimal set of “ingredients” in an idea is one that balances novelty with familiarity . This raises three questions : ( i ) How exactly should novelty and familiarity be deﬁned in the context of idea generation ? ( ii ) How may novelty and familiarity be measured ? ( iii ) What constitutes an optimal balance between nov - elty and familiarity ? Sections 2 . 3 – 2 . 5 address each of these questions in turn . 2 . 3 . The Associative Nature of Creativity One might be tempted to deﬁne novelty and familiar - ity in our context based on whether the word stems present in the idea are inherently common or novel themselves . In that case , the novelty or familiarity of a particular word stem would be measured based on how frequently it appears in language related to the idea generation topic under consideration . However , the literature suggests that it is preferable to deﬁne and measure novelty and familiarity based on the com - binations of word stems in the idea , rather than the individual word stems themselves . As we discussed previously , an idea for a new recipe that combines chicken with chocolate would be uncommon because these two ingredients are rarely found together , even though both ingredients are common in recipes . Indeed , the creativity literature has suggested that associations between concepts are the basis of cre - ativity . Dahl and Moreau ( 2002 , p . 48 ) argue that “researchers in cognitive psychology generally agree that creativity consists of reassembling elements from existing knowledge bases in a novel fashion” ( empha - sis added ) . Finke et al . ( 1992 , p . 108 ) argue that “the merging of concepts is an inherently creative process” ( emphasis added ) , and that a moderate level of incon - gruity among the concepts in an idea is useful in creative discovery . Mednick ( 1962 , p . 221 ) deﬁnes the creative thinking process as “the forming of asso - ciative elements into new combinations which either meet speciﬁed requirements or are in some way use - ful . ” As background to this deﬁnition , Mednick ( 1962 , p . 220 ) relays introspective statements by several well - known scientists and artists , including Albert Einstein ( who wrote that “combinatory play seems to be the essential feature in productive thought” ) , André Bre - ton ( according to whom artistic creativity comes the “juxtaposition of distant realities” ) , and Henri Poincaré ( who wrote that “to create consists of making new com - binations of associative elements which are useful” ) . More recently , Rothenberg ( 2014 , p . 9 ) interviewed 34 Nobel laureates in various domains and concluded that integration , where “multiple separate elements retain their discreteness and identity while connected and operating together in a whole , ” is the character - istic result of the cognitive creative process . Although Rothenberg’s ( 2014 , p . 190 ) study focuses on creativity in the scientiﬁc domain , he notes that “applications of all of the cognitive creative processes , in whole or in selective part , certainly must play a role in other types of everyday and work - day creativity , such as in busi - ness and advertising . ” Based on this perspective , it seems reasonable to deﬁne novelty in our context as the association of word stems that do not appear frequently together in text related to the topic under consideration and familiar - ity as the association of word stems that appear fre - quently together . In other words , our initial statement may be reﬁned as follows : an optimal set of “ingre - dients” in an idea is one that balances novel combi - nations of word stems with familiar combinations of word stems . Therefore , throughout the remainder of this paper , unless speciﬁed otherwise , familiarity and novelty refer to combinations of word stems . 2 . 4 . Semantic Networks We have argued that novelty and familiarity may be measured by the strength of association between word stems . The next step is to measure these associations . For this , we turn to the literature on semantic net - works and co - word analysis ( Anderson 1983 , Collins and Loftus 1975 ) . A semantic network is a network that represents associations among a set of words or word stems ( we focus on word stems ) . Today , semantic networks may be constructed rel - atively easily from primary or secondary data using Toubia and Netzer : Idea Generation , Creativity , and Prototypicality 4 Marketing Science 36 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 – 20 , ©2017 INFORMS text - mining analysis . ( See Feldman et al . 1998 for a general introduction to text mining . ) In a semantic network , the nodes are word stems , and the edges are based on co - occurrence among word stems . Word stems that appear together more frequently in textual data are connected by edges that have higher weights and are therefore closer to each other in the semantic network ( Netzer et al . 2012 ) . Thus , the measure of edge weights in a semantic network is directly related to our proposed deﬁnition of familiarity and novelty as the scaled co - occurrence of combinations of word stems . Because words can have diﬀerent meanings and associ - ations in diﬀerent contexts ( Anderson 1983 ) , we build context - speciﬁc semantic networks for each idea gen - eration topic . 1 More details are provided in Section 3 . 1 . Figure 1 provides an illustration of a semantic net - work from one of our studies in which consumers generated ideas for new insurance products designed to improve ﬁnancial stability . Note that such a ﬁgure was created only to illustrate the concept of a semantic network in the present paper , and it was not shown to any participant in any of our studies . Each idea involves a subset of the nodes ( word stems ) in the general network , which form a semantic subnetwork . If the semantic subnetwork corresponding to a given idea has N nodes , there are N ( N − 1 ) / 2 edges in the subnetwork , where the weight of each edge captures the strength of association between two nodes in the general network . Familiar combinations of word stems have higher edge weights , i . e . , they are commonly found together in natural text related to the topic . Figure 1 . ( Color online ) Example of a Baseline Semantic Network Notes . Each node represents a word stem . Each edge captures the scaled co - occurrence between two word stems . By contrast , novel combinations of word stems have lower edge weights , i . e . , their combinations are more unusual . We could describe a given semantic network based , for example , on the average weight of its edges , or based on other statistics such as the variance , median , minimum , maximum , etc . However , to capture the balance between novel and familiar combinations of words , we need to consider the entire distribution of edge weights in an idea’s semantic subnetwork . 2 . 5 . “Beauty in Averageness” Eﬀect We have argued that the creativity of an idea should be linked to the edge weight distribution of the se - mantic subnetwork associated with that idea , and that the optimal distribution is one that balances novelty and familiarity . This leaves us with our last question of what constitutes an optimal balance , i . e . , an opti - mal distribution of edge weights in a semantic subnet - work . For this , we turn to a large literature spanning psychology , biology , art , and business that has shown that prototypes or averages have inherent qualities and properties that robustly make them more appealing . This eﬀect is sometimes labeled the “beauty in avera - geness eﬀect . ” The most well - known demonstration of the beauty in averageness eﬀect is probably in the domain of human faces . A large number of studies have shown that humans ﬁnd faces with average features more beautiful and attractive ( e . g . , Langlois and Roggman 1990 , Strzalko and Kaszycka 1991 ) . This eﬀect has Toubia and Netzer : Idea Generation , Creativity , and Prototypicality Marketing Science 36 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 – 20 , ©2017 INFORMS 5 also been demonstrated for music performances ( Repp 1997 ) , polygons , drawings , and paintings ( Martindale et al . 1990 ) , and words / exemplars ( Martindale et al . 1988 ) . Demonstrations of this eﬀect in business appli - cations include Landwehr et al . ( 2011 ) and Veryzer and Hutchinson ( 1998 ) . Several explanations have been proposed for this eﬀect , often relying on biology and evolution ( Grammer and Thornhill 1994 , Langlois and Roggman 1990 , Thornhill and Gangestad 1993 ) or ﬂuency ( Landwehr et al . 2011 , Reber et al . 2004 , Winkielman et al . 2006 ) . A more straightforward explanation , which is also more relevant in our context , relies on the “wis - dom of the crowds” phenomenon ( Surowiecki 2005 ) . Domains in which the beauty in averageness eﬀect holds tend to be ones in which quality relies on the optimal balance between various features or the opti - mal distribution of resources across various dimen - sions . For example , a beautiful face is one in which the nose is neither too narrow nor too wide , a beautiful piano performance is one in which the key strokes are neither too heavy nor too light , etc . Each stimulus may be viewed as one attempt to ﬁnd an optimal distribu - tion or allocation . Taking the average of a set of stimuli cancels out the small errors made by each stimulus and gives rise to a distribution that is closer to opti - mal ( Halberstadt and Rhodes 2003 , Repp 1997 ) . Using the same reasoning , we should expect that taking the average distribution of edge weights across documents gives rise to a prototypical distribution that optimally balances novelty and familiarity . Therefore , our main hypothesis is that ideas with semantic subnetworks that have a more prototypical edge weight distribution tend to be judged as more creative . 3 . Empirical Approach We test our hypothesis and study its managerial impli - cations across eight studies , which we describe in detail in Section 4 . In this section , we describe our over - all empirical approach , which requires the following steps . We start by building a baseline semantic network related to each idea generation topic . We construct a prototypical distribution of edge weights . We collect ideas and idea evaluations and measure the prototyp - icality of each idea’s edge weight distribution . Finally , we explore the link between prototypicality and judged creativity statistically . 3 . 1 . Construction of the Baseline Semantic Network Extracting Textual Data for the Baseline Semantic Net - work . We need to identify a text corpus that will allow us to construct a baseline semantic network capturing the set of word stems commonly related to the idea generation topic at hand . This baseline semantic net - work should be exogenous to the ideas being tested ; i . e . , the semantic network should not be constructed based on the ideas themselves . Across our eight studies , we use two diﬀerent approaches for constructing this baseline semantic net - work . In Studies 1a – 1c , the baseline semantic network comes from a set of pretest ideas in which we ask consumers ( diﬀerent from those involved in the main study ) to generate an initial set of ideas on the topic . Unfortunately , this approach is costly ( both in time and money ) and it cannot be fully automated . Therefore , in Studies 2 to 6 , we test an alterna - tive approach that leverages Google and that can be fully automated . We simply perform a search query on Google using the exact wording of the idea gener - ation topic as the text of the query . For example , if a study asks consumers to generate ideas on the topic “How could smartphones help their users be health - ier ? ” we copy and paste this exact sentence into Google as a search query . We then download the HTML page source code of the top 50 search results provided by Google . Throughout this paper we refer to these doc - uments as a “Google results” or “pages retrieved from Google . ” The advantage of using top search results from Google is that this information is readily avail - able and can be scraped automatically with no human eﬀort . However , this approach is not without its limi - tations . For example , the pages retrieved from Google might be biased toward certain types of content . In addition , while some portions of the pages may be relevant to the idea generation topic , others may not . Therefore , it is an empirical question whether Google may be used as a reliable source of text to create the baseline semantic network and prototypical edge weight distribution . Text Mining . Once the text corpus has been collected , we need to mine the text to extract relevant word stems . We use the text - mining infrastructure in R ( Feinerer et al . 2008 ) . Our text - mining process includes the fol - lowing steps . First we clean the text from irrelevant information such as pictures and HTML signs . Next , we tokenize the text into words . In the next step , we use the Porter stemming algorithm implemented in R ( Porter 1980 ) to automatically stem words into their stems or roots ( e . g . , “adventur” is a stem for the words “adventure , ” “adventures , ” and “adventur - ous” ) . Human experts then check the list of stems and associated words manually , to remove stems that are too generic ( e . g . , “ﬁve” ) or manually split / combine stems that were not appropriately allocated by the stemmer . This step requires approximately one hour of human labor per ideation topic . In Study 5 , we omit the manual cleaning of the stemmed words to explore how our approach may be applied to ﬁeld data in a fully automated way . Once a ﬁnal list of word stems and associated words was obtained , we retained only those word stems that appeared frequently enough ( in at Toubia and Netzer : Idea Generation , Creativity , and Prototypicality 6 Marketing Science 36 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 – 20 , ©2017 INFORMS least 5 of the ideas generated in the pretest in Studies 1a – 1c , and at least 10 of the 50 pages retrieved from Google in Studies 2 – 6 ) . We used similar text - mining extraction and stem - ming processes to extract words from the ideas gener - ated in our studies . Edge Weights . Several measures are available to quan - tify the edge weights in our semantic network , i . e . , the scaled co - occurrence of pairs of word stems . We use a common measure , the Jaccard index ( see , e . g . , Netzer et al . 2012 ) . Consider two word stems , A and B . Let S A ( respectively , S B ) be the set of training docu - ments ( pretest ideas or Web pages ) that contain stem A ( respectively , B ) . The Jaccard index between word stems A and B is deﬁned as J A , B (cid:3) | S A ∩ S B | | S A ∪ S B | , where | S | denotes the cardinality of set S . The Jaccard index is the ratio between the number of documents that contain both A and B and the number of docu - ments that contain A or B . It is the probability that A and B appear in a randomly selected document , given that A or B appears in that document . ( The intu - ition behind the Jaccard index may be visualized easily with a Venn diagram : it is the area of the intersection of S A and S B divided by their union . ) A high value ( closer to 1 ) means that the two word stems appear frequently with one another , over and beyond chance based on their separate occurrences . Thus , seeing these two word stems in an idea is not surprising . On the other hand , a low Jaccard index ( closer to 0 ) means that these two word stems do not appear commonly in the textual corpus ; thus , seeing them together in an idea could be considered novel or surprising . Each node in our baseline semantic network corresponds to one word stem , and the weights of the edges among all possible pairs of nodes are captured by an incidence matrix of Jaccard indexes . 3 . 2 . Network Features Several features have been proposed in the literature to describe and characterize the structure of networks . As reviewed in the previous section , our key descriptor of a network is the distribution of edge weights in the network , where the weight of an edge that connects nodes i and j measures the scaled co - occurrence of these two nodes using the Jaccard index . We consider control variables derived from two additional standard network features . The ﬁrst is the set of frequencies of the nodes in the network , where the frequency of a node is the frequency of occurrence of the corresponding word stem in the training text ( i . e . , proportion of pretest ideas or results from Google in which the word stem appears ) . Note that node fre - quency describes the properties of the nodes present in the network , rather than their relationships to one another . The second feature is the set of clustering coeﬃ - cients of the nodes in the network , where the clustering coeﬃcient of node i measures how interconnected the nodes that connect to i are to each other . Readers are referred to Barrat et al . ( 2004 ) for more details on these standard network features . 2 3 . 3 . Constructing the Prototypical Distribution of Edge Weights We construct a diﬀerent prototypical distribution of edge weights for each domain - speciﬁc baseline seman - tic network . We ﬁrst compute the distribution of edge weights in the subnetwork corresponding to each of the pretest ideas / Google results used to construct the baseline network . For example , a subnetwork with ﬁve nodes may be described by a set of (cid:0) 52 (cid:1) (cid:3) 10 weights ( one per edge ) , which are distributed between 0 and 1 according to some cumulative distribution function ( cdf ) . For instance , if 2 of the 10 edge weights are smaller than or equal to 0 . 3 , the cdf would have value of 0 . 2 at x (cid:3) 0 . 3 . We then construct a prototypical distri - bution by taking the average of the distributions across pretest ideas / Google results ; that is , the value of the prototypical cdf at any value x is the average of the values of the cdf at x across all pretest ideas / Google results . For example , if 5 % of the edge weights are smaller than or equal to 0 . 1 in one pretest idea and 10 % are smaller than or equal to 0 . 1 in another , the average cdf across these two ideas would have a value of 0 . 075 for x (cid:3) 0 . 1 . Future research may explore alternative ways to construct the prototypical distribution , e . g . , by computing the median instead of the average distri - bution , although the literature reviewed in Section 2 . 5 suggests that the average is more appropriate . Building the prototypical distribution using the pretest ideas or the Google results ensures that our prototypical distri - bution is not a function of the particular set of ideas being tested . This prototypical distribution serves as our benchmark for the optimal balance between nov - elty and familiarity . Web Appendix A shows the proto - typical cdf for each study . Although using pages retrieved from Google rather than pretest ideas to build the prototypical distribu - tion allows for faster , more convenient , and automatic processes , it does not come without limitations . In par - ticular , pages are selected by Google to be maximally relevant to the query ; i . e . , they are likely to be of “high quality . ” This introduces a risk that ideas with proto - typical edge weight distributions are judged as more creative not because of how they balance novelty with familiarity , but because they are “similar” to “high quality” pages retrieved from Google . We address this concern in several ways . First , Studies 1a – 1c do not rely on Google at all , but rather on pretest ideas . Second , in Toubia and Netzer : Idea Generation , Creativity , and Prototypicality Marketing Science 36 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 – 20 , ©2017 INFORMS 7 Web Appendix C ( see Using the Ideas Themselves to Create the Prototypical Distribution ) , we show that our results still hold when the prototypical edge weight distribution is based on the ideas themselves , rather than the Google results used to construct the baseline semantic network . Third , in Section 4 . 9 . 2 , we explore directly whether ideas that are more “similar” to an average Google result in a traditional sense ( i . e . , they use similar word stems or topics ) are indeed judged as more creative . We ﬁnd that this is not the case . 3 . 4 . Measuring the “Prototypicality” of an Idea’s Edge Weight Distribution Section 3 . 3 described the construction of the proto - typical distribution of edge weights . Each idea has its own semantic subnetwork ( comprised of a subset of the nodes in the baseline network ) . This semantic subnetwork results in a distribution of edge weights , where the weight of an edge between two nodes ( word stems ) in the subnetwork is the same as the weight of the edge between these two nodes in the base - line network . We measure the “prototypicality” of that idea’s edge weight distribution by comparing it to the prototypical distribution of edge weights described in the previous section . We use a simple and common measure of the distance between two distributions , the Kolmogorov – Smirnov statistic . The Kolmogorov – Smirnov statistic between two cumulative distribu - tions is deﬁned as the maximum absolute diﬀerence between the two distributions . One advantage of this measure , compared to alternative measures such as the Kullback – Leibler divergence , is that it may be com - puted for any pair of distributions regardless of their support . ( We test the robustness of our results to the use of the Kullback – Leibler divergence measure in Web Appendix C . ) Ideas with semantic subnetworks that have a smaller Kolmogorov – Smirnov statistic have a “more prototypical” edge weight distribution . Con - versely , ideas with semantic subnetworks that have a larger Kolmogorov – Smirnov statistic have a “less pro - totypical” edge weight distribution . It is important to keep in mind that a “prototypical” idea according to this measure does not have prototypical or “aver - age” edge weights , but that the distribution of edge Figure 2 . Typical Idea Generation Interface ( from Study 2 ) weights in the semantic subnetwork corresponding to that idea is similar to the prototypical distribution of edge weights . As can be seen in Web Appendix A , the prototypical distribution contains a whole range of edge weights , and “prototypical” ideas have a balance between novelty ( coming from the presence of smaller edge weights ) and familiarity ( coming from the pres - ence of larger edge weights ) . 3 . 5 . Idea Generation We collected ideas in various ways across the eight studies , but here we provide an overview of our main approach . In all studies except Study 5 , we collected ideas from a panel of consumers using a simple online interface developed by the authors using the program - ming language PHP ( see Figure 2 for an example ) . The basic interface asks consumers to generate ideas on a speciﬁc topic by entering ideas one after another until they do not wish to contribute more ideas . Ideas were screened manually by the authors to remove “junk” ideas that were clearly oﬀ topic or nonsensical . In all studies , we removed participants who submitted only “junk” ideas from the analysis . In Studies 1a – 1c , 2 , 4 , and 6 , we allowed respondents to enter as many ideas as they wished , as long as they entered at least one . In Study 3 , we asked respondents to submit exactly three ideas , to reduce variations in the number of ideas across consumers . Study 5 uses secondary data from an online idea generation com - munity , and Study 6 uses an interactive interface aimed at improving the idea generation process on the ﬂy . We describe these approaches in detail in Section 4 . 3 . 6 . Idea Evaluation The source of idea evaluations also varied slightly across our eight studies . We describe here our main approach . In all studies except Study 5 , we collected idea evaluations from a set of individuals who were diﬀerent from those who generated the ideas , but who came from the same panel . This idea evaluation step was performed after all ideas had been collected , using an online interface developed by the authors using the programming language PHP . We followed standard Toubia and Netzer : Idea Generation , Creativity , and Prototypicality 8 Marketing Science 36 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 – 20 , ©2017 INFORMS practice ( e . g . , Kornish and Ulrich 2011 , Luo and Toubia 2015 , Toubia and Florès 2007 ) and asked each indi - vidual in the idea evaluation sample to evaluate a set of ideas one after another on several dimensions . The set of ideas rated by each individual was randomly selected among the ideas that had received the fewest number of evaluations up to that point , to reduce the variance in the number of evaluations per idea . The average number of raters per idea varied between 18 . 05 and 26 . 22 across studies . Each idea was rated by each rater on four dimensions : creativity ( e . g . , “How creative is this app idea ? ” ) , purchase interest ( e . g . , “How likely would you be to download this app if it were available for $ 0 . 99 ? ” ) , predicted popularity ( e . g . , “How popular do you think this app would be if it were available for $ 0 . 99 ? ” ) , and writing quality ( e . g . , “Is the description of this app well written ? ” ) . Each item had a ﬁve - point Likert scale . In Study 4 , we also collected idea evaluations from experts in our partner company . In Study 5 , the evalua - tions of the ideas came from an online idea generation community . 3 . 7 . Statistical Analysis In all our studies , we test our hypothesis by regressing the average creativity rating of each idea ( or its pro - portion of positive votes in Study 5 ) on the prototypi - cality of its edge weight distribution ( measured by the Kolmogorov – Smirnov statistic ) , controlling for a host of other factors . In all regressions , each observation cor - responds to one idea . In all studies except Study 5 , we use a linear regression where the dependent variable is the average creativity rating across raters . 3 In Study 5 , we run a binomial regression where the dependent variable is the proportion of positive votes . Because ideas contributed by the same participant may be more likely to be of similar quality , we control for contributor heterogeneity by including random eﬀects intercepts in all our regressions . In our regressions , in addition to our primary inde - pendent variable ( the Kolmogorov – Smirnov statistic between the edge weight distribution of the idea and the prototypical edge weight distribution ) , we control for the following characteristics of the idea’s seman - tic subnetwork : average edge weight , coeﬃcient of variation of edge weights , minimum edge weight , maximum edge weight , average node frequency , coeﬃ - cient of variation of node frequencies , minimum node frequency , maximum node frequency , and the number of nodes in the subnetwork . In addition , we control for the length of the idea using its number of charac - ters . It is important to control for the number of nodes and number of characters in the idea , as larger seman - tic subnetworks tend to have smoother distributions of edge weights , which tend to be more prototypical . In Studies 1a – 1c , we also control for variables related to the clustering coeﬃcient : average node clustering coeﬃcient , coeﬃcient of variation of node clustering coeﬃcients , minimum node clustering coeﬃcient , and maximum node clustering coeﬃcient . We were not able to control for these variables in the other studies in which the prototypical network was extracted from Google , because of a lack of variation in the clustering coeﬃcients . Indeed , in these studies the network was very dense , and almost all clustering coeﬃcients were equal to 1 , leading to poorly conditioned regressions . In our robustness checks , we run additional speci - ﬁcations accounting for other controls including word stem ﬁxed eﬀects . Finally , ideas with fewer than two nodes ( i . e . , no edge ) in their semantic subnetwork were removed from the analysis . 4 4 . Studies We test our hypothesis and study its managerial implications across eight studies , ﬁve of which were run in collaboration with three diﬀerent companies . Across studies we had over 4 , 000 ideas generated on six diﬀerent topics by over 2 , 000 idea contributors . In Studies 1a – 1c , we test our hypothesis using a base - line semantic network and prototypical distribution obtained from a pretest . Study 2 replicates our ﬁnding using Google instead of a pretest . We adopt Google in all subsequent studies for its convenience . In Study 3 , we ask each respondent to generate exactly three ideas , to reduce the variance in the number of ideas across contributors . In Study 4 , we complement our consumer evaluations with company evaluations . In Study 5 , we test our hypothesis in a typical managerial context , by using a secondary data set coming from an online idea generation community . In Study 6 , we show how our ﬁndings may be used to help people generate better ideas . We develop and test a tool that leverages our ﬁndings to recommend words to consumers on the ﬂy to help them improve their ideas . See Table 1 for an overview of our studies . 4 . 1 . Studies 1a – 1c Method . Studies 1a – 1c were conducted in collabora - tion with a large U . S . - based insurance company that was looking for innovative ideas for new insurance products . The three studies were similar to each other in design and only diﬀered in their idea generation top - ics . Participants in these three studies were recruited from Amazon Mechanical Turk . Participants were asked to generate ideas for new insurance products related to aging and being a senior ( Study 1a ) , ﬁnancial security ( Study 1b ) , and unemployment ( Study 1c ) . 5 Before running these studies , we conducted a pretest for each study in which participants were asked to gen - erate ideas on the topic . The numbers of participants in the pretests were 149 , 101 , and 98 for Studies 1a – 1c , respectively , and the numbers of ideas obtained were 447 , 303 , and 294 , respectively . The baseline semantic Toubia and Netzer : Idea Generation , Creativity , and Prototypicality Marketing Science 36 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 – 20 , ©2017 INFORMS 9 T a b l e 1 . O v e r v i e w o f S t u d i e s S t u d y 1a S t u d y 1 b S t u d y 1 c S t u d y 2 S t u d y 3 S t u d y 4 S t u d y 5 S t u d y 6 I d e a g e n e r a t i o n t o p i c I n s u r a n c e p r o d u c t s r e l a t e d t o a g i n g a n d b e c o m i n g a s e n i o r I n s u r a n c e p r o d u c t s r e l a t e d t o ﬁ n a n c i a l s e c u r i t y I n s u r a n c e p r o d u c t s r e l a t e d t o b e i n g o r s t a y i n g u n e m p l o y e d H e a l t h - r e l a t e d s m a r t p h o n e a pp s H e a l t h - r e l a t e d s m a r t p h o n e a pp s O r a l c a r e s o l u t i o n s f o r w o m e n o v e r 40 P r o t oo l s H e a l t h - r e l a t e d s m a r t p h o n e a pp s S o u r c e o f b a s e li n e s e m a n t i c n e t w o r k / p r o t o t y p i c a l e d g e w e i g h t d i s t r i b u t i o n P r e t e s t w i t h c o n s u m e r s P r e t e s t w i t h c o n s u m e r s P r e t e s t w i t h c o n s u m e r s G oo g l e G oo g l e G oo g l e G oo g l e G oo g l e P a r t i c i p a n t s i n i d e a g e n e r a t i o n A M T A M T A M T A M T A M T C o mm e r c i a l p a n e l O n li n e i d e a t i o n c o mm u n i t y A M T P a r t i c i p a n t s i n i d e a e v a l u a t i o n A M T A M T A M T A M T A M T C o mm e r c i a l p a n e l a n d c o m p a n y e x e c u t i v e s O n li n e i d e a t i o n c o mm u n i t y A M T P u r p o s e o f t h e s t u d y I n i t i a l t e s t o f h y p o t h e s i s I n i t i a l t e s t o f h y p o t h e s i s I n i t i a l t e s t o f h y p o t h e s i s T e s t t h e u s e o f G oo g l e H o l d n u m b e r o f i d e a s p e r p a r t i c i p a n t c o n s t a n t I n c l u d e c o m p a n y e v a l u a t i o n s a n d u s e c o mm e r c i a l p a n e l T e s t r e s u l t s i n r e a l - w o r l d i d e a t i o n c o mm u n i t y T e s t p r a c t i c a l t oo l f o r i m p r o v i n g i d e a s N o t e . A M T , A m az o n M e c h a n i c a l T u r k . Toubia and Netzer : Idea Generation , Creativity , and Prototypicality 10 Marketing Science 36 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 – 20 , ©2017 INFORMS network for each study was constructed as described in Section 3 . 1 . The ideas from the pretest were not used in any other part of the analysis . The baseline semantic networks contained 314 , 175 , and 184 nodes in Stud - ies 1a – 1c , respectively . After removing “junk” ideas and ideas with seman - tic subnetworks that had fewer than three nodes ( to cal - culate clustering coeﬃcient metrics ) , we were left with 276 , 271 , and 251 ideas from 178 , 177 , and 167 partici - pants , respectively . The idea evaluation stage resulted in an average number of evaluators per idea of 18 . 05 , 21 . 62 , and 20 . 91 across the studies ( standard deviations of 0 . 59 , 0 . 64 , and 0 . 46 , respectively ) . Results and Discussion . Descriptive statistics re - garding the size of the ideas semantic subnetwork ( i . e . , number of nodes ) and the prototypicality distri - bution across ideas may be found in Web Appendix A . The statistical analysis of the link between prototypi - cality and judged creativity is reported in the second , third , and fourth columns of Table 2 . As expected , the coeﬃcient for prototypicality is negative and sta - tistically signiﬁcant in all three studies ( p < 0 . 05 ) ; that is , ideas with semantic subnetworks that have an edge weight distribution closer to the prototypical distribution are judged as signiﬁcantly more creative . Table 2 . Judged Creativity vs . Prototypicality Study 1a Study 1b Study 1c Study 2 Study 3 Study 4 Study 5 Study 6 Distance to − 3 . 294 ∗∗ − 2 . 410 ∗∗ − 3 . 116 ∗∗ − 0 . 380 ∗∗ − 0 . 962 ∗∗ − 0 . 411 ∗ − 0 . 402 ∗∗ − 0 . 401 ∗∗ prototypical edge weight distribution Edge weight Average − 8 . 046 − 12 . 924 ∗ − 7 . 644 0 . 633 − 0 . 375 − 1 . 080 1 . 532 ∗∗ − 0 . 599 Coeﬀ . of var . 0 . 696 1 . 043 ∗ 0 . 560 − 0 . 131 − 0 . 221 0 . 625 − 0 . 655 ∗∗ 0 . 341 Min . − 4 . 983 0 . 706 6 . 361 − 0 . 499 − 0 . 021 1 . 858 1 . 839 ∗∗ 0 . 374 Max . − 0 . 844 − 1 . 313 − 0 . 351 0 . 267 0 . 127 − 0 . 364 0 . 734 ∗∗ 0 . 132 Node frequency Average − 10 . 781 ∗∗ 6 . 373 11 . 729 ∗∗ − 0 . 806 0 . 717 − 0 . 975 − 4 . 177 ∗∗ − 0 . 609 Coeﬀ . of var . 1 . 529 ∗∗ 1 . 028 1 . 945 ∗∗ 0 . 175 0 . 530 − 0 . 092 − 0 . 967 ∗∗ − 0 . 171 Min 14 . 117 10 . 754 ∗∗ 12 . 400 0 . 420 0 . 298 0 . 678 − 1 . 874 ∗∗ 0 . 255 Max − 0 . 397 2 . 685 − 5 . 132 ∗∗ 0 . 137 − 0 . 373 0 . 299 1 . 215 ∗∗ 0 . 449 Node clustering coeﬀ . Average 1 . 530 − 1 . 320 0 . 539 N / A N / A N / A N / A N / A Coeﬀ . of var . 0 . 291 − 4 . 399 ∗∗ − 3 . 440 N / A N / A N / A N / A N / A Min − 0 . 221 − 2 . 461 ∗∗ − 2 . 716 ∗∗ N / A N / A N / A N / A N / A Max − 4 . 271 ∗ 5 . 446 3 . 964 N / A N / A N / A N / A N / A Size of semantic − 0 . 035 ∗∗ − 0 . 012 0 . 014 0 . 007 − 0 . 002 0 . 034 − 0 . 002 − 0 . 022 ∗∗ subnetworkNumberof 1 . 321 ∗∗ 1 . 158 ∗∗ 0 . 914 ∗∗ − 0 . 032 1 . 016 ∗∗ 0 . 940 − 0 . 228 ∗∗ 1 . 299 ∗∗ characters / 1 , 000 No . of observations 276 271 251 555 173 220 1 , 735 648 No . of ideators 178 177 167 300 61 163 703 391 R 2 ( Wald χ 2 for Study 5 ) 0 . 272 0 . 371 0 . 246 0 . 192 0 . 287 0 . 072 293 . 78 0 . 268 Notes . Each column corresponds to one random - eﬀects regression with one observation per idea . The dependent variable is the average judged creativity rating of the idea across evaluators ( except in Study 5 , in which it is the proportion of positive votes for the idea ) . We are able to control for measures related to the clustering coeﬃcient only in Studies 1a – 1c . We capture heterogeneity across participants using random eﬀects . ∗ p < 0 . 1 ; ∗∗ p < 0 . 05 . Therefore , the results of these ﬁrst studies are consis - tent with our hypothesis . 4 . 2 . Study 2 Method . Study 2 replicates Studies 1a – 1c , using a dif - ferent ideation topic and using Google instead of a pretest to construct the baseline semantic network and the prototypical edge weight distribution . The baseline semantic network contained 485 nodes . Participants in the idea generation and idea eval - uation tasks were again recruited from the Amazon Mechanical Turk panel . Participants in our idea gen - eration task were asked to generate ideas for new smartphone apps that will help their users be healthier . Each participant received $ 1 as compensation . After removing “junk” ideas and ideas with semantic net - works that had fewer than two nodes ( i . e . , no edge ) , we were left with 555 ideas generated by 300 participants . A diﬀerent group of 1 , 209 Amazon Mechanical Turk participants evaluated these ideas as described above and were paid $ 0 . 50 each for their participation . Each participant evaluated 10 ideas , giving rise to an average of 20 . 31 evaluators per idea ( standard deviation 1 . 34 ) . Results and Discussion . As can be seen in Table 2 , the coeﬃcient for the prototypicality of the edge weight Toubia and Netzer : Idea Generation , Creativity , and Prototypicality Marketing Science 36 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 – 20 , ©2017 INFORMS 11 distribution is negative and statistically signiﬁcant . Hence , the results of Study 2 replicated those of Stud - ies 1a – 1c in a diﬀerent ideation domain . Moreover , this study suggests that the results are robust to the way the baseline semantic network is constructed , such that this network may be constructed based on an initial set of ideas coming from a pretest or publicly available text such as Web pages identiﬁed by Google . We adopt the latter approach throughout the rest of this paper , for its convenience . Although we control for heterogeneity across partic - ipants in their ability to generate creative ideas using random eﬀects , there is also heterogeneity in the num - ber of ideas generated by participants , and therefore some participants contribute more than others to the results . We address this concern in the next study . 4 . 3 . Study 3 Method . The design of Study 3 was identical to that of Study 2 , except that participants were forced to gen - erate three ideas each . The idea generation topic and the baseline semantic network were identical to those in Study 2 . Amazon Mechanical Turk panel members completed the idea generation task for $ 1 each . After removing “junk” ideas and ideas with semantic sub - networks that had fewer than two nodes , we were left with 173 ideas from 61 participants . A diﬀerent group of Amazon Mechanical Turk participants eval - uated these ideas , giving rise to an average of 20 . 53 evaluators per idea ( standard deviation 0 . 78 ) . Results and Discussion . The results of our main regression are reported in the sixth column of Table 2 . We see that the coeﬃcient corresponding to proto - typicality remains negative and statistically signiﬁcant . Therefore , Study 3 provides further replication of our main ﬁnding , keeping constant the number of ideas per participant . 4 . 4 . Study 4 Method . Study 4 was conducted in collaboration with an international health and beauty company that was looking for ideas for new oral care solutions targeted to women over 40 years old . The idea generation topic was , “What new product could help women main - tain healthy and beautiful oral features ? ” The baseline semantic network was constructed again by copying and pasting this idea generation topic into Google and mining the page source code of the top 50 search results . The resulting baseline semantic network con - tained 280 nodes . This study diﬀered from the previous ones in two major ways . First , ideas were evaluated by company experts , in addition to consumers . Second , partici - pants were recruited from a commercial consumer panel maintained by the marketing research ﬁrm , Research Now , instead of Amazon Mechanical Turk . 6 Interestingly , compared with the Amazon Mechanical Turk participants in Studies 1a – 3 , the commercial panel participants generated fewer and shorter ideas ( 1 . 350 ideas per respondent versus 1 . 646 in Amazon Mechani - cal Turk , with an average of 85 . 7 characters versus 300 . 0 characters on average in Amazon Mechanical Turk ) . After removing “junk” ideas , we were left with 220 ideas from 163 participants . The idea evaluation stage resulted in an average of 26 . 22 evaluators per idea ( standard deviation 1 . 13 ) . In addition , the ideas were carefully evaluated by a group of experts from the company . These judges applied a screening process developed internally and reached a consensus on each idea through delibera - tion . The experts selected ideas that were on topic , addressed unsatisﬁed needs , and were consistent with the company’s strategy . The expert selection of the ideas was independent of our text - mining analysis of the ideas and the commercial panel evaluations . Results and Discussion . We ﬁrst analyze the ideas based on the consumer evaluations . The results are reported in the seventh column of Table 2 . Consistent with our hypothesis , the coeﬃcient corresponding to prototypicality is negative and marginally signiﬁcant ( p < 0 . 08 ) . We now turn to the analysis of the company’s eval - uation of the ideas . Eighty - nine out of all 220 ideas for which a prototypicality measure was available passed the company screening as being on topic , address - ing an unsatisﬁed need and being consistent with the company’s strategy . We ﬁnd that the prototypicality of these 89 ideas was signiﬁcantly higher compared to the ideas that were not selected by the ﬁrm’s experts . Speciﬁcally , the distance to the prototypical distribu - tion of edge weights ( measured by the Kolmogorov – Smirnov statistic ) was signiﬁcantly lower for the ideas selected relative to the ideas not selected ( means of 0 . 459 versus 0 . 545 , p < 0 . 01 ) . 7 Therefore , Study 4 suggests that our results extend to not only creativity evaluations of consumers but also evaluations of practitioners who are experts in prod - uct innovation . In addition , it shows that our results still hold when both idea generators and evaluators are selected from a commercial panel rather than Amazon Mechanical Turk . 4 . 5 . Study 5 Method . Study 5 complements the previous studies by testing whether our ﬁndings apply in a typical online idea generation context . In practice , idea generation is often performed through online idea generation com - munities , such as the well - known My Starbucks Idea or Dell’s Idea Storm . Instead of collecting new ideas experimentally like in the other studies , in this study we received secondary ﬁeld data from an actual online idea generation community focused around Pro Tools , Toubia and Netzer : Idea Generation , Creativity , and Prototypicality 12 Marketing Science 36 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 – 20 , ©2017 INFORMS a digital audio workstation . Members of the online idea generation community submit new ideas that would improve the product and evaluate ideas sub - mitted to the community . Idea evaluation in the online ideation community takes the form of binary votes ( “thumbs up—I agree” versus “thumbs down—I dis - agree” ) . Users may generate as many ideas as they wish and vote on as many ideas as they wish ( although each user cannot evaluate the same idea multiple times and cannot vote on their own ideas ) . The company that manages and hosts this community made the data related to the ideas and their evaluations available to us . Our analysis focuses on the 1 , 735 ideas submitted by users in 2010 , 2011 , and 2012 that received at least one vote and that have semantic subnetworks with at least two nodes . The average number of votes per idea is 28 . 34 . Because ideas that have received the most votes tend to be featured more prominently in the com - munity ( a common practice in online ideation commu - nities ) , the standard deviation of the number of votes per idea is large , and equal to 49 . 11 . Overall , 84 . 25 % of the votes are positive . Our baseline semantic network for this study was constructed based on Google ( the text of the query was “Pro Tools” ) and had 455 nodes . To assess whether the company hosting the community would be able to leverage our ﬁndings systematically and automatically , we did not go through the list of word stems manually when constructing the baseline semantic network ( see Section 3 . 1 ) . Similar results were obtained when this manual cleaning stage was applied ( details available from the authors ) . Results and Discussion . Our statistical analysis in this study diﬀers slightly from those in the other studies , given the nature of the evaluations . Instead of run - ning a linear regression based on the average ratings across evaluators , we run a binomial regression based on the number of votes for each idea and the pro - portion of positive votes . We assume a logistic link between the proportion of positive votes and the inde - pendent variables and allow the residuals to be corre - lated between ideas submitted by the same user . The results are presented in the eighth column of Table 2 . We see that the coeﬃcient corresponding to proto - typicality is negative and statistically signiﬁcant at p < 0 . 05 . Therefore , this study further conﬁrms our results using secondary ﬁeld data coming from a popular form of idea generation , online idea generation com - munities . It also replicates our results with a much larger set of ideas than the ones used in the previ - ous studies . Moreover , it suggests that our hypothesis still holds when the text - mining process and measure - ment of prototypicality are completely automated and do not rely on any human input . Thus , our research provides ﬁrms hosting idea generation communities with a “free” measure of idea quality , which may be combined with other measures based on human judg - ment . With the advent of online ideation communi - ties such as the one we studied here , the challenge of eﬀectively screening a large number of ideas is more relevant today than ever ( Simon 2014 ) . We would not recommend making a ﬁnal selection of ideas based on prototypicality only . Rather , we envision our research being used in a ﬁrst round of screening that ﬂags a set of ideas worth considering carefully . Our results so far have conﬁrmed our main hypoth - esis that ideas with semantic subnetworks that have a more prototypical edge weight distribution tend to be judged as more creative . The results hold whether the baseline semantic network is constructed based on ideas from a pretest or based on Web pages related to the topic . The results do not seem to be driven by diﬀerences in the quantity of ideas across consumers ( Study 3 ) or by whether the evaluations are performed by consumers or company experts ( Study 4 ) , and the results hold in ﬁeld data coming from an online idea generation community ( Study 5 ) . Moreover , the results seem to extend to alternative measures of idea qual - ity ( company selection in Study 4 and votes from the community in Study 5 ) . Our next and ﬁnal study will further explore the practical implications of our main hypothesis . Before describing it , we ﬁrst describe a set of robustness checks , explore alternative measures of ﬁt , explore the extent to which our hypothesis applies to alternative dimensions of idea quality , and show var - ious boundary conditions . 4 . 6 . Robustness Checks Web Appendix C reports a series of robustness checks , which we brieﬂy summarize here . ( i ) To test whether creativity is driven by a set of word stems that are considered creative , we include ﬁxed eﬀects in the regression for the most commonly used word stems . We ﬁnd that our results are robust to the introduction of these ﬁxed eﬀects , despite the reduction in statistical power . ( ii ) We ﬁnd that our results in Studies 2 – 6 are robust to using the ideas submitted by participants to create the prototypical edge weight distribution , instead of using pages retrieved from Google . This helps address the concern that ideas with prototypical edge weight distributions might be judged as more creative only because they are “similar” to pages selected by Google for their attractive properties , not because of their edge weight distribution per se . Using the ideas sub - mitted by participants to create the prototypical edge weight distribution also makes it possible to measure prototypicality using the Kullback – Leibler divergence instead of the Kolmogorov – Smirnov statistic . We ﬁnd that our results still hold with this alternative measure . Toubia and Netzer : Idea Generation , Creativity , and Prototypicality Marketing Science 36 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 – 20 , ©2017 INFORMS 13 ( iii ) We test for possible asymmetry in the eﬀect of prototypicality by using a signed measure of the Kolmogorov – Smirnov statistic that captures whether the edge weight distribution corresponding to each idea is above ( Kolmogorov – Smirnov > 0 ) or below ( Kolmogorov – Smirnov < 0 ) the prototypical distribu - tion at the point at which the two distributions are maximally distant . We ﬁnd that prototypicality aﬀects judged creativity both for ideas whose distributions are above the prototypical distribution ( i . e . , more small weights and therefore more novel combinations ) as well as for ideas whose distributions are below the prototypical distribution ( i . e . , more large weights and therefore more familiar combinations ) , although the eﬀect is stronger for the former type of ideas . ( iv ) We ﬁnd that our results still hold when edge weights are measured using the Salton cosine ( Salton and McGill 1983 ) instead of the Jaccard index . ( v ) We test whether our results in Studies 2 – 6 are robust to reducing the number of top search results from Google used to construct the baseline seman - tic network and prototypical edge weight distribution . While in some studies the eﬀect of prototypicality is signiﬁcant with as few as 20 pages , we recommend mining at least 50 pages to obtain robust and signiﬁ - cant eﬀects . ( vi ) We ﬁnd that our results are robust to an alterna - tive regression speciﬁcation that removes the average of the edge weight , node frequency , and node cluster - ing coeﬃcient distributions , which is likely to be highly correlated with the sum of the minimum and the max - imum measures . ( vii ) We test whether our results are impacted by the use of synonyms , by identifying word stems that are synonyms and combining them in our analysis . Our conclusions are unchanged . ( viii ) We ﬁnd that our results in Studies 1a – 4 and 6 still hold when we replace the average creativity rat - ings dependent variable with the proportion of creativ - ity ratings of 4 or 5 ( on a ﬁve - point scale ) that each idea received . This addresses the concern that ideas with an average edge weight distribution might present a “compromise” that is judged as more creative on aver - age , but that is not necessarily seen as creative by many judges . 4 . 7 . Alternative Measures of the Relationship Between Prototypicality and Judged Creativity One of the practical implications of our research is helping companies identify promising ideas from a large set of ideas without the need for any human involvement . To shed more light on the ability of our approach to identify promising ideas , we look at the rank - order correlation between the ﬁtted and the observed creativity ratings of ideas based on the regressions from Table 2 . The average correlation , across studies , is r (cid:3) 0 . 44 ( p < 0 . 001 ) . See Web Appendix D for details . This analysis provides additional support for the use of our research as a tool for ﬂagging ideas that are worth considering carefully . 4 . 8 . Alternative Measures of Idea Quality Our analysis so far has focused primarily on the judged creativity of ideas , with the exception of the company expert evaluations in Study 4 and the binary votes from online community members in Study 5 . In all studies ( except Study 5 ) , all ideas were rated on four dimen - sions : purchase interest , predicted popularity , writing quality , and creativity . We explore the use of alterna - tive measures of idea quality as dependent variables and test whether the eﬀect found on judged creativity is mediated by any of these alternative measures . See Web Appendix E for details . These analyses suggest that while other measures of idea quality are also related to the prototypical - ity of the edge weight distribution , the relationship is strongest for judged creativity . Furthermore , our alter - native measures of idea quality do not mediate the rela - tionship between prototypicality and judged creativity , providing empirical support for the use of creativity as the dependent variable . This is consistent with our theoretical development from Section 2 , which relied speciﬁcally on the link between creativity and the bal - ance of novelty versus familiarity . Of particular interest is the use of writing quality as the dependent variable . Our results suggest that pro - totypicality has a positive eﬀect on the judged writ - ing quality of an idea ( but this relationship does not mediate the eﬀect of prototypicality on judged creativ - ity ) . This ﬁnding may be relevant to the literature on automated essay scoring ( e . g . , Attali and Burstein 2006 , Landauer et al . 2003 ) , which is very relevant to online academic testing ( e . g . , GRE , GMAT ) . While the algo - rithms used by companies such as Educational Testing Service ( ETS ) are proprietary and not fully public , to our knowledge this literature has not considered using the prototypicality of the structure of an essay’s seman - tic network as a measure of writing quality . 4 . 9 . Boundary Conditions 4 . 9 . 1 . Alternative Measures of Prototypicality . We have argued , based on the creativity literature , that an appropriate measure for prototypicality in the context of idea generation is one that captures the distribution of edge weights , thereby quantifying the balance between novel and familiar combinations of word stems . Here we test some boundary conditions of our results by measuring prototypicality based on the dis - tribution of two other popular network features : node frequency and clustering coeﬃcient . We construct these two alternative prototypicality measures using the approach described in Sections 3 . 3 and 3 . 4 . Toubia and Netzer : Idea Generation , Creativity , and Prototypicality 14 Marketing Science 36 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 – 20 , ©2017 INFORMS Results are provided in Web Appendix F . When pro - totypicality is measured based on the distribution of node frequency , the coeﬃcient corresponding to proto - typicality is directionally consistent with the hypothe - sis in six out of eight studies , but signiﬁcant at p < 0 . 05 in only one of them . When prototypicality is measured based on the distribution of the clustering coeﬃcient ( which we are able to do in Studies 1a – 1c only ) , the coeﬃcient has actually the opposite sign , signiﬁcantly so in one study . Also , the ﬁt in these regressions is worse compared to the regressions in Table 2 . These analyses conﬁrm our theoretical argument that proto - typicality should be measured in a way that captures the relationships among the word stems present in the ideas as well as the trade - oﬀ between familiarity and novelty . 4 . 9 . 2 . Vector Space Representation vs . Edge Weight Distributions . Section 4 . 9 . 1 explored alternative ways to measure prototypicality given a baseline seman - tic network and a set of ideas . In this subsection , we explore the relevance of using a semantic network in the ﬁrst place . The concept of a semantic network is central to our theoretical argument because it captures the balance between novelty and familiarity . We com - pare it to a more direct approach inspired by analogies with the information retrieval literature . Indeed , our approach may be compared and con - trasted with a traditional information retrieval model , where our idea generation topic would be equivalent to a query , and our goal would be to assess which documents ( i . e . , ideas ) are “relevant” to that query . Our approach compares documents to a prototypi - cal distribution derived from a set of training docu - ments related to the query ( pretest ideas or Google results ) . A standard alternative approach for making this comparison would be to represent documents as vectors of word stems and compute the distance between vectors corresponding to various documents , similar to the standard Rocchio classiﬁer ( Feldman and Sanger 2007 , p . 74 ) . To test such an alternative approach , we repre - sent each document as a vector with dimensionality equal to the number of word stems in our dictio - nary ( i . e . , number of nodes in our semantic network ) . We use a standard term frequency – inverse document frequency approach ( tf - idf ) ( see , for example , Manning et al . 2008 ) . We measure prototypicality for a given idea using the Euclidean distance between the vector representing that idea and the average vector among training documents . See details of this analysis and the results in Table F3 in Web Appendix F . We ﬁnd that measuring the prototypicality of an idea using the distance between this idea and an average document does not give rise to a robust signiﬁcant link between prototypicality and judged creativity . In fact , in all studies the coeﬃcient associated with the distance to the prototypical document is positive ( it is statistically signiﬁcant at p < 0 . 05 in three studies and at p < 0 . 10 in two ) ; that is , ideas that are further away from a proto - typical document in a vector space representation tend to be judged as more creative . We also explore representing documents by topics rather than actual words . We perform Latent Dirichlet allocation ( LDA ) on each set of training documents ( pretest ideas or Google results ) to identify a set of top - ics and associated words ( Blei et al . 2003 , Tirunillai and Tellis 2014 ) . Details of the LDA estimation are provided in Web Appendix F . Each idea is represented as a vec - tor with dimensionality equal to the number of topics . We compute the Euclidean distance between the vector representing each idea and the average vector from the training documents . Results of the regressions are pre - sented in Table F4 in Web Appendix F . Again , we ﬁnd no signiﬁcant robust relationship between distance and judged creativity . This analysis underscores the importance of deﬁn - ing prototypicality with respect to the balance between novel and familiar combinations of word stems , which calls for a semantic network . This analysis also helps to alleviate the potential concern that ideas with pro - totypical edge weight distributions are judged as more creative only because they are “similar” to pages selected by Google for their attractive properties , not because of their edge weight distribution per se . In par - ticular , the results suggest that ideas that are more “similar” to an average Google result in a traditional sense ( i . e . , they use similar word stems or similar top - ics ) in fact tend to be judged as less creative . 4 . 9 . 3 . Misspeciﬁcation of the Baseline Semantic Net - work . We have argued that the baseline semantic network and the prototypical edge weight distribu - tion should be speciﬁc to each idea generation topic . Here , we explore the consequences of using a baseline semantic network and prototypical edge weight dis - tribution from a diﬀerent idea generation topic . Stud - ies 1a – 1c were all related to insurance , but each study focused on a diﬀerent insurance domain : aging and being a senior ( Study 1a ) , ﬁnancial security ( Study 1b ) , and unemployment ( Study 1c ) . This provides us with an opportunity to explore situations where the base - line semantic network and its corresponding proto - typical edge weight distribution come from a domain that is related but diﬀerent from the idea generation topic being considered . For each of these studies , we replicate our analysis using the baseline semantic net - work and prototypical distribution from the two other studies . See details of this analysis and results in Web Appendix F . We ﬁnd that the relationship between pro - totypicality and judged creativity is neither consistent nor signiﬁcant when the baseline semantic network ( and its corresponding prototypical edge weight distri - bution ) is taken from a diﬀerent , albeit related , ideation Toubia and Netzer : Idea Generation , Creativity , and Prototypicality Marketing Science 36 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 – 20 , ©2017 INFORMS 15 topic . This underlines the need to construct baseline semantic networks and prototypical edge weight distri - butions that are speciﬁc to each idea generation topic . Luckily , this may be done eﬃciently and with no need for incremental human labor , using Google . 4 . 10 . Study 6 The previous studies have demonstrated the link between the prototypicality of the edge weight dis - tribution of an idea’s semantic subnetwork and the judged creativity of the idea . One practical implication of this ﬁnding is that it provides ﬁrms with an auto - matic measure that may be used to identify promis - ing ideas , thereby reducing the costs involved in idea screening . In our ﬁnal study , we explore a second prac - tical implication . In particular , we explore leveraging our ﬁnding to help people improve the creativity of their ideas . We develop an online idea generation tool in which participants enter their ideas , and sets of words are suggested to them on the ﬂy to help them improve their ideas . We compare the judged creativ - ity of ideas when we recommend words to users that would improve the prototypicality of their ideas’ edge weight distribution versus words based on other crite - ria versus when no recommendations are made . This study presents a proof of concept of using “big data” tools to foster creativity . Method . We used the same idea generation topic ( smartphone apps that would help their users be healthier ) , baseline semantic network , and prototypical edge weight distribution as in Studies 2 and 3 . In the idea generation phase of the study , we assigned partic - ipants randomly to one of four conditions . In all con - ditions , participants navigated between two types of interfaces , coded in the programming language PHP : an idea collection interface and an idea modiﬁcation interface . The idea collection interface looked similar to the interface used in Studies 1a – 4 . It gave partici - pants the opportunity to submit new ideas that were not related to any of their previous ideas . This inter - face was identical across conditions . The idea mod - iﬁcation interface appeared after the submission of each idea , giving participants the opportunity to mod - ify / improve the idea they had just submitted . On the idea modiﬁcation interface , a participant could either submit a modiﬁed version of their last idea ( based on a set of suggested words when applicable ) or indicate that they had no more modiﬁcation to make and go back to the idea collection interface . The idea modiﬁca - tion interface was always loaded with the response box prepopulated with the last idea submitted by the par - ticipant , to make it easier for participants to modify this idea . This process was repeated until the participant stated they had no more ideas to contribute . Screen - shots are provided in Figure 3 . In both types of inter - faces and in all conditions , a log of the ideas submitted by that participant up to that point was provided at the bottom of the screen . In the no words condition , the idea modiﬁca - tion interface simply invited participants to mod - ify / improve their last idea—“Please modify / improve your idea . If you do not wish to improve your previous idea , please select ‘I am done with this idea’ . ” See the middle panel of Figure 3 . In the other three conditions ( random words , mini - mum distance , and maximum prototypicality ) , the idea modiﬁcation oﬀered to participants showed groups of words selected to help them improve their last idea . Each group of words corresponded to one node ( word stem ) in the baseline semantic network ; e . g . , the words corresponding to the stem “electronic” were “electron - ically , ” “electronic , ” and “electronics . ” A set of 10 word stems was generated for each new idea . Participants could cycle through the 10 word stems at will and mod - ify their ideas with or without using the suggested words . See the bottom panel of Figure 3 . The only diﬀerence between the random words , minimum dis - tance , and maximum prototypicality conditions was the way the set of 10 nodes was selected . Each idea was text mined upon being submitted by a participant and the semantic subnetwork corresponding to that idea was constructed . All computations in all conditions were completed on the ﬂy with no noticeable delay . In the random words conditions , 10 nodes were ran - domly selected for each idea among those that were in the baseline semantic network but had not been used thus far in the idea . For example , if an idea’s seman - tic subnetwork contained 15 nodes and if the baseline semantic network contained 485 nodes ( as was the case in our study ) , the 10 nodes were randomly selected without replacement from the 470 nodes that were not already part of the idea’s subnetwork . In the minimum distance condition , the distribution of edge weights in the idea’s semantic subnetwork was computed , and a score for each potential new node was computed , equal to the average edge weight that would result from adding this node to the subnet - work . Consider again our example with 15 nodes in the idea’s semantic subnetwork and 485 nodes in the baseline semantic network . For each of the 470 nodes that are not part of the subnetwork , we would com - pute the average of the (cid:0) 162 (cid:1) edge weights in the new subnetwork that would result from adding this new node to the current subnetwork . The 10 nodes selected using this rule would maximally increase the average edge weight in the idea’s semantic subnetwork , i . e . , decrease the average distance between the nodes . The idea behind this rule is to suggest word stems that are most closely related to the words already used in the idea . We expected this selection rule to make it easy for participants to modify their ideas , but that these modiﬁcations would not necessarily improve the idea’s Toubia and Netzer : Idea Generation , Creativity , and Prototypicality 16 Marketing Science 36 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 – 20 , ©2017 INFORMS Figure 3 . Screenshots from Study 6 Notes . The top panel shows the idea collection interface ( common across all conditions ) . Clicking “submit new idea” submits the idea and switches to the idea modiﬁcation interface . Clicking “I am done” terminates the session . The middle and bottom panels show the idea modiﬁcation interface in the no words condition ( middle ) and the other three conditions ( bottom ) . The submission box comes preloaded with the last idea submitted by the participant . Clicking “submit improved idea” submits the modiﬁed idea and reloads the idea modiﬁcation interface , allowing the participant to modify their idea further . Clicking “I am done with this idea” switches to the idea collection interface . In the conditions in which words were presented to help participants improve their previous ideas , clicking “draw another word” cycles through the 10 word stems associated with the idea . creativity because the relationship may be too obvious or too familiar . In the maximum prototypicality condition , the met - ric to evaluate each potential new node was equal to the prototypicality ( Kolmogorov – Smirnov statistic ) of the edge weight distribution that would result from adding this node to the idea’s current subnetwork . In our previous example , for each of the 470 nodes that are not currently in the network , we would compute the Kolmogorov – Smirnov statistic for the distribution of edge weights that would be obtained by adding this node to the current subnetwork . The 10 nodes selected using this rule would maximally increase the prototypicality of the idea’s edge weight distribution . We expected this selection rule to give rise to sets of words that would best allow participants to improve their ideas . Amazon Mechanical Turk participants completed the idea generation task in exchange for $ 1 . After removing “junk” ideas as well as participants who only entered “junk” ideas , we were left with , respectively , 100 , 100 , 98 , and 95 participants in the no words , ran - dom words , minimum distance , and maximum proto - typicality conditions . 8 Idea evaluation was performed similarly to the other studies . A diﬀerent group of 2 , 000 participants from Amazon Mechanical Turk evaluated Toubia and Netzer : Idea Generation , Creativity , and Prototypicality Marketing Science 36 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 – 20 , ©2017 INFORMS 17 ( both the original and the modiﬁed ) ideas in exchange for $ 0 . 50 . Each idea received an average of 20 . 43 evalu - ations ( standard deviation 0 . 53 ) . Results . We classify ideas into two types based on how they were submitted : “original ideas” are those sub - mitted in the idea collection interface , and “modiﬁed ideas” are those submitted in the idea modiﬁcation interface ( i . e . , they are modiﬁed versions of a previous idea ) . First , for the “original” ideas , pooled across condi - tions , we replicate our ﬁndings from the previous stud - ies using the same set of regressions used earlier ( see the ninth column in Table 2 and the tables in the var - ious Web appendices ) . We limit the analysis to orig - inal ideas to ensure statistical independence between ideas from the same author . The same conclusions are reached if we include all ideas in the regressions . Next , we turn to the comparison between conditions . For each participant , we compute the number of orig - inal ideas and the average number of modiﬁed ideas per original idea . For each original idea that was mod - iﬁed at least once , we compute the diﬀerence between the judged creativity of its last modiﬁcation versus the original idea ( i . e . , if an idea was modiﬁed three times we compare the judged creativity of the last idea in that stream to that of the original idea ) . The results are reported in Table 3 . ( More detailed analyses can be found in Web Appendix G . ) We ﬁnd that the max - imum prototypicality condition is the only one that gives rise both to a signiﬁcantly greater propensity to modify ideas compared to the no words condition and to modiﬁcations that are signiﬁcant improvements over the original ideas . The random words condition did not signiﬁcantly increase participants’ propensity to modify their ideas . The minimum distance condi - tion signiﬁcantly encouraged participants modify their ideas ( compared to the no words condition ) , but the modiﬁed ideas were not signiﬁcantly better than the original ones . 9 We also explore asymmetries in the results using a signed Kolmogorov – Smirnov statistic . We separate the original ideas that were modiﬁed at least once between those with a positive Kolmogorov – Smirnov statistic Table 3 . Study 6 Results Average diﬀerence in judged creativity Average number of original Average number of modiﬁcations between last modiﬁcation Condition ideas per participant per original idea and original idea No words 1 . 590 0 . 333 0 . 236 Random words 1 . 600 0 . 489 0 . 166 Minimum distance 1 . 874 0 . 838 0 . 032 Maximum prototypicality 1 . 643 0 . 604 0 . 220 Note . Themaximumprototypicalityconditionistheonlyonethatgivesrisetobothasigniﬁcantlygreaterpropensitytomodifyideascompared to the no words condition ( p < 0 . 05 ) and to modiﬁcations that are signiﬁcant improvements over the original ideas ( p < 0 . 01 ) . ( i . e . , more small weights and therefore more novel combinations ) and those with a negative Kolmogorov – Smirnov statistic ( i . e . , more large weights and there - fore more familiar combinations ) . We ﬁnd that the maximum prototypicality condition worked primarily by helping participants with ideas that were too familiar increase the novelty of their ideas , but that participants with ideas that were too novel were not able to increase familiarity in a meaningful way using the suggested words . See detailed results in Web Appendix G . Discussion . Study 6 not only replicated the ﬁndings from the other studies ; it also demonstrated that the link between prototypicality and creativity may be leveraged in practice to create tools that help people improve their ideas . Generating new ideas involves retrieving knowledge from memory . We have shown that it is possible to use computers to assist people in this memory retrieval process by developing an online interface that provides participants on the ﬂy with pos - sible words that may help them improve their ideas . The tool we developed here is a proof of con - cept . We have developed a publicly available version of this tool , available at newtopic . protoideation . org . 10 We hope that future research will develop more sophis - ticated and powerful tools . For example , with access to individual - level data , it would be possible to build individual - speciﬁc baseline semantic networks based on the documents to which a particular individual was exposed in the past ( such data are available to compa - nies that track user behavior online ) . We could envision an online tool similar to Google in which a user would enter a problem they wish to solve or a topic on which they wish to ideate , and the tool would provide them with a customized set of possible words that could be basic ingredients to a solution , or a set of documents that are likely to contain useful information . The tool we developed in this study may be viewed as an extension of the popular “random stimulation” technique developed by De Bono ( 1992 ) . De Bono’s ( 1992 ) method consists in drawing random words one at a time and attempting to generate new ideas based on these words . Interestingly , De Bono ( 1992 , p . 182 ) writes : “How do we ﬁnd the ‘best’ random words ? The simple answer is you cannot . . . . There is no way Toubia and Netzer : Idea Generation , Creativity , and Prototypicality 18 Marketing Science 36 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 – 20 , ©2017 INFORMS of ﬁnding the ‘best’ random word because it would then no longer be random . ” Our research suggests that the words used as inspiration may in fact be “opti - mized , ” and that selecting words that will help users improve the prototypicality of their ideas’ semantic subnetworks is more eﬃcient than showing them ran - dom words . 5 . Conclusions In this paper we have uncovered and documented what appears to be a robust , fundamental property of creative ideas . We have shown ideas that balance well familiarity and novelty , as measured by the combina - tion of “ingredients” in the idea , are judged as more creative . More speciﬁcally , ideas that are more pro - totypical in terms of the edge weight distribution of their semantic subnetwork tend to be judged as more creative . We have demonstrated the link between pro - totypicality and judged creativity across eight studies in which over 2 , 000 people generated over 4 , 000 ideas in total . Five of our studies were run in collaboration with companies . Across studies , we varied the source of participants , the format of the idea generation task , the idea generation topic , the type of evaluation , and the source of the evaluations . We also used both pri - mary and secondary sources of data . Managerially , we showed that our ﬁndings can be leveraged not only to identify promising ideas automatically but also to develop tools that can help people improve their idea generation output by proposing words that may serve as “ingredients” for their ideas . We believe that many exciting opportunities for future research may be identiﬁed , in addition to those already mentioned throughout this paper . First , driven by our theoretical development and our need to cap - ture the co - occurrence of word stems , we mapped ideas onto semantic networks . However , this approach does not capture how words are combined , and it does not allow interpreting ideas . Future research might extend the analysis in such directions . Second , future research may explore the extent to which our ﬁnd - ings apply both to incremental and radical innovations . Although ideas in our studies were evaluated both by consumers and experts , they were all generated by con - sumers , and therefore may have been skewed toward incremental innovations . The literatures on which our theoretical argument is built have heavily focused on creativity in the domains of science and art , which one may argue are the bedrock of radical innovations . For example , the issue of balancing novelty with familiar - ity has been studied in the history of science literature , the literature on the associative nature of creativity was inspired by prominent scientists and artists , and the beauty in averageness eﬀect has been found in vari - ous artistic domains . Therefore , we expect our ﬁnd - ings to generalize to ideas generated by professionals searching for radical innovation opportunities . Third , prototypicality may be considered as a new metric in the automated evaluation of other types of textual data , such as essays ( e . g . , Attali and Burstein 2006 , Landauer et al . 2003 ) , movie scripts ( Eliashberg et al . 2007 ) , or academic articles ( Uzzi et al . 2013 ) . Fourth , the insights and tools from our research can be applied to the domain of recommendation systems . For example , it might be possible to identify products that best com - plement the set of products a consumer already owns , based on the properties of the subnetwork formed by these products ( e . g . , identifying which new book would best complement the user’s personal library based on the properties of the network of books in her library , Oestreicher - Singer et al . 2013 ) . Similar recom - mendations may be made in the domain of scientiﬁc citations ( e . g . , identify a set of papers that would best complement the set of papers already cited in one’s manuscript ) . Finally , this paper provides one example of exploring the use of big data tools in new ways that may have a positive impact on people’s lives and on society . A large proportion of the information to which we are exposed today is recorded electronically . This information is often used by marketers to target adver - tising and other marketing vehicles . We hope that our research will help open the door for new applications of these data that may oﬀer new beneﬁts to users . Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank Alain Lemaire and Erin Michet for their outstanding research assistance on this project . The authors are thankful to the Marketing Science Institute for their ﬁnancial support in developing the ideation tool . Endnotes 1 Text mining has been proposed previously as a method for gener - ating new ideas by automatically linking streams of literature . For example , Swanson ( 1988 ) found relationships between magnesium and migraine and between biological viruses and weapons by min - ing disjoint literatures . Similarly , Kostoﬀ ( 2006 ) proposed literature - based discovery of ideas via text mining of the academic literature about a topic . In this paper , we use text mining to better understand which types of semantic structures make for a good idea . 2 Unlike many networks found in marketing , our semantic networks are weighted networks ; i . e . , the relationship between two nodes ( word stems ) is captured by a continuous variable ( the Jaccard index , which varies between 0 and 1 ) rather than a binary one . We use a set of features that generalize standard features developed for binary networks to weighted networks ( Barrat et al . 2004 ) . 3 The average creativity rating for each idea is the average of approx - imately 20 independent evaluations , each of which is on a ﬁve - point Likert scale . We approximate this average as a continuous variable and do not explicitly model the fact that it is truncated . 4 In Studies 1a – 1c , where we also control for the clustering coeﬃcient , ideas with fewer than three nodes in their semantic subnetwork were removed from the analysis , because at least three nodes are needed to compute the clustering coeﬃcient . 5 To help participants structure their ideas and increase their rel - evance to the company , participants were asked to list three Toubia and Netzer : Idea Generation , Creativity , and Prototypicality Marketing Science 36 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 – 20 , ©2017 INFORMS 19 components in each insurance product idea : what may be lost by the customer , what the customer would get if the loss occurred , and what the customer had to give in exchange for this protection . 6 Both for idea generation and for idea evaluation , respondents were screened to include only women over 40 years old who brushed their teethatleastonceaday , hadvisitedadentalprofessionalatleastonce in the last two years , and suﬀered from at least one aging - related oral symptom from a list speciﬁed by the company . 7 In Web Appendix B , we distinguish between precision and recall using a receiver operating characteristic curve analysis . This analysis further conﬁrms that our classiﬁcation of ideas based on prototypi - cality ( Kolmogorov – Smirnov statistic ) is adequate . 8 Note that the four conditions had identical interfaces until after the submission of the participant’s ﬁrst idea . Therefore , it is unlikely that some conditions made participants more likely to submit only “junk” ideas . 9 Interestingly , the last column in Table 3 shows that asking partic - ipants to improve their ideas without any word recommendations ( no words condition ) or using random words ( random words con - dition ) led to signiﬁcant improvements in judged creativity , condi - tional on an idea being modiﬁed . Further investigation reveals that the prototypicality of the improved ideas in these conditions was signiﬁcantly higher than that of the original ideas , suggesting that when attempting to improve their ideas participants had the intu - ition to make their idea more prototypical even when no words or random words were suggested ( see Web Appendix G for details ) . 10 The development of this publicly available version was made pos - sible by a generous grant from the Marketing Science Institute . Read - ers should contact the authors directly with questions or requests about this tool . References Anderson JR ( 1983 ) A spreading activation theory of memory . J . Ver - bal Learn . Verbal Behav . 22 ( 3 ) : 261 – 295 . Attali Y , Burstein J ( 2006 ) Automated essay scoring with e - rater v . 2 . J . Tech . , Learn . , Assessment 4 ( 3 ) . Barrat A , Barthélemy M , Pastor - Satorras R , Vespignani A ( 2004 ) The architecture of complex weighted networks . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 ( 11 ) : 3747 – 3752 . Blei DM , Ng AY , Jordan MI ( 2003 ) Latent Dirichlet allocation . J . Machine Learn . 3 : 993 – 1022 . Burroughs JE , Moreau CP , Mick DG ( 2008 ) Toward a psychol - ogy of consumer creativity . Haugtvegt CP , Herr PM , Kardes FR , eds . Handbook of Consumer Psychology ( Lawrence Erlbaum , New York ) , 1011 – 1038 . Callon M , Law J , Rip A ( 1986 ) Mapping the Dynamics of Science and Technology : Sociology of Science in the Real World ( Macmillan Press , Basingstoke , UK ) . Collins AM , Loftus EF ( 1975 ) A spreading activation theory of semantic processing . Psych . Rev . 82 ( 6 ) : 407 – 428 . Dahl DW , Moreau P ( 2002 ) The inﬂuence and value of analogical thinking during new product ideation . J . Marketing Res . 39 ( 1 ) : 47 – 60 . De Bono E ( 1992 ) Serious Creativity ( HarperCollins , New York ) . Eliashberg J , Hui SK , Zhang ZJ ( 2007 ) From story line to box oﬃce : A new approach for green - lighting movie scripts . Management Sci . 53 ( 6 ) : 881 – 893 . Feinerer I , Hornik K , Meyer D ( 2008 ) Text mining infrastructure in R . J . Statist . Software 25 ( 5 ) : 1 – 54 . Feldman R , Sanger J ( 2007 ) The Text Mining Handbook ( Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK ) . Feldman R , Fresko M , Kinar Y , Lindell Y , Liphstat O , Rajman M , Schler Y , Zamir O ( 1998 ) Text mining at the term level . Proc . Second Eur . Sympos . Principles Data Mining Knowledge Discovery ( Springer - Verlag , Berlin Heidelberg ) , 65 – 73 . Finke RA , Ward TB , Smith SM ( 1992 ) Creative Cognition ( MIT Press , Cambridge , MA ) . Giora R ( 2003 ) On Our Mind : Salience , Context and Figurative Language ( Oxford University Press , New York ) . Goldenberg J , Mazursky D ( 2002 ) Creativity in Product Innovation ( Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK ) . Grammer K , Thornhill R ( 1994 ) Human ( Homo sapiens ) facial attrac - tiveness and sexual selection : The role of symmetry and avera - geness . J . Comparative Psych . 108 ( 3 ) : 233 – 242 . Halberstadt J , Rhodes G ( 2003 ) It’s not just average faces that are attractive : Computer - manipulated averageness makes birds , ﬁsh , and automobiles attractive . Psychonomic Bull . Rev . 10 ( 1 ) : 149 – 156 . Kornish L , Ulrich K ( 2011 ) Opportunity spaces in innovation : Empir - ical analysis of large samples of ideas . Management Sci . 57 ( 1 ) : 107 – 128 . Kostoﬀ RN ( 2006 ) Systematic acceleration of radical discovery and innovation in science and technology . Tech . Forecasting Soc . Change 73 ( 8 ) : 923 – 936 . Landauer T , Laham D , Foltz P ( 2003 ) Automated essay assessment . Assessment Ed . Principles Policy Practice 10 ( 3 ) : 295 – 308 . Landwehr JR , Labroo AA , Herrmann A ( 2011 ) Gut liking for the ordi - nary : Incorporating design ﬂuency improves automobile sales forecasts . Marketing Sci . 30 ( 3 ) : 416 – 429 . Langlois JH , Roggman LA ( 1990 ) Attractive faces are only average . Psych . Sci . 1 ( 2 ) : 115 – 121 . Luo L , Toubia O ( 2015 ) Improving online idea generation platforms and customizing the task structure based on consumers’ domain speciﬁc knowledge . J . Marketing 79 ( 5 ) : 100 – 114 . Manning CD , Raghavan P , Schűtze H ( 2008 ) An Introduction to Infor - mation Retrieval ( Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK ) . Martindale C , Moore K , Borkum J ( 1990 ) Aesthetic preference : Anomalous ﬁndings for Berlyne’s psychobiological theory . Amer . J . Psych . 103 ( 1 ) : 53 – 80 . Martindale C , Moore K , West A ( 1988 ) Relationship of preference judgments to typicality , novelty , and mere exposure . Empirical Stud . Arts 6 ( 1 ) : 79 – 96 . Mednick SA ( 1962 ) The associative basis of the creative process . Psych . Rev . 69 ( 3 ) : 220 – 232 . Moreau CP , Dahl DW ( 2005 ) Designing the solution : The impact of constraints on consumers’ creativity . J . Consumer Res . 32 ( 1 ) : 13 – 22 . Netzer O , Feldman R , Goldenberg J , Fresko M ( 2012 ) Mine your own business : Market - structure surveillance through text min - ing . Marketing Sci . 31 ( 3 ) : 521 – 543 . Nĳstad BA , Stroebe W ( 2006 ) How the group aﬀects the mind : A cognitive model of idea generation in groups . Personality Soc . Psych . Rev . 10 ( 3 ) : 186 – 213 . Nĳstad BA , Stroebe W , Lodewĳkx HFM ( 2003 ) Production blocking and idea generation : Does blocking interfere with cognitive pro - cesses ? J . Experiment . Soc . Psych . 39 ( 6 ) : 531 – 548 . Oestreicher - Singer G , Libai B , Sivan L , Carmi E , Yassin O ( 2013 ) The network value of products . J . Marketing 77 ( 3 ) : 1 – 14 . Perkins DN ( 1981 ) The Mind’s Best Work ( Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA ) . Porter MF ( 1980 ) An algorithm for suﬃx stripping . Program 14 ( 3 ) : 130 – 137 . Reber R , Schwarz N , Winkielman P ( 2004 ) Processing ﬂuency and aesthetic pleasure : Is beauty in the perceiver’s processing expe - rience ? Personality Soc . Psych . Rev . 8 ( 4 ) : 364 – 382 . Repp BH ( 1997 ) The aesthetic quality of a quantitatively average music performance : Two preliminary experiments . Music Per - ception 14 ( 4 ) : 419 – 444 . Rothenberg A ( 2014 ) Flight from Wonder—An Investigation of Scientiﬁc Creativity ( Oxford University Press , New York ) . Salton G , McGill MJ ( 1983 ) Introduction toModern Information Retrieval ( McGraw - Hill , New York ) . Simon R ( 2014 ) One week , 3 , 000 product ideas . Wall Street Journal ( July3 ) , http : / / www . wsj . com / articles / one - week - 3 - 000 - product - ideas - 1404332942 . Simonton DK ( 2003 ) Scientiﬁc creativity as constrained stochastic behavior : The integration of product person , and process per - spectives . Psych . Bull . 129 ( 4 ) : 475 – 494 . Toubia and Netzer : Idea Generation , Creativity , and Prototypicality 20 Marketing Science 36 ( 1 ) , pp . 1 – 20 , ©2017 INFORMS Strzalko J , Kaszycka KA ( 1991 ) Physical attractiveness : Interper - sonal and intrapersonal variability of assessments . Soc . Biol . 39 : 170 – 176 . Surowiecki J ( 2005 ) The Wisdom of Crowds ( Random House , New York ) . Swanson DR ( 1988 ) Migraine and magnesium : Eleven neglected con - nections . Perspect . Biol . Medicine 31 ( 4 ) : 526 – 557 . Thornhill R , Gangestad SW ( 1993 ) Human facial beauty . Human Nature 4 ( 3 ) : 237 – 269 . Tirunillai S , Tellis GJ ( 2014 ) Mining marketing meaning from online chatter : Brand analysis of big data using latent Dirichlet alloca - tion . J . Marketing Res . 51 ( 4 ) : 463 – 479 . Toubia O , Florès L ( 2007 ) Adaptive idea screening using consumers . Marketing Sci . 26 ( 3 ) : 342 – 360 . Uzzi B , Mukherjee S , Stringer M , Jones B ( 2013 ) Atypical combina - tions and scientiﬁc impact . Science 342 ( 6157 ) : 468 – 472 . Veryzer RW , Hutchinson JW ( 1998 ) The inﬂuence of unity and proto - typicality on aesthetic responses to new product designs . J . Con - sumer Res . 24 ( 4 ) : 374 – 385 . Ward TB ( 1995 ) What’s old about new ideas ? Smith SM , Ward TB , Fiske RA , eds . The Creative Cognition Approach ( MIT Press , Cambridge , MA ) , 157 – 178 . Winkielman P , Halberstadt J , Fazendeiro T , Catty S ( 2006 ) Prototypes are attractive because they are easy on the mind . Psych . Sci . 17 ( 9 ) : 799 – 806 .