Memory & Cognition 2002 , 30 ( 2 ) , 199 - 216 Generating new ideas is an important and pervasive humanactivity . Whetherto solvepracticalproblems , satisfy esthetic desires , or simply innovate for its own sake , peo - ple are constantlyaboutthe businessof creatingsomething new . Architects design new buildings , writers dream up new villains , engineers develop new mechanical devices , and homemakers concoct new recipes . What these and manyothergenerativeactivitieshavein commonis that they are all instances of conceptualexpansion ( Ward , Smith , & Vaid , 1997 ) , in which people extend the boundaries of a conceptualdomainby mentally crafting novelinstancesof theconcept . When an architectdrafts plansfor a new build - ing , he or she is generating a new instance of a familiar concept ( e . g . , high - rise apartment building ) . When an au - thor writes about a new villain , he or she is adding yet an - other instance to a well - known domainfrom literature , and so on . Because conceptual expansion involves the generation of new instances of existing concepts , it is not surprising that newly generated ideas tend to resemble the old ones from which they spring . Rubin and Kontis ( 1983 ) , for ex - ample , asked participants to develop designs for novel coinsand found strikingsimilaritiesbetween those designs and the attributes of known coins . Although the partici - pants were instructed not to be creative or silly , that admo - nition does not seem to have been the critical determinant of their conformity to existing instances . Ward ( 1994 ) , for example , had participants develop novel animals for the imaginary setting of a distant planet and still found their creations to possess characteristic attributes of Earth ani - mals , such as eyes , legs , and bilateralsymmetry , even when they were asked to use their wildest imagination . Ward and Sifonis ( 1997 ) also found similar results when participants were explicitlyinstructedto make creaturesthat were wildly different from Earth animals . Nor is the resemblance be - tween new and old ideaslimitedtolaboratorystudiesof col - lege students . The origin and form of many real - world cre - ative accomplishmentscan also be traced to the knowledge available to their creators ( see , e . g . , Basalla , 1988 ; Ward , Finke , & Smith , 1995 ; Ward et al . , 1997 ; Weisberg , 1986 , 1993 ) , suggesting that even the products of highly creative individualsare heavilystructuredby theirexistingconcepts . This tendency for novel ideas to be structured in pre - dictableways byexistingconceptualframeworks is referred to as structured imagination ( Ward , 1994 , 1995 ) . It is a ro - bust tendencythat has also been observedin youngnormal children ( Cacciari , Levorato , & Cicogna , 1997 ; Karmiloff - Smith , 1990 ) and gifted adolescents ( Ward , Saunders , & Dodds , 1999 ) , as well as science fiction authors ( Ward , 1994 ) , design engineers ( Condoor , Brock , & Burger , 1993 ) , and other creative individuals ( Ward , 1995 ; Ward et al . , 1995 ) . The phenomenon has also been shown to ex - tend to a variety of conceptualdomains , such as imaginary 199 Copyright 2002 Psychonomic Society , Inc . This material is based on work supported by the National Science Foundationunder Grant BCS - 9983424 . The authors thank Steve Smith and three anonymous reviewers for their comments on earlier versions of thispaper . Correspondenceshouldbeaddressed to T . B . Ward , Depart - mentofPsychology , Texas A & M University , CollegeStation , TX77843 - 4235 ( e - mail : tbw @ psyc . tamu . edu ) . —Accepted by previous editorial team The role of graded category structure in imaginative thought THOMAS B . WARD , MERRYL J . PATTERSON , CYNTHIA M . SIFONIS , REBECCA A . DODDS , and KATHERINE N . SAUNDERS Texas A & M University , College Station , Texas Participantsgeneratedlistsof exemplarsfromthe categoriesof animals , tools , and fruit , and theirlists wereusedtodeterminetherelativeaccessibilityofindividualexemplars . Measuresofaccessibilityincluded output dominance ( the number of participants who listed an exemplar ) , rank ( how early instances were listed ) , and two scores that reflecttheir combination—output precedence and dominance / rank . Other participantsdrew and describednovel exemplarsof those categoriesthat might existon an imag - inary planet and reported on the factors that influenced their creations . References to Earth animals , tools , or fruitwereusedtodetermineimaginationfrequency ( thenumber of participantswho mentioned relyingon particularEarthexemplars ) . Itemshighinaccessibilitywerealsohighinimaginationfrequency , implying that those items that come to mind most readily are the ones most likely to serve as starting points for the development of novel ideas . This result held evenwhen taskconstraintsweighed against the use of such items ( Experiment 2 ) and when participantswere encouragedto be as creativeas possible ( Experiment4 ) , suggestingthatitis difficulttoavoidthe influenceofhighlyaccessiblecategoryexemplars . Other measures of category structure , including the rated typicality , familiarity , and frequency of exem - plars , did not predict imagination frequency as well . The results are discussed in terms of expanding concept boundaries and the inadvertent application of knowledge that is readily accessible . 200 WARD , PATTERSON , SIFONIS , DODDS , AND SAUNDERS faces ( Bredart , Ward , & Marczewski , 1998 ) and restaurants ( Sifonis , 1995 ) . Theimpact ofcategoryknowledgeis alsorevealedbythe fact that novel creations can be influencedby recently en - countered category examples even when people are in - structed to avoid copying properties of those examples . This is true of design engineers developing ideas for new spill - proofcups and measuring devicesfor the blind ( Jans - son & Smith , 1991 ) and of college students imagining new toys , carpets , extraterrestrialanimals , and categoryla - bels ( Marsh , Landau , & Hicks , 1996 ; Marsh , Ward , & Landau , 1999 ; Sifonis , Ward , Gentner , & Houska , 1997 ; Smith , Ward , & Schumacher , 1993 ) . Thus , there is littledoubtthatexistingconceptsconstrain and direct the form of newly developed ideas , a notion in - herent in many views of creativity ( e . g . , Perkins , 1981 , 1988 ; Schank & Cleary , 1995 ) . Indeed , there is a trivial sense in which this must be so . What could new ideas be based on if not existing knowledge ? Beyond establishing the basic fact that new ideas are shaped by old ones , there - fore , it is important to delineate the specific properties of existing conceptual structures that are particularly influ - ential in guiding imaginative thought . In the present ex - periments , we examined one such property—namely , gradedcategorystructure—andassessedtheextentto which the influence of known category instances is predictable from theirrepresentativenesswithinthecategoryofinterest . The focus on representativeness stems from the path - of - least - resistancemodel ( Ward , 1994 , 1995 ) , which attrib - utes the resemblancebetween newly generatedentitiesand known onesto theapproachpeopletake ingeneratingthose novel entities . The model proposes that , although people can adopt a variety of strategies for developingnew ideas , a predominant approach is to retrieve specific known in - stances of the relevant concept and to project the proper - ties of those instances onto the novel idea . Furthermore , the selection of instances is assumed to be guided by their representativeness . Items that are the most representative of the concept are the ones most likely to be retrieved and used as startingpointsfor new ideas . In generatingan imag - inary animal , for example , a person would tend to move toward a level of abstractionmore specific than animal and to gravitatetoward representativeinstances , such as mam - mal and dog , rather than less representative ones , such as fish or bat . These specificity and representativeness as - sumptions are examined in the present experiments . Representativenesscan be conceptualizedand measured in several distinct ways , including obtaining ratings of how typical an entity is of its category , how closely it ap - proximates the central tendency of the category , how well it satisfies ideals , and how frequent or familiar it seems ( Barsalou , 1985 ) . Although each of these measurable as - pects of representativeness might be expected to play a role in how the category is used in different situations , the property that we assume to be most important to creative generationis retrievabilityor “coming - to - mindedness”— that is , how readily an instance comes to mind when the category name is given as a cue . The prediction from the path - of - least - resistanceis that the more readily a given in - stancecomes to mind when a conceptis activated , the more likelyit is that the item will be used as a startingpointin de - velopinga new idea . This focus on coming - to - mindedness reflects the intuitionthat generative tasks demand consid - erable cognitiveresources and that one way to simplify the task is to quickly settle on a model , any model , as a start - ing point . Whatever comes to mind first and to most peo - ple is most likely to be used . An item’s retrievabilitycould well be influencedby and interrelated with otherindicatorsof its representativeness , such as its judged typicality , frequency of occurrence , fa - miliarity , and so on . That is , it might be that more typical , frequent , or familiar instances are the ones that are most readily retrieved in response to the category name . Like - wise , gradations in retrievabilitycould be the result of the way in which a concept is constructed at a given point in time from stored information , recent experiences , and the current context . It need not be viewed as an invariantprop - erty of a concept’s structure ( see Barsalou , 1987 , for a sim - ilar observation regarding typicality ) . Nevertheless , it is an observable property of category instances that , when the category is activatedor constructed , the resulting represen - tation will be structured in such a way that some of those instanceswill be retrieved more readilythan others . Those gradations in retrievability are expected to influence imaginative activities differentially . The present paper reports a set of experimentsdesigned to test this representativenessassumption using three con - ceptualdomains : animals , tools , and fruit . For eachdomain , separate groups of participants performed a listing task and a creativegenerationtask . In the listing task , the partic - ipants simply wrote down the first 20 real instances they could think of for each category . From those lists , we de - termined retrievability indices for each item by assessing the frequency with which given items were listed ( termed outputdominance ) , their average rank order of appearance across participants’lists ( termed rank ) , and two measures that combined frequency and rank order ( termed output precedence and dominance / rank ) . In the creativegeneration task , the participants conceived and drew novel instances of the category that would be appropriate to an imaginary setting . Of most interest was the extent to which the mea - sures of retrievability predicted the likelihoodthat partic - ular instances would play a role in imaginativegeneration and the extent to which those relationships were resistant to changes in task constraints and instructions . An addi - tional experiment attempted to differentiate between the influenceof coming - to - mindednessand other measures of the representativenessof instanceswithincategories , such as typicality and familiarity . EXPERIMENT 1 Experiment 1A : Listing Real Earth Animals Method Participants . Thirty undergraduate students enrolled in introduc - tory psychology classes participated as one of several means of sat - CATEGORY STRUCTURE AND IMAGINATION 201 isfying a course requirement . All participants gave informed consent and were debriefed following participation . Materials and Procedure . Each participant received a sheet of paper containing instructions to list the first 20 animals that came to mind . The sheet also included 20 lines on which the participants were to list their responses . The participants were tested in small groups of about 5 , and each participant was allowed as much time as needed to complete the task . Coding . All individual listings of any Earth creature ( living or ex - tinct ) were noted . Adapting procedures used by Barsalou ( 1985 ) and Battig and Montague ( 1969 ) , except for clear misspellings , minor variants in inflection ( e . g . , dog and dogs ) , and colloquial variations ( e . g . , hippo for hippopotamus ) , all nonidentical items were treated as distinct entities ( e . g . , bear and polar bear remained as separate entries ) . Output dominance was determined for each of the listed Earth animals and was defined as the number of participants who listed a given animal . Each distinct instance was also coded for rank , defined as the average output position across all lists on which the instance appeared . Although output dominance and rank are group measures , the former can reasonably serve as an index of the likeli - hood that an instance will come to mind for a given individual , and the latter can serve as an index of how quickly it will come to mind when it does so . Output precedence was computed by assigning each item that appeared on a list a number corresponding to the reverse of its list position ( by subtracting its position from 21 ) . Items not ap - pearing on a given participant’s list were counted as 0 for that list . By summing thevalues foreach item across participants , theresult reflects the combined influence of frequency of listing and output position , with larger values indicating a greater accessibility . Dominance / rank was simply output dominance divided by average rank . Tothe extent that instances come quickly to mind to large numbers of participants , they will receive high output precedence and dominance / rank scores . Results The participants listed a total of 147 distinct Earth ani - mals . Outputdominancefortheseitemsranged from 28 ( for cat ) to 1 . Appendix A includes each item that was listed by 3 or more participants , alongwith theoutputdominance , rank , output precedence , and dominance / rank scores for each item . 1 Appendix A also includes additional animals and scores to be described later . Experiment 1B : Generating Imaginary Animals Method Participants . Seventy - one individuals from the same introduc - tory psychology participant pool as in Experiment 1A took part in Experiment 1B . None had participated in the animal listing task . Design and Procedure . The participants were asked to imagine a planet very different from Earth on which many species of plants and animals existed . They were further asked to imagine encounter - ing a member of one of those species of animals and to draw it in a way that would allow a naive observer to recognize it from the draw - ing . The participants were also instructed to label all of the creature’s major parts and to provide a label or name for the creature as a whole . After turning in their labeled drawings , the participants were given new response sheets on which they wrote open - ended state - ments about the factors that influenced the development of their creatures . They were encouraged to try to recount anything that might have influenced them . Drawings were removed prior to this task to reduce the possibility that the participants would look at the draw - ings , notice a similarity to an Earth animal , and list that animal as a source of their ideas even though it had not come to mind during the idea generation task . Coding . Two coders examined each drawing for the presence of standard Earth animal senses ( i . e . , eyes , ears , noses , and mouths ) and appendages ( i . e . , arms , legs , wings , and fins ) , as well as for the property of symmetry . They also assigned a global rating of origi - nality to each creature , using a 7 - point scale intended to reflect the extent to which creatures diverged from typical Earth animals . On this scale , 1 indicated that thecreature was identical to some Earth an - imal , and 7 indicated that the creature was completely different from any Earth animal ; in general , higher numbers indicated more origi - nality . The coders had percent agreement scores of 85 or better for each of the categorical variables and a correlation of . 823 between their originality ratings . The coders then noted explicit references to specific Earth animals in the labels that the participants applied to their drawings , as well as in their statements about the factors that influenced their creations . Such references could include statements about whole animals or their parts . These statements were examined after and separately from the assessments of the drawings to reduce the possibility that the coders’ judgments about the drawings would be influenced by their judgments about the statements , and vice versa . Any mention of a specific Earth animal was counted unless ( 1 ) the participant made an explicit statement that , after thinking about the Earth ani - mal , he or she attempted to avoid the influence of that animal or ( 2 ) the participant’s statement indicated a simple recognition , after the fact , that the creature resembled some Earth animal . These types of statements were not consistent with the idea that the participant had used the creature as one of the sources of the novel idea . Imag - ination frequency was determined for each specific Earth animal mentioned and was defined as the number of participants who men - tioned that animal . Although the participants’ reports about the factors that influenced their creations were retrospective , it is important to note that such re - ports have been found to correspond well to the properties of the participants’ drawings . For instance , when asked to develop feath - ered extraterrestrials , the participants who subsequently reported a reliance on birds were significantly more likely than those who re - ported other approaches to develop creatures that possessed birdlike properties ( Ward , 1994 ) . This correspondence between reported ap - proaches and the details of the participants’ creations suggests that retrospective reports of having relied on specific types of Earth an - imals can be taken as reasonably accurate reflections of the partici - pants’ having done so . The coders also examined statements for references to other influ - ences , such as science fiction books and movies . However , as in previ - ous studies ( Ward , 1994 ) , those references did not predominate , oc - curring in only 19 % of the statements . References to Earth animals were considerably more common , and since the focus of the present paper was on the relation between the representativeness of animals in the Earth animal category and the reported use of Earth animals in a task of imagination , only references to Earth animals were ana - lyzed further . Results and Discussion Reports of Earth animal use . Forty - five of the71 par - ticipants ( 63 % ) in Experiment 1B ( creature generation task ) mentioned the influence of one or more specific Earth animals . An additional3 participantsmentioned re - lying on particular Earth animals , but they failed to spec - ify the exact animals or made reference to broad classes of Earth animals ( e . g . , mammals ) . Thus , just over two thirds of the sample mentioned the influence of Earth animals . The participants mentioned relying on a total of 32 dis - tinctEarth animals in generatingtheir imaginarycreatures . Only three of those animals ( goldfish , pterodactyl , and 202 WARD , PATTERSON , SIFONIS , DODDS , AND SAUNDERS slug ) had not been mentioned by participants in the Earth animal listingtask . Imaginationfrequency ranged from 12 to 1 . That is , the most commonly used Earth animal was listed by 12 of the 71 participants in the creature genera - tion task . Imagination frequency for each animal men - tioned is shown in Appendix A . Of most interest was the relation between imagination frequency and the measures of representativeness : output dominance , rank , outputprecedence , and dominance / rank . The relevantcorrelationsfor the entire set of animals listed in the Earth animal listing task ( Experiment1A ) , the crea - ture generationtask ( Experiment1B ) , or bothare depicted in the first row of Table 1 . As can be seen , imaginationfre - quency was significantly positively correlated with all of the measures except rank , to which it appeared largely un - related . Thus , measures that incorporate the frequency withwhichspecificEarthanimalscometomindinresponse to the category cue appear to be better predictors of their use in imagination than how quickly the animals come to mind . One concern in interpretingthis patternof correlations , however , is that , because they were computed on the full set of items , many instances were included that were low in outputdominance . Rankis especiallysusceptibleto idio - syncratic influences for such items , and including them could have introduced enough extraneous variability to make it difficult to detect correlations involvingthat vari - able . For instance , an animal listed by just one participant in the Earth animal listing task ( Experiment 1A ) , and listed first would receive an “average” rank of 1 , whereas the same item listed last would receive an average rank of 20 . Items listed by larger numbers of participants are less susceptible to extreme influences of this kind from the outputorder of any one participant . An additionalconcern about using the full set of animals is that the correlation between output dominance and imagination frequency might have been influenced by the fact that a large num - ber of items in the full set had output dominancescores of 1 and imagination frequency scores of 0 . To determine whether the absence of a correlation be - tween rank and imagination frequency was an artifact of usingthe full set of items , we computedtwo additionalcor - relationcoefficients , eliminatingthepotentiallyproblematic low output dominance items . We eliminated items with output dominancelower than 5 in one case and lower than 15 in the other . As can be seen in the secondand third rows of Table 1 , in each case , the correlation between rank and imaginationfrequency was negativeand significant , indi - cating that the instances of animals that are listed earliest when people consider Earth animals are the ones that are most likely to be used as a basis for developingimaginary extraterrestrial animals . Thus , the failure to detect a cor - relation between rank and imagination frequency for the full set may have been due to the fact that rank is of lim - ited valueas a measure for items low in outputdominance . Also shown in Table 1 is the fact that the correlation be - tween output dominance and imagination frequency re - mained positive , of moderate size , and significant across thesmaller sets compared . Thus , thesignificantcorrelation found between those variablesfor the full set of animals is not simply an artifact of including a large number of in - stances that have an output dominanceof 1 and an imagi - nation frequency of 0 . Likewise , the correlations between output precedence , dominance / rank and imagination fre - quencyremained significantfor those more restrictivesets . Although the correlations for output precedence and dominance / rank tended to be higher than those for output dominance and rank , most were moderate in size , provid - ing evidence that each of the measures had some utilityin predicting imagination frequency . There is , however , evi - dence that the measures that incorporate both dominance and rank information predict variance in imagination fre - quencybeyond eitherof those measures alone . The partial correlation between output precedence and imagination frequency , controllingfor bothoutputdominanceand rank , was positive and significant [ r ( 143 ) = . 289 , p < . 001 ] , as was thecomparablepartialcorrelationbetween dominance / rank and imaginationfrequency [ r ( 143 ) = . 307 , p < . 001 ] . Taken together , the pattern of correlations suggests that the more likely a given animal is to come to mind in re - sponseto the categorylabel , andthefaster itcomesto mind , the more likely it is to be used by participants who are given the task of imagininganimals that might exist on an - other planet . The human effect . An interesting exception to the general pattern of highretrievabilitybeing associatedwith greater use in imagination is the instance human . Only 1 participant ( out of 30 ) listed human as an example of the category animal , whereas 12 ( out of 71 ) reported that they had based their imaginary creature on humans . Indeed , humans were used more than any other animal as a basis for an imaginary creature . Put differently , humans were overrepresented in the imagination task relative to their representativeness in the Earth animal category . We con - Table 1 Correlations Between Output Dominance ( OD ) , Rank , Output Precedence ( OP ) , Dominance / Rank ( OD / R ) , and Imagination Frequency for the Full Set of Animals and for Selected Subsets Retrievability Measure Set Number OD Rank OP OD / R Full 150 ( 147 ) . 486 * 2 . 051 . 524 * . 527 * OD 15 13 . 589 * 2 . 665 * . 658 * . 714 * OD 5 32 . 681 * 2 . 574 * . 719 * . 705 * Nonhuman 149 ( 146 ) . 674 * 2 . 195 * . 725 * . 715 * Note—The number of pairs in the full set for the correlation between rank and imagination frequency was 147 rather than 150 , because the full set of 150 included 3 items that had not been listed in the Earth an - imal listing task and therefore had no meaningful rank information . Their lack of occurrence in the listing task can be meaningfully repre - sented as 0 for the other measures , and thus they could be included in computingthecorrelationsinvolvingthose measures . Correspondingly , thenumberof pairs fortherank / imaginationfrequencycorrelationwas 146 rather than 149 when human was removed from the full set of 150 pairs . * Significantat or beyond the . 05 level . CATEGORY STRUCTURE AND IMAGINATION 203 sider several interpretations of this unexpected finding in the General Discussion section . For now , we simply note that , when human is deleted from the full set of items , the correlations between the retrievability measures and imaginationfrequencyare substantiallyincreased , relative to those computedon the full set , including human ( see last row of Table 1 ) . Creature attributes . Althoughour major focus was on the reported use of Earth creatures as the bases for the par - ticipants’ imagined extraterrestrials , we also noted the properties of the creatures themselves . The vast majority containedat least one standardsense organ ( 99 % ) , at least one standard appendage ( 97 % ) , and the property of bilat - eral symmetry ( 91 % ) ; those percentagesdid not differ sig - nificantly between participants who did versus those who did not report relying on specific Earth animals [ largest x 2 ( 1 , N = 71 ) = 1 . 33 , p > . 24 ] . The percentages were compa - rable to ones reported in previous research ( Ward , 1994 ; Ward & Sifonis , 1997 ) and were consistent with the idea that , regardless of specific conditions and reported ap - proaches to the task , people have a striking tendencyto in - clude those characteristic features of Earth animals in their imagined extraterrestrials . Despite those global similaritiesacross nearly all of the imagined creatures , there were differences associatedwith variations in the participants’ reported approaches to the task . Specifically , extraterrestrialsgenerated by the partic - ipantswho reported relyingon particularEarth animals re - ceivedsignificantlyloweroriginalityscores than those gen - erated by the other participants ( M s = 3 . 18 and 4 . 34 , respectively ) [ t ( 69 ) = 2 . 81 , p < . 01 ] . Put differently , the par - ticipantswho claimed to have based their extraterrestrials on Earth animals produced creatures that more closely re - sembled Earth animals—a findingthat lends credibilityto theirreports . Becausethedrawingsandreportedapproaches were coded separately , it is unlikely that this relationship was based simply on the coders’ ratings of drawing being influenced by their tabulationsof references to Earth ani - mals , and vice versa . The result also supports the assump - tion of the path - of - least - resistancemodel that people pro - jectthepropertiesofretrievedinstancesontotheirimaginedentities . Projecting the properties of specific known ani - mals would be expected to result in creations that closely resemble Earth animals . EXPERIMENT 2 The retrievability of exemplars from the Earth animal categorywas found to be positivelycorrelatedwith the re - ported use of those exemplars in an imaginative genera - tion task . This finding allows a statement beyond the sim - ple and obvious case that knowledge affects imagination . Rather , a particularaspect of category structure—namely , exemplar retrievability—determines the likelihood that specific aspects of conceptual structure will influence imagination . Items that come tomind more quicklyto more peopleare the ones most likely to be used as sources of in - formation for the development of new ideas . In Experiment 2 , we sought to extend the generality of the findings with regard to exemplar retrievability to an - other domain ( tools ) , and we examined the extent to which its influence is resistant to task constraints . In Experi - ment 1 , the participants were free to imagine any creature they could , with no constraints on what it could look like , in what type of environmentit might survive , and so on . It is possible that they gravitated toward Earth animals be - cause those animals provided an easy solution to the task and did not violate any specified constraints . In Experi - ment 2 , we required some of the participants to imagine tools for a species very unlike humans in that they had no appendages . One hypothesisis that , because manipulation by way of hands is a central property of standard tools , constrainingparticipantsto considersuch a creature might encourage them to move away from Earth tool exemplars . Alternatively , however , the tendency to rely on highly re - trievable exemplars of the domain may be strong enough that it remains even when those exemplars would need to be heavily modified to meet task constraints . By this lat - ter view , participants facing the constraint may be just as likely as unconstrained participants to rely on Earth tool models , and they will simply modify those exemplars to meet the needs of the species . Experiment 2A : Listing Real Earth Tools Method Participants . Thirty introductory psychology students from the same source as in Experiments 1A and 1B participated . None had taken part in the previous experiments . Procedure . The procedural details were identical to those in Ex - periment 1A , except that the participants listed the first 20 tools they could think of . Output dominance , rank , output precedence , and dominance / rank for individual tools were determined in the same manner as in Experiment 1A . Results The participantslisted a totalof 188 distinct tools . Out - put dominancerangedfrom 28 ( for hammer ) to 1 . Thecom - pletelist of toolswith outputdominanceof three or greater is shown in Appendix B along with output dominance , rank , dominance / rank , and output precedencefor each in - stance . Data for several additional tools and devices , as described later , are also shown in Appendix B . Experiment 2B : Generating Imaginary Tools Method Participants . One - hundred thirty - five students from the same in - troductory psychology pool as in Experiments 1A and 1B partici - pated . None had been in the previous experiments . Design and Procedure . The participants were asked to imagine tools that might be used by an intelligent species of extraterrestrials . They were further instructed to think of tools that would not be op - erated by electricity or other power sources . Sixty - six of the partic - ipants were given no special information about the creature other than its intelligence . The remaining 69 participants were told that thecrea - ture had no arms , legs , or other appendages comparable to those of Earthanimals . Theintent was toforce them toimagine tools that would 204 WARD , PATTERSON , SIFONIS , DODDS , AND SAUNDERS meet the needs of a specific target creature , rather than allowing them to develop tools with no constraints . After completing their drawings , the participants labeled the tool , gave a brief description of its use and the materials from which it was made , and wrote open - ended statements about any factors that influenced their thinking while developing the idea for the tool . Two coders assessed the properties of the tools , such as the pres - ence of handles and blades , and rated the originality of each tool on a7 - point scale , with higher numbers indicating greater originality . The coders then tabulated explicit statements referring to specific Earth tools , which were used to determine imagination frequency scores for individual instances of tools . Statements were considered to refer to Earth tools if they included a reference to any of the tools noted in the Earth tool listing task ( Experiment 2A ) or ifthey clearly fell into the category of implements designed to aid human activities , such as food preparation and agriculture . Coder agreement exceeded 85 % for each categorical variable , and originality ratings were positively correlated ( r = . 710 ) . ResultsReports of relianceon Earth tools . Collapsingacross conditions ( control vs . no appendages ) , 92 of the 135 par - ticipants ( 68 % ) mentionedspecific Earth tools . Consider - ingtheconditionsseparately , 64 % of thecontrolparticipants and 72 % of those in the no - appendages condition relied on specific Earth tools . Because those percentagesdid not differ substantially , and because the pattern of correlations between imagination frequency and the measures of ex - emplar retrievability did not differ across the conditions , thosecorrelationswill be reported collapsedacross groups . We simply note here that requiring the participantsto con - sider a species that had no appendages did not decrease their tendency to rely on Earth tools , nor did it affect their tendency to rely most heavily on tools that are more re - trievable . The participants reported reliance on 50 distinct Earth tools , and imaginationfrequencyranged from 23 ( for ham - mer ) to 1 . Of that set of tools , 13 were ones that had not been mentionedin the Earth tool listing task , and these in - cluded fruit corer , dicer , juicer , laser , lever , lightbulbre - mover , plow , scooper , scraper , scythe , straw , trowel , and tweezers . Thus , in comparison with the participants who relied on only three extralist animals in developing their imaginary extraterrestrials , the participants developing imaginary tools appear to have diverged somewhat more from the listings we obtained for standard Earth tools . However , consistent with the results for animals , the cor - relations between output dominance , rank , output prece - dence , dominance / rank , and imaginationfrequencyreveal a link between item retrievability and the use of items in imagination . Table 2 shows the correlationsfor the full set of items and for items with output dominance of at least 5 or at least 15 . Note that , although the correlations were of moderate size , they were not significant for the measures of outputdominanceand rank with imaginationfrequency for the set of items with output dominance of 15 or more . This is not surprising , however , given the low number of pairs ( 6 ) involved in the comparison . In addition , using a one - tailedcriterion ( which may be more appropriate given that the hypothesis about retrievability was a directional one ) , even those correlations were significant . As in the case of animals , partial correlations between output precedence and imagination frequency and be - tween dominance / rank and imagination frequency were significant when controlling for both output dominance and rank [ r ( 184 ) = . 337 , p < . 001 , and r ( 184 ) = . 586 , p < . 001 , respectively ] . In addition , those who mentionedspe - cific Earth tools generatedimaginarytools that were rated as significantlylower in originalitythan those who did not ( M s = 3 . 03 and 4 . 18 , respectively ) [ t ( 133 ) = 4 . 25 , p < . 001 ] . Thus , again , a reported reliance on Earth models was as - sociated with developing imaginary products that di - verged less from known category instances . Data on imaginedtools . Althoughtheparticipantsinthe no - appendages condition did not differ from those in the controlconditioninthetendencyto relyon real Earth tools , they did impose modifications needed to make the tools usable by the species they were asked to consider . Specif - ically , they were significantly less likely to include han - dles on their imagined tools ( 23 % vs . 73 % ) [ x 2 ( 1 , N = 135 ) = 33 . 20 , p < . 001 ] . They solved the problem of how the creature would use the tool by more often including alternative devices , such as mouth pieces ( 39 % vs . 1 % ) [ x 2 ( 1 , N = 135 ) = 29 . 03 , p < . 001 ] or harnesses to attach the tooltothehead or body ( 20 % vs . 3 % ) [ x 2 ( 1 , N = 135 ) = 9 . 62 , p < . 01 ] . Thus , rather than abandoningexemplars of highlyretrievable instancesof the Earth tool category , the participantswho were constrainedto think abouta creature without appendages used standard Earth tools and modi - fied them appropriately . Examples of tools including the modifications are shown in Figure 1 . EXPERIMENT 3 Other Measures of Representativeness According to the path - of - least - resistance model , when people imagine novel entities , they tend to rely on known category instances that come to mind most readily . Al - though the correlations between the retrievability of ex - Table 2 Correlations Between Output Dominance ( OD ) , Rank , Output Precedence ( OP ) , Dominance / Rank ( OD / R ) , and Imagination Frequency for the Full Set of Tools and for Selected Subsets Retrievability Measure Set Number OD Rank OP OD / R Full 201 . 615 * 2 . 213 * . 661 * . 769 * OD 15 6 . 780 2 . 745 . 868 * . 985 * OD 5 26 . 549 * 2 . 393 * . 592 * . 549 * Note—The number of pairs in the full set for the correlation between rank and imagination frequency was 188 rather than 201 , because the fullset of201included13items thathad notbeenlisted in theEarth tool listing task and therefore had no meaningful rank information . Their lack ofoccurrence in the listing task can be meaningfullyrepresented as 0 for the other measures , and thusthey could be included in computing the correlations involving those measures . * Significant at or beyond the . 05 level . CATEGORY STRUCTURE AND IMAGINATION 205 emplars and their reported use in imaginationfound in the first two experimentswere consistentwith thisview , it is by no means certain from those findings that retrievability is the only , or even the most influential , property of category representativeness . The obtainedcorrelationsmight be the result of retrievabilitybeingan indirectmeasure of another aspect of graded category structure , such as typicality . Furthermore , even if retrievabilityindependentlyaccounts for some amount of variance in imaginative tasks , it may be a smaller amount of variance than for other measures . In Experiment 3 , we examined these issues . As an alternativeto immediately adoptingthe first idea that comes to mind , peoplemight , for a variety of reasons , considerother possible models and gravitate toward those that seem most typical of the category , most familiar , and most pleasing , and that satisfy some ideal or meet some other criterion . For instance , because the generative task representsa kindof communicationbetween the participant Figure 1 . Examples of imaginary tools generated by participants in the no - appendages condition . 206 WARD , PATTERSON , SIFONIS , DODDS , AND SAUNDERS and the experimenter , the participant might be concerned with using highly typical or familiar instances to aid that communication . As another example , because the partic - ipants were asked to devise only one tool , they might have tried to develop imaginary tools that would be especially useful . Because retrievability might be related to those variables , the correlationsobserved in the first two exper - iments could be a result of the variance that output domi - nance shares with those measures . In Experiment 3 , the participants rated animals and tools on several different scales , and we correlated those ratings with the previous measures of imagination frequency . Method Participants . One hundred seventy - six students from the same pool as in Experiments 1 and 2 participated . None had been in any of the previous experiments . Materials and Design . Theparticipants provided ratings for 70an - imals . The set included all of the animals that had been listed by at least 3 participants in Experiment 1A ( the Earth animal listing task ) or that had been reported as an influence on the development of an imaginary creature by at least 1 participant in Experiment 1B ( the imaginary animals task ) . Similarly , the tools toberated included those with output dominance scores of 3 or more or that had been men - tioned by 1 or more of the participants in Experiment 2B ( the imag - inary tools task ) . The set of tools was also expanded slightly toinclude other clearly useful artifacts that had been mentioned by the partic - ipants in Experiment 2B but that had not been categorized as tools for analysis purposes in Experiment 2A . This resulted in a total of 89 tools being rated . The additional items were basket , boat , box , cage , drink machine , exercise machine , golf tee , hairbrush , injector , projector , shoe , skateboard , vehicle , wagon , and wheel . Including these items ensured a wide range of ratings and meant that the cor - relations reported here were influenced by data from 81 % of the par - ticipants in Experiment 2B . Separate groups of participants ( n s = 16 each ) used 7 - point scales to rate the animals on their typicality , familiarity , frequency of oc - currence , centrality to human concerns , likeability , and similarity to humans , with larger numbers indicating higher ratings . Following Barsalou ( 1985 ) , typicality was assessed by instructing the partici - pants to rate how good an example of the category a given exemplar was , familiarity was assessed with instructions that emphasized fa - miliarity to the rater , and frequency was assessed with instructions that emphasized frequency in the world in general . Similarly , sepa - rate groups of participants ( n s = 20 each ) rated each tool on 7 - point scales of typicality , familiarity , frequency of occurrence , and use - fulness . Results and Discussion Animals . The mean scale values for each animal are shown in AppendixA . Because human representedan un - usual item , our analysishere concentrateson the set of an - imals that were rated , excluding human . 2 We report on dominance / rank as the measure of retrievability that was compared with the ratings from the present experiment , but comparable findings were obtainedwith comparisons involving output dominance and output precedence . Cor - relations between dominance / rank , the present ratings , and imagination frequency are shown in the first column of Table 3 . As shown , ratings of typicality , liking , and sim - ilarity to humans were not significantly correlated with imaginationfrequencyas measuredin Experiment1B . Also shown is the fact that ratings of familiarity , frequency , and centrality to human concerns were positively correlated with imagination frequency , although the magnitude of thosecorrelationswas smallerthanthatbetweendominance / rank and imagination frequency . Morerevealingthantheraw correlations , however , was an analysis of the pattern of partial correlations , depicted in the second columnof Table 3 . As shown , when controlling for dominance / rank , none of the correlationsbetween any of the ratings and imagination frequency was significant . On the other hand , when controllingsimultaneouslyfor all six ratings , dominance / rank remained significantly posi - tively correlated with imagination frequency . Similar re - sults were obtained when using a log transformation of dominance / rank as a way of adjusting for positive skew - ing of that variable that might have given it an advantage in correlating with imaginationfrequency . The raw corre - lation with imagination frequency was still significant [ r ( 67 ) = . 641 , p < . 001 ] , as was the partial correlation when controllingfor all six rating variables [ r ( 61 ) = . 591 , p < . 001 ] . None of the ratings was significantlypositively related to imaginationfrequency when controllingfor the Table 3 Raw and Partial Correlations of Dominance / Rank ( OD / R ) , Typicality , Similarity , Familiarity , Frequency , Liking , and Centrality to Human Concerns With Imagination Frequency for the Category of Animals Type of Correlation Variable Raw Partial OD / R . 682 * . 595 * Typicality 2 . 010 2 . 196 Similarity . 078 2 . 084 Familiarity . 468 * . 211 Frequency . 366 * . 151 Liking . 188 2 . 019 Centrality . 257 * 2 . 024 Note—For raw correlations , df = 67 . The partial correlation of OD / R with imaginationfrequency controlledsimultaneouslyfor rated typical - ity , similarity , familiarity , frequency , liking , and importance to humans ; for this partial correlation , df = 61 . The remaining partial correlations controlledforOD / R ; for thesecorrelations , df = 66 . * Significantatthe . 05 level or beyond . Table 4 Raw and Partial Correlations of Dominance / Rank ( OD / R ) , Typicality , Familiarity , Frequency , and Usefulness With ImaginationFrequency for the Category of Tools Type of Correlation Variable Raw Partial OD / R . 741 * . 730 * Typicality . 098 2 . 220 * Familiarity . 256 * . 175 Frequency . 270 * . 230 * Usefulness . 248 * . 118 Note—For raw correlations , df = 87 . The partial correlation of OD / R with imaginationfrequency controlledsimultaneouslyfor rated typical - ity , familiarity , frequency , and usefulness ; for this partial correlation , df = 83 . The remaining partial correlations controlled for OD / R ; for these correlations , df = 86 . * Significantat the . 05 level or beyond . CATEGORY STRUCTURE AND IMAGINATION 207 log transformed dominance / rank , and , in fact , typicality was significantly negatively correlated with imagination frequency [ r ( 66 ) = 2 . 294 , p < . 05 ] . Tools . The mean scale values for each tool are shown in Appendix B . Correlations between dominance / rank , the four sets of ratings , and imaginationfrequency are shown in the first column of Table 4 . As shown , the largest cor - relationwas that between dominance / rank and imagination frequency , although frequency , familiarity , and usefulness were positively correlated to a smaller degree with imag - inationfrequency . As in the case of animals , when control - lingfor dominance / rank , the positivecorrelationsbetween those ratings and imagination frequency were reduced , al - thoughthe correlation for rated frequency remained signifi - cant , and typicality was negatively correlated with imagi - nationfrequency . Ascanbeseen , whencontrollingfor all four ratings simultaneously , dominance / rank remained signif - icantly positively correlated with imagination frequency . As was true for animals , a log transformed version of dom - inance / rank led to the same pattern of raw and partial cor - relations . Together , the results suggest that retrievability , as mea - suredbydominance / rank , predictsthelikelihoodofan item being used in imaginationmore strongly than a variety of other measures of category structure , includingtypicality , familiarity , and frequency of instantiation , as well as rat - ings of ideals , such as liking and usefulness ( see , e . g . , Barsalou , 1985 ) . EXPERIMENT 4 Imaginary Fruit and Task Demands The results of Experiments 1 – 3 established a clear link betweentheeasewithwhichitemscometomindinresponsetocategorylabelsandthetendencytousethoseitemsintasksofimagination . In Experiment 4 , we considered the extentto which the results remain the same across another domain—namely , fruit—andacross instructionalconditions designed to encourage the participantsto move away from representativeexemplars . Althoughthe prior references to imaginary planets were intended to signal to the partici - pants that creative responses would be appropriate and even desirable , it is possible that they relied on highly re - trievable instances in an effort to avoid producing items that would appear too creative or silly . In Experiment 4 , we explicitly instructed some participants to be creative , and we instructedothersnot to feel that they had to patterntheir imaginary fruit after instances of Earth fruit . Method Participants . Thirty - six participants from the same pool as in the previous experiments participated in a fruit listing task , and 203 par - ticipated in an imaginary fruit generation task . None had been in any of the previous experiments . Design and Procedure . Following the same procedure as de - scribed in Experiments 1A and 2A , 36 participants were asked to list the first 20 fruit that came to mind . Output dominance , rank , output precedence , and dominance / rank were computed as in the previous experiments . Following procedures similar to those in Experi - ments 1B and 2B , 203 participants were asked to imagine , draw , and describe fruit that might exist on a planet very different from Earth and to indicate the factors that influenced their creations . Twocoders rated the participants’ creations for originality on a 7 - point scale , noted the presence of various characteristic fruit properties ( e . g . , seeds , juiciness ) , and tabulated references to specific exemplars of Earth fruit as sources of the imaginary products . Fifty of the participants who generated ideas for imaginary fruit were asked to be as creative as they could be , and 50 were asked to use their wildest imagination and not “feel bound by what fruit is like onEarth . ” These will be referred to as the creative and not - bound conditions , respectively . The remaining 103 participants , in the con - trol condition , were given no special instructions about how to ap - proach the task . Results and Discussion The participants in the fruit listing task listed 66 dis - tinct exemplars of real Earth fruit , and output dominance ranged from 36 ( for orange ) to 1 . A listing of all fruit that were mentioned , along with their corresponding retriev - ability scores , is presented in Appendix C . Sixty - six percent of the participantsin the control con - dition of the imaginary fruit generation task mentioned at least one Earth fruit or related item as a source of infor - mationfor theirextraterrestrialfruit . Althoughthatpercent - age dippedslightlyto 62 % in the creativecondition , the de - cline in reliance on Earth fruit was not significant ( x 2 < 1 ) . In contrast , 48 % of the participants in the not - bound con - dition reported a reliance on Earth fruit , which was sig - nificantly lower than the percentage for the control group [ x 2 ( 1 , N = 153 ) = 4 . 56 , p < . 05 ] . Thus , instructionsto use one’s wildest imagination and not feel bound by what Earth fruit is like appear to have reduced the participants’ reliance on exemplars of Earth fruit as models for imagi - nary fruit . However , even with this significant decline , it is still the case that nearly half of the participants in the not - boundconditionreported a reliance on at least one ex - emplar of Earth fruit . Across the groups , 45 distinct ex - emplars were mentioned , with 32 being items that ap - peared in the fruit listingtask . The remaining 13 items did not appear in the fruit listing task but were included for analysispurposesbecausetheyare technicallyfruit ( berries , dewberry , eggplant , gourd , pepper , and zucchini ) or be - Table 5 Correlations Between Output Dominance ( OD ) , Rank , Output Precedence ( OP ) , Dominance / Rank ( OD / R ) , and Imagination Frequency for the Full Set of Fruit for Each Condition Separately and for the Conditions Combined Retrievability Measure Set Number OD Rank OP OD / R Control 79 ( 66 ) . 622 2 . 516 . 785 . 926 Creative 79 ( 66 ) . 690 2 . 517 . 812 . 841 Not bound 79 ( 66 ) . 637 2 . 491 . 750 . 703 Combined 79 ( 66 ) . 695 2 . 554 . 850 . 926 Note—The numberof pairs for the correlation between rank and imag - ination frequency was 66 rather than 79 , because the full set of 79 in - cluded13items that had notbeen listed in theEarth fruitlistingtask and therefore had no meaningful rank information . For the other measures , thoseitems could meaningfullyreceive scores of 0 and could thusbe in - cluded in computing the correlations . All correlations were significant beyond the . 05 level . 208 WARD , PATTERSON , SIFONIS , DODDS , AND SAUNDERS cause they were highly familiar plant products ( corn , flower , green bean , lettuce , onion , peanut , and turnip ) . Imaginationfrequency ranged from 35 ( for apple ) to 1 . The correlations between imagination frequency and the measures of exemplar retrievability are depicted in Table 5 separately for the three conditions . As is evident , those correlations revealed significant relations between the measures across all of the conditions . The correlations shown in Table 5 are for the full set of fruit mentioned by any participantin either the listing task or the imagination task , but , as in the previous experiments , the same pattern held for correlations computed on smaller sets of items with output dominance scores of at least 5 and 15 ( small - est r = . 579 ) . Thus , among those who rely on Earth fruit , the tendencyto rely more on fruit that are more readily re - trievable was evident in all conditions . A 2 3 3 analysis of variance was computed on origi - nality scores using reported reliance on Earth fruit ( yes or no ) and condition ( control , creative , not bound ) as factors . Consistent with results from Experiments 1B and 2B , the analysis revealed a significant effect of Earth fruit [ F ( 1 , 197 ) = 34 . 51 , MS e = 0 . 936 , p < . 001 ] , indicatingthat those who reported a reliance on Earth fruit developed creations that were rated as reliably less original than those who did not report a reliance on Earth fruit ( M s = 2 . 50 vs . 3 . 40 ) . The analysis also revealed a significant ef - fect of condition [ F ( 2 , 197 ) = 5 . 78 , MS e = 0 . 936 , p < . 05 ] , with the means for the creative and not - bound conditions being nearly identical ( 3 . 12 vs . 3 . 16 ) and the mean for the control condition being lower ( 2 . 57 ) . There was no sig - nificant interaction ( F < 1 ) . GENERAL DISCUSSION The results of these experiments yielded a strikingly consistent pattern . Across the three distinct domains of animals , tools , and fruit , roughly two thirds of the partici - pants who were asked to imagine novel instancesreported relying on specific known exemplars from those domains . Furthermore , they did so even when confronted with task constraints that might have been expected to militate against the properties of such instances , as in the case of toolsfor creatures withoutappendages , and when asked to be as creative as they could be . Although the tendency to rely on specific instancesof Earth fruit was reduced some - what when the participants were instructed to not feel bound by real Earth exemplars , even in that case nearly half of the participants reported a reliance on specific members of the domain . The results support the speci - ficity principle of the path - of - least - resistance model , which states that people will tend to move toward rela - tively specific levels of conceptual hierarchies to provide a starting point for their new ideas . It should be noted , however , that there are limits to specificity , in that most re - trieved items appear to be basic level instances . Clearly , not all individualsrely on specific instances as starting points for their novel creations . One third of the participantsgave no written indicationof having done so . Thus , it is inappropriate to characterize specificity as a rigid constraint on generative processing . Rather , it is a strategic approach , which happens to be dominant . Other approaches are possible , and the nature of the imagined productsevidentlyvaries with the person’s approach . That is , across all three domains , the participants who did not mention a reliance on specific instances developed cre - ations that were rated as higher in originality or more di - vergent from the base domain . The tendencyto rely on any givencategoryinstancewas found to be stronglyrelated to its representativenessin the relevant category . Although “representative” can be de - fined in several ways , the property that was observed to be most importantto creative generationwas retrievability or “coming - to - mindedness”—that is , how readily an in - stance comes to mind when the category name is given as a cue . The more likely it is that a given item will come to mind when accessing a concept , the more likely it is that the item will be used as a starting point in developing a new idea . In the mechanicalengineeringdomain , Jansson , Condoor , and Brock ( 1993 ) have made the related claim that design engineers tend to pattern new devices after readily accessible instances of earlier solutions , which often leads them to craft nonoptimal designs . Relation to Other Influences of Item Retrievability It may seem odd that people would have a tendency to rely on exemplars that come to mind quicklywhen they are engaged in a generative task , especially when they have been instructed to be creative . Might they not be expected to censor theirown ideas to some extentand attemptto re - trieve other , more exoticexemplars as models ? Mightthey not producemore innovativecreationsif they assessed the appropriateness of the material that came to mind for the task at hand and rejected initial items in favor of later , more divergent ones ? The tendency for the participants in the present creative generation tasks to stick with the pro - saic items that came to mind quickly , rather than rejecting them in favor of somethingmore exotic , is congruentwith other observations of people not appropriately monitoring or excluding information that is readily available , though nonoptimal or incorrect . First , there is the general phenomenon of people con - forming to prior knowledge even when encouraged not to do so or when directly informed that it might interfere with their performance . This occurs for previously stored knowledgeas well as for recently presented examples , for undergraduate students as well as for design engineers , and for a variety of domains , including toys , implements , animals , and faces ( e . g . , Bredart et al . , 1998 ; Jansson & Smith , 1991 ; Marsh et al . , 1996 ; Smith et al . , 1993 ; Ward & Sifonis , 1997 ; Wiley , 1998 ) . The picture that emerges is that either ( 1 ) peoplefail to assess whether a givenpiece of accessible information is legitimate or appropriate for the creative task they are performing or ( 2 ) having made the assessment , they neverthelesshave difficultyavoiding the influence of that information . CATEGORY STRUCTURE AND IMAGINATION 209 The fact that peopleconform to existingknowledgeand to example - activated information despite instructions to avoid doing so suggeststhat at least a portion of the struc - tured imagination phenomenon can be characterized as inadvertent in nature . To that extent , the phenomenon is also consistentwith observationsof inadvertentplagiarism in which participants copy instances they have been ex - posed to , despite admonitionsnot to do so ( e . g . , Brown & Murphy , 1989 ; Marsh & Bower , 1993 ; Marsh , Landau , & Hicks , 1997 ) . Of particularinterest , Marshet al . ( 1997 ) have shown that participants who plagiarize items to which they have been exposed are subsequently able to accu - rately identify the external origins of those items . Thus , in inadvertent plagiarism tasks as well , people do not effec - tively exclude inappropriate material that comes to mind , eventhoughtheymay possessinformationthat would allow them to do so . A similarpatternemerges in studiesof false or “created” memories . Smith , Ward , Tindell , Sifonis , and Wilkenfeld ( 2000 ) presented participants with categorized lists from which items at varying levels of output dominance and typicalityhad been deleted . Consistent with data from as - sociativelystructured lists ( e . g . , Deese , 1959 ; Roediger & McDermott , 1995 ) , participants falsely recalled some of the eliminateditems . More importantly , participantswere more likely to falsely recall those items that were higher in output dominance than those that were lower in output dominance . Interestingly , as in the present experiments , output dominance was a better predictor of performance than was typicality . When the variance that typicality shared with output dominancewas controlledfor , typical - ity was found to be uncorrelated with false recall . Thus , again , people seem not to be adept at excluding from the task items that may come to mind readily but are never - theless inappropriatein that context . And , as in the case of unconscious plagiarism , participants do seem to have at least some types of source information that could help them to exclude such items but do not spontaneously make good use of that information ( Smith , Tindell , Pierce , Gilliland , & Gerkens , 2001 ) . One reasonpeoplemay relyso heavilyonitemsthatcome to mind easily is that generation tasks are cognitively de - manding . Althoughthe informationis potentiallyavailable to allow people to reject inappropriate or limiting starting points , their cognitive resources are devoted elsewhere , leaving little left over to perform the needed metacogni - tive monitoring ( see Marsh et al . , 1997 ) . Consistent with this view , participants in the no - appendages condition of Experiment2B , who had the additionalburden of figuring outhow an appendagelesscreaturecoulduse a tool , showed no reduction in the likelihood of retrieving and using highly accessible instances of Earth tools , whereas those simply instructed to not be bound by Earth fruit but given no otherconstraintsin Experiment4 did show a reduction . The propertiesof the imaginary tools generated by the for - mer participants suggest that they devoted resources to adapting tools to novel creatures rather than to moving away from readily accessible starting tools . Despite the overwhelming influence of coming - to - mindedness , the present findings also provide a hint that there may be some censoring of the items that come to mind , albeit in a very limited form . First , as noted earlier , instructionsto not feel bound by Earth exemplars reduced reliance on those exemplars . Second , for bothanimals and tools , when controlling for the variance associated with retrievability , typicalitywas negativelycorrelatedwith use in imagination . Althoughhighlyspeculative , it may be that people tend to rely on items that come to mind quickly , but , among those items that do so , they try to choose less typical instances . In a related way , Ward , Dodds , Saun - ders , and Sifonis ( 2000 ) showed that attributes that are equally likely to bring particular exemplars to mind can nevertheless have different effects on imagined entities . For example , arms and opposable thumbs are equally likely to bring humans to mind , but only the latter leads to an increase in the proportion of humanoid extraterrestri - als that participantsdevelop . Opposable thumbs are more central to the concept human than are arms , and the par - ticipantsseem to have made use of centralityin determin - ing the extent to which they would project the properties of humans onto their creations . The Human Effect and Flexible Category Construction An interesting exception to the general pattern of find - ings was that , in comparison with their near absence from lists of Earth animals , humans were overrepresented as sources of influence on the form of imagined extraterres - trials . One possible account of this unexpected finding is that category representationsare flexible rather than rigid and that much of the graded structure of a category results from the way it is constructed on a given occasion or in a particularcontext . Ratingsof typicality , for instance , have been shown to vary with a number of factors , including the perspective the respondent is supposed to adopt ( Barsalou , 1987 ) and the specific conceptsthat are merged in a combination ( e . g . , Medin & Shoben , 1988 ) . Likewise , gradations in retrievability can be expected to vary across situations . Thus , there may be somethingaboutthe context of the generative task that leads to the category animal being constructedin such a way that human is more highly accessible than it is under ordinary listing conditions . One importantdifference between the listing and imag - inationtasks , for instance , is that they involvedifferent im - plicit contrasts . In the Earth animal listing task , the focus is necessarily on creatures that live on Earth , exclusively . In that context , the term animal may embody a natural contrast between humans and otheranimals , with the con - sequence that humans are unlikely to come to mind as in - stances of the category animal . In the context of generat - ing extraterrestrials , however , the relevant contrast sets may no longer be humans versus animals , but rather living things on Earth versus those not on Earth . In that context , humans would become part of the set of possibleEarth an - imal models and therefore more accessible in that task . Implicitor explicitcontrastsets havebeen notedas sources 210 WARD , PATTERSON , SIFONIS , DODDS , AND SAUNDERS of participants’ tendencies to either list or fail to list cer - tain category attributes ( see , e . g . , Tversky & Hemenway , 1984 ) , and it is reasonable to suppose that a similar phe - nomenon influences the accessibilityand selection of cat - egory exemplars . A number of otherobservationsare also consistentwith the idea that category construction is flexible in both non - creative and imaginativeendeavors . For instance , priming from recent experiences may alter the typicalitystructure of the category that is constructed ( e . g . , Barsalou , 1987 ) and may make some items more accessiblein the category ( i . e . , more likely to be listed as exemplars ) than they ordi - narily would be ( e . g . , Graf , Shimamura , & Squire , 1985 ) . Similarly , in creative generation tasks , people’s reliance on particular category instances has been shown to vary withtheimmediatecontext . Forexample , whenparticipants are asked to imagine extraterrestrial animals , telling them that the creatures have attributes such as feathers and scales leads them to rely more on birds and fish than they do in control tasks ( Ward , 1994 ) . The result could reflect the fact that the attributesalter the structure of the concept as it is being constructed for use in imagination , such that birds and fish are more readily accessible than they ordi - narily would be . Likewise , we would expect that instruc - tional conditionsthat increased the accessibilityof partic - ular tools or fruit would lead to a greater use of those items in an imagination task . For instance , a planet with lots of wood might increase the accessibility of carpentry tools and thus lead to more use of those tools in generatingideas for imaginary tools . Conceptualizedin this way , data from creative tasks are again seen to be consistent with those from false memory tasks . Smith et al . ( 2000 ) , for instance , showed that prim - ing by way of a pleasantnessrating task increases the like - lihoodof a given exemplar being falsely recalled . Presum - ably , the priming alters the accessibility of the items , such that participants confuse them with actual list items . An alternative account of the human effect is that it re - flects something about the underlying structure of the an - imal category and how it is projected in imagination . Par - ticipants may be exhibiting a kind of humanocentric bias in that their concepts of animals may be organized around and derive at least some of their meaning from their rela - tion to humans . When faced with the task of creating novel animals , participantsmay have a strong tendency to project much of this central aspect of themselves—that is , their humanness—onto the new entities . Variations in Category Structures and Expansion Mechanisms Although general in the sense of operating across dif - ferent conceptualdomains and conditions , the present re - sultsare limitedin the sense that the data come from North American adults ( i . e . , collegestudents ) . The strongest case of the path of least resistance is that it involves a univer - sal tendency to gravitate toward items that come to mind readily . Thus , in future research , it will be importantto ex - amine not only a broader range of conceptualdomainsbut also a broader range of participants . Any cultural , linguis - tic , or developmental differences in the retrievability of specific category instances ought to be reflected in differ - ential reliance on those instances in tasks of imagination . Conceptual expansion can also occur through a variety of other mechanisms , includingthe combinationof previ - ously separate concepts ( Hampton , 1987 , 1997 ; Murphy , 1988 ; Thagard , 1997 ; Wisniewski , 1996 , 1997 ) , the meta - phoric representation of one domain in terms of another ( Glucksberg & Keysar , 1990 ; Glucksberg , Manfredi , & McGlone , 1997 ; Tourangeau & Rips , 1991 ) , and the ana - logical transfer of knowledgefrom one domain to another ( Gentner , 1983 , 1989 ; Holyoak & Thagard , 1989 , 1995 ) . Factors , such as “coming - to - mindedness , ” that are found to be importantfor one aspect of conceptualexpansionare good candidatesfor playinga role in other aspects . In con - ceptual combination , for instance , potential interpreta - tions that come to mind most readily , perhaps on the basis of the prior combinatorial histories of their components ( e . g . , Gagne & Shoben , 1997 ) , may be adopted even if they are not necessarily optimal in a given situation . Shift - ing to more creatively appropriate interpretationsmay re - quire additional cognitive resources ( see , e . g . , Hampton , 1997 ) . Likewise , source analogs that are readily accessi - ble may dominate responding , even if they do not provide the best analogies according to structural alignment prin - ciples ( e . g . , Gentner , 1983 ; Gentner & Toupin , 1986 ) . The most successful uses of analogiesmay involvethe contin - ued assessment and refinement of the links between sources and targets ( see , e . g . , Gentner et al . , 1997 ) . Thus , part of being creative may be in the capacity or willing - ness to move beyond initiallyretrieved information to bet - ter or more refined exemplars , interpretations , and source analogs . Research on creativecognitionholdsthe promise of identifyingthe most effective means of facilitatingsuch efforts . REFERENCES Barsalou , L . W . ( 1985 ) . Ideals , central tendency , and frequency of in - stantiation . Journalof Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 11 , 629 - 654 . Barsalou , L . W . ( 1987 ) . The instability of graded structure : Implica - tionsforthenatureofconcepts . InU . Neisser ( Ed . ) , Conceptsandcon - ceptual development : Ecological and intellectual factors in catego - rization ( pp . 101 - 140 ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Basalla , G . ( 1988 ) . The evolution of technology . London : Cambridge University Press . Battig , W . F . , & Montague , W . E . ( 1969 ) . Category norms for verbal items in 56categories : A replication and extensionofthe Connecticut category norms . Journal of Experimental Psychology Monographs , 80 ( 3 , Pt 2 ) . Bredart , S . , Ward , T . B . , & Marczewski , P . ( 1998 ) . Structuredimag - ination of novel creatures’ faces . American Journal of Psychology , 111 , 607 - 625 . Brown , A . S . , & Murphy , D . R . ( 1989 ) . Cryptomnesia : Delineatingin - advertentplagiarism . Journalof ExperimentalPsychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 15 , 432 - 442 . Cacciari , C . , Levorato , M . C . , & Cicogna , P . ( 1997 ) . Imagination at work : Conceptual and linguisticcreativity in children . In T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith , & J . Vaid ( Eds . ) , Creative thought : An investigation of conceptualstructuresandprocesses ( pp . 145 - 177 ) . Washington , DC : American PsychologicalAssociation . Condoor , S . S . , Brock , H . R . , & Burger , C . P . ( 1993 , June ) . Innova - tionthroughearlyrecognitionofcriticaldesignparameters . Paperpre - CATEGORY STRUCTURE AND IMAGINATION 211 sented at the meeting of the American Society for Engineering Edu - cation , Urbana , IL . Deese , J . ( 1959 ) . On thepredictionofoccurrence of particularverbalin - trusionsinimmediate recall . Journalof ExperimentalPsychology , 58 , 17 - 22 . Gagne , C . L . , & Shoben , E . J . ( 1997 ) . Theinfluenceofthematicrelations onthecomprehensionofnonpredicatingcombinations . JournalofEx - perimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 23 , 71 - 87 . Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure mapping : A theoretical framework for analogy . CognitiveScience , 7 , 155 - 170 . Gentner , D . ( 1989 ) . Themechanisms of analogical learning . In S . Vos - niadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 199 - 241 ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Gentner , D . , Brem , S . , Ferguson , R . , Wolff , P . , Markman , A . B . , & Forbus , K . ( 1997 ) . Analogy and creativity in the works of Johannes Kepler . In T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith , & J . Vaid ( Eds . ) , Creative thought : An investigation of conceptual structures and processes ( pp . 403 - 460 ) . Washington , DC : American PsychologicalAssociation . Gentner , D . , & Toupin , C . ( 1986 ) . Systematicity and surface similar - ity in the developmentof analogy . CognitiveScience , 10 , 277 - 300 . Glucksberg , S . , & Keysar , B . ( 1990 ) . Understanding metaphorical comparisons : Beyond similarity . Psychological Review , 97 , 3 - 18 . Glucksberg , S . , Manfredi , D . A . , & McGlone , M . S . ( 1997 ) . Meta - phor comprehension : How metaphors create new categories . In T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith , & J . Vaid ( Eds . ) , Creative thought : An investiga - tion of conceptualstructures and processes ( pp . 327 - 350 ) . Washing - ton , DC : American PsychologicalAssociation . Graf , P . , Shimamura , A . P . , & Squire , L . R . ( 1985 ) . Priming across modalities and priming across category levels : Extendingthe domain of preserved function in amnesia . Journal of Experimental Psychol - ogy : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 11 , 386 - 396 . Hampton , J . A . ( 1987 ) . Inheritance of attributesin natural concept con - junctions . Memory & Cognition , 15 , 55 - 71 . Hampton , J . A . ( 1997 ) . Emergent attributes in combined concepts . In T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith , & J . Vaid ( Eds . ) , Creative thought : An inves - tigation of conceptual structures and processes ( pp . 83 - 110 ) . Wash - ington , DC : American PsychologicalAssociation . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . R . ( 1989 ) . A computational model of analogical problemsolving . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Sim - ilarityandanalogicalreasoning ( pp . 242 - 266 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Holyoak , K . J . , & Thagard , P . R . ( 1995 ) . Mental leaps . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Jansson , D . G . , Condoor , S . S . , & Brock , H . R . ( 1993 ) . Cognitionin design : Viewing the hiddensideof the design process . Environment & Planning—B , Planning & Design , 20 , 257 - 271 . Jansson , D . G . , & Smith , S . M . ( 1991 ) . Design fixation . Design Stud - ies , 12 , 3 - 11 . Karmiloff - Smith , A . ( 1990 ) . Constraints on representational change : Evidencefrom children’s drawing . Cognition , 34 , 57 - 83 . Marsh , R . L . , & Bower , G . H . ( 1993 ) . Eliciting cryptomnesia : Uncon - scious plagiarism in a puzzle task . Journal of Experimental Psychol - ogy : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 19 , 673 - 688 . Marsh , R . L . , Landau , J . D . , & Hicks , J . L . ( 1996 ) . Howexamples may ( and may not ) constraincreativity . Memory & Cognition , 24 , 669 - 680 . Marsh , R . L . , Landau , J . D . , & Hicks , J . L . ( 1997 ) . Contributionsof inadequate source monitoring to unconscious plagiarism during idea generation . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 23 , 886 - 897 . Marsh , R . L . , Ward , T . B . , & Landau , J . D . ( 1999 ) . The inadvertent useofpriorknowledgeina generativecognitivetask . Memory & Cog - nition , 27 , 94 - 105 . Medin , D . L . , & Shoben , E . J . ( 1988 ) . Context and structure in con - ceptual combination . CognitivePsychology , 20 , 158 - 190 . Murphy , G . L . ( 1988 ) . Comprehending complex concepts . Cognitive Science , 12 , 529 - 562 . Perkins , D . N . ( 1981 ) . The mind’s best work . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Perkins , D . N . ( 1988 ) . Creativityand thequest fora mechanism . In R . J . Sternberg & E . E . Smith ( Eds . ) , The psychology of human thought ( pp . 309 - 336 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Roediger , H . L . , III , & McDermott , K . B . ( 1995 ) . Creating false mem - ories : Remembering words not presented in lists . Journal of Experi - mental Psychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 21 , 803 - 814 . Rubin , D . C . , & Kontis , T . C . ( 1983 ) . A schema for common cents . Memory & Cognition , 11 , 335 - 341 . Schank , R . C . , & Cleary , C . ( 1995 ) . Making machines creative . In S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , Thecreative cognition approach ( pp . 229 - 248 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Sifonis , C . M . ( 1995 ) . Scene schemas and creativity : Examiningthe in - fluence of schema based knowledge on the creative process . Unpub - lished master’s thesis , Texas A & M University . Sifonis , C . M . , Ward , T . B . , Gentner , D . , & Houska , M . ( 1997 ) . Rela - tion versus object mapping in creative generation . Proceedings of the Nineteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society , 19 , 1050 . Smith , S . M . , Tindell , D . R . , Pierce , B . H . , Gilliland , T . R . , & Gerkens , D . R . ( 2001 ) . The use of source memory to identify one’s own episodic confusionerrors . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 27 , 362 - 374 . Smith , S . M . , Ward , T . B . , & Schumacher , J . S . ( 1993 ) . Constraining effects of examples in a creative generation task . Memory & Cogni - tion , 21 , 837 - 845 . Smith , S . M . , Ward , T . B . , Tindell , D . R . , Sifonis , C . M . , & Wilken - feld , M . J . ( 2000 ) . Category structure and created memories . Mem - ory & Cognition , 28 , 386 - 395 . Thagard , P . ( 1997 ) . Coherentand creative conceptualcombinations . In T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith , & J . Vaid ( Eds . ) , Creative thought : An in - vestigation of conceptual structures and processes ( pp . 129 - 141 ) . Washington , DC : American PsychologicalAssociation . Tourangeau , R . , & Rips , L . ( 1991 ) . Interpreting and evaluating metaphors . Journal of Memory & Language , 30 , 452 - 472 . Tversky , B . , & Hemenway , K . ( 1984 ) . Objects , parts , and categories . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 113 , 169 - 193 . Ward , T . B . ( 1994 ) . Structured imagination : The role of conceptual structure in exemplar generation . Cognitive Psychology , 27 , 1 - 40 . Ward , T . B . ( 1995 ) . What’s old about new ideas ? In S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , & R . A . Finke ( Eds . ) , The creative cognition approach ( pp . 157 - 178 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Ward , T . B . , Dodds , R . A . , Saunders , K . N . , & Sifonis , C . M . ( 2000 ) . Attribute centrality and imaginative thought . Memory & Cognition , 28 , 1387 - 1397 . Ward , T . B . , Finke , R . A . , & Smith , S . M . ( 1995 ) . Creativity and the mind : Discovering the genius within . New York : Plenum . Ward , T . B . , Saunders , K . N . , & Dodds , R . A . ( 1999 ) . Creative cogni - tion in gifted adolescents . Roeper Review , 21 , 260 - 265 . Ward , T . B . , & Sifonis , C . M . ( 1997 ) . Task demands and generative thinking : What changes and what remains the same ? Journal of Cre - ative Behavior , 31 , 245 - 259 . Ward , T . B . , Smith , S . M . , & Vaid , J . ( 1997 ) . Conceptualstructuresand processes in creative thought . In T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith , & J . Vaid ( Eds . ) , Creative thought : An investigation of conceptual structures and processes ( pp . 1 - 27 ) . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . Weisberg , R . W . ( 1986 ) . Creativity , geniusand other myths . New York : Freeman . Weisberg , R . W . ( 1993 ) . Creativity : Beyond the myth of genius . New York : Freeman . Wiley , J . ( 1998 ) . Expertise as mental set : The effects of domain knowl - edge in creative problemsolving . Memory & Cognition , 26 , 716 - 730 . Wisniewski , E . J . ( 1996 ) . Construal and similarity in conceptual com - bination . Journal of Memory & Language , 35 , 434 - 453 . Wisniewski , E . J . ( 1997 ) . Conceptualcombination : Possibilitiesand es - thetics . In T . B . Ward , S . M . Smith , & J . Vaid ( Eds . ) , Creative thought : An investigation of conceptual structures and processes ( pp . 51 - 81 ) . Washington , DC : American PsychologicalAssociation . NOTES 1 . These data are also available on line at http : / / creativityforyou . com / genlab . html . 2 . Not surprisingly , the participants gave extremely high ratings to human onthescales of familiarity , liking , similarity to humans , and cen - trality to human concerns . Thus , it is conceivable that humans are cho - 212 WARD , PATTERSON , SIFONIS , DODDS , AND SAUNDERS APPENDIX A Values of Output Dominance ( OD ) , Rank , Dominance / Rank ( OD / R ) , Output Precedence ( OP ) , Imagination Frequency ( IF ) , and Ratings of Liking , Typicality , Similarity , Familiarity , Frequency , and Centrality to Human Concerns for Animal Exempla rs Animal OD Rank OD / R OP IF Liking Typicality Similarity Familiarity Frequency Centrality cat 28 2 . 89 9 . 69 507 4 4 . 5 5 . 5 3 . 06 6 . 69 6 . 56 5 . 31 dog 27 2 . 37 11 . 39 503 8 6 . 81 5 . 94 4 . 63 6 . 88 6 . 69 6 . 19 lion 21 9 . 81 2 . 14 235 1 5 . 44 6 . 81 3 . 31 5 . 13 3 . 88 4 . 25 horse 21 7 . 42 2 . 83 285 2 6 . 31 6 . 06 3 . 13 6 . 38 6 . 25 6 . 75 tiger 20 10 . 3 1 . 94 214 3 5 . 88 6 . 63 3 . 69 5 . 19 4 3 . 81 bird 20 9 . 15 2 . 19 237 3 5 . 06 4 . 44 2 6 . 38 6 . 88 5 . 69 cow 18 11 . 61 1 . 55 169 1 4 . 88 5 . 38 3 6 . 31 6 . 5 6 . 88 elephant 17 10 1 . 7 187 6 5 . 69 6 . 56 2 . 81 5 . 44 4 . 19 4 . 5 pig 16 11 . 06 1 . 45 159 2 4 . 44 5 2 . 81 5 . 25 5 . 63 6 bear 15 13 . 27 1 . 13 116 2 5 . 13 6 . 38 4 . 06 5 . 44 4 . 69 4 . 06 monkey 15 11 . 4 1 . 32 144 2 5 . 31 6 . 25 6 . 19 5 . 38 5 . 19 5 . 38 fish 15 10 . 47 1 . 43 158 1 4 . 44 4 . 75 1 . 88 6 . 31 6 . 75 6 . 38 snake 15 10 . 13 1 . 48 163 1 3 . 69 4 . 69 2 5 . 94 6 . 31 3 . 06 mouse 14 9 . 43 1 . 49 162 0 3 . 13 4 . 06 1 . 81 5 . 13 5 . 94 4 . 06 giraffe 14 8 . 5 1 . 65 175 0 5 . 06 6 . 06 2 . 63 4 . 94 3 . 75 3 . 63 rat 12 11 . 42 1 . 05 115 2 2 . 44 3 . 81 1 . 69 5 . 38 6 . 13 4 . 19 zebra 12 9 . 67 1 . 24 136 0 5 . 19 5 . 94 2 . 94 4 . 63 3 . 75 3 . 38 deer 10 10 . 5 0 . 95 105 0 5 . 75 5 . 75 3 . 5 5 . 94 5 . 06 5 . 56 rabbit 10 9 . 4 1 . 06 116 5 5 . 19 4 . 69 2 . 69 5 . 88 6 . 13 4 . 88 chicken 9 13 0 . 69 72 1 4 . 19 4 . 06 2 . 56 6 . 06 6 . 13 6 . 56 squirrel 9 12 . 78 0 . 7 74 0 5 . 44 5 . 19 3 5 . 56 5 . 75 4 . 56 whale 9 12 . 44 0 . 72 77 0 5 . 25 5 . 63 3 . 44 4 . 88 3 . 5 4 . 63 alligator 7 13 . 28 0 . 53 54 0 3 . 88 5 . 63 1 . 94 5 . 13 3 . 88 3 . 63 ostrich 7 10 0 . 7 77 0 4 . 31 5 . 5 2 . 19 3 . 88 3 . 75 3 . 94 rhino 7 8 . 85 0 . 79 85 0 4 . 56 6 . 31 2 . 5 4 2 . 94 3 . 06 armadillo 5 17 . 2 0 . 29 19 0 4 . 38 5 2 . 25 4 . 5 4 . 38 2 . 88 dolphin 5 14 . 4 0 . 35 33 0 6 . 25 5 . 31 3 . 69 5 . 13 4 . 06 5 . 38 buffalo 5 12 . 4 0 . 4 43 0 4 . 75 6 . 06 2 . 75 4 . 25 3 . 06 4 . 5 goat 5 12 0 . 42 45 0 3 . 88 5 . 25 2 . 81 4 . 56 4 . 69 5 . 19 kangaroo 5 11 . 2 0 . 45 49 0 5 . 38 6 . 25 3 . 75 4 . 75 3 . 5 4 . 13 moose 5 9 . 8 0 . 51 56 0 4 . 19 6 . 25 3 3 . 81 3 . 31 3 . 81 wolf 5 7 . 2 0 . 69 69 1 4 . 88 6 . 63 3 . 19 4 . 75 4 . 63 4 . 25 flamingo 4 14 . 5 0 . 28 26 1 4 . 75 4 . 81 2 . 19 3 . 69 3 . 69 3 llama 4 13 . 5 0 . 3 30 0 4 . 19 5 . 56 2 . 5 3 . 19 3 . 31 3 . 56 coyote 4 13 . 25 0 . 3 31 0 3 . 94 5 . 88 3 . 31 4 . 31 4 . 38 3 . 06 hippo 4 11 0 . 36 40 0 4 . 69 6 . 06 2 . 69 4 . 44 3 . 5 3 . 56 duck 4 11 0 . 36 40 0 4 . 56 4 . 69 1 . 88 5 . 44 5 . 81 4 . 81 turkey 4 10 . 75 0 . 37 41 0 3 . 5 4 . 88 2 . 19 5 . 31 5 . 19 5 . 5 turtle 4 10 . 75 0 . 37 41 2 5 . 06 4 . 75 2 . 25 6 5 . 19 4 . 19 antelope 4 10 0 . 4 44 0 4 . 25 5 . 88 2 . 81 3 . 25 3 . 63 4 . 19 cheetah 4 9 . 75 0 . 41 45 0 5 . 88 6 . 31 3 . 75 4 . 88 3 . 69 3 . 69 frog 4 8 . 75 0 . 46 49 0 4 . 19 4 . 38 1 . 81 5 . 88 6 . 06 4 . 25 fox 4 8 . 25 0 . 49 51 2 5 5 . 94 3 . 5 4 . 5 4 . 94 3 . 56 skunk 3 17 . 33 0 . 17 11 0 2 . 88 5 . 31 2 . 69 5 . 19 4 . 94 2 . 88 penguin 3 16 . 67 0 . 18 13 0 5 . 44 4 . 94 2 . 88 4 . 19 3 . 31 3 . 44 leopard 3 14 . 67 0 . 2 19 0 5 . 56 6 . 75 3 . 69 4 . 5 3 . 75 3 . 69 mosquito 3 14 0 . 21 21 0 1 . 31 2 . 69 1 . 81 6 . 13 6 . 25 2 . 25 shark 3 14 0 . 21 21 0 4 . 13 5 . 38 2 . 44 4 . 63 4 3 . 56 polar bear 3 13 . 33 0 . 23 23 0 5 . 94 6 . 56 3 . 88 4 . 38 3 . 19 3 . 69 panda 3 13 . 33 0 . 23 23 0 5 . 75 5 . 94 3 . 38 4 . 13 2 . 69 3 . 94 seal 3 12 . 67 0 . 24 25 0 5 . 81 5 . 75 2 . 81 4 . 31 3 . 5 3 . 75 ape 3 12 0 . 25 27 0 4 . 94 6 . 31 6 . 19 4 . 75 4 . 25 5 . 25 parrot 3 11 0 . 27 30 0 4 . 94 4 . 44 3 . 25 5 4 . 38 3 . 63 elk 3 11 0 . 27 30 0 3 . 63 5 . 31 2 . 63 3 . 63 3 . 81 4 . 38 gerbil 3 10 . 33 0 . 29 32 0 4 . 44 3 . 94 1 . 88 5 5 . 19 3 . 81 sen frequently as models for imaginary creatures because participants are highly familiar with humans , because they like humans more than most other species , and so on . However , because humans are also high in imaginationfrequency , highratingsforhumansonthoseratingscales could artificially magnify the correlations between those ratings and imagination frequency , even if the relationships are not particularly strong for the remaining set of nonhumananimals . Put differently , even if those factors are responsible for the participants’ relying on humans as models , this would not necessarily support the broader notion that they are also important in determining which among all other animals will be selected as models . Thus , it is importantto examinetheextent to which familiarity , perceived frequency , similarity to humans , and so on predict the likelihood of animals being used in imaginative tasks , ex - cludingthe influence of the exceptional case of humans . CATEGORY STRUCTURE AND IMAGINATION 213 APPENDIX A ( Continued ) Animal OD Rank OD / R OP IF Liking Typicality Similarity Familiarity Frequency Centrality gorilla 3 9 . 67 0 . 31 34 0 5 6 . 5 6 4 . 69 3 . 69 5 . 06 swan 3 8 . 67 0 . 35 37 0 5 . 13 4 . 63 2 . 25 4 . 06 3 . 88 3 . 38 donkey 3 8 0 . 38 39 0 3 . 94 5 . 38 3 . 13 4 . 94 4 . 75 4 . 56 chimp 2 11 0 . 18 20 1 5 . 44 6 . 19 5 . 81 4 . 94 4 . 5 5 . 69 human 1 20 0 . 05 1 12 6 . 44 4 . 56 7 7 6 . 81 6 . 63 snail 1 20 0 . 05 1 1 2 . 75 2 . 88 1 . 56 5 . 13 5 . 19 2 . 13 jellyfish 1 19 0 . 05 2 2 2 . 44 3 . 63 1 . 5 4 . 81 4 . 69 2 roach 1 18 0 . 06 3 1 1 . 44 2 . 25 1 . 13 6 . 06 6 . 31 1 . 63 praying mantis 1 18 0 . 06 3 1 2 . 94 3 . 13 1 . 63 3 . 69 3 . 75 2 . 5 grasshopper 1 16 0 . 06 5 1 3 . 06 2 . 94 1 . 5 5 . 38 5 . 88 2 . 94 dinosaur 1 15 0 . 07 6 2 4 . 31 4 . 63 2 . 38 4 . 38 1 . 5 3 . 94 ferret 1 11 0 . 09 10 1 5 . 25 4 . 94 2 . 38 3 . 94 4 . 19 3 . 75 pterodactyl 0 0 0 1 3 . 31 4 . 19 1 . 25 3 . 06 1 . 06 3 . 44 slug 0 0 0 2 2 2 . 31 1 . 38 4 . 75 4 . 63 1 . 94 goldfish 0 0 0 1 4 . 19 4 1 . 63 6 . 38 5 . 88 3 . 63 APPENDIX B Values of Output Dominance ( OD ) , Rank , Dominance / Rank ( OD / R ) , Output Precedence ( OP ) , and Imagination Frequency in the Control Condition ( IF Con ) , Imagination Frequency in the No - Appendages Condition ( IF NA ) , Total Imagination Frequency ( IF Total ) , and Ratings of Frequency , Typicality , Familiarity , and Usefulness for Tool Exemplars Tool OD Rank OD / R OP IF Con IF NA IF Total Frequency Typicality Familiarity Usefulness hammer 29 1 . 86 15 . 57 555 12 11 23 5 . 6 6 . 75 6 . 8 5 . 95 screwdriver 25 5 . 24 4 . 77 394 1 5 6 5 . 5 6 . 7 6 . 7 5 . 5 wrench 24 5 . 17 4 . 65 380 2 1 3 5 6 . 6 6 . 1 4 . 75 saw 20 5 . 85 3 . 42 303 0 3 3 4 . 45 6 . 4 6 . 55 5 . 1 nails 16 4 . 63 3 . 46 262 1 1 2 5 . 55 5 . 05 6 . 55 5 . 45 pliers 16 9 . 31 1 . 72 187 1 1 2 4 . 95 6 . 6 6 . 05 5 . 2 drill 12 8 . 58 1 . 4 149 0 0 0 4 . 6 6 . 5 5 . 8 5 . 05 knife 11 11 1 110 5 6 11 6 . 55 5 . 45 6 . 9 6 . 4 pencil 9 11 . 11 0 . 81 89 3 2 5 6 . 6 4 . 25 7 6 . 35 screws 9 9 . 33 0 . 96 105 0 0 0 5 . 5 4 . 75 6 . 45 5 . 55 monkeywrench 7 8 . 57 0 . 82 87 0 0 0 3 . 65 6 . 55 4 . 45 4 . 35 sander 7 10 . 14 0 . 69 76 0 0 0 3 . 25 6 . 2 5 . 2 4 . 2 scissors 7 9 . 71 0 . 72 79 0 1 1 5 . 8 5 . 35 6 . 85 5 . 65 sledgehammer 7 11 . 71 0 . 6 65 0 0 0 3 . 55 5 . 95 5 . 55 4 . 1 axe 6 10 . 33 0 . 58 64 3 1 4 4 . 35 6 . 45 5 . 65 4 . 35 level 6 11 . 33 0 . 53 58 0 0 0 4 . 15 5 . 4 5 . 35 4 . 25 pen 6 12 . 83 0 . 47 49 0 0 0 6 . 6 4 . 45 6 . 95 6 . 5 Phillipsscrewdriver 6 7 . 5 0 . 8 81 0 0 0 5 . 05 6 . 5 6 . 65 5 . 6 ruler 6 13 . 17 0 . 46 47 2 0 2 5 . 85 5 . 15 6 . 85 6 . 05 wire cutters 6 11 . 5 0 . 52 57 0 0 0 4 . 5 6 . 3 5 . 8 4 . 5 chainsaw 5 6 . 8 0 . 74 71 0 0 0 3 . 9 6 . 35 4 . 7 4 . 55 crowbar 5 10 0 . 5 55 1 0 1 4 . 05 6 . 05 5 . 35 4 . 5 flatheadscrewdriver 5 6 . 6 0 . 76 72 0 0 0 4 . 95 6 . 55 6 . 45 5 . 5 jigsaw 5 10 . 2 0 . 49 54 0 0 0 4 . 25 5 . 2 4 . 85 4 . 2 shovel 5 10 . 8 0 . 46 51 8 6 14 5 . 3 5 . 95 6 . 9 5 . 4 staple gun 5 14 0 . 36 35 0 0 0 4 . 3 5 . 75 5 . 9 4 . 45 bolt 4 11 0 . 36 40 0 0 0 5 4 . 65 6 . 15 5 . 7 chisel 4 6 . 75 0 . 59 57 0 0 0 4 . 35 6 . 15 5 . 4 4 . 2 clamps 4 12 . 25 0 . 33 35 0 0 0 4 . 2 5 . 95 5 . 25 4 . 45 fork 4 9 . 75 0 . 41 45 0 2 2 6 . 5 4 . 2 6 . 85 6 . 1 jackhammer 4 10 . 75 0 . 37 41 0 0 0 3 . 1 6 . 5 3 . 45 3 . 7 mallet 4 10 0 . 4 44 0 0 0 4 . 6 5 . 85 5 . 15 4 . 15 socket set 4 9 . 5 0 . 42 46 0 0 0 3 . 9 5 . 8 5 . 4 4 . 75 spoon 4 14 . 25 0 . 28 27 0 1 1 6 . 65 4 . 45 7 5 . 9 tape measure 4 12 . 5 0 . 32 34 0 0 0 4 . 6 6 . 25 6 . 6 5 . 4 allen wrench 3 9 . 67 0 . 31 34 0 0 0 3 . 4 6 . 25 4 . 1 4 . 15 bandsaw 3 9 0 . 33 36 0 0 0 3 . 1 5 . 9 3 . 5 3 . 95 crescent wrench 3 7 . 33 0 . 41 41 0 0 0 3 . 45 6 . 3 4 . 95 4 . 55 gluegun 3 18 . 67 0 . 16 7 0 0 0 4 . 15 5 . 4 6 . 1 3 . 85 214 WARD , PATTERSON , SIFONIS , DODDS , AND SAUNDERS APPENDIX B ( Continued ) Tool OD Rank OD / R OP IF Con IF NA IF Total Frequency Typicality Familiarity Usefulness hacksaw 3 9 . 33 0 . 32 35 0 0 0 3 . 2 6 4 . 65 3 . 8 hoe 3 7 . 33 0 . 41 41 0 1 1 4 . 65 5 . 4 6 . 15 4 . 45 lawnmower 3 9 . 33 0 . 32 35 0 0 0 4 . 8 5 . 6 6 . 3 5 . 35 nail gun 3 15 0 . 2 18 0 0 0 3 . 65 6 . 5 5 . 25 4 . 1 paintbrush 3 17 0 . 18 12 1 0 1 5 5 . 1 6 . 75 3 . 95 plunger 3 8 . 67 0 . 35 37 0 0 0 4 . 9 5 . 3 6 . 1 4 . 5 power saw 3 14 . 67 0 . 21 19 0 0 0 3 . 85 6 . 5 5 . 55 4 . 6 ratchet 3 11 . 67 0 . 26 28 0 0 0 3 . 65 6 . 1 4 . 85 4 . 35 socket wrench 3 10 . 67 0 . 28 31 0 0 0 3 . 55 6 . 55 5 . 1 4 . 6 vice 3 2 . 67 1 . 13 55 0 0 0 3 . 45 5 . 25 4 . 3 4 vice grips 3 11 . 67 0 . 26 28 0 0 0 3 . 1 6 4 . 5 4 . 05 washers 3 17 . 67 0 . 17 10 0 0 0 5 . 25 4 . 65 5 . 9 4 . 65 wire stripper 3 12 0 . 25 27 0 0 0 3 . 45 6 . 25 4 . 55 4 . 25 rake 2 10 . 5 0 . 19 21 0 1 1 4 . 4 5 . 55 6 . 7 4 gun 1 4 0 . 25 17 0 1 1 4 . 8 3 . 1 4 . 85 4 . 55 hand 1 3 0 . 33 18 2 1 3 7 5 . 05 7 6 . 75 hedge clippers 1 6 0 . 17 15 2 0 2 3 . 5 5 . 55 5 . 95 3 . 75 stick 1 5 0 . 2 16 0 1 1 3 . 25 3 . 68 1 . 85 2 . 28 scale 1 16 0 . 06 5 0 0 0 5 . 55 5 . 55 6 . 1 4 . 85 vacuum 1 20 0 . 05 1 0 0 0 5 . 2 4 . 75 6 . 8 5 . 35 basket 0 0 1 1 2 5 . 85 3 . 25 6 . 6 4 . 5 4 . 55 boat 0 0 0 0 1 1 5 . 4 3 . 35 6 . 4 5 . 5 book holder 0 0 0 1 0 1 4 . 45 3 . 1 6 3 . 05 box 0 0 0 0 1 1 6 . 45 3 . 25 6 . 95 5 . 4 cage 0 0 0 1 0 1 4 . 6 3 6 . 1 4 . 3 corer 0 0 0 1 0 1 2 . 65 4 . 4 3 3 . 5 dicer 0 0 0 0 1 1 3 . 55 4 . 05 3 . 7 3 . 6 drinkmachine 0 0 0 0 1 1 4 . 95 2 . 8 5 . 7 3 . 6 exercisemachine 0 0 0 0 1 1 4 . 95 3 . 85 6 . 35 4 . 5 juicer 0 0 0 1 0 1 3 . 05 5 2 . 25 3 . 37 golf tee 0 0 0 1 0 1 4 . 55 2 . 4 6 . 1 2 . 5 hairbrush 0 0 0 0 1 1 6 . 3 3 . 95 6 . 9 5 . 7 injector 0 0 0 1 0 1 3 . 5 4 . 15 3 . 6 4 . 6 laser 0 0 0 0 1 1 2 . 8 5 . 05 4 . 3 5 . 6 lever 0 0 0 0 2 2 4 . 75 5 . 4 5 . 25 4 . 45 lightbulbremover 0 0 0 1 0 1 1 . 75 4 . 55 2 . 8 1 . 85 plow 0 0 0 0 2 2 4 . 2 5 . 85 4 . 75 4 . 95 projector 0 0 0 1 0 1 4 . 1 4 5 . 55 3 . 95 scooper 0 0 0 0 1 1 3 . 85 5 . 05 5 . 9 3 . 75 scraper 0 0 0 0 1 1 3 . 75 5 . 85 5 . 55 4 . 05 scythe 0 0 0 2 0 2 2 . 68 4 . 7 3 . 1 3 shoe 0 0 0 1 0 1 6 . 85 2 . 85 7 6 . 6 skateboard 0 0 0 0 1 1 4 2 . 3 5 . 5 1 . 65 spear 0 0 0 3 0 3 3 . 1 4 . 25 5 . 3 2 . 6 straw 0 0 0 0 2 2 5 . 85 3 . 3 6 . 9 3 . 4 trowel 0 0 0 1 0 1 2 . 95 4 . 25 4 . 05 3 . 21 tweezers 0 0 0 0 1 1 5 . 05 4 . 9 6 . 5 4 . 65 vehicle 0 0 0 0 1 1 6 . 3 4 6 . 45 6 . 7 wagon / cart 0 0 0 1 1 2 4 . 05 3 . 7 5 . 8 4 . 5 wheel 0 0 0 0 1 1 6 . 8 4 . 05 6 . 5 6 . 45 CATEGORY STRUCTURE AND IMAGINATION 215 APPENDIX C Values of Output Dominance ( OD ) , Rank , Dominance / Rank ( OD / R ) , Output Precedence ( OP ) , and Imagination Frequency in the Control Condition ( IF Con ) , Imagination Frequency in the Creative Condition ( IF Creat ) , Imagination Frequency in the Not - Bound Condition ( IF NB ) , and Total Imagination Frequency ( IF Total ) for Fruit Exemplars Fruit OD Rank OD / R OP IF Con IF Creat IF NB IF Total orange 35 3 . 4 10 . 29 616 17 5 12 34 apple 34 2 . 44 13 . 93 631 27 6 2 35 banana 34 6 . 03 5 . 64 509 7 5 7 19 strawberry 33 6 . 73 4 . 91 471 8 4 6 18 grape 31 6 . 58 4 . 71 447 3 1 3 7 watermelon 31 10 . 19 3 . 04 335 4 3 1 8 kiwi 30 8 . 23 3 . 64 383 7 3 2 12 peach 29 10 . 45 2 . 78 306 6 2 2 10 pear 29 9 . 48 3 . 06 334 10 1 4 15 cantaloupe 28 11 . 75 2 . 38 259 1 0 0 1 blueberry 25 11 2 . 27 250 0 1 0 1 cherry 22 10 . 32 2 . 13 235 2 1 0 3 lemon 22 11 . 5 1 . 91 209 0 0 2 2 lime 21 12 . 19 1 . 72 185 0 0 1 1 pineapple 19 9 . 16 2 . 07 225 4 3 5 12 plum 18 13 . 67 1 . 32 132 1 1 0 2 raspberry 18 12 . 39 1 . 45 155 0 1 1 2 mango 17 10 . 41 1 . 63 180 1 0 2 3 blackberry 16 11 . 87 1 . 35 146 0 0 0 0 grapefruit 16 10 . 25 1 . 56 172 3 0 2 5 honeydew melon 15 15 . 53 0 . 97 82 1 0 0 1 tomato 15 11 . 93 1 . 26 136 0 1 0 1 tangerine 14 11 . 57 1 . 21 132 0 0 0 0 apricot 13 12 . 69 1 . 02 108 1 0 0 1 nectarine 12 14 . 17 0 . 85 82 0 0 0 0 cranberry 11 16 . 27 0 . 68 52 0 0 0 0 coconut 9 15 0 . 6 54 1 2 1 4 papaya 7 12 . 14 0 . 58 62 0 1 0 1 melon 5 14 . 2 0 . 35 34 1 1 0 2 green grape 4 12 0 . 33 36 0 0 0 0 guava 4 12 0 . 33 36 0 0 0 0 red apple 4 10 0 . 4 44 0 0 0 0 red grape 4 10 . 5 0 . 38 42 0 0 0 0 green apple 3 6 . 34 0 . 47 44 0 0 0 0 purplegrape 3 15 . 34 0 . 2 17 0 0 0 0 boysenberry 2 19 0 . 11 4 0 0 0 0 passionfruit 2 11 . 5 0 . 17 19 0 0 0 0 raisin 2 13 . 49 0 . 15 15 0 0 0 0 avocado 1 16 0 . 06 5 2 1 0 3 black cherry 1 14 . 02 0 . 07 7 0 0 0 0 cactus fruit 1 18 . 98 0 . 05 2 0 0 0 0 carrot 1 7 0 . 14 14 1 0 0 1 champagne grape 1 19 . 99 0 . 05 1 0 0 0 0 crabapple 1 19 . 99 0 . 05 1 0 0 0 0 fig 1 9 . 01 0 . 11 12 0 1 0 1 fist fruits 1 19 . 99 0 . 05 1 0 0 0 0 Fruit Loops 1 14 . 99 0 . 07 6 0 0 0 0 fruits of labor 1 18 . 98 0 . 05 2 0 0 0 0 Fruity Pebbles 1 16 0 . 06 5 0 0 0 0 golden delicious apple 1 19 . 99 0 . 05 1 0 0 0 0 Granny Smith apple 1 14 . 02 0 . 07 7 0 0 0 0 huckleberry 1 18 . 98 0 . 05 2 0 0 0 0 loganberry 1 12 0 . 08 9 0 0 0 0 mandarin orange 1 9 . 01 0 . 11 12 0 0 0 0 marange ? 1 19 . 99 0 . 05 1 0 0 0 0 mountain cherry 1 13 . 01 0 . 08 8 0 0 0 0 navel 1 10 . 99 0 . 09 10 0 0 0 0 pecan 1 13 . 01 0 . 08 8 0 0 0 0 plantain 1 14 . 02 0 . 07 7 0 0 0 0 pomegranate 1 14 . 99 0 . 07 6 2 1 1 4 potato 1 8 0 . 12 13 0 0 0 0 prune 1 9 . 98 0 . 1 11 1 0 0 1 pumpkin 1 19 . 99 0 . 05 1 1 0 0 1 starfruit 1 18 . 01 0 . 06 3 5 2 2 9 216 WARD , PATTERSON , SIFONIS , DODDS , AND SAUNDERS sweet potato 1 5 . 99 0 . 17 15 0 0 0 0 washington apple 1 14 . 99 0 . 07 6 0 0 0 0 berries 0 0 0 2 0 2 4 pepper 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 peanut 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 flower 0 0 0 1 1 0 2 gourd 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 eggplant 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 dewberry 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 lettuce 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 turnip 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 corn 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 onion 0 0 0 1 0 1 2 green bean 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 zucchini 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 ( Manuscript received April 9 , 2001 ; revision accepted for publication September 9 , 2001 . ) APPENDIX C ( Continued ) Fruit OD Rank OD / R OP IF Con IF Creat IF NB IF Total