Dynamically Transparent Windows Abstract In this paper , we present a case study of Dynamically Transparent Windows installed during a five weeks period in the facade of a major department store on a busy high street . The windows are fitted with so - called electro - chromatic foil that can change from opaque to transparent when an electric current runs through it . By using strips or rectangles of the foil , narrow bands on the façade interactively change and reveal what is on display in the store in order to draw the by - passers closer , and encourage them to explore the display . Our evaluation based on log - data , video observations , and in - situ observations points to a number of challenges concerning 1 ) Interaction issues related to the movement vector of pedestrians , 2 ) Behaviour and attention issues , and 3 ) Issues pertaining to the diversity of the situations and external conditions in the high street setting . Keywords H5 . 2 . User Interfaces : Theory and methods ACM Classification Keywords Interactive shop window , marketing effect , experience , urban computing . Copyright is held by the author / owner ( s ) . CHI 2009 , April 4 – 9 , 2009 , Boston , Massachusetts , USA . ACM 978 - 1 - 60558 - 247 - 4 / 09 / 04 . Peter Dalsgaard Digital Urban Living & CAVI Aarhus University Helsingforsgade 14 DK 8200 Aarhus N , Denmark peter @ CAVI . dk Kim Halskov Digital Urban Living & CAVI Aarhus University Helsingforsgade 14 DK 8200 Aarhus N , Denmark halskov @ CAVI . dk CHI 2009 ~ Case Studies ~ New Technologies and Interactions April 4 - 9 , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 3019 Introduction and background Dynamically Transparent Windows ( DTW ) respond to the movements of people passing by . The window is fitted with so - called electro - chromatic foil that can change from opaque to transparent when an electric current runs through it . By using strips or rectangles of the foil , narrow bands on the façade change and reveal what is on display in the store in order to draw the by - passers closer , and encourage them to explore the display . The DTW have been developed as a part of an effect to explore interactive technologies for marketing purposes [ 10 ] . As rightly pointed out by M . van Doorn , E . van . Loeven and A . de Vries , [ 3 ] , shops and brands have a need to differentiate themselves from competitors and use the shop window ‘1 ) to express the type of store , 2 ) create the appropriate atmosphere and attract people and 3 ) to inform people about the products available and their function’ . DTW is primarily concerned with 2 ) and to some extent 1 ) , and is in this way related to Power Flower , an interactive light and sound installation at Bloomingdale’s department store in New York City ( www . digitalexperience . dk / ? p = 50 ) , which consists of an array of projected neon flowers that ‘blossom’ when the movement of passers - by activates sensors in the shop window , [ 10 ] . In general , marketing is a field in which the primary focus traditionally has been on content and media selection , but at a time in which new technologies are gaining ground in increasing numbers of areas , it is not surprising to find that the field of marketing is becoming interested in investigating the possibilities and potential offered by digital technologies . Of the minority of marketing effects being digital , web - based solutions currently constitute a very large portion thereof . Research into web - based marketing includes online advertising , search engine advertising [ 17 ] , virtual world based marketing [ 15 ] , and recommender systems [ 8 , 16 ] . This article deals with an instance of IT - based marketing experiences in a physical setting , but rather than addressing tangible interaction as in the case of for instance information kiosks , DTW works at the scale of media façades , [ 1 ] , a subcategory of urban computing [ 4 , 11 ] . DTW differs from other approaches to interactive shop windows , like for instance the Intelligent Shop Window ( ISW ) , [ 3 ] . ISW uses a transparent display for projecting images and text on the window , which is affected interactively by the mere presence of people in front of the window or by touching the window . The ISW has been developed and tested in the Experience Lab at Philips Research Europe . ISW is similar to Touchlight , an interactive display technology developed and tested by Microsoft Research Lab ( see digitalexperience . dk / ? p = 26 ) , which combines translucent holographic film projection material and computer vision techniques enabling users to interact with images on the screen . In a shopping street setting , Peltonen and colleagues [ 13 ] have experimented with a shop - window - sized display , CityWall , which consists of an interactive timeline of chronologically organized public images of the city without any direct marketing effect in mind . CHI 2009 ~ Case Studies ~ New Technologies and Interactions April 4 - 9 , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 3020 figure 1 . The features of the DTW installation presented in a design space explorer . For a duration of five weeks , we installed a custom - developed version of DTW in the high street facade of Salling , a large department store in the centre of Aarhus , Denmark . The DTW installation was developed at CAVI , the Center for Advanced Visualization and Interaction , at the University of Aarhus , a center with which both authors are affiliated as interaction design researchers . CAVI has collaborated with Salling in developing new ways of intriguiging potential customers to explore the store and its products , and the DTW installation is one of the primary results of this collaboration . In order to give a structured overview and description of the DTW installation at Salling , we employ a design space explorer for media facades [ 2 ] , a light - weight framework for addressing key aspects of media facades in an urban setting . The design space explorer consists of two parts : aspects listed in the top row and a number of design choices for each aspect , in the columns below . The set of aspects may vary from case to case ; in this context , we deem the following aspects to be of primary interest : Materials , Form , Location , Situation , Content , Interaction , and Value ( see Figure 1 ) . Material The main component of the installation is a sheet of glass custom - fitted an electro - chromatic foil that can change from opaque to transparent when an electric current runs through it . This has traditionally been used on entire sheets of glass , for instance to create non - intrusive meeting rooms in open office landscapes . Form figure 2 . DTW responds to a by - passer ' s movement . Material Form Location Situation Content Interaction Values Electro - chromatic foil on glass Narrow strips of foil High street Bustling street Alternating opaque and transparent patterns Camera - tracking of movement causes transparency Attention Vertically arranged in sequence Facade Many competing attractors B & O product display Pause mode with pre - programmed patterns Curiosity Passers - by Cutting - edge image Potential customers Social CHI 2009 ~ Case Studies ~ New Technologies and Interactions April 4 - 9 , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 3021 DTW stands out from the traditional application of electro - chromatic foil by virtue of its form : it consists of a number of thin , vertical strips of foil arranged sequentially on a single sheet of glass . Each strip is controlled individually , allowing us to hide or reveal part of what is on display according to various rules . Figure 2 is an illustration of this principle , in which a section of the facade ' opens up ' in front of a visitor . The installation consisted of 22 strips arranged on a 4 . 4 m time 2 . 2 . m sheet of glass . When not activated , the strips were imperceptible to on - lookers . Location figure 3 . DTW installed in the Bang & Olufsen section of the Salling facade . The DTW installation was embedded into the facade of the Salling department store . Salling is one of the oldest stores in the country and has just celebrated its 100th anniversary . The store has undergone a recent expansion , and its facade is a dominant feature on the high - street in the Aarhus city centre . The DTW installation covered a demarked section of the facade in which Bang & Olufsen hi - fi audio products and televisions were on display , see Figure 3 . Situation figure 4 . Salling is situated on a bustling high street . The situation in which the installation was placed can best be described as multi - variate : In peak hours ( late in the afternoon on weekdays , all day during Saturdays ) the high street is bustling with people , as illustrated in Figure 4 . The group of potential users are very diverse ; basically everyone walking down the high street is a potential user . Furthermore , the high street is very rich on stimuli : shops compete for attention using their window displays as well as products on display in racks and on tables on the high street ; street musicians give impromptu performances ; children skate down the street etc . In other words , the DTW installation had a lot to compete with when trying to catch the attention of passers - by . CHI 2009 ~ Case Studies ~ New Technologies and Interactions April 4 - 9 , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 3022 Content An note - worthy feature of the DTW installation is that it is quite literally without content in itself ; whereas most interactive media installations present some sort of content in digital form , the DTW installation serves to bring attention to the content behind the facade . It can be argued that the installation with its shifts in transparency represent and bring about specific meanings – that the medium is in itself the message [ 12 ] . However , adhering to the common - sense usage of the term content , we shall not delve deeper into this discussion here . Interaction The installation relies on camera - tracking , illustrated in Figure 5 . A camera ( A ) is mounted 5 stories above ground in order to capture an overview of the street in front of the facade . The movements of passers - by within a 7x2 meter are in front of the facade are tracked , and the data is processed by movement - based tracking software installed on a computer system ( B ) that feeds a custom - built DTW controller ( C ) combined with a power converter ( D ) which controls the individual strips of electro - chromatic foil ( E ) . The DTW has two primary operating modes . First , when no users are present , it runs in a pause - mode in which the strips fan out from the centre of the window , revealing the exhibited products behind it bit by bit . This mode is enabled in order to reveal to passers - by outside of the 7x2 meter interaction zone that the window has unique properties . Second , when a user enters the interaction zone , a strip the same width as the user opens up in front of the visitor . figure 5 . Implementation of Dynamically Transparent Windows . Since most visitors will approach the installation in an acute angle , the strips will not open directly besides them , but rather slightly towards the middle of the window . This is done because most people observably gaze straight ahead , not to the sides , and pay less interest in phenomena in their peripheral vision . Thus , the observable effects of the DTW has to be in front of users when they enter the zone . Figure 6 illustrates a section of open strips in front of an on - looker . CHI 2009 ~ Case Studies ~ New Technologies and Interactions April 4 - 9 , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 3023 figure 6 . Strips open in front of user . Values The driving intention underlying the design of the DTW in Salling is to attract the attention of potential shoppers . We sought to do this by bringing about a primary experiential value of curiosity in passers - by . The main means for doing so is the element of surprise to see a window that has the until now unseen opacity - changing property , and in a straightforward sense the mirroring of by - passers . More specifically , the strategy behind the main interaction mode may be described as one of concealment : in order to make the products stand out from the many other sources of attraction on the high street , we went against the tide by hiding the products on display in order to arouse curiosity . A further value underlying this intention was to play on social interactions in two respects : one , that more people could cooperate in opening up the whole DTW ; two , that seeing someone else use the DTW might lure potential users near . Finally , Salling sought to bring about a sense of finesse and cutting - edge technology by employing this new interactive installation . figure 7 . Inspiration card workshop The design process Before we report on the test and evaluation of the DTW at the Salling department store , we will outline the design process that led to the installation . DTW has been developed as part of the research project Experience - Oriented Applications of Digital Technology in Knowledge Dissemination and Marketing , which in addition to a commercial setting has explored the use of digital technologies in museums , see www . cavi . dk / projects / experienceapplications . php . The project explores the use of digital technologies in settings ranging from museums to the retail sector . In the beginning of our collaboration , we carried out field studies in the department store in order to establish an understanding of the specific potentials and challenges relating to this domain . Likewise , we made a general review of interesting technologies that CHI 2009 ~ Case Studies ~ New Technologies and Interactions April 4 - 9 , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 3024 might be applicable in this domain . This research is partially available in a condensed form at http : / / www . digitalexperience . dk . The basic idea behind DTW grew out of joint effort with our partners from the department store during an inspiration card workshop [ 5 ] , a collaborative activity which combines our findings from the domain studies with technological sources of inspiration into design concepts , see Figure 7 . The development of these concepts were supplemented by meetings with Salling staff in which we discussed and formulated the values and potential user experieces to inform our design work . Our inspiration workshops resulted in a number of design concepts , spanning from touch - screen personalized shopping information to information visualizations on interior walls and ceilings . The idea of using electro - chromatic foil for implementing a dynamic transparent window also sprang from these collaborative design events . We chose to move forward with this idea , since we at this early stage deemed that it would make for a suitable fit between what could be implemented technologically within the frame and budget of the project and the desirable user experiences in the high street setting . Based on our domain studies , we established that the user experience of the installation would necessarily be of a sporadic nature due to the patterns of movement and behaviour in the setting ; the installation would have to be of the ‘walk - up - and - use’ variety , or perhaps even ‘pass - by - and - use’ . The DTW concept went through a number of different visualizations , representations and physical manifestations prior to reaching the final installation stage . It was first sketched out on paper , upon which 3D storyboards of the concepts were produced ; upon this , it was refined and a visualized using virtual video prototyping [ 6 ] , see Figure 8 . figure 8 . Virtual video prototype Virtual video prototyping is an approach to design visualization , which enables the integrations of digital 3D objects and environments along with physical objects and people as part of video scenario , [ 7 , 9 ] . The DTW design was subsequently refined during prototyping experiments . Upon this , a new virtual video prototype was developed in which the functioning prototype was illustrated in the high street setting . These tests were initially carried out in our design lab , and when the prototype had matured to a fully functional level , it was installed and tested in an indoor setting at a large technology exhibition , see Figure 10 . Our findings from observing the prototype in these controlled , indoor settings were very positive and encouraging . CHI 2009 ~ Case Studies ~ New Technologies and Interactions April 4 - 9 , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 3025 figure 9 . Overview of the design process . figure 10 . Dynamically Transparent Windows at the Next exhibition This installation was very successful in attracting attention from visitors , and technologically speaking , it performed very well in terms of tracking visitors and changing transparency according to their movements . We evaluated the prototype on the basis of these initial tests and the pilot installation at the technology exhibition and went ahead to develop the final implementation for the Salling department store . Figure 9 provides an overview of the design process from initial domain studies through concept development and prototyping towards the final installation . Empirical data and evaluation In the following we outline the empirical data collection and the concrete evaluation and findings from testing the DTW installation at Salling . These serve as the foundation for the subsequent discussion of the CHI 2009 ~ Case Studies ~ New Technologies and Interactions April 4 - 9 , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 3026 challenges and potentials of developing DTW and similar installations . The installation was in place at Salling for five weeks . During that period of time , we gathered empirical data through automatically logging interaction data , capturing video from the main interaction camera , capturing video from inside the display looking out , and last but not least by 8 in situ observation sessions which were supplemented by notes , photos as well as video recordings of the use situation . Log data Through the entire period of installation , we logged every instance of activation and de - activation of the interaction zone . These data were primarily used to check if the system crashed and needed to be recalibrated or rebooted . The data lends itself poorly to interaction analysis due to a number of sources of error . First of all , the duration of an activation cannot be mapped directly to one user ' s interaction , for if another user enters the interaction zone while the first user is still there , it does not count as a new instance of activation . Second , in periods of strong sunlight , marquees are automatically activated on all of the Salling facade , covering most of the interaction zone . In these instances , the system was programmed to switch to pause mode . This means that on a sunny and busy Saturday , the system would log no activations for extended periods of time . Finally , a number of smaller activation issues such as recalibrations , reboots etc . also introduce error in the data log . For these reasons , we have based our evaluation mainly on recorded video and in - situ observations . Video observations We recorded three types of videos : 1 ) From above : We used the main interaction camera mounted 20 meters above street level to output regular video recordings , Figure 11 . These recordings were mainly used to identify the movement vectors and patterns of by - passers . From these recordings it was evident that approximately 95 % of the by - passers would move in parallel to the facade . Only a very small fraction would move orthogonally or diagonally to the facade . As we shall discuss later , this had a strong influence on the perception of the installation . figure 11 . Two screen - grabs from the camera mounted above street level . 2 ) From within : In combination with the video from above , we placed a high definition video camera within the Bang & Olufsen display , looking outwards at passers - by and users . This video was better suited for observing in detail by - passers behaviour , angles of observation , and reactions to the installation , Figure 12 . CHI 2009 ~ Case Studies ~ New Technologies and Interactions April 4 - 9 , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 3027 figure 12 . Two screen - grabs from inside the window of passers - by observing the installation . 3 ) Handheld : Finally , hand - held video recordings were carried out in combination with in - situ observations , Figure 13 . These recordings consisted both of typical use situations in which we would stand or sit near - by the facade for 5 - 10 minutes at a time to capture the general use , and of specific recordings in which we would bring out the camera when something particularly interesting occured . figure 13 . Two screen - grabs from hand - held camera recordings . In - situ observations We carried out eight in - situ sessions in which we observed the installation in selected time - slots , covering both day and night use , and off hours and peak hours . During these observations , we focused primarily on the behaviour of by - passers and their reactions to the installation . Evaluation Instead of recounting the findings from each data collection method , we have combined the data sources in our subsequent evaluation and analysis of the DTW installation . We do so because the data point at the same general tendencies : First of all , very few people are in fact window - gazers . Most people keep their gaze straight ahead . Given that they move in parallel to the store windows , this means that the store displays are most often only in their peripheral vision . Second , whereas the DTW did attract attention from by - passers , it was significantly less sucessful than we had expected on the basis of our previous tests and prototype experiments . During somewhat busy periods such as Saturday afternoons , reviews of the captured video revealed that the DTW installation would catch the attention of approximately one passer - by per minute . Every five minutes , a passer - by would stop to watch the installation in more detail . In comparison , we recorded from within a situation in which a street musician sat down to play the guitar in front of the window , and he caused approximately one person a minute to stop and listen , thus being five times as succesful in catching prolonged attention . In the remainder of the paper , we shall discuss in more detail our findings and the challenges and potentials for installations such as DTW . Challenges for Dynamically transparent window installations As can be concluded from our evaluation and findings , the DTW installation at Salling was on the whole not very successful in increasing visitor attention , in spite of functioning quite well on a technical level . As an immediate evaluation of the specific installation , this is not satisfactory , since the main objective of this specific CHI 2009 ~ Case Studies ~ New Technologies and Interactions April 4 - 9 , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 3028 DTW installation was to attract more people to Salling . From a research perspective , the installation was however quite successful in that it has yielded a number of interesting insights . In this section , we shall present and discuss what we identify as the main challenges for DTW . We do so for two reasons : one , they may support the specific development of better DTW installations in the future ; two , these challenges apply to the larger context of introducing technologies in diverse public places and are thus relevant for an ever - growing group of designers . We have condensed the challenges into three categories : Interaction , Behaviour and attention and Diverse situations external conditions . For each , we shall outline the main challenges followed by a discussion of potentials for future design . Interaction Based on insights from prototype experiments , we specifically addressed the movement vectors of visitors parallel to the facade in the design of the DTW installation , in that the strips in the facade did not open directly besides passers - by , but rather towards the centre of the display . In this way , the change from opaque to transparent would be less in the periphery of their vision when entering the interaction zone . This was done in order to order to create a fit with the movement vectors and patterns of passers - by who would move in parallel to the facade . When no users were present in the interaciton zone , the pause mode would set in , with transparent strips fanning out from the center of the window . This mode was designed to make clear to passers - by that this specific display had special properties . However , setting up the pause mode to solve the problem revealing the interactive properties led to another problem , namely when visitors moved into the interaction zone . Since it only takes 5 - 10 seconds to pass the window , many people did not notice that they were in fact affected the transparency - opacity changes . Even though the transition from pause mode to interaction mode was very swift ( typically taking less than a second ) , our observations indicate that most people perceived it as a flickering display in their peripheral vision rather than something that they could control themselves . We addressed this issue after the installation had been in use for a week by keeping transparent panels open for two seconds after people had passed by , giving the effect that passers - by would leave a trace behind them . Whereas this might not be noticed by the immediate passer - by , the intention was to reveal to other potential users that they could interact with the installation . This again introduced another problem , in that during busy periods , the many of the strips would continually be left open . Based on our experience of deploying DTW installations in other settings , we hypothesize that different approach vectors of potential users and / or a longer exposure to the interaction mode – possibly by increasing the scale of the installation , could alleviate these problems . However , there were other challenging aspects in the high street setting which might not be overcome by such changes , among these people ' s behaviour and attention in this environment . Behaviour and attention When we designed the DTW installation , an axiomatic assumption underlying our work was that we expected a large part of the potential users to be window - gazers . However , our observations and video recordings have revealed that very few people look intentionally at shop CHI 2009 ~ Case Studies ~ New Technologies and Interactions April 4 - 9 , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 3029 windows . This is true not just of the DTW section of the facade , but of the whole facade , as well as surrounding stores on the main street . This came as a surprise to us ; interestingly the Salling staff was equally surprised . Clearly , storefronts are in reality perceived in a different way by by - passers than by many people , including both the authors and the Salling staff , have common - sensically thought them to do . The main part of passers - by walk in a fairly straight vector parallel to the facade , and while they may cast a quick glance at the displays , these mostly reside in the peripheral sphere of vision . There are a large number of varied impressions that people have to deal with in the dense urban centre : other people walk by , street musicians and charity organization workers call out for attention , products are placed on racks and tables in the street , stray bicyclists pass by etc . On top of that , many stores adopt a strategy of using ' loud ' visuals to attract attention , e . g . large yellow ' special discount ' signs , blinking lights etc . It is to be expected that people , when becoming accustomed to this , pay less attention to displays . These challenges when designing installations intended to grab the attention of people is amplified by the multitude of intentions of passers - by . Some use the main street as a transitional access road , some are there specifically to visit the Salling department store , some are browsing other shops in the city centre , some are taking a stroll with their families etc . Since the DTW installation itself is devoid of content , grabbing the attention of passers - by must be done by coupling it with the products on display behind the glass . On a semantic level , there was a fine coupling between the hi - tech , yet elegant Bang & Olufsen products on display and the installation , which was quite subtle and advanced in juxtaposition to other display elements in the high street . However , the unintrusiveness of both the products on display and the installation meant that on a practical level , people ' s gaze would drift to more dominant displays . In practice , this meant that the coupling between the B & O exhibition and the DTW installation was not as succesful than we had hoped for . On a concrete , technical level , there were a number of difficulties ( described in more detail in the following section ) which led to this outcome . On a more abstract level , the seemingly ideal semantic fit between exhibition content and form proved to be less than ideal when situated in a setting in which a multitude of displays and exhibitions demand the attention of passers - by . We speculate that the display of products such as Bang & Olufsen are not very well suited to compete on these terms , however we will have to carry out further studies to explore and substantiate these speculations . Summing up , the challenges outlined thus far imply that attention - grabbing installations must be quite remarkable to stand out and catch people ' s attention . For the Salling DTW installation , we had chosen a strategy of concealment and curiosity which went against the grain of the loud , in - your - face attractors otherwise present in the street . Whereas this strategy had proven to work well in our prototype tests in labs and indoor exhibition settings , it was ill - suited for the high street setting . This was amplified by the diverse situations and external conditions in this setting , to which we will now turn . Diverse situations and external conditions As presented in section 2 , the DTW installation was placed in location in which a very expansive and CHI 2009 ~ Case Studies ~ New Technologies and Interactions April 4 - 9 , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 3030 diverse array of situations unfold . Among these situational variations are the differences in the level of activity between extremely busy Saturday mornings , in which people flock to the city centre , and weekday evenings and nights , during which few people venture down the main street . Another key situational aspect is that of the changing lighting conditions , both regarding the cycle of the day and the angles with which light hit the facade . A third important aspect is that people in the streets are engaged in a multitude of practices of which only a small part pertain to gaining information about what a store may have chosen to put on display . These diverse situations highly influence how the DTW installation is perceived and used . On a technical level , it should support both frequent and infrequent use ; the Salling installation handled this adequately . However , our empirical data make clear that it did not stand out enough for people to notice it , or at least not enough for them to be engaged by it . This is in part related to the aspect of lighting : since DTW is in essence a foil mounted on glass , its use quality can deteriorate promptly if sunlight or artificial lighting is reflected from inappropriate diagonal angles . This meant that during the busiest of times , in which there was already a lot of visual attractions and distractions in the street , the DTW installation actually performed the worst , since the reflections in the window made it harder to perceive its special properties . As sketched out in section 3 , we had previously tested a DTW installation in an indoor exhibition setting and found it very successful in attracting and engaging visitors . In this setting , the lighting conditions were much better ; combined with the fact that most visitors came with the intention of finding out what was on display , this lead to a much more successful outcome . This indicates that there is indeed a great deal of potential in using DTW installation , but that the diversity of situations and external conditions in the high street setting may be insurmountable challenges for a DTW installation of the scale that we have so far been working on . Conclusion and future work In this paper we have presented the DTW technology and the development of a specific DTW installation which was in use for five weeks in a bustling urban setting . During this period of time , we have documented and observed the use of the installation . It was designed to attract the attention of by - passers , but it did not meet this objective to the degree that we had come to expect on the basis of prototype tests and experiments . Our findings have led us to outline three challenges which we identify as the main causes for this discrepancy between expectations and outcome : 1 ) Interaction issues , 2 ) Behaviour and attention issues , and 3 ) Issues pertaining to the diversity of the situations and external conditions in the high street setting . For each of these challenges , we have outlined implications for design and potentials for future implementations of DTW and similar installations . These range from concrete physico - spatial considerations such as users ' vectors of movement and varying lighting conditions to the practices and distractions in urban space . We intend to continue the work presented in this paper in two ways : One , we plan to develop a DTW installation to be placed in an indoor setting in order to further explore the potentials of the technology under different conditions than those which have impeded its CHI 2009 ~ Case Studies ~ New Technologies and Interactions April 4 - 9 , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 3031 use in the high street setting . A further planned development of DTW is to use it in combination with visual projections developed specifically to exploit its special properties . Two , we are engaged in a new , large - scale research collaboration in which we will explore and map the challenges and potentials facing designers of digital technologies in urban environments . A specific focus area for this work is to further develop the design space explorer ( see Figure 1 ) in order to explore the potential correlations and tensions between the situations in which installations are located and the experiential values which interaction designers may seek to evoke through the use of the installations . Acknowledgements We would like to thank all contributors and team members from CAVI and Center for Digital Urban Living at the University of Aarhus , and special thanks to our collaborators at Salling . This research has been funded by the Danish Council for Strategic Research , grant number 2128 - 07 - 0011 ( Digital Urban Living ) and grant number 07 - 014564 ( Media Façades ) . References [ 1 ] ag4 . ( 2006 ) . Media Facades . Cologne : daab . [ 2 ] Dalsgård , P , Halskov , K . and Nielsen , R . ( 2008 ) : A media façade explorer . The Proceedings of OzCHI 2008 . [ 3 ] van Doorn , M . , van Loenen , E . , and de Vries , A . P . ( 2008 ) : Deconstructing ambient intelligence into ambient narratives : the intelligent shop window . In Proceedings of the 1st international Conference on Ambient Media and Systems ( Quebec , Canada , February 11 - 14 , 2008 ) . ICST ( Institute for Computer Sciences Social - Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering ) , ICST , Brussels , Belgium , 1 - 8 . [ 4 ] Greenfield , A . ( 2008 ) : On the ground running : Lessons from experience design . Adobe Think Tank . www . adobe . com / designcenter / thinktank / greenfield . htm l [ 5 ] Halskov , K . and Dalsgård , P . ( 2006 ) : Inspiration Card Workshops , in Proceedings of DIS . [ 6 ] Halskov , K . and Nielsen , R . ( 2006 ) : Virtual video prototyping . Human - Computer Interaction Journal vol 21 199 - 233 . [ 7 ] Kuutti , K . ( 1995 ) : Work Processes : Scenarios as a preliminary Vocabulary . In Scenario - Based Design : Envisioning Work and Technology in System Development , ed . Caroll , J . M . New York : John Wiley and Sons , Inc . [ 8 ] Leskovec , J . , Adamic , L . A . , and Huberman , B . A . ( 2007 ) : The dynamics of viral marketing . ACM Trans . Web 1 , 1 ( May . 2007 ) , 5 . [ 9 ] Mackay , W . , Ratzer , A . and Janecek , P . ( 2000 ) : Video Artifacts for Design : Bridging the Gap Between Abstraction and Detail . In Conference proceedings on Designing Interactive Systems . New York , NY : ACM Press . 63 - 69 . [ 10 ] Mailund , L . & Halskov , K . ( 2008 ) : Designing Marketing Experience . In Proceedings of DIS 2008 , ( 222 - 229 ) . [ 11 ] McCullough , M . ( 2004 ) . Digital Ground . MIT Press . [ 12 ] McLuhan , M . ( 1964 ) : Understanding Media : The Extensions of Man . McGraw - Hill . [ 13 ] Peltonen , P . , Kurvinen , E . , Salovaara , A . , Jacucci , G . , Ilmonen , T . , Evans , J . , Oulasvirta , A . , & Saarikko , P . ( 2008 ) : It ' s Mine , Don ' t Touch ! : Interactions at a Large Multi - Touch Display in a City Centre , Proc . CHI 2008 , ACM Press , pp . 1285 - 1294 . [ 14 ] Rakkolainen , I . K . and Lugmayr , A . K . ( 2007 ) : Immaterial display for interactive advertisements . In Proceedings of the international Conference on Advances in Computer Entertainment Technology ACE ' 07 , vol . 203 . ACM , New York , NY , 95 - 98 . CHI 2009 ~ Case Studies ~ New Technologies and Interactions April 4 - 9 , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 3032 [ 15 ] Tsz - Wai Lui and Gabriele Piccoli and Blake Ives ( 2007 ) : Marketing strategies in virtual worlds SIGMIS Database 38 , 4 ( Oct . 2007 ) , 77 - 80 . [ 16 ] Wei , Y . Z . , Moreau , L . , and Jennings , N . R . ( 2003 ) : Recommender systems : a market - based design . In Proceedings of the Second international Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems . New York , NY : ACM Press . [ 17 ] Xing , B . and Lin , Z . ( 2006 ) : The impact of search engine optimization on online advertising market . In Proceedings of the 8th international Conference on Electronic Commerce : the New E - Commerce : innovations For Conquering Current Barriers , Obstacles and Limitations To Conducting Successful Business on the internet . New York , NY : ACM Press . CHI 2009 ~ Case Studies ~ New Technologies and Interactions April 4 - 9 , 2009 ~ Boston , MA , USA 3033