@ INTERACTIONSMAG 50 INTERACTIONS MAY – JUNE 2019 c r e d i t t k INTERACTIONS . ACM . ORG MAY – JUNE 2019 INTERACTIONS 51 S P E C I A L T O P I C A LL I M A G E S B Y M Y V I S U A L S / S H U TT E R S T O C K . C O M group and between participants and facilitators [ 2 ] . The conditions in which PD takes place are not the same as those of Scandinavia in the late 1970s . As a recent Interactions feature has pointed out [ 3 ] , the political , economic , and technological climate has changed significantly , so PD practitioners need to reimagine their craft— especially in light of today’s increasingly globalized conditions . As PD travels around the globe , issues of power become more complicated . Facilitators and participants may not be from the same place and therefore may not share an understanding of participation , may At its very core , participatory design ( PD ) is concerned with issues of power [ 1 ] . Since PD’s earliest applications , the aim has been to make voices heard and provide agency through participation in the design of technological artifacts , infrastructures , and processes . But participation does not happen by itself , and what participation means differs from time to time , place to place , and culture to culture . It needs to be actively constructed and adapted to the present conditions . To do this , PD practitioners must be mindful of the existing power relations not just between participants and the rest of the world , but also between those within the participant A WHAT IS PARTICIPATION ? EMERGING CHALLENGES FOR PARTICIPATORY DESIGN IN GLOBALIZED CONDITIONS Max Krüger , University of Siegen Ana Bustamante Duarte , University of Münster Anne Weibert , University of Siegen Konstantin Aal , University of Siegen Reem Talhouk , Newcastle University Oussama Metatla , University of Bristol Insights → Group heterogeneity and internal politics hinder participation . → Colonial histories shape power relations within teams . → A loss of agency can create the belief that one’s voice will not be heard . → Failure to address these issues can mean that participants are not actually participating . @ INTERACTIONSMAG 52 INTERACTIONS MAY – JUNE 2019 special topic community : They communicated with the various stakeholders in the valley to build trust in the club , found tutors to guide the participants , identified projects that might be of interest , and located a suitable and accessible spot for the space , which ultimately led to increased ownership over the club by the village’s inhabitants . To build deeper trust and personal relationships within the community , one German member of the research team learned the local language and spent a year in the village , which was planned at the beginning of the project . The trust and relationships he and the community built together also helped to alleviate some of the power imbalances . He became a mediator and confidant , to whom also criticism and questions could be expressed . Over time the community talked to him about their concerns regarding the project’s financial issues , the training of the tutors , the influence of the Internet on participants , and possible negative consequences of the project . Nowadays the computer club is successfully established and gets daily visits . This was possible only because we involved local partners from the beginning , built trust by becoming part of the community , and overall took the local partners seriously as experts of their own lives . Collaboration and participation are ongoing , as the community is currently deciding on activities for the coming years . — Konstantin Aal CASE 2 : LOSING POWER Refugees in the Arab region are a marginalized community without a voice in local and national decision - making processes , nor within the humanitarian aid system . This is exacerbated by Arab states’ not providing any form of citizenship or residency to Syrian refugees in order to encourage future repatriation . Despite the aid system increasingly in place , refugee communities remain the largest silent stakeholder within this system . Therefore , I wanted to adopt a participatory action research approach and use PD methods . I didn’t stop to question whether taking such a research approach was possible within the context of Syrian refugees in Lebanon or whether the communities I was working with would see value in such an approach . have different preferences , and may not be aware of cultural , political , or structural obstacles that exist in a specific context . Particularly when facilitators come from historically privileged parts of the world and the participants are from the Global South , notions of the postcolonial become crucial [ 4 ] . In such situations , the specific existing power relations might be an obstacle to true participation . Facilitators and their research approaches may represent colonial structures and are likely entrenched in what can be considered the dominant regime [ 5 ] , whereas participants are likely to be outside of it . Participation therefore is hard work , and to make it happen is a difficult process . In this article we want to highlight three PD projects in which issues of power and the post - colonial came to the fore . Over these three cases , we provide examples of how these issues can play out and how we attempted to address challenges to participation posed by postcolonial conditions , power imbalances , and cultural diversity . CASE 1 : POSTCOLONIAL CONDITIONS The valley we chose to work with is located in the Moroccan High Atlas Mountains , about 80 km away from the closest city . It is divided into six smaller villages and has around 10 , 000 inhabitants , with most households making a living from agriculture and pastoralism . Since the mid - 2000s , important infrastructural improvements and development have taken place . Households in the main villages recently gained access to running water and electricity . In addition , a big telecommunications company built a set of telephone poles that now provide an LTE network all over the valley . The aim of our project was to set up a space , a computer club , that provides access to computers to explore this technology and Internet connectivity in a creative , hands - on manner . We employed a participatory approach to the design of the computer club from the start . We wanted to ensure that our joint intervention was aligned with the wishes and needs of the inhabitants , who had little or no experience with ICT , and to embed it into the community and its practices . During our stay , questions arose about power dynamics between us and the inhabitants , the postcolonial conditions we were working in , and the exchange of knowledge between us and the possible future tutors of the space . The first two issues were especially important to take seriously from the beginning . The community was acutely aware of the problems of postcolonial conditions : As far back as the classical period , the area was the target of Phoenician , Roman , Vandal , and Arab conquests , before falling to European colonization during the 18th and 19th centuries . They complained to us that in more recent times the village had negative experiences with other initiatives that came from the outside , which were often carried out without consulting or even informing the local population . These specific conditions posed serious challenges for our project : As foreign researchers who were providing technology and knowledge to the valley , we were given preferential treatment and were promised that everything would be done as we’d like ( during the stay , but also in establishing the computer club ) . We also controlled access to financial resources to employ two tutors . To balance out these power differences , we tried to establish an equal - footed partnership with local actors from the start . One local NGO was particularly relevant , as it had already built up a lot of trust within the community over the previous years . At least one member of each family is part of this organization , jointly deciding on the NGO’s activities , such as installing water pipes or bus stops . This cooperation proved crucial for the development of the project from the beginning , as the NGO mediated between us and the larger To balance out power differences , we tried to establish an equal - footed partnership with local actors from the start . INTERACTIONS . ACM . ORG MAY – JUNE 2019 INTERACTIONS 53 When conducting my initial engagements with Syrian refugee communities in Lebanon [ 6 , 7 ] , I encountered several challenges that made me question the extent to which I could adopt a participatory approach in my research . Initially I viewed my participants within the refugee community as one stakeholder group that I could bring closer to other stakeholders within the aid system through PD methods . However , over time , as I engaged with the women in the community , I realized it was naive to think that the community’s aims for participation and the outcomes they expected were homogeneous . Indeed , I came to realize that before engaging in PD methods to bring the voice of refugees to other stakeholders , PD methods should first be used to understand and work with the intra - community politics . For example , while exploring experiences of refugee food insecurity , methods were tailored to understand not only their interactions with external actors but also their interactions among themselves to address food insecurity and their motivations within such interactions . The second challenge encountered with participants was their lack of motivation to take on active roles within participatory projects that go beyond just providing information . Through further conversations with participants , I discovered that this lack of motivation is rooted in the inherent lack of agency experienced by refugees . Participants highlighted a disbelief that their voices could be heard by other stakeholders . Additionally , they recounted how they are struggling with managing their day - to - day survival to the point that they felt taking on more responsibilities would burden them . They said actions to enhance the infrastructure of the settlement were the responsibility of humanitarian organizations . Such factors highlighted the difficulty in adopting PD methods as envisioned by Western scholars , leading me to adapt methods so that I became a mediator in bringing forth refugee voices . By actively taking the political stance of empowering refugees , the role of disseminating the research conducted with participants to actors within the humanitarian system became more important . Such an approach entails a series of steps to validate data collected with participants , and also working with participants to co - design advocacy artifacts to be used in dissemination . When working with such marginalized communities , we as researchers need to take on more responsibility as active stakeholders in projects , even if this is not always sustainable . — Reem Talhouk CASE 3 : INTERCULTURAL ISSUES AND DISCRIMINATION Migrants in Germany face the difficult task of navigating excessive bureaucracy to find suitable language classes , get access to professional education , and find work . In order to alleviate these challenges , we engaged in a PD project to build a suite of digital tools to inform migrants about options and connect them with appropriate support . In this project we work with migrants from all over the globe but predominantly from the Arab world , as well as with German volunteers and professionals to jointly design the platform . The researchers and facilitators are German . We meet weekly to discuss issues related to the platform and to design together but also to write , play music , and eat ice cream . The mix of cultures , religions , and historical relations among the actors provides for rich discussions fueled by the different experiences each individual brings to our conversations . This diversity also provides challenges for participation : A lack of detailed knowledge by the German facilitators about the participants’ contexts and cultural , political , and historical origins hindered the attendance of some in particular instances . At one meeting , a participant played a song he had composed about his home , Kurdistan . The music was shared via our WhatsApp group chat , where another participant made a derogatory remark about the content of the song praising Kurdistan . The comment was made in Arabic and elicited no reply from the group ; therefore it escaped the facilitators’ attention . But it did not escape the participants’ attention : A Kurdish participant stopped attending the meetings . When we inquired , he shared what happened . At the next meeting , we raised the issue to discuss experiences of discrimination and prejudice and how we wanted to deal with them as a group . This was not the only instance where the heterogeneity of the participant group and the internal politics that result hindered participation . At other times , the specific hierarchies between German facilitators and participants , as members of the host country , and migrants , as those trying to become members of that country , emerged during our conversations . Volunteers , who were part of the participant group , relied on the concepts of migrants or refugees to distinguish themselves and to know who they were supporting , and referred to non - German participants as such . The participants with a history of migration or refugee experiences at one point mentioned how tiresome @ INTERACTIONSMAG 54 INTERACTIONS MAY – JUNE 2019 special topic 7 . Talhouk , R . , Mesmar , S . , Thieme , A . , Balaam , M . , Olivier , R . , Akik , C . , and Ghattas , H . Syrian refugees and digital health in Lebanon : Opportunities for improving antenatal health . Proc . of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , 2016 , 331 – 342 ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858331 Max Krüger is a research assistant and Ph . D . candidate at the University of Siegen . His research focuses on participatory design , especially of IT systems around issues of migration and arriving . He is also interested in how methods of technology creation are created and adapted in different cultural contexts . →maximilian . krueger @ uni - siegen . de Ana Bustamante Duarte recently completed her Ph . D . at the Institute for Geoinformatics at the University of Münster , Germany . Her work focuses on exploring participatory design and research for the design of mobile geospatial services to support newcomers arriving and ( re ) settling in urban centers . →bustamante @ uni - muenster . de Anne Weibert is a Ph . D . student and research assistant at the Institute for Information Systems and New Media , University of Siegen . Her interest is in computer - based collaborative project work and inherent processes of technology appropriation , intercultural learning , and community building . →anne . weibert @ uni - siegen . de Konstantin Aal is a research assistant and Ph . D . candidate at the Department of Business Informatics and New Media of the University of Siegen . His research focuses on the use of social media during the Arab Spring , facilitating human - animal relations in Botswana , and access to technology in rural Morocco . →konstantin . aal @ uni - siegen . de Reem Talhouk is a doctoral trainee at Newcastle University . Her research centers on how technologies contribute to community resilience among marginalized communities , primarily refugees , in the Arab region . She works with refugee communities to co - design technologies that enhance their food security and access to primary healthcare . →r . r . talhouk2 @ newcastle . ac . uk Oussama Metatla is an EPSRC research fellow and principal investigator at the University of Bristol . His vocation is to explore and demonstrate how HCI can contribute to building a more inclusive society . He is currently interested in supporting inclusive interaction between people through co - designing multisensory and crossmodal interactive systems . →o . metatla @ bristol . ac . uk it is to be called refugees , when what they are trying to do is to overcome this experience and transcend the perception as being different . The two examples show how the diversity of the participant group itself becomes a challenge for participation : Even though the respective groups are different , both cases illustrate how political disagreement and implicit power imbalances can make the participation of others seem unwelcome . The first example in particular was exacerbated by our lack of awareness of certain divides and the consequences they might have , as well as our lack of Arab language skills . Our response was to create a space where such implicit obstacles could be made explicit , discussed , and addressed as a group . The example also shows the necessity of facilitators being attuned to the sensitivities of participants . At the same time , it is questionable that facilitators can be neutral and sensitive to the needs of their participants , perhaps especially in very diverse constellations . — Max Krüger and Anne Weibert CONCLUSION These three cases show the diverse situations that participatory approaches face in globalized , intercultural , and postcolonial conditions when also dealing with ensuing power imbalances . The cases presented here were impacted by several factors . Some examples related to the participants’ prior experiences of the loss or gain of agency and sense of power , or to the actual extent of their participation on the definition of the research objectives and setup . Furthermore , the experiences presented motivated us to reflect on some challenging and sensitive questions , such as : What understanding of participation do we all bring to the project , and do we share the same understandings ? Does everyone have time to participate ? Who does and who does not ? Under which conditions can and will people speak their mind ? Who needs to be there ; who needs to be absent ? And to what extent do these create a hierarchy of participation ? As PD practitioners , we must be mindful of these initial questions , as well as of the needs and conditions we ourselves bring to the activities , and how and whether these conditions and decisions we made before engaging in a project can be altered throughout the process . The use of PD strategies not only to design , but also to create conditions for understanding sensitivities and to build a common language among all persons involved becomes a relevant and delicate matter to explore . Otherwise , we could fall into the trap of offering only partial or even tokenistic participation . The difficulties recounted here attempt to be a critical reflection on PD practices on the ground . However , we still need to explore further proper means to address them , because the consequence of not doing so can deeply limit the actual participation of all actors : Our participants might not actually be participating . Endnotes 1 . Bratteteig , T . and Wagner , I . Disentangling power and decision - making in participatory design . Proc . of the 12th Participatory Design Conference : Research Papers - Volume 1 . ACM , New York , 2012 , 41 – 50 . 2 . Bustamante Duarte , A . M . , Brendel , N . , Degbelo , A . , and Kray , C . Participatory design and participatory research : An HCI case study with young forced migrants . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 25 , 1 ( Feb . 2018 ) , Article 3 ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3145472 3 . Bannon , L . , Bardzell , J . , and Bødker , S . Reimagining participatory design . Interactions 26 , 1 ( Jan . – Feb . 2018 ) , 26 – 32 ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3292015 4 . Mainsah , H . and Morrison , A . Participatory design through a cultural lens : Insights from postcolonial theory . Proc . of the 13th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Industry Cases , Workshop Descriptions , Doctoral Consortium papers , and Keynote abstracts - Volume 2 . ACM , New York , 2014 , 83 - 86 . 5 . Björgvinsson , E . Managing collaborative critique in times of financialisation capitalism . Parse Journal Issue # 5 Management 5 ( 2017 ) , 91 – 111 ; http : / / parsejournal . com / content / uploads / 8 _ PARSE - Issue - 5 _ Management _ Managing - Collaborative - Critique - in - Times - of - Financialisation - Capitalism . pdf 6 . Talhouk , R . , Bartindale , T . , Montague , K . , Mesmar , S . , Akik , C . , Ghassani , A . , Najem , M . , Ghattas , H . , Olivier , P . , and Balaam , M . Implications of synchronous IVR radio on Syrian refugee health and community dynamics . Proc . of the 8th International Conference on Communities and Technologies . ACM , New York , 2017 , 193 - 202 ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3083671 . 3083690 DOI : 10 . 1145 / 3319376 COPYRIGHT HELD BY AUTHORS . PUBLICATION RIGHTS LICENSED TO ACM . $ 15 . 00