www . biosciencemag . org December 2009 / Vol . 59 No . 11 • BioScience 985 T he peer - review process is dependent on the largely unpaid participation of editors , referees , and authors in order to function . At any point in this process , however , it is possible that the assessment of a manuscript will be based on some - thing other than actual scientific merit ( Lortie et al . 2007 ) . Errors in assessment , or“bias , ”can occur in relation to attri - butes of the referee or to attributes of the paper . In the first instance , scientists with more experience tend to be more crit - ical in their evaluations ( Nylenna et al . 1994 ) and have been shown within the medical field to produce lower - quality reviews ( Kliewer et al . 2005 ) . Male referees also tend to rec - ommend either outright acceptance or rejection , whereas females more frequently recommend revisions ( Davo et al . 2003 ) . Second , attributes associated with a paper , such as the number of authors or authors’nationality , can influence the relative assessment of merit ( Lloyd 1990 , Tregenza 2002 , Leimu and Koricheva 2005a , 2005b ) . Research has also shown the gender of authors to be an important factor in assessments of quality . For example , articles with females as first author were more likely to receive a lower rating , particularly when the author was not previously known in their field ( Paludi and Bauer 1983 , Lloyd 1990 ) . Recent research does suggest a para - digm shift in attitudes toward author gender ( Leimu and Koricheva 2005b , Borsuk et al . 2009 ) , although the extent of such shifts has not been tested experimentally . At the very least , the sensitivity of author name and gender within the peer - review model should be tested to ensure that the general assumptions about the model’s objectivity are well founded . An important issue facing scientists is the potential for the gender of authors to inadvertently affect how a study is perceived ( Schubert and Sinha 2004 ) . Importantly , both editor and referee populations are predominantly male ( Dick - ersin et al . 1998 , Davo et al . 2003 , Dalton 2006 ) . Additionally , referee performance varies by gender , with males generally taking more time to return manuscripts ( Davo et al . 2003 ) . Studies have shown male and female referees in medicine to be partial toward authors of their own gender ( Davo et al . 2003 , Kliewer et al . 2005 ) . These demographic differences could generate differences in the treatment of manuscripts under review . In this manipulative experiment , we offered a single eco - logical article to a broad population of potential referees , in - cluding biology undergraduates , graduate students , postdoctoral researchers , and faculty researchers . The only vari - ation in the article concerned the name of the author : In some instances we supplied a male name , in others a female name , and in yet others we gave only initials or no name at all . We tested the following hypotheses using this design : ( a ) BioScience 59 : 985 – 989 . ISSN 0006 - 3568 , electronic ISSN 1525 - 3244 . © 2009 by American Institute of Biological Sciences . All rights reserved . Request permission to photocopy or reproduce article content at the University of California Press’s Rights and Permissions Web site at www . ucpressjournals . com / reprintinfo . asp . doi : 10 . 1525 / bio . 2009 . 59 . 11 . 10 To Name or Not to Name : The Effect of Changing Author Gender on Peer Review ROBYN M . BORSUK , LONNIE W . AARSSEN , AMBER E . BUDDEN , JULIA KORICHEVA , ROOSA LEIMU , TOM TREGENZA , AND CHRISTOPHER J . LORTIE The peer review model is one of the most important tools used in science to assess the relative merit of research . We manipulated a published article to reflect one of the following four author designations : female , male , initial , and no name provided . This article was then reviewed by referees of both genders at various stages of scientific training . Name changing did not influence acceptance rates or quality ratings . Undergraduate referees were less critical than graduate students or postdoctoral researchers , independent of gender . However , female postdoctoral researchers were the most critical referees : Their rejection rates were the highest and quality ratings the lowest , regardless of the author name provided . Contrary to previous reports in the literature , there was no evidence of same - gender preferences . This study strongly suggests that female postgraduate biologists may apply different expectations to peer review . Keywords : bias , graduate students , gender , name changing , peer review Professional Biologist 986 BioScience • December 2009 / Vol . 59 No . 11 www . biosciencemag . org author name : All else being equal ( it is the exact same paper with only the name changed ) , author designation should not influence the recommendation to publish ( null H 0 ) ; ( b ) referee attributes : The gender and education of the referee influence the degree of criticality when reviewing ( Nylenna et al . 1994 , Davo et al . 2003 , Kliewer et al . 2005 ) ; ( c ) same gender preferences : Referees are more likely to accept papers written by authors of their own gender ( Tregenza 2002 ) . To the best of our knowledge , this is the first study to explore whether author name changes the perception of a biological study . Sampling design We used the publication article “Zebra Mussels Decrease Burrowing Ability and Growth of a Native Snail , Campeloma decisum” ( published in Hydrobiologia ; Van Appledorn et al . 2007 ) to test whether author name affects reviews . We selected this particular article because of its general scientific charac - teristics , including its short length ( three pages ) , clear figures , and direct and uncomplicated text , as well as its design as an experimental manipulation . Importantly , this article is a representative publication for Hydrobiologia , having received the same number of citations as the mean for that journal in 2007 ( ISI Web of Science , mean = two citations for articles in 2007 ) . We thus rated this paper as acceptable and clearly publishable , and as such , an appropriate candidate for manipulation . Names of the original authors were removed and replaced by four author designations : no name , initial ( J . Thomp - son ) , male ( David Thompson ) , and female ( Catherine Thompson ) . The surname was identical for each author treatment to ensure that any potential differences in manu - script evaluation could be attributed only to author gender . We formatted the paper as a manuscript and distributed it in March 2007 to a survey population including undergraduate students ( with no reviewing experience ) , graduate students ( master’s students and PhD candidates ) , postdoctoral fellows , and faculty . To poll the undergraduates , four biology classes totaling 269 students from York University , Canada , were selected and tested in class . We also posted the manu - script and questionnaire online ( www . yorku . ca / surveys ) to expand this survey popu - lation and to potentially include graduate students , postdoctoral researchers , and more senior scientists . We sent direct e - mails to the faculty of three Cana - dian and three British uni - versities to advertise the survey , and also posted the requests on two listservs ( ECOLOG and EvolDir ) . Assignment to the four manuscript versions was randomized using an on - line algorithm , and the survey was posted for eight months . All respondents were informed that the researchers were interested in exploring whether knowledge of a topic influ - ences assessment , and were not informed of the changes in author name . We devised a seven - question survey using a 5 - point Likert scale ( figure 1 ) . The name , gender , age , and career stage of each respondent was also recorded . The York University Human Protocol Research Committee approved this research . Statistical analyses Prior to analysis , we removed respondents who did not in - dicate gender or education . As there were virtually no faculty respondents ( n = 2 ) , this group was also removed . With exclusions and incompletes , the final data set totaled 989 respondents—230 in class and 759 online . For all subsequent analyses reported herein , master’s and PhD candidates were grouped together as “graduate students” since preliminary analyses did not detect significant differences between these two groups . We tested for differences arising from the mechanism of survey presentation by analyzing under - graduate data from in - class and online surveys . All ratings were converted to an ordinal numerical score , with 1 being “strongly disagree” and 5 being “strongly agree . ” We used chi - square ( c 2 ) statistics to test whether the respondent population varied by gender . As a first approxi - mation , we used a 4 × 2 contingency analysis to test whether name designation ( male , female , initials , or none ) influenced recommendations ( accept or reject , with data on the statement “The article is suitable for publication”converted to binary ) . We also tested the decision to publish directly using the full data reported in the statement on suitability for publication ( figure 1 ) . We calculated a net“quality”score by summing the five response variables that directly addressed manuscript quality ( figure 1 , statements 2 – 6 ) . This approach allowed us to assess whether the results were sensitive to the type of question , and whether the respondents were consistent ( qual - ity and recommendation should coincide ) . We used a general linear model ( GLM ) to analyze net quality scores with education , gender of respondent , and author assignment as independent factors . An additional Figure 1 . The Likert scale used in this study . Professional Biologist www . biosciencemag . org December 2009 / Vol . 59 No . 11 • BioScience 987 GLM with the same factors was used to analyze the depen - dent variable “decision to publish . ” We used independent sample t tests to test for a difference between author gender and respondent gender for both acceptance rates and qual - ity scores . In all cases , alpha was set at 0 . 05 , tests were two - tailed , and data met parametric assumptions . Tukey and students’ t post - hoc tests were used to compare specific groups where appropriate . We used SPSS version 16 . 0 . 1 and JMP version 5 . 1 . 1 for all analyses . Results There were a total of 1031 respondents both online and in - class , with 269 biology undergraduate students completing the in - class experiment and 762 individuals completing the online version . The respondent population was entirely com - posed of biologists . The author - designated test manuscripts were equally distributed to each group ( c 21 = 1 . 751 , p = 0 . 626 ) . There were significantly more female ( 62 percent ) than male respondents ( 38 percent ) ( c 2 1 = 58 . 490 , p < 0 . 001 ) , and there was no gender difference by education ( c 22 = 0 . 579 , p = 0 . 748 ) . There were significantly more undergraduate online respondents than any other group ( c 23 = 1667 . 874 , p < 0 . 001 ; postdoctoral researchers 3 . 3 percent , graduate students 10 . 3 percent , undergraduate students 86 . 4 percent ) . Undergraduate respondents who completed the in - class ver - sion of the survey were more likely than their online counter - parts to reject the manuscript ( F 1988 = 283 . 323 , p < 0 . 001 ) and give it a lower quality rating ( F 1985 = 914 . 321 , p < 0 . 001 ) . Author gender had no effects on rejection rates for online referees ( c 26 = 3 . 195 , p = 0 . 784 ; male 25 . 44 percent , female 26 . 75 percent , initial 24 . 56 percent , no name 23 . 25 percent ; figure 2 ) . There were no author gender differences in rejec - tion rate ( F 1225 = 1 . 773 , p = 0 . 184 ) or quality rating ( F 1222 = 0 . 5607 , p = 0 . 455 ) for the in - class undergraduate respon - dents . Referees were not more likely to accept authors of their own gender ( female , t 267 = – 1 . 088 , p = 0 . 278 ; male , t 119 = 1 . 508 , p = 0 . 134 ; figure 3 ) , nor did they rate their own gender more favorably ( female , t 232 = – 0 . 775 , p = 0 . 439 ; male , t 154 = 0 . 647 , p = 0 . 519 ) . Postdoctoral researchers and graduate students were , however , more likely to reject the manuscript than under - graduate students ( F 2750 = 15 . 340 , p < 0 . 001 ; figure 4 ) . Im - portantly , female respondents generally rated manuscripts significantly lower than did male respondents ( F 1750 = 6 . 732 , p = 0 . 010 ) , but this difference was driven primarily by female postdoctoral researchers , who were more critical than any other group ( F 2750 = 4 . 290 , p = 0 . 014 ; figure 5 ) . Implications for Peer Review Peer review is generally assumed to be a fair and objective method for disseminating credible biological research . Nonetheless , simple differences between referees in experience , familiarity with authors , or gender of either the author or the referee can introduce other considerations into the relative Figure 2 . The relative distribution of rejection rates of an experimentally manipulated author gender for a single manuscript . A total of 456 biologists were tested . Figure 3 . A comparison of the acceptance rate by referee gender by author gender of a single manuscript experi - mentally manipulated for author name . A total of 238 biologists were tested . Professional Biologist 988 BioScience • December 2009 / Vol . 59 No . 11 www . biosciencemag . org assignment of merit—not necessarily mistakes , but rather tendencies . These tendencies can nonetheless be important to a potential author with a manu - script in review at a journal if the decision is border - line or if other manuscripts of comparable merit are under consideration . In this experiment , we tested the hypotheses that ( a ) author gender does not influence assessment , ( b ) different tendencies exist between groups of referees , and ( c ) same - gender preferences influence assessment . In the first instance , name changing did not affect the recommendation to pub - lish in any of the groups tested , which suggests that referees at all stages of experience in biology detect merit . As predicted in the second instance , attributes of the referee pool significantly influenced the relative assessment of the same manuscript—that is , gradu - ate students and postdoctoral researchers were more critical . However , female referees also tended to be more critical in general , and interestingly , female postdoctoral researchers were the most critical group tested . Finally , no same - gender preferences were detected in reviewing . Admittedly , this is the first experimental study of its kind and it has been tested on only one publication ; nonetheless , there was no evidence of gender discrimination by author name , which is an extremely positive finding for biologists . The different tendencies in the likelihood of rejection by female referees does suggest , however , that not all individuals approach peer review using the same set of criteria . Scientific merit identified a priori by each journal as a set of specific and unique criteria should be used in evaluating manuscripts ; in principle , this concept is simple , but in application it can be more difficult . For example , the actual merit of a particular study de - scribed in a manuscript can be influenced by the ref - eree’s perception of numerous elements of the paper , including communication style , clarity , quality of fig - ures , and so on . It is reasonable to suggest that these elements do not necessarily relate to the paper’s scientific merit , but they can nonetheless reduce the referee’s capacity to detect merit ( Lortie et al . 2007 ) . Less obviously , however , articles with only initials reported can be rated more highly than those authored by females ( Paludi and Bauer 1983 ) , and sociological experiments using manipulated , gender - specific , or unique names have detected biases in relative assessment ( Anderson and Schmitt 1990 , Kasof 1993 ) . We did not detect such tendencies . We hope this preliminary study reflects positive changes within the biological field in tandem with the over - all increase in the number of female biologists . Most important , this study does not imply that the peer - review process is perfect , nor that all published papers within a particular journal are of equally high quality . Rather , it demonstrates that potential referees at all levels of training are , on average , assessing the manuscript and not the name of the author . The differences between male and female referees , however , could be very important , and future research should Figure 4 . The mean score of “decision to publish” recommended by referees of a single manuscript . We tested 759 biologists , including undergraduates , graduates , and postdocs on a Likert scale from 1 to 5 ( 1 = negative and 5 = positive ) ; however , for purposes of visual clarity , “decision to publish” was inverted to show responses from negative to positive ( i . e . , low scores = reject , high scores = accept ) . Shown is the mean ±1 standard error . Different letters denote significantly different Tukey post - hoc contrasts ( p < 0 . 05 ) . Figure 5 . The mean “quality rating” score provided by referees of a single manuscript . We tested 759 referees , and included males and females at one of three career stages . A Likert scale from 1 to 5 was used , with 1 being negative and 5 being positive ; however , for purposes of visual clarity , scores were inverted to show responses from negative to positive ( i . e . , low scores = reject , high scores = accept ) . Shown is the mean ±1 standard error . Asterisks denote significantly different Student’s t post - hoc analyses ( p < 0 . 05 ) . Professional Biologist www . biosciencemag . org December 2009 / Vol . 59 No . 11 • BioScience 989 focus on identifying why differences may exist . It would be easy to speculate that female biologists are more critical because they were subjected to more critical experiences in science , but this is conjecture and may be incorrect in the contemporary culture . More extensive tests of these ideas should examine whether provision of criteria before review is important for standardizing reviews , and whether faculty researchers also differ by gender . Postdoctoral researchers and graduate students were more likely than undergraduates to reject the manuscript . This finding supports related research in medicine that found experienced referees to be more critical ( Nylenna et al . 1994 ) , and senior referees to be more likely to rank manuscripts as less important ( Kliewer et al . 2005 ) . We propose that a com - parative experiment involving faculty researchers would de - termine whether these differences persist in biology . However , there was an alarming lack of interest or a nonresponse bias from the senior researchers we contacted through the two largest listservs in the disciplines of ecology and evolution . There are several possible explanations for reviewers be - coming increasingly critical with greater experience , such as more junior scientists are less familiar with the expectations associated with successful publication , or , less positively , referees generally become harder to impress as they become older and more experienced ( Kliewer et al . 2004 ) , or that elements associated with“doing science”increases our capacity to critically review the research of our peers . In all instances , it is evident that we should view this variation as a positive opportunity to enhance the peer - review system , and introduce formal training early in the education and research pipeline . Gender issues in science are complicated by many factors changing concurrently . Nonetheless , we propose that con - siderations of gender and peer review are crucial because the assessment of scientists relies heavily on their publication records ( Barres 2006 ) . Since experienced referees have been shown to rate articles written by females less favorably than those written by males ( Lloyd 1990 ) , and since females fre - quently do not attain the same level of seniority as males ( Dickersin et al . 1998 , Knapp 2005 ) , these conditions can set the stage for males and females to approach the peer - review system differently . We found no evidence for differential rat - ing on the basis of author gender , nor did we find evidence of same gender preferences ; in both instances , our findings contradict previous studies ( Paludi and Bauer 1983 , Lloyd 1990 ) . Although this is encouraging , it is still only a first step toward understanding the importance of author gender— particularly since we found that female referees were more critical . We propose the novel ( yet perhaps obvious to editors ) explanation that the gender and career stage of the available referee population are important , and due consideration of that fact is needed to ensure fair reviews . Moreover , referee training for biologists , explicit and transparent protocols for selection of referees , and journal - specific criteria for referees and authors could improve the process of peer review . Acknowledgments Thisresearchwasconductedaspartof theRoleof Publication - related Biases in Ecology Working Group supported by the National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis , a center funded by the National Science Foundation ( grant no . DEB - 0072909 ) . References cited Anderson T , Schmitt PR . 1990 . Unique first names in male and female psychiatric inpatients . Journal of Social Psychology 130 : 835 – 837 . Barres BA . 2006 . Does gender matter ? Nature 442 : 133 – 136 . BorsukRM , BuddenAE , LeimuR , AarsonLW , LortieCJ . 2009 . Theinfluence of author gender , national language andnumber of authors oncitation rate in ecology . Open Ecology 2 : 25 – 28 . Dalton R . 2006 . Societies spurn women editors . Nature 440 : 974 – 975 . Davo MD , Vives C , Alvarez - Dardet C . 2003 . Why are women underused in the JECH peer review process ? Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 57 : 936 – 937 . DickersinK , FredmanL , FlegalKM , ScottJD , CrawleyB . 1998 . Isthereasex biasinchoosingeditors ? Epidemiologyjournalsasanexample . Journal of the American Medical Association 280 : 260 – 264 . Kasof J . 1993 . Sex bias in the naming of stimulus persons . Psychological Bulletin 113 : 140 – 163 . KliewerMA , DeLongDM , FreedK , JenkinsCB , PaulsonEK , ProvenzaleJM . 2004 . Peerreviewatthe AmericanJournalofRoentgenology : Howreviewer and manuscript characteristics affected editorial decisions on 196 major papers . American Journal of Roentgenology 183 : 1545 – 1550 . Kliewer MA , Freed KS , DeLong DM , Pickhardt PJ , Provenzale JM . 2005 . Reviewing the reviewers : Comparison of review quality and reviewer characteristics at the American Journal of Roentgenology . American Journal of Roentgenology 184 : 1731 – 1735 . KnappS . 2005 . Asuitablejobforawoman . TrendsinEcologyandEvolution 20 : 55 – 56 . Leimu R , Koricheva J . 2005a . Does scientific collaboration increase the impact of ecological articles ? BioScience 55 : 438 – 443 . ——— . 2005b . Whatdeterminesthecitationfrequencyof ecologicalpapers ? Trends in Ecology and Evolution 20 : 28 – 32 . LloydME . 1990 . Genderfactorsinreviewerrecommendationsformanuscript publication . Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis 23 : 539 – 543 . Lortie CJ , Aarssen LW , Budden AE , Koricheva JK , Leimu R , Tregenza T . 2007 . Publication bias and merit in ecology . Oikos 116 : 1247 – 1253 . Nylenna M , Riis P , Karlsson Y . 1994 . Multiple blinded reviews of the same two manuscripts : Effects of referee characteristics and publication language . Journal of the American Medical Association 272 : 149 – 151 . Paludi MA , Bauer WD . 1983 . Goldberg revisited : What’s in an author’s name . Sex Roles 9 : 387 – 390 . Schubert C , Sinha G . 2004 . A lab of her own . Nature 10 : 114 – 115 . Tregenza T . 2002 . Gender bias in the refereeing process ? Trends in Ecology and Evolution 17 : 349 – 350 . Van Appledorn M , Lamb DA , Albalak K , Bach CE . 2007 . Zebra mussels decrease burrowing ability and growth of a native snail , Campeloma decisum . Hydrobiologia 575 : 441 – 445 . Robyn M . Borsuk ( r . m . borsuk @ gmail . com ) and Christopher J . Lortie are with the Department of Biology at York University in Toronto , Canada . Lonnie W . Aarssen is with the Department of Biology at Queens University in Kingston , Canada . Amber E . Budden is with the National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis in Santa Barbara , California . Julia Koricheva is with the School of Biological Sciences at Royal Holloway University of London in the United Kingdom . Roosa Leimu is with the Section of Ecology at the University of Turku in Finland . Tom Tregenza is with the Centre for Ecology and Conservation at the University of Exeter , Cornwall Campus , in Penryn , United Kingdom . Professional Biologist