Article A mismatch in the expression of cell surface molecules induces tissue - intrinsic defense against aberrant cells Highlights d Robos , Teneurins , and LRR proteins confer detection of abnormal neighboring cells d An expression level mismatch between adjacent cells triggers ‘‘interface surveillance’’ d Robo2 and Robo3 activate interface surveillance independent of the ligand Slit d Fate - patterning pathways establish a cell surface proﬁle unique to each cell fate Authors Friedericke Fischer , Laurin Ernst , Anna Frey , . . . , Vanessa Weichselberger , Ramya Balaji , Anne - Kathrin Classen Correspondence anne . classen @ biologie . uni - freiburg . de In brief Fischer et al . ﬁnd that Drosophila tissues rely on a cell surface code of Robo receptors , Teneurins , and other LRR proteins to identify abnormal neighboring cells with deregulated developmental fate , including activation of oncogenic Ras . Cell identiﬁcation depends on expression differences , leading to cell elimination by ‘‘interface surveillance . ’’ Fischer et al . , 2024 , Current Biology 34 , 1 – 17 March 11 , 2024 ª 2024 The Author ( s ) . Published by Elsevier Inc . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2024 . 01 . 053 ll Article A mismatch in the expression of cell surface molecules induces tissue - intrinsic defense against aberrant cells Friedericke Fischer , 1 , 2 , 3 Laurin Ernst , 1 , 2 , 3 Anna Frey , 1 , 2 , 4 Katrin Holstein , 5 Deepti Prasad , 1 , 2 , 4 Vanessa Weichselberger , 4 , 6 Ramya Balaji , 1 , 2 and Anne - Kathrin Classen 1 , 2 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , * 1 Hilde - Mangold - Haus , University of Freiburg , 79104 Freiburg , Germany 2 Faculty of Biology , University of Freiburg , 79104 Freiburg , Germany 3 International Max Planck Research School for Immunobiology , Epigenetics , and Metabolism , 79108 Freiburg , Germany 4 Spemann Graduate School of Biology and Medicine ( SGBM ) , University of Freiburg , 79104 Freiburg , Germany 5 Department of Vascular Cell Biology , Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine , 48149 Mu¨nster , Germany 6 Aix Marseille University , CNRS , UMR 7288 , IBDM , 13288 Marseille , France 7 CIBSS Centre for Integrative Biological Signalling Studies , University of Freiburg , 79104 Freiburg , Germany 8 BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies , University of Freiburg , 79104 Freiburg , Germany 9 X ( formerly Twitter ) : @ classenlab 10 Lead contact * Correspondence : anne . classen @ biologie . uni - freiburg . de https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2024 . 01 . 053 SUMMARY Tissue - intrinsic error correction enables epithelial cells to detect abnormal neighboring cells and facilitate their removal from the tissue . One of these pathways , ‘‘interface surveillance , ’’ is triggered by cells with aber - rant developmental and cell - fate - patterning pathways . It remains unknown which molecular mechanisms provide cells with the ability to compare fate between neighboring cells . We demonstrate that Drosophila imaginal discs express an array of cell surface molecules previously implicated in neuronal axon guidance processes . They include members of the Robo , Teneurin , Ephrin , Toll - like , or atypical cadherin families . Importantly , a mismatch in expression levels of these cell surface molecules between adjacent cells is sufﬁ - cient to induce interface surveillance , indicating that differences in expression levels between neighboring cells , rather than their absolute expression levels , are crucial . Speciﬁcally , a mismatch in Robo2 and Robo3 , but not Robo1 , induces enrichment of actin , myosin II , and Ena / Vasp , as well as activation of JNK and apoptosis at clonal interfaces . Moreover , Robo2 can induce interface surveillance independently of its cytosolic domain and without the need for the Robo - ligand Slit . The expression of Robo2 and other cell sur - face molecules , such as Teneurins or the Ephrin receptor is regulated by fate - patterning pathways intrinsic and extrinsic to the wing disc , as well as by expression of oncogenic Ras V12 . Combined , we demonstrate that neighboring cells respond to a mismatch in surface code patterns mediated by speciﬁc transmembrane pro - teins and reveal a novel function for these cell surface proteins in cell fate recognition and removal of aberrant cells during development and homeostasis of epithelial tissues . INTRODUCTION Genetically altered cells are constantly appearing in epithelial tis - sues , either because of developmental errors or mutagenesis . 1 , 2 Surveillance and removal of these cells is necessary to maintain tissue homeostasis and organismal health . ‘‘Interface surveil - lance’’—a distinct branch of tissue - intrinsic error correction mechanisms , such as cell - cell competition—mediates the removal of aberrant cells from epithelial tissues . 3 , 4 Interface surveillance is speciﬁcally activated by aberrant cells that carry mutations in cellular signaling pathways or transcriptional networks , which control cell fate and differentiation programs . For example , mutations in patterning pathways ( Decapentaple - gic [ Dpp ] / TGF - b , Wingless [ Wg ] / WNT , Hedgehog ( Hh ) / Shh , JAK / STAT , and Notch ) or in cell - fate - specifying transcription factors and transcriptional regulators ( Arm , Iro - C , Omb , Yki , En / Inv , Ap , Ci , and Hox genes ) induce phenotypes related to interface surveillance . 5 – 23 Mosaic clones that deregulate these pathways produce a pronounced difference in cell fate between ‘‘aberrant’’ and surrounding ‘‘normal’’ cells , and we have previ - ously shown that such steep fate differences between neigh - boring cells cause enrichment of myosin II and ﬁlamentous actin at shared junctional and lateral interfaces in Drosophila imaginal epithelia . This drives cell segregation between the two cell pop - ulations via smoothening of the contractile interface , a charac - teristic feature of interface surveillance . 3 Importantly , this response is induced in a strictly position - dependent manner ac - cording to the cell fate of the surrounding cells . For example , Cu - bitus interruptus ( Ci ) - expressing clones have normal shapes in anterior wing compartments , where Ci - activation by Hh Current Biology 34 , 1 – 17 , March 11 , 2024 ª 2024 The Author ( s ) . Published by Elsevier Inc . 1 This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) . ll OPEN ACCESS Please cite this article in press as : Fischer et al . , A mismatch in the expression of cell surface molecules induces tissue - intrinsic defense against aber - rant cells , Current Biology ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2024 . 01 . 053 Figure 1 . Cell surface molecules with described roles in axon guidance mediate cell - cell recognition in wing discs TRE - RFP expression is reporting JNK pathway activity ( gray or magenta in all panels ) . ( A ) A mosaic wing disc with wild - type clones expressing UAS - GFP ( GFP , cyan ) . Please note that JNK activity is physiologically elevated at the A / P compartment boundary in wing discs at this developmental stage . White frame marks region shown in ( A 0 ) . ( legend continued on next page ) ll OPEN ACCESS 2 Current Biology 34 , 1 – 17 , March 11 , 2024 Please cite this article in press as : Fischer et al . , A mismatch in the expression of cell surface molecules induces tissue - intrinsic defense against aber - rant cells , Current Biology ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2024 . 01 . 053 Article signaling is high . However , Ci - expressing clones undergo smoothening and die in posterior compartments , where Ci - signaling is normally low . 3 This emphasizes that it is the differ - ence in fate at the clone interface , or in other words , the fate mismatch , rather than the fate per se , which is important for inducing interface surveillance . Curiously , actomyosin recruit - ment and interface smoothing bear a striking resemblance to the formation of compartment boundaries in developing tissues , where two cell populations of different fate are mechanically separated by the formation of a contractile actomyosin interface between them . 24 – 26 However , actomyosin enrichment in inter - face surveillance is also accompanied by activation of pro - apoptotic c - Jun N - terminal kinase ( JNK ) signaling in cells on either side of the clonal interface . 3 , 4 This drives apoptotic elimi - nation of aberrant cells and is thus an essential hallmark of inter - face surveillance and its ability to maintain tissue health . Despite this work , it is still unclear how cells recognize when a neighboring cell acquires a distinct and potentially aberrant fate . Recruitment of actomyosin to the interface and JNK activation in cells on both sides of the interface suggests that surveillance of neighbors is mediated by a cell - contact - dependent mechanism . The molecular machinery responsible for interface surveillance must therefore be composed of cell surface molecules , ( 1 ) which modulate actomyosin function and ( 2 ) which are competent to transduce contact - dependent signals into signaling pathways , such as JNK . Additionally , ( 3 ) expression of these molecules must be regulated by cell - fate - specifying transcription factors and pathways , thereby encoding cell identity . Classical cadher - ins are prime examples of transmembrane molecules that may fulﬁll these criteria . 27 Yet , the striking pattern - speciﬁc acti - vation of interface surveillance , as for Ci - expressing clones , is observed for multiple fate - patterning pathways . This implies that more than one molecule is necessary to distinguish any two of many possible cell fates from each other . 3 , 4 Recently , novel and unexpected roles for members of the neuronal axon guidance and neuronal adhesion families emerged in physiology and pathology of epithelial tissues . 28 , 29 Axon guidance mole - cules typically mediate signaling through the interaction of a transmembrane receptor with a cognate ligand . Roundabout ( Robo ) , Plexin , Frazzled ( Fra ) , or Ephrin ( Eph ) receptor families interact with respective ligands of the Slit , Semaphorin ( Sema ) , Netrin ( Net ) , and Ephrin families . 30 – 33 Recent work suggests that Teneurins interact with leucine - rich repeat ( LRR ) - domain proteins on neighboring cell surfaces . 33 , 34 Extensive research on axon guidance effectors has revealed this general principle : when the ligand binds to the receptor , it elicits signals to recruit actomyosin modulators of the small GTPase family ( Rho and Rac ) and members of the Ena / Vasp , Abl , or Src pathways . 32 This leads to either formation or retraction of actin - based cellular protrusions , thereby driving attractive or repulsive behaviors dur - ing axon pathﬁnding and mediating appropriate spatial posi - tioning of cells within neuronal systems . It is conceivable that expression of these molecules may also have a strong impact on actomyosin and adhesion dynamics in an epithelial tissue thereby regulating epithelial morphogenesis and homeosta - sis . 29 , 30 , 35 Indeed , Ephrin , Teneurins , and LRR - domain proteins including Toll - like receptors are strongly implicated in mechani - cal separation of cell populations at compartment boundaries via regulation of a contractile actomyosin interface in epithelial tis - sues of vertebrate and invertebrate species . 24 – 26 , 36 , 37 The phenomenological similarities lead us to explore whether these molecules played a role in interface surveillance against aberrant cells . Importantly , the diverse fates created by develop - mental patterning in the imaginal disc made this tissue an ideal system to experimentally address the mechanisms of cell fate recognition . We ﬁnd that neuronal cell surface molecules are widely expressed in epithelia , that misexpression of a single sur - face molecule is sufﬁcient to induce all hallmarks of interface sur - veillance , and that these cell surface molecules are co - regulated by cell fate speciﬁcation pathways . RESULTS Cell surface molecules with described roles in axon guidance mediate cell - cell recognition in wing discs To understand whether epithelial tissues may use cell surface molecules to distinguish fates and detect aberrant cells , we ﬁrst asked whether misexpression of proteins functioning in axon guidance , neuronal targeting , and cell adhesion is sufﬁcient to induce interface surveillance hallmarks . Mosaic clones express - ing aberrant fates generally induce actomyosin recruitment , apoptosis , and , importantly , bilateral JNK signaling at the inter - face between clonal and wild - type cells ( Figures S1A – S1E ) . 4 We thus used bilateral activation of the JNK - activity reporter TRE - RFP as a readout for a targeted genetic screen . 38 Where possible , we analyzed overexpression , as well as RNAi - medi - ated downregulation of cell surface molecules using the mosaic GAL4 / UAS ﬂip - out system . 39 Strikingly , we found that deregula - tion of single members of 6 cell surface protein families was suf - ﬁcient to induce TRE - RFP activation at clone boundaries in wing imaginal discs . Speciﬁcally , ectopic up - and downregulation of members of the Robo family ( Robo 2 and 3 ) , the Teneurin - family ( Ten - a and Ten - m ) , atypical cadherins ( Fat and Ds ) , the Eph / Ephrin - system , Netrins ( Netrin - B ) , and the LRR proteins Toll - 2 , Toll - 8 , or Tartan was sufﬁcient to induce bilateral JNK interface signaling ( Figures 1 and S1F – S1J ) . Importantly , several protein ( B and C ) Mosaic wing discs with clonal alterations in fate - specifying pathways by the ectopic expression of Fkh ( Fkh OE ) and the expression of constitutively active Tkv ( Tkv CA ) using the ‘‘GAL4 / UAS ﬂp - out’’ system . Please note the induction of bilateral JNK signaling at mosaic interfaces . White frame marks regions shown in ( B 0 ) and ( C 0 ) . ( D – N ) Mosaic wing discs with aberrant expression of cell surface molecules . Clones express GFP ( cyan ) and were exposed to either ectopic expression ( OE ) of UAS constructs or downregulation of expression by UAS - RNAi ( RNAi ) constructs for individual cell surface molecules , as indicated in each panel . White frame marks regions shown in ( D 0 ) – ( R 0 ) . Imagesin ( A ) – ( N ) areshownatthesamescale . JNKresponsesin ( A ) – ( C ) havebeenobservedinn R 3experimentalreplicatesforthisstudyandpreviousstudies . 4 JNKresponsesin ( F ) , ( H ) , and ( J ) – ( L ) havebeenobservedinn R 3experimentalreplicatesforthisstudy . JNKresponsein ( G ) , ( I ) , ( M ) , and ( N ) hasbeenobservedin n R 3 wing discs in one experimental replicate , which corresponds to the initial candidate screen ( see Figure S1F ) . Related to Figure S1 . ll OPEN ACCESS Current Biology 34 , 1 – 17 , March 11 , 2024 3 Please cite this article in press as : Fischer et al . , A mismatch in the expression of cell surface molecules induces tissue - intrinsic defense against aber - rant cells , Current Biology ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2024 . 01 . 053 Article Ft Robo1 Ten - a Ptc & Wg Ds Robo2 Trn Toll2 Eph Ten - m Toll8 Eph Slit Medium High 100μm Robo2Robo2 Ptc & Wg Ptc & Wg Robo2Robo2 EphEph Ptc & Wg Ptc & WgEphEph Robo2Robo2 ActinActin ActinActinRobo2Robo2 EcadEcad Robo2Robo2 10μm10μm EcadEcadRobo2Robo2 ActinActinEphEph ActinActin EphEph EcadEcadEphEph EcadEcad EphEph Ten - m Ten - m ActinActin ActinActinTen - m Ten - m EcadEcad Ten - m Ten - m EcadEcadTen - m Ten - m A B B Ten - m Ten - m Ten - m Ten - m Ptc & Wg Ptc & Wg D D B ' B ' B ' ' B ' ' C ' C ' C ' ' C ' ' D ' D ' D ' ' D ' ' C C Figure 2 . Cell surface molecules with described roles in axon guidance are expressed in wing disc epithelia ( A ) Illustrationsofexpressionpatternsofcellsurfacemoleculesinthirdinstarwingdiscsat102hafteregglay ( AEL ) . Relativeﬂuorescenceintensityisdepictedby color intensity from low ( white ) , medium ( cyan ) to high ( blue ) , see Figure S2 and experimental procedures . Expression domains of compartment boundary ( legend continued on next page ) ll OPEN ACCESS 4 Current Biology 34 , 1 – 17 , March 11 , 2024 Please cite this article in press as : Fischer et al . , A mismatch in the expression of cell surface molecules induces tissue - intrinsic defense against aber - rant cells , Current Biology ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2024 . 01 . 053 Article families , such as members of the Plexin / Sema , Irre cell recogni - tion module ( IRM ) , and Dscam - families failed to score positively for JNK interface signaling in our screen , suggesting that not all cell surface molecules with roles in neuronal morphogenesis are involved in interface surveillance responses ( Figure S1F ) . We conclude that a distinct set of cell surface molecules can mediate bilateral JNK signaling , otherwise a characteristic hall - mark of interface surveillance toward cells with aberrant fate and speciﬁcation programs . We thus wanted to examine whether these cell surface molecules may act as cell fate sen - sors required for the induction of interface surveillance . Cell surface molecules with described roles in axon guidance are widely expressed in wing disc epithelia To understand whether these cell surface molecules indeed play a role in aberrant cell recognition , we asked whether these pro - teins are physiologically expressed in wing discs . We analyzed their expression in early and late wing disc development using tools , such as antibodies , enhancer traps , or GFP - tagged pro - teins . 40 , 41 To provide a spatial reference , we included a staining for Patched ( Ptc , anterior - posterior boundary ) and Wg ( dorsal - ventral boundary ) . We were surprised to ﬁnd that most examined molecules were , indeed , expressed in wing discs , with increas - ingly complex expression patterns toward late 3rd instar stages ( Figures 2A – 2D and S2 ) . Moreover , certain attributes of those patterns , such as an elevated expression in the pouch , hinge or notum suggest a possible regulation by well - described spec - iﬁcation pathways in the wing disc ( Figure S2B ) . 42 Consequently , each spatial position within the disc is endowed with a unique cell surface code , which , importantly , is composed of multiple different proteins ( Figure 2A ) . The widespread expression of neuronal cell surface molecules suggests that these proteins may be linked to uncharacterized functions during development of imaginal discs . To conﬁrm that these proteins also locate to the cell surface in wing epithelia , we analyzed their subcellular distribution in more detail . Roundabout 2 ( Robo2 ) , Ephrin receptor ( Eph ) , or Teneurin - m ( Ten - m ) localized to adherens junctions and lateral domains of wing disc cells ( Figures 2B 0 – 2D 00 ) . Both adherens junctions and lateral surfaces establish contact between neigh - boring cells , and it is these surfaces that were previously shown to respond to the presence of aberrant cells by recruiting acto - myosin . 3 , 4 Thus , Robo2 , Eph , and Ten - m localize to cell sur - faces that are implicated in activation of interface surveillance . Combined , these observations are consistent with a model where wing imaginal discs may utilize the combinatorial expression of cell surface molecules at adherens junctions and lateral surfaces to detect the fate and identity of neigh - boring cells . A mismatch of Robo2 receptor expression levels between neighboring cells is detected by interface surveillance Although atypical cadherins , Teneurins , Ephrin , and LRR pro - teins have emerging or even established roles in epithelial tis - sues , almost nothing is known about the epithelial function of Robo receptors . 36 , 37 , 43 – 45 We thus focused our further analysis on the three Drosophila Robo receptors Robo1 , Robo2 , and Robo3 . Because Robo2 is expressed throughout wing disc develop - ment ( Figure 3G ) , we ﬁrst analyzed the effects of mosaic manip - ulation of Robo2 . We ﬁnd that Robo2 - expressing clones have smooth shapes , recruit actin to the interface and generally induce apoptosis ( Figures 3A , 3B , 3D , and 3E ) . Moreover , the characteristic pattern of bilateral JNK signaling—where both wild - type cells and aberrant cells at the clonal interface activate JNK—can be detected around Robo2 - expressing clones ( Figures 3B , 3F , 3H , and S3A – S3C ) . We previously reported that JNK signaling induced by aberrant cells drives apoptosis on either side of the clone interface , whereas a less - well - charac - terized pathway drives apoptosis in the clone interior . 4 This char - acteristic apoptotic pattern could be reproduced by Robo2 - ex - pressing clones ( Figure 3I ) . Combined , we conclude that the expression of a single cell surface molecule , such as Robo2 , is completely sufﬁcient to induce all hallmarks of interface surveillance . An important characteristic of interface surveillance is the strict position - dependent recognition of ectopic or missing fate - specifying pathways , which occurs in response to a pro - nounced mismatch in cell fate between clonal and neighboring cells . Accordingly , the endogenous Robo2 - expression pattern should dictate where differences between clonal and neigh - boring cells are largest . Looking at the Robo2 - expression pattern in third instar discs , we noticed that Robo2 is most highly expressed in the anterior notum and the hinge - hinge fold region , whereas medium levels of expression can be found along the dorsal - ventral boundary . In the dorsal and ventral pouch , Robo2 expression is low ( Figure 3G ) . Therefore , we predicted that Robo2 - expressing clones should elicit interface surveillance responses in the pouch but not the anterior notum , whereas Robo2 - RNAi - expressing clones should elicit responses in the notum and not the pouch . Indeed , Robo2 - expressing clones induced actin enrichment and JNK interface signaling in the pouch but not the notum , whereas Robo2 - RNAi - expressing clones induced these responses in the notum but not the pouch ( Figures 3B and 3C ) . The Robo2 - GFP construct helped to visu - alize these spatially restricted JNK responses for Robo2 - ex - pressing and Robo2 - RNAi - expressing clones with respect to the endogenous Robo2 expression pattern ( Figures S3D and markers Patched ( Ptc , expressed in anterior cells at the anterior / posterior compartment boundary ) and Wingless ( Wg , expressed in cells on both sides of the dorsal / ventral compartment boundary ) are shown in magenta and light magenta , respectively . All illustrated expression patterns were observed in n R 4 wing discs in n R 2 experimental replicates . ( B – D ) Wingdiscsexpressingfusionproteinsfrom robo2 - GFP , eph - GFP , and ten - m - GFP constructsundernativeregulatorycontrol ( grayormagenta ) . PtcandWg demarcate A / P and D / V compartment boundaries . Images are shown at same scale . ( B 0 – D 00 ) Pouch domains of robo2 - GFP - , eph - GFP - , and ten - m - GFP - expressing wing discs ( gray or cyan ) , also stained for the adherens junction marker E - cadherin ( Ecad , gray ormagenta ) andcorticalF - actin ( by Phalloidin , gray or yellow ) . Apical ( 0 ) and lateral ( 00 ) local - z - projections , displaying receptorlocalization relative to junctional Ecad and relative to more lateral domains . Images are shown at same scale . Please note that wing discs are not the same as in ( B ) – ( D ) . Related to Figure S2 . ll OPEN ACCESS Current Biology 34 , 1 – 17 , March 11 , 2024 5 Please cite this article in press as : Fischer et al . , A mismatch in the expression of cell surface molecules induces tissue - intrinsic defense against aber - rant cells , Current Biology ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2024 . 01 . 053 Article wild type cells at interface ( interface WT ) clonal cells at interface ( interface Robo2 OE or interface GFP ) clonal cells ( Robo2 OE or GFP ) wild type cells ( WT ) wild type clone ace Robo2 G Dcp1Dcp1 Robo2 OE Robo2 OE TRE - RFP TRE - RFP 100μm100μm B B TRE - RFP TRE - RFP ActinActin Dcp1Dcp1 B ' ' TRE - RFP TRE - RFP ActinActin Dcp1Dcp1 B ' Dcp1Dcp1 Robo2 RNAi Robo2 RNAi TRE - RFP TRE - RFP 100μm100μm C TRE - RFP TRE - RFP ActinActin Dcp1Dcp1 C ' ' TRE - RFP TRE - RFP ActinActin Dcp1Dcp1 C ' 100μm100μm Dcp1Dcp1 GFPGFP TRE - RFP TRE - RFP A A TRE - RFP TRE - RFP Dcp1Dcp1 ActinActin A ' ' TRE - RFP TRE - RFP Dcp1Dcp1 ActinActin 50μm50μm A ' GFP Robo2 OE n = 26 n = 32 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 C i r c u l a r i t y < 0 . 001 D E G F P R obo 2 O E 0 5 10 15 20 M ea n D c p 1 I n t e n s i t y [ AU ] < 0 . 0001 n = 14 n = 16 WT WTinterfaceGFP GFP 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 M ea n T R E - R F P I n t e n s i t y [ AU ] 0 . 11 n = 26 0 . 73 WT WT interface Robo2 OE Robo2 OE 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 M ea n T R E - R F P I n t e n s i t y [ AU ] < 0 . 0001 < 0 . 0001 n = 32 H WT WT interface GFP GFP 0 5 10 15 20 M ea n D c p 1 I n t e n s i t y [ AU ] 0 . 98 > 0 . 99 n = 14 0 5 10 15 20 M ea n D c p 1 I n t e n s i t y [ AU ] 0 . 96 < 0 . 001 n = 16 WT WT interface Robo2 OE Robo2 OE I F Figure 3 . A mismatch of Robo2 receptor expression levels between neighboring cells is detected by interface surveillance ( A – C ) Mosaic wing disc with wild - type clones expressing UAS - GFP ( GFP , cyan ) ( A ) , and in addition , either UAS - robo2 ( Robo2 OE ) ( B ) or UAS - robo2 - RNAi ( Robo2 RNAi ) to reduce Robo2 function ( C ) . TRE - RFP expression is reporting JNK pathway activity ( gray or magenta ) . Antibody staining against the cleaved ( legend continued on next page ) ll OPEN ACCESS 6 Current Biology 34 , 1 – 17 , March 11 , 2024 Please cite this article in press as : Fischer et al . , A mismatch in the expression of cell surface molecules induces tissue - intrinsic defense against aber - rant cells , Current Biology ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2024 . 01 . 053 Article S3E ) . These results demonstrate that cells , which create pro - nounced differences and thus a mismatch in Robo2 expression levels , are robustly detected by interface surveillance within the endogenous Robo2 expression pattern , suggesting that Robo2 may contribute to detection and removal of aberrant cells in a context - speciﬁc manner . Robo2 and Robo3 mediate interface surveillance in a Slit - independent manner Intrigued by the ability of Robo2 to induce interface surveillance , we next investigated the functional properties of the Robo2 re - ceptor and the other Robo family members Robo1 and Robo3 , as well as the known Robo - ligand Slit . First , we wanted to test , whether in addition to actin , other cytoskeletal effectors were also recruited by Robo2 - dependent interface surveillance . We therefore analyzed the localization of a GFP - tagged non - muscle myosin II regulatory light chain ( Sqh - GFP ) to visualize the actin motor myosin II , which enriches at the interface between wild - type and aberrant cells . 3 More - over , we visualized Enabled ( Ena ) , the Drosophila Ena / Vasp actin polymerase and an effector of Robo receptors in neuronal sys - tems . 46 We also stained for phosphorylated tyrosine ( pTyr ) , a marker of cellular interfaces between normal and oncogenic cells in mammalian epithelial tissue culture models . 47 We found that all markers enriched at interfaces of Robo2 - expressing clones in the pouch ( Figures 4A and 4B ) . However , as expected from the position - dependent recognition of clones , enrichment of Sqh - GFP , Ena , or pTyr was absent from interfaces of clones in the anterior notum ( Figures 4C and 4D ) . These observations strongly indicate that Robo2 targets actomyosin regulation in epithelial tissues to mediate interface surveillance responses . We next wanted to test if the downstream signal transduction by the Robo2 cytosolic domain is required for the induction of interface surveillance . To this end , we expressed a Robo2 - construct that lacks the cytosolic domain ( Robo2 D cyto ) , prevent - ing downstream signaling from the expressed Robo2 receptors . We ﬁnd that Robo2 D cyto - expressing clones also induced inter - face surveillance hallmarks , such as clone smoothening , actin enrichment , and JNK signaling at the interface ( Figure 4E ) . Importantly , the presence of endogenous Robo2 in this genetic background only allows for the conclusion that cytosolic signaling by the overexpressed Robo2 is not required for induction of interface surveillance . We thus wanted to test the requirement of the well - characterized Robo - ligand Slit , which activates canonical receptor signaling . We expressed a Robo2 - construct that lacks the extracellular immunoglobulin ( Ig ) - domains 1 and 2 ( Robo2 D Ig1 + 2 ) required for Slit ligand bind - ing . 26 , 48 – 50 We ﬁnd that Robo2 D Ig1 + 2 - expressing clones pheno - copy the interface surveillance hallmarks of full - length Robo2 - misexpression by displaying smoothening , actin enrichment , and JNK signaling at the interface ( Figure 4F ) . This experiment demonstrates that the Slit - binding domain of Robo2 is not required for interface surveillance . To further provide support for this conclusion , we analyzed the function of Slit in wing imag - inal disc . As reported before , 51 Slit is broadly expressed in imag - inal discs ( Figure S4A ) , but neither clonal overexpression of Slit or its downregulation using a validated RNAi construct induced JNK signaling at clonal interfaces ( Figures 4G , 4H , and S4C ) . Similarly , Robo1 , the Robo family member best described for Slit interaction , is broadly expressed in wing discs ( Figure S4B ) . Yet , neither clonal overexpression nor downregulation of Robo1 using a validated RNAi induced JNK interface surveillance re - sponses ( Figures 4I , 4J , S4D , and S4E ) . Combined , these results suggest that Robo2 misexpression induces interface surveil - lance via a non - canonical Robo receptor activity and that clas - sical Robo - Slit - mediated signaling may not be required . Robo3 represents the third and last member of the Robo receptor family in ﬂies . Interestingly , Robo3 shares a higher sequence similarity in extracellular and intracellular signaling do - mains with Robo2 than with Robo1 . 52 We thus asked if Robo3 - misexpression may also induce interface surveillance . In devel - oping wing discs , Robo3 is expressed at barely detectable levels ( Figure S5A ) . Hence , we reasoned that overexpression of Robo3 should strongly induce interface surveillance because Robo3 - overexpressing clones would create pronounced differ - ences in Robo3 levels to surrounding wild - type cells ( Fig - ure S5B ) . Indeed , Robo3 - expressing clones induced clone smoothening , actin enrichment , JNK signaling , and apoptosis at clonal interfaces ( Figures 5A and S5C ) . Moreover , Sqh - GFP , Ena , and pTyr were enriched at interfaces of Robo3 - expressing clones ( Figures S5D and S5E ) . In contrast , we did not observe any response when we expressed a validated Robo3 - RNAi construct in mosaic clones ( Figures 5B , S5F , and S5G ) . This result is consistent with a context - dependent model effector caspase ( Dcp1 ) visualizes apoptosis ( gray or yellow ) . Phalloidin visualizes cortical F - actin ( gray ) . Please note that JNK activity is physiologically elevated at the A / P compartment boundary in wing discs at this developmental stage . White frame marks region shown to the right in ( A 0 ) , ( B 0 ) , ( C 0 pouch ) , ( A 00 ) , ( B 00 ) , and ( C 00 notum ) . Pleasenotetheactinenrichmentatthecloneinterface ( greenarrowsinB 00 andC 0 ) . Thedottedlineindicatesstitchingofconfocalimageswithdifferent z positions . Image sets are shown at the same scale . ( D and E ) Graphs depicting circularity and apoptosis observed for individual UAS - GFP - ( GFP ) and UAS - Robo2 - ( Robo2 OE ) expressing clones . Sample number ( n ) for individual wing discs and p values of a two - tailed , unpaired t test are displayed in graphs . Error bars represent mean and 95 % conﬁdence interval . ( F ) Illustrationofregionsofinterest ( ROIs ) relativetotheclonalinterfacedeﬁnedforquantitativeimageanalysis ( seealsoFiguresS3A – S3C ) . Therearenon - labeled wild - type cells ( white ) or UAS - GFP - labeled clonal cells ( cyan ) in the wing disc . Clonal cells which additionally express UAS - Robo2 are abbreviated as Robo2 OE . BothGFP - labeled ( cyan ) andnon - labeled ( white ) cells areseparatedinto cells , whichareincontactwiththeothercell typeattheinterface ( magentastripes ) , and the remaining cells away from the interface . ( G ) Illustration of the robo2 - GFP expression pattern . Relative ﬂuorescence intensity is depicted by the color intensity from low ( white ) , medium ( light orange ) to high ( dark orange ) . ( HandI ) GraphsdepictingmeanﬂuorescenceintensityofTRE - RFPreporterandmeanDcp1intensityinthezonesofmeasurementaroundclones , asdepictedin Figure 3F . Graphs display results for mosaic discs with UAS - GFP - labeled clonal cells ( left ) or containing UAS - Robo2 ( Robo2 OE ) - expressing clones ( right ) . Sample number ( n ) for individual wing discs and p values of a repeated measured one - way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test are displayed in graphs . Error bars represent mean and 95 % conﬁdence interval . Related to Figure S3 and Data S1 . ll OPEN ACCESS Current Biology 34 , 1 – 17 , March 11 , 2024 7 Please cite this article in press as : Fischer et al . , A mismatch in the expression of cell surface molecules induces tissue - intrinsic defense against aber - rant cells , Current Biology ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2024 . 01 . 053 Article Figure 4 . Robo2 induces interfaces surveillance independent of Slit and the receptor’s cytosolic domain ( A – D ) Mosaicwingdiscwithclonesexpressing UAS - robo2 ( Robo2 OE ) ( cyan ) ineitherthepouchandhinge ( AandB ) orthenotumregion ( CandD ) ofawingdisc . In ( A ) and ( C ) A GFP - tagged non - muscle myosin II regulatory light chain ( Sqh - GFP ) tracks the actin motor myosin II . antibody staining against Enabled ( Ena ) ( legend continued on next page ) ll OPEN ACCESS 8 Current Biology 34 , 1 – 17 , March 11 , 2024 Please cite this article in press as : Fischer et al . , A mismatch in the expression of cell surface molecules induces tissue - intrinsic defense against aber - rant cells , Current Biology ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2024 . 01 . 053 Article of Robo3 - dependent interface surveillance . Combined , we conclude that misexpression of either Robo2 or Robo3—with respect to levels in the surrounding wild - type cells—are completely sufﬁcient to induce all hallmarks of interface surveillance . One observation allowed us to further unravel the close func - tional relationship of Robo2 and Robo3 already suggested by previous studies in the developing nervous system . 53 , 54 Because Robo2 elicits interface surveillance depending on its endoge - nous pattern ( Figures 5C – 5E ) , we predicted that Robo3 - express - ing clones induce interfaces surveillance in the entire disc due to its ubiquitously low expression during development ( Figure 5H ) . Contrary to those predictions , Robo3 - misexpressing clones did not induce JNK signaling in the anterior notum , similar to Robo2 - expressing clones ( Figures 5F and 5G ) . We thus asked if Robo2 and Robo3 may act redundantly at clonal interfaces . To test this , we expressed Robo3 in Robo2 - RNAi - expressing clones . We reasoned that if redundant , Robo3 expression will rescue the mismatch of Robo2 levels induced by Robo2 - RNAi clones in the anterior notum . Strikingly , Robo3 expression robustly sup - pressed induction of JNK signaling and clone smoothening by Robo2 - RNAi clones in the anterior notum ( Figures 5I and 5J ) . Combined , our experiments demonstrate a pattern - speciﬁc function for Robo2 and Robo3 receptors in inducing interface surveillance and reveal that their high sequence similarity may cause functional redundancy , suggesting that both act through similar mechanisms in interface surveillance . Expression of Robo receptors and interface surveillance molecules is regulated by fate - patterning pathways If Robo2 , Robo3 , and other cell surface molecules identiﬁed in our genetic screen are really required to mediate the detection of aberrant and misspeciﬁed cells , then deregulation and genetic aberrations of fate - specifying pathways should alter expression levels of these proteins . Such upregulated or downregulated levels in aberrant cells would create pronounced expression level differences in cell surface molecules between neighboring cells , providing the basis for interface recognition . To test this , we created clones misexpressing known cell - fate - specifying regulators : Thickveins ( tkv RNAi , tkv CA ) , a Dpp / TGF - b - receptor important for wing disc patterning . Eyeless ( ey ) , a Pax6 homolog and master regulator of the eye - speciﬁcation network . Forkhead ( fkh ) , a conserved transcription factor required for salivary gland speciﬁcation . ci , the transcription factor activated by Hh signaling in the developing wing disc . Pre - vious studies demonstrated that misexpression of these factors can drive dramatic respeciﬁcation of cell fates and alterations of entire gene expression programs in imaginal discs . 55 , 56 We ﬁrst tested if ectopic misspeciﬁcation by these pathways affects Robo2 expression . Strikingly , expression levels of Robo2 were signiﬁcantly altered , showing both upregulation and downregu - lation upon clonal misexpression of Tkv - RNAi , Fkh , or Ey in wing imaginal discs ( Figures 6A – 6D ) . Importantly , ectopic mis - speciﬁcation did not regulate Robo2 equally in every wing disc position . For instance , Ey increased expression levels of Robo2 in the pouch but not the notum , whereas Fkh downregu - lated Robo2 in the notum but not the pouch . The developing disc undergoes extensive patterning and different cell - type - speciﬁc signaling networks are active in the pouch , hinge , and notum cells . Therefore , our ﬁndings emphasize that the misexpression of one fate - specifying pathway is integrated into the intrinsic transcriptional network of different cell types , consistent with models of transcriptional networks in tissue patterning . 57 , 58 We thus suggest that—in response to ectopic deregulation of cell - fate - patterning pathways—the highly cell - type - speciﬁc tran - scriptional context determines whether to express a speciﬁc cell surface molecule or not . Such reasoning predicts that changes to a single cell speciﬁ - cation program may alter expression of several cell surface mol - ecules simultaneously , including positive hits identiﬁed in our ge - netic screen . We thus wanted to understand how aberrant cell fate speciﬁcation may reﬂect more complex changes to the composition of a cell surface code . We analyzed which cell sur - face molecules competent for interface surveillance are affected by deregulated Tkv signaling . Importantly , when we analyzed Tkv - misexpressing clones in the pouch , we found that they altered expression not just of Robo2 but also of Eph , Ten - m , Ten - a , and Tartan ( Figures 6E – 6N ) . Similarly , Fkh or Ci - express - ing clones induced changes in expression of at least three cell surface molecules simultaneously ( Figures S6A – S6I ) . These ex - periments strongly demonstrate that the alteration in activity of just one cell fate speciﬁcation pathway causes changes in expression levels of multiple cell surface molecules . This alter - ation dramatically modiﬁes the cell surface code of misspeciﬁed cells in comparison with surrounding wild - type cells . To better understand how regulation of cell surface molecules may also be relevant for oncogenic processes driven by cell fate changes , we turned to the analysis of oncogenic mutations visualizeslocalizationofthe Drosophila Ena / Vaspactinpolymerase . Phalloidin visualizescorticalF - actin . In ( B ) and ( D ) , antibodystaining againstphosphorylated tyrosine ( pTyr ) visualizes enhanced signaling activity at cellular junctions . Image sets are shown at the same scale . Projections of the apical junctional network were generated using the LocalZ - projector . ( E ) Mosaic wing discs with clones ( cyan ) expressing UAS - Robo2 . DeltaC ( Robo2 D cyto ) , a Robo2 construct lacking the cytosolic domains of the receptor . White frame marks the region shown in ( E 0 ) and ( E 00 ) . Please note the actin enrichment at the clone interface ( green arrows in E 0 ) . ( F ) Mosaicwingdiscswithclones ( cyan ) expressing UAS - Robo2 . DeltaIg1 + 2 ( Robo2 D Ig1 + 2 ) , aRobo2constructlackingtheIg1andIg2domainsoftheextracellular partofthereceptor . PleasenotethattheIg1receptordomainhasbeenshowntoconveythebindingoftheSlitligand . Whiteframemarksregionshownin ( F 0 ) and ( F 00 ) . Please note the actin enrichment at the clone interface ( green arrows in F 0 ) . ( GandH ) Mosaicwingdiscswithclones ( cyan ) expressingeither UAS - sli . D ( Sli OE ) ( G ) or UAS - sli - RNAi ( Sli RNAi ) ( H ) . Whiteframemarkstheregionshownin ( G 0 ) and ( H 0 ) . Image sets are shown at the same scale . ( IandJ ) Mosaicwingdiscswithclones ( cyan ) expressingeither UAS - robo1 ( Robo1 OE ) ( I ) or UAS - robo1 - RNAi ( Robo1 RNAi ) ( J ) . Whiteframemarkstheregionshown in ( I 0 ) and ( J 0 ) . Image sets are shown at the same scale as ( G ) and ( H ) . TRE - RFP expression is reporting JNK pathway activity ( gray or magenta ) . Antibody staining against the cleaved effector caspase ( Dcp1 ) visualizes apoptosis ( yellow ) . Phalloidin visualizes cortical F - actin ( gray ) . Related to Figure S4 . ll OPEN ACCESS Current Biology 34 , 1 – 17 , March 11 , 2024 9 Please cite this article in press as : Fischer et al . , A mismatch in the expression of cell surface molecules induces tissue - intrinsic defense against aber - rant cells , Current Biology ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2024 . 01 . 053 Article Figure 5 . Robo3 induces interface surveillance and functions redundantly with Robo2 ( A and B ) Mosaic wing discs with clones ( cyan ) expressing either UAS - robo3 . HA ( Robo3 OE ) ( A ) or UAS - robo3 - RNAi ( Robo3 RNAi ) ( B ) . TRE - RFP expression is reporting JNK pathway activity ( gray or magenta in all panels ) . Antibody staining against the cleaved effector caspase ( Dcp1 ) visualizes apoptosis ( yellow ) . ( legend continued on next page ) ll OPEN ACCESS 10 Current Biology 34 , 1 – 17 , March 11 , 2024 Please cite this article in press as : Fischer et al . , A mismatch in the expression of cell surface molecules induces tissue - intrinsic defense against aber - rant cells , Current Biology ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2024 . 01 . 053 Article incurred by Ras V12 . Ras signals through the EGF / ERK pathway and regulates both proliferation and wing fate patterning . 59 We previously reported that Ras V12 - expressing cells induce clone smoothening , actin enrichment , and JNK signaling at clonal in - terfaces ( Figure S6J ) . 3 , 60 Yet , Ras V12 cells evade apoptosis , thereby allowing them to form slow - growing tumors . 4 To under - stand if Ras V12 - expressing cells may be initially detected by altered expression of cell surface markers , we monitored expression of cell surface molecules in Ras V12 mosaic discs . Indeed , Ras V12 - expressing clones deregulated expression of Robo2 , Eph , Ten - m , and others ( Figures 6O – 6T and S6K – S6R ) . These observations provide further support for our conclusion that just a single fate - specifying aberration will alter the expres - sion of multiple cell surface molecules and thereby drive com - plex changes in the cell surface code composition . To understand whether expression of these cell surface mole - cules may also be utilized by other tissue - intrinsic error correc - tion mechanisms , we analyzed genetic models of classical cell competition . In cell competition , the comparison of proteostatic or metabolic ﬁtness between neighboring cells drives cell elimination , such that less ﬁt ‘‘loser’’ cells are eliminated by ﬁt ‘‘winner’’ cells . 61 – 68 Previous studies indicate that loser cells start to express a speciﬁc isoform of the cell surface molecule Flower , which marks them for elimination by winner cells in a cell - contact - dependent manner . 69 , 70 To test whether also a Robo2 , Eph , or Ten - m - dependent cell surface code is associ - ated with winner or loser cell state , we analyzed expression of these cell surface molecules in imaginal discs mosaic for a Myc - expressing winner genotype . In agreement with the model that cell competition and interface surveillance are mechanisti - cally distinct error correction mechanisms , we found that Myc - expressing clones did not display pronounced alterations of cell surface receptor expression patterns that were predictive of either winner or loser fate ( Figures 6U – 6Z ) . Similarly , other ge - notypes linked to cell competition , tissue growth or cell survival , such as moderate activation or inhibition of Hippo / Warts signaling , did not alter cell surface molecule expression patterns ( Figures S6U – S6AB ) . These observations demonstrate that a change in expression of the analyzed cell surface molecules is speciﬁc to cell - fate - specifying pathways and consequently highly correlates with activation of interface surveillance . This conclusion is strongly supported by our previous studies , in which cell competition and interface surveillance form distinct branches of tissue - intrinsic error correction and tumor suppres - sion mechanisms that maintain the health of epithelial tissues . 4 All our data presented so far provide strong genetic evidence that individual cell surface molecules are regulated by cell - fate - patterning pathways and that each is individually fully sufﬁcient to induce interface surveillance . We now wanted to develop an approach to also provide evidence that deregulation of individual cell surface molecules is indeed genetically necessary for the detection of aberrant cells , even though we expected that genet - ically targeting a single molecule may not be sufﬁcient to inter - fere with interface surveillance in response to changes in multiple cell surface molecules . Yet , we designed rescue experiments where we co - expressed a RNAi construct or overexpression construct for either Robo2 , Eph , or Ten - m in clones with aberrant cell fates . We ﬁnd that cells that aberrantly express ey and fkh still induced clone smoothening , enrichment of actin and even apoptosis , despite very targeted experiments to restore expres - sion levels of Eph , Robo2 , or Ten - m to that of surrounding cells ( Figures S7A – S7C ) . Similarly , Ras V12 clones that ectopically induce expression of Eph or Robo2 in the peripheral pouch still activated interface surveillance responses despite targeted knockdown of Robo2 or Eph ( Figures S7D and S7E ) . Yet , to really test whether equalizing expression levels of just one cell surface molecule between aberrant cells and surrounding cells can sup - press interface surveillance , we expressed UAS - RNAi con - structs for molecules that are upregulated in the peripheral pouch and hinge domain by tkv CA ( where Tkv is not normally active ) under the control of en - GAL4 . Thereby , all cells in the posterior compartment lacked either Eph or Ten - m at the time PhalloidinvisualizescorticalF - actin ( gray ) . Whiteframesin ( A ) and ( B ) marktheregionshownin ( A 0 ) and ( B 0 ) . Whiteframesin ( A 0 ) and ( B 0 ) marktheregionsshownin ( A 00 ) and ( B 00 ) . Image sets are shown at the same scale . Please note the actin enrichment at clone interfaces in ( A 00 ) ( green arrows ) . ( A % ) Graphs depicting mean ﬂuorescenceintensityofTRE - RFPreporterandmeanDcp1intensityinthezonesofmeasurementaroundclones , asdepictedinFigure3F . Graphsdisplayresults for mosaic discs containing UAS - Robo3 . HA ( Robo3 OE ) - expressing clones . See Figure S5C % for UAS - GFP - labeled clonal cells as wild - type control . Sample number ( n ) for individual wing discs and p values of a repeated measured one - way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test are displayed in graphs . Error bars represent mean and 95 % conﬁdence interval . ( C and D ) Mosaic wing discs where clones ( cyan ) express either UAS - robo2 ( Robo2 OE ) ( C ) or express UAS - robo2 - RNAi ( Robo2 RNAi ) ( D ) . Yellow arrows indicate anterior notum region . TRE - RFP expression is reporting JNK pathway activity ( gray or magenta ) . The dotted line indicates stitching of confocal images , with different z positions . ( E ) Illustration of the robo2 - GFP expression pattern . Relative ﬂuorescence intensity is depicted by the color intensity from low ( white ) , medium ( light orange ) to high ( dark orange ) . ( F and G ) Mosaic wing discs where clones ( cyan ) express either UAS - robo3 ( Robo3 OE ) ( F ) or express UAS - robo3 - RNAi ( Robo3 RNAi ) ( G ) . Yellow arrows indicate anteriornotumregion . TRE - RFPexpressionisreportingJNKpathwayactivity ( grayormagenta ) . PleasenotetheabsenceofJNKactivationinthenotumregionin ( F ) , reminiscent of JNK activation by Robo2 OE in ( C ) . ( H ) Illustration of the Robo3 expression in the wing disc as visualized by Robo3 antibodies . Please note that Robo3 is hardly expressed in the wing disc . See Figure S5A . ( I and J ) Mosaic wing discs with clones expressing either UAS - robo2 - RNAi ( Robo2 RNAi ) ( I ) or both UAS - robo2 - RNAi ( Robo2 RNAi ) and UAS - robo3 . HA ( Robo3 . HA OE ) ( J ) . TRE - RFPexpressionisreportingJNKpathwayactivity ( grayormagenta ) . AntibodystainingagainstHAtag ( a HA ) visualizesthepresenceofthe UAS - robo3 . HA construct . ( I 00 and J 00 ) Graphs depicting the mean ﬂuorescence intensity of TRE - RFP reporter in the zones of measurement around clones , as depicted in Figure 3F . Graphs display the results for mosaic discs containing UAS - robo2 - RNAi ( Robo2 RNAi ) ( I 00 ) , or both UAS - robo2 - RNAi ( Robo2 RNAi ) - and UAS - Robo3 . HA ( Robo3 OE ) - ex - pressing clones . Sample number ( n ) for individual wing discs and p values of a repeated measured one - way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test are displayed in graphs . Error bars represent mean and 95 % conﬁdence interval . Related to Figure S5 and Data S2 . ll OPEN ACCESS Current Biology 34 , 1 – 17 , March 11 , 2024 11 Please cite this article in press as : Fischer et al . , A mismatch in the expression of cell surface molecules induces tissue - intrinsic defense against aber - rant cells , Current Biology ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2024 . 01 . 053 Article Figure 6 . Expression of Robo receptors and other cell surface molecules is regulated by fate - patterning pathways ( A – C ) Wingdiscs expressing robo2 - GFP ( Robo2 GFP ) ( grayorcyan ) . Mosaic clones ( magenta ) deregulatefate - specifyingpathwaysbytheexpressionof UAS - tkv - RNAi ( Tkv RNAi ) ( A ) , UAS - fkh ( Fkh OE ) ( B ) , or UAS - ey ( Ey OE ) ( C ) . White frames mark the regions shown in ( A 0 ) – ( C 00 ) . ( legend continued on next page ) ll OPEN ACCESS 12 Current Biology 34 , 1 – 17 , March 11 , 2024 Please cite this article in press as : Fischer et al . , A mismatch in the expression of cell surface molecules induces tissue - intrinsic defense against aber - rant cells , Current Biology ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2024 . 01 . 053 Article when we introduced tkv CA - expressing clones using the LexA / LexO system . 71 , 72 However , removing either Eph or Ten - m from the surface code of posterior cells failed to affect interface surveillance responses of aberrant tkv CA - expressing clones in the posterior pouch and hinge ( Figures S7H – S7J ) . These experiments , while challenging , support the multifacto - rial nature of a cell surface code , where multiple cell surface molecules are simultaneously deregulated upon cell fate mis - speciﬁcation , and deregulation of any one of them is sufﬁcient to robustly induce interface surveillance . As a consequence , genetic experiments to analyze the necessity of individual mole - cules in the detection of aberrant cells are technically not possible , as our current genetic tools are incompatible with the possibly highly redundant nature of these molecules within the surface code . While we demonstrate that 12 proteins from our genetic screen are each sufﬁcient to activate all hallmarks of interface surveillance , our study is thus limited by the lack of ge - netic evidence for the necessity of these molecules in mediating detection and recognition of aberrant cells in tissues . DISCUSSION Cell fate , cell surface code , and interface surveillance In summary , we demonstrate that wing disc cells are equipped with various cell surface molecules , such as Robo2 , Teneurin , or Eph . Almost all of them are expressed during development and deregulation of expression levels and the resulting expres - sion level mismatch created at clonal interfaces is sufﬁcient to induce all hallmarks of interface surveillance ( Figure 7 ) . Further - more , aberrant cell fate programs deregulate expression of mul - tiple cell surface molecules simultaneously . We propose that this reﬂects a physiological process of cell fate speciﬁcation during development , in which cell fates establish a cell surface proﬁle unique to each fate . Importantly , a single transcription factor does not always target the same cell surface molecule . Instead , the molecular composition is shaped by the cumulative activity of cell - type - speciﬁc transcriptional networks unique to each cell type . Finally , an altered surface code is a unique feature of cells experiencing cell fate deregulation and interface surveil - lance but not classical cell competition . Among the protein families that we identiﬁed in our genetic screen , Eph / Ephrin , speciﬁcally , have previously been described to promote interface smoothening via actomyosin regulation in mosaic tissues and at compartment boundaries , both in Drosophila and mammalian systems . 36 , 43 Indeed , deregulation of Eph / Ephrin signaling induces actomyosin and Ena enrichment at clonal interfaces , clone smoothening and bilateral JNK signaling in our assays ( Figures S7K – S7R ) . Similarly , Teneurins , or LRR proteins , such as Tartan , have been implicated in modu - lating actomyosin contractility or compartment boundary smoothening in different tissues . Moreover , regulation of their expression has been previously linked to fate speciﬁcation in Drosophila . 36 , 37 , 44 , 73 – 77 Yet , we also describe a novel function of these molecules by implicating them in the induction of bilat - eral JNK activation . This suggests that these very different cell surface molecules may act not only through a shared set of cyto - skeleton effectors but also through similar signaling effectors . The cell surface molecules identiﬁed in our screen are composed of very different structural motifs , including leucine - rich , Ig , YD , or cadherin repeats . 29 , 30 , 35 , 78 How these extracellular motifs or intracellular domains contribute to these shared effector modal - ities of actomyosin contractility and JNK signaling will be an important future avenue of our research . Robo receptors in epithelia Robo receptors are increasingly recognized to play a role in epithelia . 29 For example , recent molecular data from the mouse pancreas show that epithelial islet cells express Robo receptors . Disrupting Slit - Robo signaling disrupts embryonic islet formation and adult islet architecture . 79 , 80 In Drosophila , a JNK - Robo2 - Ena axis is required for the elimination of scrib mutant cells in eye discs . 45 Importantly , we propose a distinct model for Robo2 and Robo3 receptors , where their mismatch at clonal boundaries is crucial rather than the mere presence of Robo2 receptors in aberrant cells . Moreover , JNK serves as a downstream effector of this mismatch , rather than an upstream regulator of Robo2 expression levels . In addition , neither the ligand Slit nor the cyto - solic domain in Robo2 expression constructs are required for the induction of interface surveillance in our assays . In fact , ectopic levels of solely the extracellular domain of Robo2 are sufﬁcient to activate interface signaling , suggesting that the extracellular domain of Robo2 may acts as interaction partner for cell surface molecules . Curiously , hRobo2 can interact in trans on neigh - boring cell surfaces , and the binding of LRR domains present in Slit result in conformation changes favoring the formation of an activating Robo2 dimer in cis . 50 , 81 Similarly , recent studies have focused on heterophilic receptor interactions involving Toll - like receptors containing LRR domains with Trn and Ten - m in Drosophila embryo patterning , receptors that we also ﬁnd to induce interface surveillance . 44 , 82 Whether heterophilic inter - actions through LRR - domain proteins other than Slit play a role in Robo2 - mediated interface surveillance remains to be investigated . Of note , we also ﬁnd that Robo3 is capable of compensating for the loss of Robo2 . Robo2 and Robo3 are ( D ) Graph depicting the change of robo2 - GFP in clonal cells at the interface expressing UAS - RFP ( RFP ) , UAS - tkv - RNAi ( Tkv RNAi ) , UAS - fkh ( Fkh OE ) , or UAS - ey ( Ey OE ) relative to the surrounding wild - type cells in the pouch , hinge , or notum region of the wing disc . Left axis showsthe relative change for individual clones as depicted inthe violin plots . Rightaxis shows themean change of all therelative changes of individual clonesper disc . n R 7 wingdiscs per genotype areplotted , and pvalues ofaKruskal - Wallis test withDunnett’smultiple comparisontestare displayed inthe graph . Error barsrepresentmean and 95 % conﬁdenceinterval . ( E , G , I , K , M , O , Q , S , U , W , and Y ) Wing discs presenting the speciﬁc expression patterns of robo2 - GFP ( Robo2 GFP ) ( E , O , and U ) , eph - GFP ( Eph GFP ) ( G , Q , and W ) , ten - m - GFP ( ten - m GFP ) ( I , S , and Y ) , ten - a - GFP ( Ten - a GFP ) ( K ) , or trn - LacZ ( trn - LacZ ) ( M ) serving as a reference for the experimentally induced changes in ( F ) , ( H ) , ( J ) , ( L ) , ( N ) , ( P ) , ( R ) , ( T ) , ( V ) , ( X ) , and ( Z ) . ( F , H , J , L , N , P , R , T , V , X , andZ ) Wingdiscsexpressing robo2 - GFP ( Robo2 GFP ) ( F , P , V ) , eph - GFP ( Eph GFP ) ( H , R , andX ) , ten - m - GFP ( ten - m GFP ) ( J , T , andZ ) , ten - a - GFP ( Ten - a GFP ) ( L ) , or trn - LacZ ( trn - LacZ ) ( N ) ( gray or cyan ) and carrying mosaic clones ( magenta ) with the knockdown of Tkv ( Tkv RNAi ) ( F and N ) , expression of a constitutively active Tkv ( Tkv CA ) ( H , J , and L ) , expression of UAS - RasV12 ( Ras V12 ) ( P , R , and T ) or expression of Myc ( Myc OE ) ( V , X , and Z ) . Increasing Myc - levels creates super competitor cells , which will outcompete surrounding wild - type cells . Related to Figures S6 and S7 and Data S3 and S4 . ll OPEN ACCESS Current Biology 34 , 1 – 17 , March 11 , 2024 13 Please cite this article in press as : Fischer et al . , A mismatch in the expression of cell surface molecules induces tissue - intrinsic defense against aber - rant cells , Current Biology ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2024 . 01 . 053 Article closely related molecules with previously described functions in neuronal cell - cell recognition and differ from Robo1 . 53 , 54 While all Robo receptors share similar extracellular domains , Robo2 and 3 retain only two of the four conserved cytoplasmic ( CC ) motifs found in Robo1 and lack the strongest Ena - recruiting CC - motif . 46 Interestingly , all Robo receptors retain a WAVE reg - ulatory - complex - interacting receptor sequence ( WIRS ) through which actin regulation may be facilitated independent of Slit ligand binding . 83 , 84 Regulation of neuronal cell surface molecules in cancer Multiple recent studies revealed signiﬁcant changes to the expression patterns ofneuronalcell surfacemolecules intumors , for example . 85 , 86 We demonstrate that Ras V12 - expressing cells disrupt the endogenous pattern of surface molecules , causing pronounced differences in the surface code and activation of interface surveillance responses . In mammalian epithelia , cells with oncogenic Ras signaling are detected and eliminated by a process termed epithelial defense against cancer ( EDAC ) akin to interface surveillance . 4 , 87 , 88 Eph / Ephrin signaling was shown to regulate the interaction of oncogenic Ras V12 - expressing cells with neighboring wild - type cells in cultured MDCK monolayers and pancreas in vivo . 89 , 90 Here , Ras V12 - expression induces EphA2 which underlies actin enrichment and cell shape changes upon interaction of wild - type and Ras V12 - expressing cells . This supports a model where interface surveillance mediated by altered expression of cell surface molecules may have important roles in tumor suppression by regulating the interaction between wild - type and aberrant cells . However , this very machinery can alsopromotetumorprogressionbytriggeringsignalingpathways and actomyosin dynamics at the interface with wild - type cells . Aberrant cells may exhibit resistance to apoptosis , as exempli - ﬁed by the case of Ras V12 - expressing cells , which would channel activation of JNK signaling and actomyosin dynamics toward migratory behaviors . 4 Interface surveillance in development Interfacesurveillancesharesstrikingsimilaritieswithcompartment boundary formation in developing tissues , where two cell popula - tions of distinct fate mechanically segregate via the formation of a contractile actomyosin interface between them . Indeed , many of themoleculesidentiﬁedinourgeneticscreenfacilitateactomyosin regulation during compartment boundary formation in vertebrate andinvertebratespecies . 24 – 26 , 36 , 37 Thesimilaritiesbetweendevel - opmental morphogenesis and tissue - intrinsic error correction , relying on the same principle of receptor - mediated recognition and actomyosin driven segregation of cell populations , point to - ward a common evolutionary origin of the surface code subse - quently adapted for developmental and homeostatic processes . In fact , cellular function of neuronal axon guidance in neuronal tis - sues may have originally evolved in evolutionarily more ancient epithelia . Ultimately , the cell surface code formed by so - called neuronal axon guidance molecules and related factors may repre - sent an ancient system to distinguish self from non - self in physio - logical and pathological contexts . STAR + METHODS Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following : d KEY RESOURCES TABLE d RESOURCE AVAILABILITY B Lead contact B Materials availability B Data and code availability d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL d METHOD DETAILS B Drosophila genetics B Immunohistochemistry B Image acquisition and image display B Illustration of expression patterns d IMAGE QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS B Region of interest ( ROI ) segmentation and quantiﬁca - tion workﬂow SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental information can be found online at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2024 . 01 . 053 . Figure 7 . A mismatch in cell surface mole - cules induces interface surveillance Signaling by different developmental patterning pathways ( blue ) is integrated in a cell - type - speciﬁc manner and acell - type - speciﬁc set oftranscription factors ( blue ) to drive the expression of a set of genes ( blue ) encoding for cell surface molecules ( green ) , which are known to play a role in neuronal guidance and targeting . Thus , the combination of moleculesdisplayedatthecellsurfacedepends on the signal integration and fate speciﬁcation at any position within the imaginal disc . Aberrant fate signals , for example , by the expression of onco - genic Ras V12 ( orange ) , disrupt this cell - type - spe - ciﬁc regulation of gene expression leading to a changed combination of cell surface molecules relative to that of the neighboring wild - type cell . The mismatch in cell surface molecules between neighboring cells induces all hallmarks of interface surveillance ( red ) . Related to Figure S7 . ll OPEN ACCESS 14 Current Biology 34 , 1 – 17 , March 11 , 2024 Please cite this article in press as : Fischer et al . , A mismatch in the expression of cell surface molecules induces tissue - intrinsic defense against aber - rant cells , Current Biology ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2024 . 01 . 053 Article ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank the staff of the Life Imaging Center ( LIC ) in the Hilde Mangold House ( HMH ) of the University of Freiburg for help with their confocal microscopy re - sources and the excellent support in image recording . We speciﬁcally thank the DFG for supporting our imaging work through project number 414136422 . We thank Timothy Evans , David Bilder , Ishwar Hariharan , George Pyrowolakis , Martin Juenger , Suzanne Eaton , Dirk Bohmann , Mirka Uhlirova , Helena Richardson , Jennifer Zallen , Ruth Johnson , Frank Schnorrer , David Strutt , Andrea Brand , Yoshimasa Yagi , Karl - Friederich Fischbach , and Mel Feany for sharing reagents . We thank the Bloomington Drosophila Stock Centre ( BDSC ) , theViennaDrosophila StockCollection ( VDRC ) and theDevel - opmental Studies Hybridoma Bank ( DSHB ) , and the Monoclonal Antibody Core Facility at the Helmholtz Zentrum Munich for providing ﬂy stocks and an - tibodies . We also thank the SGBM and IMPRS - IE graduate schools for sup - porting our doctoral researchers . Funding for this work was provided by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( DFG , German Research Foundation ) under Germany s Excellence Strategy ( CIBSS—EXC - 2189—project ID 390939984 and GSC - 4 , Spemann Graduate School of Biology and Medicine ) , the CRC 850 ( Control of Cell Motility in Development and Cancer ) , the Heisenberg Program ( CL490 / 3 - 1 ) , the Boehringer Ingelheim Foundation Plus3 and RiseUp ! Programmes , and the International Max Planck Research SchoolforImmunobiology , Epigenetics , andMetabolism ( MaxPlanckInstitute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics , Freiburg ) . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS Conceptualization , F . F . , A . F . , and A . - K . C . ; data curation , F . F . , L . E . , A . F . , and K . H . ; formal analysis , F . F . , A . F . , L . E . , and V . W . ; funding acquisition , A . - K . C . ; investigation , F . F . , A . F . , L . E . , K . H . , D . P . , V . W . , and R . B . ; methodology , F . F . , A . F . , L . E . , K . H . , D . P . , V . W . , and R . B . ; project administration , A . - K . C . ; supervi - sion , A . - K . C . ; validation , F . F . , A . F . , L . E . , K . H . , D . P . , V . W . , and R . B . ; visualiza - tion , F . F . , L . E . , and A . F . ; writing – original draft , F . F . and A . - K . C . ; writing – re - view & editing , L . E . , A . F . , F . F . , and A . - K . C . DECLARATION OF INTERESTS The authors declare no competing interests . Received : March 9 , 2023 Revised : September 29 , 2023 Accepted : January 19 , 2024 Published : February 12 , 2024 REFERENCES 1 . Starostik , M . R . , Sosina , O . A . , andMcCoy , R . C . ( 2020 ) . Single - cellanalysis of human embryos reveals diverse patterns of aneuploidy and mosaicism . Genome Res . 30 , 814 – 825 . 2 . Martincorena , I . ( 2019 ) . Somaticmutationandclonalexpansionsinhuman tissues . Genome Med . 11 , 35 . 3 . Bielmeier , C . , Alt , S . , Weichselberger , V . , La Fortezza , M . , Harz , H . , Ju¨licher , F . , Salbreux , G . , and Classen , A . K . ( 2016 ) . Interface Contractility between Differently Fated Cells Drives Cell Elimination and Cyst Formation . Curr . Biol . 26 , 563 – 574 . 4 . Prasad , D . , Illek , K . , Fischer , F . , Holstein , K . , and Classen , A . K . ( 2023 ) . Bilateral JNK activation is a hallmark of interface surveillance and pro - motes elimination of aberrant cells . eLife 12 . 5 . Gibson , M . C . , and Perrimon , N . ( 2005 ) . Extrusion and death of DPP / BMP - compromised epithelial cells in the developing Drosophila wing . Science 307 , 1785 – 1789 . 307 / 5716 / 1785 . 6 . Shen , J . , and Dahmann , C . ( 2005 ) . Extrusion of cells with inappropriate Dpp signaling from Drosophila wing disc epithelia . Science 307 , 1789 – 1790 . 7 . Widmann , T . J . , and Dahmann , C . ( 2009 ) . Wingless signaling and the con - trol of cell shape in Drosophila wing imaginal discs . Dev . Biol . 334 , 161 – 173 . S0012 - 1606 ( 09 ) 01063 - X . 8 . Widmann , T . J . , and Dahmann , C . ( 2009 ) . Dpp signaling promotes the cuboidal - to - columnar shape transition of Drosophila wing disc epithelia by regulating Rho1 . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 1362 – 1373 . 9 . Pallavi , S . K . , Ho , D . M . , Hicks , C . , Miele , L . , and Artavanis - Tsakonas , S . ( 2012 ) . Notch and Mef2 synergize to promote proliferation and metastasis through JNK signal activation in Drosophila . EMBO J . 31 , 2895 – 2907 . 10 . Gandille , P . , Narbonne - Reveau , K . , Boissonneau , E . , Randsholt , N . , Busson , D . , and Pret , A . M . ( 2010 ) . Mutations in the polycomb group gene polyhomeotic lead to epithelial instability in both the ovary and wing imaginal disc in Drosophila . PLoS One 5 , e13946 . 11 . Bessa , J . , Carmona , L . , and Casares , F . ( 2009 ) . Zinc - ﬁnger paralogues tsh and tio are functionally equivalent during imaginal development in Drosophila and maintain their expression levels through auto - and cross - negative feedback loops . Dev . Dyn . 238 , 19 – 28 . 12 . Aldaz , S . , Morata , G . , andAzpiazu , N . ( 2005 ) . Patterningfunctionofhomo - thorax / extradenticle in the thorax of Drosophila . Development 132 , 439 – 446 . 13 . Beuchle , D . , Struhl , G . , andMu¨ller , J . ( 2001 ) . Polycombgroupproteinsand heritablesilencing ofDrosophila Hoxgenes . Development 128 , 993 – 1004 . 14 . Prober , D . A . , and Edgar , B . A . ( 2000 ) . Ras1 promotes cellular growth inthe Drosophila wing . Cell 100 , 435 – 446 . 15 . Liu , X . , Grammont , M . , and Irvine , K . D . ( 2000 ) . Roles for scalloped and vestigial in regulating cell afﬁnity and interactions between the wing blade and the wing hinge . Dev . Biol . 228 , 287 – 303 . 16 . Worley , M . I . , Setiawan , L . , andHariharan , I . K . ( 2013 ) . TIE - DYE : acombina - torialmarkingsystemtovisualizeandgeneticallymanipulateclonesduring development in Drosophila melanogaster . Development 140 , 3275 – 3284 . 17 . Perea , D . , Molohon , K . , Edwards , K . , and Dı´az - Benjumea , F . J . ( 2013 ) . Multiple roles of the gene zinc ﬁnger homeodomain - 2 in the development of the Drosophila wing . Mech . Dev . 130 , 467 – 481 . 18 . Gold , K . S . , and Brand , A . H . ( 2014 ) . Optix deﬁnes a neuroepithelial compartment in the optic lobe of the Drosophila brain . Neural Dev . 9 , 18 . 19 . Classen , A . K . , Bunker , B . D . , Harvey , K . F . , Vaccari , T . , and Bilder , D . ( 2009 ) . A tumor suppressor activity of Drosophila Polycomb genes medi - ated by JAK - STAT signaling . Nat . Genet . 41 , 1150 – 1155 . 20 . Bell , G . P . , and Thompson , B . J . ( 2014 ) . Colorectalcancerprogression : les - sons from Drosophila ? Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 28 , 70 – 77 . 21 . Organista , M . F . , and De Celis , J . F . ( 2013 ) . The Spalt transcription factors regulate cell proliferation , survival and epithelial integrity downstream of the Decapentaplegic signalling pathway . Biol . Open 2 , 37 – 48 . 22 . Villa - Cuesta , E . , Gonza´lez - P (cid:1) erez , E . , andModolell , J . ( 2007 ) . Apposition of iroquoisexpressingand non - expressingcells leads tocell sorting and fold formation in the Drosophila imaginal wing disc . BMC Dev . Biol . 7 , 106 . 23 . Shen , J . , Dahmann , C . , and Pﬂugfelder , G . O . ( 2010 ) . Spatial discontinuity of optomotor - blind expression in the Drosophila wing imaginal disc dis - rupts epithelial architecture and promotes cell sorting . BMC Dev . Biol . 10 , 23 . 24 . Sharrock , T . E . , and Sanson , B . ( 2020 ) . Cell sorting and morphogenesis in early Drosophila embryos . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 107 , 147 – 160 . 25 . Wang , J . , and Dahmann , C . ( 2020 ) . Establishing compartment boundaries in Drosophila wing imaginal discs : An interplay between selector genes , signaling pathways and cell mechanics . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 107 , 161 – 169 . 26 . Addison , M . , and Wilkinson , D . G . ( 2016 ) . Segment Identity and Cell Segregation in the Vertebrate Hindbrain . Curr . Top . Dev . Biol . 117 , 581 – 596 . 27 . Tsai , T . Y . , Garner , R . M . , and Megason , S . G . ( 2022 ) . Adhesion - Based Self - Organization in Tissue Patterning . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 38 , 349 – 374 . 28 . Kania , A . , and Klein , R . ( 2016 ) . Mechanisms of ephrin - Eph signalling in development , physiology and disease . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 17 , 240 – 256 . ll OPEN ACCESS Current Biology 34 , 1 – 17 , March 11 , 2024 15 Please cite this article in press as : Fischer et al . , A mismatch in the expression of cell surface molecules induces tissue - intrinsic defense against aber - rant cells , Current Biology ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2024 . 01 . 053 Article 29 . Beamish , I . V . , Hinck , L . , and Kennedy , T . E . ( 2018 ) . Making Connections : Guidance Cues and Receptors at Nonneural Cell - Cell Junctions . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 10 , a029165 . 30 . Moreland , T . , and Poulain , F . E . ( 2022 ) . To Stick or Not to Stick : The Multiple Roles of Cell Adhesion Molecules in Neural Circuit Assembly . Front . Neurosci . 16 , 889155 . 31 . Cort (cid:1) es , E . , Pak , J . S . , and O¨zkan , E . ( 2023 ) . Structure and evolution of neuronal wiring receptors and ligands . Dev . Dyn . 252 , 27 – 60 . 32 . Zang , Y . , Chaudhari , K . , and Bashaw , G . J . ( 2021 ) . New insights into the molecular mechanisms of axon guidance receptor regulation and signaling . Curr . Top . Dev . Biol . 142 , 147 – 196 . 33 . Klein , R . , and Pasterkamp , R . J . ( 2021 ) . Recent advances in inter - cellular interactions during neural circuit assembly . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 69 , 25 – 32 . 34 . Del Toro , D . , Carrasquero - Ordaz , M . A . , Chu , A . , Ruff , T . , Shahin , M . , Jackson , V . A . , Chavent , M . , Berbeira - Santana , M . , Seyit - Bremer , G . , Brignani , S . , et al . ( 2020 ) . Structural Basis of Teneurin - Latrophilin Interaction in Repulsive Guidance of Migrating Neurons . Cell 180 , 323 – 339 . e19 . 35 . Honig , B . , and Shapiro , L . ( 2020 ) . Adhesion Protein Structure , Molecular Afﬁnities , and Principles of Cell - Cell Recognition . Cell 181 , 520 – 535 . 36 . Umetsu , D . , Dunst , S . , and Dahmann , C . ( 2014 ) . An RNA interference screen for genes required to shape the anteroposterior compartment boundary in Drosophila identiﬁes the Eph receptor . PLoS One 9 , e114340 . 37 . Par (cid:1) e , A . C . , Naik , P . , Shi , J . , Mirman , Z . , Palmquist , K . H . , and Zallen , J . A . ( 2019 ) . An LRR Receptor - Teneurin System Directs Planar Polarity at Compartment Boundaries . Dev . Cell 51 , 208 – 221 . e6 . 38 . Chatterjee , N . , andBohmann , D . ( 2012 ) . AversatilePhiC31 basedreporter system for measuring AP - 1 and Nrf2 signaling in Drosophila and in tissue culture . PLoS One 7 , e34063 . 39 . del Valle Rodrı´guez , A . , Didiano , D . , and Desplan , C . ( 2011 ) . Power tools for gene expression and clonal analysis in Drosophila . Nat . Methods 9 , 47 – 55 . 40 . Sarov , M . , Barz , C . , Jambor , H . , Hein , M . Y . , Schmied , C . , Suchold , D . , Stender , B . , Janosch , S . , K J , V . V . , Krishnan , R . T . , et al . ( 2016 ) . A genome - wide resource for the analysis of protein localisation in Drosophila . eLife 5 , e12068 . 41 . Venken , K . J . T . , Schulze , K . L . , Haelterman , N . A . , Pan , H . , He , Y . , Evans - Holm , M . , Carlson , J . W . , Levis , R . W . , Spradling , A . C . , Hoskins , R . A . , etal . ( 2011 ) . MiMIC : ahighlyversatiletransposoninsertionresourceforen - gineering Drosophila melanogaster genes . Nat . Methods 8 , 737 – 743 . 42 . Held , L . I . , Jr . ( 2002 ) . Imaginal Discs : the Genetic and Cellular Logic of Pattern Formation ( Cambridge University Press ) . 43 . Calzolari , S . , Terriente , J . , and Pujades , C . ( 2014 ) . Cell segregation in the vertebrate hindbrain relies on actomyosin cables located at the interhom - bomeric boundaries . EMBO J . 33 , 686 – 701 . 44 . Lavalou , J . , Mao , Q . , Harmansa , S . , Kerridge , S . , Lellouch , A . C . , Philippe , J . M . , Audebert , S . , Camoin , L . , and Lecuit , T . ( 2021 ) . Formation of polar - ized contractile interfaces by self - organized Toll - 8 / Cirl GPCR asymmetry . Dev . Cell 56 , 1574 – 1588 . e7 . 45 . Vaughen , J . , and Igaki , T . ( 2016 ) . Slit - Robo Repulsive Signaling Extrudes Tumorigenic Cells from Epithelia . Dev . Cell 39 , 683 – 695 . 46 . Bashaw , G . J . , Kidd , T . , Murray , D . , Pawson , T . , and Goodman , C . S . ( 2000 ) . Repulsive axon guidance : Abelson and Enabled play opposing roles downstream of the roundabout receptor . Cell 101 , 703 – 715 . 47 . Kajita , M . , Sugimura , K . , Ohoka , A . , Burden , J . , Suganuma , H . , Ikegawa , M . , Shimada , T . , Kitamura , T . , Shindoh , M . , Ishikawa , S . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Filamin acts as a key regulator in epithelial defence against transformed cells . Nat . Commun . 5 , 4428 . 48 . Howard , L . J . , Reichert , M . C . , and Evans , T . A . ( 2021 ) . The Slit - binding Ig1 domain is required for multiple axon guidance activities of Drosophila Robo2 . Genesis 59 , e23443 . 49 . Fukuhara , N . , Howitt , J . A . , Hussain , S . A . , and Hohenester , E . ( 2008 ) . Structural and functional analysis of slit and heparin binding to immunoglobulin - like domains 1 and 2 of Drosophila Robo . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 16226 – 16234 . 50 . Barak , R . , Yom - Tov , G . , Guez - Haddad , J . , Gasri - Plotnitsky , L . , Maimon , R . , Cohen - Berkman , M . , McCarthy , A . A . , Perlson , E . , Henis - Korenblit , S . , Isupov , M . N . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Structural Principles in Robo Activation and Auto - inhibition . Cell 177 , 272 – 285 . e16 . 51 . Sasse , S . , and Kl € ambt , C . ( 2016 ) . Repulsive Epithelial Cues Direct Glial Migration along the Nerve . Dev . Cell 39 , 696 – 707 . 52 . Simpson , J . H . , Kidd , T . , Bland , K . S . , and Goodman , C . S . ( 2000 ) . Short - Range and Long - Range Guidance by Slit and Its Robo Receptors : Robo and Robo2 Play Distinct Roles in Midline Guidance . Neuron 28 , 753 – 766 . 53 . Pappu , K . S . , Morey , M . , Nern , A . , Spitzweck , B . , Dickson , B . J . , and Zipursky , S . L . ( 2011 ) . Robo - 3 – mediated repulsive interactions guide R8 axons during Drosophila visual system development . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 7571 – 7576 . 54 . Rajagopalan , S . , Vivancos , V . , Nicolas , E . , and Dickson , B . J . ( 2000 ) . Selecting a longitudinal pathway : Robo receptors specify the lateral posi - tion of axons in the Drosophila CNS . Cell 103 , 1033 – 1045 . 55 . Halder , G . , Callaerts , P . , and Gehring , W . J . ( 1995 ) . Induction of ectopic eyes by targeted expression of the eyeless gene in Drosophila . Science 267 , 1788 – 1792 . 56 . Zecca , M . , Basler , K . , and Struhl , G . ( 1995 ) . Sequential organizing activ - ities of engrailed , hedgehog and decapentaplegic in the Drosophila wing . Development 121 , 2265 – 2278 . 57 . Beira , J . V . , and Paro , R . ( 2016 ) . The legacy of Drosophila imaginal discs . Chromosoma 125 , 573 – 592 . 58 . Ruiz - Losada , M . , Blom - Dahl , D . , Co´rdoba , S . , and Estella , C . ( 2018 ) . Speciﬁcation and Patterning of Drosophila Appendages . J . Dev . Biol . 6 , 17 . 59 . De Celis , J . F . ( 2003 ) . Pattern formation in the Drosophila wing : The devel - opment of the veins . BioEssays 25 , 443 – 451 . 60 . Prasad , D . , Illek , K . , Fischer , F . , Holstein , K . , and Classen , A . - K . ( 2022 ) . Bilateral JNK activation is a hallmark of interface contractility and pro - motes elimination of aberrant cells . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 06 . 20 . 496791 . 61 . Baumgartner , M . E . , Dinan , M . P . , Langton , P . F . , Kucinski , I . , andPiddini , E . ( 2021 ) . Proteotoxic stress is a driver of the loser status and cell competi - tion . Nat . Cell Biol . 23 , 136 – 146 . 62 . Blanco , J . , Cooper , J . C . , and Baker , N . E . ( 2020 ) . Roles of C / EBP class bZip proteins in the growth and cell competition of Rp ( ’Minute’ ) mutants in Drosophila . eLife 9 , e50535 . 63 . Ji , Z . , Kiparaki , M . , Folgado , V . , Kumar , A . , Blanco , J . , Rimesso , G . , Chuen , J . , Liu , Y . , Zheng , D . , and Baker , N . E . ( 2019 ) . Drosophila RpS12 controls translation , growth , and cell competition through Xrp1 . PLoS Genet . 15 , e1008513 . 64 . Baker , N . E . , Kiparaki , M . , and Khan , C . ( 2019 ) . A potential link between p53 , cell competition and ribosomopathy in mammals and in Drosophila . Dev . Biol . 446 , 17 – 19 . 65 . Lee , C . H . , Kiparaki , M . , Blanco , J . , Folgado , V . , Ji , Z . , Kumar , A . , Rimesso , G . , and Baker , N . E . ( 2018 ) . A Regulatory Response to Ribosomal Protein Mutations Controls Translation , Growth , and Cell Competition . Dev . Cell 46 , 456 – 469 . e4 . 66 . Baillon , L . , Germani , F . , Rockel , C . , Hilchenbach , J . , and Basler , K . ( 2018 ) . Xrp1 is a transcription factor required for cell competition - driven elimina - tion of loser cells . Sci . Rep . 8 , 17712 . 67 . Kale , A . , Ji , Z . , Kiparaki , M . , Blanco , J . , Rimesso , G . , Flibotte , S . , and Baker , N . E . ( 2018 ) . Ribosomal Protein S12e Has a Distinct Function in Cell Competition . Dev . Cell 44 , 42 – 55 . e4 . 68 . Ochi , N . , Nakamura , M . , Nagata , R . , Wakasa , N . , Nakano , R . , and Igaki , T . ( 2021 ) . CellcompetitionisdrivenbyXrp1 - mediatedphosphorylationofeu - karyotic initiation factor 2alpha . PLoS Genet . 17 , e1009958 . 69 . Madan , E . , Pelham , C . J . , Nagane , M . , Parker , T . M . , Canas - Marques , R . , Fazio , K . , Shaik , K . , Yuan , Y . , Henriques , V . , Galzerano , A . , et al . ( 2019 ) . ll OPEN ACCESS 16 Current Biology 34 , 1 – 17 , March 11 , 2024 Please cite this article in press as : Fischer et al . , A mismatch in the expression of cell surface molecules induces tissue - intrinsic defense against aber - rant cells , Current Biology ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2024 . 01 . 053 Article Flower isoforms promote competitive growth in cancer . Nature 572 , 260 – 264 . 70 . Rhiner , C . , Lo´pez - Gay , J . M . , Soldini , D . , Casas - Tinto , S . , Martı´n , F . A . , Lombardı´a , L . , and Moreno , E . ( 2010 ) . Flower forms an extracellular code that reveals the ﬁtness of a cell to its neighbors in Drosophila . Dev . Cell 18 , 985 – 998 . 71 . Bosch , J . A . , Tran , N . H . , and Hariharan , I . K . ( 2015 ) . CoinFLP : a system for efﬁcient mosaic screening and for visualizing clonal boundaries in Drosophila . Development 142 , 597 – 606 . 72 . Yagi , R . , Mayer , F . , and Basler , K . ( 2010 ) . Reﬁned LexA transactivators and their use in combination with the Drosophila Gal4 system . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 16166 – 16171 . 73 . Mila´n , M . , Weihe , U . , P (cid:1) erez , L . , and Cohen , S . M . ( 2001 ) . The LRR proteins capricious and Tartan mediate cell interactions during DV boundary for - mation in the Drosophila wing . Cell 106 , 785 – 794 . 74 . Mila´n , M . , P (cid:1) erez , L . , and Cohen , S . M . ( 2005 ) . Boundary formation in the Drosophila wing : functional dissection of Capricious and Tartan . Dev . Dyn . 233 , 804 – 810 . 75 . Willecke , M . , Hamaratoglu , F . , Sansores - Garcia , L . , Tao , C . , and Halder , G . ( 2008 ) . Boundaries of Dachsous Cadherin activity modulate the Hippo signaling pathway to induce cell proliferation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 14897 – 14902 . 76 . Bosveld , F . , Guirao , B . , Wang , Z . , Rivie ` re , M . , Bonnet , I . , Graner , F . , and Bellaı¨che , Y . ( 2016 ) . Modulation of junction tension by tumor suppressors and proto - oncogenes regulates cell - cell contacts . Development 143 , 623 – 634 . 77 . Mila´n , M . , P (cid:1) erez , L . , and Cohen , S . M . ( 2002 ) . Short - range cell interactions and cell survival in the Drosophila wing . Dev . Cell 2 , 797 – 805 . 78 . Fulford , A . D . , andMcNeill , H . ( 2020 ) . Fat / Dachsousfamilycadherinsincell and tissue organisation . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 62 , 96 – 103 . 79 . Gilbert , J . M . , Adams , M . T . , Sharon , N . , Jayaraaman , H . , and Blum , B . ( 2021 ) . Morphogenesis of the Islets of Langerhans Is Guided by Extraendocrine Slit2 and Slit3 Signals . Mol . Cell . Biol . 41 , e0045120 . 80 . Waters , B . J . , and Blum , B . ( 2022 ) . Axon Guidance Molecules in the Islets of Langerhans . Front . Endocrinol . 13 , 869780 . 81 . Evans , T . A . , Santiago , C . , Arbeille , E . , and Bashaw , G . J . ( 2015 ) . Robo2 acts in trans to inhibit Slit - Robo1 repulsion in pre - crossing commissural axons . eLife 4 , e08407 . 82 . Par (cid:1) e , A . C . , Vichas , A . , Fincher , C . T . , Mirman , Z . , Farrell , D . L . , Mainieri , A . , and Zallen , J . A . ( 2014 ) . A positional Toll receptor code directs convergent extension in Drosophila . Nature 515 , 523 – 527 . 83 . Chaudhari , K . , Gorla , M . , Chang , C . , Kania , A . , and Bashaw , G . J . ( 2021 ) . Robo recruitment of the Wave regulatory complex plays an essential and conserved role in midline repulsion . eLife 10 , e64474 . 84 . Chen , B . , Brinkmann , K . , Chen , Z . , Pak , C . W . , Liao , Y . , Shi , S . , Henry , L . , Grishin , N . V . , Bogdan , S . , and Rosen , M . K . ( 2014 ) . The WAVE regulatory complex links diverse receptors to the actin cytoskeleton . Cell 156 , 195 – 207 . 85 . Gara , R . K . , Kumari , S . , Ganju , A . , Yallapu , M . M . , Jaggi , M . , and Chauhan , S . C . ( 2015 ) . Slit / Robo pathway : a promising therapeutic target for cancer . Drug Discov . Today 20 , 156 – 164 . 86 . Ahammad , I . ( 2020 ) . A comprehensive review of tumor proliferative and suppressive role of semaphorins and therapeutic approaches . Biophys . Rev . 12 , 1233 – 1247 . 87 . Maruyama , T . , and Fujita , Y . ( 2017 ) . Cell competition in mammals — novel homeostatic machinery for embryonic development and cancer preven - tion . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 48 , 106 – 112 . 88 . Tanimura , N . , and Fujita , Y . ( 2020 ) . Epithelial defense against cancer ( EDAC ) . Semin . Cancer Biol . 63 , 44 – 48 . 89 . Porazinski , S . , de Navascu (cid:1) es , J . , Yako , Y . , Hill , W . , Jones , M . R . , Maddison , R . , Fujita , Y . , and Hogan , C . ( 2016 ) . EphA2 Drives the Segregation of Ras - Transformed Epithelial Cells from Normal Neighbors . Curr . Biol . 26 , 3220 – 3229 . 90 . Hill , W . , Zaragkoulias , A . , Salvador - Barbero , B . , Parﬁtt , G . J . , Alatsatianos , M . , Padilha , A . , Porazinski , S . , Woolley , T . E . , Morton , J . P . , Sansom , O . J . , et al . ( 2021 ) . EPHA2 - dependent outcompetition of KRASG12D mutant cells by wild - type neighbors in the adult pancreas . Curr . Biol . 31 , 2550 – 2560 . e5 . 91 . Schindelin , J . , Arganda - Carreras , I . , Frise , E . , Kaynig , V . , Longair , M . , Pietzsch , T . , Preibisch , S . , Rueden , C . , Saalfeld , S . , Schmid , B . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nat . Methods 9 , 676 – 682 . 92 . Herbert , S . , Valon , L . , Mancini , L . , Dray , N . , Caldarelli , P . , Gros , J . , Esposito , E . , Shorte , S . L . , Bally - Cuif , L . , Aulner , N . , et al . ( 2021 ) . LocalZProjectorandDeProj : atoolboxforlocal2Dprojectionandaccurate morphometrics of large 3D microscopy images . BMC Biol . 19 , 136 . 93 . Sui , L . , Alt , S . , Weigert , M . , Dye , N . , Eaton , S . , Jug , F . , Myers , E . W . , Ju¨licher , F . , Salbreux , G . , and Dahmann , C . ( 2018 ) . Differential lateral and basal tension drive folding of Drosophila wing discs through two distinct mechanisms . Nat . Commun . 9 , 4620 . 94 . Hammer , O . , Harper , D . , and Ryan , P . ( 2001 ) . Past : Paleontological Statistics Software Package for Education and Data Analysis . Palaeontol . Electron . 4 , 9 . ll OPEN ACCESS Current Biology 34 , 1 – 17 , March 11 , 2024 17 Please cite this article in press as : Fischer et al . , A mismatch in the expression of cell surface molecules induces tissue - intrinsic defense against aber - rant cells , Current Biology ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2024 . 01 . 053 Article STAR + METHODS KEY RESOURCES TABLE REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER Antibodies mouse monoclonal anti - Robo1 Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank DSHB - 13C9 RRID : AB _ 2181861 mouse monoclonal anti - Robo3 extracellular Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank DSHB - 14C9 RRID : AB _ 528454 mouse monoclonal anti - Robo3 cytoplasmic Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank DSHB - 15H2 RRID : AB _ 531800 mouse anti - Ds Suzanne Eaton N / A mouse monoclonal anti - Nrt Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank DSHB - BP106 RRID : AB _ 528404 mouse anti - Sema2 Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank DSHB - 19C2 RRID : AB _ 528460 mouse anti - Ptc Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank DSHB - Apa1 RRID : AB _ 528441 mouse anti - Wg Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank DSHB - 4D4 RRID : AB _ 528512 mouse monoclonal anti - b - gal Promega Z378B , RRID : AB _ 2323752 Rabbit polyclonal anti - b - gal MP Biomedicals 55976 , SKU : 085597 - CF rabbit anti - Ephrin Andrea Brand N / A Rabbit polyclonal anti - Dcp1 Cell Signaling Technology CST - 9578S ; RRID : AB _ 2721060 rabbit anti - GFP Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc G10362 , RRID : AB _ 2536526 rat anti - E - cadherin Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank DSHB - DCAD2 RRID : AB _ 528120 rat monoclonal anti - RFP ChromoTek 5F8 RRID : AB _ 2336064 Chemicals , peptides , and recombinant proteins DAPI Sigma - Aldrich D9564 Phalloidin - Alexa Fluor 405 Abcam ab176752 Phalloidin - Alexa Fluor 488 Invitrogen A12379 Phalloidin - Alexa Fluor 555 Sigma - Aldrich P1951 Phalloidin - Alexa Fluor 647 Invitrogen A22287 Experimental models : Organisms / strains w 118 David Bilder FBal0018157 hsﬂp 122 Ishwar Hariharan FBtp0001101 act > y + > GAL4 , UAS - GFP David Bilder FBti0012290 act > CD2 > GAL4 , UAS - RFP David Bilder FBal0058800 tub > CD2 > GAL4 , UAS - nLacZ George Pyrowolakis FBtp0010169 UAS - LacZ Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 1776 UAS - fkh - 3xHA Martin Juenger FBal0249318 UAS - tkv CA Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 36537 UAS - ey Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 6294 UAS - arm S10 Suzanne Eaton FBtp0001723 UAS - ci - HA Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 32570 dad 4 - LacZ George Pyrowolakis FBsf0000872988 TRE - RFP Dirk Bohmann FBti0147636 puc A251 . 1F3 > LacZ Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 11173 ( Continued on next page ) ll OPEN ACCESS e1 Current Biology 34 , 1 – 17 . e1 – e6 , March 11 , 2024 Please cite this article in press as : Fischer et al . , A mismatch in the expression of cell surface molecules induces tissue - intrinsic defense against aber - rant cells , Current Biology ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2024 . 01 . 053 Article Continued REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER CoinFLP - LexA : : GAD . GAL4 Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 59271 en - GAL4 Mirka Uhlirova FBal0052377 brk - GAL4 ; UAS - mCD8 : : GFP , LexO - mCherry : : CAAX / SM5 - TM6b ; Lex O - tkv QD / SM5 - TM6b George Pyrowolakis FBal0295113 UAS - tkv - RNAi ( HMS02185 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 40937 UAS - Ras V12 Helena Richardson FBtp0001705 UAS - Ras V12 Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 4847 UAS - myc . HA Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 64759 UAS - hpo Ishwar Hariharan FBal0191267 UAS - wts - RNAi ( 101055 / KK ) Vienna Drosophila Resource Center VDRC 111002 elav - GAL4 , UAS - GFP Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 6923 toll - 2 - GFP Vienna Drosophila Resource Center VDRC 318319 toll - 8 - YFP / CyO , hbLacZ Jennifer Zallen FBtp0148072 rst - GFP Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 59410 hbs - GFP Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 65321 hbs - LacZ Ruth Johnson FBal0131086 sns - GFP Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 59801 sema1a - GFP Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 50816 netA - GFP Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 59409 eph - GFP Frank Schnorrer FlyFos015198 ten - m - GFP Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 59798 ten - a - GFP Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 60541 trn - LacZ Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 4550 ft - EGFP David Strutt FBal0385338 ds - LacZ Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 11394 sli - GFP Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 64472 robo2 - GFP Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 61774 netB - GFP Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 67644 unc5 - GFP Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 60547 UAS - robo3 - HA Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 66890 UAS - robo2 - HA Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 66886 UAS - robo2 - RNAi Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 34589 UAS - DEphrin Andrea Brand FBal0269900 UAS - eph - RNAi Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 35290 UAS - ten - a Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 42018 UAS - ten - m Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 41570 UAS - toll - 8 Yoshimasa Yagi N / A UAS - toll - 2 Yoshimasa Yagi N / A UAS - netB - RNAi Vienna Drosophila Resource Center VDRC 100840 UAS - trn - HA Jennifer Zallen N / A UAS - ft David Strutt FBtp0019924 UAS - ft - RNAi Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 34970 UAS - ds David Strutt FBtp0019964 UAS - ds - RNAi ( GD14350 ) David Strutt VDRC 36219 UAS - robo1 - RNAi Vienna Drosophila Resource Center VDRC 42241 UAS - robo3 - RNAi Vienna Drosophila Resource Center VDRC 44702 UAS - ten - m - RNAi Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 29390 UAS - rst Ruth Johnson RJ459 ( Continued on next page ) ll OPEN ACCESS Current Biology 34 , 1 – 17 . e1 – e6 , March 11 , 2024 e2 Please cite this article in press as : Fischer et al . , A mismatch in the expression of cell surface molecules induces tissue - intrinsic defense against aber - rant cells , Current Biology ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2024 . 01 . 053 Article Continued REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER UAS - kirre Karl - Friedrich Fischbach FBtp0013068 UAS - hbs Ruth Johnson RJ404 UAS - eph Mel Feany Probably FBtp0055391 , not FBtp0055389 , nor FBtp0015743 UAS - plexA - RNAi ( HM05221 , GD / 14483 , GL01870 , KK / 101499 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center Vienna Drosophila Resource Center BDSC 30483 , VDRC 27240 , BDSC 67845 , VDRC 107004 UAS - plexB - RNAi ( HM05122 , GD / 16420 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center Vienna Drosophila Resource Center BDSC 28911 , VDRC 46687 UAS - sema2a - RNAi ( GL00356 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 35432 UAS - plexA Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 8479 UAS - sli . D Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 67689 UAS - slit - RNAi ( KK / 100803 ) Vienna Drosophila Resource Center VDRC 108853 UAS - cirl - RNAi ( KK / 108383 , JF02674 , HMS00136 ) Vienna Drosophila Resource Center Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center VDRC100749 , BDSC 27524 , BDSC 34821 UAS - tl Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 58987 UAS - tl - RNAi ( JF01276 , JF01491 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 31477 , BDSC 31044 UAS - toll - 2 - RNAi Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 30498 UAS - toll - 3 Yoshimasa Yagi N / A UAS - toll - 3 - RNAi ( HM05012 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 28526 UAS - toll - 4 Yoshimasa Yagi N / A UAS - toll - 4 - RNAi ( HM050297 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 28543 UAS - toll - 5 - RNAi ( HM05212 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 29533 UAS - toll - 6 Yoshimasa Yagi N / A UAS - toll - 6 - RNAi ( HMC0584 , HMS04251 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 64968 , BDSC 56048 UAS - toll - 7 Yoshimasa Yagi N / A UAS - toll - 7 - RNAi ( HM05230 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 30488 UAS - toll - 8 - RNAi Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 28519 UAS - toll - 9 - RNAi ( HM05227 , HMS00171 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 30535 , BDSC 34853 UAS - dachs . V5 Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 28814 UAS - dachs - RNAi ( JF02743 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 27664 UAS - caps - RNAi ( GD / 2530 , GD / 14433 , JF02854 ) Vienna Drosophila Resource Center Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center VDRC 3046 , VDRC 27097 , BDSC 28020 UAS - trn - RNAi ( GLC01638 , KK / 104688 , HM05011 ) Vienna Drosophila Resource Center Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 50520 , VDRC 107883 , BDSC 28525 UAS - netB - RNAi ( KK / 103672 ) Vienna Drosophila Resource Center VDRC 100840 UAS - unc5 - RNAi ( HMS01099 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 33756 UAS - fra Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 8814 UAS - fra - RNAi ( JF01231 , JF01457 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 31469 , BDSC 31664 UAS - kek1 - RNAi ( HMC04442 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 57000 UAS - kek3 - RNAi ( HMS05948 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 77354 UAS - kek4 - RNAi ( HMC06307 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 67206 UAS - kek5 - RNAi ( HMS01996 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 40830 UAS - ret . L Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 59002 ( Continued on next page ) ll OPEN ACCESS e3 Current Biology 34 , 1 – 17 . e1 – e6 , March 11 , 2024 Please cite this article in press as : Fischer et al . , A mismatch in the expression of cell surface molecules induces tissue - intrinsic defense against aber - rant cells , Current Biology ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2024 . 01 . 053 Article RESOURCE AVAILABILITY Lead contact Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the lead contact , Anne - Kathrin Classen ( anne . classen @ biologie . uni - freiburg . de ) . Materials availability This study did not generate new unique reagents . Data and code availability d Quantitative data sets are provided as supplemental source ﬁles with this publication . Raw imaging data reported in this paper will be shared by the lead contact upon request . d This paper does not report original code . d Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request . EXPERIMENTAL MODEL All experiments were performed on Drosophila melanogaster . Fly strains ( see key resources table ) were maintained on standard ﬂy food ( 10L water , 74 , 5g agar , 243g dry yeast , 580g corn ﬂour , 552ml molasses , 20 . 7g Nipagin , 35ml propionic acid ) at 18 (cid:2) C – 22 (cid:2) C . Larvae from experimental crosses were allowed to feed on Bloomington formulation ( 175 . 7g Nutry - Fly , 1100ml water 20g dry yeast , 1 . 45g Nipagin in 15ml Ethanol , 4 . 8ml Propionic acid ) and raised at 25 (cid:2) C . Our experimental design did not consider differences be - tween sexes unless for genetic crossing schemes . METHOD DETAILS Drosophila genetics Mosaic gene expression was induced by Flip - out ( act or tub > GAL4 / UAS , CoinFLP - LexA / LexO ) or mitotic FLP / FRT . 39 , 71 Parental adult ﬂies were allowed to lay eggs for 72 h at 25 (cid:2) C before ﬂippase expression was induced by heat shock ( HS ) at 37 (cid:2) C for Continued REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER UAS - ret - RNAi ( HMC04143 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 55872 UAS - GP150 ( HMS00395 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 32400 UAS - dscam4 - RNAi ( HMC03277 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 51508 UAS - dscam4 Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 17117 UAS - dscam2 - RNAi ( HMC03411 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 51839 UAS - pyd - RNAi Ruth Johnson RJ452 UAS - ics . O Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 66567 UAS - sas - RNAi ( KK / 106177 ) Vienna Drosophila Resource Center VDRC 100901 UAS - ﬁli - RNAi ( HM05054 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 28568 UAS - bsg - RNAi ( HMC03195 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 52110 UAS - con - RNAi ( HM05178 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 28967 UAS - beat - VII - RNAi ( HMC05049 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 60056 UAS - beat - IIIc - RNAi ( JF03286 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 29607 UAS - tnc - RNAi ( HMC05051 ) Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center BDSC 60058 Software and algorithms FIJI ( ImageJ 1 . 48b ) Schindelin et al . 91 https : / / ﬁji . sc / local - z - projector Fiji plugin v1 . 5 . 4 Herbert et al . 92 https : / / gitlab . pasteur . fr / iah - public / Local Zprojector GraphPad Prism Graph Pad version 9 . 5 . 0 Afﬁnity Designer Afﬁnity Up to version 1 . 10 . 8 Microsoft Excel Microsoft Microsoft Excel 365 Procreate Procreate Version 5 . 2 . 9 Inkscape ( 0 . 92 . 4 ) Inkscape https : / / inkscape . org / release / inkscape - 0 . 92 . 4 / Biorender Science Suite Inc . DBA BioRender Biorender ll OPEN ACCESS Current Biology 34 , 1 – 17 . e1 – e6 , March 11 , 2024 e4 Please cite this article in press as : Fischer et al . , A mismatch in the expression of cell surface molecules induces tissue - intrinsic defense against aber - rant cells , Current Biology ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2024 . 01 . 053 Article 5 - 15 min . Detailed genotypes and experimental conditions are listed in Table S1 . For the JNK interface signaling screen ( Figure S1F ) , larvae were dissected 48 h after a 10 min HS ( AHS ) . Due to genetic limitations , the CoinFLP experiments ( Figures S7H – S7J ) contained two GAL4 - drivers , the Actin5C - FRT / STOP - GAL4 and the en - GAL4 , resulting in mosaic GAL4 expression in the total disc and GAL4 expression in the posterior compartment . For experiments examining expression patterns ( Figures 2 and S2 ) , larvae were dissected 80 h or 102 h after egg lay ( AEL ) . Immunohistochemistry Larvae were dissected and the inverted cuticula with attached wing discs were ﬁxed in 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS for 15 min at 22 (cid:2) C . Samples were washed in 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 in PBS ( PBT ) and incubated with primary and secondary antibodies in 400 m l PBT on a nutator overnight at 4 (cid:2) C and 1 - 3 h at 22 (cid:2) C , respectively . Following a ﬁnal wash in PBS , wing discs were mounted with Molecular Probes Antifade Reagents ( # S2828 ) . Following antibodies were used : Mouse anti - Robo1 ( 1 : 20 , DSHB - 13C9 ) , mouse anti - Robo3 ( 1 : 20 , DSHB - 14C9 & 15H2 ) , mouse anti - Ds ( 1 : 1000 , Suzanne Eaton ) , mouse anti - Nrt ( 1 : 20 , DSHB - BP106 ) , mouse anti - Sema2 ( 1 : 20 , DSHB - 19C2 ) , mouse anti - Ptc ( 1 : 20 , DSHB - apa1 ) , mouse anti - Wg ( 1 : 100 , DSHB - 4D4 ) , rabbit anti - Ephrin ( 1 : 1000 , Andrea Brand ) , rabbit anti - Dcp1 ( 1 : 400 , Cell Signaling - 9578S ) , rat anti - E - cadherin ( 1 : 50 , DSHB - DCAD2 ) , mouse anti - b - gal ( 1 : 1000 , Promega Z378B ) , mouse anti - b - gal ( 1 : 1000 , MP Biochemicals - 55976 ) , rabbit anti - HA ( 1 : 200 , Invitrogen 715500 ) , rabbit anti - GFP ( 1 : 400 , Thermo Fisher - G10362 ) , rat anti - RFP ( 1 : 20 , Heinrich Leonhardt , 5F8 ) and rat anti - RFP ( 1 : 2000 , ChromoTek - 5F8 ) . Fluorescent dyes DAPI ( 0 . 25 ng / m l , Sigma ) , Phalloidin - Alexa Fluor 405 ( 1 : 2000 , Abcam - ab176752 ) , Phalloidin - Alexa Fluor 488 ( 1 : 500 , Invitrogen A12379 ) , Phalloidin - Alexa Fluor 555 ( 1 : 500 , sigma - P1951 ) and Phalloidin - Alexa Fluor 647 ( 1 : 500 , Invitrogen A22287 ) were added together with secondary antibodies . Image acquisition and image display Samples were imaged using Leica TCS SP8 confocal microscopes . Figure panels were assembled in Afﬁnity Designer . In most ﬁgure panels , individual channels represent the same z - position from a confocal image stack . However , some panels may assemble chan - nels from different z - positions in the wing disc ( as listed in Table S2 ) . Such a portrayal was chosen to better visualize the spatially distinct phenotypes at different positions within the cell , speciﬁcally of ( 1 ) junctional actin ( apical ) , ( 2 ) cytoplasmic / nuclear RFP ( lateral ) and ( 3 ) Dcp1 ( basal ) in one image panel . This was meant to reduce the ( peripheral ) data load in the manuscript that would be otherwise required to visualize all channels at all positions . If mentioned in the ﬁgure legends , the local - z - projector Fiji plugin ( https : / / gitlab . pasteur . fr / iah - public / Local Zprojector , v1 . 5 . 4 ) 92 was used to project the curved apical surface of the wing disc epithelium into the same plane . The local - z - projector generates a sur - face height - map based on a reference channel ( i . e . , Ecad or Phalloidin staining ) and other channels of interest were displayed in rela - tion to this surface height - map . Illustration of expression patterns Procreate ( Version 5 . 2 . 9 ) was used for illustration of cell surface receptor expression patterns ( Figure 2 ) . Characteristic points of refer - ence , such as hinge folds , A / P and D / V boundary , were used to transfer the expression domains manually into a wing disc template . The grading of ﬂuorescence intensity is based on overall impression of intensity across the wing disc and is presented as a subjective approximation . Bitmap tracing was done in Inkscape ( 0 . 92 . 4 ) to convert the areas of expression into vector graphics . IMAGE QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS To provide a measure for reproducibility and robustness , number of samples ( wing discs ) and experimental replicates are mentioned in the ﬁgure legends . An experimental replicate refers to an independent event for dissection and sample processing . From each larva , only one wing disc per larva was dissected and considered to be an independent sample for statistical analysis . Please note that several discs were visually analyzed for each experimental replicate . For all quantiﬁcations , control and experimental sam - ples were processed together and imaged in parallel , using the same confocal settings . For comparison of TRE - RFP and Dcp1 ﬂuo - rescence intensities in different bands around the clone , a repeated measured one - way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test was used . Kruskal - Wallis test with Dunnett’s multiple comparison test was used for comparison of changes in Robo2 - GFP in - tensities in aberrant clones . For other comparisons , a two tailed , unpaired t - test was performed . Images were processed in FIJI . 91 GraphPad Prism ( version 9 . 5 . 0 ) was used for statistical analysis and generation of graphs . Source data for our statistical analysis is provided in Data S1 , S2 , S3 , and S4 . Region of interest ( ROI ) segmentation and quantiﬁcation workﬂow ( ROI1 ) of total disc area : RFP or Phalloidin signal was thresholded and the ROI created by Convert to Mask , Fill Holes , and selection by the wand tool . ( ROI2 ) of clone area : clonal GFP signal was thresholded and ROIs were created by analyze particles = 10 m m - inﬁnity . For Dcp1 quantiﬁcation , the lower cutoff was 2 m m . ( ROI3 ) WT cells at interface : the Make Band , 4 m m command created a band around the ROI2 . ( ROI4 ) clonal cells not at the interface : the Enlarge , - 4 m m command applied on ROI2 created a ROI of the inner clone area . ( ROI5 ) Clonal cells at the interface : XOR of ROI2 and ROI4 . ( ROI6 ) WT area around the ROI3 : First , Make Band , 16 m m created a band around ROI2 . XOR of this band and ROI3 resulted in ROI6 . ll OPEN ACCESS e5 Current Biology 34 , 1 – 17 . e1 – e6 , March 11 , 2024 Please cite this article in press as : Fischer et al . , A mismatch in the expression of cell surface molecules induces tissue - intrinsic defense against aber - rant cells , Current Biology ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2024 . 01 . 053 Article Subsequent general procedures : by using the Combine command , several ROIs of a category , such as individual clones in ROI2 , were combined to one ROI and used for further analysis . Signal outside the wing disc was excluded by AND of ROI1 and other ROIs . ROIs of WT cells , such as ROI3 and ROI6 , might cover clonal area due to insufﬁcient spacing of clones . This was prevented , in example for ROI3 , by ﬁrst selecting OR of ROI3 and ROI2 , followed by XOR of that selection and ROI2 . After the disc segmentation into ROIs , the Measure command was applied . Workﬂow for quantiﬁcation of TRE - RFP intensity in UAS - eph - RNAi and UAS - GFP clones 7min HS at 37 (cid:2) C , 72 h AEL , reared at 25 (cid:2) C , dissected 72 h AHS . TRE - RFP signal was elevated by anti - RFP antibody staining . One lateral section was imaged and quantiﬁed . Area and mean intensity of TRE - RFP was measured in each ROI . For circularity , the shape of individual clones in ROI2 was measured . Workﬂow for quantiﬁcation of TRE - RFP intensity in UAS - robo2 - HA and UAS - GFP clones 8min HS at 37 (cid:2) C , 72 h AEL , reared at 25 (cid:2) C , dissected 48 h AHS . TRE - RFP signal with and without rat anti - RFP antibody was compared ( Figure S3 ) . One lateral section of native TRE - RFP was imaged and quantiﬁed . Area and mean intensity of TRE - RFP was measured in each ROI . For circularity , the shape of individual clones in ROI2 was measured . Workﬂow for quantiﬁcation of Dcp1 intensity in UAS - robo2 - HA and UAS - GFP clones 9min HS at 37 (cid:2) C , 72 h AEL , reared at 25 (cid:2) C , dissected 30 h AHS . In total , 4 confocal z - sections were quantiﬁed . As apoptotic cells are localized basally , imaging of the stack was started at the most basal position , moving towards the apical surface in 2 m m steps , re - sulting in the quantiﬁcation of basal and lateral sections . The above - described ROI segmentation and measurement of Dcp1 intensity was applied individually for each z - section in all ROIs . Eventually , the intensities of all four z - sections were averaged before doing the statistics . Workﬂow for quantiﬁcation of TRE - RFP and Dcp1 intensity in UAS - robo3 - HA and UAS - GFP clones 19min HS at 37 (cid:2) C , 72h AEL , reared at 25 (cid:2) C , dissected 48 h AHS . The workﬂow for the quantiﬁcation of Dcp1 was as described in DCP1 quantiﬁcation for UAS - robo2 - HA . TRE - RFP intensities were quantiﬁed for the second most apical slice of the z - stack . Workﬂow for quantiﬁcation of TRE - RFP intensities in the wing disc notum with UAS - robo2 - RNAi alone or with expression with UAS - robo3 - HA 13min HS at 37 (cid:2) C , 80h AEL , reared at 25 (cid:2) C , dissected 40h AHS . Of a z - stack , the z - position with best aerial coverage of the epithelial cells of the wing disc notum was selected . The anterior - notum area was manually converted into a ROI and TRE - RFP intensities were measured as mentioned before , but only within this ROI . Workﬂow for quantiﬁcation of Robo2 - GFP regulation in UAS - GFP , UAS - ey , UAS - tkv - RNAi , UAS - fkh clones Crosses : 10min HS at 37 (cid:2) C , 72 h AEL , reared at 25 (cid:2) C , dissected 44 h AHS . Confocal z - stack had a step size of 4 m m . Of those , 4 contiguous lateral z - sections beneath the peripodium were chosen for quantiﬁcation . First , the wing disc was manually separated into approximate pouch , hinge and notum areas by using the polygon selections in Fiji . For the pouch , a shape was drawn along the apical hinge - pouch fold . For the notum , the apical hinge - notum fold and wing disc outline was used . 93 The area between those two areas and the wing disc outline was used as hinge area . Then , the above - described ROI segmentation with measurement of Robo2 - GFP intensity in ROI3 and ROI5 was applied individually for each z - section . The results were then processed as follows . Individual clones were tracked through the z - stack by their centroids and the Similarity And Distance Indices function in Past4 , 94 re - sulting in up to 4 data points per clone . To avoid non genotype speciﬁc changes in Robo2 - GFP intensity due to cyst formation and consequent changes of the apical plane in clones , the data points were ﬁltered based on changes in actin levels . Data points from z - sections in which the clone had actin changes of > 20 % between ROI3 and ROI5 , while Robo2 - GFP intensity increased , were excluded . Vice versa , clones with actin changes of < - 20 % between ROI3 and ROI5 , while Robo2 - GFP intensity decreased , were excluded as well . Furthermore , small clones beneath 30 m m 2 were excluded , as well as clones which were only detected in one of the 4 z - sections . Eventually , the data point of a clone , which was used for further statistics , derived from the most apical z - section that fulﬁlled all those criteria . ll OPEN ACCESS Current Biology 34 , 1 – 17 . e1 – e6 , March 11 , 2024 e6 Please cite this article in press as : Fischer et al . , A mismatch in the expression of cell surface molecules induces tissue - intrinsic defense against aber - rant cells , Current Biology ( 2024 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2024 . 01 . 053 Article