Institutional Ecology , ' Translations ' and Boundary Objects : Amateurs and Professionals in Berkeley ' s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology , 1907 - 39 Author ( s ) : Susan Leigh Star and James R . Griesemer Source : Social Studies of Science , Vol . 19 , No . 3 ( Aug . , 1989 ) , pp . 387 - 420 Published by : Sage Publications , Ltd . Stable URL : http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 285080 Accessed : 02 - 01 - 2017 23 : 10 UTC REFERENCES Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article : http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 285080 ? seq = 1 & cid = pdf - reference # references _ tab _ contents You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references . JSTOR is a not - for - profit service that helps scholars , researchers , and students discover , use , and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive . We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship . For more information about JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use , available at http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Sage Publications , Ltd . is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize , preserve and extend access to Social Studies of Science This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms * ABSTRACT Scientific work is heterogeneous , requiring many different actors and viewpoints . It also requires cooperation . The two create tension between divergent viewpoints and the need for generalizable findings . We present a model of how one group of actors managed this tension . It draws on the work of amateurs , professionals , administrators and others connected to the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology at the University of California , Berkeley , during its early years . Extending the Latour - Callon model of interessement , two major activities are central for translating between viewpoints : standardization of methods , and the development of ' boundary objects ' . Boundary objects are both adaptable to different viewpoints and robust enough to maintain identity across them . We distinguish four types of boundary objects : repositories , ideal types , coincident boundaries and standardized forms . Institutional Ecology , ' Translations ' and Boundary Objects : Amateurs and Professionals in Berkeley ' s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology , 1907 - 39 Susan Leigh Star and James R . Griesemer Most scientific work is conducted by extremely diverse groups of actors - researchers from different disciplines , amateurs and professionals , humans and animals , functionaries and visionaries . Simply put , scientific work is heterogeneous . At the same time , science requires cooperation - to create common understandings , to ensure reliability across domains and to gather information which retains its integrity across time , space and local contingencies . This creates a ' central tension ' in science between divergent viewpoints and the need for generalizable findings . In this paper we examine the development of a natural history research museum as a case in which both heterogeneity and cooperation are central issues for participants . We develop an analytical framework for interpreting our historical material , one which can be applied to studies similarly focused on scientific work in complex institutional settings . Social Studies of Science ( SAGE , London , Newbury Park and New Delhi ) , Vol . 19 ( 1989 ) , 387 - 420 This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 388 Social Studies of Science The plan of the paper is as follows . First we consider the ramifications of the heterogeneity of scientific work and the need for cooperation among participants for the nature of translation among social worlds . We suggest modifications of the interessement model of Latour , Callon and Law . We urge a more ecological approach and develop the concept of boundary objects to analyze a case study of a research natural history museum . We discuss the history of the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology at the University of California , Berkeley , and describe conceptions of it by participants from several distinct social worlds , including those of professional scientists , amateur naturalists , patrons , hired hands and administrators . Our discussion is meant to be suggestive rather than conclusive at this stage , outlining an approach to case studies as well as providing a partial analysis of the case at hand . We conclude with further discussion of boundary objects and the allied issue of methods standardization . The Problem of Common Representation in Diverse Intersecting Social Worlds Common myths characterize scientific cooperation as deriving from a consensus imposed by nature . But if we examine the actual work organization of scientific enterprises , we find no such consensus . Instead , we find that scientific work neither loses its internal diversity nor is consequently retarded by lack of consensus . Consensus is not necessary for cooperation nor for the successful conduct of work . This fundamental sociological finding holds in science no less than in any other kind of work . ' However , scientific actors themselves face many problems in trying to ensure integrity of information in the presence of such diversity . One way of describing this process is to say that the actors trying to solve scientific problems come from different social worlds and establish a mutual modus operandi . 2 A university administrator in charge of grants and contracts , for example , answers to a different set of audiences and pursues a different set of tasks , than does an amateur field naturalist collecting specimens for a natural history museum . When the worlds of these actors intersect a difficulty appears . The creation of new scientific knowledge depends on communication as well as on creating new findings . But because these new objects and methods mean different things in different worlds , actors are faced with the task of reconciling these meanings if they wish to cooperate . This reconcilia - tion requires substantial labour on everyone ' s part . Scientists and other This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Star & Griesemer : ' Translations ' & Boundary Objects 389 actors contributing to science translate , negotiate , debate , triangulate and simplify in order to work together . The problem of translation as described by Latour , Callon and Law is central to the kind of reconciliation described in this paper . 3 In order to create scientific authority , entrepreneurs gradually enlist participants ( or in Latour ' s word , ' allies ' ) from a range of locations , re - interpret their concerns to fit their own programmatic goals and then establish themselves as gatekeepers ( in Law ' s terms , as ' obligatory points of passage ' ) . 4 This authority may be either substantive or methodological . Latour and Callon have called this process interessement , to indicate the translation of the concerns of the non - scientist into those of the scientist . Yet , a central feature of this situation is that entrepreneurs from more than one social world are trying to conduct such translations simul - taneously . It is not just a case of interessement from non - scientist to scientist . Unless they use coercion , each translator must maintain the integrity of the interests of the other audiences in order to retain them as allies . Yet this must be done in such a way as to increase the centrality and importance of that entrepreneur ' s work . The n - way nature of the interessement ( or let us say , the challenge intersecting social worlds pose to the coherence of translations ) cannot be understood from a single viewpoint . Rather , it requires an ecological analysis of the sort intended in Hughes ' description of the ecology of institutions : In some measure an institution chooses its environment . This is one of the functions of the institution as enterprise . Someone inside the institution acts as an entrepreneur . . . one of the things the enterprising element must do is choose within the possible limits the environment to which the institution will react , that is , in many cases , the sources of its funds , the sources of its clientele ( whether they be clients who will buy shoes , education or medicine ) , and the sources of its personnel of various grades and kinds . This is an ecology of institutions in the original sense of that term . 5 An advantage of the ecological analysis is that it does not presuppose an epistemological primacy for any one viewpoint ; the viewpoint of the amateurs is not inherently better or worse than that of the professionals , for instance . We are persuaded by Latour that the important questions concern the flow of objects and concepts through the network of par - ticipating allies and social worlds . The ecological viewpoint is anti - reductionist in that the unit of analysis is the whole enterprise , not simply the point of view of the university administration or of the professional scientist . It does , however , entail understanding the processes of manage - ment across worlds : crafting , diplomacy , the choice of clientele and This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 390 Social Studies of Science personnel . Our approach thus differs frorn the Callon - Latour - Law model of translations and interessement in several ways . First , their model can be seen as a kind of ' funnelling ' - reframing or mediating the concerns of several actors into a narrower passage point ( see Figure 1 ) . The story in this case is necessarily told from the point of view of one passage point - usually the manager , entrepreneur , or scientist . The analysis we propose here still contains a managerial bias , in that the stories of the museum director and sponsor are much more fully fleshed out than those of the amateur collectors or other players . But it is a many - to - many mapping , where several obligatory points of passage are negotiated with several kinds of allies , including manager - to - manager types ( see Figure 2 ) . FIGURE 1 Alliance translation Obligatory Passage Point Allies Allies Allies Allies FIGURE 2 Coherence / Boundary Objects . translations Passage Point Passage Point Passage Point < - translations Allies Allies Allies Allies The coherence of sets of translations depends on the extent to which entrepreneurial efforts from multiple worlds can coexist , whatever the nature of the processes which produce them . Translation here is indeter - minate , in a way analogous to Quine ' s philosophical dictum about language . 6 That is , there is an indefinite number of ways entrepreneurs from each cooperating social world may make their own work an obliga - tory point of passage for the whole network of participants . There is , therefore , an indeterminate number of coherent sets of translations . The problem for all the actors in a network , including scientific entrepreneurs , This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Star & Griesemer : ' Translations ' & Boundary Objects 391 is to ( temporarily ) reduce their local uncertainty without risking a loss of cooperation from allies . Once the process has established an obligatory point of passage , the job then becomes to defend it against other translations threatening to displace it . Our interest in problems of coherence and cooperation in science has been shaped , in part , by trying to understand the historical development of a particular type of institution : natural history research museums . Museums of natural history originally arose when private collectors in the 17th century opened their cabinets of curiosities to public view . The display of wealth , polite learning and emulation of the aristocracy , as well as development of reference collections for physicians and apothecaries , were common motives for making cabinets . Many such cabinets were arranged to display , and evoke wonder at , the variety and plenitude of nature or to represent the universe in microcosm . Such museums , in other words , developed as part of popular culture . 7 In the nineteenth century , many new museums were developed by amateur naturalists , rather than by members of the ' general public ' , through their participation in societies for the amateur naturalist . These societies filled an important role in the development of the museum - based science to come . 8 The museum we studied , the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology ( MVZ ) at the University of California , Berkeley , is important as an example of a museum devoted to scientific researCh from its inception , aided by the alliance of an amateur naturalist / patron and an early West Coast professional scien - tist . The MVZ did not take on scientific research as an adjunct to public instruction or popular edification as had many eastern museums ; if anything , the reverse is true . ( A symbol of this tradition of research is the evident pride with which current museum staff draw attention to an advertisement on the front door stating that there are ' NO PUBLIC EXHIBITS ' . ) As such , the development of the research natural history museum represents an important stage in the professionalization of natural history work , as well as an example of the changing relationship between amateurs and professionals after the professionalization of biology in America had already begun . Unlike many well documented cases of eastern institutions which looked to the European scientific community as a model and for legitimation , western biologists had to struggle to gain credibility in the eyes of the already professionalizing biological community in the eastern US itself . Successful pursuit of the research problems through which the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology ' s scientists hoped to gain recognition depended on an evolving set of practices instituted to manage the particular sort of work occasioned by the intersection of the professional , amateur , This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 392 Social Studies of Science lay and academic worlds . 9 There , several groups of actors - amateurs , professionals , animals , bureaucrats and ' mercenaries ' - succeeded in crafting a coherent problem - solving enterprise , surviving multiple translations . Joseph Grinnell was the first director of the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology . He worked on problems of speciation , migration and the role of the environment in Darwinian evolution . Grinnell ' s research required the labours of ( among others ) university administrators , professors , research scientists , curators , amateur collectors , private sponsors and patrons , occasional field hands , government officials and members of scientific clubs . Some objects of interest to all these social worlds included : * species and subspecies of mammals and birds * the terrain of the state of California * physical factors in California ' s environment ( such as temperature , rainfall and humidity ) * the habitats of collected animal species Methods Standardization and Boundary Objects It is normally the case that the objects of scientific inquiry inhabit multiple social worlds , since all science requires intersectional work . Varying degrees of coherence obtain both at different stages of the enterprise and from different points of view in the enterprise . However , one thing is clear . Because of the heterogeneous character of scientific work and its requirement for cooperation , the management of this diversity cannot be achieved via a simple pluralism or a laissez - faire solution . The fact that the objects originate in , and continue to inhabit , different worlds reflects the fundamental tension of science : how can findings which incorporate radically different meanings become coherent ? In analyzing our case study , we see two major factors contributing to the success of the museum : methods standardization and the develop - ment of boundary objects . Grinnell ' s managerial decisions about the best way to translate the interests of all these disparate worlds not only shaped the character of the institution he built , but also the content of his scientific claims . 10 His elaborate collection and curation guidelines established a management system in which diverse allies could participate concurrently in the heterogeneous work of building a research museum . It was a lasting legacy . Grinnell ' s methods are looked upon as quaint and overly fastidious This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Star & Griesemer : ' Translations ' & Boundary Objects 393 by current generations of museum workers , 11 but they are still taught and practised at the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology . ( They were also adopted by several other museums around the United States during the first part of this century . 12 ) For example , his course handouts for 191313 are similar to current field manuals for students in Zoology 107 at Berkeley . 14 There was an intimate connection between the management of scientific work as exemplified by these precise standards of collection , duration and description , and the content of the scientific claims made by Grinnell and others at the museum . The second important concept used to explain how museum workers managed both diversity and cooperation is that of boundary objects . This is an analytic concept of those scientific objects which both inhabit several intersecting social worlds ( see the list of examples in the previous section ) and satisfy the informational requirements of each of them . ' 5 Boundary objects are objects which are both plastic enough to adapt to local needs and the constraints of the several parties employing them , yet robust enough to maintain a common identity across sites . They are weakly structured in common use , and become strongly structured in individual - site use . These objects may be abstract or concrete . 16 They have dif - ferent meanings in different social worlds but their structure is common enough to more than one world to make them recognizable , a means of translation . The creation and management of boundary objects is a key process in developing and maintaining coherence across intersecting social worlds . In the next section , we provide some background to the museum ' s evolution , then turn to a discussion of both methods standardization and boundary objects . Grinnell and the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology , 1907 - 39 The biological sciences in America were undergoing a number of transi - tions during this period . The educational and cultural functions of natural history were being subsumed under the research goals of scientists . Biological research was increasingly conducted in academic institutions such as universities and specialized research stations rather than in societies formed by amateurs . Professional biologists sought international credibility by distinguishing themselves from amateurs , establishing advanced degrees as credentials , establishing specialized journals for the dissemination of results and by increasingly eschewing the public ' s eclectic interests in science . For organism - based subdisciplines ( for This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 394 Social Studies of Science example , ornithology , mammology , herpetology ) , the central transition was a shift from studies of classification and morphology to studies of process and function . With this change of focus , methods and practices diversified . From mostly observational and comparative approaches , biological methods came to include experimental , manipulative and quantitative techniques and natural history methods were refined so as to focus on increasingly specialized research problems . ' 7 At the same time , a number of ' inventorying ' efforts of the federal government were coming to fruition in reports of collecting and surveying trips to the west . The Bureau of the Biological Survey , founded in 1905 as an arm of the US Department of Agriculture , for example , made a massive effort to chart the flora and fauna of the states and territories . As the nineteenth century closed , these reports were used by their authors and others to go far beyond mere catalogues of materials . Their data were used , for example , to begin to develop general biogeographic principles of animal and plant distribution , most notably that of C . Hart Merriam , later an important influence on the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology workers . ' 8 The participation of ecology in these changes meant both distinguishing itself from its basis in descriptive natural history and adopting new methods . On the one hand , ecologists adopted a set of problems originating in evolutionary theory ( adaptation , natural selection ) , geography ( distribu - tion and abundance ) and physiology ( effects of physical factors such as heat , light , soil and humidity on life - history ) . On the other , they learned new methods of quantification and analysis and the use of biological indicators . 19 Ecology emerged from the last century as a subdiscipline distinct from systematics , morphology and genetics . Ecologists are concerned with ( 1 ) the bases for adaptation , ( 2 ) extending physiology to consider the dynamics of interacting groups of organisms and ( 3 ) the quantification of the physical ( physiographic ) environment as it affects the life - histories of organisms . New theoretical work was beginning to emerge which distinguished ecology as well . 20 Joseph Grinnell ( 1877 - 1939 ) extended his work in natural history to include ecological problems during this period of disciplinary shift . He studied at Stanford University under the tutelage of Charles H . Gilbert and David Starr Jordan . 21 At the turn of the century Stanford naturalists were bringing together problems of habitat and distribution along with evolutionary theory to form an emerging geographical conception of speciation . This merger was to become of central concern to evolutionists and ecologists alike later in this century . 22 This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Star & Griesemer : ' Translations ' & Boundary Objects 395 Alexander and Grinnell The Museum of Vertebrate Zoology was founded at Berkeley in 1908 by Annie Montague Alexander ( 1867 - 1950 ) Alexander was heir to a Hawaiian shipping and sugar fortune and a dedicated amateur natural - ist . 23 Inspired by paleontology courses she took at Berkeley and by safari experience with her father in Africa , Alexander decided to build a museum of natural history . As her first director , she chose Grinnell , at that time an instructor at Throop Polytechnic Institute in Pasadena ( later to become CalTech ) . Grinnell had been an enthusiastic and dedicated bird and mammal collector since his boyhood in Indian Territory . His father was a physician who worked with American Indians and he grew up with Oglala Sioux Indian playmates . 24 He was a founding member of the Cooper Ornitho - logical Club , a major western bird - watching and ornithological associa - tion . ( Their bulletin would later become the journal The Condor , edited by Grinnell for many years . ) When Alexander first met Grinnell in 1907 , he had already made significant theoretical contributions and was an established scientist . 25 David Starr Jordan , for example , included him in a survey of zoologists supporting his ' general law of distribution ' , discussed in his famous 1905 paper . 26 Grinnell became the founding director of the Museum in 1908 . In 1913 , he finished his Stanford PhD and was appointed to the Berkeley Zoology Department . 27 Beginning with Grinnell ' s and Alexander ' s own collecting efforts , the museum developed into an important repository of regional specimens of vertebrates . Alexander ' s contributions alone came to over 20 , 000 specimens . 28 As part of this work , Grinnell and his staff codified a precise set of procedures for collecting and curating specimens . 29 Many of Grinnell ' s descriptive monographs on the systematics , geography and ecology of birds and mammals are still used today as important reference works . Grinnell also contributed important concepts to the literature on geographic distribution , ecology and evolution . He extended C . Hart Merriam ' s life - zone concept to a hierarchical classification system for environments , and developed an important and influential concept of the ' niche ' . He argued for trinomialism in systematics as essential to studies of speciation . He also worked toward a ' two layer ' theory of evolution which incorporated evolution of the environment as part of an explanation for natural selection . 30 This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 396 Social Studies of Science Different Social Worlds and their Perspectives We have been talking so far about the goals and interests of only a few of the people essential for the museum ' s success as a going concern . The work at the museum , like that of scientific establishments every - where , encompassed a range of very different visions stemming from the intersection of participating social worlds . Among these were amateur naturalists , professional biologists , the general public , philanthropists , conservationists , university administrators , preparators and taxidermists , and even the animals which became the research specimens . 3 ' It is not possible to consider all these visions equally in this essay , so we are forced to consider most fully those of the entrepreneurs like Grinnell and Alexander . However , by considering the work of Grinnell and Alexander as a part of a network which spans a number of inter - secting social worlds , we can begin the task of tracing the network into those other social worlds . An adequate account of n - way translation in this case awaits the results of tracing our way out and back again . It also requires conducting such tracings from a variety of starting points ( that is , including some starting points which would be considered ' peripheral ' or ' subsidiary ' on a one - way translation model , such as the work of commercial specimen houses or taxidermists ) . Only with tracings from multiple starting points can we begin to test the robustness of the network . The more limited work discussed in this paper is , in part , conditioned by the historical record - for us as scholars , scientific publications are the boundary objects which are also obligatory passage points ! Records concerning the entrepreneurs who served as administrators of the museum are kept in the central archives of the university which housed the museum . Records concerning the many other elements of the network of such amateur collectors who contributed specimens to the museum and articles to naturalist society newsletters are not equally centralized . Nevertheless , it is important not to mistake the search heuristic of starting with the centralized records for a theoretical model of the structure of the network itself . In the following section we adumbrate the central features of several visions of the museum and its work . Grinnell ' s Vision One of Grinnell ' s passions was the elaboration of Darwinian theory which was to be derived from the work of the museum . Darwin had argued that This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Star & Griesemer : ' Translations ' & Boundary Objects 397 natural selection is the chief mechanism by which organisms adapt , but had said little about the precise nature of the environmental forces of change . Grinnell wanted to extend the Darwinian picture by developing a theory of the evolution of the environment as the driving force behind natural selection . 32 Sadly , Grinnell died before he was able to express his views on evolution and speciation in a major theoretical monograph . ( Some of his more important views are excerpted in a book posthumously produced by his students . 33 ) . While in the field , he did outline such a volume and his research programme is perhaps best characterized by its title , Geography and Evolution . Grinnell ' s overarching theoretical concern was to bring the study of both physical and biotic environmental factors to bear on the problems of evolution . The chapter titles of his book outline serve to summarize the topics to which Grinnell had devoted his career . He felt that their synthesis would have fulfilled his theoretical programmatic : 1 . The concept of distributional limitation ; chronological versus spatial conditions . 2 . The nature of barriers ; examples of different sorts of barriers in mammals and birds . 3 . Distributional areas defined : realms , life - zones , faunal areas , association ; the ecologic niche . 4 . Bird migration as a phase of geographic distribution . 5 . Kinds of isolation ; degrees of isolation as influencing results ; the significance of geographic variation . 6 . ' Plasticity ' versus ' conservatism ' in different groups of birds and mammals . 7 . The pocket gophers and the song sparrows of California . 8 . Reconcilability of geographic concept with that of genetics ; species and subspecies in nature defined . 9 . ' Orthogenesis ' from the standpoint of geographic variation . 10 . The bearing of geography and evolution upon human problems . 34 From these titles , it is clear that Grinnell ' s approach to questions of evolution differed radically from , say , those of experimental genetics . His natural world was a large - scale , topographical one ; his units of analysis and selection were subspecies and species , habitats and niches . This vision required vast amounts of highly detailed data about flora , fauna and aspects of the environment . He needed a small army of assistants to collect these data . Prior to the establishment of the museum , Grinnell and Alexander exchanged many letters in which they expressed their hopes and visions This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 398 Social Studies of Science for its future . In one of these letters Grinnell stated his scientific and political goals : First , as regards the working up of the Alaska mammals , it seems to me it should be done as far as possible by our own men . We want to establish a center of authority on this coast . I take it that was one purpose you had in mind founding the institution . I will grant that it would take our man , whoever he may be , longer to work up the paper , than the BS [ Biological Survey ] people . But in the former case we would be ever so much the stronger and better able to tackle the next problem . . I believe in buying desirable material where definitely in hand and subject to selection and inspection . I have more faith , however , in the salaried field man who turns in everything he finds . 35 Grinnell was clearly concerned to ensure that the materials collected by others met his scientific requirements . The odd specimen collected from here or there might serve as backup for work in taxonomy , but collection for ecological and evolutionary purposes required more thorough documentation . This included documenting the presence of groups of animal species in a particular place at the same time of day and season of the year . It also required comparisons of samples over time - hence Grinnell ' s preference for the salaried field man . In other words , conducting scientific research on problems in ecology and evolu - tion in a museum setting required more than just a change of interests and training on the part of the scientific staff ; it also required changes in basic collecting and curating procedures . Moreover , Grinnell clearly had an institutional goal as well as a research goal and that was to build a centre of authority . One means of doing this would be to build collec - tions of scientific value which are not easily duplicated elsewhere , or which are tailored to particular research problems not well served by collections elsewhere . Grinnell focused his collecting efforts on the American west , a place distinguished from the east by its great geo - graphical diversity , and asked scientific questions which could only be answered by careful consideration of such geographically - based organic diversity on a finer scale than is available in museums pursuing world - wide collections . Grinnell needed accurate information in the form of carefully preserved animal specimens and documented native habitats over tens or hundreds of years . This placed constraints on the museum ' s physical organiza - tion . 36 In an essay titled ' The Museum Conscience ' , Grinnell argued that the order and accuracy are the chief aims of the curator ( once the specimens are safely preserved ) . On the subject of order , he wrote that , This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Star & Griesemer : ' Translations ' & Boundary Objects 399 To secure a really practicable scheme of arrangement [ of specimens , card indexes and data on specimen labels ] takes the best thought and much experimentation on the part of the keenest museum curator . Once he has selected or devised his scheme , his work is not done , moreover , until this scheme is in operation through all the materials in his charge . Any fact , specimen , or record left out of order is lost . It had , perhaps , better not exist , for it is taking space somewhere ; and space is the chief cost initially and currently in any museum . 37 On the second aim , accuracy , Grinnell continued , The second essential in the care of scientific materials is accuracy . Every item on the label of each specimen , every item of the general record in the accession catalog , must be precise as to fact . Many errors in published literature , now practically impossible to ' head off ' , are traceable to mistakes on labels . Label - writing having to do with scientific materials is not a chore to be handed over casually to ' 25 - cent - an - hour ' girl , or even to the ordinary clerk . To do this essential work correctly requires an excep - tional genius plus training . . . By no means any person that happens to be around is capable of doing such work with reliable results . 38 Grinnell ' s vision of environmental evolution reinforced his conception of collection and curation . 39 He designed the museum so that sampling from restricted locations over long periods of time would capture evolu - tion in progress as environments changed . Fulfillment of Grinnell ' s theoretical vision required that specimens and field notes collected over many years be painstakingly curated . In this fashion comparisons of materials could be made by scientists who would come to work for the museum after Grinnell himself was long gone . This concern was not unique to Grinnell or his museum , 40 but Grinnell was a master at articulating both the ' museum conscience ' , as he called it , and his scientific goals . 4 ' That is , both preservation for posterity and hot new theoretical findings must be protected . Grinnell , too , had a sense of urgency about ' preserving California ' . Whereas the Smithsonian Institution in Washington and the American Museum in New York had the entire world ' s natural species for their purview , Alexander , Grinnell and their associates limited themselves to Californian birds and mammals and , later , reptiles and amphibians . 42 As he wrote to Alexander in the early years of the museum : . . . there is nothing attractive about collecting in a settled - up , level country . But it ought to be done , and the longer we wait , the fewer ' waste lots ' there will be in which to trap for native mammals . . 43 Again in May of the same year , Grinnell wrote , This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 400 Social Studies of Science It would surely be a fine thing if we could acquire a collection of fresh - water ducks , geese , waders , etc . All the species , with the possible exception of killdeer and herons , are decreasing in numbers rapidly , and it is at least certain that specimens will never be obtainable to better advantage than now . All thru [ sic ] San Joaquin Valley , many of the former marshy areas are not ditched or diked ; and the great fields , where geese grazed , are being cut up into farms . However , to Grinnell , the important feature of preservation was recording information . The important preserved objects were ecological facts , not mere specimens used to educate the public about a vanishing wilderness . 45 Indeed , shortly after its founding , the museum decided not to pursue displays of its objects at all . Nevertheless , it was essential to Grinnell ' s success as a research scientist that he continue to attract Alexander ' s patronage . Grinnell shaped research problems which were suited to work in the region which Alexander wished to document in the form of collections . By seeking to establish a centre of authority for problems well - served by this regional focus , Grinnell simultaneously shaped his research goals and increased the value of Alexander ' s continued support - not only would she be preserving a sample of California ' s native fauna for posterity , she would be contributing to the establishment of a research centre . Alexander ' s Vision Annie Alexander , too , saw the flora and fauna of California disappearing under the advance of civilization . She felt that it should be meticulously preserved and recorded . 46 As a passionate and single - minded patron of science , Alexander contributed funds and oversight sufficient virtually to control the museum as an autonomous organization on the Berkeley campus . She intended her museum to serve as a demonstration project to the public about what could be done in conservation and zoological research . 47 As a rich , unmarried woman , Alexander had a degree of autonomy unusual for women during this period . Alexander ' s trips were primitive by comparison with the ' ladylike ' expeditions to Africa made by aristo - cratic women in a somewhat earlier time . Her scrapbooks and the museum archives contain pictures of her camping out , toting rifles and scaling mountains . She was an indefatigable amateur collector . Along with her lifelong companion and partner , Louise Kellogg , she conducted many expeditions to gather specimens for the MVZ , the Museum of Paleontology and the Herbarium . This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Star & Griesemer : ' Translations ' & Boundary Objects 401 In addition to collecting , Alexander served the museum in other capacities . She was its primary patron , funding the museum building , staff salaries , specimen and equipment purchases and expeditions . She was as well a day - to - day administrator who approved expenditures in minute detail , including operating expenses and budget reports , hiring and firing personnel , reviewing productivity of the staff and approving the nature and location of their expeditions ( Grinnell , for example , reported to her and sought her advance approval of expeditions ) . In none of these roles was Alexander a theoretical scientist . While she read some evolutionary theory , her primary ' take ' on the job of the museum came from her commitments to conservation and educational philanthropy . The museum was a way of preserving a vanishing nature , of making a record of that which was disappearing under the advance of civilization . For her , as for many social elites of the period , natural history was both a passionate hobby and a civic duty . The Collector ' s Vision In addition to its museums , California was imbued with a particularly vigorous conservation and nature - loving amateur constituency . John Muir and the Sierra Club , the Cooper Ornithological Club , the Society of Western Naturalists and the Save the Redwoods League , among other organizations , all brought amateurs and academics together for purposes of collecting and conservation . Amateur collectors wanted to play a role in the scholarly pursuit of knowledge by professional scientists . They sought legitimacy for their conservation efforts . They shared with both Alexander and Grinnell the sentiment that what was unique to California and the west should be described , preserved and made available to the public . 48 The intrinsic beauty of nature should be shared and protected . The expeditions themselves were at once opportunities for peaceful observation and enjoyment of the natural world and a battle of wits between collectors on the one hand and recalcitrant animals and environments on the other . How does one persuade a reluctant and clever animal to participate in science ? For the natural historian , there is a delicate balance between capturing an animal at all costs , and capturing an animal with the integrity of its valuable information unassailed . The animals must be brought in physically intact ; their habitats must be detailed so that the specimen has scientific meaning . ( ' Without a label ' , says one zoologist friend , ' a specimen is just dead meat ' . ) The animals , as mentioned above , must be This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 402 Social Studies of Science caught quickly , before the larger ecological balances change and they adapt to new conditions . In order to measure changes , Grinnell and other theorists also needed baseline data from which to proceed . Animals within the museum present another kind of recalcitrance : they must be preserved against decay . The littlest allies , the dermestid beetles which clean the captured specimens so that skeletons can be used for research , are often the most difficult to discipline ! They escape their bounds , eat specimens they should not and eat parts of specimens that are needed for other work . Such allies are coaxed and managed through containment and a certain amount of brute force . A typical example of the struggles with recalcitrant animal allies may be found in Louise Kellogg ' s field notebook from an expedition in 191 1 : March 20 . We left the house at six and went to the Stop Thief traps first . Both had been robbed of their bait and the tracks of two animals , probably a civet and a coon were visible - in the one place the creature had reached through the trap and taken the bait without springing it and in the other had pushed aside a rock and got the bait out from above but in the scuffle the bait was caught in the trap and was found lying on one side partially eaten . I caught two microtus out of 21 traps set in the grass . The bait was eaten from two sets of dipodomys and the others were untouched . 49 The Trappers ' Vision In fulfilling their interests in natural history and collecting , the amateur collector was often on the front line , making contact with a host of other social worlds . These included farmers and townspeople on or near whose land the collectors searched for specimens , and trappers and traders who could provide them with specimens that were rare or difficult to capture . These people were often invaluable sources of information and other sorts of help ( food , camping places ) - sometimes for a price . Many of the backwoods trappers being ' interessed ' by the amateur collectors or the museum workers had little or no interest in either conservation or science as such . Their coin of exchange was money , information about hunting , or possibly the exchange of a less scientifically interesting but edible specimen for one valued by the collectors . Friction between viewpoints here was smoothed by such exchanges . For example , Alexander described a set of problems with a recalcitrant trapper who wanted to sell skins to the museum : You will notice that two of the skulls are broken . It seems next to impossible to persuade a trapper to kill an animal without whacking him on the head . The bob cat is in rather This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Star & Griesemer : ' Translations ' & Boundary Objects 403 a sorry plight that has a history . I am holding on to Knowles [ a trapper ] a little longer in the hope that he may get a panther and some coyotes . He has dogs with him . He set the no . 3 traps but the coyotes as he expressed it ' did not throw them ' although they walked all over them . He will have to set them finer . Knowles is about as good as the ordinary run of trappers who can ' t see anything in a skin except its commercial value - and the little extra care in skinning that we demand frets them . 50 The University Administration ' s Vision Another important participant in the museum enterprise was the university administration . Their vision of natural history and California was different yet again from that of the staff of the museum and the amateur collectors . The University of California during this period was trying to become a legitimate , national - class university , and was also trying to begin seriously to compete with the eastern universities for scientific resources and prestige . It was at the same time clearly a local school , a pet charity for many of the San Francisco Bay Area elite , and a training ground for local doctors , lawyers , industrialists and agriculturalists . The university was willing to accommodate a natural history museum as long as Alexander was willing to fund it . The administration accepted Alexander ' s funding of the museum as part of this vision , measuring the museum ' s contribution to this goal by its own criteria : level of funding and prestige returned to the university as a whole . They had similar arrangements with local philanthropists Phoebe Hearst and Jane Sather for charitable research or library endeavours on campus . In turn , Alexander enjoyed an administrative power almost unheard of for single individuals at major universities today . She hired and fired museum staff , chose expedition sites and managed administrative liaison with the Regents of the university . The different visions and economic values of participating worlds is clear from the sometimes stormy correspondence between Alexander and the Regents and university administration over autonomy for the museum . Here , Grinnell responds to Alexander ' s chagrin about the university president ' s vision of the museum in monetary terms : I think the letter from President Wheeler is fine . You must consider his limitations ( and those of the Regents ) in forming any conception of the methods and aims of such an institution as the Museum . It seems nothing more than natural that these men should measure your work for the University in terms of the dollars involved . Money is the common standard , and , too , it is the money that makes the major part of our work possible . You deserve all the credit expressed , and more , on this score alone . It is nothing to be ashamed of , or to resent , if their appreciation seems to be prompted only by This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 404 Social Studies of Science a recognition of the money cost of the Museum . They don ' t know any better , and the intrinsic value of the Museum and your work for it remain the same . 51 The museum was administratively separate from the department of zoology . It was publicly active in natural history circles and it was the home for meetings of local natural history clubs such as the Cooper Club and the Society of Western Naturalists . In this sense it helped meet the university ' s goal of being a local cultural centre . Analysis of Methods Standardization and Boundary Objects The worlds listed above have both commonalities and differences . To meet the scientific goals of the museum , the trick of translation required two things : first , developing , teaching and enforcing a clear set of methods to ' discipline ' the information obtained by collectors , trappers and other non - scientists ; and generating a series of boundary objects which would maximize both the autonomy and communication between worlds . Different social worlds maintained a good deal of autonomy in parallel work situations . Only those parts of the work essential to maintaining coherent information were pooled in the intersection of information ; the others were left alone . Participants developed extremely flexible , heterogeneous economies of information and materials , in which needed objects could be bartered , traded and bought or sold . Such economies maximized the autonomy of work considerations in inter - secting worlds while ensuring ' trade ' across world boundaries . From a purely logical point of view , problems posed by conflicting views could be managed in a variety of ways : * via a ' lowest common denominator ' which satisfies the minimal demands of each world by capturing properties that fall within the minimum acceptable range of all concerned worlds ; or * via the use of versatile , plastic , reconfigurable ( programmable ) objects that each world can mould to its purposes locally ; or * via storing a complex of objects from which things necessary for each world can be physically extracted and configured for local purposes , as from a library ; or * each participating world can abstract or simplify the object to suit its demands ; that is , ' extraneous ' properties can be deleted or ignored ; or * work in the worlds can proceed in parallel except for limited exchanges of standardized sorts ; or * work can be staged so that stages are relatively autonomous . This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Star & Griesemer : ' Translations ' & Boundary Objects 405 The strategies of the different participants in the museum world share several of these attributes ; below , we focus on two major varieties . Methods and Collectors What do you think of the system ? It seems complex at first reading . But it means detailed , exact and easily get - at - able records . And the better the records the more valuable the specimens . 52 Specimens are preserved in a highly standardized way , so that specific information can be recovered later on when the specimen is stored in a museum . For example , it makes a great deal of difference to ease of measurement , handling and storage whether the limbs are ' frozen ' at the sides of the body or outstretched , straight or bent . Colour of pelage , scales , and so on , are usually not preservable , and colour photographs or accurate notes may be the only feasible solution to this preservation problem . Whether soft parts ( internal organs and fatty tissues ) are preserved depends on the availability of techniques , the conventions for preserving external structures and the parts commonly studied . If precise measurements of long bones are desired , for example , the animal must usually be taken apart to expose them . 53 For geographical distribution work , and more especially for the ecological problem of inferring environmental factors limiting species ' ranges from distributional data , the taxa to which specimens belong must be linked to a geographical location and to each other . The objects of interest are collections of taxa represented in a particular geographical location . Study of the factors responsible for presence or absence of particular taxa from a local area proceeds according to a method outlined by Grinnell and his colleagues : In practice , the method used in this survey to get at the causes for differential occurrence as observed was , first , to consider the observed actual instances of restriction of individuals of each kind of animal ; and second , to compare all the records of occurrence with what we know in various respects of the portion of the section inhabited , this is an attempt to detect parallels between the extent of presence of the animal and of some appreciable environmental feature or set of features . 54 Thus , it is necessary to translate specimens into ecological units via a set of field notes . This creates a tension or potential incoherence between collectors and theorists . Let us examine the process of preservation of information . Once faunas are represented as lists of species ( and This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 406 Social Studies of Science subspecies ) linked to a location , their distributional limits are established in terms of the overlapping ranges of their member taxa ( or a subset of indicator species ) . These collections must in turn be linked to a dis - tribution of potentially responsible environmental factors . Hence , in addition to the translation work of creating abstract objects ( lists of species , lists of factors ) from concrete , conventionalized ones ( locations , specimens , field notes ) , a series of increasingly abstract maps must be created which link these objects together . Reports of field work begin with an itinerary and often a topographical map of the region explored . Taxa represented by specimens can be plotted on these maps , and if they also serve as indicators of life - zones , faunas or associations , an ecological map of these units can be constructed . In parallel , maps of environmental factor isoclines ( quantitatively or qualitatively expressed ) can be constructed from field notes and geo - graphic maps . Then the environmental factors maps can be superimposed on the maps of ecological units , and the strongest concordances used to rank environmental factors as delimiters of species distributions . 55 The specimens per se are not the primary objects of ecological study - the check - lists of taxa represented in a local area are . These check - lists are then mapped into ecological units ( geographically identified groups of species and subspecies ) by finding subsets of the check - list which are limited to a geographical subarea . A map is constructed in terms of ranges of the ecological units set by the species ranges ( within the geographical area studied ) of species taken to be indicators for the zones . Grinnell and Alexander were able to mobilize a network of collectors , cooperating scientists and administrators to ensure the integrity of the information they collected for archiving and research purposes . The precise set of standardized methods for labelling and collecting played a critical part in their success . These methods were both stringent and simple - they could be learned by amateurs who might have little understanding of taxonomic , ecological or evolutionary theory . They thus did not require an education in professional biology to understand or to execute . At the same time , they rendered the information collected by amateurs amenable to analysis by professionals . The professional biologists convinced the amateur collectors , for the most part , to adhere to these conventions - for example , to clearly specify the habitat and time of capture of a specimen in a standard format notebook . Grinnell ' s insistence on , and success with , standardized methods of collecting , preserving , labelling and taking field notes is a testament to his skilful management of the complex multiple translations involved in natural history work . The methods protocols themselves , and the This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Star & Griesemer : ' Translations ' & Boundary Objects 407 injunctions implied , are a record not only of the kinds of information Grinnell needed to capture for his theoretical developments , but of the conflicts between the various participating worlds . In this sense , each protocol is a record of the process of reconciliation . Propagating methods is not an easy task . In working with amateur collectors , a major problem is to ensure that the data coming back in from the field is of reliable quality ; that it does not decay en route through sloppy collecting or preserving techniques ; that the collectors give enough information about where they got the beasts from so that the locations can be precisely identified . On the other hand , directions for collectors cannot be made so complicated that they interfere with the already - difficult job of camping out in the wilderness , capturing sneaky little animals or bribing reluctant farmers to preserve intact their saleable specimens . Another way of saying this is that the allies enrolled by the scientist must be disciplined , but cannot be overly - disciplined . Each world is willing - for a price - to grant autonomy to the museum and to conform to Grinnell ' s information - gathering standards . It is only gradually that a scientist in Grinnell ' s position comes to be an authority . Part of this authority is exercized through the standardization of methods . Standardizing methods is different from standardizing theory . By emphasizing how , and not what or why , methods standardization both makes information compatible and allows for a longer ' reach ' across divergent worlds . Grinnell was thus able to accomplish several things at once . First , and perhaps most important , methods standardization allowed both collectors and professional biologists to find a common ground in clear , precise manual tasks . Collectors do not need to learn theoretical biology in order to contribute to the enterprise . Potential differences in beliefs about evolution or higher - order questions tend to be displaced by a focus on ' how ' , not ' why ' . The methods thus provided a useful ' lingua franca ' between amateurs and professionals . They also allowed amateurs to make a substantial contribution both to science and to conservation . The standardized specimens , fieldnotes and techniques provided consistent information for future generations or for researchers at a distance . Grinnell ' s methods emphasis thus translated the concerns of his allies in such a way that their pleasure was not impaired - the basic activities of going on camping trips , adding to personal hobby collections and preserving California remained virtually untouched . With respect to the collectors , Grinnell created a mesh through which their products must pass if they want money or scientific recognition , but not so narrow a mesh that the products of their labour cannot be easily used . This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 408 Social Studies of Science One consequence of this strategy is that Grinnell created a large area of autonomy for himself from which he could move into more theoretical arenas . His carefully crafted relationship with Alexander involved them both in making a commitment to methods and preservation techniques . As a sponsor , Alexander was concerned with preserving a representative collection of Californiana , both for posterity and as a demonstration of good scientific practice . It is clear from their correspondence that Alexander had little concern for the contents of the scientific theory but that she was quite concerned with curation and preservation methods . While necessary for the sort of sweeping ecological work undertaken by the MVZ , ' methods control ' alone was not sufficient . Other means were necessary to ensure cooperation across divergent social worlds . These were not engineered as such by any one individual or group , but rather emerged through the process of the work . As groups from different worlds work together , they create various sorts of boundary objects . The intersectional nature of the museum ' s shared work creates objects which inhabit multiple worlds simultaneously , and which must meet the demands of each one . Boundary Objects In natural history work , boundary objects are produced when sponsors , theorists and amateurs collaborate to produce representations of nature . Among these objects are specimens , field notes , museums and maps of particular territories . Their boundary nature is reflected by the fact that they are simultaneously concrete and abstract , specific and general , con - ventionalized and customized . They are often internally heterogeneous . We have , in the management strategies of the MVZ , a situation with the following characteristics : 1 . many participants share a common goal : preserve California ' s nature . Those that do not share this goal participate in the economy via a neutral medium - direct monetary exchange ( note : this includes the university administration ! ) ; 2 . all participants come to agree literally to preserve samples of its flora and fauna , as intact and as well - tagged as possible ; 3 . for some participants ( amateur collectors , general public , trappers and farmers ) this literal , concrete preservation of animals is sufficient for their purposes ; 4 . for others ( Grinnell , university administration ) , literal concrete preservation is only the beginning of a long process of making arguments This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Star & Griesemer : ' Translations ' & Boundary Objects 409 to professional audiences and establishing themselves as ' experts ' in some theoretical domain . So , in the case of the museum , the different worlds share goals of conserving California and nature , and of making an orderly array out of natural variety . These shared goals are lined up in such a way that everybody has satisfying work to perform in each world . How does this happen ? In building the theories and in building the organization , Grinnell had to maintain the conventionality of the objects so that future collecting could go on . The concerns and technologies of the amateurs , farmers , and so on , needed to be preserved if they were to continue fully par - ticipating . At the same time , he had to overcome the conventionality in order to make his objects scientifically interesting . It would not be enough if all the worlds collected objects which were in some sense challenging old ways of thinking about nature , nor arguing with other parts of science . How did Grinnell balance the need for argument with the need for building on the very conventional understandings about California that the amateur collectors and clubs had ? How did he escape being limited by their concerns ? Grinnell and Alexander quite brilliantly began their enterprise by building on a goal they shared with several participants ( the university presidents , nature - lovers , sponsors and local social elites ) : draw a line around the west ( sometimes even around the state ) and declare it a nature preserve . ( As one current member of the museum staff has wryly stated : ' When you get to the Nevada border , turn around and drive the other way ! ' ) For Grinnell , then , California became a delimitable ' laboratory in the field ' giving his research questions a regional , geographical focus . For the university administration , the regional focus supported its mandate to serve the people of the state . For the amateur naturalists concerned with the flora and fauna of their state , research conducted within its bounds also served their goals of preservation and conservation . This first constraint is a weak one with many advantages . It gives California itself the status of a boundary object , an object which lives in multiple social worlds and which has different identities in each . Grinnell then transformed this agreement into a resource for getting more money . He became one of the primary people in charge of preserving California . He made extensive alliances with conservation groups . This provided him with a definite but still weakly - constrained and weakly - structured base . Furthermore , the geographical concepts he wanted to advance were built on this kernel of support for California preservation . He needed a baseline for his geographical theories and comparisons , as This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 410 Social Studies of Science the conservation movement needed and wanted information about the natural baseline threatened by development interests . At the core and beginning of his work , then , he placed a common goal and conventional understanding , with boundaries from several different worlds which coincide . These coincident boundaries , around a loosely - structured , boundary object , provide an anchor for more widely - ranging , riskier claims . 56 From the standardized information which Grinnell collected , he built an orderly repository . And from this library of specimens , he was able to build ecological theories different from those being developed in the rest of the country . His autonomy in this regard rested on solving the problems of boundary tensions posed by the multiple intersections of the worlds which met in the museum . Grinnell ' s work was highly abstract , with a strong empirical base and strikingly strong support from participating worlds . In analyzing these translation tasks represented by the MVZ under - taking , we found four types of boundary objects . This is not an exhaustive list by any means . These are only analytic distinctions , in the sense that we are really dealing here with systems of boundary objects which are themselves heterogeneous . 1 . Repositories . These are ordered ' piles ' of objects which are indexed in a standardized fashion . Repositories are built to deal with problems of heterogeneity caused by differences in unit of analysis . An example of a repository is a library or museum . It has the advantage of modularity . People from different worlds can use or borrow from the ' pile ' for their own purposes without having directly to negotiate differences in purpose . 2 . Ideal type . This is an object such as a diagram , atlas or other description which in fact does not accurately describe the details of any one locality or thing . It is abstracted from all domains , and may be fairly vague . However , it is adaptable to a local site precisely because it is fairly vague ; it serves as a means of communicating and cooperating symbolically - a ' good enough ' road map for all parties . An example of an ideal type is the species . This is a concept which in fact described no specimen , which incorporated both concrete and theoretical data and which served as a means of communicating across both worlds . Ideal types arise with differences in degree of abstraction . They result in the deletion of local contingencies from the common object and have the advantage of adaptability . 3 . Coincident boundaries . These are common objects which have the same boundaries but different internal contents . They arise in the presence of different means of aggregating data and when work is distributed This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Star & Griesemer : ' Translations ' & Boundary Objects 411 over a large - scale geographic area . The result is that work in different sites and with different perspectives can be conducted autonomously while cooperating parties share a common referent . The advantage is the resolution of different goals . An example of coincident boundaries is the creation of the state of California itself as a boundary object for workers at the museum . The maps of California created by the amateur collectors and the conservationists resembled traditional roadmaps familiar to us all , and emphasized campsites , trails and places to collect . The maps created by the professional biologists , however , shared the same outline of the state ( with the same geo - political boundaries ) , but were filled in with a highly abstract , ecologically - based series of shaded areas representing ' life zones ' , an ecological concept . 4 . Standardized forms . These are boundary objects devised as methods of common communication across dispersed work groups . Because the natural history work took place at highly distributed sites by a number of different people , standardized methods were essential , as discussed above . In the case of the amateur collectors , they were provided with a form to fill out when they obtained an animal , standardized in the information it collected . The results of this type of boundary object are standardized indexes and what Latour would call ' immutable mobiles ' ( objects which can be transported over a long distance and convey unchanging information ) . The advantages of such objects are that local uncertainties ( for instance , in the collecting of animal species ) are deleted . People who inhabit more than one social world - marginal people face an analogous situation . Traditionally , the concept of marginality has referred to a person who has membership in more than one social world : for example , a person whose mother is white and father is black . 57 Park ' s classic work on the ' marginal man ' discusses the tensions imposed by such multiple membership , problems of identity and loyalty . 58 Marginality has been a critical concept for understanding the ways in which the boundaries of social worlds are constructed , and the kinds of navigation and articulation performed by those with multiple member - ships . The strategies employed by marginal people to manage their identities - passing , trying to shift into a single world , oscillating - provide a provocative source of metaphors for understanding objects with multiple memberships . Can we find similar strategies among those creating or managing joint objects across social world boundaries ? A social world , such as the world of amateur natural history collectors , ' stakes out ' territory , either literal or conceptual . If a state of war does not prevail , then institutionalized negotiations manage ordinary affairs when different social worlds share the same territory ( for instance , the This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 412 Social Studies of Science United States Government and the Mafia ) . Such negotiations include conflict and are constantly challenged and refined . Everett Hughes has talked about such overlaps and has described organizations which manage collisions in space sovereignty as ' intertribal centers ' . 59Gerson ' s analysis of resources and commitments provides a general model of sovereignties based on commitments of time , money , skill and sentiment . 60 Gerson and Gerson , drawing on Hughes ' earlier work , have discussed the complex management of such overlapping place perspectives . 61 In their analysis , the central cooperative task of social worlds which share the same space but different perspectives is the ' translation ' of each others ' perspectives . In this paper , we are interested in that sort of n - way translation which includes scientific objects . In particular , we are interested in the kinds of translations scientists perform in order to craft objects containing elements which are different in different worlds - objects marginal to those worlds , or what we call boundary objects . 62 In conducting collec - tive work , people coming together from different social worlds frequently have the experience of addressing an object that has a different meaning for each of them . Each social world has partial jurisdiction over the resources represented by that object , and mismatches caused by the overlap become problems for negotiation . Unlike the situation of marginal people who reflexively face problems of identity and membership , however , the objects with multiple memberships do not change them - selves reflexively , or voluntarily manage membership problems . While these objects have some of the same properties as marginal people , there are crucial differences . For people , managing multiple memberships can be volatile , elusive , or confusing ; navigating in more than one world is a non - trivial mapping exercise . People resolve problems of marginality in a variety of ways : by passing on one side or another , denying one side , oscillating between worlds , or by forming a new social world composed of others like themselves . However , management of these scientific objects - including construction of them - is conducted by scientists , collectors and adminis - trators only when their work coincides . The objects thus come to form a common boundary between worlds by inhabiting them both simul - taneously . Scientists manage boundary objects via a set of strategies only loosely comparable to those practised by marginal people . Intersections place particular demands on representations , and on the integrity of information arising from and being used in more than one world . Because more than one world or set of concerns is using and making the representation , it has to satisfy more than one set of concerns . This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Star & Griesemer : ' Translations ' & Boundary Objects 413 When participants in the intersecting worlds create representations together , their different commitments and perceptions are resolved into representations - in the sense that a fuzzy image is resolved by a microscope . This resolution does not mean consensus . Rather , representa - tions , or inscriptions , contain at every stage the traces of multiple viewpoints , translations and incomplete battles . Gerson and Star have discussed a similar collision in an office workplace , 63 and considered the problem of evaluating the standards which apply as reconciliation takes place - a problem which computer scientist Carl Hewitt has called ' due process ' . 64 Gdkalp has described some of the processes of colli - sions which arise when multiple fields come together ; he calls these ' borderland ' disciplines . 65 The production of boundary objects is one means of satisfying these potentially conflicting sets of concerns . Other means include imperialist imposition of representations , coercion , silencing and fragmentation . 66 Summary The different commitments of the participants from different social worlds reflects a fascinating phenomenon - the functioning of mixed economies of information with different values and only partially overlapping coin . Andrews has a compelling example of this from a natural history expedi - tion of the period to Mongolia : natives there used fossils for fang shui ( geomancy ) , and were in the habit of dissolving them in liquid and drinking them ! 67 The sacred fossil beds were well - protected against foraging paleontologists , who considered them equally valuable but for different reasons . The economy of the museum thus evolves as a mixture of barter , money and complex negotiations : money in exchange for furs and animals from trappers ; animals in exchange for other animals from other museums and collectors ; scientific classification in exchange for specimens donated by amateur naturalists ; prestige and legitimacy for economic support ; food and bait in traps in exchange for animals ' unwitting cooperation . As the museum matures , and becomes more efficient , the scientists have made headway in standardizing the interfaces between different worlds . In the case of museum work , this comes from the standardization of collecting and preparation methods . By reaching agreements about methods , different participating worlds establish protocols which go beyond mere trading across unjoined world boundaries . They begin to devise a common coin which makes possible new kinds ofjoint endeavour . This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 414 Social Studies of Science But the protocols are not simply the imposition of one world ' s vision on the rest ; if they are , they are sure to fail . Rather , boundary objects act as anchors or bridges , however temporary . The central analytical question raised by this study is : how do hetero - geneity and cooperation coexist , and with what consequences for managing information ? The museum is in a sense a model of information processing . In the strategies used by its participants are several sophisticated answers to problems of complexity , preservation and coordination . Our future work will examine these answers in different domains , including the history of evolutionary theory and the design of complex computer systems . * NOTES We would like to thank our colleague Elihu Gerson of Tremont Research Institute for many helpful conversations about the content of this paper . We would also like to thank The Bancroft Library , University of California , for access to the papers of Joseph Grinnell , Annie Alexander and the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology . David Wake and Barbara Stein of the Museum of Vertebrate Zoology have graciously allowed us access to the museum ' s archives and assisted us in locating material ; Howard Hutchinson of the Berkeley University Museum of Paleontology generously provided access to the Alexander - Merriam correspon - dence in the archives there . Annetta Carter , Frank Pitelka , Joseph Gregory and Gene Crisman have provided valuable firsthand information about Alexander and Grinnell . We would also like to thank Michel Callon , Adele Clarke , Joan Fujimura , Carl Hewitt , Bruno Latour , John Law and Anselm Strauss for their helpful comments and discussions of many of these ideas . Star ' s work on this paper was supported in part by a generous grant from the Fondation Fyssen , Paris . 1 . In general social science , this finding can most clearly be seen in the studies of workplaces by Chicago school sociologists . See , for example , Everett C . Hughes , The Sociological Eye ( Chicago , IL : Aldine , 1970 ) . For evidence of this in science , see David Hull , Science as a Process ( Chicago , IL & London : The University of Chicago Press , 1988 ) ; Bruno Latour and Steve Woolgar , Laboratory Life ( Beverly Hills , CA : Sage Publications , 1979 ) ; Latour , Science in Action ( Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press , 1987 ) ; Martin Rudwick , The Great Devonian Controversy ( Chicago , IL & London : The University of Chicago Press , 1985 ) ; Susan Leigh Star , ' Triangulating Clinical and Basic Research : British Localizationists , 1870 - 1906 ' , History of Science , Vol . 24 ( 1986 ) , 29 - 48 . 2 . Anselm Strauss , ' A Social World Perspective ' , Studies in Symbolic Interaction , Vol . 1 ( 1978 ) , 119 - 28 ; Elihu M . Gerson , ' Scientific Work and Social Worlds ' , Knowledge , Vol . 4 ( 1983 ) , 357 - 77 ; Adele Clarke , ' A Social Worlds Research Adventure : The Case of Reproductive Science ' , in T . Gieryn and S . Cozzens ( eds ) , Theories of Science in Society ( Bloomington , IN : Indiana University Press , forthcoming ) . This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Star & Griesemer : ' Translations ' & Boundary Objects 415 3 . Michel Callon , ' Some Elements of a Sociology of Translation : Domestication of the Scallops and the Fishermen of St . Brieuc Bay ' , in John Law ( ed . ) , Power , Action and Belief , Sociological Review Monograph No . 32 ( London : Routledge & Kegan Paul , 1985 ) , 196 - 230 ; Latour , Science in Action , op . cit . note 1 ; Bruno Latour , The Pasteurization of French Society ( Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press , 1988 ) . 4 . John Law , ' Technology , Closure and Heterogeneous Engineering : The Case of the Portuguese Expansion ' , in Wiebe Bijker , Trevor Pinch and Thomas P . Hughes ( eds ) , The Social Construction of Technological Systems ( Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , 1987 ) , 111 - 34 ; Michel Callon and Law , ' On Interests and Their Transformation : Enrollment and Counter - Enrollment ' , Social Studies of Science , Vol . 12 ( 1982 ) , 615 - 25 . 5 . Everett C . Hughes , ' Going Concerns : The Study of American Institutions ' , The Sociological Eye , op . cit . note 1 , 52 - 72 , at 62 . 6 . W . V . 0 . Quine , Word and Object ( Cambridge , MA : MIT Press , 1960 ) . 7 . See the excellent review by L . Daston , ' The Factual Sensibility ' , Isis , Vol . 79 ( 1988 ) , 452 - 67 . 8 . See , for example , Sally G . Kohlstedt , ' Curiosities and Cabinets : Natural History Museums and Education on the Antebellum Campus ' , Isis , Vol . 79 ( 1988 ) , 405 - 26 . Although it has frequently been claimed that the rise of scientific biology coincided with the demise of natural history at the turn of the twentieth century , some have argued that natural history was ' refined ' rather than replaced . See , for example , K . Benson , ' Concluding Remarks : American Natural History and Biology in the Nineteenth Century ' , American Zoologist , Vol . 26 ( 1986 ) , 381 - 84 . On the distinction of amateur naturalist from the public and from professional scientists , see S . Kohlstedt , ' The Nineteenth - Century Amateur Tradition : The Case of the Boston Society of Natural History ' , in G . Holton and W . Blanpied ( eds ) , Science and its Public ( Dordrecht , Holland : D . Reidel , 1976 ) , 173 - 90 . 9 . For an assessment of the effects on the structure of theoretical models produced , see also James R . Griesemer , ' Modeling in the Museum : On the Role of Remnant Models in the Work of Joseph Grinnell ' , ( submitted , 1989 ) . Additional analysis of the role of amateur naturalists can be found in David Allen , The Naturalist in Britain : A Social History ( London : Allen Lane , 1976 ) . 10 . Griesemer , ibid . 11 . Frank Pitelka , personal communication to Griesemer . 12 . E . R . Hall , Collecting and Preparing Study Specimens of Vertebrates ( Lawrence , KS : University of Kansas , 1962 ) . 13 . Joseph Grinnell Papers , The Bancroft Library , University of California , Berkeley . 14 . See manuals of instruction by Grinnell ' s student E . R . Hall , op . cit . note 13 ; and S . Herman , The Naturalist ' s Field Journal , A Manual of Instruction Based on a System Established by Joseph Grinnell ( Vermillion , SD : Buteo Books , 1986 ) . 15 . Susan Leigh Star , ' The Structure of Ill - Structured Solutions : Boundary Objects and Heterogeneous Distributed Problem Solving ' , in M . Huhs and L . Gasser ( eds ) , Readings in Distributed Artificial Intelligence 3 ( Menlo Park , CA : Morgan Kaufmann , 1989 ) . 16 . See Greisemer , op . cit . note 9 ; Nancy Cartwright and H . Mendell , ' What Makes Physics ' Objects Abstract ? ' , in J . Cushing , C . Delaney and G . Gutting ( eds ) , Science and Reality ( Notre Dame , IN : University of Notre Dame Press , 1984 ) , 134 - 52 . 17 . Garland Allen , Life Science in the Twentieth Century ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1978 ) ; Kohlstedt ( 1976 ) , op . cit . note 8 ; Benson , op . cit . note 8 ; Jane Maienschein , Ron Rainger and Keith Benson , ' Introduction : Were American Morphologists in Revolt ? ' , Journal of the History of Biology , Vol . 14 ( 1981 ) , 83 - 87 ; Philip Pauly , Controlling Life , Jacques Loeb & the Engineering Ideal in Biology ( New York : Oxford This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 416 Social Studies of Science University Press , 1987 ) ; Ronald Rainger , ' The Continuation of the Morphological Tradition : American Paleontology , 1880 - 1910 ' , Journal of the History of Biology , Vol . 14 ( 1981 ) , 129 - 58 ; Garland Allen , ' Morphology and Twentieth - Century Biology : A Response ' , ibid . , 159 - 76 . 18 . William Goetzmann , Exploration & Empire ( New York : W . W . Norton , 1966 ) ; Keir B . Sterling , Last of the Naturalists : The Career of C . Hart Merriam ( New York : Arno Press , 1977 , revised edition ) ; M . Smith , Pacific Visions , California Scientists and the Environment , 1850 - 1915 ( New Haven , CT : Yale University Press , 1987 ) ; C . Hart Merriam , ' Type Specimens in Natural History ' , Science , N . S . Vol . 5 ( 1897 ) , 731 - 32 ; Merriam , ' Criteria for the Recognition of Species and Genera ' , Journal of Mammology , Vol . 1 ( 1919 ) , 6 - 9 ; Merriam , ' Laws of Temperature Control of the Geographic Distribution of Terrestrial Animals and Plants ' , The National Geographic Magazine , Vol . 6 ( 1894 ) , 229 - 41 ; Merriam , ' Results of a Biological Survey of Mount Shasta , California ' , Bureau of the Biological Survey , North American Fauna , Vol . 16 ( 1899 ) ; J . Moore , ' Zoology of the Pacific Railroad Surveys ' , American Zoologist , Vol . 26 ( 1986 ) , 331 - 41 ; L . Spencer , ' Filling in the Gaps : A Survey of Nineteenth Century Institutions Associated with the Exploration and Natural History of the American West ' , ibid . , 371 - 80 ; on the Bureau of the Biological Survey , see Donald Worster , Nature ' s Economy ( New York : Cambridge University Press , 1988 ) . 19 . See W . C . Allee , A . E . Emerson , 0 . Park , T . Park and K . Schmidt , Principles of Animal Ecology ( Philadelphia & London : W . B . Saunders , 1949 ) ; Sharon Kingsland , Modeling Nature : Episodes in the History of Population Ecology ( Chicago , IL : The University of Chicago Press , 1985 ) ; R . McIntosh , The Background of Ecology ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1987 ) . 20 . E . Cittadino , ' Ecology and the Professionalization of Botany in America , 1890 - 1905 ' , Studies in History of Biology , Vol . 4 , ( 1980 ) , 171 - 98 ; Joel Hagen , ' Organism and Environment : Fredric Clements ' s Vision of a Unified Physiological Ecology ' , in R . Rainger , K . Benson and J . Maienschein ( eds ) , The American Development of Biology ( Philadelphia , PA : University of Pennsylvania Press , 1988 ) , 257 - 80 ; William Kimler , ' Mimicry : Views of Naturalists and Ecologists Before the Modem Synthesis ' , in Marjorie Grene ( ed . ) , Dimensions of Darwinism ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1983 ) , 97 - 128 . See also Kingsland , MacIntosh , op . cit . note 19 . 21 . Hilda Grinnell , ' Joseph Grinnell : 1877 - 1939 ' , The Condor , Vol . 42 ( 1940 ) , 3 - 34 . 22 . Ernst Mayr , ' Ecological Factors in Speciation ' , Evolution , Vol . 1 ( 1947 ) , 263 - 88 ; Mayr , ' Speciation and Systematics ' , in Glenn L . Jepsen , George Gaylord Simpson and Ernst Mayr ( eds ) , Genetics , Paleontology and Evolution ( Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press , 1949 ) , 281 - 98 ; David Lack , ' The Significance of Ecological Isolation ' , ibid . , 299 - 308 . 23 . See Hilda W . Grinnell , Annie Montague Alexander ( Berkeley , CA : Grinnell Naturalists Society , 1958 ) . That she was an amateur naturalist , and not merely a financial backer is clear from Kohlstedt ' s ( 1976 ) discussion of the amateur tradition , op . cit . note 8 . Amateurs were more interested in scientific investigation than the general public , which was largely interested in the exposition of ideas about nature as part of the general culture , but amateurs typically had a broad vision of the aims and nature of scientific research : Kohlstedt , ibid . , 175 . The dependence on amateur / patrons declined as universities and governments took over the financial stewardship of science , and eventually amateurs such as Alexander virtually disappeared from scientific academia . 24 . See Grinnell , ibid . ; Alden Miller , ' Joseph Grinnell ' , Systematic Zoology , Vol . 3 ( 1964 ) , 195 - 249 . This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Star & Griesemer : ' Translations ' & Boundary Objects 417 25 . J . Grinnell , ' The Origin and Distribution of the Chestnut - Backed Chickadee ' , The Auk , Vol . 21 ( 1904 ) , 364 - 65 , 368 - 78 . 26 . D . Jordan , ' The Origin of Species Through Isolation ' , Science , Vol . 22 ( 1905 ) , 545 - 62 . 27 . That Grinnell could become director of the Museum without appointment in the Zoology Department suggests that credentials for museum naturalists were not identical with those required for academic appointment . Grinnell ' s career marks a transition phase in the incorporation of research natural history into academic science . For histories of the Berkeley Zoology Department , including the MVZ , see Richard Eakin , ' History of Zoology at the University of California , Berkeley ' , Bios , Vol . 27 ( 1956 ) , 66 - 92 . ( Reprint available from the Department of Zoology at Berkeley . ) 28 . See Eakin , op . cit . note 27 . 29 . These procedures included directives such as : to use a single serial set of identification numbers for all specimens collected during an expedition regardless of type , ' road - kills ' , nests , eggs , wet preservations , and so on ; to give precise data on the location of capture of a specimen including altitude and county ; to ' Attend minutely to proper punctuation ' ; to observe the proper order for reporting data on both field tags and in field notebooks ; to pack ' Miscellaneous material . . . with as great care as skins or skulls . Cheek pouch contents , feces , etc . , should be placed in small envelopes or boxes , with labels inserted , and such containers packed in a stout box to prevent crushing ' ; and most importantly , to ' Write full notes , even at risk of entering much information of apparently little value . One cannot anticipate the needs of the future , when notes and collection are worked up . . . . Be alert for new ideas and new facts ' . These quotations were taken from a handout , ' Suggestions as to Collecting ' , used in Grinnell ' s natural history course , Zoology 113 , Grinnell Correspondence and Papers , Bancroft Library , University of California , Berkeley . The handout was emended and used by a number of Grinnell ' s successors at Berkeley and elsewhere . See also , Hall , op . cit . note 12 . 30 . See Griesemer , op . cit . note 9 . 31 . On museums in general , see E . Alexander , Museums in Motion : An Introduction to the History and Functions of Museums ( Nashville , TN : American Association for State and Local History , 1979 ) ; Laurence V . Coleman , The Museum in America , 3 Volumes ( Washington DC : The American Association of Museums , 1939 ) ; George Stocking , ' Essays on Museums and Material Culture ' , in G . Stocking , Jr . ( ed . ) , Objects and Others : Essays on Museums and Material Culture ( Madison , WI : University of Wisconsin Press , 1983 ) , 3 - 14 . On natural history museums in particular , see C . Adams , ' Some of the Advantages of an Ecological Organization of a Natural History Museum ' , Proceedings of the American Association of Museums , Vol . 1 ( 1907 ) , 170 - 78 ; K . Benson , ' From Museum Research to Laboratory Research : The Transformation of Natural History into Academic Biology ' , in Rainger et al . , op . cit . note 20 , 49 - 83 ; E . Colbert , ' What is a Museum ? ' , Curator , Vol . 4 ( 1961 ) , 138 - 46 ; Joseph Grinnell , ' The Methods and Uses of a Research Museum ' , Popular Science Monthly , Vol . 77 ( 1910 ) , 163 - 69 ; S . Kohlstedt , ' Henry A . Ward : The Merchant Naturalist and American Museum Development ' , Journal of the Society for the Bibliography of Natural History , Vol . 9 ( 1980 ) , 647 - 61 ; Kohlstedt , ' Natural History on Campus : From Informal Collecting to College Museums ' , paper delivered to the West Coast History of Science Association ( Friday Harbor , WA : September 1986 ) ; Kohlstedt ( 1988 ) , op . cit . note 8 ; Kohlstedt , ' Museums on Campus : A Tradition of Inquiry and Teaching ' , in Rainger et al . , op cit . note 20 , 15 - 47 ; Ernst Mayr , ' Alden Holmes Miller ' , National Academy of Sciences of the USA , Biographical Memoirs , Vol . 33 ( 1973 ) , 176 - 214 ; Ronald Rainger , ' Just Before Simpson : William Diller Matthew ' s Understanding of This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 418 Social Studies of Science Evolution ' , Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society , Vol . 130 ( 1986 ) , 453 - 74 ; Rainger , ' Vertebrate Paleontology as Biology : Henry Fairfield Osborn and the American Museum of Natural History ' , in Rainger et . al . , op . cit . note 20 , 219 - 56 ; Dillon Ripley , The Sacred Grove : Essays on Museums ( New York : Simon & Schuster , 1969 ) ; A . Ruthven , A Naturalist in a University Museum ( Ann Arbor , MI : University of Michigan Alumni Press , 1963 ) . 32 . Joseph Grinnell , ' Significance of Faunal Analysis for General Biology ' , University of California Publications in Zoology , Vol . 32 ( 1928 ) , 13 - 18 . 33 . Joseph Grinnell , Joseph Grinnell ' s Philosophy of Nature , Selected Writing of a Western Naturalist ( Berkeley & Los Angeles , CA : University of California Press , 1943 , reprinted by Freeport , NY : Books for Libraries Press , 1968 ) . 34 . Ibid . , viii . 35 . Joseph Grinnell to Annie Alexander , 14 November 1907 , Joseph Grinnell Papers , The Bancroft Library , University of California , Berkeley . 36 . Grinnell , op . cit . note 33 . This essay , originally a director ' s report to the President of the University of California , was later published in The Popular Science Monthly as an article outlining Grinnell ' s vision titled , ' The Methods and Uses of a Research Museum ' . 37 . Grinnell , ' The Museum Conscience ' ( 1922 ) , in op . cit . note 33 , 107 - 09 , at 108 . 38 . Ibid . 39 . Joseph Grinnell , ' Barriers to Distribution as Regards Birds and Mammals ' , The American Naturalist , Vol . 48 ( 1914 ) , 248 - 54 ; Grinnell , ' An Account of the Mammals and Birds of the Lower Colorado Valley with Especial Reference to the Distributional Problems Presented ' , University of California Publications in Zoology , Vol . 12 ( 1914 ) , 51 - 294 . 40 . See Rainger , ' Just Before Simpson ' , op . cit . note 31 , for similar considerations by W . D . Matthew in the American Museum . 41 . For another early example , see Adams , op . cit . note 31 . 42 . See E . M . Gerson , ' Audiences and Allies : The Transformation of American Zoology , 1880 - 1930 ' , paper presented to the conference on the History , Philosophy and Social Studies of Biology ( Blacksburg , VA , June 1987 ) ; Eakin , op . cit . note 27 , reports the possibly apocryphal story that Jordan and Grinnell agreed that Stanford would get fishes and Berkeley would get birds and mammals . 43 . Joseph Grinnell to Annie Alexander , 13 February 1911 , Joseph Grinnell Papers , The Bancroft Library , University of California , Berkeley . 44 . Joseph Grinnell to Annie Alexander , 11 May 1911 , Joseph Grinnell Papers , The Bancroft Library , University of California , Berkeley . 45 . See Grinnell , op . cit . note 31 . 46 . See Grinnell , op . cit . note 23 , 7 . 47 . Annie Alexander to Joseph Grinnell , 6 January 1911 , Annie M . Alexander Papers ( Collection 67 / 121 c ) , The Bancroft Library , University of California , Berkeley . 48 . See also Smith , op . cit . note 18 . 49 . Louise Kellogg , 1911 field notebook , Fieldnote Room , Museum of Vertebrate Zoology , University of Califomia , Berkeley . See also Annie Alexander , 1911 field notebook , for similar observations . 50 . Annie Alexander to Joseph Grinnell , 21 February 1911 , Annie M . Alexander Papers ( Collection 67 / 121 c ) , The Bancroft Library , University of California , Berkeley . 51 . Joseph Grinnell to Annie Alexander , 27 March 1911 , Joseph Grinnell Papers , The Bancroft Library , University of California , Berkeley . This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms Star & Griesemer : ' Translations ' & Boundary Objects 419 52 . Joseph Grinnell to Annie Alexander , 14 November 1907 , Joseph Grinnell Papers , The Bancroft Library , University of California , Berkeley . 53 . See Hall , op . cit . note 12 , for a full discussion of these preparation and preservation techniques . 54 . Joseph Grinnell , J . Dixon and Jean Linsdale , ' Vertebrate Natural History of a Section of Northern California through the Lassen Peak Region ' , University of California Publica - tions in Zoology , Vol . 35 ( 1930 ) , 1 - 594 and i - v . 55 . See Griesemer , op . cit . note 9 . 56 . William C . Wimsatt , ' Robustness , Reliability and Overdetermination ' , in M . Brewer and B . Collins ( eds ) , Scientific Inquiry and the Social Sciences ( San Francisco , CA : Jossey - Bass , 1981 ) , 124 - 63 . 57 . Robert E . Park , ' Human Migration and the Marginal Man ' , in his Race and Culture ( New York : The Free Press , 1928 , reprinted 1950 ) , 345 - 56 ; E . C . Hughes , ' Social Change and Status Protest : An Essay on the Marginal Man ' , in his The Sociological Eye , op . cit . note 1 , 220 - 28 . 58 . See also Everett V . Stonequist , The Marginal Man : A Study in Personality and Culture Conflict ( New York : Russell & Russell , 1937 , reprinted 1961 ) . 59 . E . C . Hughes , ' The Ecological Aspect of Institutions ' , in his The Sociological Eye , op . cit . note 1 , 5 - 13 . 60 . Elihu M . Gerson , ' On " Quality of Life " ' , American Sociological Review , Vol . 41 ( 1976 ) , 793 - 806 . 61 . Elihu M . Gerson and M . Sue Gerson , ' The Social Framework of Place Perspectives ' , in G . T . Moore and R . Golledge ( eds ) , Environmental Knowing : Theories , Research and Methods ( Stroudsberg , PA : Dowden , Hutchinson & Ross , 1976 ) , 196 - 205 . 62 . See Star , op . cit . note 15 . 63 . Elihu M . Gerson and Susan Leigh Star , ' Analyzing Due Process in the Workplace ' , ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems , Vol . 4 ( 1986 ) , 257 - 70 . 64 . Carl Hewitt , ' Offices are Open Systems ' , ACM Tranisactions on Office Information Systems , Vol . 4 ( 1986 ) , 271 - 87 . 65 . Iskander Gokalp , ' Report on an Ongoing Research : Investigation on Turbulent Combustion as an Example of an Interfield Research Area ' , paper presented at the Society for the Social Studies of Science ( Troy , NY , November 1985 ) . 66 . We are grateful to an anonymous referee for drawing our attention to the limits of the cooperation model , and the importance of conflict and authority in science - making . 67 . Roy Chapman Andrews , Across Mongolian Plains ( New York : D . Appleton , 1921 ) . Susan Leigh Star is Assistant Professor of Information and Computer Science and Sociology at the University of California , Irvine . Her latest work is Regions of the Mind : Brain Research and the Quest for Scientific Certainty ( Stanford University Press : [ October ] 1989 ) . Current research interests are the organizational aspects of computer design and of medical classification systems . James Richard Griesemer is Assistant Professor of Philosophy at the University of California , Davis . His latest This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms 420 Social Studies of Science work is ( with William Wimsatt ) ' Picturing Weismannism : A Case Study of Conceptual Evolution ' , in M . Ruse ( ed . ) What the Philosophy of Biology Is : Essays for David Hull ( Dordrecht , Netherlands : Kluwer Academic Publishers , 1 989 ) . Current research interests include an analysis of the concept of replication , the nature of theories in quantitative genetics , the history of the niche concept , and a theory of material model - building in biology . Authors ' addresses ( respectively ) : ( SLS ) Department of Information and Computer Science , University of California , Irvine , California 92717 , USA ; ( JRG ) Department of Philosophy , University of California , Davis , California 95616 , USA . This content downloaded from 198 . 40 . 30 . 166 on Mon , 02 Jan 2017 23 : 10 : 43 UTC All use subject to http : / / about . jstor . org / terms