Published online 5 September 2016 Nucleic Acids Research , 2016 , Vol . 44 , No . 22 e165 doi : 10 . 1093 / nar / gkw784 smiFISH and FISH - quant – a ﬂexible single RNA detection approach with super - resolution capability Nikolay Tsanov 1 , 2 , † , Aubin Samacoits 3 , 4 , † , Racha Chouaib 1 , 2 , 5 , † , Abdel - Meneem Traboulsi 1 , 2 , Thierry Gostan 1 , 2 , Christian Weber 3 , 4 , Christophe Zimmer 3 , 4 , Kazem Zibara 5 , 6 , Thomas Walter 7 , 8 , 9 , Marion Peter 1 , 2 , * , Edouard Bertrand 1 , 2 , * and Florian Mueller 3 , 4 , * 1 Institut de G´en´etique Mol´eculaire de Montpellier , UMR 5535 CNRS , 1919 route de Mende , 34293 Montpellier cedex 5 , France , 2 Universit´e de Montpellier , 163 rue Auguste Broussonnet , 34090 Montpellier , France , 3 Unit´e Imagerie et Mod´elisation , Institut Pasteur and CNRS UMR 3691 , 28 rue du Docteur Roux , 75015 Paris , France , 4 C3BI , USR 3756 IP CNRS – Paris , France , 5 ER045 , Laboratory of Stem Cells , DSST , PRASE , Lebanese University , Beirut , Lebanon , 6 Biology Department , Faculty of Sciences - I , Lebanese University , Beirut , Lebanon , 7 MINES ParisTech , PSL - Research University , CBIO - Centre for Computational Biology , 77300 Fontainebleau , France , 8 Institut Curie , 75248 Paris Cedex , France and 9 INSERM , U900 , 75248 Paris Cedex , France Received April 06 , 2016 ; Accepted August 26 , 2016 ABSTRACT Single molecule FISH ( smFISH ) allows studying tran - scription and RNA localization by imaging individual mRNAs in single cells . We present smiFISH ( single molecule inexpensive FISH ) , an easy to use and ﬂex - ible RNA visualization and quantiﬁcation approach that uses unlabelled primary probes and a ﬂuores - cently labelled secondary detector oligonucleotide . The gene - speciﬁc probes are unlabelled and can therefore be synthesized at low cost , thus allowing to use more probes per mRNA resulting in a sub - stantial increase in detection efﬁciency . smiFISH is also ﬂexible since differently labelled secondary de - tector probes can be used with the same primary probes . We demonstrate that this ﬂexibility allows multicolor labelling without the need to synthesize new probe sets . We further demonstrate that the use of a speciﬁc acrydite detector oligonucleotide allows smiFISH to be combined with expansion mi - croscopy , enabling the resolution of transcripts in 3D below the diffraction limit on a standard microscope . Lastly , we provide improved , fully automated soft - ware tools from probe - design to quantitative analysis of smFISH images . In short , we provide a complete workﬂow to obtain automatically counts of individual RNA molecules in single cells . INTRODUCTION Transcription is an inherently stochastic process , and this leads to heterogeneity in mRNA production within cell populations and has a number of important consequences for living organisms ( 1 ) . For many genes , the localization of mRNA within cells is also non - uniform , and this can lead to local protein synthesis , a phenomenon known to be involved in many biological processes ( 2 ) . Characterizing these temporal and spatial heterogeneities is thus important for our understanding of gene function , and this is made possible by single - cell single - molecule approaches , in partic - ular by single - molecule RNA fluorescence in situ hybridiza - tion ( smFISH ) ( 3 , 4 ) . Here , individual mRNA molecules of a given gene are targeted with 10 – 50 fluorescently la - belled probes . These mRNAs are subsequently visualized as bright , diffraction limited spots under a wide - field micro - scope , and they can be located and counted with dedicated image analysis methods ( 4 , 5 ) . This analysis can be per - formed for individual cells , therefore providing the distribu - tion of mRNA counts and localization across the cell pop - ulation . The entire smFISH workflow encompasses probe design , the actual wet lab experiment , image acquisition and image analysis with cell segmentation and mRNA detec - tion . While some of these steps are well established , we iden - tified two bottlenecks , which we clear in this study . The first bottleneck is the cost of smFISH , which mostly comes from the necessity to use a large number of fluores - cent oligonucleotide probes ( 3 , 4 ) . Labelling of the smFISH probes can be achieved during probe synthesis , or post - synthesis if a primary amine is incorporated in the oligonu - * To whom correspondence should be addressed . Florian Mueller . Tel : + 33 140613170 ; Fax : + 33 140613330 ; Email : fmueller @ pasteur . fr Correspondence may also be addressed to Marion Peter . Tel : + 33 434359662 ; Fax : + 33 434359634 ; Email : marion . peter @ igmm . cnrs . fr Correspondence may also be addressed to Edouard Bertrand . Tel : + 33 434359646 ; Fax : + 33 434359634 ; Email : edouard . bertrand @ igmm . cnrs . fr † These authors contributed equally to the work as the first authors . Present address : Nikolay Tsanov , Genome Stability Lab , National University of Ireland , Galway , Ireland . C (cid:2) The Author ( s ) 2016 . Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic Acids Research . This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc / 4 . 0 / ) , which permits non - commercial re - use , distribution , and reproduction in any medium , provided the original work is properly cited . For commercial re - use , please contact journals . permissions @ oup . com e165 Nucleic Acids Research , 2016 , Vol . 44 , No . 22 P AGE 2 OF 11 cleotides ( 6 ) . In both cases , modified oligonucleotides are required , hence the high cost , which increases with the num - ber of oligonucleotides used . It is important to note that this issue is not trivial and that it has direct consequences on sig - nal quality . smFISH experiments always suffer from back - ground due to non - specific binding of stray probes . This can yield false - positive and false - negative detections because the signal stemming from a true mRNA would not be al - ways bright enough to be separated from this background signal . Minimizing these artefacts is usually achieved by us - ing a larger number of probes , because this increases the signal of true mRNAs without much affect on the back - ground signals . A higher number of probes thus results in higher signal - to - noise ratio and to a better separation of true positives from true negatives . The possibility to use more oligonucleotides probes can thus directly affect signal quality . Recently , alternative smFISH approaches have been developed that use unlabelled primary probes , which are detected by fluorescently labelled secondary probes ( 7 , 8 ) . Although promising , these techniques involve sophisticated protocols using either branched DNAs , which leads to poor nuclear RNA detection , or complex oligonucleotide synthe - sis schemes tailored for high - content screening ( 7 , 8 ) . We de - veloped here an approach that also uses unlabelled primary probes , but in a simple design – – termed single molecule in - expensive FISH ( smiFISH ) – – that is well suited for standard smFISH experiments . Because of the low cost of the unla - belled primary probes , more probes per gene can be used , thus resulting in a substantial increase in signal quality . The second bottleneck lies in the analysis of smFISH im - ages . To obtain meaningful statistics on mRNA counts or localization in individual cells , hundreds to thousands of cells have to be included in the analysis . Such an analy - sis ideally uses fully automated RNA detection ( 5 , 9 ) , but also requires an accurate segmentation of cells . Segmenta - tion is routinely performed on 2D maximum intensity pro - jections , even if images are acquired in 3D . We found that such projections can lead to blurry cell boundaries , reduc - ing the segmentation quality and result in the loss of thin cellular extensions such as pseudopods . Here , we present a new focus - based projection approach that allows a better determination of cell boundaries . This approach can use the non - specific smFISH signal and can be combined with tra - ditional 2D segmentation software ( 10 , 11 ) based on mathe - matical morphology and traditional filtering and threshold - ing techniques . We integrated this approach in the existing Matlab toolbox to analyse smFISH data ( FISH - quant ; ( 5 ) ) . FISH - quant can be fully controlled via graphical user inter - faces and is hence easily accessible for non - specialist . In summary , we present a complete and validated work - flow for single molecule FISH . This workflow comes with several key advantages : ( i ) a reduced probe cost allowing the generation of more efficient probe sets , ( ii ) an optimized approach to determine good hybridizing sequences , ( iii ) a simple experimental protocol – including probe synthesis ( Supplementary Protocol ) , ( iv ) a flexible probe design , al - lowing multi - colour smiFISH or super - resolution imaging with expansion microscopy ( 12 ) , ( v ) software tools going from probe design to image analysis . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cells Monoparental mouse embryonic stem cells ( mES ) lines were previously derived ( 13 ) . mES cells were cultured on gelatin - coated dishes in feeder - and serum - free conditions in ESgro - complete - plus medium . A HeLa cell line with a stably integrated HIV reporter with MS2 repeats , and con - stitutive expression of MS2 - GFP and the transactivator Tat was used ( provided by St´ephane Emiliani , Institut Cochin , Paris ) . HeLa cells were grown in DMEM medium sup - plemented with 10 % FCS . For neuronal cells preparation , hippocampi from E17 - 18 OF1 mice were dissected out in 1X phosphate buffered saline ( PBS ) supplemented with 3 % glucose ( PBS - Glu ) . Cells were enzymatically dissociated in PBS - Glu supplemented with 0 . 025 % Trypsin during 5 – 10 min at 37 ◦ C and then physically dissociated using glass fire polished Pasteur pipette . After centrifugation ( 5 min at 200 x g ) , cells were resuspended in plating medium ( Neurobasal medium supplemented with B27 , Glutamax and 2 % serum ) and seeded at a density of 75 000 cells per well ( P12 ) . At DIV 4 , 2 / 3 of the plating medium were removed and replaced by 2 / 3 maintain medium ( Neurobasal medium supplemented with B27 and AraC 5 (cid:2) M ) . Probes smiFISH primary probes and FLAPs ( secondary probes , either fluorescent or conjugated to digoxigenin ) were pro - duced and purchased from Integrated DNA Technolo - gies ( IDT ) , with the following production details . The pri - mary probes are produced using high - throughput oligonu - cleotides synthesis in 96 - well plates . To make use of low - scale synthesis ( 25 nmol ) , the total length of primary probes ( transcript - binding + FLAP - binding ) should not exceed 60 nucleotides for cheaper synthesis . At this scale , oligonu - cleotides synthesis is possible at the price of ∼ 0 . 1 Euros per base at the time of the writing of the paper ( ∼ 150 Euros for 24 primary probes ) . The secondary probes are conjugated to two Cy3 , Cy5 or digoxygenin moieties through 5 (cid:5) and 3 (cid:5) amino modifications . smFISH probes were synthesized by J . M . Escudier ( SPCMIB , Toulouse , France ) and labelled with Cy3 mono - reactive dye pack ( GE Healthcare ) . All primary probes sequences are available online at https : / / bitbucket . org / muellerflorian / fish quant in the Oligostan folder . FLAP sequences are listed in Supplemen - tary Note 1 . smiFISH and image analysis smiFISH was performed according to the Supplementary Protocol . Three - dimensional image stacks were captured on a wide - field microscope ( Zeiss Axioimager Z1 / Apotome ) equipped with a 100 × 1 . 4 NA objective and a CCD cam - era ( Axiocam MRm 4 ) and controlled with Metamorph ( Molecular Devices ) . For MS2 experiments , spots in the GFP and Cy3 channels were detected in 3D stacks with Imaris ( Bitplane ) and categorized as being labelled either with MS2 - GFP , smiFISH probes or both . Because the MS2 - GFP protein is nuclear , DAPI staining was used to de - P AGE 3 OF 11 Nucleic Acids Research , 2016 , Vol . 44 , No . 22 e165 fine nuclear regions and restrain mRNA counts to nuclear spots only . Expansion microscopy and image analysis To perform expansion microscopy , we used secondary probes ( FLAP - Y ) from IDT with a 5 (cid:5) - acrydite modifi - cation and a 3 (cid:5) - Atto565 label . Primary probes ( CRM1 or GAPDH ) , were pre - hybridized with secondary probes as described in the Supplementary Protocol . smFISH ex - periments were performed with the Stellaris RNA FISH buffers ( Biosearch Technologies ) according to the pro - vided protocol ( https : / / www . biosearchtech . com / support / resources / stellaris - protocols ) , except that the final mount - ing step with Vectashield was omitted . Expansion was con - ducted as described ( 12 ) ( a more detailed version is avail - able at http : / / expansionmicroscopy . org / ) , with some modi - fications as explained next . Cells were grown on 18 mm cov - erslips to facilitate the smFISH experiments . To cast the gel , coverslips were quickly air - dried after the final washing step of the smFISH protocol . As a mold , individual wells from non - adhesive silicon insulators with an inner diameter of 4 . 5 mm ( Grace bio - labs , Product # 664206 ) were cut , and gently pressed on the coverslip . Gels were poured with 30 (cid:2) l of the monomer solution with a cross - linker concentra - tion of 0 . 2 % . After 1 h , coverslips were transferred to Nunc 2 - well LabTek chambers ( Thermo Scientific ) . Proteinase K treatment was performed for 4 h at 37 ◦ C and expansion was performed as described ( 12 ) . Expanded samples were em - bedded in 2 % low melting agarose , to avoid drift during ac - quisition . Three - dimensional images were acquired on a Nikon Ti Eclipse , with a LED light - source ( Lumencor Spectra X light engine ) , a 60 × 1 . 4 NA objective and an Orca flash 4 . 0 LT sCMOS camera . Before expansion 41 z - slices with a spac - ing of 300 nm were acquired , after expansion 40 slices with a spacing of 600 nm . DAPI images were acquired by excita - tion with 390 nm at 4 % for 100 ms , smFISH images at 560 nm at 40 % and 500 ms . Nuclear area was measured in 2D maximum intensity projections of DAPI images with CellProfiler ( 11 ) after au - tomated segmentation . mRNA detection was performed with FISH - quant ( 5 ) with local - maximum detection af - ter Laplacian of Gaussian filtering . Signal - to - noise ratio ( SNR ) was calculated for individual cells as the ratio of the mean amplitude of the fitted 3D Gaussian to the stan - dard deviation of the background in a region without cells . In Supplementary Note 3 , we provide carefully validated guidelines to select the best mRNA detection method in FISH - quant . Specimen free gels were cast in 6 mm silicon tubes with varying concentrations of the cross - linker . Gels were ex - panded as described above for cells , but without the diges - tion . Diameter of expanded gels were measured , and ratio to unexpanded gels reported as expansion factor . Code availability The source code for Oligostan and FISH - quant is avail - able together with test data and detailed tutorials at https : / / bitbucket . org / muellerflorian / fish quant RESULTS smiFISH – principle and validation smiFISH combines two types of probes : ( i ) 12 to 48 unla - belled primary probes containing both a shared sequence ( FLAP ) and a gene - specific targeting sequence ; ( ii ) a sec - ondary probe labelled with two fluorophores , which is pre - hybridized in vitro to the primary probes via the FLAP sequence ( Figure 1A , Supplementary Note 1 ) . This ap - proach is cost effective because unlabelled primary probes are cheap , while the secondary FLAP probe is used for all primary probes and can thus be synthesized at large scale , thereby greatly reducing its cost . We first tested smiFISH with a reporter gene allowing co - localization analysis in different colours , such that the speci - ficity and efficiency of smiFISH could be investigated ( Fig - ure 1B , C and Supplementary Methods ; ( 14 ) ) . This reporter gene was derived from HIV - 1 and was stably integrated in HeLa cells . It contains MS2 stem - loops in an intron that allows to detect the RNA using GFP ( 15 ) . The MS2 stem - loops are specifically recognized by the coat protein of the bacteriophage MS2 ( MCP ) , and by expressing MCP fused to GFP , the mRNA can be visualized though the MCP – GFP fusion . Images show numerous dimmer nucleoplas - mic spots corresponding to single molecules of the tagged pre - mRNA and frequently one brighter nuclear spot corre - sponding to the transcription site of the reporter ( 14 ) . We then designed a set of 20 primary smiFISH probes against this reporter and counted 20 to over 200 pre - mRNA per cell ( N = 50 cells ) , while no mRNA was detected in a control cell line lacking the MS2 reporter ( Figure 1B and C ) . These experiments also showed that the smiFISH pro - tocol left most of the GFP signal intact , most likely be - cause mild hybridization and washing conditions were used ( 37 ◦ C ; 15 % formamide and 1xSSC ; see also Supplementary Figure S1 ) . The comparison of the Cy3 and GFP signals yielded 80 % of co - localization , independently of the expres - sion level of the reporter RNA ( Figure 1B and C ) . A co - localization percentage of 80 % is in line with previous stud - ies for dual - colour labelling of other genes in various organ - isms ( 5 , 16 , 17 ) , thus indicating specific and sensitive single mRNA detection obtained with smiFISH . We then compared smiFISH to regular smFISH and evaluated the impact of using different numbers of probes . For these experiments , we used a cell line expressing a GFP - tagged version of the ING3 protein , which was expressed from a bacterial artificial chromosome ( BAC ) carrying the entire ING3 gene and stably integrated into the genome of a HeLa cell line ( Hela - ING3 - GFP cells ; ( 18 ) ) . We de - signed a pool of 40 fluorescent smFISH oligonucleotide probes that hybridized against the GFP tag ( carrying up to 4 fluorophores each ; ( 3 ) ) , as well as a pool of 45 smiFISH probes ( carrying 2 fluorophores each ; Figure 2 ) . We then performed in situ hybridization on HeLa - ING3 - GFP cells and on cells lacking the ING3 BAC as control . We analysed the impact of changing the number of used probes on signal quality ( 12 , 24 , 45 for smiFISH ; 20 , 40 for smFISH ) . Bright cytoplasmic spots corresponding to single mRNAs were de - tected in HeLa - ING3 - GFP cells and were absent from con - trol cells ( Figure 2A ) . We first counted the number of de - e165 Nucleic Acids Research , 2016 , Vol . 44 , No . 22 P AGE 4 OF 11 Figure 1 . mRNA detection using smiFISH . ( A ) Principle of smiFISH . 24 primary probes are pre - hybridized in vitro with the secondary probe via the FLAP sequence . Resulting duplexes are subsequently hybridized in cells . Length ( nt : nucleotides ) and (cid:2) G 37 ◦ C are indicated . Red circles : Cy3 moieties . ( B and C ) Dual - colour labelling of HIV transcripts with smiFISH - Cy3 and MS2 - GFP in HeLa - HIV - MS2 - GFP cells and parental HeLa cells ( negative control ) . ( B ) Red arrows indicate examples of individual mRNA molecules . Blue arrows indicate active transcription site . ( C ) Percentage of smiFISH spots that co - localized with a MS2 spot . Each dot corresponds to one cell , plotted as a function of the number of smiFISH spots per cell ( N = 50 cells ) . ( D ) Androgenetic ( AK2 ) and parthenogenetic ( PR8 ) mouse embryonic stem cells mES cells were hybridized with smiFISH probes targeting either Grb10 or Peg3 . Red arrows indicate examples of individual mRNA molecules . Number of detected mRNAs are reported for each image . Nuclei manually drawn from DAPI images ( not shown ) are outlined in blue . tected spots as a function of a threshold with increasing in - tensity ( Figure 2B ) . The number of detected spots decreased with increasing threshold intensities , but a plateau appeared in the middle of the curve when using 24 or 45 smiFISH probes ( or 20 to 40 smFISH probes ) . This plateau separates spots of low and high intensities . Control cell line lacked the spots of high intensities ( Figure 2C ) , indicating the low and high intensity spots corresponded to false positive ( back - ground ) and true positive ( RNA molecules ) spots , respec - tively . As reported before ( 4 , 5 ) , this plateau corresponds hence to a range of intensity values that yield an optimal de - tection . Smaller intensity values lead to an over - detection , larger intensity values to an under - detection . Thus , we con - cluded that the use of 24 to 45 smiFISH probes allowed a proper separation between true positive and false positive detections , and that a higher number of probes yielded a better separation between them . Next , we fit each detected RNA spot with a 3D Gaussian function ( 5 ) . We found that spot intensities ( Amplitude of the Gaussian ) increased with the number of probes ( Figure 2C ) . Finally , we calculated the signal - to - noise ratio ( SNR ) as the ratio of amplitude and standard deviation of the background , and found that the SNR also increased with probe number , and that smiFISH and smFISH yielded similar SNRs when a similar number of probes were used ( Figure 2D ) . Altogether , these data in - dicated that smiFISH performed similarly to smFISH , and that using more probes yielded a better separation between the signal of true RNA molecules from false detections . However , more probes also mean higher cost , and 24 probes provide a good compromise between cost and signal quality since it readily allowed to separate true RNA signals from background ( Figure 2C ) . Next , we optimized the method to determine the best hybridization sequences . Traditionally , sequences are cho - sen such that they have a similar melting temperature ( Tm ) . However , hybridization and washing are performed at 37 ◦ C , far lower than the typical Tm . The standard free energy of binding ( (cid:2) G ) varies in a sequence - dependent manner with temperature ( 19 ) , and oligonucleotides with different sequences may thus have an identical (cid:2) G at the Tm , but different (cid:2) G at 37 ◦ C . We thus developed a script – – Oligostan – – to identify hybridization sequences with a common (cid:2) G 37 ◦ C , and thus with an identical tar - get affinity at this temperature ( Supplementary Note 2 ) . To further improve probe design , we also incorporated empirical criteria for optimal determination of hybridiza - tion sequences , which were determined previously in large - scale hybridization experiments ( 20 ) . We tested Oligostan on three genes with different expression levels : GAPDH , CTNNA1 and CTNNB1 . In each case , we obtained im - ages with clearly identifiable mRNA molecules ( Supple - mentary Figure S2 ) . A direct comparison of 14 probe sets P AGE 5 OF 11 Nucleic Acids Research , 2016 , Vol . 44 , No . 22 e165 Figure 2 . Comparison of smiFISH and standard smFISH against a GFP - tagged version of ING3 . Negative control is a cell line not expressing the tagged ING3 . ( A ) RepresentativeimagesforsmFISHandsmiFISHperformedwithvaryingnumbersofprobes . Imageswererescaledsuchthatcellularbackground is comparable . The granular background in the negative control likely stems from non - specifically bound stray probes . Same scale bar for all images . ( B ) Number of ( normalized ) detected spots shown as a function of different ( normalized ) intensity thresholds . The number of detected spots were renormalized such that the actually detected number is 1 , in order to compare cells with different numbers of detected mRNAs . The tested intensity thresholds are not listed with their intensity values , but with an increasing index , in order to compare images with different intensity values . ( C ) Number of detected spots as a function of different tested intensity thresholds for smiFISH with 24 probes . Panel on the left shows results for 5 cells with different expression levels for ING3 , panel on the right for 5 cells of the negative control . Gray vertical bar indicates manually determined plateau for mRNA detection . Note that in the negative control no spots are detected with this threshold . ( D ) Estimated parameters after fitting detected spots with a 3D Gaussian function ( mean ± / - standard deviation ) . For each experiment , 5 cells with a total of 500 ± spots were considered . Increasing the probe number leads to brighter amplitude but also more background . Estimated width of the Gaussian stays , however , unchanged . Signal - to - noise ratio ( SNR ) relates the intensity of the mRNA molecules to fluctuations in background intensity . SNR was calculated as (cid:2) / (cid:3) , where (cid:2) is the average estimated amplitude after fitting individual mRNA molecules with a Gaussian function with FISH - quant ( 5 ) , (cid:3) is the standard deviation of the background intensity ( measured in parts of the cells with no mRNA molecules ) . Reported values are the mean ± / - standard deviation for the same cells used in ( C ) . Using increasing probe numbers leads to a higher SNR for smiFISH and smFISH . e165 Nucleic Acids Research , 2016 , Vol . 44 , No . 22 P AGE 6 OF 11 ( 24 oligonucleotides each ) , designed with Oligostan or using only the Tm further showed that Oligostan indeed yielded frequently higher SNR and thus better better mRNA de - tection ( Supplementary Table S1 ) . We then applied smiFISH to detect two endogenous genes – – Grb10 and Peg3 – – in mES . These genes are subject to genomic imprinting ( 21 ) , an epigenetic phenomenon in which parentally inherited DNA methylation marks me - diate parent - of - origin specific monoallelic expression . The mouse gene Grb10 ( Growth factor receptor - bound protein 10 ) is mostly expressed from the maternal allele ( 22 , 23 ) , whereas Peg3 ( Paternally expressed gene 3 ) is mainly ex - pressed from the paternal allele ( 24 , 25 ) . As expected , we observed many mRNA molecules for Grb10 in partheno - genetic ( PR8 ) cells and for Peg3 in androgenetic ( AK2 ) cells ( Figure 1D ) . In contrast , we detected only few molecules for each gene in its respective imprinted cell line ( Figure 1D , Supplementary Figure S3A ) , consistent with the very low expression detected by RNA - Seq ( Supplementary Fig - ure S3B ) , and in - line with the regulation of these genes by genomic imprinting . Finally , we used smiFISH to success - fully detect (cid:4) - actin mRNAs in neurons . The results indi - cated that smiFISH properly detects mRNA while preserv - ing cell’s morphology , even long and fragile cellular exten - sions ( Supplementary Figure S4 ) . Taken together , these experiments underline the sensitiv - ity and specificity of the smiFISH approach in different cell lines , as well as its ability to preserve cell’s morphology and other fluorescent labels such as GFP . Multi - colour smiFISH We then adapted smiFISH to the simultaneous detection of two different mRNAs , by labelling the primary probes for the different mRNAs in spectrally distinct colours . Im - portantly , this does not require having different FLAP se - quences on the primary probes . In the smiFISH protocol , primary probes are pre - hybridized to the secondary probe before being used in cells , and each primary probe set can thus be labelled in a separate reaction with the desired flu - orescent secondary probe ( Figure 1A ) . We found that this allows the simultaneous use of different primary probe sets carrying the same FLAP sequence . We illustrate this with single - and dual - colour smiFISH against TPX2 and CT - TNA1 ( Figure 3A and B ) . The estimated mRNA number in single - colour and dual - colour experiments were similar ( Figure 3C ) , and a co - localization analysis revealed no co - localization between the different channels , ruling out cross - hybridization ( Figure 3D and E ) . The pre - hybridization step of the smiFISH protocol therefore avoids synthesizing primary probes with different FLAP sequences , since dif - ferent fluorophores can be combined with existing libraries of primary probes . One particular advantage of smiFISH is its flexibility with respect to the used labels , since only the secondary probes are labelled . This labelling is not limited to fluo - rophores . In a second dual - colour smFISH experiment , we tagged secondary probes with digoxigenin , which was then detected with fluorescein - labelled anti - digoxigenin antibod - ies ( Supplementary Figure S5 ) . Each antibody was labelled with 3 – 4 fluoresceins , and hence providing brighter signal than can be obtained by directly coupling secondary probes with a green fluorescent dye . Super - resolution imaging with smiFISH Recently , expansion microscopy ( ExM ) has been intro - duced to obtain higher resolution by physically enlarging samples ( 12 ) . In the original ExM protocol , a protein of in - terest is targeted with antibodies labelled with DNA probes carrying both a fluorophore and an acrydite modification . The acrydite then integrates into a swellable polymer net - work , which is established within the cell . After proteol - ysis and addition of water , the polymer – – and thereby the embedded fluorescently labelled probes – – expand isotropi - cally . The physically enlarged sample allows features previ - ously located under the diffraction limit to become resolv - able through standard microscopy . We reasoned that the flexible design of smiFISH should make it readily amenable for ExM by replacing one of the fluorophores on the sec - ondary probes with an acrydite ( Figure 4A ) . To test if ExM is compatible with smiFISH , we first examined the moder - ately expressed gene CRM1 using such secondary probes . Before expansion , the typical smFISH signal was visible , with bright mRNA molecules over a non - specific back - ground ( Figure 4B , left ) . We then performed ExM ( See Ma - terial and Methods ) . It has been reported that the poly - merization leads to photobleaching of certain fluorophores ( 12 ) , but after expansion , the DAPI signal was still present ( Supplementary Figure S6A and B ) , although at reduced intensity . The increase of the nuclear area ( roughly 14 - fold , Supplementary Figure S6C ) indicates an expansion factor of ∼ 3 . 7 , in agreement with measurements of expansion in specimen free gels ( Supplementary Figure S6D ) . Remark - ably , we could also observe individual mRNA molecules af - ter expansion ( Figure 4B and Supplementary Figure S6E ) . While these spots were ∼ 2 times dimmer after expansion ( in agreement with the previously observed reduction of fluo - rescence after expansion ; ( 12 ) ) , the cellular background was almost completely removed ( Figure 4C ) . The latter effect likely results from dilution of non - specifically bound probes in the expanded volume and a reduction of cellular autoflu - orescence due to proteolysis . Importantly , this strong back - ground reduction more than compensated for the decreased mRNA signal intensity , resulting in a substantial ( ∼ 2 - fold ) increase in spot SNR after expansion ( Figure 4D ) , improv - ing mRNAs detection and localization precision . Because the expansion increases the available volume for spot de - tection , we hypothesized that ExM could help for highly expressed genes , where individual transcripts are often too dense to be resolved by conventional microscopy . We there - fore applied smiFISH with ExM to GAPDH – a housekeep - ing gene routinely used as an expression control ( Supple - mentary Figure S2 ) . Before expansion , individual GAPDH molecules were often too close to be readily distinguished ( Figure 4E , left ) . After expansion , individual mRNA could be distinguished also in dense regions ( Figure 4E , right and Figure 4F ) . As a consequence , mRNA counts after expan - sion were substantially higher ( Figure 4G ) reflecting the im - proved ability to spatially resolve transcripts . In summary , combining smiFISH with ExM provides better SNR and allows resolving spatially dense transcripts . P AGE 7 OF 11 Nucleic Acids Research , 2016 , Vol . 44 , No . 22 e165 Figure 3 . Detection of CTNNA1 and TPX2 mRNA by two - colour smiFISH in HeLa cells . Single - colour smiFISH performed with Cy3 against either gene . Dual - colour smiFISH performed with Cy3 against TPX2 , and Cy5 against CTNNA1 . Both probe - sets contain FLAP - Y , and were prehybridized separately with the secondary probes before the actual experiment . ( A and B ) Maximum intensity projections of representative smiFISH images for ( A ) single - colour and ( B ) dual - colour experiments . For automated segmentation , nuclei were marked with DAPI , and cells with HCS CellMask TM Green ( Molecular Probes ) . Segmentation was performed on focus - projected images ( see last section of results ) with CellCognition ( 10 ) : nuclei shown with dashed blue lines , cells with solid blue lines . ( C ) Left : estimated mRNA number per cell . Reported P - value from Wilcoxon rank sum test for equal medians ( Matlab function ranksum ) . Right : amplitude of 3D Gaussian fit to each detected mRNA molecule . TPX2 mRNA detection was similar in single - colour and dual - colour experiments with respect to estimated mRNA counts and mRNA spot intensity . Labelling of CTNNA1 mRNA with Cy5 leads to substantially dimmer spots , which makes mRNA detection more challenging and leads to a lower P - value for the comparison of mRNA counts . Number of cells per condition : NCTTNA1 = 143 , NTPX2 = 115 ; NCTTNA1 , TPX2 = 150 . ( D ) Dual - colour smiFISH ( TPX2 in red , and CTNNA1 in white ) . Images are zoom - ins indicated by red rectangles in ( B ) . For better visualization , images were background corrected with the SubtractBackground function in Fiji ( Rolling ball radius of 50 pixels ) . ( E ) Co - localization analysis for dual - colour smiFISH experiment in ( C ) . mRNAs were detected in 3D images with FISH - quant ( 5 ) and co - localization determined with the Matlab function munkres using the Hungarian Algorithm for linear assignment problems , which is available on Matlab File Exchange . Plots show the co - localization percentage for TPX2 ( blue , 27 178 mRNAs ) and CTNNA1 ( red , 35 623 mRNAs ) as a function of the maximum allowed distance between spots to be still considered to be co - localized . For distances smaller than 500 nm , co - localization is smaller than 5 % . Larger allowed distances lead to a significant increase of co - localization percentage , since neighbouring spots are erroneously considered to co - localize ( especially in denser area such as zoom - in 4 ) . e165 Nucleic Acids Research , 2016 , Vol . 44 , No . 22 P AGE 8 OF 11 Figure 4 . Expansion microscopy with smiFISH . ( A ) Principle of ExM with smiFISH . Secondary probes carry an acrydite modification that anchors them into the polymer . After addition of water , the polymer swells and the cell will physically increase in size . Close spots ( green rectangle ) will be separated more , and can be distinguished under a regular microscope . Grey rectangles show zoom - in to illustrate how the secondary probes get anchored in the polymer network . ( B ) smiFISH against CRM1 before ( left ) and after ( right ) ExM . Numbers in plot after ExM indicate estimated number of mature mRNA molecules . In the image before ExM 186 ± / - 70 mRNAs were detected ( Supplementary Figure S8 ) . Images show entire field of view ( 220 × 220 (cid:2) m ) . ( C ) Bar plots show estimated background and amplitude after fitting detected mRNAs with FISH - quant . N = 5 cells . Black bar shows imaging background without cells . ( D ) Bar plot shows SNR with standard deviation before and after ExM . ( E ) As in ( B ) , but for GAPDH . ( F ) Intensity profile through two mRNA spots after ExM highlighted in inset of ( E ) . Scaled distance obtained by dividing by estimated expansion factor . ( G ) Estimated mRNA number with FISH - quant before and after ExM with identical detection settings . Boxplot generated with Matlab . Central mark indicates the median , the bottom and top edges of the box indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles , respectively . The whiskers extend to the most extreme data points not considered outliers ( indicated by crosses ) . Automated image analysis for cell segmentation and mRNA detection As smFISH experiments become increasingly powerful and used in high - throughput imaging efforts , the need grows for fully automated quantification of mRNA in single cells . Therefore , in addition to identification and counting of sin - gle mRNA molecules ( 5 ) , accurate segmentation of cells is required ( 10 , 11 ) . Segmentation can be performed with dedicated cell markers , but in the following we use the non - specific smFISH background signal to determine cell boundaries . While there are imaging conditions ( confo - cal microscopy , use of an appropriate membrane marker ) , which allow in principle 3D segmentation of cells , this is rarely compatible with large scale screening approaches . As it is common in this field , we therefore performed seg - mentation on 2D intensity projections . However , we found that the projection used can have a strong impact on the segmentation quality . smFISH images – – as other wide - field images – – typically have large contributions of out - of - focus P AGE 9 OF 11 Nucleic Acids Research , 2016 , Vol . 44 , No . 22 e165 Figure 5 . Improved image segmentation with focus projection . ( A ) Images show maximum intensity projections of smFISH against KIF5B in HeLa cells along the indicated axis . Plot on the right shows averaged pixel intensity along the dashed blue line . ( B ) Schematic of focus based projection . Out - of - focus slices are removed based on a global focus calculation . Local focus measurements are done on remaining images and a projection is performed by choosing for each XY position the pixel - intensity in Z with the maximum focus value . Focus is calculated with HELM operator ( 27 ) , which computes the intensity ratio between pixels and their neighbourhood . ( C ) 2D cell segmentation after focus - projection ( see also Supplementary Note 3 ) . Eighteen cells were segmented in this image , please note that cells whose nucleus touches the image border were automatically excluded . Yellow rectangle indicate protrusions that were only properly segmented after focus - projection but not maximum intensity projection ( See Supplementary Note 3 , Figure 5 ) . ( D and E ) Evaluation of segmentation quality by comparing automatic segmentation to manually segmented ground truth for cell area and cell border . Used abbreviations : TP = true positives , FP = false positives , FN = false negatives , FP = false positives . Sensitivity = TP / ( TP ± FN ) , or the proportion of ground truth area ( or border ) that is correctly segmented . Precision = TP / ( TP ± FP ) , or the proportion of the automatically segmented area ( or border ) belonging to the ground truth . A confidence zone of 36 pixels width is used when comparing cell borders . signal ( Figure 5A ) . As a consequence , performing a stan - dard maximum intensity projection along z often yields a good signal for bright cellular structures , but also results in blurred cellular boundaries , making cell segmentation less reliable with the frequent loss of thin cell extensions ( Fig - ure 5C and Supplementary Note 3 ) . We therefore developed a new projection method that uses global and local focus measurements to circumvent this problem ( Figure 5B ) . In short , we first used a global focus measurement to automat - ically remove out - of - focus slices . Second , for the remaining slices , we calculated a local focus measurement for each lat - eral position ( x , y ) . The z - projection is then performed for each ( x , y ) position using voxels with the highest local fo - cus values , rather than highest intensity value . These pix - els are then included in an averaging operation that yields the final 2D image . This 2D image has sharper bound - aries than a standard maximum - intensity projection ( Fig - ure 5C and Supplementary Note 3 ) . In order to test if our projection approach improves cell segmentation , we used a fairly traditional workflow for cell segmentation based on prefiltering , global thresholding and watershed transfor - mation , and we integrated it to the open - source software CellCognition ( 10 ) . By comparison with a manually defined ground truth , we found that focus - based projections signif - icantly improved segmentation quality relative to standard maximum - intensity projections ( Figure 5D and E ) . Impor - tantly , this allows to capture more complex cellular outlines as for instance small protrusions ( Figure 5C ; Supplemen - e165 Nucleic Acids Research , 2016 , Vol . 44 , No . 22 P AGE 10 OF 11 tary Note 3 ) . Note that this projection method is also suc - cessful for different organisms such as yeast and ES cells , and yields substantially sharper projections even when ded - icated cell markers are used ( Supplementary Note 3 ) . We integrated this projection approach in our software FISH - quant ( 5 ) , which allows the quantification of mature and nascent mRNA molecules , to provide an integrated image analysis package for smFISH . DISCUSSION We present smiFISH – an easy - to - use , cost - effective and re - liable smFISH workflow going from probe design to image analysis . A key advantage of smiFISH is an optimized probe design that combines unlabelled specific primary probes with labelled secondary probes . This design has several ad - vantages . First , probes are substantially cheaper , and this allows to use more probes per mRNA and thus to obtain a higher SNR and a better efficiency of RNA detection . Sec - ond , it provides large flexibility in labelling primary probes , to perform for instance dye - swap , multi - colour experiments and ExM without the need of generating new probes sets . We further provide fully automated software solution from probe design to image analysis . In particular , we imple - mented a focus - based projection method providing sharper 2D projections from 3D stacks . This tool yields reliable cel - lular segmentation and is widely applicable . Together with the automated mRNA detection in FISH - quant , large data sets can now be analysed with minimal user intervention . Importantly , we demonstrate that smiFISH can be used in expansion microscopy to obtain super - resolved images on a standard microscope . Since these images are acquired in full 3D , this capability increases the potential of smFISH for analysing the spatial dimension of the transcriptome ( 26 ) , for instance in multiplex smFISH ( 8 ) where many dif - ferent mRNA species are imaged simultaneously . By com - bining this approach with protein labelling , it will be pos - sible to study protein – mRNA complexes at high resolution in situ , and possibly down to the single molecule level . Taken together , smiFISH and FISH - quant provide a complete , validated and flexible workflow for single molecule FISH from initial probe - design to final image analysis . We therefore believe that smiFISH has the po - tential to become an important routine technique to study mRNA biology at the single cell level . SUPPLEMENTARY DATA Supplementary Data are available at NAR Online . ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors thank Benjamin King , Robert Feil , David Ll ` eres , Michael Girardot and Thierry Forn´e ( IGMM , Montpellier , France ) for helpful discussions , St´ephane Emiliani ( Institut Cochin , Paris , France ) for the HeLa - HIV - MS2 - GFP cell line , Anne Debant and Susanne Schmidt ( CRBM , Montpellier , France ) for neuron samples . FUNDING Scholarship from Lebanese National Council for Sci - entific Research ( LNCSR ) [ to R . C . ] ; Agence Nationale de la Recherche [ ANR - 11 - BSV8 - 018 - 02 , ANR - 14 - CE10 - 0018 - 01 ] ; Institut Pasteur , Fondation pour la Recherche M´edicale ( FRM ) ; Agence Nationale de Recherche sur le Sida ( ANRS ) . Funding for open access charge : Institut Pas - teur . Conflict of interest statement . None declared . REFERENCES 1 . Li , G . - W . and Xie , X . S . ( 2011 ) Central dogma at the single - molecule level in living cells . Nature , 475 , 308 – 315 . 2 . Buxbaum , A . R . , Haimovich , G . and Singer , R . H . ( 2015 ) In the right place at the right time : Visualizing and understanding mRNA localization . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . , 16 , 95 – 109 . 3 . Femino , A . M . , Fay , F . S . , Fogarty , K . and Singer , R . H . ( 1998 ) Visualization of single RNA transcripts in situ . Science , 280 , 585 – 590 . 4 . Raj , A . , van den Bogaard , P . , Rifkin , S . A . , van Oudenaarden , A . and Tyagi , S . ( 2008 ) Imaging individual mRNA molecules using multiple singly labeled probes . Nat . Methods , 5 , 877 – 879 . 5 . Mueller , F . , Senecal , A . , Tantale , K . , Marie - Nelly , H . , Ly , N . , Collin , O . , Basyuk , E . , Bertrand , E . , Darzacq , X . and Zimmer , C . ( 2013 ) FISH - quant : Automatic counting of transcripts in 3D FISH images . Nat . Methods , 10 , 277 – 278 . 6 . Raj , A . and Tyagi , S . ( 2010 ) Detection of individual endogenous RNA transcripts in situ using multiple singly labeled probes . Methods Enzymol . , 472 , 365 – 386 . 7 . Battich , N . , Stoeger , T . and Pelkmans , L . ( 2013 ) Image - based transcriptomics in thousands of single human cells at single - molecule resolution . Nat . Methods , 10 , 1127 – 1133 . 8 . Chen , K . H . , Boettiger , A . N . , Moffitt , J . R . , Wang , S . and Zhuang , X . ( 2015 ) Spatially resolved , highly multiplexed RNA profiling in single cells . Science , 348 , aaa6090 . 9 . Coassin , S . R . , Orjalo , A . V . , Semaan , S . J . and Johansson , H . E . ( 2014 ) Simultaneous detection of nuclear and cytoplasmic RNA variants utilizing Stellaris ® RNA fluorescence in situ hybridization in adherent cells . Methods Mol . Biol . Clifton NJ , 1211 , 189 – 199 . 10 . Held , M . , Schmitz , M . H . A . , Fischer , B . , Walter , T . , Neumann , B . , Olma , M . H . , Peter , M . , Ellenberg , J . and Gerlich , D . W . ( 2010 ) CellCognition : time - resolved phenotype annotation in high - throughput live cell imaging . Nat . Methods , 7 , 747 – 754 . 11 . Kamentsky , L . , Jones , T . R . , Fraser , A . , Bray , M . - A . , Logan , D . J . , Madden , K . L . , Ljosa , V . , Rueden , C . , Eliceiri , K . W . and Carpenter , A . E . ( 2011 ) Improved structure , function and compatibility for CellProfiler : modular high - throughput image analysis software . Bioinformatics , 27 , 1179 – 1180 . 12 . Chen , F . , Tillberg , P . W . and Boyden , E . S . ( 2015 ) Optical imaging . Expansion microscopy . Science , 347 , 543 – 548 . 13 . Allen , N . D . , Barton , S . C . , Hilton , K . , Norris , M . L . and Surani , M . A . ( 1994 ) A functional analysis of imprinting in parthenogenetic embryonic stem cells . Development , 120 , 1473 – 1482 . 14 . Tantale , K . , Mueller , F . , Kozulic - Pirher , A . , Lesne , A . , Victor , J . - M . , Robert , M . - C . , Capozi , S . , Chouaib , R . , B¨acker , V . , Mateos - Langerak , J . et al . ( 2016 ) A single - molecule view of transcription reveals convoys of RNA polymerases and multi - scale bursting . Nat . Commun . , 7 , 12248 . 15 . Bertrand , E . , Chartrand , P . , Schaefer , M . , Shenoy , S . M . , Singer , R . H . and Long , R . M . ( 1998 ) Localization of ASH1 mRNA particles in living yeast . Mol . Cell , 2 , 437 – 445 . 16 . Batish , M . , van den Bogaard , P . , Kramer , F . R . and Tyagi , S . ( 2012 ) Neuronal mRNAs travel singly into dendrites . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . , 109 , 4645 – 4650 . 17 . Chou , Y . , Vafabakhsh , R . , Do˘ganay , S . , Gao , Q . , Ha , T . and Palese , P . ( 2012 ) One influenza virus particle packages eight unique viral RNAs as shown by FISH analysis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . , 109 , 9101 – 9106 . 18 . Poser , I . , Sarov , M . , Hutchins , J . R . A . , H´erich´e , J . - K . , Toyoda , Y . , Pozniakovsky , A . , Weigl , D . , Nitzsche , A . , Hegemann , B . , Bird , A . W . et al . ( 2008 ) BAC TransgeneOmics : A high - throughput method for exploration of protein function in mammals . Nat . Methods , 5 , 409 – 415 . P AGE 11 OF 11 Nucleic Acids Research , 2016 , Vol . 44 , No . 22 e165 19 . Wu , P . , Nakano , S . and Sugimoto , N . ( 2002 ) Temperature dependence of thermodynamic properties for DNA / DNA and RNA / DNA duplex formation . Eur . J . Biochem . FEBS , 269 , 2821 – 2830 . 20 . Xu , Q . , Schlabach , M . R . , Hannon , G . J . and Elledge , S . J . ( 2009 ) Design of 240 , 000 orthogonal 25mer DNA barcode probes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . , 106 , 2289 – 2294 . 21 . Girardot , M . , Feil , R . and Ll ` eres , D . ( 2013 ) Epigenetic deregulation of genomic imprinting in humans : Causal mechanisms and clinical implications . Epigenomics , 5 , 715 – 728 . 22 . Arnaud , P . , Monk , D . , Hitchins , M . , Gordon , E . , Dean , W . , Beechey , C . V . , Peters , J . , Craigen , W . , Preece , M . , Stanier , P . et al . ( 2003 ) Conserved methylation imprints in the human and mouse GRB10 genes with divergent allelic expression suggests differential reading of the same mark . Hum . Mol . Genet . , 12 , 1005 – 1019 . 23 . Hikichi , T . , Kohda , T . , Kaneko - Ishino , T . and Ishino , F . ( 2003 ) Imprinting regulation of the murine Meg1 / Grb10 and human GRB10 genes ; roles of brain - specific promoters and mouse - specific CTCF - binding sites . Nucleic Acids Res . , 31 , 1398 – 1406 . 24 . Kuroiwa , Y . , Kaneko - Ishino , T . , Kagitani , F . , Kohda , T . , Li , L . L . , Tada , M . , Suzuki , R . , Yokoyama , M . , Shiroishi , T . , Wakana , S . et al . ( 1996 ) Peg3 imprinted gene on proximal chromosome 7 encodes for a zinc finger protein . Nat . Genet . , 12 , 186 – 190 . 25 . Perera , B . P . U . , Teruyama , R . and Kim , J . ( 2015 ) Yy1 gene dosage effect and bi - allelic expression of Peg3 . PloS One , 10 , e0119493 . 26 . Crosetto , N . , Bienko , M . and van Oudenaarden , A . ( 2015 ) Spatially resolved transcriptomics and beyond . Nat . Rev . Genet . , 16 , 57 – 66 . 27 . Pertuz , S . , Puig , D . and Garcia , M . A . ( 2013 ) Analysis of focus measure operators for shape - from - focus . Pattern Recognit . , 46 , 1415 – 1432 .