Licensee technological potential and exclusive rights in international licensing : A multilevel model Preet S Aulakh 1 , Marshall S Jiang 2 and Sali Li 3 1 Schulich School of Business , York University , Toronto , Canada ; 2 Goodman School of Business , Brock University , St Catharines , Canada ; 3 Darla Moore School of Business , University of South Carolina , Columbia , USA Correspondence : Preet S Aulakh , Schulich School of Business , York University , 4700 Keele St , Toronto , ON , Canada M3J 1P4 . Tel : + 1 416 - 736 - 2100 ; email : paulakh @ schulich . yorku . ca Received : 31 October 2010 Revised : 2 June 2013 Accepted : 3 June 2013 Online publication date : 8 August 2013 Abstract Granting of exclusive rights is an important consideration for firms using licensing as a mode of entry into foreign markets , as exclusive contracts reduce licensors ’ flexibility in a given market during the term of the agreement . By granting exclusivity to a licensee with greater technological potential , the exchange partners can increase the potential transactional value of the licensing agreement . At the same time , a licensee with strong technological potential will increase the threat of transactional hazards due to underinvest - ment and rent appropriation . In this paper , we develop and empirically test a model that evaluates the balancing of transactional value and transaction costs in exclusive licensing . In particular , we identify the conditions under which exclusive contracts are likely to be granted to foreign licensees with strong technological potential . Empirical results from a multilevel model , based on 375 international licensing agreements of US firms in high - technology indus - tries during 1995 – 2008 , show that licensees with a stronger technological potential are more likely to be granted exclusive rights in countries with strong intellectual property rights protection , and in industries with a high rate of technological change ; but are less likely to be granted exclusive rights when there is a high degree of overlap between licensor and licensee products . Journal of International Business Studies ( 2013 ) 44 , 699 – 718 . doi : 10 . 1057 / jibs . 2013 . 31 Keywords : transaction cost analysis ; transactional value ; inter - organizational licensing ; licensing exclusivity ; intellectual property rights ; multilevel model INTRODUCTION Increase in global supply and demand of knowledge - based assets has led to an emergence of global technology markets in which knowl - edge is exchanged between independent ﬁ rms ( Anand & Khanna , 2000 ; Arora , Fosfuri , & Gambardella , 2002 ; The Economist , 2005 ) . As a consequence , ﬁ rms are increasingly using inter - organizational licensing to enter foreign markets ( Arora & Fosfuri , 2000 ; Aulakh , Jiang , & Pan , 2010 ; Contractor , 2001 ) . Compared with other entry modes such as joint ventures and wholly owned subsidiaries , licen - sing requires lower resource commitment , yet provides an initial establishment in exploring a foreign market or assessing a potential partner in preparation for future entry with greater resource commit - ments ( e . g . , Anderson & Gatignon , 1986 ; Buckley & Casson , 1996 ; Hill , Hwang , & Kim , 1990 ) . Journal of International Business Studies ( 2013 ) 44 , 699 – 718 © 2013 Academy of International Business All rights reserved 0047 - 2506 www . jibs . net Licensing relationships , as unique modes for trans - ferring know - how between organizations , entail important transactional attributes . One of the criti - cal decisions for ﬁ rms using licensing as an entry mode is whether to grant exclusive rights to a foreign licensee , whereby a licensor gives a licensee the right to use the intellectual property for a period of time , to the exclusion of others , including the licensor itself ( Gallini & Wright , 1990 ) . In interna - tional licensing agreements , exclusive rights are typically granted on a country - by - country basis ( Anand & Khanna , 2000 ; Bessy & Brousseau , 1998 ) . Licensing exclusivity is a critical decision for both licensor and licensees . For licensor ﬁ rms , exclusive contracts reduce strategic ﬂ exibility to choose other licensing partners , or to choose different ways of entering the market during the duration of the con - tract . From a licensee ’ s perspective , exclusive con - tracts entail costlier licensing fees ( Ziedonis , 2007 ) . Despite the loss of strategic ﬂ exibility and higher premiums , exclusive licensing is widely used in prac - tice ( Kim & Vonortas , 2006 ) , particularly in interna - tional technology licensing ( Anand & Khanna , 2000 ) . The popularity of exclusivity in licensing agreements can be attributed to its ability to increase transac - tional value and / or to minimize transaction costs . Prior studies ( e . g . , Arora et al . , 2002 ) argue that by limiting the number of licensees , the contracting parties can earn monopoly rents in a given market . In this sense , exclusivity helps enhance the potential transactional value of the licensing agreement . Another research stream contends that exclusivity serves as credible commitments ( a contractual hos - tage ) offered by the licensor to safeguard licensee investment in complementary assets ( Somaya , Kim , & Vonortas , 2010 ) . The latter argument highlights exclusivity provision as a mechanism to reduce trans - action costs . While recent research has examined the issue of exclusivity in licensing agreements , there has been a lack of integration of these perspectives . As noted by Zajac and Olsen ( 1993 ) and Madhok and Tallman ( 1998 ) , in order to better understand the nature of inter - organizational strategies , and to further extend the transaction cost economics ( TCE ) framework , we need to incorporate both the transaction cost and the transactional value perspectives when examin - ing exchange relationships . In licensing agreements , it is also critical to incorporate both when investigat - ing whether exclusivity provision can always simul - taneously increase transactional value and reduce transaction costs . If not , is there a balance between transactional value and transaction costs when exclusivity is granted in an international licensing agreement ? This issue has not been addressed by prior research , largely because previous studies have implicitly assumed that licensees are homogeneous regarding their capabilities or potential to create value , or their tendencies to increase transactional hazards . In that sense , by having the exclusivity provisions , a licensor can automatically achieve the strategic goals of an exclusive licensing agreement without considering the quality of its licensee . Thus the issue of how to balance between value creation and transaction cost minimization was neglected in prior research . In this paper , we incorporate the heterogeneity of inter - organizational collaboration partners – licensees in this case – and argue that the choice of licensee will in ﬂ uence both the value crea - tion and the transaction hazards in a licensing agree - ment . Therefore we propose that the exclusivity poses a trade - off , in which the licensor needs to balance its transaction cost concerns and transactional value in determining to whom it will grant exclusivity . In order to maximize the transactional value , a licensor is more likely to grant exclusivity to a strong licensee with the requisite capabilities to commer - cialize the licensed technology in a foreign market . On the other hand , a stronger licensee is more likely to increase the potential transactional risks , as it is more capable of internalizing and appropriating the know - how and becoming a future competitor in not only the local but also the global market . Since international licensing transactions are often con - ducted in imperfect markets for technology , which are largely affected by the transacting partners ’ beha - viors , and are subject to industry - and country - speci ﬁ c institutional in ﬂ uences ( Anand & Khanna , 2000 ; Arora et al . , 2002 ) , we further theorize that the relational , industry , and country contexts in which licensing agreements are embedded in ﬂ uence poten - tial transactional value and contractual hazards for both licensor and licensee ﬁ rms ( Hueschen , 1951 ) . These , in turn , in ﬂ uence both the appropriateness of offering contractual hostage through exclusive con - tracts and the potential to earn monopoly rents to justify the premium paid for such contracts . Accord - ingly , these multilevel contextual factors in ﬂ uence the balance between transactional value and transac - tion hazards of offering exclusive rights to strong licensees . Our paper makes three contributions to the literature . First , we further add to the licensing literature by integrating the transaction cost and transactional value perspectives . Our analytical Technology licensing and exclusive rights Preet S Aulakh et al 700 Journal of International Business Studies framework reconciles the monopoly rents ( Aulakh et al . , 2010 ; Fosfuri , 2006 ) and hostage ( Somaya et al . , 2010 ) views proposed in the existing literature by asserting that licensing exclusivity decision is a trade - off , as the licensor faces the dilemma of whether to grant exclusivity rights to technologi - cally strong or weak licensees . The trade - off is re ﬂ ected in the balance of lost opportunities due to adverse selection and the transaction costs due to moral hazards ( Bergen , Dutta , & Walker , 1992 ) . The trade - off view of licensing exclusivity corrects the ambiguous assumption in the previous literature that all licensees have similar levels of technological competence . Second , we explicitly acknowledge the heteroge - neity of licensees , and argue that the choice of different licensees will affect the transaction cost and value . Speci ﬁ cally , a mis - selected , incompetent licensee may lead to a failure in launching the technology , creating an opportunity cost that can never be balanced , and losing the potential strate - gic value of an early - mover advantage in the mar - ket . Third , we examine how the value creation or cost reduction is contingent upon the transacting partners ’ behaviors , and subject to industry - and country - speci ﬁ c institutional in ﬂ uences , which address the question of what conditions will favor ( or disfavor ) the granting of exclusivity to licensees with strong technological potential . These ﬁ ndings should be of interest to scholars studying the broader structuring of inter - organizational alli - ances . Within the alliance literature , a number of studies have identi ﬁ ed the need to balance the cooperation and competition aspects of allying with partners with strong capabilities . However , previous research has not identi ﬁ ed the speci ﬁ c mechanisms and factors that may in ﬂ uence this trade - off in selecting alliance partners . Our theori - zation and identi ﬁ cation of some factors relevant to licensing could be adapted and applied to different types of alliances . The rest of the paper is organized as follows . We ﬁ rst review the transactional value and trans - action cost perspectives on the use of exclusivity in licensing agreements . We then develop a trade - off view of licensing exclusivity by integrating these two perspectives . A set of hypotheses are tested , through a multilevel model , on a sample of 375 international technology licensing agree - ments of US ﬁ rms reported in the Securities Data Corporation ( SDC ) database from 1995 to 2008 . Finally , we conclude with implications for future research . THEORY AND HYPOTHESES Exclusivity is a unique attribute associated with licensing transactions ( Aulakh et al . , 2010 ; Somaya et al . , 2010 ) . From a transaction cost perspective , an exclusive licensing contract can be viewed as a hostage offered by the licensor to a licensee to reduce its concerns about the uncertainties of its commer - cialization investment ( Somaya et al . , 2010 ) . Accord - ingly , exclusivity provisions serve as a signal of the licensor ’ s commitment to the licensed technology , thus inducing the licensee to invest suf ﬁ ciently in complementary assets in order to commercialize the licensed technology . This argument goes back to the notion of credible commitment ( Williamson , 1983 ) . During transactions , owing to bounded rationality and uncertainties about outcomes , if one partner puts down credible commitments , signaling willing - ness and con ﬁ dence in investing in the exchange relationship , the other partner would reciprocally follow suit ( Chen , 2010 ; Chen & Hennart , 2004 ) . In this case , by showing credible commitments , the transactional parties mitigate the potential transaction costs , especially when the investment is irreversible or non - salvageable beyond the speci ﬁ c transaction relationship . Somaya et al . ( 2010 ) extend this argument to licensing agreements , arguing that exclusivity provi - sions create a reliance relation between the licensor and the licensee , as the licensor relinquishes its right to licensing to any other licensees or self - commercia - lizing in the market , making the licensor dependent on the sole licensee for production and marketing activities . In such exchanges , a licensor expects that its exclusive licensee fully appreciates the sacri ﬁ ce , and uses reasonable diligence to commercialize the technology . Thus an important purpose of granting licensing exclusivity by a licensor is to induce the licensee to invest suf ﬁ ciently in the licensing project , thus reducing the overall transaction costs . This contractual hostage argument explains a licensor ’ s concerns about transaction costs , but does not adequately consider the value creation role of the licensing transaction . As has been pointed out in the literature ( Dyer , 1996 ; Zajac & Olsen , 1993 ) , the traditional transaction cost perspective focuses on a single - party , cost minimization emphasis ( in this case , from the licensor ’ s perspective ) , but neglects joint value maximization in the transaction ( i . e . , how licensor and licensee jointly enhance pro ﬁ ts in the licensing agreement ) . As suggested by Zajac and Olsen ( 1993 : 137 ) , “ value estimations of inter - orga - nizational strategies require that a focal ﬁ rm con - sider the value sought by that ﬁ rm ’ s exchange Technology licensing and exclusive rights Preet S Aulakh et al 701 Journal of International Business Studies partner . … Value estimations and realizations are based upon the interests of both exchange part - ners , as opposed to those of individual ﬁ rm inter - ests only ” . In a recent study , Aulakh et al . ( 2010 ) consider exclusivity as a unique approach to achieving higher transactional value in the licensing activity . Their research highlights joint value creation as a key reason to grant exclusivity in licensing agreements . More speci ﬁ cally , using a single licensee instead of multiple licensees in a given foreign market can help both licensor and licensee obtain pro ﬁ ts , by exclu - sively controlling non - imitable resources over the contract period , in that sense “ monopoly rents ” ( Evans , 1991 ) . This argument is also supported by empirical evidence that a licensor can command signi ﬁ cantly higher revenues from exclusive licen - sing agreements than from non - exclusive ones . In the latter case , competition would come from other licensees as well as from the licensor , and rent would dissipate to a lower level than a monopoly rent ( Arora & Fosfuri , 2003 ) . Therefore , using an exclu - sive licensee in a given foreign market would max - imize the licensing partners ’ returns . Although recent research recognizes the impor - tance of value creation in granting exclusive rights , it implicitly assumes that all the potential licensees are homogeneous regarding their capabilities and potential in achieving such value creation potential , or monopoly rents . However , as noted by Madhok and Tallman ( 1998 ) , it is critical to distinguish between the potential value attainable , and its actual realization in an inter - organizational collaboration . Any collaboration has a potential value that is attainable from it . This potential , or maximum attainable , value from the alliance is determined by synergies that arise from the ideal combination of complementary resources and capabilities between the partners ( Sarkar , Aulakh , & Madhok , 2009 ) . In other words , even when a ﬁ rm uses exclusive licen - sing to enter a foreign market , expecting to achieve superior value and to mitigate transaction costs , such a licensing strategy may not succeed , because the licensee does not have the capability or potential to successfully launch the commercialization of the transaction - speci ﬁ c investment . Therefore , we argue that in order to optimize returns from technology licensing , a licensor needs to take the licensee ’ s competence into consideration . Given the dif ﬁ culty in obtaining complete infor - mation about the potential licensee ex ante , the licensor has to resolve its concerns of adverse selec - tion through certain other signaling mechanisms , or proxies for the licensee ’ s capabilities . We propose that a licensee ’ s technological efforts ( i . e . , its innova - tion investment ) serve as an important signal of its technological potential . A licensee with high techno - logical potential will be able to quickly absorb the know - how embedded in the licensed technology and facilitate the commercialization of products in the foreign market , and may also advance the licensed technology and share the technological improve - ment with the licensor ( Caves , Crookell , & Killing , 1983 ) . In this sense , granting exclusivity rights to a licensee with high technological potential will help promote the transactional value in the licensing relationship . Given that exclusivity signals and incu - bates trust ( Li & Dant , 1997 ) , it boosts cooperation between the two parties . As technology licensing has long been considered the early - stage tool of market entry ( Johanson & Vahlne , 1977 ; Kotabe , Sahay , & Aulakh , 1996 ) , it carries considerable implications for subsequent strategic moves of a licensor . For instance , technology licensing can serve as a real option for the licensor to learn local partner capabilities ( Kogut & Kulatilaka , 2001 ) and assess the local partner market ( Jiang , Aulakh , & Pan , 2009 ) , which requires the licensee ’ s suf ﬁ cient investment so that a precise assessment of the market can be obtained . In many cases , the licensee accepts the licensor ’ s invol - vement in making marketing strategy , and shares information with the licensor ( Aulakh , Cavusgil , & Sarkar , 1998 ) , which is very important for the licen - sor ’ s future expansion , as the licensor gains more understanding of the market . An exclusive licensee with a strong technological potential is very likely to become a future joint venture partner , as shown in the cases of Phoenix AG ( Germany - based ) licensing to Sigma Corp . ( India - based ) ( Mottner & Johnson , 2000 ) , and Incat ( Australia - based ) licensing to Afai ( Hong Kong - based ) ( Peng , 2008 ) . On the other hand , when granting exclusivity rights to a licensee with low technological potential , the licensor will run into an adverse selection pro - blem . Imagine that a licensee fails , either because of incompetence or because of underinvestment . The time wasted is an opportunity loss , which may result in the loss of ﬁ rst - mover advantages of the licensor ( Lieberman & Montgomery , 1988 ) . The failure of the current licensing project may stall the licensor ’ s subsequent strategic plans , such as foreign direct investment , which are supposed to be based on the result of the performance of the existing licensee ( Jiang et al . , 2009 ) . Hence granting exclusivity to a licensee with strong technological potential not only reduces opportunity losses that are temporarily Technology licensing and exclusive rights Preet S Aulakh et al 702 Journal of International Business Studies pecuniary , but also enhances strategic position in the foreign market in the long run . In the meantime , from a licensee perspective , a licensee with strong technological potential will be more likely to maintain a monopoly position in the market , generating monopoly rents . As technologi - cally strong ﬁ rms are more likely to be industry forerunners , they are more interested in seeking exclusive rights as entry deterrence in the local market to maintain their competitive positions ( Bain , 1956 ) . Therefore , the above arguments lead to our baseline hypothesis : Hypothesis 1 : All else being equal , the greater the licensee ’ s technological potential , the more it is likely that an exclusive licensing agreement will be adopted between the licensor and the licensee . Although licensees with strong technological potential may generate high transactional value in exclusive licensing agreements , they may also cause some potential downside concerns for licensors in the transaction , in particular related to appropria - tion and underinvestment . For instance , in the gen - eral alliance context , Roy and Oliver ( 2009 ) examine joint venture partner selection criteria , and note a relationship between partner capability and future appropriation concerns . Hamel ( 1991 ) suggests that alliance partners should be “ strong – but not too strong ” , since “ too strong ” a partner increases coor - dination and internal competition concerns . Simi - larly , Kale , Singh , and Perlmutter ( 2000 ) call attention to the paradox of “ learning ” and “ protec - tion ” . A strong exclusive licensee will exacerbate the licensor ’ s transaction cost concerns , as a tech - nologically stronger licensee may have a better chance to reorganize the technology and use it for other purposes , without the knowledge of the licensor ( Hill , 1992 ) . Furthermore , a strong licensee carries more bargaining power , because greater capabilities bring about more options ( Inkpen & Beamish , 1997 ) . This means the licensee may not be easily persuaded to invest adequately when the licensee starts to commercialize the licensed tech - nology , or when its priorities change over time , which exposes the licensor to signi ﬁ cant risks ( Somaya et al . , 2010 ) . 1 In the following paragraphs , we identify the fac - tors that may in ﬂ uence the balancing of transac - tional value and transaction costs associated with a strong licensing partner in an exclusive licensing agreement . As Anand and Khanna ( 2000 ) noted , licensing behaviors such as the adoption of contract exclusivity vary across countries and industries , and the variations are systematical and dif ﬁ cult to explain in terms of idiosyncratic , relationship - level aspects . Anand and Khanna ( 2000 ) thus called for further examination of industry - and country - level factors that in ﬂ uence contractual heterogeneity in licensing agreements . Some responsive investiga - tions of macro - level factors are still inconclusive , such as Aulakh et al . ’ s ( 2010 ) examination of the determining effect of intellectual property regime on the adoption of exclusive rights . We probe whether different system - related or institutional contexts could explain why individual licensing behaviors ( in terms of adoption of exclusive rights ) vary even under similar level of determinants , such as licensee technological potential . Those macro - or system - related contexts may provide a more nuanced understand - ing of ﬁ rm - level licensing behaviors , as partnering ﬁ rms are nested in broader contexts , such as types of inter - ﬁ rm relationships , and industry and country contexts . The balancing of transaction costs and value can be contingent upon the conditions where both parties ’ interests are better aligned . In particular , we identify factors at three levels – country ( i . e . , intel - lectual property rights ( IPR ) protection ) , industry ( i . e . , rate of technology change ) , and relationship ( i . e . , licensor – licensee product overlap ) – and discuss how these factors in ﬂ uence the likelihood of having a partner with high technological potential as the exclusive licensee in international licensing agreements . IPR Protection At the country level , the most important factor identi ﬁ ed by Anand and Khanna ( 2000 ) is the strength of IPR protection , on which they called for further exploration regarding how intellectual prop - erty regimes may shape the different patterns of licensing activities across countries . We propose that IPR protection is the institutional variable that mod - erates the relationship between licensee technologi - cal potential ( LTP ) and the adoption of licensing exclusivity . A licensor will be more con ﬁ dent about granting an exclusivity right to a technologically competent licensee in countries with strong IPR regimes . Gen - erally speaking , a strong IPR regime will tip a country entry decision in favor of contractual mode and the use of contractual provisions , as intellectual prop - erty - related provisions will more likely be honored ( Meyer , Estrin , Bhaumik , & Peng , 2009 ) . Regulatory institutions in strong IPR regimes provide a possibi - lity of effective monitoring and enforcement of Technology licensing and exclusive rights Preet S Aulakh et al 703 Journal of International Business Studies exchange relationships , thereby creating a deterrent force against violations of intellectual property , such as activities related to illegal copying or duplication of the licensed technology ( Abdi & Aulakh , 2012 ) . A licensor would like to choose licensing under a strong IPR regime , because such a regime can more likely guarantee the realization of the transactional value – monopoly rent , as “ competition from imita - tors is muted ” ( Sakakibara , 2010 : 930 ) ; whereas a weak IPR regime makes exclusive licensing less meaningful , as opportunistic behaviors violating exclusivity clauses can be dif ﬁ cult to deter ( Anand & Khanna , 2000 ) . Released by the institutional con - cern , a licensor would be more interested in ﬁ nding a licensee with stronger technological potential in order to better realize the transactional value . In a strong IPR regime , the granting of exclusive rights , as a promise of not offering more licenses or not commercializing the technology by the licensor in this market , will be perceived as a more credible commitment . A strong IPR regime guarantees that the promise on paper will be enforced in reality , implying that the credible commitment is more effective in a strong IPR regime than in a weak one , thereby enhancing the licensee ’ s belief that a bene ﬁ t of competitive advantage rendered from the licensed technology can be realized and maintained . At the same time , a licensor is more con ﬁ dent in granting a strong licensee exclusivity rights , because the licen - see with strong technological potential will value and respect the IPR of others , since such a licensee also creates intellectual property through its own R & D . In the case of external infringement of the technology , this licensee will serve as a vigilant guard that is ready to ﬁ ght against violations of the IPR of the technol - ogy ( Beamish , Morrison , Rosenzweig , & Inkpen , 2000 ) . For instance , Start Licensing Inc . , which holds the exclusive license to key patents in South Korea that cover animal cloning technology , ﬁ led a lawsuit in South Korea for patent infringement against a Seoul - based company , RNL Bio Ltd , for RNL ’ s unauthorized canine cloning activities ( Business Wire , 2008 ) . This case shows that a strong IPR regime helps reduce concerns of guarding IP , and reinforces the strategic relationship between the partners . On the other hand , to a licensee with high tech - nological potential , a strong IPR regime will also protect its legal right of commercialization of a patented technology , implying that its strategy of setting up entry barriers as a bene ﬁ t through seeking the exclusivity right will be more effective . At the same time , a strong IPR regime also eases the licen - see ’ s concerns about the appropriation of the return of the speci ﬁ c investment in commercializing the technology , as there will be no rent dissipation if the advanced technology monopoly is effectively main - tained ( Arora & Ceccagnoli , 2006 ) , enhancing the licensee ’ s con ﬁ dence on the creation of common transactional value . Taken together , the above argu - ments suggest the following hypothesis : Hypothesis 2 : The strength of the intellectual property protection regime moderates the associa - tion between licensee technological potential and licensing exclusivity in a way that the stronger the IPR regime , the stronger the link . Rate of Technology Change In reaching an international licensing agreement , ﬁ rms need to take the speed of industry technology change into consideration , as ﬁ rms usually license more established technologies in foreign markets . However , the rate of technological change varies across industries ( Rosenkopf & Schilling , 2007 ) , and the rate of technology change will have an impact on the credibility of the licensor ’ s commitment , as well as on the effectiveness of the licensee ’ s received competitive advantage from the licensed technology . An important implication of the rate of technology change is that the time window of commercialization becomes narrower , and thus it becomes more chal - lenging for the licensor to commercialize technology on its own ( Aulakh et al . , 2010 ; Hagedoorn , Lorenz - Orlean , & van Kranenburg , 2009 ) . In this sense , the licensor ’ s bargaining power will be lower , as “ bargain - ing power can be determined by the ease of alterna - tives to licensing : to commercialize the technology on its own ” ( Sakakibara , 2010 : 930 ) . Thus , for the licensor , the value of giving exclusivity right to a strong licensee is that the licensee will be motivated to invest suf ﬁ ciently in its complementary asset and commercialize the technology in a timely way . The narrow window due to fast change of technology makes the value of timely commercialization even more important . At the same time , a fast change of technology also mitigates the competitive threat from a licensee of becoming a future competitor , even if the licensee is technologically strong , because the licensor is gen - erally faster in making new progress in the technol - ogy ( Prahalad & Hamel , 1990 ) . This makes a licensor more con ﬁ dent in granting exclusive rights to a strong licensee . To reiterate , the high rate of tech - nology change increases the importance of seizing transactional value , while reducing the potential transactional hazards of giving exclusivity rights to Technology licensing and exclusive rights Preet S Aulakh et al 704 Journal of International Business Studies a licensee with high technological potential at the licensor side . On the other hand , a strong licensee will bargain hard for an exclusivity right when the technology is changing fast , because it will be concerned that it may not be able to recoup its investment before the technology becomes obsolete . The bargaining power comes from its strong technology base ( Sakakibara , 2010 ) , as there will be fewer potential licensees equipped with compatible technological capability available in the market ( Caves et al . , 1983 ) . In addition , in an industry with fast technological changes , it is critical for ﬁ rms to acquire and absorb advanced technological knowledge and know - how in order to survive and compete . Thus it is more common for ﬁ rms to use licensing activities to learn new technologies . In this situation , an exclusive licensing agreement will make better sense for a technologically strong licensee as a way to accumu - late cutting - edge technologies , and to prevent its local competitors from learning the licensed tech - nology . Taken together , the above arguments sug - gest the following : Hypothesis 3 : The rate of technology change in an industry moderates the association between licensee technological potential and licensing exclusivity in a way that the greater the rate of technology change , the stronger the link . Licensor – Licensee Product Overlap Licensor – licensee product overlap re ﬂ ects the extent to which the spectrum of products of the licensing partners overlaps , implying a propensity for their relationship to become directly competitive in the future when the licensing agreement ends ( Teece , 1986 ) . A licensee with strong technological potential may successfully internalize the tacit knowledge , so that the technology is absorbed to enhance its own innovative capabilities . When the licensing agree - ment expires , the licensor is unable to force the licensee to unlearn the capabilities that the licensee has established with the help of the licensed technol - ogy . In this case , the licensing activity creates compe - titive threats for the licensor ( Hagedoorn et al . , 2009 ) . In some extreme conditions , the licensee may not even wait until the licensing agreement expires to conduct research and innovate around the licensed technology . The licensee ’ s further innovation around the licensed technology may supersede the licensed technology , and can be more competitive in the host market as well as in the international market ( Contractor & Lorange , 1988 ; Porter , 1985 ) . Although the licensor could insert a “ grant - back ” clause for the related new innovations in the licensing agreement , the licensee would be reluctant to surrender its costly new innovation , and would still ﬁ nd ways to bypass the clause ( Ordover , 1991 ) . The potential creation of new competitors in foreign markets may foreclose the licensor ’ s future expansion in the host market , as did Mitsubishi ’ s application of a patent in Japan that resulted from modifying Fusion System ’ s ( US - based ) invention , foreclosing Fusion System from directly entering the Japanese market ( Fallows , 1990 ) . These risks will become more severe when there is a substitutable relationship between a licensor ’ s and a licensee ’ s products . The greater the market overlap between a strong licensee and its licensor , the higher the licensor ’ s potential transaction cost of offering an exclusive contract . The exclusivity provisions and focused technological assistance for licensees may function as an incubator to turn these licensees into direct competitors . The stronger the licensee ’ s tech - nological potential , the more substantial the hazard of offering exclusivity . On the licensee side , with a high degree of product overlap between licensor and licensee ﬁ rms , the licensee may not be able to effectively set up entry barriers through the exclu - sivity right . This is because the licensor can effec - tively accumulate its experience and knowledge of the local market through closely working with the licensee . As soon as the agreement expires , the licensor can launch more threatening entries in the local market . Therefore , with the presence of high product overlap , the perceived transactional value is lowered , while the concerns about transaction hazards become more intensi ﬁ ed . By contrast , with low product overlap , the licensee with high technological potential is considered to possess the required complementary assets ( Teece , 1986 ) without presenting competitive threats to the licensor . For this type of licensee , the bene ﬁ t of seeking commercialization of the technology is that it tends to add the value of supplementary products to its main ones , thereby offering its customers the convenience of a “ one - stop ” purchase ( Bidault , 1989 ) . In this case , both parties are more willing to include the exclusivity provision in their licensing agreement . Accordingly : Hypothesis 4 : Licensor – licensee product overlap moderates the association between licensee tech - nological potential and licensing exclusivity in a way that the greater the product overlap , the weaker the link . Technology licensing and exclusive rights Preet S Aulakh et al 705 Journal of International Business Studies METHODS Our sample consists of international technology licensing agreements of US ﬁ rms in high - technology industries . We followed the AeA 2 comprehensive industry de ﬁ nition to identify high - tech industries . The AeA includes two broad high - tech categories : high - tech manufacturing ( SIC codes 357 , 365 , 366 , 367 , 381 , 382 , 384 , and 386 ) and high - tech services ( SIC codes 481 , 482 , 484 , 489 , and 737 ) . We added the biotech and pharmaceutical industry ( i . e . , SIC 283 ) to this list , given its knowledge focus . Firms in these industries are ideal for our research , because they are active in patenting and using licensing in foreign markets . We collected information about licensing agree - ments from the SDC database for the years 1995 – 2008 . The SDC data set has been used as the primary source to track licensing activities ( Anand & Khanna , 2000 ) . As Anand and Khanna ( 2000 ) note , although SDC is unable to track the universe of licensing agreements , it has the most comprehen - sive coverage of licensing agreements . It is especially accurate in recording the contract type , and in identifying licensors / licensees in the agreements . Anand and Khanna ( 2000 ) also note that since SDC initiated systematic data collection procedures in 1989 , it has further improved its accuracy and comprehensiveness for tracking licensing deals . Therefore , SDC data are appropriate for empirical research on licensing contracts for the 1995 – 2008 period of our study . For the purposes of this study , an international technology licensing agreement is de ﬁ ned as a tech - nology license transfer from a US ﬁ rm to a foreign ﬁ rm that grants the use of the technology in the foreign country or the proxy region where the country is located . After accounting for missing data from Compustat Global , as well as missing data from the other sources with which our data were merged , the ﬁ nal sample totaled 375 US ﬁ rm international technology licensing agreements in 23 different countries ( Table 1 ) . Dependent Variable The information on licensing exclusivity is derived from the SDC data . Following a procedure similar to that of Anand and Khanna ( 2000 ) , we coded the deal synopses . This activity synopsis serves as an impor - tant source of information for alliance research , and it has been widely used by prior alliance scholars ( e . g . , Anand & Khanna , 2000 ; Li , Eden , Hitt , & Ireland , 2008 ; Oxley & Sampson , 2004 ) . 3 For our research in particular , such activity synopsis provides detailed information that allows researchers to deter - mine whether a licensing agreement contains exclu - sive rights . We read each of these synopses to code whether or not the license agreement contains an exclusive rights clause as de ﬁ ned in our study . At the end of the process , we are able to identify 95 licensing agreements that report clear exclusivity information ( i . e . , 25 % of our sample ) . This is largely consistent with Anand and Khanna ’ s ( 2000 ) observation . For logistic regression estimation , we construct a binary dependent variable to track the incidence of exclusiv - ity as follows : 1 for contracts involving an exclusive transfer clause , and 0 for contracts whose announce - ments contain no information on exclusivity , and for non - exclusive agreements . Independent and Moderator Variables Licensee technological potential ( LTP ) In this study , we use R & D intensity to measure licensee technological potential . Prior research has considered R & D expenditure to be an indicator of a ﬁ rm ’ s competence or technological strength ( De Carolis , 2003 ; Hill & Snell , 1988 ; Jensen , 1987 ) . Speci ﬁ cally , R & D intensity has been considered as Table 1 Sample distribution by country Licensee country Total licensing agreements Exclusive licensing agreements Australia 15 2 Belgium 3 1 China 1 1 Denmark 6 4 France 22 5 Germany 37 6 Hong Kong 2 0 Hungary 1 0 India 7 3 Ireland 1 0 Israel 2 0 Italy 3 2 Japan 150 36 Korea ( South ) 14 1 The Netherlands 13 2 New Zealand 1 1 Norway 3 0 Philippines 1 0 Singapore 3 0 Sweden 4 1 Switzerland 16 9 Taiwan 16 4 The United Kingdom 54 17 Total 375 95 Technology licensing and exclusive rights Preet S Aulakh et al 706 Journal of International Business Studies a measure of a ﬁ rm ’ s ability to learn and absorb new information ( Cohen & Levinthal , 1990 ; Stock , Greis , & Fischer , 2001 ; Tsai , 2001 ) . Given our research context of licensing , R & D intensity helps gauge a licensee ’ s technological potential to learn and absorb the licensing technology . We employ the natural log function of the licensee ’ s R & D expenditures over its sales as a general proxy for LTP at the year when the licensing agreement is signed . The reason for using the natural log function is that the percentage ratio is highly skewed ( the observation is consistent with other researchers , such as Zhang , Li , Hitt , & Cui , 2007 ) , and the natural log transformation provides more accurate statistic estimations ( Johnson & Wichern , 1992 ) . Data regarding R & D expenditures and ﬁ rm sales are derived from Compustat Global . IPR protection In this study , we use the IPR protection index ﬁ rst developed by Ginarte and Park ( 1997 ) and further re ﬁ ned by Park ( 2008 ) . This index contains informa - tion for 122 countries from 1960 to 2005 . The index is constructed based on ﬁ ve elements of patent law : extent of coverage , membership in international agreements , provisions for loss of protection , enfor - cement mechanisms , and duration of protection . Each element is scored on a 0 – 1 scale , and the IPR protection variable is a sum of the ﬁ ve values for the host country of the licensee . Ginarte and Park ( 1997 ) have conducted a number of tests to ensure the validity of the measure by considering the actual enforcement of property rights vs statutory protec - tion , as well as by examining the effects of alterna - tive weighting schemes . This measure of IPR protection has the advantage over other measures that it is available for more countries , and in parti - cular for countries that are signi ﬁ cant recipients of foreign direct investment . The measure has also been used extensively in previous research on inter - national alliances and cross - border investments ( e . g . , Allred & Park , 2007 ; Oxley , 1999 ) , so its use can facilitate comparison with prior research . We also obtain updated IPR protection indices through correspondence with one of the authors . Rate of technology change Prior research has suggested two alternative proxies for technological change in an industry : industry R & D intensity ( e . g . , Godoe , 2000 ; Mariani , 2004 ; Rosenkopf & Schilling , 2007 ) and industry patent intensity ( Hall , Jaffe , & Trajtenberg , 2001 ) . Following Rosenkopf and Schilling ( 2007 ) , we use Compustat data to calculate industry R & D intensity as the average R & D expenditures divided by the average sales for each given industry . Industry patent inten - sity is measured by the average patent output of an industry over the average industry sales in the year of the licensing agreement . We ﬁ rst use Compustat to derive industry sales , and to identify ﬁ rms in the industry . Then we derive the total annual patent output for each ﬁ rm in a given industry through the recent expansion of National Bureau of Economic Research ( NBER ) patent data ( Hall et al . , 2001 ) . Industry patent intensity and industry R & D intensity are highly correlated ( r = 0 . 92 ) . Given that patents are a more direct measure of technology change in terms of output rather than the input of R & D expenses , we employ the industry patent intensity as the proxy for rate of industry technology change . Licensor – licensee product overlap We draw on the industry af ﬁ liation of licensor and licensee to capture the substitution effect between the two parties ( Dushnitsky , 2004 ) . Product overlap is set to 1 if both parties have their primary opera - tions in the same four - digit SIC code ; otherwise it is set to 0 . This established variable of product overlap indicates whether the licensor and licensee are com - peting in the same industry segment , but it could not capture the extent to which the two parties ’ products are substitutable . To remedy this concern , we also develop a continuous proxy of product over - lap based on complementarity measure in our robustness test . The results of these two different measures are statistically the same . Control Variables Our primary interest in this paper is to examine the relationship between LTP and the likelihood of the licensee being granted exclusive rights . Given that past research has identi ﬁ ed a number of ﬁ rm - , industry - , and country - level factors that may in ﬂ u - ence both the propensity to license and the granting of exclusive rights ( e . g . , Aulakh et al . , 2010 ; Fosfuri , 2006 ; Somaya et al . , 2010 ) , we use an extensive set of controls in our empirical models . Firm - and transaction - level factors The respective size of the contracting parties can in ﬂ uence their relative bargaining power in nego - tiating contractual provisions , since a larger size of a licensee implies the availability of more slack resources for complementary assets ( Sakakibara , 2010 ) , and a larger size of a licensor means a greater ability to monitor partner behavior and to transfer know - how . To account for these factors , we control Technology licensing and exclusive rights Preet S Aulakh et al 707 Journal of International Business Studies for licensor and licensee size . These two variables are , respectively , measured by the total assets of the licensor and licensee for the year in which the licensing agreement is signed . We measured a licen - see ’ s international experience by counting the number of international licensing agreements formed during the 5 years prior to , but not including , the focal year in which the international licensing agreement is formed . This variable is operationalized as the log of 1 plus the number of international licensing agree - ments , in order to remedy the signi ﬁ cant positive skewness evident for the pre - transformed count measure , as this can in ﬂ ate the risks of Type I and Type II errors ( Tabachnick & Fidell , 1996 ) . We use 1 plus the number of international licensing agree - ments in the transformation , because some ﬁ rms have no prior international licensing experience , and the log of zero is unde ﬁ ned . We also include each licensor ’ s international licensing experience , in order to control for its capabilities to manage licen - sing relationships , by counting the number of inter - national licensing agreements formed during the 5 years prior to , but not including , the focal year in which the international licensing agreement is formed . International licensing experience is de ﬁ ned as the log of 1 plus the number of interna - tional licensing agreements . We include licensee r eturn on sales ( ROS ) , measured by annual ROS , to control for licensee characteristics that may re ﬂ ect capabilities other than technological potential . We also control for alliance scope , which is the scope of the licensing agreement . The SDC classi ﬁ es alliance activities into different categories , such as R & D , manufacturing , and marketing , and we follow prior research by counting the number of different activ - ities to measure the scope of the licensing agreement ( e . g . , Li et al . , 2008 , Oxley & Sampson , 2004 ) . We include open - length agreement to control for the time - related opportunity cost considerations . Open - length agreement is a dummy variable with a value of 1 for open - length agreement , and 0 for ﬁ xed - length agreement . Industry - level factors We include several variables to control for industry patterns that may in ﬂ uence licensing exclusivity choice . Because the prospective returns of a technol - ogy licensing agreement may affect the licensor ’ s decision regarding whether to grant exclusivity , we control for average royalty rate of licensing activities in the alliance industry . The average royalty rate is derived from the Ktmine and Royaltystats databases . Given the complexity of licensing agreements , Ktmine analysts have determined the minimum , average , and maximum values for each considera - tion level and base in each licensing agreement . For example , if an agreement reports a royalty of 2 . 0 % , 3 . 0 % , and 4 . 0 % of net sales for Years 1 , 2 , and 3 , respectively , Ktmine will calculate the minimum of 2 . 0 % , the average of 3 . 0 % , and the maximum of 4 . 0 % for said agreement . In our study , we use the average royalty rate across the four - digit SIC industry as a control for potential prospective returns . We also control for industry patent growth as an industry muni ﬁ cence measure . Muni ﬁ cence has been measured by industry growth rate , sales , price – cost margin , and total employment ( e . g . , Dess & Beard , 1984 ; Goll & Rasheed , 1997 ) . Given the emphasis on technology in our study , we use the growth of industry annual patent output as a way to proxy for the richness of technological resources in the given industry . To calculate this measure , we ﬁ rst use Compustat to identify ﬁ rms in the industry . Then we derive the total annual patent output for each ﬁ rm in the given industry through the recent extension of NBER patent data ( Hall et al . , 2001 ) . Industry patent growth is calculated by the percen - tage growth rate of patent output of the licensing industry , averaged across the 5 years before the focal licensing agreement is established . In addition , we include the variable industry dyna - mism to control for the amount of sales ﬂ uctuation in each industry ( Dess & Beard , 1984 ) . Following Keats and Hitt ( 1988 ) , we assess industry dynamism by regressing time against the natural logarithm of sales for each four - digit industry for a 5 - year window preceding the licensing agreement . Then the antilo - garithms of the standard errors from these models are calculated . These antilogarithms represent an index of volatility or dynamism of sales for each industry . Country - level factors At the country level , we include cultural distance , political uncertainty , and rule of law to control for institutional hazards that affect licensing transac - tions and therefore in ﬂ uence the licensing partners ’ perception of costs . We use Kogut and Singh ’ s ( 1988 ) approach to measuring cultural distance , based on the cultural dimension scores developed by Hofstede ( 1980 ) and updated in his later research . The cultural distance measure is constructed as follows : Cultural Distance US ; k = 1 4 X I i US - I ik ð Þ 2 V i " # Technology licensing and exclusive rights Preet S Aulakh et al 708 Journal of International Business Studies where Cultural Distance US , k denotes the cultural distance between the United States and country k ( i . e . , the licensee ’ s host country ) ; I i US is the score for the United States on scale i ( i = 1 – 4 for uncer - tainty avoidance , individualism – collectivism , toler - ance of power distance , and masculinity – femininity , respectively ) ; I ik is the score of country k on scale i ; and V i is the sample variance of scale i ( cf . Kogut & Singh , 1988 ) . The variable ( host country ’ s ) political uncertainty is obtained from the Political Constraint V Index developed by Henisz ( 2000 ) . The index is available annually for our countries . According to this index , each country is scored on a continuous 0 – 1 scale , with 0 indicating a dictatorship and 1 indicating democracy , which represents the degree to which checks and balances are present in a country ’ s political system . We measure political uncertainty by subtracting the Political Constraint index from 1 , such that the greater the score is , the greater the political hazards are for doing business in that country ( Delios & Henisz , 2000 ) . According to Kaufmann , Kraay , and Zoido ( 2002 ) , rule of law measures “ the extent to which agents have con ﬁ - dence in and abide by the rules of society ” , and in particular “ the effectiveness and predictability of the judiciary and the enforceability of contracts ” . The rule of law measure is desirable for our purpose , because it is available for a broad range of countries ( more than 171 countries across different years ) , and we are able to match all the licensee host countries in our sample to these data . The measure is also available for a larger number of years ( available since 1996 ) , compared with other indices we have found . However , some observations in our sample go back only to 1995 ; for such observations in our sample , we have to use the measure ’ s 1996 value , assuming little change in this value in the 1995 – 1996 period . We incorporate host country ’ s market size and gross domestic product ( GDP ) growth as two additional con - trols , because the two conditions will have a signi ﬁ - cant impact on the licensor ’ s long - term market entry strategy , and therefore on the decision to grant exclusive rights . Furthermore , size of the market could in ﬂ uence minimum ef ﬁ cient scale required by the licensee , and thus the decision to opt for an exclusive or non - exclusive contract . Market size is measured by recording the host country ’ s GDP 1 year before the licensing agreement . GDP growth is measured by the percentage growth rate in real GDP of the host country , averaged across the 5 years before the focal licensing agreement is established . The data is obtained from the Penn World Tables compiled by Wharton Research Data Services of the University of Pennsylvania . We also control for year effects . For year effects , in order to have a larger degree of freedom in the regression analyses , we create two dummy variables that capture three distinct time periods from 1995 to 2008 ( i . e . , 1995 – 1999 , 2000 – 2004 , 2005 – 2008 ) . The results reported below are based on the time period dummies ( using the most recent time win - dow , 2005 – 2008 , as the base category ) , although the results are almost the same when we use annual year dummies . Statistical Approach Given the cross - nested structure of our data ( i . e . , the transactional decision regarding licensing exclusivity can be simultaneously nested within both industry and country / region contexts ) , 4 we adopt cross - classi ﬁ ed multilevel modeling as the primary method ( Hox , 2010 ) . As Hofmann ( 1997 ) notes , this modeling approach has two major advantages over the traditional ordinary least squares ( OLS ) approach for examining data with hierarchically nested struc - tures . First , hierarchical modeling acknowledges the partial interdependence of members within the same group . The fact that measurements from indi - vidual licensing agreements may not be indepen - dent within the country or industry ( i . e . , licensing agreements formed in the same country may be subject to a similar set of institutional rules ) violates the independence assumption in the traditional regression models . Second , hierarchical modeling can simultaneously test the effects of lower - level units ( e . g . , transactional level ) and higher - level groups ( e . g . , industry and country ) on the lower - level outcome ( e . g . , the nature of exclusivity of licensing agreement ) in one model . These advan - tages are realized through the ability of hierarchical modeling to simultaneously estimate ﬁ xed effects , as the traditional OLS model does , and random coef ﬁ - cients , which are parameter estimates that are allowed to vary across groups . Thus , we can re ﬁ ne our empirical estimation of the cross - classi ﬁ ed mul - tilevels of country and industry effects on determin - ing licensing exclusivity . Moreover , since the dependent variable is a dummy variable , we use the Glimmix function in SAS to analyze the multilevel logistic regression in this study ( Hox , 2010 ; SAS / STAT 9 . 1 User ’ s Guide , 2008 ; Schabenberger , 2005 ) . RESULTS Table 2 reports descriptive statistics and a correla - tion matrix for the variables used in our empirical Technology licensing and exclusive rights Preet S Aulakh et al 709 Journal of International Business Studies Table 2 Descriptive statistics and correlation matrix a Mean s . d . 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 . Licensing exclusivity 0 . 25 0 . 44 2 . Licensee technological potential 0 . 85 5 . 27 0 . 21 3 . IPR protection 4 . 43 0 . 34 − 0 . 05 0 . 05 4 . Rate of technology change 0 . 02 0 . 08 0 . 11 0 . 01 0 . 00 5 . Product overlap 0 . 44 0 . 50 0 . 13 0 . 10 − 0 . 03 0 . 02 6 . Licensee licensing experience 1 . 07 0 . 06 − 0 . 04 − 0 . 08 0 . 12 0 . 06 − 0 . 20 7 . Licensor licensing experience 1 . 08 1 . 91 0 . 15 0 . 07 0 . 00 0 . 05 0 . 01 0 . 13 8 . Licensor size ( MM $ ) b 6582 . 67 20956 . 32 0 . 05 0 . 07 0 . 00 − 0 . 04 0 . 03 − 0 . 06 0 . 33 9 . Licensee size ( MM $ ) 2995 . 50 936 . 72 − 0 . 11 − 0 . 05 − 0 . 02 − 0 . 02 − 0 . 20 0 . 31 0 . 02 − 0 . 07 10 . Licensee ROS − 0 . 03 0 . 42 − 0 . 16 − 0 . 57 − 0 . 05 0 . 03 − 0 . 09 0 . 09 − 0 . 08 − 0 . 14 0 . 07 11 . Alliance scope 0 . 70 0 . 83 0 . 11 − 0 . 03 0 . 02 0 . 05 0 . 08 0 . 11 0 . 14 − 0 . 09 − 0 . 03 0 . 08 12 . Open - length agreement 0 . 94 0 . 24 0 . 00 0 . 02 0 . 10 0 . 01 0 . 03 − 0 . 04 0 . 06 0 . 06 − 0 . 04 − 0 . 03 13 . Industry average royalty rate 5 . 60 2 . 60 0 . 02 − 0 . 08 − 0 . 09 0 . 09 − 0 . 08 0 . 12 0 . 05 − 0 . 08 0 . 01 0 . 07 14 . Industry patent growth 0 . 06 0 . 21 0 . 03 − 0 . 03 − 0 . 12 0 . 07 − 0 . 07 0 . 16 0 . 25 − 0 . 11 0 . 02 0 . 10 15 . Industry dynamism 1 . 24 1 . 19 − 0 . 06 0 . 07 0 . 04 0 . 02 0 . 08 − 0 . 01 0 . 19 0 . 04 0 . 03 − 0 . 01 16 . Cultural distance 1 . 98 1 . 33 − 0 . 07 − 0 . 18 − 0 . 01 0 . 08 − 0 . 23 0 . 18 0 . 11 − 0 . 06 0 . 34 0 . 21 17 . Political uncertainty 0 . 49 0 . 10 0 . 05 − 0 . 13 0 . 11 0 . 08 − 0 . 12 0 . 09 0 . 10 − 0 . 07 0 . 01 0 . 16 18 . Rule of law 1 . 11 0 . 35 0 . 04 0 . 10 0 . 28 − 0 . 06 0 . 19 − 0 . 15 − 0 . 10 0 . 04 − 0 . 27 − 0 . 13 19 . Market size ( log ) 14 . 49 0 . 49 − 0 . 03 0 . 04 0 . 58 0 . 02 0 . 01 0 . 05 − 0 . 01 0 . 04 − 0 . 13 − 0 . 07 20 . GDP growth 1 . 37 1 . 43 − 0 . 02 0 . 09 − 0 . 35 − 0 . 03 0 . 07 − 0 . 09 − 0 . 09 − 0 . 07 0 . 10 − 0 . 08 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 12 . Open - length agreement − 0 . 05 13 . Industry average royalty rate 0 . 09 0 . 01 14 . Industry patent growth 0 . 19 − 0 . 02 0 . 32 15 . Industry dynamism 0 . 07 0 . 04 − 0 . 03 0 . 18 16 . Cultural distance 0 . 14 − 0 . 02 0 . 16 0 . 17 0 . 02 17 . Political uncertainty 0 . 16 0 . 03 0 . 05 0 . 18 0 . 07 0 . 35 18 . Rule of law − 0 . 11 0 . 02 − 0 . 14 − 0 . 20 − 0 . 07 − 0 . 57 − 0 . 17 19 . Market size ( log ) − 0 . 02 0 . 07 − 0 . 05 − 0 . 13 − 0 . 11 − 0 . 18 0 . 05 0 . 54 20 . GDP growth − 0 . 15 0 . 01 − 0 . 04 − 0 . 13 0 . 02 − 0 . 16 − 0 . 35 − 0 . 24 − 0 . 42 a N = 375 . Significant at the 0 . 05 level ( two - tailed test ) when Pearson correlations ⩾ 0 . 10 or ⩽ − 0 . 10 . b Million dollars T e c hn o l o g y li c e n s i ng a nd e x c l u s i v e r i gh ts P r ee t S A u l a k h e t a l 710 J ou r n a l o f I n t e r n a t i o n a l B u s i n e ss S t u d i e s analysis . As the table shows , about 25 % of the sample deals involve licensing exclusivity . On aver - age , the licensors in the sample have endowed one previous international licensing agreement ( mean of licensor prior experience = 1 . 08 ) . In addi - tion , the average licensor ’ s size is more than twice that of the average licensee . The interaction terms between independent variables are mean - centered for multilevel regression ( Hox , 2010 ; Raudenbush & Bryk , 2002 ) , and to reduce potential multicollinear - ity issues . However , to ensure the accuracy of our results , we also used the SAS linear regression collinearity diagnostics to check the value of the variance in ﬂ ation factor ( VIF ) for these independent variables and interaction terms . All the VIF values are smaller than 7 . 3 in Table 3 , below the rule - of - thumb cutoff of 10 ( Neter , Wasserman , & Kutner , 1985 ) , which suggests that multicollinearity was not a concern in our study . Table 3 presents the estimation results for the cross - classi ﬁ ed multilevel regression models on the factors affecting the likelihood of licensing exclusiv - ity . The results of the unconditional models are reported as Models I and II in Table 3 . The reason Table 3 Cross - classified multilevel logistic regression results for the determinants of licensing exclusivity a Variable Model I Model II Model III Model IV Model V Random effects Country level 0 . 46 † ( 0 . 26 ) 0 . 40 ( 0 . 27 ) 0 . 28 ( 0 . 29 ) 0 . 25 ( 0 . 35 ) 0 . 23 ( 0 . 43 ) Industry level 0 . 49 ( 0 . 36 ) 0 . 46 ( 0 . 35 ) 0 . 46 ( 0 . 38 ) 0 . 37 ( 0 . 52 ) Fixed effects Intercept − 1 . 06 * * * ( 0 . 15 ) − 0 . 93 * * * ( 0 . 29 ) 4 . 52 ( 4 . 98 ) 4 . 47 ( 5 . 59 ) − 15 . 17 ( 10 . 52 ) Licensee licensing experience 0 . 01 ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 01 ( 0 . 02 ) 0 . 01 ( 0 . 02 ) Licensor licensing experience 0 . 20 * * ( 0 . 07 ) 0 . 20 * * ( 0 . 07 ) 0 . 46 * * * ( 0 . 11 ) Licensor size ( MM $ ) b − 0 . 04 ( 0 . 07 ) − 0 . 04 ( 0 . 07 ) 0 . 01 ( 0 . 08 ) Licensee size ( MM $ ) b − 0 . 04 * * * ( 0 . 00 ) − 0 . 04 * * * ( 0 . 00 ) − 0 . 06 * * * ( 0 . 00 ) Licensee ROS − 0 . 21 ( 0 . 54 ) − 0 . 20 ( 0 . 84 ) − 0 . 51 ( 0 . 95 ) Alliance scope 0 . 15 ( 0 . 17 ) 0 . 17 ( 0 . 17 ) 0 . 12 ( 0 . 19 ) Open - length agreement − 0 . 21 ( 0 . 57 ) − 0 . 26 ( 0 . 59 ) − 0 . 02 ( 0 . 61 ) Industry average royalty rate 0 . 04 ( 0 . 06 ) 0 . 04 ( 0 . 06 ) − 0 . 03 ( 0 . 07 ) Industry patent growth 1 . 44 ( 1 . 04 ) 0 . 63 ( 1 . 15 ) 0 . 22 ( 1 . 28 ) Industry dynamism − 0 . 30 * ( 0 . 13 ) − 0 . 23 † ( 0 . 14 ) − 0 . 20 ( 0 . 16 ) Cultural distance 0 . 01 ( 0 . 17 ) 0 . 03 ( 0 . 20 ) − 0 . 12 ( 0 . 18 ) Political uncertainty 2 . 44 ( 1 . 82 ) 2 . 02 ( 1 . 92 ) 3 . 84 † ( 2 . 00 ) Rule of law 0 . 15 ( 0 . 67 ) 0 . 14 ( 0 . 69 ) 0 . 49 ( 0 . 72 ) Market size ( log ) − 0 . 50 ( 0 . 37 ) − 0 . 32 ( 0 . 44 ) − 0 . 22 ( 0 . 47 ) GDP growth − 0 . 04 ( 0 . 13 ) − 0 . 10 ( 0 . 14 ) − 0 . 04 ( 0 . 14 ) Year fixed effects Included Included Included Main effects LTP 0 . 26 * ( 0 . 13 ) 0 . 14 ( 0 . 40 ) IPR protection 5 . 64 † ( 3 . 50 ) 4 . 86 ( 4 . 15 ) Rate of technology change − 0 . 67 ( 0 . 62 ) 2 . 79 ( 1 . 91 ) Product overlap − 0 . 09 ( 0 . 34 ) 0 . 50 ( 0 . 31 ) Interaction effects LTP×IPR 1 . 73 * * * ( 0 . 41 ) LTP×Rate of technology change 5 . 26 * ( 2 . 51 ) LTP×Product overlap − 0 . 66 * ( 0 . 32 ) VIF range c 1 . 01 – 2 . 91 1 . 05 – 4 . 25 1 . 05 – 7 . 26 − 2 Log pseudo - likelihood 1981 . 67 1907 . 57 1865 . 23 1722 . 94 1686 . 37 a N = 375 . † , * , * * , * * * show significance at p < 0 . 10 , p < 0 . 05 , p < 0 . 01 , p < 0 . 001 , respectively . Controls for year are included but not shown owing to space constraints . b Multiplied by 100 for ease of presentation . c VIF is based on multicollinearity diagnostic statistics produced by linear regression analysis . Technology licensing and exclusive rights Preet S Aulakh et al 711 Journal of International Business Studies for presenting two unconditional models is to better assess variance components for cross - classi ﬁ ed multilevel models . Following Goldstein ( 1994 ) and Fielding and Goldstein ( 2006 ) , we ﬁ rst treated only one Level 2 random effect in the ﬁ rst unconditional model . In this case , Model I reports only the results with the inclusion of country - level random effect . The results show the country - level variance is about 0 . 46 , which is marginally signi ﬁ cant . In Model II we added industry - level random effect , and then the variance explained by the country level reduced to 0 . 40 . This suggests that the proportion of country - level variance explained by industry is about 13 % ( i . e . , ( 0 . 46 − 0 . 40 ) / 0 . 46 ) ( Hox , 2010 ; Raudenbush & Bryk , 2002 ) . 5 We built in ﬁ xed control effects in Model III . Results show that licensors with greater prior inter - national licensing experience are more con ﬁ dent about endowing exclusive rights to licensees ( b = 0 . 20 , p < 0 . 01 ) . Exclusive contracts are less likely to be granted to licensees with large size ( b = − 0 . 04 , p < 0 . 001 ) . It is possible that licensors are concerned about large licensees ’ ability to prevent the licensor from potential future entry , and exclusivity will enhance this power of the licensee by helping the licensee establish a monopoly in the present market . Industry dynamism re ﬂ ecting market ﬂ uctuation induces licensors not to grant exclusive rights ( b = − 0 . 30 , p < 0 . 05 ) , probably because licensees are concerned about being locked into one speci ﬁ c licensing agreement when market conditions change quickly . Model IV tests Hypothesis 1 , and Model V adds the hypothesized interaction effects . The − 2 log pseudo - likelihood tests indicate that adding the indepen - dent variable , moderators , and interaction variables to Model I signi ﬁ cantly improves upon Model I ’ s explanatory power . In Hypothesis 1 , we theorized that all else being equal , the greater the licensee ’ s technological poten - tial , the more likely it is that an exclusive contract will be adopted in the exchange relationship . The positive and signi ﬁ cant coef ﬁ cient for LTP pro - vides empirical support for Hypothesis 1 in Model IV ( b = 0 . 26 , p < 0 . 05 ) . The results of our study reveal that after controlling for other factors ( industry , size , experience , and host market conditions ) , and teas - ing out the effects of the moderators , LTP has a signi ﬁ cant effect on licensing exclusivity . 6 In Model IV , we also included the three moderator variables , among which only IPR protection has a marginal direct impact on licensing exclusivity ( b = 5 . 64 , p < 0 . 10 ) . Model V further includes the interaction terms of LTP × IPR , LTP × Rate of technology change , and LTP × Product overlap to test Hypotheses 2 – 4 . The signi ﬁ - cant interaction terms support our overall theoriza - tion that the dual mechanisms of monopoly rent potential for the licensees , and risks associated with credible commitments on the part of the licensor in granting exclusive rights to strong licensees , are enhanced or suppressed owing to factors at differ - ent levels of the model . In particular , we found a positive moderation for the host market IPR regime ( b = 1 . 73 , p < 0 . 001 ) , and for rate of technology change in the industry ( b = 5 . 26 , p < 0 . 05 ) ; and a negative moderation for product overlap of the licensor ’ s and licensee ’ s main business ( b = − 0 . 66 , p < 0 . 05 ) . 7 We sought to investigate the robustness of our results in several additional ways to supplement the above analyses ( details of testing the model are available from the authors ) . First , as other licensor characteristics may also in ﬂ uence the choice of licensing exclusivity , we further included licensor R & D intensity and licensor pro ﬁ tability , measured by licensor ROS in our analysis . However , owing to the limited data availability , the variable of licensor R & D intensity and pro ﬁ tability were available for only 265 licensors in our sample . The results based on the 265 observations were qualitatively similar to those reported above . Second , to better gauge the extent of product overlap between licensor and licensee , we also used complementarity as a proxy for low product overlap . The extent of complementarity between two ﬁ rms has been measured based on input – output ( IO ) tables from the US Bureau of Economic Analysis in prior research ( Dushnitsky , 2004 ; Fan & Lang , 2000 ; Lemelin , 1982 ; Schilling & Steensma , 2001 ; Villalonga , 2004 ) . Following Brandenburger and Nalebuff ( 1996 ) , a higher correlation in the output ﬂ ows between a licensor and its licensee indicates a greater extent to which the licensed technology will complement licensees ’ production operation , suggest - ing low product overlap between these two parties . In this study , we ﬁ rst used the 1992 , 1997 , and 2002 benchmark IO tables from the US Bureau of Economic Analysis to calculate the degree of com - plementarity between the licensee and the licensed technology . Speci ﬁ cally , we obtained the four - digit SIC codes of the licensees and the four - digit SIC codes of the licensing agreement from SDC data , and then matched the SIC codes to the industry codes in the IO tables to compute , for each four - digit SIC industry segment , the percentage of its output Technology licensing and exclusive rights Preet S Aulakh et al 712 Journal of International Business Studies supplied to each intermediate industry . The correla - tion between complementarity and product overlap is − 0 . 13 ( p < 0 . 05 ) , which is largely similar to prior research ( Dushnitsky , 2004 ) . By using this measure of complementarity as an alternative proxy for low product overlap , we found results similar to those reported in Table 3 . DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION In this paper , we examine exclusive contracts in international licensing relationships by simulta - neously incorporating the transactional value and costs associated in such agreements . Our view departs from the hostage view ( Somaya et al . , 2010 ) and monopoly rent generation view ( Aulakh et al . , 2010 ) , as we look at the exclusivity issue from a more comprehensive angle . The hostage view sees licen - sors ’ relinquishing of other licensing opportunities as a credible commitment , such that licensees will reciprocate with more effort in commercializing the licensed technology . The monopoly rent generation view sees licensing exclusivity as an opportunity to maximize rent in a new market , a view that implies that licensees are homogeneous , and serve as agents for exercising the licensor ’ s strategy in the market . Our comprehensive view sees the adoption of exclu - sivity provision as the result of assessment of both transaction costs and transactional value through selecting technologically strong licensees as the holders of exclusive licenses . By simultaneously evaluating transaction costs and transactional value , we go beyond TCE in that the exchange arrangements are the result not only of calculation between internal operation costs and external transaction costs , but also of the balance between transaction costs and transactional value . TCE essentially argues that , to reduce transaction costs , transaction parties need to create a certain lock - in arrangement that creates exit barriers to parties ( e . g . , investment of relation - speci ﬁ c assets , laydown of credible commitment or hostage ) in order to deter opportunistic behaviors . Yet the value of speci ﬁ c assets or credible commitment is not the focus of its investigation ( Zajac & Olsen , 1993 ) . Incorporating transactional value in the examina - tion of licensing exclusivity opens the possibility of including processual interactions between partners that may evolve into value - creating activities ( Jiang et al . , 2009 ) , an area worth further investigation . Whereas existing literature ﬁ nds it inconclusive to treat some external conditions as direct determi - nants of licensing exclusivity ( e . g . , strength of IPR in Aulakh et al . , 2010 ) , we clarify them as conditional factors that in ﬂ uence the adoption of exclusivity rights . The moderating roles of the hypothesized factors not only reinforce the bene ﬁ ts of having a strong licensee as an exclusive partner , but may also facilitate the negotiation process between the two parties . Our results show that these multilevel contextual conditions in ﬂ uence the evaluation of transactional value and costs by contracting parties , and thus in ﬂ uence the appropriateness of giving exclusive rights to strong licensees . Our paper also helps indirectly address the partner selection issue from the licensor ’ s perspective , an issue that has been tackled in joint venture alliances ( e . g . , Roy & Oliver , 2009 ; Shi , Sun , & Peng , 2012 ) but not in licensing relationships . If considering licensing exclusivity as a strategic choice for a licensor to enter foreign markets , then what type of licensees should be selected to offer the exclusivity rights ? Or , given that an exclusivity right can serve as entry barrier ( if similar technologies are not available ) and achieve monopoly rents , then what type of licensees are more likely to seek such a position ? The answer is that a candidate with great technological capability ( not the sheer size of the ﬁ rm ) is more likely to be selected as an exclusive licensing partner . This answer is not instinctively simple , as licensors sometimes deliber - ately license to technologically weak licensees to serve their particular purposes ( Rockett , 1990 ) . In addition , by incorporating the licensee ’ s view in our arguments , we acknowledge that licensees are active assessors of licensing agreements , and their bargaining power needs to be taken into considera - tion . This helps complement the existing literature , which implicitly takes the licensors ’ strategic per - spective and therefore tends to see licensees as homogeneous and passive agreement - takers in international licensing relationships . The incor - poration of the licensees ’ perspective echoes the TCE argument that any ignorance of transaction parties ’ bargaining power will make transaction arrangement examination ineffective ( Williamson , 1975 ) . The consideration of licensees as equal stra - tegic partners will lead to a balanced view of transaction cost reduction and transactional value creation on both sides of transaction partners . In addition to the theoretical contributions , this paper presents an empirical contribution to the literature . Despite the multilevel contexts of interna - tional management issues , and multiple calls for the application of this approach ( Bamberger , 2007 ) , few studies use the multilevel approach in the inter - national business area . The multilevel approach Technology licensing and exclusive rights Preet S Aulakh et al 713 Journal of International Business Studies ( Hox , 2010 ; Kozlowski & Klein , 2000 ) is appropriate for our study , because the licensing activities involve different levels of factors associated with the indivi - dual partners , characteristics of industries , and poli - cies of different countries . As higher - level factors exert systematic effects on licensing activities , ignor - ing the variations of high - level contexts will poten - tially lead to misleading interpretation of empirical results ( Kozlowski & Klein , 2000 ) . Our research design draws on the idea that licensing activities are cross - nested at the industry and country levels . Utilizing a cross - classi ﬁ ed model helps us factor in unobserved variability at the country and industry level in our analysis ( Goldstein , 1994 ) , allowing more rigorous tests of determinants of licensing exclusivity . Although the primary focus of this paper is to understand ﬁ rm - level trade - offs between transaction costs and value in licensing relationships , our ﬁ nd - ings also have potential implications for broader policy debates regarding IPR protection , technology diffusion , and economic development ( Branstetter , Fisman , & Foley , 2006 ; Helpman , 1993 ; Markusen , 2001 ; Nelson , 2005 ) . In much of this literature , stronger IPR protection in host markets facilitates inward technology ﬂ ows , especially in developing economies , and this diffusion of know - how allows achievement of the “ catch - up ” objectives of these countries . Our ﬁ nding that licensors are more likely to transfer know - how to strong licensees through exclusive rights ( and the associated restrictive clauses ) creates a dilemma for host governments ’ technology transfer policies . On the one hand , implementing stronger IPR protection will assuage appropriation concerns of foreign technology providers , thus increasing know - how transfer . However , in the con - text of licensing , this know - how will be transferred through exclusive licensing agreements , thereby undermining the broader diffusion of this knowledge . Weaker IPR protection , on the other hand , facilitates broader diffusion through multiple non - exclusive licensing ( Aulakh et al . , 2010 ) , but lowers potential local value creation because of lack of incentives for stronger licensees to increase local R & D efforts . Thus , from a policy perspective , the relationship between tighter IPR and attracting foreign know - how through different types of mandated contracts become perti - nent . There are opportunities for future research on examining how interdependent concerns regarding IPR and broader diffusion of know - how between foreign ﬁ rms and host governments are resolved . We acknowledge some limitations of this study , some of which also provide directions for future research . First , our primary focus is on identifying the boundary conditions that will in ﬂ uence exclusive rights being granted to a licensee with great technological potential . While technological strength is an appropriate focus , given our empirical context of high - tech industries , the strength of a licensee may have many other dimensions not considered in this study . For instance , in the case of brand licensing , it may be the marketing capabilities of the foreign licensee that are a source of adverse selection concerns . Similarly , in countries character - ized by institutional voids , the attributes of the licensee in terms of legitimacy , government ties , and social capital may play an important role in determin - ing the exclusivity decision , and in these markets adverse selection issues may trump the transactional concerns . We also acknowledge the role of negotia - tion power in granting licensing exclusivity , but owing to the nature of our data , we could not investigate that topic suf ﬁ ciently . Future research is warranted for further re ﬁ nement of the arguments based on transactional value creation and transac - tion cost reduction , as well as a more ﬁ ne - grained data set to better incorporate the bargaining issues , including the role of foreign governments . Second , we assume that all the international licen - sing incidences are long - term - oriented strategic moves . However , there is still a small amount of international licensing motivated only by economic returns , especially when the technology in question is peripheral to the licensor . As a result , considera - tions about strategic gain might not be applicable in these cases . Future research might need to separate licensors ’ core technologies and peripheral technol - ogies when examining their licensing strategies . Third , given our interest in testing our theorization empirically through a multilevel approach , we were not able to capture the speci ﬁ c nuances of individual contracts . A more qualitative methodology may be able to develop a more ﬁ ne - grained understanding of exclusive licensing agreements . In order to gain a better understanding of licensing contracts , we tried to evaluate post hoc a few accessible contracts from the Royaltystat and Ktmine databases . In these contracts , we notice that international exclusive licensing cases ( compared with non - exclusive agree - ments ) are often accompanied by restrictions on the scope of the technological applications , which actu - ally can prevent the licensee from embarking on second - order diffusion of the technology ; or “ pro - hibited ” territories that limit the extra - territorial competitive proclivities of the licensee , which may positively in ﬂ uence a licensor ’ s willingness to grant exclusivity rights . Licensors also tend to specify in Technology licensing and exclusive rights Preet S Aulakh et al 714 Journal of International Business Studies exclusive agreements those items open to licensor inspection and decision - making participation , such as co - development , periodical updates of business schedules , mutual design of marketing plans , regular visits of licensor representatives , and meetings includ - ing managers from both sides . Thus , in addition to a restriction in scope , the licensor involvement items serves as a de facto check on contractual hazards , and a “ lock - in ” as close interactions tighten the relation - ship between the two partners . Eventually , by sacri ﬁ - cing the options of self - operation in the licensee ’ s market or licensing to additional parties , a licensor may gain tangible involvement in or control over the licensee ’ s decision making and activities . Finally , we have argued that studying the exclu - sivity decision is important by itself , given the hostage situation for the licensor that restricts future moves in a given market . As Williamson ( 1991 : 75 ) pointed out , “ between economizing and strategiz - ing , economizing is much the more fundamental ” . However , the nature of our data does not allow us to examine the strategic signi ﬁ cance of licensing exclu - sivity in terms of its performance implications ( Martin , 2013 ) . Unfortunately , the archival data - bases we examined give very limited information about the performance parameters of these licensing agreements , probably because of the con ﬁ dential or sensitive nature of this information . Future research based on other sources of data , including surveys , may allow theoretical and empirical exposition of performance issues in inter - organizational licensing relationships . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We would like to thank JIBS Editor - in - Chief John Cant - well , Area Editor Mariko Sakakibara , and three anon - ymous reviewers for their insightful directions in developing the paper . Various versions of this paper have benefited from the comments received at the Strategic Management Society , Academy of Interna - tional Business and Academy of Management Confer - ences , and from seminar participants at the Australian National University . We thank W . G . Park for sharing the updated IPP Index with us . The names of the authors are given alphabetically ; all contributed equally to the paper . Financial support for this project was provided by the Social Science and Humanities Research Council of Canada ( Grant No . 410 - 2008 - 1995 ) . NOTES 1 These licensor concerns can be partially resolved through close interaction between a licensor and a licensee , as the exclusivity agreement provides conditions and privileges for the licensor to closely supervise the licensee ’ s commercialization activities through regular and frequent visits of the licensor ’ s managers and engineers ( Aulakh et al . , 1998 ) . At the same time , the licensee also has its concerns about whether the licensor will hold up some critical part of the information about the technology during the technology transfer process , or whether the licensor will shirk its responsibility to provide timely and sufficient assistance when the licensee needs it most ( Mottner & Johnson , 2000 ) . These licensee concerns can be partially resolved by placing more weight on a royalty - based compensation structure , where joint rent creation is emphasized , so as to mobilize the commitment by both sides . In general , those concerns from both the licensor and the licensee side are basically idiosyncratic , and are usually resolved by incorporating contingent clauses to prevent deviating behaviors ( Anand & Khanna , 2000 ; Somaya et al . , 2010 ) . We thank one reviewer for bringing this to our attention . 2 AeA ( website : http : / / www . aeanet . org ) is the largest association of high - tech companies in the United States . 3 Although the SDC data have an exclusivity flag to indicate exclusivity status , prior researchers ( Anand & Khanna , 2000 ) have noted that this flag indicator is not comprehensive , and requires refinement through further evaluation and coding . Indeed , by using the exclusive flag we were able to identify only 39 exclusive licensing agreements , which counts for about 10 % of our total sample and 41 % of the 95 exclusive licensing agreements we identified via synopsis . 4 Given the fact that some countries have few observations in our sample , we group these countries into regions based on geographic proximity . 5 As an alternative , we also put industry level first and then both industry and country later . The results were largely the same . For convenience , we reported only the first approach in Table 3 . Here we would also like to point out that although the country and industry random effects are not statistically significant when entering them simultaneously in the unconditional cross - classified model ( i . e . , Model II ) , their effects are significant when entering them separately in the fully unconditional model ( e . g . , Model I ) . This suggests that there are significant between - industry and between - country variances in licensing exclusivity . 6 We did a further test to examine whether the relationship between technological potential and exclusivity is curvilinear , but did not find such an effect . 7 We entered the interactions one at a time , and all the coefficients are statistically significant and in the Technology licensing and exclusive rights Preet S Aulakh et al 715 Journal of International Business Studies same direction . We also have a disproportionately high number of observations from one country , Japan . We ran our models by excluding the licensing agreements in Japan . The results from the reduced sample are similar to the ones reported . These additional results are available from the authors . REFERENCES Abdi , M . , & Aulakh , P . S . 2012 . Do country - level institutional frameworks and interfirm governance arrangements substitute or complement in international business relationships ? Journal of International Business Studies , 43 ( 5 ) : 477 – 497 . Allred , B . B . , & Park , W . G . 2007 . Patent rights and innovative activity : Evidence from national and firm - level data . Journal of International Business Studies , 38 ( 6 ) : 878 – 900 . Anand , B . N . , & Khanna , T . 2000 . The structure of licensing contracts . Journal of Industrial Economics , 48 ( 1 ) : 103 – 135 . Anderson , E . , & Gatignon , H . 1986 . Modes of foreign entry : A transaction cost analysis and propositions . Journal of interna - tional Business Studies , 17 ( 3 ) : 1 – 26 . Arora , A . , & Ceccagnoli , M . 2006 . Patent protection , comple - mentary assets , and firms ’ incentives for technology licensing . Management Science , 52 ( 2 ) : 293 – 308 . Arora , A . , & Fosfuri , A . 2000 . Wholly owned subsidiary versus technology licensing in the worldwide chemical industry . Journal of International Business Studies , 31 ( 4 ) : 555 – 572 . Arora , A . , & Fosfuri , A . 2003 . Licensing the market for technology . Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization , 52 ( 2 ) : 277 – 295 . Arora , A . , Fosfuri , A . , & Gambardella , A . 2002 . Market for technology : The economics of innovation and corporate strategy . Cambridge , MA : The MIT Press . Aulakh , P . S . , Cavusgil , S . T . , & Sarkar , M . B . 1998 . Compensation in international licensing agreements . Journal of International Business Studies , 29 ( 2 ) : 409 – 419 . Aulakh , P . S . , Jiang , M . S . , & Pan , Y . G . 2010 . International techno - logy licensing : Monopoly rents , transaction costs and exclusive rights . Journal of International Business Studies , 41 ( 4 ) : 587 – 605 . Bain , J . S . 1956 . Barriers to new competition . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Bamberger , P . 2007 . Beyond contextualization : Using context theories to narrow the micro - macro gap in management . Academy of Management Journal , 51 ( 5 ) : 839 – 846 . Beamish , P . W . , Morrison , A . J . , Rosenzweig , P . M . , & Inkpen , A . C . 2000 . International management , 4th edn . New York : Irwin McGraw - Hill . Bergen , M . , Dutta , S . , & Walker , O . C . J . 1992 . Agency relation - ships in marketing : A review of the implications and applica - tions of agency and related theories . Journal of Marketing , 56 ( 3 ) : 1 – 24 . Bessy , C . , & Brousseau , E . 1998 . Technology licensing contracts features and diversity . International Review of Law and Economics , 18 ( 4 ) : 451 – 489 . Bidault , F . 1989 . Technology pricing : From principles to strategy . London : Palgrave Macmillan . Brandenburger , A . M . , & Nalebuff , B . J . 1996 . Co - opetition : A revolutionary mindset that combines competition and cooperation in the marketplace . London : HarperCollins Publishers . Branstetter , L . G . , Fisman , R . , & Foley , C . F . 2006 . Do intellectual property rights increase international technology transfer ? Empirical evidence from US firm - level data . The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 121 ( 1 ) : 321 – 349 . Buckley , P . J . , & Casson , M . 1996 . An economic model of international joint venture strategy . Journal of International Business Studies , 27 ( 5 ) : 849 – 876 . Business Wire . 2008 . Start Licensing , Inc . sues RNL Bio Ltd for patent infringement . 30 October . Caves , R . E . , Crookell , H . , & Killing , J . P . 1983 . The imperfect market for technology licenses . Oxford Bulletin of Economics & Statistics , 45 ( 3 ) : 249 – 251 . Chen , S . F . S . 2010 . A general TCE model of international business institutions : Market failure and reciprocity . Journal of Interna - tional Business Studies , 41 ( 6 ) : 935 – 959 . Chen , S . F . S . , & Hennart , J . F . 2004 . A hostage theory of joint ventures : Why do Japanese investors choose partial over full acquisitions to enter the United States ? Journal of Business Research , 57 ( 10 ) : 1126 – 1134 . Cohen , W . M . , & Levinthal , D . A . 1990 . Absorptive capacity : A new perspective on learning and innovation . Administrative Science Quarterly , 35 ( 1 ) : 128 – 152 . Contractor , F . J . 2001 . Valuation of intangible assets in global operations . Westport , CT : Quorum Books . Contractor , F . J . , & Lorange , P . 1988 . Competition vs coopera - tion : A benefit / cost framework for choosing between fully owned investments and cooperative relationships . Manage - ment International Review , 28 ( Special Issue ) : 5 – 18 . De Carolis , D . M . 2003 . Competencies and imitability in the pharmaceutical industry : An analysis of their relationship with firm performance . Journal of Management , 29 ( 1 ) : 27 – 50 . Delios , A . , & Henisz , W . J . 2000 . Japanese firms ’ investment strategies in emerging economies . Academy of Management Journal , 43 ( 3 ) : 305 – 323 . Dess , G . G . , & Beard , D . W . 1984 . Dimensions of organizational task environments . Administrative Science Quarterly , 29 ( 1 ) : 52 – 73 . Dushnitsky , G . 2004 . Limitations to inter - organizational knowledge acquisition : The paradox of corporate venture capital . Unpub - lished dissertation , New York University . Dyer , J . H . 1996 . Does governance matter ? Keiretsu alliances and asset specificity as sources of Japanese competitive advantage . Organization Science , 7 ( 6 ) : 649 – 666 . The Economist . 2005 . A market for ideas . 377 : 48 – 51 . Evans , A . W . 1991 . On monopoly rent . Land Economics , 67 ( 1 ) : 1 – 14 . Fallows , J . 1990 . The great Japanese misunderstanding . New York Review of Books , 38 ( 10 ) : 33 – 39 . Fan , J . P . H . , & Lang , L . H . P . 2000 . The measurement of relatedness : An application to corporate diversification . Journal of Business , 73 ( 4 ) : 629 – 660 . Fielding , A . , & Goldstein , H . 2006 . Cross - classified and multiple membership structures in multilevel models : An introduction and review . Research Report No . 791 , Department of Education and Skills , University of Birmingham . Fosfuri , A . 2006 . The licensing dilemma : Understanding the determinants of the rate of technology licensing . Strategic Management Journal , 27 ( 12 ) : 1141 – 1158 . Gallini , N . T . , & Wright , B . D . 1990 . Technology transfer under asymmetric information . Rand Journal of Economics , 21 ( 1 ) : 147 – 160 . Ginarte , J . C . , & Park , W . G . 1997 . Determinants of patent rights : A cross - national study . Research Policy , 26 ( 3 ) : 283 – 301 . Godoe , H . 2000 . Innovation regimes , R & D and radical innova - tions in telecommunications . Research Policy , 29 ( 9 ) : 1033 – 1046 . Goldstein , H . 1994 . Multilevel cross - classified models . Sociological Methods & Research , 22 ( 3 ) : 364 – 375 . Goll , I . , & Rasheed , A . M . A . 1997 . Rational decision - making and firm performance : The moderating role of environment . Strate - gic Management Journal , 18 ( 7 ) : 37 – 53 . Hagedoorn , J . , Lorenz - Orlean , S . , & van Kranenburg , H . 2009 . Inter - firm technology transfer : Partnership - embedded licensing or standard licensing agreements ? Industrial and Corporate Change , 18 ( 3 ) : 529 – 550 . Hall , B . H . , Jaffe , A . B . , & Trajtenberg , M . 2001 . The NBER patent citation data file : Lessons , insights and methodological tools . NBER Working Paper 8498 , National Bureau of Economic Research . Hamel , G . 1991 . Competition for competence and inter - partner learning within international strategic alliances . Strategic Management Journal , 12 ( S1 ) : 83 – 103 . Technology licensing and exclusive rights Preet S Aulakh et al 716 Journal of International Business Studies Helpman , E . 1993 . Innovation , imitation , and intellectual prop - erty rights . Econometrica , 61 ( 6 ) : 1247 – 1280 . Henisz , W . J . 2000 . The institutional environment for economic growth . Economics and Politics , 12 ( 1 ) : 1 – 31 . Hill , C . W . L . 1992 . Strategies for exploiting technological innova - tions : When and when not to license . Organization Science , 3 ( 3 ) : 428 – 441 . Hill , C . W . L . , & Snell , S . A . 1988 . External control , corporate strategy , and firm performance in research intensive industries . Strategic Management Journal , 9 ( 6 ) : 577 – 590 . Hill , C . W . L . , Hwang , P . , & Kim , C . 1990 . An eclectic theory of the choice of international entry mode . Strategic Management Journal , 11 ( 2 ) : 117 – 128 . Hofmann , D . 1997 . An overview of the logic and rationale of hierarchical linear models . Journal of Management , 23 ( 6 ) : 723 – 744 . Hofstede , G . 1980 . Culture ’ s consequences : International differences in work - related values . New York : Sage . Hox , J . J . 2010 . Multilevel analysis : Techniques and applications , 2nd edn . New York : Routledge Taylor & Francis Group . Hueschen , G . W . 1951 . Patents – exclusive licenses – licensor and licensee relationship – licensee ’ s obligations . Michigan Law Review , 49 ( 5 ) : 738 – 754 . Inkpen , A . C . , & Beamish , P . W . 1997 . Knowledge , bargaining power , and the instability of international joint ventures . Academy of Management Review , 22 ( 1 ) : 177 – 202 . Jensen , E . J . 1987 . Research expenditures and the discovery of new drugs . Journal of Industrial Economics , 36 ( 1 ) : 83 – 95 . Jiang , M . S . , Aulakh , P . S . , & Pan , Y . G . 2009 . Licensing duration in foreign markets : A real options perspective . Journal of Interna - tional Business Studies , 40 ( 4 ) : 559 – 577 . Johanson , J . , & Vahlne , J . E . 1977 . The internationalization process of the firm : A model of knowledge development and increasing foreign market commitments . Journal of International Business Studies , 8 ( 1 ) : 23 – 32 . Johnson , R . , & Wichern , D . 1992 . Applied multivariate statistical analysis , 3rd edn . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . Kale , P . , Singh , H . , & Perlmutter , H . 2000 . Learning and protection of proprietary assets in strategic alliances : Building relational capital . Strategic Management Journal , 21 ( 3 ) : 217 – 237 . Kaufmann , D . , Kraay , A . , & Zoido , P . 2002 . Governance matters II : Updated indicators for 2000 – 01 . Washington DC : World Bank Development Research Group . Keats , B . , & Hitt , M . A . 1988 . A causal model of linkages among environmental dimensions , macro organizational characteris - tics , and performance . Academy of Management Journal , 31 ( 3 ) : 570 – 598 . Kim , Y . J . , & Vonortas , N . S . 2006 . Determinants of technology licensing : The case of licensors . Managerial and Decision Eco - nomics , 27 ( 4 ) : 235 – 249 . Kogut , B . , & Kulatilaka , N . 2001 . Capabilities as real options . Organization Science , 12 ( 6 ) : 744 – 758 . Kogut , B . , & Singh , H . 1988 . The effect of national culture on the choice of entry mode . Journal of International Business Studies , 19 ( 3 ) : 411 – 432 . Kotabe , M . , Sahay , A . , & Aulakh , P . S . 1996 . Emerging role of technology licensing in the development of global product strategy : Conceptual framework and research propositions . Journal of Marketing , 60 ( 1 ) : 73 – 88 . Kozlowski , S . W . J . , & Klein , K . J . ( Eds ) 2000 . A multilevel approach to theory and research in organizations : Contextual , temporal , and emergent processes . In , Multilevel theory , research and method in organizations : Foundations , extensions , and new direc - tions , 157 – 210 . San Francisco , CA : Jossey - Bass . Lemelin , A . 1982 . Relatedness in the patterns of inter - industry diversification . Review of Economics and Statistics , 64 ( 4 ) : 646 – 657 . Li , D . , Eden , L . , Hitt , M . , & Ireland , D . 2008 . Friends , acquain - tances , or strangers ? Partner selection in R & D alliances . Acad - emy of Management Journal , 51 ( 2 ) : 315 – 334 . Li , Z . G . , & Dant , R . P . 1997 . An exploratory study of exclusive dealing in channel relationships . Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 25 ( 3 ) : 201 – 213 . Lieberman , M . B . , & Montgomery , D . B . 1988 . First - mover advantages . Strategic Management Journal , 9 ( S1 ) : 41 – 58 . Madhok , A . , & Tallman , S . B . 1998 . Resources , transactions and rents : Managing value through interfirm collaborative relation - ships . Organization Science , 9 ( 3 ) : 326 – 339 . Mariani , M . 2004 . What determines technological hits ? Geography versus firm competencies . Research Policy , 33 ( 10 ) : 1565 – 1582 . Markusen , J . R . 2001 . Contracts , intellectual property rights , and multinational investment in developing countries . Journal of International Economics , 53 ( 1 ) : 189 – 204 . Martin , X . 2013 . Solving theoretical and empirical conundrums in international strategy research : Linking foreign entry mode choices and performance . Journal of International Business Studies , 44 ( 1 ) : 28 – 41 . Meyer , K . E . , Estrin , E . , Bhaumik , S . K . , & Peng , M . W . 2009 . Institutions , resources , and entry strategies in emerging eco - nomics . Strategic Management Journal , 30 ( 1 ) : 60 – 80 . Mottner , S . , & Johnson , J . P . 2000 . Motivations and risks in international licensing : A review and implications for licensing to transitional and emerging economies . Journal of World Business , 35 ( 2 ) : 171 – 188 . Nelson , R . R . 2005 . Technology , institutions and economic growth . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Neter , J . , Wasserman , W . , & Kutner , M . H . 1985 . Applied linear statistical models : Regression , analysis of variance , and experi - mental designs . Homewood , IL : Irwin Press . Ordover , J . A . 1991 . A patent system for both diffusion and exclusion . Journal of Economic Perspectives , 5 ( 1 ) : 43 – 60 . Oxley , J . E . 1999 . Institutional environment and the mechanisms of governance : The impact of intellectual property protection on the structure of inter - firm alliances . Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization , 38 ( 3 ) : 283 – 309 . Oxley , J . E . , & Sampson , R . C . 2004 . The scope and governance of international R & D alliances . Strategic Management Journal , 25 ( 8 – 9 ) : 723 – 749 . Park , W . G . 2008 . International patent protection : 1960 – 2005 . Research Policy , 37 ( 4 ) : 761 – 766 . Peng , M . W . 2008 . Global strategy . Mason , OH : South - Western Cengage Learning . Porter , M . E . 1985 . Competitive advantage : Creating and sustaining superior performance . New York : The Free Press . Prahalad , C . K . , & Hamel , G . 1990 . The core competence of the corporation . Harvard Business Review , 68 ( 3 ) : 79 – 91 . Raudenbush , S . W . , & Bryk , A . S . 2002 . Hierarchical linear models : Applications and data analysis methods , 2nd edn . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage Publications . Rockett , K . E . 1990 . Choosing the competition and patent licensing . Rand Journal of Economics , 21 ( 1 ) : 161 – 171 . Rosenkopf , L . , & Schilling , M . 2007 . Comparing alliance network structure across industries : Observations and explanations . Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal , 1 ( 3 – 4 ) : 191 – 209 . Roy , J . P . , & Oliver , C . 2009 . International joint venture partner selection : The role of the host country legal environment . Journal of International Business Studies , 40 ( 5 ) : 779 – 801 . Sakakibara , M . 2010 . An empirical analysis of pricing patent licensing contracts . Industrial and Corporate Change , 19 ( 3 ) : 927 – 945 . Sarkar , M . B . , Aulakh , P . S . , & Madhok , A . 2009 . Process capabilities and value generation in alliance portfolios . Organi - zation Science , 20 ( 3 ) : 583 – 600 . SAS / STAT 9 . 1 User ’ s Guide . 2008 . The GLIMMIX procedure . Cary , NC : SAS Publishing . Schabenberger , O . 2005 . Introducing the GLIMMIX procedure for generalized linear mixed models . Presentation at 30th Annual SAS Users Group International Conference . Schilling , M . , & Steensma , K . 2001 . The use of modular organiza - tional forms : An industry - level analysis . Academy of Manage - ment Journal , 44 ( 6 ) : 1149 – 1168 . Technology licensing and exclusive rights Preet S Aulakh et al 717 Journal of International Business Studies Shi , W . , Sun , S . L . , & Peng , M . W . 2012 . Sub - national institutional contingencies , network positions , and IJV partner selection . Journal of Management Studies , 49 ( 7 ) : 1221 – 1245 . Somaya , D . , Kim , Y . , & Vonortas , N . S . 2010 . Exclusivity in licensing alliances : Using hostages to support technology com - mercialization . Strategic Management Journal , 32 ( 2 ) : 159 – 186 . Stock , G . , Greis , N . , & Fischer , W . 2001 . Absorptive capacity and new product development . Journal of High Technology Manage - ment Research , 12 ( 1 ) : 77 – 91 . Tabachnick , B . , & Fidell , L . 1996 . Using multivariate statistics , 3rd edn . New York : HarperCollins . Teece , D . J . 1986 . Profiting from technological innovation : Implications for integration , collaboration , licensing and public policy . Research Policy , 15 ( 6 ) : 285 – 305 . Tsai , W . P . 2001 . Knowledge transfer in intraorganizational net - works : Effects of network position and absorptive capacity on business unit innovation and performance . Academy of Man - agement Journal , 44 ( 5 ) : 996 – 1004 . Villalonga , B . 2004 . Does diversification cause the “ diversification discount ” ? Financial Management , 33 ( 2 ) : 5 – 27 . Williamson , O . E . 1975 . Markets and hierarchies . New York : The Free Press . Williamson , O . E . 1983 . Credible commitments : Using hostages to support exchange . The American Economic Review , 73 ( 4 ) : 519 – 540 . Williamson , O . E . 1991 . Comparative economic organization : The analysis of discrete structural alternatives . Administrative Science Quarterly , 36 ( 2 ) : 269 – 296 . Zajac , E . J . , & Olsen , C . P . 1993 . From transaction cost to transactional value analysis : Implications for the study of inter - organizational strategies . Journal of Management Studies , 30 ( 1 ) : 131 – 145 . Zhang , Y . , Li , H . - Y . , Hitt , M . , & Cui , G . 2007 . R & D intensity and international joint venture performance in an emerging market : moderating effects of market focus and ownership structure . Journal of International Business Studies , 38 ( 6 ) : 944 – 960 . Ziedonis , A . A . 2007 . Real options in technology licensing . Management Science , 53 ( 10 ) : 1618 – 1634 . ABOUT THE AUTHORS Preet S Aulakh is Professor of Strategy and Pierre Lassonde Chair in International Business at the Schulich School of Business , York University . His research focuses on cross - border strategic alliances , emerging - economy multinationals , and technology licensing . Marshall S Jiang is Associate Professor of Interna - tional Business at Goodman School of Business , Brock University . He received his PhD from York University . His research focuses on international licensing , joint ventures , knowledge transfer , inno - vation , and entrepreneurship ( mjiang @ brocku . ca ) . Sali Li is Associate Professor of International Busi - ness at the Moore School of Business , University of South Carolina . His research interests include global and corporate strategy , innovation , and demand side perspective with emphasis on emerging markets ( sali . li @ moore . sc . edu ) . Accepted by Mariko Sakakibara , Area Editor , 3 June 2013 . This paper has been with the authors for three revisions . Technology licensing and exclusive rights Preet S Aulakh et al 718 Journal of International Business Studies