Signaling in the Motility Responses of the Human Neutrophil D ONCHO V . Z HELEV 1 and A BDULLATIF A LTERAIFI 2 1 Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science , Duke University , Durham , NC and 2 Department of Mechanical Engineering , United Arab Emirates University , Al Ain , United Arab Emirates ( Received 19 October 2000 ; accepted 14 March 2002 ) Abstract— The neutrophil has developed into one of the most efﬁcient vertebrate motile cells . It migrates through tissues , where it encounters multiple chemoattractant signals with com - plex spatial and temporal characteristics . The directional move - ment of the neutrophil is signaled by the binding of chemoat - tractants and chemokines to G - protein - coupled receptors expressed on the plasma membrane . The signals from the ligand - bound receptors are transmitted along signaling path - ways and initiate various cell responses , such as motility , su - peroxide production , and secretion . The signaling of the motil - ity responses ﬁnds its climax in the polymerization of F - actin , which results in lamella formation and overall rearrangement of the cellular cytoskeleton and cell crawling . Also , during motil - ity , adhesion receptors attach to and detach from their ligands and provide the necessary traction for crawling . These events are highly synchronized and allow the cell to orient in shallow chemoattractant gradients even when more than one chemoat - tractants are present . Due to the complexity of the motility responses , the signaling of their regulation is still not well understood . Recent advances in the understanding of the mechanism of F - actin polymerization have shown that the small GTPasess Cdc42 , Rac2 , and RhoA , play a critical role in motility . The bound integrin receptors may also contribute to the signaling of motility via tyrosine kinase phosphorylation of guanine nucleotide exchange factors and other regulatory pro - teins . In this review , we discuss the signaling of neutrophil motility in relation to the response of the cell to chemoattrac - tant activation . © 2002 Biomedical Engineering Society . @ DOI : 10 . 1114 / 1 . 1477446 # Keywords— Neutrophil , Motility , Signaling . INTRODUCTION Neutrophils protect our bodies from more that 90 % of the pathogens that we encounter every day . This continu - ous quest of the neutrophil to inactivate pathogens has led to its denotation as a ‘‘professional’’ killing machine . The cell senses the presence of pathogens , moves toward the sites of acute inﬂammation in a process called chemotaxis , and destroys the pathogens by either phago - cytosis or release of peroxide products and / or proteolytic enzymes . Not surprisingly , the neutrophil is one of the fastest crawling cells . Its rate of crawling is on the order of 10 m m / min , which is ﬁve to ten times faster that the rate of crawling of keratocytes and macrophages , and almost 50 times faster that the rate of crawling of ﬁbroblasts . 183 The crawling of the neutrophil shows some fundamental similarities with the crawling of other ver - tebrate motile cells , such as ﬁbroblasts and microphages . In all cases , the crawling cell protrudes surface ﬁlopodia and microspikes . The ﬁlopodia support thin veils of membrane protected cytoplasm , called lamellipodia . The lamellipodia are ﬁlled with actin ﬁlaments coupled with myosin II and numerous structural and regulatory pro - teins forming a meshwork . It is now widely accepted that the actin – myosin meshwork is the ‘‘engine’’ of neutro - phil motility . 101 This locomotory ‘‘engine’’ works against the cell - to - substratum adhesion facilitated by adhesion receptors members of the integrin family . 66 , 93 , 137 The synchronization of lamellipodia extension with adhesion to substratum and cell body contraction results in cell movement or crawling . During crawling the cell encoun - ters a complex chemical environment , where it is capable of detecting shallow gradients in chemoattractant concen - tration ~ in many cases less than 1 % concentration differ - ence across the cell length ! . 182 The ability of the neutro - phil to detect small concentration gradients allows it to ‘‘navigate’’ through tissue and to the sites of inﬂamma - tion . The ‘‘navigation’’ process is controlled by chemoat - tractant receptors , members of the G - protein - coupled re - ceptor superfamily , 12 , 106 , 128 which bind to chemoattractants produced by the invading bacteria and / or chemokines produced by the cells from the in - jured tissue . The control of motility by the chemoattrac - tant receptors is mediated by a variety of signaling pro - cesses that involve a variety of molecules grouped in signaling pathways . In addition to the signaling from the activated chemoattractant receptors , the motility of the neutrophil is affected by the signaling from the bound adhesion receptors . The precise mechanism of coupling of the signals from the different membrane receptors and the processes controlling the rearrangement of the cy - toskeleton are not well understood . Recently , many of the components involved in the signaling of motility Address correspondence to Doncho V . Zhelev , Department of Me - chanical Engineering and Materials Science , Duke University , Durham , NC 27708 - 0300 . Electronic mail : dvzh @ duke . edu Annals of Biomedical Engineering , Vol . 30 , pp . 356 – 370 , 2002 0090 - 6964 / 2002 / 30 ~ 3 ! / 356 / 15 / $ 15 . 00 Printed in the USA . All rights reserved . Copyright © 2002 Biomedical Engineering Society 356 responses , such as actin polymerization , adhesion recep - tors priming , and adhesion receptor detachment , have been identiﬁed . In this paper we discuss different aspects of the signaling of motility and the coupling between the different signaling pathways in an attempt to build a uniﬁed model of signaling of motility ~ Fig . 1 ! . SENSING CHEMOATTRACTANT STIMULI The passive neutrophil is round and uniform . It be - haves as a Newtonian liquid droplet when deformed into a pipet 40 due to the contraction of the membrane bound F - actin cortex . 40 , 180 Immediately after the exposure of the cell to a gradient of chemoattractant its shape changes in a process called polarization . The polarized cell has well - deﬁned leading lamella , which extends toward the direc - tion of increasing chemoattractant concentration , and a trailing ‘‘tail’’ called uropod , extending in the opposite direction . 140 After polarization the neutrophil starts to crawl . The crawling cell continuously creates new exten - sions at the leading edge of the lamella region , while the main cell body remains adherent to the supporting sub - strate . The crawling of the cell is coupled with body contraction , which prevents the cell from being overex - tended along its crawling path . The maintenance of the spatial and functional asymmetry of the polarized cell is essential for motility . Interestingly , the polarity of the cell is maintained even when it changes direction , which is a common behavior when it follows moving bacteria . 77 , 185 The persistence of polarity during motility has led to the conclusion that the cell senses the spatial distribution of chemoattractant in its surroundings . 182 , 185 FIGURE 1 . Signaling of actin dynamics via PI3K activation starts with the binding of chemoattractant receptors to their ligands . The binding of the receptors triggers the release of the G b G g subunit of the receptor associated G protein . The released G b G g activates phospholipase C - b (cid:132) PLC - b (cid:133) , phosphoinositide 3 - kinase - g (cid:132) PI3K g (cid:133) and adenylyl cyclase (cid:132) AC (cid:133) . PLC - b and AC are not directly involved in the signaling of motility , however , they may modulate the motility responses through PKC and PKA activation . PI3K g is a major signaling molecule in motility . It produces PIP 3 , which has multiple targets among the pleckstrin homology (cid:132) PH (cid:133) domains proteins , such as the WASp family proteins WASp and WAVE , and the guanine nucleotide exchange factors (cid:132) GEFs (cid:133) , such as the Vav family of proteins . PH domain proteins also bind PIP 2 , which modulates their activation by PIP 3 . The activated GEFs activate the GTPases Cdc42 and Rac2 . Cdc42 forms a complex with WASp , PIP 2 , proﬁlin , and Arp2 (cid:213) 3 and initiates the nucleation of free barbed ends for actin polymerization . Similarly , Rac2 binds WAVE , proﬁlin , and Arp2 (cid:213) 3 and generates free barbed ends for polymerization . The polymerization of F - actin is coupled with actin disassembly , which is also controlled by Cdc42 and Rac2 via Pak 1 and downstream by LIM kinase and ADF (cid:213) coﬁlin . The efﬁciency of coﬁlin to disassemble F - actin ﬁlaments is modulated by PIP 2 and proﬁlin . Actin disassembly is signaled also by the GTPase RhoA , which in the human neutrophil modulates integrin detachment via ROCK . RhoA and Rac2 activate PI (cid:132) 4 (cid:133) P 5 - kinase , which produces PIP 2 . The activation of chemoattractant receptors also primes the adhesion receptors to bind to their ligands and provide traction for crawling . The distant signaling of integrin priming by the chemoattractant receptors may depend on PKC , however , this signaling is unclear . Priming of the integrins is directly dependent on the phosphorylation of L - plastin by PKA . The bound adhesion receptors may contribute to the overall neutrophil activation by inducing the phosporilation of guanine nucleotide exchange factors such as Vav , by tyrosine kinase . There are still signaling relations that are unclear . These include the activation of Cdc42 by PI3K g and the signaling of z PKC activation . 357 Signaling in Motility Responses Most importantly , it appears that the sensitivity of the leading lamella is enhanced compared to the rest of the cell body . This allows the cell to respond to extremely small ~ on the order of 1 % ! changes of chemoattractant concentration along its body . 85 One possible mechanism of ampliﬁcation of the stimulating signal is the change of receptor distribution after polarization and the recruit - ment of additional receptors to the leading lamella . An - other possibility is the increase of the binding afﬁnity / avidity of the receptors in the leading lamella relative to the rest of the cell . These possibilities have been tested for several chemoattractant receptors . The early experiments of determining the distribution of chemoattractant receptors after neutrophil polarization use ﬂuorescently labeled receptor ligands . Sullivan et al . observe that the concentration of N - formyl peptide re - ceptors is the largest in the middle of the polarized cell . A smaller receptor density is found at the leading lamel - lae , and almost no receptors are found in the uropod region . 144 Walter and Marasco 162 identify two types of N - formyl peptide receptors , one with high afﬁnity of binding to ligands and another with relatively low afﬁn - ity of binding . The receptors with high afﬁnity are found mostly close to the leading lamellae , while the low af - ﬁnity receptors are found close to the uropod . 162 Others report increased N - formyl peptide receptor density at the leading lamella of the polarized neutrophil . 89 , 96 , 127 Over - all , these data show that both the density and afﬁnity of the N - formyl peptide receptor are increased in the lamella region relative to the rest of the cell . However , the same measurements for the other types of chemoat - tractant receptors , such as the receptors for C5a and IL - 8 , 50 show that receptor distribution does not change after polarization . 50 To add to the complexity of this phenomenon , different receptors show different local ag - gregation properties . For example , C5a and IL - 8 appear in clusters both in activated and nonactivated cells , 50 while the N - formyl receptors are commonly not clus - tered , and cluster only for some ligands when the tem - perature is equal to 14 °C or below . 71 A recent study of the distribution of the C5a receptor using green ﬂuores - cent protein ~ GFP - C5a ! , conﬁrms the earlier ﬁnding that the C5a receptors remain randomly distributed during polarization and crawling . 131 Similarly , the receptors of other white blood cells such as the T lymphocyte , could be either redistributed after activation or remain ran - domly distributed during polarization and motility . 107 Overall , these results show that the signal ampliﬁcation in motility is unlikely to be based solely on receptor redistribution and / or aggregation . Therefore , the mecha - nism of ampliﬁcation must occur downstream from the ligand - bound receptors . Two recent studies 70 , 130 suggest that the ampliﬁcation of chemoattractant activation may involve G - protein clustering 70 or intracellular gradients of signaling molecules , such as Akt / PKB . 130 However , there is no conclusive evidence that this is the mecha - nism of signal ampliﬁcation used by the motile cells . Ultimately , the binding of chemoattractants to their receptors is the ﬁrst event of neutrophil activation . The chemoattractant receptors are G - protein - coupled seven - transmembrane - domain receptors . 34 They are divided into ﬁve groups , which correspond to the identiﬁed groups of chemoattractants stimulating neutrophil activa - tion . These groups include : the N - formyl ~ fMLP ! pep - tides derived from bacterial proteins , platelet - activating factor ~ PAF ! produced by activated platelets , leucotriene B4 ~ LTB4 ! obtained from the metabolism of arachidonic acid by the myeloid cells , the complement factor C5a anaphylotoxin obtained after cleavage of the complement protein C5 , and the chemokines , a family of proteins with conserved cysteines linked by disulﬁde bonds and produced by the cells of different tissues . The classical view of the activation mediated by these receptors re - quires a physical association of the receptor and a sub - unit of the G protein . Such physical association has been demonstrated for the IL - 8 receptor . 31 G proteins are trimeric molecules ~ G abg ! , with three subunits— a , b , and g . The a subunit ( G a i ) is bound to GDP . Upon activation the G a i subunit binds to the re - ceptor by interacting with its intracellular loops 8 and GDP is exchanged for GTP . This results in a release of the G bg subunit . The released G bg activates two major signaling molecules : phospholipase C ~ PLC ! and phos - phoinositide 3 - kinase ~ PI3K ! , which metabolize phos - phatidylinositol 4 , 5 - biphosphate ( PIP 2 ) . The human neu - trophil contains PLC - b 1 – b 2 and b 3 , 74 , 134 which upon activation hydrolyzes PIP 2 and generates inositol 1 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate ( IP 3 ) and diacylglycerol ~ DAG ! . 86 , 105 IP 3 mobilizes Ca 2 1 from the intracellular stores , which is observed as calcium transients , while DAG activates dif - ferent isoforms of protein kinase C ~ PKC ! and other protein kinases , which catalyze protein phosphorylation and activate other not well - characterized signaling events . 4 , 97 , 105 PI3K in the human neutrophil is repre - sented by phosphoinositide 3 - kinase - g ~ PI3K g ! , which after activation uses PIP 2 to produce phosphatidylinositol triphosphate ( PIP 3 ) . 65 , 86 This pathway does not trigger the release of intracellular Ca 2 1 . 86 Studies using PLC - b 2 , - b 3 , and PI3K g deﬁcient mice , 86 show that PI3K activation is responsible for 70 % of the motility response of the neutrophil , while the motility of the neutrophil is independent of PLC - b . Finally , there is another pathway of activation , where the released G bg triggers the acti - vation of adenylyl cyclase ~ AC ! and the production of cAMP . This pathway is receptor speciﬁc , which is dem - onstrated by the increase of the intracellular cAMP when the cell is activated by fMLP , C5a and IL - 8 , but not when the cell is activated by PAF . 4 The released cAMP activates protein kinase A ~ PKA ! and other cAMP sen - sitive kinases . The overall result of these signaling events 358 D . V . Z HELEV and A . A LTERAIFI is the activation of the neutrophil , which includes F - actin polymerization , adhesion receptor priming , cell crawling , and production of superoxide anions and release of pro - teolytic enzymes . Since the motility responses of the neutrophil are intimately related to actin dynamics , we will focus our discussion on the signaling of F - actin assembly and disassembly . ACTIN DYNAMICS The actin dynamics involves the transformation of the soluble form of actin called G - actin into ﬁlamentous actin called F - actin and vise versa . Most of the actin in the passive neutrophil ~ about 70 % ! is G - actin , while the rest is F - actin . 21 Upon activation , the total amount of polymerized F - actin almost doubles . 21 , 27 The conversion of G - actin into F - actin is related to cell polarization and lamella formation . Evidence for this relationship is found in the dynamics of formation of F - actin structures . New actin ﬁlaments start to form a few seconds after the initial exposure of the cell to chemoattractant 44 , 178 and 10 – 15 s later a lamella region ﬁlled with new F - actin ﬁlaments is formed . 119 , 139 The F - actin ﬁlaments in the lamella region are shorter and depolymerize faster com - pared to the F - actin in the rest of the cell . 21 , 27 Also , the F - actin of activated cells contains a large pool of F - actin soluble in strong surfactants , while this pool is small for the passive cell . 164 These observations suggest that after neutrophil activation , new F - actin ﬁlaments are formed in the lamella region , which undergo fast actin turnover . 61 , 101 The fast turnover of actin in the lamella region is essential for motility because it allows the cell to change shape and direction of crawling fast enough to follow the moving bacteria . 141 , 183 The turnover of actin between G - actin and F - actin is highly regulated by sequestering , capping , severing , and nucleating proteins . The actin in the G - actin is bound to either ATP or ADP . 161 Since the amount of ATP in the cells is about ten times larger than that of ADP , 41 most of the monomer actin is considered bound to ATP . The ATP - actin is sequestered by either proﬁlin 136 or thymosin - b 4 . 22 This results in almost 100 % sequestering of the G - actin in the passive neutrophil . The sequestering of actin allows the cell to contain more than two orders of magnitude higher concentrations of soluble actin than the critical concentration for spontaneous actin polymerization . 22 The G - actin in the human neutrophil is almost exclusively sequestered by thymosin - b 4 , 22 how - ever , the smaller pool of G - actin sequestered by proﬁlin is essential for the formation of new F - actin ﬁlaments . 18 , 177 The F - actin ﬁlaments have two distinct sites , called barbed end and pointed end , where new actin monomers are added . The rate of polymerization at the barbed end is almost ten times faster than the same rate for the pointed end , which suggests that the addition of actin monomers occurs preferentially at the ﬁlament’s barbed end . 116 The capping proteins , gelsolin , capping protein - beta2 , cap Z , and fragmin , 36 , 141 prevent the spon - taneous addition of actin to the already formed F - actin ﬁlaments . Thus , the rate - limiting factor for F - actin poly - merization is either the rate of uncapping of the existing barbed ends , or the formation of new barbed ends . New barbed ends are formed either after severing of existing ﬁlaments by coﬁlin or gelsolin , 141 or after the nucleation of new barbed ends . 141 The comparison of the half time of dissociation of the capping proteins ~ on the order of 30 min ! , 126 with the rate of cytoskeleton rearrangement after activation ~ on the order of seconds ! , 44 , 178 shows that the spontaneous uncapping of the barbed ends is unlikely to be a factor in F - actin dynamics . The presence of a large number of new F - actin ﬁlaments in the lamella region immediately after activation , 119 suggests that actin dynamics in the activated cell is highly regulated and involves formation of new barbed ends , uncapping of existing barbed ends , and severing of actin ﬁlaments . CONTROL OF ACTIN DYNAMICS BY GTPASES The Rho GTPases : Cdc42 , RhoA , and Rac are major regulators of actin dynamics 52 , 110 ~ Fig . 1 ! . In ﬁbroblasts , the activation of Cdc42 stimulates the formation of actin - rich ﬁlopodia , the activation of RhoA induces the forma - tion of stress ﬁbers , and the activation of Rac stimulates the formation of lamellipodia and membrane rufﬂes . 52 Similar F - actin structures are formed after injecting mu - rine macrophages with constitutively active V12Cdc42 , V12Rac1 , and V14RhoA , 5 which demonstrates the direct involvement of the GTPases in actin polymerization . The activation of the GTPases with GTP g S induces F - actin polymerization in cell - free systems via the formation of new barbed ends , 76 which shows that the GTPases are intimately involved in F - actin nucleation . The activation of Cdc42 affects critically monocyte chemotaxis . 166 Similarly , the formation of new F - actin ﬁlaments in neutrophil extracts is critically dependent on Cdc42 activation with GTP g S . 184 This suggests that Cdc42 activation is involved in the signaling of F - actin polymerization . However , the activation of Cdc42 alone is not enough for actin polymerization . 116 This shows that there are downstream effectors of Cdc42 , which are crucial for F - actin formation , but require also a second - ary signal for activation by Cdc42 . The motility of neu - trophils and macrophages is signiﬁcantly impaired in pa - tients with the Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome . 181 Thus , the Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome protein ~ WASp ! is also in - volved in the signaling of actin polymerization . WASp is downstream of Cdc42 and is one of its major effectors , which is involved in the control of the nucleation of new barbed ends . 51 , 98 In the resting cell WASp is in autoin - hibited conformation and does not stimulate F - actin 359 Signaling in Motility Responses polymerization . 98 , 114 , 121 Upon activation it binds the pro - tein complex Arp2 / 3 and forms branched F - actin ﬁla - ments ~ dendrites ! . 104 Arp2 / 3 is involved in both , the for - mation of new branches of F - actin ﬁlaments with free barbed ends and the protection of the newly formed barbed ends from the capping proteins . 148 Apparently , WASp is activated by either Cdc42 or PIP 2 , which to - gether with Arp2 / 3 have distinct binding sites on the WASp molecule . 117 , 121 , 152 The detailed characterization of the activation of WASp by Cdc42 and PIP 2 shows that WASp can be activated by PIP 2 alone , 64 , 69 however , Cdc42 cannot activate WASp in the absence of PIP 2 . 64 When both PIP 2 and Cdc42 are present the activity of WASp is almost doubled . 64 , 121 This shows that the phos - phoinositide PIP 2 is the secondary signal for the activa - tion of WASp by Cdc42 . Similar synergy in the action of PIP 2 and Cdc42 in the signaling of actin polymerization is found in permeabilized neutrophils , 47 where the in - crease of PIP 2 concentration stimulates F - actin polymer - ization but the presence of the dominant negative Cdc42 ~ N17 - Cdc42 ! inhibits the effect of PIP 2 . 47 WASp has also a binding site for proﬁlin , 150 which suggests that proﬁlin may be involved in the modulation of F - actin polymerization signaled by WASp . Proﬁlin facilitates the exchange of ADP / ATP and increases the overall rate of F - actin formation facilitated by Cdc42 WASp , 143 most probably by providing actin monomers for polymeriza - tion . There is an alternative pathway for the activation of the neural WASP ~ N - WASP ! by WISH , which is inde - pendent of Cdc42 . 46 However , the existence of this path - way in the human neutrophil has not been conﬁrmed . Interestingly , F - actin polymerization in permeabilized neutrophils is also stimulated by the addition of PIP 3 . 47 PIP 3 is produced by PI3K g from PIP 2 and does not bind to either WASp or Cdc42 . 100 This suggests that the ef - fectors of PIP 3 are either upstream of Cdc42 and WASp or that there is an alternative pathway of F - actin poly - merization . One such alternative pathway is the Rac2 - dependent actin polymerization discussed below , which is PIP 3 dependent . The role of Cdc42 in the signaling of actin dynamics is dual . It is involved in both , the actin assembly discussed above , and in the modulation of F - actin disassembly . The role of Cdc42 in actin disas - sembly is mediated by Pak1 , which activates LIM kinase . 38 LIM kinase is involved in phosphorylation and inactivation of the actin depolymerizing factor coﬁlin ~ ADF / coﬁlin ! , which disassembles actin ﬁlaments . 24 , 94 , 109 , 146 Rac2 is the other GTPase involved in the signaling of F - actin dynamics 52 ~ Fig . 1 ! . Its importance for the mo - tility of the neutrophil is demonstrated by the ﬁnding that neutrophils from a patient having a rare Rac2 immuno - deﬁciency show signiﬁcantly impaired motility . 7 , 171 Simi - larly , the motility response of neutrophils from patients receiving treatment for the Kostmann syndrome is de - creased and this decrease is coupled with lower expres - sion of Rac2 . 75 Studies using Rac2 deﬁcient mice models conﬁrm that Rac is a key molecule in motility . 120 This is also conﬁrmed on cultured cells , where the expression of constitutively active Rac induces F - actin polymerization . 5 , 158 Overall , these results show that Rac provides alternative signaling pathway for F - actin poly - merization to the pathway controlled by Cdc42 . Rac ac - tivation is dependent on PI3K activation , 11 , 91 which sug - gests that the Rac signaling of F - actin polymerization is most probably one of the major pathways of actin as - sembly utilized by chemoattractant receptors . The depen - dence of Rac activity on PI3K has been demonstrated in the cell - free system by using GTP g S loaded Gi a 2 and G b 1 g 2 , 9 and in the human neutrophil , where the activa - tion of Rac2 by fMLP and LTB 4 is PI3K dependent . 1 The effector of Rac for F - actin polymerization is WAVE , which is from the WASp family proteins . 99 , 150 Similar to WASp , WAVE binds Arp2 / 3 and proﬁlin , and promotes the formation of free - barbed ends . 142 The activity of the Rac – WAVE complex 150 is dependent on the Rac guanine nucleotide exchange factors Vav and Sos1 . 32 Vav is ac - tivated by PIP 3 , 53 , 100 which most probably provides the link between PI3K activation and Rac activation . Vav also binds PIP 2 , which results in Vav inactivation . 53 Rac promotes the formation of free barbed ends in two ways ; by binding to WAVE and stimulating the formation of new barbed ends as described above and by inducing the dissociation of the capping protein gelsolin from the ac - tin ﬁlaments . 9 Similar to Cdc42 , Rac activates Pak 1 , 38 and via LIM kinase and coﬁlin regulates actin disassem - bly . The role of the third GTPase involved in signaling of motility—RhoA , is to initiate stress ﬁber formation 52 ~ Fig . 1 ! . This function of RhoA is conﬁrmed for ﬁbroblast 52 and murine macrophages , 5 however , the hu - man neutrophil does not form stress ﬁbers . One of the major roles of RhoA in the motility of hematopoietic cells is the regulation of cell detachment . 2 , 175 Blocking RhoA activity in the human neutrophil by the C3 - exoenzyme results in failure of the cell to detach from the substrate and leads to the formation of undetached ‘‘tail . ’’ 2 Similar behavior is observed for T cells where the inhibition of either RhoA or the RhoA effector Rho kinase ~ ROCK ! abolishes integrin detachment . 175 The in - hibition of either RhoA or ROCK also affects b 2 integrin distribution in the adhesion region . During the crawling of untreated cells the highest concentration of b 2 inte - grins is observed at the leading lamella , while the highest concentration of b 2 integrins for cells with inhibited RhoA or ROCK , is observed in the ‘‘tail’’ region . 175 These data demonstrate that RhoA signals integrin de - tachment via ROCK . 2 , 175 ROCK is also known to phos - phorylate LIM kinase 1 and 2 , 112 , 145 which places RhoA together with Cdc42 and Rac as major regulator of 360 D . V . Z HELEV and A . A LTERAIFI F - actin disassembly via LIM kinase activation and ADF / coﬁlin phosphorylation . The activation of Cdc42 , Rac , and RhoA after recep - tor ligation is not well understood . GTPases cycle be - tween active GTP - bound and inactive GDP - bound states depending on their regulation by guanine nucleotide ex - change factors ~ GEFs ! , GTPase activating proteins ~ GAPs ! , and guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitors ~ GDIs ! . 129 The GEFs for Rac are Vav , Sos - 1 , and Tiam - 1 , 129 while the GEFs for Cdc42 and RhoA are unknown . From the Vav family , which includes Vav 1 , 2 , and 3 , Vav 1 is the most studied GEF . It contains mul - tiple protein domains that can bind to a variety of recep - tors or receptor - associated signaling molecules . 15 Com - monly , it is activated by two signals present in motility : the activation of PI3K and the production of PIP 3 , and the tyrosine kinase phosphorylation , 15 and most probably provides means for crossover of the two signaling path - ways . ROLE OF ADF (cid:213) COFILIN PROTEINS AND PROFILIN As we mentioned already the sequestering , capping , severing , and nucleating proteins regulate cytoskeleton organization , however , some of these proteins , such as ADF / coﬁlin and proﬁlin , are also involved in the signal - ing of actin dynamics . The dephosphorylated form of the proteins from the ADF / coﬁlin family intensively severe F - actin ﬁlaments . 10 , 24 In the resting neutrophil coﬁlin is phosphorylated . About 1 min after activation with chemoattractants almost all coﬁlin in the cell becomes dephosphorylated and starts to disassemble the present F - actin ﬁlaments . 113 The ability of coﬁlin to enhance actin disassembly is increased by the presence of proﬁlin . 35 Proﬁlin also enhances actin polymerization in neutrophil extracts , 177 which seems to contradict its ef - fect on coﬁlin mediated actin disassembly . The mecha - nism by which coﬁlin and proﬁlin are involved in F - actin polymerization is still unclear . Coﬁlin binds to the side of actin ﬁlaments with high afﬁnity and increases the twist of the F - actin ﬁlament . This binding is coupled with both fast actin depolymerization from the pointed end 19 and severing of the ﬁlaments . 92 Coﬁlin binds with much higher afﬁnity to ADP - actin than it does to ATP - actin , 19 which suggests that after the disassembly coﬁlin remains attached to the dissociated ADP - actin . Proﬁlin a nucleotide exchange factor , 173 which recovers the coﬁlin bound ADP - actin , converts it into proﬁlin bound ATP - actin . 13 During this process coﬁlin is con - verted from an ADP - actin bound state to a free state , when it can bind to and severe other F - actin ﬁlaments . The recovery of the ADP - actin by proﬁlin apparently increases the ‘‘turnover’’ of coﬁlin , which results in in - crease of the overall rate of actin disassembly . In addi - tion to the increase of the coﬁlin mediated F - actin dis - assembly , proﬁlin binds to WASp and WAVE and increases the rate of recruitment of actin monomers for barbed end nucleation . 143 , 150 This explains the role of proﬁlin in enhancing Cdc42 - mediated F - actin polymer - ization in neutrophil extracts . 177 ROLE OF PHOSPHOINOSITIDES We mentioned in the previous discussion that PIP 2 and PIP 3 are involved in the modulation of GTPase activation . 149 The concentration of these lipids in the cell increases a few seconds after exposure to chemoattracta - nts , which suggests that they are involved in the early stages of activation ~ Fig . 1 ! . Most importantly , at least one of these phosphoinositides—PIP 3 —has been impli - cated for its involvement in the signaling of cell polar - ization and chemotaxis ~ directional crawling ! . The role of PIP 3 in cell polarization is derived from the role of PI3K in this process . The role of PI3K in the signaling of chemotaxis has been controversial . The inhibition of PI3K with wortmannin in the human neutrophil abolishes almost completely chemotaxis , while it has no effect on chemokinesis . 28 , 54 This is in contradiction with the re - sults from PI3K g - deﬁcient mice , 65 , 86 , 125 where the loss of PI3K g activity does not abolish chemotaxis completely . It is possible that results obtained from mice neutrophils are different from human neutrophil , because the two cell types may have different PI3 kinases . However , our ex - periments with the human neutrophil stimulated by chemoattractants ~ unpublished results ! , show that the rate of pseudopod extension is reduced by 80 % in the pres - ence of wortmannin , while it is inhibited completely if the basal calcium is also chelated . Our results are in agreement with the ﬁnding from the PI3K - deﬁcient mice models , which show that there is PI3K g - dependent and PI3K g - independent signaling of chemotaxis . The crucial role of PIP 3 in the signaling of motility is demonstrated by the ability of this lipid to induce cell polarization and chemotaxis in NIH 3T3 ﬁbroblasts 33 and human neutrophils 108 independent of wortmannin . 33 The rate of neutrophil crawling stimulated by the membrane perme - able PIP 3 analog PIP 3 / AM ~ Ref . 108 ! is smaller but comparable to the same rate in the presence of the chemoattractant fNLPNTL , which demonstrates the physiological importance of the PIP 3 signaling for mo - tility . These data show that PIP 3 is the sole mediator of PI3K signaling . Downstream of PIP 3 the signaling of motility is unclear and involves unknown calcium - independent PKC . 33 One of these PKCs is most probably the atypical z PKC , which is critically involved in the signaling of fMLP - and IL - 8 - stimulated chemotaxis . 84 PIP 2 is the other major phosphoinositide involved in the signaling of motility . 149 It inhibits the activity of the Rac guanine nucleotide exchange factor Vav 1 , the actin 361 Signaling in Motility Responses capping proteins Cap Z and gelsolin , the actin sequester - ing protein proﬁlin , 135 , 147 and the severing proteins from the ADF / coﬁlin family . 82 The inhibiting effect of PIP 2 for the actin binding proteins is a result of its competi - tive binding with actin . 135 , 147 , 155 PIP 2 activates the pro - teins from the WASp family , the proteins from the ezrin / radixin / moesin family , which link the cytoskeleton with the plasma membrane , 156 and the actin binding proteins vinculin 67 , 138 and a - actinin . 45 PIP 2 is synthesized by PI ~ 4 ! P 5 - kinase and serves as a substrate for PLC - b and PI3K g . 149 There is always a low basal level of PIP 2 in the passive cells . After activation PLC - b and PI3K g use the basal PIP 2 to produce DAG and IP 3 , and PIP 3 , respectively . This results in cell activation and additional production of PIP 2 by the PI ~ 4 ! P 5 - kinase . The upstream signaling of PI ~ 4 ! P 5 - kinase activation is not well char - acterized . The ability of the C3 toxin to abolish the release of Ca 2 1 after hormonal stimulation suggests that PI ~ 4 ! P 5 - kinase activity is RhoA dependent . 26 PI ~ 4 ! P 5 - kinase activity is also dependent on Rac , which is seen from the ability of thrombin to activate the PI ~ 4 ! P 5 - kinase . 23 , 60 , 153 The dependence of PI ~ 4 ! P 5 - kinase ac - tivity on Rac provides the link for the dependence of PI ~ 4 ! P 5 - kinase activation on PI3K . The activation of PI3K produces PIP 3 which activates Rac via Vav 1 . The activated Rac activates PI ~ 4 ! P 5 - kinase , which produces PIP 2 and down modulates Vav 1 activation . Vav 1 inac - tivation by PIP 2 provides a feedback loop for the regu - lation of PI ~ 4 ! P 5 - kinase . In the crawling cell the reac - tion of producing PIP2 is most probably a steady - state reaction controlled by the opposite effects of PIP 3 and PIP 2 on Vav1 activation . The critical importance of PIP 2 for motility is demonstrated by the use of a synthetic peptide , which has its amino acid sequence derived from the PIP 2 binding site of gelsolin . 30 The exposure of hu - man neutrophils to this PIP 2 - binding peptide abolishes almost completely their motility . 30 The effectors of phosphoinositides are proteins con - taining pleckstrin homology ~ PH ! domains and FIVE do - mains . The FIVE domains bind exclusively PIP 3 , while the PH domains bind either PIP 2 or PIP 3 , or both . 159 The FIVE and PH domains are found in several classes of proteins , such as the serine / threonine - speciﬁc protein ki - nases , the Bruton’s tyrosine kinase , the adaptor proteins , GTPase - activating proteins , and the guanine - nucleotide - exchange factors . This shows that the effectors of PIP 2 and PIP 3 in the cell cytoplasm are multiple . Presently , there is an effort to identify the FIVE - and PH - domain - containing proteins in the human cells and to determine their afﬁnity of binding to phosphoinositides . 37 The completion of these studies will allow the identiﬁcation of the effectors for PIP 2 and PIP 3 . One group of un - known phosphoinositide effectors , which is of special interest for motility , is the group of GEFs for Cdc42 and RhoA . The proteins containing FIVE and PH domains are recruited , at least in their activated state , to the plasma membrane because PIP 2 is a membrane lipid . This has been demonstrated for Dictyostelium discoi - deum amoebae , 70 NIH 3T3 ﬁbroblasts 151 and neutrophils , 130 where PH - domain - containing proteins are found to associate with the plasma membrane at the leading lamella of the crawling cell . The importance of the membrane association for the activity of the proteins involved in motility is also evident from the inability of the GTPases to stimulate F - actin polymerization in the absence of membrane structures . 103 After activation , the membrane lipids are redistributed and form clusters called rafts . The rafts contain the lipids involved in the signaling of motility as well as the associated proteins . The raft composition in the lamella region is different from the raft composition in the uropod region , 48 which suggests that raft formation plays a role in polarization . This hypothesis is conﬁrmed by measuring the kinetics of raft formation , which is very similar to the kinetics of early activation . 132 Interestingly , raft formation is depen - dent on Vav 1 activation , 160 which based on the above discussion is critically involved in the signaling of mo - tility . The formation of rafts in the membranes of acti - vated cells explains the ﬁnding from the dynamic mea - surements of pseudopod extension , that the newly formed pseudopods have a cylindrical shape . 179 This is most probably a result of raft formation in the front of the leading lamella . ROLE OF ADHESION RECEPTORS The involvement of adhesion receptors in motility is dual ; they provide the physical attachment of the cell to the substrate and are involved in the overall signaling of motility . There are many studies emphasizing the impor - tance of adhesion receptors for cell attachment . 17 , 25 , 29 , 49 , 58 , 68 , 169 Here we will focus our atten - tion on the signaling of adhesion receptor priming and the possible involvement of the bound adhesion receptors in the signaling of motility . The adhesion receptors involved in motility are from the integrin family . Integrins are heterodimmers , made of two subunits called a and b subunit . 62 , 68 Human cells express eight different b subunits and 16 a subunits , from which arise 20 heterodimers . 172 The cytoplasmic domain of the b subunit is linked to actin binding pro - teins such as a - actinin , talin , ﬁlamin , and myosin . 63 , 87 , 115 , 124 There are three b integrin subunits that play a role in the attachment of the neutrophil , they are : b 1 , b 2 , and b 3 ~ also known as b 1 , b 2 , and b 3 inte - grins ! . b 2 integrin is the most abundant integrin in the human neutrophil . It mediates the adhesion of the cell to the vascular endothelium and has the ligands : ﬁbrinogen , collagen , factor X of the coagulation cascade , comple - ment factor C3bi , and the intercellular adhesion mol - 362 D . V . Z HELEV and A . A LTERAIFI ecules ICAM 1 , ICAM 2 , and ICAM 3 . 20 The b 3 subunit mediates the adhesion to vitronectin and ﬁbronectin , 123 while the b 1 subunit binds to laminin , collagen , VCAM 1 , and ﬁbronectin and is involved in the in vivo adhesion to tissues . 169 In the passive cell integrins are in an inac - tive state and are unable to bind ligands . Upon activa - tion , they are primed and their afﬁnity / avidity of binding ligands increases dramatically . Integrin priming is very fast and allows stopping of a rolling cell 0 . 1 s ~ Ref . 49 ! to 90 s ~ Ref . 81 ! after its initial touching of the endot - helial surface . The priming factors for integrins are : ~ 1 ! many of the priming factors for the chemoattractant re - ceptors and the ligands for the immune complexes recep - tors ; ~ 2 ! some of the adhesion receptors natural ligands ; ~ 3 ! some antibodies ; and ~ 4 ! all chemoattractants and chemokines . Examination of these groups of priming fac - tors shows that integrin priming can occur either by factors outside the cell ~ ‘‘outside - in’’ activation ! , or by processes that involve intracellular signaling ~ ‘‘inside - out’’ activation ! . The existence of a variety of priming factors also suggests that the process of integrin priming is complex and may follow different signaling pathways . 88 , 165 This complexity is increased by the dif - ference of the response of the adhesion receptors to priming . For example , the treatment of T cells with phor - bol esters and the increase of the intracellular Ca 2 1 con - centration leads to an increase of a L b 2 ~ LFA - 1 ! avidity , while the treatment of the cells with Mg 2 1 or EGTA increases the afﬁnity of the same adhesion receptor . 90 , 95 The priming of adhesion receptors after chemoattractant activation is evident from the increase of the avidity of a M b 2 after exposure to fMLP , IL - 8 and C5a . 72 However , this priming is independent of PI3K activation , 72 which suggests that the signaling pathway of a M b 2 priming is distinct from the signaling pathway of F - actin polymer - ization . Interestingly , the priming of a M b 2 by the im - mune complexes for the Fc g R receptor is PI3K g dependent . 72 We mentioned earlier that blocking RhoA activity abolishes the detachment of b 2 integrins from their ligands . 2 The elevation of the intracellular cAMP , which activates RhoA , also reduces the overall binding of the cells to surfaces most probably by increasing the rate of integrin detachment . 83 While PI3K does not affect b 2 integrin priming , it is critical for the priming of b 3 integrin . 14 b 3 integrin mediates the adhesion to vitronec - tin and ﬁbronectin , 123 and is involved in the signaling of directional orientation in shear ﬂow . 118 The coupling be - tween b 3 integrin priming and PI3K activity and the involvement of b 3 integrin in the signaling of directional orientation in shear ﬂow suggests that b 3 integrin may be involved in the signaling of the PI3 - K dependent motility . 28 , 54 The immediate upstream regulation of integrin prim - ing involves phosphorylation of the actin binding protein L - plastin by the cAMP - dependent protein kinase A ~ PKA ! . 122 , 163 The role of L - plastin in integrin priming is revealed by the ability of the synthetic membrane per - meable peptides synthesized after the phosphorylated L - plastin , to prime the a M b 2 integrin . 73 The distant up - stream regulation of integrin priming is not well under - stood . RhoA controls b 2 integrin detachment , however , there are no data suggesting that this GTPase is also involved in the signaling of priming . Integrin adhesion to ﬁbrinogen is dependent on the activity of the atypical z PKC , 84 and PKC activity is PIP 3 dependent , 33 which suggests that integrin priming may be signaled by PI3K . During motility only a small portion of adhesion re - ceptors are bound to the substrate . This is seen from a simple experiment , where a single neutrophil is allowed to crawl along a pipet coated with plasma proteins and ﬁlled with chemoattractant solution . 6 We estimated the number of bound receptors ~ unpublished results ! by com - paring the force necessary to detach a crawling cell from the pipet wall and slide it along the pipet , and the force for detachment of a single bound integrin receptor . We allowed a neutrophil to crawl along a 6 - m m - diam pipet ﬁlled with 10 2 8 M fMLP at 23 °C . Then we applied a pressure until the cell started to slide . The applied pres - sure was increased fast ~ within 15 s ! , which allowed us to compare the measured force of cell detachment and sliding with the force of detachment of a single integrin receptor during its fast separation from a ligand . 133 The measured pressure for neutrophil sliding was from 80 to 100 Pa , which corresponded to a total force on the order of 3 3 10 2 9 N . The force of fast integrin detachment is on the order of 40 pN , 133 which gives for the number of bound receptors a value of 75 . This number of bound receptors is small compared to the total number of ex - pressed adhesion receptors , which is usually from 10 4 to 10 5 . 90 , 167 The above estimate suggests that the role of adhesion receptors in the signaling of motility may be limited due to the small number of bound receptors . However , our experiments with phagocytosis after tether formation 6 demonstrate that only a few bound integrin receptors are necessary for signaling cell spreading . Also , the critical role of the low - level expressed b 3 integrin in the signaling of the orientation in shear ﬂow 118 suggests that a small number of bound adhesion receptors may provide a sufﬁcient signal for cytoskeleton rearrange - ment . The possibility for the involvement of the bound adhesion receptors in the signaling of motility is sug - gested by the synergy of the action of the chemoattrac - tant and adhesion receptors . Such a synergy is observed in the secondary release of superoxide stimulated by the bound b 2 integrins . 157 Another example is the adhesion receptor stimulated tyrosine kinase phosphorylation , 174 which is signiﬁcantly enhanced by chemoattractant activation . 170 Tyrosine kinase phosphorylation is required for neutrophil spreading on ﬁbrinogen - coated surfaces 43 and for adapter molecule SPL - 76 - mediated F - actin poly - 363 Signaling in Motility Responses merization in platelets . 111 The signaling of these events involves Vav phosphorylation . 102 Vav phosphorylation is signaled by b 2 binding and is signiﬁcantly increased after activation with TNF - a , fMLP , IL - 8 , or GM – CSF . 170 The phosphorylation of Vav is negligible after chemoat - tractant activation if there are no bound integrin receptors . 170 These data suggest that the bound adhesion receptors may contribute to the overall signaling of mo - tility , however , the elucidation of this contribution needs further studies . CRAWLING OF THE NEUTROPHIL AS A DECISION MAKING PROCESS The motility of the neutrophil involves more than simple binding of ligands to chemoattractant receptors , priming of adhesion receptors , polymerization of F - actin , and cytoskeleton contraction . In its quest to defend our bodies the neutrophil encounters a complex chemical en - vironment , where it has to recognize speciﬁc stimuli and ‘‘make decisions’’ in order to fulﬁll its function . The cell distinguishes between low and high concentrations of the same chemoattractant and either crawls or exhibits a cytotoxic response . 134 The response of the cell to changes of its surroundings is complicated additionally by its ability to modulate its response either positively or negatively , depending on its prior state . 134 The ability of the neutrophil to modulate its response negatively is called desensitization and the ability to modulate its re - sponse positively is called priming . Desensitization may involve consecutive exposure to the same stimulus ~ ho - mologous desensitization ! , 3 , 34 , 128 , 168 or exposure to a dif - ferent stimulus ~ heterologous desensitization ! . 4 , 154 Prim - ing enhances the response of the neutrophil to chemoattractant activation relative to normal conditions . Some of the known priming agents include : TNF - a , granulocyte colony stimulating factor ~ GCSF ! , IL - 4 , IL - 6 , and IFN - g . 3 , 134 During crawling , the neutrophil is exposed to chemoattractant for prolonged periods of time . Thus , the effect of priming is expected to be of importance only in the initial stages of activation . During prolonged crawl - ing the desensitization of the cell may modulate its re - sponse to chemoattractant . Desensitization has been stud - ied mostly in relation to the cytotoxic responses of the neutrophil . The homologous desensitization is linked to chemoattractant receptor phosphorylation by G - protein - coupled receptor kinases , 56 while the heterologous desen - sitization is derived from the receptor cross phosphory - lation or from processes distant from the receptors . 154 Phosphorylated receptors during homologous desensitiza - tion bind to arrestin , which reduces their afﬁnity for binding ligands . 42 Arrestin bound receptors are internal - ized , which reduces the total number of receptors ex - pressed on the plasma membrane . Receptor cross phos - phorylation after heterologous desensitization is a result of the action of second messenger kinases such as pro - tein kinase A and / or protein kinase C . 55 Both homolo - gous and heterologous desensitization involve inhibition of GTPase activity , while the opposite is not always true . 4 Since GTPase activity is crucial for F - actin poly - merization and motility it is possible for desensitization to play a role in motility . The desensitization of neutrophil motility is expected to affect the cell’s ability to ‘‘navigate’’ through tissue by increasing its apparent threshold of response to the chemoattractant . This effect is demonstrated by allowing a neutrophil to crawl in a chemoattractant gradient of one chemoattractant , while another chemoattractant is present in the experimental chamber . The exposure of the cells to fMLP and C5a desensitizes the response to LTB4 and IL - 8 , while the effect of LTB4 and IL - 8 on fMLP and C5a stimulated crawling is marginal . 16 Interestingly , a similar relation between the same chemoattractants is observed for the desensitization of the cytotoxic re - sponses of the neutrophil . 154 This ﬁnding demonstrates that desensitization plays a role in motility . The studying of the release of intracellular Ca 2 1 , which is intimately coupled with the secretion responses of the neutrophil , 4 and the rate of pseudopod extension , shows that the release of intracellular calcium is desensitized , while the rate of pseudopod extension is not . This suggests that the signaling of motility and secretion follow different path - ways of activation . 6 The experiments with transfected RBL – 2H3 cells , which express human neutrophil chemoattractant receptors , also show that the signaling of motility is distinct from the signaling of secretion . 57 These results are conﬁrmed by the ﬁnding that receptor phosphorylation , which is one of the major events in the desensitization of secretion , does not affect crawling . 78 There are many motility responses that cannot be ex - plained by the simple downstream chemoattractant sig - naling of activation considered here . For example , neu - trophils change shape during activation , which is independent of chemoattractant gradient . 39 Similar cycli - cal behavior is measured for the other activation re - sponses such as : respiratory burst , 176 change of crawling velocity , 59 and release of proteolytic enzymes and oxidants . 80 The signaling mechanism of these oscillations is unknown , however , their phase is similar to the phase of the cellular metabolic oscillations , 79 which suggests that the metabolic activity of the cell may also be in - volved in the signaling of motility . CONCLUSIONS The signaling of motility responses of the human neu - trophil starts with the activation of the trimeric G pro - teins by the ligand - bound chemoattractant receptors and continue downstream along diverse pathways that control 364 D . V . Z HELEV and A . A LTERAIFI F - actin polymerization , adhesion receptor priming , cell body contraction , superoxide production , and proteolytic enzyme secretion . Our focus here has been on the sig - naling of the motility responses of the neutrophil . The complete set of molecules involved in this signaling is still unknown , and the exact relations between them are still unclear . However , in the past several years there have been signiﬁcant advances in the understanding of this signaling . Many of the critical molecules involved in this signaling have been identiﬁed and their role in mo - tility has been elucidated . Figure 1 shows the major known relations between the molecules involved in the signaling of F - actin dynamics after PI3K activation . The signaling of F - actin dynamics includes : ~ 1 ! activation of PI3K and release of PIP 3 ; ~ 2 ! activation of Rac via Vav and Cdc42 via unknown guanine nucleotide exchange factors ; ~ 3 ! binding of Rac and Cdc42 to WAVE and WASp , which then bind Arp2 / 3 and stimulate the forma - tion of new barbed ends for F - actin polymerization ; ~ 4 ! F - actin disassembly by coﬁlin controlled by LIM kinase ; and ~ 5 ! modulating the F - actin dynamics by the activated tyrosine kinase after integrin receptor binding , and PI ~ 4 ! P 5 - kinase activation by Rac . There are also factors that are not directly involved in the signaling of actin dynamics , but affect critically the overall motility re - sponse of the neutrophils . These factors include RhoA , which controls integrin detachment , PKA , which controls integrin priming via L - plastin , and PKC , which controls integrin adhesion via PI3K - dependent activation . The re - sults discussed here show also that the PI3K signaling of the F - actin assembly shown in Fig . 1 represent only 80 % of the motility response of the neutrophil . The remaining 20 % of the motility response is independent of PI3K activation and is signaled by factors that are still un - known . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by Grant No . HL57629 from the National Institutes of Health . The blood draw - ing was supported by Grant No . M01 - RR - 30 from the National Institutes of Health to the General Clinical Re - search Centers Program at Duke University . REFERENCES 1 Akasaki , T . , H . Koga , and H . Sumimoto . Phosphoinositide 3 - kinase - dependent and - independent activation of the small GTPase Rac2 in human neutrophils . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 18055 – 18059 , 1999 . 2 Alblas , J . , L . Ulfman , P . Hordijk , and L . Koenderman . Ac - tivation of Rho and ROCK are essential for detachment of migrating leukocytes . Mol . Biol . Cell . 12 : 2137 – 2145 , 2001 . 3 Ali , H . , B . Haribabu , R . M . Richardson , and R . Snyderman . Mechanisms of inﬂammation and leukocyte activation . Med . Clin . North Am . 81 : 1 – 28 , 1997 . 4 Ali , H . , R . M . Richardson , B . Haribabu , and R . Snyderman . Chemoattractant receptor cross desensitization . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 6027 – 6030 , 1999 . 5 Allen , W . E . , G . E . Jones , J . W . Pollard , and A . J . Ridley . Rho , Rac , and Cdc42 regulate actin organization and cell adhesion in macrophages . J . Cell . Sci . 110 : 707 – 720 , 1997 . 6 Alteraiﬁ , A . M . , and D . V . Zhelev . Transient increase of free cytosolic calcium during neutrophil motility responses . J . Cell . Sci . 110 : 1967 – 1977 , 1997 . 7 Ambruso , D . R . , C . Knall , A . N . Abell , J . Panepinto , A . Kurkchubasche , G . Thurman , C . Gonzalez - Aller , A . Hiester , M . deBoer , R . J . Harbeck , R . Oyer , G . L . Johnson , and D . Roos . Human neutrophil immunodeﬁciency syndrome is as - sociated with an inhibitory Rac2 mutation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 97 : 4654 – 4659 , 2000 . 8 Arai , H . , and I . F . Charo . Differential regulation of G - protein - mediated signaling by chemokine receptors . J . Biol . Chem . 271 : 21814 – 21819 , 1996 . 9 Arcaro , A . The small GTP - binding protein Rac promotes the dissociation of gelsolin from actin ﬁlaments in neutrophils . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 805 – 813 , 1998 . 10 Bamburg , J . R . , A . McGoughb , and S . Onoc . Putting a new twist on actin : ADF / coﬁlins modulate actin dynamics . Trends Cell Biol . 9 : 364 – 370 , 1999 . 11 Belisle , B . , and A . Abo . N - formil peptide receptor ligation induces Rac - dependent actin reorganization through G bg subunits and class Ia phosphoinositide 3 - kinases . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 26225 – 26232 , 2000 . 12 Ben - Baruch , A . , D . F . Michiel , and J . J . Oppenheim . Signals and receptors involved in recruitment of inﬂammatory cells . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 11703 – 11706 , 1995 . 13 Blanchoin , L . , and T . D . Pollard . Interaction of actin mono - mers with Acanthamoeba actophorin ~ ADF / coﬁlin ! and pro - ﬁlin . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 25106 – 25111 , 1998 . 14 Bruyninckx , W . J . , K . M . Comerford , D . W . Lawrence , and S . P . Colgan . Phosphoinositide 3 - kinase modulation of b 3 - integrin represents an endogenous ‘‘braking’’ mechanism during neutrophil transmatrix migration . Blood 97 : 3251 – 3258 , 2001 . 15 Bustelo , X . R . Regulatory and signaling properties of the Vav family . Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 : 1461 – 1477 , 2000 . 16 Campbell , J . J . , E . F . Foxman , and E . C . Butcher . Chemoat - tractant receptor crosstalk as a regulatory mechanism in leu - kocyte adhesion and migration . Eur . J . Immunol . 27 : 2571 – 2578 , 1997 . 17 Campbell , J . J . , J . Hedrick , A . Zlotnik , M . A . Siani , D . A . Thompson , and E . C . Butcher . Chemokines and the arrest of lymphocytes rolling under ﬂow conditions . Science 279 : 381 – 384 , 1998 . 18 Carlier , M . - F . , C . Jean , K . J . Rieger , M . Lenfant , and D . Pantaloni . Modulation of the interaction between G - actin and thymosin b 4 by the ATP / ADP ratio : Possible implica - tion in the regulation of actin dynamics . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 90 : 5034 – 5038 , 1993 . 19 Carlier , M . - F . , V . Laurent , J . Santolini , R . Melki , D . Didry , G . - X . Xia , Y . Hong , N . - H . Chua , and D . Pantaloni . Actin deploymerizing factor ~ ADF / Coﬁlin ! enhances the rate of ﬁlament turnover : Implication in actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 136 : 1307 – 1322 , 1997 . 20 Carlos , T . M . , and J . M . Harlan . Leukocyte - endothelial ad - hesion molecules . Blood 84 : 2068 – 2101 , 1994 . 21 Cassimeris , L . , H . McNeill , and S . H . Zigmond . Chemoattractant - stimulated polymorphonuclear leukocytes 365 Signaling in Motility Responses contain two populations of actin ﬁlaments that differ in their spatial distributions and relative stabilities . J . Cell Biol . 110 : 1067 – 1075 , 1990 . 22 Cassimeris , L . , D . Safer , V . T . Nachmias , and S . H . Zig - mond . Thymosin b 4 sequesters the majority of G - actin in resting human polymorphonuclear leukocytes . J . Cell Biol . 119 : 1261 – 1270 , 1992 . 23 Chatah , N . - E . - H . , and C . S . Abrams . G - protein - coupled re - ceptor activation induces the membrane translocation and activation of phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase I a by a Rac - and Rho - dependent pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 34059 – 34065 , 2001 . 24 Chen , H . , B . W . Bernstein , and J . R . Bamburg . Regulating actin - ﬁlament dynamics in vivo . Trends Biochem . Sci . 25 : 19 – 23 , 2000 . 25 Chen , S . , and T . A . Springer . An automatic braking system that stabilizes leukocyte rolling by an increase in selectin bond number with shear . J . Cell Biol . 144 : 185 – 200 , 1999 . 26 Chong , L . D . , A . Traynor - Kaplan , G . M . Bokoch , and M . A . Schwartz . The small GTP - binding protein Rho regulates a phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase in mammalian cells . Cell 79 : 507 – 513 , 1994 . 27 Coates , T . D . , R . G . Watts , R . Hartman , and T . H . Howard . Relationship of F - actin distribution to development of polar shape in human polymorphonuclear neutrophils . J . Cell Biol . 117 : 765 – 774 , 1992 . 28 Coffer , P . J . , N . Geijsen , L . M’Rabet , R . C . Schweizer , T . Maikoe , J . A . M . Raaijmekers , J . - W . J . Lammers , and L . Koenderman . Comparison of the roles of mitogen - activated protein kinase kinase and phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase sig - nal transduction in neutrophil effector function . Biochem . J . 329 : 121 – 130 , 1998 . 29 Cox , E . A . , and A . Huttenlocher . Regulation of integrin - mediated adhesion during cell migration . Microsc . Res . Tech . 43 : 412 – 419 , 1998 . 30 Cunningham , C . C . , R . Vegners , R . Bucki , M . Funaki , N . Korde , J . H . Hartwig , T . P . Stossel , and P . A . Janmey . Cell permeant polyphosphoinositide - binding peptides that block cell motility and actin assembly . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 43390 – 43399 , 2001 . 31 Damaj , B . B . , S . R . McColl , K . Neote , N . Songquing , K . T . Ogborn , C . A . Herbert , and P . H . Naccache . Identiﬁcation of G - protein binding sites of the human interlaikin - 8 receptors by functional mapping of the intracellular loops . FASEB J . 12 : 1426 – 1434 , 1996 . 32 Das , B . , X . Shu , G . - J . Day , J . Han , U . M . Krishna , J . R . Falck , and D . Broek . Control of intramolecular interactions between the pleckstrin homology and Dbl homology do - mains of Vav and Sos1 regulates Rac binding . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 15074 – 15081 , 2000 . 33 Derman , M . P . , A . Toker , J . H . Hartwig , K . Spokes , J . R . Falck , C . S . Chen , L . C . Cantley , and L . G . Cantley . The lipid products of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase increase cell mo - tility through protein kinase C . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 6465 – 6470 , 1997 . 34 Devalaraja , M . N . , and A . Richmond . Multiple chemotactic factors : Fine control or redundancy ? Trends Pharmacol . Sci . 20 : 151 – 156 , 1999 . 35 Didry , D . , M . - F . Carlier , and D . Pantaloni . Synergy between actin depolymerizing factor / coﬁlin and proﬁlin in increasing actin ﬁlament turnover . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 25602 – 25611 , 1998 . 36 DiNubile , M . J . , L . Cassimeris , M . Joyce , and S . H . Zig - mond . Actin ﬁlament barbed - end capping activity in neutro - phil lysates : The role of capping protein - beta 2 . Mol . Biol . Cell . 6 : 1659 – 1671 , 1995 . 37 Dowler , S . , R . A . Currie , D . G . Campbell , M . Deak , G . Kular , C . P . Downes , and D . R . Alessi . Identiﬁcation of pleckstrin - homology - domain - containing proteins with novel phosphoinositide - binding speciﬁcities . Biochem . J . 351 : 19 – 31 , 2000 . 38 Edwards , D . C . , L . C . Sanders , G . M . Bokoch , and G . N . Gill . Activation of LIM - kinase by Pak1 couples Rac / Cdc42 GTPase signaling to actin cytoskeletal dynamics . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 : 253 – 259 , 1999 . 39 Ehrengruber , M . U . , D . A . Deranleau , and T . D . Coates . Shape oscillations of human neutrophil leukocytes : Charac - terization and relationship to cell motility . J . Exp . Biol . 199 : 741 – 747 , 1996 . 40 Evans , E . A . , and A . Yeung . Apparent viscosity and cortical tension of blood granulocytes determined by micropipet as - piration . Biophys . J . 56 : 151 – 160 , 1989 . 41 Fechheimer , M . , and S . H . Zigmond . Focusing on unpoly - merized actin . J . Cell Biol . 123 : 1 – 5 , 1993 . 42 Ferguson , S . S . , L . S . Barak , J . Zhang , and M . G . Caron . G - protein - coupled receptor regulation : Role of G - protein - coupled receptor kinases and arrestins . Can . J . Physiol . Pharmacol . 74 : 1095 – 1110 , 1996 . 43 Fernandez , R . , and S . J . Suchard . Syk activation is required for spreading and H 2 O 2 release in adherent human neutro - phils . J . Immunol . 160 : 5154 – 5162 , 1998 . 44 Fernandez - Segura , E . , J . M . Garcia , J . L . Santos , and A . Campos . Shape , F - actin , and surface morphology changes during chemotactic peptide - induced polarity in human neu - trophils . Anat . Rec . 241 : 519 – 528 , 1995 . 45 Fukami , K . , N . Sawada , T . Endo , and T . Takenawa . Identi - ﬁcation of a phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate - binding site in chicken skeletal muscle alpha - actinin . J . Biol . Chem . 271 : 2646 – 2650 , 1996 . 46 Fukuoka , M . , S . Suetsugu , H . Miki , K . Fukami , T . Endo , and T . Takenawa . A novel neural Wiskott – Aldrich Syn - drome Protein ~ N - WASP ! binding protein , WISH , induces Arp2 / 3 complex activation independent of Cdc42 . J . Cell Biol . 152 : 471 – 482 , 2001 . 47 Glogauer , M . , J . Hartwig , and T . Stossel . Two pathways through Cdc42 couple the N - formyl receptor to actin nucle - ation in permeabilized human neutrophils . J . Cell Biol . 150 : 785 – 796 , 2000 . 48 Go´mez - Mouto´n , C . , J . L . Abad , E . Mira , R . A . Lacalle , E . Gallardo , S . Jime´nez - Baranda , I . Illa , A . Bernad , S . Man˜es , and C . Martı´nez - A . Segregation of leading - edge and uropod components into speciﬁc lipid rafts during T - cell polariza - tion . PNAS 98 : 9642 – 9647 , 2001 . 49 Grabovsky , V . , S . Feigelson , C . Chen , D . A . Bleijs , A . Peled , G . Cinamon , F . Baleux , F . Arenzana - Seisdedos , T . Lapidot , Y . v . Kooyk , R . R . Lobb , and R . Alon . Subsecond induction of a 4 integrin clustering by immobilized chemokines stimu - lates leukocyte tethering and rolling on endothelial vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 under ﬂow conditions . J . Exp . Med . 192 : 495 – 506 , 2000 . 50 Gray , G . D . , S . R . Hasslen , J . A . Ember , D . F . Carney , M . J . Herron , S . L . Erlandsen , and R . D . Nelson . Receptors for the chemoattractants C5a and IL - 8 are clustered on the surface of human neutrophils . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 45 : 1461 – 1467 , 1997 . 51 Haddad , E . , J . L . Zugaza , F . Louache , N . Debili , C . Crouin , K . Schwarz , A . Fischer , W . Vainchenker , and J . Bertoglio . The interaction between Cdc42 and WASP is required for 366 D . V . Z HELEV and A . A LTERAIFI SDF - 1 - induced T - lymphocyte chemotaxis . Blood 97 : 33 – 38 , 2001 . 52 Hall , A . Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskelton . Science 279 : 509 – 514 , 1998 . 53 Han , J . , K . Luby - Phelps , B . Das , X . Shu , Y . Xia , R . D . Mosteller , U . M . Krishna , J . R . Falck , M . A . White , and D . Broek . Role of substrates and products of PI 3 - kinase in regulating activation of Rac - related guanosine triphos - phatases by Vav . Science 279 : 558 – 560 , 1998 . 54 Harakawa , N . , M . Sasada , A . Maeda , K . Asagoe , M . No - hgawa , K . Takano , Y . Matsuda , K . Yamamoto , and M . Okuma . Random migration of polymorphonuclear leuko - cytes induced by GM – CSF involving a signal transduction pathway different from that of fMLP . J . Leukoc . Biol . 61 : 500 – 506 , 1997 . 55 Haribabu , B . , R . M . Richardson , M . W . Verghese , A . J . Barr , D . V . Zhelev , and R . Snyderman . Function and regulation of chemoattractant receptors . Immunol . Res . 3 : 271 – 279 , 2000 . 56 Haribabu , B . , and R . Snyderman . Identiﬁcation of additional members of human G - protein - coupled receptor kinase mul - tigene family . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 90 : 9398 – 9402 , 1993 . 57 Haribabu , B . , D . V . Zhelev , B . C . Pridgen , R . M . Richard - son , H . Ali , and R . Snyderman . Chemoattractant receptors activate distinct pathways for chemotaxis and secretion . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 37087 – 37092 , 1999 . 58 Harris , E . S . , T . M . McIntyre , S . M . Prescott , and G . A . Zimmerman . The leukocyte integrins . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 23409 – 23412 , 2000 . 59 Hartman , R . S . , K . Lau , W . Chou , and T . D . Coats . The fundamental motor of the human neutrophil is not random evidence for local non - Markov movement in neutrophils . Biophys . J . 67 : 2535 – 2545 , 1994 . 60 Hartwig , J . H . , G . M . Bokoch , C . L . Carpenter , P . A . Jan - mey , L . A . Taylor , A . Toker , and T . P . Stossel . Thrombin receptor ligation and activated Rac uncap actin ﬁlament barbed ends through phosphoinositide synthesis in permeabi - lized human platelets . Cell 82 : 643 – 653 , 1995 . 61 Heidermann , S . R . , and R . E . Buxbaum . Cell crawling : First the motor , now the transmission . J . Cell Biol . 141 : 1 – 4 , 1998 . 62 Hemler , M . E . Integrins . In : Guide Book to the Extracellular Matrix and Adhesion Proteins , edited by T . Kreis and R . Vale . New York : Oxford University Press , 1999 . 63 Hemmings , L . , D . J . Rees , V . Ohanian , S . J . Bolton , A . P . Gilmore , B . Patel , H . Priddle , J . E . Trevithick , R . O . Hynes , and D . R . Critchley . Talin contains three actin - binding sites each of which is adjacent to a vinculin - binding site . J . Cell . Sci . 109 : 2715 – 2726 , 1996 . 64 Higgs , H . N . , and T . D . Pollard . Activation by Cdc42 and PIP 2 of Wiscott / NAldrich syndrome protein ~ WASp ! stimu - lates actin nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Biol . 150 : 1311 – 1320 , 2000 . 65 Hirsch , E . , V . L . Katanaev , C . Garlanda , O . Azzolino , L . Pirola , L . Silengo , S . Sozzani , and A . Mantova . Central role for G - protein - coupled phosphoinositide 3 - kinase g in in - ﬂammation . Science 287 : 1049 – 1053 , 2000 . 66 Huges , P . E . , and M . Pfaff . Integrin afﬁnity modulation . Trends Cell Biol . 8 : 359 – 364 , 1998 . 67 Huttelmaier , S . , O . Mayboroda , B . Harbeck , T . Jarchau , B . M . Jockusch , and M . Rudiger . The interaction of the cell - contact proteins VASP and vinculin is regulated by phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . Curr . Biol . 8 : 479 – 488 , 1998 . 68 Hynes , R . O . Integrins : Versatility , modulation , and signal - ing in cell adhesion . Cell 69 : 11 – 25 , 1992 . 69 Imai , K . , S . Nonoyama , H . Miki , T . Morio , K . Fukami , Q . Zhu , A . Aruffo , H . D . Ochs , J . Yata , and T . Takenawa . The Pleckstrin homology domain of the Wiskott – Aldrich syn - drome protein is involved in the organization of actin cy - toskeleton . Clin . Immunol . 92 : 128 – 137 , 1999 . 70 Jin , T . , N . Zhang , Y . Long , C . A . Parent , and P . N . Dev - reotes . Localization of the G protein bg complex in living cells during chemotaxis . Science 287 : 1034 – 1036 , 1999 . 71 Johansson , B . , M . P . Wymann , K . Holmgren - Peterson , and K . E . Magnusson . N - formyl peptide receptors in human neu - trophils display distinct membrane distribution and lateral mobility when labeled with agonist and antagonist . J . Cell Biol . 121 : 1281 – 1289 , 1993 . 72 Jones , S . L . , U . G . Knaus , G . M . Bokoch , and E . J . Brown . Two signaling mechanisms for activation of a M b 2 avidity in polymorphonuclear neutrophils . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 10556 – 10566 , 1998 . 73 Jones , S . L . , J . Wang , C . W . Turck , and E . J . Brown . A role for the actin - bundling protein L - plastin in the regulation of leukocyte integrin function . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 95 : 9331 – 9336 , 1998 . 74 Juang , H . , Y . Kuang , Y . Wu , A . Surcka , M . I . Simon , and D . Wu . Pertussis toxin - sensitive activation of phospholipase C by the C5a and fMet – Leu – Phe receptors . J . Biol . Chem . 27 : 13430 – 13434 , 1996 . 75 Kasper , B . , N . Tidow , D . Grothues , and K . Welte . Differen - tial expression and regulation of GTPases ~ RhoA and Rac2 ! and GDIs ~ LyGDI and RhoGDI ! in neutrophils from patients with severe congenital neutropenia . Blood 95 : 2947 – 2953 , 2000 . 76 Katanaev , V . L . Signal transduction in neutrophil chemot - axis . Biochemistry 66 : 351 – 368 , 2001 . 77 Keller , H . , and H . Cottier . Morphological and biochemical responses of leukocytes in chemokinesis and chemotaxis . Path . Res . Pract . 180 : 125 – 129 , 1985 . 78 Kim , J . - Y . , R . D . M . Soedes , P . Schaap , R . Valkeman , J . A . Borleis , P . J . M . V . Haastert , P . N . Devreotes , and D . Hereld . Phorphorylation of chemoattractant receptors is not essential for chemotaxis or termination of G - protein - mediated re - sponses . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 27313 – 27318 , 1997 . 79 Kindzelskii , A . L . , and H . R . Petty . Extremely low - frequency pulsed - dc electric ﬁelds promote neutrophil exten - sion , metabolic resonance , and DNA damage when phase matched with metabolic oscillators . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1495 : 90 – 111 , 2000 . 80 Kindzelskii , A . L . , M . - J . Zhou , R . P . Haugland , L . A . Boxer , and H . R . Petty . Oscillatory pericellular proteolysis and oxi - dant deposition during neutrophil locomotion . Biophys . J . 74 : 90 – 97 , 1998 . 81 Kunkel , E . J . , J . L . Dunne , and K . Ley . Leukocyte arrest during cytokine - dependent inﬂammation in vivo . J . Immu - nol . 164 : 3301 – 3308 , 2000 . 82 Kusano , K . , H . Abe , and T . Obinata . Detection of a se - quence involved in actin and phosphoinositide binding in the N - terminal side of coﬁlin . Mol . Cell . Biochem . 190 : 133 – 141 , 1999 . 83 Laudanna , C . , J . J . Campbell , and E . C . Butcher . Elevation of intracellular cAMP inhibits RhoA activation and integrin - dependent leukocyte adhesion induced by chemoattractants . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 24141 – 24144 , 1997 . 84 Laudanna , C . , D . Mochly - Rosen , T . Liron , G . Constantin , and E . C . Butcher . Evidence of z protein kinase C involve - ment in polymorphonuclear neutrophil integrin - dependent 367 Signaling in Motility Responses adhesion and chemotaxis . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 30306 – 30315 , 1998 . 85 Lauffenburger , D . , B . Farrel , R . Tranquillo , A . Kistler , and S . Zigmond . Gradient perception by leucocytes . J . Cell . Sci . 88 : 415 – 416 , 1987 . 86 Li , Z . , H . Jiang , W . Xie , Z . Zhang , A . V . Smrcka , and D . Wu . Roles of PLC - b 2 and - b 3 and PI3K g in chemoattractant - mediated signal transduction . Science 287 : 1046 – 1049 , 2000 . 87 Liu , S . , D . A . Calderwood , and M . H . Ginsberg . Integrin cytoplasmic domain - binding proteins . J . Cell . Sci . 113 : 3563 – 3571 , 2000 . 88 Loike , J . D . , L . Cao , S . Budhu , E . E . Marcantonio , J . E . Khoury , S . Hoffman , T . A . Yednock , and S . C . Silverstein . Differential regulation of 1 integrins by chemoattractants regulates neutrophil migration through ﬁbrin . J . Biol . Chem . 144 : 1047 – 1056 , 1999 . 89 Loitto , V . - M . , B . Rasmusson , and K . - E . Magnusson . Assess - ment of neutrophil N - formyl peptide receptors by using an - tibodies and ﬂuorescent peptides . J . Leukocyte Biol . 69 : 762 – 771 , 2001 . 90 Lollo , B . A . , K . W . Chan , E . M . Hanson , V . T . Moy , and A . A . Brian . Direct evidence for two afﬁnity states for lympho - cyte function - associated antigen 1 on activated T cells . J . Biol . Chem . 268 : 21693 – 21700 , 1993 . 91 Ma , A . D . , A . Metjian , A . Bagrodia , S . Taylor , and C . S . Abrams . Cytoskeletal reorganization by G - protein - coupled receptors is dependent on phosphoinositide 3 - kinase g , a Rac guanosine exchange factor , and Rac . Mol . Cell . Biol . 18 : 4744 – 4751 , 1998 . 92 Maciver , S . K . , B . J . Pope , S . Whytock , and A . G . Weeds . The effect of two actin depolymerizing factors ~ ADF / coﬁlins ! on actin ﬁlament turnover : pH sensitivity of F - actin binding by human ADF , but not of Acanthamoeba acto - phorin . Eur . J . Biochem . 256 : 388 – 397 , 1998 . 93 Mackay , C . R . , and B . A . Imhof . Cell adhesion in the im - mune system . Immunol . Today 14 : 99 – 103 , 1993 . 94 Maekawa , M . , T . Ishizaki , S . Boku , N . Watanabe , A . Fujita , A . Iwamatsu , T . Obinata , K . Ohashi , K . Mizuno , and S . Narumiya . Signaling from Rho to the actin cytoskeleton through protein kinases ROCK and LIM kinase . Science 285 : 895 – 898 , 1999 . 95 McDowall , A . , B . Leitinger , P . Stanley , P . A . Bates , A . M . Randi , and N . Hogg . The I domain of integrin leukocyte function - associated Antigen - 1 is involved in a conforma - tional change leading to high afﬁnity binding to ligand in - tercellular adhesion molecule 1 ~ ICAM - 1 ! . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 27396 – 27403 , 1998 . 96 McKay , D . A . , J . R . Kusel , and P . C . Wilkinson . Studies of chemotactic factor - induced polarity in human neutrophils . J . Cell . Sci . 100 : 473 – 479 , 1991 . 97 Mellado , M . , J . M . Rodrı´guez - Frade , S . Man˜es , and C . Martı´nez - A . Chemokine signaling and functional responses : The role of receptor dimerization and TK pathway activa - tion . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 19 : 397 – 421 , 2001 . 98 Miki , H . , T . Sasaki , Y . Takai , and T . Takenawa . Induction of ﬁlopodium formation by WASP - related actin - polymerizing protein N - WASP . Nature ( London ) 391 : 93 – 96 , 1998 . 99 Miki , H . , S . Suetsugu , and T . Takenawa . WAVE , a novel WASP - family protein involved in actin reorganization in - duced by Rac . EMBO J . 17 : 6932 – 6941 , 1998 . 100 Missy , K . , V . v . Poucke , P . Raynal , C . Viala , G . Mauco , M . Plantavid , H . Charp , and B . Payrastre . Lipid products of phosphoinositide 3 - kinase interact with Rac1 GTPase and stimulate GDP dissociation . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 30279 – 30286 , 1998 . 101 Mitchison , T . J . , and L . P . Cramer . Actin - based cell motility and cell locomotion . Cell 84 : 371 – 379 , 1996 . 102 Moores , S . L . , L . M . Selfors , J . Fredericks , T . Breit , K . Fujikawa , F . W . Alt , J . S . Brugge , and W . Swat . Vav family proteins couple to diverse cell surface receptors . Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 : 6364 – 6373 , 2000 . 103 Moreau , V . , and M . Way . Cdc42 is required for membrane dependent actin polymerization in vitro . FEBS Lett . 427 : 353 – 356 , 1998 . 104 Mullins , R . D . , J . A . Heuser , and T . D . Pollard . The inter - action of Arp2 / 3 complex with actin : Nucleation , high afﬁn - ity pointed end capping , and formation of branching net - works of ﬁlaments . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 95 : 6181 – 6186 , 1998 . 105 Murdoch , C . , and A . Finn . Chemokine receptors and their role in inﬂammation and infectious diseases . Blood 95 : 3032 – 3043 , 2000 . 106 Murphy , P . M . The molecular biology of leukocyte chemoat - tractant receptors . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 12 : 593 – 633 , 1994 . 107 Nieto , M . , J . M . R . Frade , D . Sancho , M . Mellado , C . Martinez - A , and F . Sanchez - Madrid . Polarization of chemokine receptors to the leading edge during lymphocyte chemotaxis . J . Exp . Med . 186 : 153 – 158 , 1997 . 108 Niggli , V . A membrane - permeant ester of phosphatidylinosi - tol 3 , 4 , 5 - triphosphate ( PIP 3 ) is an activator of human neu - trophil migration . FEBS Lett . 473 : 217 – 221 , 2000 . 109 Nishita , M . , H . Aizawa , and K . Mizuno . Stroma cell - derived factor 1 a activates LIM kinase 1 and induces coﬁlin phos - phorylation for T - cell chemotaxis . Mol . Cell . Biol . 22 : 774 – 783 , 2002 . 110 Nobes , C . D . , and A . Hall . Rho GTPases control polarity , protrusion , and adhesion during cell movement . J . Cell Biol . 144 : 1235 – 1244 , 1999 . 111 Obergfell , A . , B . A . Judd , M . A . d . Pozo , M . A . Schwartz , G . A . Koretzky , and S . J . Shattil . The molecular adapter SPL - 76 relays signals from platelet integrin a IIb b 3 to the actin cy - toskeleton . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 5916 – 5923 , 2001 . 112 Ohashi , K . , K . Nagata , M . Maekawa , T . Ishizaki , S . Naru - miya , and K . Mizuno . Rho - associated kinase ROCK acti - vates LIM - kinase 1 by phosphorylation at threonine 508 within the activation loop . J . Biol . Chem . 275 : 3577 – 3582 , 2000 . 113 Okada , K . , H . Takano - Ohmuro , T . Obinata , and H . Abe . Dephosphorylation of coﬁlin in polymorphonuclear leuko - cytes derived from peripheral blood . Exp . Cell Res . 227 : 116 – 122 , 1996 . 114 Peterson , J . R . , R . S . Lokey , T . J . Mitchison , and M . W . Kirschner . A chemical inhibitor of N - WASP reveals a new mechanism for targeting protein interactions . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 98 : 10624 – 10629 , 2001 . 115 Pfaff , M . , S . Liu , D . J . Erle , and M . H . Ginsberg . Integrin beta cytoplasmic domains differentially bind to cytoskeletal proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 6104 – 6109 , 1998 . 116 Pollard , T . D . , L . Blanchoin , and R . D . Mullins . Molecular mechanisms controlling actin ﬁlament dynamics in non - muscle cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 29 : 545 – 576 , 2000 . 117 Prehoda , K . E . , J . A . Scott , R . D . Mullins , and W . A . Lim . Integration of multiple signals through cooperative regula - tion of the N - WASP – Arp2 / 3 complex . Science 290 : 801 – 806 , 2000 . 118 Rainger , G . E . , C . D . Buckley , D . L . Simmons , and G . B . Nash . Neutrophils sence ﬂow - generated stress and direct their migration through a v b 3 integrin . Am . J . Physiol . 276 : H858 – H864 , 1999 . 368 D . V . Z HELEV and A . A LTERAIFI 119 Redmont , T . , and S . H . Zigmond . Distribution of F - actin elongation sites in lysed polymorphonuclear leukocytes par - allels the distribution of endogenous F actin . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 26 : 7 – 18 , 1993 . 120 Roberts , A . W . , C . Kim , L . Zhen , J . B . Lowe , R . Kapur , B . Petryniak , A . Spaetti , J . D . Pollock , J . B . Borneo , G . B . Bradford , S . J . Atkinson , M . C . Dinauer , and D . A . Will - iams . Deﬁciency of the hematopoietic cell - speciﬁc Rho fam - ily GTPase Rac2 is characterized by abnormalities in neu - trophil function and host defense . Immunity 10 : 183 – 196 , 1999 . 121 Rohatgi , R . , H . H . Ho , and M . W . Kirschner . Mechanism of N - WASP activation by CDC42 and phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . J . Cell Biol . 150 : 1299 – 1310 , 2000 . 122 Rosales , C . , S . L . Jones , D . McCourt , and E . J . Brown . Bromophenacyl bromide binding to the actin - bundling pro - tein L - plastin inhibits inositol trisphosphate - independent in - crease in Ca 2 1 in human neutrophils . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 91 : 3534 – 3538 , 1994 . 123 Ruoslahti , E . Integrins . J . Clin . Invest . 87 : 1 – 5 , 1991 . 124 Sampath , R . , P . J . Gallagner , and F . M . Pavalko . Cytoskel - etal interactions with the leukocyte integrin b 2 cytoplasmic tail . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 33588 – 33594 , 1998 . 125 Sasaki , T . , J . Irie - Sasaki , R . G . Jones , A . J . Oliveira - dos - Santos , W . L . Stanford , B . Bolon , A . Wakeham , A . Itie , D . Bouchard , I . Kozieradzki , N . Joza , T . W . Mak , P . S . Ohashi , A . Suzuki , and J . M . Penninger . Function of PI3K in thy - mocyte development , T - cell activation , and neutrophil mi - gration . Science 287 : 1040 – 1046 , 2000 . 126 Schafer , D . A . , P . B . Jennings , and J . A . Cooper . Dynamics of capping protein and actin assembly in vitro : Uncapping barbed ends by polyphosphoinositides . J . Cell Biol . 135 : 169 – 179 , 1996 . 127 Schmitt , M . , and B . Bultmann . Fluorescent chemotactic pep - tide as tools to identify the f - Met – Leu – Phe receptor on human granulocytes . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 18 : 219 – 222 , 1990 . 128 Schroder , J . - M . Chemoattractants as mediators of neutro - philic tissue recruitment . Clin . Dermatol . 18 : 245 – 263 , 2000 . 129 Scita , G . , P . Tenca , E . Frittoli , A . Tocchetti , M . Innocenti , G . Giardina , and P . P . d . Fiore . Signaling from Ras to Rac and beyond : Not just a matter of GEFs . EMBO J . 19 : 2393 – 2398 , 2000 . 130 Servant , G . , O . D . Weiner , P . Herzmark , T . Balla , J . W . Sedat , and H . R . Bourne . Polarization of chemoattractant receptor signaling during neutrophil chemotaxis . Science 287 : 1037 – 1040 , 2000 . 131 Servant , G . , O . D . Weiner , E . R . Neptune , J . W . Sedat , and H . R . Bourne . Dynamics of a chemoattractant receptor in living neutrophils during chemotaxis . Mol . Biol . Cell . 10 : 1163 – 1178 , 1999 . 132 Seveau , S . , R . J . Eddy , F . R . Maxﬁeld , and L . M . Pierini . Cytoskeleton - dependent membrane domain segregation dur - ing neutrophil polarization . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 : 3550 – 3562 , 2001 . 133 Shao , J . - Y . , and R . M . Hochmuth . Mechanical anchoring strength of L - selectin , b 2 integrins , and CD45 to neutrophil cytoskeleton and membrane . Biophys . J . 77 : 587 – 596 , 1999 . 134 Snyderman , R . , and R . J . Uhing . Chemoattractant stimulus – response coupling . In : Inﬂammation : Basic Principles and Clinical Correlates , edited by J . I . Gallin , I . M . Goldstein , and R . Snyderman . New York : Raven , 1992 , pp . 412 – 439 . 135 Sohn , R . H . , J . Chen , K . S . Koblan , P . F . Bray , and P . J . Goldschmidt - Clermont . Localization of a binding site for phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - biphosphate on human proﬁlin . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 21114 – 21120 , 1995 . 136 Southwick , F . , and C . Young . The actin released from proﬁlin - actin complexes is insufﬁcient to account for the increase in F - actin in chemoattractant - stimulated polymor - phonuclear leukocytes . J . Cell Biol . 110 : 1965 – 1973 , 1990 . 137 Springer , T . A . Trafﬁc signals on endothelium for lympho - cyte recirculation and leukocyte emigration . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 57 : 827 – 872 , 1995 . 138 Steimle , P . A . , J . D . Hoffert , N . B . Adey , and S . W . Craig . Polyphosphoinositides inhibit the interaction of vinculin with actin ﬁlaments . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 18414 – 18420 , 1999 . 139 Stossel , T . P . The structure of cortical cytoplasm . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . London , Ser . B 299 : 275 – 289 , 1982 . 140 Stossel , T . P . The mechanical responses of white blood cells . In : Inﬂammation : Basic Principles and Clinical Correlates , edited by J . I . Gallin , I . M . Goldstein , and R . Snyderman . New York : Raven , 1992 , pp . 459 – 475 . 141 Stossel , T . P . On the crawling of animal cells . Science 260 : 1086 – 1094 , 1993 . 142 Suetsudu , S . , H . Miki , H . Yamaguchi , T . Obinata , and T . Takenawa . Enhancement of branching efﬁciency by the actin ﬁlament - binding activity of N - WASP / WAVE2 . J . Cell . Sci . 114 : 4533 – 4542 , 2001 . 143 Suetsugu , S . , H . Miki , and T . Takenawa . The essential role of proﬁlin in the assembly of actin for microspike formation . EMBO J . 17 : 6516 – 6526 , 1998 . 144 Sullivan , S . J . , G . Dukas , and S . H . Zigmond . Asymmetric distribution of the chemotactic peptide receptor on polymor - phonuclear leucocytes . J . Cell Biol . 99 : 1461 – 1467 , 1984 . 145 Sumi , T . , K . Matsumoto , and T . Nakamura . Speciﬁc activa - tion if LIM kinase 2 via phosphorylation of threonine 505 by ROCK , a Rho - dependent protein kinase . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 670 – 676 , 2001 . 146 Sumi , T . , K . Matsumoto , Y . Takai , and T . Nakamura . Coﬁlin phosphorylation and actin cytoskeleton dynamics regulated by Rho - and Cdc42 - activated LIM - kinase 2 . J . Cell Biol . 147 : 1519 – 1532 , 1999 . 147 Sun , H . Q . , M . Yamamoto , M . Mejillano , and H . L . Yin . Gelsolin , a multifunctional actin regulatory protein . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 33179 – 33182 , 1999 . 148 Svitkina , T . M . , and G . G . Borisy . Arp2 / 3 complex and actin depolymerizing factor / coﬁlin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin ﬁlament array in lamellipodia . J . Cell Biol . 145 : 1009 – 1026 , 1999 . 149 Takenawa , T . , and T . Itoh . Phosphoinositides , key molecules for regulation of actin cytoskeletal organization and mem - brane trafﬁc from the plasma membrane . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 1533 : 190 – 206 , 2001 . 150 Takenawa , T . , and H . Miki . WASP and WAVE family pro - teins : Key molecules for rapid rearrangement of cortical actin ﬁlaments and cell movement . J . Cell . Sci . 114 : 1801 – 1809 , 2001 . 151 Tall , E . G . , I . Spector , S . N . Pentyala , I . Bitter , and M . J . Rebecchi . Dynamics of phosphoinositol 4 , 5 - biphosphate in actin - rich structures . Curr . Biol . 10 : 743 – 746 , 2000 . 152 Thrasher , A . J . , and S . Burns . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome : A disorder of haematopoetic cytoskeletal regulation . Microsc . Res . Tech . 47 : 107 – 113 , 1999 . 153 Tolias , K . F . , J . H . Hartwig , H . Ishihara , Y . Shibasaki , L . C . Cantley , and C . L . Carpenter . Type I a phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase mediates Rac - dependent actin assem - bly . Curr . Biol . 10 : 153 – 156 , 2000 . 154 Tomhave , E . D . , R . M . Richardson , J . R . Didsbury , L . Me - nard , R . Snyderman , and H . Ali . Cross desensitization of 369 Signaling in Motility Responses receptors for peptide chemoattractants . J . Immunol . 153 : 3267 – 3275 , 1994 . 155 Troys , M . v . , D . Dewitte , J . L . Verschelde , M . Goethals , J . Vandekerckhove , and C . Ampe . The competitive interaction of actin and PIP2 with actophorin is based on overlapping target sites : design of a gain - of - function mutant . Biochemis - try 39 : 12181 – 12189 , 2000 . 156 Tsukita , S . , and S . Yonemura . Cortical actin organization : Lessons from ezrin / radixin / moesin ~ ERM ! proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 34507 – 34510 , 1999 . 157 Tyagi , S . R . , L . B . Klickstein , and A . Nicholson - Weller . C5a - stimulated human neutrophils use a subset of b 2 inte - grins to support the adhesion - dependent phase of superoxide production . J . Leukocyte Biol . 68 : 679 – 686 , 2000 . 158 Ueda , H . , R . Morishita , J . Yamauchi , H . Itoh , K . Kato , and T . Asano . Regulation of Rac and Cdc42 pathways by Gi during lysophosphatidic acid - induced cell spreading . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 6846 – 6852 , 2001 . 159 Vanhaesebroeck , B . , S . J . Leevers , K . Ahmadi , J . Timms , R . Kasto , P . C . Driscoll , R . Woscholski , P . J . Parker , and M . D . Waterﬁeld . Synthesis and function of 3 - phosphorylated inositol lipids . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 70 : 535 – 602 , 2001 . 160 Villalba , M . , K . Bi , F . Rodriguez , Y . Tanaka , S . Schoen - berger , and A . Altman . Vav 1 / Rac - dependent actin cytoskel - eton reorganization is required for lipid raft clustering in T cells . J . Cell Biol . 155 : 331 – 338 , 2001 . 161 Wagner , M . , and A . Wegner . Similar afﬁnities ADP and ATP for G actin at physiological salt concentrations . FEBS Lett . 162 : 112 – 116 , 1983 . 162 Walter , R . J . , and W . A . Marasco . Direct visualization of formylpeptide receptor binding on rounded and polarized human neutrophils : Cellular and receptor heterogeneity . J . Leukocyte Biol . 41 : 377 – 391 , 1987 . 163 Wang , J . , and E . J . Brown . Immune complex - induced inte - grin activation and L - plastin phosphorylation require protein kinase A . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 24349 – 24356 , 1999 . 164 Watts , R . G . , and T . H . Howard . Role of tropomyosin , alpha - actinin , and actin binding protein 280 in stabilizing Triton insoluble F - actin in basal and chemotactic factor ac - tivated neutrophils . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 28 : 155 – 164 , 1994 . 165 Weber , K . S . C . , L . B . Klickstein , and C . Weber . Speciﬁc activation of leukocyte 2 integrins lymphocyte function - associated antigen - 1 and Mac - 1 by chemokines mediated by distinct pathways via the subunit cytoplasmic domains . Mol . Biol . Cell . 10 : 861 – 873 , 1999 . 166 Weber , K . S . C . , L . B . Klickstein , P . C . Weber , and C . Weber . Chemokine - induced monocyte transmigration re - quires cdc42 - mediated cytoskeletal changes . Eur . J . Immu - nol . 28 : 2245 – 2251 , 1998 . 167 Weinand , R . G . , A . J . Rosenspire , and H . R . Petty . Modeling the inﬂuence of ectodomain afﬁnities on the spatial distri - bution of membrane receptors . J . Theor . Biol . 197 : 217 – 225 , 1999 . 168 Wells , T . N . C . , A . E . I . Proudfoot , and C . A . Power . Chemokine receptors and their role in leukocyte activation . Immunol . Lett . 65 : 35 – 40 , 1999 . 169 Werr , J . , X . Xie , P . Hedqvist , E . Ruoslahti , and L . Lindbom . b1 integrins are critically involved in neutrophil locomotion in extravascular tissue in vivo . J . Exp . Med . 187 : 2091 – 2096 , 1998 . 170 Willeke , T . , S . Behrens , K . Scharffetter - Kochanek , P . Gae - htgens , and B . Walzog . b 2 integrin ~ CD11 / CD18 ! - mediated signaling involves tyrosine phosphorylation of c - Cb1 in hu - man neutrophils . J . Leukocyte Biol . 68 : 284 – 292 , 2000 . 171 Williams , D . A . , W . Tao , F . Yang , C . Kim , Y . Gu , P . Mans - ﬁeld , J . E . Levine , B . Petryniak , C . W . Derrow , C . Harris , B . Jia , Y . Zheng , D . R . Ambruso , J . B . Lowe , S . J . Atkinson , M . C . Dinauer , and L . Boxer . Dominant negative mutation of the hematopoietic - speciﬁc Rho GTPase , Rac2 , is associ - ated with a human phagocyte immunodeﬁciency . Blood 96 : 1646 – 1654 , 2000 . 172 Williams , M . A . , and J . S . Solomkin . Integrin - mediated sig - naling in human neutrophil functioning . J . Leukocyte Biol . 65 : 725 – 736 , 1999 . 173 Wolven , A . K . , L . D . Belmont , N . M . Mahoney , S . C . Almo , and D . G . Drubin . In vivo importance of actin nucleotide exchange catalyzed by proﬁlin . J . Cell Biol . 150 : 895 – 903 , 2000 . 174 Woodside , D . G . , A . Obergfell , L . Leng , J . L . Wilsbacher , C . K . Miranti , J . S . Brugge , S . J . Shattil , and M . H . Ginsberg . Activation of Syk protein tyrosine kinase through interaction with integrin b cytoplasmic domains . Curr . Biol . 11 : 1799 – 1804 , 2001 . 175 Worthylake , R . A . , S . Lemoine , J . M . Watson , and K . Burr - idge . RhoA is required for monocyte tail retraction during transendothelial migration . J . Cell Biol . 154 : 147 – 160 , 2001 . 176 Wynmann , M . P . , P . Kernen , D . A . Deranleau , and M . Bag - giolini . Respiratory bust oscillations in human neutrophils and their correlation with ﬂuctuations in apparent cell shape . J . Biol . Chem . 264 : 15829 – 15834 , 1989 . 177 Yang , C . , M . Huang , J . DeBiasio , M . Pring , M . Joyce , H . Miki , T . Takenawa , and S . H . Zigmond . Proﬁlin enhances Cdc42 - induced nucleation of actin polymerization . J . Cell Biol . 150 : 1001 – 1012 , 2000 . 178 Yuli , I . , and R . Snyderman . Rapid changes in light scattering from human polymorphonuclear leukocytes exposed to chemoattractants . Discrete responses correlated with chemo - tactic and secretory functions . J . Clin . Invest . 73 : 1408 – 1417 , 1984 . 179 Zhelev , D . V . , A . M . Alteraiﬁ , and R . M . Hochmuth . F - actin network formation in tethers and in pseudopods stimulated by chemoattractant . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 35 : 331 – 344 , 1996 . 180 Zhelev , D . V . , D . Needham , and R . M . Hochmuth . Role of the membrane cortex in neutrophil deformation in small pipets . Biophys . J . 67 : 696 – 705 , 1994 . 181 Zicha , D . , W . E . Allen , P . M . Brickell , C . Kinnon , G . A . Dunn , and G . E . Jones . Chemotaxis of macrophages is abol - ished in the Wiskott – Aldrich syndrome . Br . J . Haematol . 101 : 659 – 665 , 1998 . 182 Zigmond , S . H . Mechanism of sensing chemical gradients by polymorphonuclear leucocytes . Nature ( London ) 249 : 450 – 452 , 1974 . 183 Zigmond , S . H . Recent quantitative studies of actin ﬁlament turnover during cell locomotion . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 25 : 309 – 316 , 1993 . 184 Zigmond , S . H . , M . Joyce , C . Yang , K . Brown , M . Huang , and M . Pring . Mechanism of Cdc42 - induced actin polymer - ization in neutrophil extracts . J . Cell Biol . 142 : 1001 – 1012 , 1998 . 185 Zigmond , S . H . , H . I . Levitsky , and B . J . Kreel . Cell polar - ity : an examination of its behavioral expression and its con - sequences for polymorphonuclear leucocyte chemotaxis . J . Cell Biol . 89 : 585 – 592 , 1981 . 370 D . V . Z HELEV and A . A LTERAIFI