Contact Formation During Fibroblast Locomotion : Involvement of Membrane Ruffles and Microtubules G . Rinnerthaler , * B . Geiger , * and J . V . Small * * Institute of Molecular Biology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences , Billrothstrasse 11 , 5020 Salzburg , Austria ; and * Department of Chemical Immunology , The Weizmann Institute of Science , Rehovot 76100 , Israel Abstract . We have correlated the motility of the lead - ing edge of fibroblasts , monitored by phase - contrast cinematography , with the relative distributions of sev - eral cytoskeletal elements ( vinculin , tubulin , and actin ) as well as with the contact patterns determined by in - terference reflection microscopy . This analysis has re - vealed the involvement of both ruffles and micro - spikes , as well as microtubules in the initiation of focal contact formation . Nascent vinculin sites within the leading edge or at its base , taken as primordial cell - substrate contacts , were invariably colocalized with sites that showed a history of transient , pro - longed , or cyclic ruffling activity . Extended microspike structures , often preceded the formation of ruffles . Im - munofluorescent labeling indicated that some of these primordial contacts were in close apposition to the ends of microtubules that penetrated into the leading edge . By fluorescence and electron microscopy short bundles of actin filaments found at the base of the leading edge were identified as presumptive , primor - dial contacts . It is concluded that ruffles and microspikes , either independently or in combination , initiate and mark the sites for future contact . Plaque proteins then accumulate ( within 10 - 30 s ) at the con - tact site and , beneath ruffles , induce localized bun - dling of actin filaments . We propose that all primordial contacts support traction for leading edge protrusion but that only some persist long enough to nucleate stress fiber assembly . Microtubules are postulated as the elements that select , stabilize , and potentiate the formation of these latter , long - lived contacts . UTGOING from the pioneer studies of Abercrombie and others the translocation of fibroblastic cells over a planar substratum has been widely accepted as a useful model of metazoan cell movement ( for reviews see Wessells et al . , 1973 ; Vasiliev and Gelfand , 1976 ; Abercrom - bie , 1980 ; Buckley , 1981 ; Trinkaus , 1984 ) . From these de - tailed , but mainly descriptive studies , it has been shown that despite its morphological variability and irregularity the locomotory process of fibroblastic cells may be divided into essentially three interdependent , sequential phases : the polar extension of a leading lamella via the active motility of the anterior , leading edge ; the formation of anterior contacts with the underlying substrate ; and , subsequently , the retrac - tion of the trailing tail into the advancing cell body ( Aber - crombie et al . , 1970a ; Abercrombie et al . , 1977 ; Harris , 1973 ; Goldman et al . , 1976 ; Chen , 1981 ) . Morphological and immunocytochemical studies have suggested that actin and its various associated proteins play major roles in all these processes . The leading edge of motile cells comprises a dense meshwork and fine bundles of actin - containing microfilaments ( Spooner et al . , 1971 ; Lazarides , 1976 ; Small and Celis , 1978 ; H6glund et al . , 1980 ; Small , 1981 ) complexed with various actin - associated proteins such as alpha - actinin , filamin , fimbrin , talin , and others ( Hegge - ness et al . , 1977 ; Geiger , 1979 ; Bretscher and Weber , 1980 ; Small et al . , 1982 ; Burridge and Connell , 1983 ; Yamashiro - Matsumura and Matsumura , 1986 ) and the active movements of this region are readily inhibited by the microfilament - disrupting drug cytochalasin B ( Carter , 1967 ; Wessells et al . , 1971 ; Goldman and Knipe , 1973 ; Ohnishi , 1981 ; Domnina et al . , 1982 ) . More recently , the results from microinjection studies ( Kreis et al . , 1982 ; Wang , 1984 ) have lent credence to the idea ( Small et al . , 1978 ) that leading edge protrusion may be largely mediated via the polymerization of actin fila - ments . Other studies have shown that actin is also involved in the formation of contact with the substrate . Examination of cell - substrate contacts formed along the ventral aspects of the leading lamellae by electron microscopy or immunocyto - chemical labeling showed that bundles of actin filaments are attached to the endofacial surfaces of the membrane in defined areas of closest cell - substrate contact , namely focal contacts or focal adhesion plaques ( Heaysman , 1973 ; Heath and Dunn , 1978 ; Wehland et al . , 1979 ; Izzard and Lochner , 1980 ) . Immunocytochemical labeling with antibodies specific for various actin - related proteins have further indicated that vinculin ( Geiger , 1979 ) and talin ( Burridge and Connell , 1983 ) are specifically localized at the cytoplasmic aspects of focal contacts and it was thus proposed that they and proba - bly other yet unidentified proteins are involved in the attach - (cid:14)9 The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 88 / 03 / 747 / 14 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 106 , March 1988 747 - 760 747 ment of actin to the membrane in these sites ( Geiger , 1983 ; Mangeat and Burridge , 1984 ) . The third phase of the locomotory cycle , namely the re - traction of the trailing tail , studied in some detail by Chen ( 1981 ) , is likewise actin - dependent and can be attributed to the contractile activity of the large stress fiber bundles ( Isen - berg et al . , 1976 ) that span the cell between contact foci at the rear and similar , well established contacts at the base of and behind the leading edge . The involvement of other cytoskeletal systems ( intermediate filaments and microtu - bules ) in the various phases of the locomotory cycle has not been elucidated so far . It has nevertheless been demonstrated that microtubule - disrupting drugs largely abolish cell polari - zation and directional locomotion ( Vasiliev et al . , 1970 ; De Brabander et al . , 1977 ) and that the centrosome may have a fixed orientation relative to the general direction of move - ment ( Albrecht - Buehler , 1977 ; Singer and Kupfer , 1986 ) . Despite the accumulation of much data on the phenom - enology of the locomotion process and on the static organi - zation of various cytoskeletal elements , the molecular mech - anisms underlying involvement of these elements in the motility of the leading edge and in the directional establish - ment of new substrate contacts remain elusive . In an attempt to gain insight into the molecular dynamics and mode of involvement of cytoskeletal elements in contact formation we have undertaken studies to correlate the localization of cyto - skeletal components in cells whose history of locomotion up to the time of fixation was known . In essence , similar ap - proaches have been attempted in the past ( see for example , Buckley , 1974 ; Heath and Dunn , 1978 ; Herman et al . , 1981 ; Izzard et al . , 1985 ) . However , by combining time lapse cine - matography with triple immunofluorescent labeling and by adopting new fixation procedures which optimally preserve a wide range of cytoskeletal structures , new information has emerged . In the present report we demonstrate that ruffling of the leading edge as well as microspike protrusion are as - sociated with the presence of nascent vinculin - containing contact sites , taken as precursors of focal contacts . Further , the off and apparently delayed association of microtubule ends with these vinculin loci reveals a possible route by which microtubules , known to be required for cell polariza - tion and translocation ( Vasiliev et al . , 1970 ; Vasiliev and Gel - fand , 1976 ) , may regulate directional locomotion . Prelimi - nary results relating to this work have appeared in earlier reports ( Geiger et al . , 1984 ; Small and Rinnerthaler , 1985 ) . Materials and Methods Cells Chick fibroblasts obtained by trypsinization of 9 - 11 d embryo hearts were used from the 1st to the 5th passage after primary culture . The cells were grown at 37 ~ in the absence of CO2 , compatible with conditions in the filming chamber ( see below ) . For this purpose either of two media were used , LI5 or BME with Hanks ' salts both supplemented with 10 % FCS ( all from Flow Laboratories , Vienna , Austria or Gibco , Vienna , Austria ) . Cells were plated onto round 12 - mm diameter coverslips that were etched with a finder grid pattern for cell relocation ( Small , 1985 ) , and used 2 - 5 h after plating . Perfusion Chamber The filming chamber used in this study was of the Dvorak - Stotler design ( Dvorak and Stotler , 1971 ) , but modified to give a rectangular chamber area of 4 x 8 mm with the long axis in line with the inlet and outlet syringe nee - dles ( Rinnerthaler , 1982 ) . The latter needles ( Nr . 20 ) had small , Record - type heads to allow faster drainage of fluid when exchanging solutions ( see fixation ) . The chamber was supplied with solution by a simple drop feed from a filled syringe , with needle , that was hung freely in a loop ( and therefore quickly exchangeable ) so that the needle tip was just above the cone of the chamber inlet needle . The outlet needle cone was connected to a long tube whose end could be placed at different positions below the plane of the chamber to control the flow rate by siphon action . To ensure that no air en - tered the chamber the inflow had to exceed the outflow . Overflow of liquid at the inflow cone was drained away by filter paper . With this arrangement any number of liquids could be exchanged at the inflow by changing the freely hanging syringe . Immediately before filming , the chamber was assembled together with the coverslips carrying the cells , filled with medium ( L15 or BME , see above ) and mounted on the microscope . The temperature of the chamber was controlled by a thin , home - made resistor - type heating stage ( Rinner - thaler , 1982 ) mounted between the microscope stage and the chamber that allowed temperature maintenance within less than 0 . 5 ~ Filming was car - ried out at 37 ~ Fixation Fixation was carried out using Triton X - 100 glutaraldehyde mixtures in a " cytoskeleton buffer " ( 137 mM NaCI ; 5 mM KCI ; 1 mM Na2HPO4 2H20 ; 0 . 4 mM KH2PO4 ; 5 . 5 mM glucose ; 4 mM NaHCO3 ; 2 mM MgCI2 ; 2 mM EGTA ; 10 mM MES ; pH 6 . 1 ) essentially as described previously ( Small , 1981 ) , with only minor modifications indicated below . For cells not used for filming , coverslips were briefly rinsed in medium without serum , fol - lowed by a rinse in cytoskeleton buffer and then by fixation in cytoskeleton buffer supplemented with 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 ( Sigma Chemical Co . , Munich , FRG ) and 0 . 25 % glutaraldehyde ( Polaron , Austria ; E . M . grade ) for 2 min at R . T . This was followed by a buffer rinse and then by a 10 - min post fixation in 1 % glutaraldehyde in cytoskeleton buffer at R . T . The cover - slips were subsequently rinsed and stored in cytoskeleton buffer until im - munolabeling . Cells whose locomotion was monitored by cinematography were fixed during filming in the perfusion chamber . At the appropriate time the inflow of medium was stopped by removing the feed syringe containing medium and changed , after drainage of medium in the needle head had occurred , to one containing cytoskeleton buffer at pH 6 . 5 . Approximately 5 - 10 s there - after the buffer syringe was exchanged for one containing the glutaralde - hyde - Triton mixture ( 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 , 0 . 25 % glutaraldehyde in cytoskele - ton buffer ) . After a 2 - min fixation in this mixture the fixative syringe was changed again for a buffer syringe and the interference reflection micros - copy ( IRM ) ~ image ( see below ) of the fixed cell recorded . The chamber was then opened , the coverslip rinsed in cytoskeleton buffer , and post - fixed in 1 % glutaraldehyde in the same buffer for 10 min . lmmunolabeling Before immunolabeling , free aldehyde groups were reduced by treatment of the coverslips with sodium borohydride ( 0 . 5 mg / ml ) , in ice cold cytoskele - ton buffer ; three changes , 5 min each . After 2 rinses in cytoskeleton buffer ( 5 rain each ) the coverslips were incubated for 40 - 60 min on 20 lal of a first antibody mixture containing rabbit anti - vinculin and rat anti - tubulin ( a gift from Dr . J . Kilmartin , Cambridge , U . K . ) made up in cytoskeleton buffer ( pH of 6 . 5 - 7 . 0 ) . Antibody incubations were carried out at R . T . on a sheet of parafilm that was overlaid on a glass plate mounted on a moist filter paper in a 15 - cm diameter petri dish . After washing ( 2 changes , 10 rain each ) the coversfips were transferred to the second antibody mixture consisting of goat anti - rabbit rhodamine ( see Geiger , 1979 ) and goat anti - rat fluorescein ( Nordic , Vienna , Austria ) for 40 - 60 min . After the final wash , as above , the coverslips were mounted into the filming chamber in a 1 : 3 mixture of Gelvatol mounting medium ( see below ) and 50 % Glycerol in cytoskeleton buffer , with added 3 mg / ml n - propyl gallate ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) as an - tibleach agent to record the first two fluorescent images ( see light micros - copy ) . The coverslips were then removed , thoroughly washed and over - stained with fluorescein - labeled phalloidin ( a gift from Prof . H . Faulstich , Heidelberg , FRG ) in cytoskeleton buffer . After washing they were mounted in Gelvatol ( Monsanto Corp . , St . Louis , MO ) to record the final actin im - age . Under the labeling conditions used here the actin label was sufficiently 1 . Abbreviation used in this paper : IRM , interference reflection microscopy . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 106 , 1988 748 strong as to effectively obscure the microtubule pattern labeled in the first step . Light Microscopy , Cinematography , and Projection Light microscopy was carried out on a Zeiss photomicroscope III equipped with epi - illumination ( 50 W HBO lamp ) . Fluorescence patterns of cells were recorded using a Planopochromat 63 x 1 . 4 objective on Agfapan professional 400 film ( 27 Din ) with a DIN set - ting of 36 for rhodamine and 30 for fluorescein . IRM images were obtained with the Zeiss antiflex system using Kodak technical pan film ( 18 Din : 21 Din setting on microscope ) . Leading edge movement was recorded in phase contrast ( Neofluar 40 (cid:141) 0 , 75 ) on 16 - ram Kodak technical pan film using a 16 - mm Bolex camera at a speed of 2 frames / s . Cells were usually filmed for 2 - 3 min before fixation . The movie films were processed by reversal de - velopment in a JOBO ( FRG ) 16 - ram developing system . The film projector used in this work was built up from a normal 16 - mm projector ( EIKI , Japan ) into an analytical projector . Via mechanical modifications and the construction of an electronic control system , single frame analysis , frame counting and variable speed control were made possi - ble ( Rinnerthaler , 1982 ) . Photographic and Graphic Analysis Multiple images of cells were analyzed for overlapping structures by a com - bination of photographic and graphic procedures . Initially a photographic procedure was employed as follows : Each of the five patterns of the cell ( ac - tin , vinculin , microtubules , phase contrast , and IRM ) were transferred at the same magnification onto 13 x 18 - cm sheet film ( Agfa ) either as a positive or negative copy so that any combination of superimposition was possible . Films with the protein patterns were stained either blue - green or purple ( ac - cording to the methods described in Krug and Weide , 1976 ) to facilitate rec - ognition of each pattern in superimposed film combinations . To investigate the frequency of colocalizations in the leading edge the five patterns were matched on a light box . In practice it was difficult to establish by this means the overlapping structures in more than three films at once . Hence it was necessary to make a drawing on transparent overhead foil of the leading edge characteristics summarized from two or three patterns and then to overlay the remaining images on this . The specific structures of interest were : mem - brane ruffles , microspikes , vinculin loci , free microtubule ends and cell - snbstrate contacts as shown by IRM . This type of analysis was useful for comparison of the cytoskeletal and contact patterns but was less applicable for the analysis of movie sequences . Analysis of the patterns together with locomotion sequences involved projection of the original 16 - mm images onto a translucent screen as fol - lows . The film projector was mounted on a table fitted with a double mirror system and a translucent projection screen . With the use of a zoom objective on the projector the projected image could be readily adjusted in size to match the cytoskeleton patterns on 13 x 18 cm sheet film . In an initial analy - sis the patterns on the sheet films were overlayed on and compared with the locomotion sequences . In this way , however , the accumulated activities of the leading edge ( ruffling patterns , microspikes , protrusion , and retraction ) over any period of interest was too complex to be condensed on a single im - age , necessitating a further refinement , as follows . Graphic Analysis . For the above reason it was found necessary to make a graphic recording of the movie sequencies . This was done by drawing , for each time point ( intervals of down to 15 s real time ) the outline of the cell , the ruffling pattern and the visible microspikes , on three separate transpar - ent foils . In this case the final magnification on the projection screen was fixed at 3 , 000 . The single drawings were additionally marked with the same fixed coordinate points , taken from the coverslip . The sequences of drawings were then overlaid and taped at one edge on millimeter paper , one above the other in the appropriate time sequence , in three separate sequence sets . The millimeter paper had squares with 3 - mm sides giving a corresponding linear scale of 1 ~ rn per square side . Each of the sequences was then copied on transparent foil in a photocopy machine and these copies overlaid in any combination , as desired , to establish the temporal and spatial relations be - tween different structures . Using a photographic enlarger , the 35 - ram negatives of the fluorescent patterns of the fixed cell were also projected , via a mirror onto a transparent screen in a second set up , to give , likewise , a final magnification of 3 , 000x . The details in the leading edge region were again transferred onto transpar - em overhead foils using colored fine - tipped felt pens . These images were again copied in multiple copies ( in black ) that could be overlaid on the three time sequences of the leading edge described above . The original colored drawings themselves were overlaid directly for analysis of the colocaliza - tions of actin , vinculin , and microtubules and for comparison with the pho - tographic transparency ( magnification : 3 , 000 ) of the IRM image . Although the application of this graphic method was somewhat laborious we found it to be the only way to relate the complex movements of the lead - ing edge at different time points with each other and with the cytosketeton and contact patterns . Composite Photographic Patterns The reproduction of more than one pattern on a single print was done ac - cording to the following scheme : The individual patterns were first pho - tographically enlarged as positives onto either sheet film or print paper . These were then transferred ( for black and white ) via a double exposure over a light box ( film ) or via flash exposure ( prints ) onto Agfapan 25 professional roll - film in a Mamiya 6 (cid:141) 7 - cm camera . For color combinations , the in - dividual fluorescent patterns ( in black and white ) were transferred onto a single color negative ( Agfacolor roll - film N 80L ) in the same way , but with different color filters ( green , red , and blue ) interposed for each exposure . By this means an additive color mixing was produced , e . g . , green plus red giving yellow , all three colors giving white , and so on . Color prints were made on Agfa Color paper 310 using a Linhof ( Munich FRG ) enlarger and an Agfa color processing machine ( Agfaprint C 66 TR ) . All the pho - tographical processing required for such compositions is too involved to be described here in detail . Negatively Stained Whole Mounts for Electron Microscopy Whole mount cytoskeletons for electron microscopy were prepared essen - tially as described previously ( Small , 1981 ) using a mixture of 0 . 25 % glutaraldehyde and 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 as primary fixative ( 2 rain , R . I " . ) and 1 % glutaraldehyde as secondary fixative ( 15 - 30 min at R . T . ) ; both in cytoskeleton buffer . In some cases actin was additionally stabilized after fixation by treatment with phalloidin ( 2 . 10 - - ~ M in cytoskeleton buffer ; 20 min at R . T . L Negative staining was carried out as earlier ( Small , 1981 ) but with 2 % phosphotungstic acid as the stain ( Pagh et al . , 1985 ) . Electron microscopy was carried out using a Zeiss EM 10A operating at 80 kV and with a 50 - I . tm objective aperture . Results The results presented in this paper and their analysis rely , to a large extent , on time - lapse cinematographic recording of locomotory cells ( in phase contrast ) correlated with the su - perimposed images of actin , vinculin , and microtubules as well as the contact patterns revealed by IRM after fixation . Before describing the results with filmed cells it is necessary to briefly draw attention to the various morphological aspects of fibroblasts that are relevant to this study . Morphology and Cytoskeletal Organization of the Leading Edge : Spatial Interrelationships Fig . 1 gives an example of a chick heart fibroblast that was subjected to the multiple imaging methods used and serves to introduce the methodology as well as the structural aspects that were investigated , The different organizational forms of actin are clearly shown in Fig . I a : here the prominent stress fibers dominate the main part of the cell while the delicate and motile leading edge is clearly defined by a band of diffuse actin at the cell periphery spanned by numerous fine radial fibres , or microspikes ( e . g . , arrows ) . In the phase contrast image ( Fig . 1 b ) the leading edge region is recognized as a thin anterior lamella , within which some of the microspikes seen in the actin pattern may be identified . Additionally , any upward protrusive activity , or ruffling ( see also below ) , is evident from localized increases in phase density ( arrows ) . The interference reflection image ( Fig . 1 e ) provides infor - Rinnerthaler et al . CelI - Substrate Contact Dynamics 749 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 106 , 1988 750 mation about cell contacts and compares very closely to the pattern of vinculin distribution ( Fig . 1 c ) . The distribution of microtubules is illustrated in Fig . 1 d . Superimposition of any of the patterns in combination allows a precise evaluation of their structural interrelationships ( Fig . 1 f ) . For example , a small but prominent group of microtubules is seen to pene - trate into the leading edge and their frequency of coincidence with microspikes and vinculin - containing contact sites is re - vealed . Likewise , two classes of vinculin spots are recog - nized , the larger ones associated with stress fiber bundles and smaller foci situated anterior to the stress fiber ends and present at the base of and within the leading edge , sometimes in association with the microspike bundles . Significantly we observed in many cells the common pene - tration of some microtubules into parts of the leading edge region as well as the presence of fine vinculin containing sites , sometimes colocalized with microtubule ends and or microspikes . Semiquantitative analysis ( not shown ) of the colocalization of these structures , together with ruffles and contacts in or at the base of the leading edge , revealed some consistent correlations . In particular , ruffles were invariably associated with microtubules or vinculin or both . Likewise , we noted a high frequency of colocalization of microspikes with radial contact streaks ( intermediate in density in IRM between focal and close contacts ) and of microtubules and ruffles with close contacts . Spatio - Temporal Interrelationships Revealed by Correlated Cinematography While the above data revealed some interesting relationships between the different structures , their bearing on cell motil - ity was difficult to deduce in the absence of information on the locomotion history of the cells . For this reason correlated cinematography was performed . This was carried out under phase contrast optics and thus allowed the monitoring of pro - trusion and withdrawal of the leading edge as well as the changing pattern of ruffling activity and microspike exten - sions . In the following presentation the term ruffling is used to describe any activity of the leading edge causing a local - ized increase in phase density ( see also Discussion ) . This in - cludes not only the macroscopic backfolding of the lamel - lipodium but radial upfoldings ( radial ruffles ) and foci of apparent increased thickness ( mini ruffles ) in the leading edge ( see Fig . 2 a for some examples ) . Spike Formation and Ruffling Activity Mark Sites of Subsequent Contact . In a graphic analysis ( see Materials and Methods ) of the locomotion sequences and the cytoskel - etal and contact patterns a consistent relationship emerged between a history of ruffling activity and / or microspike for - mation at a particular site and the development of contact . An example of this relationship is illustrated in Fig . 2 . The leading edge of this cell showed active ruffling and protrusive activity over the recorded period of 3 min ( only terminal 135 s shown ) . Of particular interest were the three contacts ( Fig . 2 b , arrows ) that formed in the medial region of the leading edge which protruded forward in the last 90 s before fixation . At the sites of these contacts , microspikes were rec - ognized at around 135 s before cell arrest ( Fig . 2 a , 135 arrows ) ; subsequently they disappeared and were then re - placed by ruffles in the same positions at different times dur - ing the last 80 s ( see legend to Fig . 2 a ) . In the adjacent regions that showed more or less continuous ruffling activity at the base of the leading edge , much larger and more promi - nent contacts were formed ( Fig . 2 , b and c ) . Fig . 2 , d - f illustrates part of the graphic analysis of this cell and show the relationship between the leading edge profiles at different time points and the vinculin and microtu - bule patterns in the fixed cell . The 1 lain square orthogonal scale allows direct measurement of movement : for this cell the rate of expansion of the medial leading edge was 2 . 2 - 3 . 5 lam / min in the last 105 s . As observed in Fig . 2 d ( arrows ) , there is an apparent relationship between the location of the spike structures seen at 135 s before fixation with the anterior vinculin sites which are established later . Since these sites lie out of the cell boundary seen at 105 s ( arrows Fig . 2 e ) they must have formed at a later time point ; likewise , one microtubule end ( arrowhead in Fig . 2 e ) must have penetrated into the leading edge some time during the last 105 s before fixation . Note that the new vinculin sites are lo - cated beyond the microtubule ends . Microtubules Show Colocalization with Contact Sites Along the Leading Edge . The sites of substrate contact in the leading edge were often found to be associated not only with ruffling activity but also with the apparently free ends of microtubules . An example of this type of association is shown in Figs . 3 and 4 . Prominent in this cell were radially oriented ruffles ( arrows in Fig . 3 a , 0 s ) that existed for different times up to the point of fixation . Superimposition of the phase contrast and vinculin and microtubule images ( Fig . 4 , a and b ) clearly reveals the correlation between these latter cytoskeletal elements and the radial ruffles . The vincu - lin sites in the leading edge on the right half of the cell corre - late with distinct streaks of low intensity in the IRM image ( Fig . 4 c , arrows ) that are less dark than the more posterior focal contacts . Comparison of the vinculin ( Fig . 4 a ) , actin ( Fig . 4 d ) and interference reflection images ( Fig . 4 c ) re - veals that only a minority of the microspike bundles are as - sociated with contact regions . As can be seen there is a general correspondence between the larger vinculin contain - ing sites and the focal contacts in the IRM image ( Fig . 4 , a and c ) . The precise relationship between the three cytoskele - tal patterns is shown in Fig . 4 e . As illustrated in Fig . 3 b , which shows a superimposition of the last time lapse frame ( 0 s ) and the cell ouline 129 s beforehand the leading edge of this cell showed a very low speed of protrusion , ranging from 0 . 5 - 1 . 0 Ixm / min . Of fur - ther interest in this cell was the formation of a fine radial ruffle around 10 s before fixation ( arrowhead in Fig . 3 a ; 0 s ) that showed neither association with vinculin nor with Figure 1 . Multiple imaging of fibroblasts . This figure shows the standard images obtained for the present analysis . The phase contrast ( b ) and IRM image ( e ) were obtained directly after fixation and the cytoskeleton images ( a , actin ; c , vinculin ; and d , tubulin ) after immunolabel - ing ( see Materials and Methods ) . ( f ) Shows the composite picture of the cytoskeletal components . Note infthe penetration of microtubules into the leading edge , as well as the fine vinculin foci , some of which are colocalized with microspikes and microtubules . Arrows in a and b point to examples of microspike bundles and ruffling sites , respectively . Bar , 10 ~ tm . Rinnerthaler et al . CelI - Substrate Contact Dynamics 751 Figure 2 . Microspikes , ruffling , and contact . ( a ) Time lapse sequence of a chick fibroblast leading edge , showing extension of microspikes ( 135 - 110 s ; a , arrows in 135 ) followed by rapid lamellipodium protrusion ( 80 - 0 ) , coincident with the appearance of a radial ruffle between 80 and 20 s ( arrow , 40 ) and three " mini ruffles " between 20 and 0 s ( arrowheads , 0 ) . Note decrease in phase density of radial ruffle from 20 - 0 and the coincidence of the same ruffle with a microspike extension at - 135 s ( arrows in 135 ) . b and c Show the superimposition of the vinculin pattern with the time lapse frames at 135 and 0 and illustrate the coincidence of the microspike and ruffling sites with vinculin foci in the newly protruded leading edge ( arrows in b ) . ( Note , the finest vinculin spot under the smallest ruffle indicated by top arrow was difficult to demonstrate in the double exposure combination , but was clear in the original negative , used for graphic analysis in d - f . ) The same and additional features are revealed in the graphic analysis shown in part in d - f . Here the short lines correspond to the microtubule ends and closed shapes to vinculin spots . The rate of protrusion of the leading edge ( continuous line ) can be directly ascertained from the 1 larn square scale ( 2 . 2 - 3 . 5 ~ tm / min over the last 105 s ) . From these three composite drawings selected from the graphic time sequences it is clear that vinculin accumulation at the upper two sites must have begun after 105 s , since the cell outline at this time lay behind them . In fact , this was also true at - 60 s , by this criterion . Note also that microtubules extend towards the vinculin sites but lie behind them ( also see text ) . Bars , 10 ~ tm . Figure 3 . Coincidence of vinculin , microtubule ends and ruffling loci . ( a ) Time lapse sequence of cell with slowly protruding leading edge . b Shows superimposition of cell edge at - 129 s on the time lapse frame at 0 ( leading edge protrusion , 0 . 5 - 1 . 0 ~ tm / min ) . Note , predominance of radial ruffles in this celt ( arrows in a , 0 ) . Bar , 10 ~ tm . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 106 , 1988 752 Rinnerthaler et al . CelI - Substrate Contact Dynamics 753 Figure 4 . Coincidence of vinculin , microtubule ends and ruffling loci . Cytoskeletal patterns and IRM images of cell from Fig . 4 . ( a and b ) show superimpositions of the vinculin and tubulin patterns on the 0 time lapse frame , respectively : these illustrate the coincidence of microtubule ends and vinculin foci with the ruffles in the leading edge . The vinculin sites in the leading edge on the right half of the cell correspond to contact streaks in the IRM image ( arrows in c ) . The actin pattern in d reveals the abundance of microspike bundles in the leading edge . ( e ) Composite cytoskeletal image ( tubulin , red ; vinculin blue ; actin , green ) showing coincidence of microtubule termini in the leading edge with primordial vinculin foci . Bars , 10 Ixm . Figure 5 . Temporal relationships between ruffling , microtubule ends , and vinculin colocalizations . For this cell the graphic analysis ( d ) of the locomotion sequences is presented ( time sequences 145 s to 0 s before fixation ) where the contour patterns correspond to sites of ruffling activity . In addition , the time lapse image at 0 in phase contrast ( a ) is shown as well as this image superimposed on the vinculin ( b ) and microtubule ( c ) patterns . Sites of interests are marked by the different arrows and arrowheads . The appearance of ruffles R ( with The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 106 , 1988 754 approximate starting times ) and presence ( + ) or absence ( - ) of vinculin ( V ) and microtubule ends ( MT ) at time 0 at these five sites was as follows : ( t ) R from 125 - 0 ( + V - MT ) ; ( A ) R before 125 ( + V + MT ) ; ( zx ) R from 95 - 0 ( + V + MT ; base only ) ; ( A ) R from 145 - 0 ( + V + MT ) ; 01 ~ ) R from 20 - 0 ( + V - MT ) . Bar , 10 Ixm . Rinnerthaler eta | . Cell - Substrate Contact Dynamics 755 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume t06 , 1988 756 microtubules . The same ruffle also lacked visible contact with the substrate as judged from the interference reflection image . Other examples of ruffling , vinculin , and tubulin localiza - tions in the leading edge are visible in the last cell shown in Fig . 5 . Here the phase contrast picture of the cell at the time of fixation is shown alone ( Fig . 5 a ) and with superimposi - tion of either the vinculin ( Fig . 5 b ) or microtubule patterns ( Fig . 5 c ) . The graphic analysis ( Fig . 5 d ) below shows the leading edge outline and the ruffling patterns ( contoured zones ) at different times before fixation , as indicated . The different arrows and arrowheads in Fig . 5 , a - d point to selected sites of interest . In the legend to Fig . 5 the lifetime of ruffles at these sites and the colocalizations of vinculin , microtubule ends , or both have been indicated . With the exception of one site ( open triangle ) there was a direct correlation between ruffling activity ranging from less than 20 s to more than 145 s before fixation and the localiza - tion of vinculin within the leading edge . Only two of these sites showed microtubule colocalization ( solid triangle and solid arrowhead ) , in which case the ruffles concerned per - sisted throughout the entire time sequence ( 145 s ; solid ar - rowhead ) or only transitorily , around 145 s ( solid triangle ) . At the fifth site with a prominent ruffle at 0 time , cited above ( open triangle ) both vinculin and a microtubule end were colocalized at the base of the ruffle : this ruffle persisted for ~ 1 min before fixation . In the absence of space to present more data brief mention will be made of a further relevant feature of leading edge pro - trusion . In the case of lamellipodia that protruded more rap - idly than around 4 Ixm / min and which normally lacked microspike bundles , neither microtubule ends nor vinculin loci were found beyond the base of the leading edge : in other words the protrusion of the actin rich network was clearly microtubule and vinculin independent . Actin - Bundling Sites at the Base of the Leading Edge With the aim of establishing the ultrastructure of the primor - dial vinculin - containing contacts we carried out immuno - electron microscopy on whole - mount cytoskeletons using the anti - vinculin antibody . Two problems were however en - countered . First , the immunogold conjugates used as sec - ondary probes failed to label with convincing intensity , even the large contact sites at the termini of the stress fibers , known to be rich in vinculin . And second , the multiple incu - bation and washing steps required for immunolabeling caused a structural deterioration of the actin meshworks in the lead - ing edge . Despite these setbacks it was possible to recognize struc - tural differentiations in the leading edge actin system of unla - beled cells whose distribution and general morphology cor - related precisely with that of the vinculin - containing foci seen in this region by immunofluorescence microscopy . Ex - amples of these sites in negatively stained cytoskeletons are shown in Fig . 6 . At low magnification such sites charac - teristically showed increased electron density , presumably due to their greater thickness as compared with the sur - rounding filament mat , and often an arrowhead - like mor - phology , a common feature of vinculin foci . Closer inspec - tion of these sites showed them to be short bundles of actin filaments clearly distinct from the microspike bundles and from which filaments characteristically splayed out from the posterior ends . The smallest recognizable sites of this type were (cid:127)0 . 5 Ixm long by 0 . 1 - 0 . 2 Ixm / min width ( e . g . , Fig . 6 d ) . In some cases , microtubules were observed to enter these sites ( Fig . 6 , a and b ) again identifying them with loci of the type already described in the foregoing sections . Discussion We draw attention first , in this report , to the striking relation - ship between sites of ruffling activity in the leading edge and sites of substrate contact formation . Here the term " ruffling " as it is generally understood needs some qualification ( see also Small and Rinnerthaler , 1985 ) . We use this term not just for the large veil - like ruffles described in much detail by Abercrombie and colleagues ( Abercrombie et al . , 1970b ; In - gram , 1969 ; Harris , 1973 ) but also for other smaller pertur - bations of the leading edge that lead to localized increases in phase density . Abercrombie and Ambrose ( 1958 ) were well aware of this multiplicity of " ruffle " forms but subse - quent attention was restricted mainly to the large membrane folds for which the name is most appropriate . And since ruffling of this latter type may be inhibited without inhibiting locomotion ( Heaysman and Pegrum , 1982 ; Trinkaus , 1984 ) ruffling per se has been generally considered an " unimpor - tant epiphenomenon " ( Trinkaus , 1984 ) , as far as movement is concerned . This contention has been further reinforced by the example of epidermal keratinocytes that locomote very rapidly in culture and show no macroscopic ruffling activity ( Cooper and Schliwa , 1986 ; Kolega , 1986 ) . However , close inspection of these latter cells revealed earlier the presence of small perturbations or " microcolliculi " ( Bereiter - Hahn et al . , 1981 ) in the leading edge . Since these microcolliculi resemble the smallest ruffling sites , or mini ruffles , seen in chick fibroblasts we propose that ruffling on this scale may indeed be a necessary part of the locomotory process and is linked to the kind of contact formation required for leading edge protrusion . Our observations reveal , in general , a clear correlation be - tween the amount and extent of ruffling activity taking place at a particular site and the size of the contact foci seen after fixation . We conclude therefore that ruffling , taken here in its broader sense as localized increases in vertical thickness of the leading edge is an expression of a specialized activity concerned with the accumulation and laying down of compo - nents necessary for making contact . It is interesting to note that a correlation between ruffling and contact development is also seen in spreading epithelial cells : active ruffling takes place during the spreading process and subsides once exten - sive peripheral contacts have been established ( Domnina et al . , 1985 ) . Figure 6 . Presumptive , early contact foci in the leading edge , observed in negatively - stained whole mount cytoskeletons ( phosphotungstic acid staining ) . ( a and c ) Intermediate magnification views of leading edge regions of chick heart fibroblasts . Open unmarked arrows point to presumptive , early contacts . ( b and d ) Higher magnification views of sites in a and c . In b , mt indicates microtubule entering actin bundle . Preparation in c and d was additionally stabilized with phalloidin after fixation , sf , Small stress fiber ; ms , microspike ; am , actin meshwork ; if , intermediate filament . Bars ( a and c ) 1 Ima ; ( b and d ) 0 . 2 Ixm . Rinnerthaler et al . CelI - Substrate Contact Dynamics 757 ( ~ ~ I r l n l l l n l NU ~ 4 ~ MTI - V , - C . El - El I mt 1 , Figure 7 . Schematic representation of sequence of events leading to contact formation . The contact - forming unit comprises ruffles or microspikes ( or both ) , vinculin and other plaque proteins , and microtubules , appearing in the following sequence : Initially leading edge protrusion takes place and the protruding leading edge then undergoes structural reorganization , seen as the expression of ruf - ties ( RU ) and microspike bundles ( SP ) . The single or combined formation of these structures , often in a cyclic fashion , leads to con - tact formation ( C ) . Contact is followed by vinculin accumulation ( V ) at the contact site . Thereafter , at t , the contact may exist only transitorily ( - V and - C ) or persist , enlarge and nucleate stress fiber ( SF ) formation . Under normal conditions ( middle horizontal line ) microtubules ( MT ) are proposed to potentiate and stabilize stress fiber contacts . In their absence ( with microtubule inhibitors : MTI , lower line ) stable contact development is delayed and is no longer coordinated with regional leading edge movements ( see text for further discussion ) . In concert with the conclusions of Izzard and Lochner , 1980 ; Izzard et al . , 1985 ) contact was also observed to be mediated via the extension of a microspike from the periph - ery of the leading edge , often in combination with ruffling activity at or behind the same site . And some vinculin foci were located directly beneath microspike bundles . However , a large complement of the microspikes , revealed in the actin pattern , were not associated with contacts . Moreover , we have identified vinculin - containing contact loci at the base of the leading edge , aside from microspikes and that clearly correspond to the actin - bundling sites seen in negatively - stained cytoskeletons in the electron microscope . Thus , in general terms the conclusion of Izzard and coworkers that contact is associated with actin bundles appears to be cor - rect , but these bundles take on forms that are also distinct from microspikes . Also , while we agree in general that pre - existing actin bundles ( as microspikes within or separate from ruffles ) can mark the sites of future contacts , these bun - dles do not have to be directly associated with the membrane . They may disappear concomitantly with the de novo assem - bly of actin bundles in the new contact . Before discussing further aspects of contact formation that arise out of this work some additional comment on previous studies on cell - to - substrate contacts is appropriate . Accord - ing to the criteria of the interference reflection method , for - ward protrusion of the leading lamella of chick fibroblasts ( Izzard and Lochner , 1976 ; 1980 ; Couchman and Rees , 1979 ) and other cells ( Haemmerli et al . , 1980 ; Bereiter - Hahn et al . , 1981 ) requires only close contact formation , predomi - nantly at the base of the leading edge . More firm focal con - tacts can develop within close - contact zones and elsewhere within the leading edge and these act to nucleate and anchor the stress fiber bundles ( Izzard and Lochner , 1980 ) that characteristically span the cytoplasm of most cells in culture . The stress fibers have been attributed a contractile function ( Isenberg et al . , 1976 ; Izzard and Lochner , 1980 ) necessary for the maintenance of the spread state ( Vasiliev , 1985 ) and clearly expressed during the retraction of the trailing tail of moving fibroblasts ( Chen , 1981 ) . Close contacts have thus been considered as specialized for spreading and locomotion whereas focal contacts have the opposite function of mediat - ing firm adhesion and immobility ( see also Trinkaus , 1984 ) . This generalization only applies , however , in the context of the limitations of the interference reflection method itself . By this technique the smallest recognizable focal contacts fall in the size range of 0 . 25 by 1 - 2 ~ tm ( Izzard and Lochner , 1980 ) . Vinculin foci in the leading edge can be much smaller than this and from the results of the antibody exclusion method of Neyfakh and coworkers ( Neyfakh et al . , 1983 ) these very small sites appear to be close enough to the substrate to be regarded as focal contacts of a primordial type . With the foregoing considerations in mind and the demon - strated association of microtubules with some of the new contact loci in the leading edge we propose here a general scheme for contact formation in chick fibroblasts . This scheme incorporates the concept of a " contact forming unit " comprising ruffling and spike activity , contact proteins ( in - cluding vinculin ) and microtubules ( Fig . 7 ) . After the first event of leading edge protrusion , mediated presumably by actin polymerisation at the tip of the leading edge ( Small et al . , 1978 ; Wang , 1984 ) . The leading edge meshwork ( Small , 1981 ) undergoes structural reorganisations leading to the for - mation of microspike bundles ( SP ) and ruffles ( RU ) . ( De - pending on the cell type the initial protrusion may also in - volve extension of pre - existing microspike bundles e . g . Wessels et al . , 1973 ) . Contact ( C ) at specific sites is then made , possibly by accumulated interactions with the sub - strate ( beneath ruffles and or spikes ) , during which cellular material may or may not be deposited on the substrate . In any case an extracellular structure located by or deposited by the cell is presumed to trigger contact ( Geiger et al . , 1984 ) . Membrane receptors ( e . g . , members of the integrin family : Hynes , 1987 ) then accumulating at these sites signal the deposition of the cascade of proteins ( including vinculin , V ) that finally bind actin to the membrane ( see Geiger , 1982 ; Geiger et al . , 1984 ; Horwitz et al . , 1986 ) . The specific bun - dling of actin at the membrane is presumably effected by an actin - binding protein within or associated with the cascade . Ruffling appears to be necessary for the accumulation of the peripheral cascade of proteins at the contact site . We further propose that the primordial contacts formed may follow ei - ther of two paths : they may be short lived , existing only within the leading edge ( Fig . 7 " transient " ) , or long lived and committed to enlarge and act as nuclei for stress fiber bun - dles ( SF ) . The traction for leading edge protrusion is provided by the primordial contacts . How do microtubules fit into this scheme ? The evidence we have obtained suggests that microtubules can enter the cy - cle of contact formation and influence contact development . Clearly , microtubules are not essential for contact formation since contacts , as well as stress fibers associated with them , can form in the presence of microtubule - disrupting drugs ( Lloyd et al . , 1977 ) . However , the orientation of the stress fibers and the direction of the protruding leading edges are then uncoordinated . This lack of coordination gives rise to The Journal of Cell Biology . Volume 106 , 1988 758 the random protrusion of lamellipodia and the inability to undergo net locomotion ( e . g . , Vasiliev and Gelfand , 1981 ) . Significantly , cells without microtubules take 5 - 10 times longer to spread than those with their normal complement of microtubules ( Vasiliev and Gelfand , 1981 ) . Taking this ob - servation together with our own data we suggest the follow - ing : that microtubules stabilize and thus accelerate the devel - opment of contacts destined to nucleate stress fiber bundles for anchorage ( Fig . 7 " stabilized " ) . Via this potentiation of contact development , a stress fiber system can be laid down rapidly enough that has a polarity compatible with locomo - tion in the direction of the preceding leading edge protru - sion . Without this potentiation , in the presence of microtu - bule inhibitors ( MTI ) stress fiber development lags too far behind lamellipodia protrusion for coordination to be possi - ble ( Fig . 7 " delayed " ) . In more general terms Lloyd et al . ( 1977 ) indeed concluded that microtubules influence the directionality of microfila - ment bundle formation , in line with the above arguments . What we are proposing here is that microtubules exert their influence through their ability to stabilize and thus potentiate the growth of cell - substrate contacts . In this context it is noteworthy that the measured growth rate for microtubules in a cultured cell line in vivo ( 3 - - 4 tam / min : Schulze and Kirschner , 1987 ) closely matches the speed of protrusion of the leading edge ( Abercrombie et al . , 1970a , see also this pa - per ) , fully consistent with microtubules ( presumably under the direction of perinuclear signals ) being able to follow and target contact sites . We thank Mrs . H . Kunka and Ms , M . Hattenberger for excellent technical assistance . Special thanks are due to Mr . G . Sutzer for the development of the photographic procedures without which proper presentation of the data would have been impossible , and to Ms . M . Hanenberger and Ms . K . Kop - pelstatter for additional photographic work . The involvement of Dr . Z . Av - nur in early stages of this work is also acknowledged . These studies were supported in part by a grant from the Austrian Science Research Council . Received for publication 14 August 1987 , and in revised form 3 November 1987 . References Ahercrombie , M . 1988 . The crawling movement of metazoan cells . Proc . R . Soc . Lond . B . 207 : 614 - 628 . Abercrombie , M . , and E . J . Ambrose . 1958 . Interference microscope studies of cell contacts in tissue culture . Exp . Cell Res . 15 : 332 - 345 . Abercrombie , M . , G . A . Dunn , and J . P . Heath . 1977 . The shape and move - ments of fibroblasts in culture . In Cell and Tissue Interactions . J . W . Lash , and M , M . Burger , editors . Raven Press , New York . 57 - 70 . Abercrombie , M . , J . E . M . Heaysman , and S . M . Pegrum . 1970a . The locomo - tion of fibroblasts in culture . I . Movements of the leading edge . Exp . Cell Res . 59 : 393 - 398 . Abercrombie , M . , J . E . M . Heaysman , and S . M . Pegrum . 1970b . The locomo - tion of fibroblasts in culture . II . Ruffling . Exp . Cell Res . 68 : 437 - 444 . Albrecht - Buehler , G . 1977 . Phagokinetic tracks of 3T3 cells : parallels between the orientation of track segments and of cellular structures which contain ac - tin or tubutin . Cell . 12 : 333 - 339 . Bereiter - Hahn , J . , R . Strohmaier , I . Kunzenbacher , K . Beck , and M . Voth . 1981 . Locomotion of Xenopus epidermis cells in primary culture . J . Cell Sci . 52 : 289 - 311 . Bretscher , A . , and K . Weber . 1980 . Fimbrin , a new microfilament - associated protein present in microvilli and other cell surface structures . J . Cell Biol . 86 : 335 - 340 . Buckley , I . K . 1974 . Subcellular motility : A correlated light and electron micro - scopic study using cultured cells . Tissue and Cell . 6 : 1 - 20 . Buckley , I . K . 1981 . Fine - structural and related aspects of non - muscle cell mo - tility . In Cell and Muscle Motility . R . M . Dowben and J . W . Shay , editors . Plenum Publishing Corp . New York . 135 - 203 . Burridge , K . , and L . Connetl . 1983 . Talin : A cytoskeletal component concen - trated in adhesion plaques and other sites of actin - membrane interaction . Cell Motil . 3 : 405 - 417 . Carter , S . B . 1967 . Effects of cytochalasins on mammalian cells . Nature ( Lond . L 213 : 261 - 264 . Chert , W . - T . 1981 . Mechanisms of retraction and the trailing edge during fibrobtast movement . J . Cell Biol . 90 : 187 - 200 . Cooper , M . S . , and M . Schliwa . 1986 . Motility of cultured fish epidermal cells in the presence and absence of direct current electric fields . J . Cell Biol . 102 : 1384 - 1399 . Couchman , J . R . , and D . A . Rees . 1979 . The behavior of fibroblasts migrating from chicken heart explants : changes in adhesion , locomotion and growth , and in the distribution of actomyosin and fibronectin . J . Cell Sci . 39 : 149 - 165 . De Brabander , M . , J . De Mey , R . Van de Veire , F . Aerts , and G . Geuens . t977 . Microtubutes in mammalian cell shape and surface modulation : an al - ternative hypothesis . Cell Biol . Int . Rep . 1 : 453 - 461 . Domnina , L . V . , J . A . Rovensky , J . M . Vasiliev , and 1 . M . Gelfand . 1985 . Effect of microtubule - destroying drugs on the spreading and shape of cul - tured epithelial cells . J . Cell Sci . 74 : 267 - 282 . Domnina , L . V . , V . I . Gelfand , O . Y . Ivanova , E . V . Leonova , O . Y . Pletjush - kina , J . M . Vasiliev , and I . M . Gelfand . 1982 . Effects of small doses of cytochalasins on fibroblasts : Preferential changes of active edges and focal contacts . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 79 : 7754 - 7757 . Dvorak , J . A . , and W . F . Stotler . 1971 . A controlled - environment culture sys - tem for high resolution light microscopy . Exp . Cell Res . 68 : 144 - 148 . Geiger , B . 1979 . A 130k protein from chicken gizzard . Its localization at the termini of microfilament bundles in cultured chicken cells . Cell . 18 : 193 - 205 . Geiger , B . 1982 . Involvement of vinculin in contact - induced cytoskeletal inter - actions . In Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory , New York . 671 - 682 . Geiger , B . 1983 . Membrane - cytoskeleton interaction . Biochim . Biophys Acta . 737 : 305 - 341 . Geiger , B . , Z . Avnur , G . Rinnerthaler , H . Hinssen , and J . V . Small . 1984 . Microfilament organizing centres in areas of cell contact : cytoskeletal inter - actions during cell attachment and locomotion . J . Cell Biol . 99 ( 1 , Pt . 2 ) : 83s - 91s ( Abstr . ) . Geiger , B . , Z . Avnur , Th . E . Kreis , and J . Schlessinger . 1984 . The dynamics of cytoskeletal organization in areas of cell contact . Cell Muscle Motil . 5 : 195 - 233 . Goldman , R . D . , and D . M . Knipe . 1973 . Functions of cytoplasmic fibers in non - muscle cell motility . In Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory , New York . 523 - 534 . Goldman , R . D . , L A . Sclaloss , and J . M . Starger . 1976 . Organizational changes of actintike microfilaments during animal cell movement . In Cell Motility . A . Muscle and Non - Muscle Cells . R . Goldman , T . Pollard , and J . Rosenbaum , editors . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory . Cold Spring Harbor , New York . 217 - 245 . Haemmerli , G . , P . Str ~ iuli , and J . S . Ploem . 1980 . Cell - to - substrate adhesions during spreading and locomotion of carcinoma cells . Exp . Cell Res . 128 : 249 - 256 . Harris , A . K . 1973 . Cell surface movements related to cell locomotion . In Locomotion of tissue cells . Ciba Fdn . Symp . , vol . 14 ( n . s . ) , R . Porter , and D . W . Fitzsimons , editors . Elsevier Excerpta Medica North - Holland Ass . Science Publishers , Amsterdam - London - New York . 3 - 27 . Heath , J . P . , and G . A . Dunn . 1978 . Cell to substratum contacts of chick fibro - blasts and their relation to the microfilament system . A correlated interference - reflexion and high - voltage electron - microscope study . J . Cell Sci . 29 : 197 - 212 . Heaysman , J . E . M . 1973 . In Locomotion of tissue cells : General discussion I : Cell adhesion . Ciba Fdn . Symp . vol . 14 ( n . s . ) . R . Porter , and D . W . Fitz - simons , editors . Elsevier Excerpta Medica North - Holland Ass . Sc . Publish . , Amsterdam - London - New York . 187 - 194 . Heaysman , J . E . M . , and S . M , Pegrum . 1982 . Early cell contacts in culture . In Cell Behavior . R . BeUairs , A . Curtis , and G . Dunn , editors . Cambridge Univ . Press , Cambridge . 49 - 76 . Heggeness , M . H . , K . Wang , and S . J . Singer . 1977 . Intracellular distributions of mechanochemical proteins in cultured fibroblasts . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci , USA . 74 : 3883 - 3887 . Herman , I . M . , N . J . Crisona , and T . D . Pollard . 1981 . Relation between cell activity and the distribution of cytoplasmic actin and myosin . J . Cell Biol . 90 : 84 - 91 . HSglund , A . S . , R . Karlsson , E . Arro , B . - A . Fredriksson , and U . Lindberg . 1980 . Visualization of the peripheral weave of microfilaments in glial cells . J . Muscle Res . and Cell Motil . 1 : 127 - 146 , Horwitz , A . , K . Duggan , C . Buck , M . C . Beckerle , and K . Burridge , 1986 . Interaction of plasma membrane fibronectin receptor with talin - a trans - membrane linkage . Nature ( Lond . ) . 328 : 531 - 533 . Hynes , R . O . 1987 . Integrins : a family of cellsurface receptors . Celt . 48 : 549 - 554 . lngram , V . M . 1969 . A side view of moving fibroblasts . Nature ( Lond . ) . 222 : 641 - 644 . lsenberg , G . , P . C . Rathke , N . Hiilsmann , W . W . Franke , and K . E . Wolfarth - Bottermann . 1976 . Cytoplasmic actomyosin fibrils in tissue culture cells . Di - rect proof of contractability by visualization of ATP - induced contraction in Rinnerthaler et al . Cell - Substrate Contact Dynamics 759 fibrils isolated by laser microbeam dissection . Cell Tissue Res . 166 : 427 - 443 . Izzard , C . S . , and L . R . Lochner . 1976 . Cell - to - substrate contacts in living fibroblasts : an interference reflexion study with an evaluation of the tech - nique ~ J . Cell Sci . 25 : 129 - 159 . Izzard , C . S . , and L . R . Lochner . 1980 . Formation of cell - to - substrate contacts during fibroblast motility : an interference - reflexion study . J . Celt Sci . 42 : 81 - 116 . lzzard , C . S . , S . L . Izzard , and J . A . DePasquale . 1985 . Molecular basis of cell - substrate adhesions . In Expl . Biol . Med . A . Wolsky , editor . S . Karger , Basel . 1 - 22 . Kolega , J . 1986 . Effects of mechanical tension on protrusive activity and micro filament and intermediate filament organization in an epidermal epithe - lium moving in culture . J . Cell Biol . 102 : t400 - 1411 ~ Kreis , T . E . , B . Geiger , and J . Schlessinger . 1982 . Mobility of microinjected rhodamine actin within living chicken gizzard cells determined by fluores - cence photobleach recovery . Cell . 29 : 835 - 845 . Krug , W . , and H . - G . Weide . 1976 . Wissenschafiliche Photographic in der An - wendung . 2 . Aufl . , Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft Geest & Portig K . - G . , Leipzig . 102 - 109 . Lazarides , E . 1976 . Two general classes of cytoplasmic actin filaments in tissue culture cells : The rote of tropomyosin . J . Supramolec . Struct . 5 : 53t ( 383 ) - 563 ( 415 ) . Lloyd , C . W . , C . G . Smith , A . Woods , and D . A . Rees . 1977 . Mechanisms of cellular adhesion II . The Interplay between adhesion , the cytoskeleton and morphology in substrate - attached cells . Exp . Cell Res . 110 : 427 - 437 . Mangeat , P . , and K . Burridge . 1984 . Actin - membrane interaction in fibro - blasts : what proteins are involved in this association ? J . Cell Biol . 99 ( Suppl : 1 , Pt . 2 ) : 95s - 103s . Neyfakh , AI . A . Jr . , I . S Tint , T . M . Suitkina , A . D . Bershadsky , and V . I . Getfand . 1983 . Visualization of cellular focal contacts using a monoctonal antibody to 80 kD serum protein adsorbed on the substratum . Exp . Cell Res . 149 : 387 - 396 . Ohnishi , R . 1981 . Dynamics of cultured L cells as studied by cinemicroscopy and scanning electron microscopy . Biomed . Res . 2 ( Suppl . ) : 1 - 12 . Pagh , K . I . , J . A . Vergara , and M . R . Adelman . 1985 . Improved negative stain - ing of microfilament arrangements in detergent - extracted Physarum amoeboflagellates . Exp . Cell Res . 156 : 287 - 293 . Rinnerthaler , G . 1982 . Der Meehanismus der Fibroblastenbewegung : Aspekte der Organisation des Zytoskeletts . Ph . D . Thesis , University of Salzburg . Schulze , E . , and M . Kirschner . 1987 . Dynamic and stable populations of microtubules in cells . J . Cell Biol . 104 : 277 - 288 . Singer , S . J . , and A . Kupfer . 1986 . The directed migration of eukaryotic cells . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 2 : 337 - 365 . Small , J . V , 1981 . Organization of actin in the leading edge of cultured cells : influence of osmium tetroxide and dehydration on the ultrastructure of actin meshworks . J . Cell Biol . 91 : 695 - 705 . Small , J . V . 1985 . Simple procedures for the transfer of grid images onto glass coverslips for the rapid relocation of cultured cells . J . Microsc . 137 : 171 - 175 . Small , J . V . , and J . E . Cells . 1978 . Filament arrangements in negatively stained cultured cells : the organization of actin . Cytobiologie . 16 : 308 - 325 . Small , J . V . , and G . Rinnerthaler . 1985 . Cytostructural dynamics of contact formation during fibroblast locomotion in vitro . In Expl . Biol . Med . Vol . 10 . A . Wolsky , editor . S . Karger , Basel . 54 - 68 . Small , J . V . , G . Isenberg , and J . E . Cells . 1978 . Polarity of actin at the leading edge of cultured cells . Nature ( Lond . ) . 272 : 638 - 639 . Small , J . V . , G . Rinnerthaler , and H . Hinssen . 1982 . Organization of actin meshworks in cultured cells : the leading edge . In Cold Spring Harbor Sym - posia on Quantitative Biology . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory , New York . 599 - 611 . Spooner , B . S . , K . M . Yamada , and N . K . Wessells . 1971 . Microfilaments and cell locomotion . J . Cell BioL 49 : 595 - 613 . Trinkans , J . P . 1984 . Cells into Organs . The forces that shape the embryo . 2nd ed . Prentice - Hall Inc . , New Jersey . Vasiliev , J . M . 1985 . Spreading of non - transformed and transformed cells . Bio - chim . Biophys . Acta . 780 : 21 - 65 . Vasiliev , J . M . , and I . M . Gelfand . 1976 . Effects of colcemid on morphogenetic processes and locomotion of fibroblasts . In Cell Motility . A . Motility , Muscle and Non - muscle cells . R . Goldman , T . Pollard , and J . Rosenbaum , editors . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory . Cold Spring Harbor , New York . 279 - 283 . Vasiliev , J . M . , and I . M . Gelfand . 1981 . Neoplastic and normal cells in cul - ture . Cambridge Univ . Press , Cambridge . Vasiliev , J . M . , I . M . Gelfand , L . V . Domnina , O . Y . Ivanova , S . G . Komm , and L . V . Olshevskaja . 1970 . Effect ofcolcemid on the locomotory behavior of fibroblasts . J . Embryol . Exp . MorphoL 24 : 625 - 640 . Wang , Y . - L . 1984 . Reorganization of actin filament bundles in living fibro - blasts . J . Cell BioL 99 : 1478 - 1485 . Wehland , J . , M . Osborn , and K . Weber . 1979 . Cell - to - substratum contacts in living cells : a direct correlation between interference - reflexion and indirect - immunofluorescence microscopy using antibodies against actin and ct - ac - tinin . J . Cell Sci . 37 : 257 - 273 . Wessells , N . K . , B . S . Spooner , and M . A . Luduena . 1973 . Surface move - ments , microfilaments and cell locomotion . In Locomotion of tissue cells . CIBA Foundation Symposium . ( n . s . ) . R . Porter , and D . W . Fitzsimons , edi - tors . Elsevier Excerpta Medica North - Holland Association of Science Pub - lishers , Amsterdam - London - New York . 53 - 82 . Wessells , N . K . , B . S . Spooner , J . F . Ash , M . O . Bradley , M . A . Luduena , E . L . Taylor , J . T . Wrenn , and K . M . Yamada . 1971 . Microfilaments in cel - lular and developmental processes . Science ( Wash . DC ) 171 : 135 - 143 . Yamashiro - Matsumura , S . , and F . Matsumura . 1986 . Intracellular localization of the 55 - kD actin - bundling protein in cultured cells : spatial relationships with actin , alpha - actinin , tropomyosin , and flmbrin . J . Cell BioL 103 : 631 - 640 . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 106 , 1988 760