Networks of coupled dynamical systems have been used to model biological oscillators , Josephson junction arrays , excitable media , neural networks , spatial games , genetic control networks and many other self - organizing systems . Ordinarily , the connection topology is assumed to be either completely regular or completely random . But many biological , technological and social networks lie somewhere between these two extremes . Here we explore simple models of networks that can be tuned through this middle ground : regular networks ' rewired ' to introduce increasing amounts of disorder . We ﬁnd that these systems can be highly clustered , like regular lattices , yet have small characteristic path lengths , like random graphs . We call them ' small - world ' networks , by analogy with the small - world phenomenon ( popularly known as six degrees of separation ) . The neural network of the worm Caenorhabditis elegans , the power grid of the western United States , and the collaboration graph of ﬁlm actors are shown to be small - world networks . Models of dynamical systems with small - world coupling display enhanced signal - propagation speed , computational power , and synchronizability . In particular , infectious diseases spread more easily in small - world networks than in regular lattices . ABSTRACT To interpolate between regular and random networks , we consider the following random rewiring procedure . This construction allows us to ' tune ' the graph between regularity ( p = 0 ) and disorder ( p = 1 ) , and thereby to probe the intermediate region 0 < p < 1 , about which little is known . ALGORITHM We start with a ring of n vertices n = 12 where each vertex is connected to its k nearest neighbors k = 4 like so . We choose a vertex , and the edge to its nearest clockwise neighbour . With probability p , we reconnect this edge to a vertex chosen uniformly at random over the entire ring , with duplicate edges forbidden . Other - wise , we leave the edge in place . We repeat this process by moving clockwise around the ring , considering each vertex in turn until one lap is completed . Next , we consider the edges that connect vertices to their second - nearest neighbours clockwise . As before , we randomly rewire each of these edges with probability p . We continue this process , circulating around the ring and proceeding outward to more distant neighbours after each lap , until each original edge has been considered once . As there are nk / 2 edges in the entire graph , the rewiring process stops after k / 2 laps . For p = 0 , the ring is unchanged . As p increases , the graph becomes increasingly disordered . p = 0 . 15 At p = 1 , all edges are re - wired randomly . We quantify the structural properties of these graphs by their characteristic path length L ( p ) and clustering coefﬁcient C ( p ) . L ( p ) measures the typical separation between two vertices ( a global property ) . C ( p ) measures the cliquishness of a typical neighbourhood ( a local property ) . For friendship networks , these statistics have intuitive meanings : L is the average number of friendships in the shortest chain connecting two people . C v reﬂects the extent to which friends of v are also friends of each other ; and thus C measures the cliquishness of a typical friendship circle . METRICS L is deﬁned as the number of edges in the shortest path between two vertices shortest path is 1 edge shortest path is 3 edges averaged over all pairs of vertices . C is deﬁned as follows . Suppose that a vertex v has k v neighbours . k v = 4 neighbours Then at most k v ( k v – 1 ) / 2 edges can exist between them . ( This occurs when every neighbor of v is connected to every other neighbour of v . ) at most 6 edges between 4 neighbours Let C v denote the fraction of these allowable edges that actually exist . Deﬁne C as the average of C v over all vertices . 4 out of 6 edges exist . C v = 4 / 6 = 0 . 67 SMALLWORLDS The regular lattice at p = 0 is a highly clustered , large world where L grows linearly with n . The random network at p = 1 is a poorly clustered , small world where L grows only logarithmically with n . These limiting cases might lead one to suspect that large C is always associated with large L , and small C with small L . On the contrary , we ﬁnd that there is a broad interval of p over which L ( p ) is almost as small as L random yet C p > > C random . The data shown in the ﬁgure are averages over 20 random realizations of the rewiring process , and have been normalized by the values L ( 0 ) , C ( 0 ) for a regular lattice . All the graphs have n = 1000 vertices and an average degree of k = 10 edges per vertex . We note that a logarithmic horizontal scale has been used to resolve the rapid drop in L ( p ) , corresponding to the onset of the small - world phenomenon . During this drop , C ( p ) remains almost constant at its value for the regular lattice , indicating that the transition to a small world is almost undetectable at the local level . These small - world networks result from the immediate drop in L ( p ) caused by the introduction of a few long - range edges . Such ' short cuts ' connect vertices that would otherwise be much farther apart than L random . For small p , each short cut has a highly nonlinear effect on L , contracting the distance not just between the pair of vertices that it connects , but between their immediate neighbourhoods , neighbourhoods of neigh - bourhoods and so on . 5 hops to neighbourhood shortcut to neighbourhood By contrast , an edge removed from a clustered neighbour - hood to make a short cut has , at most , a linear effect on C ; hence C ( p ) remains practically unchanged for small p even though L ( p ) drops rapidly . The important implication here is that at the local level ( as reﬂected by C ( p ) ) , the trans - ition to a small world is almost undetectable . The 4 neighbors of each vertex have 3 out of 6 edges among themselves . C = 3 / 6 = 0 . 5 With shortcut , this is still true for almost every vertex . C = 0 . 48 Collective dynamics of ‘small - world’ networks Duncan J . Watts & Steven H . Strogatz Department of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics , Kimball Hall , Cornell University , Ithaca , New York 14853 , USA