Users and Customizable Software : A Co - Adaptive Phenomenon Wendy E . Mackay Doctor of Philosophy Management of Technological Innovation Alfred P . Sloan School of Management Massachusetts Institute of Technology May , 1990 Abstract Co - adaptive phenomena are defined as those in which the environment affects human behavior and at the same time , human behavior affects the environment . Such phenomena pose theoretical and methodological challenges and are difficult to study in traditional ways . However , some aspects of the interaction between people and technology only make sense when such phenomena are taken into account . In this dissertation , I postulate that the use of information technology is a co - adaptive phenomenon . I also argue that customizable software provides a particularly good testbed for studying co - adaptation because individual patterns of use are encoded and continue to influence user behavior over time . The possible customizations are constrained by the design of the software but may also be modified by users in unanticipated ways , as they appropriate the software for their own purposes . Because customization patterns are recorded in files that can be shared among users , these customizations may act to informally establish and perpetuate group norms of behavior . They also provide a mechanism by which individual behavior can influence global institutional properties and future implementations of the technology . The presence of these sharable artifacts makes it easier to study customization than related co - adaptive phenomena such as learning and user innovation . Because some mechanisms may be the same for all co - adaptive phenomena , findings about use of customizable software may also shed light on user ' s choices about when to learn new software and when to innovate . Current research models do not provide useful ways of exploring co - adaptive phenomena , thus requiring new research models and methods . Research on technology and organizations commonly follows one of two theoretical models , each of which is inadequate to account for how users customize software . One treats technology as a static , independent variable , which influences the behavior of the people in the organization . The other treats the organization as the independent variable , in which decision - makers in an organization make strategic choices about technology and appropriate it for their own purposes . The structurational model proposed by Orlikowski ( 1989 ) takes both perspectives into account and incorporates an active role by individuals in the organization . This dissertation extends her analysis by examining the co - adaptive relationship between users and user - customizable software : users both adapt to the available technology and appropriate the technology , adapting it over time . These appropriations may take the form of user innovations which may change both the technology itself and the characteristics of the organization , such as who communicates with whom and how coordination of work processes is handled . The theoretical model and evidence for co - adaptation is first illustrated with data from a two - year study of the Information Lens , a software application that allows users to customize the process of managing their electronic mail . I describe the development of the Information Lens and identify the interactions between the technology and individual users in the context of the organization . I also examine the individual patterns of use of Lens rules and trace patterns of sharing of rules among members of the organization . I then examine user customization of software in greater detail , in a study of Unix users at MIT ' s Project Athena . The data consist of interviews and records of customization files of 51 members of the Project Athena staff . The data is presented from the perspective of the structurational model , with a micro - level analysis of the customization decisions by individual users . The key findings include : 1 . The specific identification of the interaction between users and customizable software as a co - adaptive phenomenon , supported by field data . 2 . The theoretical linking of co - adaptive phenomena and the structurational model and evidence for a mechanism by which individual interactions with technology affect the organization . 3 . The discovery of common patterns of customization : a . Users are most likely to customize when they first join an organization , which is when they know the least about the technology and their eventual use of it . b . Customization activities are often conducted as a way to explore a new software environment . c . Users attempt to incorporate their current work context into their customizations . d . Over time , most users make fewer and fewer customizations , regardless of level of technical expertise . e . Some external events , especially those that cause users to reflect upon their use of the software , increase the probability that users will customize . f . Users who customize like to maintain the same environment , even when the software changes . They will either retrofit the new software to be like the old or refuse to use it at all . g . The most common on - going customization occurs when the user becomes aware of a commonly - repeated pattern of behavior and encodes it as a customization . 4 . Customization cannot be considered a primarily individual activity . The following patterns of sharing occurred : a . Users are most likely to borrow customization files when they first join the organization . These files are rarely evaluated for effectiveness and may have been created many years ago . b . A small group of highly technical individuals act as lead users of new technology . They are the first to explore new software and create a set of customization files that other people then borrow . However , the authors of these files receive little or no feedback as to the effectiveness or use of these files . c . Less technical individuals take on the role of translators for other members in their groups . They interpret individual user ' s needs and create sets of customizations organized to meet those needs . I conclude with a discussion of the theoretical implications , including support for and elaboration of the structurational model and the beginning of a theory of the use of customizable software . I propose changes in the software development process ( to include observation of use in the field as an important input to future development ) , in software design ( to include mechanisms that support reflection about use of the software and mechanisms for sharing of customizations ) , and for managers ( to support periodic " maintenance " of skills and to support translators and help them provide more effective customizations for others in the organization ) . Acknowledgements I am deeply indebted to two people , who were instrumental in this dissertation . Professor Wanda Orlikowski gave generously of her time and I greatly enjoyed our many research discussions . She introduced me to a new body of literature and shared many insights . Professor Lotte Bailyn taught me new ways to look at data , took the time to read and carefully comment on my papers , and gave me encouragement and practical advice when I needed it most . Both provided a supportive intellectual environment and I cannot thank them enough . I would also like to thank the members of my committee . Dr . Lucy Suchman was a source of inspiration and helped to change my ways of looking at the world . Professor Marcie Tyre gave challenging , insightful comments and helped me think more deeply about the theoretical issues in this research . Professor Tom Malone supported the work on the Lens study and encouraged me to think about the software implications of the research . Professor Tom Allen showed the importance of communication patterns in organizations and provided useful ideas about how to look at and present the data . Phyllis Reisner , Deborah Tatar and Randy Trigg gave me insightful comments on an early draft and I enjoyed interesting discussions about customization and the Lens study with Christina Allen , Danny Bobrow , Stu Card , Tom Finholt , Frank Halasz , Tom Moran , Jim Miller , Don Norman , Franklyn Turbak , Isaac Salzman , Hank Strub , and Ramana Rao . I have learned a great deal from my fellow graduate students . I particularly want to thank Dietmar Harhoff , Abbie Griffin , Ben Whipple , Brad Hartfeld , Andy King , Jane Salk , Kevin Crowston , Dave Rosenblitt , Jin Tae Lee , Maya Bernstein , and especially Mark Ackerman , for challenging , on - going exchanges of ideas . Sharon Cayley deserves special mention for her practical advice , encouragement and occasional sanity checks . I want to thank my first thesis advisor , Professor Murray Sidman , for teaching me the value of good writing and clear thinking . Professor Hal Abelson was responsible for my coming at MIT in the first place and provided a wonderful role model . Professors Andy Lippman , Glorianna Davenport and Chris Schmandt at the Media Lab kept me thinking about how all this relates to multi - media . The staff at Project Athena patiently put up with all my questions and generously donated their time and I especially want to thank Beth Anderson , Paul Boutin , Don Davis , Eduard Guzovsky , Matt Hodges , and Brian Michon for many late night discussions . Professor Earll Murman and Ron Orcutt deserve special thanks for providing me with access to Athena . I am grateful to Digital Equipment Corporation , for providing me with a scholarship and the opportunity to conduct this research . Many people at Digital were helpful over the years , in particular Jack McCredie , who first brought me to Athena and George Champine who continued to be supportive throughout . I also wish to thank Jim Gettys , Jim Miller , Win Treese , Vik Vyssotsky and Jan Walker from the Digital Cambridge Research Lab for their insights and discussions , Carl Klempner , for being a wonderful person and Branko Gerovac for becoming my technical sponsor and giving me useful advice . I ' d like to thank Shirley Stahl , of the Graduate Engineering Education Program , for her understanding and help and Bob Glorioso and John Manzo for efforts far above and beyond the call of duty . Sometimes , the best help is from people who are in a completely different field . I want to thank Krzysztof Blusztajyn , Barbara Slack , Ignacio Lopez , Mary Logue , Johann Sandmann , Ellen Garde , Misha Lakher , Marek Kloczewiak , Agnes Virga and the others , for Thursday night dinners with no mention of management . Also , my thanks to Bob McKie , Jill Bennett and the Border Cafe , and Michelle Fineblum , Debby Hindus , Ottavia Bassetti , Michael Granat , Bonnie Samet and Peter Brady for friendship and support . I also want to thank the members of the SIGCHI executive committee , especially my co - chair , Austin Henderson and Phyllis Reisner , Marilyn Mantei and Carrie Ehrlich , for helping me to stay in touch with the outside world and being so understanding during the final stages of the dissertation . My thanks to George and Jean Brady , who encouraged me for many years . Finally , thanks to my family , Mum , Dad , Heather and Trevor , for their love and support .