Rab GTPases in vesicular transport Introduction Marino Zerial and Harald Stenmark European Molecular Biology Laboratory , Heidelberg , Germany Specificity and directionality are two features shared by the numerous steps of membrane transport that connect cellular organelles . By shuttling between specific membrane compartments and the cytoplasm , small GTPases of the Rab family appear to regulate membrane traffic in a cyclical manner . The restriction of certain Rab proteins to differentiated cell types supports a role for these GTPases in defining the specificity of membrane trafficking . Current Opinion in Cell Biology 1993 , 5 ~ 613 - 620 Eukaryotic cells are divided into distinct membrane - bound organelles . While this functional compartmen - talization has the advantage of both efficiency and reg - ulation , it also requires controlled interactions between the various organelles . Exchange of constituents be - tween organefles is thought to occur through vesicular or tubular intermediates that selectively deliver proteins and lipids from one compartment to another [ 10 - 3 . 1 . Specific molecules control this complex trafficking network . Over the past few years , a large number of small GTPases of the Rab family have been described and localized to var - ious intracellular compartments . By alternating between two distinct conformations in a nucleotide - dependent fashion , these proteins function as molecular switches . Through this mechanism they have been proposed to ensure fidelity in the process of docking and / or fusion of vesicles with their correct acceptor compartment [ 4 ] . The cycle of GTP binding and hydrolysis would allow multiple rounds of vesicular transport and confer vec - torial @ . This raiew focuses on the involvement of Rab proteins in individual trafficking routes between intracel - lular compartments . Function of Rab proteins in membrane traffic The role of Rab GTRases in membrane traffic was first demonstrated by studies on Sec4p and Yptlp , which function in the exocytic pathway of Saccbaromyces cere ~ r & ae [ 2 * ] . Rab proteins , the mammalian counterparts of yeast Sec4p and Yptlp [ 51 , are localized to distinct intra - cellular compartments ( Table 1 ) and a combination of in vitro and in vivo studies has emphasized their role in the regulation of different exocytic and endocytic trans - port processes . In the exocytic pathway , in vitro studies have shown that the Rablb protein is involved in endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) to Golgi transport [ 6 ] and work in intact cells has indicated that this transport process requires also Rabla and Rab2 proteins [ 71 . The participation of three differ - ent Rab proteins in ERGolgi transport might reflect se - quential steps of vesicular transport or , alternatively , the concerted function of several Rab GTPases at the same step . Rab proteins also function in regulated secretion . Synthetic peptides corresponding to the effector region of Rab3a stimulate regulated exocytosis [ S - lo ] . In the endocytic pathway , both Rab4 and Rab5 proteins are associated with early endosomes ( Rab5 is also on the plasma membrane ) [ 11 , 121 . However , they have distinct activities . An increase in the level of Rab5 stimulates en - docytosis and expands the size of the early endosomes , whereas expression of a Rab5 GTP - binding defective mu - tant has the opposite effect [ 13 * ] . These morphological alterations are consistent with a role of Rab5 in the fu - sion between early endosomes in vitro [ 141 . In contrast , overexpression of Rab4 increases the re & x of endocytic markers to the cell surface and induces the accumulation of endocytic tubules and tubule clusters that could cor - respond either to structurally altered early endosomes or even to a distinct recycling compartment [ IS * ] . Another example of distinct function of Rab proteins in the same organelle is provided by Rab7 and Rab9 . Both proteins have been local @ ed to late endosomes [ 12 , 16 ] , but only Rab9 spectically functions in transport from this compartment to the tram & olgi network ( TGN ) in vitro [ 16 ] . While the role of mammalian Rab7 remains un - known , functional studies on a structural homologue in S . cerevzs & e , Ypt7p , suggest that this protein may function at a late step of the endocytic pathway [ 17’ ] . Ypt7 null mutants are viable and exhibit normal exocyto - sis and u - factor internalization , but a - factor degradation is inhibited and the vacuole is fragmented . By analogy Abbreviations CHM - choroideremia ; DC & - dominant suppressor of Set + ER - endoplasmic reticulum ; CAP - GTPase activating protein ; CDL - GDP dissociation inhibitor ; W - mammalian suppressor of Sec4 ; NSF - N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive fusion protein ; SNAP - soluble NSF attachment protein ; SNARE - SNAP receptor ; TCN - trans - Colgi network . @ Current Biology Ltd ISSN 0955 + 674 613 614 Membranes . Table 1 . Summary of the localization , functional properties and interacting components of Yptl , Sec4 and Rab proteins in yeast and mammalian cells . Protein Localization Function Interacting components Yptl ( yeast ) Sec4 dabla Rabl b Rab2 Rab3a RaMa Rab5a Rab6 Ypt7 ER - Golgi Secretory vesicles - plasma membrane ER - Golgi ER - Golgi intermediate compartment Synaptic vesicles Chromaffin granules Early endosomes Plasma membrane , clathrin - coated vesicles , early endosomes Middle Colgi - TGN Not determined Fusion of post - ER vesicles with plasma membrane Fusion of post - Golgi vesicles with plasma membrane ER - Golgi transport in yeast and mammalian cells ER - cis - Colgi and c & medial Colgi transport ER - Goigi transport DSSC , MSSC Regulated exocytosis in pancreatic acinar cells , adrenal chromaffin cells and mast cells Early endosomes - plasma membrane recycling pathway Plasma membrane - early endosome transport and homotypic fusion between early endosomes Not determined Transport in endocytic pathway Rab7 Rab8 Rab9 Rab17 Late endosomes Post - Golgi basolateral secretory vesicles Late endosomes , TGN Apical dense tubules , basolateral plasma membrane Not determined Golgi - plasma membrane transport Transport from late endosomes to TGN Not determined Rabphilin - 3A ‘Regulatory factors active on different Rab proteins . Rab GDI is not listed among the interacting components , as it interacts with most Rab proteins . See text for references . with mammalian endocytic pathway organization and lo - calization of Rab7 to late endosomes , Ypt7p is thought to control transport between early and late endosomal com - partments in yeast [ 17’1 . This interpretation is consistent with the existence of kinetically and biochemically dis - tinct endqtic organelles in yeast [ 181 . Certainly , these observations suggest that the yeast endocytic machinery shares features with the mammalian endocytic apparatus . A vesicle transport process can be typically divided into several steps : budding , uncoating , docking and fusion [ 1 ~ 3 * ] . While Rab proteins are implicated in the regu - lation of distinct membrane traffic events , the exact step controlled by each protein is not clear . Both Sedp and Rab5 appear to control vesicle docking / fusion . However , while yeast Yptlp is thought to function in the same step [ 2 * ] , its mammalian - related protein , Rablb , is thought to be essential for vesicle formation [ 61 . The interpre - tation of in vivo studies is complicated by the fact that transport between compartments may occur in both di - rections , forwards and backwards , and affecting one di - rection is likely to influence the other . Overexpression of Rab5 stimulates endocytosis but also accelerates re - cycling from the early endosomes to the plasma mem - brane [ WI . Likewise , inhibition of retrograde transport could , in principle , indirectly affect anterograde move - ment between the ER and the Golgi , and vice versa Clearly , these studies have shown that changes in the balance between vesicles coming from and returning to a compartment have profound effects on organelle or - ganization . Similar effects have also been observed with other components of the traf3cking machinery . For ex - ample , the sbi6ire mutation in a dynamin - related protein of Drosophila mehnogaster is thought to block coated vesicle budding from the plasma membrane [ W - 21 1 . This causes an increase in its surface area , an accumu - lation of elongated coated pits and a decrease in the number of endocytic tubular elements [ 191 . Thus , simi - lar to the overexpression of Rab4 and Rab5 , the mutation induces drastic morphological changes . Altogether , these biochemical and morphological studies only represent a first step towards a more detailed dissection of Rab pro - tein function . Rab CTPases in vesicular transport Zerial and Stenmark 615 Complexity of the Rab protein family The large number of Rab GTPases identiiied in mam - malian cells ( 30 different members ) 122 - 241 led to the hypothesis that each step of vesicular traffic is regulated by at least one Rab protein [ 4 ] . Nevertheless , the implica - tions of this complexity are not clear . First , the picture is complicated by the existence of subgroups of Rab pro - teins sharing high sequence identity ( e . g . Rabla , Rablb , Rab3a , Rab3b , Rab3c , Rab3d ) . The high sequence conser - vation suggests that proteins belonging to one subgroup may have a similar function , as supported by the finding that both Rabla and Rablb regulate ER - Golgi transport [ 7 ] . However , this simple interpretation is countered by the fact that members of a subgroup may have different biochemical properties : both the exocytlc Rabla and the endocytlc RaMa proteins contain a phosphotylation site for p34u kinase [ 25 , 26 * ] whereas Rablb and Rab4b do not [ 27 ] . Anti - Rab5a specific antibodies block early endosome fusion in vitro , despite the presence of the Rab5b and Rab5c proteins [ 28 ] . Different members of the Rab3 subgroup carry out distinct functions ( see be - low ) . Altogether , these differences question the idea that Rab isofonns are functionally redundant . Instead , the di - versity might be responsible for hne tuning intracellular transport by the coordinated activity of several Rab iso - forms . Second , recent morphological data indicate that several Rab proteins localize to the same organelle . Early endo - somes provide a striking example : they contain at least three additional Rab proteins besides the Rab4 and Rab5 subgroups ( VM Olkkonen , P Dupree , 1 Killisch , A Lutcke , M Zerial , et al . and A Liitcke , A Valencia , VM Olkkonen , G Griffiths , RG Patton , et al . , unpublished data ) . What are the roles played by these different Rab proteins ? One possibility is that they function in either of the transport routes that meet in this compartment : transport from and to the cell surface , and from the TGN and to late endo - somes [ 28 ] . Alternatively , several distinct Rab proteins might be required in a given transport process . These proteins might carry out either the same function ( e . g . vesicle docking ) or different functions ( e . g . budding , un - coating , docking or fusion ) . Cell type specific Rab proteins The notion that Rab proteins control distinct intracellular transport processes suggests that cell type speciiic steps in membrane traific also require specific Rab proteins . Several Rab proteins that are cell type or tissue - specific have been identiIied . For instance , neurons , exocrine and endocrine cells , which display regulated secretion , speciIically express the Rab3a protein [ 29 - 311 . The expression of cell type specific Rab proteins is regulated during differentiation . Expression of Rab3d increases during ditferentiation of 3T3 - Ll cells into adipocytes . This protein might control the insulin - dependent exocytosis of vesicles containing glucose transporter in these specialized cells [ 32 ] . Recent data indicate that epithelial cells , which have distinct api - cal and basolateral transport pathways , and tmnscymtic routes & vkewed in [ 33 , 34 ] ) , also express specific Rab proteins once they become polarized . In the developing kidney , Rab17 is absent from the mesenchymal precur - sors but is induced upon their differentiation into epi - thelial cells . In the adult organ , the protein is associated with the basolateral plasma membrane and with apical tubules [ 35 * ] . Both expression and localization suggest that Rabl7 may function in transcytosis , an epithelial cell specilic transport process [ 331 . Rab8 , a ubiquitously expressed protein sharing high se - quence homology with Sec4 [ 27 ] , functions in tratfic from the TGN to the basolateral surface in polarized MDCK cells and to the somatodendrltic plasma mem - brane in hippocampal neurons [ 36 , 37 ] . These two do - mains are thought to correspond to tile plasma mem - brane of non - polarized cells [ 381 . This suggests that Rab8 does not function in an epithelial cell speciIic pathway . In contrast , another as yet unidenti6ed GTP - binding protein is found on immuno - isolated apical exocytic vesicles and is implicated in apical exocytosis , the epithelial cell spe - cific transport step ( 361 . Collectively , these data suggest that specialized Rab pro - teins are part of the machinery regulating cell type spe - cilic transport processes . The localization and function of the Rab proteins must depend on other cell type specific regulatory components , for example , factors that regulate their GTP - GDP cycle . Regulatory factors for Rab proteins The cycle of GTP binding and hydrolysis of Rab pro - teins has been postulated to ensure directionality in the vesicle docking / fusion process [ 41 . According to a com - mon view [ 4 , 39 ] , a speciiic Rab protein is recruited on the donor membrane or on nascent transport vesicles in its GTP - bound form . Hydrolysis of GTP by the Rab pro - tein is thought to trigger fusion of the vesicle with the ac - ceptor membrane [ 4 , 40 * ] . Subsequently , the GDP - bound Rab protein is released into the cytosol and returned to the donor membrane . There , a GDP - GTP exchange pro - tein catalyzes GDP release and GTP binding and allows the cycle to continue . Proteins that promote GDP - GTP exchange by members of the Rab protein family have been characterized in yeast and mammalian cells [ 41 , 42 * , 43m ] . Do these fac - tors regulate the activity of speciiic Rab proteins ? In vitro , yeast Dss4 stimulates GDP dissociation of both Sec4p and Yptlp [ 42 * ] . Mammalian suppressor of Sec4 , Mss4 pro - tein , that acts on Sec4p , also stimulates GDP release from Yptlp and mammalian Rab3a [ 43’ ] . Thus , exchange pro - teins appear to be active on multiple Rab proteins . If Rab proteins associate with their respective compartments in the GTP - bound form [ 391 , then exchange factors might function in association with organelle - specific compo - nents . In contrast , GTPase - activating proteins ( GAPS ) ap - pear to be more selective as the recently identified GAP 616 Membranes , of Ypt6p ( GYP6 ) does not act efficiently 0 ; other Ypt proteins [ 44 * ] . Association of Rab proteins with membranes requires gemnylgeranyl groups on the carboxyl - terminal cysteine motif [ 45 , 46 ] . This process is reversed by a cytosolic factor , Rab GDI , originally puriiied as a GDP disso - ciation inhllitor for Rab3a 1471 . Rab GDI is able to recognize several geranylgeranylated Rab proteins and extract them from membranes in vitro [ 48 - 521 . These combined properties suggest that Rab GDI could func - tion to remove Rab proteins from membranes after GTP hydrolysis and to return them to the donor membrane . As predicted from such a function , cytosolic Rab proteins are found in complex with Rab GDI [ 50 - 521 and a small but significant fraction of Rab GDI is associated with var - ious organelles [ 50 ] . Thus , Rab GDI appears to be an essential component that ensures the cyclical and vecto - rial function of Rab proteins . Is the function of GDI regulated ? Analysis of the quar - tet mutation in D . mekznogaster suggests that it might be . Mutations in the quartet locus are associated with pleiotropic developmental defects in the larvae and distinguished by the presence of a basic shift in the isoelectric point of three abundant proteins , one of which has been identihed as a Drosopbilu homologue of Rab GDI [ 531 . This suggests that Drosophila Rab GDI is post - translationally mod & d or demodiiied by the wild - type quartet gene product . Although there is no evidence that quurtetencodes a kinase , it is interesting to note that the cytosolic form of mammalian GDI seems to be highly phosphorylated ( J Gruenbetg , personal communication ) . Phosphorylation or other post - translational modifications of Rab GDI might be necessary to inhibit reassociation of Rab proteins with the target membrane and direct them to the donor compartment . Other components may also be involved in the Rab pro - tein cycle . Geranylgeranylation of Rab proteins is cat - alyzed by geranylgeranyl transferase II , an enzyme that , in contmst to other known isoprenyl transferases [ 54 ] , requires sequences amino - terminal to the target cysteine motif [ 55 - 571 . This peculiarity may be due to a third en - zyme subunit , component A [ 541 . Perhaps component A recognizes Rab proteins and presents them to compo - nent B , the catalytic part of the transferase . Intriguingly , the gene products of human and mouse choroideremia ( CI - IM ) , a disease associated with degen - eration of the retina and the underlying vasculature , the choroid , share sequence homology with rat component A 158 , 591 . Two additional iindings support the pos - sibility that CHM could be a member of a family of A components . First , in cytosol of lymphoblasts from CHM patients , geranylgeranylation activity is reduced and iso - prenylation of Rab3a is more a & c & d than that of Rabla [ & I . Second , another CHM - like gene , CHML , has been identiiied [ 611 . Interestingly , CHM shares sequence sim - ilarity with Rab GDI [ 62 ] . This sequence conservation might reflect the ability of both GDI and component A to interact with geranylgeranylated Rab proteins . How - ever , unlike Rab GDI , component A can also recognize the non - prenylated form of Rab proteins , and it interacts with both the GTP - and the GDP - bound forms [ 59’ ] . Therefore , it is thought that component A would be more likely to act as a chaperone for Rab proteins during the initial process of membrane association , than to re - move F & b proteins from membranes . This function might be necessary to prevent interactions of the hydrophobic geranylgeranyl moiety with non - target membranes . Rab proteins and the vesicle transport machinery If Rab proteins are implicated in the regulation of vesicular transport , the real challenge now is to un - derstand how they function . For this task it is impor - tant to study the relationship between Rab proteins and other elements of the transport machinery . Differ - ent vesicle fusion processes in mammalian cells and in yeast require N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive fusion pro - tein ( NSF ) and the soluble NSF attachment proteins ( SNAPS ) [ 1 * , 2 * ] . More recently , a search for SNAP re - ceptors ( SNARES ) has yielded four different factors from bovine brain , all associated with the synapse [ 63 * * , 64 * ] . VAMP / synaptobrevin - 2 is found on transport vesicles ( v - SNARE ) , while syntaxin A and B are on target membranes ( t - SNARES ) . It is not clear where the fourth protein , SNAP - 25 ( synaptosome - associated protein of 25 kDa ) is localized . These findings have led to the hypothesis that , in general , specificity in the process of vesicle fusion with its target compartment might be mediated by the interaction of a specific v - SNARE with its complementary t - SNARE through the NSF - SNAPS complex ( Fig . 1 ) . Where do Rab proteins fit into this scheme ? The answer is not there yet . However , recent progress suggests pos - sible connections between Rab proteins and the vesicle fusion apparatus . Rabphilin - $ 4 , a protein that interacts with Rab3a , has recently been puriiied and character - ized [ 65 , 66 * ] . Structural analysis of the deduced amino acid sequence from the corresponding cDNA revealed high homology with synaptotagmin , a synaptic vesicle integral membrane protein [ 67 ] . However , unlike synap - totagmin , rabphilin3A contains neither a signal peptide nor a putative transmembrane domain . The precise func - tion of synaptotagmin is unknown , although it has been postulated to be a regulatory component of calcium - de - pendent exocytosis in the presynaptic terminal [ 67 , 68 ] . The identification of rabphilin3A provides a potential link between Pab proteins and t - SNARES . In fact , syntaxin ( a t - SNARE ) can be co - immunoprecipitated with synap - totagmin suggesting an association of the two proteins [ 67 ] , and rabphilin3A is a synaptotagmin - like molecule . In addition , the SLK’Z / SEC22 and SLY12IBETl genes , which are multicopy suppressors of functional loss of YPTl in S . cerevtie , encode two members of the synap - tobrevin ( v - SNARE ) family [ 69 - 711 . Therefore , it is pos - sible to envisage interactions between a rabphilin and a t - SNARE and between a Rab protein and a v - SNARE ( Fig . 1 ) . The speciiicity of interactions between V - SNARES and t - SNARES in a complex with NSF and SNAPS might thus require further regulation by a Rab protein . This regula - Rab GTPases in vesicular transport Zerial and Stenmark 617 z ( a ) Fig . 1 . Model for possible interactions between Rab proteins and known components of the membrane traffic machinery . Proper docking and fusion of a vesicle with its correct target membrane depends on interactions between specific components present on both compartments . ( a ) NSF and SNAPS interact with v - SNARE - and t - SNARE - type molecules 1671 . ( b ) interaction between the vesicle - specific v - SNARE and its target - specific t - SNARE is still hypothetical . Cc ) The vesicle - specific , CTP - bound Rab protein in - teracts with its corresponding rabphilin , and Cd ) possibly , to a v - SNARE . ( e ) Rabphilin might interact with a t - SNARE as suggested by the interaction of syntaxin with synaptotagmin [ 671 . In this chain of connections , the CTPase activity of Rab proteins could be utilized to proof - read I41 the interaction between the correct pair of SNARES . tory mechanism might be used to proof - read the correct interactions between these components . As rabphilin - 3A can only recognize the GTP - bound form of Rab3A [ 66 * ] , GTP hydrolysis would confer unidirectional @ to the docking / fusion process . Conclusions A comprehensive analysis of the molecules implicated in membrane trticking is beginning to establish which components are common to many transport processes , and which are specific . The data obtained so far suggest that , whereas NSF and SNAPS belong to the first cathe - gory , Rab proteins belong to the latter one . Although a number of studies have demonstrated the role of these GTPases as regulators of membrane traffic , their pre - cise function remains unknown . Proteins that regulate the membrane association and nucleotide state of Rab proteins have now been identified , and further mecha - nistic studies will undoubtedly focus on three key ques - tions . First , what brings about the organelle - specific lo - calization of Rab proteins ? Second , which are their target molecules ? Third , how does the nucleotide state ( regu - lated by GAPS and exchange proteins ) control the inter - actions between Rab proteins and their target molecules ? The synaptotagmin - like protein rabphilin - 3A is certainly an interesting candidate for a Rab target [ 66 * ] . Com - plicated molecular machineries are often regulated by a number of different GTPases , and Rab proteins are not the only GTPases implicated in intracellular transport . Compelling evidence indicates that members of other subfamilies of GTPases function in regulating different aspects of membrane traffic , such as vesicle budding and vesicle coat assembly and disassembly [ 28 , 39 ] . Fu - ture studies will reveal whether there are links between Rab proteins and these other GTPases . The identification of several tissue - and cell type specific Rab proteins suggests that the complexity of this fan - ily of GTPases could still increase , when one consid - ers the high heterogeneity of cell types from different organs . Learning more about the distribution of Rab proteins in various cell types will contribute to under - standing the relationship between structural features of organelles and their specialized functions , and between sub - compartments and transport routes . Acknowledgements We thank Jean Gruenberg , Bernard Hotlack , Anne Liitcke , Carol Mur - phy , Rob Parton , Sanjay Pimplikar and Kai Simons For comments and suggestions . References and recommended reading Papers of particular interest , published within the annual period of review , have been highlighted as : . of special interest . . of outstanding interest 1 . ROTHMAN JE , ORCI L : Molecular Dissection of the Secretory Pathway . Natrrre 1992 , 355 : 4OW15 . This review focuses on the transport pathways in the ER and GO & $ , highlighting important molecular components , such as vesicle coat proteins , the KDEL receptor of the ER , NSF and SNAPS . 2 . PRYER NK , WUESTEHUBE LJ , SCHEKMAN R Vesicle - Mediated . Protein Sorting . Ann ~ r Reu Biochenz 1992 , 61 : 471 - 516 . A comprehensive oveniew of the constituents of the vesicle transport machinery . 3 . KREIS TE : Regulation of Vesicular and Tubular Membrane . Traffic on the Go & i Complex by Coat Proteins . Curr @ in Cell Bioi 1992 , 4 : 6Osr615 . This review discusses the role of coat proteins in intro - Golgi transport and in transport berzeen the Go @ apparatus and other organelles . 4 . BOLWE HR : Do GTPases Direct Membrane Traffic in Secre - tion ? CeN 1988 , 53 : 66 % 671 . 5 . TOUCHOT N , CHARDIN P , TAUTLAN A : Four Additional Members of the Ras Gene Superfamily Isolated by an Oligonucleotide Strategy : Molecular Cloning of YFT - Related cDNAs from a Rat Brain Library . Proc Nad Acad Sci USA 1987 , 84 : 821 & 8214 . 6 . PLUTNER H , COX AD , PwD S , KHOSRAVI - FAR R , BOURNE JR , SCHVANINCER R . DER CJ , BALCH B : Rablb Regulates Vesicular Transport Between the Endoplasmic Reticulum and Suc - cessive Golgi Compartments . J Cell Biol 1991 , 115 : 3143 . 618 Membranes 7 . TBDAE E , BOWINE JR , KHOSR & % FAR R , DER tZJ , BALCH WE : GTP - Binding Mutants of Rabl and Rab2 Are Potent In - hibitors of Vesicular Transport from the Endoplasmic Retic - ulum to the GoIgI Complex . J Cell Bid 1992 , 119749 - 761 . 8 . PADFIELD PJ , BALCH WE , JAMIESON JD : A Synthetic Peptide of the Rab3a Etiector Domain Stimulates hmylase Release from Permeabiied Pancreatic Acini . Proc Nafl Acad Sci USA 1992 , 89 ~ 16561660 . 9 . SENYSHYN J , BALCH WE , HOIZ RW : Synthetic Peptides of the EtTector - Biding Domain of Rab Enhance Secretion from Digitonin - Permeabiid Chromffi CeUs . FEBS Len 1992 , 30961 - 46 . 10 . OBEIXHAUSER AF , MONCK JR , B , uc ~ WE , FERNANDEZ JM : Exo - cytic Fusion is Activated by Rab3a Peptides . Nahtre 1992 , 360 : 27 & 273 . 11 . VAN DER SLIJIJS P , HUIL M , ZAHRAOUI 4 TAHITIAN A , GOUD B , MELMAN I : The SmaU GTP Binding Protein Rab4 Is Associ - ated with Early Endosomes . Pruc Nat1 Acad Sci USA 1991 , 88 : 6313 - 6317 . 12 . CHAWUER P , PARTON RG , IL ~ uRI HP , SlMo ~ s K , ZElU4L M : Localization of Low Molecular Weight GTP - Binding Pro - teins to Exocytic and Endocytic Compartments . Cell 1990 , 62 : 317 - 329 . 13 . BUCCI C , PARTON RG , MATHER IM , STLJNNENBERC H , SIMONS K , . HOFLXK B , ZERLU M : The SmaII GTP - ase RabS Functions as a Regulatory Factor in the Early Endocytic Pathway . Cell 1992 , 70 : 715 - 728 . Transient overexpression of wild - type ItabS in baby hamster kidney cells led to an increased rate of endocytosis and to the formation of unusually large early endosomes . By contrast , cells expressing a nu - cleotide binding - delicient RabS mutant displayed a reduced rate of en - doqtosis and contained numerous smaU vesicles and tubules dose to the plasma membrane . The resuhs indicate that RabS is rate - limiting and regulates the membrane t & c between the plasma membrane and the early endosome . 14 . GORVEL JP , CHAMUER P , ZER ~ AL M , GRUEN ~ ERG J : RabS Controls EarIy Endosome Fusion fn Vh - o . Cell 1991 , 64 : 91S - 925 . 15 . VAN DER SLLIIJS P , Huu M , WEBSTER P , MALE P , GOUD B , . MEUMAN I : The SmaIl GTP - Binding Protein gab4 Controls an Early Sorting Event on the Endocytic Pathway . Cell 1992 , 70 : 729 - 740 . Whereas normal Chinese hamster ovaq cells contained only 20 % of their transferring receptors on their surface , this number was raised to 80 % In stable transfectants overexpressing Rab4 . Overexpression also prevented delivery of intemalized transferrin to acidic endosomes , and a large fraction of internalized transferrin was associated with small , tubular dusters incapable qf efficient acidI6cation . Overexpression of Rab4 did not affect initial rates of transfenin internalization , but the rate of transferrin recycling and a fluid phase marker to the plasma membrane were increased . The results suggest that Rab4 controls the rate of recycling , possibly by controlling the rate of transport between the early endosome and a putative recycling compartment . 16 . ~ MBARDI D , SOIDATI T , R ~ EDERER w GODA Y , ZERVU . M , PF’EFFER SR : Rab9 Functions in Transport Between Late Endosomes and the Trans Golgi Network . EMBO J 1993 , 12 : 677 - 682 . 17 . WKHMANN H , HENGST L , GALLWITZ D : Endocytosis in Yeast : . Evidence for the InvoIvement of a SmslI GTP - Binding Pro - tein ( Ypt7p ) . Cell 1992 , 71 : 1131 - 1142 . A S . cerevtiegene encoding Ypt7 , a protein with 63 % sequence iden - tity to mammalian Rab7 , was cloned . Ypt7 and gab7 have identical ef - fector regions . Gene disruption of Ypt7 had essentially no effect on the growth properties of yeast ceUs at various temperatures . However , the Ypt7 null mutants were characterized by a highly fragmented vacuole . while uptake of the pheromone alpha factor occurred at a normal rate , its degradation was severely inhibited in the null mutants . 18 . SINGER - KRUGER B , FRANK R , CRAUSAZ F , RlEzMAN H : PattIal PurItication and Characterization of Early and Late Endo - somes hrn Yeast : Identilication of Four Novel Proteins . / Bfoi cbe ? n 1993 , 268 : in press . 19 . 20 . 21 . 22 . 23 . 24 . 25 . 26 . . KOUKA T , IKEDA K : Reversible Blockage of Mem - brane Retrieval and Endocytosis In the Garland Ceils of the Temperature - Sensitive Mutant of Drosopblla melanogastw , shibire - tsl . J Cell Biol 1983 , 97 ~ 499 - 507 . VAN DER BUEK AM , MEYERO ~ TIZ EM : Dynamin - Like Protein Encoded by the Drosophila slnibire Gene Associated with Vesicular TraEic . Nature 1991 , 351 : 411414 . CHEN MS , OUR RA , SCHROEDER CC , AUK TW , POODRY Cq WNXWARTH SC , VAUEE RB : Multiple Forms of Dynamin Are Encoded by sbibltq a Drosophfla Gene Involved in Endo - cytosls . Nature 1991 , 353585586 . VAIENCIA A , Corn P , W ~ GHOFER A , SANDER C : The ras Protein Family : Evolutionary Tree and Role of Conserved Amino Acids . Biocbem ~ ty 1991 , 30 : 4637 - 4648 . CHAMUER P , SMONS K , ZERIAL M : The CompIexity of the gab and Rho GTP - Biding Protein Subfamilies Revealed by a PCR Cloning Approach . Gene 1992 , 112 : 261 - 264 . ELFER ~ NK L4 , ANZAI K , SCHELIER RI - I : RablS , a Novel Low Molecular Weight GTP - Binding Protein SpeciftcaIIy Ex - pressed in Rat Brain . J Biol them 1992 , 2671 - 8 . BAILLY E , MCCAFFREV M , TOUCHOT N , ZAHRAOUI A , GOUD B , BORNENS M : Phosphorylation of Two Small GTP - biid - ing Proteins of the Rab Family by p34cdc * . Nafure 1991 , 350 : 71S - 718 , VAN DER SLUIJS P , Huu M , HUBER IA , m P , GOUD B , MEUMAN I : Reversible Phosphorylation - Dephosphorylation Deter - mines the Localization of Rab4 during the CeU Cycle . EMBO J 1992 , 11 : 4379 - 4389 . RaMa is known to become cytosolic during mitosis as a consequence of phosphorylation 125 ) . This regulation of membrane association may play a role in the arrest of membrane traffic observed during metaphase . In this paper , it is shown that mutation of the consensus site for p34dd kinase in the carboxyl terminus of RaMa prevents its phos - phorylation during mitosis and blocks its appearance in the cytosol . Post - translational modilication of the carboxyl - terminal cysteine motif of RaMa was shown to be unafTected by phosphorylation , and mem - brane association was found to re - occur upon dephosphorylation after mitosis . 27 . 28 . 29 . 30 . 31 . 32 . 33 . 34 . 35 . . CHAVRIER P , VmGRoN M , SANDER C , SlhlONS K , ZERLU M : Molec - ular Cloning of YPTl / SEC4 - Related cDNAs from an Epithe - liaI Cell Line . Mel Cell Biol 1990 , 10 : 6578 - 6585 . GRUENBERG J , CIAGUE MJ : Regulation of Intracellular Mem - brane Transport . Curr @ in Cell Biol 1992 , 4 : 593 - W . AYE J , OLOFSSON B , TAVTMN A , PROCHL + N - IZ A : Developmen - tal and Regional Regulation of Rab3 , a New Brain Specific Ras - Like Gene . J Neurasci Res 1989 , 22 : 241 - 246 . SANO K , KIKUCI 4 ~ WIWI Y , TERAN ~ SHI Y , TAKAI Y : Tissue Specitic Expression of a Novel GTP - Binding Protein ( Smg p2SA ) mRNA and Its Increase by Growth Factor and Cyclic AMP in Rat Pheochromocytoma PC12 Cells . Biochm Bio pbys Res Comm 1989 , 158 : 377 - 385 . MIZOGUCHI A , Km S , UEDA T , KIKUCHI A , YORJFUJI H , HIROKAWA N , TAUI Y : Localization and S & cellular Distribution of Smg ~ 254 , a ras p21 - Like GTP - Binding Protein , in Rat Brain . J Biol Cbem 1989 , 265 : 11872 - 11879 . BALDINI G , HOHL T , Lm HY , LODISH HF : Cloning of a Rab3 Isotype Predominantly Expressed in Adipocytes . Proc NatI Acad Sci USA 1992 , 89504HO52 . MOSTOV K , APOCADA B , AROETI B , OKAMOTO C : Plasma Mem - brane Protein Sorting in Polarized Epithelial Cells . J Cell Biol 1992 , 1163577 - 583 . NELSON J : Regulation of Ceil Surface Polarity from Bacteria to Mammals . Sc & nce 1992 , 258 : 94 & 955 . LC ~ TCKE A , JANSSON S , PARTON RG , CHAMUER P , VALENCLA A , HIJBER L4 , LEHTONEN E , ZERIAL M : Rabl7 , a Novel SmaU GTPase , Is Specific for EpitheIial CeUs and Is Induced during Ceil Polarization . J Cell Biof 1993 , 121 : 553564 . Rab CTPases in vesicular transport Zerial and Stenmark 619 Cloning of a mouSe cDNA for a novel Rab protein , Rabl7 , is reported . Northern blot analysis revealed that Rab17 is expressed exclusively in polarized epitheiial cells and is thus the first example of an epitheiiai ceii speciUc Rab protein . In situ hybridization on murine developing kidneys showed that rabl7 expression was turned on concomittantIy with the onset of epitheiiai differentiation . In the adult kidney , Rab17 was found to be associated with the basolaterai plasma membrane and with apical tubules . Localization data suggest that Rabl7 might be in - volved in reguiating transcytosis . 36 . 37 . 38 . 39 . 40 . . HUBER IA , PIMPUKAR S , PARTON RG , VIRTA H , ZERIAL M , SIMONS K : Rab8 , a SmaU GTpase Involved In Vesicular Traffic be - tween the TGN and the Basolateral Plasma Membrane . / cell Biof 1993 , 121 : in press . HUBER u DE HOOP MJ , DUPREE P , ZERML M , SIMONS K , Do’rn C : Protein Transport to the Dendritic P ! asma Membrane of Cultured Neurons Is Regulated by Rab8p . / Celf Biol 1993 , 121 : in press . DCnn CG , SIMONS K : Polarized Sorting of VII Glycoprotekts to the Axon and Dendrites of Hippocampai Neurons in CuI - ture . Cell 1990 , 62 ~ 63 - 72 . PFEFFER SR GTP - BindIng Proteins in IntraceUuIar Transport . Trenak Cell Biol 1992 , 2 : 4145 . WALWORTH NC , BRENNWAU ) P . KAFICENEU AK , GARRETT M , NOLICK P : Hydrolysis of GTP by Sed Protein Plays an Im - portant Role in Vesicular Transport and Is StimuIated by a GTPase - Activating Protein in Succharomyces cerevisiue . Mol Cell Biol 1992 , 12 : 2017 - 2028 . A mutation ( Gin79 - + Leu ) in the Sec4 protein strongiy inhibited its in trinsic GTPase activity . A partially purified GAP activity stimulated the hydrolysis rate of the mutant to about 30 % of the GAP - stimulated , wild - type Sec4 . The se & Leui’9 allele can function as the oniy copy of sec4 in yeast cells , but the cells are cold - sensitive , exhibit slowed in - vertase secretion and accumulate secretory vesicles . It thus appears that the mutation in Sec4 causes a partial loss of function . This is the best evidence so far that GTP hydrolysis by a member of the Sec4 / ypt / Rab famiiy is necessary for vesicle fusion , as has been suggested earlier 14 ) . 41 . BU ~ ~ TEIN ES , MAC ~ RA IG : Characterization of a Guanlne Nu - cleotide Releasing Factor and GTPase Activating Protein that Are Specitic for the Ras - Related Rotein p25 Rab3a Proc Nat1 Acad Sci USA 1992 , 89 : 1154 - 1158 . 42 . MOYA M . ROBERTS D , NOV ~ CK P : DSS4 - I Is a Dominant Sup . pressor of sec4 - 8 that Encodes a Nucleotide Exchange Pro - tein that Aids Sec4p Function . Nature 1993 , 361 : 460 - 463 . DSS41 was isolated as a dominant suppressor of the temperature . sensitive s & z + 8 mutation . The gene product , Dss4 - lp , is a protein with a molecular mass of 17kDa . It was found to stimulate GDP dissociation from Sec4p as weU as from Yptlp in vitro . Post - transla - tional modification of Sec4p was not required for its interaction with Dss4 - lp . The activity on Sec4p was about twofold higher than that on Yptl . Dss4 - lp was not active on Rab3a and Ra . 52 . Disruption of the wild - type dss4 gene was not lethal . However , synthetic lethality was ob - served when ds4 disruption was combined with certain ret mutants showing lethality in the presence of the se & - 8 mutation . It is therefore suggested that the normal role of Dss4 - lp is to aid Sec4p function . 43 . BURTON J , ROBERTS D , MO ~ ~ IDI M , NOV ~ CK P , DE CAMILIJ . P : A Mammalian Guanine - Nucleotide Releasing Protein En - hances Function of Yeast Secretory Protein Sec4 . Nature 1993 , 361 : 464 - 467 . A rat - brain cDNA library was expressed in temperature - sensitive se & 8 yeast ceUs , and screened for suppression of the growth defect at the re - strictive temperature . A temperature - resistant clone was recovered , and the mss4 cDNA was isolated . The Mss4 protein has a molecular mass of 14kDa and has sequence homology with Dss4 - lp [ 41 ] . Ms . & p stim - ulated GDP release from Sec4p , and to a lesser extent from Rab3a and Yptl , but was inactive on Ras2 . The mss4 gene is expressed in a vari - ety of tissues , suggesting that its natural target is one or more widely expressed Sec4 - iike proteins . 44 . STROM M , VOUMER P , TAN TJ , GALLWTIZ D : A Yeast GTPase - . Activating Protein that Interacts SpeciIicaUy with a Member of the Ypt / Rab Family . Nurure 1993 , 361 : 73 & 739 . Yeast cells were transformed with a yeast genomic library on a mul - ticopy plasmid , and extracts from the individual transformants wem assayed for their ability to stimulate the GTPase activity of Ypd . A single , positive colony was isolated , and from this the Cl ? 6 ( GAP of Ypt6 ) gene was cloned . The gene product , Gyp6 , has no sign & ant homology to other known proteins , Including other GTPase - activating proteins . Purified Gyp6 strongly stimuiated the GTPase activity of Ypt6 , and had a weak activity on Ypt7 . It did not stimulate the GTPase activ ity of Yptl , Sec4 , YpUA , H - ras or Rab2 . Whereas @ tideletion mutants are temperature - sensitive , disruption of gyp6resulted in no phenotypic alterations . 45 . MAGEE T , N ! zwhr ~ ~ C : The Role of Lipid Anchors for SmalI G Proteins In Membrane TraBickIng . Trends 011 Bid 1992 , 2 : 318 - 323 . 46 . CLARKE S : Protein IsoprenyIatIon and Methylation at Carboxyl - Terminal Cystelne Residues . Annu Rev Biocbem 1992 , 61 : 355 - 386 . 47 . S ~ sw T , KIKUCHI 4 A & w S , HATA Y , Isomuw M , KURODA S , TAKA ~ Y : PurIIication and Characterization from Bovine Brain Cytosol of a Protein that Inhibits the Dissociation of GDP from and the Subsequent BInding of GTP to Smg p25A , a Ras p21 - Like GTP - Binding Protein . J Eiol Ckm 1990 , 265 : 233 + 2337 . 48 . ARNU S , KIKuCHI A , HATA Y , l % MURA M , TIUW Y : Regula - tion of Reversible Binding of Smg p25A a Ras p21 - like GTP - Bmding Protein to Synaptic Plasma Membranes and Vesicles by Its SpeciIic Regulatory Protein , GDP DIssocia - tion Inhibitor . J Biol & em 1990 , 265 : 13007 - 13015 . 49 . SASAKJ T , KAIBUCHI K , KA ~ CENEU AK , NOV ~ CK P , TAJLAI Y : A Mammalian Inhibitory GDP / GTP Exchange Protein ( GDP Dissociation Inhibitor ) for Smg p25A Is Active on the Yeast SEC4 Protein . Mol Celf Biof 1991 , 11 : 2909 - 2912 . 50 . UUIUCH 0 , STENh4ARK H , ALEXANDROV K , HUBER IA , KA ~ UCHI K , SA % KI T , TAKAI Y , ZEIUAL M : Rah GDI as a General Regulator for the Membrane Association of Rab Proteins . J Bid C % e ? n 1993 , 268 : in press . 51 . REGAZZI R , K ~ KUCHI A , TAXAI Y , WO ~ IM CB : The SmaU GTP - Siding Proteins in the Cytosol of InsulinSecretIng CelIs Are Complexed to GDP Dissociation Inhibitor Proteins . J Biol c % em 1992 , 26717512 - 17519 . 52 . SOIDATI T , REIDERER MA , PFEFFER SR Rab GDI : a Solubiliaing and Recycling Factor for Rab9 Protein . Mel Bid Cell 1993 , 4 : 425434 . 53 . Z . AHNER JE , CHENEY CM : A Dnxopbiiu Homo & of Bovine Smg p25a GDP Dissociation Inhibitor Undergoes a Wft in Isoelectric Poiit In the Developmental Mutant Quartet . Mel Cdl Biol 1993 , 13217 - 227 . 54 . SEABRA MC , GOLDSTEIN JI , SUDHOF TC , BROWN MS : Rab Geranylgeranyl Transferase . A Multisubunit Enzyme that Prenylates GTP - Binding Proteins Terminating in Cys - X - Cys or Cys - Cys . J Bid Cbem 1992 , 26714497 - 14503 . 55 . KINSEUA TB , MALTESE WA : Rab GTP - Biding Roteins with Three Different Carboxyl - Terminal Cystelne Motifs Are Moditied in Vivo by 20Carbon Isoprenoids . J Biol C & m 1992 , 267 : 394 & 3945 . 56 KH ~ ~ RAVI - FAR R , Ct & tx GJ , ABE K , COX AD , MCLUN T , LUtZ RJ , S ~ NENSKY M , DER CJ : Ras ( CXXX ) and Rab ( CCKXC ) Prenylation Signal Sequences Are Unique and FunctlonaIIy Distinct . J Biol C & m 1992 . 267 : 2436324368 . 57 . P ! ZTER M , CHAVR ~ ER P , NIGG EA , ZE ~ UAI . M : Isoprenylation of Rab Proteins on StructuraIly Distinct Cysteine Motifs . J Cd Sci 1992 , 102 : 857 - 865 . 58 Cit ! ZMERS FPM , VAN DE POL DJR , VAN KERXHOFF LPM , WtElUNGA B , ROPERS H - H : Cloning of a Gene that Is Rearranged In Patients with Choroideremia Nuhtre 1990 , 347 ~ 674 - 677 . 59 . SEABRA MC , BROWN MS , SIAUGHTER ( 2 % SUDHOF TC , GOID ! % IN . JL PuriIicatIon of Component A of Rab GeranyIgeranyI 620 Membranes Transferase : Possible Identitv with the Choroideremia Gene Product . Cell 1992 , 70 : 104P - 1057 . Partial peptide sequences of purllied rat component A of geranylgetanyl transferase II showed high similarity to the human and mouse CHM gene products . 60 . SEABRA MC , BROW MS , GOIDSTEIN JL : Retinal Degeneration . in Choroideremia : Deficiency of Rab Geranylgeranyl Trans - femse . Science 1992 , 259 : 377 + X . Cytosol prepared from lymphoblasts of patients suiTering from the X - linked eye disease CHM exhibited reduced ability to geranylgeranylate RabIa and Rab3a in c & n The ability to geranylgeranylate Rab3a was more alfected than that of Rabla The results are consistent with the idea that the CHM gene product may be member of a family of A com - ponents of Rab getanylgeranyl transferases . 61 . CREMERs FPM , MOUOY CM , VAN DE POL DJR , VAN DEN HURK JAJM , BACH I , GEURT ~ VAN KERNEL AHM , ROPERS H - H : An Auto - somal Homologue of the Choroideremia Gene Colocalizes with the Usher Syndrome ‘Qpe II Locus on the Distal Part of Chromosome lq . Hum Mol Gene1 1992 , 1 : 71 - 75 . 62 . FODOR E , LEE RT , O’DONNELL JJ : Analysis of Choroderemia Gene [ Letter ] . Nufure 1991 , 351 : 614 . 63 . SOMR T , WHI ? EHEART SW , BRUNNER M , ERDJUMEN ~ - BROMAGE . . H , GEROMANOS S , TEMPST P , ROTHMAN JE : SNAP Receptors Implicated in Vesicle Targeting and Fusion . Nahtre 1993 , 362 : 318324 . SNAPS are soluble receptors for the general fusion protein NSF . In this paper , SNAP receptors ( SNARES ) from bovine brain were isolated by the use of al ? ? nity columns containing NSF / SNAP complexes . Remark - ably , of the four SNARES identified in this manner , all are proteins that have been previously found to be associated with the synapse . One of them , VAMP / synaptobrevln 2 , is a synaptic vesicle protein , whereas two others , syntaxin A and syntaxln B , are found on the synaptic plasma membrane . The fourth SNARE , SNAP - 25 , is also thought to be associ - ated with synaptic vesicles or plasma membrane . The results thus indi - cate that SNAP / NSF can intemct with SNARES in the vesicular membrane ( V - SNARES ) as well as with SNARES in the target membrane ( t . SNARFs ) . Whereas NSF and SNAPS appear to be universal components of the vesicle fusion apparatus , it is possible that families of V - SNARES and t - SNARES ensure speciiic interactions between vesicles and their target membranes . 64 . Ww SW , Gatrr IC , BRUNNER M , CIAR ( DO , MAYER T , . B ~ JHROW SA , ROTHMAN JE : SNAP Family of NSF Attachment FToteins Includes a Brain - Specific Isoform . Nufure 1993 , 362 : 353355 . This paper reports the cloning and sequencing of cDNAs encoding a . , g . and ~ - SNAPS . a - and B - SNAPS were found to be 83 % identical to each other , whereas - + SNAP showed about 25 % identity to the other SNAPS . a - and Y - SNAPS are ubiquitously expressed and act synerglsti - ally , whereas B - SNAP is bralnspeclftc . B - SNAP competes for the same biding site on SNAP receptors as a - SNAP , but unlike a - SNAP it cannot restore cell - free Golgl transport in cytosol from secl7 mutant yeast . It is most abundant in areas of high neuron density and may be involved in neurosecretion . 65 . SH ~ RATAJCI H , KA ~ ~ UCHI K , YAMAGUCHI T , WA ~ A K , HO ~ UUCHI H , TAKAI Y : A Possible Target Protein for smg p25A / Rab3A Small GTP - Biding Protein . J Biol Ckm 1992 , 267 : 10946 - 10949 . 66 . SHIRATAKI H , KAIBUCHI K , SAKODA T , KISHIDA S , YAMAGUCHI . T , WADA K , MN - M , TAKA ~ Y : RabphiIin - 3A , a Putative Target Protein for Smg p25A / Rab3A ~ 25 Small GTP - Biid - ing Protein Related to Synaptotagmin . Mol Cell Biol 1993 , 13 : 2061 - 2068 . This paper reports the cloning of a cDNA encoding tabphilin3A a protein isolated from bovine brain crude membranes by chemi - cal crosslinking to Rab3a . The carboxyl - terminal part of rabphilln3A shows significant sequence homology to the synaptic vesicle protein synaptotagmln , and contains two Cz domains like those found in pro - tein klnase C and synaptotagmin . Unlike synaptotagmin , rabphilin3A does not contain any putative transmembrane region . Rabphliin3A was found to form a complex with the GTPyS form of Rab3a , but not with Rab3a - GDP and not with the GTPyS - form of Rabll . 67 . BENNET MK , SCHELUR RI - I : The Molecular Machinery for Secretion Is Conserved from Yeast to Neurons . Proc Nat1 Acud Sci USA 1993 , 90 : 25592563 . 68 . SHOJ ~ - KAQI Y , YOSH ~ DA A SATO K , HOSHINO T , OGURA A , KONDO S , FUJIMOTO Y , Kuw ~ u ~ a ~ R KATO R , T ~ HI M : Neurotransmitter Release from Synaptotagmin - Deficient Clonal Variants of PC12 CelIs . Science 1992 , 256 : 182 & 1823 . 69 . NEWMAN AP , SHIM J , FERRO - NOVICK S : BETf , BOSI , and SEC22 are Members of a Group of Interacting Yeast Genes Re - quired for Transport from the Endoplasmic Reticulum to the Golgl Cotnlex . Mof Cell Biol 1990 , 10 : 3405 - 3414 . 70 . 71 . DASCHER C , Osstc R G ~ uwrtz D , SCHM ~ I - ~ HD : Identiiication and Structure of Four Yeast Genes ( SLY ) that Are Able to Suppress the Functional Loss of KPTI , a Member of the RAS Supedamily . Mol Cell Biol 1991 , 11 : 872 + 385 . NEWMAN AP , GIW J , MANctm P . ROSSI G , UAN JP , FEatto - NO ~ ~ CK S : SEC22 and SLY2 are Identical . Mol Cell Biol 1992 , 12 : 36633664 . M Zerial and H Stenmark , European laboratoty of Molecular Biology , Postfach 10 . 229 , Meyerhofstrasse 1 , 6900 Heidelberg , Germany .