RESEARCH ARTICLE Mechanistic insights into the inhibition of Sec61 - dependent co - and post - translational translocation by mycolactone Michael McKenna 1 , Rachel E . Simmonds 2 and Stephen High 1 , * ABSTRACT The virulence factor mycolactone is responsible for the immunosuppression and tissue necrosis that characterise Buruli ulcer , a disease caused by infection with Mycobacterium ulcerans . In this study , we confirm that Sec61 , the protein - conducting channel that coordinates entry of secretory proteins into the endoplasmic reticulum , is a primary target of mycolactone , and characterise the nature of its inhibitory effect . We conclude that mycolactone constrains the ribosome – nascent - chain – Sec61 complex , consistent with its broad - ranging perturbation of the co - translational translocation of classical secretory proteins . In contrast , the effect of mycolactone on the post - translational ribosome - independent translocation of short secretory proteins through the Sec61 complex is dependent on both signal sequence hydrophobicity and the translocation competence of the mature domain . Changes to protease sensitivity strongly suggest that mycolactone acts by inducing a conformational change in the pore - forming Sec61 α subunit . These findings establish that mycolactone inhibits Sec61 - mediated protein translocation and highlight differences between the co - and post - translational routes that the Sec61 complex mediates . We propose that mycolactone also provides a useful tool for further delineating the molecular mechanisms of Sec61 - dependent protein translocation . KEY WORDS : Buruli ulcer , Endoplasmic reticulum , Mycobacterium ulcerans , Mycolactone , Sec61 , Short secretory protein INTRODUCTION Mycolactone is a polyketide - derived virulence factor produced by Mycobacterium ulcerans , the pathogen responsible for the tropical disease Buruli ulcer ( George et al . , 1999 ) . Buruli ulcer is characterised by chronic and extensive progressively necrotising skin ulcers ( Walsh et al . , 2011 ) , and histopathology reveals atypical clusters of extracellular bacilli , as well as an absence of infiltrating immune cells ( Silva et al . , 2009 ) . Mycolactone is responsible for these symptoms , and strains that lack its polyketide - synthase - encoding plasmid produce only short - lived granulomatous infections ( Stinear et al . , 2004 ) . Mycolactone has been implicated in the under - production of several proteins that are involved in the inflammatory response ( Hall et al . , 2014 ; Pahlevan et al . , 1999 ; Simmonds et al . , 2009 ; Torrado et al . , 2007 ) , and it is responsible for impaired cell adhesion ( Guenin - Macé et al . , 2013 ) as well as a lack of pain reception in patients ( Marion et al . , 2014 ) . Despite the broad inhibition of protein production observed in Buruli ulcer , mycolactone has no direct negative effect on either transcription or translation of the affected proteins ( Boulkroun et al . , 2010 ; Hall et al . , 2014 ; Simmonds et al . , 2009 ) . Instead , mycolactone blocks the Sec61 - dependent translocation of proteins into the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) leading to their rapid degradation ( Hall et al . , 2014 ; Ogbechi et al . , 2015 ) , though the precise mechanism by which this occurs is unclear . Proteins that are synthesised in the cytosol and targeted to the ER include secretory and membrane - embedded proteins , and are often characterised by a hydrophobic stretch of amino acids at or near their N - terminus termed the ‘ signal sequence ’ ( Blobel and Dobberstein , 1975 ) . The majority of these proteins are delivered co - translationally to the ER of mammalian cells ( Nyathi et al . , 2013 ) . In this pathway , the signal sequence is recognised by the signal recognition particle ( SRP ) upon emerging from the ribosomal exit tunnel , and the rate of translation is slowed , allowing the substrate to be targeted to the ER as part of a ribosome – nascent - chain complex ( RNC ) ( Maryet al . , 2010 ; Walterand Blobel , 1981a , b ; Walter et al . , 1981 ) . At the ER , the RNC interacts first with the SRP receptor ( Gilmore et al . , 1982a , b ) , and subsequently with the Sec61 translocon ( Song et al . , 2000 ) , at which point translation continues and protein translocation into the ER lumen occurs . Some proteins are unable to use the co - translational pathway for entry into the ER and must be delivered post - translationally . These include tail - anchored proteins , which possess a hydrophobic C - terminal targeting sequence that only emerges from the ribosomal exit tunnel after translation has been terminated . Tail - anchored proteins utilise a post - translational pathway that is dependent on TRC40 ( also known as ASNA1 ) to reach the ER , and upon delivery are integrated into the ER membrane in a Sec61 - independent manner ( Hegde and Keenan , 2011 ) . Another group of proteins capable of using a post - translational route to the ER are the short secretory proteins ( SSPs ) , whose short mature domain means that translation is often terminated before their N - terminal signal sequence has the opportunity to interact co - translationally with SRP ( Johnson et al . , 2013b ) . Cytosolic factors , including calmodulin ( Shao and Hegde , 2011 ) and TRC40 ( Johnson et al . , 2012 ) , have been implicated in promoting SSP delivery to the ER but , in contrast to the integration of tail - anchored proteins , the translocation of SSPs across the ER membrane is dependent on Sec61 . Hence , both the small - molecule inhibitor eeyarestatin ( Cross et al . , 2009 ; Johnson et al . , 2012 ) , and the siRNA - mediated depletion of Sec61 α ( Lang et al . , 2012 ) perturb the translocation of model SSPs into the ER lumen . The Sec61 translocon is a heterotrimeric membrane protein complex [ comprising Sec61 α 1 ( isoform 1 ) , Sec61 β and Sec61 γ ] that is an essential component for protein translocation into the ER ( Görlich and Rapoport , 1993 ) . Based on structural studies of the Received 28 October 2015 ; Accepted 3 February 2016 1 Faculty of Life Sciences , University of Manchester , Michael Smith Building , Manchester M13 9PT , UK . 2 Department of Microbial Sciences , School of Bioscience and Medicine , Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences , University of Surrey , Guildford GU2 7XH , UK . * Author for correspondence ( stephen . high @ manchester . ac . uk ) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 3 . 0 ) , which permits unrestricted use , distributionandreproductioninanymediumprovidedthattheoriginalworkisproperlyattributed . 1404 © 2016 . Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd | Journal of Cell Science ( 2016 ) 129 , 1404 - 1415 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 182352 J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e equivalent archaeal complex ( Van den Berg et al . , 2004 ) , the Sec61 α subunit is proposed to have ten transmembrane domains that form a gated protein - conducting channel across the ER membrane , as well as a ‘ lateral gate ’ that allows partitioning of hydrophobic domains into the lipid phase of the ER membrane ( Martoglio et al . , 1995 ) . Recent high - resolution structural studies of the eukaryotic translocon have vastly improved our understanding of Sec61 - dependent translocation ( Becker et al . , 2009 ; Gogala et al . , 2014 ; Pfeffer et al . , 2015 ; Voorhees et al . , 2014 ; Voorhees and Hegde , 2016 ) , and it is clear that this process is concomitant with conformational changes of the Sec61 complex that constitute channel gating . The co - translational pathway is highly efficient , with GTP - dependent protein synthesis providing the force necessary for unidirectional translocation through the Sec61 translocon . Although in some instances this process requires the ribosome , Sec61 and SRP receptor only ( Görlich and Rapoport , 1993 ) , auxiliary factors , such as the TRAM protein and the TRAP complex , can often enhance translocation in a signal sequence - specific manner ( Fons et al . , 2003 ; Lang et al . , 2012 ; Voigt et al . , 1996 ) . In contrast , the Sec61 - mediated , post - translational translocation of many SSPs , typically less than 120 residues long , is dependent upon Sec62 , but shows no requirement for SRP receptor ( Lakkaraju et al . , 2012 ) . Indeed , a recent study suggests that the Sec61 translocon exists in two mutually exclusive states – a co - translational ( SRP - receptor - bound ) state and a post - translational ( Sec62 - bound ) state ( Jadhav et al . , 2015 ) . Likewise , in the absence of ongoing protein synthesis , the directionality of post - translational translocation is provided by ER luminal components , most notably BiP ( also known as HSPA5 ) ( Matlack et al . , 1999 ; Schäuble et al . , 2012 ; Tyedmers et al . , 2003 ) . In short , although the Sec61 complex can mediate both co - and post - translational translocation into the ER , there is evidence that these two pathways are mechanistically distinct . In this study , we establish that mycolactone induces a conformational change in Sec61 α , the central component of the ER translocon . This change correlates with distinct perturbations of both co - and post - translational translocation pathways into the ER . For example , although we observe efficient and indiscriminate inhibition of co - translational ER translocation , short and unstructured precursors that employ a post - translational route are less prone to mycolactone - mediated inhibition of the Sec61 complex . We conclude that mycolactone induces a wide - ranging , but by no means global , block on ER translocation . Taken together , our findings highlight the complexity of ER translocation and establish mycolactone as an important tool for understanding different modes of Sec61 - mediated translocation . RESULTS Mycolactone efficiently inhibits co - translational translocation of secretory proteins To assess the ability of mycolactone to inhibit protein translocation into and across the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) membrane , mRNA coding for potential substrates was translated in vitro using rabbit reticulocyte lysate ( RRL ) in the presence of ER - derived canine pancreatic rough microsomes ( Hall et al . , 2014 ) . Efficient translocation across or insertion into the rough microsomes can be detected by signal sequence cleavage ( ‘ c ’ versus ‘ nc ’ ) and / or N - glycosylation ( ‘ + 1g ’ and / or ‘ + 2g ’ ) , depending on the substrate being studied ( Fig . S1A ) . Substrates lacking endogenous glycosylation sites include an additional C - terminal opsin tag termed ‘ OPG ’ or ‘ OPG2 ’ ( one or two consensus N - glycosylation sites , respectively ) where indicated . Given that mycolactone does not directly affect translation ( Hall et al . , 2014 ) , a reduction in the amount of membrane - associated processed substrate provides a reliable readout for an inhibition of ER translocation . As previously described ( Hall et al . , 2014 ) , the co - translational translocation of yeast prepro - α - factor ( PP α F ) was effectively blocked by mycolactone ( Fig . 1A ) . Likewise , efficient processing , and hence ER translocation , of the classic secretory protein precursors preprolactin ( PPL , also known as PRL ) and preprosaposin ( PSAP ) was seen in the absence but not in the presence of mycolactone ( Fig . 1A ) . In contrast , the membrane integration of four different tail - anchored proteins was unaffected by mycolactone ( Fig . 1B ) . These findings support our proposal that mycolactone targets a key component of the co - translational translocation pathway that is not involved in tail - anchored protein biogenesis ( Fig . S1B ) . Our data also clearly show that mycolactone does not interfere with N - glycosylation within the ER lumen per se , and hence this modification provides a faithful readout for mycolactone - induced inhibition of ER translocation . Mycolactone alters the interaction between the RNC complex and the Sec61 translocon Previous studies have identified several different stages of the co - translational translocation pathway at which inhibitors can act , including SRP binding , RNC transfer to the ER , and polypeptide translocation through the Sec61 complex ( Kalies and Römisch , 2015 ) . We therefore set out to define the point at which mycolactone perturbs co - translational translocation ( Fig . 2A ) . To this end , mRNA coding for a truncated version of PPL that lacks a stop codon ( PPL86 , Fig . 2B ) wastranslated in vitro to generate a stable RNC complex that results in a trapped translocation intermediate ( Gilmore et al . , 1991 ) . The nearest neighbours of these artificial translocation intermediates Fig . 1 . Mycolactone blocks co - translational translocation into the ER but does not affect tail - anchored protein integration . Phosphorimage of the indicated in vitro synthesised co - translational substrates ( A ) or tail - anchored proteins ( B ) in the presence or absence of mycolactone ( Myco ) . Samples were treated with endoglycosidase H ( EndoH ) where indicated to distinguish glycosylated ( + g ) from non - glycosylated ( 0g ) bands . nc , signal sequence not cleaved ; c , signal sequence cleaved . 1405 RESEARCH ARTICLE Journal of Cell Science ( 2016 ) 129 , 1404 - 1415 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 182352 J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e can then be investigated by employing protein crosslinking techniques ( Cross et al . , 2009 ; MacKinnon et al . , 2014 ) . To address the possibility that mycolactone affects the ability of nascent PPL86 chains to interact with SRP ( Fig . 2A , scenario i ) , RNCs were generated in the absence of rough microsomes to enable SRP binding , and the samples were treated with the bifunctional amine - reactive crosslinking reagent disuccinimidyl suberate ( DSS ) . Immunoprecipitation using antisera raised against the 54 - kDa subunit of SRP ( SRP54 ) confirmed the identity of discreet crosslinking between it and nascent PPL86 , which persisted when Fig . 2 . Mycolactone alters the interaction between RNCs and the Sec61 complex . ( A ) Diagram of the co - translational pathway with potential sites of mycolactone inhibition indicated . Scenario ( i ) – mycolactone might interfere with the ability of the signal sequence to engage SRP . Scenario ( ii ) – mycolactone might prevent the transferof RNCs from the SRP receptor to the Sec61 complex , perhaps by preventing a productive interaction between these two components . Scenario ( iii ) – mycolactone might alter the interaction of RNCs with the Sec61 complex . ( B ) Schematic of PPL truncations used for crosslinking analysis in this study , with cysteine residues highlighted . ( C ) Phosphorimage of DSS - crosslinked ( crosslinking indicated by ‘ x ’ ) PPL86 that had been in vitro translated with or without mycolactone ( Myco ) and in the absence of rough microsomes . Samples were immunoprecipitated ( IP ) using antisera raised against either PPL ( P ) or SRP54 ( S ) . Control samples were mock immunoprecipitated with pre - immune rabbit serum ( PI ) . In addition to an adduct with SRP54 ( PPL86×SRP54 ) , a higher molecular mass species is also observed ( * ) . We speculate that this most likely represents an adduct that contains an additional component such as SRP19 . Phosphorimages of BMH - crosslinked crosslinked PPL86 ( D ) and PPL75 ( E ) that had been in vitro translated with or without mycolactone and in the presence of rough microsomes . Samples were immunoprecipitated after carbonate extraction using antisera raised against either PPL ( P ) , Sec61 α ( ‘ α ’ ) or Sec61 β ( ‘ β ’ ) . ( F ) Phosphorimage of BMH - crosslinked PPL75 and PPL75 C25A that had been in vitro translated with or without mycolactone . 1406 RESEARCH ARTICLE Journal of Cell Science ( 2016 ) 129 , 1404 - 1415 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 182352 J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e the PPL86 - RNCs were generated in the presence of mycolactone ( Fig . 2C , lane 3 versus lane 6 ) . The persistence of the PPL86×SRP54 adduct in the presence of mycolactone was also confirmed using the alternative crosslinking reagent SMCC ( Fig . S2A ) . We therefore conclude that mycolactone does not perturb the binding of SRP to nascent PPL86 chains . When PPL86 - RNCs were generated in the presence of rough microsomes , the nascent chain formed a strong crosslink with Sec61 α when treated with the thiol - selective crosslinking reagent bismaleimidohexane ( BMH ) ( Fig . 2D , lane 6 ) . Strikingly , this adduct almost completely disappeared in the presence of mycolactone ( Fig . 2D , lane 8 ) . To establish whether this loss of crosslinking to Sec61 α represents a failure of the RNC to reach the Sec61 complex ( Fig . 2A , scenario ii ) , a shorter nascent PPL chain ( PPL75 , Fig . 2B ) that potentially reflects an earlier stage of the ER translocation process ( Laird and High , 1997 ) was analysed . PPL75 generates adducts to both Sec61 α and Sec61 β ( Fig . 2E ) , and whereas the adduct with Sec61 α was clearly diminished in the presence of mycolactone ( Fig . 2E , lane 3 versus lane 7 ) , crosslinking to Sec61 β was noticeably enhanced ( Fig . 2E , lane 4 versus lane 8 ) . The amino acid residue primarily responsible for these adducts was identified as Cys25 within the PPL signal sequence ( Fig . 2B , F ; Fig . S2B ) . Furthermore , mycolactone showed no ability to prevent the re - binding of ribosomes to ER - derived microsomes that had been first stripped of ribosomes by EDTA treatment and high - salt washing ( Fig . S2D ) . Given that ribosome binding at ER - derived membranes is primarily due to interaction with the Sec61 complex ( Kalies et al . , 1994 ) , we conclude that mycolactone does not prevent the RNC from reaching the Sec61 complex ( Fig . 2A , scenario ii ) , but rather alters the nature of their interaction ( Fig . 2A , scenario iii ) . Mycolactone partially inhibits the post - translational ER translocation of short secretory proteins Having found that mycolactone blocks the co - translational translocation of secretory polypeptides through the Sec61 complex , we next wished to test its effect on short secretory protein ( SSP ) translocation . We investigated four SSPs , all of which include a C - terminal OPG2 reporter : hepcidin ( HepOPG2 ) , apelin ( ApOPG2 ) , statherin ( StathOPG2 ) and cecropin ( CecOPG2 ) . Like tail - anchored proteins , SSPs can enter the ER lumen through a post - translational and ribosome - independent mechanism ( Johnson et al . , 2013b ) , but unlike tail - anchored proteins , they do so through the Sec61 translocon ( Cross et al . , 2009 ; Johnson et al . , 2012 ; Lang et al . , 2012 ) . Unlike the classical secretory protein substrates , which were efficiently blocked by mycolactone ( Fig . 1A ) , and tail - anchored membrane proteins , which were unaffected ( Fig . 1B ) , SSPs showed an intermediate level of ER translocation when synthesised in the presence of mycolactone ( Fig . 3A ) . SSP translocation persisted even at concentrations threefold higher than those capable of fully blocking longer secretory proteins ( Fig . 3B , lane 8 ) . Furthermore , with CecOPG2 , translocation was still clearly evident when mycolactone was present at a level tenfold greater than that used to inhibit co - translational translocation ( Fig . 3B , lane 9 versus lane 10 ) , ruling out the likelihood of any simple differences in dose dependence for different classes of substrate . In fact , the amount of ER - translocated material changed little beyond mycolactone concentrations of 0 . 5 µg / ml for StathOPG2 , 1 µg / ml for ApOPG2 and 1 . 5 µg / ml for CecOPG2 ( Fig . 3B , lanes 3 , 4 and 5 , respectively ) , suggesting that these SSPs possess an inherent partial resistance to mycolactone - dependent inhibition of Sec61 - mediated translocation . Although SSPs can enter the ER lumen post - translationally , it is possible that a proportion of newly synthesised precursors might access the co - translational SRP - dependent pathway when synthesised in the presence of ER microsomes ( cf . Lakkaraju et al . , 2012 ) . In order to establish whether mycolactone is selectively inhibiting such a co - translational pool , SSP translocation was analysed using an experimental protocol that is strictly post - translational , given that ER microsomes were added after translation had been terminated and any residual nascent chains released from their ribosome . Although PP α F translocation was fully blocked by mycolactone in the co - translational system ( Fig . 3C , ‘ Co - ’ , lanes 1 and 2 ) , we observed no translocation in the post - translational system even in the absence of mycolactone ( Fig . 3C , ‘ Post - ’ , lanes 1 and 2 ) , confirming PP α F as an obligate co - translational substrate in our cell - free system . In contrast , the translocation of SSPs was apparent in this post - translational system and this process was inhibited by mycolactone to a similar extent as observed when protein synthesis was carried out in the presence of ER microsomes ( Fig . 3C , lanes 3 – 8 compare ‘ Co - ’ and ‘ Post - ’ ) . The SRP - dependent pathway can also be selectively disabled by limited trypsinisation , which degrades the α - subunit of the SRP receptor α ( SR α , also known as SRPR ) while leaving the pore - forming α - subunit of the Sec61 complex largely intact ( Abell et al . , 2004 ; Fig . 3D ) . Hence , following trypsinisation , obligate co - translational substrates such as PPL cannot be translocated and processed by the signal peptidase ( Fig . 3E , lanes 1 and 2 ) . Nevertheless , efficient SRP - independent translocation of both ApOPG2 and CecOPG2 was observed following this trypsinisation ( Fig . 3E , lanes 3 and 5 ) , and the inhibitory effect of mycolactone was similar to that previously observed ( Fig . 3E , lanes 4 and 6 , compare with Fig . 3B ) . We , therefore , conclude that mycolactone also inhibits Sec61 - dependent translocation when it occurs in a strictly post - translational manner , but the extent of this inhibition appears to be substrate specific . Inhibition of SSP translocation by mycolactone is dependent on both signal sequence identity and mature domain length Having observed that the post - translational translocation of different SSPs into the ER lumen was blocked by mycolactone to different extents , we next wished to investigate what determined this specificity . Since some inhibitors of Sec61 are highly signal sequence - dependent ( Kalies and Römisch , 2015 ) , we first addressed the potential role of the signal sequence in determining mycolactone sensitivity . To do this , α FCecOPG and Cec α F , previously characterised chimeric proteins containing the signal sequences from PP α F ( co - translational and highly mycolactone sensitive ) and CecOPG2 ( post - translational and highly mycolactone resistant ) , respectively , were analysed together with their parental proteins ( Fig . 4A ; Johnson et al . , 2013a ) . Although parental CecOPG2 is particularly refractive to mycolactone inhibition ( Fig . 3A , B ) , replacing its endogenous signal sequence with that of PP α F generated a post - translational α FCecOPG chimera that was noticeably more sensitive to mycolactone ( Fig . 4A , lanes 3 , 4 , 7 and 8 ) . However , although the signal sequence of CecOPG2 is more hydrophobic than that of PP α F ( see Fig . 4A and accompanying legend ) , replacing the normal PP α F signal sequence with that of CecOPG2 had little effect , and translocation of the resulting Cec α F chimera was also efficiently inhibited by mycolactone ( Fig . 4A , lanes 1 , 2 , 5 and 6 ) . Taken together , these data suggest that signal sequence identity plays some role in determining the mycolactone sensitivity of post - translationally translocated SSPs , but does not 1407 RESEARCH ARTICLE Journal of Cell Science ( 2016 ) 129 , 1404 - 1415 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 182352 J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e make a major contribution to the mycolactone - induced inhibition of co - translationally translocated substrates . In addition to signal sequence identity , the sensitivity of SSP translocation to mycolactone appeared to show some relationship to the length of the mature domain of the protein ( Fig . 3A ) . For example , ApOPG2 ( 95 residues long including the signal sequence ) was inhibited more effectively by mycolactone than the shorter CecOPG2 ( 82 residues including the signal sequence ) . To test this potential relationship further , a series of apelin truncations that all retained the same C - terminal OPG reporter were generated . When the length of these apelin - derived polypeptides was reduced from 91 to 63 or 55 residues , mycolactone was noticeably less effective at inhibiting their ER translocation , resulting in a higher proportion of N - glycosylation following mycolactone treatment ( Fig . 4B ) . We therefore conclude that the size of the mature domain can contribute to the mycolactone sensitivity of SSPs . Trapping a post - translational translocation intermediate at the Sec61 translocon Although artificially generated RNCs have been extensively used to probe the environment of translocating polypeptides through the co - translational route ( Gilmore et al . , 1991 ) , this approach is not well - suited to study post - translational translocation . We therefore sought to artificially trap a translocating SSP by incorporating the 29 - residue ADR1 zinc finger at the C - terminus of a truncated form of cecropin ( herein denoted ‘ CecZnF ’ ) such that this region of the polypeptide can form a stable , folded conformation in the presence of zinc ions ( Conti et al . , 2014 ) . Furthermore , the version of CecZnF that we created included two consensus sites for N - glycosylation ( N40 and N62 ) to provide a reporter for ER translocation ( Fig . 5A ) . In the absence of added zinc ions , CecZnF is capable of efficient post - translational translocation into ER - derived microsomes , as indicated by N - glycosylation of the polypeptide ( Fig . 5B , lane 1 ) . Increasing the concentration of exogenous zinc ions caused the fully glycosylated form of CecZnF to disappear ( Fig . 5B , lanes 1 – 3 , see ‘ + 2g ’ ) , and resulted in a concomitant increase in the non - glycosylated form ( Fig . 5B , lanes 1 – 3 , see ‘ 0g ’ ) . Additionof zincions led to no such change for a mutant form of CecZnF that lacks Cys58 and Cys61 and whichtherefore cannotco - ordinate zinc ions ( hereafter denoted CecZnF − Cys ) ( Fig . 5B , lanes 4 – 6 ) . We also noted that addition of zinc ions led to an increase in the amount of singly glycosylated CecZnF ( Fig . 5B , lanes 1 – 3 , see ‘ + 1g ’ ) , which we Fig . 3 . Mycolactone partially inhibits post - translational SSP translocation into the ER . ( A ) Various SSPs containing C - terminal OPG2 tags [ hepcidin ( HepOPG2 , 102residues ) , apelin ( ApOPG2 , 95residues ) , statherin ( StathOPG2 , 82residues ) andcecropin ( CecOPG2 , 82residues ) ] were invitro translatedwith or without mycolactone ( left panel ) , and their ability to translocate was assessed by dividing the amount of doubly glycosylated material ( + 2g ) in the presence of mycolactone ( Myco ) by the amount in the absence of mycolactone ( right panel ) . Results are mean±s . d . ( for CecOPG2 n = 9 ; for StathOPG2 and CytB5OPG2 , n = 6 ; forallothersubstrates , n = 8 ) . 0g , non - glycosylated ; + 1g , singlyglycosylated . ( B ) StathOPG2 , ApOPG2andCecOPG2were invitro translatedinthepresence of increasing concentrations of mycolactone . Final concentrations ( µg / ml ) ofmycolactone from left to right are : 0 , 0 . 2 , 0 . 5 , 1 , 1 . 5 , 2 , 2 . 5 and 3 . CecOPG2 was also tested with 10 µg / ml mycolactone ( lane 10 ) oran equivalent volume of DMSO only ( lane 9 ) . Between 0 and 3 µg / ml mycolactone , CecOPG2 was recovered using native immunoprecipitation as opposed to membrane recovery by high - speed centrifugation in order to demonstrate that the decrease in glycosylated material was not due to an inhibition of total material . ( C ) Translocation of SSPs into rough microsomes in the presence of mycolactone was tested in either a co - translational ( Co - , toppanel ) orapost - translational ( Post - , bottom panel ) in vitro translocationsystem . ( D ) Western blotofsalt - washed roughmicrosomes ( KRMs ) that had been incubated with or without 1 µg / ml trypsin on ice for 1 h using antisera raised against either SR α or Sec61 α ( C - term ) . ( E ) The indicated substrates were in vitro translated with or without mycolactone in the presence of trypsinised KRMs . nc , signal sequence not cleaved . 1408 RESEARCH ARTICLE Journal of Cell Science ( 2016 ) 129 , 1404 - 1415 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 182352 J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e confirmed was due to modification of residue N40 ( Fig . S3A ) . We therefore postulated that binding of zinc ions leads to two distinct populations of CecZnF ( Fig . 5C ) : ( 1 ) a singly glycosylated , yet fully translocated population , where N62 is occluded from the oligosaccharyltransferase due to folding of the zinc finger ( McGinnes and Morrison , 1997 ; Schulz et al . , 2009 ) ; and ( 2 ) a non - glycosylated population that is trapped by the Sec61 translocon . In order to test this hypothesis , we used chemical crosslinking to probe the local environment of CecZnF in the presence and absence of exogenous zinc ions . This approach revealed the appearance of an adduct between CecZnF and Sec61 α , together with a reduction in crosslinking between CecZnF and the ER lumenal chaperone calreticulin ( CRT , also known as CALR ; Fig . 5D ; Fig . S3B ) . Furthermore , upon EndoH treatment , no size shift was observed for the Sec61 α adduct ( Fig . S3C ) , confirming that its CecZnF component is not glycosylated , but is instead a bona fide post - translational trapped intermediate . The faint appearance of the CecZnF and Sec61 α adduct observed in the absence of additional zinc ions ( Fig . 5D , lanes 2 and 6 ) is most likely due to folding induced by endogenous zinc ions ( Conti et al . , 2014 ) . Like other SSPs ( see Figs 3A and 4A ) , CecZnF displays only a partial sensitivity to mycolactone , with over 50 % of the substrate still being translocated in the presence of the compound ( Fig . 5E ) . Furthermore , CecZnF is slightly more sensitive to mycolactone than its CecZnF − Cys control ( Fig . 5E ) , suggesting that the folding and / or conformation of the mature domain can influence the sensitivity of SSPs to mycolactone . Despite only partially inhibiting CecZnF translocation , mycolactone strongly diminished the DSS - mediated adduct formed between CecZnF and Sec61 α in the presence of zinc ions ( Fig . 5F , lane 5 versus lane 6 ) . This observation suggests that mycolactone does not preclude access of the substrate to the translocon pore , but changes the architecture of the translocon in such a way that it prevents the formation of this amine - dependent crosslinking product . Interestingly , mycolactone could disrupt the ability of trapped CecZnF chains to crosslink Sec61 α even when it was added after the ER - targeting step had occurred and trapped intermediates had already accumulated ( Fig . 5F , lane 7 versus lane 8 ) . In contrast , mycolactone was unable to reverse the juxtaposition of nascent PPL86 chains that had already docked at the Sec61 complex as part of a pre - existing RNC translocation intermediate ( Fig . 5G , lane 3 versus lane 4 ) . Therefore , our observations with mycolactone highlight differences between co - and post - translationally delivered secretory proteins both in their initial engagement with the Sec61 complex and subsequent translocation into the ER lumen . Mycolactone alters the crosslinking profile and protease - sensitivity of Sec61 α Taken together , the data outlined above support a model where mycolactone induces a conformational change at the ER translocon and / or its associated components that results in defective protein translocation through the Sec61 complex . Having ruled out any effect on ribosome binding ( Fig . S2D ) , we employed crosslinking to Fig . 4 . InhibitionofSSPsbymycolactoneisdependentonsignalsequenceidentityandmaturedomainlength . ( A ) ChimerasofPP α FandCecOPG2were generatedbyswappingoftheirrespectivesignalsequences ( leftpanel ) andtheirtranslocationintoroughmicrosomesinthepresenceofmycolactone ( Myco ) was assessed as described above ( middle and right panels ) . Results are mean±s . d . ( n = 3 ) . The net hydrophobicity ( Kyte - Doolittle scale , KD ) of the full PP α F and CecOPG2 signal sequences were estimated by averaging the individual values obtained using http : / / web . expasy . org / protscale / ( window size of 9 ) . Alternatively , the Δ G app for the same regions was calculated using http : / / dgpred . cbr . su . se / ( Hessa et al . , 2007 ) . It should be noted that more hydrophobic signal sequences are denoted by more positive KD values and more negative Δ G app values . ( B ) A series of apelin truncations , including C - terminal OPG tags , were generated ( left panel ) and their translocation into rough microsomes in the presence of mycolactone was assessed ( middle and right panels ) . Results are mean±s . d . ( n = 4 ) . The mycolactone sensitivity of the longest apelin - derived construct ( Ap91 ) was found to be significantly different to both Ap63 and Ap55 . * * * P ≤ 0 . 001 ; * * * * P ≤ 0 . 0001 ; ns , not significant ( one - way ANOVA ) . 1409 RESEARCH ARTICLE Journal of Cell Science ( 2016 ) 129 , 1404 - 1415 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 182352 J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e probe the local environment of four translocon and translocon - associated components : Sec61 α , Sec61 β , Sec62 and TRAM ( also known as TRAM1 ) , in the presence and absence of mycolactone ( Fig . S4A – D ) . Treatment of rough microsomes with mycolactone resulted in a modest qualitative reduction in the intensity of DSS - dependent adducts containing Sec61 α ( Fig . S4A , lanes 5 and 6 , asterisk ) and Sec61 β ( Fig . S4B , lanes 5 and 6 , asterisk ) . It remains to be confirmed that these two ∼ 47 - kDa products represent a single adduct containing both Sec61 α and Sec61 β ( Kalies et al . , 1998 ) . Nevertheless , these data are consistent with a subtle conformational change at the Sec61 translocon following mycolactone treatment , as further suggested by the enhancement of a faint ∼ 75 kDa BMH - dependent adduct of Sec61 β that is observed after mycolactone treatment of rough microsomes ( Fig . S4B , lanes 3 and 4 , double asterisk ) . As an alternative approach to study mycolactone - induced conformational changes of key translocon components , limited proteolysis was performed using high - salt - washed rough microsomes that had been pre - incubated with either mycolactone or a vehicle control . Trypsinisation of control membranes and Fig . 5 . Mycolactone affects co - and post - translationally trapped intermediates at the Sec61 translocon differently . ( A ) Schematic of CecZnF indicating N - glycosylation sites ( Y symbols ) , as well as cysteine and histidine residues involved in coordinating the zinc ion in the C - terminal ADR1 zinc finger domain . ( B ) Post - translational translocation of CecZnFand CecZnF − Cys ( afolding deficient mutant ) into rough microsomes with increasing concentrations of exogenous zinc ions ( Zn 2 + ) . 0g , non - glycosylated ; + 1g , singly glycosylated ; + 2g , doubly glycosylated . ( C ) Cartoon depicting the two postulated populations of CecZnF in the presence of exogenous Zn 2 + ( 0 . 5 mM ) : ( 1 ) fully translocated but only singly glycosylated and ( 2 ) non - glycosylated and trapped at the Sec61 translocon . ( D ) DSS crosslinking analysis of CecZnF in the presence or absence of exogenous Zn 2 + ( 0 . 5 mM ) . Samples were analysed by SDS - PAGE either following isolation of rough microsomes by ultracentrifugation ( left panel ) or by immunoprecipitation ( IP ) using antisera raised against Sec61 α ( C - terminus ) ( right panel ) . ( E ) Post - translational translocation of CecOPG2 , CecZnF and CecZnF – Cys was assessed with only endogenous Zn 2 + ions present in the presence or absence of mycolactone ( Myco ) . Results are mean±s . d . ( n = 3 ) . ( F ) DSS crosslinking analysis of CecZnF with or without additional Zn 2 + ions and with mycolactone added either before addition of rough microsomes ( Pre - ) or after addition of rough microsomes ( Post - ) . ( G ) As for F , but BMH crosslinking was performed on PPL86 . 1410 RESEARCH ARTICLE Journal of Cell Science ( 2016 ) 129 , 1404 - 1415 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 182352 J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e blotting for an N - terminal epitope of Sec61 α revealed two previously characterised digestion products that arise from cleavage at cytosolic loops L6 and L8 of this polytopic protein ( Fig . 6A ; see Song et al . , 2000 ) . Pre - treatment of membranes with mycolactone resulted in a kinetic delay in the appearance of these proteolytic fragments ( Fig . 6B , D , E ) , indicating that Sec61 α had become more resistant to trypsin cleavage at these sites . In contrast , Sec61 β showed no difference in sensitivity to trypsin following mycolactone treatment ( Fig . 6C , F ) , thus ruling out the possibility that mycolactone affects trypsin activity per se . Hence , mycolactone treatment alters the protease sensitivity of Sec61 α , the central pore - forming component of the ER translocon ( Van den Berg et al . , 2004 ) . DISCUSSION In this study , we characterise the inhibitory mechanism of the polyketide - derived virulence factor mycolactone , and confirm that its principal target is the Sec61 translocon of the ER membrane . Furthermore , we observe clear differences in the effects of mycolactone on co - and post - translational translocation through the Sec61 translocon . Mycolactone efficiently inhibits co - translational translocation of polypeptides into the ER , whereas post - translationally translocated SSPs typically show only a partial inhibition in the presence of mycolactone . The extent to which SSP translocation is inhibited by mycolactone can apparently be influenced by signal sequence hydrophobicity , as well as the length and folding propensity of the mature domain . In both cases , these effects on protein translocation are likely brought about by a mycolactone - induced conformational change in the pore - forming Sec61 α subunit , which we speculate might stabilise a closed conformation of the Sec61 complex ( see below ) . These findings highlight previously unappreciated differences between Sec61 - mediated co - and post - translational translocation , and provide further molecular insights into the pathology of Buruli ulcer . Mycolactone inhibits co - translational translocation through Sec61 The previously characterised small - molecule inhibitor eeyarestatin I ( ESI ) has been proposed to inhibit co - translational Sec61 - dependent translocation into the ER by preventing the transfer of RNCs from the SRP receptor to Sec61 ( Cross et al . , 2009 ) , and we find that adducts between a trapped PPL75 nascent chain and both Sec61 α and Sec61 β are clearly diminished in the presence of ESI ( Fig . S2C ) . However , it is worth noting that whereas ESI treatment completely inhibited crosslinking of Sec61 α to a trapped membrane protein intermediate ( Cross et al . , 2009 ) , it only partially inhibits its crosslinking to PPL75 ( Fig . S2C ) . The difference between these two precursors suggests that the effects of ESI on ER translocon might be more complex than previously envisaged ( Cross et al . , 2009 ) . In contrast to the effects of ESI , although mycolactone treatment also results in a substantial loss of crosslinking to Sec61 α , crosslinking between nascent PPL75 and Sec61 β is actually enhanced ( Fig . 2E ) . Fig . 6 . Mycolactone induces aconformational change in the Sec61 α subunit of the ER translocon . ( A ) Schematic showing Sec61 α and Sec61 β topologies in the ER membrane with trypsin cleavage sites in Sec61 α loops L6 and L8 indicated . Western blotting of trypsinised KRMs was performed with an antiserum raisedagainsteitherSec61 α ( N - terminus ) ( B ) orSec61 β ( C ) inthepresenceorabsenceofmycolactone ( Myco ) . Degradationproductscorrespondingtocleavage atSec61 α loopsL8 ( α 393 ) andL6 ( α 274 ) areindicated , aswellasanunidentifieddegradationproductat ∼ 27 kDa ( * ) . Full - lengthSec61 β isalsoindicated ( β ) . FL α , full - length Sec61 α . ( D – F ) Relative band intensity of α 393 , α 274 and β over the 60 - min trypsinisation . Results are mean±s . d . ( n = 3 ) . 1411 RESEARCH ARTICLE Journal of Cell Science ( 2016 ) 129 , 1404 - 1415 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 182352 J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e This finding suggests that rather than preventing the delivery of co - translational substrates to the ER translocon per se , mycolactone changes the nature of the Sec61 – RNC interaction at a post - targeting step . Enhanced crosslinking of nascent polypeptides to Sec61 β has been observed with the cyclodepsipeptides CAM741 and cotransin , which selectively perturb ER translocation in a signal - sequence - specific manner ( Garrison et al . , 2005 ; Besemer et al . , 2005 ; Harant et al . , 2007 ) . In contrast , the mycolactone - dependent inhibition of co - translational substrates appears to be unaffected by the signal sequence identity of the precursors in this study ( Figs 1A and 4A ) , more closely resembling the inhibitory effects of cotransin CT09 ( Maifeld et al . , 2011 ) . This suggests that mycolactone can inhibit the co - translational translocation of a wide range of substrates , consistent with the near complete loss of glycosylated and secreted proteins observed when mammalian cells are treated with the compound ( Hall et al . , 2014 ) . Furthermore , although the effects of cyclodepsipeptides on the ER translocation of bona fide SSPs are poorly characterised ( Johnson et al . , 2013a ) , the inhibitory effect of mycolactone that we observe on this class of substrate is detailed below . Although we observe that mycolactone alters the interaction between RNCs and Sec61 α , it appears less capable of doing so once the targeting of PPL86 - RNCs to the Sec61 complex has already taken place ( Fig . 5G ) . Previous studies have suggested that PPL86 - RNCs form a tight interaction with the Sec61 complex that precludes access of cytosolic factors to the nascent chain ( Connolly et al . , 1989 ; Hegde and Lingappa , 1996 ) . We therefore speculate that RNC docking at the Sec61 complex might either obstruct the target site of mycolactone , or that , once formed , the stability of this ribosome - bound complex is such that it prevents conformational changes in Sec61 α that mycolactone otherwise induces . In support of this , we find that the local environment of an SSP translocation intermediate that is trapped at the Sec61 complex in the absence of a ribosome can be perturbed upon mycolactone treatment ( Fig . 5F ) . However , we cannot rule out the possibility that our trapped SSP translocation intermediate is capable of cycling on and off the translocon , and that mycolactone prevents its proper interaction with Sec61 α by acting when our substrate is not bound to the Sec61 complex . It is worth noting that the mycolactone resistance of the RNC docked at the Sec61 complex has been observed using an artificial in vitro translocation intermediate . In a physiological setting , the rapid recycling of ribosomes on and off the ER translocon ( Jan et al . , 2014 ) would therefore afford no long - term resistance of co - translational substrates to mycolactone . Mycolactone has different effects on Sec61 - mediated co - and post - translational translocation Mycolactone inhibits SSP translocation into the ER to a lesser extent than for co - translationally translocated substrates ( Fig . 3A versus 1A ) . Moreover , this partial inhibition persists in a strictly post - translational and ribosome - independent in vitro system ( Fig . 3C – E ) , demonstrating that the effect of mycolactone on ER translocation cannot be explained solely by a disruption of the RNC – Sec61 interaction . Rather , mycolactone treatment alters the Sec61 translocon in such a way that limits its role in both co - and post - translational translocation . Interestingly , the production of several chemokines that bear the hallmarks of SSPs is affected in cell culture models ( Coutanceau et al . , 2007 ; Hall et al . , 2014 ) . We speculate that the properties of these chemokines are akin to the more sensitive SSPs , such as apelin , that we have defined using an in vitro system . Alternatively , in a cellular context , mycolactone treatment might simply inhibit the renewal of key cellular components that depend upon the co - translational pathway , including Sec61 α ( Knight and High , 1998 ) . Unlike co - translational substrates , the extent of SSP inhibition by mycolactone shows some dependence on the identity of the signal sequence , and we speculate that this might be due to differences in hydrophobicity ( see Johnson et al . , 2013a ) . Hence , when the endogenous signal sequence of CecOPG2 is replaced with the less hydrophobic signal from PP α F , the resulting chimera is more sensitive to mycolactone ( Fig . 4A ) . Additionally , the ER translocation of SSPs can be made less sensitive to mycolactone by truncating the mature domain ( Fig . 4B ) or reducing its propensity to fold prior to translocation ( Fig . 5E ) . It has been shown that signal sequence hydrophobicity must be sufficient to induce translocon gating ( Jungnickel and Rapoport , 1995 ; Trueman et al . , 2012 ) , and that point mutations and small - molecule inhibitors can alter this ‘ hydrophobicity threshold ’ by stabilising either ‘ open ’ or ‘ closed ’ conformations of the Sec61 translocon ( Junne et al . , 2007 ; MacKinnon et al . , 2014 ; Voorhees and Hegde , 2016 ) . A recent study has identified decatransin as a molecule capable of inhibiting co - and post - translational translocation into the ER , and found this compound to be much less effective when the closed conformation of Sec61 was destabilised by introducing point mutations into the so - called plug domain ( Junne et al . , 2015 ) . Similar mutations conferred partial resistance to the translocation inhibitor CT8 , as did increasing the hydrophobicity of the apolar region responsible for inducing channel gating ( MacKinnon et al . , 2014 ) . Our observations are therefore consistent with a model where mycolactone stabilises a closed conformation of the Sec61 translocon that , in the case of post - translational translocation , requires a more hydrophobic signal sequence to induce translocon opening , and which is less permissive to the post - translational translocation of mature domains that are long or stably folded . One intriguing possibility is that these different small - molecule inhibitors of the ER translocon , including mycolactone , all bind to a similar region of the Sec61 α subunit ( MacKinnon et al . , 2014 , 2007 ) . The stabilisation of a closed Sec61 conformation by mycolactone is also consistent with our observation that co - translationally translocated substrates are prevented from entering the ER , yet , unlike SSPs , the translocation of these substrates is not enhanced by increasing signal sequence hydrophobicity ( Fig . 4A ) . At present we can only speculate as to the molecular basis for this difference . It could be that a mycolactone - dependent stabilisation of a closed Sec61 conformation can indeed be overcome by increasingly hydrophobic signal sequences present on co - translational substrates , but the translocation of their large mature domains is still precluded , in contrast to the shorter and less structured SSPs ( Figs 3A , 4B and 5E ) . Alternatively , mycolactone might critically interfere with ribosome - dependent priming of the Sec61 complex ( Pfeffer et al . , 2015 ; Voorhees and Hegde , 2016 ) . Hence , although mycolactone has no effect on the binding of ribosomes to ER membranes ( Fig . S2D ) , we observe discrete changes in the architecture of the RNC – Sec61 interaction as evidenced by crosslinking of the nascent chain to Sec61 subunits ( Fig . 2E ) . Additionally , the cytosolic regions of Sec61 α that show altered trypsin sensitivity upon mycolactone treatment ( Fig . 6B , D , E ) overlap with domains that are implicated in ribosome binding ( Cheng et al . , 2005 ; Voorhees et al . , 2014 ) . On this basis , we favour a model where mycolactone perturbs an interaction between the ribosome and the Sec61 complex that is necessary for co - translational translocation to progress ( Becker et al . , 2009 ; Cheng et al . , 2005 ; Gogala et al . , 2014 ; Pfeffer et al . , 2015 ; Voorhees and Hegde , 2016 ) , and thereby 1412 RESEARCH ARTICLE Journal of Cell Science ( 2016 ) 129 , 1404 - 1415 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 182352 J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e efficiently inhibits this pathway irrespective of the precise signal sequence carried by a precursor protein . In summary , mycolactone inhibits both co - and post - translational translocation through the Sec61 translocon , and provides a promising tool for further delineating the complexities of protein translocation across the ER membrane . MATERIALS AND METHODS Synthetic mycolactone A / B was a gift from Yoshito Kishi , Harvard University , MA ( Song et al . , 2002 ) . Unless otherwise stated , all standard laboratory reagents were obtained from Merck or Sigma . DNA constructs HepOPG2 and CecZnF were obtained from Genscript and subcloned into pcDNA5 ( Invitrogen ) . All other short secretory protein and tail - anchored protein constructs were as previously described ( Johnson et al . , 2012 ; Rabu et al . , 2008 ) . CecOPG2 and PP α F chimeras were prepared as described previously ( Johnson et al . , 2013a ) . PP α F was from Jeffrey Brodsky ( University of Pittsburgh , Pittsburgh , PA ) . PSAP was obtained from Origene . PPL was as described previously ( High et al . , 1993 ) . cDNAs were generated by PCR and transcribed with T7 polymerase ( Promega ) . Antibodies The mouse monoclonal antibody recognising the opsin tag ( Adamus et al . , 1991 ) and the rabbit antiserum against Sec61 α ( N - terminus ) ( Laird and High , 1997 ) were as described previously . Rabbit antisera against : SRP54 , Sec61 β and SR α were gifts from Bernhard Dobberstein ( University of Heidelberg , Heidelberg , Germany ) ; Sec61 α ( C - terminus ) and Sec62 from Richard Zimmermann ( University of Saarland , Homburg , Germany ) ; and PPL from Sharon Tooze ( Francis Crick Institute , London , UK ) . A rabbit antiserum recognising an internal peptide of the human 25 - kDa subunit of the signal peptidase complex ( SPCS2 ) was custom made by Eurogentec . Anti - calreticulin was purchased from Affinity Bioreagents ( catalogue number , PA3 - 900 ) . Anti - RPL19 was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology ( catalogue number sc - 100830 ) . Antibody dilutions are given in the relevant section . In vitro translation and translocation assays Translation reactions ( 25 µl ) were carried out using nuclease - treated rabbit reticulocyte lysate ( Promega ) . Translations were performed in the presence of EasyTag EXPRESS 35 S Protein Labelling Mix containing [ 35 S ] methionine ( Perkin Elmer ) ( 0 . 769 MBq ; 43 . 5 TBq / mmol ) . Amino acids minus methionine ( Promega ) were added to 30 µM . 1 µg of in vitro transcribed RNA was then added . For co - translational reactions , 10 % ( v / v ) nuclease - treatedroughmicrosomes [ opticaldensityat280nm ( OD 280 ) = 44 / ml ] were added and the samples were incubated for 30 min at 30°C . For post - translational reactions , the sample was incubated for 15 min at 30°C in the absence of rough microsomes . Puromycin was added to 0 . 5 mM following the translation and incubated at 30°C for 5 min to ensure effective release of the polypeptide from the ribosome . 2 µl of rough microsomes ( OD 280 = 44 / ml ) were added and the sample was incubated for a further 20 min at 30°C . Mycolactone in DMSO was first diluted to 25 µg / ml using 0 . 5 % ( w / v ) BSA in nuclease - free water before addition to the translation mixture to give a final concentration of 1 µg / ml . Control was an equivalent volume of 10 % ( v / v ) DMSO in 0 . 5 % ( w / v ) BSA . For the co - translational system , mycolactone was present during translation . For the post - translational system , mycolactone was added after puromycin treatment , but before rough microsome addition . To look at folding of the CecZnF zinc finger , ZnCl 2 solution in 6 mM HCl was added to a final concentration of 0 . 1 or 0 . 5 mM after puromycin treatment but before rough microsome addition , and incubated at 30°C for 3 min . Membrane recovery and visualisation Membranes were recovered by centrifugation through an 80 - µl high - salt cushion [ 0 . 75 M sucrose , 0 . 5 M KOAc , 5 mM Mg ( OAc ) 2 , 50 mM Hepes - KOH , pH 7 . 9 ] at 100 , 000 g for 10 min at 4°C in a TLA100 rotor ( Beckmann ) . The membrane pellet was resuspended in 20 µl low - salt buffer [ 100 mM sucrose , 100 mM KOAc , 5 mM Mg ( OAc ) 2 , 50 mM Hepes - KOH pH 7 . 9 , 1 mM DTT ] and treated with 250 µg / ml RNase A at 37°C for 10 min . Where indicated , samples were also treated with endoglycosidase H ( EndoH ) ( New England Biolabs ) as described by the supplier . The resulting samples were analysed by SDS - PAGE and phosphorimaging using a Typhoon FLA - 7000 ( GE Healthcare ) . Images were then processed using Adobe Photoshop and Adobe Illustrator . Data were quantified using Aida ( Raytek ) and statistical analysis ( one - way ANOVA ) was performed using GraphPad ( Prism ) . The exact sample size ( n ) for each experimental group is provided in the appropriate figure legends . In each case , n was defined by the number of times the substrate was tested in the same experimental system and so represents technical replicates . Crosslinking and immunoprecipitation For crosslinking PPL86 to cytosolic components , PPL86 - RNCs were generated by carrying out in vitro translation for 15 min in the absence of rough microsomes , as described above . The RNC pellet was isolated by centrifuging 160 , 000 g for 20 min at 4°C , before being resuspended in low - salt buffer . DSS ( in DMSO stock ) was added to a final concentration of 1 mM ( control was an equivalent volume of DMSO ) and was incubated at 30°C for 10 min before being quenched with 50 mM glycine . Denaturing immunoprecipitation was then carried out by adding SDS to 1 % ( v / v ) and heating at 70°C for 10 min . Nine volumes of Triton immunoprecipitation buffer ( 10 mM Tris - HCl pH 7 . 5 , 140 mM NaCl , 1 mM EDTA , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 5 mM PMSF , 1 mM methionine ) were added , and the appropriate antiserum was added at 1 : 200 . Samples were incubated for 15 h at 4°C with constant agitation . Protein - A – Sepharose beads ( Genscript ) were added to 10 % ( v / v ) and samples were incubated at 4°C for a further 2 h . Protein - A – Sepharose beads were then recovered by centrifuging at 13 , 000 g for 1 min and washed with Triton immunoprecipitation buffer before being heated at 70°C for 10 min in SDS sample buffer . For crosslinking to translocon components , after membranes were recovered and resuspended in low - salt buffer as described above , the appropriate chemical cross - linker was added to 1 mM and incubated at 30°C for 10 min . The reaction was quenched by adding 20 mM β - mercaptoethanol for BMH - treated samples , or 50 mM glycine for DSS - treated samples . For PPL truncations , samples were also carbonate - extracted by adding 150 µl of 0 . 1 M Na 2 CO 3 ( pH 11 . 3 ) , incubating for 15 min on ice , and recovering the membrane fraction by centrifuging at 100 , 000 g for 10 min at 4°C . Samples were then either analysed directly by SDS - PAGE , or were first immunoprecipitated under denaturing conditions as described above . Native immunoprecipitation of CecOPG2 during mycolactone titration ( see Fig . 3B ) was performed as above , with the exception that Triton immunoprecipitation buffer was added to the total translation reaction without rough microsome recovery through a high - salt cushion , and no SDS was added . Microsome trypsinisation and western blotting Salt - washed rough microsomes ( denoted KRMs ) were prepared as described previously ( Walter and Blobel , 1983 ) and mycolactone was added to 2 . 5 µg / ml . Control was an equivalent volume of 10 % ( v / v ) DMSO in 0 . 5 % ( w / v ) BSA . KRMs were then treated with 1 µg / ml trypsin on ice for 1 h , with further protease activity being inhibited by the addition of 5 mM PMSF and incubating on ice for 10 min . To degrade Sec61 α , KRMs were subjected to a second round of high - salt washing before incubating with 1 µg / ml trypsin on ice . 5 mM PMSF was added at the indicated time points and the samples were incubated on ice for a further 10 min . Samples were then separated by SDS - PAGE and were analysed by using western blotting as described previously ( Johnson et al . , 2012 ) . For blotting , anti - Sec61 α ( N - terminus ) antibodies were used at a dilution of 1 : 1000 and anti - Sec61 β at 1 : 3000 . Blots were quantified using Image Studio ( LI - COR Biosciences ) . Microsome crosslinking and western blotting To perform crosslinking of translocon subunits and associated components , as seen in Fig . S4 , rough microsomes were incubated with either 2 . 5 µg / ml mycolactone or an equivalent volume of DMSO in 0 . 5 % ( w / v ) BSA for 5 min at 30°C . Either BMH or DSS was added at 100 µM final concentration and incubated at 30°C for 10 min . The reactions were quenched by adding 20 mM β - mercaptoethanol for BMH - treated samples , or 50 mM glycine for 1413 RESEARCH ARTICLE Journal of Cell Science ( 2016 ) 129 , 1404 - 1415 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 182352 J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e DSS - treated samples . Samples were then carbonate - extracted as described above and were analysed by performing SDS - PAGE and western blotting as described previously ( Johnson et al . , 2012 ) . For blotting , all primary antibodies were used at a dilution of 1 : 1000 apart from anti - Sec61 β , which was used at 1 : 3000 . Ribosome - binding assay Ribosomes were isolated from rabbit reticulocyte lysate ( Promega ) . 400 µl of lysate was centrifuged at 13 , 000 g for 20 min at 4°C to remove debris . The supernatant wasthen applied onto acushion of 0 . 5 M sucrose in binding buffer [ 20 mM HEPES ( pH 7 . 6 ) , 10 mM NaCl , 5 mM Mg ( OAc ) 2 , 150 mM KOAc , 1 mM DTT ] and centrifuged at 200 , 000 g for 30 min at 4°C . The pellet was resuspended in 400 µl of 10 % ( v / v ) glycerol in binding buffer . Ribosomes were again centrifuged at 13 , 000 g and 19 µl of the supernatant was added to 2 µl EDTA - treated and high - salt - washed rough microsomes [ denoted EKRMs , prepared as described previously ( Jadhav et al . , 2015 ) ] . The concentration of the EKRMs was equivalent to rough microsomes of OD 280 = 44 / ml , as determined by blotting for SPC25 . Samples were incubated for 10 min at 30°C with 1 µg / ml mycolactone or an equivalent volume of 10 % ( v / v ) DMSO in 0 . 5 % ( w / v ) BSA . Control samples were incubated with either 5 mM EDTA or rough microsome buffer in place of EKRMs . Membranes were then recovered by centrifuging at 13 , 000 g for 10 min at 4°C before being analysed by using SDS - PAGE and western blotting as described previously ( Johnson et al . , 2012 ) . For blotting , anti - SPC25 was used at 1 : 2000 and anti - RPL19 at 1 : 500 . The relative amount of bound ribosomes was calculated by dividing the amount of ribosomes present ( determined by blotting for RPL19 ) by the amount of EKRMs ( determined by blotting for SPC25 ) . Acknowledgements We would like to give special thanks to Martin Pool and Lisa Swanton for their comments during the preparation of the manuscript . Competing interests The authors declare no competing or financial interests . Author contributions M . M . , R . E . S . and S . H . conceived and designed the experiments . M . M . performed theexperiments . M . M . , R . E . S . andS . H . allcontributedtotheanalysisofthedataand the preparation of the manuscript . Funding This work was supported by a Doctoral Training Programme Award from the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council ( BBSRC ) [ grant number BB / J014478 / 1 to M . M . ] ; and Wellcome Trust funding [ grant number WT092744 to R . E . S . ] . Deposited in PMC for immediate release . Supplementary information Supplementary information available online at http : / / jcs . biologists . org / lookup / suppl / doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 182352 / - / DC1 References Abell , B . M . , Pool , M . R . , Schlenker , O . , Sinning , I . and High , S . ( 2004 ) . Signal recognition particle mediates post - translational targeting in eukaryotes . EMBO J . 23 , 2755 - 2764 . Adamus , G . , Zam , Z . S . , Arendt , A . , Palczewski , K . , McDowell , J . H . and Hargrave , P . A . ( 1991 ) . Anti - rhodopsin monoclonal antibodies of defined specificity : characterization and application . Vision Res . 31 , 17 - 31 . Becker , T . , Bhushan , S . , Jarasch , A . , Armache , J . - P . , Funes , S . , Jossinet , F . , Gumbart , J . , Mielke , T . , Berninghausen , O . , Schulten , K . et al . ( 2009 ) . Structure of monomeric yeast and mammalian Sec61 complexes interacting with the translating ribosome . Science 326 , 1369 - 1373 . Besemer , J . , Harant , H . , Wang , S . , Oberhauser , B . , Marquardt , K . , Foster , C . A . , Schreiner , E . P . , de Vries , J . E . , Dascher - Nadel , C . and Lindley , I . J . D . ( 2005 ) . Selective inhibition of cotranslational translocation of vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 . Nature 436 , 290 - 293 . Blobel , G . and Dobberstein , B . ( 1975 ) . Transfer of proteins across membranes . I . Presence of proteolytically processed and unprocessed nascent immunoglobulin light chains on membrane - bound ribosomes of murine myeloma . J . Cell Biol . 67 , 835 - 851 . Boulkroun , S . , Guenin - Mace ́ , L . , Thoulouze , M . - I . , Monot , M . , Merckx , A . , Langsley , G . , Bismuth , G . , Di Bartolo , V . and Demangel , C . ( 2010 ) . Mycolactone suppresses T cell responsiveness by altering both early signaling and posttranslational events . J . Immunol . 184 , 1436 - 1444 . Cheng , Z . , Jiang , Y . , Mandon , E . C . and Gilmore , R . ( 2005 ) . Identification of cytoplasmic residues of Sec61p involved in ribosome binding and cotranslational translocation . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 67 - 77 . Connolly , T . , Collins , P . andGilmore , R . ( 1989 ) . AccessofproteinaseKtopartially translocated nascent polypeptides in intact and detergent - solubilized membranes . J . Cell Biol . 108 , 299 - 307 . Conti , B . J . , Elferich , J . , Yang , Z . , Shinde , U . and Skach , W . R . ( 2014 ) . Cotranslational folding inhibits translocation from within the ribosome - Sec61 translocon complex . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 21 , 228 - 235 . Coutanceau , E . , Decalf , J . , Martino , A . , Babon , A . , Winter , N . , Cole , S . T . , Albert , M . L . and Demangel , C . ( 2007 ) . Selective suppression of dendritic cell functions by Mycobacterium ulcerans toxin mycolactone . J . Exp . Med . 204 , 1395 - 1403 . Cross , B . C . S . , McKibbin , C . , Callan , A . C . , Roboti , P . , Piacenti , M . , Rabu , C . , Wilson , C . M . , Whitehead , R . , Flitsch , S . L . , Pool , M . R . et al . ( 2009 ) . Eeyarestatin I inhibits Sec61 - mediated protein translocation at the endoplasmic reticulum . J . Cell . Sci . 122 , 4393 - 4400 . Fons , R . D . , Bogert , B . A . and Hegde , R . S . ( 2003 ) . Substrate - specific function of the translocon - associated protein complex during translocation across the ER membrane . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 529 - 539 . Garrison , J . L . , Kunkel , E . J . , Hegde , R . S . and Taunton , J . ( 2005 ) . A substrate - specific inhibitor of protein translocation into the endoplasmic reticulum . Nature 436 , 285 - 289 . George , K . M . , Chatterjee , D . , Gunawardana , G . , Welty , D . , Hayman , J . , Lee , R . and Small , P . L . C . ( 1999 ) . Mycolactone : a polyketide toxin from Mycobacterium ulcerans required for virulence . Science 283 , 854 - 857 . Gilmore , R . , Blobel , G . and Walter , P . ( 1982a ) . Protein translocation across the endoplasmic reticulum . I . Detection in themicrosomalmembrane of areceptor for the signal recognition particle . J . Cell Biol . 95 , 463 - 469 . Gilmore , R . , Walter , P . and Blobel , G . ( 1982b ) . Protein translocation across the endoplasmic reticulum . II . Isolation and characterization of the signal recognition particle receptor . J . Cell Biol . 95 , 470 - 477 . Gilmore , R . , Collins , P . , Johnson , J . , Kellaris , K . and Rapiejko , P . ( 1991 ) . Transcription of full - length and truncated mRNA transcripts to study protein translocation across the endoplasmic reticulum . Methods Cell Biol . 34 , 223 - 239 . Gogala , M . , Becker , T . , Beatrix , B . , Armache , J . - P . , Barrio - Garcia , C . , Berninghausen , O . and Beckmann , R . ( 2014 ) . Structures of the Sec61 complex engaged in nascent peptide translocation or membrane insertion . Nature 506 , 107 - 110 . Go ̈ rlich , D . and Rapoport , T . A . ( 1993 ) . Protein translocation into proteoliposomes reconstituted from purified components of the endoplasmic reticulum membrane . Cell 75 , 615 - 630 . Guenin - Mace ́ , L . , Veyron - Churlet , R . , Thoulouze , M . - I . , Romet - Lemonne , G . , Hong , H . , Leadlay , P . F . , Danckaert , A . , Ruf , M . - T . , Mostowy , S . , Zurzolo , C . et al . ( 2013 ) . Mycolactone activation of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome proteins underpins Buruli ulcer formation . J . Clin . Invest . 123 , 1501 - 1512 . Hall , B . S . , Hill , K . , McKenna , M . , Ogbechi , J . , High , S . , Willis , A . E . and Simmonds , R . E . ( 2014 ) . The pathogenic mechanism of the Mycobacterium ulcerans virulence factor , mycolactone , depends on blockade of protein translocation into the ER . PLoS Pathog . 10 , e1004061 . Harant , H . , Wolff , B . , Schreiner , E . P . , Oberhauser , B . , Hofer , L . , Lettner , N . , Maier , S . , de Vries , J . E . and Lindley , I . J . ( 2007 ) . Inhibition of vascular endothelial growth factor cotranslational translocation by the cyclopeptolide CAM741 . Mol . Pharmacol . 71 , 1657 - 1665 . Hegde , R . S . and Keenan , R . J . ( 2011 ) . Tail - anchored membrane protein insertion into the endoplasmic reticulum . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 , 787 - 798 . Hegde , R . S . and Lingappa , V . R . ( 1996 ) . Sequence - specific alteration of the ribosome - membrane junction exposes nascent secretory proteins to the cytosol . Cell 85 , 217 - 228 . Hessa , T . , Meindl - Beinker , N . M . , Bernsel , A . , Kim , H . , Sato , Y . , Lerch - Bader , M . , Nilsson , I . , White , S . H . and von Heijne , G . ( 2007 ) . Molecular code for transmembrane - helix recognition by the Sec61 translocon . Nature 450 , 1026 - 1030 . High , S . , Martoglio , B . , Go ̈ rlich , D . , Andersen , S . S . , Ashford , A . J . , Giner , A . , Hartmann , E . , Prehn , S . , Rapoport , T . A . and Dobberstein , B . ( 1993 ) . Site - specific photocross - linking reveals that Sec61p and TRAM contact different regions of a membrane - inserted signal sequence . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 26745 - 26751 . Jadhav , B . , McKenna , M . , Johnson , N . , High , S . , Sinning , I . and Pool , M . R . ( 2015 ) . Mammalian SRP receptor switches the Sec61 translocase from Sec62 to SRP - dependent translocation . Nat . Commun . 6 , 10133 . Jan , C . H . , Williams , C . C . and Weissman , J . S . ( 2014 ) . Principles of ER cotranslational translocation revealed by proximity - specific ribosome profiling . Science 346 , 1257521 . Johnson , N . , Vilardi , F . , Lang , S . , Leznicki , P . , Zimmermann , R . and High , S . ( 2012 ) . TRC40 can deliver short secretory proteins to the Sec61 translocon . J . Cell . Sci . 125 , 3612 - 3620 . 1414 RESEARCH ARTICLE Journal of Cell Science ( 2016 ) 129 , 1404 - 1415 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 182352 J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e Johnson , N . , Hassdenteufel , S . , Theis , M . , Paton , A . W . , Paton , J . C . , Zimmermann , R . and High , S . ( 2013a ) . The signal sequence influences post - translational ER translocation at distinct stages . PLoS ONE 8 , e75394 . Johnson , N . , Powis , K . and High , S . ( 2013b ) . Post - translational translocation into the endoplasmic reticulum . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1833 , 2403 - 2409 . Jungnickel , B . and Rapoport , T . A . ( 1995 ) . A posttargeting signal sequence recognition event in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane . Cell 82 , 261 - 270 . Junne , T . , Schwede , T . , Goder , V . and Spiess , M . ( 2007 ) . Mutations intheSec61p channel affecting signal sequence recognition and membrane protein topology . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 33201 - 33209 . Junne , T . , Wong , J . , Studer , C . , Aust , T . , Bauer , B . W . , Beibel , M . , Bhullar , B . , Bruccoleri , R . , Eichenberger , J . , Estoppey , D . etal . ( 2015 ) . Decatransin , anew natural product inhibiting protein translocation at the Sec61 / SecYEG translocon . J . Cell . Sci . 128 , 1217 - 1229 . Kalies , K . - U . and Ro ̈ misch , K . ( 2015 ) . Inhibitors of protein translocation acrossthe ER membrane . Traffic 16 , 1027 - 1038 . Kalies , K . U . , Go ̈ rlich , D . and Rapoport , T . A . ( 1994 ) . Binding of ribosomes to the rough endoplasmic reticulum mediated by the Sec61p - complex . J . Cell Biol . 126 , 925 - 934 . Kalies , K . - U . , Rapoport , T . A . and Hartmann , E . ( 1998 ) . The beta subunit of the Sec61 complex facilitates cotranslational protein transport and interacts with the signal peptidase during translocation . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 887 - 894 . Knight , B . C . and High , S . ( 1998 ) . Membrane integration of Sec61alpha : a core componentof the endoplasmic reticulum translocationcomplex . Biochem . J . 331 , 161 - 167 . Laird , V . and High , S . ( 1997 ) . Discrete cross - linking products identified during membrane protein biosynthesis . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 1983 - 1989 . Lakkaraju , A . K . K . , Thankappan , R . , Mary , C . , Garrison , J . L . , Taunton , J . and Strub , K . ( 2012 ) . Efficientsecretion ofsmall proteinsin mammalian cells relieson Sec62 - dependent posttranslational translocation . Mol . Biol . Cell 23 , 2712 - 2722 . Lang , S . , Benedix , J . , Fedeles , S . V . , Schorr , S . , Schirra , C . , Scha ̈ uble , N . , Jalal , C . , Greiner , M . , Hassdenteufel , S . , Tatzelt , J . et al . ( 2012 ) . Different effects of Sec61 α , Sec62 and Sec63 depletion on transport of polypeptides into the endoplasmic reticulum of mammalian cells . J . Cell . Sci . 125 , 1958 - 1969 . MacKinnon , A . L . , Garrison , J . L . , Hegde , R . S . and Taunton , J . ( 2007 ) . Photo - leucine incorporation reveals the target of a cyclodepsipeptide inhibitor of cotranslational translocation . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 129 , 14560 - 14561 . MacKinnon , A . L . , Paavilainen , V . O . , Sharma , A . , Hegde , R . S . and Taunton , J . ( 2014 ) . An allosteric Sec61 inhibitor traps nascent transmembrane helices at the lateral gate . Elife 3 , e01483 . Maifeld , S . V . , MacKinnon , A . L . , Garrison , J . L . , Sharma , A . , Kunkel , E . J . , Hegde , R . S . and Taunton , J . ( 2011 ) . Secretory protein profiling reveals TNF - α inactivation by selective and promiscuous Sec61 modulators . Chem . Biol . 18 , 1082 - 1088 . Marion , E . , Song , O . - R . , Christophe , T . , Babonneau , J . , Fenistein , D . , Eyer , J . , Letournel , F . , Henrion , D . , Clere , N . , Paille , V . et al . ( 2014 ) . Mycobacterial toxin induces analgesia in buruli ulcer by targeting the angiotensin pathways . Cell 157 , 1565 - 1576 . Martoglio , B . , Hofmann , M . W . , Brunner , J . and Dobberstein , B . ( 1995 ) . The protein - conducting channel in the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum is open laterally toward the lipid bilayer . Cell 81 , 207 - 214 . Mary , C . , Scherrer , A . , Huck , L . , Lakkaraju , A . K . K . , Thomas , Y . , Johnson , A . E . andStrub , K . ( 2010 ) . ResiduesinSRP9 / 14essential forelongationarrestactivity of the signal recognition particle define a positively charged functional domain on one side of the protein . RNA 16 , 969 - 979 . Matlack , K . E . S . , Misselwitz , B . , Plath , K . and Rapoport , T . A . ( 1999 ) . BiPactsas amolecularratchetduringposttranslationaltransportofprepro - alphafactoracross the ER membrane . Cell 97 , 553 - 564 . McGinnes , L . W . and Morrison , T . G . ( 1997 ) . Disulfide bond formation is a determinant of glycosylation site usage in the hemagglutinin - neuraminidase glycoprotein of Newcastle disease virus . J . Virol . 71 , 3083 - 3089 . Nyathi , Y . , Wilkinson , B . M . and Pool , M . R . ( 2013 ) . Co - translational targeting and translocation of proteins to the endoplasmic reticulum . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1833 , 2392 - 2402 . Ogbechi , J . , Ruf , M . - T . , Hall , B . S . , Bodman - Smith , K . , Vogel , M . , Wu , H . - L . , Stainer , A . , Esmon , C . T . , Ahnstro ̈ m , J . , Pluschke , G . et al . ( 2015 ) . Mycolactone - dependent depletion of endothelial cell thrombomodulin is strongly associated with fibrin deposition in Buruli ulcer lesions . PLoS Pathog . 11 , e1005011 . Pahlevan , A . A . , Wright , D . J . , Andrews , C . , George , K . M . , Small , P . L . and Foxwell , B . M . ( 1999 ) . The inhibitory action of Mycobacterium ulcerans soluble factor on monocyte / T cell cytokine production and NF - kappa B function . J . Immunol . 163 , 3928 - 3935 . Pfeffer , S . , Burbaum , L . , Unverdorben , P . , Pech , M . , Chen , Y . , Zimmermann , R . , Beckmann , R . and Fo ̈ rster , F . ( 2015 ) . Structure of the native Sec61 protein - conducting channel . Nat . Commun . 6 , 8403 . Rabu , C . , Wipf , P . , Brodsky , J . L . and High , S . ( 2008 ) . Aprecursor - specific role for Hsp40 / Hsc70 during tail - anchored protein integration at the endoplasmic reticulum . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 27504 - 27513 . Scha ̈ uble , N . , Lang , S . , Jung , M . , Cappel , S . , Schorr , S . , Ulucan , O ̈ . , Linxweiler , J . , Dudek , J . , Blum , R . , Helms , V . et al . ( 2012 ) . BiP - mediated closing of the Sec61 channel limits Ca2 + leakage from the ER . EMBO J . 31 , 3282 - 3296 . Schulz , B . L . , Stirnimann , C . U . , Grimshaw , J . P . A . , Brozzo , M . S . , Fritsch , F . , Mohorko , E . , Capitani , G . , Glockshuber , R . , Gru ̈ tter , M . G . and Aebi , M . ( 2009 ) . Oxidoreductase activity of oligosaccharyltransferase subunits Ost3p and Ost6p defines site - specific glycosylation efficiency . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 11061 - 11066 . Shao , S . and Hegde , R . S . ( 2011 ) . A calmodulin - dependent translocation pathway for small secretory proteins . Cell 147 , 1576 - 1588 . Silva , M . T . , Portaels , F . and Pedrosa , J . ( 2009 ) . Pathogenetic mechanisms of the intracellularparasiteMycobacteriumulceransleadingtoBuruliulcer . LancetInfect Dis 9 , 699 - 710 . Simmonds , R . E . , Lali , F . V . , Smallie , T . , Small , P . L . C . andFoxwell , B . M . ( 2009 ) . Mycolactone inhibits monocyte cytokine production by a posttranscriptional mechanism . J . Immunol . 182 , 2194 - 2202 . Song , W . , Raden , D . , Mandon , E . C . and Gilmore , R . ( 2000 ) . Role of Sec61alpha in the regulated transfer of the ribosome - nascent chain complex from the signal recognition particle to the translocation channel . Cell 100 , 333 - 343 . Song , F . , Fidanze , S . , Benowitz , A . B . and Kishi , Y . ( 2002 ) . Total synthesis of the mycolactones . Org . Lett . 4 , 647 - 650 . Stinear , T . P . , Mve - Obiang , A . , Small , P . L . C . , Frigui , W . , Pryor , M . J . , Brosch , R . , Jenkin , G . A . , Johnson , P . D . R . , Davies , J . K . , Lee , R . E . et al . ( 2004 ) . Giant plasmid - encoded polyketide synthases produce the macrolide toxin of Mycobacterium ulcerans . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 1345 - 1349 . Torrado , E . , Adusumilli , S . , Fraga , A . G . , Small , P . L . C . , Castro , A . G . and Pedrosa , J . ( 2007 ) . Mycolactone - mediated inhibition of tumor necrosis factor production by macrophages infected with Mycobacterium ulcerans has implications for the control of infection . Infect . Immun . 75 , 3979 - 3988 . Trueman , S . F . , Mandon , E . C . and Gilmore , R . ( 2012 ) . A gating motif in the translocation channel sets the hydrophobicity threshold for signal sequence function . J . Cell Biol . 199 , 907 - 918 . Tyedmers , J . , Lerner , M . , Wiedmann , M . , Volkmer , J . and Zimmermann , R . ( 2003 ) . Polypeptide - binding proteins mediate completion of co - translational protein translocation into the mammalian endoplasmic reticulum . EMBO Rep . 4 , 505 - 510 . Van den Berg , B . , Clemons , W . M . , Collinson , I . , Modis , Y . , Hartmann , E . , Harrison , S . C . and Rapoport , T . A . ( 2004 ) . X - ray structure of a protein - conducting channel . Nature 427 , 36 - 44 . Voigt , S . , Jungnickel , B . , Hartmann , E . and Rapoport , T . A . ( 1996 ) . Signal sequence - dependent function of the TRAM protein during early phases of protein transport across the endoplasmic reticulum membrane . J . Cell Biol . 134 , 25 - 35 . Voorhees , R . M . and Hegde , R . S . ( 2016 ) . Structure of the Sec61 channel opened by a signal sequence . Science 351 , 88 - 91 . Voorhees , R . M . , Ferna ́ ndez , I . S . , Scheres , S . H . W . and Hegde , R . S . ( 2014 ) . Structure of the mammalian ribosome - Sec61 complex to 3 . 4 Å resolution . Cell 157 , 1632 - 1643 . Walsh , D . S . , Portaels , F . and Meyers , W . M . ( 2011 ) . Buruli ulcer : advances in understanding Mycobacterium ulcerans infection . Dermatol . Clin . 29 , 1 - 8 . Walter , P . andBlobel , G . ( 1981a ) . Translocationofproteinsacrosstheendoplasmic reticulum . II . Signal recognition protein ( SRP ) mediates the selective binding to microsomal membranes of in - vitro - assembled polysomes synthesizing secretory protein . J . Cell Biol . 91 , 551 - 556 . Walter , P . andBlobel , G . ( 1981b ) . Translocationofproteinsacrosstheendoplasmic reticulumIII . Signalrecognitionprotein ( SRP ) causessignalsequence - dependent and site - specific arrest of chain elongation that is released by microsomal membranes . J . Cell Biol . 91 , 557 - 561 . Walter , P . and Blobel , G . ( 1983 ) . Preparation of microsomal membranes for cotranslational protein translocation . Methods Enzymol . 96 , 84 - 93 . Walter , P . , Ibrahimi , I . and Blobel , G . ( 1981 ) . Translocation of proteins across the endoplasmic reticulum . I . Signal recognition protein ( SRP ) binds to in - vitro - assembled polysomes synthesizing secretory protein . J . Cell Biol . 91 , 545 - 550 . 1415 RESEARCH ARTICLE Journal of Cell Science ( 2016 ) 129 , 1404 - 1415 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 182352 J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e