Background and Significance Actin represents the major component of the thin filament of muscle cells and the cytoskeletal system of nonmuscle cells . Monomeric actin ( G - actin ) assembles under physiological salt concentrations to form polymers ( F - actin ) , a phenomenon that has so far prevented its crystallization in an uncomplexed form . Its three - dimensional structure , however , has been revealed from complexes with three different actin - binding pro - teins ( ABP ) that block its polymerization : DNase I , 1 profilin , 2 and gelsolin . 3 An F - actin filament model was also constructed by fitting the structure of the monomer into low - resolu - tion x - ray fiber diffraction from oriented gels of F - actin . We have determined the first x - ray crystal structure of actin alone at 1 . 54 Å resolu - tion . The structure corre - sponds to the ADP state and displays a dramatic confor - mational change in subdo - main 2 resulting from Pi release . Such a conforma - tional change has been pre - dicted to play a critical role in controlling the dynamics of the actin filaments in the cells . Methods and Materials Rabbit skeletal α - actin was chemically modified with TMR at Cys374 , which blocks polymerization . The crystals were grown using the hanging - drop vapor diffusion method . They belong to space group C2 with unit cell dimensions a = 112 . 8 Å , b = 37 . 5 Å , c = 85 . 3 Å , β = 108 . 3° , and typically measured ~ 800 x 50 x 10 µm . Crystals of G - actin were collected at the BioCARS beamline 14 - BM - C and IMCA - CAT beamline 17 - ID . The data sets were processed using the programs DENZO and SCALEPACK . The structure was solved by molecular replacement and refined to 1 . 54 Å resolution using the programs wARP and REF - MAC . The final model displays good stereochemistry and R free = 2 2 . 3 and R facto r = 17 . 9 . Results Overall , the structure of uncomplexed actin ( Fig . 1 ) is simi - lar to previous actin structures obtained from complexes with DNase I , 1 profilin , 2 and gelsolin . 3 Major differences occur in the orientation of subdomain 2 and , to a lesser extent , that of subdomain 4 . A major difference is observed in the so - called DNase I binding loop within subdomain 2 ( residues His40 - Gly48 ) , which in our ADP structure is folded as a α - helix but in previous actin structures is either disordered or folded as a β - turn . In the DNase I complex , in particular , this loop is attached as an additional strand to a β - sheet in DNase I . It is unusual to observe such secondary structure transition within the same protein . The ability of some polypeptides to under - go α / β transitions has recently attracted significant attention because of their postulated role in a number of misfolding diseases asso - ciated with the accumula - tion of insoluble fibrils known as amyloids . Notice that this secondary structure transition occurs in addition to the rigid body rotation of the entire subdomain 2 . Taken together , these changes place some of the amino acids at the top of subdomain 2 , notably those around Val45 , some 14 Å apart from their location in the actin ATP structures . Close inspection of the ADP - actin structure reveals that minor reorientations of some of the side chains around the nucleotide γ - phosphate site ( more significantly Ser14 ) become gradually amplified into larges displacements of the DNase I binding loop at the top of subdomain 2 . Our results suggest that a conforma - tional change in actin subdomain 2 , resulting from the release of the nucleotide γ - phosphate , may be responsible for controlling the ATP - dependent dynamics of the actin filaments in the cells . The structure also opens the door to future structure determina - tions of actin complexes with actin binding proteins such as myosin . A manuscript describing this work has been submitted for publication to Science . Acknowledgments We thank the staff members at BioCARS beamline 14 - BM and IMCA - CAT beamline 17 - ID for their helpful assistance dur - ing data collection . Use of the Advanced Photon Source was sup - ported by the U . S . Department of Energy , Office of Science , Office of Basic Energy Sciences , under Contract No . W - 31 - 109 - ENG - 38 . Use of the BioCARS Sector 14 was supported by the National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) , National Center for Research Resources , under grant number RR07707 . Beamline 17 - ID in the facilities of the Industrial Macromol - ecular Crystallography Association Collaborative Access Team 1 The Crystal Structure of Uncomplexed G - Actin in the ADP State L . R . Otterbein , P . Graceffa , R . Dominguez Boston Biomedical Research Institute , Watertown , MA U . S . A . FIG 1 . Ribbon representation of the uncomplexed actin structure in the ADP state . Actin subdomains are represented in different colors : subdomains 1 ( purple ) , 2 ( green ) , 3 ( yellow ) , and 4 ( red ) . A molecule of ADP is bound in the active site in association with a Ca 2 + ion . The molecule used to prevent actin polymerization ( TMR ) during crystallization is covalently bound near the C - terminus . ( IMCA - CAT ) is supported by the companies of the Industrial Macromolecular Crystallography Association through a contract with the Illinois Institute of Technology ( IIT ) , executed through IIT ' s Center for Synchrotron Radiation Research and Instrumen - tation . Support for one of the authors provided by NIH grants R01 AR46524 ( RD ) and March of Dimes grant 5 - FY99 - 774 ( RD ) . References 1 W . Kabsch , H . G . Mannherz , D . Suck , E . F . Pai , and K . C . Holmes , Nature 347 , 37 ( 1990 ) . 2 C . E . Schutt , J . C . Myslik , M . D . Rozycki , N . C . Goonesekere , and U . Lindberg , Nature 365 , 810 ( 1993 ) . 3 P . J . McLaughlin , J . T . Gooch , H . G . Mannherz , and A . G . Weeds Nature 364 , 685 ( 1993 ) . 2