Social inequalities that matter for contact patterns , vaccination , and the spread of epidemics Adriana Manna 1 J´ulia Koltai 2 , 3 , 4 M´arton Karsai 1 , 4 , 5 ∗ 1 Central European University , Quellenstraße 51 , 1100 Vienna , Austria 2 Computational Social Science - Research Center for Educational and Network Studies , Centre for Social Sciences , T´oth K´alm´anutca 4 , Budapest , 1097 , Hungary 3 Department of Social Research Methodology , Faculty of Social Sciences , E¨otv¨os Lor´and University , P´azm´any P´eter s ´et´any 1 / A , Budapest , 1117 , Hungary . 4 National Laboratory for Health Security , Hungary . 5 R´enyi Institute of Mathematics , Re´altanodautca 13 - 15 , Budapest , 1053 , Hungary . ∗ Corresponding author : mkarsai @ ceu . edu Abstract Individuals socio - demographic and economic characteristics crucially shape the spread of an epidemic by largely determining the exposure level to the virus and the severity of the disease for those who got infected . While the complex interplay between individual characteristics and epidemic dynamics is widely recognized , traditional mathematical models often overlook these factors . In this study , we ex - amine two important aspects of human behavior relevant to epidemics : contact patterns and vaccination uptake . Using data collected during the Covid - 19 pandemic in Hungary , we ﬁrst identify the dimensions along which individuals exhibit the greatest variation in their contact patterns and vaccination atti - tudes . We ﬁnd that generally privileged groups of the population have higher number of contact and a higher vaccination uptake with respect to disadvantaged groups . Subsequently , we propose a data - driven epidemiological model that incorporates these behavioral diﬀerences . Finally , we apply our model to analyze the fourth wave of Covid - 19 in Hungary , providing valuable insights into real - world scenarios . By bridging the gap between individual characteristics and epidemic spread , our research contributes to a more comprehensive understanding of disease dynamics and informs eﬀective public health strategies . keywords : social inequalities , epidemics , human behaviour , mathematical models , contact matrices 1 Introduction Individuals’ socio - demographic and economic characteristics are among the most signiﬁcant factors that shape the dynamics of epidemic spreading processes . They not only inﬂuence the epidemic outcome in the hosting population but largely determine the course and severity of the disease for those who got infected [ 1 ] . There is a widespread agreement that pandemics disproportionately aﬀect certain population groups rather than others [ 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 ] . Health - related inequalities in the burden of an epidemic partly arise from diﬀerences in the level of exposure to viruses and bacteria . These are related to diﬀerences in social inter - actions , mobility patterns and work - related conditions , which are aggravated by disparities in the ability to be compliant with non - pharmaceutical interventions ( NPIs ) , such as self - isolation , home - oﬃce and avoiding crowded places [ 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 ] . At the same time , inequalities in the severity and fatality of a disease can be accounted for the heterogeneity in preexisting individual health conditions , protection attitudes and access to medical care , which are themselves related to socio - demographic and economic factors [ 13 , 14 ] . Although it is widely recognized that socioeconomic inequalities play a crucial role in the transmission dynamics of diseases , traditional mathematical approaches have often overlooked these factors . Indeed , the state - of - the - art framework of modelling infectious diseases incorporates stratiﬁcation of the population according to age groups [ 15 ] , while discarding other potential relevant heterogeneities between groups of individuals belonging to diﬀerent socioeconomic strata . They commonly ignore the mechanisms through which these heterogeneities come into play - both directly and indirectly , in the diﬀerent phases of an 1 a r X i v : 2 3 07 . 04865v1 [ phy s i c s . s o c - ph ] 10 J u l 2023 6 8 10 12 a v g nu m b e r o f c o n t a c t s ( d a il y ) Figure 1 : ( a ) Left axis : number of new daily Covid - 19 cases in Hungary from 2020 / 04 to 2022 / 07 . Right axis : average number of daily contacts from 2020 / 04 to 2022 / 06 . The white and grey areas delimit the periods that have been aggregated in the analysis : two interim periods ( IPs ) and four epidemic waves ( W ) . ( b ) Box - plot of the maximum conﬁdence level at which the eﬀect of the diﬀerent categories of the variable on the total number of contacts becomes signiﬁcantly diﬀerent . The dispersion of the box plot refers to the variation of this value over diﬀerent age groups . Results are shown for education level , employment situation , income level , gender , settlement , chronic disease , acute disease , and smoking behaviour . The higher this value is , the more the variable inﬂuences people’s number of contacts given their age . epidemic process . In traditional epidemiological models , contact patterns are usually represented in the aggregate form of an age contact matrix ( C ij ) , which encodes information on the average number of contacts that individuals of diﬀerent age groups have with each other [ 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 ] . Moreover , not only the description of contact patterns is limited to an age structure but also other epidemiological - relevant factors , such as vaccination uptake , infection fatality rates [ 22 ] or susceptibility [ 23 ] are usually described only by considering diﬀerences between diﬀerent age groups . While age is unarguably one of the most important determinant of these characters , the current literature falls short to understand the role of other social , demographics , and economic factors in shaping human behaviour that are relevant to the epidemic spreading . In recent years , researchers have advocated including social aspects in infectious disease modelling , arguing that the epidemic modelling community is lacking a deep understanding of the mechanisms through which the socioeconomic divide translates into heterogeneities in the spread of infectious diseases [ 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 ] . With this in mind , we aim to shed light on these mechanisms to address the following interrogatives : which are the most important individual characters and corresponding sub groups of the population that diﬀerentiate the most their epidemic - relevant behaviours ; and , how these diﬀerences translate into epidemio - logical outcomes ? We address these questions by analyzing a large survey dataset coming from the MASZK study carried out in Hungary during the Covid - 19 pandemic [ 28 , 29 ] . This data collects information on indi - viduals’ face - to - face interaction patterns in diﬀerent contexts and other epidemiological - related behavioural patterns and opinions such as travel habits , vaccination attitude , or mask - wearing . The MASZK study con - sists of 26 cross - sectional representative surveys carried out in each month between 2020 / 04 and 2022 / 06 ( for more details on the data see MM ) . By considering the course of the pandemic in the country , we aggregate the data in six periods covering four epidemic waves ( Ws ) and two interim periods ( IPs ) as demonstrated in Fig . 1a . Throughout this study we are mainly interested in the dynamics and most inﬂuential determinants of social contacts , that were recorded in the data as reported proxy interactions between pairs of individuals who spent at least 15 minutes within 2 meters from each other on a given day . Outside of home , we distin - guish between two context where social interactions may evolve . We diﬀerentiate between work contacts that emerge at the workplace ( or at school ) of respondents ( or their minors ) and community contacts that they evolved elsewhere than home or work . Meanwhile , we do not take into account household contacts in our 2 study as we assume they do not change signiﬁcantly during the diﬀerent phases of the pandemic . Through the analysis of contact patterns , our aim is to show existing signiﬁcant diﬀerences among sub - groups of diﬀerent socio - demographic characters , when accounting for the eﬀect of age . Particularly , we demonstrate that dimensions such as employment situation and education level play a crucial role in determining contact numbers and vaccination uptake during a pandemic . Additionally , by proposing a new data - driven math - ematical framework , which explicitly considers further social dimensions , other than age , we analyze the impact of such diﬀerences in terms of epidemic outcomes . Finally , by focusing on the Hungarian Covid - 19 pandemic scenario , we reveal the unequal impact of the pandemic in terms of individuals belonging to dif - ferent socio - economic statuses , where we diﬀerentiate individuals by their employment situation and income level . Note that although all the models have been completed on each pandemic periods , for the demonstra - tion of our ﬁndings we exclusively show results about the 4 th wave in the main text , while reporting our ﬁndings concerning other periods in the Supplementary Information . Results The main determinants of human contact patterns Human contact patterns represent the routes of infectious disease spreading by shaping the underlining transmission chain among susceptible individuals . During the Covid - 19 pandemic , many aspects of human behaviour has experienced drastic interruption in most countries worldwide . This was largely due to the implementation of non - pharmaceutical interventions ( NPIs ) that were installed to mitigate the spreading and other eﬀects of the pandemic . They aimed at controlling the number of contacts , as well as inﬂuencing individual attitudes , to change the ways humans meet and interact with each other [ 23 , 30 , 31 ] . Their eﬀects are evident from Fig . 1a , where the average number of daily contacts in Hungary are shown . These numbers increase during interim periods ( IPs ) when the numbers of daily infection cases are low , and decrease during the epidemic waves ( Ws ) when infection risk is high , this way sensitively reﬂecting the adaptive behaviour of people throughout the pandemic . Although at the aggregate level these patterns are clear , there are non - trivial disparities at the level of individuals that may result in diverse contact patterns for given sub - groups of the population . To explore these eﬀects , in our statistical analysis , we focus on several socioeconomic dimensions , that , interacting with age , may signiﬁcantly aﬀect the number of contacts that individuals have . We consider various socio - demographic variables such as individual’s education , employment , income , gender , settlement type , actual chronic or acute disease or smoking habits ( for more details and deﬁnitions see MM and SI ) . As a ﬁrst observation , in Fig . 1 b we show the distribution of the maximum conﬁdence level of the eﬀects of these variables that they had on the number of contacts in interaction with age , during each period ( for deﬁnition see MM ) . In these distributions a higher value indicates that a given variable explains better diﬀerences in the number of contacts , given the age of individuals . Based on these results employment , education and income level were found to be the three most important dimensions in determining the number of contact . This observation stands if we consider the overall number of contacts including both work and community relationships , and it is true as well if we only consider community contacts ( with results shown in the SI ) . To further investigate the ways individuals of diﬀerent characters adapt their number of contacts to the actual epidemiological situation , in Fig 2 we show the average number of contacts over time decoupled by education level ( Fig 2 a , c ) and employment situation ( Fig 2 b , d ) for adult individuals older than 15 years old ( for the corresponding plot decoupled by age groups see SI ) . Results in panel ( a ) suggest that high and mid - educated individuals have consistently higher number of contacts in the community layer throughout the observed period . In addition , these groups are able to better adapt to the epidemiological situation and NPIs by decreasing their contact numbers during epidemic waves and increasing again during interim periods . At the same time , low - educated individuals maintain a lower number of contacts over time with smaller variation , reﬂecting their limited social environment and adaption capacities . By looking at the contact dynamics at workplaces it is evident that only highly educated individuals were able to adapt to the epidemiological situation , while the low - and mid - educated people presented similar dynamics and had less ﬂexibility to adapt during the diﬀerent pandemic periods . Interestingly , mid - educated individuals reported a higher number of contacts at work particularly during the 2 nd and the 3 rd epidemic waves . When we group people by their employment situation , it makes sense to compare groups in the community 3 Figure 2 : ( a - b ) Average number of contacts in the community layer ( a ) by diﬀerent education levels and ( b ) employment situation . ( c - d ) Average number of contacts at workplace ( c ) by diﬀerent education levels and ( d ) for employed people . All curves have been smoothed over the observation periods for better visualisation . ( e - g ) Decoupled age contact matrices by education level for the 4th epidemic wave . ( h - i ) Decoupled age contact matrices by employment situation for the 4th wave . These ﬁgures depict contact numbers only for adult population [ 15 + ) , while matrices containing children are shown in SI . layer . From Fig 2 b it is evident that employed people maintain more contacts even outside of their workplace as compared to not - employed individuals , which is a clear sign of behavioural diﬀerences between these two groups . Meanwhile , employed individuals follow somewhat similar contact dynamics as high - educated people ( see Fig . 2 d , signalling some correlation between these two groups . From an epidemic modelling perspective , the most convenient way to code interaction patterns between diﬀerent groups is via contact matrices that represent a social network at an aggregate level . Contact matrices allow models to depart from the homogeneous mixing assumption , i . e . taking all individuals to meet with the same probability . Instead , they allow the introduction of non - homogeneous mixing patterns between diﬀerent groups , while keeping the model computationally more feasible as compared to contact network based simulations . Conventionally , epidemic models incorporate C i , j age contact matrices that code the average number of contacts between people from diﬀerent age - groups ( for formal deﬁnition see MM ) . Nevertheless , age contact matrices could be further stratiﬁed by other socio - demographic characters that inﬂuence the contact numbers of individuals . In Fig 2 e − i we show the age contact matrices decoupled by education level and employment situation ( C di , j ) for the 4 th epidemic wave for the adult population ( See MM for more details and SI for the corresponding matrices including children ) . These matrices have been computed by considering community , work and household contacts together . The emerging large diﬀerences between these matrices demonstrate clearly that beyond age , the identiﬁed variables , i . e . education and employment status , induce signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the contact patterns of people . Although these variables may not be independent of the age of people , the observed distinct patterns suggest more complex mechanisms controlling contact patterns among sub - groups that can be explained by age alone . Beyond age stratiﬁcation We demonstrated that social inequalities signiﬁcantly inﬂuence human contact patterns , thereby shaping the network of proxy social interactions . This is critically important for the propagation of diseases as they 4 determine the transmission chain of an infection spreading among a susceptible population . Consequently , incorporating the contact pattern diﬀerences among individuals of diﬀerent socioeconomic background into epidemiological models is crucial . This could help to understand the unequal spread and uneven burden what an epidemic could impose for the diﬀerent socio - demographic groups of a society . To this end , we propose a simple mathematical framework based on the extension of a conventional age - structured SEIR compartmental model [ 32 , 33 ] , which we call the extended SEIR model . The conventional SEIR model assumes that each individual in a population is in one of the mutual exclusive states of Susceptible ( S ) , Exposed ( E ) , Infected ( I ) or Recovered ( I ) . Transitions of an individual between these states are controlled by rates ( S λ −→ E , E ε −→ I , I µ −→ R ) with the λ rate inﬂuenced by the frequencies of interactions between age groups coded in a C i , j age - contact matrix . The proposed extended model incorporates C ¯ d , i , j age contact matrices instead , that are decoupled along important socio - demographic dimensions ¯ d to model epidemic spreading in diﬀerent sub - groups of the population ( See MM for further details ) . 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 p o p u l a t i o n f r a c t i o n a ) employment employednot employed b ) education edu low edu mid edu high c ) settlement capitalurbanrural d ) income income low income mid income high [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 + ) o v e r a ll age class 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 a tt a c k r a t e e ) M w / C id , j M w / C i , j [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 + ) o v e r a ll age class f ) M w / C id , j M w / C i , j [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 + ) o v e r a ll age class g ) M w / C id , j M w / C i , j [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 + ) o v e r a ll age class h ) M w / C id , j M w / C i , j [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 + ) o v e r a ll age class 0 . 050 0 . 025 0 . 000 0 . 025 0 . 050 d i ff e r e n c e i n a tt a c k r a t e i ) M w / C i , j vs M w / C id , j employmenteducationsettlementincome Figure 3 : ( a - d ) Population distribution by age and employment situation ( a ) , education level ( b ) , settlement ( c ) and income ( d ) . ( e - h ) Attack rate by age and employment situation ( e ) , education level ( f ) , settlement ( g ) and income ( h ) as predicted by the extended SEIR ( i . e . calculated with both age and the given socioeconomic variable stratiﬁcation ) . The grey lines represent the attack rate by age calculated only with age stratiﬁcation as predicted by classical SEIR with C i , j ( solid lines ) and extended SEIR with C di , j ( dotted lines ) . i Diﬀerence in the attack rate by age as predicted by the classical ( Mw / C i , j ) and the extended ( Mw / C di , j ) model , when diﬀerent the dimensions are considered . Results are shown for the 4 th wave . Epidemiological parameters : µ = 0 . 25 , (cid:15) = 0 . 4 , and R 0 = 2 . 5 . Simulations start with I 0 = 5 initial infectious seed . Results were computed over 500 simulations with standard deviation smaller than the symbols . Particularly , we analyze the impact of decoupled age - contact matrices along four dimensions : employment situation , education level , settlement , and income level ( for exact deﬁnitions and possible variable values see MM ) . Taking the decoupled contact matrices as input we simulate the spread of infectious disease among an entirely susceptible population using both the conventional SEIR and the extended SEIR models . Having ﬁxed the epidemiological parameters such as the transmission rates and seeding strategy , other input parameters like the population distributions and contact matrices have been estimated from data as we explain in the SI in more details . The proposed model allows us to investigate how diﬀerences in contact patterns along diverse social groups translate into an unequal burden of the epidemic . To quantify these diﬀerences in the epidemic outcome , we measure the attack rate deﬁned as the population wise normalised fraction of individuals who contracted the infection from a given group . To follow the distribution of the people along the investigated dimensions , we show their population fractions in the diﬀerent age groups in Fig . 3a - d . Meanwhile , in Fig 3e - h we depict the attack rates calculated using the extended SEIR models for diﬀerent age and socio - demographic groups ( and as reference only for age - see grey solid lines ) . Results are shown for the cases when we decouple each age - group along the four dimensions analyzed . As anticipated by the statistical analysis , employment , and education produce the largest diﬀerences between groups in terms of attack rate by age . Interestingly , the group of employed people happened to be the most infected group in all age groups , while mid and high educated individuals are more infected among those , who are 45 - 60 years old . When decoupling age contact matrices by settlement and income , although diﬀerences appear smaller between groups , high - income 5 individuals and the ones living in the capital are more infected , particularly elderly ones with age 60 + . These modelling results suggest the interesting overall conclusion that privileged people of the population report a higher attack rate , thus they are typically the most infected group relative to their population size . These results also demonstrate that the extended SEIR model is able to capture diﬀerences introduced by the considered socio - demographic variable and , in this way , to model the epidemic impact on the diﬀerent groups of the population . These diﬀerences are also visible at the population level . In Fig 3 i we show the diﬀerences between the attack rates predicted by the conventional and the extended SEIR models , for each age group and overall too . It is evident from these results that models using contacts only stratiﬁed by age may underestimate ( negative diﬀerence ) the size of the epidemic in diﬀerent age groups or in the whole population . For example , our simulations based on data from the 4 th wave demonstrate that the conventional SEIR model could predict higher attack rates for each age group with respect to the extended SEIR , which considers diﬀerences in contact numbers along the employment situation or the education level too . It is important to highlight that the uneven age distribution within the diﬀerent subgroups sometimes reduces or annul the eﬀect of diﬀerence in the contact patterns when we are computing aggregate quantities at the population level . This explains why , even if there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in contact patterns , the diﬀerence in the attack rates only spans a small range between the two models . Vaccination uptake and contact number diﬀerences Beyond the crucial role played by the network of face - to - face interactions , individual vaccination attitudes may also substantially aﬀect epidemiological outcomes by decreasing the morbidity and mortality . By apply - ing the same pipeline of statistical analysis as we explained above , we identiﬁed the dimensions along which individuals made diﬀerent decisions in terms of vaccination , given their age . In this case , the interaction with age is particularly important given that the Covid - 19 immunization strategy implemented in Hungary followed an age - stratiﬁed outreach by prioritizing elderly individuals [ 34 , 35 ] . Interestingly , the statistical analysis in this case indicated income as the most important dimension along which individuals made dif - ferent vaccination decisions ( See SI for the results of the statistical analysis ) . Fig 4a - d show the percentage of vaccinated individuals by age and the investigated dimensions , during the 4th wave of the pandemic . Although by the 4th epidemic wave the vaccination saturated in Hungary , the eﬀects of the age - dependent vaccination policy is clearly visible . More strikingly , we ﬁnd that privileged groups of the population were more likely to get vaccinated against the Covid - 19 virus . Convincingly , this observation is valid for all age groups and periods considered in the analysis ( See SI for the corresponding ﬁgures for the other periods ) . To consider these observations , we model the vaccination uptake in the extendend SEIR framework . More precisely , we deﬁne the probability of getting vaccinated ( i . e . immune or recovered from the point of the infection ) to be dependent in this case on both the age and the subgroup of the population considered . Using this extended SEIR model , we are able to compare the eﬀects of vaccination uptake , while keeping ﬁxed the structure of contacts . Fig 4e - h shows the averted attack rate due to vaccination with respect to the non - vaccination scenario . We consider the probability of getting vaccinated along the four diﬀerent investigated dimensions separately . In all of these scenarios the gain in averted infection is strongly dependent on the subgroup membership . As expected , the groups with higher vaccination uptakes are the ones , which reduce their attack rate the most in the vaccination scenario . However , this pattern is not linear . For example , among individuals aged 60 + , although the not - employed people report a higher vaccination uptake , they are the ones that gain the less in terms of averted infections . This is because these individuals , having a low number of contact , are already protected from exposure to the virus thus they gain less from vaccination . It should be noted that our focus is solely on the number of infected individuals . It is important to acknowledge that alternative conclusions may arise if the number of averted deaths is taken into consideration . In any case , these results clearly show that although several other factors aﬀect the outcome of an epidemic , by neglecting diﬀerences in vaccination uptake and the eﬀects of vaccination campaigns among subgroups in modelling , we miss an important determinant , which signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the ﬁnal outcome of an epidemic . Stratiﬁed modelling of the Hungarian scenario To provide an example of how the proposed mathematical framework can be applied to a real case scenario , we model the 4 th Covid - 19 wave in Hungary between 09 / 2021 and 01 / 2022 . As the statistical analysis 6 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1 . 0 % v a cc i n a t e d a ) employment employednot employed b ) education edu low edu mid edu high c ) settlement capitalurbanrural d ) income income low income mid income high [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 + ) age class 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 a v e r t e d a tt a c k r a t e e ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 + ) age class f ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 + ) age class g ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 + ) age class h ) Figure 4 : ( a - d ) Fraction of individuals vaccinated with at least one dose against Covid - 19 during the 4th wave , decoupled by age and ( a ) employment situation , ( b ) education level , ( c ) settlement , and ( d ) income . Panels ( e - h ) show averted attack rates by ( e ) age and employment situation , ( f ) education level , ( g ) settlement , and ( h ) income as predicted by extended SEIR . The model takes into account diﬀerent rates of vaccination uptake by subgroups of the given variable , compared to the non - vaccination scenario . Epidemiological parameters : µ = 0 . 25 , (cid:15) = 0 . 4 , and R 0 = 2 . 5 . Simulations start with I 0 = 5 initial infectious seeds . Results were computed over 500 simulations with standard deviation smaller than the symbols . showed that employment and income are the most important dimensions along which , respectively , contact patterns and vaccination uptake change the most , here we divide the population into subgroups by considering simultaneously these two additional dimensions other than age . In addition , we introduce a new compartment D to our SEIR model , that represents a dead state that infected individuals may enter with transmission rate I µIFR −−−−→ D . To simulate the SEIRD for the 4 th Covid - 19 wave in Hungary we calibrate our model using the Approx - imate Bayesian Computation ( ABC ) method [ 36 , 37 ] on the total number of daily deaths from 09 / 2021 to 01 / 2022 [ 38 ] . Details about the ﬁtting method and calibrated results are summarised in the SI . The results of the simulated model are presented in Figure 5 , which shows the daily fraction of newly infected ( panels ( a ) - ( c ) ) and new dead ( panels ( d ) - ( f ) ) cases for diﬀerent employment , income , and age groups . As expected , these curves suggests that group of employed people extracted the infection with the highest rate as compared to not employed others . At the same time , in terms of socioeconomic status and age , more aﬄuent and younger people got infected more during the simulated epidemic wave . On the other hand , strikingly the contrary trend is suggested in terms of mortality rates . From the simulations we found that although not - employed , low - income and older individuals appeared with the lowest infection rates , they evolved with the highest mortality rate as compared to other groups . Considering that the fatality rate of infected individuals depends on their age , these observation can be largely accounted to the fact that not - employed and low - income individuals are also the oldest one in the population . To further explore the correlation between these dimensions , we examine the attack rates and mortality rates by age groups separately in each of the subgroups of the population stratiﬁed by income level and employment status ( Fig . 5 g − h ) . These results conﬁrm an overall decreasing infection rate by age and that not - employed individuals experience the lowest attack rate in each age group . Further stratiﬁcation of this group by income level reveals a clear pattern , with high - income people exhibiting a higher infection rate compared to mid - income and low - income individuals . In contrast , the infection pattern among income levels of employed individuals is age - dependent . For young employed individuals in age group 15 - 30 , high and mid - income individuals register a higher share of infections , while among those older than 30 , low - income individuals exhibit a higher infection rate compared to mid and high - income individuals . An exception is represented by the age group 60 - 70 , for which the most infected group is still the high income . In terms of mortality we ﬁnd an increasing trend by age , otherwise we can conclude a similar pattern . Once we account for the correlations among the dimensions of interest and age , our results show that employed people die with a higher rate , while in terms of income , other than the group of age 15 - 30 and 60 - 70 , the lower income 7 / / Figure 5 : Results from the simulated model for the 4 th wave in Hungary . The ﬁgure shows the median and 95 % conﬁdence interval over 3000 runs . ( a - c ) Fraction of newly infected by ( a ) employment situation , ( b ) income level , and ( c ) age group . ( d - f ) Fraction of new deaths by ( d ) employment situation , ( f ) income level , and ( g ) age groups . ( g ) Attack rate by age , employment situation and income level . ( h ) Mortality rate by age , employment situation and education level . For more details about the parameters of the numerical simulations see SI . people suﬀered more death according to our simulations . The extreme decrease of mortality rate for the employed high - income group is due to data sparsity in the survey data , recording only a few data point in this category . Discussion There are several particular factors that may determine how an infection would turn - out for a given person . Some of them are coded genetically , or determined by physiological conditions , but many of them are environmental and correlate with one’s socio - demographic characters . In any society people show uneven patterns along numerous social , demographic , and economic characters , like age , income or employment status . These characteristics not only induce medical disparities between people ( as in immunity , overall health conditions , or chronic diseases ) but they naturally translate to diﬀerences in adaption capacities and other behavioural patterns , letting certain groups more exposed to infection . The simultaneous actions of all these factors lead to observable inequalities in terms of epidemic burden between diﬀerent groups at the population level . This study highlights the signiﬁcant impact that social determinants have on human behaviours that are relevant to epidemic transmission . Speciﬁcally , exploiting the data of the MASZK study [ 28 , 29 ] , we show that contact patterns and vaccination uptake are inﬂuenced by socioeconomic factors . Our ﬁndings suggest that contact patterns are shaped by social factors not only in their absolute values but also in the extent to which they ﬂuctuate in response to extraordinary events , such as a lockdown or curfew interventions . Speciﬁcally , our statistical analysis shows that socioeconomic factors such as employment situation and education level played a signiﬁcant role in determining contact numbers and vaccination uptake during the COVID - 19 pandemic in Hungary . Additionally , we ﬁnd that privileged groups tend to have a higher number of a contact and are the ones able to better adapt to the epidemiological situation and NPIs by adjusting their number of contacts . Contrarily , less privileged groups maintain a lower number of contacts over time with smaller oscillations . We also ﬁnd that privileged groups , such as those with higher education , income , and employment status , were more likely to get vaccinated . We propose a mathematical framework that extends the well - known age - stratiﬁed approach to model infectious diseases by explicitly accounting for diﬀerences in contact patterns and vaccination uptake for speciﬁc sub - groups of the population . This method allows us to better understand the mechanisms un - 8 derlying the emergence of inequalities in epidemiological outcomes . Results demonstrate that traditional epidemiological models , that only consider age , could overlook crucial heterogeneities along other social and demographic aspects that may impact the spreading of an epidemic . By simulating a pandemic period in Hungary , we reveal the unequal health - related impact of the COVID - 19 pandemic along individuals belong - ing to diﬀerent socioeconomic groups . Although the higher number of contacts translates into higher attack rates for privileged individuals , the age structure and the vaccination decision of such groups translate into lower mortality rates for these individuals , while disadvantaged groups are the one suﬀering higher mortal - ity . These results are in line with the empirical ﬁndings of [ 39 , 40 ] for the 2 nd and 3 rd Covid - 19 waves in Hungary . Due to the limitation of the survey collection methodology , contact patterns of individuals can be diﬀeren - tiated only by the characteristics of participants . Indeed , the only information we know about the contacted peers is their age , while their other characteristics remain unknown . Thus , our extended SEIR model can only account for age - contact matrices that are decoupled along other social dimension of the participants ( ego ) . In other words , although our model incorporates additional social dimensions , given the sub - group the ego belongs to , it still only considers the average number of contacts stratiﬁed by the age group of the contacted ( alter ) . In order to introduce a generalised matrix [ 41 ] stratiﬁed along multiple socio - demographic dimensions of the contactee , we would need information about such dimensions . Such information can be collected via detailed contact diaries [ 29 ] , which are based on the reports of the respondents about the peers , and commonly suﬀer from recall biased and other limitations . By shedding light on the complex interplay between social , demographic and economic factors and disease transmission dynamics , our ﬁndings underline the need for a new mathematical framework for epidemic modelling that accounts for multidimensional inequalities . This would help us to better understand the socially stratiﬁed consequences of an epidemic and to highlight non - negligible inequalities between diﬀerent socio - demographic groups . Additionally , incorporating social factors into epidemiological models will provide a valuable tool to design and evaluate targeted NPIs to cope more eﬃciently with the spread of an infectious disease . 2 Materials and Methods Data description The data used in this study comes from the MASZK survey study [ 28 , 29 ] , a large data collection eﬀort on social mixing patterns made during the COVID - 19 pandemic . It was carried out in Hungary from April 2020 to July 2022 on a monthly basis . The data was collected via cross - sectional anonymous representative phone surveys using CATI methodology and involved a 1000 large nationally representative sample each month . During the data collection participants were not asked information that could be used for their re - identiﬁcation . The data collection was fully complying with the actual European and Hungarian privacy data regulations and was approved by the Hungarian National Authority for Data Protection and Freedom of Information [ 42 ] , and also by the Health Science Council Scientiﬁc and Research Ethics Committee ( resolution number IV / 3073 - 1 / 2021 / EKU ) . The primary goal of the data collection eﬀort was to follow how people changed their social contact patterns during the diﬀerent intervention periods of the pandemic . Relevant to this study , the questionnaires recorded information about the proxy social contacts , deﬁned as interactions where the respondent and a peer stayed within 2 meters for more than 15 minutes [ 43 ] at least one of them not wearing mask . Approximate contact numbers were recorded between the respondents and their peers from diﬀerent age groups of 0 – 4 , 5 – 14 , 15 – 29 , 30 – 44 , 45 – 59 , 60 – 69 , 70 – 79 , and 80 + . Contact number data about underage children were collected by asking legal guardians to estimate daily contact patterns . Beyond information on contacts before and during the pandemic , the MASZK dataset provided us with an extensive set of information on social - demographic characteristics ( gender , education level etc . ) , health condition ( chronic and acute illness etc . ) , ﬁnancial and working situation ( income , employment status , home oﬃce etc . ) , and attitude towards Covid - 19 related measures and recommendations ( attitude towards vaccination , mask - wearing etc . ) of the participants . In order to study diﬀerent stages of the pandemic , we consider six epidemiological periods including three epidemic waves ( Ws ) and three interim periods ( IPs ) ( see Fig 1a ) . 9 On the collected data a multi - step , proportionally stratiﬁed , probabilistic sampling procedure was elab - orated and implemented by the survey research company using a database that contained both landline and mobile phone numbers . The survey response rate was 49 percent , which is expressly higher than the average response rate ( being between 15 - 20 percent ) of telephone surveys in Hungary . The sample is representative for the Hungarian population aged 18 or older by gender , age , education and domicile . Sampling errors were corrected using iterative proportional post - stratiﬁcation weights . After data collection , only the anonymised and hashed data was shared with people involved in the project after signing non - disclosure agreements . Sociodemographic dimensions The sociodemographic dimensions that we analyze are the following : ( i ) education level , which can have three possible levels : low , mid and high ; ( ii ) employment situation , which can be either employed or not - working , including students and retirees individuals ; ( iii ) income can have three possible levels : low , mid and high ; ( iv ) gender refers to the biological gender and can be either female or male ; ( v ) settlement , which refers to the area where individual live and can be either capital , rural or urban ; ( vi ) chronic disease is a boolean dimension indicating if an individual is aﬀected by any chronic disease ; ( vii ) acute disease is a boolean dimension indicating if an individual is aﬀected by any acute disease ; and ( viii ) smoking is a boolean dimension indicating if an individual is a smoker or not . A detailed explenation of these variables is provided in the SI . Statistical analysis In order to build an epidemiological model that explicitly takes into account social inequalities we need to identify , which are the main dimensions , that interacting with age aﬀect contact patterns the most . To identify these dimensions , we model the expected number of contacts of respondents i using a negative binomial regression [ 44 , 17 ] as deﬁned in Eq . 1 : µ i = α + β 1 age group i + β 2 X i + β 3 age group i ∗ X i + (cid:15) i , ( 1 ) where age group i is the age class of i ; X i is the variable of interest ( e . g . , education , income etc . ) , age group i ∗ X i is the interaction term of age group and the variable of interest , and (cid:15) i is the error term . Given µ i , we deﬁne λ i = exp ( µ i ) to be the expected number of contacts for respondent i . Then we model the reported number of contacts for respondent i , y i , as y i ∼ Neg − Bin ( λ i , φ ) ( 2 ) where φ ∈ [ 1 , ∞ ) is a shape parameter that is inversely related to over - dispersion : the higher φ is estimated to be , the closest y i ’s distribution is to a Poisson distribution with rate parameter λ i . We build a model 1 for each variable of interest ( X ) . Particularly , the interaction term between age group i and the variable of interest allows us to examine , whether there are diﬀerences in the eﬀect of X i on the number of contacts in the diﬀerent age groups . To be able to provide a meaningful description of the interactions , we analyse the average marginal eﬀect ( AME ) [ 45 , 46 , 47 ] of X i on the number of contacts for diﬀerent age groups , deﬁned as : AME X i = 1 n (cid:80) n i = 1 ∂µ i ∂age group i ∂µ i ∂age group i = β 1 + β 3 X i . ( 3 ) Working mostly with categorical variables ( e . g . , education level or employment situation ) , we can cal - culate diﬀerent AMEs for all categories of the categorical variables in each age group . For each age group , we consider the maximum conﬁdence level , at which the AME s of two categories of the categorical variable show a statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence . Finally , to summarize the results , we consider the median of these maximum conﬁdence levels . Therefore , we have one value for each variable of interest , which characterise the strength of the interaction between age and the variable of interest on the number of contacts . By following this procedure for each of the variables of interest , we are able to rank the variables according to their importance in driving diﬀerences in contact patterns additionally to age , in diﬀerent periods of the Covid - 19 pandemic . The pipeline of these analyses are illustrated in Fig . 6 . 10 STEP 1 Regression x y 0 0 STEP 2 AME of X by age group STEP 3 Compute max signiﬁcance level STEP 4 Distribution of max signiﬁcance level over age groups 0 - 29 30 - 69 70 + 0 - 29 30 - 69 70 + A M E A M E age group employment 78 % 95 % 99 % age group 95 m ax s i gn i ﬁ ca n ce l eve l X Figure 6 : Pipeline of the statistical analysis to compute the distribution of the max conﬁdence level over age groups for each of the variables analyzed . The ﬁgure is made considering as an illustrative example the variable employment . Following the same methodology we investigate the dimensions that - in interaction with age - aﬀect the most the probability of getting vaccinated against Covid - 19 . In this case , we model this probability using a logistic regression model instead of a negative binomial , as the dependent variable was binary and not a count one . In the Supplementary Information we provide the details of this models and we report their relative results . Decoupled contact matrices Conventionally , to compute age - contact matrices C ij we divide a population into sub - groups according to their age and calculate the average number of contacts that individuals in age class i have with individuals in age class j [ 29 ] . Here , instead , we further stratify individuals from each age class i according to various dimensions , like employment status , settlement or education level . In detail , we decouple the conventional age contact matrix C ij into D number of matrices , one for each of the sub - groups of the dimension that we want to take into account . More precisely , let ¯ d be the sub - group of the dimension considered and let ¯ d ∈ 1 , . . . , D . We can write C ¯ di , j = CT ¯ di , j / N ¯ di , ( 4 ) where CT ¯ di , j is the total number of contacts that individuals of age class i and belonging to sub - group ¯ d have with individuals in age class j , regardless of the sub - group , to which the contacted individuals belong ; and N ¯ di is the total number of individuals in age class i and sub - group ¯ d . For example , to diﬀerentiate between employed and not - employed individuals , we compute two age con - tact matrices : C employed , i , j and C not − employed , i , j . Note that here we are considering each of these dimensions ( e . g . , employment , education level , settlement ) separately and only include one dimension additionally to age . However , this framework can be extended to any number of dimensions considered simultaneously , in this case , the length of the ¯ d vector will correspond to the number of combinations of the levels of the dimensions considered . The epidemiological model In order to investigate the eﬀect of the decoupled contact matrices on the dynamic of infectious disease transmission , we propose a simple mathematical framework as an extension of the conventional age - structured SEIRD compartmental model [ 32 , 33 ] . The conventional SEIRD model is deﬁned on a population where individuals are assigned to ﬁve com - partments based on their actual state : susceptible ( S ) , exposed ( E ) , infected ( I ) , recovered ( R ) and dead ( D ) . The model further deﬁnes the transition rates of individuals from one compartment to another by in - corporating for each age class a given force of infection , which includes the average number of contacts with all the other age classes . The model proposed here extends this deﬁnition by taking into account not only the age structure of the contacts in the population but also their diﬀerences along a set of other dimensions ¯ d , such as education level , income level and employment situation . The model can be described by a set of ordinary coupled diﬀerential as presented in Eq . 5 : 11 ˙ S ¯ d , i = − λ ¯ d , i S ¯ d , i ˙ E ¯ d , i = λ ¯ d , i S ¯ d , i − (cid:15)E ¯ d , i ˙ I ¯ d , i = (cid:15)E ¯ d , i − µI ¯ d , i ˙ R ¯ d , i = µ ( 1 − IFR i ) I ¯ d , i ˙ D ¯ d , i = µIFR i I ¯ d , i . ( 5 ) Here i indicates the age group of the ego , j indicates the age group of the peer , ¯ d represents a vector of dimensions to which the ego belongs , β is the probability of transmission given a contact , (cid:15) is the rate at which individuals become infectious , µ is the recovery rate , IFR is the infection fatality rate , and C ¯ d is the age contact matrix corresponding to dimensions ¯ d . In this equation system we rely on the concept and of force of infection that is deﬁned as : λ ¯ d , i ( t ) = β (cid:80) j C i ¯ d , j N j I j ( 6 ) Further we rely on the deﬁnition of the infection fatality rate ( IFR i ) , that is deﬁned as fraction of infected individuals that died . See Supplementary Information for the details on the implementation of the numerical simulations . Acknowledgment The authors gratefully thank to Alessandro Vespignani , Eszter Bok´ani , Alessia Melegaro and Filippo Trentini for useful discussions . A . M . and M . K . were supported by the Accelnet - Multinet NSF grant . J . K . and M . K . acknowledges funding from the National Laboratory for Health Security ( RRF - 2 . 3 . 1 - 21 - 2022 - 00006 ) . M . K . acknowledges support from the ANR project DATAREDUX ( ANR - 19 - CE46 - 0008 ) ; the SoBigData + + H2020 - 871042 ; the EMOMAP CIVICA projects . 12 Supplementary Informations Data pre - processing All the analysis on the number of contacts have been performed after having delete the outliers at the 99 % percentile with respect to the period of interest . All the results presented in this work have been computed by accounting each participant according to it’s representative weight . The weight has been provided by the survey company as described in the MM section of the main text . Socio - demographic dimensions The MASZK dataset provided us with an extensive set of information on social - demographic characteristics of the participants . In this section we provide a detailed explanation of all the variables used in this work . • Education level which can have three possible levels : low , mid and high . We considered low educated individuals those with any primary school degrees , mid educated those holding any diploma or certiﬁ - cate from professional schools , and high educate those with an university education or above ( eg . BSc , MSc , PhD ) . • Employment situation which can be either employed or not - employed . In the not - employed category we include students and retirees individuals . • Income level can have three possible levels : low , mid and high . In particular , individuals were asked to report their perceived income with respect to the average using a scale from 1 to 10 . We consider as low income individual those that answered from 1 to 4 , mid income those who answered 5 or 6 and high income those that answered 7 or above . • Gender refers to the biological gender and can be either female or male . • Settlement which refer to the area where individual live and can be either capital , rural or urban . • Chronic disease is a boolean dimension indicating if an individual is aﬀected by any chronic disease or not . • Acute disease is a boolean dimension indicating if an individual is aﬀected by any acute disease or not . • Smoking is a boolean dimension indicating if an individual is a smoker or not . We consider as non smoker individuals that declared them self as not - smoker or that stopped , while we consider smokers individuals that smoke frequently or occasionally . Statistical Model In this section we provide all the results of the additional statistical analysis that we performed in order to support the ﬁndings presented in the Result section of the main text . Model on contacts Accounting for the high number of zeros Due to the implementation of NPIs ( lockdowns and curfews ) throughout the pandemic , people were forced , when possible , to reduce or completely reset their number of contacts . Thus , when analysing the distribution of the number of contacts we found a high presence of zeros . To test the robustness of the results , coming from the negative binomial regression model ( nb ) , to this zero - inﬂated mechanism we implemented two additional models : 13 1 . After having excluded the observations where the number of contacts were zero we re - run the negative binomial regression model on the non - zero number of contacts ( nb ncontacts > 0 ) . µ i = α + β 1 age group i + β 2 X i + β 3 age group i ∗ X i + (cid:15) i ( 7 ) 2 . We modelled the probability to have at least a contact using a logistic regression model ( logit ) . log P i ( anycontact = 1 ) = α + β 1 age group i + β 2 X i + β 3 age group i ∗ X i + (cid:15) i ( 8 ) where age group i is the age class of i ; X i is the variable of interest ( e . g . , education , income etc . ) , age group i ∗ X i is the interaction term of age group and the variable of interest , and (cid:15) i is the error term . In model 7 given µ i , we deﬁne λ i = exp ( µ i ) to be the expected number of contacts for respondent i . While in model 8 P i ( anycontact = 1 ) indicate the probability for respondent i to have at least one contact . By applying the same methodology as explained in the Method section we computed the max signiﬁcance level by age for each of the variables and period considered in the analysis for model 7 and 8 . Fig 7 shows the results of the three models that we implemented . Interestingly , we can see that the same qualitative patterns result from both the negative binomial models , that is if we include the observations where the number of contacts is 0 ( nb ) , o we discard it ( nb ncontacts > 0 ) ( Fig . 7 a , b ) . In particular , although the maximum conﬁdence level computed with these models diﬀer in terms of variability , education , employment and income seem to remain the most signiﬁcant dimensions in terms of explaining diﬀerences in contact numbers among subgroups of the population . The logistic regression model ( logit ) ( Fig . 7 c ) , shows similar results regarding the education and employment situation while it indicates that the other variable analyzed are not actually determining if individuals actually have contacts or not . 14 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 nb a ) 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 nb n ° contacts > 0 b ) 1st IP 2nd W 3rd W 2nd IP 4th W 5th W 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 logit c ) education employment income gender settlement chronic disease acute disease smoking m a x c o n f i d e n c e l e v e l m a x c o n f i d e n c e l e v e l m a x c o n f i d e n c e l e v e l Figure 7 : Box - plot of the maximum conﬁdence level at which the eﬀect of the diﬀerent categories of the variable on the dependent variable of contacts becomes signiﬁcantly diﬀerent . The dispersion of the box plot refers to the variation of this value over diﬀerent age groups . Results are shown for education level , employment situation , income level , gender , settlement , chronic disease , acute disease , and smoking behaviour . Results for the three models implemented nb ( negative binomial ) ( a ) , nb ncontacts > 0 ( negative binomial on non - zeros number of contact ) ( b ) , and logit ( logistic regression ) ( c ) . 15 Community contacts Furthermore , we also investigated the contacts happening exclusively in the community layer , excluding the ones happening at work . We show here the results of the statistical analysis on the number of contacts in the community layer . Particularly in Fig . 8 we show the results of the three models we are implementing : 1 . negative binomial regression ( nb ) , 2 . negative binomial regression only on positive observations of the number of contacts ( nb ncontacts > 0 ) , and 3 . logistic regression to model the probability of having at least one contact ( logit ) . In all these models the dependent variable ( y i ) refers to the community - level contacts of the individuals . Results are similar to the one run considering all the types of contacts together . Indeed , also in this case results indicate that education , employment and income are the most signiﬁcant dimensions in terms of explaining diﬀerences in contact numbers in the community layer among subgroups of the population . Also the logistic regression model ( logit ) ( Fig . 8 c ) , shows similar results indicating that only education and employment are signiﬁcant in determining if individuals actually have contacts or not in the community layer . 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 nb a ) 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 nb n ° contacts > 0 b ) 1st IP 2nd W 3rd W 2nd IP 4th W 5th W 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 logit c ) education income gender settlement chronic disease acute disease smoking m a x c o n f i d e n c e l e v e l m a x c o n f i d e n c e l e v e l m a x c o n f i d e n c e l e v e l Figure 8 : Box - plot of the maximum conﬁdence level at which the eﬀect of the diﬀerent categories of the variable on the dependent variable of contacts becomes signiﬁcantly diﬀerent . The dispersion of the box plot refers to the variation of this value over diﬀerent age groups . Results are shown for education level , employment situation , income level , gender , settlement , chronic disease , acute disease , and smoking behaviour . Results for the three models implemented nb ( negative binomial ) ( a ) , nb ncontacts > 0 ( negative binomial on non - zeros number of contact ) ( b ) , and logit ( logistic regression ) ( c ) . 16 Model on vaccination We model the probability of getting vaccinated against Covid - 19 using a logistic regression model instead of a negative binomial , as the dependent variable was binary . Namely , we model the probability of getting vaccinated for respondent i using logistic regression as deﬁned in Eq . 9 : log P i ( vax = 1 ) = α + β 1 age group i + β 2 X i + β 3 age group i ∗ X i + (cid:15) i ( 9 ) where age group i is the age class of i ; X i is the variable of interest ( e . g . , education , income etc . ) , age group i ∗ X i is the interaction term of age group and the variable of interest , and (cid:15) i is the error term . By applying the same methodology as explained in the Method section we computed the max signiﬁcance level by age for each of the variables and period considered in the analysis ( Fig . 9 ) 3rd W 2nd IP 4th W 5th W 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 education employment income gender settlement chronic disease acute disease smoking m a x c o n f i d e n c e l e v e l Figure 9 : Box - plot of the maximum conﬁdence level at which the eﬀect of the diﬀerent categories of the variable on vaccination become signiﬁcantly diﬀerent . The dispersion of the box plot refers to the variation of this value over diﬀerent age groups . Results are shown for education level , employment situation , income level , gender , settlement , chronic disease , acute disease , and smoking behaviour . Contacts Average number of contacts in the community and in the work layer by sub - groups In the main text , we show the evolution of contacts over time decoupled by education level and employment . For completeness , here we report the same ﬁgures for income level Fig 10 - a , c and settlement Fig 10 - b , d . Looking at the community contact we can observe that there is a clear rank among the income levels in their number of contacts , with high - income individuals having the highest number of contact and low - income individuals having the lowest . The same is arguable for the individuals living in the capital , which appear to be the most active in the community layer , while , individuals living in rural areas are the less active . To what concern the contacts at work , we can clearly observe that high - income individuals were the ones who would better adapt to the epidemiological situation , while mid and low income maintained a fairly stable number of contact over time at the workplace . Particularly , they reported a higher number of contacts at the workplace during the Covid - 19 waves . A similar conclusion can be drawn when we decoupled individuals according to their settlement . In this case , individuals living in rural areas appear to be the most active in the workplace while the ones living in the capital tend to have a lower number of interactions in the workplace . Average number of contacts in the community layer by sub - groups and age groups To show the robustness of our ﬁnding over diﬀerent age groups in Fig 11 we report the evolution of community contacts over time decoupled by education level , employment , income level and settlement . While the correlation with age inﬂuences the magnitude of diﬀerences among the examined sub - groups , the conclusion discussed in the main text appears to be still valid . 17 2021 - 03 - 01 2021 - 07 - 01 2021 - 11 - 01 2022 - 03 - 01 time 2 5 8 11 14 a v g . nu m b e r o f c o n t a c t s 3rd W 2nd IP 4th W 5th W community a ) income low income mid income high 2020 - 07 - 01 2021 - 01 - 01 2021 - 07 - 01 2022 - 01 - 01 time 2 5 8 11 14 a v g . nu m b e r o f c o n t a c t s 1st IP 2nd W 3rd W 2nd IP 4th W 5th W community b ) capitalurbanrural 2021 - 03 - 01 2021 - 07 - 01 2021 - 11 - 01 2022 - 03 - 01 time 2 5 8 11 14 a v g . nu m b e r o f c o n t a c t s 3rd W 2nd IP 4th W 5th W work c ) 2020 - 07 - 01 2021 - 01 - 01 2021 - 07 - 01 2022 - 01 - 01 time 2 5 8 11 14 a v g . nu m b e r o f c o n t a c t s 1st IP 2nd W 3rd W 2nd IP 4th W 5th W work d ) Figure 10 : ( a - b ) Smoothed average number of contacts in the community layer by diﬀerent income levels a ) and settlement types b ) . ( c - d ) Smoothed average number of contacts at the workplace by diﬀerent income levels c ) and settlement types d ) . 10 20 a v g . n o f c o n t a c t s a ) education [ 15 - 30 ) edu low edu mid edu high b ) employment [ 15 - 30 ) employednot employed c ) income [ 15 - 30 ) income low income mid income high d ) settlement [ 15 - 30 ) capitalurbanrural 10 20 a v g . n o f c o n t a c t s [ 30 - 45 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 30 - 45 ) 5 10 15 a v g . n o f c o n t a c t s [ 45 - 60 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 45 - 60 ) 2020 - 07 - 01 2021 - 04 - 01 2022 - 01 - 01 time 5 10 a v g . n o f c o n t a c t s [ 60 + ) 2020 - 07 - 01 2021 - 04 - 01 2022 - 01 - 01 time [ 60 + ) 2021 - 05 - 01 2021 - 11 - 01 time [ 60 + ) 2020 - 07 - 01 2021 - 04 - 01 2022 - 01 - 01 time [ 60 + ) Figure 11 : Average number of contacts in the community layer by diﬀerent age groups ( rows ) and sub - groups ( columns : education levels a ) , employment situation b , income levels c ) and settlement d ) . Contact Matrices For each of the periods considered in this study , we computed the age contact matrix C ij considering the whole population as shown in Fig 12 . These are the matrices that have been fed to to the conventional SEIR model . Instead for the extended SEIR model , we computed the decoupled contact matrices ( C di , j ) considering diﬀerent dimensions as well : ( i ) employment situation ( Fig 13 ) , ( ii ) education level ( Fig 14 ) , ( iii ) settlement ( Fig 15 ) , and ( iv ) income level ( Fig 16 ) . All the matrices have been computed considering the contact at work , in the community and in the household . Detailed explanation of the computation of such matrices is provided in the Method section . 18 [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) a g e c l a ss j 1st IP 2nd W 3rd W [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) age class i [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) a g e c l a ss j 2nd IP [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) age class i 4th W [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) age class i 5th W 2 4 6 8 10 2 4 6 8 10 Figure 12 : Age contact matrices ( C ij ) for diﬀerent periods . 19 [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) 1 s t I P a g e c l a ss j employed not employed [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) 2 n d W a g e c l a ss j [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) 3 r d W a g e c l a ss j [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) 2 n d I P a g e c l a ss j [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) 4 t h W a g e c l a ss j [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) age class i [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) 5 t h W a g e c l a ss j [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) age class i 2 4 6 8 2 4 6 8 2 4 6 8 2 4 6 8 2 4 6 8 2 4 6 8 Figure 13 : Age contact matrices decoupled by employment situation ( C employmenti , j ) for diﬀerent periods . 20 [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) 1 s t I P a g e c l a ss j edu low edu mid edu high [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) 2 n d W a g e c l a ss j [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) 3 r d W a g e c l a ss j [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) 2 n d I P a g e c l a ss j [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) 4 t h W a g e c l a ss j [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) age class i [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) 5 t h W a g e c l a ss j [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) age class i [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) age class i 2 4 6 8 2 4 6 8 2 4 6 8 2 4 6 8 2 4 6 8 2 4 6 8 Figure 14 : Age contact matrices decoupled by education level ( C educationi , j ) for diﬀerent periods . 21 [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) 1 s t I P a g e c l a ss j capital urban rural [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) 2 n d W a g e c l a ss j [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) 3 r d W a g e c l a ss j [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) 2 n d I P a g e c l a ss j [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) 4 t h W a g e c l a ss j [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) age class i [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) 5 t h W a g e c l a ss j [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) age class i [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) age class i 2 4 6 8 2 4 6 8 2 4 6 8 2 4 6 8 2 4 6 8 2 4 6 8 Figure 15 : Age contact matrices decoupled by settlement ( C settlementi , j ) for diﬀerent periods . 22 [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) 2 n d W a g e c l a ss j income low income mid income high [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) 3 r d W a g e c l a ss j [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) 2 n d I P a g e c l a ss j [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) 4 t h W a g e c l a ss j [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 1 5 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) age class i [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) 5 t h W a g e c l a ss j [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 1 5 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) age class i [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 1 5 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) age class i 2 4 6 8 10 2 4 6 8 10 2 4 6 8 10 2 4 6 8 10 2 4 6 8 10 Figure 16 : Age contact matrices decoupled by income level ( C incomei , j ) for diﬀerent periods . 23 Vaccination uptake Here we show the probability of getting vaccinated against COVID - 19 given age and another dimension of interest . Namely , we consider ( i ) employment situation , ( ii ) education level , ( iii ) settlement , and ( iv ) income level . From Fig . 17 we can observe that privilege groups of the population tend to have higher vaccination uptake across all age groups . This ﬁning is consistent over the four diﬀerent periods considered in the analysis . 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 3 r d W % v a cc i n a t e d a ) employment employed not employed b ) education edu low edu mid edu high c ) settlement capital urban rural d ) income income low income mid income high 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 2 n d I P % v a cc i n a t e d 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 4 t h W % v a cc i n a t e d [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 + ) age class 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 5 t h W % v a cc i n a t e d [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 + ) age class [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 + ) age class [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 + ) age class Figure 17 : Probability of getting vaccinated given age and ( i ) employment situation , ( ii ) education level , ( iii ) settlement , and ( iv ) income level Epidemic models In this section , we report the ODE’s equation of the ( i ) conventional age - stratiﬁed SEIRD model and , ( i ) extended SEIRD where beyond the age stratiﬁcation we can diﬀerentiate the population along others dimension of interest ( ¯ d ) . Speciﬁcally , the reported equations for the extended SEIRD model account also for vaccination . Conventional age - stratiﬁed SEIRD Let’s consider an infectious disease that can be described with a Susceptible - Exposed - Infected - Recovered - Death model [ 32 ] . The epidemic dynamic is encoded in the set of diﬀerential equations in Eq . 10 . Where , i indicates the age group of the ego , j indicates the age group of the alter , β is the probability of transmission given a contact , (cid:15) is the rate at which individuals become infectious , µ is the recovery rate , C ij is the age contact matrix , and IFR i is the infection fatality rate by age group . 24 ˙ S i = − λ i S i ˙ E i = λS i − (cid:15)E i ˙ I i = (cid:15)E i − µI i ˙ R i = µI i ˙ D i = µIFR i I i ( 10 ) The force of infection is deﬁned as in eq . 11 λ i = β (cid:88) j C ij N j I j ( 11 ) Extended SEIRD with vaccination We extend the conventional SEIRD model to account for diﬀerent vaccination uptake of diﬀerent groups of the population . Namely , each of the compartments is now considered separately for vaccinated and unvaccinated individuals . We deﬁne as g 1 and g 2 the eﬃciency of the vaccination respectively against infection and against death . In addition , we consider the delay in the oﬃcial registrations of deaths by adding a new compartment Da and a delay of ∆ − 1 days . The equations of the model are presented in equation 12 . ˙ S ¯ d , i = − λ ¯ d , i S ¯ d , i ˙ Sv ¯ d , i = − ( 1 − g 1 ) λ ¯ d , i Sv ¯ d , i ˙ E ¯ d , i = λ ¯ d , i S ¯ d , i − (cid:15)E ¯ d , i ˙ Ev ¯ d , i = ( 1 − g 1 ) λ ¯ d , i Sv ¯ d , i − (cid:15)Ev ¯ d , i ˙ I ¯ d , i = (cid:15)E ¯ d , i − µI ¯ d , i ˙ Iv ¯ d , i = (cid:15)Ev ¯ d , i − µIv ¯ d , i ˙ R ¯ d , i = µ ( 1 − IFR i ) I ¯ d , i ˙ Rv ¯ d , i = µ ( 1 − ( 1 − g 2 ) IFR i ) Iv ¯ d , i ˙ D ¯ d , i = µIFR i I ¯ d , i ˙ Dv ¯ d , i = µ ( 1 − g 2 ) IFR i Iv ¯ d , i ˙ D a ¯ d , i = ∆ − 1 ˙ D ¯ d , i ˙ Dv a ¯ d , i = ∆ − 1 ˙ Dv ¯ d , i ( 12 ) The force of infection is deﬁned as in eq . 13 λ ¯ d , i ( t ) = β (cid:80) j C ¯ d , ij N j [ I j + Iv j ] ( 13 ) Epidemic Simulations We developed stochastic , discrete - time , compartmental models using chain binomial processes to simulate the transitions among compartments . Speciﬁcally , at each time step t , the model samples the number of individ - uals in group ( ¯ d , i ) and compartment X transitioning to compartment Y from PrBin ( X ¯ d , i ( t ) , p X ¯ d , i −→ Y ¯ d , i ( t ) ) . Here , p X ¯ d , i −→ Y ¯ d , i ( t ) represents the transition probability . To illustrate this , let’s consider the number of individuals in the group ( ¯ d , i ) and compartment S that at time t become exposed transiting to compartment E . Thus , the number of individuals in S ¯ d , i ( t ) getting exposed are extracted from a PrBin ( S ¯ d , i ( t ) , λ ¯ d , i ( t ) ) where λ ¯ d , i ( t ) is the force of infection . The model has been initialize by computing the population distributions from the MASZK data , while we set the Hungarian population size to 9 . 750 . 000 . The decoupled contact matrices have been computed considering the contacts happening at work , in the community and in with family members . While , the epidemiological parameters are set to realistic values to closely simulate the characteristics of Covid - 19 . These values are retrieved from the literature . In particular , (cid:15) is set to 2 . 4 ; γ is set to 1 / 6 . 6 [ 22 , 48 , 49 ] . The transmission rate β is computed in each of the periods using the Next Generation Matrix approach [ 50 ] 25 on the aggregate age - contact matrices corresponding to the periods analysed . We ﬁxed R 0 = 2 . 5 and we derived β using Eq . 14 . R 0 = β µρ ( C ij ) ( 14 ) Where ρ ( C ij ) is the spectral radius of the mage contact matrix . In the simulations in which we introduce vaccination , we respectively set the g 1 = 0 . 6 and g 2 = 0 . 8 [ 51 , 52 ] . The initial size of the epidemic is set to 5 . All the results in the main text refer to the median over 500 simulations of the model . Impact of diﬀerent contact patterns In this section , we show the results of the extended SEIR model when diﬀerences in age contact matrices are considered for diﬀerent sub - groups of the population . Particularly , we model age contact interactions diﬀerentiating individuals along their employment situation , education level , settlement and income level . For each of the dimensions considered , we run the extended SEIR model . We look at ( i ) and how the prediction of this model diﬀers from the conventional SEIR and ( ii ) how the attack rate diﬀers for diﬀerent subgroups as a result of their diﬀerences in contact patterns . Speciﬁcally , in Fig . 18 we show the diﬀerence between attack rate by age group as predicted by the extended SEIR model and the conventional SEIR model . The results are shown for each of the periods considered in the analysis . Again , as demonstrated in the main text , the conventional SEIR model tend to overestimate the attack rate by age group with respect to extended SEIR model , particularly when employment situation and education are taken into account . In Fig . 19 we show the output of each of the extended SEIR models in terms of attack rate by age by diﬀerentiating along the subgroups taken into account . Results are shown for each of the periods considered in the analysis . As shown in the main text the analysis over the other periods conﬁrms that , employed and highly educated individuals happened to be the most infected groups in all age groups . When decoupling age contact matrices by settlement and income , although diﬀerences appear smaller between groups , high - income individuals and the ones living in the capital are more infected , particularly elderly ones with age 60 + . [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 + ) o v e r a ll age class 0 . 06 0 . 04 0 . 02 0 . 00 0 . 02 0 . 04 0 . 06 d i ff e r e n c e i n a tt a c k r a t e 1st IP employmenteducationsettlementincome [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 + ) o v e r a ll age class 2nd W [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 + ) o v e r a ll age class 3rd W [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 + ) o v e r a ll age class 2nd IP [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 + ) o v e r a ll age class 4th W [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 + ) o v e r a ll age class 5th W Figure 18 : Averted attack rate by age and ( i ) employment situation , ( ii ) education level , ( iii ) settlement , ( iv ) income and ( v ) overall , in the diﬀerent periods ( columns ) . 26 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 s t I P a tt a c k r a t e a ) employment b ) education c ) settlement 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 2 n d W a tt a c k r a t e 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 3 r d W a tt a c k r a t e 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 2 n d I P a tt a c k r a t e 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 4 t h W a tt a c k r a t e [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 + ) o v e r a ll age class 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 5 t h W a tt a c k r a t e M . w / C id , j M . w / C i , j employednot employed [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 + ) o v e r a ll age class M . w / C id , j M . w / C i , j edu low edu mid edu high [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 + ) o v e r a ll age class M . w / C id , j M . w / C i , j capitalurbanrural [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 + ) o v e r a ll age class M . w / C id , j M . w / C i , j income low income mid income high Figure 19 : Attack rate by age and employment situation , education level , settlement and income ( columns ) , in diﬀerent periods ( rows ) 27 Impact of diﬀerent vaccination uptake In order to show the impact of diﬀerent vaccination uptake here we show the averted attack rate by age due to vaccination ( Fig . 20 ) . Speciﬁcally , we show the diﬀerence among the attack rate by age , for the diﬀerent subgroups as predicted by the extended SEIR in the non - vaccination scenario with respect to the one in which individuals get vaccinated according to their age and subgroup - as shown in Fig . 17 . The ﬁndings from the additional periods support the observations discussed in the main text . Indeed , Fig . 20 clearly shows that vaccination beneﬁts are disproportionately advantageous for more privileged population groups . 0 . 02 0 . 04 0 . 06 0 . 08 3 r d W a v e r t e d a tt a c k r a t e a ) employment employednot employed b ) education edu low edu mid edu high c ) settlement capitalurbanrural d ) income income low income mid income high 0 . 150 0 . 175 0 . 200 0 . 225 0 . 250 2 n d I P a v e r t e d a tt a c k r a t e 0 . 15 0 . 20 0 . 25 4 t h W a v e r t e d a tt a c k r a t e [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 + ) age class 0 . 15 0 . 20 0 . 25 0 . 30 5 t h W a v e r t e d a tt a c k r a t e [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 + ) age class [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 + ) age class [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 + ) age class Figure 20 : Diﬀerence in attack rate due to vaccination by age and employment situation , education level , settlement and income ( columns ) , in diﬀerent periods ( rows ) Model Calibration We calibrate a SEIRD model with vaccination by modelling diﬀerences in contacts patterns and vaccination uptake among employed and not employed individuals belonging to diﬀerent education levels . In particular , we calibrate the free parameters of the model using an Approximate Bayesian Computation ( ABC ) technique [ 36 , 37 ] . First , we deﬁne the prior distributions of the free parameters P ( θ ) , a number of accepted sets N , an error metric m ( E , E (cid:48) ) , and a tolerance δ . We start sampling a set of parameters θ from P ( θ ) , and generate an instance of the model using these parameters . Then , using the chosen error metric we compare an output quantity E (cid:48) of the model with the corresponding real quantity E : if m ( E , E (cid:48) ) < δ then we accept the set θ , otherwise we reject it . We repeat this accept / reject step until N parameter sets are accepted . The empirical distribution of the accepted sets is an approximation of their real posterior distribution . Finally , we generate an ensemble of possible epidemic trajectories sampling parameter sets from the posteriors distributions . In this work , we consider the following free parameters and prior distributions : • the transmission rate parameter β : the prior distribution is set to U ( 0 . 02 , 0 . 15 ) 28 • the delay in reporting deaths ∆ : the prior distribution is set to U ( 5 , 20 ) • the initial recovered population R : the prior distribution is set to U ( 700 K , 2800 K ) • the initial exposed population E : the prior distribution is set to U ( 100 , 3 K ) • the initial infected population I : the prior distribution is set to U ( 200 , 9 K ) We calibrate our model on the aggregate number of daily deaths from 09 / 2021 to 01 / 2022 . For simplicity , as the percentage of those who were vaccinated was quite stable [ 53 ] in the period considered we assume that the population got vaccinated at time 0 . As an error metric , we use the Median Absolute Percentage Error ( MdAPE ) . We also set the number of accepted sets N = 3000 and the tolerance δ = 0 . 3 In Fig 21 are shown the posterior distributions of the parameters calibrated through the ABC rejection algorithm . The ﬁxed parameters of the model have been informed from the literature . In particular : • the eﬃcacy of the vaccine against infection and against death , is modelled as a normal distribution with mean respectively g 1 = 0 . 7 , g 2 = 0 . 8 , and standard deviation 0 . 05 [ 51 , 52 ] . This choice has been made to account for the variability of the eﬃcacy of the diﬀerent vaccination types and against the diﬀerent variants . • the recovery rate µ = 1 / 2 . 5 [ 22 , 49 , 48 ] • the incubation period (cid:15) = 1 / 4 [ 22 , 49 , 48 ] • the infection fatality rate by age IFR i is set as in Table 1 [ 54 ] Age group IFR [ 0 - 5 ) 0 . 001 % [ 5 - 15 ) 0 . 001 % [ 15 - 30 ) 0 . 005 % [ 30 - 45 ) 0 . 02 % [ 45 - 60 ) 0 . 2 % [ 60 - 70 ) 0 . 7 % [ 70 - 80 ) 1 . 9 % [ 80 + ) 8 . 3 % Table 1 : Infection Fatality Rate by age group In Fig . 21 we report the number of daily real and simulated deaths ( median and 95 % CI ) . a ) b ) c ) d ) e ) f ) 0 . 06 0 . 07 0 . 08 0 100 200 300 400 f r e q u a n c y 0 2000 Exposed t = 0 0 50 100 150 200 0 5000 Infected t = 0 0 100 200 300 1 2 Recovered t = 0 1e6 0 50 100 150 200 5 10 15 0 50 100 150 200 10 20 30 MdAPE 0 100 200 300 400 Figure 21 : ( a - e ) Posterior distribution of the calibrated parameters of the model ( f ) Distribution of the MdAPE ( (cid:15) ) . 29 0 100 0 100 200 n e w d e a t h s a ) a ) overall truemodel 0 100 0 50 b ) b ) employment employednot employed kids 0 100 0 20 40 60 c ) c ) income income low income mid income high 0 100 0 20 40 d ) d ) age group [ 0 - 5 ) [ 5 - 15 ) [ 15 - 30 ) [ 30 - 45 ) [ 45 - 60 ) [ 60 - 70 ) [ 70 - 80 ) [ 80 + ) 0 100time 0 1 2 % n e w d e a t h s × 10 5 0 100time 0 1 2 3 × 10 5 0 100time 0 1 2 × 10 5 0 100time 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 × 10 4 Figure 22 : ( a - d ) Number of daily deaths real ( blue dots ) and simulated ( grey ) overall ( a ) , by education ( b ) , employment ( c ) , and age group ( d ) . ( e - h ) Percentage of daily deaths real ( red line ) and simulated ( grey ) overall ( e ) , by education ( f ) , employment ( g ) , and age group ( h ) . Results refers to the median of 3000 simulations . References [ 1 ] Michael Marmot , Sharon Friel , Ruth Bell , Tanja AJ Houweling , and Sebastian Taylor . Closing the gap in a generation : health equity through action on the social determinants of health . The lancet , 372 ( 9650 ) : 1661 – 1669 , 2008 . [ 2 ] Svenn - Erik Mamelund , Clare Shelley - Egan , and Ole Rogeberg . The association between socioeconomic status and pandemic inﬂuenza : systematic review and meta - analysis . PLoS One , 16 ( 9 ) : e0244346 , 2021 . [ 3 ] Mariana Kikuti , Geraldo M Cunha , Igor AD Paploski , Amelia M Kasper , Monaise MO Silva , Aline S Tavares , Jaqueline S Cruz , T´assia L Queiroz , Moreno S Rodrigues , Perla M Santana , et al . Spatial distribution of dengue in a brazilian urban slum setting : role of socioeconomic gradient in disease risk . PLoS neglected tropical diseases , 9 ( 7 ) : e0003937 , 2015 . [ 4 ] Gonzalo E . Mena , Pamela P . Martinez , Ayesha S . Mahmud , Pablo A . Marquet , Caroline O . Buckee , and Mauricio Santillana . Socioeconomic status determines covid - 19 incidence and related mortality in santiago , chile . Science , 372 ( 6545 ) : eabg5298 , 2021 . [ 5 ] Bo Burstr¨om and Wenjing Tao . Social determinants of health and inequalities in COVID - 19 . European Journal of Public Health , 30 ( 4 ) : 617 – 618 , 07 2020 . [ 6 ] Ayan Paul , Philipp Englert , and Melinda Varga . Socio - economic disparities and covid - 19 in the usa . Journal of Physics : Complexity , 2 ( 3 ) : 035017 , 2021 . [ 7 ] H . Zhao , R . J . Harris , J . Ellis , and R . G . Pebody . Ethnicity , deprivation and mortality due to 2009 pandemic inﬂuenza a ( h1n1 ) in england during the 2009 / 2010 pandemic and the ﬁrst post - pandemic season . Epidemiology and Infection , 143 ( 16 ) : 3375 – 3383 , 2015 . [ 8 ] Nicol ` o Gozzi , Michele Tizzoni , Matteo Chinazzi , Leo Ferres , Alessandro Vespignani , and Nicola Perra . Estimating the eﬀect of social inequalities in the mitigation of covid - 19 across communities in santiago de chile . medRxiv , 2020 . [ 9 ] Jonathan Jay , Jacob Bor , Elaine O . Nsoesie , Sarah K . Lipson , David K . Jones , Sandro Galea , and Julia Raifman . Neighbourhood income and physical distancing during the covid - 19 pandemic in the united states . Nature Human Behaviour , 12 , 12 2020 . [ 10 ] Eugenio Valdano , Jonggul Lee , Shweta Bansal , Stefania Rubrichi , and Vittoria Colizza . Highlighting socio - economic constraints on mobility reductions during covid - 19 restrictions in france can inform eﬀective and equitable pandemic response . Journal of travel medicine , 28 ( 4 ) : taab045 , 2021 . 30 [ 11 ] Giulia Pullano , Eugenio Valdano , Nicola Scarpa , Stefania Rubrichi , and Vittoria Colizza . Evaluating the eﬀect of demographic factors , socioeconomic factors , and risk aversion on mobility during the covid - 19 epidemic in france under lockdown : a population - based study . The Lancet Digital Health , 2 ( 12 ) : e638 – e649 , 2020 . [ 12 ] Giovanni Bonaccorsi , Francesco Pierri , Matteo Cinelli , Andrea Flori , Alessandro Galeazzi , Francesco Porcelli , Ana Lucia Schmidt , Carlo Michele Valensise , Antonio Scala , Walter Quattrociocchi , et al . Economic and social consequences of human mobility restrictions under covid - 19 . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 117 ( 27 ) : 15530 – 15535 , 2020 . [ 13 ] Isolde Sommer , Ursula Griebler , Peter Mahlknecht , Kylie Thaler , Kathryn Bouskill , Gerald Gartlehner , and Shanti Mendis . Socioeconomic inequalities in non - communicable diseases and their risk factors : an overview of systematic reviews . BMC Public Health , 15 , 09 2015 . [ 14 ] Clare Bambra , Ryan Riordan , John Ford , and Fiona Matthews . The covid - 19 pandemic and health inequalities . Journal of Epidemiology & Community Health , 74 ( 11 ) : 964 – 968 , 2020 . [ 15 ] Roy M Anderson and Robert M May . Infectious diseases of humans : dynamics and control . Oxford university press , 1991 . [ 16 ] Kathy Leung , Mark Jit , Eric H . Y . Lau , and Joseph T . Wu . Scientiﬁc Reports , 7 ( 1 ) , 08 2017 . [ 17 ] Jo¨el Mossong , Niel Hens , Mark Jit , Philippe Beutels , Kari Auranen , Rafael Mikolajczyk , Marco Massari , Stefania Salmaso , Gianpaolo Scalia Tomba , Jacco Wallinga , et al . Social contacts and mixing patterns relevant to the spread of infectious diseases . PLoS medicine , 5 ( 3 ) : e74 , 2008 . [ 18 ] Alessia Melegaro , Emanuele Del Fava , Piero Poletti , Stefano Merler , Constance Nyamukapa , John Williams , Simon Gregson , and Piero Manfredi . Social contact structures and time use patterns in the manicaland province of zimbabwe . PLOS ONE , 12 ( 1 ) : 1 – 17 , 01 2017 . [ 19 ] Dina Mistry , Maria Litvinova , Ana Pastore y Piontti , Matteo Chinazzi , Laura Fumanelli , Marcelo F C Gomes , Syed A Haque , Quan - Hui Liu , Kunpeng Mu , Xinyue Xiong , M Elizabeth Halloran , Ira M Longini , Stefano Merler , Marco Ajelli , and Alessandro Vespignani . Inferring high - resolution human mixing patterns for disease modeling . Nature Communications , 12 ( 1 ) : 323 , 2021 . [ 20 ] Kiesha Prem , Alex R Cook , and Mark Jit . Projecting social contact matrices in 152 countries using contact surveys and demographic data . PLoS computational biology , 13 ( 9 ) : e1005697 , 2017 . [ 21 ] Carlos G Grijalva , Nele Goeyvaerts , Hector Verastegui , Kathryn M Edwards , Ana I Gil , Claudio F Lanata , Niel Hens , et al . A household - based study of contact networks relevant for the spread of infectious diseases in the highlands of peru . PloS one , 10 ( 3 ) : e0118457 , 2015 . [ 22 ] Nicol ` o Gozzi , Matteo Chinazzi , Jessica T Davis , Kunpeng Mu , Ana Pastore y Piontti , Marco Ajelli , Nicola Perra , and Alessandro Vespignani . Anatomy of the ﬁrst six months of covid - 19 vaccination campaign in italy . PLoS Computational Biology , 18 ( 5 ) : e1010146 , 2022 . [ 23 ] Juanjuan Zhang , Maria Litvinova , Yuxia Liang , Yan Wang , Wei Wang , Shanlu Zhao , Qianhui Wu , Stefano Merler , C´ecile Viboud , Alessandro Vespignani , Marco Ajelli , and Hongjie Yu . Changes in contact patterns shape the dynamics of the covid - 19 outbreak in china . Science , 368 ( 6498 ) : 1481 – 1486 , 2020 . [ 24 ] Michele Tizzoni , Elaine O Nsoesie , Laetitia Gauvin , M´arton Karsai , Nicola Perra , and Shweta Bansal . Addressing the socioeconomic divide in computational modeling for infectious diseases . Nature Com - munications , 13 ( 1 ) : 1 – 7 , 2022 . [ 25 ] Caroline Buckee , Abdisalan Noor , and Lisa Sattenspiel . Thinking clearly about social aspects of infec - tious disease transmission . Nature , 595 ( 7866 ) : 205 – 213 , 2021 . 31 [ 26 ] Jamie Bedson , Laura A Skrip , Danielle Pedi , Sharon Abramowitz , Simone Carter , Mohamed F Jalloh , Sebastian Funk , Nina Gobat , Tamara Giles - Vernick , Gerardo Chowell , et al . A review and agenda for integrated disease models including social and behavioural factors . Nature human behaviour , 5 ( 7 ) : 834 – 846 , 2021 . [ 27 ] Jon Zelner , Nina B Masters , Ramya Naraharisetti , Sanyu A Mojola , Merlin Chowkwanyun , and Ryan Malosh . There are no equal opportunity infectors : epidemiological modelers must rethink our approach to inequality in infection risk . PLoS computational biology , 18 ( 2 ) : e1009795 , 2022 . [ 28 ] M´arton Karsai , J´ulia Koltai , Orsolya V´as´arhelyi , and Gergely R¨ost . Hungary in mask / maszk in hungary . Corvinus Journal of Sociology and Social Policy , ( 2 ) , 2020 . [ 29 ] J´ulia Koltai , Orsolya V´as´arhelyi , Gergely R¨ost , and M´arton Karsai . Reconstructing social mixing patterns via weighted contact matrices from online and representative surveys . Scientiﬁc Reports , 12 ( 1 ) : 1 – 12 , 2022 . [ 30 ] Gabrielle Brankston , Eric Merkley , David N Fisman , Ashleigh R Tuite , Zvonimir Poljak , Peter J Loewen , and Amy L Greer . Quantifying contact patterns in response to covid - 19 public health measures in canada . BMC public health , 21 ( 1 ) : 1 – 10 , 2021 . [ 31 ] Filippo Trentini , Adriana Manna , Nicoletta Balbo , Valentina Marziano , Giorgio Guzzetta , Samantha O’Dell , Allisandra G Kummer , Maria Litvinova , Stefano Merler , Marco Ajelli , et al . Investigating the relationship between interventions , contact patterns , and sars - cov - 2 transmissibility . Epidemics , 40 : 100601 , 2022 . [ 32 ] Matt J . Keeling and Pejman Rohani . Modeling Infectious Diseases in Humans and Animals . Princeton University Press , 2008 . [ 33 ] Herbert W Hethcote . The mathematics of infectious diseases . SIAM review , 42 ( 4 ) : 599 – 653 , 2000 . [ 34 ] J´anos S´andor , Ferenc Vincze , Maya Liza Shrikant , L´aszl´o K˝or¨osi , L´aszl´o Ulicska , Karolina K´osa , and R´oza ´Ad´any . Covid - 19 vaccination coverage in deprived populations living in segregated colonies : A nationwide cross - sectional study in hungary . Plos one , 17 ( 2 ) : e0264363 , 2022 . [ 35 ] Chiara Cadeddu , Aldo Rosano , Leonardo Villani , Giovanni Battista Coiante , Ilaria Minicucci , Domenico Pascucci , and Chiara de Waure . Planning and organization of the covid - 19 vaccination campaign : An overview of eight european countries . Vaccines , 10 ( 10 ) : 1631 , 2022 . [ 36 ] Amanda Minter and Renata Retkute . Approximate bayesian computation for infectious disease mod - elling . Epidemics , 29 : 100368 , 2019 . [ 37 ] Mikael Sunn˚aker , Alberto Giovanni Busetto , Elina Numminen , Jukka Corander , Matthieu Foll , and Christophe Dessimoz . Approximate bayesian computation . PLoS computational biology , 9 ( 1 ) : e1002803 , 2013 . [ 38 ] Covid - 19 mortality and recovery data on settlement level , atlatszo . hu Accessed : May 9 , 2023 . [ 39 ] Beatrix Oroszi , Attila Juh´asz , Csilla Nagy , Judit Krisztina Horv´ath , Krisztina Eszter Koml´os , Gerg˝o T´uri , Martin McKee , and R´oza ´Ad´any . Characteristics of the third covid - 19 pandemic wave with special focus on socioeconomic inequalities in morbidity , mortality and the uptake of covid - 19 vaccination in hungary . Journal of personalized medicine , 12 ( 3 ) : 388 , 2022 . [ 40 ] Beatrix Oroszi , Attila Juh´asz , Csilla Nagy , Judit Krisztina Horv´ath , Martin McKee , and R´oza ´Ad´any . Unequal burden of covid - 19 in hungary : a geographical and socioeconomic analysis of the second wave of the pandemic . BMJ global health , 6 ( 9 ) : e006427 , 2021 . [ 41 ] Adriana Manna , Lorenzo Dall’Amico , Michele Tizzoni , Marton Karsai , and Nicola Perra . Generalized contact matrices for epidemic modeling . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2306 . 17250 , 2023 . [ 42 ] Nemzeti adatv´edelmi ´es inform´aci´o szabads´ag hat´os´ag , date of access 2023 . 05 . 23 . 32 [ 43 ] Surveillance deﬁnitions for covid - 19 , european centre for disease prevention and control , date of access 2023 . 05 . 23 . [ 44 ] Dennis M Feehan and Ayesha S Mahmud . Quantifying population contact patterns in the united states during the covid - 19 pandemic . Nature communications , 12 ( 1 ) : 1 – 9 , 2021 . [ 45 ] Thomas Brambor , William Roberts Clark , and Matt Golder . Understanding interaction models : Im - proving empirical analyses . Political analysis , 14 ( 1 ) : 63 – 82 , 2006 . [ 46 ] Carina Mood . Logistic regression : Why we cannot do what we think we can do , and what we can do about it . European sociological review , 26 ( 1 ) : 67 – 82 , 2010 . [ 47 ] Paul D Allison . Comparing logit and probit coeﬃcients across groups . Sociological methods & research , 28 ( 2 ) : 186 – 208 , 1999 . [ 48 ] Stephen M Kissler , Christine Tedijanto , Edward Goldstein , Yonatan H Grad , and Marc Lipsitch . Projecting the transmission dynamics of sars - cov - 2 through the postpandemic period . Science , 368 ( 6493 ) : 860 – 868 , 2020 . [ 49 ] Jantien A Backer , Don Klinkenberg , and Jacco Wallinga . Incubation period of 2019 novel coronavirus ( 2019 - ncov ) infections among travellers from wuhan , china , 20 – 28 january 2020 . Eurosurveillance , 25 ( 5 ) : 2000062 , 2020 . [ 50 ] Julie C Blackwood and Lauren M Childs . An introduction to compartmental modeling for the budding infectious disease modeler . 2018 . [ 51 ] Zolt´an Vok´o , Zolt´an Kiss , Gy¨orgy Surj´an , Orsolya Surj´an , Zs´oﬁa Barcza , Bernadett P´alyi , Eszter Formanek - Balku , Gerg˝o Attila Moln´ar , R´obert Herczeg , Attila Gyenesei , et al . Nationwide eﬀective - ness of ﬁve sars - cov - 2 vaccines in hungary—the hun - ve study . Clinical Microbiology and Infection , 28 ( 3 ) : 398 – 404 , 2022 . [ 52 ] Julia Shapiro , Natalie E Dean , Zachary J Madewell , Yang Yang , M Elizabeth Halloran , and Ira Longini . Eﬃcacy estimates for various covid - 19 vaccines : what we know from the literature and reports . MedRxiv , pages 2021 – 05 , 2021 . [ 53 ] Statista . Hungary : Number of people vaccinated against covid - 19 . https : / / www . statista . com / statistics / 1196109 / hungary - number - of - people - vaccinated - against - covid - 19 / , 2023 . Ac - cessed : May 9 , 2023 . [ 54 ] Henrik Salje , C´ecile Tran Kiem , No´emie Lefrancq , No´emie Courtejoie , Paolo Bosetti , Juliette Paireau , Alessio Andronico , Nathana¨el Hoz´e , Jehanne Richet , Claire - Lise Dubost , et al . Estimating the burden of sars - cov - 2 in france . Science , 369 ( 6500 ) : 208 – 211 , 2020 . 33