Articles The Crystal Structure of the BAR Domain from Human Bin1 / Amphiphysin II and Its Implications for Molecular Recognition † Eva Casal , ‡ Luca Federici , § Wei Zhang , ‡ Juan Fernandez - Recio , | Eva - Maria Priego , ‡ Ricardo Nun˜ez Miguel , ‡ James B . DuHadaway , ^ George C . Prendergast , ^ Ben F . Luisi , * , ‡ and Ernest D . Laue ‡ Department of Biochemistry , Uni V ersity of Cambridge , 80 Tennis Court Road , Cambridge CB2 1GA , U . K . , Ce . S . I . Centro Studi sull’In V ecchiamento and Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche , Uni V ersita ` di Chieti “G . D’Annunzio” , Via dei Vestini 31 , 66013 Chieti , Italy , Institute of Biomedical Research , Barcelona Science Park , Josep Samitier 1 - 5 , 08028 Barcelona , Spain , and Lankenau Institute for Medical Research , 100 Lancaster A V enue , Wynnewood , Pennsyl V ania 19096 Recei V ed April 13 , 2006 ; Re V ised Manuscript Recei V ed July 21 , 2006 ABSTRACT : BAR domains are found in proteins that bind and remodel membranes and participate in cytoskeletal and nuclear processes . Here , we report the crystal structure of the BAR domain from the human Bin1 protein at 2 . 0 Å resolution . Both the quaternary and tertiary architectures of the homodimeric Bin1BAR domain are built upon “knobs - into - holes” packing of side chains , like those found in conventional left - handed coiled - coils , and this packing governs the curvature of a putative membrane - engaging concave face . Our calculations indicate that the Bin1BAR domain contains two potential sites for protein - protein interactions on the convex face of the dimer . Comparative analysis of structural features reveals that at least three architectural subtypes of the BAR domain are encoded in the human genome , represented by the Arfaptin , Bin1 / Amphiphysin , and IRSp53 BAR domains . We discuss how these principal groups may differ in their potential to form regulatory heterotypic interactions . The BAR domain was first identified by its common occurrence in vertebrate Bin1 and Amphiphysins and in the Saccharomyces cere V isae Rvs proteins ( 1 ) . The family has now expanded to include many other BAR - containing proteins , such as endophilins , sorting nexins , nadrins , cen - taurins , and oligophrenins , which are mostly involved in membrane binding or remodeling events ( 2 ) . The structures of the BAR domains of Drosophila Amphiphysin , human Arfaptin2 , and murine Endophilin have been published recently , in addition to the more distantly related IRSp53 / MIM domain ( IMD 1 ) of human IRSp53 ( 2 - 5 ) . Architecturally , the BAR domain is a kinked , trihelical coiled - coil that forms a banana - shaped homodimer with a positively charged concave face . This face is proposed to engage curved membranes through electrostatic attraction , and so may induce curvature in otherwise planar membranes . † This work was supported by the Wellcome Trust . E . C . was a recipient of a Gates - Cambridge Trust scholarship , L . F . was a recipient of a Marie Curie fellowship , and E . - M . P was supported by a grant from Ministero Espan˜ol de Educacion y Ciencia . J . F . - R . was supported by a Curie European Reintegration Grant and by the Ramon y Cajal Program of the Spanish Ministry of Science and Technology . G . C . P . is supported by grants from the NIH , DoD Breast and Prostate Cancer Research Programs , and the Lankenau Hospital Foundation . * Corresponding author . E - mail : bfl20 @ mole . bio . cam . ac . uk . Phone : 44 - 1223 - 766019 . Fax : 44 - 1223 - 766002 . ‡ University of Cambridge . § Universita ` di Chieti “G . D’Annunzio” . | Institute of Biomedical Research , Barcelona Science Park . ^ Lankenau Institute for Medical Research . 1 Abbreviations : IMD , IRSp53 / MIM domains ; ODA , optimal dock - ing area . © Copyright 2006 by the American Chemical Society Volume 45 , Number 43 October 31 , 2006 10 . 1021 / bi060717k CCC : $ 33 . 50 © 2006 American Chemical Society Published on Web 10 / 10 / 2006 In V itro , the BAR domain causes liposomes to elongate dramatically , a process which has been described as “tubu - lation” . Mutation of the positively charged residues in the concave face inhibits this tubulation activity ( 2 ) . In V i V o , overexpression of the BAR domain of human Amphiphysin II in tissue culture cells causes invagination of the plasma membrane to form internal tubules that resemble the T - tubules of skeletal muscle involved in excitation - contraction coupling ( 6 ) . As well as the BAR domain , the N - terminal region also plays an important role in membrane bending ( 7 ) . This auxiliary region is likely to undergo a random coil to helical transition on engagement with the membrane ( 2 ) . Amphiphysins are BAR - containing proteins proposed to function chiefly in endocytosis and other membrane remod - eling processes ( 7 , 8 ) . They are composed of an N - terminal BAR domain with an additional N - terminal helix , followed by a variable central region which shows significant variation in different alternatively spliced protein isoforms , and a C - terminal SH3 domain . Mammalian Amphiphysin I proteins are expressed in the brain and nervous system , and they contain domains that bind components of the endocytic machinery , such as clathrin , adaptor protein complex 2 ( AP2 ) V ia the central CLAP domain , and dynamin and synaptojanin V ia the C - terminal SH3 domain ( 9 ) . Mammalian Bin1 / Amphiphysin II proteins include nearly a dozen splice isoforms that have more complex patterns of expression than Amphiphysin I . The Amphiphysin II isoforms expressed in the brain and nervous system most closely resemble Am - phiphysin I in structure , localization , and function in en - docytosis . In contrast , the Bin1 isoforms expressed in other cells throughout the body lack brain - specific segments , do not function in endocytosis , and display distinct patterns of cellular localization ( 1 , 10 - 14 ) . Recent evidence suggests that Bin1 / Amphiphysin II may function in intracellular vesicle trafficking ( 10 , 15 ) . One tissue - specific isoform of Bin1 is expressed at very high levels in skeletal muscle where it contributes to formation of the specialized membranes of the T - tubule system ( 6 , 14 ) . Notably , the Drosophila Amphiphysin gene ( which resembles mammalian Bin1 / Amphiphysin II most closely ) is dispensable for endocytosis but essential for proper organization of the T - tubule system in muscle ( 16 - 18 ) . In the mouse , a homozygous knockout of the Bin1 / Amphiphysin II gene , leads to severe cardiac muscle disorganization ( 19 ) , in support of a role in maintain - ing the T - tubule system . In this regard , it is interesting to note that the upstream element of the human Amphiphysin II gene contains a consensus binding site for MyoD , the master regulator of muscle cell differentiation ( 13 ) . Col - lectively , these observations implicate the BAR domain in recognizing and remodeling membranes , and suggest a key role of Bin1 - type proteins in maintaining muscle T - tubule membrane structure . In addition to the potential for membrane binding , many BAR domain proteins have been shown to interact , either directly or indirectly , with small G - proteins ( 20 ) . For instance , Arfaptin binds to Rac , Arf1 , Arf3 , and Arf6 ( 3 ) . The proteins known as the APPL group , which also contain an N - terminal BAR domain , interact with the small G - protein Rab5 ( 21 ) . The more distantly related IRSp53 , a protein involved in lamellopodium formation , interacts with Rac ( 22 ) . These observations suggest that BAR domains may serve as a general platform for binding small G - proteins ( 20 ) . The structure of the Arfaptin - Rac complex ( 3 ) shows that the small G - protein binding site and the putative membrane - binding face of the BAR domain occur in the same region of the protein . Thus , the membrane - binding activity of the BAR domain could be modulated by regulatory interactions with small G - protein or other partner proteins ( 20 ) . Here we describe the 2 . 0 Å resolution structure of the BAR domain of the human Bin1 protein ( Bin1BAR ) , an isoform of Amphiphysin II . We have compared the Bin1BAR structure to other BAR domain structures and analyzed their curvature and potential for binding small G - proteins . The implications of these observations for the function of BAR domains in different proteins are discussed . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Expression and Purification of Bin1BAR . The BAR domain of human Bin1 / Amphiphysin II ( Bin1BAR , residues 1 - 251 ) was cloned into the bacterial expression pET14b vector . The histidine tagged recombinant protein was ex - pressed in Escherichia coli BL21 ( DE3 ) and purified in the soluble form . Cell cultures were grown at 37 (cid:176) C to OD 600 of 1 . 0 and induced with 1 mM IPTG for 4 h . The cells were harvested by centrifugation and resuspended in Tris lysis buffer ( 40 mM Tris - Cl pH 8 . 0 , 100 mM NaCl , 10 mM imidazole ) containing protease inhibitors . The cells were then lysed on ice using a Misonix ultrasonicator , and the cell lysate was clarified by centrifugation . The supernatant was subsequently loaded onto an immobilized nickel column equilibrated in lysis buffer , and His - Bin1BAR was eluted with a gradient of elution buffer ( 40 mM Tris - Cl pH 8 . 0 , 100 mM NaCl , 10 - 400 mM imidazole ) . The His tag was then removed with thrombin ( 0 . 5 unit / mg of protein , 4 h , room temperature ( RT ) ) , and the untagged Bin1BAR was further purified by gel filtration , using a Superdex - 75 column equilibrated with gel filtration buffer ( 25 mM Tris - Cl pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl ) . Approximately 50 mg of pure , soluble protein was obtained from 1 L of culture . Analysis of Bin1BAR and Small G Protein Interaction by Size - Exclusion Chromatography and Pull - Down Analyses . The Bin1BAR was expressed and purified as described above . Small G - protein Rac was expressed and purified from E . coli BL21 ( DE3 ) as described earlier ( 23 ) . Three purified small G - proteins , Rab6B , Rab9B , and Rab17 , were kind gifts from Dr . M . Dyson at the Sanger Centre , Cambridge . Either 25 (cid:237) L of single protein or 50 (cid:237) L of preincubated mixture of Bin1BAR : small G - protein at a 2 : 1 molar ratio was applied onto a Superdex 200 P . C . 3 . 2 / 30 analytical column pre - equilibrated with gel filtration buffer at 4 (cid:176) C on an Ettan LC system ( GE healthcare ) . The traces of each single Bin1BAR and small G - protein and their mixture were superposed to verify any change in the peak position which will reflect the complex formation . Peaks were analyzed by SDS - PAGE . In pull - down experiments , His - tagged Bin1BAR was absorbed onto Ni - NTA superflow beads ( Novagen ) which were pre - equilibrated with Bin1Bar protein buffer . Bin1BAR bound to the beads was washed 4 times with purification buffer . For the interaction , 50 (cid:237) L of Bin1BAR bound to the beads was added to 400 (cid:237) L of each small G - protein at 100 (cid:237) g / mL and incubated at 4 (cid:176) C for 2 h with gentle rotation . The beads were spun down and washed 4 times with buffer . Bin1BAR and any interacting proteins were analyzed on 12 % Bis - Tris NuPAGE denaturing gels . 12918 Biochemistry , Vol . 45 , No . 43 , 2006 Casal et al . Crystallization . Human Bin1BAR was crystallized by the hanging drop vapor diffusion method . The protein was concentrated to approximately 25 mg / mL in gel filtration buffer and mixed with an equal volume of the reservoir solution containing 20 % monomethylether - PEG550 , 100 mM Tris - Cl pH 8 . 0 , 100 mM NaCl . Crystals appeared after approximately 2 weeks at 20 (cid:176) C and reached final dimensions of 0 . 7 (cid:2) 0 . 2 (cid:2) 0 . 2 mm 3 . Crystals were immersed in crystallization buffer containing 20 % v / v glycerol as a cryoprotectant , before freezing in a nitrogen stream at 100 K for data collection . Crystals derivatized with xenon were placed in a pressure cell under 15 bar for approximately 20 s before flash - freezing . Structure Determination . Bin1BAR crystals displayed anisotropic diffraction and usually diffracted to a maximum of 3 . 0 Å resolution . However , a good quality crystal was found that had been derivatized with xenon , and data were collected to 2 . 0 Å resolution from this specimen at the ESRF in Grenoble , France , on beamline ID14 - 4 . The improvement of data quality may be due to dehydratation of the crystal due to exposure to a high pressure of xenon prior to freezing . Data were also collected from a selenomethionine derivative . The fluorescence spectra indicated a mixed oxidation state for the Se , and the derivative was not satisfactory for experimental phase determination ; however , the positions of the Se atoms were useful for corroborating the modeling using anomalous Fourier syntheses . The data were processed with Denzo and Scalepack ( 24 ) . Crystals belong the space group P 2 1 with cell dimensions a ) 69 . 92 Å , b ) 59 . 09 Å , c ) 75 . 01 Å , and (cid:226) ) 117 . 53 (cid:176) . Two molecules were predicted to occupy the asymmetric unit of the crystal according to Matthews calculations , with a solvent content of (cid:24) 50 % . The structure was solved by molecular replacement using the xenon derivative data set as a native data set . The structure of the Amphiphysin BAR domain protomer from Drosophila melanogaster ( PDB entry 1URU ) was used as a search model ( 2 ) . The dyad axis protocol as implemented in the program MolRep ( 25 ) was used to obtain the correct solution . Refinement was initially performed with CNS ( 26 ) while REFMAC5 ( 27 ) was used in the later stages . Iterative cycles of model building with QUANTA ( Molecular Struc - ture Inc . ) or Coot ( 28 ) and restrained refinement were performed . The final model contains two monomers in the asymmetric unit ( chain A , residues 52 - 249 ; chain B , residues 50 - 250 ) ; the physiological dimers are generated through crystallographic symmetry . Due to poor definition of the electron density , residues were not modeled for the first 51 residues of chain A and 49 residues of chain B , residues 173 - 179 in the loop between helices 2 and 3 of chain A , the two C - terminal residues of chain A , and the C - terminal residue of chain B . Density was found for two partially occupied xenon atoms lying at the interface between two symmetry related molecules in the physiological dimer . Statistics from data processing and model refinement are shown in Table 1 . Coordinates and structure factors have been deposited within the Protein Data Bank ( http : / / www . rcsb . org ) with accession code 2FIC . Computational Analyses . The optimal docking area ( ODA ) computations used the procedure of Fernandez - Recio et al . ( 29 ) . The knobs - into - holes interactions of the helices were analyzed with the program SOCKET ( http : / / www . biols . susx . ac . uk / Biochem / Woolfson / html / coiledcoils / socket / ) ( 30 ) using an 8 Å cutoff . Structure superpositions were performed using programs COOT ( 28 ) or ALIGN ( 31 ) . Figure 3 was prepared using program GRASP ( 32 ) . Figures were otherwise prepared using program PyMOL ( 33 ) . Modelin g . The sequence of human Amphiphysin II includ - ing the inserted region was analyzed by the program FUGUE ( 34 ) , which searches for likely homologues based on a sequence - structure comparison . This query yielded a single structure ( human squalene synthase , 1EZF ) with a stretch of sequence that aligned to the inserted region in Amph - iphysin II described above ( 35 ) ( Figure 7 ) . This stretch of sequence ( amino acids 232 - 278 ) constituted an R - helical region that connected two R - helices of the protein together , as is predicted to be the case for the inserted region of Amphiphysin II . In addition , the secondary structure predic - tion for the insert and the structure of this region of human squalene synthase matched reasonably well . The structure of this connecting segment was then manually superposed to the Bin1BAR structure , and this was used as the template from which the model of Bin1BAR plus the insertion was made . The model was prepared in MODELLER ( 36 ) . Missing side chains of incomplete pdb models were rebuilt using the program SCWRL ( 37 ) . Validation of the structure was carried out as for the Bin1BAR structure using PROCHECK ( 38 ) , Verify 3D ( 39 ) , and Molprobity ( 40 ) . All amino acids fell within allowed regions of the Ramachandran plot . RESULTS O V erall Structure . The structure of Bin1BAR was deter - mined by molecular replacement using the structure of the Drosophila Amphiphysin BAR protomer ( 2 ) as a search Table 1 : Summary of Crystallographic Data and Refinement radiation source ESRF ID14 . 4 wavelength ( Å ) 0 . 9393 resolution ( Å ) 30 . 00 - 2 . 00 ( last shell ) 2 . 07 - 2 . 00 R merge 0 . 079 ( 0 . 257 ) unique reflections 36 811 completeness 98 . 3 ( 84 . 8 ) multiplicity 4 . 2 I / (cid:243) ( I ) 37 . 2 cell dimensions a ) 69 . 922 Å b ) 59 . 086 Å c ) 59 . 086 Å (cid:226) ) 117 . 534 (cid:176) space group P 2 1 Refinement R ( working set ) 0 . 2303 R free ( test set ) 0 . 2798 rms deviationsbondlengths ( Å ) 0 . 018 bond angles ( deg ) 1 . 642 Ramachandran statistics % of residues in allowed regions 99 . 7 % of residues in generously allowed regions 0 . 3 % of residues in not allowed regions 0 Model amino acids chain A ) 52 - 249 ; chain B ) 50 - 250 water molecules 200 xenon atoms 2 Structure of Human Bin1 / Amphiphysin II BAR Domain Biochemistry , Vol . 45 , No . 43 , 2006 12919 model . Two molecules are present in the asymmetric unit of the Bin1BAR crystal , and the physiological dimer is obtained by applying crystallographic symmetry . Bin1BAR forms a completely R - helical , symmetric ho - modimer with an elongated , curved shape ( Figure 1 ) . Both the tertiary and the quaternary structures of Bin1BAR are congruent with the structure of other BAR domains known to date ( Figure 2 ) , in particular with the structure of Drosophila Amphiphysin BAR domain ( Figure 2B ) and the murine Endophilin BAR domain ( Figure 2C ) ( 2 , 5 ) . The structural similarity is striking given the comparatively small sequence identities of the proteins ( Table 2 and figure in Supporting Information ) . The key characteristic of the BAR domain fold is “knobs - into - holes” interactions of nonpolar side chains , similar to those proposed by Crick for conven - tional left - handed coiled - coils . These coiled - coil interactions occur not only within the protomers but also at the dimer interface between protomers . The helical associations define the radius of curvature of the putative membrane engaging face . The architecture of the Bin1BAR dimer can be deconvo - luted into three main segments that differ in the number of bundled helices ( Figure 2A ) . The simplest is composed of two R - helices at the extreme ends of the dimer ( yellow helices in Figure 2A ) , and these pack together as a conventional antiparallel , left - handed coiled - coil . The next level of complexity as we move into the center of the dimer is a left - handed bundle of three helices ( orange - red helices in Figure 2A ) , two of which are parallel and one of which is in an antiparallel configuration . As for the bundle of two helices at the extreme ends of the dimer , this three - helix bundle is formed with residues from the same protomer . Finally , the central segment of the dimer comprises a “six - helix bundle” ( blue helices in Figure 2A ) . Each protomer contributes three helices to the bundle , which associate in an antiparallel fashion and form self - complementary interac - tions . Knobs - into - holes interactions , such as those found in conventional coiled - coils , occur at each of the helix - helix interfaces . The same arrangement of helices is shared with the Drosophila Amphiphysin and murine Endophilin BAR domains ( Figure 2B , C ) ( 2 , 5 ) . The helical arrangement of human Arfaptin2 is , however , different from that of the proteins described above ( Figure 2D ) ( 3 ) . In this case , the central core containing the six - helix bundle structure is much shorter , so that most of the dimer interface of Arfaptin2 corresponds to a region that resembles a “five - helix bundle” ( violet in Figure 2D ) . This results in a slight difference in quaternary structure between Bin1BAR and Arfaptin2 , with consequences for their radii of curvature , as discussed below . The more distantly related IMD domain of IRSp53 has a similar arrangement of helices to the Amphiphysin class , but it contains an extra helix at the C terminus ( green in Figure 2E ) ( 4 ) that packs against the 3 - helix bundle ( orange - red in Figure 2E ) . Furthermore , the helices leave the central body of the dimer and follow a straight path . In contrast to the straight helices of IMD , the correspond - ing helices of Bin1 and endophilin are kinked , and this is most apparent near the structural transition from 6 to 3 helical bundles . For Arfaptin , helix two that is part of each of the 6 - 5 - 3 - 2 helical bundles is smoothly bent without a noticeable kink . Nonetheless , the effect on accumulative curvature of these different proteins is the same for the kinked or smoothly deformed helices . F IGURE 1 : Overall structure of the BAR domain of Bin1 . ( A ) Protomer of Bin1BAR . The numbering refers to the helices , starting from the N terminus . ( B ) The Bin1 homodimer , generated from crystallographic symmetry . The protein forms a banana - shaped homodimer . ( C ) View of the concave face of the dimer . ( D ) View of the convex face of the dimer . 12920 Biochemistry , Vol . 45 , No . 43 , 2006 Casal et al . In the Drosophila and human Bin1BAR domains , the kink is contributed by a pair of conserved prolines that are conserved among close homologues ( corresponding to posi - tions 144 and 207 in the numbering convention for the human BAR ; see figure in Supporting Information for a structure - based sequence alignment ) . A single proline is found on the corresponding helix in endophilin ( helix 2 ) , except that it is a helical turn away . This proline occurs at position 142 in endophilin and is strongly conserved among homologues . In the case of Arfaptin , the smooth bending occurs through - out the length of the helix and is more difficult to attribute to a defined sequence pattern . Analysis of the Cur V ature and Membrane Binding Poten - tial in BAR Domains . Positively charged amino acids in the second helix and loop regions give the concave face of BAR domain dimers an overall positive electrostatic potential ( Figure 3 ) . This face has been proposed to associate with negatively charged phospholipid membranes , and to act as a means of sensing , and in some cases inducing , membrane curvature ( 2 ) . Positively charged residues in the concave face of Bin1BAR were mutated to negatively charged residues ( 2 ) . These mutations reduced or , when combined , abrogated the tubu - F IGURE 2 : Ribbon representation of the different BAR domains of known structure . ( A ) The helical arrangement in Bin1BAR consists of a central 6 - helix bundle ( blue ) , flanked by a 3 - helix bundle ( orange - red ) and , finally , a 2 - helix coiled - coil at the periphery ( yellow ) . ( B ) Drosophila Amphiphysin BAR and ( C ) Endophilin BAR share the same helical arrangement . ( D ) Arfaptin BAR contains a region that corresponds to a 5 - helix bundle ( violet ) . ( E ) IRSp53 IMD contains an extra helix ( green ) that associates with the 3 - helix bundle ( orange - red ) . F IGURE 3 : Electrostatic potential surface analysis of Bin1BAR using the program GRASP ( 32 ) . Bin1BAR shows the canonical bipartite charge distribution present in other BAR domains : positive charge in the concave face ( far left ) , negative charge in the convex face ( far right ) . The dashed circles indicate the positively charged residues that were mutated in Amphiphysin II and rendered the BAR domain unable to bind to liposomes ( 2 ) . Structure of Human Bin1 / Amphiphysin II BAR Domain Biochemistry , Vol . 45 , No . 43 , 2006 12921 lation activity and can be mapped to the structure of the Bin1BAR presented here ( dashed circles in Figure 3 ) . As predicted , they lie on the face speculated to engage with membranes , supporting the proposed mode of membrane binding and bending for BAR domains . In contrast to the concave face , the convex face displays a negatively charged surface ( Figure 3 ) . This bipartite polarity could aid in the alignment of BAR domains on membranes and perhaps favor the packing of neighboring domains to form the smooth , cylindrical tubule - like structures observed in V i V o and in V itro without any “dimple” distortion of the engaged surface . It is interesting to note that all BAR domains seem to display this charge distribution pattern , including those for which membrane association is not a demonstrated aspect of their function , such as the IMD domain of IRSp53 ( 2 - 5 ) . The Bin1BAR dimer would fit a sphere of 220 Å diameter , with its molecular 2 - fold axis normal to the spherical surface . The curvature of the dimer results from the way that the monomers intersect and also from the kinks in helices 2 and 3 caused by two prolines ( residues 144 and 207 ) . The same radius of curvature is observed in Drosophila Amphiphysin and Endophilin BAR domain structures ( without taking into consideration the insertion in the concave face that occurs in endophilin BAR domain , which has been suggested to match a membrane of 300 Å diameter ) ( 2 , 5 ) . The larger radius of curvature for endophilin is extrapolated from the predicted location of the highly mobile insertion ; however , this portion may not affect the surface curvature from the typical value of 220 Å if it is inserted into the membrane or distributed over the surface ( see Note Added in Proof ) . This is shown in a superposition of Bin1BAR with the two other structures ( Figure 4A , B ) . Just as described for the Bin1BAR domain , the curvature in these proteins is caused both by the way the protomers intersect and by the kinks in the helices as the domains make the transition between helical bundles . Thus , the BAR domains from the three Bin1 , Drosophila Amphiphysin , and Endophilin proteins have similar surface curvature , with similar electrostatic distribu - tions , and may all recognize a complementary target surface in similar ways . However , not all BAR domain structures share the same curvature . The curvature of the Arfaptin2 BAR domain differs markedly from that of the Amphiphysin type de - scribed above ( 3 ) . This is shown in a structural overlay where one protomer from each dimer ( Bin1BAR and Arfaptin ) has been used as the common reference frame ( Figure 4C i - iii ) . In comparison to the Amphiphysin class of BAR domain , which would fit a circle of diameter 220 Å , the Arfaptin2 BAR domain structure would fit a tighter circle of only 150 Å in diameter . Since the Bin1BAR and Arfaptin2 protomers are structurally similar ( Figure 4C iv ) , the difference in radius of curvature between the dimers arises from the relative orientation of the interacting protomers . If we imagine the dimer to be like a pair of scissors , then the Bin1BAR domain might be described as more “open” than Arfaptin2 BAR . This arises from the slightly different orientation of the helices in the five - helix bundle of Arfaptin V ersus the comparatively straighter six - helix bundle of Bin1 ( Figure 2 ) . In contrast to Arfaptin2 , the IMD domain of IRSp53 is more open than Bin1BAR ( 4 ) and appears completely straight . When the two proteins are superimposed using the dimer interface as the reference frame , the two central regions match remarkably well ( Figure 4D i - iii ) . However , when the single protomers are superimposed , the extreme ends of the monomers bend in opposite directions , due to kinks caused by proline residues at different positions ( Figure 4D iv ) . Moreover in IRSp53 this different structure appears to be stabilized by the binding of a small C - terminal helix . Therefore , when comparing IRSp53 and Bin1BAR structures , it is the curvature of the protomers themselves , rather than the way in which they intersect , that is different . Potential for Protein - Protein Interactions . The structure of the BAR domain of Arfaptin in complex with the small G - protein Rac reveals that the interaction occludes the concave surface of Arfaptin BAR ( 3 ) . A functional relation - ship between Amphiphysins and the signaling pathways mediated by the small G - protein Rab5 has been suggested ( 15 , 41 ) , and a link between other BAR proteins and small G - proteins has also been proposed ( 20 ) . This prompted us to investigate whether Bin1BAR may bind Rab5 in a manner analogous to the Arfaptin2 - Rac interaction , using a com - putational approach . The surfaces of Bin1BAR and ArfaptinBAR were analyzed with an algorithm that evaluates propensity for protein - protein interactions based on the desolvation energy , known as the optimal docking area ( ODA ) ( 29 ) . The method calculates the effective desolvation energy of burying a surface patch from the solvent , based on atomic solvation parameters ( ASPs ) optimized for protein - protein docking ( 42 ) . As a test of the method , the first set of calculations were undertaken with the isolated Bin1BAR protomers , and they successfully predicted the observed dimerization inter - faces ( Figure 5A ) . When calculations were undertaken for the Arfaptin2 BAR dimer , the binding interface for Rac was also predicted accurately ( Figure 5C ) . Significantly , the corresponding region is not predicted to be a protein - protein interaction site in the Bin1BAR dimer ( Figure 5B ) . This analysis suggests that Bin1BAR lacks the capacity to bind small G - proteins in the same way as seen in the Arfaptin - Rac interaction . In addition , in V itro binding studies per - formed between human Bin1BAR and several human small Rab proteins also failed to detect an interaction at micromolar concentrations ( details in Experimental Procedures ) . Two regions with weak potential for protein - protein interaction were nevertheless detected in Bin1BAR ( arrows in Figure 6A ) . These regions occur on the convex face of the domain , at the point where the structural transition occurs from the six - helix to the three - helix bundle ; there are two such sites that are related by molecular symmetry . The same ODA calculations were performed on Drosophila Amph - iphysin , Endophilin A1 , and Arfaptin2 , and analogous regions with propensity for protein - protein interactions were detected ( Figure 6B - D , regions marked with arrows ) . Even though the propensity is weak for the Bin1BAR and Drosophila Amphiphysin domains , the fact that the sites are Table 2 : Sequence Identities for Homologues Bin1 human Drosophila Arfaptin Bin1 Drosophila 36 . 7 Arfaptin 7 . 9 8 . 0 Endophilin 7 . 8 7 . 4 10 . 0 12922 Biochemistry , Vol . 45 , No . 43 , 2006 Casal et al . conserved suggests that they might be a general feature of the family . It is not likely that the residues lacking from the N - terminus are affecting the ODA results , because the residues with lowest ODA values are not close to the N - terminus . We propose that these sites are interaction or regulatory sites in a subset of BAR domain proteins . This surface could form interdomain interactions in the full - length proteins , given its proximity to the terminus of the BAR domain structure . Since these sites are located at the convex face of the dimer , they would not interfere with membrane binding that is suggested to be the central function of Bin1 , Endophilin , and Amphiphysin . Corresponding interaction sites are not present in the more distantly related IMD of IRSp53 , but there is an extra C - terminal extension that masks the putative binding site ( Figure 6E ) . Interestingly , in the IMD of IRSp53 , a site analogous to the Rac - binding site of Arfaptin2 is predicted ( Figure 6E ) . IRSp53 has been shown to interact with the small G - protein Rac and the Rac regulatory protein Wave , even though the specific sites of the interaction have not been mapped ( 22 ) . We speculate that the IMD domain of IRSp53 interacts with G - proteins in the same way as in the Arfaptin - Rac complex . Other Bin1 / Amphiphysin II Isoforms . Although there are differences in the structure and function of the central nervous F IGURE 4 : Comparison of the curvature of Bin1BAR with other BAR domains of known structure . Curvatures were compared by superposing the structure of Bin1BAR ( navy blue ) with all the other structures . The numbers i , ii , and iii correspond to the side , concave , and convex views of the dimer , respectively . Number iv corresponds to the superpositions of the protomers alone , where appropriate . ( A ) Bin1BAR dimer ( blue ) superposed with Drosophila Amphiphysin BAR ( red ) . ( B ) Bin1BAR dimer ( blue ) superposed with Endophilin BAR ( gray ) . ( C ) Bin1BAR dimer ( blue ) superposed with Arfaptin 2 BAR ( pink ) . ( D ) Bin1BAR ( blue ) superposed with the IMD domain of IRSp53 ( green ) . Structure of Human Bin1 / Amphiphysin II BAR Domain Biochemistry , Vol . 45 , No . 43 , 2006 12923 system isoforms ( termed Amphiphysin II isoforms ) and the ubiquitous isoforms and muscle isoforms ( termed Bin1 isoforms ) , all the Bin1 / Amphiphysin II isoforms share the same domain organization at the extreme ends of the protein , i . e . , the N - terminal BAR domain and the C - terminal SH3 domain . In some Amphiphysin II isoforms found in the brain and central nervous system , the BAR domain includes an insertion of 31 residues at amino acid position 173 , resulting from alternate splicing ( between helices 2 and 3 ) . This insertion distinguishes Amphiphysin II splice variants from the human Amphiphysin I and Drosophila Amphiphysin . However , we expect that the insertion will not affect curvatures and archectures , although it may affect function . Endophilin B1 is expected to have an insertion similar to that found in Amphiphysin II , judging from a reported structure - based sequence alignment ( 5 ) . Secondary structure predictions ( 43 ) indicate that this region forms a helix . Based on the sequence alone , we have prepared a model with a helical insertion ( Figure 7A ) . Electrostatic analysis of the model suggests that isoforms carrying this insertion have a markedly more electropositive concave face , and the insertion may thus strengthen the interaction of the domain with membranes ( Figure 7B ) . All the isoforms that carry this insertion are likely to be expressed in the central nervous system and to function in endocytosis or vesicle trafficking . In addition , ODA analysis predicts that this region contains a strong potential for mediating protein - protein interactions ( Figure 7C ) . However , whether this insertion is used for specialized interactions with membranes or components of the endocytic or vesicle trafficking machinery is at this point unknown . As noted above , the protein encoded by the single Amphiphysin gene in the Drosophila genome ( 44 ) is believed to be more similar to the ubiquitous human Bin1 isoforms that lack this insertion than to mammalian Amphiphysin I or Amphiphysin II isoforms expressed in the central nervous system . Drosophila Amphiphysin therefore also lacks the 31 amino acid insertion in the BAR domain , and is dispensable for endocytosis and expressed predominantly in muscle , consistent with the notion that its function resembles one of the ubiquitous Bin1 isoforms ( 16 - 18 ) . DISCUSSION BAR and IMD domains constitute a family of elongated coiled - coiled dimers with varying degrees of curvature . Members of this family all share a bipartite distribution of electrostatic surface potential that would support a membrane binding role . However , it is also very likely that certain subclasses of BAR domains may not have a membrane - binding function , but instead play other roles involving protein - protein interactions . Here , we have solved and examined the crystal structure of the BAR domain of human Bin1 , and compared it to other reported BAR - domain structures . Based on our analysis of the curvature , and potential for protein - protein interactions , we propose a structural classification of the BAR - domain family . F IGURE 5 : Optimal docking area ( ODA ) analysis of Bin1BAR and Arfaptin2 BAR . The difference between the proteins indicates that Bin1BAR is unlikely to engage in interactions with G - proteins . The numbers i , ii , and iii correspond to the concave , side , and convex views of the dimer , respectively . ( A ) ODA analysis for a Bin1BAR protomer . As can be seen from the dark blue patches , the dimerization interface in the protomer is clearly predicted with this analysis . ( B ) ODA analysis for the Bin1BAR dimer . The concave face of the Bin1BAR dimer has no predicted propensity for protein interaction . ( C ) ODA analysis for the Arfaptin2 BAR dimer . ( D ) Structure of Arfaptin2 BAR ( white ) in complex with Rac ( blue ) . A comparison of panels C and D clearly indicates that the binding site for Rac in Arfaptin is correctly predicted by the ODA calculations . 12924 Biochemistry , Vol . 45 , No . 43 , 2006 Casal et al . From our observations , the BAR / IMD family can be divided into at least three architectural classes on the basis of their structures and curvatures ; these will have implications for their distinctive biological roles and potential for protein - protein interactions : 1 . The Amphiphysin - Type Class of BAR Domains , En - compassing Bin1BAR , Drosophila Amphiphysin , and Endo - philin . The main features of the class include the ability to tubulate membranes , the ability to match a circle of (cid:24) 220 Å diameter , and two potential protein interaction sites on the convex face of the dimer . A kink that contributes to the curvature is correlated with a pair of conserved prolines corresponding to positions 144 and 207 in the numbering convention for the human BAR . A single proline is found at position 142 on the corresponding helix in endophilin ( helix 2 ) and is strongly conserved among homologues . We note that , because of its mobile protusions , the Endophilin A1 BAR would be expected to be distinct within this group in regard to function . ( See Note Added in Proof . ) 2 . The Arfaptin Class . So far , this is based on the Arfaptin protein alone . The protein is characterized by a smaller radius of curvature that would fit a circle (cid:24) 150 Å in diameter , and its direct association with membranes is yet to be established . However , it contains a protein interaction site in the center of the concave face of the dimer , and two possible sym - metrical interaction sites on the convex face analogous to F IGURE 6 : Optimal docking area ( ODA ) analysis of BAR domain structures and of the IMD domain structure of IRSp53 . The numbers i , ii , and iii correspond to the concave , side , and convex views of the dimer , respectively . ( A ) Bin1BAR , ( B ) Drosophila Amphiphysin BAR , ( C ) Endophilin BAR , ( D ) Arfaptin BAR , and ( E ) IMD domain of IRSp53 . BAR domains from panels A to D possess a predicted site with potential for protein - protein interactions on the convex face of the dimer ( shown as arrows in iii ) . For some BAR domains , this potential is strong , such as in endophilin BAR and Arfaptin BAR ( C and D ) while in the amphiphysins ( A and B ) it is only weak . This site does not seem to be present in the IMD domain of IRSp53 ( E ) . However , a site analogous to Arfaptin’s Rac interaction site in the concave face is predicted . Structure of Human Bin1 / Amphiphysin II BAR Domain Biochemistry , Vol . 45 , No . 43 , 2006 12925 that found in the Amphiphysin class . Unlike the Amph - iphysin - like class mentioned above , there are no apparent kinks in the helices that contribute to the curvature ; instead , a long central helix that is smoothly bent occurs throughout its length , and this is likely caused by a distributed sequence effect in contrast to a more defined sequence pattern . 3 . The IMD Domain Class . As with the Arfaptin class , the direct association of this domain with membranes is yet to be established , although the protein is clearly involved in membrane remodeling events . It is characterized by a straight shape with no curvature , and a potential for protein interac - tions on the concave face of the dimer equivalent to F IGURE 7 : ( A ) The structure of the mammalian Amphiphysin II model ( dark blue ) superimposed to the Bin1 isoform structure ( Bin1BAR ) ( yellow ) . The modeled insertion region is highlighted with a dashed circle . The numbers i , ii , and iii correspond to the concave , side , and convex views of the dimer , respectively . ( B ) Electrostatic analysis of the model . ( C ) ODA analysis of the model . 12926 Biochemistry , Vol . 45 , No . 43 , 2006 Casal et al . Arfaptin2 . The convex face of the dimer does not seem to have any interaction site analogous to those in the Amphi - physin and Arfaptin classes , although these sites could be potentially masked by the additional C - terminal helix . We have described here how different BAR domain classes have different curvatures , and how this originates from knobs - into - holes interactions that influence both quaternary and tertiary organization . Many BAR domain containing proteins induce tubulation of liposomes in V itro , but these tubules can vary in radii from 200 to 1000 Å , even for the same protein . One puzzle is how the varying radii might arise if the curvature of the BAR domain determines the induced membrane curvature . We note that a macromolecular as - semblage as extensive as a tubule is likely to be formed by great numbers of BAR proteins , which could for instance make protein - protein interactions to generate parallel , coaxial filaments on the surface of the tubule and cause its radius to expand . Another possibility is that other regions of BAR proteins may also interact with membranes and so effect the macroscopic curvature . Functional diversity of BAR domains can be generated through inserted regions . For example , Endophilin contains an insertion on the concave face ( 5 ) , while certain Amphi - physin II isoforms have insertions at the extreme ends of the dimer that are expected to change the properties of the dimer , as indicated in the model presented here . Many BAR domains contain an additional N - terminal helix that enhances the membrane binding ability of the BAR domain ( 2 ) . All the differences will clearly have a major impact on the properties of the proteins , and in many cases , a combination of characteristics may be used to tailor the protein for a particular cellular function . Note Added in Proof . The crystal structure of human endophilin BAR domain has been reported and reveals a pair of helices inserted on the center of the concave face of the dimer ( 45 ) . The authors present functional data that show that these helices become inserted into the membrane to facilitate membrane curvature , and they also provide evidence that rigidity of the crescent shape is required for causing tubulation , but not vesicle formation . ACKNOWLEDGMENT We thank the staff of the ESRF and Daresbury SRS Laboratory for use of synchrotron facilities . We are grateful to Venkatesh Pratap and Kenji Mizuguchi for helpful discussions . SUPPORTING INFORMATION AVAILABLE Figure for structure based sequence alignment . This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http : / / pubs . acs . org . REFERENCES 1 . Sakamuro , D . , Elliott , K . J . , Wechsler - Reya , R . , and Prendergast , G . C . ( 1996 ) BIN1 is a novel MYC - interacting protein with features of a tumour suppressor , Nat . Genet . 14 , 69 - 77 . 2 . Peter , B . J . , Kent , H . M . , Mills , I . G . , Vallis , Y . , Butler , P . J . , Evans , P . R . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2004 ) BAR domains as sensors of membrane curvature : the amphiphysin BAR structure , Science 303 , 495 - 9 . 3 . Tarricone , C . , Xiao , B . , Justin , N . , Walker , P . A . , Rittinger , K . , Gamblin , S . J . , and Smerdon , S . J . ( 2001 ) The structural basis of Arfaptin - mediated cross - talk between Rac and Arf signalling pathways , Nature 411 , 215 - 9 . 4 . Millard , T . H . , Bompard , G . , Heung , M . Y . , Dafforn , T . R . , Scott , D . J . , Machesky , L . M . , and Futterer , K . ( 2005 ) Structural basis of filopodia formation induced by the IRSp53 / MIM homology domain of human IRSp53 , EMBO J . 24 , 240 - 50 . 5 . Weissenhorn , W . ( 2005 ) Crystal structure of the endophilin - A1 BAR domain , J . Mol . Biol . 351 , 653 - 61 . 6 . Lee , E . , Marcucci , M . , Daniell , L . , Pypaert , M . , Weisz , O . A . , Ochoa , G . C . , Farsad , K . , Wenk , M . R . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2002 ) Amphiphysin 2 ( Bin1 ) and T - tubule biogenesis in muscle , Science 297 , 1193 - 6 . 7 . Farsad , K . , Ringstad , N . , Takei , K . , Floyd , S . R . , Rose , K . , De Camilli , P . ( 2001 ) Generation of high curvature membranes mediated by direct endophilin bilayer interactions , Cell Biol . 155 , 193 - 200 . 8 . Zhang , B . , and Zelhof , A . C . ( 2002 ) Amphiphysins : raising the BAR for synaptic vesicle recycling and membrane dynamics . Bin - Amphiphysin - Rvsp , Traffic 3 , 452 - 60 . 9 . Yamamoto , R . , Li , X . , Winter , S . , Francke , U . , Kilimann , M . W . ( 1995 ) Primary structure of human amphiphysin , the dominant autoantigen of paraneoplastic stiff - man syndrome , and mapping of its gene ( AMPH ) to chromosome 7p13 - p14 , Hum . Mol . Genet . 4 , 265 - 8 . 10 . Leprince , C . , Le Scolan , E . , Meunier , B . , Fraisier , V . , Brandon , N . , De Gunzburg , J . , and Camonis , J . ( 2003 ) Sorting nexin 4 and amphiphysin 2 , a new partnership between endocytosis and intracellular trafficking , J . Cell Sci . 116 , 1937 - 48 . 11 . Butler , M . H . , David , C . , Ochoa , G . C . , Freyberg , Z . , Daniell , L . , Grabs , D . , Cremona , O . , and De Camilli , P . ( 1997 ) Amphiphysin II ( SH3P9 ; BIN1 ) , a member of the amphiphysin / Rvs family , is concentrated in the cortical cytomatrix of axon initial segments and nodes of ranvier in brain and around T tubules in skeletal muscle , J . Cell Biol . 137 , 1355 - 67 . 12 . Tsutsui , K . , Maeda , Y . , Tsutsui , K . , Seki , S . , and Tokunaga , A . ( 1997 ) cDNA cloning of a novel amphiphysin isoform and tissue - specific expression of its multiple splice variants , Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 236 , 178 - 83 . 13 . Wechsler - Reya , R . , Sakamuro , D . , Zhang , J . , Duhadaway , J . , and Prendergast , G . C . ( 1997 ) Structural analysis of the human BIN1 gene . Evidence for tissue - specific transcriptional regulation and alternate RNA splicing , J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 31453 - 8 . 14 . Wechsler - Reya , R . J . , Elliott , K . J . , and Prendergast , G . C . ( 1998 ) A role for the putative tumor suppressor Bin1 in muscle cell differentiation , Mol . Cell . Biol . 18 , 566 - 75 . 15 . Kajiho , H . , Saito , K . , Tsujita , K . , Kontani , K . , Araki , Y . , Kurosu , H . , and Katada , T . ( 2003 ) RIN3 : a novel Rab5 GEF interacting with amphiphysin II involved in the early endocytic pathway , J . Cell Sci . 116 , 4159 - 68 . 16 . Razzaq , A . , Robinson , I . M . , McMahon , H . T . , Skepper , J . N . , Su , Y . , Zelhof , A . C . , Jackson , A . P . , Gay , N . J . , and O’Kane , C . J . ( 2001 ) Amphiphysin is necessary for organization of the excitation - contraction coupling machinery of muscles , but not for synaptic vesicle endocytosis in Drosophila , Genes De V . 15 , 2967 - 79 . 17 . Leventis , P . A . , Chow , B . M . , Stewart , B . A . , Iyengar , B . , Campos , A . R . , and Boulianne , G . L . ( 2001 ) Drosophila Amphiphysin is a post - synaptic protein required for normal locomotion but not endocytosis , Traffic 2 , 839 - 50 . 18 . Zelhof , A . C . , Bao , H . , Hardy , R . W . , Razzaq , A . , Zhang , B . , and Doe , C . ( 2001 ) Drosophila Amphiphysin is implicated in protein localization and membrane morphogenesis but not in synaptic vesicle endocytosis , De V elopment 128 , 5005 - 15 . 19 . Muller , A . J . , Baker , J . F . , DuHadaway , J . B . , Ge , K . , Farmer , G . , Donover , P . S . , Meade , R . , Reid , C . , Grzanna , R . , Roach , A . H . , Shah , N . , Soler , A . P . , and Prendergast , G . C . ( 2003 ) Disruption of the murine Bin1 / Amphiphysin II gene does not disable endocytosis but results in embryonic cardiomyopathy with aberrant myofibril formation , Mol . Cell . Biol . 23 , 4295 - 306 . 20 . Habermann , B . ( 2004 ) The BAR - domain family of proteins : a case of bending and binding ? , EMBO Rep . 5 , 250 - 5 . 21 . Miaczynska , M . , Christoforidis , S . , Giner , A . , Shevchenko , A . , Uttenweiler - Joseph , S . , Habermann , B . , Wilm , M . , Parton , R . G . , and Zerial , M . ( 2004 ) APPL proteins link Rab5 to nuclear signal transduction via an endosomal compartment , Cell 116 , 445 - 56 . 22 . Miki , H . , Yamaguchi , H . , Suetsugu , S . , and Takenawa , T . ( 2000 ) IRSp53 is an essential intermediate between Rac and WAVE in the regulation of membrane ruffling , Nature 408 , 732 - 5 . Structure of Human Bin1 / Amphiphysin II BAR Domain Biochemistry , Vol . 45 , No . 43 , 2006 12927 23 . Owen , D . , Lowe , P . N . , Nietlispach , D . , Brosnan , C . E . , Chirgadze , D . Y . , Parker , P . J . , Blundell , T . L . , and Mott , H . R . ( 2003 ) . Molecular dissection of the interaction between the small G proteins Rac1 and RhoA and protein kinase C - related kinase 1 ( PAK1 ) , J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 50578 - 87 . 24 . Otwinowski , Z . , and Minor , W . ( 1997 ) Methods Enzymol . 276 , 307 - 26 . 25 . Vagin , A . , and Teplyakov , A . ( 2000 ) An approach to multi - copy search in molecular replacement , Acta Crystallogr . , D : Biol . Crystallogr . 56 , 1622 - 4 . 26 . Brunger , A . T . , Adams , P . D . , Clore , G . M . , DeLano , W . L . , Gros , P . , Grosse - Kunstleve , R . W . , Jiang , J . S . , Kuszewski , J . , Nilges , M . , Pannu , N . S . , Read , R . J . , Rice , L . M . , Simonson , T . , and Warren , G . L . ( 1998 ) Crystallography & NMR system : A new software suite for macromolecular structure determination , Acta Crystallogr . , D : Biol . Crystallogr . 54 , 905 - 21 . 27 . Murshudov , G . N . , Vagin , A . A . , Lebedev , A . , Wilson , K . S . , and Dodson , E . J . ( 1999 ) Efficient anisotropic refinement of macro - molecular structures using FFT , Acta Crystallogr . , D : Biol . Crystallogr . 55 , 247 - 55 . 28 . Emsley , P . , and Cowtan , K . ( 2004 ) Coot : model - building tools for molecular graphics , Acta Crystallogr . , D : Biol . Crystallogr . 60 , 2126 - 32 . 29 . Fernandez - Recio , J . , Totrov , M . , Skorodumov , C . , and Abagyan , R . ( 2005 ) Optimal docking area : a new method for predicting protein - protein interaction sites , Proteins 58 , 134 - 43 . 30 . Walshaw , J . , and Woolfson , D . N . ( 2001 ) SOCKET : A Program for Identifying and Analysing Coiled - coil Motifs Within Protein Structures , J . Mol . Biol . 307 , 1427 - 50 . 31 . Cohen , G . H . ( 1997 ) ALIGN : a program to superimpose protein coordinates , accounting for insertions and deletions , J . Appl . Crystallogr . 30 , 1160 - 1 . 32 . Nicholls , A . , Sharp , K . , and Honig , B . ( 1991 ) Protein folding and association : insights from the interfacial and thermodynamic properties of hydrocarbons , Proteins 11 , 281 - 96 . 33 . DeLano , W . L . ( 2002 ) The PyMOL molecular graphics system . http : / / www . pymol . org . 34 . Shi , J . , Blundell , T . L . , and Mizuguchi , K . ( 2001 ) FUGUE : sequence - structure homology recognition using environment - specific substitution tables and structure - dependent gap penalties , J . Mol . Biol . 310 , 243 - 57 . 35 . Pandit , J . , Danley , D . E . , Schulte , G . K . , Mazzalupo , S . M . , Pauly , T . A . , Hayward , C . M . , Hamanaka , E . S . , Thompson , J . F . , and Harwood , H . J . ( 2000 ) Crystal structure of human squalene synthase . A key enzyme in cholesterol biosynthesis , J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 30610 - 7 . 36 . Fiser , A . , and Sali , A . ( 2003 ) Modeller : generation and refinement of homology - based protein structure models , Methods Enzymol . 374 , 461 - 91 . 37 . Canutescu , A . A . , Shelenkov , A . A . , and Dunbrack , R . L . , Jr . ( 2003 ) A graph theory algorithm for protein side - chain prediction , Protein Sci . 12 , 2001 - 14 . 38 . Laskowsky , R . A . , MacArthur , M . W . , Moss , D . S . , and Thornton , J . R . ( 1993 ) PROCHECK s A program to check the stereochemical quality of protein structures , J . Appl . Crystallogr . 26 , 283 - 91 . 39 . Luthy , R . , Bowie , J . U . , and Eisenberg , D . ( 1992 ) Assessment of protein models with three - dimensional profiles , Nature 356 , 83 - 5 . 40 . Davis , I . W . , Murray , L . W . , Richardson , J . S . , and Richardson , D . C . ( 2004 ) MOLPROBITY : structure validation and all - atom contact analysis for nucleic acids and their complexes , Nucleic Acids Res . 32 ( Web Server issue ) , W615 - 9 . 41 . Talarek , N . , Balguerie , A . , Aigle , M . , and Durrens , P . ( 2005 ) A novel link between a Rab GTPase and Rvs proteins : the yeast amphiphysin homologues , Cell Biochem . Funct . 23 , 253 - 66 . 42 . Fernandez - Recio , J . , Totrov , M . , and Abagyan , R . ( 2004 ) Iden - tification of protein - protein interaction sites from docking energy landscapes , J . Mol . Biol . 335 , 843 - 65 . 43 . Cuff , J . A . , Clamp , M . E . , Siddiqui , A . S . , Finlay , M . , and Barton , G . J . ( 1998 ) Jpred : A Consensus Secondary Structure Prediction Server , Bioinformatics 14 , 892 - 3 . 44 . Razzaq , A . , Su , Y . , Mehren , J . E . , Mizuguchi , K . , Jackson , A . P . , Gay , N . J . , and O’Kane , C . J . ( 2000 ) Characterisation of the gene for Drosophila amphiphysin , Gene 24 , 167 - 74 . 45 . Masuda , M . , Takeda , S . , Sone , M . , Ohki , T . , Mori , H . , Kamioka , Y . , and Mochizuki , N . ( 2006 ) Endophilin Bar domain drives membrane curvature by two newly identified structure - based mechanisms , EMBO J . 25 , 2889 - 97 . BI060717K 12928 Biochemistry , Vol . 45 , No . 43 , 2006 Casal et al .