INTRODUCTION In mammalian cells , morphological and biochemical studies have provided detailed insights into the organization of the endocytic pathway ( for reviews see Hubbard , 1989 ; Kornfeld and Mellman , 1989 ) . The best characterized pathway involves the formation of clathrin - coated vesicles that pinch off from the plasma membrane and fuse with the early endosomes after losing their clathrin coat . Early endosomes , which have a tubulo - vesicular morphology , are preferentially found at the cell periphery and play an important role in the uncoupling of ligands from their receptors and in the recycling of some receptors ( e . g . transferrin receptor ) back to the plasma membrane . Following sorting in early endosomes , ligands destined for degradation are next transported to late endosomes ( also referred to as prelysosomes ) . This compartment is generally located in the perinuclear region of the cell and is enriched in lysosomal enzymes , lysosomal membrane proteins and the cation - independent mannose - 6 - phoshate receptor ( CI - MPR ) . These ﬁndings led to the proposal that late endosomes correspond to the site where newly synthesized lysosomal enzymes bound to CI - MPR and lysosomal glycoproteins delivered from the trans - Golgi network , meet endocytosed material ( Griffiths et al . , 1988 ) . However , more recently newly synthesized lysosomal enzymes have been shown to be tran - siently present in early endosomes ( Ludwig et al . , 1991 ) sug - gesting that this compartment represents the earliest point of convergence of the lysosomal biosynthetic and the endocytic pathways . Lysosomes serve as the terminal compartment for intracellular transport of newly synthesized hydrolases , and are generally considered as the end station of the endocytic pathway , where degradation occurs . In contrast to higher eukaryotic cells , the compartmental - ization of the endocytic pathway in the budding yeast Saccha - romyces cerevisiae is still poorly understood . During the delivery from the plasma membrane to the vacuole the endocytic marker a - factor sequentially passes through two kinetically distinct membrane compartments , tentatively termed early and late endosomal fractions , with different densities on a Nycodenz density gradient ( Singer and Riezman , 1990 ; Singer - Krüger et al . , 1993 ) . Since the biochemical and morphological characterization of the isolated fractions is presently still preliminary , it remains to be determined whether these compartments may either be equivalent to the early and late endosomes described in mammalian cells or represent transient vesicular intermediates . While the exploration of the morphological and functional organization of the endocytic compartments in yeast is only at 3509 Journal of Cell Science 108 , 3509 - 3521 ( 1995 ) Printed in Great Britain © The Company of Biologists Limited 1995 JCS9353 Ypt51p , a small GTPase of Saccharomyces cerevisiae , has been previously identiﬁed as a structural homolog of mammalian Rab5 . Although disruption analysis revealed that the protein is required for endocytic transport and for vacuolar protein sorting , the precise step controlled by Ypt51p was not determined . In this work we show that by heterologous expression in animal cells Ypt51p was targeted to Rab5 - positive early endosomes and stimulated endocytosis . Furthermore , two Ypt51p mutants induced similar morphological alterations as the corresponding Rab5 mutants . Also in yeast cells Ypt51p was found to be required at an early step in endocytic membrane traffic , since a - factor accumulated in an early endocytic inter - mediate in the absence of Ypt51p . Cell fractionation analysis revealed cofractionation of Ypt51p with endocytic intermediates , while no association with the late Golgi com - partment could be detected . Indirect immunoﬂuorescence microscopy allowed us to morphologically identify the Ypt51p - containing compartment . Similar to the mammalian system larger Ypt51p - positive structures were revealed upon expression of Ypt51p Q66L . These struc - tures were also positive for a - factor receptor and for car - boxypeptidase Y , thus providing direct evidence for their endocytic nature and for the convergence of the vacuolar biosynthetic and endocytic pathways . Key words : endocytosis , GTPase , yeast SUMMARY Yeast Ypt51p and mammalian Rab5 : counterparts with similar function in the early endocytic pathway Birgit Singer - Krüger * , Harald Stenmark † and Marino Zerial ‡ Cell Biology Program , EMBL , Postfach 10 . 22 . 09 , D - 69012 Heidelberg , Germany * Present address : Howard Hughes Medical Institute , Boyer Center for Molecular Medicine , Yale University School of Medicine , PO Box 9812 , New Haven , CT 06536 - 0812 , USA ‡ Present address : The Norwegian Radium Hospital , Department of Biochemistry , N - 0310 Oslo , Norway ‡ Author for correspondence 3510 its beginning , this experimental system provides the advantage of using a genetic approach to identify and characterize com - ponents that regulate endocytic transport . This approach has uncovered a number of proteins required for the initial step of endocytic internalization : clathrin heavy chain ( Payne et al . , 1988 ) , the cytoskeletal elements actin and yeast ﬁmbrin ( Sac6p ) ( Kübler and Riezman , 1992 ) , calmodulin ( Kübler et al . , 1994 ) , and the gene products of END3 , END4 ( Raths et al . , 1993 ) , END 8 , END9 , END10 , and END11 ( Munn and Riezman , 1994 ) . Small GTPases of the Rab / Ypt family have been implicated in regulating distinct steps of vesicular traffic ( reviewed by Zerial and Stenmark , 1993 ; Pfeffer , 1994 ) . In S . cerevisiae several Ypt proteins have been suggested to control endocytic membrane traffic . Disruption of YPT7 , whose gene product is homologous to the mammalian late endosome marker Rab7 ( Chavrier et al . , 1990 ) , causes pleiotropic effects on the endocytic pathway and vacuolar biogenesis ( Wichmann et al . , 1992 ) . Cell fractionation experiments suggested a role for this small GTPase in controlling membrane traffic between the kinetically deﬁned late endocytic fraction and the vacuole ( Schimmöller and Riezman , 1993 ) . Furthermore , Ypt51p ( identical to Vps21p ) , Ypt52p and Ypt53p were previously identiﬁed as structural homologs of mammalian Rab5 ( Singer - Krüger et al . , 1994 ; Horazdovsky et al . , 1994 ) . Similar to Rab5 , which is a key regulator of endocytic transport between the plasma membrane and early endosomes ( Gorvel et al . , 1991 ; Bucci et al . , 1992 ) , the yeast Ypt5 proteins were shown to be required for endocytic delivery of two endocytic markers , a - factor and Lucifer Yellow CH ( LY ) , to the vacuole . In addition , a vacuolar protein sorting defect was revealed for mutants of the YPT51 gene ( Singer - Krüger et al . , 1994 ; Horazdovsky et al . , 1994 ) . Although the structural similarity of the Ypt5 proteins to Rab5 was intriguing and suggestive of a primary role in endocytic transport , the initial phenotypic characteriza - tion of the mutants did not reveal at which precise step in membrane traffic these small GTPases were required . In the present paper , we have used a variety of approaches to address in more detail the role and localization of Ypt51p in endocytic transport . Although three Rab5 homologs have been identiﬁed ( Singer - Krüger et al . , 1994 ) , here we focus on Ypt51p , because the ypt51 null mutant is characterized by a number of detectable phenotypes , while the other mutants behave phenotypically like wild - type cells . By heterologous expression of Ypt51p in animal cells , we provide evidence that Ypt51p displays Rab5 - like properties , lending further support for the idea that Rab5 and Ypt51p are functionally conserved proteins . Furthermore , subcellular fractionation studies in com - bination with epistasis analysis suggest that Ypt51p is required prior to Ypt7p in transport between the kinetically deﬁned early and late endocytic compartments and that the protein is localized to both endocytic intermediates . Using indirect immunoﬂuorescence microscopy , we found that the Ypt51p - positive structures contain endocytosed a - factor receptor ( Ste2p ) and carboxypeptidase Y ( CPY ) . These results provide direct evidence for the association of Ypt51p with an endocytic compartment at the convergence of the endocytotic and vacuolar protein sorting pathways . Our results support the view that the molecular regulation of the endocytic pathway is conserved from yeast to mammals . MATERIALS AND METHODS Plasmids , strains and growth conditions The wild - type YPT51 - Sal I / III fragment was subcloned into pGEM2 , opened by Sal I and Bam HI , to generate pGEM - Ypt51 for expression from the T7 promotor by the vT7 system in BHK cells . DNA clones encoding Ypt51p S21N and Ypt51p Q66L were generated by the polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) from pSEY8 - BS6 ( Singer - Krüger et al . , 1994 ) between nucleotide 501 and 1 , 133 . Both mutants were prepared by two PCR fragments : the ﬁrst fragment encoded the 5 ¢ region of YPT51 and included the mutation to create S21N or Q66L , respectively . For that , oligo 326 ( 5 ¢ - ATGGCCATG - GAGGGGATCCGTATGAACACATCAGTCACTTCCATAAAG - 3 ¢ ) and 5 ¢ - CCTTAGTACTATTGAGTTTTTACCAAC - 3 ¢ ( to create S21N ) or 5 ¢ - ATCTCTCGAGCCCAGCAGTGTCCCATATTTCAA - 3 ¢ ( to create Q66L ) were used ; the second fragment contained the remaining coding region of the YPT51 gene and was generated using oligo 325 ( 5 ¢ - GCTACTGCAGGTCGACTGACCTAACAACTG - CAAGCACTGTTTGCG - 3 ¢ ) and 5 ¢ - CAATAGTACTAAGGTTTG - TATCTAATGATTTTGC - 3 ¢ ( to create S21N ) or 5 ¢ - TGGGCTCGA - GAGATTTGCATCTTTA - 3 ¢ ( to create Q66L ) , respectively . The two mutant ypt51 clones were obtained by a tripartite ligation using pGEM - 1 as a vector to generate pGEM - Ypt51S21N and pGEM - Ypt51Q66L . A c - myc epitope tagged YPT7 clone in pGEM - 1 ( pGEM - mycYpt7 ) was obtained by positioning a Nde I / BamH I - fragment encoding YPT7 ( Wichmann et al . , 1992 ) behind the T7 promotor and a 42 base pair - long sequence encoding the c - myc epitope in pGEM - myc ( Olkkonen et al . , 1993 ) . For expression of Ypt51p Q66L in yeast , the mutant ypt51 on a Bam HI / Sal I fragment was isolated from pGEM - Ypt51Q66L ( see above ) and positioned behind the ADH - promoter of the CEN - plasmid pBPH1 ( Jansen et al . , 1991 ) , to generate pBS - ADH - Ypt51Q66L . The strains of S . cerevisiae , used in this work , are listed in Table 1 . Unless otherwise indicated , yeast strains were grown in complete medium ( 1 % yeast extract , 2 % peptone , and 2 % glucose ) ( YPD ) to early logarithmic phase ( 0 . 5 - 2 · 10 7 cells / ml ) at 24°C or 30°C on a rotary shaker . Synthetic growth medium ( SD medium ; Dulic et al . , 1991 ) was used for growth of yeast strains containing plasmids . Materials 35 S - labelled a - factor was prepared from biosynthetically labelled yeast cells overproducing the pheromone ( Dulic et al . , 1991 ) . Chemicals for gel electrophoresis were obtained from Bio - Rad ( Richmond , CA ) and National Diagnostics ( Atlanta , Georgia ) . Nitro - cellulose ﬁlters and the reagents for western blotting using the ECL detection system were from Schleicher and Schüll ( Dassel , Germany ) and Amersham ( Buckinghamshire , UK ) , respectively . Heavy water ( D 2 O ) , and Freund’s complete and incomplete adjuvants were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co . ( St Louis , MO ) . Affi10 - and Affi15 - beads were from Bio - Rad . Unlabeled and rhodamine - labeled goat anti - rabbit IgG was from Kirkegaard & Perry Laboratories , Inc . ( Gaithersburg , MD ) , and the FITC - labeled and rhodamine - labeled donkey anti - rabbit IgG was from Dianova ( Hamburg , Germany ) . Centricon - 10 devices were from Amicon ( Danvers , MA ) . Synthetic oligonucleotides for PCR ampliﬁcation of YPT51 clones and the synthetic peptide used for immunization were synthesized by facili - ties at the EMBL , Heidelberg , Germany . Generation of polyclonal antibodies against Ypt51p , and affinity puriﬁcation of anti - Ypt51p , anti - CPY and anti - Ste2p antibodies A 2 . 4 mg sample of a synthetic peptide representing an internal sequence of Ypt51p plus an additional N - terminal lysine ( KTAEE - QNSASNERESNN ) was coupled to 4 mg of keyhole limpet hemo - cyanin ( KLH ) as described by Ternynck and Avrameas ( 1976 ) and B . Singer - Krüger , H . Stenmark and M . Zerial 3511 Yeast Ypt51p in the early endocytic pathway Louvard et al . ( 1983 ) . An aliquot ( containing approximately 300 m g of peptide coupled to KLH ) was mixed with complete Freund’s adjuvants to a stable emulsion and used for the initial immunization , which was applied into the popliteal lymphnodes ; 250 mg of peptide - conjugate was used for the subsequent intra - dermal or intra - muscular injections using an emulsion with Freund’s incomplete adjuvant . Bleeds were taken 7 - 10 days after the previous injection . The sera were tested by immunoprecipitation of in vitro - translated Ypt51p , Ypt52p and Ypt53p . For this purpose , 5 m l of in vitro - translated protein ( Ullrich et al . , 1993 ) was incubated with 20 m l Protein A - Sepharose beads ( loaded with 10 to 30 m l immune or preimmune serum ) for 1 hour at RT and washed as described by Singer - Krüger et al . ( 1994 ) . Immunoprecipitates were analyzed by PAGE and ﬂu - orography on 12 % gels . An affinity resin to purify the anti - Ypt51p antiserum was prepared with 1 ml of Affi10 - gel resin and 5 mg of peptid ( see above ) according to the protocol provided by the manufacturer . In analogy , Affi15 - gel resin and a synthetic peptide corresponding to the N - terminal sequence of Ste2p ( SDAAPSLSNLFYDPTK ) , was used to prepare an affinity column for the puriﬁcation of the anti - Ste2p antiserum ; 1 ml of anti - Ypt51p and 0 . 6 ml of anti - Ste2p antiserum ( gratefully obtained from H . Riezman , Biocenter , Basel , Switzerland ) were added to the corresponding beads and rotated overnight at 4°C . After extensive washing with 0 . 1 M Hepes , pH 7 . 1 , the bound IgGs were eluted using 0 . 2 M glycine , pH 2 . 4 . After immediate neutralization with 1 M Tris - base , BSA and NaN 3 were added to 1 mg / ml and 0 . 02 % , respectively . To purify antibodies against CPY , a 0 . 5 cm · 7 cm nitrocellulose strip was incubated with 1 . 9 mg CPY ( Sigma ) for 4 hours and washed extensively with PBS . Subsequently , the strip was incubated with 170 m l of anti - CPY antiserum ( obtained from H . Riezman ) . Elution was by three successive incubations with 0 . 2 M glycine , pH 2 . 4 , for 5 minutes each , followed by immediate neutralization with Tris - Base . The eluates were combined and concentrated to a volume of 100 m l with Centricon - 10 concentration devices . The affinity - puriﬁed anti - bodies were stored at 4°C or frozen at - 20°C . Indirect immunoﬂu - orescence microscopy with BHK cells , overexpressing Ypt51p using the vT7 sytem , was performed to conﬁrm the puriﬁcation of anti - Ypt51p antibody . Western blot analysis was performed to follow the puriﬁcation of anti - CPY and anti - Ste2p antibodies . Cell fractionation For the kinetic analysis of a - factor appearance in light and heavy endosome - enriched fractions on a Nycodenz density gradient , the wild - type ( BS64 ) and mutant strains ( BS25 , BS84 , RH1 ) were grown at 24°C to early logarithmic stage . 35 S - labeled pheromone was bound at 0°C for 1 hour and internalized at 30°C for 3 , 15 and 40 minutes , respectively . Preparation of spheroplasts and subfractionation of a high speed pellet fraction ( P3 ) on Nycodenz density gradients was performed as described by Singer and Riezman ( 1990 ) except that spheroplasts were lysed by dounce homogenization with seven strokes in a 2 ml Wheaton homogenizer . To follow the distribution of Ypt51p and Kex2p in comparison to the endocytic marker a - factor , subcellular fractionation was performed according to Singer - Krüger et al . ( 1993 ) using RH732 cells , which , after a - factor binding at 0°C , internalized the pheromone at 15°C for 20 minutes . A high speed pellet fraction ( P3 ) was obtained from a cell lysate ( L ) , and fractionated on a Nycodenz gradient to enrich for the early ( # 7 and # 8 ) and late ( # 4 and # 5 ) endocytic fractions . Each of these fractions were subfractionated on a sucrose / D 2 O density gradient , from which 19 fractions ( including the pellet ) with 2 ml fraction size were collected . Aliquots from each fraction were used for scintillation counting to detect 35 S - labeled a - factor , and SDS - PAGE and western blotting to follow Ypt51p and Kex2p . Additionally , the Kex2p enzyme assay was used to detect Kex2p - enzyme activity ( Singer - Krüger et al . , 1993 ) . The relative speciﬁc activities of a - factor and Ypt51p were deter - mined in the following fractions : the cell lysate ( L ) , the high speed pellet fraction ( P3 ) , the early and late endocytic fractions from the Nycodenz gradient and the two respective a - factor peak fractions from the sucrose / D2O gradients . 35 S - a - factor was quantiﬁed by scin - tillation counting , and the speciﬁc activity was calculated with respect to total protein . The quantiﬁcation of Ypt51p was by western blotting . For that , equal amounts of protein ( approximately 20 m g ) were loaded per fraction and densitometric scanning of ﬂuorographs was performed ( see below ) . The relative speciﬁc activities were deter - mined with respect to the speciﬁc activities in L , normalized to 1 . SDS - PAGE and western blotting For SDS - PAGE , samples were incubated for 10 minutes at room tem - perature in the presence of 0 . 015 % sodium deoxycholate , precipitated with 6 % TCA ( ﬁnal concentration ) on ice for 30 minutes and cen - trifuged for 10 minutes in a microcentrifuge at 4°C ( Peterson , 1977 ) . The precipitates were washed twice with - 20°C acetone and lyophilized . Samples were resuspended in sample buffer and separated on 12 % SDS - polyacrylamide gels according to the method of Laemmli ( 1970 ) . For western blot analysis , proteins were transferred to nitrocellu - lose ﬁlters ( Towbin et al . , 1979 ) , which were stained with Ponceau S . Immunblot analysis was done with 5 % ( w / v ) low fat milk powder , 0 . 1 % ( v / v ) Tween - 20 in PBS . The antisera against Ypt51p was used at a dilution of 1 : 400 and incubated for 1 hour at RT . To detect antibody binding the ECL detection system was used . The ﬂuoro - grams ( Kodak XAR5 ) were quantiﬁed by densitometric scanning using a computing densitometer ( Molecular Dynamics , Sunnyvale , CA ) . Transfection of BHK - 21 cells and subsequent indirect immunoﬂuorescence microscopy and HRP uptake For the expression of wild - type and mutant forms of Ypt51p , c - myc epitope - tagged Ypt7p , Rab5 and human transferrin receptor with the vT7 system , BHK - 21 cells were infected with vT7 for 30 minutes at 25°C , and then transfected for 4 hours with plasmid DNA containing the gene of interest behind a T7 promoter using DOTAP ( Boehringer Mannheim , Mannheim , Germany ) , as described by Stenmark et al . , 1995 . The conditions of cells infection and transfection were chosen to overexpress Rab5 ~ 15 - fold over endogenous ( Bucci et al . , 1992 ) . By western blot analysis the expression levels of the various Rab / Ypt proteins after 4 hours of transfection were analysed and found to be comparable and all within the typical range as described by Stenmark et al . ( 1995 ) . Cells transfected with DNA encoding the human trans - ferrin receptor were incubated post - transfection for 90 minutes in the presence of 10 m g / ml cycloheximide in order to allow newly synthe - sized receptor to be transported to the plasma membrane ( Bucci et al . , 1992 ) . For indirect immunoﬂuorescence , cells grown on 10 mm round coverslips were permeabilized for 5 minutes with 0 . 05 % saponin in 80 mM Hepes , pH 6 . 8 , 5 mM EGTA , 1 mM MgCl 2 , and then ﬁxed for 15 minutes with 3 % paraformaldehyde as described by Zerial et al . ( 1992 ) . Overexpressed proteins were labeled with : rabbit anti - Ypt51p , mouse anti - Rab5 mAb 4F11 ( Bucci et al . , 1994 ) , rabbit anti - Rab5 ( Chavrier et al . , 1990 ) , mouse anti - c - myc mAb 9E10 ( Evan et al . , 1985 ) , and mouse anti - human transferrin receptor mAb B3 - 25 ( Boehringer Mannheim ) . Endogenous Rab7 and b - COP were detected with rabbit antibodies described by Chavrier et al . ( 1990 ) and mouse anti - b COP mAb M3A5 ( Allan and Kreis , 1986 ) , respectively . All antibodies ( except mAb 4F11 ) were affinity puriﬁed . The secondary antibodies used were a rhodamine - labeled donkey anti - mouse antibody and a FITC - labeled donkey anti - rabbit antibody ( Dianova , Hamburg , Germany ) . Cells were mounted with Mowiol ( Merck , Darmstadt , Germany ) and viewed with the EMBL confocal micro - scope using the excitation wavelengths 529 and 476 nm . For analyzing HRP uptake the BHK cells , after transfection , were incubated in the presence of 1 mg / ml HRP ( 1 , 000 U / mg , Sigma ) for 1 hour at 37°C and endocytosed HRP was assayed as described by 3512 Bucci et al . ( 1992 ) . Uptake values were calculated as per cent of the amount internalized in infected but untransfected cells , and corrected for differences in protein content and transfection efficiency ( ranging between 50 and 80 % , as determined by indirect immunoﬂuorescence ) . The shown values are the average of three experiments . Indirect immunoﬂuorescence on yeast cells BS64 cells ( wild type ) , BS25 cells ( ∆ ypt51 ) , and RH1651 cells ( ∆ prc1 ) were grown overnight in YPD medium at 30°C or 24°C to approximately 0 . 5 - 1 · 10 7 cells / ml . BS64 cells carrying the CEN - plasmid pBS - ADH - Ypt51Q66L were grown at 30°C to a similar cell density in SD medium lacking uracil ( for expression of Ypt51p Q66L as compared to wild - type Ypt51p see below ) . For labelings with anti - Ypt51p and anti - CPY antibodies cells were directly ﬁxed and processed essentially as described by Roberts et al . ( 1991 ) and Zanolari and Riezman ( 1991 ) . Fixation with 4 % paraformaldehyde was for 30 minutes at 30°C and another 3 - 6 hours at RT . For labelings with anti - Ste2p antibody BS64 cells harboring pBS - ADH - Ypt51Q66L were treated with 25 m g / ml cycloheximide for 1 hour at 30°C to deplete the cells of internal pools of Ste2p . The cells were cooled on ice and a - factor was added to 10 - 6 M ﬁnal concen - tration to allow pheromone binding for 1 hour . Subsequently , cells were pelleted and resuspended in 30°C - prewarmed YPD to allow internalization of a - factor and Ste2p for 10 minutes at 30°C in the presence of 25 m g / ml cycloheximide . After that , ﬁxative was added and cells were processed for immunoﬂuorescence as described before . To reduce residual background - labeling , the affinity puriﬁed anti - Ypt51p , anti - CPY and anti - Ste2p antibodies were preabsorbed against ﬁxed BS25 , RH1651 , and RH449 cells , respectively , as described by Roberts et al . ( 1991 ) . For single - label immunoﬂuorescence , incuba - tion with preabsorbed primary antibody was followed by rhodamine - labeled goat anti - rabbit IgG ( diluted 1 : 1 , 000 ) . For double - label immunoﬂuorescence , anti - Ypt51p antibody was added ﬁrst , followed by incubation with FITC - conjugated donkey anti - rabbit IgG . To block any residual binding sites of Ypt51p antibodies an incubation with an excess of unlabed goat anti - rabbit IgG ( 1 : 50 diluted ) was performed . Subsequently , cells were labeled with anti - CPY or anti - Ste2p anti - bodies , respectively , and with secondary rhodamine - labeled goat anti - rabbit IgG . Cells were viewed with a Zeiss Axiophot microscope equipped with appropiate Zeiss ﬁlters for rhodamine ﬂuorescence and Nomarski interference optics and with the EMBL confocal micro - scope at excitation wavelengths 476 nm for FITC and 529 nm for rhodamine . To quantify the percentage of Ypt51p Q66L - expressing cells dis - playing the large Ypt51p - positive structures 82 cells viewed with the confocal microscope were analyzed . For example , those cells indicated by arrows in Fig . 6B - D were considered as positive for the large Ypt51p - positive structures , while cells with smaller punctate structures ( an example marked with an arrowhead in Fig . 6D ) were considered as negative for those structures . To demonstrate that plasmid - borne Ypt51 Q66L was not strongly overexpressed as compared to endogenous wild - type Ypt51p , cell extracts of BS64 cells and BS64 cells carrying pBS - ADH - Ypt51Q66L were prepared from cells that were grown as described before . Cells ( 5 OD units ) were incubated with 0 . 2 M NaOH , 0 . 5 % b - mercap - toethanol for 10 minutes on ice and proteins were precipitated with 10 % TCA as described by Singer - Krüger et al . ( 1994 ) . The precipi - tate was collected by centrifugation , washed twice with acetone and resuspended in Laemmli sample buffer , excluding b - mercaptoethanol and Bromophenol Blue . After determining the protein concentration of both samples , b - mercaptoethanol and Bromophenol Blue were added and pairs of equal amounts of protein ( 50 , 37 . 5 , 25 , and 12 . 5 mg ) from wild type and Ypt51 Q66L - expressing cells were loaded onto a 12 % SDS - polyacrylamide gel . After transfer of the gel onto nitrocellulose , western analysis was performed as described with the affinity - puriﬁed anti - Ypt51p antibody ( at a dilution of 1 : 100 ) using the ECL system . A similar intensity of the Ypt51p - speciﬁc band was detected when 50 mg of wild - type extracts were compared to 25 mg of Ypt51Q66L containing extracts . RESULTS Yeast Ypt51p and mammalian Rab5 represent functional counterparts To determine whether Ypt51p and Rab5 represent functional equivalents in yeast and mammalian cells we ﬁrst analyzed whether wild - type and mutant Ypt51p could share the local - ization and activity of Rab5 when expressed in baby hamster kidney ( BHK ) cells . Using the T7 RNA polymerase vaccinia virus ( vT7 ) system we ﬁrst determined whether Ypt51p was targeted to early endocytic compartments similar to Rab5 ( Chavrier et al . , 1990 ; Bucci et al . , 1992 ) . The intracellular distribution of Ypt51p was studied by indirect immunoﬂuorescence using a poly - clonal antibody , that was raised against a peptide correspond - ing to the C - terminal region of Ypt51p . As determined by immunoprecipitation experiments , the antiserum recognized speciﬁcally Ypt51p , but not the highly related Ypt52p and Ypt53p , while preimmune serum did not immunoprecipitate Ypt51p ( see Materials and Methods ) . Furthermore , indirect immunoﬂuorescence and western blot analysis also revealed that the affinity - puriﬁed antibody reacted speciﬁcally with vT7 - expressed Ypt51p . No signal could be detected in untrans - fected cells ( data not shown ) . To analyze the cellular distribu - tion of Ypt51p and Rab5 under similar conditions , both proteins were coexpressed . Quantitative western - blotting conﬁrmed that the experimental conditions used allowed over - expression of Rab5 ~ 15 - fold over the endogenous level ( Bucci et al . , 1992 ; Stenmark et al . , 1995 ) and a similar level of expression was obtained for the wild type and mutant Ypt51 proteins ( see Materials and Methods ) . Upon staining with an anti - Rab5 monoclonal antibody ( Bucci et al . , 1994 ) a typical pattern of early endosome labeling could be observed ( Fig . 1B ) that largely overlapped with the Ypt51p - labeling ( Fig . 1A ) . When cotransfection was carried out with Ypt51p and the human transferrin receptor , again both proteins were found to colocalize ( Fig . 1C , D ) , supporting the view that Ypt51p was associated with the early endosomal compartment . We have recently shown that expression of two Rab5 mutants with different biochemical properties induced opposite effects on the morphology of early endosomes . Rab5 Q79L , a mutant with decreased GTPase activity , was found to induce the formation of unusually large endosomes , whereas expression of Rab5 S34N with preferential affinity for GDP led to the fragmentation of early endosomes ( Stenmark et al . , 1994b ) . To test whether , in addition to targeting information , Ypt51p also shares functional properties with Rab5 , we intro - duced the corresponding mutations into Ypt51p ( Q66L and S21N , respectively ) and analyzed their effects on the mor - phology of early endosomes . As shown in Fig . 1E expression of Ypt51p Q66L led to a dramatic increase in the size of the Ypt51p - positive structures . These corresponded to expanded early endosomes , since they were positive both for Rab5 ( data not shown ) and the human transferrin receptor ( Fig . 1F ) . The morphological alteration of the early endosomes was com - parable to that caused by Rab5 Q79L and was restricted to the early endocytic compartment ( see below ) . In contrast , B . Singer - Krüger , H . Stenmark and M . Zerial 3513 Yeast Ypt51p in the early endocytic pathway expression of the Ypt51p S21N mutant resulted in a diffuse punctate labeling pattern that was distinct from the pattern obtained after expression of wild - type Ypt51p ( data not shown ) . Since also in this case colocalization with the trans - ferrin receptor was observed , expression of Ypt51p S21N is likely to induce fragmentation of early endosomes , as shown for the corresponding Rab5 S34N mutant ( Stenmark et al . , 1994b ) . Similar experiments were carried out with myc - tagged Ypt7p to exclude the formal possibility that expression of a foreign Ypt protein resulted in association with , and / or alter - ation of , early endosomes unspeciﬁcally . In contrast to Ypt51p , the Ypt7p - labeling pattern was clearly distinct from the early endosome staining as determined by double - labeling with Rab5 ( Fig . 2A , B ) showing very little colocalization of the two chromophores . On the other hand , Ypt7p was found to be asso - ciated with Rab7 - positive late endosomal structures ( data not shown ) . These data indicate that Ypt51p and Ypt7p are specif - ically targeted to distinct endocytic organelles in mammalian cells . Furthermore , as revealed by double - labeling with anti - bodies against the Golgi - speciﬁc coat protein b - COP ( Allan and Kreis , 1986 ) and Rab7 ( Chavrier et al . , 1990 ) , the mor - phology of the Golgi apparatus ( Fig . 2D ) and late endosomes ( not shown ) was unaffected upon overexpression of wild - type ( Fig . 2C ) and mutant Ypt51p . This demonstrates that the mor - phological alterations caused by the mutant proteins were speciﬁc and restricted to early endosomes . We next tested the ability of wild - type and mutant Ypt51p to stimulate endocytosis with a biochemical assay . For this the uptake of the ﬂuid - phase marker horseradish peroxidase ( HRP ) was measured . As found previously ( Bucci et al . , 1992 ; Li and Stahl , 1993 ; Stenmark et al . , 1994b ) , overexpression of Rab5 stimulated HRP internalization approximately two - fold as compared to untransfected cells ( Fig . 3 ) . Ypt51p shared the ability of Rab5 to stimulate HRP uptake , albeit with lower effi - ciency ( Fig . 3 ) . In contrast , neither overexpression of Rab7 nor of Ypt7p affected ﬂuid - phase endocytosis although the expression levels of the two proteins were similar to that of Rab5 and Ypt51p . Conversely , expression of Ypt51p S21N inhibited HRP uptake ( Fig . 3 ) , as previously found for the cor - responding Rab5 mutant ( Li and Stahl , 1993 ; Stenmark et al . , 1994b ) . These results support the idea that , in addition to Rab5 - like targeting information , Ypt51p also contains Rab5 - speciﬁc regulatory activity . Given the Rab5 - like functional properties of Ypt51p , we also undertook the reverse approach and analyzed whether Rab5 can complement the loss of Ypt51p in ypt51 null cells . Since this mutant revealed a delayed growth at 37°C we tested Table 1 . Strains used Yeast strain Genotype Source BS25 Mata his4 ura3 leu2 lys2 ypt51 : : LYS2 bar1 - 1 Singer - Krüger et al . , 1994 BS64 Mata his4 ura3 leu2 lys2 bar1 - 1 Singer - Krüger et al . , 1994 BS84 Mata his4 ura3 leu2 lys2 ypt51 : : LYS2 ypt7 : : URA3 bar1 - 1 This study RH1 Mata his4 ura3 leu2 ypr7 : : URA3 bar1 - 1 D . Gallwitz , Göttingen RH449 Mata his4 ura3 leu2 lys2 pep4 : : URA3 bar1 - 1 H . Riezman , Basel RH732 M ata his4 ura3 leu2 lys2 pep4 : : URA3 bar1 - 1 H . Riezman RH1651 Mata his4 ura leu2 prc1 : : LEU bar1 - 1 H . Riezman Fig . 1 . Heterologous expression of Ypt51p in BHK cells results in association with early endosomes containing Rab5 and human transferrin receptor . BHK cells were cotransfected with plasmids encoding Ypt51p and Rab5 ( A , B ) , Ypt51p and the human transferrin receptor ( C , D ) , and Ypt51p Q66L and the human transferrin receptor ( E , F ) using the vT7 expression system . After 30 minutes of infection and 4 hours of transfection cells were permeabilized with 0 . 05 % saponin and ﬁxed with 3 % paraformaldehyde prior to incubation with antibodies . The primary antibodies used were rabbit anti - Ypt51p ( A , C , E ) , mouse anti - Rab5 ( B ) , and mouse anti - human transferrin receptor ( D , F ) . Secondary antibodies used were FITC - labeled donkey anti - rabbit IgG and rhodamine - labeled donkey anti - mouse IgG . Microscopic analysis was with the EMBL confocal microscope viewing an optical section of 0 . 4 m m . Sets of double - labelings are shown in A , B , C , D and E , F . Bars , 4 m m . 3514 whether expression of Rab5 could restore this defect . Although the Rab5 - transformants generated larger colonies on plates after growth at 37°C in comparison to control cells carrying the vector alone , a difference in the growth - rate at 37°C could not be observed in liquid culture . Therefore , we did not assess the putative complementation by Rab5 with other assays . Role of Ypt51p at an early stage of endocytic transport in yeast Previous studies have demonstrated that loss of Ypt51p resulted in inhibition of a - factor degradation and lack of accu - mulation of Lucifer Yellow in the vacuole . These phenotypes were consistent with a defect in endocytosis , but did not dis - criminate between a fuction of Ypt51p in early or late steps of endocytic transport ( Singer - Krüger et al . , 1994 ) . Based on the ability to regulate early endocytic traffic in mammalian cells we tested the hypothesis that Ypt51p may also function in the early endocytic pathway in yeast . We used a previously described cell fractionation approach to separate two kineti - cally deﬁned endocytic intermediates ( Singer - Krüger et al . , 1993 ) . Thus , this fractionation method can be conveniently used to investigate whether the endocytic tracer a - factor is able to gain access to early and late compartments in cells depleted of Ypt51p . 35 S - labeled a - factor was internalized into wild - type and ∆ ypt51 cells for 3 , 15 and 40 minutes at 30°C and a high speed pellet fraction ( P3 ) , that was enriched for endosomes , was obtained . Subsequent density gradient centrifugation on Nycodenz gradients of the P3 fraction allowed the separation of the early and late endocytic fractions . Consistent with previous ﬁndings , in wild - type cells a sequential passage of a - factor from the plasma membrane ( Fig . 4 , fraction no . 12 , after 3 minutes of uptake ) to the early ( fraction no . 7 , 8 , after 3 minutes of uptake ) and the late endocytic fraction ( fraction no . 4 , 5 , after 15 minutes of uptake ) could be observed after increasing times of internalization . In contrast , the appearance of a - factor in the late fraction was strongly inhibited in the ∆ ypt51 mutant ( Fig . 4 ) . After 15 minutes of internalization the majority of the pheromone was still associated with the early fraction , whereas in wild - type cells it was mainly found in the late fraction . Remarkably , even after 40 minutes of endocyto - sis in ∆ ypt51 cells no change in the distribution of a - factor could be observed . On the other hand , wild - type cells revealed a strong decrease of a - factor in the fractions from the gradient suggesting that the pheromone was delivered to the vacuole ( not enriched in the P3 fraction applied to the gradient ; Singer and Riezman , 1990 ) . A similar cell fractionation approach has been previously employed to show that the ypt7 null mutant accumulates endo - cytosed a - factor in a gradient fraction corresponding to the late endocytic intermediate and to propose a function for Ypt7p in transport from the late compartment to the vacuole ( Schim - möller and Riezman , 1993 ) . To determine whether Ypt51p and Ypt7p regulate endocytic membrane traffic in a successive fashion we carried out the analysis in the ypt51ypt7 double mutant as well as in the ypt7 mutant . Since both of the mutants had a similar genetic background to the wild type and the ypt51 strain this comparison was possible . Most likely as a result of B . Singer - Krüger , H . Stenmark and M . Zerial Fig . 2 . Association of wild - type and mutant Ypt51p with early endosomes is speciﬁc and does not result in a morphological alteration of the Golgi complex . BHK cells were either cotransfected with plasmids encoding myc - tagged Ypt7p and Rab5 ( A , B ) , or single - transfected with a plasmid encoding Ypt51p ( C , D ) using the vT7 system and prepared for double - labeling immunoﬂuorescence as described in Fig . 1 . The primary antibodies to detect overexpressed protein were the mouse monoclonal antibody 9E10 to label c - myc epitope - tagged Ypt7p ( A ) , rabbit anti - Rab5 ( B ) , and rabbit anti - Ypt51p ( C ) . Endogenous b - COP was detected with mouse monoclonal anti - b - COP M3A5 ( D ) . Microscopic analysis was as described in Fig . 1 . Sets of double - labelings are shown in A , B and C , D . Bars , 4 m m . Fig . 3 . Effect of overexpressed Ypt51p on HRP endocytosis . BHK cells were transfected with plasmids encoding the proteins indicated using the vT7 system as described in Fig . 1 . The intracellular accumulation of HRP after 1 hour of internalization at 37°C was measured as described in Materials and Methods . The values of HRP uptake are expressed as per cent stimulation / inhibition with respect to infected but untransfected cells . The error bars indicate the standard error of the mean of three independent experiments . 3515 Yeast Ypt51p in the early endocytic pathway the Pep4 + - phenotype of our ∆ ypt7 strain background , we did not observe a substantial accumulation of a - factor in the late endocytic fraction of the ∆ ypt7 mutant ( Fig . 4 ) , in agreement with Schimmöller and Riezman ( 1993 ) . This is explained by the ﬁnding that in a PEP4 background a - factor is subject to degradation in the late endocytic intermediate . Most impor - tantly , in ∆ ypt51ypt7 cells the gradient proﬁles of a - factor after the various times of internalization were very similar to those of the ypt51 and not of the ypt7 mutant ( Fig . 4 ) . Therefore , this epistasis experiment further suggests that Ypt51p is required prior to Ypt7p in transport to the vacuole , most likely between the kinetically deﬁned early and late endocytic intermediates . Ypt51p is localized to endocytic organelles but not to the late Golgi If the transport block observed is a direct consequence of the loss of Ypt51p , one would expect this small GTPase to be localized to the endocytic compartments . Furthermore , the vacuolar protein sorting defect displayed by the ∆ ypt51 mutant ( Singer - Krüger et al . , 1994 ; Horazdovsky et al . , 1994 ) led to the proposal that Ypt51p may play a role in transport between a late Golgi subcompartment and the late endosome ( Horaz - dovsky et al . , 1994 ) . To shed further light onto this question , we also analyzed whether Ypt51p cofractionates with the late Golgi compartment . The proteins and pheromone 35 S - a - factor were followed in wild - type cells during a three - step isolation procedure , which has been recently developed to further purify the early and late endocytic intermediates isolated from the Nycodenz gradient . This method consists of an additional density gradient cen - trifugation step on a sucrose / D 2 O gradient ( Singer - Krüger et al . , 1993 ) . Importantly , this procedure allows the separation of the late Golgi subcompartment , as deﬁned by the presence of the marker Kex2p , from the early endocytic intermediate . As shown in Fig . 5 , Ypt51p cofractionated with a - factor associated with both the early and late endocytic intermediates on sucrose / D 2 O gradients . In contrast , no Ypt51p could be detected in the fractions ( # 9 - 13 ) that were highly enriched for Kex2p . When the speciﬁc activity of Ypt51p was determined during the puriﬁcation , it became apparent that it was mostly enriched in the late endocytic intermediate ( 960 - fold over lysate ) , while the enrichment in the early intermediate was lower ( 100 - fold over lysate ) . In conclusion , the cofractionation of Ypt51p with both endosomal intermediates is most consistent with the localiza - tion on these compartments and with the observed role of Ypt51p in controlling membrane traffic between these two compartments . While our data do not support an association of Ypt51p with the late Golgi compartment positive for Kex2p , we cannot rule out an association with other compartments , for example Golgi - derived vesicles , due to the lack of markers to follow their distribution during cell fractionation . Appearance of enlarged Ypt51p - positive structures upon expression of mutant Ypt51p Q66L Despite the existence of endocytic transport intermediates , the vacuole is the only organelle of the endocytic pathway in wild - type cells that has been morphologically visualized so far ( Riezman , 1985 ) . We therefore attempted the morphological characterization of the Ypt51p - containing endocytic compart - Fig . 4 . Endocytic marker , 35 S - labeled a - factor , accumulates in an early endocytic fraction in ypt51 as well as in ypt51ypt7 mutants . After growth at 24°C the wild - type and mutant strains were incubated with 35 S - a - factor for 1 hour at 0°C to allow pheromone binding . The cells were collected , resuspended in 30°C - prewarmed medium and incubated at 30°C for 3 , 15 and 40 minutes to allow internalization of a - factor . The cells were then transferred to ice and NaN 3 and NaF were added to stop further endocytosis . The cells were lysed at 4°C and a high speed pellet fraction ( P3 ) , obtained by differential centrifugation , was subjected to ﬂotation centrifugation on a Nycodenz gradient . After centrifugation 15 fractions were collected from the top and aliquots from each fractions were analyzed for the presence of 35 S - a - factor by liquid scintillation counting . 3516 ments by indirect immunoﬂuorescence microscopy . Due to the relatively low abundance of Ypt51p ( Singer - Krüger et al . , 1994 ) and the presumptive small size of the endosomes , we initially attempted to detect the small GTPase under conditions which , in animal cells , resulted in enlarged endocytic structures ( Stenmark et al . , 1994b , and see above ) . This was done by expressing the mutant Ypt51p Q66L , which leads to enlarged endosomal structures when transiently expressed in BHK cells ( Fig . 1 ) . To avoid mislocalization of the protein by overpro - duction , the mutant gene was placed behind the ADH - promoter on a centromere - based plasmid and expressed in wild - type cells . In fact , as determined by quantitative western blotting , this resulted in only a 2 - to 3 - fold increased level of mutant Ypt51p over wild - type protein ( see Materials and Methods ) . For immunoﬂuorescence , the affinity puriﬁed antibody used for the labeling was additionally pre - absorbed against ﬁxed ∆ ypt51 cells lacking the Ypt51p protein . This step efficiently removed background staining , as shown in the case of ∆ ypt51 cells ( Fig . 6A ) . In contrast , yeast cells expressing Ypt51p Q66L revealed a very bright ﬂuorescent signal , consisting of usually one to three larger structures per focal plane ( Fig . 6B - F , arrows ) and a number of smaller structures ( for example Fig . 6D , arrowhead ) . Although the Ypt51p - positive large structures were frequently found in the proximity of the vacuole identi - ﬁed by Nomarski optics ( Fig . 6E , F ) , they did not correspond to that compartment . Also nuclei and mitochondria , seen by DAPI staining of the DNA , showed distinct and nonoverlap - ping distributions in comparison to the Ypt51p labeling ( data not shown ) . Quantiﬁcation revealed a high percentage of cells ( approximately 55 % ) containing the large Ypt51p - positive structures ( as indicated by arrows in Fig . 6 ) , of which approx - imately 30 % appeared to contain one , 18 % two , and 7 % three large structures . We next investigated the localization of Ypt51p in wild - type yeast cells . Interestingly , these cells did not reveal the large punctate structures but numerous smaller entities , that were distributed throughout the cell ( Fig . 6G , H , indicated by arrow - heads ) . The Ypt51p - positive compartment is endocytic in nature and localized at the intersection with the vacuolar protein sorting pathway To provide further evidence that the enlarged structures labeled by the anti - Ypt51p antibody upon expression of Ypt51p Q66L were endosomal in origin , double - labeling with an endocytic marker was attempted . Since so far we have not been able to detect the pheromone a - factor by immunolocalization tech - niques , the a - factor receptor ( Ste2p ) was followed . This seven - transmembrane protein is internalized via endocytosis and delivered to the vacuole , where it gets rapidly degraded ( Davis et al . , 1993 ) . Due to the presence of the receptor also along the secretory pathway we examined its location after preventing protein synthesis with cycloheximide and allowing pre - existing Ste2p protein to be transported to the plasma membrane . Following this treatment , pheromone was bound at 4°C and receptor - mediated endocytosis allowed for 10 minutes at 30°C before the cells were ﬁxed with paraformaldehyde and prepared for immunoﬂuorescence microscopy . Ste2p was detected with an affinity - puriﬁed antibody , raised against a Ste2p - speciﬁc peptide ( Zanolari et al . , 1992 ) , which was pre - absorbed against ﬁxed a cells that do not express Ste2p . Since both the anti - Ypt51p and the anti - Ste2p antibodies were from rabbit , conditions were established for double - labeling exper - iments to independently detect each primary antibody with FITC - and rhodamine - conjugated secondary antibodies , respectively . This was achieved by an incubation step in the presence of an excess of unlabeled goat anti - rabbit IgG following labeling with the ﬁrst primary and secondary anti - bodies ( see Materials and Methods ) . Although some residual diffuse background labeling was seen with the puriﬁed anti - Ste2p antibody preparation ( Fig . 7B ) , a punctate staining was only observed in Ste2p - contain - B . Singer - Krüger , H . Stenmark and M . Zerial Fig . 5 . Ypt51p cofractionates with 35 S - a - factor , but not with Kex2p , on sucrose / D 2 O gradients , loaded either with the early or the late endocytic fraction from the Nycodenz gradient . Cell fractionation analysis to follow Ypt51p and Kex2p in comparison to endocytic marker a - factor was performed with YPT51 cells ( RH732 ) . The cells were incubated with 35 S - labeled a - factor for 20 minutes at 15°C to accumulate the pheromone in the early and late endocytic fractions . A P3 fraction was generated by differential centrifugation and subjected to Nycodenz density gradient centrifugation . The early and late endocytic fractions were subfractionated on sucrose / D 2 O gradients , as described in Materials and Methods ; 18 fractions ( 2 ml ) were collected from the top and the pellet , which formed during centrifugation , was resuspended in 2 ml sorbitol medium ( fraction 19 ) . a - factor in each of the fractions was followed by scintillation counting , Ypt51p by western blotting and ﬂuorography using the ECL - system . Kex2p localization was determined by its enzyme activity ( see Materials and Methods ) . The gradient shown in A was loaded with the early endocytic fraction from the Nycodenz gradient , the one presented in B was loaded with the late fraction . Since Kex2p is largely present in fractions containing the early but not the late endocytic intermediate ( Singer - Krüger et al . , 1993 ) , it was only followed on the gradient shown in A . 3517 Yeast Ypt51p in the early endocytic pathway ing cells ( Fig . 7A , D ) . Since synthesis of Ste2p was inhibited , these structures are likely to represent endocytic organelles . When double immunoﬂuorescence analysis was performed with the anti - Ypt51p and anti - Ste2p antibodies , several of the labeled structures were positive for both antigens ( Fig . 7C , D , indicated by arrows ) . This ﬁnding strengthens the idea that the structures containing Ypt51p do represent endocytic elements . In a control experiment to demonstrate the lack of cross - reac - tivity , after the ﬁrst round of labeling the second primary antibody was omitted and rhodamine - labeled goat anti - rabbit IgG was added ( for details see Fig . 7 and Materials and Methods ) . Had the afore mentioned blocking step been inef - ﬁcient , then labeling with rhodamine should have been observed . As shown in Fig . 7E - F , structures FITC - labeled for Ypt51p were visible ( Fig . 7E ) whereas under these conditions the rhodamine signal was hardly detectable ( Fig . 7F ) . Further - more , to test whether the excitation wavelength selected for observing the FITC signal could result in some rhodamine - derived signal ( and vice versa ) single - labeled samples were viewed at the wavelength of the complementary chromophore . This analysis revealed that no ﬂuorescent signal could be detected under these conditions ( data not shown ) . In addition to inhibition of endocytic transport , the ∆ ypt51 mutant was characterized by a defect in the vacuolar protein sorting pathway . Maturation of the Golgi - modiﬁed form of CPY was delayed and a fraction of the protein missorted to the extracellular space ( Singer - Krüger et al . , 1994 ; Horazdovsky et al . , 1994 ) . These ﬁndings were explained by a putative inter - section of the endocytic pathway with the vacuolar protein sorting pathway . An implication of this idea is that CPY would be expected to localize , at least partially , to the Ypt51 - con - taining compartment . To test this , we analyzed whether the structures , labeled by the anti - Ypt51p antibody , also contained CPY . Using an affinity - puriﬁed , pre - absorbed antibody against CPY , which resulted in low background labeling with cells deleted for PRC1 ( the gene encoding CPY ) ( Fig . 7H ) , in cells expressing Ypt51p Q66L a punctate labeling was predominant ( Fig . 7G , K ) . The ﬁnding that the vacuole was not labeled can most likely be explained by the antibodies detecting preferen - tially the precursor form of CPY . This was supported by the observation that in cells deleted for PEP4 ( thereby lacking the zymogen proteinase A ) vacuolar staining was clearly detectable ( data not shown ) . Double - labeling experiments in cells expressing Ypt51p Q66L to detect Ypt51p and CPY clearly revealed a high degree of colocalization of the two proteins ( Fig . 7J , K ) . This ﬁnding provides direct evidence for the idea that CPY transits through the compartment which is involved in endocytic transport of a - factor and that contains Ypt51p as a regulatory component . It would follow , that the additional structures occasionally seen only with a - CPY but not with a - Ypt51p antibodies might represent CPY en route through the secretory pathway ( Fig . 7K , indicated by arrows ) . DISCUSSION While previous studies identiﬁed Ypt51p of S . cerevisiae as a structural homolog of mammalian Rab5 , the initial phenotypic characterization of YPT51 - disrupted cells revealed pleiotropic defects in endocytosis and vacuolar protein sorting , but did not allow us to determine at which precise step in membrane traffic Ypt51p is required ( Singer - Krüger et al . , 1994 ) . In this paper , we have applied a variety of experimental approaches to study in more detail the role and localization of Ypt51p in intracel - lular membrane traffic . We show that Ypt51p controls early Fig . 6 . Indirect immunoﬂuorescence microscopy reveals Ypt51p on multiple punctate structures in wild - type cells and larger and less numerous structures in cells expressing Ypt51p Q66L . YPT51 cells ( BS64 ) ( G , H ) , expressing endogenous Ypt51p , BS64 cells carrying pBS - ADH - Ypt51Q66L ( B - F ) expressing Ypt51p Q66L from a CEN - based plasmid , and BS25 cells ( A ) ( ∆ ypt51 ) were ﬁxed in culture with 4 % paraformaldehyde and processed for indirect immunoﬂuorescence microscopy as described in Materials and Methods . The primary antibody used was rabbit anti - Ypt51p , which was affinity - puriﬁed and preabsorbed against ﬁxed cells carrying a disruption of YPT51 . The secondary antibody was rhodamine - labeled goat anti - rabbit IgG . Cells in A - D and G and H were viewed using the EMBL confocal microscope . Cells in E and F were analyzed with the Zeiss Axiophot by ﬂuorescence and Nomarski optics , respectively , to reveal the vacuolar compartment . Bar , 5 m m . Arrows in B , C , and D point to large structures speciﬁcally observed upon expression of Ypt51p Q66L . Arrowheads in D , G and H indicate the typical wild - type - like staining pattern . 3518 steps of endocytosis in yeast and mammals and morphologi - cally identify the Ypt51 - containing endocytic compartments of yeast . Our results are consistent with the idea that Ypt51p and Rab5 are functional counterparts in yeast and mammals . Rab5 and Ypt51p are counterparts with a similar function in the early endocytic pathway Heterologous expression of Ypt51p in mammalian cells provided evidence that these two small GTPases represent functional equivalents . First , similar to S . pombe ypt5 ( Armstrong et al . , 1993 ) , transiently expressed wild - type Ypt51p in mammalian cells colocalized with Rab5 and the transferrin receptor indicating a speciﬁc association with early endosomes . Second , Ypt51p was found to be able to control Rab5 - speciﬁc fusion events . Expression of wild - type Ypt51p speciﬁcally stimulated endocytosis , while Ypt7p and Rab7 B . Singer - Krüger , H . Stenmark and M . Zerial Fig . 7 . Double - label immunoﬂuorescence microscopy reveals that the Ypt51p - containing structure is also positive for a - factor receptor and CPY . BS64 cells expressing Ypt51p Q66L ( A , C - F ) were collected after growth at 30°C and treated with 25 m g / ml cycloheximide for 1 hour in YPD medium to prevent new synthesis of a - factor receptor ( Ste2p ) and to deplete the cells of internal pools of Ste2p . Subsequently , cells were cooled to 4°C and incubated in the presence of pheromone for 1 hour on ice . After collecting the cells and resuspending them in 30°C pre - warmed YPD ( containing cycloheximide ) , endocytosis was allowed for 10 minutes at 30°C . After that cells were ﬁxed and processed for immunoﬂuorescence microscopy as described in Fig . 7 . Cells in B ( RH449 , mating type a ) , H ( RH1651 , ∆ prc1 ) , and G , J , K ( BS64 carrying pBS - ADH - Ypt51Q66L ) were directly ﬁxed after growth at 30°C . Singel - label immunoﬂuorescence was performed with anti - Ste2p antibody on cells shown in A and B , and with anti - CPY antibody on cells shown in G and H . Double - label immunoﬂuorescence was performed in C , D , E , F and J , K . In C , E , and J the primary antibody detected was rabbit anti - Ypt51p . In D the primary antibody detected was rabbit anti - Ste2p . In F cells are shown , where the primary antibody anti - Ste2p was omitted . In K the primary antibody detected was rabbit anti - CPY . Cells were viewed using the EMBL confocal microscope . Bar , 5 m m . Arrowheads point to structures that were double - labeled by antibodies against Ypt51p and Ste2p ( C , D ) or Ypt51p and CPY ( J , K ) , respectively . Arrows in K indicate structures labeled by the anti - CPY antibody that were not labeled by the anti - Ypt51p antibody . Anti - Ypt51p antibodies were visualized with FITC - conjugated donkey anti - rabbit IgG , whereas anti - CPY or anti - Ste2p antibodies were detected with secondary rhodamine - labeled goat anti - rabbit IgG ( see Materials and Methods ) . 3519 Yeast Ypt51p in the early endocytic pathway were shown to have no effect . Analogous to Rab5 S34N , shown to exist preferentially in the GDP - bound form and to inhibit endocytic fusion events ( Stenmark et al . , 1994b ) , the yeast counterpart Ypt51p S21N inhibited endocytosis in BHK cells . Third , the expression of Ypt51p mutants resulted in mor - phological alterations of the early endosome compartment similar to those caused by the corresponding Rab5 mutants ( Stenmark et al . , 1994b ) . What is the molecular basis for the targeting of S . cerevisiae Ypt51p ( and S . pombe ypt5 ) to the early endosomes and for its function in early endocytic membrane traffic in mammalian cells ? Earlier work from our laboratory and others has demon - strated that distinct structural motifs confer localization and functional speciﬁcity to Rab / Ypt proteins ( Chavrier et al . , 1991 ; Brennwald and Novick , 1993 ; Stenmark et al . , 1994a ) . Our results suggest that Ypt51p is sufficiently conserved to interact with the Rab5 - regulatory factors and effectors . For example , the effector domain and part of the a 2 - helix ( LAPMYYR ) , which have been shown to determine Rab5 - speciﬁc activity , are highly conserved in Ypt51p . The C terminus of Ypt51p , ypt5 , and Rab5 , which contains targeting information , displays a low sequence conservation . This might suggest that the localization signal is either a short sequence or a structural motif with no speciﬁc sequence requirements , as previously suggested ( Armstrong et al . , 1993 ; Stenmark et al . , 1994a ) . Furthermore , it is possible that the other conserved functional determinants may contribute to the targeting process . Role of Ypt51p in endocytic traffic in yeast Cell fractionation analysis in yeast cells lacking Ypt51p revealed an accumulation of a - factor in the early endocytic intermediate and indicated that transport to the late endocytic compartment was inhibited . The ﬁnding that Ypt51p is localized to both endocytic intermediates argues that the effects of the protein on endocytic traffic are not indirect but reﬂect a functional requirement of this small GTPase in transport between the two endocytic compartments . In particular , the fact that Ypt51p was mostly enriched in the late fraction suggests that this may represent its acceptor compartment . These data conﬁrm our previous hypothesis , which postulated that the lack of a - factor degradation in the various ypt5 mutants is due to inhibited transport to the vacuole rather than to vacuolar protein missorting and lack of vacuolar protease activity ( Singer - Krüger et al . , 1994 ) . Previous studies with the ∆ ypt7 mutant suggested that the yeast Rab7 - homolog functions more distal in the endocytic pathway towards the vacuole in comparison to Ypt51p . First , a - factor degradation is less strongly inhibited in ypt7 than in ypt51 mutants . Second , in the ypt7 mutants endocytic markers accumulate in the late endocytic fraction ( Schimmöller and Riezman , 1993 ) , whereas in ∆ ypt51 cells transport is blocked in the early intermediate . While these phenotypes per se indicate that Ypt51p and Ypt7p act in a sequential fashion , the observation that the endocytic phenotype of the ypt51ypt7 double mutant is similar to that of the ypt51 mutant provides further evidence for this interpretation and strengthens the idea of a molecular regulation similar to animal cells . Nevertheless , we cannot exclude the possibility that Ypt51p and Ypt7p function at the same step , although one would have to consider that the ypt51 phenotype appears to be prevalent . Equivalence of yeast and mammalian endocytic organelles ? In mammalian cells Rab5 was found to be present at the plasma membrane , clathrin coated vesicles and early endosomes ( Chavrier et al . , 1990 ; Bucci et al . , 1992 ) and to regulate the kinetics of endocytosis ( Bucci et al . , 1992 ) as well as the homotypic fusion between early endosomes ( Gorvel et al . , 1991 ; Stenmark et al . , 1994b ; Barbieri et al . , 1994 ) . In the yeast system , the present data imply a role of Ypt51p in transport between an early and a late endocytic intermediate . How can this apparent difference between the two systems be recon - ciled ? One explanation could be that a fundamental difference exists between the mammalian and the yeast pathways , and , although Ypt51p also appears to control early endocytic traffic in mammalian cells , it may regulate a different step of transport in yeast . This possibility would be consistent with the ﬁnding that no effect on the rate of endocytic internalization of surface - bound a - factor could be observed upon disruption of YPT51 ( Singer - Krüger et al . , 1994 ) . However , it is worth con - sidering that the early and late ‘endosomes’ in yeast have been named due to their sequential aquisition of the endocytic marker a - factor and , so far , have only been described from a kinetic point of view ( Singer - Krüger et al . , 1993 ) . Except for the existence of two endocytic intermediates reminiscent of the situation in mammalian cells , there is no experimental evidence indicating that these particular fractions correspond to the early and late endosomes of animal cells . It is conceiv - able that one of the fractions may rather represent an endocytic transport vesicle . The ﬁnding that in ypt51 mutants small vesicular structures accumulate ( Singer - Krüger et al . , 1994 ) supports this hypothesis . For example , the yeast early endosomal intermediate , though clearly distinct from the bulk of the plasma membrane ( Singer and Riezman , 1990 ) , may represent a specialized plasma membrane domain or an endocytic vesicle derived from it . Recently , ﬁnger - like invagi - nations of the plasma membrane , around which actin ﬁlaments and actin binding proteins were organized , have been identi - ﬁed by electron microscopy ( Mulholland et al . , 1994 ) . Since the actin cytoskeleton has been recently implicated in the control of endocytic internalization in S . cerevisiae ( Kübler and Riezman , 1993 ) , these plasma membrane domains may constitute active sites of endocytosis , where actin - cables may be involved to drive scission of endocytic vesicles . It could be imagined that after or during this step Ypt51p is recruited onto this intermediate to control the fusion of these vesicles with the acceptor compartment . Since , in addition to the kinetic deﬁni - tion , the endocytic intermediates can now be deﬁned on the basis of their molecular composition and regulation , the analysis of the compartmental organization of the endocytic pathway will hopefully be facilitated . Ypt51p may not directly be involved in Golgi to endosome transport but is localized at the intersection of the endocytic and vacuolar protein sorting pathways In a model to explain the vacuolar protein sorting defect upon disruption or mutation of the YPT51 / VPS21 locus ( Singer - Krüger et al . , 1994 ; Horazdovsky et al . , 1994 ) , it was specu - lated that Ypt51p ( Vps21p ) could regulate transport between the late Golgi compartment ( the site where sorting of vacuolar 3520 enzymes from the secretory pathway occurs ; Graham and Emr , 1991 ) and endosomes ( Horazdovsky et al . , 1994 ) . This would imply that the endocytic transport defect to the vacuole might be caused indirectly . Alternatively , it could be envisaged that the vacuolar sorting defect itself may arise as an indirect con - sequence of inhibition of endocytic transport to the vacuole . Our subcellular fractionation studies revealed cofractionation of Ypt51p with the early and late endocytic fractions , but not with the late Golgi compartment , suggesting that this small GTPase is not associated with the latter organelle . The associ - ation of Ypt51p with an endocytic compartment was indepen - dently conﬁrmed by double labeling immunoﬂuorescence showing colocalization of Ypt51p and the a - factor receptor . Therefore , our results do not support a direct role for Ypt51p in Golgi to endosome traffic . On the other hand , the ﬁnding that Ypt51p partially colocalized with CPY provided direct experimental evidence for the idea that the endocytic and vacuolar protein sorting pathways converge at least at the stage of the Ypt51p - containing compartment . Indirect evidence for the latter idea was previously provided by various observations ( Vida et al . , 1993 ; Davis et al . , 1993 ) , the most compelling being that endocytosed a - factor can be degraded by vacuolar hydrolases before the delivery to the vacuole ( Schimmöller and Riezman , 1993 ) . The fact that vacuolar enzymes transit through a Ypt51p - containing compartment implies that the defect in vacuolar protein sorting shown by the ypt51 mutant may arise as an indirect consequence of a defect in endocyto - sis . Morphological identiﬁcation of the Ypt51p - containing compartment Immunoﬂuorescence microscopy enabled us to identify the Ypt51p - containing structure in wild - type cells and in cells expressing the Ypt51p Q66L mutant . While endogenous Ypt51p in wild - type cells could be localized to numerous punctate structures , which were evenly distributed throughout the cytoplasm , expression of Ypt51p Q66L resulted in the appearance of less numerous ( most frequently one to three ) and larger Ypt51p - positive structures . Consistent with a role for Ypt51p in the early endocytic pathway , the appearance of the vacuole was unaffected upon expression of the Ypt51p Q66L mutant . Therefore , the morphological alteration of Ypt51p - containing structures is similar to that previously observed upon expression of either Rab5 Q79L or Ypt51p Q66L in mammalian cells . This implies that Ypt51p can stimulate endo - cytotic fusion events in yeast cells similar to the mammalian counterpart . In wild - type cells this is the ﬁrst time that endocytic transport intermediates besides the vacuole have been mor - phologically visualized in vivo . Interestingly , in a search for mutants that are impaired in endocytosis of a - factor receptor , ren1 - 1 ( a mutant of REN1 , identical to VPS2 ) was identiﬁed and found to accumulate the receptor in a compartment localized in the proximity of the vacuole . This compartment is reminiscent of the Ypt51p - containing structures appearing upon expression of Ypt51p Q66L . In fact , a pre - vacuolar com - partment with similar morphological characteristics was orig - inally described by Raymond et al . ( 1992 ) . Because it was found in a number of vacuolar protein sorting mutants , it was deﬁned as the class E compartment . This pre - vacuolar structure was characterized by the presence of CPY and vacuolar ATPase , and by a lack of alkaline phosphatase , another vacuolar marker , which was mostly present in the vacuole . However , vps21 ( which is a mutant allele of YPT51 ; Horaz - dovsky et al . , 1994 ) was not classiﬁed as a class E mutant . This mutant displayed rather a diffuse staining of one subunit of the vacuolar ATPase ( Raymond et al . , 1992 ) . We believe that the different , sometimes opposing , morphological alterations of endocytic / pre - vacuolar compartments can be explained as the result of distinct mutations in one and the same gene product , as has been shown for two different Rab5 mutants ( Stenmark et al . , 1994b ) , and not as the consequence of the inactivation of the gene product per se . In conclusion , this work establishes Ypt51p as a marker protein for the early yeast endocytic pathway . Together with Ypt7p , this small GTPase should hopefully facilitate the bio - chemical and morphological characterization of this transport route . One major aim towards this direction is the reconstitu - tion of the Ypt51p - controlled transport step in vitro , by which we hope to further identify and characterize the molecular requirements for endocytic traffic in yeast . We would like to thank Howard Riezman for providing the anti - Ste2p and anti - CPY antisera and a number of yeast strains ; Dieter Gallwitz for providing the ypt7 strain , plasmids and antisera ; and Frauke Schimmöller for help with the densitometric analysis . We gratefully acknowledge Valerie Doye , Bernard Hoﬂack , Meltje de Hoop , Rob Parton and Kai Simons for critical reading of the manu - script . This research was supported by a grant from the Human Frontier Science Program ( to M . Z . ) . During part of the work B . S . - K . has been a recipient of a postdoctoral long - term EMBO fellowship , and H . S . of a postdoctoral fellowship from the Research Council of Norway . REFERENCES Allan , V . J . and Kreis , T . E . ( 1986 ) . A microtubule - binding protein associated with membranes of the Golgi apparatus . J . Cell Biol . 103 , 2229 - 2239 . Armstrong , J . , Craighead , M . W . , Watson , R . , Ponnambalam S . and Bowden , S . ( 1993 ) . Schizosaccharomyces pombe ypt5 : a homologue of the rab5 endosome fusion regulator . Mol . Biol . Cell 4 , 583 - 592 . Barbieri , M . A . , Li , G . , Colombo , M . I . and Stahl , P . D . ( 1994 ) . Rab5 , an early acting endosomal GTPase , supports in vitro endosome fusion without GTP - hydrolysis . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 18720 - 18722 . Brennwald , P . and Novick , P . ( 1993 ) . Interactions of three domains distinguishing the Ras - related GTP - binding proteins Ypt1 and Sec4 . Nature 362 , 560 - 563 . Bucci , C . , Parton , R . G . , Mather , I . H . , Stunnenberg , H . , Simons , K . , Hoﬂack , B . and Zerial , M . ( 1992 ) . The small GTP - ase rab5a functions as a regulatory factor in the early endocytic pathway . Cell 70 , 715 - 728 . Bucci , C . , Wandinger - Ness , A . , Lütcke , A . , Chiariello , M . , Bruni , C . B . and Zerial , M . ( 1994 ) . Rab5a is a common component of the apical and basolateral endocytic machinery in polarized epithelial cells . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 91 , 5061 - 5065 . Chavrier , P . , Parton , R . G . , Hauri , H . P . , Simons , K . and Zerial , M . ( 1990 ) . Localization of low molecular weight GTP - binding proteins to exocytic and endocytic compartments . Cell 62 , 317 - 329 . Chavrier , P . , Gorvel , J . - P . , Stelzer , E . , Simons , K . Gruenberg , J . and Zerial , M . ( 1991 ) . Hypervariable C - terminal domain of rab proteins acts as a targeting signal . Nature 353 , 769 - 772 . Davis , N . G . , Horecka , J . L . and Sprague , G . F . ( 1993 ) . Cis - and trans - acting functions required for endocytosis of the yeast pheromone receptors . J . Cell Biol . 122 , 53 - 65 . Dulic , V . , Egerton , M . , Elguindi , I . , Raths , S . , Singer , B . and Riezman , H . ( 1991 ) . Yeast endocytosis assays . Meth . Enzymol . 194 , 679 - 710 . Evan , G . I . , Lewis , G . K . , Ramsay , G . and Bishop , J . M . ( 1985 ) . Isolation of monoclonal antibodies speciﬁc for human c - myc proto - oncogene product . Mol . Cell . Biol . 5 , 3610 - 3616 . B . Singer - Krüger , H . Stenmark and M . Zerial 3521 Yeast Ypt51p in the early endocytic pathway Gorvel , J . - P . , Chavrier , P . , Zerial , M . and Gruenberg , J . ( 1991 ) . Rab5 controls early endosome fusion in vitro . Cell 64 , 915 - 925 . Graham , T . R . and Emr , S . D . ( 1991 ) . Compartmental organization of Golgi - speciﬁc protein modiﬁcation and vacuolar protein sorting events deﬁned in a sec18 ( NSF ) mutant . J . Cell Biol . 114 , 207 - 218 . Griffiths , G . , Hoﬂack , B . , Simons , K . , Mellman , I . and Kornfeld , S . ( 1988 ) . The mannose 6 - phoshate receptor and the biogenesis of lysosomes . Cell 52 , 329 - 341 . Horazdovsky , B . F . , Busch , G . and Emr , S . D . ( 1994 ) . VPS21 encodes a rab5 - like GTP binding protein that is required for the sorting of yeast vacuolar proteins . EMBO J . 13 , 1297 - 1309 . Hubbard , A . L . ( 1989 ) . Endocytosis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 1 , 675 - 683 . Jansen , R . P . , Hurt , E . C . , Kern , H . , Lehtonen , H . , Carmo - Fonseca , M . , Lapeyre , B . and Tollervey , D . ( 1991 ) . Evolutionary conservation of the human nucleolar protein ﬁbrillarin and its functional expression in yeast . J . Cell Biol . 113 , 715 - 729 . Kornfeld , S . and Mellman , I . ( 1989 ) . The biogenesis of lysosomes . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 5 , 483 - 525 . Kübler , E . and Riezman , H . ( 1993 ) . Actin and ﬁmbrin are required for the internalization step of endocytosis in yeast . EMBO J . 12 , 2855 - 2862 . Kübler , E . , Schimmoller , F . and Riezman , H . ( 1994 ) . Calcium - independent calmodulin requirement for endocytosis in yeast . EMBO J . 13 , 5539 - 5546 . Laemmli , U . K . ( 1970 ) . Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of the bacteriophage T4 . Nature 117 , 680 - 685 . Li , G . and Stahl , P . D . ( 1993 ) . Structure - function relationship of the small GTPase rab5 . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 24475 - 24480 . Louvard , D . , Morris , C . , Warren , G . , Stanley , K . , Winkler , F . and Reggio , H . ( 1983 ) . A monoclonal antibody to the heavy chain of clathrin . EMBO J . 2 , 1655 - 1664 . Ludwig , T . , Griffiths , G . and Hoﬂack , B . ( 1991 ) . Distribution of newly synthesized lysosomal enzymes in the endocytic pathway of normal rat kidney cells . J . Cell Biol . 115 , 1561 - 1572 . Mulholland , J . M . , Preuss , D . , Moon , A . , Wong , A . , Drubin , D . and Botstein D . ( 1994 ) . Ultrastructure of the yeast actin cytoskeleton and its association with the plasma membrane . J . Cell Biol . 125 , 381 - 391 . Munn , A . L . and Riezman , H . ( 1994 ) . Endocytosis is required for the growth of vacuolar H + - ATPase - defective yeast : identiﬁcation of six new END genes . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 373 - 386 . Olkkonen , V . M . , Dupree , P . , Killisch , I . , Lütcke , A . , Zerial , M . and Simons , K . ( 1993 ) . Molecular cloning and subcellular localization of three GTP - binding proteins of the rab subfamily . J . Cell Sci . 106 , 1249 - 1261 . Payne , G . S . , Baker , D . , van Tuinen , E . and Schekman , R . ( 1988 ) . Protein transport to the vacuole and receptor - mediated endocytosis by clathrin heavy chain - deﬁcient yeast . J . Cell Biol . 106 , 1453 - 1461 . Peterson , G . L . ( 1977 ) . A simpliﬁcation of the protein assay of Lowry et al . which is more generally applicable . Anal . Biochem . 83 , 346 - 356 . Pfeffer , S . ( 1994 ) . Clues to brain function from bakers’ yeast . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 91 , 1987 - 1988 . Raths , S . , Rohrer , J . , Crausaz , F . and Riezman , H . ( 1993 ) . end3 and end4 : two mutants defective in receptor - mediated and ﬂuid - phase endocytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Cell Biol . 120 , 55 - 65 . Raymond , C . K . , Howald - Stevenson , I . , Vater , C . A . and Stevens , T . H . ( 1992 ) . Morphological classiﬁcation of the yeast vacuolar protein sorting mutants : Evidence for a prevacuolar compartment in class E vps mutants . Mol . Biol . Cell 3 , 1389 - 1402 . Riezman , H . ( 1985 ) . Endocytosis in yeast : several of the yeast secretory mutants are defective in endocytosis . Cell 40 , 1001 - 1009 . Roberts , C . J . , Raymond , C . K . , Yamashiro , C . T . and Stevens , T . H . ( 1991 ) . Methods for studying the yeast vacuole . Meth . Enzymol . 194 , 644 - 661 . Schimmöller , F . and Riezman , H . ( 1993 ) . Involvement of Ypt7p , a small GTP - binding protein , in traffic from late endosome to the vacuole in yeast . J . Cell Sci . 106 , 823 - 830 . Singer , B . and Riezman , H . ( 1990 ) . Detection of an intermediate compartment involved in transport of a - factor from the plasma membrane to the vacuole in yeast . J . Cell Biol . 110 , 1911 - 1922 . Singer - Krüger , B . , Frank , R . , Crausaz , F . and Riezman , H . ( 1993 ) . Partial puriﬁcation and characterization of early and late endosomes from yeast . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 14376 - 14386 . Singer - Krüger , B . , Stenmark , H . , Düsterhöft , A . , Philippsen , P . , Yoo , J . - S . , Gallwitz , D . and Zerial , M . ( 1994 ) . Role of three rab5 - like GTPases , Ypt51p , Ypt52p , and Ypt53p , in the endocytic and vacuolar protein sorting pathways of yeast . J . Cell Biol . 125 , 283 - 298 . Stenmark , H . , Valencia , A . , Martinez , O . , Ullrich , O . , Goud , B . and Zerial , M . ( 1994a ) . Distinct structural elements of rab5 deﬁne its functional speciﬁcity . EMBO J . 13 , 575 - 583 . Stenmark , H . , Parton , R . G . , Steele - Mortimer , O . , Lütcke , A . , Gruenberg , J . and Zerial , M . ( 1994b ) . Inhibition of rab5 GTPase activity stimulates membrane fusion in endocytosis . EMBO J . 13 , 1287 - 1296 . Stenmark , H . , Bucci , C . and Zerial , M . ( 1995 ) . Expression of Rab GTPases using recombinant vaccinia viruses . Meth . Enzymol . 257 , 155 - 164 . Ternynck , T . and Avrameas , S . ( 1976 ) . A new method using p - benzoquinone for coupling antigens and antibodies to marker substances . Annu . Immunol . ( Inst . Pasteur ) 127C , 197 - 208 . Towbin , H . , Staehelin , T . and Gordon , J . ( 1979 ) . Electrophoretic transfer of proteins from polyacrylamide gels to nitrocellulose sheets : procedure and some applications . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . USA 76 , 4350 - 4354 . Ullrich , O . , Stenmark , H . , Alexandrov , K . , Huber , L . A . , Kaibuchi , K . , Sasaki , T . , Takai , Y . and Zerial , M . ( 1993 ) . Rab GDI as a general regulator for the membrane association of rab proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 18143 - 18150 . van Tuinen , E . and Riezman , H . ( 1987 ) . Immunolocalization of glyceraldehyde - 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase , hexokinase , and carboxypeptidase Y in yeast cells at the ultrastructural level . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 35 , 327 - 333 . Vida , T . A . , Huyer , G . and Emr , S . D . ( 1993 ) . Yeast vacuolar proenzymes are sorted in the late Golgi complex and transported to the vacuole via a prevacuolar endosome - like compartment . J . Cell Biol . 121 , 1245 - 1256 . Wichmann , H . , Hengst , L . and Gallwitz , D . ( 1992 ) . Endocytosis in yeast : evidence for the involvement of a small GTP - binding protein ( Ypt7p ) . Cell 71 , 1131 - 1142 . Zanolari , B . and Riezman , H . ( 1991 ) . Quantitation of a - factor internalization and response during the Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell cycle . Mol . Cell . Biol . 11 , 5251 - 5258 . Zanolari , B . , Raths , S . , Singer - Krüger , B . and Riezman , H . ( 1992 ) . Yeast pheromone receptor endocytosis and hyperphosphorylation are independent of G protein - mediated signal transduction . Cell 71 , 755 - 763 . Zerial , M . , Parton , R . , Chavrier , P . and Frank , R . ( 1992 ) . Localization of Rab family members in animal cells . Meth . Enzymol . 219 , 398 - 407 . Zerial , M . and Stenmark , H . ( 1993 ) . Rab GTPases in vesicular transport . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 5 , 613 - 620 . ( Received 22 February 1995 - Accepted 4 August 1995 )