Sustainable HCI Under Water : Opportunities for Research with Oceans , Coastal Communities , and Marine Systems Laura J . Perovich Catherine Titcomb Tad Hirsch l . perovich @ northeastern . edu titcomb . c @ northeastern . edu tad . hirsch @ northeastern . edu Northeastern University Northeastern University Northeastern University Boston , Massachusetts , USA Boston , Massachusetts , USA Boston , Massachusetts , USA Brian Helmuth b . helmuth @ northeastern . edu Proteus Ocean Group Northeastern University Boston , Massachusetts , USA ABSTRACT Although the world’s oceans play a critical role in human well - being , they have not been a primary focus of the sustainable HCI ( SHCI ) community to date . In this paper , we present a scoping re - view to show how concerns with the oceans are threaded through - out the broader SHCI literature and to fnd new research opportu - nities . We identify several themes that could beneft from focused SHCI research , including marine food sources , culture and coastal communities , ocean conservation , and marine climate change im - pacts and adaptation strategies . Finally , we discuss opportunities for further work on marine human - natural systems research in SHCI and interdisciplinary collaboration with marine science and coastal communities . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Human computer interac - tion ( HCI ) . KEYWORDS sustainable HCI , SHCI , sustainable interaction design , marine sys - tems , oceans , environment , Sustainable Development Goal 14 ACM Reference Format : Laura J . Perovich , Catherine Titcomb , Tad Hirsch , Brian Helmuth , and Casper Harteveld . 2023 . Sustainable HCI Under Water : Opportunities for Research with Oceans , Coastal Communities , and Marine Systems . In CHI’23 : Confer - ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 16 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544548 . 3581291 1 INTRODUCTION Earth’s oceans provide a wide array of benefts to people , ranging from food to recreation to spiritual well - being [ 45 ] . Approximately Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proft or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the frst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specifc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany © 2023 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9421 - 5 / 23 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3544548 . 3581291 Casper Harteveld c . harteveld @ northeastern . edu Northeastern University Boston , Massachusetts , USA half of all the world’s atmospheric oxygen comes from ocean plants and phytoplankton , and over 3 billion people rely on the ocean for their primary source of protein [ 104 ] . Approximately 40 % of the world’s population live within 100km of the coast , and are at risk from a range of threats from climate change such as coastal fooding . The “blue economy” contributed by the ocean is currently estimated at $ 1 . 5 trillion USD annually and could reach $ 3 trillion USD by 2030 [ 69 ] . From the viewpoint of biodiversity , the oceans comprise 70 % of the earth’s surface and 95 % of its total living space , yet an estimated 90 % of ocean species have yet to be classifed [ 65 ] . As historian Naomi Oreskes [ 72 ] notes , ignoring the oceans in an era of ongoing climate change is no longer a viable proposition , as evidenced by the 2021 launch of the United Nations’s Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development , which directly addresses UN Sustainable Development Goal ( SDG ) 14 , Life Below Water . HCI has a history of working on important environmental is - sues through subfelds such as sustainable HCI ( SHCI ) . Work in this space has become increasingly interdisciplinary as HCI ex - pands beyond a largely technology - centered focus and considers the complex ways that issues are contextualized in the world [ 11 ] . SHCI researchers have worked on a variety of sustainability is - sues , such as energy consumption , air pollution , the depletion of natural resources , and climate change more broadly . Yet a recent review paper speculates that the feld may not be well positioned to contribute to the important environmental issues around marine systems . Hansson et al . note that it is “a challenge to see how HCI could substantially contribute to SDG 14 , Life Below Water ( ‘Con - serve and sustainably use the oceans , seas and marine resources for sustainable development’ ) ” as they “believe there is less of a match between this specifc goal ( SDG 14 ) and the methods and tools that HCI researchers have at their disposal” [ 38 ] . This spec - ulation has not been investigated in depth—though others have repeated it in the SHCI literature [ 87 ] —and requires scrutiny given the importance oceans , coastal communities , and marine systems play now , and certainly in the future . 1 For our efort , we take SDG 14 as a starting point because the SDGs have emerged as a guiding 1 " Coastal communities " typically refers to human communities on shorelines and so would not be encompassed by " ocean " . " Marine systems " would include open ocean and shallow coastal ( non - human ) habitats / ecosystems . Because we are interested in how humans " interact " with oceans we include coastal communities in our discussion of marine systems and thus use this term as encompassing everything that directly and indirectly has to do with Life Below Water , as specifed by SDG 14 . CHI’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Laura J . Perovich , Catherine Titcomb , Tad Hirsch , Brian Helmuth , and Casper Harteveld structure for sustainability and development eforts on an interna - tional scale and have recently become an important framework for socially engaged eforts in HCI in particular [ 26 , 38 , 53 ] . In this paper , we consider the questions , what methods and tools have self - identifed SHCI researchers used to explore sustainability in the context of marine systems , and what does that suggest for future opportunities in this area ? Through a scoping review [ 18 , 59 ] of the Association for Computing Machinery ( ACM ) Digital Library ( DL ) , which includes the premier venues that SCHI researchers are active at , including but not limited to CHI , DIS , and CSCW , we iden - tifed papers in SHCI that are relevant to SDG 14 and analyzed them to surface themes and perspectives in this area that can provide a foundation for future work . We also describe ways in which SHCI research around marine systems dovetails with ongoing considera - tions within HCI and SHCI , including work in areas such as food systems [ 36 , 42 , 56 ] , economics [ 51 , 52 , 87 , 106 ] , and social justice [ 1 , 6 , 8 , 20 , 28 , 29 ] ; and argue that SCHI has an important role to play in marine systems research and community engagement . Overall , our research identifed a small , but important , body of work around marine systems in SHCI , which exemplifes both that marine systems is an underexplored area of SHCI , but also an area to which SHCI can meaningfully contribute . The contributions of this paper are threefold . First , it provides a scoping review of SDG 14 related marine systems research in SHCI to surface methods , themes , and considerations that might facilitate its investigation . Second , it presents a qualitative analysis that clarifes the nature of this research . Finally , it identifes future research opportunities around marine systems in SHCI based on the literature review fndings , ongoing areas of interest in HCI , and complementary marine science research . 2 BACKGROUND In this paper , we connect SHCI research with the UN SDGs , espe - cially SDG 14 . Here , we provide a brief background on these two areas that give context to the larger discussion . 2 . 1 Sustainable Human Computer Interaction Sustainability has been of interest to HCI for over ffteen years . For many , Blevis’s 2007 paper on Sustainable Interaction Design marks an important moment that brought these concerns to a broader research audience [ 9 ] . There has been a consistent thread of sus - tainability research in HCI since then that includes work on a wide range of environmentally - related issues and perspectives . Work in this area has explored a broad array of topics and methods of impact , from convincing individuals to change their recycling behaviors [ 19 , 44 ] to developing playful tools for environmental pollution monitoring in public spaces [ 3 , 54 , 55 ] , to surfacing ways that tech - nology might support social movements around small farms [ 36 , 56 ] . Though some researchers have attempted to defne boundaries or frameworks for this space , it remains a broad afnity group within HCI . Here we briefy describe a few landmarks in the feld and key considerations relevant to this paper . A number of major review papers of SHCI both describe the space of existing work and identify new opportunities . A 2009 paper by Goodman et al . provides an overview of three main environmen - tal discourses in HCI—sustainable interaction design , re - visioning consumption , and citizen sensing—and points towards infrastruc - ture and participatory practices as areas for future work [ 32 ] . In 2010 , DiSalvo et al . identify fve genres within the feld—persuasive technology , ambient awareness , sustainable interaction design , for - mative user studies , and pervasive and participatory sensing—and point towards opportunities for interdisciplinary collaborations and refective debate [ 24 ] . Knowles et al . develop a framework of ten mo - tivating questions that capture sustainability challenges explored in computing and describe a need for a broader " quadruple bottom line " approach to sustainability that considers environmental needs , social needs , and personal needs , and the ways in which economic considerations impact our ability to meet these core needs [ 52 ] . Neris et al . identify seven major thematic groups in the SHCI lit - erature and point towards a number of opportunities for the feld , including further use of long term , ethnographic , or participatory work [ 21 ] . A 2021 review paper by Ferreira et al . focuses on climate change communication work within HCI and dovetails with past SHCI reviews [ 27 ] . Though these review papers each contain unique fndings , they also identify a few overlapping considerations for SHCI that sur - face in related literature . A number of authors—in these review papers and elsewhere – refect on or criticize the historic focus on persuasion - based work in SHCI . Persuasive SHCI often is based in a neoliberal perspective that considers people to be individual actors that can be motivated towards behavior change through better information or " nudges " towards optimal behaviors . Some papers identify alternatives to this model , including repeated calls for additional participatory or community based work in SHCI and for interdisciplinary research that can take a holistic approach to sustainability by incorporating economic , social , and other con - siderations . Pierce et al . describe the need to move towards an understanding of technology systems " as just one aspect of various practices , " suggesting that " human activities need to be understood as situated within social practices that are substantially more com - plex than behaviors driven by individual attitudes and choices " [ 79 ] . In order to take on these challenges and perspectives , HCI researchers have argued for the incorporation of methods suited to complexity , and social , cultural , and afective considerations , such as sociological methods [ 23 ] , the arts [ 23 , 98 ] , and practice based approaches [ 79 ] , as well as participatory or community based methods [ 93 ] . Hansson et al . ’s recent work contextualizing SHCI relative to the UN SDGs provides another approach to addressing many of the criticisms of SHCI described above [ 38 ] . In particular , by drawing on a holistic framework for sustainability developed outside of HCI , researchers can more easily move beyond persuasion , de - center technology , and engage with the complexities and on - the - ground realities of sustainability . In this paper , we draw from SDG 14 – Life Below Water , as a starting point for exploring the possibilities for marine systems research in SHCI . 2 . 2 SDG 14 : Life Below Water Sustainable Development Goal 14 ( or SDG 14 ) is one of the 17 development goals identifed by the United Nations ( UN ) . Adopted by the member states in 2015 , the goals are to be achieved by 2030 and aim to take on global challenges through recognizing their Sustainable HCI Under Water CHI’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany interconnected nature , including addressing economic , social , and environmental needs [ 110 ] . The SDGs provide a framework for international conversations around sustainability and development and are used by some governments , policy makers , and NGOs in agenda setting . The SDGs have been used within HCI around a number of socially engaged or impact - based eforts , including applications in HCI Across Borders [ 53 ] and SHCI [ 26 , 38 ] , among other ar - eas [ 30 , 53 , 76 ] . Because of the role of the SDGs in past HCI re - search and their prominence within international , environmental , and research communities , SDG 14 ( Life Below Water ) can pro - vide an initial framework for understanding how sustainability research in HCI can ( and has ) moved beyond land and into the oceans . SDG 14 has also been formalized as the United Nations Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development ( 2021 - 2030 ; see https : / / www . oceandecade . org / ) . SDG 14 sets out to " conserve and sustainably use the oceans , seas and marine resources " [ 109 ] . It describes how large water systems are closely tied to human and environmental well - being , including implications for coastal economic systems , food availability , and ecosystems . Ten targets delineate the main aims within this goal , in - cluding commitments to reduce marine pollution of all kinds ( 14 . 1 ) , protect and restore marine ecosystems ( 14 . 2 , 14 . 5 ) , and broaden access to economic opportunities through sustainable fsheries , aquaculture and tourism ( 14 . 7 ) while also reducing illegal fshing practices ( 14 . 6 ) , among others benchmarks . The full text of SDG 14 is available at https : / / www . un . org / sustainabledevelopment / oceans / . 3 METHODS We conducted a scoping review [ 18 , 59 ] to surface SDG 14 - related papers in HCI and qualitatively analyzed the results as described below . According to Colquhoun et al . [ 18 ] , a scoping review is " a form of knowledge synthesis that addresses an exploratory research question aimed at mapping key concepts , types of evidence , and gaps in research related to a defned area or feld by systematically searching , selecting , and synthesizing existing knowledge . " In our case , we seek to explore the HCI methods and tools used for sus - tainability eforts in the context of marine systems with the aim of " informing practice " and " providing direction to future research priorities " ( see also [ 18 ] ) . We limited our review to the HCI litera - ture , and more specifcally to self - identifed SHCI research because within the HCI literature this community focuses on sustainability eforts . We acknowledge that this limitation potentially excludes relevant literature ; however , it allows for an in - depth examination of this specifc community in this area . 3 . 1 Literature review We used the Association for Computing Machinery Digital Library ( ACM DL , see https : / / dl . acm . org ) as the database for our review . This approach was selected as it aligns with previous literature searches in SHCI , such as Hansson et al . [ 38 ] , is a database that is commonly used as part of HCI literature reviews [ 21 , 24 , 32 , 52 ] , and includes the premier venues that SCHI researchers are active at , including but not limited to CHI , DIS , and CSCW ; at the same time , it is important to recognize the emerging conversations within HCI around citational justice and the ways commonly used databases can exclude work from diferent knowledge traditions and publications in languages other than English [ 17 ] , as discussed further in Sections 3 . 3 and 11 . The search was conducted to include papers published before mid - June 2022 . Our search terms included all the combinations of a term refer - ring to SHCI and a term referring to themes in SDG 14 . Including the SHCI terms helped to fnd the self - identifed SCHI research , a community within HCI who prioritize issues of sustainability , speak to environmental challenges , and have been iteratively re - considering how HCI might defne and interact with these spaces over the past 15 years , as described in Section 2 . The list of SHCI terms included SHCI , Sustainable Interaction Design , Sustainable Human Computer Interaction , and Sustainable HCI and were se - lected in alignment with the search terms in the prior review paper by Hansson et al . [ 38 ] . The SDG 14 search terms were selected directly from the text of SDG 14 ( see [ 109 ] , the full text is also included in the supplemen - tal materials ) in June 2022 . Based on feedback from the research community on the included search terms , the SDG 14 text was revisited in November 2022 resulting in the addition of one search term ( island ) . We worked from this text in alignment with eforts in HCI to ground research on global challenges in broader eforts established by experts and on the ground practitioners [ 38 , 53 ] . The text of the goal is also visible and legible to many publics—as it is shared in the six ofcial languages of the UN—and uses common words and phrases that are likely to appear in any research in these areas . In selecting search terms from this text , researchers aimed to identify a list of words particular to marine environments but suf - ciently broad to capture a variety of considerations and concerns . To achieve this , one author read the SDG 14 text multiple times to identify all the phrases related to sustainability and marine systems . They then removed terms that were overly broad or suggested other environmental challenges that may not be closely tied to ma - rine systems ( e . g . , conserve , sustainably , earth , rainwater , weather , climate , food , oxygen , air ) and categorized the remaining phrases to pull out the common search terms from sets of similar phrases ( e . g . , using the search term " ocean " to cover ocean acidifcation , healthy and productive oceans , ocean health ) ( see Figure 1 ) . Each step of this process and the outcomes were reviewed by a second researcher and discussed until consensus was reached . The fnal list of search terms include marine , ocean , island , sea , coast , fsh , and aquaculture . Note that in order to stay in close alignment with the goals , we did not include search terms that may be relevant to this aim , but were not included in the text of SDG 14 , such as various specifc types of marine life ( e . g . , dolphins , oysters ) . Searching all combinations of the four SHCI search terms and the seven SDG 14 search terms led to 351 initial results , and 171 unique papers after removing duplicate papers that appeared in more than one combination of search terms ( Figure 2 ) . The 171 papers were then fltered by one researcher to remove papers that included ( 1 ) only alternative meanings of one of the search terms ( e . g . , " Fish " referring to a person’s last name or SHCI as a fnancial abbreviation ) , ( 2 ) the search term in a context unrelated to the environment or sustainability ( e . g . , describing a texture as similar to fsh scales ) , and / or ( 3 ) the SDG 14 search term in the reference list only . This removed 81 papers that were not relevant to the study from the review . The remaining 90 papers were then assessed for CHI’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Laura J . Perovich , Catherine Titcomb , Tad Hirsch , Brian Helmuth , and Casper Harteveld Figure 1 : Researchers identifed key phrases and words related to marine environments from the SGD 14 text and established overarching search terms from these phrases . inclusion independently by two researchers who evaluated whether the papers discussed at least one of the SDG 14 search terms at some length ( a paragraph or more of related content ) and were clearly situated in SHCI . Researchers then compared and discussed outcomes , resulting in agreement on all papers . A list of the 74 papers excluded from the review in this step is included in the supplemental material . It is important to note that most of the papers excluded in this screening had very limited discussion of the SDG 14 search term—for example , papers mentioned sea level rise as one of many environmental challenges in the paper introduction , acknowledged the existence of the Atlantic Ocean , or included fsh as one example of a food in a longer sentence . The fnal list of 16 included papers can be seen in Table 1 . 3 . 2 Literature analysis The included papers were analyzed through inductive and deduc - tive coding [ 84 ] . First , the 16 included papers were read in full and discussed by at least two members of the research team to begin developing a shared understanding of the space and identify key attributes of all papers ( e . g . , publication venue , publication type , study type , SDG 14 themes , research site ) . Papers were then re - read in four subsets by two researchers . Researchers independently identifed in vivo codes for the frst subset of papers and collabo - ratively clustered them to create a preliminary set of categories . Researchers then independently applied these categories to the second , third , and fourth subsets of papers , while also identifying any new in vivo codes . At least two researchers discussed the codes and the outcomes after each subset of papers to collaboratively refne the categories , clarify their scope and nature , and identify new potential categories . Diferences in the codings were discussed until agreement was reached . After reviewing all the papers , two researchers divided up the categories and independently wrote summaries of them based on the coding ; they then reviewed and discussed the sections together for additions , clarifcations , and accuracy . This led to fve emergent themes across the papers : ( 1 ) sustainability as a “solvable” problem , ( 2 ) sustainability as situated practice , ( 3 ) market efciencies , ( 4 ) role of technology , and ( 5 ) social justice ( see the supplemental material for coding details ) . The fnal summaries were then reviewed by all authors and edited for clarity , length , writing style , and larger considerations of these themes in the context of HCI and marine science . These results are described in the following sections . 3 . 3 Positionality Researcher identity infuences the collection and analysis of litera - ture ; as the Citational Justice Collective describes " no knowledge is produced in a vacuum " [ 17 ] . The intellectual , social , and geograph - ical networks that researchers are situated in can impact decisions about the search process ( e . g . , the selection of databases and search terms ) , the languages included in the search , and the themes that are made visible during the analysis . All authors work at a research university in the United States and received their degrees at univer - sities in the United States or Europe . Four of the fve authors’ highest degrees are in design and / or technology , one author’s degree is in marine biology and zoology . The authors’ sustainability - related re - search experience spans a variety of felds including environmental health , environmental justice , digital intervention in sustainability , biodiversity , ecosystem function , ecosystem services , and socioeco - logical systems , and includes work occurring in the United States , South America , Eastern Asia , the Middle East , and the Caribbean . The authors participate primarily in research communities that publish in English . Many of the HCI communities the authors work in are dominated by researchers employed in North America or Europe [ 17 ] , though some authors are also part of marine science communities that include many researchers from the Middle East , China , and Southeast Asia . Overall , our perspective is primarily— though not exclusively—situated in the intellectual , social , and geographical networks of the global North ; we revisit the potential implications of our positionality in Section 11 . 4 RESULTS OVERVIEW Overall , we see that there is a small—but important—body of work around SDG 14 in SHCI . This presents a space from which to con - sider what HCI methods and techniques are suited to the needs of oceans , seas , coastal communities , and marine research . Our literature review identifed 16 papers in SHCI that discussed SDG 14 themes in alignment with our inclusion criteria ( Table 1 ) . Papers were published at nine diferent venues between 2010 to 2022 and were fairly evenly distributed over this timeframe . The papers ft into one or more of four main study types : six papers included ethnographic or community based elements [ 13 , 16 , 42 , 90 , 101 , 107 ] , six design studies discussed the creation , design , and / or testing of prototypes [ 41 , 61 , 67 , 73 , 94 , 107 ] , fve case studies took a broader look at one topic [ 42 , 64 , 66 , 98 , 111 ] , and one review paper identifed themes over a set of projects [ 27 ] . Sustainable HCI Under Water CHI’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Figure 2 : Researchers iteratively applied the inclusion criteria to the publications identify by the search terms . The removed papers had no relevance or minimal relevance to the search ( e . g . including the word Fish as a last name , mentioning the existence of the Atlantic Ocean ) . The fnal list of 16 included papers are analyzed here . The papers in the literature review connected to SDG 14 through four main themes : ( 1 ) food that comes from the ocean [ 41 , 42 , 66 , 101 , 111 ] ( e . g . , seafood purchasing decisions ) , ( 2 ) climate change impacts on the ocean and coastal populations [ 27 , 64 , 67 , 73 , 94 , 98 ] ( e . g . , the future habitability of coastal areas ) , ( 3 ) conservation of the ocean [ 61 , 64 , 107 ] ( e . g . , sea turtle protection ) , and ( 4 ) the cultural and social context of the ocean [ 13 , 16 , 42 , 90 , 101 ] ( e . g . , fshing practices or coastal communities ) . Research was most likely to take place in rural locations [ 13 , 16 , 42 , 61 , 67 , 90 , 94 , 101 ] or virtual and online settings [ 27 , 61 , 64 , 66 , 67 , 73 , 111 ] . Other research sites included urban settings [ 98 , 107 ] , research settings [ 41 , 42 ] , and work that had no site [ 27 , 64 ] ( e . g . , theoretical analysis ) or was at an unspecifed site [ 41 ] . Geographically , the rural and urban sites described in the papers were located in North America and Europe despite the fact that there are many marine science related sustainability challenges throughout the globe . This may refect biases in the search process , the research community , or other factors ; we further explore these issues in Section 11 . 5 THEME # 1 : SUSTAINABILITY AS A " SOLVABLE " PROBLEM The papers take three main perspectives on addressing sustainabil - ity and the type of SCHI work that is needed to create impact on these large challenges . Papers address sustainability by ( 1 ) fnding solutions to particular environmental challenges through shifting specifc behaviors or attitudes , ( 2 ) identifying sustainability chal - lenges and better understanding their complexities , and ( 3 ) both identifying solutions and better understanding sustainability chal - lenges to move towards holistic change . Seven papers describe solutions - oriented approaches to sustain - ability and are typically centered on technologies [ 27 , 41 , 61 , 66 , 67 , 73 , 94 ] . Ferreira et al . suggest that more HCI researchers should identify solutions , not only problems , to encourage and empower people to take action [ 27 ] . Pan et al . describe the need for tools that can help humans adapt , and present technology they designed for communication around geographic climate risks [ 73 ] . Similarly , Muralikumar et al . , Herbig et al . , and Maheshwari et al . create and assess technologies that address particular environmental chal - lenges related to unsustainable behaviors around the food chain , agriculture , and conservation [ 41 , 61 , 66 ] . Nisi et al . and Simm et al . both start from the idea that energy usage is a key environmental challenge and explore how eco - feedback and eco - forecasting tech - nologies may lead people to reduce their energy usage or time it to align with the availability of renewable energy [ 67 , 94 ] . Though these papers include some limited discussion of the complexities of these systems , they remain optimistic about the ability of technolo - gies to make an impact on sustainability and assume that people already agree on what the sustainability challenges are and under - stand them in the same way . Two additional papers described solutions - oriented approaches to sustainability , but focus on solutions targeted at changing peo - ple’s attitudes around sustainability through experiences [ 98 , 107 ] . Tennent et al . develop a game that aims to increase empathy and buy - in on sea turtle protections to support an environmental NGO in their work [ 107 ] . Soden et al . describe projects from an Artathon , many of which aim to shift people’s attitudes around a particu - lar climate issue , by , for example , using ironic advertisements to show life under capitalism in the sea - level rise impacted future [ 98 ] . Overall , these nine papers move towards addressing sustainability challenges through interventions around particular environmental challenges that have already been identifed . Four papers focus on addressing sustainability by working to better characterize these challenges and identify their complexities [ 13 , 42 , 64 , 111 ] . Meyers et al . argue that sustainability is a contested space in SHCI and that it is crucial to recognize the dynamic , plural nature of our understanding ( s ) of sustainability [ 64 ] . They describe how SHCI’s research agendas should include making room for the general public to recognize diverse values and how SHCI should move away from " designing for existing norms with tightly bounded problems and anticipated solutions " [ 64 ] . Hirsch et al . and Wakkary et al . also point towards the complexity of sustainability , the need to recognize the dynamic and situated nature of sustainability , and the value of complicating HCI’s understanding of the space beyond work that prioritizes solutions [ 42 , 111 ] . Finally , Brynjarsdóttir discusses particular sustainability systems through on - the - ground applied research and describes the need for more situated in - depth CHI’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Laura J . Perovich , Catherine Titcomb , Tad Hirsch , Brian Helmuth , and Casper Harteveld Table 1 : The 16 papers included in the literature review . The papers are published from 2010 - 2022 in nine diferent venues . Author , Year Brynjarsdóttir , 2012 Venue CSCW ( conference ) Paper title Gone fshin’ : Information Technology in the Icelandic Fishery Cibin et al . , 2021 DIS ( conference ) Land , Water and Sun : Tuning into Socio - Ecological Relations in Radio Design Ferreira et al . , 2021 Herbig et al . , 2018 Creativity & Cognition ( conference ) DIS ( conference ) Climate Change Communication in HCI : a Visual Analysis of the Past Decade Design Guidelines for Assistance Systems Supporting Sustainable Purchase Deci - sions Hirsch et al . , 2010 CHI ( conference ) Making Food , Producing Sustainability Maheshwari et al . , 2022 CHI ( conference ) Designing Tools and Interfaces for Ecological Restoration : An Investigation into the Opportunities and Constraints for Technological Interventions Meyers et al . , 2016 CSCW ( conference ) Impoverished Visions of Sustainability : Encouraging Disruption in Digital Learning Environments Muralikumar et al . 2018 LIMITS ( conference ) Addressing Limits through Tracking Food Nisi et al . , 2013 CHItaly ( conference ) SINAIS from Fanal : Design and Evaluation of an Art - inspired Eco - feedback System Pan et al . , 2010 Interactions ( journal ) The Climate Change Habitability Index Sengers , 2011 Interactions ( journal ) What I Learned on Change Islands : Refections on IT and Pace of Life Simm et al . , 2015 CHI ( conference ) Tiree Energy Pulse : Exploring Renewable Energy Forecasts on the Edge of the Grid Soden et al . , 2020 DIS ( conference ) The Disaster and Climate Change Artathon : Staging Art / Science Collaborations in Crisis Informatics Steup et al . , 2018 CSCW ( conference ) Growing Tiny Publics : Small Farmers’ Social Movement Strategies Tennent et al . , 2016 BCS HCI ( conference ) Playful Campaigning Wakkary et al . , 2013 ACM TOCHI ( journal ) A Sustainable Design Fiction : Green Practices work that surfaces the complexity of these challenges in practice [ 13 ] . Finally , three papers address both sustainability challenges and solutions and point to opportunities for a process that addresses both areas [ 16 , 90 , 101 ] . All three papers take an ethnographic ap - proach to their research and focus on small rural fshing or agricul - tural communities . Steup et al . describe sustainability as a compli - cated space that requires further examination of challenges through values , as well as ongoing solutions - based work ; for example , farm - ers must fnd solutions that address their daily practical needs—such as fnding ways to sell their product in the short term—while also supporting refective work around larger collective sustainability values to facilitate the long term viability of these spaces [ 101 ] . Cibin et al . also describe the complexity of sustainability and re - lated systems and detail how community members identify both short term solutions and a need for larger shifts that require engag - ing with complexity [ 16 ] . Finally , Sengers takes a situated approach that surfaces the layered norms , values , and daily practices in a subsistence - based community and discusses how they might serve as a foundation for creating alternative technologies based in these diferent perspectives [ 90 ] . 6 THEME # 2 : SUSTAINABILITY AS SITUATED PRACTICE The papers in this review are situated to various degrees in a range of social , political , cultural , and environmental contexts . Papers fall into three main categories : ( 1 ) ethnographically - centered papers that include detailed consideration of the many systems intertwined with sustainability , ( 2 ) technology - centered papers that include limited or no consideration of social or cultural contexts , and ( 3 ) papers that fall between these two approaches . Six papers emphasize the importance of social , political , and cultural context in consideration of environmental issues and sus - tainability [ 13 , 16 , 42 , 90 , 101 , 111 ] . Wakkary et al . argue for the importance of incorporating socio - technical considerations in re - search and ofer a critique of previous work in HCI that focuses on technical aspects or tools without considering communities , cul - tures , and people [ 111 ] . Similarly , Hirsch et al . point at the impor - tance of social considerations by describing ways in which culture Sustainable HCI Under Water CHI’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Table 2 : Description of the themes , study types , and research sites of the 16 papers included in the literature review . Author , Year SDG14 theme Study type Research site Brynjarsdóttir , 2012 Cultural & social context of the Ethnographic or community Rural ( fshing towns in Iceland ) ocean based work Cibin et al . , 2021 Cultural & social context of the Ethnographic or community Rural ( fshing towns in Romania and ocean based work Ireland ) Ferreira et al . , 2021 Climate change impacts on the Review paper Virtual / online ( digital research re - ocean and coastal populations sources ) ; No site ( theoretical work ) Herbig et al . , 2018 Food that comes from the ocean Technology or design study Research space ( a living lab ) ; Unknown ( grocery store in unnamed location ) Hirsch et al . , 2010 Food that comes from the ocean ; Case study Research space ( conference event ) ; Ru - Cultural & social context of the ral ( small food producers in a variety of ocean locations ) Maheshwari et al . , 2022 Conservation & the ocean Technology or design study Rural ( agriculture and conservation experts in the United States ) ; Vir - tual / online ( online interviews ) Meyers et al . , 2016 Conservation & the ocean ; Climate Case study Virtual / online ( digital games ) ; No site change impacts on the ocean & ( theoretical work ) coastal populations Muralikumar et al . , 2018 Food that comes from the ocean Case study Virtual / online ( digital tool ) Nisi et al . , 2013 Climate change impacts on the Technology or design study Rural ( Madeira Island , Portugal ) ; Vir - ocean & coastal populations tual / online ( primarily screen - based ) Pan et al . , 2010 Climate change impacts on the Technology or design study Virtual / online ( digital tool ) ocean & coastal populations Sengers , 2011 Cultural & social context of the Ethnographic or community Rural ( fshing towns in Canada ) ocean based work Simm et al . , 2015 Climate change impacts on the Technology or design study Rural ( Tiree , Scotland ) ocean & coastal populations Soden et al . , 2020 Climate change impacts on the Case study Urban ( Artathon in San Francisco , ocean & coastal populations United States ) Steup et al . , 2018 Cultural & social context of the Ethnographic or community Rural ( small food farms in the United ocean ; Food that comes from the based work States ) ocean Tennent et al . , 2016 Conservation & the ocean Technology or design study Urban ( music festival in Athens , Greece ) Wakkary et al . , 2013 Food that comes from the ocean Case study Virtual / online ( online communities ) can infuence environmental attitudes in the context of small - scale fshing and farming and describe the “three pillars” model of sus - tainability research that includes environmental , economic , and social considerations [ 42 ] . Cibin et al . identify socio - ecological considerations—as well as socio - technical considerations—as an important lens throughout their research and draw on detailed discussions of ecological features ( e . g . , the weather , the land , the sea ) in understanding aspects of sustainability [ 16 ] . Steup et al . , Brynjarsdóttir , and Sengers also center the sociotechnical , socio - cultural , and socioecological nature of their work , and the ways in which these considerations are closely intertwined with one another [ 13 , 90 , 101 ] . Six additional papers include some discussion of the ways in which sustainability work is situated and use these lenses to varying degrees in their applied research [ 41 , 61 , 64 , 67 , 94 , 98 ] . Soden et al . assert that the arts - based approach to SHCI used in their Artathon makes more space for social , political , and cultural considerations ; CHI’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Laura J . Perovich , Catherine Titcomb , Tad Hirsch , Brian Helmuth , and Casper Harteveld specifcally , that it allows crisis informatics to go beyond quantita - tive or technologically focused spaces to a more holistic approach [ 98 ] . Meyers et al . discuss the importance of context , social perspec - tives , and politics around sustainability issues and assert that game environments can be a space for bringing disparate communities to - gether to exchange perspectives [ 64 ] ; at the same time , interaction in an artifcial online world can remove or reframe social , politi - cal , and environmental contexts . Herbig et al . observe that social and cultural factors can infuence purchasing decisions , yet these considerations play a minimal role in their technology design or development [ 41 ] . Nisi et al . integrate aspects of the local environ - mental context—the landscapes , trees , and weather patterns—into their artistic visualization of energy consumption , yet they note that some local participants did not recognize the environment ; there is also limited engagement in the prototype with the broader social , political , and cultural context around energy use issues [ 67 ] . Simm et al . use a codesign process on the island of Tiree , Scotland , and describe how the motivation for their collaboration stems from Tiree’s position on the edge of the energy grid and the islanders’ prior lived experience with numerous power outages ; at the same time , the technological prototype at the center of the paper focuses on providing opportunities for individuals to align their energy con - sumption with the energy production , and places less emphasis on the collective aspects of the local energy challenge , such as political or social considerations [ 94 ] . Maheshwari et al . consider the " eco - logical , economic , and regulatory processes that might infuence the impact of conservation technologies and practices " through the interviews included in their study , though cultural or social considerations are not fully surfaced in the context of policy or science - driven decisions making [ 61 ] . Finally , four papers contain very limited consideration of the ways in which SHCI practices and products are situated in a larger social , political , cultural , or ecological context [ 27 , 66 , 73 , 107 ] . These papers largely focus on the design and development of a specifc technical intervention created for a particular challenge . For example , Pan et al . describe an information aggregation and synthesis tool to support decision making around climate migration , but do not include the social , political , or cultural components of this process [ 73 ] . Tennent et al . use social interaction to support their game experience around protection of sea turtles , yet the larger political , economic , or social considerations around conservation , habitat protection , and political systems remain unexplored [ 107 ] . 7 THEME # 3 : MARKET EFFICIENCIES The papers in the literature review take two main approaches to market systems by ( 1 ) leveraging and working within existing mar - ket systems to guide them towards more sustainable behaviors , and ( 2 ) critiquing capitalistic market systems and identifying opportu - nities to support sustainability through moving towards diferent economic models . Eight papers in the literature review include discussion of ways to work within current market systems to achieve better sustainabil - ity outcomes . Three papers discuss infuencing consumer behavior to shift the market system into providing more sustainable options according to consumer desires [ 41 , 66 , 101 ] . Two of these papers situate their aims within the current market system , and seek to support consumers in making more sustainable purchasing choices to create more demand for sustainable practices . Specifcally , Her - big et al . design and test a smartphone - based shopping system that provides information to infuence purchasing behaviors while gro - cery shopping [ 41 ] . Muralikumar et al . analyze two systems that synthesize supply chain information and share it with consumers through web - based platforms or blockchain technologies [ 66 ] . In both of these papers , the authors discuss how increasing trans - parency , accessibility , and legibility of sustainability information can change consumer behaviors and encourage people to purchase food that is more sustainable , which strengthens the market power of sustainable food producers , and incentivizes other producers to adopt similar behaviors to maintain their market competitiveness . Steup et al . also include techniques for shifting consumer behav - ior towards sustainability through supporting small local farmers , though they frame this efort as one piece of a large complex system and discuss a need for alternative market systems [ 101 ] . Maheshwari et al . also describe their work in the context of existing market systems , specifcally identifying the demand for cost - efective technologies for reforestation and environmental monitoring [ 61 ] . The authors note that the approaches that are currently available are expensive , time consuming , and inefcient , and that therefore bringing new technologies to the market could ease the burden of existing eforts ( e . g . , reducing the manual la - bor needed ) and facilitate the scaling of these eforts [ 61 ] . Three additional papers do not directly discuss markets , but mention approaches that are generally aligned with market - centered per - spectives . Though Nisi et al . and Simm et al . do not focus on market systems in their discussion of energy , their approach aligns with market - based solutions that attempt to change people’s behaviors by making consumption or production more visible to the con - sumer [ 67 , 94 ] . Instead of using fnancial motivators ( changes in price ) , these projects aim to leverage emotional , aesthetic , or civic motivators to create space for behavior change while delivering information about energy . Pan et al . create a platform for commu - nicating geographical climate risk information and describe how they imagine people would use it to decide what regions are safe or desirable to live in to avoid climate disasters [ 73 ] . This approach seems to assume that by adding more information to the geograph - ical " market " of habitable areas they can encourage individuals to incorporate that information into their decision making process as rational actors . Two papers describe particular situations where new technolo - gies impact market systems directly or indirectly [ 13 , 16 ] . Though both papers focus on communities , not markets , market forces play an important role as the communities’ economies are cen - tered around fshing . Brynjarsdóttir describes how technologies for monitoring fsheries and governmental policies around the use of those technologies have signifcant economic impacts on the livelihoods of fshing communities , as well as impacting relation - ships between fsheries and marine conservation groups [ 13 ] . Cibin et al . describe how new technologies that are locally developed and / or implemented—in this case , grassroots radio—can be used by communities to advocate for their needs in relation to market systems [ 16 ] . For example , in one town , fshers created a radio show where they shared information about their experiences to build power in the community and advocate against policies that made it Sustainable HCI Under Water CHI’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany difcult for them to make a liveable income , such as sustainability - focused regulations [ 16 ] . Similar to Steup et al . , this community seeks to shift their position in the market by using technology to build understanding and create allies , though in this case the impact on the markets is through infuencing regulation , not purchasing behaviors . Another signifcant set of papers takes a critical stance on the use of market systems in SHCI research , describes a need for alternative systems , or shares an example of an alternative approach [ 42 , 90 , 101 , 111 ] . Hirsch et al . discuss how SHCI research so far has focused on particular kinds of market interventions—monitoring personal consumption or changing consumer behavior—and suggests that this approach is limited and that HCI could explore other ways to engage with economic aspects of sustainability [ 42 ] . Though Steup et al . points towards ways in which small farmers might try to infuence markets to sustain their businesses , they also are skeptical about the reach of these tactics and describe how market systems have failed small farmers and hypothesize about ways to change or avoid these systems through approaches such as bartering [ 101 ] . Wakkary et al . explore two sustainable practices—green DIY and everyday repair—and describe the practices as outside of the norms of markets in capitalist systems as they subvert the structure of consumers continually purchasing new items and discarding them when they break or are no longer valued [ 111 ] . Sengers also describes a way of living that is outside the " modern " capitalistic systems through a community in which efciency is not a core value and where market choices are limited in a way that can be freeing ; for example , there is less need for decision making when only in - season or easy to store produce is available [ 90 ] . They contrast this with other market systems where information synthesis is needed to make consumer decisions [ 90 ] . Two additional papers make brief minor critiques of market sys - tems [ 64 , 98 ] and one paper has very little discussion of this area [ 107 ] . Meyers et al . note that sustainability games that include " pre - mium " features at a cost might send a message that sustainability is only for people with fnancial means [ 64 ] . They also suggest that games might ofer alternatives to capitalism or consumerism by incorporating barter systems or cooperative models [ 64 ] . A number of the project outcomes from the Artathon described in Soden et al . subtly challenge capitalist market systems ; for example , the Ironic Advertising Posters show cars that can be driven underwater in a future impacted by climate change [ 98 ] . 8 THEME # 4 : ROLE OF TECHNOLOGY The papers take four main perspectives in describing the specifc role that technology plays in shaping the ways that people un - derstand their environment : ( 1 ) technology as infuencing human behavior to beneft nature , ( 2 ) technology as helping people refect on nature , ( 3 ) technology as supporting social movements around sustainability , and ( 4 ) technology as playing a complex role in the relations between humans and nature . Six papers describe ways in which technology might change human behavior or help humans make decisions to beneft nature ; a perspective that dovetails with persuasive technology approaches in SHCI [ 27 , 41 , 66 , 67 , 73 , 94 ] . In these papers , digital tools synthe - size complex information and present it in a clear way that helps people make more environmentally sound decisions . Muralikumar et al . create a tool that repackages and digests supply chain infor - mation to help people make sustainable food purchasing decisions , such as moving towards more locally - sourced produce [ 66 ] . Herbig et al . similarly seek to infuence decisions around food shopping while at the grocery store by creating a digital tool that simpli - fes sustainability information about products to make it easier to buy things that align with one’s values [ 41 ] . Pan et al . also bring together diverse and complicated information into a communica - tion tool , in this case centered on climate change adaptation and decision making [ 73 ] . Nisi et al . and Simm et al . describe how tech - nology around energy awareness may be used to facilitate behavior change in the home ; Nisi et al . focus on how artistic visualizations of energy consumption that draw on the local environment might add an emotional layer that further facilitate behavior change and Simm et al . discuss technologies and codesign processes that raise awareness of energy production as a way to help people synchro - nize their energy usage with energy availability [ 67 , 94 ] . Finally , though it is not discussed directly in the paper , Ferreira et al . limit their literature search to projects that use interaction to commu - nicate about climate change to a general audience ; this strategy primarily produces projects that use HCI to share information and move people towards more sustainable behaviors [ 27 ] . Another set of three papers describe technology as a mecha - nism for helping people see the value in nature or for creating space for people to refect on humanity’s relationship with nature and imagine new alternatives [ 98 , 107 , 111 ] . Tennent et al . use narrative - oriented games to raise awareness and to create a space for an environmental non - proft to have empathy - building conver - sations about conservation with young people [ 107 ] . Wakkary et al . describe how design fctions about technology can help people imagine new relationships between people and nature as part of the long journey to creating diferent realities [ 111 ] . Soden et al . argue that by combining HCI and the arts , researchers can create a space for thinking beyond current risk - based approaches to crisis informatics [ 98 ] . Three papers suggest that technology can be used to support social movements around sustainability by connecting people with each other and the natural world [ 42 , 64 , 101 ] . Meyers et al . describe how diferent perspectives can be surfaced , shared , and mediated through games to fnd new approaches to sustainability [ 64 ] . Steup et al . consider technology’s role in a broader efort to create trust - ing long term - relationships that support environmentally positive behaviors in communities [ 101 ] ; for example , local farms can use video sharing platforms to promote their practice , educate people on its importance , and keep the public engaged , and online commu - nities provide a space to share information and build community with other farmers [ 101 ] . Hirsch et al . also suggest that technol - ogy can support or create social movements that might beneft nature and also describe how interactive technology can be used " as a means of bridging divides between ourselves and the natural world " [ 42 ] . Three papers take stances on the role of technology in shaping people’s environmental understandings that are less well - represented in the literature review . These papers vary in their perspectives and depictions of technology’s power in regards to and in relationship with nature . Maheshwari et al . describe how technology can impact CHI’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Laura J . Perovich , Catherine Titcomb , Tad Hirsch , Brian Helmuth , and Casper Harteveld human - nature relationships by protecting nature through efective conservation , or conversely by helping humans to increase its pro - ductivity [ 61 ] . The authors discuss how there are multiple visions for how humans should interact with nature and the ways in which these approaches can have multi - layered results [ 61 ] , yet overall this approach may be interpreted as technology facilitating some human control or infuence over nature . Sengers explores ways in which nature acts on or shapes people and may render technologies signifcantly less useful [ 90 ] . They describe how online shopping systems are of limited use in remote locations due to extremely high shipping costs , how seasonality or weather conditions guide people’s day to day actions , and how the collapse of the cod fshery signifcantly impacted an island’s economic situation . Though they do not discuss this directly , overall , technology is portrayed as mak - ing a limited impact on day to day life compared to the large way that nature shapes human experiences . Cibin et al . bring the con - nections between humans , technology , and nature even closer by arguing that humans and nature—and all human activity , including technology and design—are so closely intertwined that they must be considered as an integrated whole [ 16 ] . By moving away from human - nature dualism , the authors preclude consideration of the ways in which technology may act as a space separate from nature or humans . Finally , fve papers describe a complicated and situated under - standing of the ways in which technology acts to shape people’s environmental understanding [ 13 , 42 , 61 , 90 , 101 ] . Brynjarsdóttir describes how technology has allowed governments and scientists to collect more data about nature and use that information to at - tempt to protect nature through data - driven conservation policies . Yet these policies may or may not be efective in reaching their in - tended goals because they are part of a complex human - ecological system [ 13 ] . Maheshwari et al . similarly describes ways in which using technology to understand or act on nature can be compli - cated and lead to unexpected or multilayered outcomes [ 61 ] . Steup et al . describe how technologies can be a useful piece of commu - nity building and outreach eforts at small farms , though they also emphasize that these approaches must be applied in situationally appropriate ways and are only one piece of a large system [ 101 ] . Hirsch et al . recognize the varied or complex ways that technol - ogy shapes people’s environmental understanding through their encouragement to move sustainable HCI work beyond persuasive approaches [ 42 ] . Finally , Sengers’ discussion of life on Change Is - lands emphasizes the situated and layered nature of relationships between technology , nature , and humans [ 90 ] . 9 THEME # 5 : SOCIAL JUSTICE Papers in this review took three main approaches to social , eco - nomic and environmental justice issues around sustainability : ( 1 ) incorporating social justice issues , especially economic justice , ( 2 ) not including social justice issues in their work , and ( 3 ) suggesting alternative approaches to social justice that learn from community practices , instead of working to change them . Four papers engage with economic justice issues as one of their primary concerns , often through the particular communities that are centered in the research and a focus on the socio - cultural con - texts in which HCI operates [ 13 , 16 , 90 , 101 ] . Brynjarsdóttir works with fshing communities in rural Iceland and describe the eco - nomic burdens the fshers and communities often face in relation to data - informed wildlife management or other policies [ 13 ] . Steup et al . describe the limited fnancial and material resources of many rural small farms and the ways in which that can be personally and economically challenging , especially in the context of large agri - cultural competitors [ 101 ] . Sengers learns from the Change Islands community that has " traditional livelihoods , " many of which are almost subsistence in nature and mentions economic challenges that can arise from jolts to this system , such as the collapse of a fshery [ 90 ] . Cibin et al . also focus on rural fshing communities and the challenges they face as a result of their economic situation , including decreasing populations , precarious economic power in the larger regional systems , and poor labor conditions in capital - ism [ 16 ] . Finally in one additional paper , Muralikumar et al . briefy touch on economic justice issues by including labor conditions as part of their food tracking system and assert that this will help address unjust or illegal practices [ 66 ] Three papers examine issues around power , voice , and justice [ 13 , 16 , 98 ] . Brynjarsdóttir describes how fshers experience a lack of voice in relation to governments and other agencies on matters that concern them and that they are knowledgeable about [ 13 ] . They connect this to power dynamics informed by emerging technologies , data collection practices , and the ways in which diferent groups have access to or are required to support these resources [ 13 ] . Cibin et al . apply an Action Research approach throughout their work to reframe power and voice within the research process and to create space to consider questions of justice in the systems they investigate [ 16 ] . Finally , the Artathon described in Soden et al . led to one project that aimed to help people to refect on what voices are or are not heard in environmental conversations [ 98 ] . A majority of papers in our review have limited or no discussion of social justice issues . In some cases , the authors acknowledge a focus on well - resourced target populations , such as experts , pro - fessionals , or people who already prioritize sustainable purchasing behaviors [ 41 ] ; in other cases , similar assumptions about fnancial means , access to technology , and availability of free time seem built into the profle of the assumed target audience ( s ) , though the audiences and their resources are not directly described in detail [ 27 , 61 , 64 , 66 , 67 , 73 , 94 , 98 , 107 , 111 ] . Though Simm et al . use codesign practices and consider a community on the " edge " of the electricity grid , they do not discuss how justice and power might be manifest both in the community and in relation to the larger nation that is the community’s primary energy source and also do not compensate participants for their participation , which may limit the population that can be part of the process [ 94 ] . Papers also describe topic areas that would seem to overlap with social jus - tice issues—for example , climate related migration—but have very limited discussion of the issues or factors that might be relevant to the work [ 73 ] . Some of these papers do briefy raise economic considerations as a secondary point—for example , negative mes - sages that may emerge from charging people for extra features in an environmental game [ 64 ] —yet social justice issues are not a core concern of the papers . A fnal set of papers inverts the common approach to develop - ment in HCI that aims to aid " developing " communities by helping them become more like " developed " communities . Instead , these Sustainable HCI Under Water CHI’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany papers suggest that researchers take a critical look at environmental issues and reconsider what " solutions " to those challenges might include and where they might come from [ 16 , 42 , 90 , 101 ] . In par - ticular , these papers suggest that small scale , subsistence communi - ties , or other groups that might be perceived as " disadvantaged , " may provide compelling examples of sustainability practices that other—often more afuent—communities might learn from . Steup et al . describe how small farmers are " exemplars of sustainabil - ity " in relation to SHCI as they already take a holistic view of sustainability by , for example , cultivating tiny publics to create social sustainability tied in to their environmental sustainability eforts , among other innovative approaches [ 101 ] . Similarly , Hirsch et al . discuss an opportunity for SHCI to center the work of small scale food producers—including farming , fshing , and subsistence communities—and support social movements around these prac - tices [ 42 ] . Cibin et al . aim to center the knowledge of the rural fshing communities they work with as one way to develop an " approach capable of considering the role of capitalism in the eco - logical crisis " [ 16 ] and Sengers similarly points to how the Change Island community provides social expertise and an alternative to the norms of modernity that HCI researchers can learn from [ 90 ] . 10 DISCUSSION : A DEEPER VISION FOR HCI + OCEAN SUSTAINABILITY The previous sections describe a range of methods , approaches , and perspectives that HCI has already successfully used to explore sus - tainability issues that have direct relevance to marine systems . We see a range of approaches to addressing sustainability challenges— including solutions focused approaches [ 27 , 41 , 61 , 66 , 67 , 73 , 94 , 98 , 107 ] , problem or values defning approaches [ 13 , 42 , 64 , 111 ] , and approaches that seek to both illuminate challenges and move towards solutions [ 16 , 90 , 101 ] . Some researchers approach sus - tainability within or in general alignment with market systems [ 16 , 41 , 61 , 66 , 67 , 73 , 94 , 101 ] while others suggest a need to move towards new economic models [ 42 , 90 , 101 , 111 ] . Many researchers align themselves with persuasive approaches , where technologies can act to convince or support people in making more sustain - able choices [ 27 , 41 , 66 , 73 ] , while others advocate creating space for refection on nature [ 98 , 107 , 111 ] and supporting social move - ments around environmental issues [ 42 , 64 , 101 ] . Some authors engage with broader social , cultural , or ecological contexts around sustainability [ 13 , 16 , 42 , 90 , 101 , 111 ] , others maintain narrower contexts [ 27 , 66 , 73 , 107 ] ; still others are somewhere between these two positions [ 41 , 61 , 64 , 67 , 94 , 98 ] . Finally , most of the papers are fairly limited in their discussion of social justice issues , despite their centrality to sustainability issues and despite their being a key component of the United Nations Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development . In this section , we identify several particularly promising areas for future SCHI research to address ocean sustainability : ( 1 ) consid - ering social justice through ethnographic marine systems research in urban areas , ( 2 ) bridging between technical interventions and ethnographies , ( 3 ) examining economic systems , ( 4 ) considering participation in SHCI , and ( 5 ) participating in marine science and related felds . 10 . 1 Urban marine systems Ethnographic work around marine systems situated in urban areas could provide an opportunity to build from similar work in rural areas and further consider social justice issues that have limited presence in the current literature . Four papers in this review [ 13 , 16 , 90 , 101 ] closely consider day - to - day practices in specifc rural areas , yet no papers look closely at particular systems in urban areas , despite the large number of coastal cities facing the consequences of climate change . Expanding into urban areas—and focusing on more diverse rural areas , such as the United States south—could provide opportunities to meaningfully engage with aspects of social justice that are currently underrepresented in the SCHI literature , such as environmental justice , gentrifcation , or racial bias . Additionally , work with island or subsistence fshing communities around the globe—as suggested in prior research [ 16 , 42 , 90 ] —could provide further depth to the economic justice discussions in the feld . This work opens opportunities for collaboration with other areas in HCI , such as work on decolonizing HCI [ 1 ] , environmental justice [ 7 ] , and racial justice [ 39 , 70 ] , as well as in other disciplines . We note that there is a rich and expanding body of literature from marine social science exploring the perspectives of coastal residents facing challenges ranging from increased risk of fooding and storm damage to declining fsheries ( for a review , see [ 63 ] ) . In addition , extensive literature exists on coastal and marine socio - ecological systems [ 81 ] , including the importance of considering place - based , local , and Indigenous knowledge and values as part of the decision - making process for marine conservation [ 48 , 103 ] . 10 . 2 Bridging technical interventions and ethnographies The design and development of technical interventions could be combined with ethnographic work that situates and contextualizes these interventions in communities . Most of the technology - based design or development papers in this review—such as [ 41 , 61 , 73 , 107 ] —make a number of assumptions about the impacts of the tech - nology and have limited exploration of the on - the - ground realities . Conversely , most of the ethnographic work in the review—such as [ 13 , 16 , 90 , 101 ] —remain a number of steps away from developing or designing technical artefacts connected to community challenges , aims , and interests . Bringing these two spaces more closely together could provide an opportunity to both engage with the complexities and on - the - ground realities of sustainability issues—as encouraged in prior work [ 23 , 36 ] —while also responding to the urgency of these issues , working towards short and long term solutions , and applying the technical and design knowledge central to much HCI research . Within this work , an opportunity also exists to connect with an extensive body of literature exploring human - nature inter - actions in the context of coasts and oceans [ 99 ] . Researchers could also investigate the materiality [ 83 ] of technological interventions such as underwater renewable energy infrastructure [ 50 ] in these coastal systems , the mechanisms by which this materiality may be concealed [ 10 ] , and ways in which cultivating awareness of materiality may further sustainable practices [ 77 , 78 ] . CHI’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Laura J . Perovich , Catherine Titcomb , Tad Hirsch , Brian Helmuth , and Casper Harteveld 10 . 3 Reconsidering economic systems Existing work in SHCI on economic justice around marine sys - tems could be expanded to engage with broader conversations around economic systems . A number of papers in this review crit - icize current capitalistic markets and suggest a need to move to - wards new economic models [ 42 , 90 , 101 , 111 ] , in alignment with broader SHCI conversations on alternative economies [ 51 , 52 , 87 ] . Researchers have long identifed a need for grassroots approaches to SHCI [ 42 ] and recent work has called for anti - capitalist or alter - native economies that better support sustainability [ 51 , 56 , 87 , 106 ] . Landwehr et al . summarize the perspective of many of these au - thors when they note that " a root cause for unsustainable practices , then , lies in our economic system and it calls for new modes of organizing economic activity in local , resilient and quality of life oriented production " [ 56 ] . Within marine systems , opportunities to reconsider markets might be particularly relevant in the areas of fshing and aquaculture , where current models may not serve small scale producers . What could alternative economic models in these areas include ? How can SHCI support and understand the design and realization of these systems ? Work in these areas could pro - vide opportunities to collaborate with HCI researchers exploring community - based , action - oriented , and participatory approaches to research and design [ 16 , 36 , 40 ] . There is also an opportunity to connect to work in other dis - ciplines , which include innovative approaches to changing con - sumer behavior to promote sustainable fsheries [ 62 ] , literature exploring structural changes that would make sustainable seafood markets more viable [ 82 ] , and work on economic and social con - siderations around aquafarming [ 4 ] and artisanal fsheries [ 68 ] in Ghana . Researchers in a variety of felds are also exploring the use of blockchain technologies in fshing , including work on increasing data integrity through blockchain - based fsh farm platforms [ 37 ] and suggesting that these technologies could be added to existing software platforms to help ensure the traceability of fsh supplies and convey that information to consumers [ 71 ] . HCI researchers are well positioned to contribute to the development , assessment , and critique of such systems due to their experience working across people , technologies , and complex social issues ; in fact , HCI re - searchers have already highlighted the importance of considering second and third order impacts of blockchain or cryptocurrency systems on environmental outcomes and questions of justice [ 87 ] . 10 . 4 The invisible boundaries of SHCI Our review centered on work in the SHCI literature in order to focus our search on areas of HCI that prioritize sustainability and have a history of work in this space . As noted in Section 4 , this resulted in a set of papers centered on North America and Europe . HCI research in other regions also considers marine systems , but in - terestingly , does not self - identify as sustainable HCI or sustainable interaction design . Some of this work focuses on the development of technologies , such as tools that automatically tie fshing lines in order to make it easier for young people to fsh in Japan [ 85 ] and apps to communicate weather information and alerts for rural fshers in Maharashtra , India [ 95 ] . Researchers have also consid - ered the possibilities of human - aquatic interactions through digital underwater play in Australia [ 75 ] . Other work explores how tech - nologies are used and developed in communities , such as work on the use of phone - based systems as part of identifying exploitation of migrant fshers in Thailand [ 108 ] and the creation of processes to ensure that human centered design is included in the develop - ment of navigation systems in Australia [ 34 ] . Researchers have used ethnographic approaches to examine the use of mobile phones for fsh trade in Kerala , India [ 100 ] , and technology repair processes in fshing communities in the Philippines [ 47 ] , and the ways in which these are situated in a particular geographic , environmental socio - political , and economic contexts . Overall , these papers use similar research methods and address similar topics as papers in SHCI , while also going beyond the work identifed in this review in important ways by engaging additional communities and surfacing new perspectives on marine systems . Future work could explore why these researchers do not self - identify their work as part of SHCI and the implications of potential geographic boundaries for SHCI research more broadly . SHCI researchers could also support the assemblage of communities interested in sustainability topics in and across local CHI venues ; this work could build from the 2014 workshop at NordiCHI that explicitly sought to establish SHCI as a theme of regional importance and establish a local community that could engage with broader eforts in this space [ 74 ] . Additionally , these eforts could including revisiting the ways in which the community defnes sustainability . SCHI has often refected on—though rarely ofered a defnitive defnition of—what it means by sustainability , or how sustainability work is manifest in an HCI context [ 11 , 25 , 51 , 87 , 92 , 93 ] . Engagement with relational approaches to sustainable could make an important contribution to enriching this space and further inform existing eforts within HCI that individually consider areas such as economics or culture with sustainability . This work could build on prior HCI research that draws on relational ways of understanding through collaborating with an Aboriginal community to explore relational approaches to language and language learning artefacts [ 105 ] . 10 . 5 Participating in ongoing marine systems research The oceans play an important role in sustainability on cultural , en - vironmental , social , and economic levels . They are also inextricable from land - based sustainability concerns . By engaging with marine systems , SHCI will both strengthen its own eforts to address sus - tainability and position itself to make meaningful contributions parallel to—and also intersecting with—eforts in marine science and other felds . As SHCI researchers have noted , " most sustainability - oriented work takes place outside HCI " [ 93 ] and working in this space requires engaging with other felds [ 11 ] . Marine science re - search also has a signifcant global presence , including work from , in , and with communities underrepresented in the HCI literature . There is a rich body of research in marine science that explores issues of environmental sustainability , human interactions with the ocean , and environmental justice that overlaps with areas of interest in HCI . For example , while there is growing interest in the concept of " living shorelines " —green infrastructure that promotes coastal resilience [ 31 , 88 , 97 ] —there is also recognition that these Sustainable HCI Under Water CHI’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany strategies can inadvertently lead to " green gentrifcation " by dis - placing vulnerable populations [ 2 , 91 ] . Marine science researchers also consider the complex connections between coastal systems , and tourism , including work from the Galápagos [ 14 ] , Eastern and Western Africa [ 22 ] , and Tonga , the Solomon Islands , and other small island developing states [ 113 ] . Other work explores the inter - play between technological , ecological , and social factors in climate change adaptation in the Caribbean and the policies that may help communities deal with these threats [ 58 ] . SCHI approaches that provide tools that facilitate the exploration of values , attitudes , and tensions between diferent stakeholder groups—while also attend - ing to issues of justice—provide an opportunity for groups to better understand how their own decisions and actions afect others [ 96 ] . Work using participatory methods , design probes , or speculative design could be particularly relevant to these eforts and would complement ongoing social science research in this area ( e . g . , [ 89 ] ) . Marine science and marine social science researchers also work to foster efective engagement and build connections between peo - ple and oceans to ensure that the value of these systems is recog - nized . For example , marine scientists work with visual artists and storytellers to create immersive exhibits such as Ocean Odyssey [ 5 , 102 ] , a 60 , 000 square foot augmented reality exhibit in Times Square that ofered visitors the ability to cognitively embed them - selves in a coral reef environment . HCI researchers could contribute to similar storytelling eforts and bring important expertise in novel technologies and experience design to the challenge . Many current projects in ocean exploration explicitly include eforts to involve members of the public—such as Fabien Cousteau’s 2014 Mission 31 , where he and his team of aquanauts lived underwater for 31 days and publicly broadcast their experience , garnering over 34 billion unique media impressions [ 15 ] . Today Cousteau is building the PROTEUS ( TM ) underwater habitat , which will allow aquanauts to live underwater for months at a time , with multiple modalities of communication with the world above water [ 35 ] . Understanding and developing new approaches at the interface of humans and technology will be essential to these endeavors . HCI researchers could contribute to the design of systems and technologies for marine science data collection and analysis . Ocean science relies on enormous streams of data , and visualization re - search in HCI can play a critical role in helping scientists struc - ture , represent , and make sense of these data streams individu - ally and collectively ( e . g . , [ 86 ] ) . There is also increasing interest in autonomous marine data collection , including a need to design interaction frameworks for exchanges between humans and au - tonomous robots operating on the surface of the ocean or in its depths ( e . g . , [ 12 , 49 ] ) . Overall , interdisciplinary collaborations and exchange between HCI , marine science , and social science researchers—along with stakeholders , community organizations , and policy makers—can facilitate research that can make an impact on the large and urgent sustainability challenges that we face today . 11 LIMITATIONS This paper presents a systematic review of ocean - related work in the SHCI literature by starting from the ACM DL and using keywords directly from the SDG 14 text and prior SHCI review papers . The use of the ACM database is common for reviews in the HCI literature , yet , as Ahmed et al . describe , reproducing such approaches also has the potential to perpetuate historic injustices and exclude experiences ; for example , it does not capture fndings from papers written in languages other than English and important work that occurs outside of academic or textual traditions [ 17 ] . We also selected our marine environment keywords directly from the SDG 14 text . Because of this , our search may have missed concepts or related topics that are not directly mentioned in SDG 14 , such as work on specifc organisms from the ocean ( e . g . , dol - phin , cod , plankton ) . At the same time , papers that have signifcant discussion of such terms seem likely to contain terms included in the search—such as marine or ocean—and the scale of our search terms generally align with previous literature . As our primary audience for this work is the HCI community— one of the intellectual communities for many of the authors—our search starts from the computer science literature . Therefore , it excludes important related work in other venues . For example , some marine science researchers use citizen science approaches that dovetail with work in HCI [ 33 , 43 , 46 ] and others consider human - machine collaboration in underwater environments that relates to work in human - robot interaction [ 49 ] —but these lines of worked are published in very diferent venues . The industry and non - proft space includes technology - based work on marine systems that align with HCI , such as work by the Ocean Discovery League [ 57 ] . Many social scientists , geographers and ethnographers use technologies such as visualizations in their work , but may not take full advantage of techniques from HCI , and / or consider themselves explicitly as falling within the HCI world ( e . g . , [ 80 ] ) . Similarly , there is considerable research on the social aspects of marine conservation eforts in felds such as human geography and the social sciences , that dovetails with much of the socially engaged , community - based , and ethnographic work described in a number of papers in this review ( some examples are included in Section 10 . 5 ) . Future work could include a full survey of these venues to translate between these spaces and support the development of interdisciplinary collaborations . Within HCI , our search builds from the SHCI literature and uses well - established terms from this space in order to focus the search on areas of HCI that take sustainability as a primary concern . This subfeld has a considerable body of work over the past 15 years , but is likely to exclude related work occurring before these terms became more established in HCI communities . There are also indications that these terms may be continue to be geographically limited ; at least some authors working on similar topics in HCI located in India , Japan , Austalia , and other countries ( as described in Section 10 . 4 ) do not appear to be using these terms and therefore did not appear in the outcomes of our ACM DL searches . This suggests the need to consider how particular language spreads—or does not spread—in our communities , and what that implies for the ways in which we understand concepts like sustainability , the nature of our work as HCI researchers , and the politics of citation . Indeed , in 2014 researchers in Europe identifed lack of engagement with the SHCI community despite the fact that many researchers worked on sustainability , and organized a workshop at NordiCHI to address this gap [ 74 ] . It appears that this efort to engage the global community in SHCI is far from complete and warrants further CHI’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Laura J . Perovich , Catherine Titcomb , Tad Hirsch , Brian Helmuth , and Casper Harteveld attention . Future work could provide a detailed accounting of the use of sustainability and environmental terms within HCI and within subcommunities of HCI , and the implications for the types of research included in this work and citational justice [ 17 ] . Finally , this paper begins from the UN SDGs based on the ob - servations around the utility of these goals for identifying oppor - tunities for SHCI and their use in other areas of HCI [ 38 ] . People have critiqued the goals through a number of lenses , including the ways in which they depend on narrow understandings of sustain - ability and exclude many Indigenous and relational perspectives [ 112 ] . Others note that the SDGs can be traced to colonial attitudes , histories , and behaviors and that they both assume and promote a neolibral perspective [ 60 ] . Some of these perspectives can be drawn from the opening text of SDG 14 " Conserve and sustainably use the oceans , seas and marine resources for sustainable development " [ 109 ] . Why does this center the “use” of the oceans and what kind of relationships between humans and nature does that imply ? Who or what is experiencing " development " and who decides what de - velopment includes ? Future work could translate critiques of the SDGs to an HCI context to better examine the potential value or harms of drawing on these frameworks . 12 CONCLUSION The oceans are at the center of sustainability , given both their over - whelming importance to humanity and the remaining social , cul - tural , and knowledge gaps around these systems . Their importance has been recognized at an international level through UN SDG 14 and by the United Nations Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development . In this paper , we describe the small , but important , body of work around marine systems in SHCI and demonstrate that there are opportunities to expand this work and further con - tribute to sustainability eforts within and beyond SHCI . Analyzing these papers reveals opportunities to grow this research to fur - ther explore urban marine systems , bridge between ethnographic work and technology design , and contribute to the development of alternative economic systems . We also suggest ways in which SCHI can refect on its own community and participate in eforts in marine science around social systems , storytelling , and research technologies . Overall , we hope this work will contribute to expand - ing oceans - related research in SHCI and will motivate researchers to pursue interdisciplinary collaborations with coastal communities , marine scientists , and policy makers to address the sustainability challenges we face today . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was funded by a Northeastern University Tier 1 Grant . We thank the full Tier 1 and TinySea teams for their discussion of this work and comments on early outlines of this paper . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Adriana Alvarado Garcia , Juan F . Maestre , Manuhuia Barcham , Marilyn Iriarte , Marisol Wong - Villacres , Oscar A . Lemus , Palak Dudani , Pedro Reynolds - Cuéllar , Ruotong Wang , and Teresa Cerratto Pargman . 2021 . Decolonial Pathways : Our Manifesto for a Decolonizing Agenda in HCI Research and Design . In Extended Abstracts of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 9 . [ 2 ] Isabelle Anguelovski , James JT Connolly , Melissa Garcia - Lamarca , Helen Cole , and Hamil Pearsall . 2019 . New Scholarly Pathways on Green Gentrifcation : What Does the Urban ‘Green Turn’Mean and Where Is It Going ? Progress in human geography 43 , 6 ( 2019 ) , 1064 – 1086 . [ 3 ] Paul M . Aoki , R . J . Honicky , Alan Mainwaring , Chris Myers , Eric Paulos , Sush - mita Subramanian , and Allison Woodruf . 2009 . A Vehicle for Research : Using Street Sweepers to Explore the Landscape of Environmental Community Action . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 375 – 384 . [ 4 ] Berchie Asiedu , F . K . E . Nunoo , and Seidu Iddrisu . 2017 . Prospects and Sus - tainability of Aquaculture Development in Ghana , West Africa . Cogent Food & Agriculture 3 , 1 ( 2017 ) , 1349531 . [ 5 ] Randy Astle . 2017 . Interactive Video in a Gallery Experience : Lisa Truitt on National Geographic Encounter : Ocean Odyssey . [ 6 ] Shaowen Bardzell . 2010 . Feminist HCI : Taking Stock and Outlining an Agenda for Design . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Com - puting Systems . 1301 – 1310 . [ 7 ] Oliver Bates , Vanessa Thomas , Christian Remy , Lisa P . Nathan , Samuel Mann , and Adrian Friday . 2018 . The Future of HCI and Sustainability : Championing En - vironmental and Social Justice . . In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 4 . [ 8 ] Nicola J . Bidwell , Tigist Sherwaga Hussan , Satinder Gill , Kagonya Awori , and Silvia Lindtner . 2016 . Decolonising Technology Design . In Proceedings of the First African Conference on Human Computer Interaction . 256 – 259 . [ 9 ] Eli Blevis . 2007 . Sustainable Interaction Design : Invention & Disposal , Renewal & Reuse . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 503 – 512 . [ 10 ] Alan Borning , Batya Friedman , and Deric Gruen . 2018 . What Pushes Back from Considering Materiality in IT ? . In Proceedings of the 2018 Workshop on Computing within Limits . 1 – 6 . [ 11 ] Christina Bremer , Bran Knowles , and Adrian Friday . 2022 . Have We Taken On Too Much ? : A Critical Review of the Sustainable HCI Landscape . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 11 . [ 12 ] Michael L . Brennan , Frank Cantelas , Kelley Elliott , James P . Delgado , Kather - ine LC Bell , Dwight Coleman , Allison Fundis , Jack Irion , Hans K . Van Tilburg , and Robert D . Ballard . 2018 . Telepresence - Enabled Maritime Archaeological Exploration in the Deep . Journal of Maritime Archaeology 13 , 2 ( 2018 ) , 97 – 121 . [ 13 ] Hrönn Brynjarsdóttir . 2012 . Gone Fishin’ : Information Technology in the Ice - landic Fishery . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work Companion . 323 – 326 . [ 14 ] Adam Burke . 2021 . The Crossroads of Ecotourism Dependency , Food Security and a Global Pandemic in Galápagos , Ecuador . Sustainability 13 , 23 ( 2021 ) , 13094 . [ 15 ] Fabien Cousteau Ocean Learning Center . 2022 . ABOUT | The Fabien Cousteau Ocean Learning Center . https : / / www . fabiencousteauolc . org / about - us . [ 16 ] Roberto Cibin , Sarah Robinson , Nicola J . Bidwell , Conor Linehan , Laura Maye , Nadia Pantidi , and Maurizio Teli . 2021 . Land , Water and Sun : Tuning into Socio - Ecological Relations in Radio Design . In Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2021 . 1954 – 1969 . [ 17 ] The Citational Justice Collective , Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed , Sareeta Amrute , Jefrey Bardzell , Shaowen Bardzell , Nicola Bidwell , Tawanna Dillahunt , Sane Gaytán , Naveena Karusala , Neha Kumar , Rigoberto Lara Guzmán , Maryam Mustafa , Bonnie Nardi , Lisa Nathan , Nassim Parvin , Beth Patin , Pedro Reynolds - Cuéllar , Rebecca Rouse , Katta Spiel , Soraia Silva Prietch , Ding Wang , and Marisol Wong - Villacrés . 2022 . Citational Justice and the Politics of Knowledge Production . Interactions 29 , 5 ( 2022 ) , 78 – 82 . [ 18 ] Heather L Colquhoun , Danielle Levac , Kelly K O’Brien , Sharon Straus , Andrea C Tricco , Laure Perrier , Monika Kastner , and David Moher . 2014 . Scoping re - views : time for clarity in defnition , methods , and reporting . Journal of clinical epidemiology 67 , 12 ( 2014 ) , 1291 – 1294 . [ 19 ] Rob Comber and Anja Thieme . 2013 . Designing beyond Habit : Opening Space for Improved Recycling and Food Waste Behaviors through Processes of Persuasion , Social Infuence and Aversive Afect . Personal and ubiquitous computing 17 , 6 ( 2013 ) , 1197 – 1210 . [ 20 ] Eric Corbett and Yanni Loukissas . 2019 . Engaging Gentrifcation as a Social Justice Issue in HCI . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 16 . [ 21 ] Vânia Paula de Almeida Neris , Kamila Rios da Hora Rodrigues , and Re - nata Firmino Lima . 2014 . A Systematic Review of Sustainability and Aspects of Human - Computer Interaction . In International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction . Springer , 742 – 753 . [ 22 ] Salif Diop and Peter A . Scheren . 2016 . Sustainable Oceans and Coasts : Lessons Learnt from Eastern and Western Africa . Estuarine , Coastal and Shelf Science 183 ( 2016 ) , 327 – 339 . [ 23 ] Carl DiSalvo , Kirsten Boehner , Nicholas A . Knouf , and Phoebe Sengers . 2009 . Nourishing the Ground for Sustainable HCI : Considerations from Ecologically Engaged Art . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 385 – 394 . [ 24 ] Carl DiSalvo , Phoebe Sengers , and Hrönn Brynjarsdóttir . 2010 . Mapping the Landscape of Sustainable HCI . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Sustainable HCI Under Water CHI’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany Factors in Computing Systems . 1975 – 1984 . [ 25 ] Carl DiSalvo , Phoebe Sengers , and Hrönn Brynjarsdóttir . 2010 . Mapping the Landscape of Sustainable HCI . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1975 – 1984 . [ 26 ] Elina Eriksson , Daniel Pargman , Oliver Bates , Maria Normark , Jan Gulliksen , Mikael Anneroth , and Johan Berndtsson . 2016 . HCI and UN’s Sustainable Development Goals : Responsibilities , Barriers and Opportunities . In Proceedings of the 9th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction . 1 – 2 . [ 27 ] Marta Ferreira , Miguel Coelho , Valentina Nisi , and Nuno Jardim Nunes . 2021 . Climate Change Communication in HCI : A Visual Analysis of the Past Decade . In Creativity and Cognition . 1 – 16 . [ 28 ] Sarah Fox , Mariam Asad , Katherine Lo , Jill P . Dimond , Lynn S . Dombrowski , and Shaowen Bardzell . 2016 . Exploring Social Justice , Design , and HCI . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 3293 – 3300 . [ 29 ] Sarah Fox , Jill Dimond , Lilly Irani , Tad Hirsch , Michael Muller , and Shaowen Bardzell . 2017 . Social Justice and Design : Power and Oppression in Collaborative Systems . In Companion of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . 117 – 122 . [ 30 ] Joel Fredericks , Callum Parker , Glenda Amayo Caldwell , Marcus Foth , Hilary Davis , and Martin Tomitsch . 2019 . Designing Smart for Sustainable Communi - ties : Refecting on the Role of HCI for Addressing the Sustainable Development Goals . In Proceedings of the 31st Australian Conference on Human - Computer - Interaction . 12 – 15 . [ 31 ] Rachel K . Gittman , Charles H . Peterson , Carolyn A . Currin , F . Joel Fodrie , Michael F . Piehler , and John F . Bruno . 2016 . Living Shorelines Can Enhance the Nursery Role of Threatened Estuarine Habitats . Ecological Applications 26 , 1 ( 2016 ) , 249 – 263 . [ 32 ] Elizabeth Goodman . 2009 . Three Environmental Discourses in Human - Computer Interaction . In CHI’09 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Com - puting Systems . 2535 – 2544 . [ 33 ] Steven Gray and Steven Scyphers . 2017 . Innovations in Collaborative Science : Advancing Citizen Science , Crowdsourcing and Participatory Modeling to Un - derstand and Manage Marine Social – Ecological Systems . In Conservation for the Anthropocene Ocean . Elsevier , 463 – 480 . [ 34 ] Michelle Rita Grech and Margareta Lutzhoft . 2016 . Challenges and Opportuni - ties in User Centric Shipping : Developing a Human Centred Design Approach for Navigation Systems . In Proceedings of the 28th Australian Conference on Computer - Human Interaction ( OzCHI ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machin - ery , New York , NY , USA , 96 – 104 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3010915 . 3010920 [ 35 ] Proteus Ocean Group . 2022 . Home . https : / / www . proteusoceangroup . com . [ 36 ] Maria Håkansson and Phoebe Sengers . 2014 . No Easy Compromise : Sustain - ability and the Dilemmas and Dynamics of Change . In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems . 1025 – 1034 . [ 37 ] Lei Hang , Israr Ullah , and Do - Hyeun Kim . 2020 . A Secure Fish Farm Platform Based on Blockchain for Agriculture Data Integrity . Computers and Electronics in Agriculture 170 ( 2020 ) , 105251 . [ 38 ] Lon Åke Erni Johannes Hansson , Teresa Cerratto Pargman , and Daniel Sapiens Pargman . 2021 . A Decade of Sustainable HCI : Connecting SHCI to the Sustain - able Development Goals . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 19 . [ 39 ] Christina Harrington , Daniela Rosner , Alex Taylor , and Mikael Wiberg . 2021 . Engaging Race in HCI . Interactions 28 , 5 ( 2021 ) , 5 – 5 . [ 40 ] Gillian R . Hayes . 2011 . The Relationship of Action Research to Human - Computer Interaction . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 18 , 3 ( 2011 ) , 1 – 20 . [ 41 ] Nico Herbig , Gerrit Kahl , and Antonio Krüger . 2018 . Design Guidelines for Assistance Systems Supporting Sustainable Purchase Decisions . In Proceedings of the 2018 Designing Interactive Systems Conference . 1333 – 1344 . [ 42 ] Tad Hirsch , Phoebe Sengers , Eli Blevis , Richard Beckwith , and Tapan Parikh . 2010 . Making Food , Producing Sustainability . In CHI’10 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 3147 – 3150 . [ 43 ] Maia Hoeberechts , Dwight Owens , David J . Riddell , and Andrew D . Robertson . 2015 . The Power of Seeing : Experiences Using Video as a Deep - Sea Engagement and Education Tool . In OCEANS 2015 - MTS / IEEE Washington . IEEE , 1 – 9 . [ 44 ] David Holstius , John Kembel , Amy Hurst , Peng - Hui Wan , and Jodi Forlizzi . 2004 . Infotropism : Living and Robotic Plants as Interactive Displays . In Proceedings of the 5th Conference on Designing Interactive Systems : Processes , Practices , Methods , and Techniques . 215 – 221 . [ 45 ] Roger N . Hughes , David Hughes , and I . Philip Smith . 2013 . Oceans and Marine Resources in a Changing Climate . Oceanography and marine biology : an annual review 51 ( 2013 ) , 71 – 192 . [ 46 ] Roger N . Hughes , David J . Hughes , and I . Philip Smith . 2014 . Citizen Scien - tists and Marine Research : Volunteer Participants , Their Contributions , and Projection for the Future . Oceanography and marine biology : an annual review 52 ( 2014 ) , 257 – 314 . [ 47 ] Esther Han Beol Jang , Philip Garrison , Ronel Vincent Vistal , Maria Theresa D . Cunanan , Maria Theresa Perez , Philip Martinez , Matthew William Johnson , John Andrew Evangelista , Syed Ishtiaque Ahmed , Josephine Dionisio , Mary Claire Aguilar Barela , and Kurtis Heimerl . 2019 . Trust and Technology Repair Infrastructures in the Remote Rural Philippines : Navigating Urban - Rural Seams . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( Nov . 2019 ) , 99 : 1 – 99 : 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359201 [ 48 ] Tyler D . Jessen , Natalie C . Ban , Nicholas XEMTOLTW Claxton , and Chris T . Darimont . 2022 . Contributions of Indigenous Knowledge to Ecological and Evolutionary Understanding . Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 20 , 2 ( 2022 ) , 93 – 101 . [ 49 ] Yu Jiang , Xianglong Peng , Mingzhu Xue , Chong Wang , and Hong Qi . 2021 . An Underwater Human – Robot Interaction Using Hand Gestures for Fuzzy Control . International Journal of Fuzzy Systems 23 , 6 ( 2021 ) , 1879 – 1889 . [ 50 ] A . Peter Klimley , Nathan F . Putman , A . Keller , and David Noakes . 2021 . A Call to Assess the Impacts of Electromagnetic Fields from Subsea Cables on the Movement Ecology of Marine Migrants . Conservation Science and Practice 3 , 7 ( 2021 ) , e436 . [ 51 ] Bran Knowles , Oliver Bates , and Maria Håkansson . 2018 . This Changes Sus - tainable HCI . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 12 . [ 52 ] Bran Knowles , Lynne Blair , Mike Hazas , and Stuart Walker . 2013 . Exploring Sustainability Research in Computing : Where We Are and Where We Go Next . In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing . 305 – 314 . [ 53 ] Neha Kumar , Vikram Kamath Cannanure , Dilrukshi Gamage , Annu Sible Prab - hakar , Christian Sturm , Cuauhtémoc Rivera Loaiza , Dina Sabie , Md Moinuddin Bhuiyan , and Mario A . Moreno Rocha . 2020 . HCI across Borders and Sustainable Development Goals . In Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 8 . [ 54 ] Stacey Kuznetsov , George Noel Davis , Eric Paulos , Mark D . Gross , and Jian Chiu Cheung . 2011 . Red Balloon , Green Balloon , Sensors in the Sky . In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing . 237 – 246 . [ 55 ] Stacey Kuznetsov , Scott E . Hudson , and Eric Paulos . 2014 . A Low - Tech Sens - ing System for Particulate Pollution . In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Tangible , Embedded and Embodied Interaction . 259 – 266 . [ 56 ] Marvin Landwehr , Philip Engelbutzeder , and Volker Wulf . 2021 . Community Supported Agriculture : The Concept of Solidarity in Mitigating between Har - vests and Needs . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 13 . [ 57 ] Ocean Discovery League . 2022 . Ocean Discovery League . https : / / www . oceandiscoveryleague . org . [ 58 ] Walter Leal Filho , Murukesan Krishnapillai , Henry Sidsaph , Gustavo J . Nagy , Johannes M . Luetz , Jack Dyer , Michael Otoara Ha’apio , Peni Hausia Havea , Kushaal Raj , and Priyatma Singh . 2021 . Climate Change Adaptation on Small Island States : An Assessment of Limits and Constraints . Journal of Marine Science and Engineering 9 , 6 ( 2021 ) , 602 . [ 59 ] Danielle Levac , Heather Colquhoun , and Kelly K O’Brien . 2010 . Scoping studies : advancing the methodology . Implementation science 5 , 1 ( 2010 ) , 1 – 9 . [ 60 ] Diana M . Liverman . 2018 . Geographic Perspectives on Development Goals : Constructive Engagements and Critical Perspectives on the MDGs and the SDGs . Dialogues in Human Geography 8 , 2 ( 2018 ) , 168 – 185 . [ 61 ] Aditi Maheshwari , Abhay Kumar Aggarwal , and Andreea Danielescu . 2022 . Designing Tools and Interfaces for Ecological Restoration : An Investigation into the Opportunities and Constraints for Technological Interventions . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 17 . [ 62 ] Gavin McDonald , Molly Wilson , Diogo Veríssimo , Rebecca Twohey , Michaela Clemence , Dean Apistar , Stephen Box , Paul Butler , Fel Cesar Cadiz , and Stuart J . Campbell . 2020 . Catalyzing Sustainable Fisheries Management through Behavior Change Interventions . Conservation Biology 34 , 5 ( 2020 ) , 1176 – 1189 . [ 63 ] Emma McKinley , Tim Acott , and Katherine L . Yates . 2020 . Marine Social Sciences : Looking towards a Sustainable Future . Environmental Science & Policy 108 ( 2020 ) , 85 – 92 . [ 64 ] Eric M . Meyers and Lisa P . Nathan . 2016 . Impoverished Visions of Sustainability : Encouraging Disruption in Digital Learning Environments . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing . 222 – 232 . [ 65 ] Camilo Mora , Derek P . Tittensor , Sina Adl , Alastair GB Simpson , and Boris Worm . 2011 . How Many Species Are There on Earth and in the Ocean ? PLoS biology 9 , 8 ( 2011 ) , e1001127 . [ 66 ] Meena Devii Muralikumar and Bonnie Nardi . 2018 . Addressing Limits through Tracking Food . In Proceedings of the 2018 Workshop on Computing within Limits . 1 – 9 . [ 67 ] Valentina Nisi , Nuno Jardim Nunes , Filipe Quintal , and Mary Barreto . 2013 . SINAIS from Fanal : Design and Evaluation of an Art - Inspired Eco - Feedback System . In Proceedings of the Biannual Conference of the Italian Chapter of SIGCHI . 1 – 10 . CHI’23 , April 23 – 28 , 2023 , Hamburg , Germany [ 68 ] F . K . E . Nunoo , Berchie Asiedu , Jessica Olauson , and George Intsiful . 2015 . Achieving Sustainable Fisheries Management : A Critical Look at Traditional Fisheries Management in the Marine Artisanal Fisheries of Ghana , West Africa . Journal of Energy and Natural Resource Management 2 , 1 ( 2015 ) . [ 69 ] OECD . 2016 . The Ocean Economy in 2030 . Technical Report . [ 70 ] Ihudiya Finda Ogbonnaya - Ogburu , Angela DR Smith , Alexandra To , and Kentaro Toyama . 2020 . Critical Race Theory for HCI . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 16 . [ 71 ] José Oliveira , José Evaristo Lima , Dimitri da Silva , Volodymyr Kuprych , Pedro Miguel Faria , Cláudio Teixeira , Estrela Ferreira Cruz , and António Miguel Rosado da Cruz . 2021 . Traceability System for Quality Monitoring in the Fishery and Aquaculture Value Chain . Journal of Agriculture and Food Research 5 ( 2021 ) , 100169 . [ 72 ] Naomi Oreskes . 2014 . Scaling up Our Vision . Isis 105 , 2 ( 2014 ) , 379 – 391 . [ 73 ] Yue Pan , Chit Meng Cheong , and Eli Blevis . 2010 . The Climate Change Habit - ability Index . Interactions 17 , 6 ( 2010 ) , 29 – 33 . [ 74 ] Daniel Pargman , Elina Eriksson , Cecilia Katzef , Chris Preist , Maria Håkansson , and Bran Knowles . 2014 . Is There a European Strand of Sustainable HCI ? . In Proceedings of the 8th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Fun , Fast , Foundational . 809 – 812 . [ 75 ] Sarah Jane Pell and Florian ’Floyd’ Mueller . 2013 . Designing for Depth : Un - derwater Play . In Proceedings of The 9th Australasian Conference on Interactive Entertainment : Matters of Life and Death ( IE ’13 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 6 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2513002 . 2513036 [ 76 ] Lara SG Piccolo , Vânia Neris , Kamila Rios Rodrigues , and Masood Masoodian . 2021 . Human - Centred Technology for Sustainable Development Goals : Chal - lenges and Opportunities . In IFIP Conference on Human - Computer Interaction . Springer , 553 – 557 . [ 77 ] James Pierce . 2009 . Material Awareness : Promoting Refection on Everyday Materiality . In CHI’09 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 4459 – 4464 . [ 78 ] James Pierce and Eric Paulos . 2010 . Materializing Energy . In Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems . 113 – 122 . [ 79 ] James Pierce , Yolande Strengers , Phoebe Sengers , and Susanne Bødker . 2013 . Introduction to the Special Issue on Practice - Oriented Approaches to Sustainable HCI . , 8 pages . [ 80 ] Michelle E . Portman . 2014 . Visualization for Planning and Management of Oceans and Coasts . Ocean & coastal management 98 ( 2014 ) , 176 – 185 . [ 81 ] Sonia Refulio - Coronado , Katherine Lacasse , Tracey Dalton , Austin Humphries , Suchandra Basu , Hirotsugu Uchida , and Emi Uchida . 2021 . Coastal and Marine Socio - Ecological Systems : A Systematic Review of the Literature . Frontiers in Marine Science 8 ( 2021 ) , 648006 . [ 82 ] C . A . Roheim , S . R . Bush , F . Asche , J . N . Sanchirico , and H . Uchida . 2018 . Evolu - tion and Future of the Sustainable Seafood Market . Nature Sustainability 1 , 8 ( 2018 ) , 392 – 398 . [ 83 ] Daniela Rosner , Jean - François Blanchette , Leah Buechley , Paul Dourish , and Melissa Mazmanian . 2012 . From Materials to Materiality : Connecting Practice and Theory in Hc . In CHI’12 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2787 – 2790 . [ 84 ] Johnny Saldaña . 2021 . The Coding Manual for Qualitative Researchers . SAGE publications Ltd . 1 – 440 pages . [ 85 ] Takumi Sasaki , Seiichi Serikawa , and Yuhki Kitazono . 2019 . Fishing Support System : Tying Fishing Line Automatically . In Proceedings of the 7th ACIS Inter - national Conference on Applied Computing and Information Technology ( ACIT 2019 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 6 . [ 86 ] Carrie Schuman , Kathryn A . Stofer , Lisa Anthony , Hannah Nef , Peter Chang , Nikita Soni , Alice Darrow , Annie Luc , Amanda Morales , and Jeremy Alexandre . 2020 . Ocean Data Visualization on a Touchtable Demonstrates Group Content Learning , Science Practices Use , and Potential Embodied Cognition . Research in Science Education ( 2020 ) , 1 – 13 . [ 87 ] Sabrina Scuri , Marta Ferreira , Nuno Jardim Nunes , Valentina Nisi , and Cathy Mulligan . 2022 . Hitting the Triple Bottom Line : Widening the HCI Approach to Sustainability . In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 19 . [ 88 ] Steven B . Scyphers , Michael W . Beck , Kelsi L . Furman , Judy Haner , Andrew G . Keeler , Craig E . Landry , Kiera L . O’Donnell , Bret M . Webb , and Jonathan H . Grabowski . 2020 . Designing Efective Incentives for Living Shorelines as a Habitat Conservation Strategy along Residential Coasts . Conservation Letters 13 , 5 ( 2020 ) , e12744 . [ 89 ] Steven B . Scyphers , J . Steven Picou , and Sean P . Powers . 2015 . Participatory Con - servation of Coastal Habitats : The Importance of Understanding Homeowner Decision Making to Mitigate Cascading Shoreline Degradation . Conservation Letters 8 , 1 ( 2015 ) , 41 – 49 . [ 90 ] Phoebe Sengers . 2011 . What I Learned on Change Islands : Refections on IT and Pace of Life . Interactions 18 , 2 ( 2011 ) , 40 – 48 . [ 91 ] Linda Shi . 2020 . Beyond Flood Risk Reduction : How Can Green Infrastructure Advance Both Social Justice and Regional Impact ? Socio - Ecological Practice Research 2 , 4 ( 2020 ) , 311 – 320 . Laura J . Perovich , Catherine Titcomb , Tad Hirsch , Brian Helmuth , and Casper Harteveld [ 92 ] M . Six Silberman , Eli Blevis , Elaine Huang , Bonnie A . Nardi , Lisa P . Nathan , Daniela Busse , Chris Preist , and Samuel Mann . 2014 . What Have We Learned ? A SIGCHI HCI & Sustainability Community Workshop . In CHI’14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 143 – 146 . [ 93 ] M . Six Silberman , Lisa Nathan , Bran Knowles , Roy Bendor , Adrian Clear , Maria Håkansson , Tawanna Dillahunt , and Jennifer Mankof . 2014 . Next Steps for Sustainable HCI . Interactions 21 , 5 ( 2014 ) , 66 – 69 . [ 94 ] Will Simm , Maria Angela Ferrario , Adrian Friday , Peter Newman , Stephen Forshaw , Mike Hazas , and Alan Dix . 2015 . Tiree Energy Pulse : Exploring Renewable Energy Forecasts on the Edge of the Grid . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1965 – 1974 . [ 95 ] Dineshkumar Singh , Divya Piplani , Karthik Srinivasan , and Sujit Shinde . 2016 . Visual Design for Blue Ocean Services : mKRISHI® Fisheries . In Proceedings of the 8th Indian Conference on Human Computer Interaction . 96 – 101 . [ 96 ] David Sittenfeld , Mahmud Farooque , Brian Helmuth , Sara Benson , Emily Hostetler , Francis Choi , Nicholas Weller , Caroline Nickerson , Katie Todd , and Darlene Cavalier . 2022 . Citizen Science , Civics , and Resilient Communities : In - forming Community Resilience Policies Through Local Knowledge , Community Values , and Community - Generated Data . Citizen Science : Theory and Practice 7 , 1 ( 2022 ) . [ 97 ] Carter S . Smith , Morgan E . Rudd , Rachel K . Gittman , Emily C . Melvin , Virginia S . Patterson , Julianna J . Renzi , Emory H . Wellman , and Brian R . Silliman . 2020 . Coming to Terms with Living Shorelines : A Scoping Review of Novel Restoration Strategies for Shoreline Protection . Frontiers in Marine Science 7 ( 2020 ) , 434 . [ 98 ] Robert Soden , Perrine Hamel , David Lallemant , and James Pierce . 2020 . The Disaster and Climate Change Artathon : Staging Art / Science Collaborations in Crisis Informatics . In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference . 1273 – 1286 . [ 99 ] Masashi Soga and Kevin J . Gaston . 2022 . Towards a Unifed Understanding of Human – Nature Interactions . Nature Sustainability 5 , 5 ( 2022 ) , 374 – 383 . [ 100 ] Janaki Srinivasan and Jenna Burrell . 2013 . Revisiting the Fishers of Kerala , India . In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development : Full Papers - Volume 1 ( ICTD ’13 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 56 – 66 . [ 101 ] Rosemary Steup , Arvind Santhanam , Marisa Logan , Lynn Dombrowski , and Nor - man Makoto Su . 2018 . Growing Tiny Publics : Small Farmers’ Social Movement Strategies . Proceedings of the ACM on human - computer interaction 2 , CSCW ( 2018 ) , 1 – 24 . [ 102 ] Daniel Stone . 2017 . The Ocean Is Coming to Times Square . https : / / www . nationalgeographic . com / magazine / article / further - encounter - ocean - odyssey - new - york - city . [ 103 ] Aaron Strong and Nicole Ardoin . 2021 . Barriers to Incorporating Ecosystem Services in Coastal Conservation Practice : The Case of Blue Carbon . Ecology and Society 26 , 4 ( 2021 ) . [ 104 ] Martin Stuchtey , Adrien Vincent , Andreas Merkl , Maximilian Bucher , Peter M . Haugan , Jane Lubchenco , and Mari Elka Pangestu . 2020 . Ocean Solutions That Beneft People , Nature and the Economy . High Level Panel for a Sustainable Ocean Economy ( 2020 ) . [ 105 ] Jennyfer Lawrence Taylor , Wujal Wujal Aboriginal Shire Council , Alessandro Soro , Paul Roe , and Margot Brereton . 2019 . A Relational Approach to Designing Social Technologies That Foster Use of the Kuku Yalanji Language . In Proceedings of the 31st Australian Conference on Human - Computer - Interaction . 161 – 172 . [ 106 ] Maurizio Teli , Myriam Lewkowicz , Chiara Rossitto , and Susanne Bødker . 2021 . Understanding , Promoting , and Designing for Sustainable Appropriation of Technologies by Grassroots Communities . Towards a New Wave of Techno - logical Activism : Sustainable Appropriation of Technologies by Grassroots Communities . In C & T’21 : Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Communities & Technologies - Wicked Problems in the Age of Tech . 332 – 335 . [ 107 ] Paul Tennent , Nadia Pantidi , and Steve Benford . 2016 . Playful Campaigning . In Proceedings of the 30th International BCS Human Computer Interaction Conference 30 . 1 – 12 . [ 108 ] Hannah Thinyane and Michael Gallo . 2021 . Negotiating Trade - Ofs : Identifying Labour Exploitation in the Fishing Sector in Thailand . In ACM SIGCAS Con - ference on Computing and Sustainable Societies ( COMPASS ’21 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 55 – 65 . [ 109 ] United Nations . 2022 . Oceans . www . un . org / sustainabledevelopment / oceans / . [ 110 ] United Nations . 2022 . The Sustainable Development Agenda . www . un . org / sustainabledevelopment / development - agenda / . [ 111 ] Ron Wakkary , Audrey Desjardins , Sabrina Hauser , and Leah Maestri . 2013 . A Sustainable Design Fiction : Green Practices . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 20 , 4 ( 2013 ) , 1 – 34 . [ 112 ] Johannes M . Waldmüller , Mandy Yap , and Krushil Watene . 2022 . Remaking the Sustainable Development Goals : Relational Indigenous Epistemologies . Policy and Society 41 , 4 ( 2022 ) , 471 – 485 . [ 113 ] Franziska Wolf , Walter Leal Filho , Priyatma Singh , Nicolai Scherle , Dirk Reiser , John Telesford , Ivana Božić Miljković , Peni Hausia Havea , Chunlan Li , and Dinesh Surroop . 2021 . Infuences of Climate Change on Tourism Development in Small Pacifc Island States . Sustainability 13 , 8 ( 2021 ) , 4223 .