(cid:0)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:3)(cid:6) (cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:2)(cid:12)(cid:13)(cid:4)(cid:5) Applications of high - speed atomic force microscopy to real - time visualization of dynamic biomolecular processes Takayuki Uchihashi , Simon Scheuring PII : S0304 - 4165 ( 17 ) 30221 - 0 DOI : doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbagen . 2017 . 07 . 010 Reference : BBAGEN 28890 To appear in : BBA - General Subjects Received date : 4 May 2017 Accepted date : 13 July 2017 Please cite this article as : Takayuki Uchihashi , Simon Scheuring , Applications of high - speed atomic force microscopy to real - time visualization of dynamic biomolecular pro - cesses , BBA - General Subjects ( 2017 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbagen . 2017 . 07 . 010 This is a PDF ﬁle of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication . As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript . The manuscript will undergo copyediting , typesetting , and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its ﬁnal form . Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could aﬀect the content , and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain . A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 1 Applications of high - speed atomic force microscopy to real - time visualization of dynamic biomolecular processes Takayuki Uchihashi a , Simon Scheuring b , c a Department of Physics , Kanazawa University , Kanazawa 920 - 1192 , Japan . b Department of Physiology and Biophysics , Weill Cornell Medicine , New York , NY 10065 , USA . c Department of Anesthesiology , Weill Cornell Medicine , New York , NY 10065 , USA . Background : Many biological processes in a living cell are consequences of sequential and hierarchical dynamic events of biological macromolecules such as molecular interactions and conformational changes . Hence , knowledge of structures , assembly and dynamics of proteins is the foundation for understanding how biological molecules work . Among several techniques to analyze dynamics of proteins , high - speed atomic force microscopy ( HS - AFM ) is unique to provide direct information about both structure and dynamics of single proteins at work . Scope of review : The scope of this review is overviewing recent progresses of HS - AFM for studying dynamic processes of biomolecular systems . In the technical descriptions , key developments enabling fast and non - invasive imaging of biological samples are briefly mentioned . Then recent successful applications of HS - AFM are overviewed to showcase the power of HS - AFM in biological research . Major conclusions : We discuss examples where HS - AFM movies captured important dynamic biological processes , including conformational dynamics of membrane proteins , processive movements of enzymes , assembly and disassembly processes of protein supramolecular structures , and dynamics in a two - dimensional protein crystal . These examples demonstrate the usability of HS - AFM to reveal biomolecular processes at high spatiotemporal ( nanometer and subsecond ) resolution . General Significance : Real - time movies of unlabeled proteins at work captured by HS - AFM allowed us to directly gain insights into mechanisms of molecular actions . Together with further functional extensions , HS - AFM will enable researchers to investigate more complex biological systems involving multiple proteins and will become an indispensable technique for life science . This article is part of a Special Issue entitled “Biophysical Exploration of Dynamical Ordering of Biomolecular Systems” Guest Editor : Dr . , Professor Koichi Kato . A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 2 1 . Introduction Most biological phenomena in cells are elicited by cascades of a wide range of dynamic molecular processes such as conformational changes , binding and dissociation , and assembly and disassembly of proteins . A fundamental appreciation for complex biological processes can be inherently reduced through understanding the dynamics of a small number of molecules at each stage within such a cascade . Since the protein motions are usually unsynchronized and often have multimodal distributions which cannot be directly evaluated by ensemble - averaged methods , a single - molecule approach is required to monitor individual molecular behaviors . Optical microscopy has been widely used to analyze dynamics of single molecules through labeling proteins with small fluorophores or larger tags , such as green fluorescence protein or beads [ 1 - 4 ] . Fluorescence - based optical microscopy allows to analyze linear and rotational motions of single molecules with nanometer spatial accuracy not only in vitro but also in cell [ 5 , 6 ] . Furthermore , fluorescence resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) can detect domain motions by attaching two different fluorophores ( acceptor and donor ) to two distinct locations within the target proteins [ 7 , 8 ] . Despite the versatility of optical microscopy - based techniques for studying single molecule dynamics , fluorophore - based methods visualize only featureless fluorescence spots ( with large point - spread function ) associated to the target proteins but not proteins themselves . Therefore these techniques imply a multitude of experimental evidence and / or additional information to deduce firm conclusions about the actual behavior of labeled molecules from the trajectories of fluorescent spots or the energy transfer between two fluorophores . Therefore , a more direct method with high spatiotemporal resolution to monitor single - molecule dynamics has been required . Atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) [ 9 ] was invented in 1986 as an offshoot technique of scanning tunneling microscopy ( STM ) [ 10 ] . The prominent feature of AFM is its applicability to an insulating sample in various environments ( including buffer solution ) has opened the door for imaging biological molecules under close - to - native conditions with nanometer resolution [ 11 - 15 ] . AFM is now routinely used to analyze the structure of a wide variety of biological samples ranging from proteins and nucleic acids to living cells [ 16 - 18 ] . In addition to the imaging ability , force spectroscopy measurements , in which the interaction force between the tip and a molecule is measured as a function of the tip - surface distance , are extensively used to evaluate the strength of intra - and intermolecular bonds at the single - molecule level [ 19 ] . Although AFM has been recognized as a powerful tool in biological sciences , the limited imaging speed , at least 30s to complete one image , has hampered its more A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 3 widespread use besides popular techniques such as optical and electron microscopies . The slow imaging speed precluded observing not only molecular dynamics but also the imaging of weakly adsorbed and thus diffusive molecules . Driven by the motivation to overcome these limitations , several groups have worked for improving the imaging speed of AFM [ 20 - 25 ] . Sub - second HS - AFM imaging on biological samples was first achieved by Ando’s group in 2000 owing to the developments of several devices and control techniques [ 24 ] . Following developments were focused to mature the technique , notably to improve image acquisition speed and low - invasive , i . e . optimized feed - back and force control [ 26 ] . These important technical advances greatly reduced the tip - sample interaction force without sacrificing the imaging rate , therefore allowing weak interactions between biological macromolecules to be studied without significant perturbation . Following the establishment of the current HS - AFM , its excellent performance has been demonstrated by imaging studies various protein’s dynamics [ 27 ] . Despite the youth of the technique , early studies have not only demonstrated that HS - AFM can corroborate previously proposed models and provide intuitive views by visual evidence of indirectly described phenomena , but also that it can solve long - standing questions that had previously been difficult or impossible to be addressed by other approaches . Now the numbers of publications describing dynamics of biological molecules as well as HS - AFM users are increasing . In this review , we briefly present the fundamentals for HS - AFM imaging and highlight recent imaging studies of dynamic biomolecular processes . 2 . Key developments of HS - AFM instrumentation Among several operation modes of AFM , high - speed AFM employs the so - called amplitude modulation or ‘tapping - mode’ [ 28 ] , in which the AFM tip is vertically oscillated at the first resonant frequency of the cantilever and intermittently contacts the sample surface during raster scanning . Amplitude modulation mode is effective for fragile and weakly substrate - adsorbed biological samples , because the intermittent contact between the tip and sample greatly reduces the lateral friction force during scanning and thus minimizes damage and deformation of biological molecules [ 29 ] . The cantilever oscillation amplitude is detected by an optical - beam - defection method [ 30 ] and kept constant to a reference amplitude by a PID ( Proportional - Integral - Derivative ) feedback controller that drives the z - piezo to compensate for tip - sample separation A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 4 distance changes , resulting in maintaining the interaction force between the tip and sample constant ( Fig . 1 ) . Then the AFM topographic image is constructed by recording the PID signal ( z - dimension ) at each pixel ( x , y - dimensions ) . The most important issue for low - invasive imaging on biological samples is precise and fast feedback control because errors in the feedback control cause accidentally increased force applied on the tip or its loss of contact with the surface . When a sample is scanned over an area of W × W with a scanning velocity of V s along the x - direction with N scan lines in the y - direction , the imaging time for a square frame T is given by T = 2WN / V s . When the surface topography is supposed to be of perfect sinewave shape with a spatial frequency of 1 / λ , the feedback control should modulate the tip - surface distance with the frequency of f = V s / λ . Therefore the feedback bandwidth f B should be equal to or higher than f , and thus the relationship between the imaging time and the feedback bandwidth is given by T > 2WN / ( f B λ ) [ 26 ] . The feedback bandwidth limit is generally defined by a feedback frequency at a closed - loop phase delay of π / 4 because the sample topography is always traced with a phase delay due to the chasing - after nature of feedback control [ 22 ] . The phase delay θ is given by ~ 2×2 πf B Δτ , where Δτ is the open - loop time delay which is the sum of delay times of devices contained in the feedback loop [ 26 ] . Thus the relationship between the feedback bandwidth and the delay time is expressed by f B = α / ( 16 Δτ ) , where α is a recovery factor of the phase delay in the closed loop , compensated by the D operation of the PID feedback control [ 31 ] . Finally , in order to achieve an imaging rate of 0 . 1 s / frame for α = 2 , λ = 10nm , W = 200 nm , and N = 100 , one has to achieve f B > 40 kHz and thus Δτ < 3 . 2μs . The delay time in tapping - mode AFM arises from several factors included in the feedback loop . An underlying delay is the read - out time of the cantilever oscillation amplitude and the transient time of change in the cantilever amplitude to be the steady state , which is defined by the mechanical response of the cantilever . It takes at least the time of 1 / ( 2 f c ) to detect the amplitude of a cantilever oscillating at its resonant frequency f c . The response time of mechanical resonant systems such as cantilevers is given by Q / πf c , where Q and f c are its quality factor and the resonant frequency , respectively . Therefore the resonant frequency f c of the cantilever should be as high as possible , but the Q factor low ( a highly damped system ) . A stiff cantilever can easily attain a high A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 5 resonance frequency , but it easily damages biological molecules because of its high spring constant and quality factor . To have both a soft spring constant and a high resonant frequency , the cantilever must inevitably be miniaturized . Small cantilevers for HS - AFM have been developed by Nanoworld ( Neuchâtel , Switzerland , http : / / www . nanoworld . com / Ultra - Short - Cantilevers - USC - F1 . 2 - k7 . 3 . html ) and Olympus ( Tokyo , Japan , http : / / probe . olympus - global . com / en / product / bl _ ac10ds _ a2 / ) . Typical dimensions of small cantilevers are length ~ 10 μm , width ~ 2 μm and thickness ~ 90 nm , which results in resonant frequencies of ~ 600 kHz , a spring constant of ~ 0 . 1 N / m , and Q ~ 2 . 5 in water ( Olympus , BL - AC10FS - A2 ) . The read time of the cantilever amplitude was improved by a new developed Fourier - based amplitude detector with high bandwidth and high signal - to - noise ratio [ 32 ] . The feedback delay time is also caused by the mechanical response of the z - piezoactuator , which controls the tip - surface distance . A quick displacement of a piezoactuator easily excites unwanted mechanical vibrations . Similar to the cantilever property , the response time of the z - scanner ( τ z ) is determined by τ z = Q z / ( π f z ) , where Q z and f z are the quality factor and resonant frequency of the z - scanner , respectively . f z depends on the original resonant frequency of the piezoactuator and the attachment method on a supporting base . By optimizing the attachment of the z - piezoactuator in the supporting block , the reduction of the resonant frequency was minimized without spurious vibrations . In addition , the resonant peak of the z - piezoactuator is damped by an active Q - control technique , resulting into a reduction of the Q factor to 0 . 8 [ 31 ] . Including further essential developments of other devices , such as the optimization of the xy - scanner for fast scanning , the current high - speed AFM is capable of recording images at a rate of 30 – 60 ms / frame , under typical conditions for biomolecular investigations with a scan range of ~ 250 nm and ~ 100 scan lines [ 26 , 33 ] . 3 . Imaging of dynamic biomolecular processes High - speed AFM has now become a powerful tool to visualize proteins on a substrate without fatal disturbance of their physiological functions and has been applied to analyze a wide range of dynamic molecular processes [ 27 ] . The imaging studies can be roughly classified into ( i ) conformational dynamics of proteins [ 34 - 44 ] , ( ii ) growth processes of amyloid - like fibrils [ 45 - 47 ] , ( iii ) dynamic protein - protein interactions [ 48 - 52 ] , ( iv ) diffusion dynamics of membrane proteins [ 53 - 59 ] ( v ) processive enzymatic reactions A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 6 [ 60 - 64 ] , and ( vi ) dynamics related to DNA origamis [ 65 , 66 ] . Apart from imaging studies , it has been demonstrated that the high - speed AFM is useful for fast force spectroscopy , which allows direct comparison of experimental unfolding forces with molecular dynamics simulations [ 67 ] . In this section , we demonstrate the potential of HS - AFM by reviewing recent results showing four typical dynamic phenomena of biological samples captured by HS - AFM . 3 . 1 Conformational dynamics of membrane proteins : ion channels and transporters The most exciting and challenging application of HS - AFM would be the visualization of conformational dynamics of functioning proteins . So far motor proteins such as myosin V [ 36 ] and F 1 - ATPase [ 40 ] are the most successful samples for HS - AFM applications in terms of conformational dynamics , whereas successful observations of membrane protein dynamics , except for the light - driven structural changes of bacteriorhodopsin [ 38 ] , were scarce despite their importance in biology . Here we review two recent HS - AFM studies on the structural dynamics of membrane proteins , a cyclic nucleotide - modulated ( CNM ) ion channel [ 68 ] and a glutamate transporter [ 69 ] . CNM ion channels play important roles in the nervous system for regulating certain modes of signal transduction [ 70 ] and neuronal excitability in brain and pace making in heart cells [ 71 , 72 ] . Binding of cyclic AMP or GMP ( cAMP or cGMP ) to a cyclic nucleotide - binding domain ( CNBD ) results in conformational change in the channel to pore opening which allows ion flow across the membrane . The CNM ion channels form a tetramer in which subunits are aligned around a central pore . Each subunit consists of six transmembrane helices : the first four form the voltage sensor ( S1 – S4 ) and the last two form the pore ( S5 – S6 ) ( Fig . 2a ) . The CNBD is C - terminally connected to S6 via a C - linker . A prokaryotic homologue from the bacterium Mesorhizobium loti , MloK1 [ 73 ] , is an excellent platform to study the structure - function relationship of CNM channels because the structure of MloK1 has been extensively studied by X - ray crystallography [ 74 ] , NMR [ 75 ] , electron microscopy ( EM ) [ 76 ] and conventional AFM [ 77 ] . Based on the structural analyses , a gating model was proposed , where the binding of ligand causes a A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 7 movement of the CNBDs towards the membrane [ 77 ] . However , all above - mentioned techniques provided static views and no direct information about conformational dynamics . For the HS - AFM observation , 2D - crystals of wild - type MloK1 were prepared in the presence of cAMP [ 77 ] . Fig . 2b shows a high - resolution HS - AFM image obtained in the presence of 100μM cAMP , revealing individual channels as windmill - like structures formed by four clearly distinguishable CNBDs with the protrusion of 1 . 6 ± 0 . 1nm from the membrane . Remarkably , the HS - AFM movies acquired at an imaging rate of 80 ms / frame revealed that about 10 % of the molecules dynamically switch between two conformations with different heights . Fig . 2c shows several individual molecules blinking up and switching back , which is best reported by height changes in the cross - sectional profiles . This blinking motion can be displayed in kymographs over extended imaging periods , indicating the reversible motions of the CNBDs between conformations ( Fig . 2d , top ) . The blinking channels are clearly distinguishable by a broadening of their height distribution from non - blinking channels ( Fig . 2d , middle ) . The number of channels showing blinking was dependent on the cAMP concentrations : a lower concentration of cAMP increased the number of blinking molecules , indicating that the observed back and forth height changes were related to ligand dissociation from the channels ( Fig . 2d , bottom ) . The number of ligand binding to the CBDs in the tetramer was next investigated by analyzing the averaged height of the blinking channels . If only one CNBD in a tetramer had lost its ligand , then the overall blinking height of that specific channel would be lower than if all four CNBDs were ligand - free and switch between up and down states . Fig . 3a shows a time course of a height evolution of an individual channel at sub - k D cAMP concentration . The non - blinking molecule with an average height of 1 . 6 ± 0 . 2nm fluctuated slightly after 30 min incubation in 10nM cAMP ( Fig . 3a , gray trace ) . Then , the blinking molecule showed larger and larger fluctuations in subsequent movie acquisitions and reached a higher height level of 2 . 0 ± 0 . 3 nm ( red trace ) , and 2 . 5 ± 0 . 4 nm and 2 . 8 ± 0 . 4 nm after 60 ( yellow trace ) and 90 minutes ( blue trace ) , respectively , where the blinking height reached a plateau . The gradual height increase seen in blinking molecules was observed only in the low sub - k D ( 10nM ) ligand concentrations ( Fig . 3b ) , and not when saturating ( 100µM ) cAMP was provided ( Fig . 3c ) . Consequently , the gradual height increase in blinking molecules would be caused by progressive cAMP dissociation from individual CNBDs within a tetramer over time . A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 8 This study demonstrates the unique capability of HS - AFM to directly detect minor conformational changes of ion channels as a change in height of individual molecules in real time . The detailed analysis of the CNBD height dynamics provided novel insights into protein – ligand interactions , which could not be , or only indirectly , accessed by other techniques . This approach has been further applied to reveal the elevator mechanism of a glutamate transporter [ 69 ] , which play an important role of regulating extracellular glutamate concentrations to maintain dynamic synaptic signaling processes [ 78 ] . Purified Glt Ph , which is a glutamate transporter homolog from the archaebacterium Pyrococcus horikoshii , sodium / aspartate symporter [ 79 ] was reconstituted into lipid bilayers . The HS - AFM image under substrate - free ( apo ) conditions showed dense packing of the Glt Ph trimers in the membrane , each of which exposed protrusions of ~ 2 nm in diameter and ~ 2 nm in height with their centers separated by ~ 5 . 5 nm ( Fig . 4a ) . These surface features were in excellent agreement with the expected molecular surface of Glt Ph exposing the extracellular sides towards the solution . Time - resolved high - resolution images revealed that the transport domains reversibly altered between two conformations ( Fig . 4b ) : outward facing ( up , U ) and inward facing ( down , D ) . This elevator motion is consistent with the outward - and inward - facing conformations proposed by crystal structures of extreme states [ 80 ] , sm - FRET [ 81 ] , and electron paramagnetic resonance ( EPR ) [ 82 ] . Furthermore , the direct real time imaging capability of HS - AFM allowed to characterize the state dwell - times under various conditions from which the state probabilities and energies could be derived . The results showed that the outward - facing state is a lower energy state that is preferably adopted by the transporter , probably important for exposing the substrate binding sites for a new transport cycle . An advantage of HS - AFM is the ability to monitor not only the conformational changes of individual protomers but of all protomers composing an oligomer at the same time . This allowed to analyze correlations between conformations of protomers within the oligomer . A Glt Ph trimer can adopt eight configurations with each transport domain in either outward - or inward - facing position . Analyses of probabilities of U·U·U , U·U·D , U·D·D , and D·D·D configurations for the substrate - free ( Fig . 4c , yellow ) and A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 9 transport ( Fig . 4c , blue ) conditions agree very well with predictions based on a noncooperative model taking into account the state probabilities of the individual protomers . Further each protomer in the trimer changes their conformations in outward - and inward facing states without regularity or predictable sequence ( Fig . 4d ) , suggesting that there are no correlations between the motions of individual transport domains in the Glt Ph trimer . Therefore , HS - AFM showed directly and unambiguously that protomers in the trimer act independently of each other in agreement with evidence from functional studies [ 83 ] . 3 . 1 Processive enzymatic reaction of chitinase moving on chitin Processivity refers to the ability of synthesizing , modifying and degrading enzymes to catalyze multiple successive cycles of reactions with polymeric substrates without disengaging from the substrates . Evaluation of processivity is a key characterization for the understanding of activity and functions of these enzymes . Although single - molecule techniques can , in principle , directly monitor translational motions of enzymes , it is often difficult to acquire reliable data for enzymes with a slow translational rate such as cellulase because of the limited spatial resolution . High - speed AFM has already been applied to monitor processive movements of cellulase enzymatic action in the degradation of crystalline cellulose and revealed that the enzymatic activity of cellulase is highly affected by molecular congestion on the cellulose fibril [ 84 ] . We further applied high - speed AFM to observe the processive movements of chitinases , ChiA and ChiB , which are the only two extracellular processive chitinases from the chitinolytic bacterium S . marcescens [ 85 ] , on recalcitrant crystalline polysaccharide , chitin [ 86 ] . For sample preparation , a suspension of crystalline β - chitin purified from L . satsuma was placed on a highly oriented pyrolytic graphite ( HOPG ) substrate . Since chitin polymers are packed into microcrystals with hydrophobic surfaces , the microfibrils strongly bound to the HOPG surface due to hydrophobic interaction . The chitinases then act onto the opposing bulk - exposed hydrophobic surface of the chitin . The enzymes were added during HS - AFM observation , and their real - time movement on individual microfibrils can be followed . Fig . 5a shows ChiA moving unidirectionally from the right to the left on the crystalline β - chitin . The kymograph constructed by a stack of sliced images from successive frames shows diagonal lines , indicating that movements A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 10 of all ChiA molecules are unidirectional ( Fig . 5b ) . ChiB molecules also move unidirectionally as visible from the diagonal lines in kymographs ( Fig . 5c ) , but fewer molecules of ChiB than ChiA were observed on the chitin despite the fact that ChiB and ChiA concentrations were identical . This lower frequency of appearance of ChiB suggests a lower binding affinity of ChiB compared to ChiA for the substrate [ 85 ] . Figs . 5c and d represent the time courses of moving distances of ChiA and ChiB created from the kymographs , respectively . Although the velocity of movement of both proteins varied depending on individual molecules , ChiA had in average a longer and faster movement than ChiB . The half - life of processive movements τ were estimated from the histograms of the duration times of the processive movements as 0 . 293 ± 0 . 036 sec and 0 . 267 ± 0 . 035 sec for ChiA and ChiB , respectively . The mean velocities were 70 . 5 ± 25 . 2 nm s - 1 and 46 . 9 ± 19 . 8 nm s - 1 for ChiA and ChiB , respectively . From these values , the half - life of processivity for ChiA was estimated to be 21 reactions whereas that of ChiB was estimated to be 13 reactions , considering that the length of the N , N ’ - diacetylchitobiose repeating unit is 1 . 0 nm in crystalline β - chitin [ 87 ] . In conclusion , the processivity of ChiA is about twice that of ChiB and this may reflect the fact that the substrate - binding site in ChiA is longer than that of ChiB [ 88 ] . Opposite directionality of the movements of ChiA and ChiB were also visualized ( Fig . 5e ) . When ChiB initially moved on the substrate from the top left to the bottom right , ChiA was added into the observation solution , and then the newly added ChiA moved in the opposite direction from the bottom right to the top left on the same chitin crystal . This HS - AFM movie represented the first direct evidence that the enzyme activity of ChiA and ChiB were in opposite directions on crystalline chitin . Such opposite directionality could be caused by asymmetric architectures of the substrate - binding and product - binding sites of ChiA and ChiB . It is known that ChiA binds the substrate at negative subsites ( - 13 to - 1 in Sm ChiA ) and bind the product at positive subsites ( + 1 and + 2 ) , whereas ChiB has the opposite arrangement , i . e . the substrate is bound at subsites + 1 to + 10 , while the product is bound at subsites - 1 and - 2 ( Fig . 5f ) . 3 . 2 Assembly and disassembly of artificial protein cage A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 11 TRAP ( trp - RNA binding attenuation protein ) forming a homo - 11mer ring functions in regulating tryptophan synthesis in Bacillus [ 89 ] . TRAP has a well - defined shape , small size and high thermostability and thus is an ideal building block for protein engineering / bionano studies for constructing a number of structures and devices [ 90 ] . It has been shown that mutated TRAP from Geobacillus stearothermophilus with residue substitution of lysine 35 to cysteine ( TRAP - K35C ) forms a large and hollow spherical protein superstructure with a dimeter of 20 - 21 nm , called TRAP - cage , in the presence of 1 . 4 nm diameter ( Au 55 ) gold nanoparticles [ 91 ] . It was suggested that the gold nanoparticles functioned as a catalyst in TRAP - cage formation because the catalytic activity of small gold nanoparticles is well known , particularly in oxidative reactions . However , previous studies did not have sufficient resolution to determine the exact arrangement of protein elements comprising the TRAP - cage sphere . HS - AFM was applied to understand how the TRAP - cage was formed by assembly of the TRAP rings [ 92 ] . Fig . 6a shows the interaction between TRAP - K35C rings upon addition of gold nanoparticles , which are stabilized with mono - sulfonated triphenylphosphine ligands ( known as Au1 . 4MS ) . The addition of Au1 . 4MS induced an increase in the height of the observed structures with a notable central protrusion , indicating the binding of Au1 . 4MS to the central cavity of the ring structure . Additionally , the TRAP - K35C rings clustered . The highly condensed aggregate is presumably caused by closely packed TRAP rings due to the inter - ring disulfide bond formation . In agreement , when DTT was added into the observation solution , it promoted disaggregation of the highly condensed structures and reformation of discrete and isolated TRAP ring structures within a few minutes ( Fig . 6b ) . Therefore the disaggregation is considered to be caused by breaking of the disulfide bonds holding the TRAP rings together . Importantly , the addition of DTT also led the recovery of the initial height of the TRAP rings as observed prior to the addition of Au1 . 4MS . These results demonstrate that the binding of Au1 . 4MS and the aggregation of TRAP rings were reversible by the addition of the reducing agent . Fig . 6c shows the disassembly process of a pre - formed TRAP cage due to addition of DTT . In the absence of DTT , the TRAP cage structures maintained their shape during HS - AFM observation and the high - pass filtered images showed individual A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 12 TRAP - K35C rings on the surface as marked by arrows ( - 63 . 5 s ) . Although the overall spherical shape was retained for several minutes even after addition of 1 . 4 mM DTT at 0 s , cracks on the surface gradually increased in size ( 9 – 149 s ) , indicating the breaking of inter - ring disulfide bonds in the TRAP cage . Deep fissures were apparent on the surface at 154 . 5 s followed by a sudden bursting of the entire cage structure at 155 s . After the cage disruption , some of the cage material was lost to the surrounding bulk and some rings appeared to form a flat layer on the mica surface ( 159 . 5 and 160 s ) . At this stage the individual TRAP rings could not be recognized , however loosening the structure further a gradual re - formation of discrete ring structures was observed from 156 s – 214 s through an unknown process . The discrete rings were considered to be TRAP - K35C rings , based on their dimensions . It seems intriguing that the discrete ring structures in the fully - formed TRAP - cage were not visible just after the collapse of the TRAP cage but appeared only gradually . This suggests dynamic rearrangements in protein structural conformation possibly due to non - synchronous disulfide bond reduction . It was hard to directly observe the complete assembly process of the TRAP rings into cage structures because HS - AFM observation requires objects to be two - dimensionally bound on a substrate and thus losing some three - dimensional freedom . Also the HS - AFM imaging of the disassembly process of TRAP cage induced by the breakage of inter - ring disulfide bonds clearly showed that the TRAP - cage is actually composed of closely packed TRAP - K35C rings forming the surface of a sphere . This result indicates that monitoring disassembling processes of protein superstructure with HS - AFM provides some clues to resolve the structure of higher - order complexes and may represent the reverse process of the assembly . 3 . 4 Dynamics of a protein 2D - crystal Some proteins form a homogeneous two - dimensional crystal on / in a lipid membrane due to anisotropic intermolecular interactions . Visualization of dynamic events taking place in protein crystals is also one of the successful applications of HS - AFM [ 49 , 53 , 55 , 56 , 59 ] . Here we review crystal assembly and disassembly dynamics of annexin V , a membrane bound protein implicated in Ca 2 + binding and membrane healing , revealed by HS - AFM [ 93 ] . A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 13 Annexin V ( A5 ) is a 36 kDa hydrophilic protein with an amphipathic face that binds to lipid membranes containing negatively charged lipids such as phosphatidylserine ( PS ) in the presence of Ca 2 + ions [ 94 ] . EM and AFM studies have revealed the supramolecular assemblies of annexins in intricate regular lattices made of A5 trimers on lipid membranes [ 95 ] . Fig . 7a shows a high - resolution HS - AFM image of a highly ordered 2D lattice of A5 , showing A5 trimers ( labelled 1 ) assembling in a lattice with p6 symmetry . An ill - defined and apparently lower molecular topography was observed at the p6 axis location ( labelled 2 ) . At some locations these molecules were missing and therefore a deep cavity down to the lipid surface was seen ( labelled 3 ) . High image acquisition speeds enabled better resolution of the molecule at the p6 axis location ( Fig . 7b ) as an A5 trimer that may adopt two major orientations ( Fig . 7b , left and right images ) , depending on the triangular orientation with respect to the horizontal axis . The A5 trimer must be attached to the membrane over Ca 2 + to the negatively charged PS ( similar to the p6 trimers ) , but its interaction with surrounding A5 trimers had to be very different and weak compared to the p6 trimers , allowing rotational diffusion . By plotting the angular distribution of the rotational cross - correlation searches , four major angular distributions peaking at −7° and 0° and 53° and 60° were identified ( Fig . 7c ) . Merging molecules with orientation alignments of 0° / 60° or −7° / 53° , the average topographs of these two subclasses could be calculated ( Fig . 7c , central inset , greyscale images labelled 1 and 2 ) . Furthermore , an interaction energy potential E ( α ) map of the non - p6 trimer within the p6 honeycomb was estimated by using the angular probability distribution p ( α ) because p ( α ) = p e −E ( α ) / kBT ( where k B T is the thermal energy and k B is the Boltzmann constant ) . This interaction energy landscape describes a major well of −6 kBT at 0° / 60° neighbored by a more shallow well of −5 kBT at −7° / 53° reaching out to about −20° / 40° ( Fig . 7c , top inset ) . Assembly and disassembly processes of the A5 crystal were captured by HS - AFM combined with newly developed buffer exchange and a flash photolysis systems . The buffer exchange system is realized by connection of the fluid cell to a high - precision buffer exchange pump system . This constant - pressure and constant - flow pump system allows complex buffer composition changes such as the gradual addition of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid ( EDTA ) . A pulsed UV laser was introduced into the HS - AFM apparatus that enables photo - cleavable caged compounds to be liberated during imaging . Upon injecting a buffer solution containing 2 mM Ca 2 + ions , HS - AFM monitored the appearance of a well - ordered 2D - lattice of A5 ( Fig . 8a , t = 15 s ) . Then , a buffer containing 40 mM EDTA was slowly injected and the 2D A5 crystal disassembled due to chelation of the Ca 2 + ions by EDTA ( Fig . 8a , t = 277 s ) . Then pulsed UV laser A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 14 flashes were applied and thus induced the reassembly of the A5 2D - crystals mediated by Ca 2 + uncaging ( Fig . 8a , t = 441 s ) . Switching off the UV laser led to the dissociation of the A5 from the membrane again because the fluid cell has a much larger volume than the focal volume of the UV laser that uncages the caged Ca 2 + and hence the newly liberated Ca 2 + diluted rapidly into the larger volume ( Fig . 8a , t = 870 s ) . This process was repeatable for several times . Moreover , high - resolution HS - AFM movies of slow buffer exchange processes revealed that the non - p6 trimers dissociated first from the lattice and the lattice edges were also more sensitive to Ca 2 + withdrawal , indicating that the lattice location confers not only rotational freedom to the non - p6 trimers , but also modulates the strength of the membrane association through Ca 2 + binding ( Fig . 8b , t = 276 s ) . 4 . Conclusion Through long - term development of key devices and the following performance of proof - of - principle experiments , HS - AFM has matured to be an unprecedented tool to directly visualize dynamic biological processes at nanometer scale . As demonstrated by the most recent results highlighted in this review , the application range of HS - AFM is now expanding and it has become a powerful tool for single - molecule biophysics . Nevertheless , there is still room for improvement in HS - AFM to become a more versatile technique in biological sciences . In this context , the presented developments for fast ( photoactivation ) and slow ( buffer exchange pumping ) environmental changes [ 93 ] , but also the development of temperature [ 96 ] and force [ 97 ] control will allow researchers to play with essential parameters to stimulate biomolecules during HS - AFM observation . So far HS - AFM has been restricted to well - controlled molecular systems of purified proteins which are usually characterized by a limited number of pure molecular species with small dimensions . On the other hand , one of the prospective applications of HS - AFM is the visualization of dynamic events on live cells such as endocytosis , exocytosis , and reorganization of the cytoskeleton , demanding wider imaging areas . Recently a wide - area scanner with the maximum scan range of ~ 50 × 50 μm 2 and a combined system of HS - AFM and fluorescent optical microscope have been developed [ 98 - 100 ] . These developments allow us to image the nanometer - scale morphogenesis of mammalian cells and hippocampal neurons for more than ten minutes without damages [ 100 ] . Further , integration of HS - AFM and optical microscope enabled a AFM tip positioning with high precision on cells and HS - AFM imaging of individual membrane proteins on the cell surface [ 99 ] . A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 15 Other functional extension concerns the combination of HS - AFM and single - molecule fluorescence microscopy . AFM usually visualizes only surface structure of objects and therefore lacks the capability of identifying the target molecules when the molecules have no distinct structural features or are in a crowded system containing multiple species , whereas fluorescence microscopy detecting fluorescence emitted from fluorescent dye - labeled molecules can identify the labeled molecules but can neither reveal their structures nor detect the surrounding non - labeled molecules . Therefore , the combination of the two microscopy techniques would complement their weaknesses . A tip - scanning type HS - AFM , which can be mounted on a stage on an inverted optical microscope , has been developed and simultaneous imaging of HS - AFM and fluorescence microscopy was successful [ 101 ] . Thus , together with the novel functional extensions , the HS - AFM will become increasingly valuable to life science . Acknowledgements We thank Toshio Ando for his long - term dedication to the development of HS - AFM and its application . We also thank to all lab members in the Ando and Scheuring labs . This work was partly supported by the MEXT / JSPS Grants in Aid for Scientific Research ( JP 16H00758 , JP 16H00830 , JP15H03540 ) to TU and a European Research Council ( ERC ) Grant ( # 310080 , MEM - STRUCT - AFM ) to SS . A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 16 Figure Captions Fig . 1 ) Schematic of amplitude modulation mode HS - AFM . Fig . 2 ) Conformational changes of MloK1 revealed by HS - AFM . ( a ) Topology of one subunit with six transmembrane segments ( orange ) ; the C - terminus contains the CNBD ( yellow ) . The voltage sensor ( S1 – 4 ) and the pore ( S5 – 6 ) are in the transmembrane region . ( b ) High - resolution HS - AFM topograph of MloK1 in 2D crystals in presence of 100 μM cAMP . Scale bar : 15 nm . ( c ) Representative HS - AFM movie frames of arrayed MloK1 tetramers . Arrows 1 and 2 indicate two individual molecules blinking between two heights . On the right are the corresponding height profiles along the center axis of the outlines in each frame on the left . Scale bar : 20 nm . ( d ) ( top ) Kymograph of the height evolution over 3 min for the eight MloK1 molecules highlighted in c . ( middle ) Height histograms of the non - blinking ( grey ) and blinking ( red ) molecule from the kymograph in b ( arrows ) . ( bottom ) Cartoon of the blinking process : unliganded CNBDs alternate between down - and up - states . Fig . 3 ) Increase of averaged height of blinking MloK1 over time in low cAMP . ( a ) Time course of average molecular heights of a channel ( grey ) and after incubation for 30 ( red ) , 60 ( yellow ) and 90 ( blue ) minutes in 10 nM cAMP . Cartoons representing liganded and unliganded MloK1 are shown . ( b ) Histograms of MloK1 heights after 30 , 60 and 90 min incubation in 10 nM cAMP ( left ) and 100μM cAMP ( right ) , respectively . Colour code is as in a . As a reference , the average height ( solid line ) and s . d . ( dashed line ) of non - blinking down - state molecules ( grey , n = 18 ( 10 nM cAMP ) and n = 15 ( 100 μM cAMP ) molecules ) are shown . Fig . 4 ) Direct visualization of Glt Ph transport domain elevator movements by HS - AFM . ( a ) A typical HS - AFM image of a membrane containing densely packed Glt Ph trimers . ( b ) Sequential frames displaying the conformational dynamics of a Glt Ph trimer under substrate - free ( apo ) conditions . Each Glt Ph in the trimer marked by the circles shows reversible conformational alternation between outward facing ( up , U ) and inward facing ( down , D ) states . ( c ) Experimentally determined probabilities of U·U·U , U·U·D , U·D·D , and D·D·D configurations for the substrate - free ( yellow ) and transport ( blue ) conditions ( n = 40 molecules ) . The black bars represent probabilities calculated for a system of three independent protomers . Insets show representative images of single molecules . A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 17 ( d ) In trimers where single transport domains were observed to move inward one at a time , both clockwise ( CW ) ( top left ) and counterclockwise ( CCW ) ( top right ) sequences were observed . ( middle ) In trimers with one domain already in the inward - facing state , neighboring CCW ( left ) and CW ( tight ) transport domains were equally likely to translocate from outward to inward state . ( bottom ) In trimers with two domains in the inward position , the probabilities that either would return to the outward position were similar . Fig . 5 ) Processive movements of chitinase on chitin . ( a ) Real - time observation of crystalline β - chitin incubated with 1 μM ChiA . The time interval between images is 0 . 2 s ( 150 × 75 nm 2 ) . ( b ) Kymographic analysis of ChiA movement on crystalline chitin . Scale bar : 60 nm . ( c ) Kymographic analysis of ChiB movement . for the images taken at 1 μM ChiA . Scale bar indicates 80 nm . ( d ) Time courses of distance from the initial position for ChiA ( upper ) and ChiB ( lower ) molecules . ( e ) Two enzymes , ChiA and ChiB , move along crystalline β - chitin . The time interval between images is 0 . 2 s ( 200 × 120 nm 2 , ) . Cyan and magenta lines indicate the movements of ChiA and ChiB , respectively . The processive direction was decided when ChiB alone was incubated with the substrate . Scale bar : 60 nm . Fig . 6 ) Assembly and disassembly processes of TRAP proteins . ( a ) Aggregation of TRAP – K35C after the addition of Au1 . 4MS to TRAP – K35C . ( b ) Addition of 1 . 4mM DTT to the same sample as in ( a ) induces disaggregation of the TRAP ring . White lines are the path of line height profiles which are shown in the insets . Scan area for all HS - AFM images is 80 × 80 nm 2 . ( c ) Time course of structural changes observed in an individual TRAP - cage with the addition of 1 . 4mM DTT . The images were processed by a high - pass filter to enhance detailed structures on the sphere . For certain key images , original images are also shown ( - 63 . 5 , 149 , 155 , 160 and 214 s ) . Scan areas for the images from 0 to 154 . 5 s are 56 × 48 nm 2 . In the following images , the scan area is 60 × 55 nm 2 . Arrows in the image at - 63 . 5s show ring structures on the surface of the TRAP cage . Fig . 7 ) Dynamics of annexin5 molecules in two - dimensional crystal . ( a ) High - resolution time - averaged HS - AFM topograph of an A5 2D - array ( average over 20s of HS - AFM image acquisition ) . ( b ) Individual HS - AFM frames acquired at a 650ms scan rate . At a A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 18 high imaging rate and high resolution , a well - defined A5 trimer could be detected at the p 6 axis , which shows rotational freedom as it could be imaged in up ( left ) and down ( right ) orientations in subsequent frames . ( c ) Orientation angle histogram of the non - p 6 trimer within the p 6 honeycomb interstice . Two major orientations around 0° ( up ) and 60° ( down ) were found . These two subclasses could be averaged ( bottom inset ) . From the angular alignment probability distribution , an angular interaction energy landscape was calculated ( top inset ) . Fig . 8 ) Reversible assembly and dissociation of A5 2D - crystals . ( a ) Representative frames from a longer HS - AFM movie illustrating the sequential disassembly and reassembly of A5 . Addition of EDTA ( t = 150 s ) leads to dissociation of the A5 - lattice due to chelation of Ca 2 + ions . UV laser pulses ( t = 375s ) uncage Ca 2 + in the area of investigation leading to the reformation of A5 2D - crystals . Switching off the UV laser leads again to dissociation of the crystal due to diffusion of the uncaged Ca 2 + into the large fluid cell . The process can be repeated several times . ( b ) High - resolution image series of A5 2D - array disassembly following the slow injection of EDTA into the fluid cell . A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 19 References [ 1 ] W . E . Moerner , New directions in single - molecule imaging and analysis , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 104 ( 2007 ) 12596 - 12602 . [ 2 ] K . Adachi , K . Oiwa , T . Nishizaka , S . Furuike , H . Noji , H . Itoh , M . Yoshida , K . Kinosita , Coupling of rotation and catalysis in F - 1 - ATPase revealed by single - molecule imaging and manipulation , Cell , 130 ( 2007 ) 309 - 321 . [ 3 ] C . Joo , H . Balci , Y . Ishitsuka , C . Buranachai , T . Ha , Advances in single - molecule fluorescence methods for molecular biology , Annual review of biochemistry , 77 ( 2008 ) 51 - 76 . [ 4 ] T . Yanagida , Y . Ishii , Single molecule dynamics in life science , Wiley - VCH , Place Published , 2009 . [ 5 ] H . Murakoshi , R . Iino , T . Kobayashi , T . Fujiwara , C . Ohshima , A . Yoshimura , A . Kusumi , Single - molecule imaging analysis of Ras activation in living cells , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 101 ( 2004 ) 7317 - 7322 . [ 6 ] G . W . Li , J . Elf , X . S . Xie , PHYS 643 - Probing transcription factor dynamics at the single molecule level in a living cell , Abstr Pap Am Chem S , 234 ( 2007 ) . [ 7 ] S . Weiss , Measuring conformational dynamics of biomolecules by single molecule fluorescence spectroscopy , Nature structural biology , 7 ( 2000 ) 724 - 729 . [ 8 ] T . Ha , Single - molecule fluorescence resonance energy transfer , Methods , 25 ( 2001 ) 78 - 86 . [ 9 ] G . Binnig , C . F . Quate , C . Gerber , Atomic force microscope , Phys Rev Lett , 56 ( 1986 ) 930 - 933 . [ 10 ] H . R . G . Binnig , Ch . Gerber , and E . Weibel , Surface Studies by Scanning Tunneling Microscopy , Phys Rev Lett , 49 ( 1982 ) 57 - 61 . [ 11 ] H . G . Hansma , J . H . Hoh , Biomolecular imaging with the atomic force microscope , Annual review of biophysics and biomolecular structure , 23 ( 1994 ) 115 - 139 . [ 12 ] Z . Shao , J . Yang , Progress in high resolution atomic force microscopy in biology , Q Rev Biophys , 28 ( 1995 ) 195 - 251 . [ 13 ] C . Bustamante , C . Rivetti , Visualizing protein - nucleic acid interactions on a large scale with the scanning force microscope , Annual review of biophysics and biomolecular structure , 25 ( 1996 ) 395 - 429 . [ 14 ] D . J . Muller , C . A . Schoenenberger , F . Schabert , A . Engel , Structural changes in native membrane proteins monitored at subnanometer resolution with the atomic force microscope : a review , Journal of structural biology , 119 ( 1997 ) 149 - 157 . A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 20 [ 15 ] S . Scheuring , D . J . Muller , P . Ringler , J . B . Heymann , A . Engel , Imaging streptavidin 2D crystals on biotinylated lipid monolayers at high resolution with the atomic force microscope , J Microsc , 193 ( 1999 ) 28 - 35 . [ 16 ] D . Fotiadis , S . Scheuring , S . A . Muller , A . Engel , D . J . Muller , Imaging and manipulation of biological structures with the AFM , Micron , 33 ( 2002 ) 385 - 397 . [ 17 ] S . Scheuring , Y . F . Dufrene , Atomic force microscopy : probing the spatial organization , interactions and elasticity of microbial cell envelopes at molecular resolution , Mol Microbiol , 75 ( 2010 ) 1327 - 1336 . [ 18 ] D . J . Muller , Y . F . Dufrene , Atomic force microscopy : a nanoscopic window on the cell surface , Trends Cell Biol , 21 ( 2011 ) 461 - 469 . [ 19 ] M . Rief , F . Oesterhelt , B . Heymann , H . E . Gaub , Single Molecule Force Spectroscopy on Polysaccharides by Atomic Force Microscopy , Science , 275 ( 1997 ) 1295 - 1297 . [ 20 ] S . R . Manalis , S . C . Minne , C . F . Quate , Atomic force microscopy for high speed imaging using cantilevers with an integrated actuator and sensor , Appl Phys Lett , 68 ( 1996 ) 871 - 873 . [ 21 ] M . B . Viani , T . E . Schaffer , G . T . Paloczi , L . I . Pietrasanta , B . L . Smith , J . B . Thompson , M . Richter , M . Rief , H . E . Gaub , K . W . Plaxco , A . N . Cleland , H . G . Hansma , P . K . Hansma , Fast imaging and fast force spectroscopy of single biopolymers with a new atomic force microscope designed for small cantilevers , Review of Scientific Instruments , 70 ( 1999 ) 4300 - 4303 . [ 22 ] T . Sulchek , G . G . Yaralioglu , C . F . Quate , S . C . Minne , Characterization and optimization of scan speed for tapping - mode atomic force microscopy , Review of Scientific Instruments , 73 ( 2002 ) 2928 - 2936 . [ 23 ] P . K . Hansma , G . Schitter , G . E . Fantner , C . Prater , Applied physics - High - speed atomic force microscopy , Science , 314 ( 2006 ) 601 - 602 . [ 24 ] T . Ando , N . Kodera , E . Takai , D . Maruyama , K . Saito , A . Toda , A high - speed atomic force microscope for studying biological macromolecules , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 98 ( 2001 ) 12468 - 12472 . [ 25 ] A . D . L . Humphris , M . J . Miles , J . K . Hobbs , A mechanical microscope : High - speed atomic force microscopy , Appl Phys Lett , 86 ( 2005 ) 3 . [ 26 ] T . Ando , T . Uchihashi , T . Fukuma , High - speed atomic force microscopy for nano - visualization of dynamic biomolecular processes , Prog Surf Sci , 83 ( 2008 ) 337 - 437 . [ 27 ] T . Ando , T . Uchihashi , S . Scheuring , Filming Biomolecular Processes by High - Speed Atomic Force Microscopy , Chem Rev , 114 ( 2014 ) 3120 - 3188 . A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 21 [ 28 ] P . K . Hansma , J . P . Cleveland , M . Radmacher , D . A . Walters , P . E . Hillner , M . Bezanilla , M . Fritz , D . Vie , H . G . Hansma , C . B . Prater , J . Massie , L . Fukunaga , J . Gurley , V . Elings , TAPPING MODE ATOMIC - FORCE MICROSCOPY IN LIQUIDS , Appl Phys Lett , 64 ( 1994 ) 1738 - 1740 . [ 29 ] M . Bezanilla , B . Drake , E . Nudler , M . Kashlev , P . K . Hansma , H . G . Hansma , MOTION AND ENZYMATIC DEGRADATION OF DNA IN THE ATOMIC - FORCE MICROSCOPE , Biophysical journal , 67 ( 1994 ) 2454 - 2459 . [ 30 ] G . Meyer , N . M . Amer , Optical - Beam - Deflection Atomic Force Microscopy - the Nacl ( 001 ) Surface , Appl Phys Lett , 56 ( 1990 ) 2100 - 2101 . [ 31 ] N . Kodera , H . Yamashita , T . Ando , Active damping of the scanner for high - speed atomic force microscopy , Review of Scientific Instruments , 76 ( 2005 ) 5 . [ 32 ] J . Kokavecz , Z . Toth , Z . L . Horvath , P . Heszler , A . Mechler , Novel amplitude and frequency demodulation algorithm for a virtual dynamic atomic force microscope , Nanotechnology , 17 ( 2006 ) S173 - S177 . [ 33 ] T . Uchihashi , N . Kodera , T . Ando , Guide to video recording of structure dynamics and dynamic processes of proteins by high - speed atomic force microscopy , Nature protocols , 7 ( 2012 ) 1193 - 1206 . [ 34 ] M . Yokokawa , C . Wada , T . Ando , N . Sakai , A . Yagi , S . H . Yoshimura , K . Takeyasu , Fast - scanning atomic force microscopy reveals the ATP / ADP - dependent conformational changes of GroEL , The EMBO journal , 25 ( 2006 ) 4567 - 4576 . [ 35 ] Y . Shinozaki , K . Sumitomo , M . Tsuda , S . Koizumi , K . Inoue , K . Torimitsu , Direct Observation of ATP - Induced Conformational Changes in Single P2X ( 4 ) Receptors , Plos Biol , 7 ( 2009 ) . [ 36 ] N . Kodera , D . Yamamoto , R . Ishikawa , T . Ando , Video imaging of walking myosin V by high - speed atomic force microscopy , Nature , 468 ( 2010 ) 72 - + . [ 37 ] M . Yokokawa , S . M . Carnally , R . M . Henderson , K . Takeyasu , J . M . Edwardson , Acid - sensing ion channel ( ASIC ) 1a undergoes a height transition in response to acidification , FEBS letters , 584 ( 2010 ) 3107 - 3110 . [ 38 ] M . Shibata , H . Yamashita , T . Uchihashi , H . Kandori , T . Ando , High - speed atomic force microscopy shows dynamic molecular processes in photoactivated bacteriorhodopsin , Nature nanotechnology , 5 ( 2010 ) 208 - 212 . [ 39 ] M . Yokokawa , K . Takeyasu , Motion of the Ca2 + - pump captured , The FEBS journal , 278 ( 2011 ) 3025 - 3031 . [ 40 ] T . Uchihashi , R . Iino , T . Ando , H . Noji , High - Speed Atomic Force Microscopy Reveals Rotary Catalysis of Rotorless F ( 1 ) - ATPase , Science , 333 ( 2011 ) 755 - 758 . A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 22 [ 41 ] M . Shibata , T . Uchihashi , H . Yamashita , H . Kandori , T . Ando , Structural Changes in Bacteriorhodopsin in Response to Alternate Illumination Observed by High - Speed Atomic Force Microscopy , Angew Chem Int Edit , 50 ( 2011 ) 4410 - 4413 . [ 42 ] K . Noi , D . Yamamoto , S . Nishikori , K . Arita - Morioka , T . Kato , T . Ando , T . Ogura , High - speed atomic force microscopic observation of ATP - dependent rotation of the AAA + chaperone p97 , Structure , 21 ( 2013 ) 1992 - 2002 . [ 43 ] H . Yamashita , K . Inoue , M . Shibata , T . Uchihashi , J . Sasaki , H . Kandori , T . Ando , Role of trimer - trimer interaction of bacteriorhodopsin studied by optical spectroscopy and high - speed atomic force microscopy , Journal of structural biology , ( 2013 ) . [ 44 ] J . M . Eeftens , A . J . Katan , M . Kschonsak , M . Hassler , L . de Wilde , E . M . Dief , C . H . Haering , C . Dekker , Condensin Smc2 - Smc4 Dimers Are Flexible and Dynamic , Cell Rep , 14 ( 2016 ) 1813 - 1818 . [ 45 ] T . Watanabe - Nakayama , K . Ono , M . Itami , R . Takahashi , D . B . Teplow , M . Yamada , High - speed atomic force microscopy reveals structural dynamics of amyloid beta1 - 42 aggregates , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 113 ( 2016 ) 5835 - 5840 . [ 46 ] P . - E . Milhiet , D . Yamamoto , O . Berthoumieu , P . Dosset , C . Le Grimellec , J . - M . Verdier , S . Marchal , T . Ando , Deciphering the Structure , Growth and Assembly of Amyloid - Like Fibrils Using High - Speed Atomic Force Microscopy , Plos One , 5 ( 2010 ) . [ 47 ] P . E . Milhiet , D . Yamamoto , O . Berthoumieu , P . Dosset , C . Le Grimellec , J . M . Verdier , S . Marchal , T . Ando , Deciphering the Structure , Growth and Assembly of Amyloid - Like Fibrils Using High - Speed Atomic Force Microscopy , Plos One , 5 ( 2010 ) . [ 48 ] I . Casuso , P . Sens , F . Rico , S . Scheuring , Experimental Evidence for Membrane - Mediated Protein - Protein Interaction , Biophysical journal , 99 ( 2010 ) L47 - L49 . [ 49 ] H . Yamashita , K . Voitchovsky , T . Uchihashi , S . Contera , J . Ryan , T . Ando , Dynamics of bacteriorhodopsin 2D crystal observed by high - speed atomic force microscopy , Journal of structural biology , 167 ( 2009 ) 153 - 158 . [ 50 ] D . Yamamoto , N . Nagura , S . Omote , M . Taniguchi , T . Ando , Streptavidin 2D Crystal Substrates for Visualizing Biomolecular Processes by Atomic Force Microscopy , Biophysical journal , 97 ( 2009 ) 2358 - 2367 . [ 51 ] D . Yamamoto , T . Ando , Chaperonin GroEL - GroES Functions as both Alternating and Non - Alternating Engines , Journal of molecular biology , 428 ( 2016 ) 3090 - 3101 . A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 23 [ 52 ] K . X . Ngo , N . Kodera , E . Katayama , T . Ando , T . Q . P . Uyeda , Cofilin - induced unidirectional cooperative conformational changes in actin filaments revealed by high - speed atomic force microscopy , Elife , 4 ( 2015 ) . [ 53 ] D . Yamamoto , T . Uchihashi , N . Kodera , T . Ando , Anisotropic diffusion of point defects in a two - dimensional crystal of streptavidin observed by high - speed atomic force microscopy , Nanotechnology , 19 ( 2008 ) . [ 54 ] H . Yamashita , A . Taoka , T . Uchihashi , T . Asano , T . Ando , Y . Fukumori , Single - Molecule Imaging on Living Bacterial Cell Surface by High - Speed AFM , Journal of molecular biology , 422 ( 2012 ) 300 - 309 . [ 55 ] I . Casuso , J . Khao , M . Chami , P . Paul - Gilloteaux , M . Husain , J . P . Duneau , H . Stahlberg , J . N . Sturgis , S . Scheuring , Characterization of the motion of membrane proteins using high - speed atomic force microscopy , Nature nanotechnology , 7 ( 2012 ) 525 - 529 . [ 56 ] A . Colom , I . Casuso , T . Boudier , S . Scheuring , High - Speed Atomic Force Microscopy : Cooperative Adhesion and Dynamic Equilibrium of Junctional Microdomain Membrane Proteins , Journal of molecular biology , 423 ( 2012 ) 249 - 256 . [ 57 ] N . Yilmaz , T . Yamada , P . Greimel , T . Uchihashi , T . Ando , T . Kobayashi , Real - Time Visualization of Assembling of a Sphingomyelin - Specific Toxin on Planar Lipid Membranes , Biophysical journal , 105 ( 2013 ) 1397 - 1405 . [ 58 ] N . Yilmaz , T . Kobayashi , Visualization of Lipid Membrane Reorganization Induced by a Pore - Forming Toxin Using High - Speed Atomic Force Microscopy , ACS Nano , 9 ( 2015 ) 7960 - 7967 . [ 59 ] I . Munguira , I . Casuso , H . Takahashi , F . Rico , A . Miyagi , M . Chami , S . Scheuring , Glasslike Membrane Protein Diffusion in a Crowded Membrane , ACS Nano , 10 ( 2016 ) 2584 - 2590 . [ 60 ] M . Yokokawa , S . H . Yoshimura , Y . Naito , T . Ando , A . Yagi , N . Sakai , K . Takeyasu , Fast - scanning atomic force microscopy reveals the molecular mechanism of DNA cleavage by ApaI endonuclease , IEE Proc - Nanobiotechnol . , 153 ( 2006 ) 60 - 66 . [ 61 ] K . Igarashi , A . Koivula , M . Wada , S . Kimura , M . Penttila , M . Samejima , High Speed Atomic Force Microscopy Visualizes Processive Movement of Trichoderma reesei Cellobiohydrolase I on Crystalline Cellulose , Journal of Biological Chemistry , 284 ( 2009 ) 36186 - 36190 . [ 62 ] N . Crampton , M . Yokokawa , D . T . F . Dryden , J . M . Edwardson , D . N . Rao , K . Takeyasu , S . H . Yoshimura , R . M . Henderson , Fast - scan atomic force microscopy reveals that the type III restriction enzyme EcoP151 is capable of DNA translocation and looping , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 104 ( 2007 ) 12755 - 12760 . A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 24 [ 63 ] T . Watanabe - Nakayama , M . Itami , N . Kodera , T . Ando , H . Konno , High - speed atomic force microscopy reveals strongly polarized movement of clostridial collagenase along collagen fibrils , Sci Rep , 6 ( 2016 ) 28975 . [ 64 ] K . Igarashi , T . Uchihashi , A . Koivula , M . Wada , S . Kimura , T . Okamoto , M . Penttila , T . Ando , M . Samejima , Traffic Jams Reduce Hydrolytic Efficiency of Cellulase on Cellulose Surface , Science , 333 ( 2011 ) 1279 - 1282 . [ 65 ] S . F . J . Wickham , M . Endo , Y . Katsuda , K . Hidaka , J . Bath , H . Sugiyama , A . J . Turberfield , Direct observation of stepwise movement of a synthetic molecular transporter , Nature nanotechnology , 6 ( 2011 ) 166 - 169 . [ 66 ] M . Endo , H . Sugiyama , Single - molecule imaging of dynamic motions of biomolecules in DNA origami nanostructures using high - speed atomic force microscopy , Acc Chem Res , 47 ( 2014 ) 1645 - 1653 . [ 67 ] F . Rico , L . Gonzalez , I . Casuso , M . Puig - Vidal , S . Scheuring , High - Speed Force Spectroscopy Unfolds Titin at the Velocity of Molecular Dynamics Simulations , Science , 342 ( 2013 ) 741 - 743 . [ 68 ] M . Rangl , A . Miyagi , J . Kowal , H . Stahlberg , C . M . Nimigean , S . Scheuring , Real - time visualization of conformational changes within single MloK1 cyclic nucleotide - modulated channels , Nat Commun , 7 ( 2016 ) 12789 . [ 69 ] Y . Ruan , A . Miyagi , X . Wang , M . Chami , O . Boudker , S . Scheuring , Direct visualization of glutamate transporter elevator mechanism by high - speed AFM , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 114 ( 2017 ) 1584 - 1588 . [ 70 ] U . B . Kaupp , R . Seifert , Cyclic nucleotide - gated ion channels , Physiological reviews , 82 ( 2002 ) 769 - 824 . [ 71 ] U . B . Kaupp , R . Seifert , Molecular diversity of pacemaker ion channels , Annu Rev Physiol , 63 ( 2001 ) 235 - 257 . [ 72 ] R . B . Robinson , S . A . Siegelbaum , Hyperpolarization - activated cation currents : from molecules to physiological function , Annu Rev Physiol , 65 ( 2003 ) 453 - 480 . [ 73 ] C . M . Nimigean , T . Shane , C . Miller , A cyclic nucleotide modulated prokaryotic K + channel , The Journal of general physiology , 124 ( 2004 ) 203 - 210 . [ 74 ] G . M . Clayton , W . R . Silverman , L . Heginbotham , J . H . Morais - Cabral , Structural basis of ligand activation in a cyclic nucleotide regulated potassium channel , Cell , 119 ( 2004 ) 615 - 627 . [ 75 ] S . Schunke , M . Stoldt , J . Lecher , U . B . Kaupp , D . Willbold , Structural insights into conformational changes of a cyclic nucleotide - binding domain in solution from Mesorhizobium A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 25 loti K1 channel , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 108 ( 2011 ) 6121 - 6126 . [ 76 ] P . L . Chiu , M . D . Pagel , J . Evans , H . T . Chou , X . Zeng , B . Gipson , H . Stahlberg , C . M . Nimigean , The structure of the prokaryotic cyclic nucleotide - modulated potassium channel MloK1 at 16 A resolution , Structure , 15 ( 2007 ) 1053 - 1064 . [ 77 ] J . Kowal , M . Chami , P . Baumgartner , M . Arheit , P . L . Chiu , M . Rangl , S . Scheuring , G . F . Schroder , C . M . Nimigean , H . Stahlberg , Ligand - induced structural changes in the cyclic nucleotide - modulated potassium channel MloK1 , Nat Commun , 5 ( 2014 ) 3106 . [ 78 ] R . J . Vandenberg , R . M . Ryan , Mechanisms of glutamate transport , Physiological reviews , 93 ( 2013 ) 1621 - 1657 . [ 79 ] D . Yernool , O . Boudker , Y . Jin , E . Gouaux , Structure of a glutamate transporter homologue from Pyrococcus horikoshii , Nature , 431 ( 2004 ) 811 - 818 . [ 80 ] N . Reyes , C . Ginter , O . Boudker , Transport mechanism of a bacterial homologue of glutamate transporters , Nature , 462 ( 2009 ) 880 - 885 . [ 81 ] N . Akyuz , R . B . Altman , S . C . Blanchard , O . Boudker , Transport dynamics in a glutamate transporter homologue , Nature , 502 ( 2013 ) 114 - 118 . [ 82 ] I . Hanelt , D . Wunnicke , E . Bordignon , H . J . Steinhoff , D . J . Slotboom , Conformational heterogeneity of the aspartate transporter Glt ( Ph ) , Nature structural & molecular biology , 20 ( 2013 ) 210 - 214 . [ 83 ] C . Grewer , P . Balani , C . Weidenfeller , T . Bartusel , Z . Tao , T . Rauen , Individual subunits of the glutamate transporter EAAC1 homotrimer function independently of each other , Biochemistry , 44 ( 2005 ) 11913 - 11923 . [ 84 ] K . Igarashi , T . Uchihashi , A . Koivula , M . Wada , S . Kimura , T . Okamoto , M . Penttila , T . Ando , M . Samejima , Traffic jams reduce hydrolytic efficiency of cellulase on cellulose surface , Science , 333 ( 2011 ) 1279 - 1282 . [ 85 ] S . J . Horn , A . Sorbotten , B . Synstad , P . Sikorski , M . Sorlie , K . M . Varum , V . G . Eijsink , Endo / exo mechanism and processivity of family 18 chitinases produced by Serratia marcescens , The FEBS journal , 273 ( 2006 ) 491 - 503 . [ 86 ] M . N . V . R . Kumar , A review of chitin and chitosan applications , React Funct Polym , 46 ( 2000 ) 1 - 27 . [ 87 ] Y . N . Daisuke Sawada , Paul Langan , V . Trevor Forsyth , Satoshi Kimura , Masahisa Wada , Water in Crystalline Fibers of Dihydrate β - Chitin Results in Unexpected Absence of Intramolecular Hydrogen Bonding , Plos One , 7 ( 2012 ) e39376 . A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 26 [ 88 ] F . K . Taku Uchiyama , Naoki Nikaidou , Takamasa Nonaka , Junji Sugiyama and Takeshi Watanabe , Roles of the exposed aromatic residues in crystalline chitin hydrolysis by chitinase A from Serratia marcescens 2170 , Journal of Biological Chemistry , 276 ( 2001 ) 41343 - 41349 . [ 89 ] P . Gollnick , Regulation of the Bacillus subtilis trp operon by an RNA - binding protein , Mol Microbiol , 11 ( 1994 ) 991 - 997 . [ 90 ] J . G . Heddle , I . Fujiwara , H . Yamadaki , S . Yoshii , K . Nishio , C . Addy , I . Yamashita , J . R . Tame , Using the ring - shaped protein TRAP to capture and confine gold nanodots on a surface , Small , 3 ( 2007 ) 1950 - 1956 . [ 91 ] A . D . Malay , J . G . Heddle , S . Tomita , K . Iwasaki , N . Miyazaki , K . Sumitomo , H . Yanagi , I . Yamashita , Y . Uraoka , Gold nanoparticle - induced formation of artificial protein capsids , Nano letters , 12 ( 2012 ) 2056 - 2059 . [ 92 ] M . Imamura , T . Uchihashi , T . Ando , A . Leifert , U . Simon , A . D . Malay , J . G . Heddle , Probing Structural Dynamics of an Artificial Protein Cage Using High - Speed Atomic Force Microscopy , Nano letters , 15 ( 2015 ) 1331 - 1335 . [ 93 ] A . Miyagi , C . Chipot , M . Rangl , S . Scheuring , High - speed atomic force microscopy shows that annexin V stabilizes membranes on the second timescale , Nature nanotechnology , 11 ( 2016 ) 783 - 790 . [ 94 ] V . Gerke , C . E . Creutz , S . E . Moss , Annexins : Linking Ca2 + signalling to membrane dynamics , Nat Rev Mol Cell Bio , 6 ( 2005 ) 449 - 461 . [ 95 ] I . Reviakine , W . Bergsma - Schutter , A . N . Morozov , A . Brisson , Two - dimensional crystallization of annexin A5 on phospholipid bilayers and monolayers : A solid - solid phase transition between crystal forms , Langmuir , 17 ( 2001 ) 1680 - 1686 . [ 96 ] H . Takahashi , A . Miyagi , L . Redondo - Morata , S . Scheuring , Temperature - Controlled High - Speed AFM : Real - Time Observation of Ripple Phase Transitions , Small , 12 ( 2016 ) 6106 - 6113 . [ 97 ] A . Miyagi , S . Scheuring , Automated force controller for amplitude modulation atomic force microscopy , Rev Sci Instrum , 87 ( 2016 ) 053705 . [ 98 ] H . Watanabe , T . Uchihashi , T . Kobashi , M . Shibata , J . Nishiyama , R . Yasuda , T . Ando , Wide - area scanner for high - speed atomic force microscopy , Review of Scientific Instruments , 84 ( 2013 ) . [ 99 ] A . Colom , I . Casuso , F . Rico , S . Scheuring , A hybrid high - speed atomic force - optical microscope for visualizing single membrane proteins on eukaryotic cells , Nat Commun , 4 ( 2013 ) 2155 . A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 27 [ 100 ] M . Shibata , T . Uchihashi , T . Ando , R . Yasuda , Long - tip high - speed atomic force microscopy for nanometer - scale imaging in live cells , Scientific Reports , 5 ( 2015 ) . [ 101 ] S . Fukuda , T . Uchihashi , R . Iino , Y . Okazaki , M . Yoshida , K . Igarashi , T . Ando , High - speed atomic force microscope combined with single - molecule fluorescence microscope , Review of Scientific Instruments , 84 ( 2013 ) . A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 28 A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 29 A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 30 A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 31 A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 32 A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 33 A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 34 A CC EP T E D M A NU S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 35