Detection and localization of single molecular recognition events using atomic force microscopy Peter Hinterdorfer 1 & Yves F Dufrêne 2 Because of its piconewton force sensitivity and nanometer positional accuracy , the atomic force microscope ( AFM ) has emerged as a powerful tool for exploring the forces and the dynamics of the interaction between individual ligands and receptors , either on isolated molecules or on cellular surfaces . These studies require attaching specific biomolecules or cells on AFM tips and on solid supports and measuring the unbinding forces between the modified surfaces using AFM force spectroscopy . In this review , we describe the current methodology for molecular recognition studies using the AFM , with an emphasis on strategies available for preparing AFM tips and samples , and on procedures for detecting and localizing single molecular recognition events . Molecular recognition between receptors and their cognate ligands is important in life sciences . Such spe - cific interactions include those between complemen - tary strands of DNA , enzyme and substrate , antigen and antibody , lectin and carbohydrate , ligands and cell - surface receptors as well as between cell adhesion pro - teins . These interactions are involved in many important biological processes , including genome replication and transcription , enzymatic activity , immune response , ini - tiation of infection , and many other cellular functions . Furthermore , their selectivity and specificity are widely exploited in nanobiotechnology for developing bio - analytical and biomedical devices such as biosensors 1 . Despite the vast body of available literature on the struc - ture and function of receptor - ligand complexes , infor - mation about the molecular dynamics within the com - plexes during the association and dissociation process is usually lacking . Moreover , until recently , mapping the spatial distribution of individual binding sites on model or cellular surfaces was not accessible because of a lack of appropriate imaging techniques . Consequently , there is clearly a need to develop and exploit single molecule tools for sensing and mapping molecular recognition interactions on biosurfaces . Owing to its capacity to allow observation and manip - ulation of biosurfaces under physiological conditions , the AFM 2 has revolutionized the way in which research - ers now explore biological structures at the single - molecule level 3 . Although AFM imaging provides three - dimensional views of specimens with unprecedented resolution and with minimal sample preparation 4 , AFM force spectroscopy allows measurement of piconetwon ( 10 − 12 N ) forces associated with single molecules 5 , 6 thereby providing fundamental insights into the molec - ular basis of biological phenomena and properties as diverse as molecular recognition 7 – 9 , protein folding and unfolding 10 , 11 , DNA mechanics 12 and cell adhesion 13 . The main parts of the AFM are the cantilever , the tip , the sample stage and the optical deflection system con - sisting of a laser diode and a photodetector ( Fig . 1 ) . AFM images are created by scanning ( in the x and y direc - tions ) a sharp tip , mounted to a soft cantilever spring , over the surface of a sample and by using the interac - tion force between the tip and the sample to probe the topography of the surface . Force spectroscopy relies on measuring this force with piconewton sensitivity as the tip is pushed toward the sample and retracts from it in the z direction . The sample is mounted on a piezoelectric 1 Institute for Biophysics , Johannes Kepler University of Linz , Altenbergerstr . 69 , A - 4040 Linz , Austria . 2 Laboratory of Interfaces Chemistry , Catholic University of Louvain , Croix du Sud 2 / 18 , B - 1348 Louvain - la - Neuve , Belgium . Correspondence should be addressed to P . H . ( peter . hinterdorfer @ jku . at ) or Y . F . D . ( dufrene @ cifa . ucl . ac . be ) . PUBLISHED ONLINE 20 APRIL 2006 ; DOI : 10 . 1038 / NMETH871 NATURE METHODS | VOL . 3 NO . 5 | MAY 2006 | 347 REVIEW © 2006 N a t u r e P ub li s h i ng G r oup h tt p : / / www . n a t u r e . c o m / n a t u r e m e t hod s scanner which ensures three - dimensional positioning with sub - nanometer resolution . The force is monitored by measuring the deflection ( vertical bending ) of the cantilever . The cantilever deflec - tion is usually detected by a laser beam focused on the free end of the cantilever and reflected into a photodiode ; this deflection is directly proportional to the force . In so - called dynamic force spectroscopy , the rate of the increasing force ( loading rate ) is varied during the experiment , thereby providing insights into the molecular dynamics of recognition processes . Here we describe current methodologies for sensing single molec - ular recognition events using AFM force spectroscopy . We highlight procedures and practical advice for preparing AFM tips and sam - ples as well as for analyzing the forces , dynamics and localization of receptor - ligand interactions . Preparing AFM tips and samples Single molecule – recognition studies require functionalization of AFM tips ( or cantilevers ) and samples with relevant biomolecules ( or cells ) . It must be emphasized that the quality and reproducibility of these preparation steps are the key factors that govern the success and the reliability of a single - molecule experiment ( Box 1 ) . AFM tips . In the first pioneering studies of single receptor - ligand force measurements , strong physical adsorption of biotinylated bovine serum albumin ( BBSA ) was used to directly coat the tip 7 or a glass bead glued to it 14 . This physisorbed protein layer may be reacted with avidin or streptavidin ( Fig . 2a ) , and then serve as a matrix for modification with biotinylated ligands 15 . In spite of the large number of probe molecules on the tip , the small fraction of properly oriented molecules and / or blockage of most reactive sites may be sufficient to allow the measurement of single receptor - ligand unbinding forces . But because parallel breakage of multiple bonds is often observed with this configuration , it is not ideally suited for single molecule – recognition studies . Another limitation of the bio - tin - avidin system is its fairly low binding strength compared to that of covalent bonds 16 . In fact , several important factors must be considered to achieve single molecular interaction detection . First , the binding of the mol - ecules to the surfaces should be much stronger than the intermo - lecular force being studied . This is best achieved by using covalent bonds as they are at least ten times stronger ( 1 – 2 nN ) 16 than typical receptor - ligand bonds . Second , the surface density of the molecules should be sufficiently low to ensure single - molecule interactions . Third , the molecules should retain sufficient mobility so that they can freely interact with complementary molecules , which is usually achieved by attaching the molecules on the surfaces via a flexible molecular spacer . Forth , unspecific adsorption on the modified sur - faces should be inhibited to minimize the contribution of unspecific adhesion to the measured forces . Fifth , for oriented systems , site - directed coupling in which the molecule has a defined orientation may be desired . To fulfill these requirements , essentially two types of surface chemistries have been developed in different laboratories , which are based either on the strong chemisorption of thiols on gold surfaces or on the covalent attachment of silanes or alcohols on silicon oxide surfaces . In the thiol approach ( Fig . 2b ) , gold surfaces are first obtained by coating microfabricated cantilevers ( or supports ) by thermal evaporation with a thin adhesive layer of chromium ( or titanium ) , followed by a 15 – 100 - nm - thick gold layer . Then , proteins , oligo - nucleotides or carbohydrates that bear thiol groups can be attached directly on the gold surfaces . This type of surface chemistry has allowed the detection of intermolecular forces between complemen - tary DNA oligonucleotides 8 , between ferritin antibody and ferri - tin 17 , between concanavalin and oligosaccharides 18 , and between fibronectin and bacterial cells 19 . Alternatively , biomolecules can be attached onto gold via self - assembled monolayers ( SAMs ) of functionalized alkanethiols . SAMs are easily obtained by immers - ing gold surfaces in dilute ( typically 1 mM ) ethanol solutions of the selected alkanethiols . The latter can then be reacted with the bio - molecule of interest in different ways , depending on their terminal functional groups . Alkanethiols that terminate in carboxyl functions can be reacted with amino groups of proteins using 1 - ethyl - 3 - ( 3 - dimethylaminopropyl ) carbodiimide ( EDC ) and N - hydroxysuccin - imide ( NHS ) in aqueous solution 20 . Amino - functionalized surfaces prepared using either alkanethiols or silanes ( see below ) may also be used to attach proteins . In this context , carboxymethyl - amylose activated with NHS and EDC has been used to provide both firm attachment and molecular mobility 21 , 22 . This approach , however , is only of limited use as it usually gives broad unbinding force distribu - tions owing to multiple attachment points . For some studies , it may be desired to orient all the attached mol - ecules in the same way , which can be achieved using the site - directed nickel nitrilotriacetate ( Ni - NTA ) - histidine system ( Fig . 2b ) 23 – 27 . In this system , recombinant histidine - tagged proteins are attached via their carboxy or amino termini onto an AFM tip coated with NTA - terminated alkanethiols . This coupling approach offers the Photodiode Laser Cantilever Tip Sample Scanner x y z Figure 1 | General principle of atomic force microscopy . AFM imaging is performed by scanning a very sharp tip across the sample surface while the force of interaction between the tip and the sample is monitored with piconewton sensitivity . The sample is mounted on a piezoelectric scanner which ensures three - dimensional positioning with high resolution , and the force between tip and surface is monitored by measuring the cantilever deflection using an optical method ( laser , photodiode ) . Beside imaging surfaces , AFM can be used in the force spectroscopy mode , in which the cantilever deflection is recorded as a function of the vertical displacement of the piezoelectric scanner , that is , as the sample is pushed towards the tip and retracted from it ( bidirectional arrow ) . 348 | VOL . 3 NO . 5 | MAY 2006 | NATURE METHODS REVIEW © 2006 N a t u r e P ub li s h i ng G r oup h tt p : / / www . n a t u r e . c o m / n a t u r e m e t hod s advantage of allowing an optimal exposure of the C - terminal or N - terminal domains . In addition , dilution of the NTA alkanethi - ols in a matrix of shorter tri ( ethylene glycol ) alkanethiols ( Fig . 2b ) confers high mobility to the attached proteins , minimizes nonspe - cific protein adsorption and allows low - density coupling to ensure single - molecule recognition 25 , 26 . A limitation of the Ni - NTA – His system is its low binding strength ( 150 – 200 pN ) 23 compared to that of covalent bonds ( 1 – 2 nN ) 16 . Therefore , it is important to empha - size that this approach may not be appropriate for studying strong receptor - ligand bonds , and that control experiments should be per - formed to confirm that the bond between His and Ni - NTA did not break during the experiment ( for example , comparing the measured unbinding forces with those obtained for the bond between His and Ni - NTA using the same loading rate ) . In contrast to the above procedures , silane or alcohol - based approaches can be applied directly to silicon tips ( or supports ) , that is , without predepositing a gold layer ( Fig . 2c ) . In particular , vari - ous amine - functionalization procedures using ethanolamine 9 , 28 or different silanization methods 29 – 32 are available to anchor biomol - ecules for single - molecule experiments . As the amine surface density determines , to a large extent , the number of ligands on the tip that can specifically bind to the receptors on the surface , the amine sur - face density has to be sufficiently low to guarantee single - molecu - lar recognition events 9 , 28 . The amino - terminated surfaces readily react with a cross - linker , which provides the ligands with motional freedom and prevents their denaturation . Cross - linkers typically carry two different functional ends , for example , an amine - reac - tive NHS group on one end , and 2 - pyridyldithiopropionyl ( PDP ) 33 There are several important factors that determine the quality of a single molecular recognition experiment . Practical advice related to these factors is provided below . Preparing AFM tips . Functionalization of AFM tips using appropriate procedures is of key importance for the detection of single molecular recognition . As a general rule , the use of covalent binding to attach biomolecules on tips should be favored , which is generally obtained using either thiol or silane surface chemistries . Protocols should be carefully developed and tested to achieve strong attachment of the biomolecules at low surface density , to guarantee sufficient mobility and to inhibit unspecific adsorption . Orientation of the biomolecules can be achieved using the site - directed Ni - NTA – His system or sulfur chemistry after introduction of cysteine residues into the protein of interest ; the first approach , however , is limited by its fairly weak binding strength . Protocols are also available that describe how to attach cells onto AFM cantilevers , among which there are elegant approaches relying on specific receptor - ligand interactions . For every new system , the quality of the surface modifications should be assessed using fluorescence or other surface analysis techniques . Preparing supporting surfaces . Purified biomolecules can be attached to mica , glass and silicon supports using generally the same protocols as those available for tip functionalization . Procedures are also available to immobilize cells on supports . The use of chemical fixation and / or air - drying should generally be avoided as this may cause denaturation of the cell - surface constituents . As a general rule , it is recommended to keep functionalized tips and samples hydrated and in conditions where their functionality remains intact . Recording force curves . Depending on the nature of both tip and sample , the lifetime of a functionalized tip may be very short because of tip contamination or damage . In particular , when the sample surface is fragile and coated with loosely bound material , as often the case for cell surfaces , the ‘activity’ of the biological tip may be lost after recording a single image or a few force curves . In these conditions , it may therefore be useful to visualize the morphology of the sample surface with an unmodified tip to identify a region that is sufficiently smooth , homogeneous and stable before engaging a functionalized tip on the same region . Then , it is recommended to record force curves immediately after the tip is engaged on a single spot and to assess how the force behavior evolves with time and when moving from one spot to another . Another important point to avoid tip and sample alteration , is to limit the maximum contact force to several hundred piconewtons . To measure discrete molecular recognition forces , it may sometimes be useful not only to dilute the surface density of biomolecules on the tip , but also to modulate the contact force and the contact time between tip and sample . Most importantly , quantitative force measurements require accurate determination of the cantilever spring constant , which can be achieved using different methods . How about statistics ? To get reliable force data on a given molecular recognition system , users should record several hundred force - curves using many independent tips and samples . Varying the loading rate . For force spectroscopy experiments on receptor - ligand complexes it is important to vary the loading rate over orders of magnitude . The loading rate is the force increase over time during pulling the receptor - ligand complex and can be approximated by the effective spring constant of the system ( cantilever and bound molecules ) multiplied by pulling velocity . It can be varied by changing the spring constant of the cantilever and / or by changing the retraction speed . The upper limits are given by the force sensitivity and the possibly occurring hysteresis between tip approach and tip retraction , respectively . The latter is caused by hydrodynamic forces acting on the cantilever during movement . Another limitation to the pulling speed is the resonance frequency of the cantilever 85 . As a rule of thumb , spring constants should not exceed 0 . 1 N / m , and pulling speeds should be lower than 5 µm / s . Recording force maps . Microscopists may use either adhesion force mapping or dynamic recognition force mapping to localize specific binding sites on biosurfaces . The choice will depend on the type of microscope available , on the targeted application and on the desired information . Although the first method allows quantitative determination of forces , it is slow and offers fairly poor lateral resolution compared to the second method . In the future , we anticipate that an ideal combination will consist of using first dynamic recognition force mapping for identifying specific recognition sites and then exploiting force spectroscopy to provide quantitative force data . BOX 1 RECOMMENDATIONS FOR RELIABLE SINGLE - MOLECULE EXPERIMENTS NATURE METHODS | VOL . 3 NO . 5 | MAY 2006 | 349 REVIEW © 2006 N a t u r e P ub li s h i ng G r oup h tt p : / / www . n a t u r e . c o m / n a t u r e m e t hod s or vinyl sulfone 34 groups , which can be covalently bound to thi - ols , on the other ( Fig . 2c ) . This sulfur chemistry is highly advanta - geous as it is very reactive and readily permits site - directed coupling via NTA groups 23 . In addition , the cross - linker may also be used as a spacer , which allows the molecule to freely orient and diffuse within a certain volume 9 . Free thiols on ligands can be generated by ( i ) binding N - succinnimidyl - 3 - ( S - acethylthio ) propionate to amines 33 , ( ii ) cleaving antibodies according to a standard proce - dure 35 , or ( iii ) attaching PDP hydrazide to oligosaccharide residues of antibodies 36 , 37 . Alternatively , proteins can be directly coupled via their lysines to aldehyde end groups of cross - linkers ( L . Wildling , P . H . & H . Gruber ; manuscript in preparation ) . For any new system , it is strongly recommended to validate the quality of the tip surface modifications even when using well - established protocols from the literature . To this end , flat model sup - ports such as silicon or mica are treated in parallel with the tips , and characterized by means of various analytical techniques , including fluorescence and AFM imaging . For fluorescence measurements 9 , 28 , the attached molecules can either be directly fluorescence labeled or fluorescence - labeled secondary antibodies can be ligated to surface - bound primary antibodies . Alternatively , the density of specific sites can be determined with an enzyme immunological assay 29 . The lat - ter two methods provide the advantage to test the functionality of the attached molecules on the surface , whereas the first determines only the total number density . Using standard amine - functional - ization procedures as described above , values between 200 and 500 molecules / µm 2 were usually obtained with all three protocols . For a typical AFM tip radius of 20 – 50 nm , this value corresponds to about one molecule per effective tip area , which appears to be suited for single - molecule experiments . AFM topographic imaging in aqueous solution is also very useful to assess the quality of the functionalized surfaces as it allows determination of whether the modified sur - faces are homogenous and devoid of aggregates 14 , 25 . Furthermore , scanning small areas at large forces results in the removal of the biomolecular layers and thereby allows direct determination of their thickness . Notably , several techniques have also been developed to attach cells directly onto AFM cantilevers ( Fig . 2d ) , allowing researchers to probe cell - cell or cell - support interactions . Strategies for creat - ing cell - probes involve the use of specific receptor - ligand interac - tions 13 , 38 , electrostatic interactions 39 , glue 40 or chemical fixation 41 . Depending on the application , best results may be obtained using tip - less cantilevers , as cell contact is favored in this case . An impor - tant issue when applying these protocols is to make sure that the native surface of the attached cells is not altered or denatured . In this respect , an elegant approach is to attach individual cells to an AFM cantilever via lectins such as wheatgerm agglutinin . This tech - nique allowed measurement of the specific adhesion force between two adjacent cells of Dictyostelium discoideum on a single - molecule level ( Fig . 2d ) 13 . Notably , this force could be ascribed to the discrete interaction between two cell adhesion glycoproteins engaged in cell aggregation . Samples . Another crucial issue is that the receptors ( or ligands ) recognized by the functionalized tip need to be firmly attached to a solid support using appropriate , nondestructive methods . Mica , glass and silicon have proved to be excellent supports for immo - bilizing purified receptors . Muscovite mica , the most frequently used support for biological AFM , is a nonconducting layered min - eral which can be easily cleaved with the help of an adhesive tape leading to clean , atomically flat surfaces . Because the mica surface is negatively charged at neutral pH , simple adsorption of positively charged proteins , such as lysozyme 35 , may be sufficient to withstand the pulling force exerted by the tip during the force spectroscopy measurements . Physical adsorption is also a well - suited immobiliza - tion strategy for probing native membranes 4 , 42 . For most biomolecules , however , immobilization through cova - lent attachment is required . When using glass , silicon or mica , the immobilization schemes are very similar to those described above for tip functionalization , that is , supports can either be modified through thiol surface chemistry 43 , 44 after gold deposition , or directly subjected to silane 45 or ethanolamine 46 modification . It is worth noting that ultrasmooth gold - coated surfaces ( roughness ~ 0 . 1 nm ) may be obtained using template stripped gold methods 47 . The typical procedure involves depositing gold onto a smooth sup - port such as mica , supporting the free gold surface by gluing it to a glass slide using epoxy glue and stripping the gold film from the support . Another important remark is that silanes , as opposed to alkanethiols , do not allow for high surface densities , that is , > 1 , 000 molecules / µm 2 . By comparison , the surface density of a monolayer of streptavidin is ~ 60 , 000 molecules / µm 2 and that of a phospholipid monolayer may exceed 10 6 molecules / µm 2 . When using single - molecule AFM force spectroscopy on cellular Gold tip BiotinylatedBSA Silicon tip Streptavidin Biotinylatedprotein Ethylene glycol ( EG ) alkanethiols Gold tip NTA alkanethiol His - tagged protein PEG crosslinker Cell probes a b c d Figure 2 | Schematics of surface chemistries commonly used for modifying AFM tips for single - molecule recognition studies . ( a ) Physisorption of proteins such as BBSA 7 , 14 . The BBSA - coated tip may be reacted with streptavidin and then modified with biotinylated proteins . ( b ) Chemisorption of alkanethiols on gold 25 , 26 . Histidine - tagged proteins are attached onto a gold - coated tip modified with NTA - terminated alkanethiols . ( c ) Covalent coupling of silanes on silicon oxide 9 , 28 . Proteins are coupled to the tip via a heterobifunctional polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) crosslinker : the amine reactive NHS end of the crosslinker reacts with amines on the silicon tip , yielding a stable amide bond , and the reactive PDP group forms a bond with free thiols presented by cysteines in the protein , resulting in a stable disulfide bond . ( d ) Attachment of living cells by means of receptor - ligand interactions . Light - microscopy image of a Dictyostelium discoideum cell mounted on an AFM cantilever ( left ) . By applying a repulsive contact force between the cantilever - mounted cell and a target cell at the bottom of a Petri dish , and then retracting the cantilever from the target cell ( right schematics ) , specific cell - cell adhesion forces can be measured . Scale bar , 20 µm ; d reproduced with permission from ref . 13 . 350 | VOL . 3 NO . 5 | MAY 2006 | NATURE METHODS REVIEW © 2006 N a t u r e P ub li s h i ng G r oup h tt p : / / www . n a t u r e . c o m / n a t u r e m e t hod s surfaces , a key issue is to immobilize the cells while preserving their viability and integrity . For animal cells , a simple preparation method is to exploit their ability to spread and adhere to solid surfaces 48 – 51 . Firm immobilization of weakly adhering cells can be achieved by various adhesive coatings such as Cell - Tak 52 , gelatin , collagen or polylysine 21 . Alternatively , chemical fixation using cross - link - ing agents such as glutaraldehyde may also be applied . Although this approach may be relevant for topographic imaging 53 , in most instances it will not be satisfactory for single - molecule recognition studies . Unlike animal cells , microbial cells such as bacteria and yeast can - not spread on solid supports . Thus , immobilization by means of simple adsorption procedures is often inappropriate as this usually leads to cell detachment by the scanning tip . Stronger attachment may be achieved either by pretreating the support with polycations 54 or lectins 55 , or by binding the cells covalently to the support 56 . An alternative approach is to immobilize the cells mechanically in a polymer membrane with a pore size comparable to the dimensions of the cell . This method allows one to perform repeated imaging and force spectroscopy on living cells without causing cell detachment or cell damage 57 , 58 . Measuring single - molecule recognition forces Several powerful techniques are available for probing the interaction forces between biosurfaces ; they include the use of shear flow detach - ment 59 , surface force apparatus 60 , biomembrane force probe 61 , optical tweezers 62 and AFM . Remarkably , AFM is the force - measuring meth - od with the smallest force sensor ( AFM tip radii are in the 2 – 50 nm range ) and therefore provides the highest lateral resolution . In fact , AFM is currently the only force technique that allows one to map and analyze single receptors with nanoscale lateral resolution . Measuring molecular recognition forces by AFM requires record - ing so - called force curves between the modified tip and sample sur - face . AFM force curves are obtained by monitoring , at a given ( x , y ) location , the cantilever deflection ( d ) as a function of the vertical dis - placement of the piezoelectric scanner ( z ) . This yields a raw ‘voltage - displacement’ curve , which can be converted into a ‘force - displace - ment’ curve using two conversions . Firstly , the sensitivity of the AFM detector , that is , the slope of the retraction curve in the region where tip and sample are in contact , is used to convert the voltage into a cantilever deflection . It is important to note that the estimated sensi - tivity is only valid when the sample behaves like a hard , nondeform - able material , which is often true for purified molecules attached on hard supports . For soft cells , however , the value obtained for the sensitivity may be incorrect owing to sample deformation by the tip . In this case , it is mandatory to assess the sensitivity of the detector on a hard support , before or after the force measurements on cells . Secondly , the cantilever deflection is converted into a force ( F ) using Hooke’s law : F = k × d , where k is the cantilever spring constant . The force resolution of the AFM is in first approximation limited by the thermal noise of the cantilever that , in turn , is determined by its spring constant . In addition , the resonance frequency , the quality factor , and the measurement bandwidth can also substan - tially contribute 63 . Therefore , for single - molecule force measure - ments , best results are generally obtained with cantilevers exhibiting small spring constants ( that is , in the range of 0 . 01 to 0 . 10 N / m ) and short lengths ( < 50 µm ) , because they exhibit lower force noise . Notably , the actual spring constants may differ substantially from values quoted by the manufacturer , meaning researchers must deter - mine spring constants experimentally to get accurate knowledge of the measured forces ( see ref . 64 for a recent comparison of calibra - tion methods ) . Various features may be distinguished in a force curve . At large tip - sample separation distances , the force experienced by the tip is zero . As the tip approaches the surface , the cantilever may bend upwards owing to repulsive forces ( electrostatic , hydration or most importantly steric forces ) until the tip jumps into contact when the gradient of attractive forces exceeds the spring constant plus the gradient of repulsive forces . Upon retracting the tip from the sur - face , the curve often shows a hysteresis referred to as the adhesion ‘pull - off’ force ( Fig . 3a ) . This value is most important in molecular recognition studies as it represents the unbinding force between complementary receptor and ligand molecules . In the presence of flexible molecules , such as long biomolecules or cross - linkers , an elongation force may develop before the unbinding event , reflecting an increase of the spring constant of the flexible molecule during extension . A key feature in molecular recognition studies is to demonstrate the specificity of the measured unbinding forces , which can be achieved in different ways . Block experiments in which the recep - tor sites are masked by adding free ligands is the most simple and straightforward approach ( Fig . 3b ) . Another , probably less convinc - ing , approach is to use a tip that has been functionalized with bio - molecules resembling the ligands but that do not have specificity for the receptors . For cell studies , mutants deficient in receptor produc - tion may provide elegant additional controls . Concerning statistics , it is recommended to measure many unbinding events by recording several hundred force curves on different locations of the sample and to express the data as force F o r c e F o r c e Piezo displacement 10 0 p N 10 nm a b Figure 3 | Measurement of molecular recognition interaction forces . ( a ) Typical force - displacement curve obtained upon retracting ( down arrow ) an AFM tip functionalized with oligoglucose carbohydrates from a surface modified with the lectin concanavalin A . Force - displacement curves are obtained from raw ‘voltage - displacement’ curves using the sensitivity of the AFM detector and the cantilever spring constant . The curve shows an unbinding force of about 100 pN , attributed to the rupture of a single carbohydrate - lectin pair . The unbinding event is accompanied by a nonlinear elongation force ( arrow on the right ) reflecting essentially the stretching of the flexible spacer . ( b ) Blocking experiment demonstrating that the 100 pN unbinding force is not observed when the measurements are performed in the presence of blocking agents like glucose or mannose . NATURE METHODS | VOL . 3 NO . 5 | MAY 2006 | 351 REVIEW © 2006 N a t u r e P ub li s h i ng G r oup h tt p : / / www . n a t u r e . c o m / n a t u r e m e t hod s histograms showing the distribution of at least 100 unbinding force values . Also , the reliability and reproducibility of the mea - sured unbinding forces should be demonstrated by comparing data obtained using many independent tips and samples . Finally , as we shall see below , unbinding force histograms should be generated while varying the loading rate over several orders of magnitude . Exploring the dynamics of receptor - ligand interactions Unbinding forces between receptors and ligands measured at con - stant pulling velocity represent only a single point in a continuous spectrum of bond strengths because theory predicts 65 and experi - ments confirm 15 , 38 , 61 , 66 that these depend on the loading rate , that is , the timely rate at which the load , that is , the force F , is applied to the bond . Therefore , users should always control , and when possible vary , the loading rate to compare unbinding forces from different experiments . As we shall see , this procedure is also very useful to assess kinetic parameters and shapes of energy landscapes of the unbinding process . To understand the loading rate dependence , one must keep in mind that receptor - ligand bonds have limited lifetimes and that the lifetime is shortened when a force is applied to a bond owing to thermal activation . In fact , the thermal energy of the surrounding solution makes bonds also break in the absence of an external force , which is essential for rendering possible time - controlled regulation of ligand - stimulated processes . The characteristic time scale ( τ ( 0 ) ) needed for this spontaneous dissociation ( 0 in τ indicates that no force is applied ) is given by the inverse of the kinetic off - rate constant in solution ( k off ) , thus τ ( 0 ) = k off – 1 . Pulled faster than τ ( 0 ) , bonds will resist detachment and an unbinding force becomes measur - able . The millisecond to second time scale accessible for AFM force experiments lies in the thermally activated regime , in which thermal impulses govern the dissociation process . Here , a Boltzmann ansatz can be used to describe how a force F acting on a complex low - ers the dissociation barrier and shortens the bond lifetime : τ ( F ) = τ ( 0 ) exp ( – x β F / k B T ) 65 , 67 ; x β marking the thermally averaged projec - tion of the energy barrier along the direction of the force , τ ( F ) is the bond life time under force F , k B is the Boltzmann constant , and T is the absolute temperature . In a mode termed dynamic force spectroscopy , the unbinding force of a receptor - ligand complex is measured as a function of the actual loading rate ( r = d F / d t ) , in which the latter can be derived from the product of the pulling velocity and the effective spring constant of the whole system ( cantilever and involved molecules ) . This approach is actually very useful to assess kinetic parameters of the unbinding process , including length scales and relative heights of energy barriers . For most experimental configurations , the force applied to a receptor - ligand complex in force curves increases approximately linearly with time ( Fig . 3 ) . Bond rupture itself is a sto - chastic process , and the likelihood of bond survival can be expressed in a master equation as a time - dependent probability N ( t ) to be in the bound state under a linearly increasing force ( load ) , that is , d N ( t ) / d t = – k off ( rt ) N ( t ) ( ref . 68 ) . This , together with the equation for τ ( F ) given above , results in a distribution of unbinding forces P ( F ) parameterized by the loading rate 65 , 68 . In experiments , careful analysis of the force distributions , from which each has to be constructed from the force values of many force curves , obtained at the different loading rates ( Fig . 4 ) 66 is required to gain the variables mentioned above . The theory above 61 , 65 , 68 predicts that , if only one single , sharp energy barrier governs the dissociation process , the maxima of the distributions at different loading rates ( F * ) , are in logarithmic dependence on the loading rate , according to F * = F β ln ( rk off - 1 / F β ) , with F β being the force scale set by the ratio of thermal energy ( k B T ) to x β 65 , 68 . Thus , a single energy barrier should lead to a simple , straight line in an F * versus log ( r ) plot . Several examples of this behavior for a variety of receptor - ligand combi - nations are available in the literature 15 , 23 , 30 . But for cases in which C oun t s Force ( pN ) 240 pN / s 4 , 300 pN / s 125 , 000 pN / s 20 15 15 10 10 5 5 0 0 0 50 100 150 200 10 12 8 6 4 2 300 400 200 100 0 10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5 Loading rate ( pN / s ) U nb i nd i ng f o r c e ( p N ) aa b Figure 4 | Dynamic force spectroscopy of a single receptor - ligand bond . ( a ) Unbinding force histograms of the sialyl Lewis X ( sLeX ) – P - selectin interaction recorded at the indicated loading rates . ( b ) Dynamic force spectra of the sLeX – P - selectin interaction in the absence ( open symbols ) and presence ( closed symbols ) of EDTA . Data represent the mean ± s . e . m . Reproduced with permission from ref . 66 . 352 | VOL . 3 NO . 5 | MAY 2006 | NATURE METHODS REVIEW © 2006 N a t u r e P ub li s h i ng G r oup h tt p : / / www . n a t u r e . c o m / n a t u r e m e t hod s different barriers become dominant at varying loading rates , the curve will follow a sequence of linear regimes , each marking a par - ticular barrier 61 , 65 . Transition from one regime to another is associ - ated with an abrupt change of slope determined by the inverse of the characteristic barrier length scale x β ( Fig . 4b ) 66 . Notably , length scales and relative heights of energy barriers can be obtained by mea - suring the bond strength over a broad range of loading rates 38 . One may also attempt to extract dissociation rate constants by extrapola - tion to zero force 15 and compare the values with those obtained with ensemble - average experiments like surface plasmon resonance 26 . Nevo and coworkers 69 recently found that the force histograms of the interaction between nuclear pore proteins show two maxima , strongly suggesting the coexistence of two complex populations , one with high affinity and the other with lower affinity . Mapping molecular recognition events There is increasing evidence indicating that eukaryotic cell membranes show lateral heterogeneities that are enriched in ( glycol ) sphingolipids , cholesterol and specific membrane proteins 70 . These nano - and microdomains are thought to have important roles in a variety of cellular functions including signaling , cell adhesion and membrane trafficking . It is also increasingly recognized that bacterial cell walls are dynamic structures that can show selective accumulations of constituents at particular locations 71 . This empha - sizes the need to develop high - resolution imaging tools for localiz - ing specific sites on eukaryotic and prokaryotic cell surfaces . In this context , AFM offers exciting opportunities for mapping individual binding sites with nanoscale resolution , thereby providing informa - tion that is complementary to that obtained by fluorescence and electron microscopy methods . Adhesion force mapping . A first approach to map molecular recognition sites is to record arrays of force curves in the x , y plane using functionalized tips . Typically , 16 × 16 or 32 × 32 force curves are recorded on areas of a given size , the unbinding force value is estimat - ed for each curve and then displayed as grey pixels , the brightness of which reflects the magnitude of the unbinding force ( Fig . 5 ) . The first proof of concept of this ‘affinity imaging’ mode has been provided by imaging microscale streptavidin patterns using a biotinylated tip 72 . The feasibility of using a lectin - modified tip for mapping wall poly - saccharides on living yeast cells has also been demonstrated 55 . Since then , this method has been exploited for mapping binding sites on various types of living cells , including red blood cells 21 , osteoclasts 73 , endothelial cells 50 and mycobacteria 25 ( Fig . 5 ) . Although adhesion force mapping provides a quantitative analysis of unbinding forces , it is limited by its time resolution . The time currently required to record a map is on the order of 2 – 15 min , depending on the acquisi - tion parameters , which is much greater than the time scale at which dynamic processes usually occur in biology . Dynamic recognition force mapping . In dynamic recognition imaging 74 , molecular recognition signals are detected 9 during dynamic force microscopy imaging 75 , 76 . In more detail , AFM tips carrying ligands are oscillated at very small ( 5 – 10 nm ) amplitudes while being scanned along the surface to which the cognate recep - tors are bound . Topography and recognition images are simulta - neously obtained ( by simultaneous topography and recognition ( TREC ) imaging ) using an electronic circuit ( PicoTrec ; Molecular Imaging ) 77 , 78 . Maxima ( U up ) and minima ( U down ) of each sinusoi - dal cantilever deflection period are depicted and fed into the AFM controller , with U down driving the feedback loop to record the height ( that is , the topography ) image and U up providing the data for con - struction of the recognition image ( Fig . 6a ) . It is important to note that only for cantilevers with a low quality factor ( ~ 1 in liquid ) driven at frequencies below resonance both types of information are independent . Using this approach , singly distributed avidin mol - ecules were scanned with a biotinylated AFM tip 79 , yielding topog - raphy and recognition images at the same time ( Fig . 6b ) . The lateral positions of the avidin molecules obtained in the topography image were spatially well correlated with the recognition signals of the rec - ognition image ( Fig . 6b ) . Dynamic recognition imaging offers the advantage that topography and recognition images can be recorded 100 pN 0 pN Figure 5 | Mapping molecular recognition sites on living cells . Topographic image ( left ) showing two living mycobacteria on a polymer support and adhesion force map ( right ) recorded on a single cell with a heparin - modified tip . In localized regions , the map reveals adhesion events ( clear pixels ) owing to the presence of adhesion proteins referred to as heparin - binding haemagglutinin adhesin ( HBHA ) . Notably , the adhesin distribution is not homogeneous , but apparently concentrated into nanodomains that may have an important role in mediating the attachment of mycobacteria to epithelial cells . Scale bars , 2 µm ( left ) and 100 nm ( right ) . Adapted from ref . 25 . O sc ill a t i on Scan direction PicoTREC Recognitionimage Topographyimage U max U min 43210 nm – 1 0 1 nm a b Figure 6 | Simultaneous topography and recognition imaging ( TREC ) . ( a ) The cantilever oscillation signal is split into minima U min and maxima U max . ( b ) Singly distributed avidin molecules imaged with a biotin - tethered tip . The bright dots 2 to 3 nm in height and 15 to 20 nm in diameter visible in the topography image ( left , solid circles ) are single avidin molecules , and the black dots of the recognition image ( right ) arise from a decrease of the oscillation maxima that result from the physical avidin - biotin connection during recognition . Some topographical features lack specific interaction ( dashed circle ) . Scan size was 500 nm . Scale bars , 100 nm . Reproduced with permission from ref . 79 . NATURE METHODS | VOL . 3 NO . 5 | MAY 2006 | 353 REVIEW © 2006 N a t u r e P ub li s h i ng G r oup h tt p : / / www . n a t u r e . c o m / n a t u r e m e t hod s at the same speed as that used for conventional topographic imaging , typically 1 – 5 minutes per image . Yet , this is still slower than the rate of most dynamic processes , meaning that developing AFM instru - ments with increased imaging rates is an important challenge . Conclusions The methodology for exploring the forces and the dynamics of receptor - ligand interactions using AFM force spectroscopy is well established and should be increasingly used by biophysicists , chemi - cal biologists , cell biologists and microbiologists . Remarkably , AFM is the only force - measuring technique that can map the nanoscale lateral distribution of single molecular recognition sites on bio - surfaces . Yet , it is clear that the full potential of AFM will be best exploited when combined with other advanced microscopy and spectroscopy techniques . Reliable protocols are available for attaching biomolecules or cells on the AFM tips and on supporting surfaces . Also , procedures to probe the forces , the dynamics and the localization of molecular recognition interactions are now well established . Nevertheless , it is fair to say that accurate data collection and interpretation remain often delicate and require strong expertise , especially when dealing with complex specimens like living cells . The main tasks are those associated with the quality of tip and support surface chemistries and with their possible alteration during data acquisition . Thus , a detailed understanding of the principle of the different modalities of AFM and of their limitations is essential before users start their first experiment . In the future , we anticipate that the use of small cantilevers will improve the force resolution , thereby allowing measurement of smaller unbinding forces 63 . Nanotube tips functionalized with single biomolecules will permit the mapping of binding sites with a reso - lution that would be difficult to achieve with conventional tips 80 . In nanobiotechnology , functionalized cantilevers 81 , 82 , combined with automatic analyses , will provide a basis for a new generation of highly sensitive biosensors , which may find important applica - tions for the detection of toxins and for diagnosis and monitoring of diseases . Another big challenge is the development of fast scan - ning AFMs because the time resolution of this method is still a very limiting factor 83 , 84 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Our work is supported by Belgian Funds ( National Foundation for Scientific Research ( FNRS ) , Fonds Spéciaux de Recherche ( Université Catholique de Louvain ) , Interuniversity Poles of Attraction Programme ( Federal Office for Scientific , Technical and Cultural Affairs ) , Région wallonne ) , by the Austrian National Science Fund , by the Austrian Nano and GENAU initiative from the Austrian Ministery of education , science and culture , and by the FP6 of the European Union . Y . F . D . is a Research Associate of the FNRS . COMPETING INTERESTS STATEMENT The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests . Published online at http : / / www . nature . com / naturemethods / Reprints and permissions information is available online at http : / / npg . nature . com / reprintsandpermissions / 1 . Turner , A . P . Biosensors ⎯ sense and sensitivity . Science 290 , 1315 – 1317 ( 2000 ) . 2 . Binnig , G . , Quate , C . F . & Gerber , C . Atomic Force Microscope . Phys . Rev . Lett . 56 , 930 – 933 ( 1986 ) . 3 . Jena , B . P . & Hörber , J . K . Atomic Force Microscopy in Cell Biology , Methods in Cell Biology Vol . 68 . ( Academic Press , San Diego , 2002 ) . 4 . Engel , A . & Müller , D . J . Observing single biomolecules at work with the atomic force microscope . Nat . Struct . Biol . 7 , 715 – 718 ( 2000 ) . 5 . Clausen - Schaumann , H . , Seitz , M . , Krautbauer , R . & Gaub , H . E . Force spectroscopy with single bio - molecules . Curr . Opin . Chem . Biol . 4 , 524 – 530 ( 2000 ) . 6 . Fisher , T . E . , Marszalek , P . E . & Fernandez , J . M . Stretching single molecules into novel conformations using the atomic force microscope . Nat . Struct . Biol . 7 , 719 – 724 ( 2000 ) . 7 . Florin , E . L . , Moy , V . T . & Gaub , H . E . Adhesion forces between individual ligand - receptor pairs . Science 264 , 415 – 417 ( 1994 ) . 8 . Lee , G . U . , Chrisey , L . A . & Colton , R . J . Direct measurement of the forces between complementary strands of DNA . Science 266 , 771 – 773 ( 1994 ) . 9 . Hinterdorfer , P . , Baumgartner , W . , Gruber , H . J . , Schilcher , K . & Schindler , H . Detection and localization of individual antibody - antigen recognition events by atomic force microscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 3477 – 3481 ( 1996 ) . 10 . Rief , M . , Gautel , M . , Oesterhelt , F . , Fernandez , J . M . & Gaub , H . E . Reversible unfolding of individual titin immunoglobulin domains by AFM . Science 276 , 1109 – 1112 ( 1997 ) . 11 . Oberhauser , A . F . , Marszalek , P . E . , Erickson , H . P . & Fernandez , J . M . The molecular elasticity of the extracellular matrix protein tenascin . Nature 393 , 181 – 185 ( 1998 ) . 12 . Rief , M . , Clausen - Schaumann , H . & Gaub , H . E . Sequence - dependent mechanics of single DNA molecules . Nat . Struct . Biol . 6 , 346 – 349 ( 1999 ) . 13 . Benoit , M . , Gabriel , D . , Gerisch , G . & Gaub , H . E . Discrete interactions in cell adhesion measured by single - molecule force spectroscopy . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 , 313 – 317 ( 2000 ) . 14 . Lee , G . U . , Kidwell , D . A . & Colton , R . J . Sensing discrete streptavidin - biotin interactions with atomic force microscopy . Langmuir 10 , 354 – 357 ( 1994 ) . 15 . Fritz , J . , Katopidis , A . G . , Kolbinger , F . & Anselmetti , D . Force - mediated kinetics of single P - selectin / ligand complexes observed by atomic force microscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 12283 – 12288 ( 1998 ) . 16 . Grandbois , M . , Beyer , M . , Rief , M . , Clausen - Schaumann , H . & Gaub , H . E . How strong is a covalent bond ? Science 283 , 1727 – 1730 ( 1999 ) . 17 . Harada , Y . , Kuroda , M . & Ishida , A . Specific and quantized antigen - antibody interaction measured by atomic force microscopy . Langmuir 16 , 708 – 715 ( 2000 ) . 18 . Touhami , A . , Hoffmann , B . , Vasella , A . , Denis , F . A . & Dufrêne , Y . F . Probing specific lectin - carbohydrate interactions using atomic force microscopy imaging and force measurements . Langmuir 19 , 1745 – 1751 ( 2003 ) . 19 . Bustanji , Y . et al . Dynamics of the interaction between a fibronectin molecule and a living bacterium under mechanical force . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 13292 – 13297 ( 2003 ) . 20 . Dammer , U . et al . Binding strength between cell adhesion proteoglycans measured by atomic force microscopy . Science 267 , 1173 – 1175 ( 1995 ) . 21 . Grandbois , M . , Dettmann , W . , Benoit , M . & Gaub , H . E . Affinity imaging of red blood cells using an atomic force microscope . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 48 , 719 – 724 ( 2000 ) . 22 . Touhami , A . , Hoffmann , B . , Vasella , A . , Denis , F . A . & Dufrêne , Y . F . Aggregation of yeast cells : direct measurement of discrete lectin - carbohydrate interactions . Microbiol . SGM 149 , 2873 – 2878 ( 2003 ) . 23 . Kienberger , F . et al . Recognition force spectroscopy studies of the NTA - His6 bond . Single Mol . 1 , 59 – 65 ( 2000 ) . 24 . Schmitt , L . , Ludwig , M . , Gaub , H . E . & Tampé , R . A metal - chelating microscopy tip as a new toolbox for single - molecule experiments by atomic force microscopy . Biophys . J . 78 , 3275 – 3285 ( 2000 ) . 25 . Dupres , V . et al . Nanoscale mapping and functional analysis of individual adhesins on living bacteria . Nat . Methods 2 , 515 – 520 ( 2005 ) . 26 . Berquand , A . et al . Antigen binding forces of single antilysozyme Fv fragments explored by atomic force microscopy . Langmuir 21 , 5517 – 5523 ( 2005 ) . 27 . Lee , G . et al . Nanospring behaviour of ankyrin repeats . Nature 440 , 246 – 249 ( 2006 ) . 28 . Hinterdorfer , P . , Schilcher , K . , Baumgartner , W . , Gruber , H . J . & Schindler , H . A mechanistic study of the dissociation of individual antibody - antigen pairs by atomic force microscopy . Nanobiology 4 , 39 – 50 ( 1998 ) . 29 . Allen , S . et al . Spatial mapping of specific molecular recognition sites by atomic force microscopy . Biochemistry 36 , 7457 – 7463 ( 1997 ) . 30 . Ros , R . et al . Antigen binding forces of individually addressed single - chain Fv antibody molecules . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 7402 – 7405 ( 1998 ) . 31 . Strunz , T . , Oroszlan , K . , Schäfer , R . & Güntherodt , H . - J . Dynamic force spectroscopy of single DNA molecules . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 11277 – 11282 ( 1999 ) . 32 . Yersin , A . et al . Interactions between synaptic vesicle fusion proteins explored by atomic force microscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 8736 – 8741 ( 2003 ) . 354 | VOL . 3 NO . 5 | MAY 2006 | NATURE METHODS REVIEW © 2006 N a t u r e P ub li s h i ng G r oup h tt p : / / www . n a t u r e . c o m / n a t u r e m e t hod s 33 . Haselgrübler , T . , Amerstorfer , A . , Schindler , H . & Gruber , H . J . Synthesis and applications of a new poly ( ethylene glycol ) derivative for the crosslinking of amines with thiols . Bioconjugate Chem . 6 , 242 – 248 ( 1995 ) . 34 . Riener , C . K . et al . Bioconjugation for biospecific detection of single molecules in atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) and in single dye tracing ( SDT ) . Recent Res . Devel . Bioconj . Chem . 1 , 133 – 149 ( 2002 ) . 35 . Raab , A . et al . Antibody recognition imaging by force microscopy . Nat . Biotechnol . 17 , 902 – 905 ( 1999 ) . 36 . Zara , J . J . et al . A carbohydrate - directed heterobifunctional cross - linking reagent for the synthesis of immunoconjugates . Anal . Biochem . 194 , 156 – 162 ( 1991 ) . 37 . Carlsson , J . , Drevin , H . & Axen , R . Protein thiolation and reversible protein - protein conjugation . N - Succinimidyl 3 - ( 2 - pyridyldithio ) propionate , a new heterobifunctional reagent . J . Biochem . 173 , 723 – 737 ( 1978 ) . 38 . Li , F . , Redick , S . D . , Erickson , H . P . & Moy , V . T . Force measurements of the α 5 β 1 integrin - fibronectin interaction . Biophys . J . 84 , 1252 – 1262 ( 2003 ) . 39 . Lower , S . K . , Hochella , M . F . & Beveridge , T . J . Bacterial recognition of mineral surfaces : nanoscale interactions between Shewanella and α - FeOOH . Science 292 , 1360 – 1363 ( 2001 ) . 40 . Bowen , W . R . , Lovitt , R . W . & Wright , C . J . Atomic force microscopy study of the adhesion of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Coll . Interf . Sci . 237 , 54 – 61 ( 2001 ) . 41 . Razatos , A . , Ong , Y . - L . , Sharma , M . M . & Georgiou , G . Molecular determinants of bacterial adhesion monitored by atomic force microscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 11059 – 11064 ( 1998 ) . 42 . Scheuring , S . & Sturgis , J . N . Chromatic adaptation of photosynthetic membranes . Science 309 , 484 – 487 ( 2005 ) . 43 . Wagner , P . , Hegner , M . , Kernen , P . , Zaugg , F . & Semenza , G . Covalent immobilization of native biomolecules onto Au ( 111 ) via N - hydroxysuccinimide ester functionalized self - assembled monolayers for scanning probe microscopy . Biophys . J . 70 , 2052 – 2066 ( 1996 ) . 44 . Wagner , P . Immobilization strategies for biological scanning probe microscopy . FEBS Lett . 430 , 112 – 115 ( 1998 ) . 45 . Karrasch , S . , Dolder , M . , Schabert , F . , Ramsden , J . & Engel , A . Covalent binding of biological samples to solid supports for scanning probe microscopy in buffer solution . Biophys . J . 65 , 2437 – 2446 ( 1993 ) . 46 . Klein , D . C . et al . Covalent immobilization of single proteins on mica for molecular recognition force microscopy . ChemPhysChem 4 , 1367 – 1371 ( 2003 ) . 47 . Wagner , P . , Hegner , M . , Guntherodt , H . - J . & Semenza , G . Formation and in situ modification of monolayers chemisorbed on ultraflat template - stripped gold surfaces . Langmuir 11 , 3867 – 3875 ( 1995 ) . 48 . Radmacher , M . , Tillmann , R . W . , Fritz , M . & Gaub , H . E . From molecules to cells : imaging soft samples with the atomic force microscope . Science 257 , 1900 – 1905 ( 1992 ) . 49 . LeGrimellec , C . et al . Imaging of the surface of living cells by low - force contact - mode atomic force microscopy . Biophys . J . 75 , 695 – 703 ( 1998 ) . 50 . Almqvist , N . et al . Elasticity and adhesion force mapping reveals real - time clustering of growth factor receptors and associated changes in local cellular rheological properties . Biophys . J . 86 , 1753 – 1762 ( 2004 ) . 51 . Stroh , C . M . et al . Detection of HSP60 on the membrane surface of stressed human endothelial cells ( HUVECs ) by atomic force and confocal microscopy . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 1587 – 1594 ( 2005 ) . 52 . Schilcher , K . , Hinterdorfer , P . , Gruber , H . J . & Schindler , H . A non - invasive method for the tight anchoring of cells for scanning force microscopy . Cell Biol . Int . 21 , 769 – 778 ( 1997 ) . 53 . Le Grimellec , C . et al . High - resolution three - dimensional imaging of the lateral plasma membrane of cochlear outer hair cells by atomic force microscopy . J . Comp . Neurol . 451 , 62 – 69 ( 2002 ) . 54 . Schaer - Zammaretti , P . & Ubbink , J . Imaging of lactic acid bacteria with AFM - elasticity and adhesion maps and their relationship to biological and structural data . Ultramicroscopy 97 , 199 – 208 ( 2003 ) . 55 . Gad , M . , Itoh , A . & Ikai , A . Mapping cell wall polysaccharides of living microbial cells using atomic force microscopy . Cell Biol . Int . 21 , 697 – 706 ( 1997 ) . 56 . Camesano , T . A . , Natan , M . J . & Logan , B . E . Observation of changes in bacterial cell morphology using tapping mode atomic force microscopy . Langmuir 16 , 4563 – 4572 ( 2000 ) . 57 . Kasas , S . & Ikai , A . A method for anchoring round shaped cells for atomic force microscope imaging . Biophys . J . 68 , 1678 – 1680 ( 1995 ) . 58 . Dufrêne , Y . F . , Boonaert , C . J . , Gerin , P . A . , Asther , M . & Rouxhet , P . G . Direct probing of the surface ultrastructure and molecular interactions of dormant and germinating spores of Phanerochaete chrysosporium . J . Bacteriol . 181 , 5350 – 5354 ( 1999 ) . 59 . Bongrand , P . , Capo , C . , Mege , J . - L . & Benoliel , A . - M . Use of hydrodynamic flows to study cell adhesion . In Physical basis of cell adhesion ( Bongrand , P . , ed . ) 125 – 156 ( CRC Press , Boca Raton , Florida , 1988 ) . 60 . Leckband , D . E . , Israelachvili , J . N . , Schmitt , F . J . & Knoll , W . Long - range attraction and molecular rearrangements in receptor - ligand interactions . Science 255 , 1419 – 1421 ( 1992 ) . 61 . Merkel , R . , Nassoy , P . , Leung , A . , Ritchie , K . & Evans , E . Energy landscapes of receptor - ligand bonds explored with dynamic force spectroscopy . Nature 397 , 50 – 53 ( 1999 ) . 62 . Ashkin , A . Optical trapping and manipulation of neutral particles using lasers . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 4853 – 4860 ( 1997 ) . 63 . Viani , M . B . et al . Small cantilevers for force spectroscopy of single molecules . J . Appl . Phys . 86 , 2258 – 2262 ( 1999 ) . 64 . Burnham , N . A . et al . Comparison of calibration methods for atomic - force microscopy cantilevers . Nanotechnology 14 , 1 – 6 ( 2003 ) . 65 . Evans , E . & Ritchie , K . Dynamic strength of molecular adhesion bonds . Biophys . J . 72 , 1541 – 1555 ( 1997 ) . 66 . Zhang , X . H . , Bogorin , D . F . & Moy , V . T . Molecular basis of the dynamic strength of the sialyl Lewis X - selectin interaction . ChemPhysChem 5 , 175 – 182 ( 2004 ) . 67 . Bell , G . I . Models for the specific adhesion of cells to cells . Science 200 , 618 – 627 ( 1978 ) . 68 . Strunz , T . , Oroszlan , K . & Schumakovitch , I . Güntherodt , H . - G . & Hegner , M . Model energy landscapes and the force - induced dissociation of ligand - receptor bonds . Biophys . J . 79 , 1206 – 1212 ( 2000 ) . 69 . Nevo , R . et al . A molecular switch between alternative conformational states in the complex of Ran and importin β 1 . Nat . Struct . Biol . 10 , 553 – 557 ( 2003 ) . 70 . Simons , K . & Ikonen , E . Functional rafts in cell membranes . Nature 387 , 569 – 572 ( 1997 ) . 71 . Cabeen , M . T . & Jacobs - Wagner , C . Bacterial cell shape . Nat . Rev . Microbiol . 3 , 601 – 610 ( 2005 ) . 72 . Ludwig , M . , Dettmann , W . & Gaub , H . E . Atomic force microscope imaging contrast based on molecular recognition . Biophys . J . 72 , 445 – 448 ( 1997 ) . 73 . Lehenkari , P . P . , Charras , G . T . , Nykänen , A . & Horton , M . A . Adapting atomic force microscopy for cell biology . Ultramicroscopy 82 , 289 – 295 ( 2000 ) . 74 . Raab , A . et al . Antibody recognition imaging by force microscopy . Nat . Biotechnol . 17 , 902 – 905 ( 1999 ) . 75 . Han , W . , Lindsay , S . M . & Jing , T . A magnetically driven oscillating probe microscope for operation in liquid . Appl . Phys . Lett . 69 , 1 – 3 ( 1996 ) . 76 . Han , W . , Lindsay , S . M . , Dlakic , M . & Harrington , R . E . Kinked DNA . Nature 386 , 563 ( 1997 ) . 77 . Stroh , C . M . et al . Simultaneous topography and recognition imaging using force microscopy . Biophys . J . 87 , 1981 – 1990 ( 2004 ) . 78 . Stroh , C . et al . Single - molecule recognition imaging microscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 12503 – 12507 ( 2004 ) . 79 . Ebner , A . et al . Localization of single avidin - biotin interactions using simultaneous topography and molecular recognition imaging . ChemPhysChem 6 , 897 – 900 ( 2005 ) . 80 . Wong , S . S . , Joselevich , E . , Woolley , A . T . , Cheung , C . L . & Lieber , C . M . Covalently functionalized nanotubes as nanometre - sized probes in chemistry and biology . Nature 394 , 52 – 55 ( 1998 ) . 81 . Fritz , J . et al . Translating biomolecular recognition into nanomechanics . Science 288 , 316 – 318 ( 2000 ) . 82 . Wu , G . et al . Bioassay of prostate - specific antigen ( PSA ) using microcantilevers . Nat . Biotechnol . 19 , 856 – 860 ( 2001 ) . 83 . Ando , T . et al . A high - speed atomic force microscope for studying biological macromolecules . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 12468 – 12472 ( 2001 ) . 84 . Humphris , A . D . , Hobbs , J . K . & Miles , M . J . Ultrahigh - speed scanning near - field optical microscopy capable of over 100 frames per second . Appl . Phys . Lett . 83 , 6 – 8 ( 2003 ) . 85 . Janovjak , H . Struckmeier , & Müller , D . J . Hydrodynamic effects in fast AFM single - molecule force measurements . Eur . Biophys . J . 34 , 91 – 96 ( 2005 ) . NATURE METHODS | VOL . 3 NO . 5 | MAY 2006 | 355 REVIEW © 2006 N a t u r e P ub li s h i ng G r oup h tt p : / / www . n a t u r e . c o m / n a t u r e m e t hod s