Kennesaw State University DigitalCommons @ Kennesaw State University Faculty Publications 1 - 2007 Strongly and Weakly Directed Approaches to Teaching Multiple Representation Use in Physics Patrick B . Kohl University of Colorado at Boulder David Rosengrant Kennesaw State University , drosengr @ kennesaw . edu Noah D . Finkelstein University of Colorado at Boulder Follow this and additional works at : http : / / digitalcommons . kennesaw . edu / facpubs Part of the Higher Education and Teaching Commons , and the Science and Mathematics Education Commons This Article is brought to you for free and open access by DigitalCommons @ Kennesaw State University . It has been accepted for inclusion in Faculty Publications by an authorized administrator of DigitalCommons @ Kennesaw State University . For more information , please contact digitalcommons @ kennesaw . edu . Recommended Citation Kohl PB , Rosengrant D , Finkelstein ND . 2007 . Strongly and weakly directed approaches to teaching multiple representation use in physics . Phys Rev Spec Top - Phys Educ R 3 ( 1 ) : 010108 . Strongly and weakly directed approaches to teaching multiple representation use in physics Patrick B . Kohl , 1 David Rosengrant , 2 and Noah D . Finkelstein 1 1 University of Colorado at Boulder , Boulder , Colorado 80309 , USA 2 Kennesaw State University , Kennesaw , Georgia 30144 – 5591 , USA (cid:1) Received 11 December 2006 ; published 12 June 2007 ; publisher error corrected 18 June 2007 ; corrected 27 July 2007 (cid:2) Good use of multiple representations is considered key to learning physics , and so there is considerable motivation both to learn how students use multiple representations when solving problems and to learn how best to teach problem solving using multiple representations . In this study of two large - lecture algebra - based physics courses at the University of Colorado (cid:1) CU (cid:2) and Rutgers , the State University of New Jersey , we address both issues . Students in each of the two courses solved ﬁve common electrostatics problems of varying difﬁculty , and we examine their solutions to clarify the relationship between multiple representation use and performance on problems involving free - body diagrams . We also compare our data across the courses , since the two physics - education - research - based courses take substantially different approaches to teaching the use of multiple representations . The course at Rutgers takes a strongly directed approach , emphasizing speciﬁc heu - ristics and problem - solving strategies . The course at CU takes a weakly directed approach , modeling good problem solving without teaching a speciﬁc strategy . We ﬁnd that , in both courses , students make extensive use of multiple representations , and that this use (cid:1) when both complete and correct (cid:2) is associated with signiﬁcantly increased performance . Some minor differences in representation use exist , and are consistent with the types of instruction given . Most signiﬁcant are the strong and broad similarities in the results , suggesting that either instructional approach or a combination thereof can be useful for helping students learn to use multiple representations for problem solving and concept development . DOI : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevSTPER . 3 . 010108 PACS number (cid:1) s (cid:2) : 01 . 40 . Fk I . INTRODUCTION Instructors and researchers in physics education research (cid:1) PER (cid:2) have long argued that students can beneﬁt from solv - ing problems that require the use of multiple representations together . 1 – 6 The distinction between multiple representation problems and other problems is somewhat artiﬁcial , as it is difﬁcult to imagine solving any physics problem or making sense of any physics idea without making use of more than one representation (cid:1) in thought , if not on paper (cid:2) . Neverthe - less , the class of problems referred to as multiple represen - tation problems , and the use of multiple representations in general , is often understood to mean the explicit use of more than one representation in solving problems . These kinds of problems are said to require a more complete understanding of the underlying physics than traditional “plug and chug” problems in which only mathematics is explicitly present . 1 , 2 Experts and novices differ signiﬁcantly in their use of multiple representations . Experts tend to use multiple repre - sentations in their problem setups more often than novices , who have a tendency to jump directly to mathematics . 1 , 7 Thus , use of multiple representations brings student problem - solving procedures more in line with expert proce - dures . These differences extend beyond problem solving , as research has shown that novices and professional scientists differ signiﬁcantly in their ability and willingness to use mul - tiple representations productively in more applied settings such as the laboratory or workplace . 8 , 9 It has even been sug - gested that competency with several representations of a con - cept is a prerequisite for expertlike understanding , 10 and popular research - based physics assessments have implicitly acknowledged this point by including a spread of represen - tations in their questions and by requiring translations among representations to solve problems . 11 – 13 Previous work has established that students in tradi - tional physics courses only sometimes use multiple representations , 3 and that efforts speciﬁcally focused on in - creasing student use of multiple representations can be suc - cessful , even if students are not graded speciﬁcally for mul - tiple representation use . 4 , 5 , 14 , 15 In addition , it has been suggested that this multiple representation use can be asso - ciated with increased problem - solving performance , though this correlation is far from perfect . 16 To address this , Rosen - grant et al . have considered the correlation between the qual - ity of multiple representation use and student success . 15 They ﬁnd that this association is quite strong , a point we return to in the present paper . The courses in the above studies can be described as tak - ing strongly directed approaches to teaching problem solving with multiple representations . By “strongly directed , ” we mean that these approaches teach explicit steps and heuristics for solving multiple representation physics problems and continue to emphasize these steps throughout the course . An - other , less studied (cid:1) but perhaps common (cid:2) approach is to model good multiple representation problem - solving tech - niques for students without teaching speciﬁc steps . We can refer to this approach as “weakly directed . ” Arguments can be made in favor of either the strongly or weakly directed approaches . For example , a strongly directed approach gives students an easy - to - follow checklist , though it might also result in dependence on algorithms executed with little un - derstanding . A weakly directed approach may prevent depen - dence on checklists , but novice students may be incapable of picking up the appropriate skills in the course of an introduc - tory class without such direction . We are unaware of any studies directly comparing strongly and weakly directed ap - proaches to teaching multiple representation problem solv - ing . In this paper , we perform such a comparison . PHYSICAL REVIEW SPECIAL TOPICS - PHYSICS EDUCATION RESEARCH 3 , 010108 (cid:1) 2007 (cid:2) 1554 - 9178 / 2007 / 3 (cid:1) 1 (cid:2) / 010108 (cid:1) 10 (cid:2) ©2007 The American Physical Society 010108 - 1 We address these questions regarding the use and learning of representations in two parts . In the ﬁrst part , we verify that multiple representations aid problem solving , and ask whether we can begin to understand more speciﬁcally how multiple representation use is associated with student perfor - mance . In the second part , we ask how multiple representa - tion use and success with multiple representation problems varies with instruction , and examine two multiple - representation - rich , PER - based courses that take different approaches to teaching multiple representations : one strongly and one weakly directed . To this end , we study student per - formance on ﬁve multiple representation problems in two introductory large - lecture algebra - based physics courses , one taught at Rutgers , the State University of New Jersey , and one taught at the University of Colorado at Boulder (cid:1) CU (cid:2) . The problems vary in their difﬁculty and in their framing . For example , one problem hints that a force diagram might be useful , while another makes no such hint . Four of the problems were given in recitation , and a more difﬁcult “chal - lenge problem” was given as a recitation quiz at CU and as part of an exam at Rutgers . By examining student solutions and performance in detail , we begin to address our ﬁrst questions . As we have noted , many studies have established that using multiple represen - tations can improve performance . We ﬁnd , perhaps not sur - prisingly , that student use of multiple representations does indeed often correlate with success . However , we ﬁnd that the correlation is nontrivial . Use of multiple representations alone is insufﬁcient for success and can even be associated with lower - than - average performance . Correct use of mul - tiple representations and close coordination of those repre - sentations is much more likely to be associated with high success rates . We also ﬁnd that problem framing can alter student use of multiple representations ; for instance , student solutions to problems might show different uses of free - body diagrams (cid:1) FBDs (cid:2) depending on whether the problem used the word “force” or not . 17 Notably , this last result regarding framing is tentative : The data here are insufﬁcient to fully characterize the effect ; rather the results serve to suggest that multiple representation use in problem solving may be sus - ceptible to the same kinds of cueing observed in other contexts . 18 – 20 Given these data , the second part of the paper focuses on a cross - course comparison , and on the question of whether one approach or the other is optimal . Most signiﬁcant was the overall constancy of the results from the ﬁrst part of our study across both environments . Both courses were success - ful in promoting multiple representation use , and student per - formances were very similar . We note some speciﬁc differ - ences that emerged , though we emphasize that the major picture was one of strong similarity . The CU students were slightly more likely to use multiple representations on shorter , easier problems , while Rutgers students were more likely to use complete FBDs on the most difﬁcult problem . These differences and others can be plausibly attributed to the differences in instructional environment , and lead us to suppose that elements of each course might be reasonably combined in the future . To summarize , we ask two primary questions , with the associated ﬁndings following : (cid:1) 1 (cid:2) When and how does the use of multiple representa - tions affect student performance on problems involving free - body diagrams ? Here , we ﬁnd a correlation between FBD use and success , but it is not strict : Poor use of multiple representations is no better and possibly worse than no use thereof . (cid:1) 2 (cid:2) What sorts of instructional methods best foster mul - tiple representation use ? We compare two PER - based and representationally rich approaches that differ signiﬁcantly in their details , with both yielding very high rates of picture and FBD use among introductory students . Neither is clearly su - perior by our measures . II . METHODS AND COURSE DESCRIPTIONS A . Methods : Study problems In each course , students received a set of four electrostat - ics problems in recitation that either required calculation of a force or speciﬁed forces in the problems . These problems were given after all lecture coverage of electrostatics and students received recitation credit for signiﬁcant effort . The problems did not otherwise count toward the course grade . All problems are shown in Fig . 1 . The problems contained a variety of cues regarding the use of multiple representations . The ﬁrst problem made no mention of multiple representa - tions . The second problem hinted that it may be useful to draw a force diagram . The third problem included both a picture and a FBD as part of the statement . The fourth prob - lem stated that a FBD was required as part of the solution . Students were also given a more challenging problem , intended to be very difﬁcult to solve without a FBD . This problem was issued with multiple - choice answers on the ﬁrst exam in the Rutgers course , and as a free - response quiz in recitation just before the ﬁrst exam in the CU course . This problem and an example solution are shown in Fig . 2 . We shall refer to this problem as the challenge problem . Student solutions to these problems were coded in several ways in a scheme that extends methods developed FIG . 1 . Four problems given in recitation . Note the different prompts regarding multiple representation use (cid:3)(cid:1) 1 (cid:2) no prompt , (cid:1) 2 (cid:2) hint to draw a force diagram , (cid:1) 3 (cid:2) diagrams included , and (cid:1) 4 (cid:2) state - ment that diagrams are required (cid:4) . KOHL , ROSENGRANT , AND FINKELSTEIN PHYS . REV . ST PHYS . EDUC . RES . 3 , 010108 (cid:1) 2007 (cid:2) 010108 - 2 previously . 21 The answers were coded as correct or incorrect . Speciﬁc answer features were also tracked ; for example , if the answer required a number and a direction , each feature was coded separately . Student use of representations was coded using a more complex scheme . Each solution was coded with respect to any picture used and any free - body diagram used . For problems 1 , 2 , and 4 in the recitation set , the problem was coded as either containing a picture or not containing a picture . A picture was deﬁned as some drawing representing the situation , not to include an isolated free - body diagram (cid:1) coded separately (cid:2) . The expected elements of each picture were then coded as present or absent . For ex - ample , in problem 1 (cid:1) Fig . 1 (cid:2) the coders looked for the pres - ence of each of the two charges and for a labeling of the distance between them . The pictures for the challenge prob - lem were coded in more detail : The presence and correctness of the picture was evaluated using a 0 – 3 rubric , where 3 meant a correct depiction of the physical situation , 2 referred to a common error in which the picture was drawn “back - ward , ” 1 referred to an otherwise incorrect picture , and 0 indicated no picture . The expected elements of the picture were then coded as present or absent , as before in the reci - tation problem . For problem 3 in the recitation section , a picture was provided , so coders noted whether students made their own marks on the given picture , and whether they re - drew a picture of their own . Free - body diagrams were coded in a similar fashion . For each problem , as many as two to four forces could reason - ably be present . For each possible force (cid:1) a gravitational force , a normal force , etc . (cid:2) , the force was ﬂagged as being present or not , being shown in the correct direction or not (cid:1) ambiguities were also ﬂagged (cid:2) , and being labeled correctly or not . Coding each element of the FBDs and pictures sepa - rately facilitated analysis , as most combinations of features of interest were available in the codings . An author from Rutgers University coded all of the data from that institution , and an author from CU coded all the data from CU . These authors then both coded two sections of the data chosen at random and compared codings . Agreement varied from 91 % to 100 % , depending on the category . B . Course descriptions The study involved second - semester large - lecture algebra - based physics courses from CU and Rutgers , taught in the spring of 2006 . The instructors for these courses had also taught the ﬁrst semester of the sequence , and have been in - volved in PER for many years . Both courses can be de - scribed as reformed in nature , making use of many common tools and practices from PER . The courses each had one recitation or lab meeting per week , with two or three full class meetings . Each course was four credit hours . Lecture sections had approximately 300 students each . Each school is a large state university , with similar standardized test scores for incoming students . As these were life - science track courses , the backgrounds and performances of the students within each of the classes varied considerably . 1 . Rutgers University The Rutgers course uses the ISLE curriculum , which is inquiry - based and spends considerable time on the use of multiple representations . 22 The instructors use the Active Learning Guide workbook in lecture and in recitation , which includes many tasks designed to teach multiple representa - tion use . 23 The recitations have research - based design elements , 24 and also use ACTIVPHYSICS computer simula - tions , which emphasize conceptual development , problem solving , and multiple representations . 25 The lectures also use personal response systems (cid:1) clickers (cid:2) . For both mechanics and electrostatics problems in the ISLE curriculum , the instructor teaches students an explicit problem - solving heuristic with ﬁve main steps , which em - phasizes multiple representations and is described elsewhere . 23 Note that this ﬁve - step procedure includes within it a subprocedure for drawing free - body diagrams . These procedures are emphasized whenever multiple repre - sentation problems are discussed , though rigid adherence to each step of the procedure is not required , and students were never graded speciﬁcally on following the steps . 2 . University of Colorado The CU course features such reforms such as clickers and PER - based labs and recitation activities , 26 and includes the PhET computer simulations . 27 It also includes substantial multiple representation use in lecture and in homework and exam tasks , but little explicit instruction in multiple repre - sentation use is given . The instructor taught no speciﬁc problem - solving heuristics . In Fig . 3 , we see an example of an exam question from the CU course . Such multiple repre - sentation questions were common . With substantial multiple representation use in lecture and on exams , students were held accountable for using multiple representations effec - tively as well as having such use modeled for them . 28 C . Environment evaluation The multiple - representation based reforms present in the Rutgers lectures are well documented . 22 , 23 To establish the representational richness of the CU environment , we ana - lyzed the representational content of their lectures using a procedure developed and validated previously . 28 To help compare the two course environments , we performed a simi - lar analysis on the exams from each course . We will only summarize the procedure here . To characterize the lecture FIG . 2 . Challenge problem with example solution . The picture drawn shows the common backwards picture error , as the balls are supposed to attract each other , leading to inward - facing strings . STRONGLY AND WEAKLY DIRECTED APPROACHES TO … PHYS . REV . ST PHYS . EDUC . RES . 3 , 010108 (cid:1) 2007 (cid:2) 010108 - 3 content , we take a series of videotaped lectures and break them into one minute intervals . We code each minute accord - ing to whether it includes use of verbal , mathematical , graphical , or pictorial representations , with “verbal” includ - ing written physics principles , but not spoken language (cid:1) since spoken language is almost always present (cid:2) . Any inter - val that has more than one representation is also coded as having “multiple representations . ” We then average over all lectures to come up with an average fraction of lecture time spent on each category . We videotaped eight CU lectures in between the ﬁrst day of class and the ﬁrst exam (cid:1) the lectures covering the material used in this study (cid:2) . For the exam content , we focus on all the exams that lead up to the study material , as these would be the only ones likely to inﬂuence student behavior in the study . This means we consider all the exams from the ﬁrst semester of the course , keeping in mind that all student data presented come from students who took both semesters consecutively . We quantiﬁed the fraction of each exam that could be described as verbal , mathematical , graphical , and pictorial in represen - tation on a problem - by - problem basis using a previously de - veloped standard . 28 We also quantiﬁed the fraction of each exam that explicitly required the use of multiple representa - tions . No effort was made to weight the different representa - tions in a multiple representation problem ; for instance , we did not designate a problem as 80 % pictorial and 20 % math - ematical , but rather as 100 % of each , and so the sums across all representations included in the data can exceed 100 % . Once we characterized each exam in terms of its representa - tional content , we calculated the average representational content of the exams in each of the courses . III . DATA AND ANALYSIS We present the data and analysis in three parts . First , we compare the representational content of the courses studied . Second , we examine student performance and representation use on a problem - by - problem basis , comparing across courses when appropriate . Finally , we focus more closely on cross - course analysis . A . Part I : Environment data We have claimed that both the CU and Rutgers courses are representation rich , noting the various curriculum re - forms present in each . In particular , we saw that the Rutgers course made use of speciﬁc curricula intended to promote the use of multiple representations in lecture . Since CU used no such documented curricula , we present data on the represen - tational richness of CU’s lectures here . For the sake of cross - course comparisons , we also analyze the representational content of the exams in each class . In Fig . 4 , we see the fraction of the sampled lectures that contained verbal , mathematical , graphical , and pictorial rep - resentations . The CU data show more representations being used more often than in a similar , traditionally taught class studied previously , 28 supporting the claim that this environ - ment is representationally rich , much like the Rutgers lecture environment . Such richness is consistent with the strong , broad similarities observed in representation use among CU and Rutgers students . In Fig . 4 we also see the fraction of the ﬁrst - semester exams (cid:1) those leading up to this study (cid:2) using each of these four representations and using multiple representations . In these , we see a difference between the courses . The CU ex - ams tended to use more representations more often , and used multiple representations more often , while the Rutgers ex - ams focused more on mathematical representations . 30 B . Part II : Performance and representation use 1 . Recitation problems In Table I we see the fraction of the students in each course answering each of the four recitation problems cor - rectly . The numbers in parentheses indicate the number of students sampled for each problem . Problems 1 , 2 , and 3 had the same sample size . 31 Problems 1 and 2 are similar in that both require single applications of Coulomb’s law , but with different variables to be solved for (cid:1) force in problem 1 , and charge in problem 2 (cid:2) . Students in both courses performed signiﬁcantly worse on 1 than on 2 , with an average fraction correct across courses of 0 . 37 for problem 1 and 0 . 53 for problem 2 . These differ at a p (cid:1) 0 . 0001 level using a two - tailed binomial proportion test , but this is likely a result of the extra information requested by problem 1 . Problem 1 asks students to note the direction of the force calculated , and examination of student solutions shows that many stu - FIG . 3 . Multiple representation problem from a Univeristy of Colorado exam . The free - body diagram is not part of the problem statement . FIG . 4 . (cid:1) Color (cid:2) Fraction of lectures and exams at CU and exams at Rutgers using verbal , math , graphical , pictorial , and multiple representations . KOHL , ROSENGRANT , AND FINKELSTEIN PHYS . REV . ST PHYS . EDUC . RES . 3 , 010108 (cid:1) 2007 (cid:2) 010108 - 4 dents simply overlooked or ignored this directive . Thus , we also include in Table I the fraction of students answering the scalar portion of problem 1 correctly , which does not differ signiﬁcantly from the fraction answering problem 2 cor - rectly . We consider problems 3 and 4 to be less directly com - parable to the others since their solutions were substantially different , as were their treatments of multiple representations in the setup . In Table II we see the fraction of students in each course that drew a picture with their problem solutions . Since prob - lem 3 provided a picture , we instead show the fraction of students in each course that redrew their own picture . Stu - dents were quite likely to draw pictures in all cases , with 90 % or more of students drawing a picture in four of six cases (cid:1) not counting problem 3 (cid:2) . Students were equally likely to draw pictures for problems 1 and 2 . Table II also shows the fraction of students identifying any forces correctly in their solution , using some kind of vector representation . Since problem 3 provided an FBD , we show the fraction of students who redrew some force information on their own . Two data features are notable : First , the vast majority of students drew a complete and correct FBD for problem 4 (cid:1) almost all who identiﬁed at least one force identiﬁed both possible forces (cid:2) . Since this problem asked students to draw an FBD as part of their answer and since it was the last problem in the set , we consider this an indication that stu - dents were taking the problems seriously throughout the set . Second , students were much more likely to draw some kind of FBD for problem 1 than for problem 2 . Forty - ﬁve percent of students identiﬁed some forces correctly for problem 1 , compared to 29 % for problem 2 (cid:1) p (cid:1) 0 . 0001 (cid:2) . Mathemati - cally , these problems were very similar , and it is possible that this difference resulted from some difference in the problem framing , a point we will return to in the discussion . 2 . Challenge problem In the ﬁrst column of Table III , we see the fraction of students answering the challenge problem correctly in each course . Because the Rutgers problem was given as a ﬁve - answer multiple - choice question and the CU problem was given as a free - response question , we do not consider the difference in performance between Rutgers and CU to be signiﬁcant or useful for further analysis . In the next three columns , we see the fraction of students identifying exactly one , two , or three forces correctly in their solution . Note again that an FBD was not requested by the problem . More than 98 % of students drew a picture . The last two columns show what we refer to as type 2 and type 3 picture use (cid:1) from the previously described picture rubric (cid:2) . Picture type 3 is complete and correct . Picture type 2 was a common misin - terpretation of the problem statement , where students drew the balls as if they were repelling (cid:1) an example is shown in Fig . 2 (cid:2) . Students drawing picture type 1 were otherwise in - correct , are not shown in the table , and will not be consid - ered further . Once again , we note the very frequent use of multiple representations , with nearly all students in either course drawing a picture , and 83 % of students identifying at least one force correctly , despite no request for a picture or FBD in the problem . 3 . Relation of performance to representation use We next consider student performance as a function of multiple representation use . That is , we ask whether students that used pictures and FBDs performed better . We cannot compare problem - by - problem performance between picture - drawing students and non - picture - drawing students since nearly all drew a picture . Instead , we begin by examining student success as a function of correct FBD use . Previous work has shown that students who construct a correct FBD to help them solve problems do signiﬁcantly better than stu - dents who do not construct diagrams or who construct incor - rect diagrams . 15 In Fig . 5 , we see the success rate for stu - dents correctly identifying 0 , 1 , 2 , or 3 + (cid:1) 3 or 4 (cid:2) forces per problem on the challenge problem . Since the CU and Rut - gers problems differed in format (cid:1) CU being free response and Rutgers multiple choice (cid:2) , we have normalized the data to reﬂect this . Each CU data point has been renormalized by a constant factor so that the CU and Rutgers overall mean scores are identical , allowing for easier trend comparison . 32 This scaling does not change the shape of the curve observ - ably . Overlap is very thorough . Student performance drops TABLE I . Fraction of students answering the four recitation problems correctly at Rutgers and CU . Parentheses indicate sample sizes . Samples for problems 1 , 2 , and 3 are the same . Standard errors vary but are on the order of 0 . 03 . The 1 (cid:1) scalar (cid:2) category refers to the scalar portion of the answer for problem 1 . Problem 1 1 (cid:1) scalar (cid:2) Problem 2 Problem 3 Problem 4 Rutgers 0 . 36 (cid:1) 296 (cid:2) 0 . 51 0 . 49 0 . 29 0 . 38 (cid:1) 155 (cid:2) CU 0 . 38 (cid:1) 314 (cid:2) 0 . 60 0 . 56 0 . 43 0 . 40 (cid:1) 269 (cid:2) TABLE II . Fraction of students drawing a picture for each of the four recitation problems , and fraction of students identifying any forces correctly in their solution . Standard errors vary but are on the order of 0 . 03 . Pictures Problem 1 Problem 2 Problem 3 Problem 4 Forces Problem 1 Problem 2 Problem 3 Problem 4 Rutgers 0 . 90 0 . 85 0 . 00 0 . 73 Rutgers 0 . 36 0 . 26 0 . 03 0 . 90 CU 0 . 92 0 . 91 0 . 13 0 . 90 CU 0 . 53 0 . 32 0 . 11 0 . 92 STRONGLY AND WEAKLY DIRECTED APPROACHES TO … PHYS . REV . ST PHYS . EDUC . RES . 3 , 010108 (cid:1) 2007 (cid:2) 010108 - 5 from zero to one force identiﬁed , and increases to two and ﬁnally to three . Uncertainties are relatively large for zero , one , and two forces , but we consider the fact that both schools’ curves overlap so closely as to make the observed trend more likely to be real . Averaging the CU and Rutgers data sets results in error bars of approximately half the size (cid:1) not shown (cid:2) . We can perform a similar analysis for problems 1 and 2 but the trends are much less clear . For those data (cid:1) not shown (cid:2) , we cannot conclusively claim that more correct use of multiple representations leads to higher performance (cid:1) and neither can we claim that it does not (cid:2) : the trend is more or less ﬂat . We note here that this analysis would be inappro - priate for problems 3 and 4 , as problem 3 provides students with a complete FBD already , and problem 4 tells students explicitly to draw a FBD as part of their answer . In the chal - lenge problem and in problems 1 and 2 , a free - body diagram is potentially useful but is neither provided nor required . The above data conﬁrm previous results 15 where FBD use is strongly associated with student success on this problem . This suggests to us a ﬁner - grained analysis here . Is success associated with any more speciﬁc pattern of representation use ? In Table IV , we show student performance versus the identiﬁcation of each force , the correct representation of each force , and the correct , labeled representation of each force present in the exam problem . Rutgers and CU data are very similar , so we display only CU data . Student performance is ﬂat along the vertical dimension (cid:1) which would show a de - pendence on correctness or labeling (cid:2) , and mostly ﬂat along the horizontal dimension (cid:1) which would show a dependence on force type (cid:2) . There is a minor excess in the second column , corresponding to the electrostatic force . Notably , this is the force whose correctness can be most easily impacted by drawing a type 2 versus a type 3 picture , so this excess might be more reﬂective of picture type than anything else . Gener - ally , the weak dependence on any one factor suggests that only correct coordination across all of the forces will be as - sociated with success . C . Part III : Cross - class comparison The above data are interesting when viewed from a problem - by - problem perspective . We see that multiple repre - sentation use can signiﬁcantly inﬂuence success , especially on more difﬁcult problems , and that complete , correct mul - tiple representation use is associated with high performance . We also note that the data , when viewed from a cross - course perspective , show similarities and differences . Performances overall are quite similar , as is the dependence of performance on representation use . In this section , we investigate those differences and similarities in more detail , to work toward an understanding of their source . 1 . Cross - class performance First , we compare Rutgers and CU performances on prob - lems 1 – 4 (cid:1) Table I (cid:2) . We can compare the performances pair - wise , but since this analysis is post hoc we must modify the p value considered signiﬁcant (cid:1) or use an appropriate post hoc test (cid:2) . A simple and very conservative approach is to choose the p value such that if one were to make N post hoc com - parisons , a difference on any one comparison could be con - sidered signiﬁcant . We thus choose p = 1− (cid:1) 1− (cid:2) (cid:2) 1 / N , where (cid:2) is the desired signiﬁcance level (cid:1) 0 . 05 (cid:2) and N is the number of post hoc comparisons (cid:1) 4 (cid:2) . 29 This yields p = 0 . 013 . The CU and Rutgers performances on problem 3 differ at a p = 0 . 0002 level using a two - tailed binomial proportion test , but no other pair differs signiﬁcantly . Averaged across all recitation problems , the two courses do not differ signiﬁ - cantly in problem performance . 2 . Cross - class representation use Perhaps the most noticeable result is the very large frac - tion of both course types that made use of pictures and free - body diagrams , despite the signiﬁcant differences in instruc - tion . Student performance is also very constant across courses , as the performances for problems 1 , 2 , and 4 are statistically indistinguishable , with the challenge problem performances also similar after accounting for the format dif - ferences . Thus , we have a signiﬁcant performance difference on only one of the ﬁve problems studied . However , some differences emerge in representation use . On the recitation problems that neither demand nor provide a free - body dia - gram (cid:1) problems 1 and 2 (cid:2) , the CU students identify at least one force correctly signiﬁcantly more often (cid:1) 43 % vs 31 % , p = 0 . 002 , Table II (cid:2) . In contrast , on the exam problem (cid:1) where the vast majority of students in both courses draw some forces (cid:2) , the Rutgers students are signiﬁcantly more likely than the CU students to identify all three forces correctly , generating a complete and correct FBD (cid:1) 51 % vs 32 % , p (cid:1) 0 . 0001 , Table III (cid:2) . Picture use is comparable on problems 1 and 2 , but on problem 4 CU students were more likely to draw a picture (cid:1) 90 % vs 73 % , p (cid:1) 0 . 0001 (cid:2) . 3 . Cross - class performance versus representation use As noted , the dependence of performance on representa - tion use is similar in both classes . The trends of correctness vs FBD use in Fig . 5 are nearly identical , and in neither class TABLE III . Fraction of students answering the challenge problem correctly , fraction correctly identifying one two , or three of the possible forces , and fraction drawing either picture type 2 or type 3 . Parentheses indicate sample size . Challenge Correct One force Two forces Three forces Picture 2 Picture 3 Rutgers 0 . 56 a (cid:1) 283 (cid:2) 0 . 09 0 . 22 0 . 51 0 . 34 0 . 41 CU 0 . 29 a (cid:1) 280 (cid:2) 0 . 23 0 . 31 0 . 32 0 . 39 0 . 45 a Note that the Rutgers version was multiple choice , while the CU quiz was free response . KOHL , ROSENGRANT , AND FINKELSTEIN PHYS . REV . ST PHYS . EDUC . RES . 3 , 010108 (cid:1) 2007 (cid:2) 010108 - 6 does the performance difference for the challenge problem depend on which speciﬁc force was identiﬁed (cid:1) as opposed to how many (cid:2) . Since the data suggest that complete and coor - dinated use of multiple representations is most relevant , we can continue along these lines by breaking down student challenge problem performance by both FBD use and picture use . While nearly all students drew a picture , not all students drew the same picture . In Table V , we show student perfor - mance as a function of picture type drawn (cid:1) 2 or 3 (cid:2) and as a function of the number of forces correctly identiﬁed (cid:1) two or three (cid:2) . We note that , for Rutgers students , the performance difference between using two forces and three forces was minimal , while the difference between using picture 2 and picture 3 was large . Conversely , for CU students the differ - ence between using two forces and three forces was large , while the difference associated with the picture types was small . From the above , we see some speciﬁc differences between the two classes : the CU students appear to be more likely to use multiple representations on the simpler problems (cid:1) spe - ciﬁcally , problems 1 , 2 , and 4 (cid:2) , while the Rutgers students are more successful with FBDs on the more difﬁcult chal - lenge problem . Furthermore , the correctness of the picture seems to be a more signiﬁcant factor for Rutgers students , while correctness of the FBD appears to be the most signiﬁ - cant factor for CU students . IV . DISCUSSION Our ﬁrst goal was to ask whether multiple representation use mattered , and if so , how . The challenge problem data conﬁrm what has been observed previously : Students that use free - body diagrams correctly signiﬁcantly outperform those who do not . 15 , 33 However , the trends were less clear for the recitation data , especially for problems 1 and 2 . There , the quality of a student’s FBD is not clearly associated with their success , which may be due in part to the relative sim - plicity of these problems . A student with a good grasp of the material could reasonably solve both of these problems in a “plug ’n chug” fashion , without any additional representa - tions , leading to a less straightforward dependence . The challenge problem was more difﬁcult , and perhaps beneﬁts more from the use of a picture and free - body dia - gram . This is consistent with the fact that many more stu - dents used both pictures and FBDs for the challenge problem than for the recitation problems , and with the fact that the dependence of performance on representation use was much clearer for the challenge problem . Thus , these data suggest the somewhat intuitive result that for difﬁcult problems , mul - tiple representations can be especially helpful . There are no guarantees , of course : From Fig . 5 , we can see that students who drew a FBD that was only partially correct were no more likely to answer the problem correctly than those who drew no FBD at all . Indeed , it is possible (cid:1) though not con - clusive from these data (cid:2) that the students who drew only one force correctly did worse than those who drew none , which is consistent with earlier work , 15 and is reasonable if we assume that the “no forces” group includes some students who are extremely comfortable with the material and skip diagrams , or keep track of information with mental represen - tations rather than external representations . Along these lines , we note in Table IV that no one type of force in student solutions was a driving factor in student success . Only the successful coordination of all three forces was associated with better - than - average performance . TABLE IV . Fraction of students answering the challenge prob - lem correctly , shown for each force available in the problem and broken down according to whether that force was present , drawn correctly , or drawn correctly and labeled . Data for CU and Rutgers are very similar , so we display only those for CU . Forces mg F e Tension Present 0 . 30 (cid:1) 243 (cid:2) 0 . 38 (cid:1) 186 (cid:2) 0 . 32 (cid:1) 222 (cid:2) Correct 0 . 30 (cid:1) 243 (cid:2) 0 . 38 (cid:1) 114 (cid:2) 0 . 36 (cid:1) 198 (cid:2) Correct and labeled 0 . 31 (cid:1) 240 (cid:2) 0 . 39 (cid:1) 108 (cid:2) 0 . 34 (cid:1) 191 (cid:2) TABLE V . Fraction of students answering the challenge prob - lem correctly , broken down by whether they drew picture type 2 or 3 and whether they identiﬁed two or three forces correctly . Rutgers CU Two forces Three forces Two forces Three forces Picture 2 0 . 44 (cid:1) 39 (cid:2) 0 . 46 (cid:1) 37 (cid:2) 0 . 28 (cid:1) 47 (cid:2) 0 . 38 (cid:1) 21 (cid:2) Picture 3 0 . 75 (cid:1) 8 (cid:2) 0 . 71 (cid:1) 87 (cid:2) 0 . 22 (cid:1) 27 (cid:2) 0 . 42 (cid:1) 47 (cid:2) FIG . 5 . (cid:1) Color (cid:2) Challenge question performance as a function of number of forces identiﬁed correctly . Note that CU scores have been shifted to account for free response vs multiple choice difference . STRONGLY AND WEAKLY DIRECTED APPROACHES TO … PHYS . REV . ST PHYS . EDUC . RES . 3 , 010108 (cid:1) 2007 (cid:2) 010108 - 7 On a problem - by - problem basis , we note that problems 1 and 2 are very similar in their solution . Each requires a single use of Coulomb’s law with one variable missing . From an expert perspective , it is not obvious that one is more difﬁcult than the other , or that one is more likely to beneﬁt from a picture and / or FBD than the other . Students did , in fact , perform very similarly on the scalar - only parts of prob - lems 1 and 2 . Yet many more students drew an FBD for problem 1 than for 2 (cid:1) 45 % vs 29 % (cid:2) . This difference occurs despite the fact that problem 2 hinted directly for students to use a force diagram , and problem 1 did not . We speculate that this variation might have been a result of the problem framing . Problem 1 asked students to calculate a force using Coulomb’s law , perhaps suggesting a FBD , while problem 2 asked students to calculate a charge . This is potentially sig - niﬁcant if true : A change in framing (cid:1) in this case , a language cue (cid:2) had a signiﬁcant effect on multiple representation use where an explicit statement did not . In future work , we will vary the problems slightly to look for inﬂuences on represen - tation use . For instance , problem 2 could be changed to pro - vide charge and request force magnitude . If the framing is in fact responsible for the differerence in representation use be - tween problems 1 and 2 , we should expect this change to problem 2 to result in increased use of FBDs . Our second goal was to compare the two courses directly . Both courses were representationally rich , but with a signiﬁ - cant difference . The Rutgers course strongly directed student use of multiple representations , providing speciﬁc problem - solving procedures that were emphasized throughout the course . The CU course was representationally rich , present - ing a variety of representations in lecture and recitation , and on exams , but did not teach speciﬁc procedures . Despite this difference , both courses were very successful in fostering multiple representation use . On all ﬁve problems in both recitation and exam environments , students were extremely likely (cid:1) typically (cid:3) 90 % (cid:2) to use supplementary representa - tions like pictures and FBDs . For comparison , Van Heuvelen observes much less frequent multiple representation use in traditional courses . 3 Performance was also quite similar across the courses , and only problem 3 showed a signiﬁcant difference . The main feature distinguishing problem 3 from the others was the fact that a picture and FBD were included with the problem statement , so students were less dependent on their own supplementary representations . While we consider the major result to be the strong simi - larities between the results for both courses , some aspects of the data did differ from course to course . The CU students were more likely to use multiple representations on the shorter , easier recitation problems (cid:1) particularly problems 1 and 2 (cid:2) . The Rutgers students were more likely to use com - plete and correct FBDs on the challenge problem . This sug - gests a possible explanation . Since the Rutgers students are being taught (cid:1) but not graded on (cid:2) a multistep problem - solving process using multiple representations , they may be less will - ing to engage in that process in the easier , lower - stakes reci - tation problems , and more willing to engage in that process for a high - stakes exam problem . In comparison , the CU stu - dents have learned to use multiple representations , but with - out speciﬁc procedures or guidelines for their use . This could result in more willingness to use them on lower - stakes prob - lems , and in relatively less success with them on higher - stakes problems (cid:1) though those that do succeed in using mul - tiple representations appear to succeed similarly in solving the problem (cid:2) . If this is the case , we might expect there to be less performance dependence on representation use for Rut - gers students on high - stakes problems : most students in that case would be using the problem - solving procedure , and the ability and willingness to draw a complete FBD might be less of a discriminator than it would be for CU students . In one sense , we do not observe this . Student performance as a function of FBD correctness is nearly identical in both courses . In another sense , we do see this . Picture correctness is a much more powerful discriminator for Rutgers students than for CU students , which is consistent with the notion that most students , strong or weak , are drawing fairly good FBDs (cid:1) 73 % identifying two or more forces correctly (cid:2) , so that some other factor could present itself as a strong discriminator . Either way , these differences in representation use should not detract from the striking broad similarities observed in the data from the two courses . There is another possible contributor to the surprising ob - servation that CU students solved problems using multiple representations as often as the Rutgers students , whose course appears more likely upon initial inspection to promote multiple representation use . In previous work , we have sug - gested that facility with multiple representations might best be promoted by infusing all aspects of a course with multiple representation use . 28 Here , we saw that the Rutgers and CU environments differed in another way . The CU exams were richer in representations and in multiple representations use , whereas the Rutgers exams were more focused on math - ematical representations . The fact that the CU exams were more likely to hold students accountable for being able to interpret a variety of representations might have offset some of the effect of the more detailed Rutgers multiple represen - tations curriculum . Note that the data do not demonstrate this effect clearly ; we mention it only as a possible confounding factor . Nor is this a value judgment : The extent to which course exams should focus on nonmathematical representa - tions is dependent on course goals and upon which aspects of the course are meant to promote which goals . We close our discussion with a summary of the limitations of the study . First , the student populations are different . While both universities were large , fairly selective state uni - versities with comparable SAT and ACT scores , it is quite possible that some systematic differences existed , though none could be clearly identiﬁed and correlated with the ob - served differences in the results . Second , the challenge prob - lem was given in two different formats : multiple choice on an exam for Rutgers , and free response on a recitation quiz for CU . This makes performance comparisons difﬁcult , and introduces an environmental difference between the two groups (cid:1) quiz vs exam (cid:2) . Third , course language was not nec - essarily identical . For example , the CU instructor sometimes used the term “force diagram” rather than “free - body dia - gram . ” Problem 2 in our study used the phrase “force dia - gram , ” though Rutgers students were not exposed to that speciﬁc term . Finally , we acknowledge that this study in - cludes only one challenge - style problem , and only one prob - lem in each of the four categories of framing that we deﬁne KOHL , ROSENGRANT , AND FINKELSTEIN PHYS . REV . ST PHYS . EDUC . RES . 3 , 010108 (cid:1) 2007 (cid:2) 010108 - 8 (cid:1) hint to use a FBD , FBD required , etc . (cid:2) . Nonetheless , we consider these ﬁve problems administered to several hundred students to be adequate to establish the broad similarities between the courses studied , and to establish the existence of the other effects noted . V . CONCLUSIONS We can draw two main conclusions from our results , each addressing one of our two primary research questions . First , we conﬁrm that multiple representation use is important in successful physics problem solving as seen in previous work , but ﬁnd that the dependence is not trivial . Coordinated and correct use of multiple representations on challenging prob - lems can be very helpful , but multiple representation use on simple problems , or poor use of multiple representations , might not have a positive impact on student success . This dependence of performance on representation use was very similar across two different courses . Second , we ﬁnd that multiple representation use can be taught , and in more than one way . One of the physics courses studied took a strongly directed approach to teaching physics problem solving with multiple representations , while the other took a weakly di - rected approach . Both courses were very successful in pro - moting multiple representation use across a variety of prob - lems , and student performances were generally comparable . Notably , both courses were heavily PER inﬂuenced . We ob - served some minor differences between the two courses . The CU students were more likely to use multiple representations on some of the easier problems , while the Rutgers students were more likely to use multiple representations correctly on the more difﬁcult and higher - stakes challenge problem . This is consistent with the idea that Rutgers students are learning approaches to using multiple representations which , while successful , might not be drawn on in lower - stakes situations . In addition to the above , we observe that problem framing may have a powerful effect on student use of representations , possibly a more powerful effect than explicit references to multiple representations in the problem . This observation is tentative , but it reinforces previous results of this nature , 17 and we plan to investigate this more thoroughly in future work . For instruction , we note that multiple representation use can be taught successfully . Furthermore , an instructor can do so in either a strongly or a weakly directed manner . Neither of these approaches was clearly superior for this purpose , so the instructor has some freedom in choosing between them according to other course goals . Alternatively , one might adapt elements of each . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported in part by a NSF Graduate Award , a NSF CAREER grant , NSF Grants No . DUE 0241078 and No . DUE 0336713 , and Colorado PhysTEC . Special thanks to M . Dubson , E . Etkina , A . Van Heuvelen , and the rest of the Physics Education Research groups at the University of Colorado and at Rutgers University . 1 J . H . Larkin , in Mental Models , edited by D . Gentner and A . Stevens (cid:1) Lawrence Erbaum , Mahwah , NJ , 1983 (cid:2) . 2 F . Reif , Millikan Lecture 1994 : Understanding and teaching im - portant scientiﬁc thought processes , Am . J . Phys . 63 , 17 (cid:1) 1995 (cid:2) . 3 A . Van Heuvelen , Learning to think like a physicist : A review of research - based instructional strategies , Am . J . Phys . 59 , 891 (cid:1) 1991 (cid:2) . 4 A . Van Heuvelen and X . Zou , Multiple representations of work - energy processes , Am . J . Phys . 69 , 184 (cid:1) 2001 (cid:2) . 5 R . J . Dufresne , W . J . Gerace , and W . J . Leonard , Solving physics problems with multiple representations , Phys . Teach . 35 , 270 (cid:1) 1997 (cid:2) . 6 D . P . Maloney , in Handbook of Research on Science Teaching and Learning , edited by D . Gabel (cid:1) MacMillan , New York 1994 (cid:2) . 7 M . Chi , R . Glaser , and E . Rees , in Advances in the Psychology of Human Intelligence , edited by R . J . Sternberg (cid:1) Lawrence Er - lbaum , Hillsdale , NJ , 1982 (cid:2) , Vol . 1 . 8 R . B . Kozma and J . Russell , Multimedia and understanding : Ex - pert and novice responses to different representations of chemi - cal phenomena , J . Res . Sci . Teach . 34 , 949 (cid:1) 1997 (cid:2) . 9 R . B . Kozma , The material features of multiple representations and their cognitive and social affordances for science under - standing , Learn . Instr . 13 , 205 (cid:1) 2003 (cid:2) . 10 L . McDermott , in Toward a Scientiﬁc Practice of Science Educa - tion , edited by M . Gardner , J . Greeno , F . Reif , A . Schoenfeld , A . diSessa , and E . Stage (cid:1) IOS , Amsterdam 2004 (cid:2) . 11 D . Hestenes , M . Wells , and G . Swackhamer , Force concept inven - tory , Phys . Teach . 30 , 141 (cid:1) 1992 (cid:2) . 12 R . K . Thornton and D . R . Sokoloff , Assessing student learning of Newton’s laws : The Force and Motion Conceptual Evaluation and the evaluation of Active Learning Laboratory and Lecture curricula , Am . J . Phys . 66 , 338 (cid:1) 1998 (cid:2) . 13 L . Ding , R . Chabay , B . Sherwood , and R . Beichner , Evaluating an electricity and magnetism assessment tool : Brief electricity and magnetism assessment , Phys . Rev . ST Phys . Educ . Res . 2 , 010105 (cid:1) 2006 (cid:2) . 14 P . Heller , R . Keith , and S . Anderson , Teaching problem solving through cooperative grouping , parts i and ii , Am . J . Phys . 60 , 627 (cid:1) 1992 (cid:2) . 15 D . Rosengrant , E . Etkina , and A . Van Heuvelen , Ph . D . thesis , Rutgers , the State University of New Jersey , 2007 . 16 C . DeLeone and E . Gire , in Proceedings of the 2005 PERC (cid:1) AIP , Melville , NY , 2006 (cid:2) . 17 D . Rosengrant , E . Etkina , and A . Van Heuvelen , in Proceedings of the 2006 PERC (cid:1) AIP , Melville , NY , 2007 (cid:2) . 18 P . B . Kohl and N . D . Finkelstein , The effects of representation on students solving physics problems : A ﬁne - grained characteriza - tion , Phys . Rev . ST Phys . Educ . Res . 2 , 010106 (cid:1) 2006 (cid:2) . 19 J . P . Mestre , T . C . Thaden - Koch , R . J . Dufresne , and W . J . Ger - ace , in Research on Physics Education , Proceedings of the In - ternational School of Physics “Enrico Fermi” Course CLVI (cid:1) IOS , Amsterdam , 2004 (cid:2) . 20 A . Elby , What students’ learning of representations tells us about constructivism , J . Math . Behav . 19 , 481 (cid:1) 2000 (cid:2) . STRONGLY AND WEAKLY DIRECTED APPROACHES TO … PHYS . REV . ST PHYS . EDUC . RES . 3 , 010108 (cid:1) 2007 (cid:2) 010108 - 9 21 E . Etkina , A . Van Heuvelen , S . White - Brahmia , D . T . Brookes , M . Gentile , S . Murthy , D . Rosengrant , and A . Warren , Scientiﬁc abilities and their assessment , Phys . Rev . ST Phys . Educ . Res . 2 , 020103 (cid:1) 2006 (cid:2) . 22 E . Etkina and A . Van Heuvelen , in Proceedings of the 2001 PERC (cid:1) AIP , Melville , NY , 2002 (cid:2) , p . 17 . 23 A . Van Heuvelen and E . Etkina , Active Learning Guide (cid:1) Addison Wesley , San Francisco , 2006 (cid:2) . 24 E . Etkina and S . Murthy , in Proceedings of the 2005 PERC (cid:1) AIP , Melville , NY , 2006 (cid:2) . 25 http : / / www . physics . ohio - state . edu / ~ physedu / tools 26 http : / / www . colorado . edu / physics / EducationIssues / 27 http : / / phet . colorado . edu 28 P . B . Kohl and N . D . Finkelstein , The effect of instructional en - vironment on physics students’ representational skills , Phys . Rev . ST Phys . Educ . Res . 2 , 010102 (cid:1) 2006 (cid:2) . 29 D . Sheshkin , Handbook of Parametric and Nonparametric Statis - tical Procedures , 3rd ed . (cid:1) CRC Press , Boca Raton , 2004 (cid:2) . 30 We emphasize that this is an evaluation of the representations contained within the problem , not necessarily an evaluation of all the representations used by the students . Students were in - tended to (cid:1) and often did (cid:2) use FBDs and pictures in many of their solutions of Rutgers exam problems that were strictly math - ematical in presentation . 31 We had initially planned to give problem 4 separately , but changed this partway through the study , resulting in some reci - tation sections not receiving problem 4 . 32 We have found that leaving the data unnormalized tends to prompt the conclusion that the Rutgers students substantially outperformed the CU students , neglecting the previously men - tioned problem format difference . 33 We will not attempt to argue causation here . It could well be that using multiple representations leads to better performance di - rectly . Alternatively , it could be that better students overall are more likely to use multiple representations . Or , most likely (cid:1) in our opinions (cid:2) , these are both true , and are intertwined . KOHL , ROSENGRANT , AND FINKELSTEIN PHYS . REV . ST PHYS . EDUC . RES . 3 , 010108 (cid:1) 2007 (cid:2) 010108 - 10