Organization Science Vol . 18 , No . 6 , November – December 2007 , pp . 1006 – 1021 issn 1047 - 7039 (cid:1) eissn 1526 - 5455 (cid:1) 07 (cid:1) 1806 (cid:1) 1006 inf orms ® doi 10 . 1287 / orsc . 1070 . 0325 ©2007 INFORMS Exploring the Foundations of Cumulative Innovation : Implications for Organization Science Fiona Murray Sloan School of Management , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Cambridge , Massachusetts 02142 , fmurray @ mit . edu Siobhán O’Mahony Graduate School of Management , University of California at Davis , Davis , California 95616 , somahony @ ucdavis . edu O rganizational theorists have built a deep understanding of the conditions affecting knowledge sharing . However , for innovation to occur , knowledge must not just be shared , but also reused , recombined , and accumulated . Such accumu - lation is not inherent to the innovation process but can be either supported or limited by the context in which it occurs . We propose a framework arguing that three conditions shape this context : disclosure , access , and rewards . We show how these conditions operate at the institutional , ﬁeld , community , and organizational levels . Our framework highlights how when innovators encounter barriers to the accumulation of knowledge , their solutions are often organizational ones rather than legal ones . This suggests an expanding terrain for organizational scholars interested in debates often dominated by law and economics . Key words : innovation ; intellectual property ; ideas ; cumulative How to enable entrepreneurs to appropriate the fruits of their investments in cumulative and sequential innova - tion without impeding follow - on innovation and without creating barriers to entry has become one of the great unsolved puzzles that the law and economics of intellec - tual property rights needs to address as the new millen - nium gets under way . ( Reichman 2001 , p . 23 ) Introduction Reichman’s research agenda highlights the growing importance of cumulative innovation—the process of building on the ideas of others to create new innovations . This phenomenon lies at the heart of creativity , orga - nizational success , and economic growth ( Romer 1990 , 1994 ; Hargadon and Sutton 1997 ; Aghion and Howitt 1998 ) . However , we do not fully understand the con - ditions that shape an innovator’s actual ability to build on the work of others . Therefore , Reichman’s challenge cannot , as he suggests , be left to law and economics alone . Organization scholars need a place at this table . For it is only through a synthesis of economic , legal , and organizational perspectives that we will deepen our understanding of the conditions that affect the degree to which innovation can and will be cumulative . In their studies of cumulative innovation , economists and legal scholars have privileged the effects of legal in - stitutions , such as intellectual property rights , on innova - tors and follow - on innovators ( Nelson 1986 ; Scotchmer 1991 , 1996 , 2004 ; Dasgupta and David 1994 ) . However , legal institutions do not operate in isolation . Institutions , ﬁelds , organizations , and communities operate in con - cert , often in the shadow of the law , to establish mech - anisms enabling or inhibiting knowledge accumulation ( Hargardon and Douglas 2001 , O’Mahony 2003 , Murray 2006 ) . For example , organizational scholars have shown how innovators rely on social relationships to tap diverse networks and communities to build on the ideas of others ( e . g . , Weick 1979 , Hargadon and Sutton 1997 , Fleming 2001 , Reagans and Zuckerman 2001 ) . By further elab - orating the conditions affecting cumulative innovation , we encourage organizational scholars to examine how intellectual property rights affect innovation , bring the law into our understanding of organizational life , and build a more comprehensive understanding of the inno - vation process . To do this , organizational scholars must 1006 Murray and O’Mahony : Perspective Organization Science 18 ( 6 ) , pp . 1006 – 1021 , ©2007 INFORMS 1007 shift their emphasis from studies of knowledge ﬂows to examining the opportunities and constraints innova - tors confront as they attempt to reuse , recombine , and accumulate knowledge . Therefore , the overarching ques - tion we encourage organization scholars to investigate is : How do the conditions surrounding the access and use of an innovation affect others’ ability to innovate cumulatively ? In this essay , we develop an analytic framework to address this question . Our framework synthesizes economics and organization theory to identify three con - ditions necessary for people to innovate cumulatively— disclosure , accessibility , and reward . In their most simpliﬁed formulation these three interrelated conditions provide follow - on innovators with the minimally sufﬁ - cient requirements to build on the innovations of ear - lier generations . We also identify the level of analysis where these conditions are established . With economic and organization theory as a guide , we draw on exam - ples from several sectors and argue that the antecedents for cumulative innovation are established across multi - ple levels of analysis : institutional , ﬁeld , organizational , and community . We then use this framework to motivate a long - term research agenda . This framework helps organizational theorists con - tribute to the cumulative innovation conversation in three ways . First , it moves the discussion beyond a narrow focus on the legal system to encompass social and nor - mative mechanisms that may affect knowledge accu - mulation . Second , it explicates the interplay among institutions , ﬁelds , organizations , and communities in providing the conditions that shape an innovator’s abil - ity to innovate cumulatively . Third , this framework also improves our ability to compare knowledge - accumula - tion processes in different settings . These contributions should enhance our ability to develop more generaliz - able theories of cumulative innovation . Traditional Perspectives on Knowledge Accumulation Scholars have long recognized that when we innovate , we stand on the shoulders of others ( Merton 1973 ) . Recent evidence shows that innovation is , more often than not , cumulative to the extent it incorporates prior knowledge from multiple sources ( e . g . , Fleming 2001 , Katila and Ahuja 2002 , Garud and Karnoe 2003 ) . Such an emphasis on cumulative innovation may , at ﬁrst glance , seem at odds with the more traditional focus on the disruptive nature of innovation ( Christensen 1997 ) . However , in assessing the conditions that affect the degree to which an innovation is accumulative , we make no claim as to its ability to be disruptive . An innova - tion that accumulates disparate contributions from dif - ferent sources may be as disruptive as an innovation that builds on a narrow stream of prior innovations and vice versa . The relationship between patterns of knowl - edge accumulation and the degree to which an innova - tion is disruptive remains an open question . However , the cumulative innovation framework proposed in this paper provides a starting point for scholars interested in these issues . Our argument is simple . If our economy is increas - ingly reliant on the production , reﬁnement , and accu - mulation of ideas ( Powell and Snellman 2004 ) , then it is essential that we understand not just what affects ﬂows of knowledge and ideas , but also what affects the degree to which innovators are able to recombine and integrate these ideas with extant stocks of knowledge . However , with little exchange between economics and organization theory , we have only a fragmented picture of the accumulation process . To develop a framework that enhances our understanding of the conditions for cumulative innovation , we draw from both literatures . Organizational theory highlights one important aspect of knowledge accumulation—the role of networks and technical communities in helping innovators to build on one another’s ideas ( e . g . , Van de Ven 1993 , Hansen 1999 , Hargadon and Sutton 1997 , Fleming 2001 , Knorr - Cetina 1999 ) . A large body of work illustrates the importance of an individual’s or ﬁrm’s network posi - tion in providing opportunities for knowledge accumu - lation through brokerage and by facilitating knowledge exchange . Different network structures can support inno - vation ( Hansen et al . 2005 ) : Brokered networks arising when an individual or organization connects otherwise disconnected innovators can be effective for the accu - mulation of previously diverse knowledge ( Burt 2004 ) . Cohesive collaborations can also lead to creative out - comes ( Uzzi and Spiro 2005 ) . The identiﬁcation of such networks as critical to an innovator’s success has directed scholarly attention to the conditions shaping knowledge ﬂows . Hargadon and Sutton argue that knowledge brokers use their indus - try position to facilitate the acquisition , retention , and retrieval of information ( Hargadon and Sutton 1997 , p . 717 ) . The ability of brokers , such as IDEO , to gain access to a variety of ideas enables them to effec - tively recombine knowledge ( 1997 , p . 723 ) . Access is enhanced by innovation work practices that reinforce the beneﬁts of such a structural position . Designers of IDEO engage with artifacts ( Latour 1987 ) , become immersed in prior knowledge , and “learn by using” ( Rosenberg 1982 ) . Artifacts help them recall and recombine distinct pieces of knowledge offering a tangible form of access to help translate knowledge from one community of experts to another ( Bechky 2003a , b ; Carlile 2004 ) . Organizational scholars studying open - source commu - nities also examine conditions that allow for knowledge accumulation without necessarily labeling them as such . Although open - source communities may lack many of the institutions that reinforce academic norms , they are Murray and O’Mahony : Perspective 1008 Organization Science 18 ( 6 ) , pp . 1006 – 1021 , ©2007 INFORMS strongly inﬂuenced by programming norms embrac - ing access to code and reciprocal exchange of ideas ( Stallman 1999 , Levy 1984 , von Hippel and von Krogh 2003 ) . Like academics , open - source contributors tend to be motivated more by recognition than reward ( Lakhani and Wolf 2005 ) . But motivation for recognition is not enough to spur contributions . It is only with open access to a community’s source code and development pro - cess that contributors can make accumulative contribu - tions ( Shah 2005 , von Krogh et al . 2003 , Lakhani and von Hippel 2003 ) . However , little research has examined how differences in the norms and structures of particular communities actually affect opportunities for knowledge accumulation . Economists , in contrast , explicitly attend to the fac - tors affecting cumulative innovation but with a strong emphasis on the law—speciﬁcally intellectual prop - erty rights ( Scotchmer 1991 , Jaffe and Lerner 2004 ) . The patent system is designed to manage the ten - sion between rewarding ﬁrst - generation innovators while ensuring that second - generation innovators can learn of ideas generated by others and have adequate incen - tives to build on them . To understand this tension economists model how changes in the length and scope of patent protection shape incentives for both ﬁrst - and second - generation innovators ( Scotchmer 2004 , Katz and Shapiro 1985 , Klemperer 1990 ) . Empirical studies explore how changes in patent law inﬂuence the rate and direction of knowledge accumulation using comprehen - sive patent statistics ( Hall and Ziedonis 2001 , Hall et al . 2001 ) . Economists also examine how different orga - nizational settings ( Henderson et al . 1998 ) , promotion systems ( Henderson and Cockburn 1994 ) , and reward structures ( Lach and Schankerman 2006 ) affect the accu - mulation of patented knowledge . Dasgupta and David ( 1994 ) provide a richer insti - tutional perspective on the economics of knowledge accumulation . Their comparative institution - level analy - sis identiﬁes two conditions—the disclosure of ideas and rewards for disclosure—that support cumulative innova - tion . These conditions exist in both public and private institutions—although they are provided through quite different mechanisms . The private system depends on contractual and legal mechanisms to provide disclosure and rewards . The public system depends on social and normative mechanisms . The public system is based on the premise that knowl - edge should be accessible and widely distributed with limited constraints on an actor’s ability to reuse or recombine it . Thus , knowledge accumulation depends on norms that foster disclosure , veriﬁcation , and diffusion of knowledge . These norms are most commonly asso - ciated with science ( Merton 1973 ) and encourage indi - viduals to disclose their ﬁndings through a variety of ( often reputational ) incentives . In contrast , innovation in the private system relies on institution - level legal mecha - nisms structured around the provision of private property rights ( Nelson 1959 , Arrow 1962 ) . Governments have made disclosure a condition for patent awards . Innova - tors must disclose the knowledge needed to allow others to replicate the work . In return , innovators receive rights allowing them to exclude others from accessing or using the invention for a limited time . Economics provides an institution - level understand - ing of cumulative innovation with parsimonious models . However , the dominant mechanism theorized to shape cumulative innovation is the blunt and costly instru - ment of the law . Even when other instruments are con - sidered , such as technical committees ( Simcoe 2006 ) , economists tend to ignore how social and organizational factors mediate the use and effectiveness of legal tools ( e . g . , Gilson 1999 , Saxenian 1996 ) . In contrast , organi - zation theorists devote attention to knowledge sharing rather than knowledge accumulation . Their emphasis has been on how social factors affect ﬂows of knowledge ( Allen 1977 , Hansen 1999 ) . But for innovation to occur , knowledge must not just ﬂow : Innovators must have the ability to actually combine or accumulate knowledge . A Framework for Examining Cumulative Innovation We synthesize contributions from economic and organi - zational theory to provide a coherent framework for the study of cumulative innovation . Our framework is partic - ularly important , given recent changes in our economy . First , the degree to which innovations are cumulative may be increasing ( Fleming and Sorensen 2003 ) . Sec - ond , with a shift toward “open innovation” ( Chesbrough 2003 ) , contributors to innovations are more likely to come from different types of organizations ( e . g . , Powell et al . 1996 , Owen - Smith and Powell 2003 ) and across individual and ﬁrm units of analysis ( Rosenkopf et al . 2001 ) . Third , with a growing diversity of contributors to cumulative innovation , the potential for divergent inter - ests also rises ( e . g . , David 2003 , Nelson 2004 ) . Recent debates over the role of IPR across the academic - industry divide or among content providers and distributors in the entertainment industry illustrate these tensions . However , scholars provide few systematic insights to illuminate these debates . Such insights can only come when we recognize that the accumulation of knowl - edge is not inherent to the innovation process but can be either supported or limited by the context in which innovation occurs ( Mokyr 2004 ) . When we acknowl - edge that cumulative innovation is essentially a behav - ioral process , then the conditions affecting one’s ability to recombine knowledge become of interest . Rather than focusing on “who knows who , ” the cumulative innova - tion framework focuses on “who is able to share , reuse , and build on knowledge” and , most importantly , “under what conditions . ” This approach will help organizational scholars contribute more systematically to policy and Murray and O’Mahony : Perspective Organization Science 18 ( 6 ) , pp . 1006 – 1021 , ©2007 INFORMS 1009 industry debates . It can also open up new avenues for organizational scholarship . The framework is built by articulating the antecedents of cumulative innovation —conditions fostering or in - hibiting the accumulation of “pieces” of knowledge at multiple levels of analysis . Antecedents of Cumulative Innovation Economists emphasize disclosure and reward as impor - tant antecedent conditions for knowledge accumula - tion—conditions they assume operate at the institutional level . Organizational theorists emphasize access to knowledge as the central condition for accumulation— operating primarily at the community or network level . By integrating these two approaches , we identify three minimally sufﬁcient conditions for cumulative innova - tion : disclosure , access , and reward . It is only with mechanisms for disclosure , opportunities for access , and rewards to encourage disclosure and access that today’s innovators can build on the work of earlier generations and innovate cumulatively . First , to cumulatively build on the ideas that “came before , ” the innovator must know what came before ; this requires disclosure on the part of prior generations . Dis - closure is the ﬁrst step , initiating a cycle that allows for cumulative innovation ( e . g . , Dasgupta and David 1994 ) . It makes knowledge available to other innovators ( for free or for a price ) but does not necessarily provide access rights to that innovation or the capability to reuse it or modify it . Disclosure is therefore a necessary condi - tion to innovate cumulatively , but alone , it is insufﬁcient . Second , the innovator must be able to access these ideas . We distinguish disclosure from access because to build on the knowledge disclosed by someone else one must understand how the original knowledge was developed and have access to the various inputs ( tools , materials , information , techniques ) . The mere act of dis - closure does not specify the terms under which follow - on innovators can engage in two distinctive activities : ( 1 ) explore , understand , and practice the ideas and ( 2 ) build on and combine the idea into a new innovation . We deﬁne these two types of access because each con - strains or enables second - generation innovators in funda - mental ways . Reuse access , which grants “reuse rights” and allows others to experiment with how those ideas were developed . Recombinative access , provides permis - sion to not only reuse ideas but to recombine them in the creation of a new innovation . Third , both of these conditions depend on rewards , to encourage earlier innovators to both disclose their ideas and provide access so that later generations can usefully integrate these ideas . We refer not only remunerative rewards , but also reciprocal rewards such as reputation or credit ( Latour and Woolgar 1979 ) . We recognize that a wide range of entities affect the degree to which the antecedent conditions for knowledge accumulation are provided . These range from “high - level” entities such as legal bodies , whose edicts are broadly applicable to most innovators , to local expecta - tions and practices relevant to only a few . As an organiz - ing framework , we focus on how these conditions arise at four levels of analysis : institutions , ﬁelds , communi - ties , and ﬁrms . At the highest level we examine how institutions have a wide - reaching inﬂuence on innovators engaged in cumulative work . We then analyze the more spe - ciﬁc inﬂuence of ﬁelds on innovation ( which we deﬁne as “those organizations that , in the aggregate , consti - tute a recognized area of institutional life” ( DiMaggio and Powell 1983 ) ) . Our next level is the community— a group of interdependent participants who provide the context in which learning about innovation occurs ( Brown and Duguid 2001 ) . Such communities may oper - ate within the boundaries of a ﬁrm ( Brown and Duguid 1991 ) or across ﬁrms and other organizations in sci - entiﬁc ( Knorr - Cetina 1999 ) , technical ( Barley 1986 ) , or occupational ( van Maanen and Barley 1984 ) commu - nities . Finally , we articulate the role of organizations in shaping the conditions for knowledge accumula - tion . Although innovators within ﬁrms may be com - posed of many distinctive communities and subject to ﬁeld - level inﬂuences , the ﬁrm itself , through geography ( Allen 1977 ) , processes ( Hargadon and Sutton 1997 ) , or policies ( i . e . , nondisclosure agreements ) shapes the antecedent conditions for innovation . Many empirical examples suggest that institutions , ﬁelds , communities , and organizations constitute a com - prehensive list of entities that shape the conditions for cumulative innovation . Next , we provide a more ﬁne - grained analysis of how the three antecedent conditions for knowledge accumulation are either facilitated or con - strained at these different levels . Disclosure Anyone who discloses ideas or knowledge does so to make it available to others but without necessarily providing them access . Innovators disclose their ideas through a range of mechanisms ( e . g . , patents , publica - tions , community forums , individual conversations ) that are facilitated or constrained at multiple levels of anal - ysis . With selected examples , we explore how different disclosure mechanisms affect how follow - on innovators build on ideas . Institutions . In the private sphere , patent law shapes disclosure by requiring innovators to disclose their ideas at a level of detail sufﬁcient to “allow one skilled in the art” to replicate their claims . However , the degree to which disclosure allows for “enablement” is some - times a source of contention . In the United States , tests of enablement are often enforced by overworked and understaffed federal patent examiners ( Jaffe and Lerner Murray and O’Mahony : Perspective 1010 Organization Science 18 ( 6 ) , pp . 1006 – 1021 , ©2007 INFORMS 2004 , p . 142 ) . The only action open to a follow - on inno - vator who has difﬁculty replicating ideas in patents is through the courts—which can be slow and costly . In the public sphere , disclosure is supported at the broad institution - level by academic publishing . Like patents , journal articles must provide disclosure of meth - ods and results . However , academic communities vary in their expectations for disclosure in publishing . Most if not all journals use peers to determine the veracity and detail of disclosure through the review process , rather than using professional examiners . Another critical dis - tinction lies in the nature of the sanctions involved for poor ( or false ) disclosure . Unlike the patent system , jour - nals can only provide relatively informal sanctions ( leav - ing the punishment for falsiﬁcation up to the employer ) ( Couzin and Unger 2006 ) . Both private ( legal ) and public ( academic ) institution - level arrangements for disclosure make knowledge avail - able to all . Although acquiring a full understanding of any disclosed knowledge may require years of train - ing and analysis , the “source” information from which to do so is available . First - generation innovators can choose to disclose in either public or private institutions , if their knowledge is deemed worthy of publication by peer reviewers or worthy of patent grant by examiners . Second - generation innovators can also choose the degree to which they build on knowledge disclosed in either form ( although there may be associated access costs ) . However , the degree to which an individual’s community or organization rewards either behavior may affect the disclosure choice ( Owen - Smith 2003 , Stern 2004 ) . In the life sciences , innovators in academia and industry may pursue dual routes of disclosure—simultaneously ﬁling patent applications when an idea is disclosed in an aca - demic publication . These “patent - paper” pairs disclose knowledge in two distinctive settings offering similar levels of disclosure but ( as we will discuss below ) quite different implications for access ( Murray 2002 , Murray and Stern 2007 ) . Fields . Actual disclosure practices within ﬁelds can profoundly affect the ability of an innovator to build on the work of others . Surveys have shown ﬁrms’ use of patents may be differentiated by industry sector , pro - ducing widely varying levels of knowledge disclosure ( Levin et al . 1985 ) . In different ﬁelds , ﬁrms , their sup - pliers , and key partners established distinctive practices for knowledge disclosure . For example , in response to the Federal Trade Commission’s actions against Dell in 1996 , standard - setting bodies now require the disclosure of knowledge otherwise unavailable , particularly when it is needed to practice a new standard . These choices can affect the entire set of actors within a particular ﬁeld . After the U . S . Supreme Court granted strong patent cov - erage of genetically modiﬁed organisms , ﬁrms began disclosing ideas and materials previously secret , in the hopes of receiving patents . In the arts , culture , and entertainment ﬁelds , innova - tors have collaborated to change ( and often expand ) dis - closure . Creative Commons , for example , developed a common set of reuse and distribution terms , which artists can use to license their works with more ﬂexibility than copyright can offer ( Lessig 2004 ) . Their modular license allows creators to decide whether and how to restrict the ability of others to use or recombine original works for commercial or noncommercial purposes . Approximately 145 million works licensed under Creative Commons’ terms ( Rohter 2007 ) have arguably enhanced the abil - ity of creators and innovators within common ﬁelds to disclose their work to others . However , as is the case with all these examples , the ultimate effect of ﬁeld - level changes in disclosure practices on cumulative innovation remains undocumented and unmeasured . Organizations . Organizations face complex strategic decisions regarding what , where , and when to disclose knowledge throughout their innovation process . Internal policies and practices may affect the degree to which individual members of an organization disclose their ideas to outsiders . At a minimum , managers must assess the value of disclosure as a source of motivation and reward for employees ( Stern 2004 ) . More strategically , they must balance their desire for secrecy with the ben - eﬁts of disclosure . Some of these beneﬁts include reci - procity—the opportunity to learn from others working on similar problems ( Saxenian 1996 ) ; reputation—the value placed by investors on peer - reviewed publications or a patent portfolio ( Hall et al . 2005 ) ; exchange— for example , cross - licensing ; and direct rewards—from property rights ( Grindley and Teece 1997 ) . These chal - lenges are not new . Increasingly , however , ﬁrms are establishing new disclosure practices that improve the conditions for cumulative innovation . For example , after investing millions researching the genetic origins of type 2 diabetes , Swiss pharmaceuti - cal ﬁrm Novartis released on the Internet , for anyone to use , a vast amount of gene sequence data from a genome - wide analysis of more than 3 , 000 type 2 dia - betes patients . The president of the Novartis Institute for Biomedical Research chose this strategy because the data contained more research leads than his researchers could ever pursue : “To translate this study’s provocative identiﬁcation of diabetes - related genes into the invention of new medicines will require a global effort” ( Tapscott and Williams 2007 ) . Novartis has not created speciﬁc mechanisms to capture the value of any cumulative inno - vations that stem from their disclosure . Although Novar - tis’ three - year lead in analyzing the data prior to release is likely to confer some advantage , the ﬁrm has cre - ated valuable goodwill and reputational beneﬁts with the research community . Novartis is not alone in its strategic use of disclosure . Bar - Gill and Parchomovsky ( 2003 ) identiﬁed more than Murray and O’Mahony : Perspective Organization Science 18 ( 6 ) , pp . 1006 – 1021 , ©2007 INFORMS 1011 1 , 000 ﬁrms engaged in publicly disclosing their research and development ( R & D ) ﬁndings ( a practice referred to as defensive publishing ) . This practice provides disclo - sure to potential follow - on innovators and prevents oth - ers from establishing ownership over these ideas using patents . Such practices also allow ﬁrms to signal their openness to enable innovators to build on existing ideas and may encourage complementary innovations . Communities . Formal disclosure practices only par - tially describe “disclosure - in - action” because commu - nities also shape the nature and effectiveness of these practices . For example , the timing and scope of disclo - sure varies signiﬁcantly across different academic com - munities . Until the early 1990s , knowledge of newly discovered gene sequences was disclosed in academic journals—but the time delay from discovery to disclosure was discretionary . This delay allowed human geneticists to keep their knowledge of new gene sequences secret while they ( or their students ) hunted for the more precise location of a gene . With the entry of a private sec - tor gene - sequencing effort ( Celera ) , the academic com - munity strove to justify the role of public funding for gene sequencing . In 1996 , as part of their commitment to public sequencing , leading scientists in the commu - nity created the Bermuda Rules—a new set of disclo - sure practices requiring scientists to disclose their gene sequences within 24 hours into Genbank ( a public DNA database ) . There is no systematic evidence documenting whether this shift in disclosure changed the rate of knowl - edge accumulation , but anecdotal evidence suggests the new policy , combined with new DNA search infrastruc - ture , allowed scientists from around the world to com - pare sequences , combine disparate data , and accumulate knowledge at a greater rate . Thus , a community’s prac - tices and rules has dramatic consequences for follow - on innovation rates . The degree to which disclosure practices affect cumu - lative innovation is also mediated by the role of tacit knowledge . As scholars have articulated , “full” and “meaningful” disclosure may require more than simply a “text . ” For knowledge to be actionable , it may require access to materials , know - how , translation , or the sharing of expertise among individuals . This type of disclosure most often arises within communities through informal mechanisms ( Collins 1974 , Brown and Duguid 1991 , Bechky 2003a , Carlile 2004 ) . In scholarly , technical , occupational , and online com - munities , disclosure enhances or restricts according to a community’s norms or rules . Reciprocal exchange norms among academic colleagues ( Crane 1969 ) or coworkers ( Saxenian 1996 , Almeida and Kogut 1999 ) encourages disclosure . For example , the revolutionary elucidation of the structure of DNA in 1953 by Watson and Crick would not have been possible without the informal dis - closure of the X - ray crystallography results by Franklin , Wilkins , and Gosling at a small meeting at Univer - sity College , London , in July 1951 ( Berressem 2005 ) . Similarly , members of open - source software communi - ties and user - innovation communities share norms that encourage the disclosure of problems , inquiries , and suggestions to foster individual and collective learning ( Lakhani and von Hippel 2003 ) . In contrast , formal con - tracts such as nondisclosure agreements ( NDAs ) con - strain individuals from disclosing organizational secrets in communities—although their enforcement varies by region ( Marx et al . 2007 ) . Thus , an individual’s dual membership in communities and organizations ( e . g . , Van Maanen and Barley 1984 ) may result in conﬂict - ing norms and rules regarding disclosure . For example , when industrial scientists want to publish their research , they may ﬁnd the scope or timing of such disclosures limited by the strategic imperative of their employers . How such conﬂicts are resolved , and the consequences for knowledge accumulation remain to be explored . Access To cumulatively build on the knowledge disclosed by someone else requires access . By managing both reuse and recombination access , early generations of innova - tors control the use of their ideas by later generations . Innovators exert control over access to their ideas using legal , normative , or technical mechanisms operating at institution , ﬁeld , organization , and community levels . Institutions . Patent law mandates one type of disclo - sure and academic publishing another , yet there are few overarching institutions ( legal or otherwise ) that sup - port access to the innovative work of prior generations . Patents give innovators the right to provide , restrict , or prohibit access to follow - on innovators under whatever terms and conditions they deem acceptable . There are two exceptions to these broad rights . First , “march - in” rights allow federal agencies to insist patented ideas developed with federal funding be licensed to others under certain conditions ( such as where public health is at stake or the innovations are not in use ) . Sec - ond , an innovator’s “refusal to license” may constitute an antitrust violation and be subject to federal review ( Lewis and Yao 1995 , Mackie - Mason 2002 ) . However , the U . S . Congress recently gave greater at - tention to the issue of access to innovations . A new law shaping access in technical ﬁelds is the Digital Millennium Copyright Act . It permits both technical and legal means to restrict reuse and recombinative access ( Samuelson 2001 , Felten 2002 , Samuelson and Scotchmer 2002 ) . Hardware can be engineered to restrict follow - on innovators from accessing copyrighted con - tent—limiting reuse access . The act reinforces this barrier through legal means by restricting follow - on innovators from reengineering or bypassing technical barriers . Samuelson ( 2001 ) and Felten ( 2002 ) have per - suasively argued that restricting an owner’s right to Murray and O’Mahony : Perspective 1012 Organization Science 18 ( 6 ) , pp . 1006 – 1021 , ©2007 INFORMS experiment with technology they have purchased ham - pers learning and innovation . However , copyright owners depend on this law to prevent unauthorized tampering of content that enables copyright violation . National resources such as the Library of Congress and the Smithsonian Institution preserve and disclose the work of primary generations of innovators , but they do not provide access to these ideas for later reuse and recombination . Immediate access through univer - sity libraries is often costly and restricted . This may be why some members of Congress recently drafted a Research Public Access Act ( S . 2695 ) , 1 which would require federally funded research to be made publicly and freely available online within six months of publi - cation . Although this bill would only apply to federally funded research ( some 65 , 000 publications per year from the National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) alone ) , it has received the ire of academic journals and publishers who view it as reducing their ability to recoup costs . About 10 % of academic journals currently make their publi - cations freely accessible to the general public ( Dotinga 2007 ) . Other private organizations took the initiative to improve access to the research they fund . For example , the Howard Hughes Medical Institute ( HHMI ) is pay - ing the Elsevier publishing house to make HHMI funded research available to the public for free after six months ( Dotinga 2007 ) . Thus , at the institution level , new laws are being both proposed and passed either restricting or enabling access to knowledge and innovation—with only a limited appreciation of their cumulative effects . Fields . Innovators within speciﬁc ﬁelds , particularly dynamic ones , are experimenting with access rules to fos - ter ( or stiﬂe ) cumulative innovation by follow - on inno - vators . Preliminary evidence suggests changes in access rules signiﬁcantly affect subsequent rates of knowledge accumulation within ﬁelds . In the ﬁeld of cancer biology , changes in access to one of the ﬁrst cancer “animal models” ( animals engineered with a predisposition to a disease ) —the “Oncomouse”— affected many different innovators . When the Onco - mouse discovery was published by Harvard scientists in 1984 , it was widely recognized as an important building block for further innovations in cancer biology and drug discovery . Access to the mice followed the broad norms of public science ( Merton 1973 ) and the local conven - tions of mouse geneticists ( Rader 2004 ) . Research col - laborations among scientists initially formed the basis of exchange , but over the years , mice started to be shared through informal agreements ( Murray 2006 ) . Industrial scientists were also able to access the mice through a mix of informal and formal means . As a result , knowl - edge accumulation proceeded rapidly . In 1988 , access rules changed . Harvard University was granted a patent on the Oncomouse , which , under the terms of its research grant , was exclusively licensed to DuPont . The corporation imposed strict access conditions on all follow - on innovators . It limited recombinative access through reach - through rights to any downstream use of the Oncomouse . It also controlled reuse access by charging for the mice ( with differential prices for aca - demic and industry innovators ) and requiring oversight of publications by follow - on innovators . The private sec - tor found the access costs prohibitive , and the use of Oncomice in drug discovery slowed and failed to reach its full potential . Academic research was inhibited as follow - on innovators turned to different animal models . By the late 1990s , DuPont , at the behest of the NIH , eased its access requirements on academic scientists , and knowledge accumulation by academics rose again . In its agreement with NIH , DuPont publicly recognized the importance of access to furthering cumulative innovation and stated it “deeply appreciates the importance of wide dissemination of tools for basic research and is commit - ted to making [ Oncomouse ] available to the academic community” ( quoted in Marshall 2000 ) . Within information technology ﬁelds , access to tech - nology is similarly contested ( and strategically used ) , particularly in markets dominated by a single technol - ogy platform . Technology platforms provide both an architecture that facilitates interactions among compo - nent parts as well as a set of rules that govern access to those parts or interfaces by others ( Eisenmann et al . 2006 , Gawer and Cusumano 2002 , Baldwin and Clark 2000 ) . Such platforms can be designed and owned by a single player in a ﬁeld ( e . g . , Microsoft owns Windows ) or by multiple parties ( e . g . , many players contribute to the Symbian telecommunications platform ) . Similarly , innovators within a ﬁeld may cooperatively establish or revise rules of access to shared technologies or standards by working through alliances or technical standard com - mittees ( Rosenkopf et al . 2001 , Simcoe 2006 ) . Because platforms affect the rules by which many in a speciﬁc technical ﬁeld must play , some countries , such as France , now view access to proprietary platforms as critical to their national interests . They are concerned that proprietary platforms may inhibit competition and encourage the development of “winner - takes - all” mar - kets ( e . g . , Eisenmann et al . 2006 ) . The French govern - ment has thus mandated access to proprietary platforms ( such as Apple’s iTunes software ) with the aim of creat - ing a level playing ﬁeld and furthering opportunities for cumulative innovation . 2 Other European Union nations are equally concerned . Thus , although rules of access to a particular technology may appear to be squarely the purview of a single ﬁrm or actors within a common ﬁeld , they can gravitate to the national or even transnational level when the interests of many are perceived to be at stake . As we show in the next section , organization - level practices also play an important role in managing access among different generators of innovators . Murray and O’Mahony : Perspective Organization Science 18 ( 6 ) , pp . 1006 – 1021 , ©2007 INFORMS 1013 Organizations . It remains an organization’s strategic decision to provide others access to internally devel - oped innovations , platforms , technologies , or other types of knowledge ( e . g . , Garud and Kumaraswamy 1993 ) . The patent system mandates disclosure , but access to patented innovations is typically negotiated at the orga - nizational level ( less frequently at the inventor level ) . Armed with a patent , a ﬁrm selectively contracts with any party interested in incorporating their ideas into their own activities on an exclusive or non - exclusive basis ( Edwards et al . 2003 ) . Exclusive licenses offer great ben - eﬁt to a single party but can also narrow the number of possible paths following from an innovation . This makes the ultimate effect of such licensing arrangements on cumulative innovation difﬁcult to evaluate . In either case , follow - on innovators must bargain with early inno - vators to access their ideas through legal mechanisms ( Scotchmer 2004 ) . Such organizational strategies extend well beyond patented knowledge . As research on Intel , Microsoft , Palm , Cisco ( Gawer and Cusumano 2002 ) , and Sun Microsystems ( Garud and Kumaraswamy 1993 , Garud et al . 2002 ) shows , “platform leaders” may provide selective access to parts of their technologies ( often man - aged through common interfaces ) to allow other ﬁrms to develop complementary innovations . This allows inno - vators to tightly manage reuse and recombinative access in ways that enable their competitive advantage over those who would otherwise be able to generate follow - on innovations . The impact of a single organization’s access decisions on the rate and direction of follow - on cumu - lative innovation within markets or ﬁelds is not fully appreciated . Often these choices are examined in terms of the strategic beneﬁts to the focal ﬁrm or its competi - tors , as exempliﬁed by the U . S . Supreme Court’s lengthy and costly analysis of the consequences of Microsoft’s closed operating system on its competitors . 3 However , we know when a ﬁrm makes new access choices , it often affects other ﬁrms in the ﬁeld . When IBM committed to share access to 500 software patents with the open - source community , 4 ﬁrms such as Novell , Sun Microsystems , and Computer Associates soon fol - lowed suit . These ﬁrms have since created a patent commons ( http : / / www . patentcommons . org ) to aggregate their commitments to share patents . Unlike patent pools , there are no shared royalties , and use of their con - tent is not restricted to members but open to the pub - lic . Such “boundary organizations” ( typically nonproﬁt foundations ) ( O’Mahony and Bechky 2007 ) play a new role in managing access to once privately held bod - ies of knowledge . They provide a safe “trading zone , ” where actors organize around their shared interests in cumulative innovation without compromising their diver - gent interests . Examples from both biology and open - source software suggest that boundary organizations can have a positive impact on cumulative innovation—by preserving access to knowledge and innovations and by enabling innovators from public and private spheres to work cumulatively . For example , biological resource centers ( BRCs ) serve as repositories for critical materials used in the life sciences by both industry and academic scientists . Indi - vidual scientists , ﬁrms , universities , and nonproﬁt labora - tories use more than 300 BRCs worldwide to deposit and distribute biological materials critical to basic research . Some academic journals even require that authors use BRCs . According to U . S . patent law , the deposition of critical materials ( particularly biological materials ) is required if the materials are not publicly available through simple experimentation ( 35 USC114 ) ( Stern 2004 ) . Furman and Stern ( 2006 ) use careful comparisons to examine the effect of BRC cell line storage and distri - bution on later knowledge accumulation . They ﬁnd that after deposit of the cell line , scientiﬁc articles receive higher rates of citation than those that do not ( Furman and Stern 2006 ) . They conclude that BRCs have the power to amplify the impact of scientiﬁc discoveries by enhancing the ability of future generations to access past discoveries . Across a wide range of technical arenas , new boundary organizations serve a similar function— they maintain access to common bodies of knowledge enabling parties from both public and private sectors to innovative cumulatively . The prevalence of such orga - nizations , their effectiveness and their origins are less clear . Conversely , organizations may have an unintended negative effect on future cumulative innovation . A recent study of the semiconductor industry showed when ﬁrms exit speciﬁc product markets and cease to engage in R & D , citations to the ﬁrms’ patents decline markedly ( Hoetker and Agrawal 2007 ) . The loss of access to pri - vate knowledge embedded in individual or community practices may inhibit other ﬁrms from building on those innovations . Communities . Communities also shape access to the innovations they generate . Perhaps the best known set - ting for community - level action is the open - source soft - ware movement . Open - source code provides reuse access because an informed reader of the source code under - stands how it can be modiﬁed . However , the right to modify code and accumulate ideas embedded in it re - quires recombinative access of a legal nature . The Gnu General Public License ( GPL ) is probably the most widespread example of such a license and is used throughout the open - source community ( Lerner and Tirole 2005 , O’Mahony 2003 ) . This legal mechanism reinforces norms of reciprocity by mandating the recip - rocal disclosure of source code for derived works ( Rosen 2005 ) . Few would disagree that open source licenses helped spur new practices in the software industry , but Murray and O’Mahony : Perspective 1014 Organization Science 18 ( 6 ) , pp . 1006 – 1021 , ©2007 INFORMS the ultimate effect of access on the ability to innovate cumulatively in either public or private sectors has not been measured . Reward Last , for cumulative innovation to occur , innovators need assurance of some form of reward , encouraging them to disclose their ideas and provide access to others . Such rewards may be intrinsic but can also include remuner - ative or reciprocal rewards from follow - on innovators . A system that allows for a ﬂow of rewards between ﬁrst - and second - generation innovators is necessary but without some ease in distributing rewards among differ - ent generations , innovators will have difﬁculty accumu - lating knowledge ( Scotchmer 1991 ) . Evidence suggests rewards can be managed through normative or legal mechanisms at multiple levels . Institutions . Legal mechanisms typically support insti - tution - level arrangements for rewards across innovators . However , the degree to which patents bring economic rewards depends on the scope of the patent , and on the competitive landscape of the industry ( Teece 1986 ) . Moreover , even within sectors , the rewards realized from patents are highly skewed ( Scherer 2001 , Scherer and Harhoff 2000 ) . This explains ﬁrst - generation innovators’ preference for a broad patent scope . Unable to predict which innovation will be the most valuable to others down the road , innovators prefer to accrue as much leverage or bargaining power as they can when establish - ing early property rights ( Jaffe and Lerner 2004 ) . Some argue that overly broad patent protection reduces the incentives of second - generation innovators , particularly in areas relying on multiple prior pieces of knowledge , such as biotechnology . As Heller and Eisenberg noted , “Each upstream patent allows its owner to setup another tollbooth on the road to product development , adding to the cost and slowing the pace of downstream biomedical innovation” ( 1998 , pp . 698 – 9 ) . Jaffe and Lerner ( 2004 ) argue that changes in U . S . legal institutions are increas - ingly supportive of intellectual property holders’ scope and duration over time . As a result , innovators in a com - mon ﬁeld seek to use negotiation and / or collaboration as an alternative mechanism for distributing rewards . Fields . Different types of actors within a ﬁeld may collaborate to forge ﬁeld - level solutions for reward allo - cation across generations of innovators . For example , patent pools help reduce intellectual property transac - tion costs among parties with interdependent or cumu - lative innovation components ( Merges 2001 ) . Multiple patent holders aggregate their patents and agree to make them available to other members . The pool may agree to license rights to nonmembers and distribute the pro - ceeds . Both legal and organizational means are used to ensure a reciprocal ﬂow of rewards among parties to the same innovation arena . Copyright collectives work in a similar way ; they bundle and manage the distribution of rights to large quantities of work that may be held by multiple parties ( e . g . , the American Society of Com - posers , Authors , and Publishers ) ( Merges 2001 ) . These solutions , however , received more attention from legal scholars than from organizational scholars . Thus , their ultimate effect on the rates and direction of cumulative innovation is underexplored . As an alternative to organized collective action , inno - vators use bilateral licensing agreements and contracts to craft the distribution of rewards to follow - on inno - vators , as reﬂected in royalty rates , up - front payments , and milestone payments ( Anton and Yao 2002 ) . How - ever , researchers only recently began to explore the con - sequences of different contractual structures on future cumulative innovation . Organizations . Within organizations , rewards affect an innovator’s willingness to disclose and provide access to his or her knowledge as well as his or her willingness to build on prior knowledge . These rewards are shaped by the norms of particular work groups or communi - ties inside the organization ( Knorr - Cetina 1999 , Brown and Duguid 2000 , Bechky 2003a ) . Community norms are either reinforced or countered by organizational poli - cies and practices that structure rewards . For example , Hargadon and Bechky’s research ( 2006 ) shows that even when disclosure and access was rewarded by a pro - fessional service ﬁrm , concern for personal power and ﬁefdom could still trump and lead to secrecy . Further - more , organizations tend to vary in the degree to which formal reward policies and practices align with their strategies . Henderson and Cockburn ( 1994 ) found that pharmaceutical ﬁrms exhibit wide variation in the degree they reward the disclosure of research ﬁndings in aca - demic peer - reviewed journals through promotion , salary enhancement , and recognition . When an organization’s formal structure fails to pro - vide adequate rewards for cumulative innovation , inno - vation is stiﬂed—even when disclosure and access are provided . A case in point is the Apache http Web server , developed at the National Center for Supercom - puting Applications ( NCSA ) . Apache is a software pro - gram that accepts http requests from a Web browser and “serves” a Web page to the requester . The NCSA made its source code freely available , and when com - mercial use of the Internet grew , demand for the program increased . Developers around the world began sending code improvements to the NCSA . However , no one at the NCSA accumulated these improvements into future versions of the code base . Although the NCSA provided both disclosure and access by placing the Apache source code in the pub - lic domain , it failed to reward or encourage cumula - tive innovation at a critical time . In response , eight developers accumulated improvements to the code them - selves and formed a community—“the Apache” group Murray and O’Mahony : Perspective Organization Science 18 ( 6 ) , pp . 1006 – 1021 , ©2007 INFORMS 1015 ( Fielding 1999 ) . The group built a revamped code base and protected it with an “Apache” license that permits free modiﬁcation and reuse of the code as long as the community is attributed ( Rosen 2005 ) . Without orga - nizational incentives or legal requirements , norms of reciprocity prevailed—hundreds of contributors donated bug ﬁxes and system enhancements from the time of the project’s inception ( Mockus et al . 2002 ) . The Apache server is now used by more than two - thirds of the 80 million websites surveyed . 5 Years later , the group incorporated as a nonproﬁt orga - nization ( Apache Software Foundation or ASF ) and now provides organizational and legal support to more than 30 open - source projects ( O’Mahony 2005 ) . Additionally , the ASF helped further a host of follow - on innovations derived from the Apache code in both public and pri - vate sectors . Like the boundary organizations discussed earlier , the ASF reinforces reciprocal rewards among innovators and has become an organizational platform for cumulative innovation—supporting an entire industry selling Apache related goods and services . This example suggests that a community can become an effective locus for fostering cumulative innovation when an organiza - tion fails to do so . It also suggests that we should study the transition of innovations between communities and organizations . CERN’s transition of the governance of the World Wide Web to the W3C consortium hosted by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology is one exam - ple . IBM’s transition of the Eclipse application devel - opment platform to a nonproﬁt foundation is another . What triggers such transitions and the consequences for cumulative innovation is yet to be elaborated . Communities . The role of communities in shaping the rewards for knowledge accumulation is not new . For centuries , collaborators in academic communities have disclosed and provided access to knowledge , techniques , and materials in return for shared recognition through citations and career - based rewards of promotion and tenure . Similarly , contributors to open - source software communities allow their work to be freely used , mod - iﬁed , and distributed in return for recognition by their peers and the prestige of contributing to the community ( von Krogh et al . 2003 ) . However , in this case , community norms do not oper - ate alone—they are blended with software licenses and organizational structures that reinforce a reciprocal ﬂow of rewards ( such as the ASF ) . At a minimum , open - source software licenses require appropriate attribution to the community ( Rosen 2005 ) . At a maximum , licenses such as the Gnu GPL request follow - on innovators to freely distribute the source code of any derived works they disclose . Gnu does not constrain an innovator’s ability to derive rewards from his or her reuse of GPL code , but it does limit those seeking to acquire exclusive rights to derived works . While the community collec - tively monitors the reuse of open - source code and may use cease and desist letters , their primary enforcement mechanism is the normative threat of public opinion ( O’Mahony 2003 ) . Strengths of the Cumulative Perspective This essay began by posing the question How do the conditions and rules surrounding an innovation affect others’ ability to build cumulatively upon that innova - tion . To answer this question , we drew on organizational theory and economics elaborating the antecedent con - ditions for knowledge accumulation : disclosure , access , and reward . These conditions are shaped at four levels of analysis : institutions , ﬁelds , organizations , and com - munities . Our framework allows organization theorists to specify how these conditions are created , how they are enacted , and how they subsequently shape the ability of others to innovate cumulatively . It also achieves three other objectives . First , it provides a more coherent approach to the identiﬁcation of factors enabling or inhibiting knowl - edge accumulation . In contrast to innovation approaches describing the source , dispersion , or location of innova - tion e . g . , “distributed” or “open” innovation ( Chesbrough 2003 , von Hippel 2005 ) , we attend to the legal and social context and mechanisms affecting who can share and under what conditions . These two approaches are not mutually exclusive ; rather , they have a different emphasis . Second , by specifying the antecedent conditions for cumulative innovation , we are better equipped to con - sider the different ways actors shape the innovation pro - cess at multiple levels of analysis in a conceptually consistent way . Studies of knowledge networks often focus on individuals ( e . g . , Hansen 1999 , 2002 ) and eco - nomic analyses focus on broad institutional conditions ( Dasgupta and David 1994 , Murray and Stern 2007 ) . Our framework considers how parties at multiple levels work together to enable ( or stiﬂe ) the accumulation of knowledge . This brings us closer to understanding how knowledge accumulation is enabled “on the ground” and suggests a way to understand the interplay of institutions and daily practices on knowledge accumulation . Davis and Marquis ( 2005 ) argue that this approach is particu - larly helpful in explaining how macro level shifts affect actors ( e . g . , Lounsbury and Ventresca 2002 ) . Our intent is not to provide a framework to adjudicate the degree to which a particular innovation is or is not cumulative . Nor will it allow us to assess whether an idea has the intrinsic potential to serve as a founda - tion for future innovations . Our approach is agnostic as to whether an innovation is incremental or radical in nature . Instead , it allows us to analyze any and all types of innovation because each can contribute to cumula - tive innovation . Incremental and radical innovation will likely differ in the diversity and origins of the knowl - edge they incorporate , but accumulation processes are Murray and O’Mahony : Perspective 1016 Organization Science 18 ( 6 ) , pp . 1006 – 1021 , ©2007 INFORMS at work in both instances . The degree to which the rate and diversity of knowledge accumulation are disruptive to speciﬁc industries needs to be explored . In fact , con - sidering the antecedents of innovation might help distin - guish incremental innovations from radical ones . Finally , our framework is particularly well suited , but not limited to , knowledge - intensive ﬁelds with a dis - tributed “locus of innovation” ( Powell et al . 1996 ) such as software , biotechnology , and creative industries . As scholars increasingly recognize that sources of innova - tion are more diverse and more distributed in sectors such as semiconductors , oil and gas exploration , consumer products , and electronics the scope of our framework widens ( von Hippel 1988 , Chesbrough 2003 , Jeppersen and Frederiksen 2006 , Linder et al . 2003 ) . New Research Directions Our framework drives a rich research agenda for organi - zation scholars—working alone or in collaboration with those in law and economics . The need is clear for more empirical studies examining how changes in disclosure , access , and rewards affect follow - on accumulation . At the same time , we must study how organizations grap - ple with the opportunities and challenges of knowledge accumulation within or across organizational bound - aries . This essay raises many interdisciplinary questions , but we focus on two dimensions : ( 1 ) ways to advance organizational theory with more systematic analysis of cumulative innovation within and across organizations and ( 2 ) ways to sharpen our toolbox by improving the measures , methods , and approaches used to study cumu - lative innovation . Advancing Organizational Theory . First , we encour - age more systematic analysis of organizational decisions affecting the subsequent rate and direction of cumula - tive innovation . From a strategy perspective , we must develop a clearer understanding of the types of knowl - edge ﬁrms are willing to disclose or access and when . At what point in the innovation cycle are ﬁrms more likely to pursue an innovation strategy based on mak - ing their ideas available for follow - on innovators ? And when do they strike a more complex balance of access and restriction ? How do these decisions vary by type of innovation ? At ﬁrst glance it might seem all knowledge accumulation is beneﬁcial for a ﬁrm . But we might well ask what levels of follow - on knowledge accumulation are actually desired . Does this affect an organization’s policies and practices ? The answer is most likely con - tingent . The degree of disclosure and access may well depend on the type of innovation itself or the struc - ture of the industry ( e . g . , Tushman and Rosenkopf 1992 , Baldwin and Clark 2000 ) . Future research should examine how disclosure , access , and reward decisions affect opportunities for follow - on innovations . It must move beyond sparse eco - nomic models that consider only patents and the sharing of monetary rewards ( Scotchmer 2004 ) by accounting for how rewards of all types for the next generation of innovators are balanced with potential losses for the ﬁrm . For example , scholars might examine how ﬁrms beneﬁt from the reciprocity , learning , and reputation coming from making their innovators widely available . These decisions cannot be evaluated in a vacuum , as ﬁrms simultaneously use institution - , ﬁeld - , organization - and community - level practices selectively and strategi - cally to either foster or stiﬂe knowledge accumulation . For example , IBM is one of the top patent ﬁlers and also the largest corporate supporter and developer of open - source software ( e . g . , Baldwin et al . 2003 ) . Simultane - ous pursuit of such divergent approaches suggests that a ﬁrm’s strategies for disclosure and access differ across its portfolio of innovations . However , we know little about what contributes to these differences . Thus , we should compare how different mechanisms support dif - ferent levels of knowledge accumulation within a ﬁrm . What types of mechanisms are used ? To date , organi - zational theory has paid little attention to the role of law , while economic studies tend to neglect the impact of norms . We suggest scholars integrate the use of legal mechanisms into organizational theory and examine how laws are shaped by the local conditions in which they are employed ( e . g . , Knorr - Cetina 1999 ) . Second , how do an organization’s internal policies affect the provision of the three conditions necessary for knowledge accumulation inside the organization ? Individual innovators need the appropriate incentives to participate in cumulative innovation . Firm policies and resources determines whether people can discover and access the knowledge they ﬁnd around them . Current studies in knowledge management focus on building repositories of information . We argue that disclosure without reuse or recombinative access may be insuf - ﬁcient to foster cumulative innovation . A cumulative innovation perspective would broaden this approach to address issues of disclosure , access , and reward . Do all users have access , and are they aware of access restric - tions ( such as NDAs , patents , etc . ) ? Are there rewards for the accumulation of knowledge from outside the ﬁrm ? In an effort to enhance their rates of cumulative innovation , companies like Proctor and Gamble explic - itly reward reuse and recombination of knowledge devel - oped outside the ﬁrm ( Huston and Sakkab 2006 ) . Third , what of the tensions arising within the ﬁrm among researchers , product managers , strategists , and lawyers in setting strategies that blend legal and social mechanisms ? A ﬁrm’s legal counsel needs to play a sig - niﬁcant role in shaping the mechanisms through which a ﬁrm participates in cumulative innovation . Doing so effectively requires a deep understanding of how intel - lectual property rights are used to protect a ﬁrm’s assets , Murray and O’Mahony : Perspective Organization Science 18 ( 6 ) , pp . 1006 – 1021 , ©2007 INFORMS 1017 and how the allocation of rights can affect downstream innovation—inside as well as outside the ﬁrm . More - over , the decision to pursue intellectual property rights and how to triage them requires an appreciation for the social practices associated with the relevant innovation communities . Such choices can beneﬁt from the inte - gration of complex technical and legal considerations or what Bagley recently called “legal astuteness” ( 2007 ) . These insights can only be developed through interdisci - plinary collaboration , yet the practices through which the legal , technical , and strategic functions of a ﬁrm come together have not been of interest to most organizational scholars . Sharpening Our Toolbox . This approach to studying knowledge accumulation raises serious methodological challenges . How should we measure knowledge accumu - lation ? Can we move beyond measures that capture the rate of accumulation to encompass the direction or diver - sity of accumulation ? Current studies of the impact of a particular institution , rule , or norm on knowledge accu - mulation use simple measures . The most widespread outcome variable is a citation count—either to publi - cations ( as measured using the ISI - Thomson Web of Science database ) or to patents using the U . S . Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce data . For example , in their study of the impact of patent grant on the citation rate of scien - tiﬁc publications , Murray and Stern ( 2007 ) measure for - ward citations to publications as a proxy of knowledge accumulation . Furman and Stern ( 2006 ) used the same measure in their study of BRCs . Patent citations have also been applied to examine the potential impact of an institutional change such as postgrant patent opposition ( Graham and Harhoff 2006 ) . This cumulative innovation research agenda would advance with richer measures of accumulation encom - passing different types of knowledge from disparate con - tributors . For example , MacCormack et al . ( 2006 ) built design structure matrices to track changes in software architectures ( e . g . , the Linux operating system and the Mozilla browser ) as different contributors participated in knowledge accumulation over time . Using modeling techniques , Baldwin and Clark ( 2006 ) found an increase in the modularity of software architecture enhanced par - ticipation rates and thus cumulative innovation . Similarly , gene - by - gene annotations in the human genome database could be analyzed over time to acquire a window into knowledge accumulation in genetics re - search ( Jensen and Murray 2005 ) . Such analysis might reveal what factors are likely to attract new versus repeat contributors . In other ﬁelds , scholars can examine how communities creating new content ( e . g . , music , photos , art , reviews ) are affected by changes in access , disclo - sure , or reward to see how member growth and rates and types of contributions change . However , three conditions are needed to foster these types of studies : ( 1 ) a com - mon repository or record of multiparty contributions to a set of linked or interdependent innovations ; ( 2 ) open access to such a resource ; and ( 3 ) the ability to examine these data over time . While existing and newly developed measures can proxy the rate of knowledge accumulation under dif - ferent antecedent conditions , it is important to capture other outcomes . Using publication citations , it is pos - sible to examine changes in the distribution of follow - on innovators along at least four dimensions : location ( at the regional or national level ) , types of afﬁliation ( academic or industry ) , disciplines ( i . e . , engineering ver - sus physics ) , and quality ( high - or low - impact journals ) . Some such distributive measures have been developed for patent citations ( Henderson et al . 1998 ) . Richer mea - sures can also crafted from new sources of data . For example , gene sequence measures of knowledge accu - mulation might be parsed to examine the backgrounds of different contributors . Such measures of diversity are particularly valuable given that innovations drawing on diverse inputs are likely to have greater impact ( Fleming and Sorenson 2003 , Hargadon 2003 ) . Conclusion We argue that the ability of future innovators to build cumulatively on an idea is not an inherent property of an innovation itself . Our synthesis of the economics and organizational theory literatures suggests rather that cumulative innovation is constrained or enabled by the degree to which the context provides three important conditions : access , disclosure , and rewards . Selected empirical and anecdotal examples show how these con - ditions are molded at the institution , ﬁeld , community , and organization levels . Based on our framework and observations , this essay encourages organizational schol - ars to move beyond studies of knowledge ﬂows to understand how changes in antecedent conditions affect the accumulation of knowledge . As our examples illus - trate , such changes are not driven by the law alone . When innovators encounter ( or erect ) barriers to knowl - edge accumulation , the solutions they devise are often organizational ones . This suggests an expanding terrain for organizational scholars interested in exploring how multiple generations of innovators intent on cumulative innovation can use institutions , ﬁelds , organizations , and communities to pursue their goals . Acknowledgments The authors thank Paul DiMaggio , Stanley Katz , Edward Fel - ton , and the participants of the Princeton University - Microsoft Intellectual Property Rights Conference for their helpful com - ments on the ideas in this paper . The authors also appreciate the valuable comments from reviewers and editors who helped greatly in clarifying those ideas . Endnotes 1 The Federal Research Public Access Act of 2006 ( S 2695 IS ) was introduced in the Senate by Senators Cornyn ( R - TX ) Murray and O’Mahony : Perspective 1018 Organization Science 18 ( 6 ) , pp . 1006 – 1021 , ©2007 INFORMS and Lieberman ( I - CT ) to “provide for federal agencies to develop public access policies relating to research conducted by employees of that agency or from funds administered by that agency . ” 2 At the time of this writing , French lawmakers supported a draft bill ruling that closed and proprietary music platforms are anticompetitive and mandating access across providers . This ruling would affect providers of closed music platforms such as Apple’s iTunes . 3 U . S . vs . Microsoft . 2002 . Civil Action No . 98 - 1232 ( CKK ) , United States District Court ( November 12 ) 2002 . http : / / www . us . doj . gov / atr / cases / f200400 / 200457 . htm . 4 See http : / / www . ibm . com / ibm / licensing / patents / pledgedpatents . pdf for IBM’s pledge of nonassertion ( granting the free use of its patents ) as well as the list of the 500 software patents . 5 http : / / news . netcraft . com / archives / web _ server _ survey . html . References Aghion , P . , P . Howitt . 1998 . Endogenous Growth Theory . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Allen , T . J . 1977 . Managing Flows of Technology . MIT Press , Cam - bridge , MA . Almeida , P . , B . Kogut . 1999 . Localization of knowledge and the mobility of engineers in regional networks . Management Sci . 45 ( 7 ) 905 – 917 . Anton , J . J . , D . A . Yao . 2002 . The sale of ideas : Strategic disclo - sure , property rights , and contracting . Rev . Econom . Stud . 69 ( 3 ) 513 – 531 . Arrow , K . 1962 . Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention . R . Nelson , ed . The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity . Princeton University Press , Princeton , NJ , 609 – 625 . Bagley , C . 2008 . Winning legally : The value of legal astuteness . Acad . Management Rev . 33 ( 2 ) . Baldwin , C . Y . , K . B . Clark . 2000 . Design Rules (cid:1) The Power of Mod - ularity , Vol . 1 . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Baldwin , C . Y . , K . B . Clark . 2006 . The architecture of participation : Does code architecture mitigate free riding in the open source development model ? Management Sci . 52 ( 7 ) 1116 – 1127 . Baldwin , C . Y . , S . O’Mahony , J . Quinn . 2003 . IBM and Linux (cid:2) A (cid:3) . Harvard Business School Case 903 - 083 , Cambridge , MA . Bar - Gill , O . , G . Parchomovsky . 2003 . The value of giving away secrets . Virginia Law Rev . 89 1857 – 1895 . Barley , S . R . 1986 . Technology as an occasion for structuring : Evi - dence from observations of CT scanners and the social order of radiology departments . Admin . Sci . Quart . 31 78 – 108 . Bechky , B . A . 2003a . Object lessons : Workplace artifacts as repre - sentations of occupational jurisdiction . Amer . J . Sociol . 109 ( 3 ) 720 – 752 . Bechky , B . A . 2003b . Sharing meaning across occupational commu - nities : The transformation of knowledge on a production ﬂoor . Organ . Sci . 14 312 – 330 . Berressem , J . 2005 . Education in chemistry : Kings College London— A DNA landmark . http : / / www . rsc . org / lap / educatio / eic / 2003 / column2 _ jul03 . htm . Brown , J . S . , P . Duguid . 1991 . Organizational learning and commu - nities - of - practice : Toward a uniﬁed view of working , learning , and innovation . Organ . Sci . 2 ( 1 ) 40 – 57 . Brown , J . S . , P . Duguid . 2000 . The Social Life of Information . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA . Brown , J . S . , P . Duguid . 2001 . Knowledge and organization : A social - practice perspective . Organ . Sci . 12 ( 2 ) 198 – 213 . Burt , R . 2004 . Structural holes and good ideas . Amer . J . Sociol . 110 349 – 399 . Carlile , P . 2004 . Transferring , translating , and transforming : An inte - grative framework for managing knowledge across boundaries . Organ . Sci . 15 ( 5 ) 555 – 569 . Chesbrough , H . 2003 . Open Innovation . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA . Christensen , C . 1997 . The Innovator’s Dilemma . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA . Collins , H . M . 1974 . The TEA set : Tacit knowledge and scientiﬁc networks . Sci . Stud . 4 165 – 186 . Couzin , J . , K . Unger . 2006 . Scientiﬁc misconduct : Cleaning up the paper trail . Science 312 ( 5770 ) 38 – 43 . Crane , D . 1969 . Social structure in a group of scientists : A test of the invisible college hypothesis . Amer . Sociol . Rev . 34 ( 3 ) 335 – 352 . Dasgupta , P . , P . David . 1994 . Towards a new economics of science . Res . Policy 23 487 – 521 . David , P . 2003 . Can “open science” be protected from the evolving regime of IPR protections ? Stanford Economics Working paper , Palo Alto , CA . Davis , G . R . , C . Marquis . 2005 . Prospects for organization theory in the early twenty - ﬁrst century : Institutional ﬁelds and mecha - nisms . Organ . Sci . 16 332 – 343 . DiMaggio , P . , W . Powell . 1983 . The iron cage revisited : Institutional isomorphism and collective rationalty in organizational ﬁelds . Amer . Sociol . Rev . 48 147 – 160 . Dotinga , R . 2007 . Open access launches journal wars . Wired News . http : / / www . wired . com / news / technology / medtech / 1 , 72704 - 0 . html . Edwards , M . , F . Murray , R . Yu . 2003 . Value creation and sharing among universities , biotechnology , and pharma . Nature Biotech - nology 21 ( 6 ) 618 – 624 . Eisenmann , T . E . , G . G . Parker , M . Van Alstyne . 2006 . Strategies for two - sided markets . Harvard Bus . Rev . ( October ) 92 – 101 . Felten , E . W . 2002 . The digital millennium copyright act and its legacy : A view from the trenches . Illinois J . Law , Tech . Policy ( Fall ) . Fielding , R . T . 1999 . Shared leadership in the Apache project . Comm . ACM 42 ( 4 ) 42 – 43 . Fleming , L . 2001 . Recombinant uncertainty in technological search . Management Sci . 47 ( 1 ) 117 – 132 . Fleming , L . , O . Sorenson . 2003 . Navigating the technology landscape of innovation . Sloan Management Rev . 44 15 – 23 . Furman , J . , S . Stern . 2006 . Climbing atop the shoulders of giants : The impact of institutions on cumulative research . NBER Working paper . Garud , R . , P . Karnoe . 2003 . Bricolage versus breakthrough : Dis - tributed and embedded agency in technology entrepreneurship . Res . Policy 32 277 . Garud , R . , A . Kumaraswamy . 1993 . Changing competitive dynam - ics in network industries : An exploration of Sun Microsystems’ open systems strategy . Strategic Management J . 14 351 – 369 . Murray and O’Mahony : Perspective Organization Science 18 ( 6 ) , pp . 1006 – 1021 , ©2007 INFORMS 1019 Garud , R . , S . Jain , A . Kumaraswamy . 2002 . Institutional entrepreneur - ship in the sponsorship of common technological standards : The case of Sun Microsystems and Java . Acad . Management J . 45 196 – 214 . Gawer , A . , M . A . Cusumano . 2002 . Platform Leadership (cid:1) How Intel , Microsoft , Cisco Drive Industry Innovation . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA . Gilson , R . J . 1999 . The legal infrastructure of high technology indus - trial districts : Silicon Valley , Route 128 , and covenants not to compete . New York Univ . Law Rev . 74 ( 3 ) 575 – 629 . Graham , S . J . H . , D . Harhoff . 2006 . Can post - grant reviews improve patent system design ? A twin study of US and European patents . Discussion Papers 38 , SFB / TR 15 Governance and the Efﬁ - ciency of Economic Systems , Free University of Berlin , Hum - boldt University of Berlin , University of Bonn . Grindley , P . C . , D . J . Teece . 1997 . Managing intellectual capital : Licensing and cross - licensing in semiconductors and electronics . California Management Rev . 39 ( 2 ) 8 – 41 . Hall , B . H . , R . H . Ziedonis . 2001 . The patent paradox revisited : An empirical study of patenting in the U . S . Semiconductor industry , 1979 – 1995 . RAND J . Econom . 32 ( 1 ) 101 – 128 . Hall , B . H . , A . B . Jaffe , M . Trajtenberg . 2001 . The NBER patent citation data ﬁle : Lessons , insights and methodological tools . NBER Working Paper W8498 . http : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 285618 . Hall , B . H . , A . B . Jaffe , M . Trajtenberg . 2005 . Market value and patent citations . RAND J . Econom . 36 ( 1 ) 16 – 38 . Hansen , M . T . 1999 . The search - transfer problem : The role of weak ties in sharing knowledge across organization subunits . Admin . Sci . Quart . 44 82 – 111 . Hansen , M . T . 2002 . Knowledge networks : Explaining effective knowledge sharing in multiunit companies . Organ . Sci . 13 232 – 248 . Hansen , M . T . , M . L . Mors , B . Løvås . 2005 . Knowledge sharing in organizations : Multiple networks , multiple phases . Acad . Man - agement J . 48 ( 5 ) 776 – 793 . Hargadon , A . 2003 . How Breakthroughs Happen (cid:1) The Surprising Truth About How Companies Innovate . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA . Hargadon , A . B . , B . Bechky . 2006 . When collections of creatives become creative collectives : A ﬁeld study of problem solving at work . Organ . Sci . 17 484 – 500 . Hargadon , A . , Y . Douglas . 2001 . When innovations meet institutions : Edison and the design of the electric light . Admin . Sci . Quart . 46 476 – 501 . Hargadon , A . , R . I . Sutton . 1997 . Technology brokering and inno - vation in a product development ﬁrm . Admin . Sci . Quart . 42 716 – 749 . Heller , M . , R . Eisenberg . 1998 . Can patents deter innovation ? The anticommons in biomedical research . Science 280 698 – 701 . Henderson , R . , I . Cockburn . 1994 . Measuring competence : Exploring ﬁrm effects in pharmaceutical research . Strategic Management J . 15 63 – 84 . Henderson , R . , A . B . Jaffe , M . Trajtenberg . 1998 . Universities as a source of commercial technology : A detailed analysis of univer - sity patenting , 1965 – 1988 . Rev . Econom . Statist . 80 ( 1 ) 119 – 127 . Hoetker , G . , R . Agrawal . 2007 . Death hurts but isn’t fatal : The post - exit diffusion of knowledge created by innovative companies . Acad . Management J . 50 ( 2 ) 446 – 467 . Huston , L . , N . Sakkab . 2006 . Connect and develop : Inside P & G’s new model for innovation . Harvard Bus . Rev . 84 ( 3 ) 58 – 66 . Jaffe , A . B . , J . Lerner . 2004 . Innovation and Its Discontents (cid:1) How Our Broken Patent System Is Endangering Innovation and Progress , and What to Do About It . Princeton University Press , Princeton , NJ . Jensen , K . , F . Murray . 2005 . Intellectual property landscape of the human genome . Science 310 239 – 240 . Jeppersen , L . B . , L . Frederiksen . 2006 . Why do users contribute to ﬁrm - hosted user communities ? The case of computer - controlled music instruments . Organ . Sci . 17 45 – 63 . Katila , R . , G . Ahuja . 2002 . Something old , something new : A longi - tudinal study of search behavior and new product introduction . Acad . Management J . 45 1183 . Katz , M . , C . Shapiro . 1985 . On the licensing of innovations . RAND J . Econom . 16 ( 4 ) 504 – 520 . Klemperer , P . 1990 . How broad should the scope of patent protection be ? RAND J . Econom . 21 ( 1 ) 113 – 130 . Knorr - Cetina , K . 1999 . Epistemic Cultures (cid:1) How Sciences Make Knowledge . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA . Lach , S . , M . Schankerman . 2006 . The impact of royalty sharing incen - tives on technology licensing in universities . CEP Discussion Paper 0729 , Centre for Economic Performance , London School of Political Science . Lakhani , K . , R . Wolf . 2005 . Why do hackers do what they do : Under - standing motivation and effort in free / open source software projects . J . Feller , B . Fifzgerald , S . A . Hissam , K . R . Lakhani , eds . Perspectives on Free and Open Source Software . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , 3 – 21 . Lakhani , K . R . , E . von Hippel . 2003 . How open source software works : “Free” user - to - user assistance . Res . Policy 32 923 – 943 . Latour , B . 1987 . Science in Action (cid:1) How to Follow Scientists and Engineers Through Society . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA . Latour , B . , S . Woolgar . 1979 . Laboratory Life (cid:1) The Construction of Scientiﬁc Facts . Sage Publications , Beverly Hills , CA . Leonard , D . , W . Swap . 1999 . When Sparks Fly . Harvard Business School Publishing , Boston , MA . Lerner , J . , J . Tirole . 2005 . The scope of open source licensing . J . Law , J . Law , Econom . Organ . 21 20 – 56 . Lessig , L . 2004 . Free Culture : How Big Media Uses Technology and the Law to Lock Down Culture and Control Creativity . Penguin Press , New York . Levin , R . C . , W . M . Cohen , D . C . Mowery . 1985 . R & D appropriabil - ity , opportunity , and market structure : New evidence on some Schumpeterian hypotheses . Amer . Econom . Rev . 75 ( 2 ) 20 – 24 . Levy , S . 1984 . Hackers (cid:1) Heroes of the Computer Revolution . Penguin Books , New York . Lewis , T . R . , D . A . Yao . 1995 . Some reﬂections on the antitrust treat - ment of intellectual property . Antitrust Law J . 63 ( 2 ) 603 – 619 . Linder , J . , S . Jarvenpaa , T . H . Davenport . 2003 . Towards an innova - tion sourcing strategy . Sloan Management Rev . 44 ( 4 ) 43 – 49 . Lounsbury , M . , M . J . Ventresca , eds . 2002 . Social Structure and Orga - nization Revisited . JAI Press , Oxford , UK . MacCormack , A . , J . Rusnak , C . Y . Baldwin . 2006 . Exploring the structure of complex software designs : An empirical study of open source and proprietary code . Management Sci . 52 ( 7 ) 1015 – 1030 . Murray and O’Mahony : Perspective 1020 Organization Science 18 ( 6 ) , pp . 1006 – 1021 , ©2007 INFORMS MacKie - Mason , J . K . 2002 . What to do about unilateral refusals to license ? Testimony to FTC - DOJ Hearings on Compe - tition and Intellectual Property Law and Policy in the Knowledge - Based Economy . http : / / www . ftc . gov / opp / intellect / detailsandparticipants . htm # May % 201 : . Marshall , E . 2000 . NIH cuts deal on use of OncoMouse . Science 287 ( 5453 ) 567 . Marx , J . , D . Strumsky , L . Fleming . 2007 . Noncompetes and inventor mobility : Specialists , stars , and the Michigan experiment . Har - vard Business School Working Paper 07 - 042 , Cambridge , MA . Merges , R . P . 2001 . Institutions for intellectual property transac - tions : The case of patent pools . R . Dreyfuss , D . L . Zimmerman , H . First , eds . Expanding the Boundaries of Intellectual Property (cid:1) Innovation Policy for the Knowledge Society . Oxford University Press , New York , 123 – 165 . Merton , R . 1973 . The Sociology of Science (cid:1) Theoretical and Empirical Investigations . University of Chicago Press , Chicago , IL . Mockus , A . , R . T . Fielding , J . D . Herbsleb . 2002 . Two case studies of open source software development : Apache and Mozilla ACM . Trans . Software Engrg . Methodology 11 ( 3 ) 309 – 346 . Mokyr , J . 2004 . The Gifts of Athena (cid:1) Historical Origins of the Knowl - edge Economy . Princeton University Press , Princeton , NJ . Murray , F . 2002 . Innovation as co - evolution of scientiﬁc and tech - nological networks : Exploring tissue engineering . Res . Policy 31 ( 8 – 9 ) 1389 – 1403 . Murray , F . 2006 . The Oncomouse that roared : Resistance and accommodation of patenting in academic science . Unpublished manuscript . Murray , F . , S . Stern . 2007 . Do formal intellectual property rights hin - der the free ﬂow of scientiﬁc knowledge ? An empirical test of the anti - commons hypothesis . J . Econom . Behav . Organ . 63 ( 4 ) 648 – 687 . Nelson , R . 1959 . The simple economics of basic scientiﬁc research . J . Political Econom . 67 ( 3 ) 297 – 306 . Nelson , R . 1986 . Institutions supporting technical advance in industry . Amer . Econom . Rev . , Amer . Econom . Assoc . 76 ( 2 ) 186 – 189 . Nelson , R . 2004 . The market economy , and the scientiﬁc commons . Res . Policy 33 ( 3 ) 455 – 471 . O’Mahony , S . 2003 . Guarding the commons : How community man - aged software projects protect their work . Res . Policy 32 1179 – 1198 . O’Mahony , S . 2005 . Non - proﬁt foundations and their role in com - munity - ﬁrm software collaboration . J . Feller , B . Fitzgerald , S . Hissam , K . Lakhani , eds . Perspectives on Open Source and Free Software . MIT Press , Boston , MA . O’Mahony , S . , B . Bechky . 2007 . The role of a boundary institution in reconciling competing logics . Annual Meeting Amer . Sociol . Assoc . , Philadelphia , PA ( August 13 ) . Owen - Smith , J . 2003 . From separate systems to a hybrid order : Accu - mulative advantage across public and private science at research one universities . Res . Policy 32 1081 – 1104 . Owen - Smith , J . , W . Powell . 2003 . The expanding role of university patenting in the life sciences : Assessing the importance of expe - rience and connectivity . Res . Policy 32 ( 9 ) 1695 – 1711 . Powell , W . , K . Snellman . 2004 . The knowledge economy . Annual Rev . Sociol . 30 199 – 220 . Powell , W . , K . Koput , L . Smith - Doerr . 1996 . Interorganizational col - laboration and the locus of innovation : Networks of learning in biotechnology . Admin . Sci . Quart . 41 116 – 145 . Rader , K . 2004 . Making Mice . Princeton University Press , Princeton , NJ . Reagans , R . , E . Zuckerman . 2001 . Networks , diversity , and perfor - mance : The social capital of corporate R & D teams . Organ . Sci . 12 ( 4 ) 502 – 517 . Reichman , J . H . 2001 . Of Green Tulips and legal Kudzu : Repackaging rights in subpatentable innovation . R . Dreyfuss , D . Zimmerman , H . First , eds . Expanding the Boundaries of Intellectual Property (cid:1) Innovation Policy for the Knowledge Society . Oxford University Press , New York . Rohter , L . 2007 . Gilberto Gil hears the future , some rights reserved . New York Times ( March 11 ) . Romer , P . M . 1990 . Endogenous technological change . J . Political Econom . 98 ( 5 ) S71 – S102 . Romer , P . M . 1994 . The origins of endogenous growth . J . Econom . Perspectives , Amer . Econom . Assoc . 8 ( 1 ) 3 – 22 . Rosen , L . 2005 . Open Source Licensing (cid:1) Software Freedom and Intel - lectual Property Law . Prentice Hall , Upper Saddle River , NJ . Rosenberg , N . 1982 . Inside the Black Box—Technology and Eco - nomics . Cambridge University Press , New York . Rosenkopf , L . , A . Metiu , V . George . 2001 . From the bottom up ? Technical committee activity and alliance formation . Admin . Sci . Quart . 46 748 – 772 . Samuelson , P . 2001 . Anticircumvention rules : Threat to science . Sci - ence 293 ( 5537 ) 2028 – 2031 . Samuelson , P . , S . Scotchmer . 2002 . The law and economics of reverse engineering . Yale Law J . 111 ( 7 ) 1575 – 1663 . Saxenian , A . - L . 1996 . Regional Advantage (cid:1) Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and Route 128 . Harvard University Press , Cam - bridge , MA . Scherer , F . M . 2001 . The innovation lottery . R . Dreyfuss , D . L . Zimmerman , H . First , eds . Expanding the Boundaries of Intellectual Property (cid:1) Innovation Policy for the Knowledge Soci - ety . Oxford University Press , New York , 3 – 21 . Scherer , F . M . , D . Harhoff . 2000 . Technology policy for a world of skew - distributed outcomes . Res . Policy 29 559 – 566 . Scotchmer , S . 1991 . Standing on the shoulders of giants : Cumulative research and the patent law . J . Econom . Perspectives 5 29 – 41 . Scotchmer , S . 1996 . Protecting early innovators : Should second - generation products be patentable ? RAND J . Econom . 27 ( Summer ) 322 – 331 . Scotchmer , S . 2004 . Innovation and Incentives . MIT Press , Cam - bridge , MA . Shah , S . 2005 . Open beyond software . C . DiBona , D . Cooper , M . Stone , eds . Open Sources 2 . O’Reilly , Sebastapol , CA . Simcoe , R . 2006 . Public and private participation in the develop - ment of and governance of the internet . R . Nelson , ed . The Limits and Complexities of Market Organization . Russell Sage . Forthcoming . Stallman , R . 1999 . The GNU operating system and the free soft - ware movement . C . DiBona , S . Ockman , M . Stone , eds . Open Sources . O’Reilly , Sebastopol , CA . Stern , S . 2004 . Biological Resource Centers (cid:1) Knowledge Hubs for the Life Sciences . Brookings Institution , Washington , D . C . Tapscott , D . , A . D . Williams . 2007 . The new science of sharing : Companies such as Novartis and Intel are at the forefront of Science 2 . 0 by encouraging open systems of collaboration . Busi - nessweek . com ( March 2 , 2007 ) , http : / / www . businessweek . com / print / innovate / content / mar2007 / id20070302 _ 219704 . htm . Murray and O’Mahony : Perspective Organization Science 18 ( 6 ) , pp . 1006 – 1021 , ©2007 INFORMS 1021 Teece , D . J . 1986 . Proﬁting from technological innovation : Implica - tions for integration , collaboration , licensing , and public policy . Res . Policy 15 285 – 305 . Tushman , M . , L . Rosenkopf . 1992 . Organizational determinants of technological change : Toward a sociology of technological evo - lution . Res . Organ . Behav . 14 311 – 347 . Uzzi , B . , J . Spiro . 2005 . Collaboration and creativity : The small world problem . Amer . J . Sociol . 111 ( Sept . ) 447 – 504 . van de Ven , A . H . 1993 . A community perspective on the emergence of innovations . J . Engrg . Tech . Management 10 23 – 51 . Van Maanen , J . V . , S . R . Barley . 1984 . Occupational communities : Cul - ture and control in organizations . Res . Organ . Behav . 6 287 – 365 . von Hippel , E . 1988 . The Sources of Innovation . Oxford University Press , New York . von Hippel , E . 2005 . Democratizing Innovation . MIT Press , Boston , MA . von Hippel , E . , G . von Krogh . 2003 . Open source software and the “private - collective” innovation model : Issues for organization science . Organ . Sci . 14 209 – 223 . von Krogh , G . , S . Spaeth , K . R . Lakhani . 2003 . Community , joining , and specialization in open source software innovation : A case study . Res . Policy 32 1217 – 1241 . Weick , K . E . 1979 . The Social Psychology of Organizing , 2nd ed . Addison , Wesley , Reading , MA .