Developmental Psychology Copyright 1997 by the American Psychological Association . Inc . 1997 , Vol . 33 , No . 3 , 555 - 567 0012 - 1649 / 97 / $ 3 . 00 Challenging the Notion of a Thematic Preference in Young Children Sandra R . Waxman and Laura L . Namy Northwestern University Many researchers have argued that early cognitive development is characterized by a conceptual preference for thematic over taxonomic relations . However , more recent research indicates that infants and toddlers may not favor thematic relations . To resolve this discrepancy , the conceptual preferences of children ranging from 2 to 4 years of age were examined , using a forced - choice task including a target ( e . g . , a carrot ) , a thematic alternative ( e . g . , a rabbit ) , and a taxonomic alternative ( e . g . , a tomato ) . The effects of age , experimenter ' s instructions , hierarchical level ( basic vs . superordinate ) , and stimulus medium ( pictures vs . objects ) were examined systematically . Children revealed no pervasive preference for either thematic or taxonomic relations . This challenges the notion of a developmental shift in conceptual preferences and suggests a more continuous trajectory in early conceptual development . Within the field of cognitive development , there is a robust finding that preschool - age children have a conceptual preference for thematic over taxonomic relations ( Denney , 1974 ; Green - field & Scott , 1986 ; Nelson , 1977 ; Scott , Serchuk , & Mundy , 1982 ; Smiley & Brown , 1979 ) . This thematic preference has typically been revealed in forced - choice paradigms in which participants are presented with a target object ( e . g . , a carrot ) and two alternatives , one bearing a thematic or complementary relation to the target ( e . g . , a rabbit ) , and the other bearing a taxonomic relation to the target ( e . g . , a tomato ) . Under such circumstances , researchers have reported that young children prefer to match the target with the thematic , as opposed to the taxonomic , alternative . Smiley and Brown ( 1979 ) have reported that this thematic preference is not uniform throughout the course of development . On the contrary , they describe a non - monotonic , U - shaped developmental function , with preschool - age children and elderly adults demonstrating a thematic prefer - ence and participants at the intervening ages favoring taxonomic relations . The discovery of a thematic preference in preschool - age chil - dren was especially influential because it offered a reconciliation Sandra R . Waxman and Laura L . Namy , Department of Psychology , Northwestern University . This research was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant HD 28730 . Portions of this research were presented at the April 1995 meeting of the Society for Research in Child Development in Indianapo - lis , Indiana . We are grateful to the children , parents , and teachers from the Baby - Toddler Nursery , Central Evanston Childcare , Child Care Center , Discov - ery Preschool , and the School for Little Children for participating in these studies , and to Lisa Kosmicki and Tara Smith for their assistance in data collection . We are indebted to Douglas Medin , Rochel Gelman , Elizabeth Lynch , John Coley , and David Uttal for comments and discus - sion , and to Dana Markow and Joanna Crist for their assistance in all phases of the project . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Sandra R . Waxman , Department of Psychology , Northwestern University , 2029 Sheridan Road , Evanston , Illinois 60208 - 2710 . 555 between the empirical finding that children failed to invoke taxonomic systems of organization in many tasks ( Bruner , Goodnow , & Austin , 1956 ; Inhelder & Piaget , 1964 ; Vygotsky , 1962 ) and the theoretical position that performance on such tasks masked children ' s underlying cognitive competence ( cf . Gelman , 1978 ; Gelman & Greeno , 1989 ) . In fact , Smiley and Brown ' s ( 1979 ) study was among the first to demonstrate that preschool - age children do indeed appreciate taxonomic relations among objects , even if this is not their preferred mode of organization . Although this demonstration of a nonmonotonic shift in con - ceptual preferences has had a powerful and long - standing im - pact , there are two independent reasons to question its promise as a current model of conceptual organization . First , consider - able work in adult cognition has challenged the view that there are stable conceptual preferences underlying adults ' perfor - mance in tasks such as decision - making , judgment , and choice behaviors . Instead , the weight of the empirical evidence is con - sistent with the view that the expression of any particular con - ceptual preference . is context - dependent . The claim is that con - ceptual preferences are not stable phenomena but are instead constructed flexibly in the process of solving the particular task at hand ( Kahneman & Tversky , 1979 ; Slovic , 1995 ; Slovic & Lichtenstein , 1983 ; Tversky & Kahneman , 1981 ; Tversky & Simonson , 1993 ) . This body of work is relevant to developmentalists because it suggests that the " conceptual preferences " exhibited by adults and children in a given task may reflect context - dependent processes ( including , e . g . , the participants ' responses to the materials and to the instructions ) rather than stable preferences that characterize cognition at a particular developmental level . This issue is especially pertinent because most developmental studies of conceptual preferences have included only a single instruction condition . In the absence of a systematic test of the effects of instructions , it remains unclear whether the " prefer - ences " expressed in these experimental tasks would be ex - pressed consistently across different experimental contexts . A second reason to question the view that conceptual develop - ment entails a series of shifts between thematic and taxonomic 556 WAXMAN AND NAMY ( or syntagmatic and paradigmatic ) conceptual preferences comes from recent research with very young children . In the original demonstrations of a thematic preference in early child - hood , the youngest children tested were 3 and 4 years of age ( Greenfield & Scott , 1986 ; Smiley & Brown , 1979 ) . Yet , these results have contributed to a strong implicit assumption that a thematic preference necessarily precedes a taxonomic prefer - ence in development and that a thematic preference is character - istic of even younger children as well . For years , this assumption remained unexplored , largely because of the challenges of exam - ining toddlers and infants with relatively limited repertoires of behaviors . However , over the last decade , as developmental psychologists have shifted their focus to examine the cognitive capacities of infants and toddlers , experimental evidence bearing on this as - sumption has begun to accumulate ( Bauer & Mandler , 1989 ; Markman , 1994 ; Waxman & Hall , 1993 ; Waxman & Kosowski , 1990 ) . Interestingly , although none of these recent studies were designed specifically to address the issue of early conceptual preferences , each study includes data that bears on this issue directly . l In the control conditions in each of these experiments , children ranging in age from 15 to 31 months were presented with a target object , a thematic alternative , and a taxonomic alternative in a forced - choice task . The results of these experi - ments have been somewhat inconsistent . Although there were circumstances under which a thematic preference seemed to surface ( Markman , 1994 ) , in the majority of these recent studies ( Bauer & Mandler , 1989 ; Waxman & Hall , 1993 ; Waxman & Kosowski , 1990 ) , children in the control conditions revealed a strong inclination to select the taxonomic , as opposed to the thematic , alternatives . Despite the highly taxonomic performance in this age group , there do appear to be individual children who find thematic relations to be highly salient . Dunham and Dunham ( 1995 ) have identified stable individual differences in young children ' s conceptual preferences . However , a stable thematic preference was displayed by only a minority of children . Moreover , Dun - ham and Dunham ' s data reveal no shift from one conceptual preference to another . In contrast , their data suggest that this individual preference may be relatively stable across the first 3 years of development . In summary , these patterns of recent findings challenge di - rectly the assumption of a thematic preference in the early pre - school years . Recent work in adult cognition and in cognitive development calls into serious question the view that cognition and cognitive development are characterized by overarching , age - related conceptual preferences ; this work also challenges the assumption that a conceptual preference for thematic relations necessarily precedes a taxonomic preference in development . We therefore propose a different characterization of early conceptual development . We propose that children ( like adults ) appreciate many different kinds of conceptual relations among objects but reveal a pervasive preference for none . As a corollary , we expect that children ( like adults ) will adjust their responses flexibly according to the particular task at hand . There are sev - eral advantages to this proposal . First , it is consistent with cur - rent models of preference in adult cognition . Second , it shifts the focus of the developmental work . Rather than seeking to identify stable conceptual preferences or modes of response across development , the goal becomes one of determining the contexts or circumstances under which children may express a preference for one particular relation over another ( Gelman & Greeno , 1989 ; Thelen & Smith , 1994 ) . In this way , this proposal provides a framework to bridge the empirical gap between tradi - tional studies that revealed thematic preferences in preschool - age children ( Denney , 1974 ; Greenfield & Scott , 1986 ; Mark - man & Hutchinson , 1984 ; Nelson , 1977 ; Scott et al . , 1982 ; Smiley & Brown , 1979 ) and more recent work that challenges the assumption of a thematic preference in toddlers and pre - school - age children ( Bauer & Mandler , 1989 ; Waxman & Hall , 1993 ; Waxman & Kosowski , 1990 ) . To examine this proposal , we take a systematic look at the patterns of performance of children ranging from 2 to 4 years of age . In Experiments 1 and 2 , we examine the performance of 3 - and 4 - year - old children , devoting particular attention to the effects of age , the experimenter ' s instructions to the children , the hierarchical level ( basic vs . superordinate ) of the stimuli presented , and the stimulus medium ( pictures vs . objects ) . The results of these experiments motivate our investigations with 2 - year - olds ( Experiment 3 ) . In the experiments reported here , we adapted the standard forced - choice procedure in several ways . One adaptation con - cerned the instructions that were presented to the children . In most of the traditional studies of conceptual preferences , experi - menters have typically shown the child a target and then asked the child which of the alternatives ( thematic or taxonomic ) " goes with " or " goes best with " it . In contrast , in the more recent studies with infants and toddlers , experimenters have typically asked participants to " find another one " or " find an - other one just like this one . " These different instructions may account for some of the performance differences between pre - schoolers and toddlers ( see Markman & Hutchinson , 1984 ; Wax - man & Kosowski , 1990 , for further discussion of this factor ) . Asking a child , " Which one goes with it ? " or " Which one goes best with it ? " seems to highlight thematic relations , whereas asking a child to " find another one " seems to call to mind primarily taxonomic relations . Therefore , in this series of experiments , we examine this contextual factor directly , pre - dicting that children will be more likely to select the thematically related alternatives when asked , " Which one goes best with it ? " than when asked , " Can you find another one ? " A second factor of interest was the role of the hierarchical relation between the target and taxonomic alternatives . To exam - ine this factor , in half of the trials , the target ( e . g . , a cookie ) was related to the taxonomic alternative ( e . g . , another cookie ) at the basic level ; on the remaining trials , the target ( e . g . , a carrot ) was related to the taxonomic alternative at the superordi - nate level ( e . g . , a tomato ) . On the basis of evidence concerning the developmental primacy of the basic level ( Mervis & Crisafi , 1982 ; Rosch , Mervis , Gray , Johnson , & Boyes - Braem , 1976 ; Waxman , 1990 , 1994 ) , we suspected that children would be more likely to choose the taxonomic aitemative on basic than on superordinate level trials because the perceptual and functional The primary focus of Bauer and Mandler ( 1989 ) and Waxman and Hall ( 1993 ) was to examine the influence of novel words on the concep - tual organization of l - and 2 - year - olds . Waxman and Kosowski ( 1990 ) and Markman ( 1994 ) examined this issue in 2 - to 4 - year - olds . CHALLENGING THE THEMATIC PREFERENCE 557 similarity between the taxonomic alternative and the target is most pronounced on the basic - level trials . Conversely , we sus - pected that children would be more likely to choose the thematic alternatives on the superordinate - level trials because on these trials , the perceptual and functional relation between target and taxonomic alternative is less compelling . Third , we examined the effect of the medium in which the stimuli were presented . In most studies with preschool - age chil - dren , pictorial representations of familiar objects have been used as stimuli . In contrast , in most of the more recent studies with infants and toddlers , toy replicas have been used as stimuli . Because children may perform differently on tasks involving pictures versus objects ( Becker , Rosner , & Nelson , 1979 ; Daehler , Lonardo , & Bukatko , 1979 ; Etaugh & Van Sickle , 1971 ; Monroe & Lange , 1977 ; Zaft & Daehler , 1979 ) , we exam - ine children ' s performance using three - dimensional toy replicas of objects ( Experiments 1 and 3 ) and using two - dimensional pictures of those objects ( Experiment 2 ) . In sum , we examined the performance of children ranging from 2 to 4 years of age , devoting particular attention to the effects of ( a ) age , ( b ) the instructions presented to the children , ( c ) the hierarchical level of the stimuli , and ( d ) the medium in which the stimuli were presented . To the best of our knowledge , no such systematic evaluation of these factors has yet been carried out . Table 1 Complete List of Stimuli Used in Experiments 1 - 3 Taxonomic Thematic Target object alternative alternative Basic level a 1B Chocolate chip cookie Oreo cookie Cookie Monster 2B White fish Orange fish Fish bowl 3B Tulip Daffodil Vase 4B Yellow shampoo Pink shampoo Doll 5B White airplane Red airplane Person 6B Blue bed White bed Smurf 7B Blue car b White car Key Superordinate level 1S Carrot Tomato Rabbit 2S Chair Table Minnie Mouse 3S Tiger Panda bear Cage 4S Grapes Corn Plate 5S Sweater Pants Snoopy 6S Boat Car Person 7S Car b Jeep Stop sign " Target object and taxonomic alternative on basic level trials were not identical . They differed from one another on a number of characteristics , including color , size , and patterning , b These trials were excluded from Experiment 3 . Experiment 1 In this experiment , we examined the performance of 3 - and 4 - year - old children , using three - dimensional toy replicas of fa - miliar objects in a forced - choice task . We examined two contex - tual factors : ( a ) the experimenter ' s instructions , and ( b ) the hierarchical level at which the target was related to the taxo - nomic alternative ( basic vs . superordinate level ) . Method Participants Participants were 48 three - year - olds ( M = 3 years 6 months , range from 3 years 0 months to 3 years 11 months ) and 48 four - year - olds ( M = 4 years 7 months range from 4 years 0 months to 5 years 2 months ) enrolled in preschool programs serving middle - to upper - middle - class families in Evanston , Illinois . The racial and ethnic composition of the participants ( . 61 , White ; . 23 , African American ; . 06 , Latino ; and . 09 , other minorities ) reflects the distribution in the Evanston community in general . Approximately equal numbers of boys and girls participated in each condition at each age . One additional participant was excluded from analysis because of a tendency to pick alternatives from only one side of the table . Stimuli Stimuli were 42 small objects ranging from 5 cm to 28 cm in height . These were arranged to form 14 sets of 3 objects each . Each set consisted of a target object ( e . g . , a carrot ) , a taxonomically related object ( e . g . , a tomato ) , and a thematically related object ( e . g . , a rabbit ) . In half of the sets , the taxonomic choice was a nonidentical member of the same basic - level category as was the target . For the remaining sets , the taxo - nomic choice was related to the target at a superordinate level . A com - plete list of stimuli may be found in Table 1 . To ensure that the perceptual similarity between the basic level alterna - tives and their targets was greater than the similarity of the superordinate level alternatives and their targets , 15 adults were asked to rate the perceptual similarity of each target with its taxonomic alternative ( see Table 1 ) . Participants were instructed to rate each pair using a 7 - point scale , from 1 ( low ) to 7 ( high ) perceptual similarity . They were told that because these stimuli were to be used in a study with young children , they should ignore their knowledge of the objects and should focus primarily on the appearance of the objects themselves as we presented them . As predicted , the mean similarity rating for the targets paired with their basic level taxonomic alternatives ( M = 5 . 75 , SD = . 49 ) , was significantly greater than that between targets and their superordinate level alternatives ( M = 3 . 57 , SD = 1 . 41 ) , t ( 12 ) = 4 . 66 , p < . 001 . Procedure Participants in the experiment proper were tested individually in a quiet room within their preschool . Trials were presented in one of two different orders . These orders were determined randomly , with the con - straint that no more than two trials from a given hierarchical level were presented consecutively . Each trial consisted of two phases : a demonstration phase and a test phase . Demonstration phase . During the demonstration phase , the target and the two choice objects were placed in a horizontal row before the child , with the target object in the center . The experimenter demonstrated both the thematic and taxonomic relations between the target and the alternatives in a standardized fashion , following Waxman and Hall ( 1993 ) . To demonstrate the thematic relation , she performed the relation that was appropriate to the objects . For example , she showed the rabbit eating the carrot , saying , " See this ? " To demonstrate the taxonomic relation , she tapped the taxonomic alternative and the target objects together , saying , " See this ? " For half of the children in each condition , the experimenter demonstrated the taxonomic relation first and the the - 558 WAXMAN AND NAMY matic relation second on the first trial ; for half of the children , she demonstrated the thematic relation first and the taxonomic relation sec - ond on the first trial . Thereafter , the demonstrations were presented in alternating fashion . The left - right placement of the choice objects was determiried randomly for each trial . Test phase . Immediately following the demonstration phase , the ex - perimenter began the test phase by drawing the child ' s attention to the target ; she then moved the two choice objects toward the child and asked the child to choose between the taxonomic and thematic alternatives . The children were randomly assigned to one of three conditions , which varied only in the type of instructions that the experimenter of - fered during the test phase . In the Goes Best condition , the experimenter drew the child ' s attention to the target by tapping and labeling it with its familiar basic - level term , saying , " Look ! That ' s a label ! " She then moved the two choices toward the child , asking , " Which goes best with the label ? " The instructions in the Goes Best condition are precisely those used by Smiley and BrowR ( 1979 ) . In the Goes With condition , the experimenter tapped the target with her hand saying , " See this ? " She then asked , " Which one goes with it ? " as she moved the choice objects toward the child . In the Another One condition , the experimenter tapped the target with her hand saying , " See this ? " She then asked , " Can you find another one ? " as she moved the choice objects toward the child . If a child failed to make a clear choice , the experimenter repeated the instruction , while pointing to each of the choice objects in turn in the same order as they were demonstrated . If , after the experimenter repeated the instructions , the child still did not make a clear choice , the experi - menter recorded the behavior and moved on to the next trial . After making their selection , children in all conditions were allowed to play freely with all three objects in a triad . This playtime was brief ( approxi - mately 30 - 60 s ) , and children willingly relinquished the objects at the experimenter ' s request . Coding The child ' s response on each trial was recorded . Four different types of responses were possible . These included ( a ) selecting a thematic alternative , ( b ) selecting a thematic alternative , ( c ) making no selection , or ( d ) selecting both alternatives . Results Children made clear choices , selecting one of the two alterna - fives on 100 % of the trials . There was no evidence for a stable , overarching preference for thematic relations . Instead , children ' s responses varied as a function of age and condition . The mean proportion of thematic responding in each condition is reported in Table 2 . The data were subjected to a three - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) , with condition ( 3 ) and age ( 2 ) as between - subjects factors and with hierarchical level ( 2 ) as a within - subjects fac - tor . As predicted , the main effect of condition , F ( 2 , 90 ) = 34 . 55 , p < . 0001 , revealed that children in both the Goes With and the Goes Best condition were more likely to select the thematic alternatives than were children in Another One condi - tion , Tukey ' s honestly significant difference ( HSD ) , ( both ps < . 001 ) . The difference between the Goes With and the Goes Best conditions was not significant . There was also a main effect of age , F ( 1 , 90 ) = 9 . 374 , p < . 005 , indicating that as a group , 4 - year - olds ( M = . 54 , SD = . 32 ) were more likely to select the thematic alternatives than were 3 - year - olds ( M = . 40 , SD = . 28 ) . There were no effects of hierarchical level and no interactions . Table 2 Mean Proportion ( and Standard Deviation ) of Thematic Choices Made by Participants as a Function of Age , Condition , and Hierarchical Level in Experiment 1 ( Objects ) Condition Level Goes best Goes with Another one 3 - year - olds Basic M . 50 . 52 . 18 " * * SD . 26 . 29 . 22 Superordinate M . 54 . 46 . 19 " * * SD . 21 . 30 . 21 Combined M . 52 . 49 . 18 " * * SD . 22 . 28 . 20 4 - year - olds Basic M . 81 " * * . 62 . 19 " * * SD . 21 . 28 . 20 Superordina ~ M . 79 * * * . 56 . 27 * * SD . 23 . 24 . 24 Combined M . 80 * * * . 59 . 23 * * * SD . 19 . 25 . 20 Combined Overall M . 66 * * * . 54 . 20 * * * SD . 25 . 26 . 20 * * p < . 005 . * * * p < . 001 . We also compared the proportion of thematic responses in each condition to . 50 ( the chance level of responding ) . Children in the Goes Best condition revealed a thematic preference , t ( 31 ) = 3 . 58 , p < . 001 . However , this effect , which is consistent with Smiley and Brown ' s ( 1979 ) original findings , was evident only in the 4 - year - olds ; 3 - year - olds in this condition did not differ from chance . Children in the Goes With condition selected the thematic alternatives at a rate that was indistinguishable from chance , t ( 31 ) = . 87 , p > . 05 . This effect held up for both 3 - and 4 - year - olds . Children in the Another One condition revealed a " taxonomic preference , " selecting the thematic alternatives less often than would be predicted by chance , t ( 31 ) = 8 . 26 , p < . 0005 . This was evident in both 3 - and 4 - year - olds ( see also Dunham & Dunham , 1995 ) . Individual Patterns of Response To gain a more thorough appreciation of performance on this task , we examined each child ' s individual pattern of response . Following the binomial formula and setting a p value of . 05 , children selecting the thematic alternative on 11 or more trials of the 14 trials can be characterized as displaying consistently thematic behavior ; those selecting the thematic alternative on 3 or fewer trials display consistently taxonomic behavior ; children CHALLENGING THE THEMATIC PREFERENCE 559 Table 3 Number of Individual 3 - and 4 - Year - Olds Revealing Consistently Thematic Patterns , No Consistent Pattern , or Consistently Taxonomic Patterns of Response in Experiment 1 ( Objects ) Condition Response pattern Goes best Goes with Another one 3 - year - olds Consistently thematic ( thematic - 11 ) 2 4 No consistent pattern ( 3 < thematic < 11 ) 13 9 Consistently taxonomic ( thematic < 3 ) 1 3 0 5 11 4 - year - olds Consistently thematic ( thematic ~ 11 ) 11 4 No consistent pattern ( 3 < thematic < 11 ) 5 10 Consistently taxonomic ( thematic < 3 ) 0 2 falling between these extremes were categorized as revealing no consistent pattern . The distribution of individual patterns for each age and condition is reported in Table 3 . In general , the individual response patterns in each condition mirrored the mean performance reported above . Performance in the Goes Best condition revealed an interesting effect of age : At 3 years of age , most children ( n = 13 ) displayed no consis - tent pattern ; in contrast , at 4 years of age , most children ( n = 11 ) displayed consistently thematic performance . This is consis - tent with the results reported above . In the Goes With condition , neither 3 - nor 4 - year olds revealed individual patterns that were distinguishable from chance . Finally , in the Another One condi - tion , most children revealed consistently taxonomic perfor - mance at age 3 ( n = 11 ) and at age 4 years ( n = 9 ) . This suggests that the highly taxonomic performance in this condition reflects consistent taxonomic responding from most children . In general , we were surprised that there was not a stronger indication of a thematic preference in this experiment . There - fore , to investigate this outcome further , we conducted three additional analyses , looking more specifically at the individual sets of items . Analysis Based on Individual Items First , we conducted a 2 × 3 × 2 ( Hierarchical Level × Condition × Age ) ANOVA using items as a random factor ( Clark , 1973 ) . A main effect for condition , F ( 2 , 24 ) = 215 . 23 , p < . 001 , revealed that targets were most likely to be matched with thematic alternatives in the goes best condition , followed by the goes with condition , and finally the another one condition , Tukey ' s HSD ( all ps < . 05 ) . A main effect for age , F ( 1 , 12 ) = 57 . 40 , p < . 001 , revealed that targets were more likely to be matched with thematic alternatives by 4 - than by 3 - year - olds . These main effects , which echo those reported above in the analysis treating participants as a random factor , were qualified by an interaction between condition and age , F ( 2 , 24 ) = 9 . 742 , p < . 005 . In the Goes Best and Goes With conditions , targets were more likely to be paired with the thematic alternatives by 4 - than by 3 - year - olds ; in the Another One condition , there was no effect of age . Finally , a three - way interaction among condition , age and level , F ( 2 , 24 ) = 4 . 704 , p < . 05 , suggested that for 4 - year - olds in the Goes Best and Goes With conditions , targets were more likely to be paired with thematic alternatives on superordinate than on basic level trials . There was no effect of hierarchical level for 4 - year - olds in the Another One condition or for 3 - year - olds in any condition . We next examined participants ' performance for each of the 14 stimulus sets ( see Table 1 ) . Our motivation for undertaking this closer inspection of the materials was to discover whether there were particular sets on which children revealed a dispro - portionate tendency to select either the thematic or the taxo - nomic alternative . To examine this possibility , we identified each individual set on which the mean performance for that set dif - fered by more than 1 standard deviation from the mean ( col - lapsed across sets and conditions ) for each age group . For the 3 - year - olds , whose mean rate of thematic selection was . 41 ( SD = . 06 ) , four sets met this criterion . On two of these sets ( 5B and 7S ) , performance was more than 1 standard deviation above the mean rate ; on the remaining two sets ( 6B and 6S ) , perfor - mance was more than 1 standard deviation below the mean rate . For the 4 - year - olds , whose mean rate of thematic selection was . 54 ( SD = . 08 ) , there were two sets that met this criterion . On one set ( 7S ) , performance was more than 1 standard deviation above the mean rate ; on the other set ( 5S ) , performance was more than 1 standard deviation below the mean rate . This de - tailed examination suggests that although there was a tendency to favor one relation over another on a few stimulus sets , there was an impressive degree of balance , with an equal number of sets eliciting high and low rates of thematic responding . Finally , we conducted a control experiment to assess directly children ' s familiarity with the thematic and taxonomic relations depicted in Experiment 1 . We explicitly asked six 4 - year - old children to describe the thematic and taxonomic relations . 2 We reasoned that if children could describe these relations , then this would count as evidence of their familiarity . We presented the children with each target ( e . g . , carrot ) , paired with ( a ) its thematic match ( e . g . , rabbit ) , and ( b ) its taxonomic match ( e . g . , tomato ) . The order in which pairs were presented was random - ized . For each pair , we asked , " Why do these two go together ? " Two raters independently judged the nature of the explanations for the entire sample . Agreement between raters was 95 . 2 % . The children participated readily and successfully . They pro - vided thematically based explanations for 96 % of the themati - cally related pairs ( e . g . , " Rabbits eat carrots " ) , and taxonomi - cally based explanations for 79 % of the taxonomically related pairs ( e . g . , " They ' re both vegetables " ) . In addition , children 2 We interviewed only 4 - year - olds because pilot testing indicated that 3 - year - olds were less able to articulate explanations , even for relations with which they were highly familiar . This is consistent with previous demonstrations that 3 - year - olds are unable to articulate the reasons be - hind their selections in forced - choice tasks ( Markman , 1991 ; Scott et al . , 1982 ; Waxman & Kosowski , 1990 ) . 560 WAXMAN AND NAMY were more likely to provide taxonomically based explanations for the taxonomic relation when the target and taxonomic alter - native were related at the basic ( 88 % ) than at the superordinate ( 69 % ) level , t ( 5 ) = 2 . 70 , p < . 05 . The results of this control experiment confirmed that both the taxonomic and the thematic relations among the objects presented in Experiment 1 were familiar and accessible to preschool - age children . Together , these three detailed analyses of individual items indicate that it is unlikely that the absence of a strong thematic preference across ages and conditions in Experiment 1 is attrib - utable to our having selected triads on which the thematic rela - tions were weaker or less accessible than were the taxonomic relations . Discussion The results of Experiment 1 are consistent with the prediction that preschool - age children ' s performance varies reliably as a function of their age and the instructions with which they were provided . In the Goes Best condition , 4 - year - olds relied primar - ily on the thematic alternatives ; 3 - year - olds revealed no consis - tent preference . In the Goes With condition , neither 3 - nor 4 - year - olds revealed a consistent preference . In the Another One condition , both 3 - and 4 - year - olds chose primarily the taxor ! omic alternatives . These results indicate that a tendency to favor thematic over taxonomic relations is evident in preschool - age children only under a restricted set of circumstances . In particular , a thematic preference was apparent only in 4 - year - old children , and only in the condition most similar to that used by Smiley and Brown ( 1979 ) . Three - year - olds did not favor thematic relations in any condition . However , the 3 - year - olds ' tendency to choose the tax - onomic alternatives in the Another One condition suggests that they were sensitive to the different instruction conditions . Preschool - age children in Experiment 1 revealed an apprecia - tion of both thematic and taxonomic relations ; they did not reveal a stable conceptual preference for one type of relation over another . On the contrary , they appeared to adjust their responses rather flexibly , according to the demands of the task at hand . In Experiment 2 , we asked whether the discrepancy between the results of Experiment 1 and those of previous investigations of conceptual preferences is related to the medium in which the stimuli were presented . In most studies of conceptual prefer - ences in preschool - age children , pictorial representations of fa - miliar objects have been used as stimuli . However , in Experiment 1 , we used toy replicas as stimuli . Because children may perform differently on tasks involving pictures versus objects ( Becker , Rosner , & Nelson , 1979 ; Daehler , Lonardo , & Bukatko , 1979 ; Etaugh & Van Sickle , 1971 ; Monroe & Lange , 1977 ; Zaft & Daehler , 1979 ) , in Experiment 2 we examined 3 - and 4 - year - old children ' s performance using two - dimensional pictures of objects . Experiment 2 In virtually all previous studies of the thematic preference in preschool - age children , two - dimensional pictures of objects have served as stimuli ( D ' Entremont & Dunham , 1992 ; Dun - ham & Dunham , 1995 ; Fenson , Vella , & Kennedy , 1989 ; Mark - man & Hutchinson , 1984 ; Scott et al . , 1982 ; Smiley & Brown , 1979 ; Waxman & Kosowski , 1990 ) . However , in most of the more recent studies with infants and toddlers , toy replicas of objects have served as stimuli . The use of objects is motivated primarily by the fact that toddlers are more readily engaged in tasks that permit active manipulation of objects than in those that require more passive inspection of pictures . Because we sought to include 2 - year - olds in this series of experiments ( see Experiment 3 ) , we presented children in Experiment 1 with objects rather than pictures . Although this change in stimulus medium may indeed in - crease young children ' s attention to the tasks , it may have an - other unintended ( and , as yet , unexplored ) consequence : The absence of a clear thematic preference in Experiment 1 may be related to the use of objects as opposed to pictures as stimuli . Interestingly , there is a hint in the performance of 15 - to 31 - month - olds that is consistent with this possibility . In forced - choice tasks involving objects , 15 - to 31 - month - olds appear to favor taxonomic over thematic alternatives ( Bauer & Mandler , 1989 ; Waxman & Hall , 1993 ; Waxman & Kosowski , 1990 ) ; in tasks involving pictures , children at this age appear to favor thematic alternatives ( Markman , 1994 ) . However , the direct experimental evidence regarding the in - fluence of stimulus medium on children ' s performance is some - what contradictory . Much of the literature on this topic centers on the question of perceptual similarity among objects versus pictures . There is considerable evidence suggesting that percep - tual similarity may be more salient among objects than it is among pictures , ( see , e . g . , Daehler , et al . , 1979 ; Etaugh & Van Sickle , 1971 ; Zaft & Daehler , 1979 ) , but there is also evidence to the contrary ( Becker et al . , 1979 ; Monroe & Lange , 1977 ) . This debate is relevant because children may be more likely to select the taxonomic alternative when the perceptual similarity between that alternative and the target is high . Following this logic , if perceptual similarity is diminished in tasks involving pictures as compared to objects , then the overall rates of taxonomic response should decrease ( and thematic re - sponding should increase ) in tasks involving pictures as stimuli . On the other hand , because children can act out thematic rela - tions with objects , it is plausible that thematic relations would be more salient in tasks involving objects than pictures . In this case , the overall rates of taxonomic response should increase ( and thematic responding should decrease ) in tasks involving pictures . Method Participants Participants were 24 three - year - olds ( M = 3 years 5 months , range = 2 years 11 months to 3 years 11 months ) and 24 four - year - olds ( M = 4 years 7 months , range = 4 years 1 month to 4 years 11 months ) , drawn from the same preschool population as in Experiment 1 . At each age , 8 children were assigned to each of the three instruction conditions . Approximately equal numbers of boys and girls participated in each condition at each age . Stimuli The stimuli were 4 in . × 6 in . ( 10 . 2 cm × 15 . 2 cm ) color photographs of the objects that were used in Experiment 1 , mounted on plain card - CHALLENGING THE THEMATIC PREFERENCE 561 board and laminated . The photographs were taken against a plain , white , reflective background , with relative size cues of the objects preserved . Procedure and Coding The procedure and coding were identical to that of Experiment 1 , with one modification to accommodate the use of pictures . Instead of demonstrating the relations during the demonstration phase , the experi - menter placed the three pictures on the table in a row , with the target in the middle . She then moved the target picture so that it touched one of the choice pictures , saying , " See this ? " Next , she moved the target picture to touch the other choice , saying , " See this ? " Results As was the case in Experiment 1 , children successfully com - pleted the task , making a clear choice on 100 % of the trials . The mean proportion of thematic responses for each condition is indicated in Table 4 . Participants ' responses were first submitted to a three - way ANOVA with condition ( 3 ) and age ( 2 ) as between - subjects measures and hierarchical level ( 2 ) as a within - subject measure . This analysis revealed a main effect of condition , F ( 2 , 42 ) = 6 . 39 , p < . 005 . As was the case in Experiment 1 , children in the Goes Best condition were more likely to select the thematic Table 5 Number of Individual 3 - and 4 - Year - Olds Revealing Consistently Thematic Patterns , No Consistent Pattern , or Consistently Taxonomic Patterns of Response in Experiment 2 ( Pictures ) Condition Response pattern Goes best Goes with Another one 3 - year - olds Consistently thematic ( thematic - > 11 ) 1 0 No consistent pattern ( 3 < thematic < 11 ) 6 6 Consistently taxonomic ( thematic - - - 3 ) 1 2 4 - year - olds Consistently thematic ( thematic > 11 ) 6 2 No consistent pattern ( 3 < thematic < 11 ) 2 6 Consistently taxonomic ( thematic - < 3 ) 0 0 Table 4 Mean Proportion ( and Standard Deviation ) of Thematic Choices Made by Participants as a Function of Age , Condition , and Hierarchical Level in Experiment 2 ( Pictures ) Condition Level Goes best Goes with Another one 3 - year - olds Basic M . 36 . 34 . 37 SD . 30 . 25 . 34 Superordinate M . 48 . 45 . 43 SD . 17 . 29 . 29 Combined M . 42 . 39 . 40 SD . 21 . 24 . 30 4 - year - olds Basic M . 70 . 50 . 21 " SD . 30 . 30 . 27 Superordinate M . 81 " * . 54 . 18 " * SD . 13 . 21 . 20 Combined M . 75 * . 52 . 20 * * SD . 19 . 23 . 19 Combined Overall M . 59 . 46 . 30 * SD . 26 . 24 . 26 * p < . 05 . * * p < . 005 . alternatives than were children in the Another One condition , Tukey ' s HSD ( p < . 05 ) . Performance in the Goes With condi - tion was intermediate and did not differ reliably from either of the other two conditions , Tukey ' s HSD ( both ps > . 05 ) . An interaction between condition and age , F ( 2 , 42 ) = 5 . 61 , p < . 01 , indicated that the main effect of condition was driven pre - dominantly by 4 - year - olds . For 4 - year - olds , the tendency to se - lect the thematic alternatives was greater in the Goes Best than in the Another One condition . In contrast , for 3 - year - olds , there were no reliable differences among the means in each condition . We next compared performance at each age and in each condi - tion to chance ( . 50 ) . As in Experiment 1 , 4 - year - olds in the Goes Best condition revealed a thematic preference , t ( 7 ) = 3 . 77 , p < . 01 , but 3 - year - olds in this condition did not differ from chance . In the goes with condition , neither 3 - nor 4 - year olds selected the thematic alternatives at a rate that was distin - guishable from chance . In the another one condition , 4 - year - olds revealed a taxonomic preference , t ( 7 ) = 4 . 61 , p < . 005 , but 3 - year - olds did not differ from chance . Individual Patterns of Response We next examined each individual child ' s pattern of response . As in Experiment 1 , we used the binomial formula , setting a p value of . 05 , to ascertain the number of children displaying consistently thematic behavior , consistently taxonomic behavior , or no consistent pattern . The distribution for each condition and age is reported in Table 5 . Across conditions , most 3 - year - olds revealed no consistent pattern . In contrast , 4 - year - olds revealed different patterns as a function of condition : In the Goes Best condition , most 4 - years - olds were consistently thematic ; in the Another One condition , most were consistently taxonomic ; and in the Goes With condition , most failed to reveal a consistent 562 WAXMAN AND NAMY response pattern . These individual analyses bolster the results that were based on analyses of group means . Analysis Based on Individual Items As in Experiment 1 , we conducted two additional analyses to examine the performance on individual trials . A 2 × 3 × 2 Hierarchical Level × Condition × Age ) ANOVA with items as a random factor revealed a main effect for condition , F ( 2 , 24 ) = 12 . 79 , p < . 005 . Targets were more likely to be matched with thematic alternatives in the Goes Best than in the Another One condition , Tukey ' s HSD , p < . 05 . Performance in the Goes With condition did not differ reliably from the two more extreme conditions . This main effect was qualified by an interaction between condition and age , F ( 2 , 24 ) = 28 . 26 , p < . 001 , indicat - ing that in the Goes Best condition , targets were more likely to be paired with the thematic alternatives by 4 - than by 3 - year - olds ; in the Another One condition , targets were more likely to be paired with the taxonomic alternatives by 4 - than by 3 - year - olds ; in Goes With condition , there was no effect of age . We next sought to discover whether there were particular sets on which children revealed a disproportionate tendency to select either the thematic or the taxonomic alternative . As in Experi - ment 1 , we identified each individual set on which the mean performance for that set different by more than 1 standard devia - tion from the mean performance ( collapsed across sets and conditions ) for each age group . For 3 - year - olds , whose mean rate of thematic selection was . 41 ( SD = . 11 ) , 5 of the 14 sets met this criterion . On 2 of these sets ( 7B and IS ) , performance was more than 1 standard deviation above the mean rate ; on the remaining 3 sets ( 1B , 3B , and 5S ) , performance was more than 1 standard deviation below the mean rate . For the 4 - year - olds , whose mean rate of thematic selection was . 47 ( SD = . 16 ) , there were 5 sets that met this criterion . On 3 sets ( 2B , 3S , and 7S ) , performance was more than 1 standard deviation above the mean rate ; on the others ( 2S and 5S ) , performance was more than 1 standard deviation below the mean rate . As in Experiment 1 , although there was a tendency to favor one rela - tion over another on some stimulus sets , there was an impressive " degree of balance , with an approximately equal number of sets eliciting high and low rates of thematic responding . Together , these analyses based upon individual items indicate that the thematic relations were no weaker or less accessible than were the taxonomic relations . Comparison of Experiment 2 ( Pictures ) and Experiment 1 ( Objects ) In the next analysis , we examine the potential effect of stimu - lus medium more directly by comparing performance in this experiment ( using pictures ) with performance in Experiment 1 ( using objects ) . The data from Experiments 1 and 2 were sub - mitted to a four - way ANOVA with stimulus medium ( 2 : objects vs . pictures ) , condition ( 3 ) and age ( 2 ) as between - subject measures and hierarchical level ( 2 ) as a within - subject measure . There were no main effects or interactions involving stimulus medium . Participants were equally likely to select thematic alter - natives with pictures or toy replicas serving as stimuli . A main effect for condition , F ( 2 , 132 ) = 29 . 56 , p < . 001 , revealed that differences among all three conditions were reliable . A main effect for age , F ( 1 , 132 ) = 7 . 93 , p < . 01 , indicated that 4 - year - olds were more likely to select the thematic alternatives than were 3 - year - olds . A Condition × Age interaction , F ( 2 , 132 ) = 7 . 77 , p < . 001 , revealed that the differences among conditions were greater at 4 than at 3 years of age . Discussion In Experiment 2 , as in Experiment 1 , there was no strong indication for a conceptual preference for thematic relations over taxonomic relations . One difference between the two exper - iments did emerge : Although 4 - year - olds ' performance varied as a function of condition in both experiments , this was not the case for the 3 - year - olds . These younger children were more sensitive to the differences among conditions in Experiment 1 with toy replicas of objects than they were in Experiment 2 with pictures of objects . The results of Experiments 1 and 2 challenge the view that preschool thought is characterized by a stable thematic prefer - ence . Instead , our results reveal that the expression of a " prefer - ence " for one relation over another is largely a function of task demands rather than a consequence of an overarching preferred mode of response . In the next experiment , we extended our investigation to in - clude younger children to test the possibility that a thematic preference is evident early in development . We selected young 2 - year - olds for this investigation because children at this age tend to demonstrate the functional and thematic relations among objects spontaneously ( Bates , Benigni , Bretherton , Camaioni , & Volterra , 1979 ; Sugarman , 1983 ) . We capitalized on this sponta - neous behavior in Experiment 3 , using it as an approximate index of children ' s familiarity with the thematic relations de - picted in our task . Experiment 3 In this experiment , we examined the performance of 2 - year - old children in a forced - choice procedure , using the three - di - mensional toy replicas of objects as stimuli . We manipulated the effects of ( a ) the experimenter ' s instructions and ( b ) the hierarchical level relating the taxonomic alternative to the target . The procedure was comparable to that used in Experiment 1 , with only one exception . We included a familiarization phase ( immediately preceding the demonstration period ) , during which the children were allowed to play freely with the objects in each set . Method Participants Participants were 48 two - year - olds ( M = 2 years 1 month ; range from 1 year 11 months to 2 years 3 months ) who visited our laboratory for a single play session . These children were taken from a pool of predominantly White , middle - to upper - middle - class families recruited through newspaper advertisements in the greater Chicago area . Sixteen children were randomly assigned to each of the three conditions that were used in the previous studies . There were approximately equal num - bers of boys and girls in each condition ; the mean age was approximately equal across conditions . Seven additional children were excluded , 5 CHALLENGING THE THEMATIC PREFERENCE 563 because of failure to complete the task and 2 because of experimenter error . remaining 3 . 3 % of trials , in which no clear choice was apparent , were excluded from the analyses reported below . Stimuli The stimuli included 12 of the 14 triads of objects that were presented in Experiment 1 . We excluded two trials to accommodate the attention spans of this younger population . Because pilot testing suggested that many children at this age were not familiar with the stop sign , we excluded the set involving that object ( 7S ) ; to balance the number of basic and superordinate trials , we also excluded a basic - level set involv - ing vehicles ( 7B ) , leaving six trials each at the basic and at the superordi - nate levels . Procedure Participants were tested individually in the laboratory . They were seated in a booster seat directly across a table from the experimenter ; caretakers were seated next to the child . The procedure was identical to that in Experiment 1 , with one modification . As in Experiments 1 and 2 , there was a demonstration phase and a test phase . In addition , we included a familiarization phase prior to the demonstration phase . Familiarization phase . During the familiarization phase , the experi - menter presented the three objects and invited the child to play freely with them . Children willingly relinquished the objects after 15 s , at the experimenter ' s request . The purpose of the familiarization period was twofold . First , pilot testing revealed that 2 - year - olds were more interested in playing with the objects than in complying with the experimenter ' s requests . However , we found that when we provided children with an opportunity to play spontaneously with objects during a brief familiar - ization period , we effectively reduced their distractibility and increased their cooperation during the demonstration and test periods . Second , we used the children ' s spontaneous play during the familiarization period as a rough index of their appreciation of the relations among objects in each set . Demonstration and test phases . These followed immediately after familiarization and were identical to those in Experiment 1 . Coding Because the 2 - year - olds ' responses were often more ambiguous than those of the 3 - and 4 - year - olds , the sessions were videotaped for subse - quent coding . The sessions were coded for two behaviors . First , we examined each child ' s behavior during the familiarization phase for spontaneous demonstrations of thematic play ( e . g . , putting the carrot to the rabbit ' s mouth ) . An act was counted as an instance of thematic play if the children demonstrated the thematic relation on either objects ( e . g . , putting the carrot to the rabbit ' s mouth ) or on themselves ( e . g . , putting the carrot to his or her own mouth ) . Second , responses on each trial were recorded . As in the previous studies , four different types of re - sponses were possible . These included ( a ) selecting a thematic alterna - tive , ( b ) selecting a taxonomic alternative , ( c ) making no selection , or ( d ) selecting both alternatives . Children who failed to make a clear choice on three or more trials was excluded ? A primary coder analyzed the videotapes of all 48 children . A second coder analyzed a randomly selected 25 % of the children . Intercoder reliability was 96 . 5 % on the forced - choice measure and 98 . 6 % on the thematic play measure . Results Children were readily engaged in this task , making a clear single choice on an average of 96 . 7 % of trials . Data from the Analysis of the Familiarization Period The goal of this analysis was to ascertain whether 2 - year - olds were familiar with and interested in the thematic relations depicted in our forced - choice task . For each of the 12 triads presented , we calculated the percentage of children who sponta - neously demonstrated that thematic relation during the familiar - ization period . Across trials , the mean percentage was . 62 ( SD = . 23 ) , ranging from . 30 ( Set 4B ) to . 93 ( Set 2B ) . It is important to note that our measure of spontaneous dem - onstrations likely underrepresents the children ' s familiarity with the thematic relations that were depicted in our task . This is because a child ' s failure to demonstrate a thematic relation in spontaneous play cannot be taken as evidence of that child ' s failure to appreciate that relation . Rather , it is plausible to as - sume that a child who was familiar with a given thematic relation may simply have not chosen to demonstrate it spontaneously in the 15 - s familiarization period . Indeed , we suspect that the incidence of thematic behavior would have been even higher if we had elicited thematic behaviors more explicitly or if we had allowed more time for free play during familiarization . Nevertheless , the data from the familiarization phase reveal that overall , the thematic relations that we presented were suffi - ciently familiar and interesting to the 2 - year - old children to elicit spontaneous demonstrations . This finding sets the stage for the next analysis in which we examine 2 - year - old children ' s perfor - mance in the forced - choice task . Analysis of Forced Choice Like preschool children , 2 - year - olds revealed no evidence of a conceptual preference for thematic relations in the forced - choice task . However , unlike preschoolers in Experiments 1 and 2 , two - year - olds did not perform differently as a function of experimental condition . The mean proportion of trials on which children in each condition selected the thematic alternative is reported in Table 6 . A two - way ANOVA with condition ( 3 ) as a between - subjects variable and hierarchical level ( 2 ) as a within - subjects variable revealed no significant effects . Further , children in all three con - ditions selected the thematic alternatives significantly less often than would be , expected by chance ( . 50 ) : Another One , t ( 15 ) = 4 . 74 , p < . 0005 ; Goes With , t ( 15 ) = 3 . 88 , p < . 005 ; Goes Best , t ( 15 ) = 2 . 57 , p < . 05 . This finding - - that children as a group tend to select predominantly taxonomic alternatives on this forced - choice task - - is consistent with other studies of chil - dren ranging from 15 to 31 months of age ( Bauer & Mandler , 1989 ; Waxman & Hall , 1993 ; Waxman & Kosowski , 1990 ) . 3 Choice was determined by the first object that the child touched . If the first object touched was the only object touched , or if the child did not touch the other objects during the first 3 s following the first touch , the first object touched was considered the choice for that trial . If the child touched both objects within the same 3 - s period , the trial was coded as choosing both . To be included in these analyses , a child had to complete at least 10 sets of 12 trials . 564 WAXMAN AND NAMY Table 6 Mean Proportion ( and Standard Deviation ) of Thematic Choices Made by Participants as a Function of Condition and Hierarchical Level in Experiment 3 ( Objects ) Condition Level Goes best Goes with Another one 2 - year - olds Basic M . 33 * * . 34 * * . 41 " SD . 19 . 18 . 10 Superordin ~ e M . 49 . 44 . 34 * SD . 24 . 15 . 23 Combined M . 41 ' . 39 * . 39 * SD . 14 . 11 . 11 * p < . 05 . * * p < . 005 . Individual Patterns of Performance As in Experiments 1 and 2 , we also examined the individual pattern of performance exhibited by each child . Following the binomial formula and setting a p value of . 05 , children selecting the thematic alternative on 10 or more out of 12 trials can be characterized as displaying consistently thematic behavior ; those selecting the thematic alternative on 2 or fewer trials out of 12 display consistently taxonomic behavior ; children falling between these extremes were categorized as revealing no consis - tent pattern . The distribution of individual patterns for each age and condition is reported in Table 7 . Although the mean performance in each condition had suggested an inclination on the part of 2 - year - old children to favor the taxonomic over the thematic alternatives , very few individual children exhibited a clear taxonomic preference . In fact , very few individual children focused consistently on either the taxonomic or the thematic relations . In future work , it will be important to pursue further this discrepancy between results based on groups versus individ - ual participants ( see also Dunham & Dunham , 1995 ) . However , the most relevant point here is that 2 - year - olds , like 3 - and 4 - year - olds , failed to reveal a preference for thematic relations on either analysis . an approximately equal number of sets eliciting high and low rates of thematic responding . Integration of Familiarization and Forced Choice We also examined the hypothesis that a child would be more likely to choose the thematic alternative if that child had just demonstrated the thematic relation during the familiarization phase . However , we found no evidence for this hypothesis : chil - dren were no more likely to select the thematic alternative when they had demonstrated that relation than when they had not , t ( 43 ) = . 715 , p > . 05 . Discussion The results of this experiment reveal that 2 - year - old children performed comparably in all three conditions . We suspect that this null effect is jointly related to the fact that ( a ) 2 - year - olds ' performance is typically more variable than that of older preschoolers , ( b ) 2 - year - olds participated in fewer trials than did the older preschoolers , and ( c ) 2 - year - olds may not be sensi - tive to the interpretive differences among the instruction conditions . In addition , there was no evidence of a thematic preference in any condition . It is unlikely that this is a consequence of the thematic relations being unfamiliar or inaccessible , particularly because the experimenter demonstrated these relations before presenting the forced - choice trial . Even more compelling is the finding that the 2 - year - olds themselves often spontaneously dem - onstrated these thematic relations during the familiarization pe - riod , just seconds before the forced - choice task . Finally , children in this experiment were no more likely to choose the thematic alternative on trials for which they had demonstrated the the - matic relation than were on those for which they had not . It is also unlikely that children at this age have a consistent conceptual preference for taxonomic relations . Although as a group children in each condition selected the taxonomic alterna - tives more frequently than the thematic alternatives in the forced - choice task , this taxonomic preference did not hold up in an analysis of individual children . On the contrary , most individual children failed to reveal a consistent preference for either the taxonomic or the thematic alternatives . In summary , 2 - year - old children ' s spontaneous play revealed Analysis Based on Individual Items A 2 x 3 ( Hierarchical Level x Condition ) ANOVA with items as a random factor revealed no significant main effects or interactions . We next examined performance on each trial to discover whether particular sets elicited a disproportionate amount of thematic responding in our 2 - year - old sample . We identified each individual set on which the proportion of thematic re - sponding differed by more than 1 standard deviation from the mean ( collapsed across sets and conditions ) . Two sets ( 2S and 6S ) elicited a disproportionately high incidence of thematic responding ; two sets ( 5B and 6B ) elicited a disproportionately low incidence of thematic response . Thus , as in the preceding experiments , there was an impressive degree of balance , with Table 7 Number of lndividual 2 - Year - Olds Revealing Consistently Thematic Patterns , No Consistent Pattern , or Consistently Taxonomic Patterns of Response in Experiment 3 ( Objects ) Condition Response pattern Goes best Goes with Another one Consistently thematic ( thematic - > 10 ) 0 0 0 No consistent pattern ( 2 < thematic < 10 ) 15 14 16 Consistently taxonomic ( thematic - - < 2 ) 1 2 0 CHALLENGING THE THEMATIC PREFERENCI ~ 565 that they were familiar with and interested in the thematic rela - tions depicted in this task . Nonetheless , they revealed no prefer - ence for thematic relations in the forced - choice task . This finding is consistent with the data from Experiments 1 and 2 with older preschool - age children and with other reports based on children ranging from 15 to 31 months of age ( Bauer & Mandler , 1989 ; Waxman & Hall , 1993 ; Waxman & Kosowski , 1990 ) . Taken together , these results challenge the notion of a conceptual pref - erence for thematic relations in young children . General Discussion The goal of these experiments was to examine the strong , if implicit , assumption that early cognitive development is best characterized by a thematic preference that only later gives way to a taxonomic preference in school - age children . The results of all three experiments call this assumption into serious question . Although participants in our studies were familiar with the the - matic relations that were depicted in our tasks , they were not " captured " by these relations . On the contrary , a clear tendency to respond on the basis of thematic over taxonomic relations was evident only in one experimental condition ( Goes Best ) at one age level ( 4 - year - olds ) . Thus , we find converging evidence with Smiley and Brown ' s ( 1979 ) pioneering work , but only under the circumstances that most closely resemble those that were used in their original studies . Our data also converge with Smiley and Brown ' s in that we found that preschool - age children appreciate both the - matic and taxonomic relations among objects . However , unlike Smiley and Brown , we have highlighted children ' s conceptual flexibility rather than confirming the stability of a thematic " preference " or " mode of response " in the preschool years . Our data suggest that 4 - year - old children , and to a lesser extent 3 - year - old children , can recruit both thematic and taxo - nomic relations flexibly in a forced - choice task ( see also Wax - man , 1990 ) and can adjust their responses in accordance with the experimenter ' s instructions . The data from 2 - year - olds ( Ex - periment 3 ) were less straightforward . Although 2 - year - olds were less flexible in adjusting their responses in the forced - choice task , they did convey an emerging appreciation of both taxonomic relations ( especially during the forced - choice task ) and thematic relations ( especially during the familiarization pe - riod in spontaneous play ) . The most important contribution from this series of experi - ments is the evidence it brings to bear on the assumption of a thematic preference in cognitive development . The absence of a stable thematic mode of response in preschool - age children challenges the view that ( a ) cognition is characterized by perva - sive , age - related conceptual preferences and ( b ) a preference for thematic relations necessarily precedes a preference for taxo - nomic relations . Instead , the data provide empirical support for a different characterization of early conceptual development . They reveal a more continuous , monotonic course in early con - ceptual development , in which children rely upon various kinds of conceptual relations among objects but reveal an overarching preference for none . This characterization of early development has several advan - tages . It is compatible with current models of adult cognition suggesting that conceptual preferences are constructed largely in response to the particular task demands ( Kahneman & Tversky , 1979 ; Slovic , 1995 ; Slovic & Lichtenstein , 1983 ; Tversky & Kahneman , 1981 ; Tversky & Simonson , 1993 ) . Further , because this approach embraces the idea that performance is influenced by task demands , it offers a framework for bridging the empiri - cal gap between traditional studies with preschool - age children ( Denney , 1974 ; Greenfield & Scott , 1986 ; Nelson , 1977 ; Scott et al . , 1982 ; Smiley & Brown , 1979 ) and more recent work with infants and toddlers ( Bauer & Mandler , 1989 ; Waxman & Hall , 1993 ) . This pattern of results calls for a reconsideration of our as - sumptions regarding the course of conceptual development . First , the absence of a thematic preference in early development indicates that preschool - age children do not struggle to over - come a compelling preferenc e for thematic relations to derive other , nonthematic categories ( cf . Inhelder & Piaget , 1964 ) . Notice , however , that the absence of a thematic preference does not imply ( either logically or empirically ) the presence of a taxonomic preference in its stead . On the contrary , we argue that preschool - age children do not rely upon a " default " prefer - ence for one type of relation over another . Second , the absence of a thematic preference does not imply that it is a simple task to construct taxonomic systems of organi - zation . Young children appreciate various kinds of relations among objects . Therefore , to construct taxonomic systems of organization , they must direct their attention specifically to this type of relation , despite their interest in other types of relations . Thus , the research reported here does not diminish the impor - tance of continuing to investigate the young child ' s establish - ment and use of taxonomic systems of organization . Third , the absence of a frank thematic preference is relevant to a consideration of the young child as a word learner . Children appreciate various kinds of conceptual relations . This flexibility could , in principle , complicate the task of word learning because it raises the following question : How do children select from among the many logically possible interpretations when map - ping a novel word to its meaning ? The absence of a thematic preference does not , in itself , ease the logical difficulty of this task . Thus , the results of the experiments reported here in no way diminish the importance of examining the factors that con - tribute to the child ' s remarkable success in word learning . These factors include the identification of predispositions inherent in the child ( cf . Waxman , 1990 , 1994 ; Markman , 1994 ) and a description of the social and cultural scaffolding provided by caretakers in the context of word learning ( cf . Callanan , 1990 , 1991 ; Nelson , 1985 ) . Finally , the absence of a thematic preference in any group of children does not preclude the possibility that there may be stable individual differences in conceptual strategies . Dunham and Dunham ( 1995 ) conducted a longitudinal study that re - vealed stable individual differences across children ' s first 3 years in the extent to which a particular child tended to rely on taxonomic or thematic relations among objects . However , these individual differences do not reflect an exclusive focus on one type of relation over another . As we have shown , a child ' s tendency to focus on various relations will depend on several factors , including the child ' s interest in the relations depicted and the context in which they are presented . Moreover , Dun - ham and Dunham ' s data support our claim that cognitive de - 566 WAXMAN AND NAMY velopment is not characterized by age - related conceptual reorganization . In future work , it will be important to examine further chil - dren ' s performance under a wider range of circumstances . There is no doubt that there will be contexts under which children will favor thematic over taxonomic relations . For example , in the experiments reported here , we included the familiar basic - level label for each target in the Goes Best condition because our goal was to replicate Smiley and Brown ' s ( 1979 ) original in - structions . However , because there is considerable evidence that labels ( nouns ) applied to individual objects highlight taxonomic relations ( Markman & Hutchinson , 1984 ; Waxman , 1990 ; Wax - man & Kosowski , 1990 ) , it would be interesting to compare performance in each condition with and without labelling the target . Children in the Goes Best condition might reveal a stronger tendency to select the thematic alternatives if targets were not labeled . Yet children in the Another One condition might reveal a stronger tendency to select the taxonomic alterna - tives if the targets were labeled ( see Waxman & Hall , 1993 ) . It will also be instructive to examine directly the influence of demonstrating the taxonomic and thematic relations ( as in the experiments reported here ) prior to the forced - choice task . Fi - nally , to broaden the perspective in this research area , it will be important to examine children ' s performance in circumstances beyond the forced - choice task . For instance , we found that 2 - year - olds were more likely to reveal an appreciation of thematic relations in their spontaneous play than they were in the forced - choice task itself . Extensions like these will clarify further the range of circumstances under which children favor one type of relation over another . In summary , the results of the three experiments reported here challenge the view that early development is characterized by a pervasive shift from syntagmatic to paradigmatic , or from the - matic to taxonomic , modes of responding ( Nelson , 1977 ; Smi - ley & Brown , 1979 ) . Instead , the data suggest a more continu - ous developmental function with no frank shift from one con - ceptual mode to another . From infancy ( Bauer & Mandler , 1989 ; Waxman & Hall , 1993 ) through the preschool years , children reveal an emerging appreciation of many different kinds of con - ceptual relations but a pervasive preference for none . On this view , conceptual development has a more continuous trajectory , one that entails enriching , cultivating , and assembling these early relations to build the rich , complex , and flexible systems of knowledge that characterize the adult conceptual systems . References Bates , E . , Benigni , L . , Bretherton , I . , Camaioni , L . , & Volterra , V . ( 1979 ) . The emergence of symbols : Cognition and communication in infancy . New York : Academic Press . Bauer , P . J . , & Mandier , J . M . ( 1989 ) . Taxonomies and triads : Concep - tual organization in one - to two - year - olds . Cognitive Psychology , 21 , 156 - 184 . Becker , J . A . , Rosner , S . R . , & Nelson , K . ( 1979 ) . Stimulus mode and concept formation in preschool children . Developmental Psychology , 15 , 218 - 220 . Bruner , J . S . , Goodnow , J . J . , & Austin , G . A . ( 1956 ) . A study of think - ing . New York : Wiley . Callanan , M . ( 1990 ) . Parents ' descriptions of objects : Potential data for children ' s inferences about category principles . Cognitive Develop - ment , 5 , 101 - 122 . Callanan , M . ( 1991 ) . Parent - child collaboration in young children ' s understanding of category hierarchies . In S . A . Gelman & J . P . Byrnes ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on language and thought : Interrelations in devel - opment ( pp . 440 - 484 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Clark , H . H . ( 1973 ) . The language - as - fixed - effect fallacy : A critique of language statistics in psychological research . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 12 , 335 - 359 . Daehler , M . W . , Lonardo , R . , & Bukatko , D . ( 1979 ) . Matching and equivalence judgements in very young children . Child Development , 50 , 170 - 179 . Denney , N . W . ( 1974 ) . Evidence for developmental changes in categori - zation criteria . Human Development , 17 , 41 - 53 . D ' Entremont , B . , & Dunham , P . J . ( 1992 ) . The noun - category bias phenomenon in 3 - year - olds : Taxonomic constraint or translation ? Cog - nitive Development , 7 , 47 - 62 . Dunham , P . , & Dunham , E ( 1995 ) . Developmental antecedents of taxo - nomic and thematic strategies at 3 years of age . Developmental Psy - chology , 31 , 483 - 493 . Etaugh , C . E , & Van Sickle , D . ( 1971 ) . Discrimination of stereometric objects and photographs of objects by children . Child Development , 42 , 1580 - 1582 . Fenson , L . , Vella , D . , & Kennedy , M . ( 1989 ) . Children ' s knowledge of thematic and taxonomic relations at two years of age . Child Develop - ment , 60 , 911 - 919 . Gelman , R . ( 1978 ) . Cognitive development . Annual Review of Psychol - ogy , 29 , 297 - 332 . Gelman , R . , & Greeno , J . G . ( 1989 ) . On the nature of competence : Principles for understanding in a domain . In L . B . Resnick ( Ed . ) , Knowing , learning , and instruction : Essays in honor of Robert Glaser ( pp . 125 - 186 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Greenfield , D . B . , & Scott , M . S . ( 1986 ) . Young children ' s preference for complementary pairs : Evidence against a shift to a taxonomic preference . Developmental Psychology , 22 , 19 - 21 . Inhelder , B . , & Piaget , J . ( 1964 ) . The early growth of logic in the child . New York : Norton . Kahneman , D . , & Tversky , A . ( 1979 ) . Prospect theory : An analysis of decision under risk . Econometrica , 47 , 263 - 291 . Markman , E . M . ( 1991 ) . The whole - object , taxonomic , and mutual ex - clusivity assumptions as initial constraints on word meanings . In S . A . Gelman & J . P . Byrnes ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on language and thought : Interrelations in development ( pp . 72 - 106 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Markman , E . M . ( 1994 ) . Constraints on word meaning in early language acquisition . Lingua , 92 , 199 - 227 . Markman , E . M . , & Hutchinson , J . E . ( 1984 ) . Children ' s sensitivity to constraints on word meaning : Taxonomic versus thematic relations . Cognitive Psychology , 16 , 1 - 27 . Mervis , C . B . , & Crisafi , M . A . ( 1982 ) . Order of acquisition of subordi - nate - , basic - and superordinate - level categories . Child Development , 53 , 258 - 266 . Monroe , E . K . , & Lange , G . ( 1977 ) . The accuracy with which children judge the composition of their free recall . Child Development , 48 , 381 - 387 . Nelson , K . ( 1977 ) . The syntagmatic - paradigmatic shift revisited : A re - view of research and theory . Psychological Bulletin , 84 , 93 - 116 . Nelson , K . ( 1985 ) . Making sense : The acquisition of shared meaning . New York : Academic Press . Rosch , E . , Mervis , C . B . , Gray , W . D . , Johnson , D . M . , & Boyes - Braem , P . ( 1976 ) . Basic objects in natural categories . Cognitive Psychology , 8 , 382 - 439 . Scott , M . S . , Serchuk , R . , & Mundy , P . ( 1982 ) . Taxonomic and comple - mentary picture pairs : Ability in two - to five - year - olds . International Journal of Behavioral Development , 5 , 243 - 256 . CHALLENGING THE THEMATIC PREFERENCE 567 Slovic , P . ( 1995 ) . The construction of preference . American Psycholo - gist , 50 , 364 - 371 . Slovic , P . , & Lichtenstein , S . ( 1983 ) . Preference reversals : A broader perspective . American Economic Review , 73 , 596 - 605 . Smiley , S . S . , & Brown , A . L . ( 1979 ) . Conceptual preference for the - matic or taxonomic relations : A nonmonotonic trend from preschool to old age . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 28 , 437 - 458 . Sugarman , S . ( 1983 ) . Children ' s early thought : Developments in classi - fication . New York : Cambridge University Press . Thelen , E . , & Smith , L . B . ( 1994 ) . A dynamic systems approach to the development of cognition and action . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Tversky , A . , & Kahneman , D . ( 1981 , January ) . The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice . Science , 211 , 453 - 458 . Tversky , A . , & Simonson , I . ( 1993 ) . Context - dependent preferences . Management Science , 39 , 1179 - 1189 . Vygotsky , L . ( 1962 ) . Thought and language . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Waxman , S . R . ( 1990 ) . Linguistic biases and the establishment of con - ceptual hierarchies : Evidence from preschool children . Cognitive De - velopment , 5 , 1123 - 1150 . Waxman , S . R . ( 1994 ) . The development of an appreciation of specific linkages between linguistic and conceptual organization . Lingua , 92 , 229 - 257 . Waxman , S . R . , & Hall , D . G . ( 1993 ) . The development of a linkage between count nouns and object categories : Evidence from fifteen - to twenty - month - old infants . Child Development , 64 , 1224 - 1241 . Waxman , S . R . , & Kosowski , T . D . ( 1990 ) . Nouns mark category rela - tions : Toddlers ' and preschoolers ' word - learning biases . Child Devel - opment , 61 , 1461 - 1473 . Zaft , A . , & Daehler , M . W . ( 1979 ) . Naming response times to objects and pictures in very young children . Perceptual and Motor Skills , 49 , 162 . Received September 25 , 1995 Revision received July 8 , 1996 Accepted July 9 , 1996 •