2006 - 980 : DESIGN FOR FRONTIER CONTEXTS : CLASSROOM ASSESSMENT OF A NEW DESIGN METHODOLOGY WITH HUMANITARIAN APPLICATIONS Matthew Green , LeTourneau University MATTHEW G . GREEN is an assistant professor of Mechanical Engineering at LeTourneau University , Longview . His objective is to practice and promote engineering as a serving profession , with special recognition of opportunities to improve the quality of life in developing countries . Topics include the design of affordable transportation , training engineers to design for marginalized populations , needs assessment in frontier design environments , assistive devices for persons with disabilities , and remote power generation . Contact : MatthewGreen @ letu . edu . Julie Linsey , University of Texas - Austin Carolyn Seepersad , University of Texas - Austin Kathy Schmidt , University of Texas - Austin Kristin Wood , University of Texas - Austin © American Society for Engineering Education , 2006 P age 11 . 403 . 1 Design for Frontier Contexts : Classroom Assessment of a New Methodology with Humanitarian Applications Abstract Engineering educators are recognizing the value of exposing students to need - based engineering problems and pedagogies 1 . A parallel interest is the globalization the scope of engineering education . These important topics are both addressed by a service - learning approach to globally - based humanitarian projects 2 - 4 . The importance of integrating both globalization and social needs into the engineering curriculum is acknowledged by the ABET criteria . Human need is also a clear priority of the engineering profession , as indicated in the NSPE creed i . However , the majority of engineering students are not familiar with the contexts in which vast needs exist , such as among the physically disabled or the 4 billion people living on less than $ 2 a day ( PPP ) 5 . These conditions represent formidable frontier design contexts , environments and situations outside the experience and expertise of most engineering students . Currently taught design methodologies advocate gathering customer needs , and many methods reference the importance of doing so within the context of use . However , sufficiently understanding design needs within the actual context of use of frontier contexts is notoriously problematic where data and contextual experience are not readily available . This is a challenge faced by organizations such as Engineers for a Sustainable World ( ESW ) , Engineers without Borders ( EWB ) , Engineering Ministries International ( EMI ) , and other humanitarian and educational organizations engineering high human - impact solutions in these unfamiliar , frontier contexts . In response to this need , we have developed a basic but powerful Design for Frontier Contexts methodology 6 to improve discovery and application of contextual information vital to successful frontier design . Grounded in empirical product - context studies 7 , 8 , the Design for Frontier Contexts method supports gathering , documenting , and applying contextual design information . By improving needs assessment , the method is expected to increase the successful application of engineering to high human - need contexts such as poor areas of developing countries and assistive technologies for persons with disabilities . The new needs assessment method can also improve the design of everyday consumer products to provide greater benefit to humanity with lower consumption of resources . The method enhances the use of context - specific resources and knowledge within the frontier context and provides a common template for collaborative communication among geographically diverse groups . Evaluation under controlled conditions suggests the new method is not only extremely effective , but also easy to use and well received by students . Classroom testing has shown very positive results , signifying broad applicability in education as well as field practice . We are currently integrating the method into the design curricula of our departments and conducting ongoing assessment for continued improvement . Here we present the essence of the method , results of preliminary testing , and examples of student projects which could benefit from the method . Templates , lecture slides , and examples in electronic format are freely available from the corresponding author . P age 11 . 403 . 2 1 Introduction : Motivation and Background 1 . 1 Benefits of Understanding Design Context Engineers are often called on to design for frontier design contexts outside their experience and expertise . This situation occurs by default because engineers are a subset of society ; they design products to be used by children , remote villagers , the illiterate , and other groups typically not represented among design engineers . Additionally , the importance multi - national companies place on positioning products in a global marketplace requires design for customers in other countries , cultures , and economies . Although most design engineering is performed in developed countries , 86 % of the world lives in a developing country 9 . A special case of global design occurs when engineers in affluent societies create life - improving designs for use in high human - need environments , such as the human - powered Freeplay Radio initially targeted at rural African customers . ( A case study of the Freeplay Radio design is given by Cagan and Vogel 10 ) . Another example is the “robust , fully articulating dental chair and battery - operated hand piece , all in a package you can comfortably carry on your back” developed by the US - based Indigenous People’s Technology & Education Center ( I - TEC ) to enable dental care in remote regions 11 . One of the top business books of 2004 , “ The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid ” makes the case that “the world ' s poor [ are ] potential customers …” and that everyone will benefit when recognizing the market potential among the 4 billion people living on less than $ 2 a day ( PPP ) 5 . Numerous opportunities exist for engineering designs to improve the quality of life on a global scale , many of which are in frontier design contexts . In addition to the large international development programs of many wealthy nations , smaller , non - governmental organizations such as Engineers for A Sustainable World ( ESW ) , Engineers without Borders ( EWB ) , and Engineering Ministries International ( EMI ) , are also acting upon such opportunities . The product definition step is critical for the success of any new product , and particularly problematic for frontier design contexts . An opportunity exists to increase the success of any product design process , particularly when addressing a frontier context , through formalizing methods of discovering , documenting , and addressing the product design context during the design process . Numerous benefits are expected from discovering how context factors influence customer preferences . An improved theoretical understanding of the fundamental contextual causes influencing customer needs and preferences will improve the success of the product definition phase to define products which satisfy and delight customers . First , an improved understanding of product context will facilitate and organize the needs gathering process . This understanding will improve the quality and quantity of information gathered within resource constraints , and illuminate latent customer needs which might be missed otherwise . Designers will be able to select and interview customers more effectively and better understand and classify the information received in interviews . This improvement is particularly important when interviewees view the product need through lenses of different context scenarios , and thus report different and sometimes conflicting needs . This difference in context scenario viewpoint can easily become muddled or go completely unnoticed if the interviewer is not adequately prepared to appropriately obtain and handle contextual information . Second , a framework of contextual understanding will improve the task of setting target values by equipping the designer to account for how contextual factors influence customer preferences for product attribute values . Current techniques prescribe capturing the “voice of the customer , ” but provide insufficient guidance on how to translate these data into quantifiable numbers . QFD is an excellent technique to organize and document this conversion ; however , it is left to the designer to translate what the customer means by “light - weight , ” for example , into a quantity in kg . Or perhaps even more difficult than quantification is the problem of determining P age 11 . 403 . 3 what metrics appropriately measure the fulfillment of needs such as “easy to use” ( possibly measured by “number of steps” , and / or “minutes” ) or “good beverage taste” ( possibly measured by “saturation and bitterness levels” ) 12 . The customer may clearly indicate the need for portability , but setting specifications accordingly for mass and volume depends heavily on the means and frequency with which the product will be transported . Third , a framework of contextual understanding will better equip designers to leverage the known to design for the unknown through an improved understanding of how changes in usage context influence customer preferences . Forming design targets has traditionally relied heavily on benchmarking , but this activity can be difficult or impossible in frontier design contexts in which comparable designs are sparse . With an appropriate contextual understanding , product definition information from an accessible and information - rich environment may be intelligently brought to bear upon a frontier and information - scarce context . A product context framework and the concept of a functional family ( a group of products which solve the same primary need ) will provide the designer with tools to maximize domain cross - over of benchmarking information , intelligently selecting and adapting information from existing products that may exhibit some similarities , but do not occur in the target context . One example is the design of a $ 100 above - knee prosthetic by a US University for a charity hospital in Kenya ii 13 . The challenges of accessing and understanding Kenyan customers were partially addressed through local access to US amputees , and properly translating the knowledge gathered into the Kenyan context . 1 . 2 Cross - Cultural Design Courage and Baxter 14 include a case study by Ann 15 , “Cultural Differences Affecting User Research Methods in China” citing numerous cultural differences posing challenges to market research . Differences mentioned include : differing cultural concepts can cause difficulty in translating language without loss of actual concepts ; a greater focus on relationships requires more attention to building trust and respecting privacy of the home than in western countries , and the intuitive / subjective mentality vs . the scientific / rational focus of the West can reduce effectiveness of objective and direct interview approaches . The discussion of these differences shows both the challenge and importance of understanding the cultural context . Crawley et al . 16 present the “Design , Development and Marketing of Solar Lanterns” for the rural poor of African countries . They specifically address Kenya , which has a large population without hope of access to electricity in the near future ; more than 90 % of households use kerosene lighting , and 70 % also use scarce cash supplies to buy batteries . Crawley et al . employ focus groups and general discussions to gather information about what customers want in a solar lantern . They note the importance of : ( 1 ) picking groups not dominated by a few dominant members , ( 2 ) holding surveys during the day for travel safety of participants , and ( 3 ) focusing on individuals with incomes similar to the target customers , who often had significantly different spending patterns than wealthier individuals . The authors note that product development is in general expensive and high - risk for companies in developing countries , and for the new products they design conventional customer needs gathering techniques are often incomplete and inaccurate in accounting for lifestyles and cultures . Chen et al . 17 advise that when tapping global markets , multinational companies must be wary of segmentation errors on two extremes : attempting to standardize the product for significantly different markets , or excessive customization for essentially similar markets . A balance must be struck which properly accommodates real and important differences , without unnecessarily undercutting economies of scale through standardization . Examples of major differences faced when political and / or cultural boundaries are crossed include : language , ethnic , P age 11 . 403 . 4 religious , social structure , tradition , literacy , income patterns , geography and climate , infrastructure , product distribution , advertising , and legal climate . Chen et al . 17 predict that “ . . . multicultural factors are the most difficult issues for organizations to address … [ and will be a ] future direction in NPD [ ( New Product Development ) ] . ” They address the need for research in this area , commenting “… there are few successful or effective techniques available for the evaluation of multicultural factors in customer requirements . ” Chen et al . propose one system employing a laddering technique and radial basis function ( RBF ) neural network to help overcome multicultural barriers to customer needs gathering . A mobile phone design case study is included . The cultural factors addressed primarily deal with the customer context . Other design researchers also explicitly address the consideration of “culture” in the design process . Culture may be defined as the customary beliefs , values , social forms , and material traits of a group of people that are learned from preceding generations ( author’s adaptation from 18 ) . Ellsworth et al . 19 report on the “effects of culture on refrigerator design . ” This paper does not define culture , but references the “needs and values” of customers which differ from place to place . The authors build a case for improved cultural understanding among design engineers , stating that products will be more successful worldwide as design engineers account for cultural needs . The authors propose the development of a Design for Culture ( DfX ) methodology , citing a lack of attention to the subject evidenced by a dearth of literature and suggesting that cultural considerations must include not only marketing but also design . They suggest studying the use of similar products across different cultures to begin development of such a method . Refrigerators were chosen for this study because they are in widespread use globally and the designs have stabilized with distinct differences in various countries . The paper itemizes a number of macro physical differences ( such as volume , energy efficiency , and construction ) in refrigerators used in the US , Europe , Japan , and Brazil , and comments on the apparent cultural reasons for these differences . The authors conclude by suggesting the following categories of cultural aspects to account for : aesthetic appeal , cultural habits ( e . g . tendency to snack ) , traditions , available resources , and the physical environment . Donaldson 20 , 21 proposes various items to improve product design for developing countries , and comments extensively on the particular barriers and problems associated with designing for this context . Some of Donaldson’s findings may be generalize - able to other frontier design contexts . Donaldson , et al . 22 describe Customer Value Chain Analysis ( CVCA ) as a tool to improve identification of needs and requirements in the product definition phase . One of the case studies is a micro - irrigation pump successfully designed and marketed in Kenya , implicitly illustrating the applicability of the CVCA tool to the complexities of projects in this economy and culture . Donaldson and Sheppard 23 provide detailed observation and analysis of product design practice in Kenya , an example of a “less industrialized economy . ” They analyze design practice in the informal sector , the formal sector , and by donor - funded groups . They identify four types of product design : ( 1 ) imitated design , ( 2 ) imported design , ( 3 ) basic original design and ( 4 ) specialty design . Donaldson and Sheppard note that virtually all Kenyan products are designed outside the country or are imitations of imports . The local language has no complete equivalent for the verb “to design” and designers and producers typically view “design , sketching , pondering and brainstorming” as an extravagance . No formal design processes such as those defined in design literature were observed in the formal or informal sectors , and NGOs followed semi - formal processes . Economic and political instability along with business monopolies are possible contributors to the lack of attention to customer needs and the associated product P age 11 . 403 . 5 definition steps . These findings suggest the continued importance of donor - funded design until the local sectors begin designing products in response to customer needs , and likewise the need for design methodologies applicable in frontier design contexts . 1 . 3 The Importance of Contextual Information in Product Design In language , context adds to meaning . Elementary language arts curricula teach young readers the life - long skill of exploiting “context clues” in order to determine the meaning of new , foreign - looking words . Context also adds to the “meaning” or value a user perceives in a designed product or system iii . From the perspective of customer satisfaction , possible implications of a product include : delight , satisfaction , indifference , or disgust on the part of the user . The varying levels of customer satisfaction depend upon the value or utility of a product’s attributes , and value or utility depends in part upon the context iv . Since product designers rarely dictate the context surrounding products , it is necessary to understand and account for context in the design process . The definition of context used throughout this paper is : Context – the circumstances or setting in which an object occurs , and which influences its value . In addition to the definition of context above , the definitions shown in Table 1 are also important in the discussion that follows . Table 1 : Context Related Definitions Product [ design ] context – the collection of factors influencing customer attribute preferences including : product usage context , customer context , and market context . [ Product ] usage context ( PUC ) – the application and environment in which a product will be used that may significantly influence customer attribute preferences . Context factor – a single characteristic of a product’s usage context . For example , “usage frequency” or “product surroundings . ” Context scenario – a set of specific values for a set of context factors . Numerous authors reference the influence of context on product design , and many explicitly express its importance . Empirical studies of the influence of product design context v on customer preferences are reported in previous work 7 , 8 . These studies include : exploration of customer needs and attributes of functional product families , customer product choice surveys , and an exploration of how individual factors of a target usage context influence customer preferences for product attributes . Clarkson , et al . 24 report a large - scale study of the UK health system to recommend a design approach to improve patient safety . They report that improving patient safety requires an improved understanding of the context of the health care system . “Without a sound understanding – from a design perspective – of the healthcare services as a complex system of P age 11 . 403 . 6 interacting organizations , professions , care environments , procedures and tasks … there can be no certainty that discrete design solutions will contribute to patient safety” ( emphasis added ) . Sutinen , et al . 25 report results of an empirical study of an IT - based requirements management tool . They map the requirements management process , identify tools and information needed by various participants , and recommend a process for introducing new requirements management tools into the product development process . Among other findings they observe that , “the requirements specifications used in the cases studied could have been enriched by adding requirement context information … and scenarios in order to provide a better understanding of why the requirement is stated” ( italics added ) . Maier and Fadel 26 discuss the consideration of context in choosing design methods . They suggest that the concept of function is well suited to capture design aspects characterized by input / output relationships , whereas the concept of affordance is well suited to describe the more complex relationships involved when the interrelationships among the context of the artifact , designer , and user are taken into account . In other words , the role of contextual information is an important factor in the selection of appropriate design methods . Norman’s classic work 27 enumerates a myriad of design problems in “everyday things” causing them to be very difficult to use successfully . As part of this discussion , Norman gives significant attention to the interactions among objects and users , and offers design guideline “do’s and don’ts . ” Many of the difficulties in everyday things described by Norman occur from lack of proper accounting for the context of how and where the products will be used , and the context of who ( and with what capabilities ) will be using them . 1 . 4 A Case for Design Context : Mobility Enabling Products Healthwrights and the Hesperian Foundation have worked for years to improve the quality of life for persons with disabilities in developing countries . As part of this effort they have published extensive self - help guides for community workers and those they serve with prolific illustrations to transcend language and literacy barriers 28 , 29 . One of the books in this series 29 notes that wheelchairs exported from wealthy nations are often not appropriate in the foreign contexts of developing countries . As a result , the failure to satisfy customer needs often leads to abandonment ( Figure 1 ) . Table 2 summarizes four examples from around the world which require a specific mobility product to fit the context . The left column pictures a unique aspect of each context , and the right column pictures a mobility enabling product appropriate for each context . As shown in the table , none of the solutions are the same as wheelchairs commonly seen in the United States . Figure 1 : Wheelchairs Must Fit the Context to be Satisfactory 29vi P age 11 . 403 . 7 Table 2 : Different Mobility Products for Different Contexts 29vi Design Need Context Context - Appropriate Product Meals Cooked Low to the Ground Enables Reaching the Pot Steep , Hilly Terrain Enables Traversing Steep Terrain Rocky Terrain Enables Traversing Rocky Terrain 1 . 5 A 2 nd Case for Design Context : Improved Village Cooking Systems The importance of design context is evidenced both in successful products with attributes that match context , as well as in failed products which did not address critical context factors . Table 3 is based on data from a World Bank review of numerous programs to introduce improved village cooking systems in countries around the world 30 . Out of 16 major reasons commonly causing the failure ( or success ) of a stove program , 8 of the reasons vii appear to be directly tied to how well context is understood and addressed . The importance of accounting for context is evident from the report text , as shown in the following quote 30 p . 28 : For assessing consumer needs … determine the existing patterns of stove use , the factors people consider when purchasing new stoves , the person who makes the decision to purchase a stove , and whether income and fuel savings will provide adequate incentives … stoves should be designed around the utensils used and food dishes typically prepared . … They should also be modified or redesigned to meet regional requirements . P age 11 . 403 . 8 Table 3 : Historical Reasons for Failure of Improved Village Cooking Systems Data from 30 Causes of Failure Contextual Information Required for Success The new cooking system does not : … account for actual conditions of use and is therefore uneconomical and inconvenient . What are actual conditions of use ? … resemble the traditional cooking system . What is the traditional cooking system ? … accommodate large pieces of wood . What size and types of fuel are available ? … improve a fuel supply problem . What size and types of fuel are available ? … improve a smoke problem due to low - ventilation . What is location and ventilation available ? … accommodate design for manufacture needs of local artisans . What are local manufacturing practices ? … use locally available materials ( increases cost ) . What are locally available materials ? … utilize mass - production of critical components . What local mass - production or import capabilities are available ? 1 . 6 Conclusions and Implications for Product Design Empirical studies of two product families 7 , 8 have shown that : ( 1 ) different context scenarios exist within the same functional family and even the same products , ( 2 ) the customers surveyed prefer different products for different context scenarios , and ( 3 ) clear relationships exist between context factors and attributes of the preferred products . These findings , along with the previous sections , give strong evidence that product attribute preferences depend , in part , upon factors of the intended usage context scenario . These results affirm the importance of accounting for contextual factors in product design processes intended to realize products delivering customer satisfaction . 2 The Contextual Needs Assessment Methodology 2 . 1 Product Design Context Framework In response to the need for improved contextual understanding , a product design context framework for handling contextual information is presented as a foundation for contextual needs assessment . Product design context refers here to the collection of factors influencing customer attribute preferences . These factors may be divided into three categories defined as follows ( Table 4 ) : ( 1 ) usage context factors cover the application and environment in which the product will be used such as task frequency , weather and infrastructure ; ( 2 ) customer context factors include consumer values , practices , and demographics such as wealth and education level ; and ( 3 ) market context factors include aspects of competing products . More details of the context framework are reported prior work 7 , 8 . Of these three major categories of contextual factors influencing a customer - driven product design process , usage context often receives the least attention from textbook methodologies . Benchmarking 12 is a well known method to explore the market context , and customer context is partially explored through currently prescribed needs P age 11 . 403 . 9 assessment methods . However , even with activity diagram techniques 12 , designers are essentially on their own when it comes to accurately discovering and applying important usage context information . Table 4 : Product Design Context Categories Category Sub - Category Sample Context Factors HOW Application Context ‚ Application task ‚ Usage frequency ‚ Transportation mode ‚ . . . Usage Context ( PUC ) WHERE Environment Context ‚ Infrastructure ( e . g . energy supply and cost ) ‚ Weather and climate ‚ Maintenance and parts availability ‚ . . . Customer Context WHO Customer Context ‚ Physical Abilities ‚ Skills and education ‚ Cost expectations ‚ . . . Market Context ‚ Features of available products ‚ Performance and quality of available products ‚ Cost of available products ‚ . . . 2 . 2 Contextual Needs Assessment Method The contextual needs assessment method shown in Figure 2 is proposed to improve task clarification through the formal support of discovering and documenting contextual information in a format readily applied throughout the design process . The method incorporates traditional customer needs methodologies , but extends significantly beyond these by formally incorporating contextual information . Step ( 1 ) calls for identification of as many of the relevant contextual factors as possible , and multiple supporting techniques are provided ( Table 5 ) . Templates for context factor identification are given in Appendix A . Step ( 2 ) involves translating each factor identified in Step one into the form of one or more questions . Step ( 3 . 1 ) may be fulfilled with established needs elicitation techniques . Step ( 3 . 2 ) involves answering the questions generated in Step two through customer interviews or research . Step ( 4 ) refers to standard needs aggregation techniques such as affinity analysis . Step ( 5 ) involves identifying the different factor values to be addressed by one or more products , noting any additional customer needs identified . 1 . Identify relevant contextual factors 2 . Generate list of contextual questions to be answered 3 . Gather customer needs and factor values 3 . 1 . Gather customer needs 3 . 2 . Gather factor values 4 . Aggregate customer needs into weighted list 5 . Aggregate factor values into context scenario ( s ) Figure 2 : Contextual Needs Assessment Methodology P age 11 . 403 . 1 0 Table 5 : Context Factor Identification Techniques ‚ Use context factor checklists , such as the template provided ( Appendix A ) ‚ Translate customer needs and product reviews into factors ‚ Translate black box model into factors ‚ Translate activity diagram into factors ‚ Translate available data ( e . g . physical characteristics ) and experiences ‚ Identify functional family members , noting attribute distinctions The contextual needs assessment methodology facilitates and directs the process of discovering , documenting , and applying contextual information and is easily adaptable to a variety of design needs . The straightforward method provides valuable structure and insight for organizing and driving the needs assessment process , and the templates place the power of contextual assessment in the hands of even novice engineers tackling a design need outside of their experience and expertise . 3 Case 1 : Undergraduate Reverse Engineering of Consumer Products 3 . 1 Design Team Background The UT Austin Department of Mechanical Engineering undergraduate curriculum includes a senior design methods course followed by a semester of capstone design . Students in the design methods course apply design methodologies in a semester - long project involving the reverse engineering and re - design of a consumer product . The text used for the course 12 conceptually presents the design process in three phases : ( 1 ) task clarification ( understanding the re - design need ) , ( 2 ) concept generation , and ( 3 ) concept implementation ( detailed design and prototyping ) . In the first phase students use a number of tools to understand the re - design need such as : a mission statement , a checklist of technical questions , and articulated - use or like / dislike customer needs interviews 12 , 31 . Additionally , students perform a number of reverse - engineering steps such as prediction , product teardown , and functional modeling to identify re - design avenues . The students choose one or two high - priority , re - design avenues based on the understanding gained of the re - design need . The accuracy and completeness of customer needs understanding directly influences the correct selection and implementation of a re - design avenue that will maximize value added to the customer . This design methods course was chosen as a case study in part because students are already learning design methods and are therefore open to learning and implementing a newly developed method . Additionally , since the students are near the end of their undergraduate degree they are a good representation of the intended users of the proposed methodology . 3 . 2 Classroom Delivery of the Methodology For this study the task clarification lectures given in past semesters are augmented with some additional steps intended to enhance understanding of the re - design need context . Students are provided the five - step method shown in Figure 3 and a supporting tool in the form of an MS - Excel template ( Figure 4 ) in which each Excel worksheet tab corresponds to one step of the method . The method would ideally be presented step - by - step in an interactive lecture format in which each step is illustrated “live . ” After each step is partially demonstrated , a complete version would be reviewed in a prepared example using the template ( Appendix A ) and distributed via a courseware website . However , classroom realities limited the time available , so in this case the methodology was reviewed in a single lecture with an emphasis on conceptual P age 11 . 403 . 1 1 understanding of the methodology and detailed exploration left for homework . ( Although the study results are very positive , there is also evidence of the need for increased teaching time to improve understanding of the method ) . Procedure for Gathering Customer Needs & Product Context 1 . Brainstorm interview questions : “What do we need to know about Where , How , and Who ? ” 2 . Customize context questions template : add , delete , and modify questions as needed . 3 . Interview customers using product in a realistic context : 3 . 1 . Actively question customer during product use , recording “voice of the customer” 3 . 2 . Ask any remaining * questions in the customized context questions template 4 . Form customer needs list : Translate voice of customer ; combine & prioritize needs 5 . Form context scenario by combining context answers to each question [ Advanced : Identify distinct context scenarios to address with a multi - product offering ] * Note : some questions may already have been answered , or may be better answered through research . Figure 3 : Contextual Needs Assessment Methodology Figure 4 : MS - Excel Template Supporting Contextual Needs Assessment 3 . 3 Methodology Results – Customized Context Questions Fourteen out of 20 design teams voluntarily submitted their contextual needs assessment data for the study . The contextual needs assessment data submitted by the teams was analyzed in detail to assess patterns and insights into how the teams customized the context questions template . A major purpose of this assessment was to glean insight to improve the generalized template for future use . Virtually all of the customized questions the teams wrote took one of the four forms listed in Table 6 . Modifications which departed from form # 1 , although helpful P age 11 . 403 . 1 2 for the team’s specific project , were often not appropriate for a template intended to be generalizable across products and types of design other than reverse engineering and re - design . Dozens of modifications and additions to the general template are derived from careful analysis of the data , and these are incorporated into the updated context questions template provided in Appendix A . More detail is provided in Green , et al . ( 2005 ) , including details of each change made to the template as a result of this case study . Many teams included suggested responses at the end of a question to facilitate both correct interpretation and consideration of multiple possibilities . This type of information occurs in the template ( an earlier version of Appendix A ) only in item e8 “What is the cost & availability of possible energy sources ( human , battery , gas , electric , biomass ) ? ” Listing suggested responses in the customized template clarifies the question and can make it more specific to the design problem . The drawback is potentially biasing the interviewee with suggested responses to the point of suppressing an actual response . The use of a scale was included in one team’s data ( “rate needed durability on a scale of 1 - 10” ) . Although a numerical scale is limited , the use of a semantic scale has great potential , and is future work . Table 6 : Four Forms of Context Elicitation Questions 1 . Question Form : What is _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ( context factor ) ? Example : What is the cost & availability of possible energy sources ? This question is the most basic and direct type of elicitation prompt , and is the form of almost all of the elicitation questions in the generalized template . 2 . Question Form : How satisfactory is the current product for ( context factor ) ? Example : Are you satisfied with how long the current product’s batteries last ? This question bears similarity to a like / dislike interview technique and in the same way it is most effective when the current product ( or solution ) is similar to the future product such as is the case with reverse engineering . 3 . Question Form : How will ( or does ) the future ( or current ) product interact with the context ? Example : What energy sources would you use to power the product ? This question bears similarity to an articulated use interview , and requires a clear mutual understanding the solution being discussed between the customer and interviewer . 4 . Question Form : What product attributes are needed in light of ( context factor ) ? Example : How long should the batteries last for jogging ? Although accurate answers to this question are very valuable , they are often difficult to obtain from customers . Sometimes it is necessary , however , as in the case of customer expectations such as costs . 3 . 4 Survey Results – Designer Perceptions of the Method An online survey was deployed to measure designer perceptions of the contextual needs assessment method . The survey collected data on : participant background , perceived value of the methodology and re - use likelihood , and perceptions of the usability and usefulness of the methodology . Survey results were extremely positive in all aspects . P age 11 . 403 . 1 3 The response rate was 57 students , 61 % of the class of 94 . The survey participants self - reported demographics indicate 84 % are male and 16 % female with an average age of 22 . 1 ( ranging from 21 - 31 ) and an average GPA of 3 . 4 ( ranging from 2 . 5 - 4 . 0 ) . 80 % of the students agreed they were personally very involved in using the contextual needs assessment method . 3 . 4 . 1 Perceived Value of Methodology and Re - Use Likelihood Figure 5 compares the perceived value of the contextual needs assessment methodology with other “benchmark” methodologies shown in Figure 6 . It is not possible to benchmark perceptions against traditional needs assessment methods since students do not have either a clear understanding of or experience base with alternative methods . For this reason other aspects of design methodology familiar to the students are used as a comparison . The figures combined show that the new methodology has an equal or higher perceived value than benchmark methods used in the comparison . Both figures distinguish between perceived value for the respondent’s actual class design project and the perceived value for a foreign product . The data shows , virtually without exception , that students believe design methodology has even more value for products in a foreign context than for those in a familiar context . The graphs additionally show a level of re - use likelihood averaging midway between neutral and likely . 0 . 0 1 . 0 2 . 0 3 . 0 4 . 0 ( 1 ) Brainstorm Factors ( 2 ) Customize Template ( 3 . 1 ) VOC Interview ( 3 . 2 ) Ask Questions ( 4 ) Form Needs List ( 5 ) Form Scenario Steps 1 - 5 Combined Actual Product Foreign Product Will Use Again Extremely Valuable High Value Medium Value A Little Value Zero Value Very Likely Likely Neutral Unlikely Very Unlikely Figure 5 : Experimental Methodology – Perceptions and Re - Usage Likelihood P age 11 . 403 . 1 4 0 . 0 1 . 0 2 . 0 3 . 0 4 . 0 A : Background research B : Technical questioning C : Mission Statement D : Black Box E : Activity Diagram Steps A - E combined Actual Product Foreign Product Will Use Again Extremely Valuable High Value Medium Value A Little Value Zero Value Very Likely Likely Neutral Unlikely Very Unlikely Figure 6 : Benchmark Methodologies – Perceptions and Re - Usage Likelihood 3 . 4 . 2 Perceived Usability and Usefulness of Methodology Table 7 presents survey data rating the perceived usability of the contextual needs assessment method . The data shows a high level of agreement with all statements related to usability , and neutral agreement on whether the method needs improvement . Table 8 similarly shows a high level of agreement for the perceived usefulness of the method . Table 7 : Perceived Usability of Experimental Method Strongly disagree Disagree Neutral / Undecided Agree Strongly agree I understand how to gather information using the above method . 0 % ( 0 ) 2 % ( 1 ) 2 % ( 1 ) 81 % ( 46 ) 16 % ( 9 ) I like using the above method . viii 0 % ( 0 ) 14 % ( 8 ) 28 % ( 16 ) 49 % ( 28 ) 9 % ( 5 ) The above method does not need improvement . viii 0 % ( 0 ) 24 % ( 13 ) 49 % ( 27 ) 22 % ( 12 ) 5 % ( 3 ) The above method is not difficult to understand and use . viii 4 % ( 2 ) 12 % ( 7 ) 18 % ( 10 ) 58 % ( 33 ) 9 % ( 5 ) P age 11 . 403 . 1 5 Table 8 : Perceived Usefulness of Experimental Method Strongly disagree Disagree Neutral / Undecided Agree Strongly agree Using the above method helped me understand the design need . 0 % ( 0 ) 4 % ( 2 ) 12 % ( 7 ) 66 % ( 37 ) 18 % ( 10 ) I would consider using the above method again in the future . 0 % ( 0 ) 0 % ( 0 ) 14 % ( 8 ) 68 % ( 39 ) 18 % ( 10 ) After using the above method , I do not still feel uncertain about the design need . viii 0 % ( 0 ) 14 % ( 8 ) 28 % ( 16 ) 46 % ( 26 ) 12 % ( 7 ) Using the above method will / did help our re - design provide better customer satisfaction . 2 % ( 1 ) 5 % ( 3 ) 21 % ( 12 ) 47 % ( 27 ) 25 % ( 14 ) Our re - design will / would not have been the same even without the above method . viii 4 % ( 2 ) 19 % ( 11 ) 39 % ( 22 ) 32 % ( 18 ) 7 % ( 4 ) I am likely to use the above method again in the future . 0 % ( 0 ) 2 % ( 1 ) 25 % ( 14 ) 59 % ( 33 ) 14 % ( 8 ) 3 . 4 . 3 Participant Free Response Comments Regarding Methodology The free response comments in the online survey were generally very positive regarding the contextual needs assessment methodology . Sample characteristic responses are listed below , with analysis comments included in italics . ‚ “ [ The method ] really helps in organizing all of the data … [ i ] t is very effective in identifying our customer needs . ” Some students commented positively on the effortless organizational structure the template provides . ‚ “I felt like we overdid the contextual information . A lot of questions we developed had no use for the customer . Some but not all data was used for our CN . ” Perceived redundancies of the method were noted ; however the needs assessment philosophy is a very thorough coverage because the cost of missing needs is so great . ‚ “The method allows for a clear definition of customer needs . Knowing the importance and most vocalized needs helps spotlight the areas of the product that could benefit from redesign . ” ‚ “Though it was tedious going through the entire process , I do feel like it ensured the results we were looking for . It would be difficult to make it any more concise . ” In the beginning of a project students may find this method very tedious but will see its benefits later . The free response results also show that a number of students did not understand or apply the method correctly . The misconceptions evident in their comments suggest that more in - class instruction and instructional materials are needed . It is notable that the survey results were very positive despite these misunderstandings , and plausible that better instruction would lead to even better results and more favorable student perceptions of the method . P age 11 . 403 . 1 6 ‚ “Don ' t give such a well done template for the context questions . I felt that one of the best parts of the likes dislikes methods was brainstorming questions to ask in that . So as students when we are given such a defined sheet we loose some of the learning by not thinking of these questions ourselves . ” Brainstorming questions is part of the method . ‚ “Minimize context questions and let interviewer feel more free to ask questions based on how the interview is flowing . ” This is a part of the method . The interviewer is encouraged to stray from the context questions for clarification and to probe more deeply . ‚ “The design context process almost needs to be led by the like / dislike method in order to allow the costumer to voice their own thoughts before being prompted by questions . ” The method specifies that the like / dislike interview technique should be used prior to the context questions . 3 . 5 Conclusions Case 1 demonstrates that within an undergraduate reverse engineering setting , the contextual needs assessment methodology can be realistically deployed and well received , and result in significant improvement in needs assessment . Data analysis identifies eight new context factors and eighteen question revisions to improve the generalized template . Survey results show students rated the contextual needs assessment methodology of medium - high value for their product and high value for a foreign product , comparable to the perceived value of benchmark methodologies such as a black box and activity diagram . The majority of students rate the proposed methodology as usable and useful . Free response comments are favorable towards the method , but reveal misunderstandings indicating the need for more thorough teaching . 4 Case 2 : Graduate Original Design of Assistive Devices 4 . 1 Design Team Background The second case study was conducted within the graduate Product Design and Prototyping class at UT Austin , which culminates with students delivering fully functional prototypes to local “customers” with physical disabilities . Table 9 summarizes this course 3 . The basis of the course is product design , development , and prototyping . Product design projects are the focus of the student efforts , with emphasis on functional , working designs as opposed to the common ink - paper concepts . Students must produce a working , tested , and robust design by the end of a semester , delivering the result to the customer . This focus provides graduate students from mechanical engineering , social work , and special education with a unique opportunity to work with hardware , in contrast to the theoretical focus of most graduate - level courses . Thus , the intent of the course is to produce functional designs based on real product / humanitarian needs . The course includes other innovative pedagogies such as experiential learning with hands - on in - class activities , instruction in drawing for design , and experiential walls as a medium for team presentations . P age 11 . 403 . 1 7 Table 9 : Graduate Product Design and Prototyping Class ( UT Austin ) Project Source Local schools with students that have special needs Funding Foundation funding , endowment funding , and course fees Tools Design methods , Traditional engineering methods , Prototyping lab Deliverables Working prototype and manufacturing plan Projects are selected which require the novel synthesis of low to medium technology ( not high technology ) , and involve $ 100 - $ 300 of funding . Projects are solicited from facilities that include persons with disabilities : the Austin State School and two local school districts . Interdisciplinary design teams of 4 - 5 graduate students from engineering , social work , and special education are formed using team selection algorithms 32 based on MBTI , Six Hats , and technical / hands - on skills . The teams work with supervisors , teachers , and the students ( customers ) at the schools to refine project ideas into electromechanical design problems related to the customers ' occupations and learning environments . These projects present a unique challenge to the design teams in that most of the problems admit solutions that provide assistive technologies for the tasks currently performed by the customers . Table 10 shows examples of projects completed since the course’s inception . Table 10 : Examples of Past Design Projects in the Graduate Product Design Class . ‚ Assistive bowling device ( Figure 7 ) ‚ Key turner usable with limited strength and range of motion ( Figure 8 ) ‚ Switch activated ball thrower ( Figure 9 ) ‚ Visual phone interface for deaf persons ‚ Device to wrap baking potatoes in foil using only one hand ‚ Letter labeler to assist persons with disabilities on a job site ‚ Sand - bagging system to assist persons with disabilities on a job site ‚ Electro - mechanical can crushing system ‚ Sensory - stimulation system for persons with disabilities ‚ Décor chip sorter to assist persons with disabilities on a job site ‚ Accessible shelving system for persons with disabilities After initial project choices and visits to their customer locations in Austin , the students systematically follow the product development process 12 taught in the class . Design teams produce a proof - of - concept , an alpha prototype , and a beta prototype at key milestones . Students are required to deliver a package at the end of the semester to the customer that includes : a working device or system that satisfies the customer needs , a brief report documenting the project results and chronological decisions , a Bill - of - Materials , an illustrated manufacturing plan , and a brief user’s manual . Each team also submits a 3 - page article and a 5 - minute videotape to the annual Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Technology Society of North America ( RESNA ) international student design competition 33 . Since 1994 , twelve teams from UT Austin have been selected to present their designs at the annual RESNA conference . For illustration , Figure 7 through Figure 9 show three RESNA winners that have been used in Austin schools . The assistive bowling project focused on the design of a bowling device that would allow people , especially children , with disabilities to bowl with more autonomy and normalization than current wheelchair bowling ramps offer . The innovative design enhanced accessibility for children with many types of disabilities and greatly increased the performance P age 11 . 403 . 1 8 of the bowling ball ramp . The adaptive key handler ( Figure 8 ) allows a wheel - chair user with severely limited strength and range of motion to use key - operated elevators and doors . The device was designed to be compact , portable and lightweight for use by an 11 - year - old student with rheumatoid arthritis . His use of a wheelchair requires riding the elevator to attend classes . The switch activated ball thrower ( Figure 9 ) is a portable device enabling students with limited mobility , strength , and coordination to participate in ball throwing activities integrated with their peers . A RESNA paper reporting the design , prototyping and testing of the switch activated ball thrower is available 34 . Figure 7 : Assistive Bowling Device 35 . Figure 8 : Assistive Key Handler 36 . P age 11 . 403 . 1 9 Figure 9 : Switch Activated Ball Thrower 34 . 4 . 2 Classroom Delivery of the Methodology The contextual needs assessment methodology was delivered for the graduate prototyping class in essentially the same way as for the undergraduate reverse engineering course . 4 . 3 Methodology Results – Customized Context Questions The class is divided into three teams of 5 to 6 students each , and all three teams submitted their contextual needs assessment data for the study . Table 11 itemizes the design needs addressed by each team . Similar to the reverse engineering undergraduate teams , virtually all the customized template questions in the Case 2 study took one of the four forms listed in Table 6 . Again modifications which departed from form # 1 , although helpful for the specific project , were often not appropriate for a template intended to be generalizable across products and types of design other than reverse engineering and re - design . Dozens of modifications and additions to the general template are derived from careful analysis of the data , and these are incorporated into the updated context questions template provided in Appendix A . More detail is provided in Green , et al . ( 2005 ) , including details of each change made to the template as a result of this case study . P age 11 . 403 . 2 0 Table 11 : Summary of Graduate Teams for Case Study 2 Team Design Need Statement AutoFold [ AF ] Prepare clean laundry for storage with portability and switch activation . AutoRocker [ AR ] Automatically provide a rocking motion to a chair to sooth students with cerebral palsy and other disabilities . Stimulation Nation [ SN ] Provide rehabilitative stimulation to visual and other senses when activated by visually impaired students in a classroom . 4 . 4 Survey Results – Designer Perceptions of the Method An online survey was deployed to measure designer perceptions of the contextual needs assessment method , essentially identical to the one discussed in Section 3 . 4 . The survey collected data on : participant background , perceived value of the methodology and re - use likelihood , and perceptions of the usability and usefulness of the methodology . Similar to Case 1 , survey results for Case 2 were extremely positive in all aspects . 4 . 4 . 1 Study Participant Background The response rate was 16 students , 94 % of the class of 17 . The survey participants self - reported demographics indicate 75 % are male and 25 % female with an average age of 23 . 3 ( ranging from 21 - 26 ) . A number of the respondents are first semester graduate students , and did not report an average GPA . A significant number of students recently came to the US to attend graduate school , but virtually all are fluent in English . Table 12 indicates most respondents and their teams were very involved in using the contextual needs assessment method . Table 13 shows participants have a high level of previous design experience and virtually all believe in the importance of design in both education and engineering practice . Table 12 : Involvement Using Experimental Method Strongly disagree Disagree Neutral / Undecided Agree Strongly agree I was personally very involved in using the above method . 0 % ( 0 ) 0 % ( 0 ) 12 % ( 2 ) 50 % ( 8 ) 38 % ( 6 ) My teammates were very involved in using the above method . 0 % ( 0 ) 0 % ( 0 ) 12 % ( 2 ) 75 % ( 12 ) 12 % ( 2 ) P age 11 . 403 . 2 1 Table 13 : Previous Design Experience and Design Attitudes Design Experience and Perceptions Strongly disagree Disagree Neutral / Undecided Agree Strongly agree I have had previous experience with design outside of my UT classes . 6 % ( 1 ) 12 % ( 2 ) 0 % ( 0 ) 56 % ( 9 ) 25 % ( 4 ) I have had previous experience with defining project constraints and requirements outside of my UT classes . 0 % ( 0 ) 31 % ( 5 ) 0 % ( 0 ) 69 % ( 11 ) 0 % ( 0 ) I have had previous experience with design needs assessment outside of my UT classes . 6 % ( 1 ) 19 % ( 3 ) 6 % ( 1 ) 62 % ( 10 ) 6 % ( 1 ) I believe design classes are an important part of the engineering curriculum . 0 % ( 0 ) 0 % ( 0 ) 0 % ( 0 ) 25 % ( 4 ) 75 % ( 12 ) I believe design is important in engineering practice . 0 % ( 0 ) 0 % ( 0 ) 6 % ( 1 ) 25 % ( 4 ) 69 % ( 11 ) I like design . 0 % ( 0 ) 0 % ( 0 ) 0 % ( 0 ) 44 % ( 7 ) 56 % ( 9 ) 4 . 4 . 2 Perceived Value of Methodology and Re - Use Likelihood Figure 10 compares the perceived value of the contextual needs assessment methodology with other “benchmark” methodologies shown in Figure 11 . It is not possible to benchmark perceptions against traditional needs assessment methods since students do not have either a clear understanding of or experience base with alternative methods . For this reason other aspects of design methodology familiar to the students are used as a comparison . The figures combined show that the new methodology has an equal or higher perceived value than benchmark methods used in the comparison . Both figures distinguish between perceived value for the respondent’s actual class design project and the perceived value for a foreign product . The data shows virtually without exception that students believe design methodology has even more value for products in a foreign context than for those in a familiar context . The graphs additionally show a level of re - use likelihood averaging midway between neutral and likely . P age 11 . 403 . 2 2 0 . 0 1 . 0 2 . 0 3 . 0 4 . 0 ( 1 ) Brainstorm Factors ( 2 ) Customize Template ( 3 . 1 ) VOC Interview ( 3 . 2 ) Ask Questions ( 4 ) Form Needs List ( 5 ) Form Scenario Steps 1 - 5 Combined Actual Product Foreign Product Will Use Again Extremely Valuable High Value Medium Value A Little Value Zero Value Very Likely Likely Neutral Unlikely Very Unlikely Figure 10 : Experimental Methodology – Perceptions and Re - Usage Likelihood 0 . 0 1 . 0 2 . 0 3 . 0 4 . 0 A : Background research B : Technical questioning C : Mission Statement D : Black Box E : Activity Diagram Steps A - E combined Actual Product Foreign Product Will Use Again Extremely Valuable High Value Medium Value A Little Value Zero Value Very Likely Likely Neutral Unlikely Very Unlikely Figure 11 : Benchmark Methodologies – Perceptions and Re - Usage Likelihood 4 . 4 . 3 Perceived Usability and Usefulness of Methodology Table 14 presents survey data rating the perceived usability of the contextual needs assessment method . The data shows a high level of agreement with all statements related to P age 11 . 403 . 2 3 usability , and neutral agreement on whether the method needs improvement . Table 15 similarly shows a high level of agreement for the perceived usefulness of the method . Table 14 : Perceived Usability of Experimental Method Strongly disagree Disagree Neutral / Undecided Agree Strongly agree I understand how to gather information using the above method . 0 % ( 0 ) 0 % ( 0 ) 6 % ( 1 ) 69 % ( 11 ) 25 % ( 4 ) I like using the above method . ix 0 % ( 0 ) 0 % ( 0 ) 6 % ( 1 ) 62 % ( 10 ) 31 % ( 5 ) The above method does not need improvement . ix 6 % ( 1 ) 19 % ( 3 ) 62 % ( 10 ) 12 % ( 2 ) 0 % ( 0 ) The above method is not difficult to understand and use . ix 0 % ( 0 ) 0 % ( 0 ) 19 % ( 3 ) 69 % ( 11 ) 12 % ( 2 ) Table 15 : Perceived Usefulness of Experimental Method Strongly disagree Disagree Neutral / Undecided Agree Strongly agree Using the above method helped me understand the design need . 6 % ( 1 ) 0 % ( 0 ) 6 % ( 1 ) 69 % ( 11 ) 19 % ( 3 ) I would consider using the above method again in the future . 0 % ( 0 ) 0 % ( 0 ) 12 % ( 2 ) 50 % ( 8 ) 38 % ( 6 ) After using the above method , I do not still feel uncertain about the design need . ix 0 % ( 0 ) 12 % ( 2 ) 6 % ( 1 ) 75 % ( 12 ) 6 % ( 1 ) Using the above method will / did help our re - design provide better customer satisfaction . 0 % ( 0 ) 0 % ( 0 ) 19 % ( 3 ) 69 % ( 11 ) 12 % ( 2 ) Our re - design will / would not have been the same even without the above method . ix 0 % ( 0 ) 6 % ( 1 ) 62 % ( 10 ) 19 % ( 3 ) 12 % ( 2 ) I am likely to use the above method again in the future . 0 % ( 0 ) 0 % ( 0 ) 12 % ( 2 ) 69 % ( 11 ) 19 % ( 3 ) 4 . 4 . 4 Participant Free Response Comments Regarding Methodology The free response comments in the online survey were very positive regarding the contextual needs assessment methodology . Sample characteristic responses are listed below , with analysis comments included in italics . ‚ The method is very effective at capturing customer / design needs in frontier design scenarios and was heavily used by my team to build the basis of our entire customer interview activities . ‚ I feel very confident that we asked all the questions we needed , due in large part to having such a complete checklist . ‚ This method is extremely effective . If I had only used the like / dislike method my team would have very little information about the customer needs of our product . The P age 11 . 403 . 2 4 like / dislike method is very difficult to use when designing a very innovative and different product . ‚ [ My team discovered ] ' extra ' information from the customer by using the 5 - step procedure . There is no doubt in that . ‚ This method helps us gather the data for the frontier design [ context ] easily ; in a normal design method it will take a lot of interviews to get the data . Some criticisms of the contextual needs assessment method and suggested improvements are as follows : ‚ … this method is very good [ and efficient ] , but it takes a lot of time … ‚ There’s the assumption that the customer knows what he needs . ‚ At times what a customer communicates [ is inaccurate ] … observation and interaction point those discrepancies out and can be useful in the design process . This is a classic weakness of customer reported information . The articulated - use portion of the interview prescribes observation , but this is limited to observing the environment when no comparable product exists . ‚ … some customers who do not think of a product in such detail and tend to get annoyed or bored . Some teams prioritize questions and adapt the list to the customers attention span . ‚ Brainstorming questions … after an initial discussion with the customer … may facilitate forming a much more effective questions template . ‚ More clearly define some of the template questions … ‚ I think the method should involve the manufacturing part of the design process too . ‚ [ Provide ] more generic context questions … to capture an even wider sphere of customer / design needs . [ Provide further guidance ] in generation of specific questions for peculiar design needs from the [ template ] . Increasing the breadth of the template is one result of these case studies , and continues as future work . ‚ Most times when the customer is asked to give quantitative values … the values are very [ far from practical ] . It is always better to perform such interviews … using an existing product or compare the expected values with some analogous product … This is an important avenue for future work , and can be addressed in large part by the development of semantic inquiry scales as proposed . 5 Conclusions and Call to Action The case studies in this paper provide strong quantitative and qualitative support for the usability , usefulness , and designer acceptance of the proposed contextual needs assessment method . The case studies further provide valuable illustrations of methodology application and P age 11 . 403 . 2 5 numerous findings to continue improving the usefulness and generality of the method . Table 16 itemizes the outcomes of the two case studies discussed here . Case 1 demonstrates that within an undergraduate reverse engineering setting , the contextual needs assessment methodology can be realistically deployed and well received , and result in significant improvement in needs assessment . Data analysis identifies eight new context factors and eighteen question revisions to improve the generalized template . Survey results show students rated the contextual needs assessment methodology of medium - high value for their product and high value for a foreign product , comparable to the perceived value of benchmark methodologies such as a black box and activity diagram . The majority of students rate the proposed methodology as usable and useful . Free response comments are favorable towards the method , but reveal misunderstandings indicating the need for more thorough teaching . Case 2 demonstrates very similar results to Case 1 for graduate teams performing original design in a frontier context . Data analysis identifies four new context factors and eleven question revisions to improve the generalized template x . These case study results provide strong justification for continued improvement and applications of the methodology leading towards widespread dissemination in education as well as in field practice . Table 16 : Case Study Outcomes Summary Case Study Outcomes Case 1 : UT Reverse Engineering Assessment of designer perceptions of usefulness , usability , and re - use likelihood å validation of method in undergraduate reverse engineering application Analysis of template customization å template revisions to increase usefulness and generality Case 2 : UT Assistive Technology Assessment of designer perceptions of usefulness , usability , and re - use likelihood å validation of method in graduate original frontier design application Analysis of template customization å template revisions to increase usefulness and generality Although many exciting avenues for future expansions remain , the methodology is already well suited for widespread implementation . The overwhelmingly positive student reviews and quantitative data from the case studies demonstrate the contextual needs method is not only classroom - ready , but also project - ready . As data is catalogued from a variety of institutions employing the method in varied project domains , the growing knowledgebase ( database ) can rapidly and effectively be transferred across projects and teams to continue improving the application of engineering design to frontier design contexts . The teaching materials and templates used in the case studies proved effective ; however , the survey data also suggests that additional teaching would significantly improve performance of the methodology . Further , instructional materials customized to the unique needs of humanitarian design teams from organizations such as Engineers for a Sustainable World , Engineers without Borders , and Engineering Ministries International have an important role to play . The materials should include a data reporting mechanism ( serving as an input to the data archiving discussed in the previous paragraph ) and foster a community of collaboration . This community might loosely follow the example of the open source software community in which every individual may contribute , and central organization and quality control are provided ( as in the case of Red Hat Linux ) . The methodology should be made accessible to those who need it and will build upon it through the appropriate publication outlets . P age 11 . 403 . 2 6 Acknowledgements The work reported in this document was made possible , in part , by the National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate Fellowship program , the University of Texas at Austin College of Engineering , a grant from the National Science Foundation , and the Cullen Trust Endowed Professorship in Engineering No . 1 . Any opinions , findings , or recommendations are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the sponsors . References and Endnotes 1 . Tsang , E . , 2001 , Projects That Matter : Concepts and Models for Service - Learning in Engineering , American Association for Higher Education . 2 . Duda , F . T . , 2002 , " Experiences with Identifying Senior Level Engineering Design Projects to Meet Developing Country Needs , " Proceedings of the 4th Christian Engineering Education Conference ( CEEC ) , Montreal , Canada . 3 . Green , M . G . , A . Dutson , K . L . Wood , R . B . Stone and D . A . McAdams , 2002 , " Integrating Service - Oriented Design Projects in the Engineering Curriculum , " ASEE Annual Conference , Montreal , Quebec . American Society for Engineering Education . 4 . VanderLeest , S . H . and E . G . Nielsen , 1998 , " Global Engineering and the Liberal Arts , " ASEE Annual Conference , Seattle , WA . American Society for Engineering Education . 5 . Prahalad , C . K . , 2004 , The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid : Eradicating Poverty Through Profits , Wharton School Publishing . 6 . Green , M . G . , 2005 , " Enabling Design in Frontier Contexts : A Contextual Needs Assessment Method with Humanitarian Applications , " PhD Dissertation , Mechanical Engineering , University of Texas , Austin . 7 . Green , M . G . , R . P . K . Palani and K . L . Wood , 2004 , " Product Usage Context : Improving Customer Needs Gathering and Design Target Setting , " ASME Design Engineering Technical Conferences , Salt Lake City , UT . American Society of Mechanical Engineers , New York , NY . 8 . Green , M . G . , J . Tan , J . S . Linsey , C . C . Seepersad and K . L . Wood , 2005 , " Effects of Product Usage Context on Consumer Product Preferences , " ASME Design Theory and Methodology Conference , Long Beach , CA . American Society of Mechanical Engineers , New York , NY . 9 . Mahajan , V . and K . Banga , 2005 , The 86 Percent Solution : How to Succeed in the Biggest Market Opportunity of the Next 50 Years , Wharton School Publishing . 10 . Cagan , J . and C . M . Vogel , 2002 , Creating Breakthrough Products : Innovation from Product Planning to Program Approval , Prentice Hall , NJ . 11 . I - TEC Portable Dental System , http : / / www . itecusa . org / pds . htm , May , 2005 . 12 . Otto , K . N . and K . L . Wood , 2001 , Product Design : Techniques in Reverse Engineering and New Product Development , Prentice Hall , Upper Saddle River , NJ . 13 . L . E . G . S . Homepage , http : / / www . letu . edu / legs , May , 2005 . 14 . Courage , C . and K . Baxter , 2005 , Understanding Your Users : A Practical Guide to User Requirements Methods , Tools , and Techniques , Morgan Kaufmann , San Francisco , CA . 15 . Ann , E . , 2003 , " Cultural Differences Affecting User Research Methods in China , " National Educational Conference , Industiral Design Society of North America ( IDSA ) , New York . P age 11 . 403 . 2 7 16 . Crawley , K . , R . Holland and S . Gitonga , 2001 , " Design , Development , and Marketing of Solar Lanterns , " Development by Design : 1st International Conference on Open Collaborative Design of Sustainable Innovation , Boston , MA . 17 . Chen , C . - H . , L . P . Khoo and W . Yan , 2003 , (cid:31)Evaluation of Multicultural Factors from Elicited Customer Requirements for New Product Development , (cid:31) Research in Engineering Design , Vol . 14 , No . 3 , pp . 119 . 18 . Merriam - Webster On - Line Dictionary , http : / / www . m - w . com , January 29 , 2002 . 19 . Ellsworth , K . , S . Magleby and R . Todd , 2002 , " A Study of the Effects of Culture on Refrigerator Design : Towards Design for Culture , " ASME Design Theory and Methodology Conference . , Montreal , Que . , Canada . American Society of Mechanical Engineers , New York , NY . Paper No : DETC 2002 / EDC - 34383 . 20 . Donaldson , K . , 2002 , " Recommendations for Improved Development by Design , " Development by Design : 2nd International Conference on Open Collaborative Design of Sustainable Innovation , Bangalore , India . 21 . Donaldson , K . and S . Sheppard , 2001 , " Modification of a Methodological Design Tool for the Developing Country Scenario : A Case Study in Product Definition , " ICED01 13th International Conference for Engineering Design , Glasgow , Scotland . Professional Engineering Publishing , pp . 505 - 512 . 22 . Donaldson , K . M . , K . Ishii and S . D . Sheppard , 2004 , " Customer Value Chain Analysis , " ASME Design Engineering Technical Conference , Salt Lake City , UT . American Society of Mechanical Engineers , New York , NY . 23 . Donaldson , K . M . and S . D . Sheppard , 2004 , " Approaches to Product Design in Kenya : Is Design Practice Universal ? " ASME Design Engineering Technical Conference , Salt Lake City , UT . American Society of Mechanical Engineers , New York , NY . 24 . Clarkson , P . J . , J . Ward , P . Buckle , D . Stubbs and R . Coleman , 2004 , " Designing for Patient Safety : A Review of the Effectiveness of Design in the UK Health Service , " ASME Design Theory and Methodology Conference , Salt Lake City , UT . American Society of Mechanical Engineers , New York , NY . 25 . Sutinen , K . , G . Gustafsson and J . Malmqvist , 2004 , " Computer Support for Requirements Management in an International Product Development Project , " ASME Design Engineering Technical Conference , Salt Lake City , UT . American Society of Mechanical Engineers , New York , NY . 26 . Maier , J . R . A . and G . M . Fadel , 2002 , " Comparing Function and Affordance as Bases for Design , " ASME Design Theory and Methodology Conference , Montreal , Que . , Canada . American Society of Mechanical Engineers , New York , NY . 27 . Norman , D . , 2002 , The Design of Everyday Things , Basic Books , New York . 28 . Werner , D . , 1987 , Disabled Village Children : A Guide for Community Health Workers , Rehabilitation Workers , and Families , Healthwrights , Palo Alto , CA . Available : http : / / www . healthwrights . org / books / disabledvch . htm . 29 . Werner , D . , 1998 , " Introduction 2 - Disabled Persons as Leaders in the Problem - Solving Process , " Nothing About Us Without Us : Developing Innovative Technologies For , By and With Disabled Persons , Healthwrights , Palo Alto , CA . Available : http : / / www . healthwrights . org / books / nothingabout . htm . 30 . Barnes , D . F . , K . Openshaw , K . R . Smith and R . v . d . Plas , 2002 , What Makes People Cook with Improved Biomass Stoves ? a Comparative International Review of Stove Programs , World Bank . 31 . Urban , G . and J . Hauser , 1993 , Design and Marketing of New Products , 2nd Ed . , Prentice - Hall , Upper Saddle River . 32 . Jensen , D . L . and K . L . Wood , 2000 , " Incorporating Learning Styles to Enhance Mechanical Engineering Curricula by Restructuring Courses , Increasing Hands - on Activities , and Improving Team Dynamics , " Proceedings of the 2000 ASME International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Expo . , Orlando , Florida . 33 . Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Technology Society of North America Homepage , http : / / www . resna . org , May , 2005 . 34 . Green , M . G . , C . Anderson , C . Nguyen and S . Samad , 2000 , " Switch Activated Ball Thrower , " Proceedings of the Rehabilitation Engineering Society of North America Annual Conference , Orlando , FL . 35 . Cox , D . , S . Koshti , B . Jackson , A . Malish , M . Numan and D . Shipley , 1999 , " Design of an Assistive Bowling Device , " Proceedings of the Rehabilitation Engineering Society of North America Annual Conference . P age 11 . 403 . 2 8 36 . Shimek , M . , M . Van Wie , S . Kothawade , R . Subrahmanyam and M . Escobar , 2001 , " An Assistive Technology Key Turning Device For Independent Entryway Access , " Proceedings of the Rehabilitation Engineering Society of North America Annual Conference , Reno , NV . i “As a Professional Engineer , I dedicate my professional knowledge and skill to the advancement and betterment of human welfare …” ( NSPE Code of Ethics for Engineers ) ii www . letu . edu / legs iii “product or system” is simplified to “product” from this point forward to enhance readability iv Formally , Product Utility = f ( product attributes , context factors ) where f ( ) is a model of user preferences . v Specifically , usage context vi This book encourages distribution : “Any parts of this book … may be copied … without permission from the author or publisher … [ if ] distributed free or at cost …” vii Example reasons not counted as contextual include : “Major results expected in less than 3 years , ” “Planned & managed by outsiders , ” and “Government involvement in production . ” viii Opposite question asked and responses reversed for consistent data interpretation ( better is to the right ) . ix Opposite question asked and responses reversed for consistent data interpretation ( better is to the right ) . x The Case 2 data set included three teams whereas Case 1 included 14 . P age 11 . 403 . 2 9 Appendix A : Context Questions Template Table 17 : Context Questions Template – “How” Factors HOW : Usage Application # Context Factor Question Prompts v3 . 0 Response Notes a0 task application What specific purpose ( s ) will product be used for ? How will the product be used ? a1 task function What major function ( s ) should the product provide ? a2 task quality What quality of the primary function is needed ? a3 task process What is the current usage process ? How will product change the current usage process ? a4 task frequency How often will product be used ? a5 task duration How long will product be used each time ? a6 task quantity How much quantity of the product ' s output is needed ? a7 task rate At what rate should the product perform ? a8 task ruggedness How roughly will product be handled / treated ? a9 transportation type & amount How often , how far , and in what way will product be transported ? a10 operator position What physical position will the user be in ( standing , sitting , hands occupied ) ? a11 cleaning How and where might the product be cleaned ? P age 11 . 403 . 3 0 Table 18 : Context Questions Template – “Where” Factors WHERE : Usage Environment # Context Factor Question Prompts v3 . 0 Response Notes e0 surroundings Where and in what type of surroundings will product be used ? What in the surroundings might influence what the product must be like ? e1 surroundings ( sound ) How noisy are product surroundings ? How much noise from the product is acceptable ? e2 weather / climate What weather / climate will product be exposed to ? e3 environment ruggedness What objects and substances will product interact with ? Will product be exposed to any unusual substances or conditions ? e4 space ( when in use ) How much space is available for using product ? e5 space ( storage ) How and where will product be stored ? How much space is available for storing product ? e6 aesthetics of surroundings What do the product surroundings look like ? How should the product interact w / the surrounding aesthetics ? e7 maintenance & parts cost & availability What is the cost & availability of maintenance & parts ? e8 energy availability & cost What is the cost & availability of possible energy sources ( human , battery , gas , electric , biomass ) ? P age 11 . 403 . 3 1 Table 19 : Context Questions Template – “Who” Factors WHO : Customer Characteristics # Context Factor Question Prompts v3 . 0 Response Notes c0 user Who will use the product ? ( Choose ? Buy ? ) What user characteristics affect what the product must be like ? c1 user skills & education How skilled / experienced is the user with the task ? What is the user ' s education level ? c2 physical ability Does the user have any physical conditions that may cause difficulty performing the task ? ( strength , control , range - of - motion , vision ) . c3 user tolerance for complexity What is the most complex product the user is comfortable using ? Must this product be less complex ? How long is user willing to spend learning the product ? c4 relevant customs and practices Are there any cultural practices or expectations related to this product ? c5 cost expectations : ( purchase ) About how much is the buyer willing to pay to purchase this product ? c6 cost expectations : ( operation ) How much is the user willing to pay / work monthly to operate this product ? c7 cost expectations : ( maintenance ) How much is the user willing to pay / work monthly to maintain this product ? c8 time expectations : setup & operation About how much time is the user willing to spend to setup this product ? To operate this product ? How valuable is saving time ? c9 safety expectations What product safety concerns does the user have ? What safety features is the user expecting ? What dangers must be avoided ? What is the most dangerous product familiar to the user ? Must this one be less dangerous ? c10 durability expectations How long does the user expect the product to last ? c11 purchase context Where and how might the product be purchased ? How would the buying decision be made ( research , referral , impulse ) ? P age 11 . 403 . 3 2