Modeling Capping Protein FRAP and CALI Experiments Reveals In Vivo Regulation of Actin Dynamics Maryna Kapustina , 1 Eric Vitriol , 2 Timothy C . Elston , 3 , 4 Leslie M . Loew , 5 and Ken Jacobson 1 , 4 * 1 Department of Cell and Developmental Biology , University of North Carolina School of Medicine , Chapel Hill , North Carolina 2 Department of Cell Biology , Emory University School of Medicine , Atlanta , Georgia 3 Department of Pharmacology , University of North Carolina School of Medicine , Chapel Hill , North Carolina 4 Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center , University of North Carolina School of Medicine , Chapel Hill , North Carolina 5 Center for Cell Analysis and Modeling , University of Connecticut Health Center , Farmington , Connecticut Received 11 February 2010 ; Revised 25 May 2010 ; Accepted 3 June 2010 Monitoring Editor : Joseph Sanger To gain insights on cellular mechanisms regulating actin polymerization , we used the Virtual Cell to model ﬂuo - rescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) and chro - mophore - assisted laser inactivation ( CALI ) experiments on EGFP - capping protein ( EGFP - CP ) . Modeling the FRAP kinetics demonstrated that the in vivo rate for the dissociation of CP from actin ﬁlaments is much faster ( ~ 0 . 1 s 2 1 ) than that measured in vitro ( 0 . 01 – 0 . 0004 s 2 1 ) . The CALI simulation revealed that in order to induce sustainable changes in cell morphology after CP inactivation , the cells should exhibit anticapping ability . We included the VASP protein as the anticapping agent in the modeling scheme . The model predicts that VASP afﬁnity for barbed ends has a cooperative dependence on the concentration of VASP - barbed end complexes . This dependence produces a positive feedback that stabilizes the complexes and allows sustained growth at clustered ﬁlament tips . We analyzed the range of laser intensities that are sufﬁcient to induce changes in cell morphology . This analysis demonstrates that FRAP experiments with EGFP - CP can be performed safely without changes in cell morphology , because , the intensity of the photo - bleaching beam is not high enough to produce the criti - cal concentration of free barbed ends that will induce ﬁlament growth before diffusional replacement of EGFP - CP occurs . V C 2010 Wiley - Liss , Inc . Key Words : Ena / VASP , cooperativity , ﬂuorescent protein , ﬁlopodia , Virtual Cell Introduction N umerous motile processes in cell and developmental biology are driven by actin polymerization and depend on rapid actin ﬁlament assembly and disassembly at speciﬁc cellular locations . Thus , the precise spatial and temporal con - trol over actin dynamics is vitally important for cell function . Actin polymerization is tightly regulated by various actin binding proteins , which nucleate , promote , stabilize , or sever actin ﬁlaments [ Chhabra and Higgs , 2007 ; Pollard , 2007 ; Cooper and Sept , 2008 ; Le Clainche and Carlier , 2008 ; Chesarone and Goode , 2009 ] . The extent of ﬁlament elonga - tion in vivo is limited by the presence of high - afﬁnity barbed end capping proteins ( CPs ) but this inhibition is antagonized by anticappers , among them the proteins from the Ena / VASP family [ Bear et al . , 2002 ; Paul and Pollard , 2009 ] . CP b binds the barbed ends of actin ﬁlaments preventing contin - ued polymerization and rapid growth from this end [ Hug et al . , 1995 ; Wear and Cooper , 2004 ] and this maintains a short , highly - branched lamellipodial actin network as well as a pool of monomeric G - actin , an arrangement more suitable for productive protrusion [ Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ] . The presence of Ena / VASP proteins at the leading edge of cells antagonizes CPs at barbed ends of actin ﬁlaments , enabling actin polymerization to continue , generating long , unbranched actin ﬁlaments [ Bear et al . , 2002 ; Barzik et al . , 2005 ; Pasic et al . , 2008 ; Trichet et al . , 2008 ] . The mechanism and regulation of actin polymerization have been studied extensively in vitro for many years but now there is increasing interest to compare and contrast this body of information with that obtained in vivo . Recently , several microscopic techniques , such as speckle microscopy [ Ponti et al . , 2004 ] , image correlation microscopy [ Digman et al . , 2005 ] , ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) [ Roy et al . , 2002 ] , and chromophore - assisted laser inactivation ( CALI ) [ Jacobson et al . , 2008 ] have begun to yield important qualitative and quantitative information on the processes that promote and regulate actin polymerization in living cells . Interpretation and analysis of the Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article . * Address correspondence to : Ken Jacobson , Department of Cell and Developmental Biology , University of North Carolina School of Medicine , Chapel Hill , North Carolina 27599 - 7090 , USA . E - mail : frap @ med . unc . edu Published online 8 July 2010 in Wiley InterScience ( www . interscience . wiley . com ) . RESEARCH ARTICLE Cytoskeleton , August 2010 67 : 519 – 534 ( doi : 10 . 1002 / cm . 20463 ) V C 2010 Wiley - Liss , Inc . 519 n spatiotemporal data obtained from these techniques requires mathematical analysis and quantitative modeling . FRAP is a technique to measure translational mobility in membranes and the cytoplasm by ﬁrst photobleaching the ﬂuorescence emitted from a labeled component from a small region of the cell and subsequently measuring the recovery of ﬂuorescence into the previously bleached region ; the kinetics of recovery are related to the transport process that dominates the recovery process . CALI , in particular , has attracted attention because of its potential to affect nearly in - stantaneous loss - of - function and thereby complement more conventional genetic manipulations . In this method , target proteins are inactivated by reactive photoproducts such as re - active oxygen species generated by intense irradiation of chromophores that are immediately adjacent to the protein . Because FRAP also uses a bright ﬂash of light to bleach ﬂuo - rophores , the question naturally arises as to how much CALI occurs during a typical FRAP experiment . Indeed , the moti - vation for this study was to understand why one could per - form a FRAP measurement on EGFP - CP in vivo without obtaining the protrusive phenotype observed in CALI [ Vit - riol et al . , 2007 ] . To achieve both our original goal and an expanded set of objectives that arose during this study , we employed the Virtual Cell platform and a mathematical description embodying the dendritic nucleation model for actin polymerization [ Ditlev et al . , 2009 ] to simulate FRAP and CALI experiments on EGFP - CP [ Vitriol et al . , 2007 ] . By comparing simulation results directly to data obtained from FRAP experiments , we show that the rate constant for the dissociation of CPs from barbed ends must be much larger than the values reported for in vitro measurements . Our results are consistent with recent experimental results [ Miyoshi et al . , 2006 ; Iwasa and Mullins , 2007 ] . Simulation of CALI experiments on knockdown - rescue EGFP - CP cells revealed that anticapping activity is required to induce sustainable changes in cell morphology after CP inactivation . This prompted us to explicitly include vasodila - tor - stimulated phosphoprotein ( VASP ) protein as an anticap - ping agent in the model . Interestingly , the model predicts that VASP afﬁnity for barbed ends must be cooperatively de - pendent on concentration of VASP - barbed ends ( VASP - BE ) complexes . Thus , locally high concentration of uncapped barbed ends , such as those produced by CALI , is able to cre - ate large number of VASP - BE complexes in close proximity to each other with the consequence that the VASP dissocia - tion rate from barbed ends is decreased , possibly due to VASP clustering . This positive feedback stabilizes VASP , antagonizes recapping and leads to rapid ﬁlament elongation . Finally , by analyzing the range of laser intensities that pro - duce morphological changes in CALI of EGFP - CP , we address the issue of whether intensities typically used for FRAP experiments produce signiﬁcant collateral CALI . Methods The Virtual Cell modeling and simulation software was used for this work ( http : / / vcell . org ) . The Virtual Cell provides a formal framework for modeling biochemical , electrophysio - logical , and transport phenomena while considering the sub - cellular localization of the molecules that take part in them . This localization can take the form of a three - dimensional ( 3D ) arbitrarily shaped cell , where the molecular species might be heterogeneously distributed . Each two - dimensional ( 2D ) or 3D model explicitly considers the diffusion of the mole - cules within the geometry , as well as their reactions . The spa - tiotemporal changes to the concentrations of molecular species are governed by a mass conservation law : the rate of concentration change of a molecular species inside a volume element is caused by all the reactions that affect this species and diffusion ﬂuxes coming in and out of the element . [ Slep - chenko et al . , 2003 ] . The mass and charge conservation laws , which form the physical basis in the Virtual Cell , are mathe - matically expressed by a system of differential equations . In this study , we employ a biochemical and mathematical description embodying the dendritic nucleation model for actin polymerization on Virtual Cell platform . The biochem - istry and polymer physical chemistry underlying the Actin Dendritic Nucleation model has been thoroughly described [ Ditlev et al . , 2009 ] and it includes : a . Activation of Arp2 / 3 at the cell membrane by a nuclea - tion promoting factor [ e . g . , neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) ] ; b . Nucleation and branching on preexisting F - actin by activated Arp2 / 3 and two actin monomers ( including proﬁlin - bound G - actin ) [ Carlsson et al . , 2004 ; Beltzner and Pollard , 2008 ] ; c . Dissociation of Arp2 / 3 branches in the cytoplasm [ Mahaffy and Pollard , 2006 ] ; d . Interconversions between the different nucleotide forms ( ATP , ADP , and ADPPi ) of both monomeric G - actin and ﬁlamentous F - actin [ Melki et al . , 1996 ; Kinosian et al . , 2000 ; Blanchoin and Pollard , 2002 ; Fujiwara et al . , 2007 ] ; e . Assembly and disassembly of these three nucleotide - bound monomer forms to each of the three forms of barbed and pointed ends ( i . e . 18 unique pairs of for - ward and reverse reactions ) [ Pollard and Cooper , 1986 ; Kinosian et al . , 2002 ] ; f . Acceleration of nucleotide exchange on G - actin by pro - ﬁlin [ Godschmidt - Clermont et al . , 1991 ; Blanchoin and Pollard , 1998 ; Kinosian et al . , 2000 ] ; g . Addition of G - actin associated with proﬁlin to barbed ends [ Godschmidt - Clermont et al . , 1991 ; Kang et al . , 1999 ; Kinosian et al . , 2002 ] ; h . Capping of the three forms of barbed ends [ Schafer et al . , 1996 ; Wear and Cooper , 2004 ; Kuhn and Pollard , 2007 ] ; i . Length - dependent annealing and fragmentation of actin ﬁlaments [ Sept et al . , 1999 ; Andrianantoandro et al . , 2001 ] ; j . Buffering of G - actin by thymosin - (cid:1) 4 [ Carlier et al . , 1993 ; Nachmias , 1993 ; Kang et al . , 1999 ] ; k . Severing and accelerated disassembly of actin ﬁlaments by ADF / coﬁlin [ Ressad et al . , 1998 ; Blanchoin and n 520 Kapustina et al . CYTOSKELETON Pollard , 1998 ; Ressad et al . , 1999 ; Blanchoin and Pol - lard , 1999 ; Blanchoin et al . , 2000 ; Andrianantoandro and Pollard , 2006 ; Cao et al . , 2006 ; Carlsson , 2006 ; Cai et al . , 2007 ] . The individual mechanisms and their parameters were based on published data , as detailed in the ‘‘Table of Sour - ces’’ provided in the Supporting Information [ Ditlev et al . , 2009 ] and within a BioModel entitled ‘‘Actin Dendritic Nucleation’’ that is accessible in the Virtual Cell database under username ‘‘les . ’’ The model was formulated as a continuum model consist - ing of systems of partial differential equations . This necessi - tated the formulation of approaches that could consolidate the inﬁnite number of possible states of actin to a reduced set of variables . Thus , the concentrations of actin in the different nucleotide forms were expressed in terms of the concentration of actin subunits . The hydrolysis of ATP to ADPPi and the dissociation of the ADPPi forms to ADP are explicitly included in the reaction network for all the actin species . The model independently keeps track of the concentration of barbed and pointed ends in each of the nucleotide - bound forms ; these depend on both the hydrolysis and dissociation reactions of the nucleotide as well as the addition or dissocia - tion of the various nucleotide forms of monomers . The total concentration of subunits in actin ﬁlaments is given by the sum of all the state variables corresponding to different forms of F - actin , including all forms of free and capped ends , Arp2 / 3 - bound and coﬁlin - bound subunits . The concentration of ﬁl - aments can be calculated from the sum of all the pointed ends , i . e . , in all three nucleotide forms and both free and Arp2 / 3 - capped in branches . The average ﬁlament length , in number of subunits , is given by the total concentration of F - actin divided by the concentration of ﬁlaments . Parameters For all simulations in this paper we used the following total concentrations of molecular species : [ proﬁlin ] ¼ 10 l M , [ coﬁlin ] ¼ 5 l M , [ thymosin ß4 ] ¼ 100 l M , [ Arp2 / 3 ] ¼ 1 l M and a total actin concentration ¼ 200 l M . All proteins within the cytoplasm were assumed to have a diffusion coef - ﬁcient of 5 l m 2 (cid:1) s (cid:2) 1 , while for actin ﬁlaments , the diffusion coefﬁcient was assumed to be 0 . 01 l m 2 (cid:1) s (cid:2) 1 . The diffusion coefﬁcient , concentration , and actin binding and dissociation rate constants for the CP were varied in the simulations . In this study , the original Actin Dendritic Nucleation model was modiﬁed to include mechanisms for anticapping activity by Ena / VASP and for simulation of FRAP and CALI of EGFP - CP . The modiﬁed computational models for FRAP and CALI simulations are available as the BioModels entitled ‘‘CALI , ’’ ‘‘FRAP’’ ‘‘Filopodia formation’’ in the Virtual Cell database under username ‘‘marynka . ’’ Modiﬁcations of the Model To simulate the photobleaching during FRAP or CALI com - putational experiments several new ‘‘species’’ ( ‘‘laser , ’’ ‘‘Cap _ - dark’’ ) were added to the reaction scheme as shown in Fig . 1 . During the bleaching phase , the new species ‘‘laser’’ transforms EGFP - CP , both free molecules ( Cap ) and those bound to three barbed ends forms ( CBarbedT , CBarbedDPi , CBarbedD corresponding to the three nucleotide - bound forms , respectively : ATP , ADPPi , or ADP ) , into ‘‘dark’’ forms of the same molecules ( Cap _ dark , CBarbedT _ dark , CBar - bedDPi _ dark , CBarbedD _ dark ) . All ‘‘dark’’ forms of CP were assumed to have the same diffusion coefﬁcient as unbleached EGFP - CP . To model the FRAP experiments , the dark form of EGFP - CP was assumed to participate in all the chemical reactions that unbleached EGFP - CP does . In the CALI simulations , laser inactivated EGFP - CP can not bind to barbed ends , so k on for inactive EGFP - CP ( species Cap _ - dark ) is equal to zero . The VASP molecule ( Fig . 1 , green rectangle ) was included in four different forms , the free VASP molecule and complexed with the three nucleotide - bound barbed ends ( VASP _ CBarbedT , VASP _ CBarbedDPi , and VASP _ CBarbedD ) . VASP - BE complexes were assumed to be able to participate in all the biochemical reactions that free barbed ends do but were not able to bind CP . The VASP binding and dissociation rate constants are discussed in Results . Cell Geometry FRAP and CALI experiments were performed on ﬁbroblasts adherent to glass substrates and fully spread [ Vitriol et al . , 2007 ] . For the CALI experiments , the diameter of TEM 00 Gaussian proﬁle laser beam ( width at 1 / e 2 of peak intensity ) was 23 . 4 l m and the ratio of the irradiated area to the entire cell surface was between 1 / 6 and 1 / 4 . To approximate the ra - tio of the laser beam diameter to the cell size , the cell radius in the model was set to 25 l m . To model cell geometry in the numerical simulations , we modiﬁed the analytical geome - try employed in the actin polymerization model [ Ditlev et al . , 2009 ] . The computational domain consisted of a cell with radius R ¼ 25 l m , a height ( H ) in the center of 4 l m and thickness at the edge of the lamellipodium of 0 . 3 l m ( Fig . 2a ) . To decrease the computational time , the model equations for the FRAP simulations were solved only in half of the cell , because the irradiated area during the FRAP ( R ¼ 2 . 5 l m ) was substantially smaller than the entire cell body . Simulations The resulting system of partial differential algebraic equa - tions was solved using the ﬁnite volume solver available in Virtual Cell [ Schaff et al . , 1997 ; Slepchenko et al . , 2000 ; Schaff et al . , 2001 ; Novak et al . , 2007 ; Moraru et al . , 2008 ] , using a regular rectangular grid of 150 (cid:3) 75 (cid:3) 12 elements and 0 . 002 s time step for FRAP simulations and 150 (cid:3) 150 (cid:3) 36 elements and 0 . 02 s time step for CALI simulations . The accuracy of the simulations was checked by reﬁning the CYTOSKELETON Modeling of FRAP and CALI Experiments 521 n mesh and using shorter time steps . The computations were carried out on the computer cluster of Center for Cell Anal - ysis and Modeling . Results Steady State Distribution of Actin Filaments It is known that cell adhesion and spreading involves com - plex and dynamic rearrangements of the actin cytoskeleton [ Dobereiner et al . , 2004 ] that are coordinated and controlled by the Arp2 / 3 complex [ Lai et al . , 2008 ] . The nucleation function of the Arp2 / 3 complex is activated by the N - WASP [ Anton et al . , 2007 ; Chesarone and Goode , 2009 ] located on the membrane . Initially simulations were run for a sufﬁciently long time to achieve a steady state and to generate a distribution of actin ﬁlaments that is similar to those observed in spread cells . In this case , high concentrations of short ﬁlaments re - side near the edge of lamellipodium while longer ﬁlaments are present toward the center of the cell . To produce this ﬁla - ment distribution , the concentration of N - WASP is taken to be small ( 5 – 20 molecules (cid:1) l m (cid:2) 2 ) on the majority of the plasma membrane but greatly increases ( 25 – 200 molecule - s (cid:1) l m (cid:2) 2 ) in regions within 2 . 5 l m of the cell edge . A similar pattern of N - WASP distribution was reported in [ Sukumva - nich et al . , 2004 ] . For each parameter set , the model initially was simulated for 200 s , which was sufﬁcient to allow all concentrations to come to steady state . The steady state con - centration proﬁles were used later as the initial conditions for the FRAP or CALI simulations . Figure 2 demonstrates the cell geometry ( Fig . 2a ) and initial conditions for simulation . Fig . 2b shows the concen - tration of N - WASP at the beginning of the simulation while Fig . 2c presents the distribution of active Arp2 / 3 , which has been recruited to the membrane by N - WASP , af - ter a 200 s simulation . An example of the ﬁlament length distributions at equilibrium is given in Figs . 2d and 2e . The differences in the average ﬁlament lengths between the lamellipodium ( (cid:4) 540 nm , or 200 actin monomers ) and the cell center ( (cid:4) 710 nm , or 300 actin monomers ) is clearly visible . Fig . 1 . The part of reaction scheme on Virtual Cell platform , which was used to simulate FRAP and CALI experiment , green circles denote the species which participate in simulation ; yellow circles denote the reaction nodes . During the irradiation , the laser transforms CP both free ( Cap ) and all forms bound to the barbed ends ( CBarbedD , CBarbedDPi , CBarbedT ) to the ‘‘dark’’ form ( pink rectangle ) . In FRAP simulation the photobleached , ‘‘dark’’ form , is still active and able to participate in all reactions . For CALI experiments the ‘‘dark’’ form is inactive and the crossed reaction edges show what reaction is only one way reaction for CALI simulation . The new VASP species can participate in binding reaction equally with each type of free barbed end ( green rectangle ) . The ‘‘on’’ reaction rate is a constant . The ‘‘off’’ reaction rate is a variable that depends on the total concentration of VASP - BE complexes . A higher concentration of these complexes reduces the dissociation rate constant for VASP from barbed ends . A VASP - BE complex is assumed to be equivalent to a free barbed end for the actin polymerization reactions . n 522 Kapustina et al . CYTOSKELETON To investigate how the amounts of N - WASP and CP inﬂuence the actin ﬁlament distribution and the concentra - tions of free / capped barbed ends , we performed additional simulations with different total amounts of N - WASP and CP ( Figs . 2f and 2g ) . The results show that , indeed , increas - ing the CP concentration produces shorter ﬁlaments with higher concentration . Simulations with a 10 - fold increase in the abundance of N - WASP ( 50 molecules (cid:1) l m (cid:2) 2 over the entire plasma membrane and an additional 200 molecule - s (cid:1) l m (cid:2) 2 near the edges ) also decreased the ﬁlament length , but the effect was weaker than that of the CP . Simulation of EGFP - CP FRAP Kinetics Before attempting to model the CALI data , we used the model to ﬁt FRAP data and estimate the values of key model Fig . 2 . Initial conditions for simulations . ( a ) X – Z depiction of the cell geometry , used for simulations ( cell dimension R ¼ 25 l m ) . ( b ) Concentration of N - WASP at the beginning of simulation . ( c ) Equilibrated distribution of active Arp2 / 3 after a 200 s simulation . ( d , e ) Equilibrated actin filament network prior to performing FRAP and CALI simulation . # of subunits refers to the number of G - actin subunits in individual filaments . Initial conditions : N - WASP ¼ 20 molecules (cid:1) l m (cid:2) 2 around the cell and additional 50 molecules (cid:1) l m (cid:2) 2 near the edges ( denoted in the legends as N - WASP ¼ 20 þ 50 ) ; [ CP ] ¼ 1 l M ; simulation time ¼ 200 s ; ( f , g ) Plot of filament lengths ( f ) and filament concentrations ( g ) along the radius of the cell after equilibration with different concentrations of CP ( l M ) and N - WASP ( mol (cid:1) l m (cid:2) 2 ) . Black dashed lines on ( d , e ) shows where the number of filaments and their concentrations were measured . CYTOSKELETON Modeling of FRAP and CALI Experiments 523 n parameters . The recovery kinetics of EGFP - CP following photobleaching depend on several factors : ( 1 ) the total con - centrations of EGFP - CP and barbed ends that bind CPs ; ( 2 ) rate constants for EGFP - CP binding to and dissociating from barbed ends ; and ( 3 ) diffusion coefﬁcients for EGFP - CP and actin ﬁlaments in the cytosol . We investigated how each of these parameters affects the recovery curve . We assumed that all endogenous CPs are replaced by EGFP - CP which exhibit identical chemical properties as endogenous CP . Furthermore , we assumed that transport and binding properties of bleached EGFP - CP were identical to those of unbleached EGFP - CP . The experimental FRAP measurements were performed on an Olympus FV1000 confocal microscope in the tornado scanning mode , which allows generation of a circular bleach - ing spot within a short time interval ( t ¼ 200 ms ) . To mimic the experimental setup in the simulation , we uni - formly ‘‘bleached , ’’ in 200 ms , a 5 l m diameter cylinder through the cytoplasm positioned so that its center was located 5 l m from the cell edge . The parameter characteriz - ing the laser intensity ( I ) has the dimension of s (cid:2) 1 similar to the rate constant for a zero - order reaction . This parameter was adjusted to reduce ﬂuorescence in the bleached region to 2 % of the initial ﬂuorescence , similar to that measured in the experiments . In our simulation the ﬂuorescence intensity is proportional to total concentration ( bound and free ) of unbleached EGFP - CP , and , during the recovery phase , the change in ﬂu - orescence was monitored within the entire bleached region . Figures 3a and 3b show the distribution of ﬂuorescence within the cell and the result of laser photobleaching of EGFP - CP in side and top views , respectively . The ﬂuorescence in the simulation recovers nearly com - pletely , with the failure to reach 100 % recovery due to the (cid:4) 1 % of the total EGFP - CP that was bleached . In experi - mental FRAP measurements , there is generally an immobile fraction that leads to less than 100 % recovery ( Fig . S1 in the Supporting Information ) . We estimated from analyzing each separate data curve that recovery was nearly complete ( 95 % ) between 42 and 48 s after photobleaching . Using this estima - tion , the immobile part of experimental ﬂuorescence recovery was extracted and experimental FRAP data was normalized by dividing each time point in the recovery curve by the 100 % ﬂuorescence recovery value for that curve ( Fig . 3c ) . This procedure did not change the value of the half - time for ﬂuorescence recovery after bleaching . After normalization , the immobile fraction for each curve can be estimated by the comparing the ﬂuorescence value before the photobleaching to that after recovery is deemed complete . Initially , all simulations were performed using k on ¼ 10 l M (cid:2) 1 (cid:1) s (cid:2) 1 and k off ¼ 0 . 01 s (cid:2) 1 , respectively as values for the association and dissociation rate constants for EGFP - CP to and from the barbed ends respectively [ Schafer et al . , 1996 ] . However , simulations with these rate constants derived from in vitro measurements , failed to reproduce the experimental results even when other parameters important for the recov - ery kinetics were varied widely . In particular , the CP diffu - sion coefﬁcient was varied between 0 . 1 and 20 l m 2 (cid:1) s (cid:2) 1 , the CP concentration was varied from 0 . 5 to 4 l M , and the concentration of barbed ends was varied from 0 . 5 to 2 l M ( Fig . 3d ) . By contrast , good ﬁt between the simulations and experimental data was obtained when the uncapping rate was increased by one order of magnitude ( k off ¼ 0 . 1 s (cid:2) 1 ) ( Fig . 3e and 3f ) . This requirement for a large value of the rate constant for uncapping is supported by the results of single speckle microscopy experiments performed recently by two independent research groups . Iwasa and Mullins [ 2007 ] showed that the average lifetime for CP on barbed ends is (cid:4) 15 s ( k off (cid:4) 0 . 05 s (cid:2) 1 ) , and Watanabe’s group [ Miyoshi et al . , 2006 ] measured an unexpectedly fast dissociation rate for CPs at the leading edge ( k off (cid:4) 0 . 58 s (cid:2) 1 ) . Simulations with various diffusion coefﬁcients for CP and a dissociation rate constant equal to 0 . 1 s (cid:2) 1 ( Fig . 3e ) show that a diffusion coefﬁcient between 5 and 15 l m 2 (cid:1) s (cid:2) 1 pro - duce results that ﬁt the experimental data within two stand - ard deviations . Fixing the diffusion coefﬁcient for CP at 5 l m 2 (cid:1) s (cid:2) 1 and varying the dissociation rate constant between 0 . 05 and 0 . 2 s (cid:2) 1 revealed that the best ﬁt was obtained for k off ¼ 0 . 1 s (cid:2) 1 ( Fig . 3f ) . Simulation of CALI Experiments Performed on EGFP - CP Our ﬁrst approach to model the effect of CALI was to use the same scheme as for the FRAP simulations , but with one signiﬁcant difference : laser inactivated EGFP - CP can not bind to barbed ends , so k on for inactive EGFP - CP ( species Cap _ dark in Virtual Cell scheme ) is equal to zero ( Fig . 1 ) . The dissociation rate , k off , for inactive ( photodamaged ) EGFP - CP was varied for different simulations . To compare the simulations to experimental results , we assumed that an increase in ﬁlament length corresponds to the dorsal ridges observed experimentally in ﬁbroblasts [ Vit - riol et al . , 2007 ] . This assumption is justiﬁed by the addi - tional f - actin associated with these structures [ Vitriol et al . , 2007 ] . For quantiﬁcation , the number of ridges in concentric rings centered on the optical axis was counted using an image processing algorithm that detects edges [ Vitriol et al . , 2007 ] and plotted versus time . This experimental time de - pendence was compared qualitatively with simulated ﬁlament length in corresponding areas . The time of simulated laser inactivation was chosen to equal the experimental irradiation time of 100 ms . The model parameter that corresponds to laser intensity was cho - sen to produce (cid:5) 95 % inactivation of CP on the optical axis . The laser beam has a Gaussian intensity proﬁle ( Fig . 4a ) characterized by a 1 / e 2 diameter where the intensity drops to 1 / e 2 of the maximum value on the optical axis of the micro - scope ; this diameter was 23 . 4 l m . The laser optical axis was located 10 l m from the cell edge . We ran several CALI simulations using different parameter sets . Figure 4c shows the time course of average F - actin length inside a circle of radius 6 um centered on the optical axis . As seen , these simulations produced the expected n 524 Kapustina et al . CYTOSKELETON elongation of F - actin inside the irradiated zone , but the time course of this increase differed signiﬁcantly from experimen - tal observations ( Fig . 4b ) . The elongation phase was too rapid and reached maximum within 15 – 20 s . By contrast , the experiments exhibited slower kinetics , reaching a maxi - mum between 100 and 120 s . Also , the experiments showed that new actin - ﬁlled ridges after CALI diminished slowly and many of them persisted for the entire observation period whereas the simulations produced a rapid diminution of the long ﬁlaments . An attempt to slow down the elongation phase by decreasing the dissociation rate for CALI damaged EGFP - CP [ Fig . 4c , ( black ) ] from 1 to 0 . 1 s (cid:2) 1 did not sub - stantially slow the growth phase but simply produced a smaller increase in F - actin . These results can be explained by the fast diffusion of free CPs . The concentration of free undamaged EGFP - CP inside the irradiated area is restored to nearly 80 % of normal level within the ﬁrst 20 – 40 s ( Fig . 5a ) and the rapid binding of Fig . 3 . Simulation of FRAP experiments . ( a , b ) Fluorescence distribution immediately after photobleaching applied to an equilibrated sys - tem . Laser beam diameter ¼ 5 l m ; time of photobleaching ¼ 200 ms . White dashed line on ( a ) shows where the cross - sectional profile in ( b ) is taken . White dashed line in ( b ) shows the depth at which the 2D image in ( a ) is taken . ( c ) Experimental data for FRAP of EGFP - CP ( N ¼ 10 ) . Data are normalized by the mean value of intensity between 42 and 48 s of recovery , considering this value as 95 % of recovery . ( d , f ) Simulation results of a FRAP experiment . ( d ) With EGFP - CP k off ¼ 0 . 01 s (cid:2) 1 , traces show poor fit with any combination of diffusion coefficient and EGFP - CP concentration . ( e ) Simulation for k off ¼ 0 . 1 s (cid:2) 1 with different diffusion coefficients for EGFP - CP . Red line shows experimental results with standard deviations . ( f ) Variation of k off ( ¼ 0 . 1 , 0 . 15 , 0 . 2 s (cid:2) 1 ) and EGFP - CP diffusion coefficient of 5 and 10 l m 2 (cid:1) s (cid:2) 1 Traces show the best fit with experiment for EGFP - CP k off ¼ 0 . 1 s (cid:2) 1 and diffusion rate between 5 and 10 l m 2 (cid:1) s (cid:2) 1 . A larger diffu - sion coefficient with a smaller k off does not produce good agreement with experimental FRAP data . CYTOSKELETON Modeling of FRAP and CALI Experiments 525 n Fig . 4 . Comparison between experimental growth of dorsal ridges and V - cell modeling of the F - actin increase after CALI . ( a ) Pseudo - colored image shows the distribution of laser intensity and 6 , 10 , 15 l m distance from optical axis ; ( b ) Experimental results for dorsal ridge development , analyzed by an edge detection method from Vitriol et al . [ 2007 ] ; ( black ) , dorsal ridges within a 6 l m circle centered on the optical axis ; ( red ) , dorsal ridges in an annulus from 6 – 10 l m from optical axis ; ( green ) , dorsal ridges in an annulus from 10 – 15 l m from optical axis ; ( c ) F - actin elongation after laser inactivation of CP inside 6 l m circle . Simulation scheme doesn’t include anticapping agent . Plots were computed for two different unbinding rates for photo deactivated CPs ( k off ¼ 0 . 1 s (cid:2) 1 , blue , k off ¼ 1 s (cid:2) 1 , red ) . ( d ) The growth of actin filaments as a function of time and distance from the optical axis for simulation that includes VASP as an anticapper . Color scheme is the same as for ( b ) . ( e ) Pseudocolored images show the position of increased filament growth at different times after CALI . Point indicates the center of laser beam . n 526 Kapustina et al . CYTOSKELETON CPs to ﬁlaments quickly inhibits further F - actin elongation . We analyzed the FRAP inside an area with a 12 l m radius . The computational results predict that the half - time for ﬂuo - rescence recovery ( corresponding to the sum of free and bound EGFP - CP ) according to our model should be around 50 s ( Fig . S2 in the Supporting Information ) which contra - dicts the experimental results where substantial recovery of ﬂuorescence inside the CALI’ed region was observed only after 150 s following irradiation [ Vitriol et al . , 2007 ] . The comparison between computational and experimental data suggests that the cells have an additional mechanism to regulate capping dynamics that is absent in our model . To properly capture persistent ﬁlament elongation following CALI that lasts for hundreds of seconds , an anticapping mechanism is required . We propose that Ena / VASP family of proteins are prime candidates for this role ; these proteins have been shown to antagonize CP activity [ Bear et al . , 2002 ; Breitsprecher et al . , 2008 ; Trichet et al . , 2008 ] . We introduced VASP protein into the Virtual Cell modeling scheme and assumed that VASP molecules bind barbed ends independently of their ATP / ADP status . The VASP - BE com - plex can participate in all reactions that free barbed ends can , but it cannot be capped by CP ( Fig . 1 ) . For proper assignment of VASP modeling parameters , some important experimental evidence about VASP , CPs , and their interactions with barbed ends needs to be consid - ered . Thus far , the evidence is somewhat controversial and has been the topic of many recent investigations and discus - sions [ Bear et al . , 2002 ; Sechi and Wehland , 2004 ; Barzik et al . , 2005 ; Pasic et al . , 2008 ; Trichet et al . , 2008 ; Bear and Gertler , 2009 ] : 1 . In vitro , all barbed ends are capped despite a 20 - to 25 - fold molar excess of VASP [ Breitsprecher et al . , 2008 ; Pasic et al . , 2008 ] which indicates that the afﬁn - ity of CPs for barbed ends is a 2 – 3 orders of magni - tude greater than the VASP afﬁnity for barbed ends . 2 . Titration of cell lysates revealed that the molar ratios of VASP to CPs are approximately 5 : 1 with the concentra - tion of VASP being 4 (cid:6) 1 (cid:2) M [ Laurent et al . , 1999 ; Breitsprecher et al . , 2008 ] . The concentration of free CP in the intact cell was estimated to be approximately 1 – 2 (cid:2) M . Thus , there appeared to be enough high af - ﬁnity cappers to cap all the barbed ends in vivo [ DiNu - bile et al . , 1995 ] . Indeed , a simple simulation shows that 5 (cid:2) M of VASP with a K d 5 (cid:2) M together with 1 (cid:2) M of CP ( K d 0 . 01 (cid:2) M ) results in 95 % of the barbed ends being capped . Nevertheless , immediately after lysis with detergent , cells contained large number of barbed ends that are not capped and are able to bind pyrenyl - G - actin resulting in ﬁlament elongation [ DiNubile et al . , 1995 ] . 3 . Several investigations [ Samarin et al . , 2003 ; Breit - sprecher et al . , 2008 ] show that dense packing of VASP bound to beads signiﬁcantly enhanced actin assembly even in the presence of CP , suggesting that if VASP molecules are located on the barbed ends in close prox - imity to each other , they are able to support processive ﬁlament elongation , possibly by protecting ﬁlaments from capping . 4 . Applewhite et al . [ 2007 ] performed a series of FRAP experiments which showed that EGFP - VASP exhibits rapid recovery in lamellipodia but almost no recovery in ﬁlopodia . This observation suggests that , in resting cells , VASP molecules in the lamella and lamellipodia have a high dissociation rate , in which case actin ﬁla - ments grow only to short lengths before being capped . However , when barbed ends are concentrated , such as Fig . 5 . Time development for the replacement of active EGFP - CP after CALI in the irradiated region . ( a ) Kinetics for the repopulation of free undamaged EGFP - CP inside the irradiated region . Rapid diffusion of free EGFP - CP results in a nearly uniform distribution with a slightly lower concentration within the first 50 s compared to the bulk of the cytoplasm . ( b ) Kinetics of the fluorescence recovery after CALI , which reflects the total concentration of free EGFP - CP and that bound to barbed ends . Note that there is no fast fluorescence recovery after irradiation because barbed ends which were capped prior to CALI are replaced by VASP - BE complexes and that leaves the irradiated area with less fluorescence . CYTOSKELETON Modeling of FRAP and CALI Experiments 527 n in ﬁlopodia , dissociation of VASP is much slower , allowing VASP to remain complexed with ﬁlaments for longer times , thereby protecting them from being capped and permitting ﬁlaments to elongate . We modeled this effect using the following equation for the VASP - BE dissociation rate constant , k dis : k dis ¼ k 0 1 þ ð a (cid:1) VASP B Þ n ; ( 1 ) where k 0 is dissociation rate in the absence of VASP - BE complexes , VASP - B is the concentration of VASP - BE com - plexes , a is a scaling coefﬁcient that determines the concen - tration of complex at which the dissociation rate is half its maximum , and n is a coefﬁcient of cooperativity . This equa - tion captures our suggestion that the dissociation of VASP from barbed ends decreases with increasing concentrations of VASP - BE complexes in a cooperative fashion . This equation was incorporated into the Virtual Cell sim - ulations of the EGFP - CP CALI experiment . Figure 4d shows simulation results for the average ﬁlament length as a func - tion of time derived in several regions ( concentric circles R ¼ 6 , 10 , 15 l m ) centered on the optical axis . The good qualitative agreement between the model and experimental results ( Fig . 4b ) supports the hypothesis that VASP binds cooperatively to barbed ends . In fact , a coefﬁcient of cooper - ativity smaller than 4 did not produce a stable effect in time and a coefﬁcient higher than 4 replaces all CP with anticap - per too quickly to match the experimental kinetics . These ﬁgures clearly indicate that where the intensity is highest at the center of the laser beam , ﬁlament growth is most pro - nounced corresponding to the strongest CALI effect . Dynamics and Position of Morphological Changes are Similar in the Model and Experiments By monitoring the dynamics of ﬁlament growth , we found that the position of stable morphological changes depends not only on the irradiation intensity but also on the distance from the cell edge . Shortly after inactivation , the majority of ﬁlament growth shifted toward the cell edge ( Fig . 4e , t ¼ 40 s ) . This effect occurs for two reasons . First , due to geometric considerations , the diffusional recovery of active CP is aniso - tropic , resulting in delayed replacement close to edge as com - pared to more central locations . Second , the higher concentration of free barbed ends near the edge requires more CP to halt growth , so depletion of this protein has a more pronounced effect near the cell edge . As a result , uncapped barbed ends at the cell edge collect more VASP molecules which increases the probability of VASP clustering and resultant stabilization at barbed ends , in turn protecting those barbed ends from being recapped when the concentra - tion of active EGFP - CP is restored by diffusion . The panels of Fig . 5a show a time course for the concen - tration of free active EGFP - CP as it recovers following CALI . The panels in Fig . 5b show a time course for the kinetics of ﬂuorescence recovery , which takes into account the formation of new EGFP - CP - barbed end complexes . Note that free EGFP - CP quickly reaches a uniform distribu - tion inside the cell due to the rapid diffusion of this protein . However , EGFP - CP bound to barbed ends exhibits a distinc - tive pattern with lower concentration close to the cell edge inside the irradiated region . The simulations produce a number of satisfying similarities with the experimental results . Figures 6a – 6d present three different cells with developed dorsal ridges after CALI and pseudocolored ﬂuorescent images of actin ﬁlament barbed - ends labeled with Alexa Fluor 568 - conjugated G - actin at 3 min post - CALI [ Vitriol et al . , 2007 ] . The computational panel ( Fig . 6e ) shows the increased ﬁlament length after CALI . The dashed circle on both panels marks the region where the laser beam is applied . Inspection of these ﬁgures reveals that the increase in ﬁlament length ( corresponding to the protrusive ridges in the experiment ) persists proximate to the cell edge longer than in the other parts of the cell . Simulation of FRAP and CALI Experiments With Various Irradiation Conditions To determine how the development of the EGFP - CP CALI phenotype depends on irradiation conditions , we ran addi - tional simulations with different laser intensities and beam radii . The typical FRAP bleaching power is between 0 . 5 and 30 mW , which is less than 5 % of the CALI laser intensity used in our experiment ( I ¼ 650 mW , measured on the specimen plane ) . A FRAP experiment [ Vitriol et al . , 2007 ] with laser beam 1 / e 2 width ¼ 23 . 4 l m and intensity equal to 5 % of that used for CALI revealed that no appreciable changes in ﬁlament length occur after irradiation ( Fig . 7a ) . To simulate possible collateral damage in a FRAP experi - ment , we performed additional CALI simulations using Vir - tual Cell with the same parameters as above , but with laser intensity only 5 – 10 % of that previously used in the simula - tions . Thus , during the CALI step , the laser beam inactivated only 10 % of EGFP - CP on the optical axis , instead of the > 95 % as in previous simulations ( Fig . 7b and 7c ) . The results show that no elongation of actin ﬁlaments developed after irradiation ( Fig . 7d ) . Thus , our simulations also indi - cate that in the case of EGFP - CP , the FRAP experiments can be performed using different sizes of laser beam ( 5 – 25 l m ) without developing a CALI phenotype . A Small Radius of Irradiation Does Not Produce the CALI Phenotype The experimental results reported earlier in Vitriol et al . [ 2007 ] demonstrated that when cells were irradiated with a smaller beam size with high laser intensity ( 5 l m ; 6 . 1 mW (cid:1) l m (cid:2) 2 ) , no increase in dorsal surface protrusive ridges occurred . In that study it was suggested that the CALI effects require inactivating a large enough fraction of the EGFP - CP pool to avoid rapid recovery of active EGFP - CP through dif - fusion . Using Virtual Cell , we tested this prediction . In the simulations , a beam diameter of 5 l m was used and the laser n 528 Kapustina et al . CYTOSKELETON intensity was varied from I ¼ 20 to 100 s (cid:2) 1 , which is consist - ent with the experimental conditions . The dissociation rate constant was taken as k off ¼ 0 . 1 s (cid:2) 1 for active EGFP - CP and k off ¼ 0 . 2 s (cid:2) 1 for inactivated EGFP - CP . The pseudocolor image of active EGFP - CP concentration immediately follow - ing CALI is shown in Fig . 7e . The recovery of active EGFP - CP in the center of the irradiated area and kinetics of ﬁlament length are presented in Figs . 7f and 7g . The results of this simulation demonstrate that ﬁlament length does not increase after a high intensity irradiation in a small area . Fig . 6 . Similarities in the location of morphological changes development between the experimental ( a – d ) and computational ( e ) results . Dashed circle shows the 1 / e 2 width of applied laser beam . ( a - c ) Microscope images of three different cells after CALI . Red lines show the area of the most pronounced dorsal ridges development . Scale bar in c represents 20 l m . ( d ) A pseudocolored fluorescent image of actin filament barbed - ends labeled with Alexa Fluor 568 - conjugated G - actin at 3 min post - CALI from Vitriol et al . [ 2007 ] . ( e ) Computational results of post - CALI showing where filament growth is most pronounced with white regions representing the longest filaments . CYTOSKELETON Modeling of FRAP and CALI Experiments 529 n The dissociation rate of photodamaged EGFP - CP is another parameter that can affect the development of mor - phological change after CALI . More rapid EGFP - CP dissoci - ation from ﬁlament tips after CALI will enhance the probability of VASP binding to vacant barbed ends before the diffusional replacement of active EGFP - CP occurs . Table S1 in Supporting Information presents results for different combinations of intensity and k off for inactive EGFP - CP , Fig . 7 . Simulation of CALI experiments with various irradiation conditions . ( a ) Montage showing FRAP of EGFP - CP ( center ) with no appreciable CALI phenotype developing ( DIC image before and after FRAP ) . Laser beam d ¼ 23 . 4 l m . ( b – d ) Simulation with intensity equal to 5 % of CALI intensity ( I ¼ 1 s (cid:2) 1 ) showing that no appreciable increase in filament length occurs in the simulation . ( e – g ) Results of CALI with small radius of irradiation showing that the simulation does not produce CALI phenotype when the CALI beam has a diameter of 5 l m and intensity of 20 s (cid:2) 1 . ( h – j ) CALI of EGFP - CP without Knockdown / Rescue does not produce changes in the phenotype . The total concentration of CP is 1 . 5 l M of which [ 1 / 2 ] is EGFP - CP , laser intensity I ¼ 7 s (cid:2) 1 . ( b , e , h ) show inactivation of EGFP - CP after CALI ; ( c , f , i , d , g , j ) show the recovery of active EGFP - CP ( c , f , i ) , and average filament length ( d , g , j ) in the center of CALI’ed region . n 530 Kapustina et al . CYTOSKELETON where ‘‘N’’ means that the simulation produced no ﬁlament growth while ‘‘Y’’ means that substantial ﬁlament growth occurred . The table shows that employing a 5 l m diameter of inactivation , with a laser intensity even ﬁve to 10 times higher than that normally used for wide beam CALI , does not produce increased ﬁlament growth unless the off rate for inactivated EGFP - CP is appreciably increased . CALI Without Knockdown of Endogenous CP CALI experiments also were performed on a cell line in which both endogenous CP and EGFP - CP are present [ Vit - riol et al . , 2007 ] . To reproduce this condition in the model , we assumed that total concentration of CP in the cell is higher than was used in the previous simulations and equal to 1 . 5 l M , with only half of this being EGFP - CP We ran simulations for 200 s to allow the new system to reach steady state . Next we performed CALI with a laser intensity that was able to inactivate only 50 % of available CP ( Figs . 7h and 7i ) . The results of this simulation ( Fig . 7j ) demon - strate that under this condition CALI does not induce changes in ﬁlament length . After VASP protein was introduced into the actin polymer - ization model , we repeated all our simulations for FRAP of EGFP - CP . The recovery kinetics were identical to those al - ready reported for the FRAP experiments ( data not shown ) , which showed that the VASP molecules did not interfere sub - stantially with CPs binding to the barbed ends . This means that under resting conditions , the local concentration of free barbed ends is not high enough to create conditions for VASP - BE cooperative behavior . This result also supports sev - eral experimental observations [ Sechi and Wehland , 2004 ; Pasic et al . , 2008 ] which demonstrated that in resting cells VASP molecules do not play signiﬁcant role in actin dynam - ics ; by contrast , VASP activity is required to regulate the rate of actin ﬁlament elongation and provide a mechanism to recruit barbed ends during assembly of specialized actin ﬁla - ment structures [ Sechi and Wehland , 2004 ; Pasic et al . , 2008 ] . Discussion Virtual Cell simulations described in this paper , employing a detailed model of actin polymerization in the context of the dendritic nucleation scheme [ Pollard , 2007 ] , provide insights into FRAP and CALI experiments involving CP and other actin binding proteins . The major results of computational modeling show that : ( 1 ) the CP dissociation rate constant must be around 0 . 1 s (cid:2) 1 , which is much larger than measured in vitro ; ( 2 ) in order to induce sustainable changes in cell morphology after CP inactivation , the cells require an anti - capping mechanism , which includes cooperativity with posi - tive feedback ; ( 3 ) at the low doses of irradiation that are employed in FRAP experiments , collateral CALI is not sufﬁ - cient to produce signiﬁcant alterations in morphology . Most analytical equations developed for FRAP analysis must assume that the bleach spot is small relative to the size of the ﬂuorescent compartment so that diffusional recovery is isotropic . Other limitations include the failure to account for the positioning of the bleached area within the 3D geom - etry of the cell and include the assumption of a homogenous prebleach distribution of the ﬂuorophores [ Carrero et al . , 2003 ; Sprague et al . , 2004 ; Kang and Kenworthy , 2008 ; Tsi - bidis and Ripoll , 2008 ] . The complexity of the cell geometry and its position with respect to the bleaching beam as well as uneven ﬂuorescent distributions in many cell experiments may violate the usual approximations . The numerical meth - ods employed in this work permit the use of realistic geome - tries and heterogeneous distributions as well as complex biochemical mechanisms that may govern the FRAP kinetics observed experimentally . In general , the use of the Virtual Cell modeling platform permits facile incorporation of spa - tial and biochemical details in the analysis of FRAP and CALI data and this allows extraction of more accurate and important kinetic constants . Comparison of the CALI simulations and the kinetics of morphological changes measured from actual CALI experi - ments showed that without an anticapping agent the induced morphological changes are smaller and persist for a signiﬁ - cantly shorter time than is experimentally observed . This was remedied in the simulation by including VASP as the anti - capping agent and resulted in simulations that reproduced the experimental kinetics . Furthermore , the area of dorsal ridge development , which is shifted from the center of irradi - ation toward the cell edge after CALI ( Fig . 6 ) , is also repro - duced in the simulation . This self - consistency provides an additional measure of conﬁdence in the validity of our pro - posed biophysical mechanism of VASP action as incorporated in our system . Finding the appropriate kinetic parameters for VASP mod - eling prompted us to look into the details of VASP binding kinetics . One hypothesis which reconciles the experimental work [ Applewhite et al . , 2007 ; Breitsprecher et al . , 2008 ] is that when VASP binds to a single isolated ﬁlament , the rate of dissociation is determined primarily by dissociation from the membrane . FRAP kinetics for the EVH1 domain respon - sible for membrane binding are rapid with a half - time (cid:4) 3 s [ Applewhite et al . , 2007 ] . We hypothesize that when the concentration of free barbed ends is sufﬁciently high , there is an increased probability for binding many VASPs in close proximity to each other . In such cases , VASP molecules clus - ter with the consequence that the dissociation rate from barbed ends is decreased . Results of the parameter search demonstrate that the best ﬁt to the experimental data is achieved with a coefﬁcient of cooperativity characterizing the inverse dependence of the VASP - BE dissociation on the con - centration of VASP - BE complexes of around 4 . Interestingly , this value is in agreement with experiments showing that tet - ramerization of VASP actively drives processive actin ﬁlament elongation [ Bachmann et al . , 1999 ; Breitsprecher et al . , 2008 ; Bear and Gertler , 2009 ] . Our model also suggest that recruitment of Ena / VASP proteins to the leading edge requires free barbed ends explaining why low to moderate doses of cytochalasin D ( 100 – 150 nM ) , which caps barbed ends , displaced all Ena / CYTOSKELETON Modeling of FRAP and CALI Experiments 531 n VASP proteins from the leading edge and ﬁlopodial tips [ Sechi and Wehland , 2004 ] . The proposed mechanism also explains why Ena / VASP proteins are concentrated at the leading edge in proportion to the protrusion velocity [ Rott - ner et al . , 1999 ] . As protrusion velocity and free barbed end density increase , greater levels of Ena / VASP proteins will bind the ﬁlaments creating a positive feedback effect which stabilizes Ena / VASP . We performed a simulation to test if this mechanism could initiate the ﬁlopodia formation . Figure 8 and Movie S1 in Supporting Information demonstrate the results for the situation where , after equilibration , additional molecules of active N - WASP were applied for a short time ( 5 s ) to a lim - ited membrane area ( Fig . 8a ) . The simulation shows that the increase of the barbed end concentrations due to N - WASP activation on the leading edge , can very quickly switch the competition between CP and VASP toward VASP binding ( Fig . 8c ) , leading to the increased actin polymerization . The pseudocolor images ( Fig . 8d ) of ﬁlament length distribution and the time plots of ﬁlament length and concentration ( Fig . 8b ) show that immediately after the stimulus , the ﬁla - ments become shorter and denser with a higher concentra - tion of free barbed ends . The excess free barbed end quickly exhausts the pool of available CP increasing the VASP bind - ing . The growing concentration of VASP - BE complexes cre - ates a positive feedback via clustering of the complexes and results in ﬁlament elongation ( Fig . 8d , t ¼ 100 s ) and possi - bly ﬁlopodia - like protrusions on the leading edge . Vitriol et al . [ 2007 ] also showed that a CALI induced dor - sal ridge development ensues only when CP is totally replaced by EGFP - CP . The simulation , which incorporated VASP as an anticapper , also showed that no appreciable CALI phenotype could be obtained without the knockdown - rescue feature of this experiment ( Figs . 7h – 7j ) . Without this , the morphological changes observed in the CALI experi - ments are not developed because the concentration of endog - enous CP , unaffected by CALI irradiation , is sufﬁcient to successfully compete with VASP molecules and replace the photodamaged CP so that signiﬁcant increase in ﬁlament length does not occur . Fig . 8 . Hypothetical mechanism to develop filopodial protrusion after N - WASP activation . ( a ) The position of additional N - WASP application . Concentration of applied stimulus is 100 molecules (cid:1) l m (cid:2) 2 . Time of stimulus application is 5 s . ( b ) Time dependence for nor - malized filament length and filament concentration in the center of the stimulus zone . ( c ) Time dependence of the relationship between con - centrations of barbed ends complexed with CP ( red ) and with VASP ( blue ) . ( d ) Pseudocolor images illustrate the time development of long filaments on the cell edge . Animated version of simulation are available as Movie S1 in Supporting Information . n 532 Kapustina et al . CYTOSKELETON Previously it also has been documented that , under condi - tions when a successful FRAP experiment was conducted , no CALI phenotype was detected [ Vitriol et al . , 2007 ] . Our simulations demonstrated that a FRAP experiment with EGFP - CP does not produce sufﬁcient collateral damage from CALI to effect changes in cell morphology ; this is because the intensity of the photobleaching beam is not high enough to produce the critical concentration of free barbed ends that will induce ﬁlament growth before diffusional replacement of EGFP - CP occurs . This simulation is impor - tant because the successful application of CALI in cell biol - ogy highlights concerns about whether appreciable photodamage occurs during FRAP experiments . These results allow us to formulate a working hypothesis for the case where the quantum yield for photobleaching is signiﬁcantly greater than that for CALI and the exchange between CALI’ed protein and the undamaged protein is rapid com - pared to the half - time for development of the biological phe - notype . In such cases , bleaching can be accomplished with much lower intensity , meaning that only a minute fraction of the protein actually experiences the CALI effect . Because of the rapid exchange with the normal , undamaged protein , any damaged protein is quickly replaced by the normal pro - tein before phenotypic effects can develop . In this case , FRAP experiments can be performed without danger of inducing an inactivation effect . However , photochemical effects in the cytosol are a complicated function of the par - ticular ﬂuorescent protein and the fusion protein itself , so that the independence of FRAP and CALI should be checked for each case . Acknowledgments This work was supported by US Public Health Service grants from the National Institutes for General Medical Sciences grant RO1 GM078994 ( to T . C . E . ) , the Cell Migration Con - sortium ( U54 GM064346 ( to K . J . and L . M . L . ) , the National Center for Research Resources P41 RR013186 ( L . M . L . ) , and the NIH Roadmap National Technology Cen - ters for Networks and Pathways U54 RR022232 ( L . M . L . ) . This work was prompted by a suggestion from and initial experiments with Harold Erickson , Duke University . The authors also acknowledge many helpful discussions with James Bear , UNC - CH . References Andrianantoandro E , Blanchoin L , Sept D , McCammon JA , Pollard TD . 2001 . Kinetic mechanism of end - to - end annealing of actin ﬁlaments . J Mol Biol 312 ( 4 ) : 721 – 730 . Andrianantoandro E , Pollard TD . 2006 . Mechanism of actin ﬁlament turn - over by severing and nucleation at different concentrations of ADF / coﬁlin . Mol Cell 24 ( 1 ) : 13 – 23 . Anton IM , Jones GE , Wandosell F , Geha R , Ramesh N . 2007 . WASP - inter - acting protein ( WIP ) : working in polymerisation and much more . Trends Cell Biol 17 ( 11 ) : 555 – 562 . Applewhite DA , Barzik M , Kojima SI , Svitkina TM , Gertler FB , Borisy GG . 2007 . Ena / VASP proteins have an anti - capping , independent function in ﬁlopodia formation . Mol Biol Cell 18 ( 7 ) : 2579 – 2591 . Bachmann C , Fischer L , Walter U , Reinhard M . 1999 . The EVH2 domain of the vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein mediates tetramerization , F - actin binding , and actin bundle formation . J Biol Chem 274 ( 33 ) : 23549 – 23557 . Barzik M , Kotova TI , Higgs HN , Hazelwood L , Hanein D , Gertler FB , Schafer DA . 2005 . Ena / VASP proteins enhance actin polymerization in the presence of barbed end capping proteins . J Biol Chem 280 ( 31 ) : 28653 – 28662 . Bear JE , Gertler FB . 2009 . Ena / VASP : towards resolving a pointed contro - versy at the barbed end . J Cell Sci 122 ( 12 ) : 1947 – 1953 . Bear JE , Svitkina TM , Krause M , Schafer DA , Loureiro JJ , Strasser GA , Maly IV , Chaga OY , Cooper JA , Borisy GG , Gertler FB . 2002 . Antagonism between Ena / VASP proteins and actin ﬁlament capping regulates ﬁbroblast motility . Cell 109 ( 4 ) : 509 – 521 . Beltzner CC , Pollard TD . 2008 . Pathway of actin ﬁlament branch formation by Arp2 / 3 complex . J Biol Chem 283 ( 11 ) : 7135 – 7144 . Blanchoin L , Pollard TD . 1998 . Interaction of actin monomers with Acan - thamoeba actophorin ( ADF / coﬁlin ) and proﬁlin . J Biol Chem 273 ( 39 ) : 25106 – 25111 . Blanchoin L , Pollard TD . 1999 . Mechanism of interaction of Acanthamoeba actophorin ( ADF / Coﬁlin ) with actin ﬁlaments . J Biol Chem 274 ( 22 ) : 15538 – 15546 . Blanchoin L , Pollard TD . 2002 . Hydrolysis of ATP by polymerized actin depends on the bound divalent cation but not proﬁlin . Biochemistry 41 ( 2 ) : 597 – 602 . Blanchoin L , Pollard TD , Mullins RD . 2000 . Interactions of ADF / coﬁlin . Arp2 / 3 complex , capping protein and proﬁlin in remodeling of branched actin ﬁlament networks . Curr Biol 10 ( 20 ) : 1273 – 1282 . Breitsprecher D , Kiesewetter AK , Linkner J , Urbanke C , Resch GP , Small JV , Faix J . 2008 . Clustering of VASP actively drives processive , WH2 domain - mediated actin ﬁlament elongation . EMBO J 27 ( 22 ) : 2943 – 2954 . Cai L , Marshall TW , Uetrecht AC , Schafer DA , Bear JE . 2007 . Coronin 1B coordinates Arp2 / 3 complex and coﬁlin activities at the leading edge . Cell 128 ( 5 ) : 915 – 929 . Cao W , Goodarzi JP , De La Cruz EM . 2006 . Energetics and kinetics of cooperative coﬁlin - actin ﬁlament interactions . J Mol Biol 361 ( 2 ) : 257 – 267 . Carlier MF , Jean C , Rieger KJ , Lenfant M , Pantaloni D . 1993 . Modulation of the interaction between G - actin and thymosin beta 4 by the ATP / ADP ratio : possible implication in the regulation of actin dynamics . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90 ( 11 ) : 5034 – 5038 . Carlsson AE . 2006 . Stimulation of actin polymerization by ﬁlament sever - ing . Biophys J 90 ( 2 ) : 413 – 422 . Carlsson AE , Wear MA , Cooper JA . 2004 . End versus side branching by Arp2 / 3 complex . Biophys J 86 ( 2 ) : 1074 – 1081 . Carrero G , McDonald D , Crawford E , de Vries G , Hendzel MJ . 2003 . Using FRAP and mathematical modeling to determine the in vivo kinetics of nuclear proteins . Methods 29 ( 1 ) : 14 – 28 . Chesarone MA , Goode BL . 2009 . Actin nucleation and elongation factors : mechanisms and interplay . Curr Opin Cell Biol 21 ( 1 ) : 28 – 37 . Chhabra ES , Higgs HN . 2007 . The many faces of actin : matching assembly factors with cellular structures . Nat Cell Biol 9 : 1110 – 1121 . Cooper JA , Sept D . 2008 . New insights into mechanism and regulation of actin capping protein . Int Rev Cell Mol Biol 267 : 183 – 206 . Digman MA , Sengupta P , Wiseman PW , Brown CM , Horwitz AR , Gratton E . 2005 . Fluctuation correlation spectroscopy with a laser - scanning micro - scope : exploiting the hidden time structure . Biophys J 88 ( 5 ) : L33 – L36 . DiNubile MJ , Cassimeris L , Joyce M , Zigmond SH . 1995 . Actin ﬁlament barbed - end capping activity in neutrophil lysates : the role of capping pro - tein - beta 2 . Mol Biol Cell 6 ( 12 ) : 1659 – 1671 . Ditlev JA , Vacanti NM , Novak IL , Loew LM . 2009 . An open model of actin dendritic nucleation . Biophys J 96 ( 9 ) : 3529 – 3542 . Dobereiner HG , Dubin - Thaler B , Giannone G , Xenias HS , Sheetz MP . 2004 . Dynamic phase transitions in cell spreading . Phys Rev Lett 93 ( 10 ) : 108105 / 1 – 108105 / 4 . Fujiwara I , Vavylonis D , Pollard TD . 2007 . Polymerization kinetics of ADP - and ADP - Pi - actin determined by ﬂuorescence microscopy . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 ( 21 ) : 8827 – 8832 . CYTOSKELETON Modeling of FRAP and CALI Experiments 533 n Godschmidt - Clermont PJ , Machesky LM , Doberstein SK , Pollard TD . 1991 . Mechanism of the interaction of human platelet proﬁlin with actin . J Cell Biol 113 : 1081 – 1089 . Hug C , Jay PY , Reddy I , McNally JG , Bridgman PC , Elson EL , Cooper JA . 1995 . Capping protein - levels inﬂuence actin assembly and cell motility in dictyostelium . Cell 81 ( 4 ) : 591 – 600 . Iwasa JH , Mullins RD . 2007 . Spatial and temporal relationships between actin - ﬁlament nucleation , capping , and disassembly . Curr Biol 17 ( 5 ) : 395 – 406 . Jacobson K , Rajfur Z , Vitriol E , Hahn K . 2008 . Chromophore - assisted laser inactivation in cell biology . Trends Cell Biol 18 ( 9 ) : 443 – 450 . Kang F , Purich DL , Southwick FS . 1999 . Proﬁlin promotes barbed - end actin ﬁlament assembly without lowering the critical concentration . J Biol Chem 274 ( 52 ) : 36963 – 36972 . Kang M , Kenworthy AK . 2008 . A closed - form analytic expression for FRAP formula for the binding diffusion model . Biophys J 95 ( 2 ) : L13 – L15 . Kinosian HJ , Selden LA , Gershman LC , Estes JE . 2000 . Interdependence of proﬁlin , cation , and nucleotide binding to vertebrate non - muscle actin . Bio - chemistry 39 ( 43 ) : 13176 – 13188 . Kinosian HJ , Selden LA , Gershman LC , Estes JE . 2002 . Actin ﬁlament barbed end elongation with nonmuscle MgATP - actin and MgADP - actin in the presence of proﬁlin . Biochemistry 41 ( 21 ) : 6734 – 6743 . Kuhn JR , Pollard TD . 2007 . Single molecule kinetic analysis of actin ﬁla - ment capping . Polyphosphoinositides do not dissociate capping proteins . J Biol Chem 282 ( 38 ) : 28014 – 28024 . Lai FP , Szczodrak M , Block J , Faix J , Breitsprecher D , Mannherz HG , Stra - dal TE , Dunn GA , Small JV , Rottner K . 2008 . Arp2 / 3 complex interactions and actin network turnover in lamellipodia . EMBO J 27 ( 7 ) : 982 – 992 . Laurent V , Loisel TP , Harbeck B , Wehman A , Grobe L , Jockusch BM , Wehland J , Gertler FB , Carlier MF . 1999 . Role of proteins of the Ena / VASP family in actin - based motility of listeria monocytogenes . J Cell Biol 144 ( 6 ) : 1245 – 1258 . Le Clainche C , Carlier MF . 2008 . Regulation of actin assembly associated with protrusion and adhesion in cell migration . Physiol Rev 88 ( 2 ) : 489 – 513 . Mahaffy RE , Pollard TD . 2006 . Kinetics of the formation and dissociation of actin ﬁlament branches mediated by Arp2 / 3 complex . Biophys J 91 ( 9 ) : 3519 – 3528 . Melki R , Fievez S , Carlier MF . 1996 . Continuous monitoring of Pi release following nucleotide hydrolysis in actin or tubulin assembly using 2 - amino - 6 - mercapto - 7 - methylpurine ribonucleoside and purine - nucleoside phospho - rylase as an enzyme - linked assay . Biochemistry 35 ( 37 ) : 12038 – 12045 . Miyoshi T , Tsuji T , Higashida C , Hertzog M , Fujita A , Narumiya S , Scita G , Watanabe N . 2006 . Actin turnover - dependent fast dissociation of capping protein in the dendritic nucleation actin network : evidence of fre - quent ﬁlament severing . J Cell Biol 175 ( 6 ) : 947 – 955 . Moraru II , Schaff JC , Slepchenko BM , Blinov ML , Morgan F , Lakshminar - ayana A , Gao F , Li Y , Loew LM . 2008 . Virtual cell modeling and simulation software environment . IET Syst Biol 2 : 352 – 362 . Nachmias VT . 1993 . Small actin - binding proteins : the beta - thymosin family . Curr Opin Cell Biol 5 ( 1 ) : 56 – 62 . Novak IL , Gao F , Choi YS , Resasco D , Schaff JC , Slepchenko BM . 2007 . Diffusion on a curved surface coupled to diffusion in the volume : applica - tion to cell biology . J Comput Phys 226 ( 2 ) : 1271 – 1290 . Pasic L , Kotova T , Schafer DA . 2008 . Ena / VASP proteins capture actin ﬁlament barbed ends . J Biol Chem 283 ( 15 ) : 9814 – 9819 . Paul AS , Pollard TD . 2009 . Review of the mechanism of processive actin ﬁlament elongation by formins . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 66 ( 8 ) : 606 – 617 . Pollard TD . 2007 . Regulation of actin ﬁlament assembly by Arp2 / 3 complex and formins . Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 36 : 451 – 477 . Pollard TD , Borisy GG . 2003 . Cellular motility driven by assembly and dis - assembly of actin ﬁlaments . Cell 112 ( 4 ) : 453 – 465 . Pollard TD , Cooper JA . 1986 . Actin and actin - binding proteins . A critical evaluation of mechanisms and functions . Annu Rev Biochem 55 : 987 – 1035 . Ponti A , Machacek M , Gupton SL , Waterman - Storer CM , Danuser G . 2004 . Two distinct actin networks drive the protrusion of migrating cells . Science 305 ( 5691 ) : 1782 – 1786 . Ressad F , Didry D , Egile C , Pantaloni D , Carlier MF . 1999 . Control of actin ﬁlament length and turnover by actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF / coﬁlin ) in the presence of capping proteins and ARP2 / 3 complex . J Biol Chem 274 ( 30 ) : 20970 – 20976 . Ressad F , Didry D , Xia GX , Hong Y , Chua NH , Pantaloni D , Carlier MF . 1998 . Kinetic analysis of the interaction of actin - depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) / coﬁlin with G - and F - actins . Comparison of plant and human ADFs and effect of phosphorylation . J Biol Chem 273 ( 33 ) : 20894 – 20902 . Rottner K , Behrendt B , Small JV , Wehland J . 1999 . VASP dynamics during lamellipodia protrusion . Nat Cell Biol 1 ( 5 ) : 321 – 322 . Roy P , Rajfur Z , Pomorski P , Jacobson K . 2002 . Microscope - based techni - ques to study cell adhesion and migration . Nat Cell Biol 4 ( 4 ) : E91 – E96 . Samarin S , Romero S , Kocks C , Didry D , Pantaloni D , Carlier MF . 2003 . How VASP enhances actin - based motility . J Cell Biol 163 ( 1 ) : 131 – 142 . Schafer DA , Jennings PB , Cooper JA 1996 . Dynamics of capping protein and actin assembly in vitro : uncapping barbed ends by polyphosphoinositi - des . J Cell Biol 135 ( 1 ) : 169 – 179 . Schaff J , Fink CC , Slepchenko B , Carson JH , Loew LM . 1997 . A general computational framework for modeling cellular structure and function . Bio - phys J 73 : 1135 – 1146 . Schaff JC , Slepchenko BM , Choi Y , Wagner J , Resasco D , Loew LM . 2001 . Analysis of non - linear dynamics on arbitrary geometries with the Virtual Cell . Chaos 11 : 115 – 131 . Sechi AS , Wehland J . 2004 . ENA / VASP proteins : multifunctional regulators of actin cytoskeleton dynamics . Front Biosci 9 : 1294 – 1310 . Sept D , Xu J , Pollard TD , McCammon JA . 1999 . Annealing accounts for the length of actin ﬁlaments formed by spontaneous polymerization . Biophys J 77 ( 6 ) : 2911 – 2919 . Slepchenko BM , Schaff JC , Choi YS . 2000 . Numerical approach to fast reaction - diffusion systems : application to buffered calcium waves in bistable models . J Comput Phys 162 : 186 – 218 . Slepchenko BM , Schaff JC , Macara I , Loew LM . 2003 . Quantitative cell biology with the Virtual Cell . Trends Cell Biol 13 ( 11 ) : 570 – 576 . Sprague BL , Pego RL , Stavreva DA , McNally JG . 2004 . Analysis of binding reactions by ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching . Biophys J 86 ( 6 ) : 3473 – 3495 . Sukumvanich P , DesMarais V , Sarmiento CV , Wang Y , Ichetovkin I , Mou - neimne G , Almo S , Condeelis J . 2004 . Cellular localization of activated N - WASP using a conformation - sensitive antibody . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 59 ( 2 ) : 141 – 152 . Trichet L , Sykes C , Plastino J . 2008 . Relaxing the actin cytoskeleton for ad - hesion and movement with Ena / VASP . J Cell Biol 181 ( 1 ) : 19 – 25 . Tsibidis GD , Ripoll J . 2008 . Investigation of binding mechanisms of nuclear proteins using confocal scanning laser microscopy and FRAP . J Theor Biol 253 ( 4 ) : 755 – 768 . Vitriol EA , Uetrecht AC , Shen FM , Jacobson K , Bear JE . 2007 . Enhanced EGFP - chromophore - assisted laser inactivation using deﬁcient cells rescued with functional EGFP - fusion proteins . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 ( 16 ) : 6702 – 6707 . Wear MA , Cooper JA . 2004 . Capping protein : new insights into mechanism and regulation . Trends Biochem Sci 29 ( 8 ) : 418 – 428 . n 534 Kapustina et al . CYTOSKELETON