Hierarchy and co - evolution processes in urban systems Juste Raimbault 1 , 2 , 3 1 CASA , UCL 2 UPS CNRS 3611 ISC - PIF 3 UMR CNRS 8504 Géographie - cités juste . raimbault @ polytechnique . edu Abstract The concept of hierarchy in complex systems is tightly linked to co - evolutionary processes . We pro - pose here to explore it in the case of the co - evolution between transportation networks and territories . More precisely , we extend a co - evolution model for systems of cities and infrastructure networks , and systematically study its behavior following speciﬁc hierarchy indicators we introduce . We show that population hierarchy and network hierarchy are tightly linked , but that a broad range of regimes can exist . Model exploration furthermore yields non - trivial stylized facts which can be taken into account for territorial planning on such long time scales with co - evolutionary processes . 1 Introduction 1 . 1 Complexity and hierarchy Complex systems with emergent properties produced by self - organization processes are also most of the time exhibiting some kind of hierarchical structure . Although the term of hierarchy has several diﬀerent deﬁnitions and uses in very diﬀerent disciplines , ranging from political science ( Crumley , 1987 ) to physics ( Mones et al . , 2012 ) , it seems to be intrinsically linked with complexity . Lane ( 2006 ) classiﬁes four frequent uses of the term hierarchy , namely ( i ) order hierarchy corresponding to the existence of an order relation for a set of elements , ( ii ) inclusion hierarchy which is a recursive inclusion of elements within each other , ( iii ) control hierarchy which is the “common sense” use of the term as ranked entities controlling other entities with lower rank , and ( iv ) level hierarchy which captures the multi - scale nature of complex systems as ontologically distinct levels ( or scales ) . For the particular study of social systems , he concludes that hierarchical levels may be entangled , that upward and downward causations are both essential , and that at least three levels ( micro , meso , macro ) are generally needed to capture the complexity of such systems . In a more philosophical account of complexity , Morin ( 1980 - 2005 ) constructs a hierarchical method of interdisciplinary knowledge , insists on the tension between dependancy and interdependency or between opening and closing ( rejoining ideas from Holland ( 2012 ) ) , and develops an implicit hierarchy of social systems when hypothesizing the emergence of third - type societies ( swarm intelligence between humans ) . Diﬀerent types of complexity may be related to diﬀerent types of hierarchy as Raimbault ( 2019 a ) proposes , and hierarchy would indeed be endogenous to theories of complexity . Allen et al . ( 2017 ) develop a multiscale information theory in which the information proﬁle across scales , or hierarchical levels , allows quantifying the complexity of a system . The complex adaptive system theory of Holland ( 2012 ) considers complex systems as systems of boundaries that ﬁlter signals , implying an inclusion and scale hierarchy between boundaries . Theories of scaling as the one synthesized by West ( 2017 ) rely on the quantiﬁcation of hierarchy in certain dimensions of systems , captured by exponents of scaling laws . Hierarchy may be endogenous to complexity , or to knowledge of the complex itself , since for example Fanelli and Glänzel ( 2013 ) provides empirical evidence of a “hierarchy of sciences” , in the sense of possibility to reach theoretical and methodological consensus . This corresponds in some sense to the “ontological complexity” of Pumain 1 a r X i v : 2 0 01 . 11989v1 [ phy s i c s . s o c - ph ] 31 J a n 2020 ( 2003 ) , which relies on the number of viewpoints needed to grasp a system , or the number of perspectives in an applied perspectivism framework ( Raimbault , 2020 a ) . Wether linked to systems themselves or to models and theories of them , hierarchy appears to be tightly linked to complexity . 1 . 2 Territorial systems and hierarchy Urban systems , and more generally territorial systems , are particularly linked to hierarchy ( Pumain , 2006 c ) : they indeed encompass all the meanings aforementioned ( order hierarchy between settlement sizes for example , inclusion hierarchy between territorial boundaries , control hierarchy through governance structure , and more importantly level hierarchy through their multi - scalar nature ) . Batty ( 2006 ) shows that hierarchies are inherent to urban systems , as fat tail distribution of settlement size are already pro - duced by simple models of urban growth , and suggests also that urban design processes imply underlying overlapping hierarchies . Pumain ( 2006 a ) links hierarchical selection and hierarchical diﬀusion of innova - tion across cities to the long - term dynamics of urban systems . Pumain ( 2019 ) recalls that interactions in systems of cities are tightly linked to the emergence of urban hierarchies . Generally , scaling laws in urban systems can be considered as systematic manifestations of a hierarchical structure ( Pumain , 2004 ) , which is more complex than a simple order hierarchy , since scaling patterns vary with the deﬁnition of cities ( Cottineau et al . , 2017 ) Hierarchical properties can be observed on several dimensions of urban systems . For example , trans - portation systems are hierarchical in their structure ( Yerra and Levinson , 2005 ) but also patterns of use such as transportation ﬂows ( Jiang , 2009 ) . Urban hierarchies are tightly related to hierarchies of their transportation links ( Bigotte et al . , 2010 ) , and diﬀerent modes of transportation networks are concerned including the air network ( Dang and Peng , 2012 ) . The global distribution of multinational ﬁrms also exhibits strong hierarchical patterns ( Godfrey and Zhou , 1999 ) . Governance structures are organized fol - lowing both an inclusion hierarchy for administrative areas ( Li et al . , 2015 ) but also level hierarchies for example for economic processes ( Liao and Gaudin , 2017 ) . Territorial systems are therefore intrinsically hierarchical in their multiple dimensions , what is tightly linked to their diﬀerent complexities ( Raimbault , 2019 d ) . 1 . 3 Co - evolution and hierarchy Hierarchy in complex systems is furthermore intrinsically linked to the concept of co - evolution . Following Lane ( 2006 ) , the approach to complex adaptive systems proposed by Holland ( 2012 ) integrates levels and nested hierarchies , since it considers complex systems as ensembles of boundaries that ﬁlter signals . Hol - land ( 2012 ) formalizes complex adaptive systems as these structures of boundaries which form co - evolution niches for the elements and subsystems within a given boundary . The concept is slightly diﬀerent from the concept of ecological niche which more generally designates a region in a parameter space quantifying the environment in which a species can live . In ecology , Pires et al . ( 2011 ) show that the emergence of mutualistic species networks imply some feeding hierarchy . In the context of economic and geographical processes , Volberda and Lewin ( 2003 ) distinguish for the co - evolution of ﬁrms between a genealogical hierarchy ( evolutionary processes in the biological sense ) and an ecological hierarchy ( co - evolutionary economic processes ) . Liu et al . ( 2013 ) suggest that air networks co - evolve with ﬁrm networks and that their hierarchies are related therethrough . Raimbault ( 2019 b ) introduces a co - evolution to study interactions between transportation networks and territories , which from an urban system viewpoint in the sense of Pumain et al . ( 2006 ) relates to urban hierarchies . Levinson et al . ( 2007 ) conﬁrm a correspondance between urban and network hierarchies in a co - evolution model . Within the SimpopNet model for the co - evolution of cities and networks ( Schmitt , 2014 ) , discrete hierarchical level of network links corresponding to successively improved transportation technologies are a core component of simulation rules . Raimbault ( 2020 b ) furthermore showed that the level of initial urban hierarchy in terms of rank - size slope had signiﬁcant impacts on model outcomes . Studying hierarchies in the context 2 of co - evolution transportation networks and territories is thus a relevant entry to the underlying concepts , including complexity , hierarchy , co - evolution and territorial systems . 1 . 4 Proposed approach Pumain ( 2006 b ) recalls in the context of social systems some remaining open methodological questions : how are hierarchies produced ? How do hierarchies evolve ? What discriminates between continuous and discrete hierarchical organisations ? Our contribution brings new elements of answer to the ﬁrst two questions above , in the particular case of co - evolution of transportation networks and territories . It situates at the intersection of the three previously given contexts , namely hierarchy in complex systems and more particularly territorial systems , seen through the prism of co - evolutive processes . More precisely , we propose to systematically explore a macroscopic co - evolution model for cities and networks , and study its properties regarding both hierarchies of each components , in terms of ﬁnal hier - archy produced but also in terms of the relations between these hierarchies . Establishing links between microscopic processes and emergent hierarchical patterns through model exploration informs on possi - ble drivers of these macroscopic patterns . Our contribution relies on three aspects : ( i ) we introduce a comprehensive set of indicators tailored to the study of hierarchy in territorial systems ; ( ii ) we system - atically explore the version with a physical network of the co - evolution model introduced by Raimbault ( 2019 c ) which only studied extensively the virtual network ; and ( iii ) we apply a novelty search algorithm to establish the feasible space of hierarchy patterns which can be produced by the model . The rest of this chapter is organized as follows . We ﬁrst describe the model used and introduce a novel set of indicators to quantify hierarchy in territorial systems . We then describe the results of a grid exploration of the co - evolution model using these indicators , both with the physical and virtual networks , and establish the feasible space of model outputs . We ﬁnally discuss the implications of these results for hierarchy within co - evolutionary processes . 2 Co - evolution model 2 . 1 Context The issue of interactions between transportation networks and territories remains an open question for which diﬀerent approaches have been proposed Oﬀner ( 1993 ) ; Oﬀner et al . ( 2014 ) . Raimbault ( 2018 a ) has explored a co - evolution approach , in the sense that both dynamics have circular causal relationships . More precisely , Raimbault ( 2019 b ) introduces a deﬁnition of co - evolution in that particular context , based on the aforementioned co - evolution niches ( Holland , 2012 ) , for which an empirical characterization method based on lagged correlations is developed ( Raimbault , 2017 ) . As its application on empirical data yield various or inconclusive results , the use of simulation models is a medium to indirectly link microscopic processes with a potentially emergent co - evolution , both at the mesoscopic scale ( Raimbault , 2019 e ) and at the macroscopic scale ( Raimbault , 2019 c ) . This latest model is the one used in this study . 2 . 2 Model description The co - evolution model for cities and transportation networks at the macroscopic scale extends the spatial interaction model introduced by Raimbault ( 2018 b ) by adding dynamical speeds to network links . A system of cities is represented as cities as agents and network links between these . Interaction ﬂows are determined with a spatial interaction model , and they determine city growth rates , while network links evolve according to the ﬂow traversing them . See Raimbault ( 2019 c ) for a full mathematical description of the model . We describe below the speciﬁcation and parameters used here . More precisely , a time step of the simulation model consists in the following steps : 3 1 . cities evolve their populations following gravity interaction ﬂows of unit weight w G , as a scaling function of population with exponent γ G , and with a distance decay parameter d G ; cities do not have endogenous growth in our setting ( Gibrat model ) as we focus our study on interactions ; 2 . ﬂows are assigned to network links , either ( i ) to the direct link between the two cities in the case of the virtual network , or ( ii ) through a shortest path assignment algorithm ( betweenness centrality ) in the case of a physical network ; 3 . links evolve their speed with a thresholded self - reinforcement function of ﬂows , with maximal time travel decrease g M ; a threshold for ﬂows above which ( resp . below which ) speed increase ( resp . decrease ) determined by a ﬂow quantile parameter φ ( q ) 0 ; and as a scaling relation to relative ﬂows with exponent γ N . The model can be initialized with real data or by generating a synthetic initial conﬁguration which has its own parameters ( Raimbault , Cottineau , Le Texier , Le Nechet and Reuillon , 2019 ) . In our case , N = 30 cities are randomly distributed in an uniform space of width W = 200 km , and population follow a rank - size law with parameter α S . For the virtual network case , all pari links are initialized with pace one , while for the physical network case a perturbed grid network is used as described in Raimbault ( 2019 c ) . We show in Fig . 1 model runs for synthetic virtual and physical networks , and for the French system of cities with railway data . We visually observe that the number of important links is smaller in the physical case as it could be expected as infrastructure is shared by neighboring ﬂows . For the real system , the most important links emerging correspond roughly to the actual existing high - speed lines . In our exploration settings , the model has thus six parameters ( for which we give practical boundaries in experiments ) : the initial population hierarchy α S ∈ [ 0 . 1 ; 2 . 0 ] , the gravity interaction weight w G ∈ [ 1 e − 4 ; 1 e − 2 ] , the gravity interaction hierarchy γ G ∈ [ 0 . 0 ; 5 . 0 ] , the gravity decay d G ∈ [ 1 . 0 ; 500 . 0 ] , the network maximal speed growth g M ∈ [ 0 . 0 ; 0 . 05 ] , the network growth hierarchy γ N ∈ [ 0 . 0 ; 5 . 0 ] , and the network threshold quantile φ ( q ) 0 ∈ [ 0 ; 1 ] . 2 . 3 Quantifying hierarchy in systems of cities Indicators to understand macroscopic trajectories in simulated systems of cities have been introduced by Raimbault ( 2020 b ) . They include some related to hierarchy but are not speciﬁcally focused on this aspect . We propose now to give a broad set of indicators to capture diﬀerent dimensions of hierarchy . 2 . 3 . 1 Static quantiﬁcation of hierarchy The most straightforward way to quantify hierarchy is to use Zipf rank - size law in the case of population , or more generally scaling laws for other dimensions of the urban system . Let Y i the variable for which the hierarchy is estimated . Assuming i is ordered in decreasing order , the Ordinary Least Square estimation of log ( Y i ) ∼ log ( i ) gives an estimation of the rank - size slope α [ Y ] which is a proxy of hierarchy . Additional indicators to explain more accurately the size distribution include for example the primacy index . We take a generic approach to this issue of more degree of freedoms to capture the distribution and use a piecewise linear regression , implementing the algorithm of Muggeo ( 2003 ) . Given the distribution observed empirically and the ones generated by simulation models , going beyond one breakpoint does not bring signiﬁcant improvement . We consider thus the estimated slopes and breakpoint as reﬁned indicators of the hierarchy , given as α 1 [ Y ] , α 2 [ Y ] and Ψ [ Y ] . Finally , to quantify interactions between two aspects , a correlation between two hierarchies informs they correspond in terms of ranks , and is computed with r s [ X i , Y i ] for two variables X i , Y i with r s an estimator of Spearman rank correlation . 4 Figure 1 : Examples of diﬀerent setups for the co - evolution model . ( Top row ) Synthetic system of cities with virtual network , initial conﬁguration ( left ) and after t f = 30 time steps ( right ) , with parameters α S = 1 , φ ( q ) 0 = 0 . 9 , g M = 0 . 01 , γ N = 2 , w G = 4 . 7 e − 3 , d G = 248 , γ G = 0 . 9 ; ( Middle row ) Synthetic system of cities with physical network , initial conﬁguration ( left ) and after t f = 30 time steps ( right ) , with parameters φ ( q ) 0 = 0 . 7 , g M = 0 . 05 and the same other parameters than the ﬁrst conﬁguration ; ( Bottom row ) French system of cities simulated between 1975 ( left ) and 1999 ( right ) with three time steps , with parameters φ ( q ) 0 = 0 . 8 , g M = 0 . 2 , γ N = 4 and same others . City color and size give the population and link thickness the speed ( rescaled at each time step ) . 5 2 . 3 . 2 Dynamical indicators The rank correlation between initial and ﬁnal distribution of a variable will measure how much an ordering hierarchy was modiﬁed , which is diﬀerent from the variation of hierarchy given the variations of previous indicators such as the rank - size slope . Dynamical indicators for hierarchy regimes can furthermore be deﬁned in several ways : dynamics of the rank correlation between two variables , time - series properties of rank - size trajectories , lagged rank correlations . Studying these extensively is out of the scope of this chapter , and we will consider diﬀerences between initial and ﬁnal hierarchies to capture dynamics . 2 . 3 . 3 Spatialized indicators Finally , some spatial extension of hierarchy indicators can be introduced . A spatial non - stationary version of a scaling law would write Y i ( (cid:126)x ) ∼ (cid:16) X i ( (cid:126)x ) X 0 ( (cid:126)x ) (cid:17) α ( (cid:126)x ) , where (cid:126)x is the spatial position and assuming that samples can be deﬁned at each point in space . In practice , a discrete version could be more relevant , for which (cid:126)x k center point are deﬁned , samples consist of points within Thiessen polygons of centers and the exponents are estimated for each center α ( (cid:126)x k ) . Some heuristics should be developed to estimate such a discrete non - parametric scaling law , and also remains out of our scope here . 3 Results 3 . 1 Implementation The model is implemented in NetLogo Tisue and Wilensky ( 2004 ) , which is a good compromise between performance and interactivity , the former being necessary with a model with such a spatialized network . The model is explored using the OpenMOLE model exploration software Reuillon et al . ( 2013 ) to use integrated design of experiments ( DOE ) and exploration methods , but also the seamless access its provide to high performance computing infrastructures . Source code for model , exploration scripts , result analysis , and results are available on a git repository at https : / / github . com / JusteRaimbault / CoevolutionNwTerritories . Large dataset for simulation results are available on the dataverse at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7910 / DVN / 6GUKOX . 3 . 2 Hierarchy patterns We now turn to a ﬁrst basic exploration of the model , using a grid exploration of the parameter space . A ﬁrst broad grid varying all parameters with 3 steps each and 20 model repetitions , for both virtual and physical models , allows identifying the dimensions along which no signiﬁcant variation or qualitative variation in model behavior occur . We then ﬁx a more targeted exploration by taking g M = 0 . 05 and γ N = 1 and varying α S ∈ { 0 . 5 , 1 . 0 , 1 . 5 } , φ ( q ) 0 ∈ { 0 . 1 , 0 . 5 , 0 . 9 } , γ G ∈ [ 0 . 5 ; 1 . 5 ] with a step of 0 . 2 , and d G ∈ [ 10 ; 210 ] with a step of 50 . We consider the static indicators of hierarchy and their variation between initial and ﬁnal time , applied on city populations P and city closeness centrality C . The variation of some indicators exhibiting an interesting behavior are shown for the model with the virtual network in Fig . 2 . The evolution of city population hierarchy , captured by α ∆ [ P ] = α [ P ] ( t f ) − α S ( top left panel of Fig . 2 ) , exhibits a low qualitative sensitivity to initial hierarchy α S ( rows ) , but subplots are translated and a signiﬁcant quantitative sensitivity is observed : in other words , more hierarchical systems produce more hierarchy , what can be expected in such self - reinforcing processes . Always negative values mean that hierarchy always increases . As a function of gravity decay d G , a systematic absolute decrease is observed for the lowest values : very local interaction mitigate the increase in hierarchy . The gravity interaction γ G has a monotonous and expected eﬀect , systematically increasing the hierarchy . Finally , an eﬀect of the co - evolution with network distances which yields non - monotonous eﬀects is worth noticing : when network threshold φ ( q ) 0 increases , a minimum of α ∆ [ P ] is observed for high γ G values and low initial hierarchy . In that context , an intermediate range of spatial interaction will yield more 6 Figure 2 : Patterns of hierarchy in the model with a virtual network . Each indicator is shown as a function of d G for varying γ G ( color ) , varying φ ( q ) 0 ( columns ) and varying α S ( rows ) . ( Top Left ) Dif - ference in the rank - size exponent for populations between ﬁnal time and initial time ; ( Top Right ) Dif - ference in the rank - size exponent for centralities ; ( Bottom Left ) Diﬀerence in rank correlation between population and centralities ; ( Bottom Right ) Diﬀerence in breakpoint of the hierarchy of centralities . 7 hierarchical systems . As only few links increase their speed with this value of network threshold , it means that long range interactions are no longer ampliﬁed by the network . Thus , the evolution of city hierarchies depends on several parameters , in a non - monotonous way when interacting with network processes . Regarding the evolution of network hierarchies α ∆ [ C ] ( top right panel of Fig . 2 ) , the most signiﬁcant eﬀect is the one of network threshold φ ( q ) 0 , which witnesses an inversion of the sense of variation as a function of distance decay d G when network threshold increases . When all links are allowed to grow their speed , longer span interaction will lead to more hierarchical networks : indeed , the probability for two large cities to interact is then higher , and their ﬂow will be favored in terms of network growth . But when only a few proportion of links improve their travel time while most of them decay , then higher network hierarchies are produced by the most local interactions . In a setting of a scarcity of network investments , taking into account long range interaction gives thus a more balanced network than a local approach , which is kind of counter - intuitive . The behavior of the rank correlation between population and centrality ρ r [ P , C ] ( bottom left panel of Fig . 2 ) informs on the co - evolution processes between the territory and the transportation network . Empirically , the better connectivity of larger cities has been suggested by Bretagnolle ( 2003 ) as a sig - nature of co - evolution processes . Our results conﬁrm that indeed such co - evolution processes produce a correspondance between city and network hierarchy , as high values of correlations are attained for interac - tion spans over 100km . The interaction distance furthermore systematically increase the correlation , and local interaction yield a close to zero correlation except for highly initially hierarchic systems with a high network threshold ( in which case some very large cities will still construct a local interaction system ) . The correlation is maximal at an intermediate value of φ ( q ) 0 , which means that the link selection process plays a role in the synchronization between the two hierarchies , and that the co - evolution process captures more than just a self - reinforcement . Finally , as we introduced segmented regression as a ﬁner characterization of hierarchical patterns in a system of cities , we observe an interesting behavior for the variation of the breakpoint for centralities Ψ ∆ [ C ] . The breakpoints always shifts in time to lower values , meaning that the distribution becomes more unequal in time regarding the most dominating links ( in the sense that less links are included in the head of the hierarchy ) . The shift is stronger when interaction distance is larger and network threshold is larger , meaning that favoring less long range links will break the hierarchy in a more uneven way . Our second experiment to study patterns of hierarchy is the same exact Design of Experiment than the previous one , but with the physical network . We show in Fig . 3 the same indicators for the same parameter space . The discrepancy between the two behaviors is particularly relevant from a thematic point of view , as it reveals the role of spatializing and assigning network ﬂows , even in such as case where no congestion is included . Some patterns are similar , but some important diﬀerences can be observed . Globally , the behavior of population hierarchy , rank correlation , and centrality hierarchy breakpoint , are qualitatively similar . The minimum which existed for population hierarchies at short range interactions mostly disappears ( although still slightly present for γ G = 1 . 5 , φ ( q ) 0 = 0 . 9 and α S = 1 ) : spatializing the network removes some output complexity in that case . Rank correlations ( bottom panel of Fig . 3 ) , i . e . the correspondance between population and centrality hierarchies , is still growing as a function of d G and exhibits a maximum at the intermediate value φ ( q ) 0 . However , the eﬀect of interaction hierarchy γ G is much more impactful in this case : more uniform interactions ( low γ G ) lead to a much smaller correlation . This means that the approximation of using a virtual network accurately captures the hierarchy correspondance in physical networks for ﬂows with a superlinear scaling exponent : depending on the type of activities generating ﬂows , spatial structure of the network is more or less important . The hierarchy of centralities also behave quite diﬀerently when switching to a physical network ( top right panel of Fig . 3 ) . It is in that case roughly insensitive to any parameter when all links are growing ( φ ( q ) 0 = 0 . 1 ) , and always grows as a function of distance decay d G : longer range interactions diﬀuse through most network links and yield less inequality between their speeds . Increasing the hierarchy of interactions still increases the hierarchy of centralities but the eﬀect is less strong . In a nutshell , constraining spatially 8 Figure 3 : Patterns of hierarchy in the model with a physical network . With the same design of experiment than in Fig . 2 , each indicator is shown as a function of d G for varying γ G ( color ) , varying φ ( q ) 0 ( columns ) and varying α S ( rows ) . ( Top Left ) Diﬀerence in the rank - size exponent for populations between ﬁnal time and initial time ; ( Top Right ) Diﬀerence in the rank - size exponent for centralities ; ( Bottom Left ) Diﬀerence in rank correlation between population and centralities ; ( Bottom Right ) Dif - ference in breakpoint of the hierarchy of centralities . 9 the link and making them share ﬂows through the assignment procedure restricts the degrees of freedom their speed dynamics have . 3 . 3 Hierarchy regimes After having inspected the link between parameters and hierarchical patterns emerging through a basic grid exploration , we turn now to a speciﬁc experiment aimed at establishing the feasible hierarchy regimes that the model can produce . Indeed in such complex simulation models , simple DOE may only capture a part of potential behavior , and miss strong non - linearities . Therefore , the Pattern Space Exploration ( PSE ) algorithm was introduced by Chérel et al . ( 2015 ) as an heuristic to approximate the feasible space of a model output , based on a novelty search algorithm ( Lehman and Stanley , 2008 ) . We apply here this algorithm with the following three dimensional pattern space : evolution of population hierarchy α ∆ [ P ] , evolution of centrality hierarchy α ∆ [ C ] , and ﬁnal rank correlation between population and centrality hierarchies ρ r [ P , C ] . For the ﬁrst two , looking at dynamics is important to control for the artiﬁcial initial level of hierarchy α S for population , while initial centrality hierarchy is solely linked to geometry and exhibits a narrow peak distribution of average − 0 . 2 ( similar pattern for virtual and physical , the physical distribution being a bit wider ) . These three dimension capture not only which hierarchies are produced along the two aspects included in the model , but also which relation they have in term of rank correlation . We run the PSE algorithm using OpenMOLE and distribute the computation on a grid with an island scheme . The grid for patterns , set from previous exploration results , is taken as α ∆ [ P ] ∈ [ − 0 . 2 ; 0 . 2 ] with step 0 . 02 , α ∆ [ C ] ∈ [ − 0 . 2 ; 0 . 2 ] with step 0 . 1 , and ρ r [ P , C ] ∈ [ − 1 . 0 , 1 . 0 ] with step 0 . 1 . Variable parameters are aforementioned model parameters , with the addition of g M ∈ [ 0 . 0 ; 0 . 05 ] . The algorithm was run on 500 parallel islands ( termination time 10 minutes ) , for 30 , 000 generations ( reasonable convergence in terms of number of patterns discovered . We show in Fig . 4 the scatterplot of the obtained feasible space , conditionally to having at least 10 stochastic repetitions ( robust patterns ) . We ﬁnd that closeness hierarchy dynamics have a much wider range of possible values than population hierarchy dynamics , conﬁrming what was obtained with the grid experiment . Furthermore , possible correlations have also a large span from - 0 . 19 to 0 . 84 , which means that the model can combine the production of a broad set of hierarchies for population and network , but also of their correlations . These correlations take mostly positive values as expected ( mutual reinforcement of hierarchies ) , but are sometimes uncorrelated and can even be negative : in such a setting the lowest cities of the urban hierarchy have the highest centralities . These correspond to a very low initial hierarchy ( < α S > = 0 . 18 where the average is taken for points with a negative correlation ) , a high network reinforcement exponent ( < γ N > = 3 . 2 ) , a low interaction hierarchy ( < γ G > = 0 . 88 ) , and long range interactions ( < d G > = 228 ) . This can be interpreted as diﬀuse and uniform interaction in a low - hierarchical system which are mostly dominated by network processes . We can also observe in Fig . 4 for the ( α ∆ [ C ] , ρ r [ P , C ] ) point cloud , that around 75 % of the surface covered is by short range interactions , and correspond to extreme values : normal range interactions produce a restricted output space . Finally , it is interesting to note the upper and lower boundaries of the ( α ∆ [ P ] , ρ r [ P , C ] ) point cloud : population hierarchy increase ﬁxes both kind of linear upper and lower bounds on correlations : high absolute increase of hierarchy imply high correlations , while correlations can not be too high for small variations of population hierarchy . Altogether , this experiment show a high diversity of hierarchy regimes that the model can produce . Finally , as the output produced by the PSE algorithms are assumed to be mostly representative of what the model can oﬀer , we can expect statistical models linking parameters and indicators to capture most of its behavior . We propose therefore in Table 1 a linear regression analysis of model behavior . The estimation is done on the full PSE population but with weighting according to the number of stochastic samples , in order to avoid bias by non robust patterns . Most of variations explained in the grid experiment are conﬁrmed , as hierarchies increasing with d G , or decreasing with γ G . The overall behavior of correlations is opposed to what was observed as a function of d G since it decreases . It is also interesting to note that centrality hierarchy and correlation are not signiﬁcant in α S , while population hierarchy is not signiﬁcant in 10 Figure 4 : Feasible space of hierarchy regimes obtained with the PSE algorithm . Scatter plots of the three objective dimensions . Color level gives the value of d G , and distributions and correlation between indicators are also stratiﬁed following d G . Patterns were ﬁltered to have at least ten stochastic repetitions . 11 Table 1 : Linear regression analysis of model behavior based on PSE patterns . Each model is estimated with a Weighted Least Square , with weights being the number of stochastic samples . Signiﬁcance levels : ( * * * ) p (cid:39) 0 ; ( * ) p < 0 . 01 ; ( ) p > 0 . 1 . Model α ∆ [ P ] α ∆ [ C ] ρ r [ P , C ] Constant 1 . 04 · 10 − 2 * * * 0 . 15 * * * − 0 . 27 * * * α S − 7 . 2 · 10 − 3 * * * − 6 . 9 · 10 − 3 − 1 . 4 · 10 − 2 φ ( q ) 0 − 8 . 6 · 10 − 4 − 0 . 32 * * * 8 . 4 · 10 − 2 * * * g M 7 . 5 · 10 − 2 * − 6 . 3 * * * 1 . 6 * * * γ N − 2 . 1 · 10 − 3 * * * − 4 . 2 · 10 − 2 * * * 3 . 2 · 10 − 2 * * * w G − 6 . 9 * * * 15 . 6 * * * 65 . 5 * * * γ G − 8 . 2 · 10 − 3 * * * − 2 . 9 · 10 − 3 * 7 . 6 · 10 − 2 * * * d G 4 . 6 · 10 − 5 * * * 5 . 0 · 10 − 4 * * * − 5 . 2 · 10 − 4 * * * Observations 5208 5208 5208 Adjusted R 2 0 . 40 0 . 70 0 . 41 φ ( q ) 0 : on these dimensions , the intrication between cities and the transportation network is not statistically eﬀective for a linear model ( since these non - signiﬁcant link occur between city indicator and network parameter on the one hand , and between network indicator and city parameter on the other hand ) . 4 Discussion Our model exploration results have implications on the thematic question of hierarchy in urban systems and the role of co - evolution between cities and networks in its dynamics . We showed several stylized fact which have non trivial implications , including : ( i ) the fact that urban hierarchy depends on network processes , and that in some cases this link is non - monotonous - what introduces an additional complexity in planning such infrastructures at a macroscopic scale if put in a long time co - evolutionary context ; ( ii ) the fact that correlation between urban hierarchy and network hierarchy are most of the time positive , but that it can take a broad range of values and even be negative - this also challenges the reductionist view of a direct correspondance between the hierarchy of a city and its accessibility , since the link depends of several parameters and of the type of interactions considered ; ( iii ) the fact that conclusions obtained with the physical network model are globally qualitatively similar to the conclusions obtained with the virtual network , but that behavior still signiﬁcantly diﬀers in some regions of the parameter space for some indicators - what means that in some case such a simpliﬁcation will be ﬁne to be done while in other it will miss some crucial processes ; ( iv ) the fact that the realm of possible hierarchy regimes is very broad , surely much broader than existing regimes . This last point opens the issue of comparing this approach with data and possibly identifying hierarchy regimes in existing urban systems . Raimbault ( 2019 c ) have applied this model to real population data and real rail network distance matrices in the case of the French urban system , by calibrating it on population and distance trajectories . As the model is ﬁtted on a moving window in time , the temporal trajectory of ﬁtted parameters may inform on the actual regime the urban system is in . However , such conclusions would be more robust if applied on diﬀerent urban systems , as Raimbault , Denis and Pumain ( 2019 ) do for six large urban systems when benchmarking similar interaction growth models . A purely empirical characterization of hierarchy regimes , using indicators introduced here , would also be a relevant entry to this issue , but the lack of transportation data on long time scales and broad spatial spans remains an obstacle diﬃcult to overcome . The methodology to understand hierarchical patterns in systems of cities , and the model itself are also prone to several potential developments . For example , the idea of spatial non - stationarity in estimating scaling laws , which would in a sense be linked to the existence of urban subsystems with their own hier - 12 archical patterns , should be developed in methodological terms . An heuristic to optimize the adjustment of such a non - stationary model has to be introduced , and may be diﬃcult to elaborate since a spatial neighborhood is not necessarily the rule in constituting subsystems of cities ( large global metropolises may be a subsystem linked tighter than one of these with its hinterland in Europe for example ) . This then also relates to issues of relevant scales to identify hierarchies . Regarding the model in itself , it remains very simple and not realistic in the sense that similarly to ( Xie and Levinson , 2009 ) , no link are added , but only the speeds of existing links are updated . On the contrary , road network growth models at other scales such as Raimbault ( 2019 e ) focus on the addition of links . Bridging these two approaches would be a relevant extension of the model studied here . Finally , our results can be put into a wider theoretical perspective . As explained in introduction , hierarchies in the sense of the imbrication of subsystems at multiple levels , are endogenous to complex systems . At a ﬁxed scale , quantitative indicators such as the one we used capture emergent patterns of this organisation , as is the hierarchical structure in systems of cities in terms of scaling laws . Thus , to understand and manage such systems in a resilient and adaptive way , multi - scale approaches embracing these hierarchies are necessary , as put forward out by Rozenblat and Pumain ( 2018 ) . Our model is a ﬁrst suggestion of scale integrations , since in the physical network case cities are at the macroscopic scale while the network is at a ﬁner mesoscopic scales . 5 Conclusion We explored here the concept of hierarchy in the particular context of the co - evolution of transportation networks and cities . More particularly , we introduced a set of indicators to quantify hierarchy patterns , and systematically studied a co - evolution model for cities and networks , at two abstraction levels for the network . Our exploration results provide some non trivial stylized facts and inform on the diversity of regimes the model can produce . This provides an illustration of how to study hierarchy in territorial systems regarding two complementary dimensions , in terms of how each hierarchically organizes and what is the actual correspondance between the two hierarchies . 6 Acknowledgements Results obtained in this paper were computed on the vo . complex - system . eu virtual organization of the European Grid Infrastructure ( http : / / www . egi . eu ) . We thank the European Grid Infrastructure and its supporting National Grid Initiatives ( France - Grilles in particular ) for providing the technical support and infrastructure . This work was funded by the Urban Dynamics Lab grant EPSRC EP / M023583 / 1 . References Allen , B . , Stacey , B . C . , Bar - Yam , Y . ( 2017 ) , Multiscale information theory and the marginal utility of information , Entropy , 19 ( 6 ) , 273 . Batty , M . ( 2006 ) , Hierarchy in cities and city systems , in Hierarchy in natural and social sciences , Springer , pp . 143 – 168 . Bigotte , J . F . , Krass , D . , Antunes , A . P . , Berman , O . ( 2010 ) , Integrated modeling of urban hierarchy and transportation network planning , Transportation Research Part A : Policy and Practice , 44 ( 7 ) , 506 – 522 . Bretagnolle , A . ( 2003 ) , Vitesse et processus de sélection hiérarchique dans le système des villes françaises , D . Pumain , MF . Mattéi F . ( eds . ) , Données urbaines , 4 . Chérel , G . , Cottineau , C . , Reuillon , R . ( 2015 ) , Beyond corroboration : Strengthening model validation by looking for unexpected patterns , PloS one , 10 ( 9 ) . 13 Cottineau , C . , Hatna , E . , Arcaute , E . , Batty , M . ( 2017 ) , Diverse cities or the systematic paradox of urban scaling laws , Computers , environment and urban systems , 63 , 80 – 94 . Crumley , C . L . ( 1987 ) , A dialectical critique of hierarchy , Power relations and state formation , pp . 155 – 169 . Dang , Y . , Peng , L . ( 2012 ) , Hierarchy of air freight transportation network based on centrality mea - sure of complex networks , Journal of Transportation Systems Engineering and Information Technology , 12 ( 3 ) , 109 – 114 . Fanelli , D . , Glänzel , W . ( 2013 ) , Bibliometric evidence for a hierarchy of the sciences , PLoS One , 8 ( 6 ) , e66938 . Godfrey , B . J . , Zhou , Y . ( 1999 ) , Ranking world cities : multinational corporations and the global urban hierarchy , Urban Geography , 20 ( 3 ) , 268 – 281 . Holland , J . H . ( 2012 ) , Signals and boundaries : Building blocks for complex adaptive systems , Mit Press . Jiang , B . ( 2009 ) , Street hierarchies : a minority of streets account for a majority of traﬃc ﬂow , International Journal of Geographical Information Science , 23 ( 8 ) , 1033 – 1048 . Lane , D . ( 2006 ) , Hierarchy , complexity , society , in Hierarchy in natural and social sciences , Springer , pp . 81 – 119 . Lehman , J . , Stanley , K . O . ( 2008 ) , Exploiting open - endedness to solve problems through the search for novelty . , in ALIFE , pp . 329 – 336 . Levinson , D . M . , Xie , F . , Zhu , S . ( 2007 ) , The co - evolution of land use and road networks , Transportation and traﬃc theory , pp . 839 – 859 . Li , H . , Wei , Y . D . , Liao , F . H . , Huang , Z . ( 2015 ) , Administrative hierarchy and urban land expansion in transitional china , Applied Geography , 56 , 177 – 186 . Liao , L . , Gaudin , J . P . ( 2017 ) , The opening to the market in china ( 1980 - 2000 ) and the local economic development : a form of multilevel governance ? , CYBERGEO - EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF GEOGRA - PHY , . Liu , X . , Derudder , B . , García , C . G . ( 2013 ) , Exploring the co - evolution of the geographies of air transport aviation and corporate networks , Journal of Transport Geography , 30 , 26 – 36 . Mones , E . , Vicsek , L . , Vicsek , T . ( 2012 ) , Hierarchy measure for complex networks , PLOS ONE , 7 ( 3 ) , 1 – 10 . URL : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0033799 Morin , E . ( 1980 - 2005 ) , La Méthode , tome 2 . La Vie de la Vie , Le Seuil . Muggeo , V . M . ( 2003 ) , Estimating regression models with unknown break - points , Statistics in medicine , 22 ( 19 ) , 3055 – 3071 . Oﬀner , J . - M . ( 1993 ) , Les " eﬀets structurants " du transport : mythe politique , mystiﬁcation scientiﬁque , Espace géographique , 22 ( 3 ) , 233 – 242 . Oﬀner , J . - M . , Beaucire , F . , Delaplace , M . , Frémont , A . , Ninot , O . , Bretagnolle , A . , Pumain , D . ( 2014 ) , Les eﬀets structurants des infrastructures de transport , Espace Geographique , ( 42 ) , p – 51 . Pires , M . M . , Prado , P . I . , Guimarães Jr , P . R . ( 2011 ) , Do food web models reproduce the structure of mutualistic networks ? , PLoS One , 6 ( 11 ) . Pumain , D . ( 2003 ) , Une approche de la complexité en géographie , Géocarrefour , 78 ( 1 ) , 25 – 31 . 14 Pumain , D . ( 2004 ) , Scaling laws and urban systems , , . Pumain , D . ( 2006 a ) , Alternative explanations of hierarchical diﬀerentiation in urban systems , in Hierarchy in natural and social sciences , Springer , pp . 169 – 222 . Pumain , D . ( 2006 b ) , Hierarchy in natural and social sciences , introduction , in Hierarchy in natural and social sciences , Springer , pp . 1 – 12 . Pumain , D . ( 2019 ) , Les voies de l’interaction et les hiérarchies urbaines , in actes du colloque Voies , réseaux , paysages en Gaule en hommage à Jean - Luc Fiches , Revue d’Archéologie Narbonnaise . URL : https : / / halshs . archives - ouvertes . fr / halshs - 02303136 Pumain , D . e . ( 2006 c ) , Hierarchy in Natural and Social Sciences , Springer , Dordrecht . Pumain , D . , Paulus , F . , Vacchiani - Marcuzzo , C . , Lobo , J . ( 2006 ) , An evolutionary theory for interpreting urban scaling laws , Cybergeo : European Journal of Geography , . Raimbault , J . ( 2017 ) , Identiﬁcation de causalités dans des données spatio - temporelles , in Spatial Analysis and GEOmatics 2017 . Raimbault , J . ( 2018 a ) , Caractérisation et modélisation de la co - évolution des réseaux de transport et des territoires , PhD thesis , Université Paris 7 Denis Diderot . Raimbault , J . ( 2018 b ) , Indirect evidence of network eﬀects in a system of cities , Environment and Planning B : Urban Analytics and City Science , p . 2399808318774335 . Raimbault , J . ( 2019 a ) , De l’endogénéité des hiérarchies dans les systèmes territoriaux complexes , in Journée Des jeunes chercheurs de l’Institut de Géographie : Compter , classer , catégoriser , Paris , France . URL : https : / / halshs . archives - ouvertes . fr / halshs - 02089520 Raimbault , J . ( 2019 b ) , Modeling interactions between transportation networks and territories : a co - evolution approach , arXiv preprint arXiv : 1902 . 04802 , . Raimbault , J . ( 2019 c ) , Modeling the co - evolution of cities and networks , forthcoming in Handbook of Cities and Networks , Rozenblat C . , Niel Z . , eds . arXiv : 1804 . 09430 , . Raimbault , J . ( 2019 d ) , Space and complexities of territorial systems , arXiv e - prints , p . arXiv : 1901 . 09869 . Raimbault , J . ( 2019 e ) , An urban morphogenesis model capturing interactions between networks and ter - ritories , in The mathematics of urban morphology , Springer , pp . 383 – 409 . Raimbault , J . ( 2020 a ) , Relating complexities for the reﬂexive study of complex systems , in Theories and models of urbanization , Springer , pp . 27 – 41 . Raimbault , J . ( 2020 b ) , Unveiling co - evolutionary patterns in systems of cities : a systematic exploration of the simpopnet model , in Theories and Models of Urbanization , Springer , pp . 261 – 278 . Raimbault , J . , Cottineau , C . , Le Texier , M . , Le Nechet , F . , Reuillon , R . ( 2019 ) , Space matters : Extending sensitivity analysis to initial spatial conditions in geosimulation models , Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simulation , 22 ( 4 ) , 10 . URL : http : / / jasss . soc . surrey . ac . uk / 22 / 4 / 10 . html Raimbault , J . , Denis , E . , Pumain , D . ( 2019 ) , An evolutionary theory for the spatial dynamics of urban systems worldwide , in European Colloquium in Theoretical and Quantitative Geography 2019 . 15 Reuillon , R . , Leclaire , M . , Rey - Coyrehourcq , S . ( 2013 ) , Openmole , a workﬂow engine speciﬁcally tailored for the distributed exploration of simulation models , Future Generation Computer Systems , 29 ( 8 ) , 1981 – 1990 . Rozenblat , C . , Pumain , D . ( 2018 ) , Conclusion : Toward a methodology for multi - scalar urban system policies , International and Transnational Perspectives on Urban Systems , p . 385 . Schmitt , C . ( 2014 ) , Modélisation de la dynamique des systèmes de peuplement : de SimpopLocal à Sim - popNet , PhD thesis , Université Panthéon - Sorbonne - Paris I . Tisue , S . , Wilensky , U . ( 2004 ) , Netlogo : A simple environment for modeling complexity , in International conference on complex systems , vol . 21 , Boston , MA , pp . 16 – 21 . Volberda , H . W . , Lewin , A . Y . ( 2003 ) , Co - evolutionary dynamics within and between ﬁrms : From evolution to co - evolution , Journal of management studies , 40 ( 8 ) , 2111 – 2136 . West , G . B . ( 2017 ) , Scale : the universal laws of growth , innovation , sustainability , and the pace of life in organisms , cities , economies , and companies , Penguin . Xie , F . , Levinson , D . ( 2009 ) , Topological evolution of surface transportation networks , Computers , Envi - ronment and Urban Systems , 33 ( 3 ) , 211 – 223 . Yerra , B . M . , Levinson , D . M . ( 2005 ) , The emergence of hierarchy in transportation networks , The Annals of Regional Science , 39 ( 3 ) , 541 – 553 . 16