administrative sciences Article The Effects of Knowledge Sharing on Individual Creativity in Higher Education Institutions : Socio - Technical View Joosung Lee Division of Interdisciplinary Wellness Studies , Soonchunhyang University , 22 Soonchunhyang - ro , Asan , Chungnam 31538 , Korea ; jsl @ sch . ac . kr ; Tel . : + 82 - 41 - 530 - 4974 Received : 14 May 2018 ; Accepted : 7 June 2018 ; Published : 16 June 2018 (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8) (cid:1) (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7) Abstract : Knowledge sharing has multifaceted effects on organizations , such as improving work performance , among which creativity is apparently one of the most important parts . Nevertheless , the effects of knowledge sharing on individuals has not been paid attention sufﬁciently by previous research . Furthermore , knowledge sharing research mainly concerns business organizations rather than public organizations . This study aims to examine the effects of knowledge sharing on individuals in a higher institution of education in Korea , for which a socio - technical view and social capital theory is used to investigate the important antecedents of knowledge contribution , as well as to examine social and technical facets . This study is the ﬁrst research regarding the relationship between knowledge sharing and individual creativity , and it also identiﬁes the mediating effects of knowledge sharing on individual creativity at an individual level in a higher education institution . Keywords : socio - technical view ; individual creativity ; knowledge sharing 1 . Introduction Knowledge is considered the primary source of competitive advantage ( Stewart and Ruckdeschel 1998 ) and is critical to the long term sustainability and success of the organization ( Nonaka and Takeuchi 1995 ) , thus knowledge is one of the most important resources for an organization ( Choe 2004 ) . In the recent literature regarding knowledge management , several studies have analyzed critical success factors and barriers , such as organizational culture , affecting knowledge management and the adoption of knowledge management systems ( KMSs ) ( Khan et al . 2015a , 2015b ) . The crucial role of alignment between enterprise knowledge and KMSs has been suggested ( Centobelli et al . 2017 ) , and the impact of knowledge management and KMSs on individual and corporate performance has been identiﬁed ( Bhatt 2001 ; Dyer and Hatch 2006 ) . Against this backdrop , knowledge sharing , which is the central activity of knowledge management , has multifaceted implications and potential beneﬁts for organizations , and the effects of knowledge sharing have been investigated by many previous researchers in multifaceted dimensions . Knowledge sharing is known to be positively related to cost reduction , improvement of efﬁciency , organization and employee performance , and organizational teamwork ( Nonaka and Takeuchi 1995 ; Hansen 2002 ; Cummings 2004 ; Cabrera and Cabrera 2005 ; and Mesmer - Magnus and DeChurch 2009 ) . Furthermore , effective management of knowledge sharing can promote organizational innovation by supporting organizational members in innovating , collaborating , and making correct decisions efﬁciently ( Nonaka and Takeuchi 1995 ; Du Plessis 2005 ) . In today’s high risk and ruthless competitive environment , which is faced by each industry , both academic scholars and practitioners have found that continuous innovation is a critical competitiveness that is needed to survive , especially for knowledge base development industries ( Mumford 2000 ; Adm . Sci . 2018 , 8 , 21 ; doi : 10 . 3390 / admsci8020021 www . mdpi . com / journal / admsci Adm . Sci . 2018 , 8 , 21 2 of 16 Weiner 2000 ; DiPietro and Anoruo 2006 ) . Additionally , it has been conﬁrmed that organizations are the most likely to succeed in a situation when they truly recognize individual creativity and focus on nurturing and promoting creativity ( Williamson 2001 ) , as creativity is the foundation of innovation ( Dewett and Gruys 2007 ) . Individual creativity can be used as building blocks for organizational innovation , change , and competitiveness ( Mumford 2000 ; Williamson 2001 ; Zhou and George 2001 ; DiPietro and Anoruo 2006 ) , as an individual is always regarded as the source of a novel idea of an organization ( Gilad 1984 ; Whiting 1988 ; Mumford 2000 ) , which is the basic element of an organization’s creative and innovative potential ( Amabile 1988 ; Shalley 1995 ) . Nevertheless , the effects of knowledge sharing on individuals have not been paid enough attention by previous research ( Quigley et al . 2007 ) . Based on the previous research regarding creativity , to improve creativity , there are multiple approaches , amongst which the most frequently cited one is to continually educate individuals on their capacity for generating new knowledge , discovering applications , and maintaining the knowledge for future applications ( Chen and Chen 2010 ; Gardner and Laskin 2011 ) . Higher education represents the basic capacity of innovation , and the key driver of national economic competitiveness and development quality . Thus , higher education is currently getting much attention from practitioners and government agencies ( Fairweather 2000 ; Meek 2000 ; Chen and Chen 2010 ) . Higher education institutions’ mission is to create and transfer knowledge , which includes explicit and tacit knowledge . It is imperative that students in the higher education institutions consciously or subconsciously share knowledge with others in both formal communities ( teamwork or research project ) and informal communities ( Petrides and Nodine 2003 ) . Thus , knowledge sharing is gaining much attention in higher education institutions , as well as for its information practices and learning strategies , particularly in developed countries , which have been receiving grants to implement knowledge management practices ( Sohail and Daud 2009 ) . From the absence of understanding about the current approach regarding the relationship between knowledge sharing and individual creativity in a higher education institution case , this research develops an integrative model to explain the effects of knowledge sharing on individual creativity . The study draws on both a socio - technical view and social capital theory to investigate the important antecedents of knowledge sharing , as well as examining the social and technical factors on individual creativity through the mediating effects of knowledge sharing . Accordingly , the study should make a theoretical ﬁt of a socio - technical view and social capital theory in the knowledge sharing and individual creativity context . After developing the preceding factors , related factors are linked to perceived knowledge sharing and individual creativity extent , and then each variable and path to examine the mediating effects of knowledge sharing on individual creativity is veriﬁed . This paper makes four key contributions . Firstly , to the best of the authors’ knowledge , it is the ﬁrst research regarding the relationship between knowledge sharing and individual creativity , while previous studies have only focused on the effects of knowledge sharing on organizational performance . With this new perspective on knowledge sharing , this study is expected to establish the ﬁrst research literature of knowledge sharing’s effects on individual creativity that has not yet been explored in previous studies . Secondly , this study set knowledge sharing as a mediator between antecedent factors of knowledge sharing and individual creativity . With this improved approach , this model can explain the mediating effects of knowledge sharing on individual creativity , which contributes to both academics and practices , to facilitate individual creativity through knowledge sharing . Thirdly , this study uses socio - technical theory and social capital theory in knowledge sharing effects on individual creativity to propose an improved model of socio - technical view that is suitable for knowledge sharing practices in higher education institutions . Finally , this study focuses on the knowledge sharing practices in a higher education institution . By applying this approach , the study provides a better rationale of understanding the role of knowledge sharing , as well as the relationship between knowledge sharing and individual creativity in higher education institutions . Furthermore , it also indicates abundant theoretical and practical implications for individual creativity improvement through getting knowledge by boosting sharing among members in higher education institutions . Adm . Sci . 2018 , 8 , 21 3 of 16 2 . Theoretical Background 2 . 1 . Knowledge Management for Knowledge Sharing and Individual Creativity As mentioned above , knowledge management is critical for successfully sharing and utilizing individuals’ knowledge at an organization level . This impact of knowledge management and KMSs on individual and corporate performance has been well established ( Bhatt 2001 ; Dyer and Hatch 2006 ) . For this purpose , the alignment between enterprise knowledge and KMSs ( Centobelli et al . 2017 ) is important . Several researchers applied knowledge management to team creativity and to organizational performance improvement . Dong et al . ( 2017 ) suggested ways to enhance employee creativity via individual skill development and team knowledge sharing . Son et al . ( 2017 ) also examined the impact of close monitoring on creativity and knowledge sharing and found the mediating role of leader - member exchange . Men et al . ( 2017 ) investigated when and how knowledge sharing benefitted team creativity , and pointed out the importance of cognitive team diversity . Knowledge sharing ( KS ) is part of knowledge management ( KM ) , but sometimes researchers use the terms interchangeably ( Kim and Lee 2006 ; Lee et al . 2010 ) . From the literature review of previous research , the deﬁnition of knowledge sharing has not reached an agreement by researchers . This study deﬁnes knowledge as ideas , facts , expertise , and judgments that can inﬂuence individual , team , and organizational performance ( Bartol and Srivastava 2002 ) , and information is considered as the source of this knowledge . Thus , the concepts that are presented in this study are closely related to effective KMS development as an organizational practice , as well as system infrastructure . This is consistent with the fact that Fink and Ploder ( 2009 ) and Centobelli et al . ( 2017 ) deﬁned KMSs as a combination of knowledge management practices ( KM - Practices ) , that is , a set of methods and techniques to support the organizational processes of KM development on the one hand , and knowledge management tools ( KM - Tools ) , namely speciﬁc IT - based systems that support KM - Practices on the other hand . Knowledge sharing is means to an end , but not an end in itself . Knowledge is a critical organizational resource and knowledge sharing can raise the sustainable competitiveness of an organization ( Davenport and Prusak 2000 ; Foss and Pedersen 2002 ) . Among many means of knowledge - based resources , knowledge sharing can help members and teams to exploit knowledge - based resources , and capitalize on them , which will contribute to the competitiveness of an organization ( Davenport and Prusak 2000 ; Cabrera and Cabrera 2005 ; Jackson et al . 2006 ) . Among the multiple beneﬁts of knowledge sharing , the most important effect of knowledge sharing should be related to organizational creativity and innovation , because knowledge sharing does not only mean reorganization and effective transfer of knowledge , skills , and information , but it also indicates the creation of new knowledge and innovative ideas ( Cabrera and Cabrera 2005 ) . Creativity needs several resources to be realized , for instance , time , materials , teamwork effort , a great deal of hard work , knowledge resources , and strenuous mental energy . Among them , knowledge can be viewed as an important resource that facilitates individual creativity . Knowledge sharing among members in organization can share knowledge and information , which is an essential source for individual creativity ( Shalley et al . 2004 ) . Although there is some research that indicates that knowledge sharing has positive relationship with individual creativity , there is not much actual research investigating the relationship between knowledge sharing and individual creativity . 2 . 2 . Socio - Technical View on Knowledge Sharing The main idea of the socio - technical view is that an organization is composed of a social sub - system and technical sub - system . An organization is a sophisticated system , and sub - systems are needed in order for it to work harmoniously . Therefore , social and technical sub - systems , as two key functions of an organization , need to be considered interactively to maintain continuous improvement ( Bostrom and Heinen 1977 ) . Table 1 shows the deﬁnition and examples of social and technical sub - systems . Adm . Sci . 2018 , 8 , 21 4 of 16 Table 1 . Social and technical subsystems . Sub - Systems Deﬁnitions and Examples Social sub - system The social part of an organization , for example , attitude , knowledge , values , skills , motivation , work atmosphere , and organizational structures . Technical sub - system The technical part of an organization that improves organizational performance , for example , devices , tools , and techniques . Previous research on socio - technical views is mainly about knowledge sharing , especially in business sectors , but in public sectors , like higher education institutions , there is not much relative research . There are many contextual factors that facilitate knowledge sharing , based on previous research , many of them can be classiﬁed into the socio - technical factors . In recent years , much of the knowledge sharing research has adopted an integrated socio - technical perspective on knowledge sharing , which concentrates on the interactive role of social and technical factors . For instance , the socio - technical perspective is utilized in conceptual research that investigates the contextual factors of knowledge sharing in a speciﬁc company ( Pan and Scarbrough 1998 ) . Other research of the socio - technical perspective is summarized in Tables 2 and 3 . Table 2 . Discriminant validity : correlations and average variance extracted ( AVE ) . Variable AVE SIT SI IT EF SDU IKS QKS IC Social Trust ( ST ) 0 . 614387 0 . 7835 Social Interaction Ties ( SIT ) 0 . 69128 0 . 320629 0 . 831432 Social Identiﬁcation ( SI ) 0 . 709861 0 . 182286 0 . 528636 0 . 842532 IT Support ( IT ) 0 . 793187 0 . 248476 0 . 147863 0 . 189136 0 . 89061 End - user Focus ( EF ) 0 . 658468 0 . 219714 0 . 114117 0 . 098641 0 . 139565 0 . 81146 Smart Device Utilization ( SDU ) 0 . 636148 0 . 307299 0 . 114412 0 . 201135 0 . 632071 0 . 227027 0 . 791295 Intensity of Knowledge Sharing ( IKS ) 0 . 701408 0 . 280467 0 . 437818 0 . 350336 0 . 173657 0 . 078168 0 . 339639 0 . 837501 Quality of Knowledge Sharing ( QKS ) 0 . 682872 0 . 469848 0 . 508585 0 . 499505 0 . 241864 0 . 316561 0 . 349437 0 . 56622 0 . 826361 Individual Creativity ( IC ) 0 . 619493 0 . 069712 0 . 232795 0 . 322877 0 . 175175 0 . 300178 0 . 15141 0 . 205357 0 . 42306 Table 3 . Hypotheses testing results . Hypotheses T - Value Result ( Two Tails ) H1a 0 . 571489 Not supported H1b 2 . 291318 Supported ( p < 0 . 05 ) * H2a 2 . 282699 Supported ( p < 0 . 05 ) * H2b 1 . 9643 Supported ( p < 0 . 05 ) * H3a 0 . 774949 Not supported H3b 2 . 106269 Supported ( p < 0 . 05 ) * H4a 1 . 979202 Supported ( p < 0 . 05 ) * H4b 0 . 346368 Not supported H5a 0 . 374359 Not supported H5b 1 . 796683 Supported ( p < 0 . 1 ) H6a 1 . 966251 Supported ( p < 0 . 05 ) * H6b 0 . 428985 Not supported H7a 0 . 079318 Not supported H7b 2 . 0156138 Supported ( p < 0 . 05 ) * 2 . 3 . Social Capital Theory Nahapiet and Ghoshal ( 1998 ) deﬁned social capital as “the sum of the actual and potential resources embedded within , available through , and derived from the network of relationships possessed by an individual or social unit” . Social capital theory is mainly about a perspective that regards social relationships as productive resources ( Chiu et al . 2006 ) . Based on the empirical research ( Nahapiet and Ghoshal 1998 ; Tsai and Ghoshal 1998 ) , social capital has proved to facilitate organizational innovation and resource exchange . In terms of knowledge sharing , Adm . Sci . 2018 , 8 , 21 5 of 16 Bergami and Bagozzi ( 2000 ) found that social capital had positive influence on knowledge attainment and exploitation in technology - based firms . Besides the traditional organization , the research of social capital in networks has been investigated by many researchers . Wasko and Faraj ( 2005 ) examined the effects of social capital and motivation on knowledge management in a virtual electronic practice . However , higher education institutions are different from other organizations in terms of organizational structure and culture , as well as interactions among students , which are more dynamic . Consequently , it is still unclear what the effects of social capital on knowledge sharing involving knowledge management and resource exchange in higher education institution are ( Ellison et al . 2007 ) . 3 . Hypotheses Based on the theoretical support regarding the effect that social and technical factors affect knowledge sharing and that knowledge sharing affects individual creativity , a research model has been developed and the following hypotheses have been proposed . See Figure 1 . Adm . Sci . 2018 , 8 , x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 16 Figure 1 . Research model . 3 . 1 . Social Factors and Knowledge Sharing 3 . 1 . 1 . Social Interaction Ties Social interaction ties , as information channels and resource flows ( Tsai and Ghoshal 1998 ) , can provide more channels for knowledge sharing among members in an organization ( Nahapiet and Ghoshal 1998 ) . Social networks in the organization must facilitate communication among members , in order to improve the capabilities of knowledge sharing ( Kim and Lee 2006 ) . From the point of social capital theory , social interaction ties provide access to knowledge resource by giving opportunities for an exchange of knowledge ( Nahapiet and Ghoshal 1998 ) . Furthermore , recent studies proved that social interaction ties had a positive influence on the unit resource combination and exchange ( Cabrera and Cabrera 2005 ) , thus , knowledge sharing could be promoted , so members could acquire more knowledge . Chiu et al . ( 2006 ) examined the positive social interaction ties’ effects on knowledge sharing , which indicated that people who had more social interaction ties tended to participate more actively in knowledge sharing . Participating in knowledge sharing activities not only expanded the access to knowledge resources , but it also gave more opportunities to interact with other members . Accordingly , Hypotheses 1a and 1b are given , as follows : Hypothesis 1a ( H1a ) . An individual’s perceived social interaction ties are positively associated with their intensity of knowledge sharing . Hypothesis 1b ( H1b ) . An individual’s perceived social interaction ties are positively associated with their quality of knowledge sharing . 3 . 1 . 2 . Social Trust Many previous researchers have argued that social trust is an important enabler for knowledge sharing , because it helps members in an organization to overcome barriers and intentions , so as to start knowledge sharing activities more easily ( Butler and Murphy 2007 ) . Von Krogh ( 1998 ) indicated that trust as a kind of organizational culture could enhance communication speed , because members with high trust toward others could share knowledge and information without hesitation , thus activating knowledge sharing . Moreover , there were also several empirical studies that directly Figure 1 . Research model . 3 . 1 . Social Factors and Knowledge Sharing 3 . 1 . 1 . Social Interaction Ties Social interaction ties , as information channels and resource flows ( Tsai and Ghoshal 1998 ) , can provide more channels for knowledge sharing among members in an organization ( Nahapiet and Ghoshal 1998 ) . Social networks in the organization must facilitate communication among members , in order to improve the capabilities of knowledge sharing ( Kim and Lee 2006 ) . From the point of social capital theory , social interaction ties provide access to knowledge resource by giving opportunities for an exchange of knowledge ( Nahapiet and Ghoshal 1998 ) . Furthermore , recent studies proved that social interaction ties had a positive inﬂuence on the unit resource combination and exchange ( Cabrera and Cabrera 2005 ) , thus , knowledge sharing could be promoted , so members could acquire more knowledge . Chiu et al . ( 2006 ) examined the positive social interaction ties’ effects on knowledge sharing , which indicated that people who had more social interaction ties tended to participate more actively in knowledge sharing . Participating in knowledge sharing activities Adm . Sci . 2018 , 8 , 21 6 of 16 not only expanded the access to knowledge resources , but it also gave more opportunities to interact with other members . Accordingly , Hypotheses 1a and 1b are given , as follows : Hypothesis 1a ( H1a ) . An individual’s perceived social interaction ties are positively associated with their intensity of knowledge sharing . Hypothesis 1b ( H1b ) . An individual’s perceived social interaction ties are positively associated with their quality of knowledge sharing . 3 . 1 . 2 . Social Trust Many previous researchers have argued that social trust is an important enabler for knowledge sharing , because it helps members in an organization to overcome barriers and intentions , so as to start knowledge sharing activities more easily ( Butler and Murphy 2007 ) . Krogh ( 1998 ) indicated that trust as a kind of organizational culture could enhance communication speed , because members with high trust toward others could share knowledge and information without hesitation , thus activating knowledge sharing . Moreover , there were also several empirical studies that directly proved that trust could lead to better knowledge sharing ( Nonaka and Takeuchi 1995 ; Chiu et al . 2006 ; Kim and Lee 2006 ) . Without trust , individuals were reluctant to share knowledge with others , both in formal and informal knowledge sharing practices ( Andrews and Delahaye 2000 ) . Therefore , trust was a particularly significant variable for facilitating knowledge sharing . Blau ( 1964 ) believed that trust was essential for creating and maintaining relationships for knowledge sharing , and led to a good quality of knowledge sharing . Accordingly , Hypotheses 2a and 2b are given , as follows : Hypothesis 2a ( H2a ) . An individual’s perceived social trust is positively associated with their intensity of knowledge sharing . Hypothesis 2b ( H2b ) . An individual’s perceived social trust is positively associated with their quality of knowledge sharing . 3 . 1 . 3 . Social Identiﬁcation People with a high level of emotional identiﬁcation have a high level of loyalty and belongingness towards organizations , and also show willingness to maintain committed relationships and helpful behaviors with the organizational members . From the perspective of social capital theory , Nahapiet and Ghoshal ( 1998 ) indicated that identiﬁcation was a social capital resource that could change members’ motivation to share knowledge . This ﬁnding also coincided with the fact that a high level of personal networks were always associated with a strong and positive social identiﬁcation in an organization ( Bartol and Srivastava 2002 ) . On the contrary , contradictory and negative identities toward an organization would make barriers for members to share knowledge and information . Accordingly , Hypotheses 3a and 3b are given , as follows : Hypothesis 3a ( H3a ) . An individual’s perceived social identiﬁcation is positively associated with their intensity of knowledge sharing . Hypothesis 3b ( H3b ) . An individual’s perceived social identiﬁcation is positively associated with their quality of knowledge sharing . Adm . Sci . 2018 , 8 , 21 7 of 16 3 . 2 . Technical Factors and Knowledge Sharing 3 . 2 . 1 . IT Support IT support has been a platform for effective knowledge management , and it has also been a foundation for knowledge sharing . IT support here meant an integrated IT infrastructure with Intranet , Internet , hardware , software , and databases . IT support was not only reﬂected from the IT infrastructure of an organization , but it has also been related to utilization by users . Many researchers have argued that IT utilization has been a fundamental and critical enabler for knowledge sharing ( Machlup 1984 ; Davenport and Prusak 2000 ) . IT infrastructure has played key role as knowledge management system ( KMS ) in the knowledge sharing process , which is a foundation for knowledge management , and many researchers have examined the positive effects of IT support on knowledge sharing capabilities ( Kim and Lee 2006 ) . Accordingly , Hypotheses 4a and 4b are given , as follows : Hypothesis 4a ( H4a ) . An individual’s perceived IT support is positively associated with their intensity of knowledge sharing . Hypothesis 4b ( H4b ) . An individual’s perceived IT support is positively associated with their quality of knowledge sharing . 3 . 2 . 2 . End - User Focus The importance of end - user focus for technology - based instruments or applications is the focused of much research ( Davenport and Prusak 2000 ; Butler and Murphy 2007 ) . Effective knowledge sharing requires IT utilization to be integrative , easy to use , easy to access , and searchable ( Bartol and Srivastava 2002 ) . In addition , technical systems are required to update fast and to be easy - to - use , in order to allow users to actively access to knowledge sharing activities ( Durst 1999 ; Gardner and Laskin 2011 ) . Hypotheses 5a and 5b are given , as follows : Hypothesis 5a ( H5a ) . An individual’s perceived end - user focus is positively associated with their intensity of knowledge sharing . Hypothesis 5b ( H5b ) . An individual’s perceived end - user focus is positively associated with their quality of knowledge sharing . 3 . 2 . 3 . Smart Device Utilization Smart devices , alternatively called ubiquitous devices , can be viewed as computer - based devices , which ultimately are used for getting information from networks . Through the utilization of smart devices , the Internet has been linked both to increases and decreases in knowledge sharing . Nowadays , smart devices are used broadly in the university , in order to check webpages , SNSs , e - mail , and other activities , all of which are online knowledge sharing activities . Thus , the smart device has become important platform of knowledge sharing , besides the computer ( Ellison et al . 2007 ) . Accordingly , Hypotheses 6a and 6b are given , as follows : Hypothesis 6a ( H6a ) . An individual’s perceived smart device utilization is positively associated with their intensity of knowledge sharing . Hypothesis 6b ( H6b ) . An individual’s perceived smart device utilization is positively associated with their quality of knowledge sharing . Adm . Sci . 2018 , 8 , 21 8 of 16 3 . 3 . Knowledge Sharing and Individual Creativity Members in organization may get creative ideas when they share their ideas with others and when they discuss ideas . Lee et al . ( 2011 ) argued that knowledge sharing was a critical facilitator of creative ideas , and was a primary factor to facilitate organizational creativity and innovation . Furthermore , knowledge sharing could also stimulate individual creativity ( Chen and Chen 2010 ) , because knowledge sharing could help collaboration within an organization , and could also improve the domain knowledge ( Amin et al . 2011 ) . All of this could be explained by the fact that the knowledge resource is the most important factor for facilitating individual creativity . By knowledge sharing , people can get high quality knowledge and information , and combine them with their own knowledge , which would ﬁnally result in creative ideas and new knowledge ( Amin et al . 2011 ) . Accordingly , Hypotheses 7a and 7b are given , as follows : Hypothesis 7a ( H7a ) . An individual’s perceived intensity of knowledge sharing is positively associated with their individual creativity . Hypothesis 7b ( H7b ) . An individual’s perceived quality of knowledge sharing is positively associated with their individual creativity . 4 . Research Methodology 4 . 1 . Survey Methodology There were 213 samples that were selected for the ﬁrst data analysis among the KAIST ( Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology ) students . From them , 9 of the 213 samples were excluded because of the incomplete and unsatisﬁed responses . Therefore , 204 samples were selected for the ﬁnal data analysis . 4 . 2 . Measurement Items The questionnaire was conducted with a multi - item method , and each item was measured based on the seven - point Likert scale , ranging from ‘strongly disagree’ to ‘strongly agree’ . The measurement items that were used to operationalize the construct were adopted from the relevant prior studies ; they had already been validated in other prior literature . The questionnaire for this research is shown in the Appendix A . This study was comprised of six independent variables , two mediating variables , and one dependent variable . Among them , the independent variables were divided into two dimensions , the social and technical . The social dimension consisted of three variables , namely , social interaction ties , social trust , social identification , and the technical dimension was composed of IT support , end - user focus , and smart device utilization . The social interaction ties were based on the studies of Tsai and Ghoshal ( 1998 ) and Chiu et al . ( 2006 ) . Social trust and identification were modified from the researches of Chiu et al . ( 2006 ) . The items for IT support were based on Kim and Lee ( 2006 ) , and the items of the end - user focus were modified from the work of Kim and Lee ( 2006 ) . Finally , smart device utilization was a new item that was based on self - developed items . In terms of the mediating and dependent variables , intensity and quality of knowledge sharing were relatively based on the research of Chiu et al . ( 2006 ) and Kim and Lee ( 2006 ) . Finally , the items that were developed to measure the individual creativity were from Scott and Bruce ( 1994 ) , and Zhou and George ( 2001 ) . Adm . Sci . 2018 , 8 , 21 9 of 16 4 . 3 . Data Analysis The data analysis in this study was performed using the PLS ( partial least square ) method and several other statistical methods . The application of the statistical methods followed the reliability and validity test , the assessment of the measurement model , and the assessment of the structural model . Firstly , conﬁrmatory factor analysis ( CFA ) was applied so as to test the adequacy of the measurement model , which was assessed on the criteria of the model ﬁt , convergent validity , and discriminant validity Cronbach’s alpha was used to assess the internal reliability . The value of Cronbach’s alpha ranged from 0 . 70 to 0 . 88 , which exceeded the Nunnally’s criterion of 0 . 7 . To check the convergent validity , a conﬁrmatory factor analysis ( CFA ) was conducted and it checked the parameter estimates and their associated t - values . All of the measurement items were valid ( p < 0 . 001 ) and higher than 0 . 7 , which also demonstrated unidimensionality . The composite reliability ( CR ) was also checked , the lowest value of CR was above 0 . 83 , which exceeded the recommended value of 0 . 7 . The average variance extracted ( AVE ) was also calculated and each AVE was above 0 . 6 , exceeding the threshold value of 0 . 5 . The discriminant validity was assessed so as to evaluate whether the measures of the constructs were distinct and whether the indicators were loaded on the appropriate construct . The square root of the AVE was checked to be greater than all of the inter - construct correlations , which presented evidence of sufﬁcient discriminant validity ( Chin 1998 ) . Table 2 shows that the diagonal elements , the square root of AVE , were greater than their corresponding off - diagonal elements . The detailed hypotheses testing results are presented in Table 3 . Among the 14 hypotheses , most were supported . The variance explained ( R2 ) by the paths was examined and the results are presented in Table 4 . The R2 for the ﬁnal dependent variable , individual creativity , was 0 . 63 . Additionally , the R2 for the quality of knowledge sharing , which was the most important independent factor inﬂuencing individual creativity , was 0 . 82 . The R2 value indicated that the model explained a substantial amount of variance for the online knowledge contribution . Table 4 . R square . Intensity of Knowledge Sharing Quality of Knowledge Sharing Individual Creativity R Square 0 . 29832 0 . 56642 0 . 308347 5 . Discussion 5 . 1 . Summary of Results After the empirical analysis , a rich set of results were obtained . The most important result was that the quality of knowledge sharing was positively associated with individual creativity and played a mediating role between socio - technical factors and individual creativity , however the intensity of knowledge sharing was not . Firstly , the results indicated that social interaction ties , IT support , and end - user focus were positively associated with intensity of knowledge sharing , and that the social interaction ties , social trust , social identiﬁcation , and smart device utilization were positively associated with quality of knowledge sharing . The social interaction ties increased the individuals’ intensity of knowledge sharing . This ﬁnding was similar to Tsai and Ghoshal ( 1998 ) , who found that social interaction ties had a strong effect on trust in the context of resource exchange and production innovation within the organization . Social trust and social identiﬁcation did not have a signiﬁcant impact on intensity of knowledge sharing , but had an impact on the intensity of knowledge sharing . One possible explanation might have been that individuals were willing to share their personal knowledge because of the close and frequent interaction among members , fairness in exchanging knowledge , and strong feelings toward university , without necessarily trusting other members in the university . Adm . Sci . 2018 , 8 , 21 10 of 16 Another possible explanation was that trust and social identiﬁcation were not crucial in less risky knowledge sharing relationships . Secondly , IT support and end - user focus were positively associated with intensity of knowledge sharing , but not with the quality of knowledge sharing . This result coincided with other research that was about the positive effects of IT on knowledge sharing . However , it did not inﬂuence the quality of knowledge sharing , which meant that IT support and end - user focus were not enablers of the quality of knowledge sharing . It could have been explained by the fact that IT infrastructure was a platform of knowledge sharing , but did not inﬂuence the quality of knowledge sharing , which was more related to the knowledge sharers’ motivation . However , on the contrary of the expectation , smart device utilization was positively associated with the quality of knowledge sharing , but not with the intensity of knowledge sharing . One explanation was that the smart device had the mobility that could help students to ﬁnd the knowledge timely and appropriately , which increased quality of knowledge sharing . On the other hand , the individuals’ smart device utilization did not change the perceived intensity of knowledge sharing . Finally , the quality of knowledge sharing had mediating effects , as shown in Table 4 . The results showed that the quality of knowledge sharing played a strong mediating role between those social and technical factors and individual creativity . It meant that individual creativity could be improved through visible support by increasing the members’ social networks , building a culture of trust and identiﬁcation , and encouraging the use of a smart device for knowledge sharing . Additionally , by examining the relationship between knowledge sharing and individual creativity , an individual’s ﬂow through knowledge sharing was enabled . According to the results , the quality of knowledge sharing was the major factor that facilitated individual creativity , rather than the intensity of knowledge sharing . It indicated that quality was more important than intensity or volume , in terms of knowledge . 5 . 2 . Limitations and Future Research First , the deﬁnition of creativity that was used in this research was very generalized . In fact , creativity could be classiﬁed with many dimensions and categories . Thus , future research could make contributions by investigating the effects of knowledge sharing on a different creativity . Based on the facts that there was limited research on the effects of knowledge sharing on an individual level , this research focused on individual creativity . However , further research should notice that individual creativity is one of the most antecedents of organizational innovation and performance . Thus , it was very important to understand how knowledge sharing improved organizational performance through individual creativity . There could have been a sample bias inherent in most of the online survey - based research . As the survey was conducted on the Internet using a self - motivated questionnaire , on people who were very active and altruistic , and this may have biased the results . Because the survey was only conducted among the KAIST students , KAIST was the only sample organization . The results could be different in relation to the way knowledge sharing took place , as this result was not able to be generalized into various types of higher education institutions . Future research that would compare different types of services may be needed . 5 . 3 . Implications for Theory and Practice 5 . 3 . 1 . Theoretical Implication The effects of knowledge sharing have been discussed in many previous studies , but they were mainly focused on organizational performance . However , in terms of creativity and innovation , there was limited literature available to explore . The relationship between knowledge sharing and individual creativity was , ﬁrstly , investigated in this study with the socio - technical view on knowledge sharing . This study was theoretically important , because it bridged the gap between knowledge sharing with Adm . Sci . 2018 , 8 , 21 11 of 16 individual creativity , which had thorough backgrounds . By developing the research model under the socio - technical view , a strong framework was offered for explaining knowledge sharing’s effects on individual creativity . This study was important as it was the ﬁrst research article that investigated the relationship between knowledge sharing and individual creativity . Theoretically , this was a pioneering study that adopted a socio - technical theory and a social capital theory into the effects of knowledge sharing on individual creativity research . This was a theoretically important contribution , because the socio - technical theory was used frequently in recent research on knowledge sharing . Focusing on the integrative effect of social and technical factors on knowledge sharing , this gaves shape to causal relationships and the path from major components of socio - technical factors to individual creativity through knowledge sharing . By adopting this model , the social interaction ties , social trust , social identiﬁcation , and smart device utilization could contribute to individual creativity through the quality of knowledge sharing . Moreover , it was important to clarify whether the intensity of knowledge sharing or the quality of knowledge sharing , and the results showed that the quality of knowledge sharing only had mediating effect between socio - technical factors and individual creativity . This ﬁnding established the exact difference in intensity and quality of knowledge sharing , and ﬁgured out the quality sides’ important mediating role . This study found that the antecedent factors of knowledge sharing could boost individual creativity . This study also made up the limitation of knowledge sharing in the public sector , especially in higher education institutions , where individual creativity was especially important . Accordingly , the results better explained the knowledge sharing’s effects on individual creativity in a higher education institution . This empirical study on real contributors will enrich the understanding of both knowledge sharing and individual creativity . 5 . 3 . 2 . Practical Implication Our ﬁndings offered guidance and insights for practitioners and leaders who were trying to boost individual creativity . As the individual creativity was an important source of organization , and knowledge sharing could contribute to the individual creativity , more speciﬁcally , the more qualiﬁed knowledge was attained from knowledge sharing , the more the individual creativity improved . Through this study , socio - technical factors were suggested for practitioners and academics in higher education systems to focus on . Particularly , the practitioners needed to strive to increase the quality of knowledge sharing so as to boost individual creativity . Among the social factors , social interaction ties , social trust , and social identiﬁcation , all had increased the individual creativity through the quality of knowledge sharing . Thus , higher education institutions should focus more on the social capital inside the organization , so as to make an appropriate environment for individual creativity , which would ﬁnally contribute to the organization level innovation and improve the performance of the organization . This social capital could be raised up by the intended support of organizations . For instance , the university should support formal and informal communities inside the university , to let the students make more social interaction ties . The increase in social interaction ties would result in the knowledge ‘gateway’ of individuals , to make knowledge sharing smoother and increase the chance to ﬁnd qualiﬁed knowledge . Social trust and social identiﬁcation could be cultivated by the organizational culture , for instance , organizational history has been an important aspect of organizational culture , which was found to increase the members’ belongingness and the trust among the members . That was why many famous universities collected the history of the university and reorganized the history for differentiating the history of universities for contributing to forming its speciﬁc culture . Based on our study , these activities were not only contributing to the belongings and culture of universities , but it also contributed to individual creativity through knowledge sharing . Thus , universities should make use of this social capital to Adm . Sci . 2018 , 8 , 21 12 of 16 making contributions to qualiﬁed knowledge sharing , and to increase individual creativity , which ﬁnally contributed to the individuals’ and organizational performance . Among the technical factors , only the smart device utilization was related to the quality of knowledge sharing . However , it did not ignore the importance of IT support and end - user focus , which played an important role in forming the platform of knowledge sharing . However , IT support and end - user focus mainly contributed to the intensity of knowledge sharing , not the quality of knowledge sharing , which could be explained by the fact that KAIST already had enough IT support and end - user focus that they were not critical factor for the quality of knowledge sharing . While smart device utilization was the new factor in creativity research , results showed that it was positively related to creativity by the mediating effect of knowledge sharing , thus organizations should diffuse the smart devices to allow members access to knowledge sharing process , to increase their creativity . However , the smart device was not only related to knowledge sharing among the organization , thus organizations also had to regulate the utilization of the smart device for knowledge gain and sharing , such as encouraging access to the organization related resources and online community , but also by restricting accessing to entertainment or SNS that was not related to the organizational knowledge sharing . Finally , the implications for ﬁrms and / or policy makers were that the social capital formation within an organization was important for knowledge sharing . That is , an organizational culture that built social trust and interaction ties should be fostered . Microsoft , for example , has been able to increase its new product development and ﬁnancial performance signiﬁcantly by innovating its organizational culture of social trust and knowledge sharing . Such organizational culture policies are necessary to support the competitiveness of education systems , improving the knowledge management processes . This study found that , to increase individual creativity , the quality of knowledge sharing should be getting more attention instead of just encouraging students to share more knowledge . Acknowledgments : This work was supported by Soonchunhyang University Research Grant No . 20180408 . Conﬂicts of Interest : The author declares no conﬂict of interest . Appendix A Table A1 . Measurement items . KAIST—Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology . Social Interaction Ties I maintain close social relationships with some members in the university community . ( Tsai and Ghoshal 1998 ) ( Chiu et al . 2006 ) I spend a lot of time interacting with some members in the university community . I know some members in the university community on a personal level . I have frequent communication with some members in the university community . Social Trust I believe that other members in KAIST are honest and reliable . ( Gefen et al . 2003 ; Cabrera and Cabrera 2005 ) ( Chiu et al . 2006 ) I believe that other members in KAIST are knowledgeable and competent in their area . I expect that students in my personal network will help each other . Adm . Sci . 2018 , 8 , 21 13 of 16 Table A1 . Cont . Social Identiﬁcation I believe I am similar to my friends in KAIST . ( Cabrera and Cabrera 2005 ) ( Chiu et al . 2006 ) I am happy to spend time with the group of my friends . I perceive an overlap between my self - identity and my friends group in KAIST . I feel feelings of belongingness towards the group of my friends . IT support The KAIST’s IT infrastructure facilitates knowledge sharing . ( Kim and Lee 2006 ) Knowledge / information available in the KAIST’s IT is relevant . Knowledge / information available in the KAIST’s IT is up - to - date . End - user Focus I regularly use the Internet , e - mail , and the organization’s intranet ( Kim and Lee 2006 ) In KAIST , IT infrastructure is designed to be user - friendly It is easy for me to use IT infrastructure without extra training . Smart Device Utilization In the past week , on average , approximately how many minutes per day have you spent on smart device ? ( Ellison et al . 2007 ) Smart device has become part of my daily routine . I feel out of touch when I do not have smart device for a while . I would be sorry if smart device shut down . Intensity of Knowledge Sharing In KAIST , knowledge is shared frequently among members . ( Chiu et al . 2006 ) Members share their knowledge and expertise voluntarily in KAIST . Members share knowledge with people from other divisions in KAIST . Quality of Knowledge Sharing The knowledge shared by members in KAIST is relevant to the topics . ( Chiu et al . 2006 ) The knowledge shared by members in KAIST is easy to understand . The knowledge shared by members in KAIST is accurate . The knowledge shared by members in KAIST is complete . The knowledge shared by members in KAIST is reliable . The knowledge shared by members in KAIST is timely . Individual Creativity I am a good source of creative ideas . ( Shin and Zhou 2003 ) I come up with new and practical ideas to improve performance . I am not afraid to take risks . I promote and champion ideas to others . References Amabile , Teresa M . 1988 . A model of creativity and innovation in organizations . Research in Organizational Behavior 10 : 123 – 67 . Amin , Aamir , Shuib Basri , Mohd Fadzil Hassan , and Mubashir Rehman . 2011 . Occupational stress , knowledge sharing and GSD communication barriers as predictors of software engineer’s creativity . Paper presented at 2011 IEEE International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management ( IEEM ) , Singapore , 6 – 9 December . Andrews , Kate M . , and Brian L . Delahaye . 2000 . Inﬂuences on knowledge processes in organizational learning : The psychosocial ﬁlter . Journal of Management Studies 37 : 797 – 810 . [ CrossRef ] Bartol , Kathryn M . , and Abhishek Srivastava . 2002 . Encouraging knowledge sharing : The role of organizational reward systems . Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies 9 : 64 – 76 . Bergami , Massimo , and Richard P . Bagozzi . 2000 . Self - categorization , affective commitment and group self - esteem as distinct aspects of social identity in the organization . British Journal of Social Psychology 39 : 555 – 77 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Bhatt , Ganesh D . 2001 . Knowledge management in organizations : examining the interaction between technologies , techniques , and people . Journal of Knowledge Management 5 : 68 – 75 . [ CrossRef ] Blau , Peter M . 1964 . Exchange and Power in Social Life . New York : Transaction Publishers . Bostrom , Robert P . , and J . Stephen Heinen . 1977 . MIS Problems and failures : a sociotechnical perspective part I : The cause . MIS Quarterly 1 : 17 – 32 . [ CrossRef ] Butler , Tom , and Ciaran Murphy . 2007 . Understanding the design of information technologies for knowledge management in organizations : a pragmatic perspective . Information Systems Journal 17 : 143 – 63 . [ CrossRef ] Adm . Sci . 2018 , 8 , 21 14 of 16 Cabrera , Elizabeth F . , and Angel Cabrera . 2005 . Fostering knowledge sharing through people management practices . The International Journal of Human Resource Management 16 : 720 – 35 . [ CrossRef ] Centobelli , Piera , Roberto Cerchione , and Emilio Esposito . 2017 . Knowledge management in startups : systematic literature review and future research agenda . Sustainability 9 : 361 . [ CrossRef ] Chen , Jui - Kuei , and I - Shuo Chen . 2010 . Critical creativity criteria for students in higher education : taking the interrelationship effect among dimensions into account . Quality & Quantity 46 : 1057 – 75 . Chin , Wynne W . 1998 . The partial least squares approach for structural equation modeling . Modern Methods for Business Research 295 : 295 – 336 . Chiu , Chao - Min , Meng - Hsiang Hsu , and Eric T . G . Wang . 2006 . Understanding knowledge sharing in virtual communities : An integration of social capital and social cognitive theories . Decision Support Systems 42 : 1872 – 88 . [ CrossRef ] Choe , Jong - min . 2004 . The consideration of cultural differences in the design of information systems . Information & Management 41 : 669 – 84 . Cummings , Jonathon N . 2004 . Work groups , structural diversity , and knowledge sharing in a global organization . Management Science 50 : 352 – 64 . [ CrossRef ] Davenport , Thomas H . , and Laurence Prusak . 2000 . Working Knowledge : How Organizations Manage What They Know . Boston : Harvard Business Press . Dewett , Todd , and Melissa L . Gruys . 2007 . Advancing the case for creativity through graduate business education . Thinking Skills and Creativity 2 : 85 – 95 . [ CrossRef ] DiPietro , William R . , and Emmanuel Anoruo . 2006 . Creativity , innovation , and export performance . Journal of Policy Modeling 28 : 133 – 39 . [ CrossRef ] Dong , Yuntao , Kathryn M . Bartol , Zhi - Xue Zhang , and Chenwei Li . 2017 . Enhancing employee creativity via individual skill development and team knowledge sharing : Inﬂuences of dual - focused transformational leadership . Journal of Organizational Behavior 38 : 439 – 58 . [ CrossRef ] Du Plessis , Marina . 2005 . Drivers of knowledge management in the corporate environment . International Journal of Information Management 25 : 193 – 202 . [ CrossRef ] Durst , Samantha L . 1999 . Assessing the effect of family friendly programs on public organizations . Review of Public Personnel Administration 19 : 19 – 33 . [ CrossRef ] Dyer , Jeffrey H . , and Nile W . Hatch . 2006 . Relation - speciﬁc capabilities and barriers to knowledge transfers : Creating advantage through network relationships . Strategic Management Journal 27 : 701 – 19 . [ CrossRef ] Ellison , Nicole B . , Charles Steinﬁeld , and Cliff Lampe . 2007 . The beneﬁts of Facebook “friends : ” Social capital and college students’ use of online social network sites . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication 12 : 1143 – 68 . [ CrossRef ] Fairweather , James S . 2000 . Diversiﬁcation or homogenization : How markets and governments combine to shape American higher education . Higher Education Policy 13 : 79 – 98 . [ CrossRef ] Fink , Kerstin , and Christian Ploder . 2009 . Knowledge management toolkit for SMEs . International Journal of Knowledge Management 5 : 46 – 60 . [ CrossRef ] Foss , Nicolai J . , and Torben Pedersen . 2002 . Transferring knowledge in MNCs : the role of sources of subsidiary knowledge and organizational context . Journal of International Management 8 : 49 – 67 . [ CrossRef ] Gardner , Howard E . , and Emma Laskin . 2011 . Leading Minds : An Anatomy of Leadership . New York : Basic Books . Gefen , David , Elena Karahanna , and Detmar W . Straub . 2003 . Trust and TAM in online shopping : An integrated model . MIS Quarterly 27 : 51 – 90 . [ CrossRef ] Gilad , Benny . 1984 . Entrepreneurship : The issue of creativity in the market place . The Journal of Creative Behavior 18 : 151 – 61 . [ CrossRef ] Hansen , Morten T . 2002 . Knowledge networks : Explaining effective knowledge sharing in multiunit companies . Organization Science 13 : 232 – 48 . [ CrossRef ] Jackson , Susan E . , Chih - Hsun Chuang , Erika E . Harden , and Yuan Jiang . 2006 . Toward developing human resource management systems for knowledge - intensive teamwork . Research in Personnel and Human Resources Management 25 : 27 – 70 . Khan , Zaheer , Yong Kyu Lew , and Rudolf R . Sinkovics . 2015a . International joint ventures as boundary spanners : technological knowledge transfer in an emerging economy . Global Strategy Journal 5 : 48 – 68 . [ CrossRef ] Khan , Zaheer , Oded Shenkar , and Yong Kyu Lew . 2015b . Knowledge transfer from international joint ventures to local suppliers in a developing economy . Journal of International Business Studies 46 : 656 – 75 . [ CrossRef ] Adm . Sci . 2018 , 8 , 21 15 of 16 Kim , Soonhee , and Hyangsoo Lee . 2006 . The Impact of Organizational Context and Information Technology on Employee Knowledge - Sharing Capabilities . Public Administration Review 66 : 370 – 85 . [ CrossRef ] Lee , Pauline , Nicole Gillespie , Leon Mann , and Alexander Wearing . 2010 . Leadership and trust : Their effect on knowledge sharing and team performance . Management Learning 41 : 473 – 91 . [ CrossRef ] Lee , Kun Chang , Dae Sung Lee , Young Wook Seo , and Nam Young Jo . 2011 . Antecedents of team creativity and the mediating effect of knowledge sharing : bayesian network approach to PLS modeling as an ancillary role . Intelligent Information and Database Systems , 545 – 55 . Machlup , Fritz . 1984 . Knowledge : Its Creation , Distribution , and Economic Signiﬁcance . Princeton : Princeton University Press . Meek , V . Lynn . 2000 . Diversity and marketisation of higher education : Incompatible concepts ? Higher Education Policy 13 : 23 – 39 . [ CrossRef ] Men , Chenghao , Patrick S . W . Fong , Jinlian Luo , Jing Zhong , and Weiwei Huo . 2017 . When and how knowledge sharing beneﬁts team creativity : The importance of cognitive team diversity . Journal of Management & Organization , 1 – 18 . [ CrossRef ] Mesmer - Magnus , Jessica R . , and Leslie A . DeChurch . 2009 . Information sharing and team performance : A meta - analysis . Journal of Applied Psychology 94 : 535 – 46 . [ CrossRef ] [ PubMed ] Mumford , Michael D . 2000 . Managing creative people : Strategies and tactics for innovation . Human Resource Management Review 10 : 313 – 51 . [ CrossRef ] Nahapiet , Janine , and Sumantra Ghoshal . 1998 . Social capital , intellectual capital , and the organizational advantage . Academy of Management Review 23 : 242 – 66 . [ CrossRef ] Nonaka , Ikujiro , and Hirotaka Takeuchi . 1995 . The Knowledge - Creating Company : How Japanese Companies Create the Dynamics Of Innovation . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Pan , Shan L . , and Harry Scarbrough . 1998 . A socio - technical view of knowledge sharing at Buckman Laboratories . Journal of Knowledge Management 2 : 55 – 66 . [ CrossRef ] Petrides , Lisa A . , and Thad R . Nodine . 2003 . KM in Education , Deﬁning the Landscape . Half Moon Bay : The Institute for the Study of Knowledge Management in Education , March . Quigley , Narda R . , Paul E . Tesluk , Edwin A . Locke , and Kathryn M . Bartol . 2007 . A multilevel investigation of the motivational mechanisms underlying knowledge sharing and performance . Organization Science 18 : 71 – 88 . [ CrossRef ] Scott , Susanne G . , and Reginald A . Bruce . 1994 . Determinants of innovative behavior : A path model of individual innovation in the workplace . Academy of Management Journal 37 : 580 – 607 . Shin , S . J . , and J . Zhou . 2003 . Transformational leadership , conservation and creativity : Evidence from Korea . Academy of Management Journal 45 : 703 – 714 . [ CrossRef ] Shalley , Christina E . 1995 . Effects of coaction , expected evaluation , and goal setting on creativity and productivity . Academy of Management Journal 38 : 483 – 503 . Shalley , Christina E . , Jing Zhou , and Greg R . Oldham . 2004 . The effects of personal and contextual characteristics on creativity : Where should we go from here ? Journal of Management 30 : 933 – 58 . [ CrossRef ] Sohail , M . Sadiq , and Salina Daud . 2009 . Knowledge sharing in higher education institutions : Perspectives from Malaysia . Vine 39 : 125 – 42 . [ CrossRef ] Son , Seung Yeon , Duck Hyun Cho , and Seung - Wan Kang . 2017 . The impact of close monitoring on creativity and knowledge sharing : The mediating role of leader - member exchange . Creativity and Innovation Management 26 : 256 – 65 . [ CrossRef ] Stewart , Thomas , and Clare Ruckdeschel . 1998 . Intellectual capital : The new wealth of organizations . Performance Improvement 37 : 56 – 59 . [ CrossRef ] Tsai , Wenpin , and Sumantra Ghoshal . 1998 . Social capital and value creation : The role of intraﬁrm networks . Academy of Management Journal 41 : 464 – 76 . Krogh , Von G . 1998 . Care in knowledge creation . California Management Review 40 : 133 – 153 . [ CrossRef ] Wasko , Molly McLure , and Samer Faraj . 2005 . Why should I share ? Examining social capital and knowledge contribution in electronic networks of practice . MIS Quarterly 29 : 35 – 57 . [ CrossRef ] Weiner , Robert Paul . 2000 . Creativity & Beyond : Cultures , Values , and Change . New York : The State University of New York Press . Whiting , Bruce G . 1988 . Creativity and entrepreneurship : How do they relate ? The Journal of Creative Behavior 22 : 178 – 83 . [ CrossRef ] Adm . Sci . 2018 , 8 , 21 16 of 16 Williamson , Bill . 2001 . Creativity , the corporate curriculum and the future : a case study . Futures 33 : 541 – 55 . [ CrossRef ] Zhou , Jing , and Jennifer M . George . 2001 . When job dissatisfaction leads to creativity : Encouraging the expression of voice . Academy of Management Journal 44 : 682 – 96 . © 2018 by the author . Licensee MDPI , Basel , Switzerland . This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution ( CC BY ) license ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) .