Look at me and grab this ! Materiality and the practices around negotiation of social attention with children on the autistic spectrum Justyna Wierbiłowicz University of Trento , Department of Psychology and Cognitive Science Alessandro , Cappelletti Fondazione Bruno Kessler - FBK Davide , Giovanelli Fondazione Bruno Kessler - FBK Angela Pasqualotto University of Trento , Department of Psychology and Cognitive Science Arianna Bentenuto University of Trento , Department of Psychology and Cognitive Science Elisabetta Farella Fondazione Bruno Kessler - FBK Massimo Zancanaro University of Trento , Department of Psychology and Cognitive Science & Fondazione Bruno Kessler - FBK ABSTRACT In this paper , we present a tangible tool that supports therapists in engaging autistic children on simple educational activities of categorization of objects . The tool has been designed to digitally augment an approach routinely used in cognitive training . An initial pilot evaluation provides evidence of its effectiveness of engaging children and focusing their attention on a given task . A novel aspect of this work is the possibility offered to therapists by the material aspect of the tool to positively influence social attention of children . This work , although preliminary , contributes as a design case study to understanding of the relationship between social practices and the design space for digital artifacts that are built to support these practices . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing ; • Collaborative and social computing ; • Collaborative and social computing device ; KEYWORDS autism , tangible interaction , practice - based design , social technolo - gies ACM Reference Format : Justyna Wierbiłowicz , Alessandro , Cappelletti , Davide , Giovanelli , Angela Pasqualotto , Arianna Bentenuto , Elisabetta Farella , and Massimo Zancanaro . 2020 . Look at me and grab this ! Materiality and the practices around negotia - tion of social attention with children on the autistic spectrum . In Proceedings Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM mustbehonored . Abstractingwithcreditispermitted . Tocopyotherwise , orrepublish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . NordiCHI ’20 , October 25 – 29 , 2020 , Tallinn , Estonia © 2020 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 7579 - 5 / 20 / 10 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3419249 . 3420176 of the 11th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Shaping Expe - riences , Shaping Society ( NordiCHI ’20 ) , October 25 – 29 , 2020 , Tallinn , Estonia . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 5 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3419249 . 3420176 1 INTRODUCTION Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by im - paired communication and social interaction , as well as repeti - tive behaviors and stereotypies which severity varies across the spectrum [ 1 ] . People with autism often have difficulties in con - ducting an independent life , especially considering social activities [ 14 ] . Digital technologies offer interesting opportunities to struc - ture educational intervention for children on the autistic spectrum [ 7 , 21 , 36 ] and there is growing evidence for overall effectiveness of technology - based training [ 25 , 31 ] . On the other hand , there are some concerns that digital technologies , although attractive , do not improve behavioral performance [ 4 ] and , at least for some types of technologies , worsen sociality of children on the autistic spectrum [ 16 ] . Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder ( ASD ) are attracted by digital technologies because they tend to be more predictable and usually offer a clearly defined task [ 5 , 49 ] , which reduces distractions from unnecessary sensory stimuli [ 34 , 35 ] and because of reduced demands on sociality [ 49 ] . Furthermore , the possibility of providing visual and auditory feedback , such as lights and sounds , allows the provision of clear and timely reward [ 12 , 19 ] . There have been several streams of research on design for educational digital technologies to facilitate representational concrete – abstract links [ 40 ] , as well as for teaching or improving social competence in this target group [ 3 , 26 , 32 ] . Among the several technological approaches , tangible interaction [ 28 , 43 , 55 ] is a paradigm that aims to bring computation more fully into the physical world [ 15 , 39 , 48 ] . While there is a large amount of evidence about the beneficial effects and the possible drawback of technology in support to therapy and education of children with autism , not many investigations have been conducted on how tech - nology influences the practices of therapists and educators as well as how they appropriate the technology in their working practices . NordiCHI ’20 , October 25 – 29 , 2020 , Tallinn , Estonia Justyna Wierbiłowicz et al . In this paper , we adopt a ‘practice perspective’ [ 27 , 57 ] and explore how a consolidated practice in a therapeutic context interplays with a digital artifact intentionally designed to support that practice . 2 RELATED WORKS In recent years , applying technology supporting special education and rehabilitation programs , in particular , although not only , for children with ASD , is becoming more and more common [ 21 ] . These technologies often focus on improving cognitive and social skills . For example , there are many serious games applications that imple - ment cognitive training [ 52 ] or training on mundane tasks [ 9 ] , pro - mote collaborative behaviors [ 26 , 41 ] or social skills [ 24 ] , as well as exercises that aim to train and improve recognizing and expressing emotions [ 47 ] . Shared Interactive Surface is an example of tech - nology where multi - user touch detection enables implementation of various solutions for improving sociability and communication skills in children with ASD [ 3 ] . Another example is multi - user full - body interaction that empowers awareness of others’ actions and improves collaborative behaviors [ 13 , 32 ] , and Virtual Reality that has been investigated with the aim to create environments benefi - cial for children with ASD , for instance , for social skills training [ 37 ; 23 ] . In addition , robots [ 52 , 56 ] and virtual conversational agents [ 33 , 46 ] have been experimented as companions for children . Tan - gible interfaces , by combining physical representations with digital feedback , seems to offer interesting opportunities as well . Marti and colleagues [ 30 ] explored in a research - by - design approach a suite of tangible games to stimulate play and collaboration and found that the material qualities of the games are fundamental in fostering ex - ploration and interaction . Francis and colleagues [ 20 ] investigated the impact of tangible interaction on sociability and collaborative play by comparing behaviors of typically developing children and children with ASD , while playing with a tangible interactive toy versus a non - digital toy ; their findings suggest that tangible toys improve social behaviors among typically developing children as well as children with ASD , compared to playing with typical , pas - sive toys . Similar results were obtained by Farr and colleagues [ 17 ] , according to their study children with ASD showed bigger encour - agement and more diverse , parallel and cooperative play when interacting with a digital version of the toy . Further research by Barajas and others [ 4 ] , showed in their preliminary experimental study , that when using a tangible system consisting of an interac - tive board with LEGO DUPLO like pieces together with a graphical user interface children with ASD showed improvement in social in - teraction , collaborative play , exercise performance , and decrease in solitary play when compared to their performance using a passive , non - digital method . Similarly , Villafuerte and colleagues [ 54 ] ob - served that social interaction increased when children played with a tangible digital musical instrument . Sitdhisanguan and others [ 45 ] attribute the superior learning efficacy of their tangible tools to strong engagement that they stimulate in children with ASD . 3 A TANGIBLE TOOL FOR CATEGORIZATION TASKS Categorization is at the basis of cognition for what concerns the semantic representation of concepts [ 42 ] . It is well known in educa - tion literature that semantic concepts are acquired in a better way when demonstrated with elements of a specific class and through reflection on their main attributes ( see for example [ 50 , 51 ] ) . Categorization tasks are routinely used in various psychoedu - cational interventions ( nonmedical interventions that attempt to improve some social - communicative behavior and some specific cognitive abilities ) : they consist of description of an object by its main properties . For example , an apple can be categorized as round , red , and big , while a strawberry as round , red , and small . The design of our tool has been explicitly inspired by the categorization exer - cises used by therapists in the ODFLab ( http : / / www . odflab . unitn . it / ) . Those therapists routinely engaged children in categorization tasks using either simple geometric objects ( such as cubes , pyramids , spheres , with different sizes and colors ) , everyday small objects ( such as a mug or a toothbrush ) or even scenario cards for repre - senting events . The therapist would present an object and would ask the child to verbally name its properties . Our design idea started from a technological opportunity grounded in the literature on tangible interaction and from ob - servations of how therapists conduct categorization exercises . The initial design concept was then discussed and refined in a focus group with 6 therapists from the ODFLab starting from a first mockup realized by the designers . The therapists were skeptical about a digital implementation of categorization exercises using computers or tablets because they feared that these devices would distract the children . Yet , they found the idea of tangible interaction intriguing , in particular because of the supposedly engaging effect of the multimedia feedback . Eventually , the final version of the tool was supported by the following 3 design assumptions : Design assumption 1 : improved attention on the task is expected because of the structured inter - action and the simplicity of the task [ 5 , 49 ] as well as because of the materiality of the tool [ 30 , 38 ] ; Design assumption 2 : increase of engagement is expected because of multimedia feedback used as a reward [ 12 , 19 ] ; Design assumption 3 : increase of social attention is expected because of the materiality [ 4 , 20 ] . Following a design brainstorm , a working version of the tool ( see figure 1 ) was implemented as a circular surface made of polystyrene foam with a diameter of around 50 centimeters ( 20 inches ) . The object to be categorized should be placed in the central area of the surface . Along the outer edge , there are three spaces ( around 30 cm / 12 inches of length ) on which semi - circular labeled elements can be positioned . Four LEDs are also placed on the surface : one po - sitioned close to the central area and the other three are positioned in the middle of each semicircular element length . The back of the tool accommodates the hardware : 4 NFC antennas that recognize both the object to be categorized and the labelled elements ; the embedded processor that controls the antennas , and the LEDs . NFC tags are placed on each object to be categorized and on the back of each labelled element and each of these elements has two magnets on the back for its positioning . A remote database contains the association of each object with its specific properties . When an object is placed at the center of the surface , its NFC tag is read and the system retrieves its properties from the remote database . Then , a child should choose which ones among the labelled ele - ments represent the properties of the object and place them on the areas along the outer edge . When a labelled element is placed on an area , it is automatically aligned by the magnet and the LED Look at me and grab this ! Materiality and the practices around negotiation of social attention with children on the autistic spectrum NordiCHI ’20 , October 25 – 29 , 2020 , Tallinn , Estonia Figure 1 : On the left , an image of the tool during the classification exercise of a large square . On the right , the objects used in the case study ( top ) and ( middle and bottom ) the 3 groups of labelled elements used to categorize objects along the properties of color ( red vs green vs blue vs yellow ) , size ( big vs small ) and shape ( circle vs square vs triangle vs star vs diamond ) switch on : the color is blue if the property chosen is correct ( that is , the selected object is associated to that specific property in the database ) and a joyful sound is played ; the color is white if the property chosen is wrong and no sound is played . When the task is completed correctly ( that is , when all three , correct properties are placed on the board ) , a pleasant sound ( to signal the positive outcome ) is played together with a rainbow effect visualized with the LEDs ( see video here : https : / / youtu . be / IikvaHPltak . . 4 THE FIELD STUDY The tool was used in a pilot explorative field study during a 2 - week long summer camp organized by the ODFLab as an intensive rehabilitation camp for children with ASD diagnosiss . The camp of - fered psycho - educational activities targeted to specific needs of the children . During the day , they attended a variety of rehabilitation activities ( such as music - therapy , speech - language therapy , psy - choeducational intervention , psychomotor training ) interspersed with moments of free play and routines as lunch and luncheon . In the summer 2019 , the camp hosted 25 children with ASD ranging from 3 to 6 years old . Methodology . In order to evaluate our design concept , we adopted a case study approach [ 58 ] . The strength of this research strategy lies in the possibility of studying a phenomenon in its natural contexts by investigating a large number of variables not previously determined [ 10 ] . Qualitative case studies are increasingly used in Information Systems research [ 44 ] and in education [ 29 ] . Procedure . The tangible tool has been used by 3 therapists in - volving 8 children with ASD with different cognitive profiles : 4 children had a diagnosis of ASD with intellectual disability and 4 children had a diagnosis of ASD without intellectual disability or language impairment . Children with low functioning ASD used the tangible tool twice a day for two weeks with a therapist only , whereas children with high functioning ASD used it one time per day in session with a therapist and peers . Each intervention session lasted 45 minutes . The therapists involved in the study received a short training and had an opportunity to use the tool in a few test cases in the laboratory before engaging in the summer camp activities . During the two weeks of the camp , a technician was available to solve technical issues . After the experience , an unstructured focus group has been organized with the therapists who participated in the study to assess their experience and their perception of the effectiveness of the tool . The audio recording of the focus groups was transcribed and analyzed using thematic analysis [ 6 ] . Below , we elaborate on the main themes emerged from the focus group . 4 . 1 Results Satisfaction and ease of use . The therapists reported a very high satisfaction of the tool , specifically because of its ease of use . All the children could easily understand the mechanism and all of them were able to operate it without much effort . For what concerns the therapists , the ease of use derived from the closeness to their well - established practices . Satisfaction and engagement of children . A second relevant aspect that contributed to the satisfaction of the therapist was the engage - ment of the children , evident by the laughing and smiling during the sessions . Despite the fact that the specific objects prepared for the categorization were simple ( and for some of the children the exercise soon became boring in itself ) , the enjoyment of the mul - timedia feedback lasted much longer than the novelty effect only . Indeed , the feedback and its explicit and automatic reward was a major part of engagement . Effect on performance and on attention on the task . A common impression of the therapists was that the tool did not help more on the cognitive aspects of the task compared to the traditional way of performing the exercise ; yet they noticed a greater impact on the attention on the task , which was longer and more sustained . Effect on socialization and social attention . The therapists noticed that low functioning children showed a great increase in shared attention on the activities with an adult when using the tool . Sim - ilarly , high functioning children demonstrated a large amount of social behaviors using both verbal and non - verbal strategies , while performing the task within small groups of peers . An important as - pect that emerged was how therapists spontaneously started using the physical labelled elements as a way to get the attention of the children : when a child got distracted , the therapist would keep the tangible elements in his / her hands and use them to attract attention of the child ( see figure 2 ) . Since children were always interested in NordiCHI ’20 , October 25 – 29 , 2020 , Tallinn , Estonia Justyna Wierbiłowicz et al . Figure 2 : Examples of the use of the tool : on the left , the child is presented with the elements for the classification of the red square placed in the middle of the tool ; on the right , the therapist is trying to grab the child’s attention by physically placing the elements out of his reach . operating the tool , eventually this strategy was effective in grab - bing their attention . This aspect was deemed the most important by the therapists . Suggestions for future work and improvements . In further dis - cussion , the therapists reported the need of customization of the feedback ( lights and sounds ) , they also would like to have the pos - sibility to visualize the logs and , of course , the need of different instances of classification ( beyond the simple geometric colored forms ) . 5 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION Many of the themes that emerged in the focus group are in line with the results of the studies described in the related work section . As expected , our tool was easy to use and easily accepted by the therapists and by the children . After our Design Assumption 2 , we attribute the engagement mainly to the implementation of a positive reward that acknowledges the progress during the task [ 12 ] . Of course , the well - established attraction effect of tangible interaction on children with ASD [ 4 , 17 , 20 , 44 , 53 ] might as well have played a role here . Furthermore , it does not seem that there was an effect on task performance in our study : that is , children did not categorize objects better or faster with our tool , in respect to the practice of using standard toys and verbal interaction as it is routinely done in the ODFLab ( see also [ 8 ] ) . The fact that the tool did not require to change the current practices was highly appreciated but it is worth noting that , after their own novelty effect , the therapists started noticing some limitations in the tool’s simplicity ( although the need of technological skills to use it was still worrying them ) . In this respect , the need and possibility for therapists to customize the experiences might be further elaborated as an example of End - User Programming [ 18 , 38 ] . This approach has recently been proposed to empower end users in dealing with new technologies in many different contexts [ 2 , 11 ] but it has never been fully investigated in a clinical context specifically to empower therapists ( with few notable exceptions like for example [ 22 ] ) . Although the fact that the tool did not change the nature of the task and the corresponding practices was the main aspect of their satisfaction , the therapists noted how they spontaneously started using the labelled elements for mediation : they used to retain the object until they got a full attention of the children . This behavior was not possible in the previous context because there was no physical representation of the properties in the classification task but rather the children expressed them only verbally . This is a small but significant change in the practice of the exercise and it is relevant that it was expected in the design phase but it emerged from the actual use of the tool . Indeed , this meta - use of the tool to intentionally mediate the therapist - children ( or the child - child ) interaction has been noted in a different setting [ 59 ] . Yet , while in their context the facilitator might play different roles ( super - user or playing a specific user role ) in a multi - user game , in our case the empowerment does not come by the digital augmentation of the object only but rather by the combination of materiality ( that allows the therapist to grab and hold the element ) and the digital property ( the multimedia feedback that attracts and engages the child , see also [ 49 ] ) . After this experience , while the team was still worried about the nuisances possibly brought in by the digital artefact , they were more open and more positive to explore further technological in - novations . REFERENCES [ 1 ] American Psychiatric Association . 2013 . Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders : DSM - V ( 5th ed . ) . Washington , DC , USA : APA . [ 2 ] Carmelo Ardito , Paolo Buono , Giuseppe Desolda , and Maristella Matera . 2018 . From smart objects to smart experiences : An end - user development approach . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 114 , ( June 2018 ) , 51 – 68 . [ 3 ] Nirit Bauminger - Zviely , Sigal Eden , Massimo Zancanaro , Patrice L Weiss , and Eynat Gal . 2013 . Increasing social engagement in children with high - functioning autism spectrum disorder using collaborative technologies in the school environ - ment . Autism 17 , 3 ( May 2013 ) , 317 – 339 . [ 4 ] Alejandra Ornelas Barajas , Hussein Al Osman , and Shervin Shirmohammadi . 2017 . A Serious Game for children with Autism Spectrum Disorder as a tool for play therapy . In 2017 IEEE 5th International Conference on Serious Games and Applications for Health ( SeGAH ) , IEEE , Perth , Australia , 1 – 7 . [ 5 ] Vera Bernard - Opitz , N Sriram , and Sharul Nakhoda - Sapuan . 2001 . Enhancing Social Problem Solving in Children with Autism and Normal Children Through Computer - Assisted Instruction . Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 31 ( 4 ) : 377 – 384 . [ 6 ] Braun , V . , & Clarke , V . ( 2006 ) . Using thematic analysis in psychology . Qualitative Research in Psychology , 3 ( 2 ) , 77 – 101 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1191 / 1478088706qp063oa [ 7 ] Jennifer Brown and Donna Murray . 2001 . Strategies for enhancing play skills for children with autism spectrum disorder . Education and Training in Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities 36 ( 3 ) : 312 – 317 [ 8 ] Francesca Brunero , Aldina Venerosi , Flavia Chiarotti , and Giuseppe Maurizio Arduino . 2019 . Are touch screen technologies more effective than traditional educational methods in children with autism spectrum disorders ? A pilot study . Annali dell’Istituto Superiore di Sanità 2 ( April 2019 ) . [ 9 ] Serena Caria , Fabio Paternò , and Carmen Santoro . 2019 . Understanding ASD individuals’difficultieswithmanagingmoney : aninteractivestudy . In Proceedings of the 13th Biannual Conference of the Italian SIGCHI Chapter on Designing the next interaction - CHItaly ’19 , [ 10 ] Angèle LM Cavaye . 1996 . Case study research : a multi - faceted research approach for IS . Information systems journal 6 , 3 ( 1996 ) , 227 – 242 . [ 11 ] Luca Corcella , Marco Manca , Jan Egil Nordvik , Fabio Paternò , Anne - Marthe Sanders , and Carmen Santoro . 2019 . Enabling personalisation of remote elderly assistance . Multimed Tools Appl 78 , 15 ( August 2019 ) , 21557 – 21583 . [ 12 ] Constantin , A . , Johnson , H . , Smith , E . , Lengyel , D . , & Brosnan , M . 2017 . Designing computer - based rewards with and for children with Autism Spectrum Disorder and / or Intellectual Disability . Computers in Human Behavior , 75 , 404 – 414 . [ 13 ] Ciera Crowell , Joan Mora - Guiard , & Narcis Pares . 2019 . Structuring Collabora - tion : Multi - User Full - Body Interaction Environments for Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder . Research in Autism Spectrum Disorder . vol . 58 , 96 – 110 . [ 14 ] Renee R Dijkhuis , Tim B Ziermans , Sophie Van Rijn , Wouter G Staal , and Hanna Swaab . 2017 . Self - regulation and quality of life in high - functioning young adults with autism . Autism 21 , 7 ( October 2017 ) , 896 – 906 . [ 15 ] Paul Dourish . 2001 . Where the Action Is : The Foundations of Embodied Interac - tion ; MIT Press : Cambridge , MA . [ 16 ] Kevin Durkin . 2010 . Videogames and Young People with Developmental Disor - ders . Review of General Psychology 14 , 2 ( June 2010 ) , 122 – 140 . [ 17 ] William Farr , Nicola Yuill , & Steve Hinske . 2012 . An Augmented Toy and So - cial Interaction in Children with Autism . In International Journal of Arts and Look at me and grab this ! Materiality and the practices around negotiation of social attention with children on the autistic spectrum NordiCHI ’20 , October 25 – 29 , 2020 , Tallinn , Estonia Technology , 5 . 104 - 125 . [ 18 ] Gerhard Fischer . 2009 . End - user development and meta - design : Foundations for cultures of participation . In International Symposium on End User Development , Springer , 3 – 14 . [ 19 ] Sue Fletcher - Watson , Helen Pain , S . Hammond , A . Humphry , and Helen Mc - Conachie . 2016 . Designing for young children with autism spectrum disorder : A case study of an iPad app . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 7 : 1 – 14 . [ 20 ] Gill Althia Francis , Silvana Mareva , William Farr , and Jenny Louise Gibson . 2019 . Do Tangible User Interfaces promote social behaviour during free play ? A comparison of autistic and typically - developing children playing with passive and digital construction toys . Research in Autism Spectrum Disorder s 58 : 68 – 82 . [ 21 ] Eynat Gal , Patrice T . Weiss and Massimo Zancanaro . 2019 . Using innovative tech - nologies as therapeutic and educational tools for children with autism spectrum disorder . InAlbert " Skip " RizzoStéphaneBouchard VirtualRealityforPsychological and Neurocognitive Interventions ( pp . 227 - 246 ) . Springer , New York , NY . [ 22 ] Garzotto , F . , & Gonella , R . ( 2011 ) . An Open - ended Tangible Environment for Disabled Children’s Learning . 10 . [ 23 ] Mirko Gelsomini , Franca Garzotto , Vito Matarazzo , Nicolò Messina , and Daniele Occhiuto . 2017 . Creating Social Stories as Wearable Hyper - Immersive Virtual Reality Experiences for Children with Neurodevelopmental Disorders . In Pro - ceedings of the 2017 Conference on Interaction Design and Children - IDC ’17 , ACM Press , Stanford , California , USA , 431 – 437 . [ 24 ] CharlineGrossard , OurielGrynspan , SylvieSerret , Anne - LiseJouen , KevinBailly , and David Cohen . 2017 . Serious games to teach social interactions and emotions to individuals with autism spectrum disorders ( ASD ) . Computers & Education 113 : 195 – 211 . [ 25 ] Ouriel Grynszpan , Patrice L ( Tamar ) Weiss , Fernando Perez - Diaz , and Eynat Gal . 2014 . Innovative technology - based interventions for autism spectrum disorders : A meta - analysis . Autism 18 ( 4 ) : 346 – 361 . [ 26 ] Juan Pablo Hourcade , Stacy R . Williams , Ellen A . Miller , Kelsey E . Huebner , and Lucas J . Liang . 2013 . Evaluation of tablet apps to encourage social interaction in children with autism spectrum disorders . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on human factors in computing systems . [ 27 ] Kari Kuutti and Liam J . Bannon . 2014 . The turn to practice in HCI : towards a research agenda . ACM Press , 3543 – 3552 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557111 [ 28 ] Hiroshi Ishii and Brygg Ullmer . 1997 . Tangible bits : towards seamless interfaces between people , bits and atoms . In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human factors in computing systems . [ 29 ] JenniferW . M . LaiandMattBower . 2019 . Howistheuseoftechnologyineducation evaluated ? A systematic review . Computers & Education 133 , ( May 2019 ) , 27 – 42 . [ 30 ] Patrizia Marti , Luca Giacolini , and Iolanda Iacono . 2016 . Tangible Technologies for the Development of Play Skills in Autistic Children . In Proceedings of 9th International Conference on Advances in Computer - Human Interactions ( ACHI 2016 ) . [ 31 ] CécileMazon , CharlesFage , andHélèneSauzéon . 2019 . Effectivenessandusability of technology - based interventions for children and adolescents with ASD : A systematic review of reliability , consistency , generalization and durability related to the effects of intervention . Computers in Human Behavior 93 , ( April 2019 ) , 235 – 251 . [ 32 ] Joan Mora - Guiard , Ciera Crowell , Narcis Pares , and Pamela Heaton . 2017 . Spark - ing social initiation behaviors in children with Autism through full - body Interac - tion . International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction 11 : 62 – 71 . [ 33 ] Emily Mower , Matthew P . Black , Elisa Flores , Marian Williams , and Shrikanth Narayanan . 2011 . Rachel : Design of an emotionally targeted interactive agent for children with autism . In 2011 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo ( ICME ) , IEEE , Barcelona , Spain , 1 – 6 . [ 34 ] Dinah K . C . Murray . 1997 . Autism and information technology : therapy with computers . In : Powell S and Jordan R ( eds ) Autism and Learning : A Guide to Good Practice . London : David Fulton Publishers : 100 – 117 [ 35 ] David Moore and Jill Taylor . 2000 . Interactive multimedia systems for students with autism . Journal of Educational Media 25 ( 3 ) : 169 – 177 . [ 36 ] David Moore , Paul McGrath and John Thorpe . 2000 . Computer aided learning for people with autism—a framework for research and development . Innovations on Education & Training International 37 ( 3 ) : 218 – 228 . [ 37 ] Sarah Parsons , & Cobb , S . 2011 . State - of - the Art of Virtual Reality Technologies for Children on the Autism Spectrum . In European Journal of Special Needs Education , 26 ( 3 ) , 355 – 336 . [ 38 ] Fabio Paternò and Carmen Santoro . 2019 . End - user development for personaliz - ing applications , things , and robots . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies 131 , ( November 2019 ) , 120 – 130 . [ 39 ] Taciana Pontual Falcão . 2018 . Tangible Representational Properties : Implications for Meaning Making . MTI 2 , 3 ( September 2018 ) , 54 . [ 40 ] Taciana Pontual Falcão . 2017 . Action - effect mappings in tangible interaction for children with intellectual disabilities . IJLT 12 , 4 ( 2017 ) , 294 . [ 41 ] Paula C . Ribeiro , & Alberto B . Raposo . 2014 . ComFiM : A Game for Multitouch Devices to Encourage Communication Between People with Autism . Serious Games and Applications for Health ( SeGAH ) , 2014 IEEE 3rd Int . Conf . IEEE , 2014 . [ 42 ] Eleonor Rosch . 1975 . Cognitive representations of semantic categories . Journal of Experimental Psychology , General , 104 : 192 - 233 . [ 43 ] Orit Shaer and Eva Hornecker . 2009 . Tangible User Interfaces : Past , Present , and Future Directions . Foundations and Trends®in Human – Computer Interaction 3 ( 1 – 2 ) : 1 – 137 . [ 44 ] Graeme G . Shanks and Anne N . Parr . 2003 . Positivist single case study research in information systems : a critical analysis . In Proceedings of the European Con - ference on Information Systems . Naples . [ 45 ] Karanya Sitdhisanguan , Nopporn Chotikakamthorn , Ajchara Dechaboon , and Patcharaporn Out . 2012 . Using tangible user interfaces in computer - based train - ing systems for low - functioning autistic children . Pers Ubiquit Comput 16 , 2 ( February 2012 ) , 143 – 155 . [ 46 ] Micol Spitale , Fabio Catania , Piero Crovari , and Franca Garzotto . 2020 . Multicri - teria Decision Analysis and Conversational Agents for children with autism . In Proceedings of the 53rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences . [ 47 ] Deborah Sturm , Ed Peppe , & Bertram Ploog . 2016 . eMot - iCan : Design of an Assessment Game for Emotion Recognition in Players with Autism . In 2016 IEEE International Conference on Serious Games and Applications for Health ( SeGAH ) , Orlando , FL , pp . 1 - 7 . [ 48 ] Connie Svabo . 2009 . Materiality in a practice - based approach . The Learn - ing Organization 16 , 5 ( July 2009 ) , 360 – 370 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / 09696470910974153 [ 49 ] JohnSSwettenham . 1996 . Canchildrenwithautismbetaughttounderstandfalse belief using computers ? Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry , 37 : 157 – 165 . [ 50 ] RobertD . Tennyson & Ok - ChoonPark . 1980 . TheTeachingofConcepts : AReview of Instructional Design Research Literature . Review of Educational Research , 50 ( 1 ) , 55 – 70 . [ 51 ] Robert D . Tennyson , Judith Youngers , & Prapavadee Suebsonthi . 1983 . Concept Learning by Children Using Instructional Presentation Forms for Prototype For - mation and Classification - Skill Development . Journal of Educational Psychology , 75 ( 2 ) : 280 – 291 . [ 52 ] StavrosTsikinas , SteliosXinogalos . 2018 . Studyingtheeffectsofcomputerserious games on people with intellectual disabilities or autism spectrum disorder : A systematic literature review . Journal of Computer Assisted Learning , 35 ( 1 ) , 61 - 73 . [ 53 ] Renée J . F . van den Heuvel , Monique A . S . Lexis , Rianne M . L . Janssens , Patrizia Marti , and Luc P . de Witte . 2017 . Robots supporting play for children with physi - cal disabilities : Exploring the potential of IROMEC . Technology and Disability 29 ( 3 ) : 109 – 120 . [ 54 ] Lilia Villafuerte , Milena S . Markova , & Sergi Jorda . 2012 . Acquisition of Social Abilities Through Musical Tangible User Interface : Children with Autism Spec - trum Condition and the Reactable . In CHI EA ’12 on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 745 - 760 . [ 55 ] Torben Wallbaum , Andrii Matviienko , Wilko Heuten , and Susanne Boll . 2017 . Challenges For Designing Tangible Systems . In Proceedings of the 3rd european tangible interaction studio ( etis 2017 ) . [ 56 ] LukeJaiWood , BenRobins , GabriellaLakatos , DagSverreSyrdal , AbolfazlZaraki , and Kerstin Dautenhahn . 2019 . Developing a protocol and experimental setup for using a humanoid robot to assist children with autism to develop visual perspective taking skills . Paladyn , Journal of Behavioral Robotics 10 ( 1 ) : 167 - 179 . [ 57 ] Volker Wulf , Volkmar Pipek , David Randall , Markus Rohde , Kjeld Schmidt , and Gunnar Stevens ( Eds . ) . 2018 . Socio - informatics : a practice - based perspective on the design and use of IT artifacts . Oxford University Press , Oxford , United Kingdom . [ 58 ] Robert K . Yin . 1994 . Case Study Research : Design and Methods . Sage Publications , Thousand Oaks [ 59 ] Massimo Zancanaro , Leonardo Giusti , Eynat Gal , and Patrice T . Weiss . 2011 . Three around a table : the facilitator role in a co - located interface for social competence training of children with autism spectrum disorder . In Proceedings of IFIP Conference on Human - Computer Interaction , Springer .