# thyghgap p : Instagram Content Moderation and Lexical Variation in Pro - Eating Disorder Communities Stevie Chancellor Jessica Pater Trustin Clear Eric Gilbert Munmun De Choudhury School of Interactive Computing , Georgia Institute of Technology , Atlanta GA 30332 { schancellor3 , pater , trustin } @ gatech . edu , { gilbert , mchoudhu } @ cc . gatech . edu ABSTRACT Pro - eating disorder ( pro - ED ) communities on social media encourage the adoption and maintenance of disordered eat - ing habits as acceptable alternative lifestyles rather than threats to health . In particular , the social networking site Instagram has reacted by banning searches on several pro - ED tags and issuing content advisories on others . We pre - sent the first large - scale quantitative study investigating pro - ED communities on Instagram in the aftermath of mod - eration – our dataset contains 2 . 5M posts between 2011 and 2014 . We find that the pro - ED community has adopted non - standard lexical variations of moderated tags to circumvent these restrictions . In fact , increasingly complex lexical vari - ants have emerged over time . Communities that use lexical variants show increased participation and support of pro - ED ( 15 - 30 % ) . Finally , the tags associated with content on these variants express more toxic , self - harm , and vulnerable content . Despite Instagram’s moderation strategies , pro - ED communities are active and thriving . We discuss the effec - tiveness of content moderation as an intervention for com - munities of deviant behavior . Author Keywords Instagram ; social media ; lexical variation ; eating disorder . ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . INTRODUCTION Online connectivity has changed our experiences of health disorders , both for good and for bad . On one hand , the web provides a candid and emotionally supportive network for communities with socially stigmatized illnesses , e . g . , de - pression [ 12 , 31 ] . On the other , online platforms have con - nected people in ways that can enable and amplify the de - structive power of eating disorders [ 19 ] . Once socially or physically isolated , individuals with eating disorders can now connect with other sufferers online . Sometimes , these users connect in “pro - eating disorder” ( pro - ED ) communi - ties that share content , advice , and provide social support for disordered or unusual eating choices as a reasonable lifestyle alternative [ 7 ] . Social sharing of such behaviors is dangerous not only for those with eating disorders but also represents contagion threats to those who do not currently have these conditions but may be vulnerable [ 7 ] . Instagram is a photo - sharing social network founded in 2010 . The platform is unique in that it does not have formal - ized community structures , like forums or private groups . Instead , communities form around more amorphous , pub - lic tags . In the case of the pro - ED community on Instagram , users cluster around tags relat - ing to eating disorders ( e . g . , “anorexia” , “proana” ) . Instagram , along with other social media platforms like Tumblr , has been challenged with the proliferation of such content . In response to media scrutiny in 2012 [ 32 ] , Insta - gram began to publicly ban some of the most common tags associated with pro - ED [ 24 ] with the stated goal that such restrictions would discourage pro - ED content . Banned tags can still be used in posts , but posts will not be returned if a user searches for any of these tags . In addition , Instagram issues content advisories that serve as public service announcements on searches around eating disorder - related tags ( Figure 1 ) . We will refer to the - se practices by Instagram as “content moderation . ” In response to such moderation , the pro - ED community has adopted tagging conventions to circumvent restrictions on accessing pro - ED content . One popular technique used by the community is adopting non - standard linguistic variants of moderated tags [ 10 , 13 ] , what we call “lexical variants . ” These variants include adding or deleting characters in tags ( “anorexiaa” ) , substituting letters ( “thynsporation” ) , or de - liberate misspellings ( “anarexic” ) but keeping the semantics of the tag consistent . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for com - ponents of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Ab - stracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . CSCW ' 16 , February 27 - March 02 , 2016 , San Francisco , CA , USA © 2016 ACM . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 3592 - 8 / 16 / 02… $ 15 . 00 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2818048 . 2819963 Figure 1 . A content advi - sory is issued on searches for “ana” . In this paper , we investigate the adoption of lexical varia - tion in tags used by the pro - ED community before and after Instagram began moderating pro - ED content . Our research is the first large - scale quantitative study that examines the effectiveness of such content moderation over time . This study has four aims – to : • Study the emergence and evolution of lexical variations of moderated tags , focusing on the period following changes to Instagram’s community policy in 2012 . • Explore how communities adopting lexically variant tags change over time . • Quantify how the greater community engages with the content associated with lexical variants . • Examine the topical context of lexical variants and contrast it with that of the moderated tags . Our study uses 2 . 5 million pro - ED Instagram posts from half a million users , shared between 2011 and 2014 . After content moderation , Lexical variants emerged for all 17 pro - ED tags that underwent initial moderation in 2012 . Many lexical variants were adopted by the pro - ED commu - nity following the enforcement of content moderation – an average of almost 40 variants emerged corresponding to each moderated tag . Further , engagement on these variant tags through ‘likes’ and comments was 15 - 30 % higher compared to the original moderated tags . While the size of communities adopting the variations was often smaller and largely non - overlapping with the moderated tags , certain lexical variations reached dramatic sizes ( 2 to 40 times larger ) relative to the initial tag . In fact , lexical variants of tags with content advisories grew by 22 % following Insta - gram’s moderation of pro - ED content . We also find that the content associated with lexical variants reflected heightened vulnerability to self - harm and isolation from the greater community of sufferers of eating disorders on Instagram . Our quantitative investigation suggests that Instagram’s current moderation practices are not effective at dispersing the pro - ED community or in controlling the propagation of pro - ED behavior on the platform . Moderation might in fact be amplifying the destructive power of pro - ED posts . Our research offers insights into avoidance mechanisms of plat - form - imposed moderation for pro - ED communities . These insights can inform whether moderation is a viable inter - vention mechanism for pro - ED , and if not , how to craft more effective ways to help vulnerable communities . Be - yond eating disorders , we hope our findings to encourage deeper discussions around the role of policing and moderat - ing content to curb deviant behavior . Privacy and Ethics . In this paper , given the sensitivities around the topic of investigation , we use only public data collected via Instagram’s official API . We also do not re - port activities of specific users , their postings , or any in - formation that could potentially be personally identifiable . Since our methods involved no interaction with the users and public data was used , our work did not qualify for insti - tutional review board approval . PRIOR WORK AND RESEARCH QUESTIONS Eating disorders are a group of psychosocial disorders char - acterized by abnormal behaviors in eating and exercise . These disorders negatively affect both mental and physical health and include symptoms of binging , restricting , purg - ing , obsessing , or other forms of extreme emotional re - sponses to the procurement and ingestion of food , exercise , or body modification [ 38 ] . Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa are the two well - known eating disorders specified in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disor - ders ( DSM - 5 ) . In the US , it is estimated that roughly 20 million women and 10 million men suffer from an eating disorder at some point in their life [ 41 ] . Eating disorders have the highest mortality rate of any mental disorder [ 2 ] . Online Communities and Eating Disorders Previous research has examined the content of pro - ED communities on blogs and related social networks [ 7 , 19 , 27 , 34 ] . Most of these studies use qualitative coding schemes to analyze content . They categorize the various support structures these postings offer community members [ 7 , 19 ] , analyze search patterns for pro - ED content [ 27 ] , and look at the ethical situations surrounding pro - ED in online communities [ 34 ] . One preliminary study examined Tumblr as a content portal for pro - ED behavior [ 9 ] , but very few have deeply delved into the membership and structure of these user - generated and amorphous networks . Quantitative examinations of pro - ED communities are limited aside from the work in [ 42 ] , which examines images and com - munity dynamics . With the exception of [ 11 ] , few studies have explored pro - ED communities that have emerged on social media , such as Tumblr and Instagram . Instagram has unique affordances that make it an appropri - ate platform to examine pro - ED behavior . The de - mographics of Instagram and the demographics of the common eating disorder patient are similar . Approximately 70 % of Instagram users are female and roughly half of all Internet - using young adults ( 12 - 18 years ) are using Insta - gram [ 14 ] compared to typical eating disorder patients who are women ages 15 - 24 [ 34 ] . In addition , the visual nature of Instagram itself may predispose pro - ED communities to stay . A 2010 study found that 69 % of American girls five to 12 - years old say pictures influence their concept of ideal body shape and 47 % report that images make them want to lose weight [ 29 ] . Further , the use of tags on Instagram makes the social network a likely target for deviant behav - ior . Pro - ED communities are often hidden in plain sight ; that is , their activities are generally cut off from the main - stream activity of users but are easily accessible by search - ing for related tags / keywords . Social Media Content Moderation Various social media platforms moderate and remove con - tent for legal or political reasons [ 35 ] . Some decisions are driven by the legalities of the country where they operate . All US social media sites , for instance , ban child pornogra - phy as well as content that commits copyright infringement . Platforms may also abide by censorship standards imposed by governments . Several studies have examined attributes and impacts of Chinese censorship on social media [ 3 , 17 , 22 , 25 , 28 ] or social media censorship more broadly [ 38 ] . The impact of censorship on information sharing , propagation , accessibility , and journalistic practices was discussed in [ 41 ] in the context of socio - political protests in authoritarian regimes . Beyond these , social media sites may also choose to remove content for social , moral , or community reasons . Facebook , Instagram , Tumblr , and YouTube moderate general porno - graphic content , and Facebook bans hateful and violent speech [ 18 ] . In the context of eating disorders , while there is no obvious moderation on eating disorder - related content on Twitter , YouTube , or Reddit , other platforms like Pin - terest and Facebook more rigorously ban tags and terms around it [ 10 ] . Tumblr issues public service announcements on searches on pro - ED terms and Instagram has banned several pro - ED tags and provides content advisories on others [ 21 ] . Instagram’s regulation of pro - ED content falls into this broad social space and our research presents one of the first quantitative insights into the effectiveness of plat - form - enforced moderation of pro - ED behavior . Language Variation in Social Media Language variation has been of great interest to researchers for many decades . Social media has become a popular me - dium to explore , model , and detect a variety of linguistic variations [ 15 ] and to understand the emergence of linguis - tic conventions [ 23 , 26 ] over contexts such as geography , demographics , and style . Automated detection of language variation has been meth - odologically challenging . Most quantitative work in this area focuses on identifying a hand - curated small set of vari - able pairs ( actual term and variant term ) and measuring their frequencies , except [ 15 ] which uses a latent variable model for the purpose . Lexical variation , in particular , is challenging to measure because it is often difficult to assess what could be in the possible universe of all variants – so - cial media is known for use of non - standard terms ( smh , jk , ima , wassup ) . Lexical variants often do not follow any reg - ular , expected patterns , conventions or rules as they deviate from their actual terms . Note that the precise definition of lexical variation in the literature is varied and often depends on the specific re - search question under investigation . Eisenstein et al . [ 15 ] defined lexical variation to be the differences in the use of different linguistic constructs ( e . g . , words ) and proposed Root tag # Var . Lexical Variants ana 9 anaa , anna , anaaa , anaaaa , annaa , annna , annaaa , anaaaaaa , anaaaaa anorexia 99 anorexic , anorexie , anoressia , anorexi , anorexia , anorexique , anorexica , ano - rectic , anorexia , anoretic anorexianervosa 62 anorexianervousa , anorexianerviosa , anoressianervosa , anorexianevosa , anorexicnervouse , anorexianevrosa , anorexicnervosa , anorexinervosa , anorexianervose , anorexianervosia bonespo 6 bonespoo , bonespoooo , bonespooo , bonesspo , bonesporation , bonessspo bulimia 49 bulimic , bulima , bulimie , bulimi , bu - limia , bulimica , bulimc , bulimiaaa , bulimic , bulimist eatingdisorder 97 eatingdisorders , eatingdissorder , eat - ingdisoder , eatingdis , eatingdisorter , eatingdisoreder , eatingdisorde , eating - disorderrr , eatingdisordered , eat - ing _ disorder mia 3 miaa , miaaa , miaaaa proana 11 proanaa , proanna , proanaaa , proa - naaaa , pro _ ana , prooana , proaa - na , pronana , proannaa , proa - naaaaaa proanorexia 1 proanorexic probulimia 1 probulimic promia 4 promiaa , promiaaa , promiaaaa , proomia secretsociety 55 secret _ society123 , secretsociety _ 123 , secretsociety123 , secret _ society , se - cret _ society _ 123 , secretsociety1234 , secret _ society1234 , se - cret _ society124 , thesecretsociety , secretsociety124 skinny 18 skinny , skiny , skinny , skinny , skinny , skinnyyy , skini , skynni , skinnyyyy , skinnnyyy thighgap 107 thighgaps , thygap , thighgapp , thigh _ gap , thightgap , thyghgap , thighgappp , thegap , thigap , thighgapss thin 9 thyn , thinn , thynn , thinnn , thynnn , thiin , thiiin , thinnnn , thyyn thinspiration 101 thynspiration , thinsperation , thinspire , thynsporation , thinsporation , thinspir - ing , thinspirationn , thinspirational , thinsparation , thynsperation thinspo 40 thinspoooo , thynspo , thynspoo , thynspooo , thinspoo , thinspooo , thin - spooooo , thynspoooo , thinnspo , thin - spoooooo Total root tags 17 Total variant tags 672 Table 1 . Root tags , total number of variants in each tag chain , and 10 most frequent lexical variants . methods to detect how such constructs vary with geogra - phy . Bamman et al . [ 4 ] extended these investigations of lexical variations in Twitter to gender identity . Schwartz et al . [ 33 ] found differences in lexical constructs across popu - lations on Twitter . The lengthening of sentiment words as a form of lexical variation was examined by Brody and Dia - kopoulos in [ 8 ] . In this paper , we address these issues by developing a lexical variation detection method that com - bines automated natural language processing techniques with human annotations . Further , prior literature did not focus on the unique circumstances of adoption of lexical variation to engage in deviant behavior – our contributions lie in examining the nature of changes in one particular deviant behavior community , pro - ED , following the adop - tion of lexical variation . In our work , we define lexical variation in the light of tag - ging strategies adopted by the pro - ED community in the aftermath of content moderation enforcement by Instagram . Research Questions In light of the above prior work and our focus on the social media Instagram , we examined lexical , behavioral , and topical changes associated with the emergence of lexical variation in Instagram’s pro - ED communities . We address the following research questions : RQ 1 . ( Lexical Changes ) How do lexical variations of moderated pro - ED tags evolve over time ? RQ 2 . ( Behavioral Changes ) How does posting activity and support manifested in pro - ED posts evolve as lexi - cal variations are adopted ? RQ 3 . ( Topical Changes ) What topics characterize posts with lexically variant tags , and how do they contrast to the set of posts with the moderated tags ? DEFINITIONS , DATA , AND METHODS Defining Lexical Variation Because there is no standard definition or a set of “gold standard labels” on tag variations in analyses of pro - ED communities , we offer a definition for lexical variation for this paper . We began our investigation with anecdotal ob - servations made in popular media on this topic , e . g . , “thin - spoo” was identified to be a variation that emerged follow - ing moderation of “thinspo” [ 10 , 13 ] . Variations that emerged out of moderated tags included lexical additions , deletions , substitutions , or permutations of characters . However , we noticed that these variant tags kept similar semantic meaning and structure . For example , “anatips” and “anaaaaa” are both tags with Levenshtein edit distance of 4 [ 30 ] with respect to the moderated tag “ana , ” have ad - ditions and permutations , and could , with traditional met - rics [ 15 ] , be considered variants . However our qualitative observations indicated “anatips” and “anaaaaa” are used for different purposes – the former tag for gathering advice on the maintenance of anorexic lifestyle , while the latter as a description of anorexia . As also observed by [ 8 ] , standard lemmatization methods or spell - correction techniques that are based on edit distance were therefore not appropriate for selecting our initial set of variants for the moderated tags . Based on these observations , we offer a set of general rules to define lexical variants . We consider a tag ( t j ) to be a “lex - ical variant” of another tag ( t i ) if : 1 ) t j is lengthened by repeating any of t i ’s characters or other newly added characters . 2 ) Some of the characters in t i are permuted to create t j . 3 ) Some of the characters in t i are eliminated to create t j . 4 ) One or more characters not in t i ( including alphanumeric characters ) are added to or substituted in t j . 5 ) A combination of the above criteria is used to create t j These rules are relatively more restrictive compared to those used in existing literature on language variation [ 15 ] ; however , they allow us to define a form of variation in which the semantic structure is unchanged , and the varia - tion is limited to the lexical elements of a tag . These rules provide a much - needed scope to examine tag variants in pro - ED communities . Based on these criteria , we formally define the following two terms that are used throughout the paper : a . Root tag : A tag t i which serves as a basis for us to dis - cover and understand lexical variations of tag use , is re - ferred to as a “root tag” . We assume the root tag t i to be the canonical form of lexical variants t j . Root tags are the original version of a tag ; in our case they are the tags which underwent moderation by Instagram in 2012 . b . Tag chain : The set of all the lexical variants t j of each root tag t i , as obtained through the rules above . Data Collection We used Instagram’s official API 1 to collect over eight mil - lion public posts in the pro - ED space . However , Insta - gram’s API does not return any posts when queried with banned tags . Our data gathering occurred in three steps to work around this limitation : sampling for pro - ED tags that co - occurred with banned tags in posts , a larger data collec - tion , and creating a candidate pro - ED post set by removing noisy , ambiguous or irrelevant content . First , we obtained post counts for nine “seed tags” 2 known to be related to eating disorders [ 11 ] . We collected all posts for each of these nine tags over 30 days . The resulting sam - ple contained 434K posts with 234K unique tags . We used this to establish co - occurrence probabilities for all tag pairs . Sorting tags in order of decreasing probability of co - occurrence identified 222 tags with at least a 1 % occurrence 1 http : / / instagram . com / developer / 2 Seed tags include : “ed” , “eatingdisorder” , “ednos” , “ana” , “ano - rexia” , “anorexic” , “mia” , “bulimia” , and “bulimic” . rate , collectively associated with tens of millions of posts dating back as far as January 2011 . With this co - occurrence tag list , we then excluded tags that were not related to eating disorders . This step needed to be done manually to find tags semantically related to eating disorders , not the closely related communities of mental health and eating disorder recovery . Our selection criteria excluded tags that were broad enough to be used by the general population or be applied to another mental disorder . Tags that were too broad include “fat” , “beautiful” , and “whale” as well as tags related to other mental disorders like “anxiety” and “depression . ” We also excluded any ob - vious recovery tags like “anarecovery” – this is because we wanted to specifically focus on the behavior of the pro - ED community that promoted / reinforced eating disorders . This reduced the dataset from 222 tags to 72 known eating dis - order tags . Next , we collected our dataset , which contained all available posts tagged with any of these 72 tags from November 2014 as far back as January 2011 . This dataset contained over 8 million posts . Finally , we created a candidate set of posts from this raw set that we confirmed to be related to pro - ED behavior . We removed any posts with three tags ( “mia” , “ana” , and “ed” ) that did not also contain another tag from our list of 72 tags . Qualitative observation showed that these tags were strong - ly associated with the pro - ED community on Instagram but were also commonly used as first names or for referencing popular celebrities ( “ed” for Ed Sheeran ) . This filtering created a dataset of 6 . 5 million posts . Identifying Root Tags Following our data collection , we devised an approach to identify a set of root tags relevant to the pro - ED community that underwent moderation . Instagram does not publish a centralized resource for all moderated tags , and third - party sources on the same are scarce and only include banned tags , not the ones with content advisories . To overcome these limitations , we first constructed a tag usage frequency distribution to identify frequent tags in all crawled posts . For the top 200 tags , two researchers who are Instagram users manually checked for bans or content advisories on these tags . This produced 17 tags that uniquely character - ized pro - ED content and have either a ban or content advi - sory placed by Instagram . These 17 tags served as our set of moderated root tags on which we base our ensuing analyses of lexical variation . Identifying Lexical Variants Finally , we identified lexical variants of our 17 root tags in our dataset . For the purpose , we constructed a matching regular expression in line with the rules stated earlier in the section “Defining Lexical Variation” . Our regular expres - sions were intentionally broad to capture any potential vari - ants . This returned a rough list of potential variants for our root tags . Two researchers familiar with Instagram and pro - ED con - tent independently participated in a binary rating task to remove spurious and unrelated variants ( recall the “anatips” and “anaaaaa” example from before ) . Each candidate vari - ant was rated as “yes” or “no” – “yes” indicated a valid variant , whereas “no” did not . The researchers then pooled their responses , and Cohen’s κ of interrater agreement was observed to be very high ( . 98 ) . Our analysis uses variants where both raters agreed “yes . ” Table 1 gives a list of the 17 root tags along with the num - ber of lexically variant tags obtained through the method above ( 672 total ) . We also show the top 10 lexical variants found to be most frequent in our pro - ED post set . In Table 2 , we further report the moderation status of these 17 tags and the total posts for the root and all variant tags . As Table 2 shows , different styles of tag variants , ranging from arbi - trary word lengthening ( e . g . , “thinspoo” ) to permutations of letters in a word ( e . g . , “anoreixa” ) , to elimination and addi - tion of arbitrary characters ( e . g . , “bulimkc” ) characterized the pro - ED communities following moderation . Our final dataset contained all posts from our candidate set that were tagged with any moderated tags and any of their Tag Chain Status Posts ( All ) Posts ( Root ) Posts ( Variants ) ana Advisory 1654530 1617455 37075 ( ↓ ) anorexia Advisory 2137204 1333694 803510 ( ↓ ) anorexianervosa Advisory 121037 116125 4912 ( ↓ ) bonespo Advisory 35371 34587 784 ( ↓ ) bulimia Advisory 1169581 773704 395877 ( ↓ ) eatingdisorder Advisory 748204 683115 65089 ( ↓ ) mia Advisory 964083 948164 15919 ( ↓ ) proana Banned 17593 13170 4423 ( ↓ ) proanorexia Banned 365 303 62 ( ↓ ) probulimia Banned 219 168 51 ( ↓ ) promia Banned 4470 4124 346 ( ↓ ) secretsociety Banned 332287 8166 324121 ( ↑ ) skinny Advisory 521933 519852 2081 ( ↓ ) thighgap Banned 88457 14572 73885 ( ↑ ) thin Advisory 304684 293318 11366 ( ↓ ) thinspiration Banned 68474 21254 47220 ( ↑ ) thinspo Banned 206473 62380 144093 ( ↑ ) Total posts ( roots + variants ) 2416272 Mean change in # variant posts compared to # root posts - 70 % Table 2 . Summary statistics of the tag chains as well as the moderation status of each root tag . Downward arrows indi - cate chains where moderation results in fewer posts with variants . Upward arrows indicate an increase . lexical variants . It has more than 2 . 4 million posts and had over half a million users . RESULTS RQ1 ( Lexical Changes ) : Evolution of Lexical Variations To answer RQ1 , we investigate the pattern and evolution of lexical variations associated with the root tags . Levenshtein edit distance between two words is the minimum number of single - character edits ( i . e . insertions , deletions , or substitu - tions ) required to change one word into the other [ 30 ] . In Figure 2 we show scatter plots of the Levenshtein edit dis - tance for variants of “anorexia” , “eatingdisorder” and “thighgap” over time . Figure 2 shows that all chains , edit distance of a variant tag compared to the root increases over time – linear trend ( least squares ) fits to the edit distances of all variants for “anorexia” , “eatingdisorder” , and “thighgap” yield R 2 = . 2 ( p = . 002 ) , R 2 = . 27 ( p = . 001 ) and R 2 = . 34 ( p = . 0005 ) respective - ly . As newer variants emerged over time after the root , they were increasingly more syntactically distinct ( “thighgap” → “thyghgapss” ) . The mean and maximum edit distance over all variants per root tag are reported in Table 3 – we note that the mean edit distances are higher than one and the maximum at nine characters , indicating considerable lexical variation in the tag chains . However , it is important to note that there is no positive correlation between the mean edit distance of the variants and activity ( i . e . , volume of posts , ref . Table 2 ) on the corresponding moderated tag ( Pearson correlation coefficient ρ = . 045 ; p = . 19 ) . For instance , mean edit distance is highest for the “thinspo” and “ana” tag chains , however lower for “anorexia” and “bulimia” ; how - ever , the latter two have some of the largest proportion of posts in our data . This shows that the increased dispersion in lexical elements ( indicated by high edit distance in the variants ) is likely not an artifact of the moderated tag being a more popular tag in the pro - ED community . In each chain , we further define a rate of change metric momentum [ 23 ] , given as : ( 1 / N ) Σ i ( e ( t i ) / e ( t i - 1 ) ) , i . e . , the mean ratio between edit distance of the i th tag t i to the tag t i - 1 appearing in the time slot before it , where N is the total number of variant tags corresponding to a root . All 17 tag chains show increased edit distance momentum of the vari - ants with mean momentum of 1 . 3 across all chains ( a value of 1 would indicate the rate of change is constant ) . Interest - ingly , based on a Mann - Whitney U - test , there is no statisti - cally significant differences between the edit distance mo - mentum of variants of banned tags and those of the adviso - ry tags ( p = . 35 ) . We conjecture the pro - ED community adopts increasing lexical variance in their tags to avoid In - Tag chain Max . edit dist . Mean edit dist . Momentum ana 5 2 . 556 ±1 . 257 1 . 281 anorexia 7 1 . 939 ±1 . 043 1 . 285 anorexianervosa 8 1 . 629 ±1 . 096 1 . 192 bonespo 6 2 . 500 ±1 . 708 1 . 367 bulimia 7 1 . 755 ±0 . 980 1 . 203 eatingdisorder 5 1 . 629 ±0 . 778 1 . 156 mia 3 2 . 000 ±0 . 816 1 . 750 proana 5 2 . 000 ±1 . 348 1 . 492 promia 3 1 . 750 ±0 . 829 1 . 278 secretsociety123 6 2 . 255 ±1 . 239 1 . 321 skinny 4 1 . 722 ±0 . 870 1 . 221 thighgap 5 2 . 084 ±1 . 006 1 . 218 thin 3 1 . 889 ±0 . 737 1 . 188 thinspiration 6 2 . 307 ±1 . 318 1 . 396 proanorexia 1 1 . 000 0 . 000 - probulimia 1 1 . 000 0 . 000 - thinspo 9 3 . 125 ±1 . 952 1 . 383 Mean momentum 1 . 3 Table 3 . Variation patterns among tags in a chain , with respect to the root . Momentum indicates the rate of change of edit distance of variants over time of their emergence . “proanorex - ia” and “probulimia” each had one variant , so there was no momentum measured for these tag chains . Figure 2 . Changes in Levenshtein’s edit distance with emergence of newer lexical variations over time – shown for “anorexia” , “eatingdisorder” and “thighgap” tag chains . Each data point in the scatter plot corresponds to the edit distance of a particular variant at a certain point in time . stagram’s moderation of tags , beginning with closer vari - ants to the root tag and becoming increasingly complex . RQ2 ( Behavioral Changes ) : Posting Activity & Support In RQ2 , we explore temporal changes in posting activity , users , and engagement / support around root and variant tags . Comparing Activity Figure 3 shows the changes in normalized proportions of posts that correspond to six moderated root tags and the same for three of their most common variants . To determine this normalized proportion of posts , we divided the total number of users who posted on a root tag or any of its lexi - cal variants by the number of users that posted on any tag during the same time slot . Normalizing posts was necessary to prevent effects of overly active users as well as to cir - cumvent disproportionate distribution of posts obtained from Instagram over the course of our three yearlong analy - sis . Our time slots were one week . After changing community policies and introducing content moderation in April 2012 , posting activity changed in ways we consider both varied and surprising . For the banned tags ( “thighgap , ” “thinspo , ” and “thinspiration” ) , the proportion of posts sharply drops when Instagram reported changing its community policies . This is consistent across the other banned tags ( not shown for brevity ) – the use of banned tags decreased 13 - 78 % after April 2012 ( mean 52 % ) . However , for root tags with content advisories , we see a surprising increase in the proportion of posts after the poli - cy change ( “ana” , “mia” , “eatingdisorder” ) . This increase ranges between 9 and 37 % ( mean 22 % ) . The emergence and substantial adoption of lexical variant tags only hap - pens after April 2012 . While a causal effect may not be directly derived , we believe that this shows a deliberate strategy by the pro - ED community to circumvent content moderation policies and to continue to organize and sustain themselves . Next , while lexical variants did emerge for the moderated tags , in some cases , the proportion of posts on variants is lower than the posts on the root tag ( Table 2 ) . In fact , on average there is a 70 % decrease in proportion of variant posts compared to that of the root tag posts . This shows that Instagram’s moderation policy did reduce activi - ty on these tags . However , certain tag chains also increase in size ( in terms of posts ) through the adoption of lexical variants – e . g . , “secretsociety” increases by more than 4000 % , “thighgap” by 500 % , and “thinspo” more than 200 % . This increased activity shows that the pro - ED com - munity continues to thrive even though overall participation dropped on some tags . Comparing Users and Support Next , we examine the volume of unique users associated with the root tags and their variants as well as the Jaccard similarity / overlap of users between the two ( Table 4 ) . In general , there are some tag chains where there is considera - ble overlap of users between the root tags and adopters of their variants ( e . g , “bulimia , ” “secretsociety” ) . However , most tag chains have little overlap ( e . g . , “ana , ” “thighgap” ) . We believe this shows a shift in users who adopt these vari - ations to overcome moderation restrictions enforced by Instagram . It also implies that adoption of lexical variation in tag usage might be an intrinsic individual characteristic ; Table 4 . Number of users who used the root tag , all variants , and the percentage overlap , and their overlap . Down arrows are tag chains where the number of variant users decreased after moderation , whereas up arrows indicate an increase . Tag chain Root users Variant users Overlap ( % ) ana 87575 2792 ( ↓ ) 2 . 12 anorexia 86631 57837 ( ↓ ) 39 . 06 anorexianervosa 5156 547 ( ↓ ) 4 . 81 bonespo 2107 115 ( ↓ ) 2 . 80 bulimia 49468 25758 ( ↓ ) 36 . 61 eatingdisorder 40605 9622 ( ↓ ) 9 . 11 mia 53880 684 ( ↓ ) 0 . 97 proana 2338 355 ( ↓ ) 3 . 59 proanorexia 24 9 ( ↓ ) 8 . 33 probulimia 10 1 ( ↓ ) 10 . 00 promia 672 51 ( ↓ ) 1 . 79 secretsociety 852 15215 ( ↑ ) 65 . 73 skinny 55639 564 ( ↓ ) 0 . 66 thighgap 973 5931 ( ↑ ) 5 . 86 thin 27386 865 ( ↓ ) 2 . 25 thinspiration 2919 3534 ( ↑ ) 17 . 71 thinspo 9304 9289 ( ↓ ) 17 . 79 Total unique users ( roots + variants ) 496498 Mean change in # variant users from # root users - 68 % Likes Tag Chain Mean ( Root ) Mean ( Variants ) z eatingdisorder 53 ±55 . 28 44 ±72 . 87 - 36 . 21 * * * mia 44 ±46 . 37 56 ±46 . 42 32 . 79 * * * thighgap 36 ±39 . 02 52 ±49 . 00 38 . 55 * * * thinspiration 31 ±26 . 35 58 ±57 . 86 64 . 12 * * * thinspo 33 ±34 . 47 53 ±50 . 58 87 . 16 * * * Change in # likes in variant posts vs . root posts 30 . 6 % Comments Tag Chain Mean - Root Mean – Variant t Stat . eatingdisorder 2 ±4 . 80 2 ±4 . 01 - 23 . 76 * * * thighgap 1 ±3 . 05 2 ±3 . 97 27 . 85 * * * thinspiration 1 ±3 . 01 1 ±3 . 62 24 . 50 * * * thinspo 1 ±3 . 22 2 ±3 . 95 38 . 54 * * * Change in # comments in variant posts vs . root posts 15 . 1 % Table 5 . Engagement ( likes , comments ) on the roots and their variants . Tag chains with most significant change in mean likes and comments are shown . Statistical significance is test - ed based on Mann Whitney U - tests . Bonferroni correction ( α / 17 ) , where α = . 05 ( * ) , . 01 ( * * * ) , and . 001 ( * * * ) , is adopted to control for familywise error rate . that is , the users likely to embrace this strategy are perhaps a small fraction of those who use the root tags . Alternative - ly , it may also indicate the propensity of a certain segment of the pro - ED community to adopt the lexical variations in their content sharing , perhaps to avoid discoverability more broadly , build and maintain social cohesion , and to even “hide in plain sight” following the enforcement of the mod - eration policy . To compliment this analysis , we examine how the pro - ED community engages and supports posts in the root and vari - ant tags . To measure engagement and support , we use mean ‘likes’ and mean comments on root posts and variant posts ( Table 5 ) . There is a statistically significant increase in likes and comments for most variants when compared to the base tags . The mean number of likes in variant posts is higher by 30 % compared to the root posts , while comments are 15 % higher in variants ( statistically significant through Mann Whitney U - tests ) . Despite a drop in the user base in some tags and the content moderation efforts of Instagram , there is continued support in the pro - ED community on lexical variants . RQ3 ( Topical Changes ) : Comparison of Topical Context Finally , in RQ3 , we investigate how the context of root tag use in posts differs from posts containing variant tags . We consider the context of use to be the tags that co - occur with roots or variants in posts . In our data , there are 194 , 421 tags that co - occur with roots three or more times , while 225 , 282 tags co - occur with variants three or more times . Before we could compare topical content , we determined that the two sets of tags are considerably different . Mean normalized mutual information ( NMI ) between the two co - occurrence tag distributions is . 32 ( high NMI implies high correlation ) , and a Mann - Whitney U - test notes this difference to be sta - tistically significant ( z = - 2 . 93 ; p = . 002 ) . Further , the fre - quencies of co - occurrence of the tags with roots and vari - ants are also different – Kendall’s τ between the frequency distributions of the two sets is . 28 . To explore these differences , we report a sample of 10 tags with lowest and highest log likelihood ratios between the two sources ( excluding co - occurring tags that are roots or variants themselves ( Table 6 ) ) . The Log likelihood ratio of a tag t i is computed as : LLR ( t i ) = log ( P ( t i | { roots } ) / P ( t i | { variants } ) , i . e . , a measure proportional to the ratio between probability of co - occurrence of t i with any of the More freq . w / roots LLR More freq . w / variants LLR Equally freq . LLR ednos 5 . 52 insecure - 6 . 62 depressed . 72 feelugly 5 . 19 cutting - 6 . 44 mentalhealth . 55 starve 4 . 87 loathemyself - 6 . 43 tired . 93 anamia 4 . 63 killingmeinside - 6 . 37 worthless . 49 anatips 4 . 15 lifeispointless - 5 . 91 life . 20 anaaccounts 4 . 09 bloodsecret123 - 5 . 75 hate . 19 disappeared 4 . 01 nobodylikesme - 5 . 57 perfection . 04 darkangel 4 . 01 skinnyplease - 5 . 28 dead . 71 purge 3 . 89 trigger - 5 . 24 sad . 70 thinstagram 3 . 82 selfhate - 5 . 17 blithe . 79 Table 6 . Top 10 tags co - occurring with roots and variants with the highest , lowest and near zero log likelihood ( LLR ) . Figure 3 . Normalized proportion of weekly posts for six root tags and their corresponding three most frequent variants over time . The vertical grey lines indicate time when Instagram publicly reported change in its community policies ( Apr 2012 ) . roots to the probability of its co - occurrence with any of the variants . Large positive values of LLR imply that a tag more frequently co - occurs with root tags , while large nega - tive values of LLR imply that it co - occurs more with the variants . A value of zero LLR implies it is equally frequent in both sources . As shown in Table 6 , there are considerable differences between the tags co - occurring with roots and those co - occurring with variants . Are these systematic themes that encompass these co - occurring tags of roots and variants and which are likely responsible for the observed differences ? Clustering Co - occurrence Tags . To answer this , we detect clusters of topics in an unsupervised manner in the set of tags co - occurring with the roots and those co - occurring with the variants . We use the normalized spectral clustering algorithm [ 35 ] on two graphs constructed out of the two sets . For instance , the root co - occurrence tag graph G r ( V , E ) comprises the tags t i as nodes , such that t i co - occurs with one of the root tags in a post and e ij is in E if the tag t i has co - occurred with the tag t j at least five times in posts con - taining a root tag . The algorithm partitions the data by mapping the original space to an eigen space . Spectral clus - tering has been used in prior work to partition graphs [ 34 ] and is robust because it does not make any assumptions on the form of the clusters . This algorithm works well when the graph is sparse , which is the case with both of our tag co - occurrence graphs . Extracting Themes in Co - Occurrence Tag Clusters . To examine the most dominant themes in the tag co - occurrence graphs , we analyze the two clusters corresponding to the first two eigenvalues of the Laplacian matrix given by spec - tral clustering ( Table 7 ) . Clustering algorithms , like spectral clustering , do not associate descriptive thematic elements with inferred clusters , so we incorporate human annotations into our analysis . Two researchers familiar with pro - ED social media content and Instagram validated the set of tags in these clusters . They used an open coding approach to develop a codebook and extracted descriptive topical themes for the clusters ( Cohen’s κ was observed to be . 84 ; we also tested for over - all marginal homogeneity using the Stuart - Maxwell test [ 6 ] , which is often useful in analyzing interrater agreement ) . During codebook development , the two annotators referred to prior literature on content characterization relating to eating disorders [ 7 , 42 ] . In Table 7 , we report a sample of the 15 most frequent tags in each of the two clusters for the root and variant cases . Themes in Root and Variant Tag Clusters . The clusters of tags that appear with root tags depict negative emotions and feelings known to be associated with pro - ED . The first cluster of tags co - occurring with root tags depicts expres - sion of sadness and pain ( “alone , ” “alwayssad , ” “broken , ” ) and attributes of eating disorder and anorexia ( “pain , ” “anaxiety , ” “sadstagram” ) . The pro - ED experience is asso - ciated with introversion , avoidance , and negative experi - ence of social relationships – attributes supported by the use of the tags in this cluster [ 42 ] . The second cluster is associ - ated with thinness and body image depiction where users describe physical attributes of their body ( “collarbones , ” “hipbones” ) . Tags like “nofood , ” “mustbesmaller , ” and “skinnyangels” indicate the desire to practice the pro - ED lifestyle by suggesting unusual dieting strategies and emo - tionally justifying pro - ED as a legitimate choice . The content of the variant tag clusters depict more vulnera - ble , toxic , and “triggering” content . The first cluster con - tains tags that bear a tone of self - loathing and self - harm ( “suicide , ” “selfharmmm , ” “cuts” ) . We believe it comes from the community’s constant dissatisfaction and discom - fort with their objectified sense of physical appearance and attributes – self - harm takes such thoughts and emotions to an extreme . These tags also describe depression and re - duced self - esteem more dramatically than the other cluster ( e . g . , “depression , ” “deadinside , ” “notgoodenough” ) . Liter - ature indicates such pro - ED behavior to be consequences of disturbed interpersonal relations , difficulties with impulse control , and feelings of anxiety and failure [ 7 ] . These two distinctive clustering patterns show a tendency of the variant communities to adopt the lexical variations perhaps as a way to subvert Instagram attention on sharing of triggering , self - harm , and vulnerable content . Moreover , since we observed earlier that there is little overlap of the root tag and the variant tag communities , the user base who use these lexical variations may be the segment of the pro - ED community who intend to use the platform for sharing and promoting self - harm . Tags co - occurrent w / roots Tags co - occurrent w / variants Topic I Topic II Topic I Topic II alone bodycheck suicide smoke alwayssad nofood selfharrrrm failure lifesucks bones selfmutilation depression pain flatstomach cutaddict depressedquotes unhappy collarbones cuts deadinside emptyfeeling skinnyangels harmingmyself notgoodenough anaxiety thinstagram scar addiction broken mustbesmaller razor wishiweredead emogirl fat bloodsecret123 abandon sad tiny blades paranoid sadstagram assbutt cutting callmemistaken sadsmile fatty beautifulpain useless anxiety hipbones slicemywrists letmeleave sorry beautiful blood lost im _ not _ okay pale die crying Table 7 . 15 most frequent tags in two dominant clusters ex - tracted from the root and variant co - occurrence graphs . DISCUSSION Summary of Findings . Our research has explored linguis - tic , behavioral , and topical changes in pro - ED communities in the aftermath of Instagram’s moderation of pro - ED tags in 2012 . Moderation in April 2012 led to the emergence of lexical variants of banned tags and tags with advisories . In fact , lexical variation showed a monotonic increase over time , indicating a desire on the part of the community to avoid outside attention and operate as an isolated , closed group ( RQ 1 ) . Next , while in general the sizes of these communities adopting lexical variant tags were smaller relative to the corresponding root tag , some lexical varia - tion communities disproportionally increased in size ( RQ 2 ) . Communities adopting lexical variants were also found to show increased social participation and engagement compared to those around the moderated tags , revealing a tendency of the variant communities to continue to rein - force their pro - ED belief systems . Finally , these variants were extensively used to continue to share information en - couraging adoption and maintenance of pro - ED lifestyles , often to also share more triggering , vulnerable , and self - harm content ( RQ 3 ) . Is Moderation Effective ? Overall , Instagram - enforced moderation was associated with negative consequences on Instagram’s long - term strategy to remove pro - ED content . We observed increased use of lexical variation and expres - sion of heightened toxic and vulnerable behavior over time . While social support and cohesion are generally linked to improved well - being , the pro - ED community situates such social cohesion to strengthen harmful attitudes towards body and health . Thus , content moderation has been mostly ineffective at decelerating the dissemination and prolifera - tion of pro - ED behavior on the platform . Moderation and Polarization . We note that banning a pro - ED tag does not remove or automatically delete posts that contain the tag ; it only makes the tag unsearchable . Such moderation practices thus pose a genuine risk of these communities moving to the periphery of Instagram where any intervention techniques will be increasingly difficult to implement . In other words , if the community continues to move to increasing lexically variant tags and away from the more common pro - ED tags , as our results show , it would be difficult to discover them and thereby report , remove , or bring help to them . Additionally , these policies risk polariz - ing the pro - ED community and favoring pro - ED content . As our findings indicate , content on the variant tags is more triggering and vulnerable and relates to topics like self - harm . As users move away from the broader and more common pro - ED tags , they are less likely to be exposed to alternate views on eating disorders outside of their “echo chambers” or “filter bubbles” – especially views that can alter their perceptions of pro - ED as a lifestyle choice or raise awareness the dangerous effects of eating disorders on physical and emotional health . Pro - ED as a Form of Deviance . This kind of adversarial adoption of non - conventional practices to subvert content moderation , as practiced by the pro - ED communities on Instagram , has been observed in other contexts as well . For example , citizens of authoritarian regimes avoid censorship by embracing different linguistic variation [ 3 , 17 , 25 , 28 ] . Further , several communities of deviant behavior have been known to avoid oversight of moderation by adopting a vari - ety of agreed upon unorthodox norms , such as communities engaging in cyberbullying and online harassment [ 39 ] , as well as those involved in socially unacceptable or damaging activities ( human trafficking , drug abuse , violence , orga - nized crime ) [ 1 ] . Our research corroborates what has been observed scientifi - cally and anecdotally in these other communities . We ex - pand on this knowledge and show that platforms that use this as a strategy to disrupt dysfunctional communities may not be successful . Broadly , our work offers some of the first quantitative insights into the effectiveness of intervention strategies towards deviant behavior on social media , with pro - ED being a specific instance of deviance . Design Implications Previous research has shown the importance of sensitive communities as emotional “safety valves” of negative be - havior , allowing disinhibiting discourse to avoid more dras - tic / dangerous actions [ 16 ] . However , use of safety valve communities can also have detrimental effects on the health of a community [ 12 ] . Our findings show that moderation of content may not be the most appropriate intervention . Communities simply adapt their social norms and conven - tions and share more vulnerable content . Rather than sup - pressing such content , social media platforms need to con - sider alternative intervention techniques that both provide this safety valve and promote recovery from pro - ED . We present some design considerations for alternative ( both preventive and remedial ) intervention techniques : ( 1 ) Exposure to Recovery Content . Platforms could more critically examine the strategies that they use to moderate content . Prohibiting pro - ED content from being discovera - ble at all ( banning precludes searches on a tag ) was fol - lowed by increased activity and social participation . A more nuanced intervention strategy that does not ban content , for instance , could be issuing public service announcements , with pointers to eating disorder support communities or to an eating disorder hotline / resources ( e . g . , the National Eat - ing Disorders Association NEDA website : http : / / www . national eatingdisorders . org / ) . This might cre - ate less incentive to migrate to different tags and more chances of continued use of the popular ones . This might also have beneficial effects on the community , since prior work indicates the recovery community to often attempt to “permeate” into the pro - ED community by using frequent and prominent tags in their content [ 11 , 42 ] . In essence , this kind of intervention can promote pro - ED users’ likelihood of being exposed to healthier behaviors than what is possi - ble via banning . ( 2 ) Recommending Healthy Behaviors . Many social net - works like Instagram include recommendation systems that find similar content to a user’s posting history or their so - cial ties with other users . However , when these systems suggest content related to pro - ED or other damaging behav - iors , pro - ED behavior gets reinforced to these vulnerable populations . We already observed that engagement and support on variant tags in the aftermath of enforcement of moderation increased over time . Therefore , recommending similar pro - ED content would only fortify such attitudes towards pro - ED . With appropriate modifications to the rec - ommendation algorithms , Instagram and other platforms could limit the exposure of content associated with pro - ED tags . Instead , platforms could introduce recovery - related content in the suggested recommendations and to help dis - seminate information on the benefits and importance of ED recovery . ( 3 ) Preemptively Detecting Emergent Pro - ED Tags . As we have noted , automatic discovery of the lexically variant tags can be challenging . As a way to tackle this , social net - works could , for instance , detect emergent pro - ED tags , including the variant tags that are found to co - occur with known pro - ED tags . One method they could employ is identifying trending topics within the community over time . Such efforts would allow platforms to monitor the “health” of specific tags and communities . They could also monitor sentiment and attitudes across different communities and make appropriate adjustments to content advisories and notification strategies . ( 4 ) Social and Clinical Help on Vulnerable Content . Our findings showed that variant tags were used by a segment of the pro - ED community with more vulnerable behavior . Social computing system designers could work with clini - cians , therapists , and trusted / identified family members , and close friends to examine how to bring timely , appropri - ate , and privacy - preserving help to such groups alter their attitudes about the impact of pro - ED behaviors on health . In fact , recovery from pro - ED is a challenging experience and many individuals undergo conflicting perceptions of identi - ty during recovery attempts , including revelation of vulner - ability [ 11 ] . Intervention tools may specifically focus on the needs of such groups , for instance , providing psychosocial support in response to expression of vulnerable behavior in social media content . Ethical Considerations Social networks and platforms do not have any obligation to intervene in the case of the pro - ED community or other vulnerable populations . However , eating disorders are unique in that body perception and self - esteem are nega - tively impacted by social comparison enabled by social platforms as well as consumption of images of idealized physical appearance [ 5 ] . Unlike other health conditions , there is a collective opportunity for social media designers and researchers to rethink the affordances around discover - ability and sharing of pro - ED content , not only for the dis - sipation of such behaviors but also to promote recovery and treatment of eating disorders . We note that designing intervention strategies for users who participate in these communities is challenging on many practical and ethical fronts . Interventions must be delicately crafted . But at what point do interventions on social media become counterproductive or possibly manipulative ? It is also important to balance these public health impacts along - side privacy concerns . To what extent can we notify trusted friends , family , and clinicians that someone may be suffer - ing from an eating disorder ? We would expect that our sug - gested strategies would be implemented with privacy - protecting standards in mind . Detection and intervention will always be reactionary to new trends of deviant communities to avoid detection and hide in plain sight . Thus , any kind of intervention technique is a “game of cat and mouse” for many social networks . Pro - ED is only one example of a community strategically avoiding oversight ; however , our research shows that , for this particular instance of deviant behavior , moderating content does not remove or reduce the proliferation of the community . Through our findings and this discussion , we hope to spur conversations in social media research and design communities towards crafting effective intervention systems for sensitive populations like pro - ED . Limitations and Future Work We acknowledge limitations of our research . This study used Instagram’s official API for data collection , which is limited by Instagram’s content moderation policies . The API does not return any data for banned tags . Our current dataset could only consider those posts where the banned tag also co - occurred with at least one other non - banned tag . While we are confident our findings hold given the overall size of the dataset , further investigations could incorporate alternative methods for broader data collection . We also note that we investigated the adaptation of behav - ior in a specific community , pro - ED , following platform - enforced moderation of tags . However Instagram bans or provides advisory on tags spanning a variety of other topics too ( e . g . , pornography , suicide ) . Does the kind of adversari - al attitude in our findings generalize to those settings as well ? Future work will be able to explore to what extent our results were characteristic of the pro - ED community , or if it was a response by the broader Instagram user population towards content moderation Our dataset is also limited by the public accessibility of Instagram content . We cannot access private posts , those that have been formally removed by Instagram , or deleted or hidden by the users themselves . Importantly , from a sta - tistical perspective , we suggest caution in deriving causali - ty . While our findings do indicate increased lexical change in variant tags over time as well as heightened vulnerability manifested through their use in the aftermath of enforce - ment of moderation , there might be other latent factors re - lating to pro - ED behavior that might contribute to the ob - servations in our data . Identifying such latent factors consti - tute a promising direction for future research . Finally , our research does not make any claim to attributing a diagnosis of an eating disorder to the posters of Instagram we study . It is not clear to what extent these posters actually met clinical criteria on eating disorders defined by DSM - 5 . Future research could also incorporate a mixed methods approach toward developing deeper understanding of the intent and motives of Instagram and social media usage by the pro - ED communities . A complementary research ques - tion could examine how users came to know , understand , and agree on lexically variant tags . Detecting the lexical variant tags automatically through machine learning meth - ods is another direction towards methodological innovation . Certainly , future work will require sensitivity and balancing privacy and other ethical concerns alongside goals of reduc - ing the incidence of eating disorders . Collaborations be - tween social media researchers and clinicians will be essen - tial in developing future studies that examine the pro - ED space and other controversial communities . CONCLUSION In this paper , we offered the first quantitative analysis of pro - ED communities and their adoption of lexical variation on Instagram . Overall , we observed Instagram’s content moderation policy to curb the sharing of pro - ED content to be ineffective . While some tags experience drop in usage after moderation , activity and engagement increased in oth - ers . More importantly , we showed that in lexical variants , topics of conversation move towards topics of self - harm , self - loathing , and other negative topics compared to root tags . Our findings thus raise interesting questions as to whether content moderation is the most effective means of intervention in the pro - ED community . Given the contro - versial nature of pro - ED content , social media design needs to consider broadly the impact of content moderation on deviant behavior and in social networks . REFERENCES 1 . Ronald L . Akers , Marvin D . Krohn , Lonn Lanza - Kaduce , and Marcia Radosevich . 1979 . Social learning and deviant behavior : A specific test of a general theory . American Sociological Review , 636 - 655 . 2 . Jon Arcelus , Alex J Mitchell , Jackie Wales , and Sren Nielsen . 2011 . Mortality rates in patients with anorexia nervosa and other eating disorders : a meta - analysis of 36 studies . Archv . Gen . Psychiatry 68 , 7 ( 2011 ) , 724 – 731 . 3 . David Bamman , Brendan O’Connor , and Noah Smith . 2012 . Censorship and deletion practives in Chinese so - cial media . First Monday , 17 ( 3 ) . 4 . David Bamman , Jacob Eisenstein and Tyler Schnoe - belen . 2014 . Gender identity and lexical variation in so - cial media . Journal of Sociolinguistics , 18 ( 2 ) , 135 - 160 . 5 . Anna M Bardone - Cone and Kamila M Cass . 2006 . In - vestigating the impact of pro - anorexia websites : A pilot study . European Eating Disorders Review 14 , 4 ( 2006 ) , 256 – 262 . 6 . Yvonne M . Bishop , Stephen E . Feinberg , and Paul W . Holland . 2007 . Discrete multivariate analysis : theory and practice . Springer Science & Business Media . 7 . Dina LG Borzekowski , Summer Schenk , Jenny L Wil - son , and Rebecka Peebles . 2010 . e - Ana and e - Mia : A content analysis of pro – eating disorder web sites . Amer - ican journal of public health 100 , 8 ( 2010 ) , 1526 . 8 . Samuel Brody and Nicholas Diakopoulos . 2011 . Cooooooooooooooo llllllllllllll ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! : using word lengthening to detect sentiment in microblogs . In Proc . EMNLP . 562 - 570 . 9 . Jane Callaghan . 2013 . Research in online spaces : ‘Tum - blr’ and eating ‘disorder’ . Symposium presented to : Children and Young People ' s Mental Health . The Uni - versity of Northampton . 10 . Justine Costanza . Instagram ‘Thinspo’ Ban Won’t Com - bat Pro - Eating Disorder Web Content . 2013 . Retrieved November 15 , 2014 from http : / / www . ibtimes . com / instagram - thinspo - ban - wont - combat - pro - eating - disorder - web - content - 994366 11 . Munmun De Choudhury . 2015 . Anorexia on Tumblr : A Characterization Study . In Proc . Digital Health . 12 . Munmun De Choudhury and Sushovan De . 2014 . Men - tal Health Discourse on Reddit : Self - Disclosure , Social Support , and Anonymity . In Proc . ICWSM . 13 . Lauren Duca . Can Thinspiration Really Be # Banned From Instagram ? . 2013 . Retrieved November 16 , 2014 from http : / / www . huffingtonpost . com / lauren - duca / thinspiration - banned - from - instagram _ b _ 3829155 . html 14 . Maeve Duggan , Nicole B . Ellison , Cliff Lampe , Aman - da Lenhart , and Mary Madden . 2015 . Social Media Up - date 2014 . Pew Research Internet Proj . 15 . Jacob Eisenstein , Brendan O’Connor , Noah A . Smith , and Eric P . Xing . 2010 . A latent variable model for geo - graphic lexical variation . In Proc . EMNLP . 16 . Tobit Emmens and Andy Phippen . 2010 . Evaluating Online Safety Programs . Harvard Berkman Center for Internet & Society . 17 . Antonio M . Espinoza and Jedidiah R . Crandall . 2011 . Work - in - progress : Automated named entity extraction for tracking censorship of current events . In USENIX Workshop on Free & Open Comm . on the Internet . 18 . Facebook . Statement of Rights and Responsibilities . 2013 . Retrieved January 10 , 2015 from https : / / www . facebook . com / legal / terms 19 . Rachel A Fleming - May and Laura E Miller . 2010 . I’m scared to look . But I’m dying to know : Information seeking and sharing on Pro - Ana weblogs . In Proc . ASIST 47 , 1 ( 2010 ) , 1 – 9 . 20 . Stephan Gouws , Donald Metzler , Congxing Cai , and Eduard Hovy . 2011 . Contextual bearing on linguistic variation in social media . In Proc . Workshop on LSM . 20 - 29 . 21 . Heba Hasan . Instagram bans Thinspo Content . 2012 . Retrieved November 15 , 2014 from http : / / newsfeed . time . com / 2012 / 04 / 26 / instagram - bans - thinspo - content / 22 . Chaya Hiruncharoenvate , Zhiyuan Lin , and Eric Gilbert . " Algorithmically Bypassing Censorship on Sina Weibo with Nondeterministic Homophone Substitutions . " 2015 . In Proc . ICWSM . 23 . Yuheng Hu , Kartik Talamadupula , & Subbarao Kambhampati . 2013 . Dude , srsly ? : The Surprisingly Formal Nature of Twitter ' s Language . In Proc . ICWSM . 24 . Instagram . Instagram’s New Guidelines Against Self - Harm Images & Accounts . 2012 . Retrieved November 17 , 2014 from http : / / blog . instagram . com / post / 21454597658 / insta - grams - new - guidelines - against - self - harm 25 . Gary King , Jennifer Pan , & Margaret E . Roberts . 2013 . How censorship in China allows government criticism but silences collective expression . American Political Science Rev , 107 ( 02 ) , 326 - 343 . 26 . Farshad Kooti , Haeryun Yang , Meeyoung Cha , P . Krishna Gummadi , and Winter A . Mason . 2012 . The Emergence of Conventions in Online Social Networks . In Proc . ICWSM . 27 . Stephen P . Lewis and Alexis E . Arbuthnott . 2012 . Searching for thinspiration : The nature of internet searches for pro - eating disorder websites . Cyberpsy - chology , Behavior , and Social Networking , 15 ( 4 ) , 200 - 204 . 28 . Rebecca MacKinnon . 2008 . Flatter world and thicker walls ? Blogs , censorship and civic discourse in China . Public Choice 134 , 1 - 2 ( 2008 ) , 31 – 46 . 29 . Jeanne B Martin . 2010 . The development of ideal body image perceptions in the United States . Nutrition Today 45 , 3 ( 2010 ) , 98 – 110 . 30 . Gonzalo Navarro . 2001 . A guided tour to approximate string matching . ACM comp . surveys , 33 ( 1 ) , 31 - 88 . 31 . Minsu Park , David W McDonald , and Meeyoung Cha . 2013 . Perception Differences between the Depressed and Non - depressed Users in Twitter . In Proc . ICWSM . 32 . Alice Philipson . Concerns raised over Instagram after app allows users to see photos promoting anorexia . 2013 . Retrieved November 16 , 2014 from http : / / www . telegraph . co . uk / technology / social - media / 9775559 / Concerns - raised - over - Instagram - after - app - allows - users - to - see - photos - promoting - anorexia . html 33 . Hansen Andrew Schwartz , Johannes C . Eichstaedt . , Margaret L . Kern , Lukasz Dziurzynski , Richard E . Lu - cas , Megha Agrawal , Gregory J . Park , et al . 2013 . Char - acterizing Geographic Variation in Well - Being Using Tweets . In Proc . ICWSM . 34 . Leslie Regan Shade . 2003 . Weborexics : The Ethical Issues Surrounding Pro - Ana Websites . SIGCAS Comput . Soc . 33 , 4 ( Dec . 2003 ) . 35 . Jianbo Shi and Jitendra Malik . 2000 . Normalized cuts and image segmentation . Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , IEEE Transactions on , 22 ( 8 ) , 888 - 905 . 35 . Clay Shirky . 2011 . The political power of social media : Technology , the public sphere , and political change . Foreign affairs , 28 - 41 . 36 . Irina Shklovski and Nalini Kotamraju . 2011 . Online contribution practices in countries that engage in Inter - net blocking and censorship . In Proc . CHI . 1109 - 1118 . 37 . Frédérique RE Smink , Daphne van Hoeken , and Hans W Hoek . 2012 . Epidemiology of eating disorders : inci - dence , prevalence and mortality rates . Current psychia - try reports 14 , 4 ( 2012 ) , 406 – 414 . 38 . John R Suler and Wende L Phillips . 1998 . The bad boys of cyberspace : Deviant behavior in a multimedia chat community . CyberPsychology & Behavior 1 , 3 ( 1998 ) , 275 – 294 . 39 . Zeynep Tufekci , & Christopher Wilson . 2012 . Social media and the decision to participate in political protest : Observations from Tahrir Square . Journal of Comm , 62 ( 2 ) , 363 - 379 . 40 . Tracey D . Wade , Anna Keski - Rahkonen . , & James I . Hudson . 2011 . Epidemiology of Eating Disorders . In Textbook in Psychiatric Epidemiology . Wiley , 343 – 360 . 41 . Elad Yom - Tov , Luis Fernandez - Luque , Ingmar Weber , and P Steven Crain . 2012 . Pro - Anorexia and Pro - Recovery Photo Sharing : A Tale of Two Warring Tribes . J Med Internet Res ( 2012 ) . 42 . Yafu Zhao and William Encinosa . 2009 . Hospitaliza - tions for Eating Disorders from 1999 - 2006 . Agency for Healthcare Policy and Research , Rockville , MD .