COLLECTIVE IMPACT MODEL IMPLEMENTATION : PROMISE AND REALITY LYNDA M . SAGRESTANO Ludwig - Maximilians Universität München JOY CLAY RUTHBETH FINERMAN The University of Memphis The authors would like to acknowledge the support of the NIH Office of Adolescent Health for funding the project Pregnancy and Parenting Success in Shelby County ; PI Michael Warren , Tennessee Governor’s Office , 2011 - 2014 . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to : Lynda M . Sagrestano , Institut für Soziologie , Ludwig - Maximilians Universität München , Konradstrasse 6 , 80801 München , Germany . Email : Lynda . Sagrestano @ LMU . de ABSTRACT This article helps public administration practitioners and policymakers leverage broad community - wide collaboration and promote program impact . We present outcomes from a coordinated community response to teen pregnancy that adopted collective impact ( CI ) methodologies . Lessons learned highlight barriers to creating and sustaining a common agenda , raising funding for collaboration infrastructure , and implementing a shared data system intended to strengthen collaboration among partnering agencies and assure accountability . Implementation of a CI approach proved time intensive and required committed leaders to work through power dynamics and foster communication , trust , understanding , and willingness to overcome technology and administrative challenges to shared data . Successfully navigating these barriers offers the opportunity to bridge research and practice , leading to actionable knowledge and positive community outcomes . Key Words : Collective Impact , Coordinated Community Response , Collaboration , Shared Data Systems 88 JHHSA SUMMER 2018 Within the social service sector , achieving the greatest impact with the most efficient use of funds drives the push for evidence - based approaches to designing , implementing , and sustaining programs that better the lives of citizens and communities . At the forefront of these initiatives are federal and state agencies , private foundations , and nonprofit and voluntary organizations that seek to pool resources and build community collaborations that address systems - level issues . Practitioners and scholars in public administration and related fields use the term “collaboration” to describe both the structure and collective / shared processes when individuals and agencies work together for mutual benefit ( Winer & Ray , 1994 ) . Networks , coalitions , or partnerships are also used to describe collaborative structures and processes . Compounding the definitional complexity are the administrative tools of coordination , cooperation , and collaboration used to adjust to group members’ different purposes , relationships , and resource commitments ( Keast , Brown , & Mandell , 2007 ) . Collaborative activities require attention to both informal and formal dynamics and a recognition that processes tend to be inherently cyclical and iterative ( Bryson , Crosby , & Stone , 2006 ; Thomson & Perry , 2006 ; Agranoff , 2005 ) . Attention to collaboration capacity building is important to lend participants the opportunity to build a shared problem definition , goals , expectations , and the trust that is so important to sustainable relationships ( Norris - Tirrell & Clay , 2010 ) . Managing stakeholder involvement also requires intentional attention to the members’ agency - specific goals and mission ( Proenca , 2003 ) . In reality , collaboration is not always member - driven or organic ; it may be mandated by funders or authorities ( Page , 2004 ; Selden , Sowa , & Sandfort , 2006 ; Agranoff , 2008 ) . Further , researchers have championed authentic citizen participation in collaborative activities JHHSA SUMMER 2018 89 rather than “hollow exercises” of expert - driven participation activities “as they hold on to and control the outcome” ( Yang & Callahan , 2007 , p . 259 ; see also Fung , 2006 ; Keast et al . , 2007 ) . To counter some of the challenges to achieving effective collaboration , Norris - Tirrell and Clay ( 2010 ) argue that the focus of collaborative efforts need to shift to “strategic” collaboration if communities are to address far - reaching and profound issues by purposefully and more inclusively collaborating to assure that the effort proves innovative and consequential , and leaves a legacy of trust and strong relationships among community stakeholders . This article illustrates the challenges of using a collective impact ( CI ; Kania & Kramer 2011 ; 2013 ) approach , a model that grew out of coordinated community response ( CCR ; Kubisch , Auspos , Brown , & Dewar , 2010 ) approaches , to leverage collaboration and program impact in a Mid - South teen pregnancy / parenting program . The authors , long involved in using data to help address teen pregnancy and related issues in the community , provided research support to the CI initiative , conducting a needs assessment and outcome evaluation of the funded project . In this article , we provide an overview of the coordinated community response ( CCR ) and collective impact ( CI ) approaches . We then reflect on and gain insights from the community’s attempt to use a collective impact approach to combat teen pregnancy , focusing on the key aspects of a CI approach , the difficulties in implementing them , and lessons learned from this experience . Finally , we highlight to role of social context and policy issues for communities attempting to implement change using the CI approach . 90 JHHSA SUMMER 2018 DEFINING COORDINATED COMMUNITY RESPONSE AND COLLECTIVE IMPACT Support for a coordinated community response has been growing since the 1970’s , and with great acceleration since the 1990’s ( Cytron , 2010 ; Kubisch et al . , 2010 ) . The core idea underlying CCR is that no one organization or agency can adequately address complex community issues ; these require a comprehensive , collaborative , synchronized approach involving multiple community stakeholders ( Allen , 2005 ; Gamache & Asmus , 1999 ; Nowell , 2009 ) . This is clearly in line with Gaus’ notion of the ecology of government ( 1947 ) that argues for involvement of and collaboration among community stakeholders representing diverse knowledge and interests in order to achieve collective action . Typically , CCR efforts incorporate a series of strategies to improve interorganizational coordination and foster broader systems change ( Himmelman , 2001 ; Pence & Shepard , 1999 ; Stevenson & Mitchell , 2003 ) . To be effective , leaders from the key stakeholder agencies must participate . Evidence suggests that when leaders designate subordinates to represent them , lack of decision - making authority results in structural and procedural changes that cannot be implemented ( Uekert , 2003 ) . Recently , leaders in our community shifted from using CCR to describe their approach to coalescing around the concept of collective impact , the process by which a group of leaders from different constituencies unite to develop and implement a common agenda to solve a specific social problem ( Kania & Kramer , 2011 ; 2013 ) . The argument that was made centered around the more concrete nature of the collective impact approach ( Kania & Kramer , 2011 ) . Thus , CI was perceived as a natural extension to achieving coordinated action within the community but one that would bring explicit focus on collective impact . The JHHSA SUMMER 2018 91 theory behind CI is that large scale change is better accomplished via coordination across sectors ( e . g . , nonprofit , government , business ) than from an “isolated impact” model in which individual organizations work independently to solve problems within their agency ( Kania & Kramer , 2011 ; 2013 ) . As with CCR , the isolated impact model is viewed as often ineffective and potentially leading to greater cost and more competition for scarce resources ( Kania & Kramer , 2011 ; 2013 ) . Distinct from CCR , effective CI initiatives require that three conditions should be in place : an influential champion , adequate financial resources , and a sense of urgency for change ( Hanleybrown , Kania , & Kramer , 2012 ) . Collective Impact initiatives are by definition long - term commitments , and are best suited to complex problems in which there is no single solution and require cooperation among stakeholders to most effectively realize change ( Heifetz , Kania , & Kramer , 2004 ; Kania & Kramer , 2013 ) . The methodology underlying CI initiatives requires : 1 ) a common agenda , 2 ) ongoing communication , 3 ) mutually reinforcing activities , 4 ) a backbone support organization , and 5 ) shared measurement system ( Kania & Kramer , 2011 ) . Components are interrelated and asynchronous ; each may be introduced as appropriate . Building a common agenda arises from the group developing a shared understanding of the problem and then agreeing on an approach and action plan to solve it . This shared vision of change comes only from continuous communication ; through regular meetings over a sustained timeframe stakeholders gain experience with partners , better appreciate one another’s motivations , and develop trust . For this to be effective , stakeholders must regard the decision making process as fair , based on objective evidence , and that decisions favor the initiative rather than any one organization ( Kania & Kramer , 2011 ; 2013 ) . Mutually reinforcing activities means that each stakeholder 92 JHHSA SUMMER 2018 agrees to undertake activities that reflect their strengths ; these activities should support and coordinate with the activities of the other collaborating agencies with a mutual goal in mind ( Kania & Kramer , 2011 ) . Building the initiative requires a centralized infrastructure , or backbone support organization , in which dedicated staff ( e . g . , project manager , data manager , facilitator ) create a structured process that builds and reinforces the partnership . The backbone organization facilitates all aspects of planning , managing , and supporting the initiative , including overseeing technology issues , data collection and reporting , and communications ( Kania & Kramer , 2011 ) . Finally , one of the most challenging aspects of launching a CI initiative is developing a shared measurement system , comprising a common set of indicators that monitor performance , track progress , and identify what is working or unsuccessful ( Hanleybrown et al . , 2012 ) . This is of utmost importance , as the four other aspects of the CI initiative depend upon all stakeholders agreeing on how success will be measured and reported . Kania and Kramer ( 2011 ) recommend developing a short but comprehensive list of community level indicators that can be measured across organizations . These indicators must support the action framework and allow stakeholders to measure progress towards their common agenda , and will therefore allow organizations to more closely align their goals , engage in collaborative problem solving , and hold each other accountable . Effective CI development and implementation of the shared measurement system requires strong but transparent leadership , consistent funding , and a robust infrastructure and administration that oversees the measurement process , providing stakeholder training to use the system , facilitating the data management process , and systematically reviewing data for accuracy . Finally , the shared data system is only effective if stakeholders fully disclose all results and use what they have learned to JHHSA SUMMER 2018 93 continually refine their collective work ( Hanleybrown et al . , 2012 ) . BACKGROUND Community leaders ( e . g . , city and county mayors , superintendent of schools ) in a Midsouth city embraced CI when they began working with the nonprofit network Strive , a partnership formed to address educational issues in Cincinnati that helped launch the CI approach ( http : / / www . strivepartnership . org / ) . Using the Strive model , community leaders in the Midsouth city highlighted in this narrative developed a multipronged cradle to career collective impact initiative called Fast Forward . Adoption of the CI model was guided by the perceived need for collective action and desire for a lasting positive effect on the community . Fast Forward had many components , one of which was to reduce teen pregnancy and strengthen parenting in the county . To advance the CI agenda , however , the teen initiative needed new , specific external funding designated for that purpose , which eventually gave rise to the Teen Pregnancy and Parenting Success ( TPPS ) Project , the focus of this applied analysis ( see Table 1 for a description of local initiates and Table 2 for a timeline of relevant milestones ) . 94 JHHSA SUMMER 2018 Table 1 Description of Key Community Initiatives Initiative Description Strive A Cincinnati - based partnership comprised of leaders from the education , business , philanthropic , nonprofit , civic , and faith communities who believe in the importance of education and the impact of working together to change the system of education for every child , from cradle to career . Served as model for Fast Forward . ( http : / / www . strivepartnership . org / about - the - partnership ) Fast Forward A multi - layered collective impact initiative focused on increasing economic prosperity and quality of life in a Midsouth city . Initiated by local government , business , academic , and civic leaders . Teen Vision A collaborative effort of over 30 agencies and organizations in a Midsouth city dedicated to promoting comprehensive sex education , delaying the onset of sexual intercourse , reducing teen pregnancies , and , providing assistance to teen parents . Teen Pregnancy and Parenting Success Project developed under the auspices of Fast Forward , funded by the US DHHS Office of Adolescent Health to design , implement , and evaluate a program aimed at supporting and improving outcomes for pregnant and parenting teens . Designed to be a system of care that connected schools , faith - based organizations , healthcare facilities , and social service providers in a system of targeted care . JHHSA SUMMER 2018 95 Table 2 Timeline of Key Developments in Community Implementation Dates Key Developments 2005 Fast Forward Established November 2008 Teen Vision established Spring 2010 DHHS OAH Teen Pregnancy and Parenting Success ( TPPS ) Request for Proposals released July 26 , 2010 University researchers asked to contribute information for TPPS proposal being written by county Mayor’s office and children’s hospital August 2 , 2010 TPPS proposal submitted by county Mayor’s office via Governor’s office September 1 , 2010 Anticipated award announcement ( as listed on RFP ) September 1 , 2010 Anticipated start date ( as listed on RFP ) October 1 , 2010 Actual award announcement released by DHHS July 1 2011 Actual project start date ( Year 1 reduced to 3 months ) July 1 2011 Needs Assessment planning begun ( without signed contract ) September 2011 TPPS funded partners begin to meet April 2012 Contract between state government and university researchers signed April 20 2012 TPPS Initiative design completed ( prior to needs assessment completion ) June 14 2012 Design of TPPS logo and promotional materials completed June 26 2012 Needs Assessment completed July 2012 Design of intake forms completed September 2012 Begin recruiting participant for TPPS initiative ( using paper intake forms ) Fall 2012 Design shared data system February 2013 User training and implementation of shared data system August 31 , 2013 Project end date ( initial 3 - year contract , with Year 1 reduced to 3 months ) August 31 , 2014 Year 4 ( no - cost - extension ) end date 96 JHHSA SUMMER 2018 Several years prior to the development of TPPS , a broad voluntary network of local researchers , service providers , and governmental agencies focused on developing a coordinated community response to teen pregnancy and parenting , called Teen Vision , was convened by a local think - tank , and thus had a history of uniting to address these issues . The authors were involved with Teen Vision early on , and eventually were asked to assume leadership of the network . The network’s mission was to develop a coordinated community response to teen pregnancy and parenting that includes : 1 ) Comprehensive sex education for teens including abstinence and contraceptive information ; 2 ) Services , support , and education to pregnant and parenting teens ; and 3 ) Strong policies and programs that promote adolescent sexual health . Teen Vision was unique within the local community in that it included approximately 35 organizations ( including service providers , public schools , faith based organizations , county government , and school board members ) and connected groups from multiple perspectives that typically do not work together ( e . g . , abstinence only education programs , abortion service providers ) . The Teen Vision network committed to increasing communication and collaboration across agencies , presenting accurate data about teen pregnancy and parenting in the community , and developing specific messages and a media campaign around those messages ( Clay , Sagrestano , & Finerman , 2012 ) . Involvement in the collaborative was voluntary . Thus , the foundation was already in place for engagement of a network of concerned stakeholders and building sufficient trust to promote buy - in on performance and outcome measurement . Understandably , the potential for funding reinforced agency willingness to participate in the new project . As the Fast Forward effort unfolded , it became apparent that the team leaders had in mind a CI - inspired data driven approach , although participating JHHSA SUMMER 2018 97 stakeholders were not familiar with the workload impact of agreeing to the shared data system so critical to CI . CI IMPLEMENTATION : AGENDA SHARING AND CONTINUOUS COMMUNICATION In 2010 the DHHS Office of Adolescent Health issued a request for proposals for Support for Pregnant and Parenting Teens and Women . Leaders from the county mayor’s office , together with partners at a local children’s hospital , met with a small group of stakeholders and prepared a grant proposal to develop a coordinated system of care for pregnant and parenting teens , called Teen Pregnancy and Parenting Success ( TPPS ) project , with a shared data system as the hub . The main goals of the system of care were to identify targeted clients as early as possible and , through the use of referrals , facilitate their access to services . The system of care provided support for academic retention among students still in school , and encouraged return for those out of school . The shared data system was to serve as a platform for both tracking referrals and collecting data on key indicators . From the start , TPPS was more informally than rigidly CI - theory driven and despite citing local data , the focus was on obtaining funding to create and launch the shared data system , with the longer term goal of expanding the system across many sectors of development in the county ( e . g . , crime , housing , infant mortality ) . Paradoxically , the potential for external funding was perceived as an opportunity for the community to advance broad collaboration , yet the realities of grant writing required a more instrumental approach to meet proposal deadlines . Rather than bringing Teen Vision and other stakeholders to the table to assure a shared agenda and authentic participation , a small group from the county mayor’s office and the local children’s hospital developed 98 JHHSA SUMMER 2018 the TPPS project . Indeed , the research partners never met with the grant writing team , but in the week prior to the submission deadline reviewed partial drafts and provided some background data on the context of teen pregnancy , which was inserted into the proposal . The grant writing team later contacted several community organizations that provided relevant services and asked them to sign on as TPPS grant partners . In return , TPPS partners were offered funding from the grant to implement the shared data system and other components of the initiative . Only after it was awarded did the grant developers bring TPPS partners together to disclose specifics of the proposal and outline the CI model , placing emphasis on developing the shared data system . Because they did not jointly design the project from the start , TPPS partners responded with varying levels of buy - in to the common agenda , and information flow tended to remain centralized and hierarchical , from the project leadership to the funded partners , rather than mutual or bidirectional . It should be noted that most of the providers who were asked to participate in TPPS were already involved with Teen Vision , but the majority of member organizations in Teen Vision were not funded by TPPS . The weekly TPPS meetings were facilitated by consultants who attended to the timeline and deliverables necessary to maintain funding , and used a task - oriented leadership style to stay on track . This was exacerbated by delays in the release of funds that had to pass through the governor’s office to the mayor’s office and then to the partners , resulting in the first year of the project being truncated to only 3 months . Ideally , a skilled facilitator can switch between task - oriented and relationship - oriented styles as dictated by situational needs ( Fiedler , 1967 ) . Especially early on , as the TPPS partners were building familiarity and trust , the TPPS leadership team’s task - oriented style , perceived as necessary to address the JHHSA SUMMER 2018 99 challenges imposed by a truncated first year , posed one of several obstacles to building communication , trust , and ultimately converging on a shared agenda . However , local government officials responsible for overseeing the TPPS grant likely gave this explicit charge to the consultants due to concerns about the number of independent agencies involved in the project and promised deliverables . The realities of competing goals thus resulted in a much modified CI implementation of these two aspects . The grant’s tight submission deadline forced the proposal development process to shed a more time - consuming but organic , relationship building process that would have created a sustainable shared agenda and more fully realized CI model . Building a collaborative and crafting a genuinely shared common vision requires a significant investment of time facilitated by consensus - focused leadership ( Cabaj , 2014 ; Warm , 2011 ; Gillam , Counts , & Garstka , 2016 ) . In addition to forging mutual trust and understanding , partners must learn to appreciate the strengths and challenges that each brings to the collaboration , and how these might help or thwart organizational development and growth ( Warm , 2011 ) . Over time , this more strategic approach to collaboration can improve mission alignment , as partner agencies transform from a group of independent organizations with isolated impact , to an integrated structure focused on collective success . To be successful , thinking must also shift : rather than assimilate new information and teamwork strategies into their existing organizing frameworks , partners must accommodate , or change their cognitive schemas ( Block , 1982 ) and consider how to bring in new community networks ( Tortola , 2015 ) . Real change comes when group members reconfigure their psychological routines and schemas about collaboration , leading to an evolution in how they collaborate . In other words , to be most effective , 100 JHHSA SUMMER 2018 partners must shift from organizing their work within a framework of compartmentalization and isolation , to a framework of mutual priorities , strategies , and commitment . Although each of the participants recognized their role in the collective , they did not become interdependent or fully integrated , instead continuing with their isolated impact approach , and compartmentalizing this initiative as a special and temporary case . CI IMPLEMENTATION : SHARED ACTIVITIES AND SUPPORTIVE INFRASTRUCTURE Once awarded , financing for the 3 - year project flowed from the federal government to the state governor’s office , to the county mayor’s office , and finally to the community partners . In essence , the federal government provided funding and clear expectations , local government led and coordinated the effort , and funded partners implemented the project in the community . In practice , personnel hired by the mayor’s office focused more on the grant requirements than on facilitating collaboration . The consultant who helped to write the grant proposal was hired to lead the process and develop the coordinated community response with funded partners . Project leadership ( mayor’s office staff , consultants , and the project coordinator ) convened the funded partners’ team , which met weekly to develop and implement the project . Because specific deliverables were associated with the grant , the project quickly became focused on creating the infrastructure to meet these goals and the process became strongly hierarchical . A related challenge concerned leadership infrastructure . The CI model stresses that long - term funding must be found to sustain both the initiative and its organizing backbone infrastructure , yet federal grants generally decline to fund these operating costs ; this places JHHSA SUMMER 2018 101 the burden on private funders and nonprofit foundations . Unfortunately , it can be difficult to find funders willing to assume this particularly long - term burden ( Fruchterman , 2016 ) . Instead , communities that wish to implement CI initiatives look to federal funds to jump start projects . In addition , many federal RFPs explicitly request evidence of prior and / or existing collaborations and expect genuine community involvement , yet do not provide the resources needed to build engagement capacity needed for CI initiatives . In this community example , a teen pregnancy collaborative with a mission of CCR already existed , yet , as mentioned , this network was only marginally involved in the project’s initial development . When some funding was awarded , the majority of individual member organizations did not benefit , and network members who were funded shifted their time to the new initiative . This underscores the value of more inclusive planning even at the earliest stages so that all relevant partners are invested in the initiative . Effective leadership is critical to a successful CI initiative to better coordinate shared activities and counter fragmentation . Contracting with a lead organization that is charged with forming a voluntary network of service providers has become a favored local government strategy to combat the high transaction costs of directly organizing local networks , yet this tactic is not without its pitfalls . For example , the contracted lead organization might only establish weak referral arrangements , retaining much of the funding and control instead of building a more equitable , tightly - coupled and shared arrangement ( Graddy & Chen , 2006 ) . This may thwart sustainable results , such as forging strong and confident relationships , strengthening relationships and advancing teamwork among the partners . Moreover , the willingness to partner in the future may be diminished ( Norris - Tirrell & Clay , 2010 ) . At the same time , the competitive environment facing nonprofit social services agencies is fierce . Agencies compete for resources , 102 JHHSA SUMMER 2018 inclusion in future funding opportunities , and protection against “unintended knowledge transfers” ( Graddy & Chen , 2006 , p . 548 ) . In the teen pregnancy and parenting initiative , the structure of the leadership team and funded partners led to predictable power dynamics . The leadership team , which was securely employed by local government or a well - established consulting firm , held legitimacy , rewards , and coercive power over the funded partners ( see French & Raven , 1959 for a discussion of the bases of social power ) . The city schools also held coercive power as the gatekeepers to the pregnant and parenting teens being served , and were vital to the initiative’s success . There were frequent power struggles between the project leadership and the schools over who was best qualified / positioned to make strategic decisions . The university - based research partners held their own expert - centered power , as well as intimidating positionality stemming from their role as evaluators . In meetings , the project coordinator regularly referred to the professors who led the needs assessment and evaluation as “Doctor , ” while calling all other partners by their first names . Those same professors were the only funded partners who contributed to the original grant writing process , and they were often called upon by the leadership to remind the group of the initiative’s original goals . In contrast , the small nonprofit youth - serving organizations , that juggled staff and delivered actual services based on shoestring budgets , had little power , although a few representatives who had earned respect for their community work retained status among their peers . They were regularly asked to report progress , and if they were not meeting targets , were threatened with funding cuts . As a result , they withheld comment in the project meetings , and their participation in forming the common agenda and their level of buy - in diminished . JHHSA SUMMER 2018 103 Exacerbating tension and impeding mutually reinforcing activities were issues of race , class , and positionality . The university professors and the consultants were white , more highly educated and earned higher salaries , whereas the almost all of the other participants in the partners’ team meetings were African American , moderately educated , and earned modest incomes . To be culturally responsive and knowledgeable , many of the small youth serving not - for - profits hired individuals from their community to conduct outreach with teens , bringing greater local knowledge to the discussions , but less organizational experience , lower educational standing , and the lowest wages . Their absence at the early stages of project implementation also hindered their preparation for and experience with the collaboration . Bryson , Crosby , and Stone ( 2015 ) suggest that leaders need to effectively manage the power imbalances inherent in collaboration . Moreover , the greater complexity inherent in cross - sector involvement requires that leaders purposefully match expected outcomes to the design of collaboration processes and structures , sustain broad engagement , and integrate joint - learning opportunities . Efforts to reduce power differentials , such as using first names for all partners and rotating who facilitated the meetings , have the potential to strengthen relationships and trust among the partners , but were not implemented . CI IMPLEMENTATION : SHARED MEASUREMENT As access to digital technology and big data increase , the call for data - driven approaches to better collaborate on decision - making and impact assessment has intensified . The demand for improved accountability to deliver on promised outcomes places added administrative stress on agencies dealing with complex implementation issues . Thus an important challenge facing local policy and 104 JHHSA SUMMER 2018 program officials and community - engaged researchers is building data systems that facilitate coordinated service delivery ( e . g . , data for action ) while satisfying accountability expectations ( e . g . , data for impact ) , protecting confidentiality and privacy of data , and placing only reasonable data collection burdens on participating agency staff ( Fruchterman , 2016 ) . As noted , the architects of the teen pregnancy CI project intentionally integrated shared data as a key component of the design , as this type of system had been used locally in an earlier initiative . In an article for the Brookings Institution , Betts ( 2006 ) described an information - based strategy to promote community development in an inner city urban context . That team used an extensive data tracking protocol to yield a comprehensive population profile that in turn informed planning and programs . Connecting various elements , such as crime , housing and demographics with expert neighborhood knowledge , the collaboration analyzed the forces at work in an area struggling with crime hotspots and growing areas of residential blight . University researchers and partners used the data system to create “actionable knowledge , ” which transcended what a traditional public records approach could realize in analyzing transitional neighborhoods . Betts ( 2006 ) concluded that a critical and deeper understanding of housing market issues was elicited by ensuring that collaborators did not just provide data but played “an active role in convening partners , designing interventions , and mobilizing assets” ( pp . 19 - 20 ) . The collection and use of data throughout the teen pregnancy and parenting initiative was fraught with challenges . As the research partners , we were tasked with conducting a needs assessment to facilitate the development of an evidence - based and data - informed system of care . Yet , the 3 - year grant timeline allocated just 6 months for this process , a period insufficient for JHHSA SUMMER 2018 105 understanding a complex issue like adolescent childbearing . In addition , state level elections precipitated months - long delays in the release of funds while the new governor determined whether the project fit his political and policy agenda . Ultimately , the needs assessment intended to inform the shared agenda and goals was instead completed in tandem with developing the system of care and the shared data system , and did not drive the process . Instead , researchers and project leaders created a comprehensive set of indicators to be tracked after the fact . These indicators were broader than the teen pregnancy focus , as the architects wanted a single comprehensive and county - wide shared data system which would serve for multiple Fast Forward initiatives , including housing , crime , infant mortality , education , and other key intervention areas . Timing remained a challenge throughout the project . Developing the shared data system proved complex and time consuming , and required each of the partner agencies to sign intricate legal agreements about confidentiality and data sharing . Although the smaller nonprofits were reluctant , they signed off to secure funds and deliver the program to their constituencies / clients . Larger organizational partners , including the county school system and the university , required the involvement of upper - level administrators and lawyers . It took months for all of the partners to sign on ; as a result , the system of care was launched before the shared data system was online . Lack of partner participation in setting the common agenda and key indicators posed a significant barrier to the shared data system . The extensive list of indicators was presented to them as necessary for the initiative and broader county vision . Partners balked at collecting the volume of data that was demanded , and voiced concerns about how the highly sensitive data would be protected and ultimately used . Some worried that confidential 106 JHHSA SUMMER 2018 information would be accessible to all partners , irrespective of its relevance for their individual work . For example , if a pregnant teen was assessed and referred for supplementary services ( e . g . , mental health , housing ) , that referral and case notes would be entered into the system . The teen would accrue reward points for participating in various activities ( e . g . , prenatal care , therapy , parenting classes ) , and could use those points to “buy” items from baby stores created for this project . Baby stores were run by other funded partners , thus a baby store employee could , in theory , access the teen’s medical or mental health records when looking up the total reward points accrued . Consequently , complex arrangements and data system software fixes were required to restrict the information that different partners could access . Although such limits were necessary , they also reinforced the collective’s inherent power dynamics . Those at the top of the power hierarchy could see everything ; others in this ironically named “shared” data system had restricted access . Of further concern was how the system protected the confidentiality of ‘family level’ information . For example , if a pregnant teen enrolled in the project , she and her parent / guardian signed consent forms that allowed their data to be entered in the system . Questions were then asked about family members , and in the case of pregnant and parenting girls , about the baby’s father . Partners asked : if the baby’s father was not enrolled , yet information about him was entered in relation to her case , did this breach his consent ? If he were to enter the system through another avenue ( for example , if he sought housing support and was enrolled in a program linked to the comprehensive shared data system ) , would his fatherhood role become linked to his housing file ? And , who could access that data ? Such issues required constant attention / response . Given the grant timeline and deliverables , the project launch could not be deferred until the shared data JHHSA SUMMER 2018 107 system was ready , and as a result , the entire system of care ( including flows for referrals and other aspects of programming ) was implemented without the underlying infrastructure in place . Although service provider partners tried to track their work on paper , the effort was largely undermined , few referrals were made , and follow - up could not be verified ( Clay , Sagrestano , & Finerman , 2012 ) . Once the shared data system went live , extensive training began . Because the data indicators were so extensive and the software so complex and multi - layered , training and technical support proved protracted and intensive . Many of the partners encountered difficulties using the system , and given its complexity , data appear to be inaccurate and records / case files mis - linked . In addition , data that were collected on paper had to be back entered into the system , a time consuming prospect , particularly for the smaller partner agencies that had limited staff . As a result , when the funding period neared completion , substantial data were still missing from the system . Ultimately , some partners were motivated to enter the requisite data following threats that funding would not be renewed , and some data never made it into the system . For some partners , most notably the county school system , the interface of their existing tracking software and the new shared data system posed unique challenges . Although the company providing the new platform suggested that existing records could be “dumped” into the shared data system , the software proved incompatible . Only minimal school data entered the new system , almost all by hand at the end of the funding period , which may have introduced further errors into the records / files . As the project drew towards a close , the authors were tapped to conduct an outcome evaluation . At the time of the proposal , researchers from another local university had been slated to conduct the evaluation , but pulled out of the project soon after the funding was announced . Hence , 108 JHHSA SUMMER 2018 the authors had not designed the evaluation plan for the original grant proposal , which allocated limited support and was based solely on information in the shared data system . The timing , funding , and scope of the project represented a suboptimal approach to evaluation ; however , the research team agreed to assess outcomes based on available resources . The problematic data system yielded swaths of missing information , exacerbating the analysis . Struggles in crafting a shared data system are many and multifaceted , and underscore the importance of collective accountability for an effective launch and also its challenges . Legal and ethical considerations , including privacy and confidentiality , are paramount ( Culhane , Fantuzzo , Rouse , Tam , & Lukens , 2010 ) . Multiple federal ( e . g . , Privacy Act , HIPAA , FERPA ) and state ( e . g . , identity theft deterrent laws , Social Security Number protection laws , security procedures for employees of public agencies and municipalities using laptops and removable storage devices ) laws protect individuals from disclosure of their private information , while balancing the need to access data for various legitimate purposes , including research . These laws preclude the misuse of personal information , and include guidelines for data collection , storage , and appropriate use . Ethical research involves , in part , ensuring that the study is in the best interests of the participants , the benefits outweigh costs , there is meaningful informed consent , and sensitive data are kept confidential . Researchers must mask identifying information and provide fair and balanced evidence that benefits partners and the community ( Culhane et al . , 2010 ) . Accomplishing this in the context of a CI initiative adds complexity to the mandate for a shared agenda and data system . Technical issues affecting the practicalities of information collection and access while assuring confidentiality and protecting data integrity are only part of the challenge . The oft termed “soft skills” of collaboration , JHHSA SUMMER 2018 109 such as building trust and a shared vision among partners , are critical to resolving technical and systems complications ( Clay & Martin , 2010 ) and must be integrated into the process from the outset . To be effective , more comprehensive planning of a shared data system , from conceptualization to implementation , is necessary at the outset of a project , rather than cobbled together / created as an afterthought once the project unfolds . One benefit of a shared data system is the opportunity to collectively evaluate an initiative’s effectiveness . Not surprisingly , assessing community change is problematic , and historically most coordinated community response evaluations focused on individual - level outcomes rather than systems - level change ( Salazar , Emshoff , Baker , & Crowley , 2007 ) . Yet , the collective impact model is founded in part on creating a set of shared metrics that should expedite measurement of systemic change . Since 2011 , many interventions / projects have adapted the model across a wide range of seemingly intractable social issues . Preliminary evidence suggests that communities are witnessing significant progress on key indicators , while confronting significant challenges to implementing the methodology with fidelity to the model and maintaining momentum over time ( Weaver , 2016 ) . But , because CI encompasses multiple and interactive components evaluating the shared metrics is not sufficient . Evaluation must document the change - making process itself , including not only what , but how and why indicators have shifted , using a combination of developmental , formative , and summative techniques ( Cabaj , 2014 ; Kelly , 2010 ; Kramer , Parkhurst , & Vaidyanathan , 2009 ; Parkhurst & Preskill , 2014 ) . Indeed , recent research suggests that it is not the CI components themselves but the interplay among them and the strength of informal relationships that together lead to substantive collaboration and impact ( Gillam et al . , 2016 ) . 110 JHHSA SUMMER 2018 CONCLUSION : POLICY AND SOCIAL CONTEXT MATTER As noted , three conditions are optimal to launch a CI initiative : having an influential champion , adequate financial resources , and a sense of urgency for change ( Hanleybrown et al . , 2012 ) . In this community example , the funding opportunity helped to identify project champions ; the DHHS proposal was expected to address funding shortfalls within the community ; and publicity around the high rate of teenage pregnancy drove a sense of urgency . County governments can capitalize on similar environments to strengthen collaboration and network partner performance through skilled staffing , coordinate effective communication among partnering organizations ( Knepper , 2012 ) , proactively recruit new collaborators rather than sustain familiar provider partnerships ( Tortola , 2015 ) , and foster nonprofit capacity ( MacIndoe , 2013 ) . The Teen Pregnancy and Parenting CI , however , suggests that public agency officials need the foresight to better predict when funder expectations will conflict with the emerging collaborative’s capacity to fulfill all five conditions of CI . Seeking external funding , although often critical to such initiatives , may truncate and undermine the very processes they are meant to inspire . For instance , the subset of teen pregnancy collaborative members who received funding shifted their time to the new initiative , yet their activities did not always reflect the vision and mission of the network , precipitating further fragmentation among members who had partnered voluntarily for several years . Ultimately , most unfunded members of the preexisting collaborative grew peripheral to the initiative . Had the county government more fully integrated the collaborative in the grant writing process and aligned the goals of the proposal with those of the collaborative , distinctions JHHSA SUMMER 2018 111 between funded and unfunded partners may have been minimized , leading to stronger and more comprehensive buy - in . Moreover , effective CI initiatives require multiple key components detailed earlier : a common agenda , ongoing communication , mutually reinforcing activities , a backbone support organization , and a shared measurement system ( Kania & Kramer , 2011 ) . Yet we have found that it can be difficult for community partners to unite and create an initiative that adheres to all of these principals , especially within a resource constrained context with externally imposed deadlines for deliverables . Overcoming such barriers requires an investment to develop sustained , effective , bidirectional communication that breaks down existing power structures and fosters the organic ( bottom up ) development of a common shared agenda . Trust and a true spirit of collaboration that comes with effective communication and shared power are critical to introducing the shared data system , particularly given the ethical and legal complexities and skills necessary for effective implementation and use . This can only be achieved through strong and adept leadership and sustained support for the backbone infrastructure needed to build capacity , coordinate shared activities and counter fragmentation . As practitioners , policymakers , and scholars consider the creation and implementation of CI initiatives , an understanding of theoretical underpinnings driving the model can enhance the process . To achieve collective action , public administrators and community leaders must attend to diverse and multidimensional environmental factors ( Gaus , 1947 ; Bronfenbrenner , 1979 ; Kelly , Ryan , Altman , & Stelzner , 2000 ; Ryerson Espino & Trickett , 2008 ; Sallis , Owen , & Fisher , 2008 ) . Because interventions and / or policy decisions designed to influence one system will likely impact others ( Trickett , Barone , & Buchanan , 1996 ) , the most effective programs and policies should 112 JHHSA SUMMER 2018 purposefully target multiple levels in interconnected systems to have the greatest impact ( Sagrestano & Paikoff , 1997 ; Sallis et al . , 2008 ) . This understanding aligns with the theoretical commitment of the CI approach to broad , deep and inclusive community action . The challenge for practitioners is in applying insights from the ecological model to realize unified and effective collaborative community action around a substantial policy problem . Addressing the multidimensional and interconnected systems outlined above thus requires a coordinated effort that is grounded in knowledge obtained from dynamic social science study ( Nutley , Walter , & Davies , 2008 ; Weiss , 1979 ) , purposeful implementation of shared governance structures and processes ( Goldsmith 2010 ; Norris - Tirrell & Clay , 2010 ) , and authentic and inclusive engagement of citizens / local knowledge ( Welsh , 2004 ) . Practitioners engaged in collaborative service delivery must navigate the demands of a multi - tier system , as national , state , and local governments face their own specific issues ( Mayhew , 2012 ) . FINAL THOUGHTS In theory , CCR and CI are driven by the belief that agencies working for communities must pool resources , advance collaboration , and use evidence - based approaches when designing , implementing , and sustaining programs that address systems - level issues to improve quality of life . This will yield the greatest impact with the most efficient use of resources . Although promising in theory , CI implementation can be complicated by barriers operating across the interconnected levels of an ecological system . For example , building a meaningful collaboration with a strong foundation of open communication , shared power , mutual trust , and understanding is vital to create a shared JHHSA SUMMER 2018 113 agenda , yet this process can be time intensive and requires strong yet balanced leadership to work through difficult power dynamics ( Norris - Tirrell & Clay , 2010 ; Warm , 2011 ) . Securing funding for both the leadership structure and collaboration partners is hindered by federal and state grant limitations as well as the timelines and deliverables inherent in most RFPs ( Fruchterman , 2016 ) . Sharing public data has the potential to promote positive community outcomes , however government data vary in reliability , and designers of participatory information systems should better understand real world applications to design a user - friendly platform that will yield accurate and useful data ( Evans & Yen , 2005 ; Gil - Garcia & Pardo , 2005 ; Holtzblatt & Jones , 1993 ; Prokopiadou , Papatheodorou , & Moschopoulos , 2004 ) . If this is achieved , community - based data sharing and a shift from data “owners” to data “stewards” could bridge public policy research and practice , leading to actionable knowledge ( Dawes , 1996 ; Dawes , Pardo , & Cresswell , 2004 ) and long lasting change through collective impact . Moreover , a shift to collective accountability and agendas , authentic communication , reciprocal relationships , support for infrastructure , and shared measurement continues to hold promise . The struggle for public administration is to successfully overcome barriers to its effective implementation . 114 JHHSA SUMMER 2018 REFERENCES Agranoff , R . ( 2005 ) . Managing collaborative performance . Public Performance & Management Review , 29 , 18 - 45 . Agranoff , R . ( 2008 ) . Enhancing performance through public sector networks : Mobilizing human capital in communities of practice . Public Performance & Management Review , 31 , 320 - 347 . Allen , N . E . ( 2005 ) . A multi - level analysis of community coordinating councils . American Journal of Community Psychology , 35 , 49 – 63 . Betts , P . G . ( 2006 ) . Neighborhood housing markets and the Memphis model : Linking information to neighborhood action in Memphis , Tennessee . Brookings Institution , Metropolitan Policy Program . Block , J . ( 1982 ) . Assimilation , accommodation , and the dynamics of personality development . Child Development , 53 , 281 - 295 . Bronfenbrenner , U . ( 1979 ) . The ecology of human development : Experiments by nature and design . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Bryson , J . , Crosby , B . C . , & Stone , M . M . ( 2006 ) . The design and implementation of cross - sector collaborations : Propositions from the literature . Public Administration Review , 66 ( Supplement ) , 44 - 55 . JHHSA SUMMER 2018 115 Bryson , J . , Crosby , B . C . , & Stone , M . M . ( 2015 ) . Designing and implementing cross - sector collaborations : Needed and challenging . Public Administration Review , 75 , 647 - 663 . Cabaj , M . ( 2014 ) . Evaluating collective impact : Five simple rules . The Philanthropist , 26 , 109 – 124 . Clay , J . A . , & Martin , C . ( 2010 ) . Information stewardship and collaboration : Advancing evidence - based public policy decision making . In D . Norris - Tirrell & J . A . Clay ( Eds . ) , Strategic collaboration in public and nonprofit ( pp . 177 - 207 ) . Boca Raton , FL : CRC Press . Clay , J . A . , Sagrestano , L . M . , & Finerman , R . ( 2012 ) . Building relationships to strategically impact community initiatives to reduce teen pregnancy . Journal of Health and Human Services Administration , 35 , 271 - 299 . Culhane , D . P . , Fantuzzo , J . , Rouse , H . L . , Tam , V . , & Lukens , J . ( 2010 ) . Connecting the dots : The promise of integrated data systems for policy analysis and systems reform . Intelligence for Social Policy , Retrieved from http : / / repository . upenn . edu / spp _ papers / 146 Cytron , N . ( 2010 ) . Improving the outcomes of place - based initiatives . Community Investments , 22 , 2 - 7 . Dawes , S . S . ( 1996 ) . Interagency information sharing : Expected benefits , manageable risks . Journal of Policy Analysis and Management , 15 , 377 - 394 . 116 JHHSA SUMMER 2018 Dawes , S . S . , Pardo , T . A . & Cresswell , A . M . ( 2004 ) . Designing electronic government information access programs : A holistic approach . Government Information Quarterly , 21 , 3 - 23 . Evans , D . & Yen , D . C . ( 2005 ) . E - government : An analysis for implementation : Framework for understanding cultural and social impact . Government Information Quarterly , 22 , 354 - 373 . Fiedler , F . E . ( 1967 ) . A theory of leadership effectiveness . New York : McGraw - Hill . French , J . R . , Raven , B . , & Cartwright , D . ( 1959 ) . The bases of social power . Classics of organization theory , 7 . Fruchterman , J . ( 2016 ) . Using data for action and for impact . Stanford Social Innovation Review , Summer 2016 . Fung , A . ( 2006 ) . Varieties of participation in complex governance . Public Administration Review , 66 ( Supplement ) , 66 - 75 . Gamache , D . & Asmus , M . E . ( 1999 ) . Enhancing networking among service providers : Elements of successful coordination strategies . In M . F . Shepard & E . L . Pence ( Eds . ) , Coordinating community responses to domestic violence : Lessons from Duluth and beyond ( pp . 65 - 88 ) . Thousand Oaks : Sage . JHHSA SUMMER 2018 117 Gaus , J . ( 1947 ) . Reflections on public administration . Tuscaloosa , AL : University of Alabama . Retrieved from https : / / books . google . com / books ? hl = en & lr = & id = rr WQs4pU5voC & oi = fnd & pg = PP8 & dq = reflections + o n + public + administration & ots = s - OGJ6tx4O & sig = bwnxIVe - taSWjZWJoEXO7K5i9rA # v = onepage & q = reflectio ns % 20on % 20public % 20administration & f = false Gillam , R . J . , Counts , J . M . & Garstka , T . A . ( 2016 ) . Collective impact facilitators : How contextual and procedural factors influence collaboration . Community Development , 47 , 209 - 224 . Gil - Garcia , J . R . & Pardo , T . A . ( 2005 ) . E - government success factors : Mapping practical tools to theoretical foundations . Government Information Quarterly , 22 , 187 - 216 . Goldsmith , S . ( 2010 ) . The power of social innovation : How civic entrepreneurs ignite community networks for good . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Graddy , E . A . & Chen , B . ( 2006 ) . Influence on the size and scope of social service delivery . Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory , 16 , 533 - 552 . Hanleybrown , F . , Kania , J . & Kramer , M . ( 2012 ) . Channeling change : Making collective impact work . Stanford Social Innovation Review , January 2012 . Heifetz , R . , Kania , J . , & Kramer , M . ( 2004 ) . Leading boldly . Stanford Social Innovation Review , Winter 2004 . 118 JHHSA SUMMER 2018 Himmelman , A . T . ( 2001 ) . On coalitions and the transformation of power relations : Collaborative betterment and collaborative empowerment . American Journal of Community Psychology , 29 , 277 – 284 . Holtzblatt , K . & Jones , S . ( 1993 ) . Contextual inquiry : A participatory technique for system design . In D . Schuler & A . Namioka ( Eds . ) Participatory design : Principles and practices ( pp . 177 - 210 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . Kania , J . & Kramer , M . ( 2011 ) . Collective impact . Stanford Social Innovation Review , Winter 2011 . Kania , J . & Kramer , M . ( 2013 ) . Embracing emergence : How collective impact addresses complexity . Stanford Social Innovation Review , January 2013 . Keast , R . , Brown , K . , & Mandell , M . ( 2007 ) . Getting the right mix : Unpacking integration meanings and strategies . International Public Management Journal , 10 , 9 - 33 . Kelly , J . G . , Ryan , A . M . , Altman , B . E . , & Stelzner , S . P . ( 2000 ) . Understanding and changing social systems : An ecological view . In J . Rappaport , & E . Seidman ( Eds . ) , Handbook of community psychology ( pp . 133 - 159 ) . New York : Kluwer Academic / Plenum . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4615 - 4193 - 6 _ 7 Kelly , T . ( 2010 ) . Five simple rules for evaluating complex community initiatives . Community Investments , 22 , 19 - 36 . JHHSA SUMMER 2018 119 Knepper , H . ( 2012 ) . Testing a model of county government influence on health care safety - nets . Journal of Health and Human Services Administration , 35 , 11 - 40 . Kramer , M . , Parkhurst , M . , & Vaidyanathan , L . ( 2009 ) . Breakthroughs in shared measurement and social impact . Boston : FSG Social Impact Advisors . Kubisch , A . C . , Auspos , P . , Brown , P . , & Dewar , T . ( 2010 ) . Community change initiatives from 1990 - 2010 : Accomplishments and implications for future work . Community Investments , 22 , 8 - 12 . MacIndoe , H . ( 2013 ) . Reinforcing the safety net : Explaining the propensity for and intensity of nonprofit - local government collaboration . State and Local Government Review , 45 , 283 - 295 . Mayhew , F . ( 2012 ) . Human service delivery in a multi - tier system : The subtleties of collaboration among partners . Journal of Health and Human Services Administration 35 , 109 - 135 Norris - Tirrell , D . & Clay , J . A . ( 2010 ) . Strategic collaboration in public and nonprofit administration : A practice - based approach to solving shared problems . Boca Raton , FL : CRC Press . Nowell , B . ( 2009 ) . Profiling capacity for coordination and systems change : The relative contribution of stakeholder relationships in interorganizational collaboratives . American Journal of Community Psychology , 44 , 196 - 212 . 120 JHHSA SUMMER 2018 Nutley , S . M . , Walter , I . & Davies , H . T . O . ( 2008 ) . Using evidence : How research can inform public services . Bristol , UK : University of Bristol Policy Press . Page , S . ( 2004 ) . Measuring accountability for results in interagency collaboratives . Public Administration Review , 64 , 591 - 606 . Parkhurst , M . & Preskill , H . ( 2014 ) . Collective insights on collective action : Learning in action : Evaluating collective impact . Stanford Social Innovation Review , Supplement , 17 - 19 . Pence , E . & Shepard , M . ( 1999 ) . Developing a coordinated community response . In M . F . Shepard & E . L . Pence ( Eds . ) , Coordinating community responses to domestic violence : Lessons from Duluth and beyond ( pp . 3 - 24 ) . Thousand Oaks : Sage . Proenca , E . J . ( 2003 ) . A stakeholder approach to community health management . Journal of Health and Human Services Administration , 26 , 10 - 34 . Prokopiadou , G . , Papatheodorou , C . & Moschopoulos , D . ( 2004 ) . Integrating knowledge management tools for government information . Government Information Quarterly , 21 , 170 - 198 . Ryerson Espino , S . & Trickett , E . J . ( 2008 ) . The spirit of ecological inquiry and intervention research reports : A heuristic elaboration . American Journal of Community Psychology , 42 , 60 - 78 . JHHSA SUMMER 2018 121 Sagrestano , L . M . & Paikoff , R . L . ( 1997 ) . Preventing high risk sexual behavior , sexually transmitted diseases , and pregnancy among adolescents . In R . P . Weissberg , T . P . Gullotta , R . L . Hampton , B . A . Ryan , & G . R . Adams ( Eds . ) , Healthy children 2010 : Enhancing Children’s Wellness ( pp . 76 - 104 ) . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Salazar , L . F . , Emshoff , J . G . , Baker , C . K . , & Crowley , T . ( 2007 ) . Examining the behavior of a system : An outcome evaluation of a coordinated community response to domestic violence . Journal of Family Violence , 22 , 631 - 641 . Sallis , J . F . , Owen , N . & Fisher , E . B . ( 2008 ) . Ecological models of health behavior . In K . Glanz , B . K . Rimer , & K . Viswanath ( Eds . ) , Health Behavior and Health Education : Theory , Research , and Practice , 4 th edition ( pp . 465 - 485 ) . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Selden , S . C . , Sowa , J . E . , & Sandfort , J . ( 2006 ) . The impact of nonprofit collaboration in early child care and education on management and program outcomes . Public Administration Review , 66 , 412 - 425 . Stevenson , J . F . & Mitchell , R . E . ( 2003 ) . Community - level collaboration for substance abuse prevention . Journal of Primary Prevention , 23 , 371 – 404 . Thomson , A . M . & Perry , J . L . ( 2006 ) . Collaborative processes : Inside the black box . Public Administration Review , 66 ( Supplement ) , 20 - 32 . 122 JHHSA SUMMER 2018 Tortola , P . D . ( 2015 ) . The microfoundations of policy inertia : A city - level analysis of the community development block grant . State and Local Government Review , 47 , 6 - 14 . Trickett , E . J . , Barone , C . & Buchanan , R . M . ( 1996 ) . Elaborating developmental contextualism in adolescent research and intervention : Paradigm contributions from community psychology . Journal of Research on Adolescence , 6 , 245 - 269 . Uekert , B . K . ( 2003 ) . The value of coordinated community responses . Criminology and Public Policy , 3 , 133 - 136 . Weaver , L . ( 2016 ) . Possible : Transformational change in collective impact . Community Development , 47 , 274 - 283 . Welsh , M . ( 2004 ) . Fast - forward to a participatory norm : Agency response to public mobilization over oil and gas leasing in Pennsylvania . State and Local Government Review , 36 , 186 - 197 . Warm , D . ( 2011 ) . Local government collaboration for a new decade : Risk , trust , and effectiveness . State and Local Government Review , 43 , 60 - 65 . Weiss , C . H . ( 1979 ) . The many meanings of research utilization . Public Administration Review , 39 , 426 - 431 . Winer , M . B . & Ray , K . L . ( 1994 ) . Collaboration handbook : Creating , sustaining , and enjoying the journey . St . Paul , MN : Amhurst H . Wilder Foundation . JHHSA SUMMER 2018 123 Yang , K . & Callahan , K . ( 2007 ) . Citizen involvement efforts and bureaucratic responsiveness : Participatory values , stakeholder pressures , and administrative practicality . Public Administration Review , 67 , 249 - 264 .