Eukaryotic transcription is governed , in part , by DNA - binding transcription factors ( TFs ) , which assemble at promoter and enhancer sequences throughout the genome . A characteristic feature of promoters and enhancers is the presence of sequence motifs that allow multiple TFs to bind across the same region . In addition to sequence - specific DNA - binding domains , TFs typi - cally have separate activation domains that interact with transcription regulators . The Mediator complex , which is comprised of 26 subunits in mammals ( and up to 21 sub - units in yeast ; BOX 1 ) , is a general target of TF activation domains ; moreover , as different TFs bind to different Mediator subunits , multiple TFs might bind to Mediator at the same time . A basic function of Mediator is to communicate regulatory signals from DNA - bound TFs directly to the RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) enzyme . The precise mecha - nisms by which Mediator regulates Pol II activity remain poorly understood , but they clearly involve extensive protein – protein interactions between Mediator , Pol II and other general and gene - specific transcription regula - tory factors . Mediator is also crucial for the organization of genomic DNA into topological domains , including gene loops , which seem to be fundamental structures that enable the coordinated regulation of cellular tran - scription 1 . The large size of Mediator is likely to facilitate these diverse functional interactions . Indicative of its functional versatility , Mediator is implicated in regulating at least some aspect of many fun - damental processes involved in transcription , including transcription initiation , transcription elongation , chro - matin architecture and enhancer – promoter gene looping . Throughout this Review , we emphasize the role of Mediator in some of these processes and direct readers to other recent reviews that address additional aspects of Mediator structure and function 2 , 3 , or the roles of Mediator in selected human diseases 4 – 6 . Mediator composition and structure A fundamentally important characteristic of Mediator is that its subunit composition can change ; subunits can be lost or added to affect its biological function . Little is known about how subunit exchange is regulated , and this remains an area of great interest and importance . Mass spectrometry analyses have indicated that although most Mediator subunits are present in similar numbers in human and yeast cells , select subunits are markedly over - or under - represented 7 . Furthermore , several laboratories have isolated mammalian Mediator complexes lacking one or more of the 26 core Mediator subunits 8 , 9 . These results suggest that a subset of endogenous Mediator complexes may lack specific subunits . Mediator com - plexes that lack specific subunits cannot transduce acti - vation signals from TFs that would usually bind to the missing subunits . For example , the thyroid hormone receptor binds to the MED1 sub unit and the ELK1 TF binds to the MED23 subunit 10 , 11 . In MED1 - knockout murine embryonic fibroblasts ( MEFs ) , the activation of thyroid hormone receptor target genes was inhibited 12 ; similarly , ELK1 was unable to activate its target genes in MED23 - knockout murine embryonic stem cells 11 . Importantly , however , Mediator complexes lacking MED1 or MED23 can activate transcription in response to TFs that bind to other Mediator subunits 11 , 12 . Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry , University of Colorado , Boulder , Colorado 80303 , USA . Correspondence to D . J . T . e‑mail : taatjes @ colorado . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm3951 Published online 18 February 2015 Mediator complex ( Also known as core Mediator ) . The 21‑subunit ( Saccharomyces cerevisiae ) or 26‑subunit ( human ) complex that does not contain the cyclin‑dependent kinase 8 module . Enhancer – promoter gene looping Looping of genomic DNA that juxtaposes an enhancer , which may be dozens ( or more ) of kilobases away , and a promoter . The Mediator complex : a central integrator of transcription Benjamin L . Allen and Dylan J . Taatjes Abstract | The RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) enzyme transcribes all protein - coding and most non - coding RNA genes and is globally regulated by Mediator — a large , conformationally flexible protein complex with a variable subunit composition ( for example , a four - subunit cyclin - dependent kinase 8 module can reversibly associate with it ) . These biochemical characteristics are fundamentally important for Mediator’s ability to control various processes that are important for transcription , including the organization of chromatin architecture and the regulation of Pol II pre - initiation , initiation , re - initiation , pausing and elongation . Although Mediator exists in all eukaryotes , a variety of Mediator functions seem to be specific to metazoans , which is indicative of more diverse regulatory requirements . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 16 | MARCH 2015 | 155 F O C U S O N T r a N S C r i p T i O N © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Cyclin - dependent kinase 8 module ( CDK8 module ) . A group of four subunits , CDK8 , CCNC , MED12 and MED13 , that can reversibly associate with Mediator . CDK8 – Mediator Mediator bound to the four‑subunit cyclin‑dependent kinase 8 ( CDK8 ) module ; in metazoans , this complex lacks the MED26 subunit . Intrinsically disordered regions ( IDRs ) . Protein sequences that do not adopt a fixed 3D structure , yet may do so upon binding to another protein . These examples illustrate that different TFs — and thus the signalling pathways that activate them — rely on different Mediator subunits to orchestrate their trans - criptional responses . In support of this , it seems that the subunit composition of Mediator is simplified in differ - entiated cells 13 , 14 . Whereas the phenomenon of simplified subunit composition in differentiated cells is best defined for the multisubunit TFIID complex 15 , smaller Mediator complexes with fewer than the typical 26 sub units are also likely to adopt more - specialized functions . This could help to enforce the expression of a restricted set of genes in differentiated cells ; by contrast , proliferating cells , includ - ing cancer cells or stem cells , generally express all 26 core Mediator subunits in addition to the cyclin‑dependen t kinase 8 modul e ( CDK8 module ) sub units ( see below ) . CDK8 – Mediator . The most well - characterized example of Mediator subunit exchange is the reversible associa - tion , with Mediator , of the four - subunit CDK8 modul e , which is comprised of CDK8 , CCNC , MED12 and MED13 . The CDK8 module can stably associate with Mediator , which results in a biochemically distinct pool of CDK8 – Mediator complexes in cells 16 , 17 . Notably , the MED26 subunit is not present in CDK8 – Mediator , which results in a 29 - subunit CDK8 – Mediator complex . Upon association with Mediator , the CDK8 module dra - matically alters Mediator structure and function 18 , 19 . The molecular mechanisms underlying the reversible CDK8 module – Mediator association are incompletely under - stood , but recent studies indicate that the phosphoryla - tion , ubiquitylation and protein turnover of MED13 are involved 20 . The targeted degradation of MED13 is expected to affect the association of the CDK8 mod - ule with Mediator , as MED13 directly links the CDK8 modul e to Mediator in both yeast and humans 18 , 19 . Subunits of the CDK8 module have been implicated in a growing number of cancers and developmental diseases 21 – 24 ( BOX 2 ) . Although some mechanistic details have been delineated 25 , 26 , much remains to be discovered regarding the altered function of CDK8 module subunits with pathogenic mutations . The general lack of under - standing stems from insufficient structural data and the fact that connections between CDK8 module subunits and human diseases have been made fairly recently . In addition , CDK8 seems to function in context - specific ways ; its biological function may vary among different cell types or in response to distinct stimuli . For example , in HCT116 cells , CDK8 regulates different genes during hypoxia or in response to serum 27 , 28 . As a kinase that reversibly associates with Mediator , CDK8 seems to be poised to broadly regulate gene expression . Although few CDK8 kinase targets have been identified , DNA - binding TFs represent com - mon targets in yeast and human cells , suggesting that CDK8 may serve as a general regulator of TF function . Phosphorylation by yeast or human CDK8 seems to regulate TF activity and / or target TFs for proteasomal degradation 29 , 30 . As examples , Cdk8 - dependent phos - phorylation of Gal4 or Sip4 activates these yeast TFs 31 , 32 , whereas CDK8 - dependent phosphorylation of the human TFs sterol regulatory element - binding protein 1c or E2F1 seems to repress their activity 33 , 34 . Another important consideration is the presence of CDK19 , MED12L and MED13L — paralogues of CDK8 , MED12 and MED13 , respectively , that have emerged in vertebrate organisms . Little is known about the biologi - cal roles of these paralogues , but they appear to assem - ble in a mutually exclusive manner 35 . Specifically , mass spectrometry analyses have revealed that MED12 and MED12L will not associate in the same kinase module , nor will MED13 and MED13L or CDK8 and CDK19 . CDK19 , MED12L and MED13L have been linked to neuronal and developmental disorders 36 , 37 , but their basic biological importance relative to CDK8 , MED12 or MED13 remains unclear . Structural dynamics of Mediator . Mediator is dynamic not only in its subunit composition but also in its structure . An abundance of computationally predicted intrinsicall y disordered regions ( IDRs ) are observed in both yeast and human Mediator subunit sequences 38 , and a high degree of structural flexibility is evident based on electron microscopy analyses of Mediator 17 , 39 , 40 . In addition , the structural state of Mediator can shift dramatically upon binding to other proteins or pro - tein complexes ( FIG . 1 ) . In each case , structural shifts in Mediator correlate with changes in Mediator function . Structural shifts that occur upon TF – Mediator binding ( FIG . 1a ) , which seem to propagate throughout the entire Mediator complex 17 , correlate with the activation of Pol II transcription 41 . Large - scale structural shifts also occur upon the binding of Mediator to Pol II ( FIG . 1b ) or the CDK8 module ( FIG . 1c ) ; these structural changes may ensure that the binding of Pol II and the CDK8 module to Mediator is mutually exclusive . Numerous structural , functional and biochemical assays have Box 1 | The evolution of Mediator Consistent with its role as a general transcription factor ( TF ) 175 , the emergence of Mediator in eukaryotes coincided with the emergence of other general TFs , such as TFIIH and the TATA - binding protein - associated factor ( TAF ) subunits of TFIID . However , throughout eukaryotic evolution , the subunit composition , sequences 176 and function of Mediator diversified 2 . The poor sequence conservation between yeast and human Mediator ( see Supplementary information S1 ( table ) ) may partly reflect the high proportion of predicted intrinsically disordered regions ( IDRs ) within its subunit sequences 38 , which generally tend to diverge more rapidly over time 177 . As a general target of DNA - binding TFs , the divergence of Mediator sequences throughout evolution may have been partially driven by the increasing diversity of DNA - binding TFs . An intriguing hypothesis is that Mediator may have evolved as a type of cellular defence mechanism against ‘selfish’ DNA elements from viruses and transposons 178 . The transcription of these DNA elements is deleterious to the host , and Mediator may help to ensure that transcription activation uses host - specific factors , such as endogenous TFs and co - activators . This could be one basis for Mediator’s ancient origins in eukaryotes 176 . Many basic functions of Mediator are conserved from yeast to humans — for example , the ability of Mediator to bind to TFs and the carboxy - terminal domain ( CTD ) of RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) , and its requirement for Pol II transcription genome - wide — but Mediator also regulates and interacts with various chromatin - or Pol II - associated factors that are not present in yeast genomes , such as POLR2M 72 , 75 , negative elongation factor ( NELF ) 179 and activator RNAs 134 . Mediator also seems to be essential for long - range enhancer – promoter interactions in mammalian cells 102 , 128 , whereas similar enhancer - dependent regulatory mechanisms are not observed in yeast 122 . R E V I E W S 156 | MARCH 2015 | VOLUME 16 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Uterine leiomyomas Benign tumours of smooth muscle cells originating from the uterus . Head module The yeast Mediator subunits Med6 , Med8 , Med11 , Med17 , Med18 , Med19 , Med20 and Med22 . Middle module The yeast Mediator subunits Med1 , Med4 , Med7 , Med9 , Med10 , Med21 and Med31 . Tail module The yeast Mediator subunits Med2 , Med3 , Med5 , Med14 , Med15 and Med16 . Crystal structure docking Fitting an existing crystal structure into a larger structural model . demonstrated that Pol II – Mediator binding precludes the association of the CDK8 module with Mediator and , conversely , that the CDK8 – Mediator complex does not associate with Pol II . For instance , Mediator complexes bound to the Pol II carboxy - terminal domain ( CTD ) lack any detectable CDK8 module subunits 42 , and pro - teomic data for CDK8 – Mediator yield no detectable co - purifyin g Pol II sub units 43 . As existing structural data for the large assemblies depicted in FIG . 1 are of low resolution , the precise nature of the structural shifts they undergo remains unknown . It is not clear how many subunits are involved in a given TF – Mediator structural shift or which subunit – subunit interfaces are changed . TF - induced structural changes appear to be a conserved feature of Mediator 44 , and the general conservation of IDRs 38 and conformational flexibility from yeast to humans suggests that structural plasticity is a fundamental aspect of Mediator’s cellular functions . Indicative of its structural complexity , recent elec - tron microscopy studies have completely redefined previous architectural models of yeast Mediator , which had assigned subunits to the so - called head module , middl e module and tail module sections of the complex . A key feature of the more recent studies was the imple - mentation of electron microscopy labelling strategies to identify the location of select subunits for the first time . The resulting models , aided by crystal structure docking of individual Mediator subunits , allowed a more accu - rate delineation of the head , middle and tail modules 44 , 45 . Whereas previous structural models placed tail domain subunits away from a Pol II – Mediator binding site 46 , the new models position the tail subunits adjacent to this site . These results clarify some confounding issues with the previous models , including how tail module sub units could influence Pol II – Mediator interactions 47 and the assembly of the pre - initiation complex ( PIC ) 48 – 51 ( BOX 3 ) , and how the interaction of the CDK8 module with head module subunits was observed in yeast two - hybrid screens 52 . The question of whether the subunit organization of mammalian Mediator complexes is similar to that of yeast is complicated by the fact that humans have addi - tional Mediator subunits ( see Supplementary informa - tion S1 ( table ) ) . However , a partial human Mediator complex ( 15 subunits ) was recently reconstituted , and this has provided the most information to date about this basic query 53 . Crosslinking – mass spectrometry studies of this 15 - subunit Mediator complex showed similarities and differences between yeast and human Mediator in terms of overall subunit organization 53 . As existing subunit – subunit interaction data for yeast and human Mediator ( for example , via crystal struc - tures or crosslinking – mass spectrometry ) have , under - standably , involved partial assemblies 53 – 57 , it remains to be determined whether potential differences in sub - unit organization will persist upon the comparison of fully assembled complexes . These questions should be answered in the next few years . Mediator in Pol II transcription Mediator is generally required for PIC assembly ( BOX 3 ) , as revealed by a host of biochemical , cellular and genetic studies in human cells and model organisms . In agree - ment with this finding , structural studies showed that Mediator makes extensive contacts with Pol II 39 , 58 , 59 , which serves as a central scaffold around which the rest of the PIC assembles . Mediator is also a general target for DNA - binding TFs , invoking a ‘molecular bridge’ model in which Mediator integrates and communicates regulatory signals from DNA - binding TFs directly to the Pol II enzyme and the rest of the PIC . This central and funda mental role for Mediator is consistent with its global requirement for Pol II transcription 60 , 61 . PIC assembly . For gene - specific transcription ( that is , regulated transcription ) , Pol II must be recruited to spe - cific sites on the genome . This is generally controlled by sequence - specific , DNA - binding TFs . Although TFs do not directly bind to Pol II , one mechanism by which they can promote Pol II recruitment is by binding to the Mediator complex . Mediator enables Pol II recruit - ment via interaction with the CTD of the Pol II RPB1 sub unit 42 , 62 – 64 . The large size of Mediator is likely to promote stable PIC formation by allowing the complex to directly interact with multiple PIC factors ( FIG . 2a ) . Numerous laboratories have shown cooperative and even synergistic functions between Mediator and TFIID during PIC assembly and transcription activation 65 – 69 ; more over , Mediator helps to regulate the recruitment and / or the activity of the PIC components TFIIA , TFIIB , TFIIE and TFIIF within promoter - bound PICs 70 – 72 . Box 2 | Mediator and human disease The number of diseases identified as linked to Mediator subunits or Mediator subunit mutations is increasing , including a growing number of links to developmental diseases and cancer 4 , 5 , 180 . This information is medically important , but it can also help to delineate cellular functions for specific subunits . For example , mutations in the gene encoding MED12 found in uterine leiomyomas were shown to affect its interaction with the cyclin - dependent kinase 8 ( CDK8 ) module subunit CCNC , which negatively affected the kinase function of CDK8 ( REF . 26 ) . The biological and structural characteristics of Mediator suggest that it could represent an effective therapeutic target 181 . As different transcription factors ( TFs ) bind to different Mediator subunits , blocking one TF – Mediator interaction site ( for example , the site at which VP16 interacts with MED25 ) may not broadly inhibit cellular transcription . This is supported by the fact that knockout of single Mediator subunits can shut down transcriptional responses to specific signalling pathways while leaving other pathways intact 11 , 12 , 154 . Moreover , in the few cases in which structural data are available , the TF binding site within a Mediator subunit is structured , with hydrophobic clefts or patches that could be selectively targeted with small molecules 182 – 184 . Genome - wide chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing ( ChIP – seq ) analyses in mammalian cells have uncovered enhancer elements that are unusually large and that have high - level occupancy of DNA - binding TFs and other transcription regulators such as cohesin and Mediator . These domains have been called super - enhancers 185 , 186 , and they seem to be similar to high - occupancy target ( HOT ) domains 187 , 188 or locus control regions ( LCRs ) 189 that have been identified in other studies . Super - enhancers are essentially clusters of enhancers , and they typically regulate the expression of genes that control cell identity ; super - enhancers can also drive high expression levels of oncogenes in cancer cells . Mediator seems to have a key role in forming or maintaining super - enhancer structure and function 185 ; in fact , perturbing Mediator structure by knocking down key subunits , such as MED12 , disproportionately affects genes regulated by super - enhancers 102 , 186 , suggesting that targeting Mediator may selectively disrupt oncogene expression in cancer . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 16 | MARCH 2015 | 157 F O C U S O N T r a N S C r i p T i O N © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Core Mediator CDK8 module CDK8 – Mediator Pol II Cofactor 3 Pol II – Mediator TF TF – Mediator Cofactor 1 Cofactor 2 Pol II Cofactor 1 Cofactor 4 Cofactor 5 Cofactor 6 a b c Open complex An RNA polymerase II complex in which double‑stranded DNA is unwound to single‑stranded DNA around the transcription start site ; an open complex is required to initiate transcription . CTD repeats A series of YSPTSPS repeats within the carboxy‑terminal domain ( CTD ) of the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II . Mediator also helps to recruit the multisubunit TFIIH complex to the PIC , most likely via an interaction with the MED11 sub unit of Mediator 73 , 74 . An additional role for Mediator in PIC assem - bly seems to involve Pol II complexes that contain GDOWN1 , which is now considered to be a thirteenth subunit of Pol II called POLR2M . POLR2M was iden - tified as a factor that repressed transcription in the absence of Mediator in vitro 75 . Later work has shown that POLR2M affects PIC assembly by inhibiting TFIIF – Pol II binding 72 , 76 . In fact , structural and bio - chemical data indicate that the binding of TFIIF and POLR2M to the free Pol II enzyme is mutually exclu - sive 72 , 77 . However , in the presence of Mediator , it seems that TFIIF can associate with Pol II complexes contain - ing POLR2M and this , in turn , may promote the for - mation of active PICs 72 . The central role of Mediator in regulating POLR2M and TFIIF – Pol II interactions may also have important implications in Pol II pausing and elongation 76 ( see below ) . Pol II initiation . Following PIC assembly and the forma - tion of the open complex , Pol II must break contacts with Mediator and the PIC to leave the promoter and transi - tion to productive elongation . Although many mecha - nistic details remain to be discovered , phosphorylation of the CTD of Pol II plays a key part in disrupting the Mediator – Pol II interaction 78 ( FIG . 2a ) . In particular , the Pol II CTD is phosphorylated by TFIIH ( via its CDK7 kinase subunit ) , and this is accompanied by Pol II ( and thus transcription ) initiation 79 , 80 . The ability of TFIIH to phosphorylate the Pol II CTD is dependent on Mediator 41 , 62 , 81 , 82 , but it is unknown whether Mediator regulates other enzymatic functions within TFIIH . It also remains unknown how many CTD repeats must be phosphorylated to sufficiently disrupt Mediator – Pol II binding in order to enable Pol II to escape from the promoter . Recent results in yeast have shown that the TFIIH - dependent phosphorylation of the Pol II CTD contributes to , but is not required for , the disruption of Mediator – Pol II contacts at the promoter 83 , 84 . Whereas promoter - proximal paused Pol II does not seem to be a common regulatory intermediate in yeast 85 , these and other 86 findings suggest a conserved role for Mediator in the regulation of the escape of Pol II from promoters . Pol II pausing and Pol II elongation . In metazoans , the Pol II enzyme can pause after transcribing 30 – 60 nucleotides 87 , 88 ; these ‘paused’ Pol II complexes are widely observed at promoter - proximal sites throughout the genome , which establishes paused Pol II complexes as common regulatory intermediates 89 – 91 . Although Mediator appears to regulate Pol II pausing and / or pause release , the molecular mechanisms remain unclear 41 , 92 – 94 . For example , it is not known whether Mediator remains bound to paused Pol II or whether paused Pol II com - plexes dissociate from Mediator ( FIG . 2b ) ; if Mediator – Pol II contacts are broken during early initiation and pausing stages , the Mediator - dependent regulation of Pol II pausing or pause release would require Mediator to associate with intermediary factors . A growing set of proteins and protein complexes are known to regulate Pol II pausing or elongation in metazoans 95 . Among these , many physically or functionally interact with Mediator , including POLR2M and the super elongation complex ( SEC ) . Whereas Mediator has been shown to regulate PIC assembly in the presence of POLR2M ( see above ) , biochemical , gene expression and chromatin immuno‑ precipitation followed by sequencing ( ChIP – seq ) data have also implicated Mediator in regulating the poten - tial functions of POLR2M in Pol II pausing and / or elongation 72 , 76 . In vitro transcription assays indicate that POLR2M stabilizes Pol II pausing , at least in part , through blocking pause termination by transcription termination factor 2 ( TTF2 ) 76 . Furthermore , POLR2M colocalized with paused Pol II across the genome , and POLR2M knockdown caused an increase in Pol II den - sity downstream of pause sites 76 . As Mediator seems to be essential for activating PICs that contain POLR2M 72 , 75 , these data suggest additional roles for Mediator in the regulation of Pol II pausing and elongation . Figure 1 | Structural changes in Mediator control its interactions with other transcription regulators . As the structure of Mediator changes , its ability to interact with other regulatory proteins may also change . Such structural transitions could enable the same Mediator complex to adopt distinct functions at the appropriate stages of transcription ( for example , during initiation as opposed to elongation ) . The model also allows some cofactors to bind to Mediator in more than one structural state . a | Upon binding a transcription factor ( TF ) , Mediator undergoes structural changes that facilitate interactions with additional transcription regulators 43 . Structural changes associated with TF – Mediator binding also seem to promote the stable association of this complex with RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) 197 and correlate with transcription activation 41 . b | Pol II – Mediator binding triggers distinct structural changes throughout Mediator 58 , 59 ; these might be important for functional interactions between Mediator and factors that promote Pol II initiation and / or elongation ( depicted as generic cofactors ) , such as TFIIS , TFIIF or POLR2M 72 , 76 , 104 , 105 . c | Cyclin - dependent kinase 8 ( CDK8 ) module – Mediator binding also induces structural changes in Mediator that prevent Pol II binding 18 , 198 ; furthermore , CDK8 – Mediator associates with elongation factors ( depicted as generic cofactors ) , such as the super elongation complex ( SEC ) 27 , 43 , which may regulate the timing of SEC recruitment at some genes . R E V I E W S 158 | MARCH 2015 | VOLUME 16 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology IIB M e d i a t o r II D II H P o l II IIF IIA IIE DNA Promoter TFIIA : 2 subunits TFIIB : 1 protein TFIID : 19 subunits * TFIIE : 2 subunits TFIIF : 2 subunits TFIIH : 10 subunits Pol II : 13 subunits Mediator : 26 subunits Chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing ( ChIP – seq ) . Immunoprecipitation of a protein followed by DNA sequencing to determine the binding sites of the protein throughout the genome . SEC 96 , in various forms 97 , appears to be a general regulator of Pol II elongation and contains factors such as positive transcription elongation factor - b ( P - TEFb ) , AF4 / FMR2 family member 4 ( AFF4 ) and eleven - nineteen Lys - rich leukaemia ( ELL ) . The metazoan - specific MED26 subunit of Mediator interacts with the SEC to facilitate Pol II elongation at a subset of genes 68 . Interestingly , a region on MED26 to which the SEC binds was also shown to bind to TFIID , suggesting that MED26 acts as a switch , perhaps initially binding to TFIID to promote PIC assembly and then , in response to an activating sig - nal , binding to the SEC to control elongation 68 . Another mechanistic link has been observed between the SEC and CDK8 – Mediator complexes ( FIG . 2b ) . SEC subunits , including CDK9 , cycli n T1 ( CCNT1 ) and AFF4 , interact with CDK8 – Mediator complexes 43 , and knockdown of CDK8 negatively affects transcription elongation and the recruitment of SEC factors at gene promoters activated during serum response 27 . Similarly , Pol II elongation and the recruitment of SEC at hypoxia - inducible genes are highly sensitive to CDK8 protein levels 28 . These findings suggest that CDK8 – Mediator stimulates Pol II elongation . As the association of the CDK8 module with Mediator is mutually exclusive with Pol II , CDK8 – Mediator - controlled regulation of Pol II elongation is likely to occur after Pol II – Mediator interactions are disrupted . Under these circumstances , the SEC may function as an interme - diary factor ( FIG . 2b ) . Interestingly , MED26 and the CDK8 module are rarely in the same Mediator complex 43 , 98 , and it will be interesting to determine whether MED26 and CDK8 – Mediator regulate the occupancy or activity of the SEC across the genome . Their varied association with Mediator suggests that MED26 and CDK8 – Mediator regulate SEC function in mechanistically distinct ways . Interestingly , the functional cooperativity between Mediator and POLR2M or the SEC has been pro - posed to involve a structural remodelling or switching mechanism 68 , 76 . Consistent with this , structural shifts in Mediator are induced by TF – Mediator binding . TF – Mediator binding triggers structural changes at the Pol II – Mediator interaction site , which correlate with activation of Pol II at the promoter 2 . In agree - ment with this finding , numerous laboratories have documented that the Mediator - dependent activation of Pol II elongation coincides with the binding of TFs , such as heat shock factor protein 1 ( HSF1 ) , ELK1 or p53 , to promoters 41 , 99 , 100 . Much remains to be discovered regarding the mecha - nisms by which Mediator contributes to the regulation of Pol II pausing and elongation . In addition to POLR2M and the SEC , other factors involved in regulating Pol II pausing and elongation have been shown to have mech - anistic links to Mediator , including cohesin 101 , 102 , ELL3 ( REF . 103 ) , TFIIS 104 – 106 and DRB - sensitivity - inducing fac - tor ( DSIF ) 107 . This elaborate and expanding network of factors , the regulatory roles of which are still emerging , coupled with the dynamic and apparently combinatorial nature of the Pol II initiation and elongation machin - ery , suggests that delineation of specific mechanistic details will require structural , cellular and biochemica l assays , including studies with reconstituted in vitro transcriptio n systems . Pol II re - initiation . After Pol II transcription initiation and promoter escape , another Pol II enzyme could bind to the promoter and initiate another transcript ( FIG . 2c ) . This process , called re - initiation , can generate multi - ple transcripts via the recruitment of additional Pol II enzymes . As a sustained transcriptional response is likely to require efficient re - initiation , this is probably a key regulatory stage at active genes 108 . In vitro experi - ments have demonstrated that transcription re - initiation occurs more rapidly than the initial round of transcrip - tion 109 and that it is facilitated by scaffold PIC assemblies Box 3 | The pre - initiation complex The eukaryotic RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) enzyme transcribes most non - coding RNA genes and all protein - coding genes . Unlike bacterial polymerases , however , Pol II relies on an array of auxiliary factors that ensure transcription initiation occurs at the correct site in the genome , and that ensure that RNA processing events result in the production of a mature transcript 190 . At the transcription start site , Pol II initiation is regulated by a protein assembly known as the pre - initiation complex ( PIC ) 191 ( see the figure ) . Each of the factors that constitute the PIC ( transcription factor IIA ( TFIIA ) , TFIIB , TFIID , TFIIE , TFIIF , TFIIH , Pol II and Mediator ) have varied functional and structural roles 192 , but much remains unknown about how the PIC functions as a unit . Biophysical studies have begun to determine the overall structure and architecture of the PIC . Although current results suggest different architectures for human and yeast PICs 193 , 194 , this remains an area of active investigation 195 . Finally , even though the PIC can function in various forms ( for example , the PIC contains simpler TFIID assemblies in differentiated cells ) , it represents a fundamental intermediate in transcription initiation that is targeted by an array of general and gene - specific regulatory factors . The asterisk ( see the figure ) indicates that TFIID contains a TATA - binding protein ( TBP ) and 13 different TBP - associated factors ( TAFs ) , 5 of which dimerize ( TAF4 , TAF5 , TAF6 , TAF9 and TAF12 ) 196 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 16 | MARCH 2015 | 159 F O C U S O N T r a N S C r i p T i O N © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology CDK8 – Mediator SEC RNA II D II D II D II H II H P o l II P o l II P o l II IIFIIA IIE CDK8 module CDK8 module IIB M e d i a t o r DNA Promoter M e d i a t o r Ser2 phosphorylation CDK9 a b c 1 TFIIH phosphorylates Pol II CTD 2 Pol II escapes promoter Pol II CTD Sequential chromatin immunoprecipitation ( ChIP – reChIP ) . Two sequential ChIP experiments designed to determine the co‑occupancy of two different proteins at or around the same DNA sequence . that remain following Pol II promoter escape 110 . These scaffold assemblies appear to be stabilized by DNA - binding TFs and retain most PIC factors , including Mediator , but lack Pol II and TFIIF ( FIG . 2c ) . Although TF turnover via proteasome - mediated degradation represents one simple means to regulate transcription re - initiation ( that is , additional TFs must then be physically present to replace degraded TFs ) 111 , the CDK8 module alone , and as part of the CDK8 – Mediator complex , may also have an important role 18 . ChIP – seq data suggest that the CDK8 module colocal - izes with Mediator across the genome 28 , 102 ; however , sequential chromatin immunoprecipitation ( ChIP – reChIP ) and biochemical assays indicate that the association of the CDK8 module with Mediator is transient and revers - ible 18 , 112 . In stark contrast to the core Mediator complex , CDK8 – Mediator does not interact with Pol II or the Pol II CTD 42 , 43 ; thus , CDK8 module – Mediator bind - ing will prevent Pol II from being incorporated into the PIC 18 , 113 . In addition , the occupancy of CDK8 and TFIIH seems to be mutually exclusive at the HIV - 1 promoter , suggesting that CDK8 – Mediator disrupts Mediator – TFIIH interactions as well 114 . Following transcription initiation and Pol II promoter escape , binding of the CDK8 module to Mediator would prevent a second Pol II enzyme from immediately re - engaging the promoter ( FIG . 2b ) . Disruption of CDK8 module – Mediator inter - actions would then be required to enable the PIC to fully re - assemble for the re - initiation of transcription ( FIG . 2c ) . As the CDK8 module can negatively regulate Mediator – Pol II interactions , it is fundamentally impor - tant to understand how CDK8 module – Mediator bind - ing is regulated . PARP1 , which catalyses the poly ( ADP ) ribosylation of proteins , and the FBW7 ubiquitin ligase have been shown to regulate the CDK8 module – Mediator interaction in human cells 20 , 115 . PARP1 pro - motes the release of the CDK8 module from Mediator independently of its catalytic activity 115 . By contrast , ubiquitylation of MED13 by FBW7 ( which required FBW7 to bind to a metazoan - specific phospho - degron motif in MED13 ) promoted the proteasome - mediated degradation of MED13 ( REF . 20 ) . As MED13 directly links the CDK8 module to Mediator 18 , 19 , inhibition of MED13 degradation resulted in an increased level of CDK8 – Mediator in cells 20 . Mediator and chromatin architecture In eukaryotes , genomic DNA is wrapped around his - tone proteins , and this ‘packaged’ genomic DNA is called chromatin . Chromatin provides a general barrier to gene expression ; compared with unobstructed ‘naked’ DNA , histone - bound DNA ( that is , nucleosomal DNA ) can block PIC assembly to suppress transcription . Mediator may simply maintain nucleosome - free regions at key regulatory loci , as demonstrated recently in yeast , in which the occupancy of Mediator at promoters corre - lated with PIC assembly , which seemed to block nucleo - some assembly 116 . This model is analogous to results in Drosophila melanogaster , in which paused promoter - proximal Pol II complexes helped to maintain nucleo - some - free regions to promote transcription activation 117 . Mediator also interacts with the SWI / SNF and CHD1 chromatin remodelling complexes 118 – 120 and appears to contribute to nucleosome displacement during transcriptio n activation in both yeast and humans 92 , 106 . DNA looping . In all domains of life , the 3D organiza - tion of the genome has basic roles in coordinating gene expression programmes 121 . A common theme is the for - mation of loops that enable interaction between linearly separated DNA sequences . The architectural constraints and topological complexity appear to have increased substantially from bacteria to yeast and from yeast to mammals 122 . A general trend towards increasingly larger loops in more - complex organisms ( that is , loops with a greater number of DNA bases spanning the interacting Figure 2 | A simplified model for Mediator - dependent regulation of multiple stages of RNA polymerase II transcription . a | Mediator has key roles in the assembly of the pre - initiation complex ( PIC ) . Mediator helps to recruit RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) and other PIC factors to the promoter 191 . At this stage , the Pol II carboxy - terminal domain ( CTD ) is not highly phosphorylated , but transcription factor IIH ( TFIIH ) phosphorylates it during transcription initiation 80 , after which the Pol II enzyme ‘escapes’ the promoter and begins to transcribe the gene . At some genes , Pol II may pause after transcribing ~ 60 nucleotides 95 ; whether this ‘paused Pol II’ remains associated with Mediator is unknown . b | The cyclin - dependent kinase 8 ( CDK8 ) module may associate with Mediator after Pol II – Mediator contacts are broken , and this may regulate Pol II elongation or release from a paused state at some genes . CDK8 – Mediator may regulate the recruitment or activity of the super elongation complex ( SEC , which contains CDK9 ) to promote Pol II pause release and elongation 27 , 28 . c | As CDK8 – Mediator cannot interact with Pol II , re - initiation of transcription requires release of the CDK8 module . A scaffold PIC complex , which may be stabilized by a transcription factor , could facilitate rapid re - initiation 110 . Dashed arrows indicate enzymatic activity . R E V I E W S 160 | MARCH 2015 | VOLUME 16 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology TF CDK8 – Mediator RNA ncRNA II D P o l II P o l II Promoter DNA Cohesin Enhancer IIA IIE IIB Operons Groups of genes that are sequentially arranged in the genome and that are under the control of a single promoter . sequences ) has been observed , including interactions among sequence elements on different chromosomes in mammalian cells . Gene loops may represent a pre - dominant regulatory mechanism in metazoans 1 , 123 , and 3D chromatin organization may functionally replace operons to facilitate the coordinated regulation of sets of genes that are not adjacent along a chromosome 124 . Although Mediator is not required for the formation of gene loops per se — looping can be mediated by lacR in bacteria , which lack a recognizable Mediator complex — it has a central role in the formation and / or stabili - zation of looped DNA structures in eukaryotes ( FIG . 3 ) . In mammalian cells , long - range looping interactions between enhancer and promoter sequences appear to be important for driving high - level and cell type - specifi c gene expression 125 – 127 . Precisely how these loops are formed and stabilized remains uncertain , but Mediator , in conjunction with other factors , seems to have impor - tant roles 102 , 128 – 130 . Whereas yeast genes are not regulated via long - distance enhancer – promoter interactions 122 , it is notable that mutant forms of Sin4 ( the yeast orthologue of Med16 ) were identified in Saccharomyces cerevisia e that enabled upstream activating sequences to activate transcription at longer distances from the promoter than normally observed in yeast ( upstream activating sequences are normally only 100 – 200 base pairs from the promoter TATA sequence ) 131 . Furthermore , Mediator has been implicated in the formation of looped DNA structures between the 5ʹ and 3ʹ ends of yeast genes 132 . These findings suggest an ancient origin for Mediator in long - range interactions with Pol II . Non - coding RNAs ( ncRNAs ) are key regulators of gene expression patterns and have important roles throughout human development . Mediator’s large size and extensive surface area may allow it to interact with a diverse set of ncRNAs . In fact , some of the biologi - cal functions of ncRNAs overlap with known functions of the Mediator complex , such as their association with enhancer regions and their ability to regulate chromatin architecture . Recent studies suggest that these shared functions may partly result from functional coopera - tion between Mediator and ncRNAs . Indeed , a type of long intergenic ncRNA called activator RNA ( aRNA ) increases the transcription of neighbouring genes 133 . These aRNAs interact with Mediator , potentially via the MED12 sub unit , and this interaction correlates with transcription activation and gene looping between the aRNA locus and target promoters 134 ( FIG . 3 ) . Importantly , MED12 mutants that are linked to developmental dis - orders show a reduced ability to form gene loops and associate with aRNAs 134 . As MED12 is part of the CDK8 module , potential ncRNA – MED12 interactions may help to tether the CDK8 module near the promoter . This could facilitate the reversible ( on – off ) CDK8 module – Mediator interaction at the promoter , thereby regulating Pol II recruitment 18 and / or Pol II elongation 27 , 28 . The transcription of enhancer sequences , which appears to be common in mammals , correlates with enhancer – promoter looping and gene activation 1 , 127 , 135 . In fact , enhancer transcription is considered to be an indicator of enhancer activity ( that is , whether the enhancer will activate transcription at a distal pro - moter ) 136 – 138 . Although the study of enhancer RNAs ( eRNAs ) is in its infancy , several groups have shown that Mediator is required for eRNA - dependent enhancer – promoter looping and gene activation , sug - gesting a functional synergy analogous to aRNAs 139 , 140 . Whereas the biogenesis of aRNAs and eRNAs may be distinct 137 , these findings broadly implicate Mediator – ncRNA interactions in the 3D organization of mamma - lian genomes . Many important questions remain , such as whether Mediator – ncRNA interactions are specific ( that is , if select ncRNA sequences or structures target a specific Mediator subunit ) or general ( that is , if inter - actions are RNA sequence - independent ) , and whether or how ncRNA – Mediator binding might affect Mediator structur e or function . Interactions between Mediator and the Pol II CTD may also help to stabilize enhancer – promoter gene loops in mammals . Whereas the Pol II CTD binds to both yeast and mammalian Mediator complexes 42 , 62 , 64 , the length of the CTD has increased from yeast ( approximately 26 repeats , depending on species ) to humans ( 52 repeats ) . This increase in CTD length correlates with an increase in the length of potential DNA looping interactions ( that is , increased distance between enhancers and promoters in mammals ) . Furthermore , it seems that a longer Pol II CTD is required for cell viability in mammals than in yeast 64 , 141 . As the Pol II CTD serves as a binding platform for RNA processing factors 79 , 80 , a longer CTD could reflect the greater extent and diversity of RNA process - ing events in mammalian cells ( for example , increased Figure 3 | Mediator regulates chromatin architecture . The cooperative interactions between Mediator and transcription factors ( TFs ) , cohesin and non - coding RNAs ( ncRNAs ) seem to stabilize enhancer – promoter loops 102 , 134 , 139 , 140 . An expanding set of factors influence the formation and stability of these loops 1 , and the formation of such structures correlates with high levels of transcription 125 – 127 . As the cyclin - dependent kinase 8 ( CDK8 ) module must dissociate from Mediator to allow RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) – Mediator binding 18 , 19 , a potential ncRNA – CDK8 module interaction , perhaps via the CDK8 module subunit MED12 ( REF . 134 ) , may tether the CDK8 module near the pre - initiation complex ( PIC ) . This could facilitate the re - formation of CDK8 – Mediator complexes following Pol II promoter escape . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 16 | MARCH 2015 | 161 F O C U S O N T r a N S C r i p T i O N © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Pericentromeric heterochromatin Heterochromatin regions near chromosomal centromeres ; the primary sites of sister chromatid cohesion . Telomeric heterochromatin Heterochromatin regions near telomeres , which are repetitive regions of DNA at the ends of chromosomes . reliance on splicing , alternative splicing , alternative 3ʹ end processing , and so on ) . Not mutually exclusive is the possibility that an extended CTD helps to establish long - distanc e enhancer – promoter gene loops that are preva - lent in mammalian cells . In fact , it has been demonstrated that Pol II CTD truncations disproportionately reduce enhancer - driven transcription in mammalian cells , whereas transcription directed from promoter - proxima l elements was not markedly affected 142 . Heterochromatin . In addition to promoting the for - mation of looped chromatin architectures , studies in model organisms have provided fascinating insights into alternative ways by which Mediator regulates chromatin structure . In the yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe , Mediator has been linked to pericentromeric heterochromati n formation 143 . These studies suggest that Mediator coordinates Pol II - dependent ncRNA tran - scription with the RNAi machinery to help to form and maintain hetero chromatin domains 143 – 145 . Similarly , Mediator has been implicated in telomeric heterochromati n maintenance in the budding yeast S . cerevisiae . Using genetic screens and cell biology techniques , severa l groups showed that S . cerevisiae Mediator associ - ates with telomeric heterochromatin and may have basic roles in regulating heterochromatin structure at telom - eres , as well as in maintaining telomere length 146 – 149 . Whereas data linking Mediator to similar functions in mammalian cells have been lacking , it is notable that the D . melanogaster Med26 protein — but not other Mediator subunits — localizes to pericentric hetero - chromatin and appears to interact with heterochroma - tin protein 1 ( Hp1 ) 150 . Furthermore , Med26 colocalized with pericentric heterochromatin on D . melanogaster polytene chromosomes , but other Mediator subunits did not 150 ; this may reflect functional antagonism between Hp1 and Mediator , as seen in human cells 151 . Mediator and signalling cascades Different TFs are activated in response to distinct signal - ling pathways . For example , the signal transducer and activator of transcription ( STAT ) family of TFs is acti - vated during infection , and p53 is activated after DNA damage . As different TFs activate transcription , partly by interacting with different Mediator subunits , specific subunits must be able to convert the biological input ( for example , developmental cues ) to specific transcriptional outcomes ( FIG . 4 ) . In agreement with this , Mediator has been described as the end point of cell signalling path - ways because it represents an ultimate , functional target for TFs 152 . Below , we highlight a few pathways that help to illustrate this concept . TGFβ – SMAD signalling . Signalling through the trans - forming growth factor - β ( TGFβ ) receptors ultimately results in the formation of different SMAD TF com - plexes ( for example , SMAD1 and SMAD5 ( SMAD1 / 5 ) with SMAD4 , or SMAD2 and SMAD3 ( SMAD2 / 3 ) with SMAD4 ) ; these complexes form in response to differ - ent ligands and control processes such as pluripotency or germ - layer specificity during development . For instance , TGFβ signalling promotes the formation of the SMAD2 / 3 – SMAD4 complex , whereas bone morpho - genetic protein ( BMP ) signalling promotes formation of the SMAD1 / 5 – SMAD4 complex 153 . The transcriptional outcomes of TGFβ signalling in zebrafish are shut down in the absence of MED15 , whereas BMP signalling is unaffected 154 . Subsequent experiments confirmed that SMAD2 / 3 must interact with MED15 to activate its target genes , whereas SMAD1 / 5 targets a different , unknown Mediator subunit 155 . The MED12 sub unit , perhaps as part of the CDK8 module , also modulates TGFβ signal - ling by directly binding to TGFβ receptor 2 and inhibitin g its activity 156 . Notably , MED12 regulates CDK8 kinase activity 26 , 157 , and CDK8 - dependent phosphorylation of SMAD1 or SMAD2 / 3 fully activates these TFs while also marking them for proteasomal degradation 29 , 158 . These observations suggest an intricate regulator y feedback involving Mediator and TGFβ signalling . WNT – β - catenin signalling . The WNT – β - catenin pathway is crucial for the development of a vast array of tissues , and misregulation of the pathway has been implicated in a variety of cancers 159 . Genetic studies have shown that the CDK8 module subunits MED12 and MED13 are essential for the activation of WNT signalling in metazoans 160 – 163 , and binding assays sug - gest a direct interaction between β - catenin and MED12 ( REF . 162 ) . In addition , the CDK8 module increases WNT – β - catenin signalling by phosphorylating E2F1 . The phosphorylation of E2F1 antagonizes its ability to repress the WNT – β - catenin pathway ; it usually represses this pathway by promoting β - catenin degradation 33 , 164 . As a consequence , high levels of CDK8 expression can drive colon cancer progression 165 . The CDK8 module therefore facilitates WNT – β - catenin signalling by two mechanisms : mediating the transcription of β - catenin target genes and repressing an opposing pathway through its kinase activity . RAS – ERK – MAPK signalling . The RAS – ERK – MAPK pathway helps to regulate cell growth , survival and dif - ferentiation via a set of TFs termed the ternary complex factor subfamily that function in part through their interaction with Mediator 166 . Specifically , MED23 is required for RAS – ERK signalling through the ternary complex factor ELK1 in mammals 11 . However , certain cell types are able to signal through the MAPK pathway without MED23 . For instance , whereas MAPK signal - ling is almost completely dependent on MED23 in murine embryonic stem cells , knocking down MED23 in MEFs has only a moderate effect . This is explained by the higher expression of an alternative ternary complex factor , ELK3 , in MEFs ; because ELK3 does not stimu - late transcription through MED23 , MED23 - knockout MEFs are still able to respond to MAPK signalling 99 . The ELK1 – MED23 interaction is necessary for angiogen - esis in both MEFs and multipotent mesenchymal stem cells 167 , 168 . However , in mesenchymal stem cells , reduc - ing the levels of MED23 leads to adipogenesis rather than angiogenesis 168 . This difference between RAS – ERK signalling in MEFs and mesenchymal stem cells is also R E V I E W S 162 | MARCH 2015 | VOLUME 16 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology Nucleus p53 IRF7 MDM2 p53 MDM2 TLR MED17 MED23 MED15 MYD88 TRAF3 Frizzled GSK3 β - catenin β - catenin degradation Mediator Cytoplasm SREBP1 SREBP1 Golgi ER MED12 Activation of stimulus - speciﬁc genes W N T SREBP1 Growth and diﬀerentiation Inﬂammationand infection Metabolism Stress attributed to a different ternary complex factor interact - ing with a Mediator subunit other than MED23 ( REF . 168 ) . Activation of the RAS – ERK – MAPK pathway addition - ally leads to MED1 phosphorylation , which increases its association with core Mediator and enhances transcrip - tion in response to specific TFs 169 , 170 . Concluding remarks Because of its myriad roles in gene expression , Mediator represents ‘fertile ground’ on which to cultivate a deeper understanding of transcription regulatory mechanisms . Future work will no doubt expand on the themes dis - cussed here and is likely to reveal completely new struc - tural or functional roles of Mediator . Further studies of Mediator - dependent regulation of chromatin architec - ture and enhancer – promoter gene loops should yield fundamental insights into the functions of Mediator subunits and define additional roles for them in tran - scription regulation . New insights may include roles for Mediator in establishing nuclear domains , such as tran - scription factories 171 , the functional relevance of which is congruent with increasingly sophisticated chromosome conformation capture experiments suggesting that sets of genes can be coordinately regulated via their nuclear colocalization . Interestingly , proteins that bind to RNA or that contain IDRs are capable of forming ‘phase domains’ in vitro 172 , 173 , which provides a means of spa - tial segregation in the absence of lipid membranes 174 . The formation of such structures requires RNA , and clusters of highly active genes would provide high local concentrations of RNA that could help to promote the formation and stabilization of these domains . Mediator binds to RNA 134 , and its large size and abundance of IDRs 38 suggests that Mediator could help to demarcate transcription factories by facilitating the formation of structural barriers in the nucleus . Although this con - cept remains to be tested , it is consistent with Mediator’s known roles in 3D chromatin organization at sites of active transcription 102 , 128 . Recent and future insights regarding Mediator structure and function should provide a framework for the development of methods to manipulate Mediator function for therapeutic purposes . Improvements in the quality of structural data , which will increasingly rely Figure 4 | Mediator as an end point of signalling cascades . Four representative , simplified signalling pathways are shown . Each pathway is activated by different signals ; for instance , WNT – β - catenin signalling is activated during growth and differentiation ; p53 is activated during cell stress ; Toll - like receptors ( TLRs ) are activated in response to inflammation and infection , and sterol regulatory element - binding protein 1 ( SREBP1 ) is activated in response to metabolic cues . Each pathway activates a distinct transcription factor ( TF ) that targets a different Mediator subunit ( Mediator subunits that interact with specific TFs are shown in the same colour ) , which helps to recruit and regulate Mediator activity at select genomic loci . The end result is TF - dependent activation ( or repression ) of a specific set of genes that are important for the response to the stimulus . Owing to Mediator’s role in relaying and integrating these signals directly to the transcription machinery ( including the RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) enzyme itself ) , Mediator can be considered an end point of signalling cascades 152 . ER , endoplasmic reticulum ; GSK3 , glycogen synthase kinase 3 ; IRF7 , interferon regulatory factor 7 ; MYD88 , myeloid differentiation 88 ; TRAF3 , tumour necrosis factor receptor - associated factor 3 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 16 | MARCH 2015 | 163 F O C U S O N T r a N S C r i p T i O N © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved on advances in electron microscopy data collection and image processing , will enhance our mechanistic under - standing of the complex and may identify strategies to target Mediator with small molecules . Although the development of small molecules that bind to specific motifs or domains within Mediator would represent only a first step towards molecular therapeutics , such reagents are likely to serve as versatile mechanistic probes to interrogate Mediator function in vitro and in vivo . Finally , advances in genome editing tools , com - bined with increasingly reliable genomics and infor - matics approaches , should continue to transform our ability to study Mediator function in cellular and in vivo contexts . 1 . Plank , J . L . & Dean , A . Enhancer function : mechanistic and genome - wide insights come together . Mol . Cell 55 , 5 – 14 ( 2014 ) . 2 . Poss , Z . C . , Ebmeier , C . C . & Taatjes , D . J . The Mediator complex and transcription regulation . Crit . Rev . Biochem . Mol . Biol . 48 , 575 – 608 ( 2013 ) . 3 . Ansari , S . A . & Morse , R . H . Mechanisms of Mediator complex action in transcriptional activation . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 70 , 2743 – 2756 ( 2013 ) . 4 . Xu , W . & Ji , J . Y . Dysregulation of CDK8 and Cyclin C in tumorigenesis . J . Genet . Genom . 38 , 439 – 452 ( 2011 ) . 5 . Spaeth , J . M . , Kim , N . H . & Boyer , T . G . Mediator and human disease . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 22 , 776 – 787 ( 2011 ) . 6 . Schiano , C . , Casamassimi , A . , Vietri , M . T . , Rienzo , M . & Napoli , C . The roles of mediator complex in cardiovascular diseases . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1839 , 444 – 451 ( 2014 ) . 7 . Kulak , N . A . , Pichler , G . , Paron , I . , Nagaraj , N . & Mann , M . Minimal , encapsulated proteomic - sample processing applied to copy - number estimation in eukaryotic cells . Nature Methods 11 , 319 – 324 ( 2014 ) . 8 . Malik , S . et al . Structural and functional organization of TRAP220 , the TRAP / mediator subunit that is targeted by nuclear receptors . Mol . Cell . Biol . 24 , 8244 – 8254 ( 2004 ) . 9 . Taatjes , D . J . & Tjian , R . Structure and function of CRSP / Med2 : a promoter - selective transcriptional co - activator complex . Mol . Cell 14 , 675 – 683 ( 2004 ) . 10 . Fondell , J . D . , Ge , H . & Roeder , R . G . Ligand induction of a transcriptionally active thyroid hormone receptor coactivator complex . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 8329 – 8333 ( 1996 ) . This paper reports the first biochemical purification of a human Mediator complex . 11 . Stevens , J . L . et al . Transcription control by E1A and MAP kinase pathway via Sur2 mediator subunit . Science 296 , 755 – 758 ( 2002 ) . 12 . Ito , M . , Yuan , C . X . , Okano , H . J . , Darnell , R . B . & Roeder , R . G . Involvement of the TRAP220 component of the TRAP / SMCC coactivator complex in embryonic development and thyroid hormone action . Mol . Cell 5 , 683 – 693 ( 2000 ) . 13 . D’Alessio , J . A . , Ng , R . , Willenbring , H . & Tjian , R . Core promoter recognition complex changes accompany liver development . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 3906 – 3911 ( 2011 ) . 14 . Deato , M . D . E . et al . MyoD targets TAF3 / TRF3 to activate Myogenin transcription . Mol . Cell 32 , 96 – 105 ( 2008 ) . 15 . Herrera , F . J . , Yamaguchi , T . , Roelink , H . & Tjian , R . Core promoter factor TAF9B regulates neuronal gene expression . Elife 3 , e02559 ( 2014 ) . 16 . Liu , Y . , Ranish , J . A . , Aebersold , R . & Hahn , S . Yeast nuclear extract contains two major forms of RNA polymerase II mediator complexes . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 7169 – 7175 ( 2001 ) . 17 . Taatjes , D . J . , Naar , A . M . , Andel , F . , Nogales , E . & Tjian , R . Structure , function , and activator - induced conformations of the CRSP coactivator . Science 295 , 1058 – 1062 ( 2002 ) . This study shows that the structural state of human Mediator changes upon binding to the activation domains of TFs . 18 . Knuesel , M . T . , Meyer , K . D . , Bernecky , C . & Taatjes , D . J . The human CDK8 subcomplex is a molecular switch that controls Mediator co - activator function . Genes Dev . 23 , 439 – 451 ( 2009 ) . 19 . Tsai , K . L . et al . A conserved Mediator – CDK8 kinase module association regulates Mediator – RNA polymerase II interaction . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 20 , 611 – 619 ( 2013 ) . 20 . Davis , M . A . et al . The SCF - Fbw7 ubiquitin ligase degrades MED13 and MED13L and regulates CDK8 module association with Mediator . Genes Dev . 27 , 151 – 156 ( 2013 ) . 21 . Barbieri , C . E . et al . Exome sequencing identifies recurrent SPOP , FOXA1 and MED12 mutations in prostate cancer . Nature Genet . 44 , 685 – 689 ( 2012 ) . 22 . Li , N . et al . Cyclin C is a haploinsufficient tumour suppressor . Nature Cell Biol . 16 , 1080 – 1091 ( 2014 ) . 23 . Makinen , N . et al . MED12 , the mediator complex subunit 12 gene , is mutated at high frequency in uterine leiomyomas . Science 334 , 252 – 255 ( 2011 ) . 24 . Risheg , H . et al . A recurrent mutation in MED12 leading to R961W causes Opitz – Kaveggia syndrome . Nature Genet . 39 , 451 – 453 ( 2007 ) . 25 . Ding , N . et al . Mediator links epigenetic silencing of neuronal gene expression with X - linked mental retardation . Mol . Cell 31 , 347 – 359 ( 2008 ) . 26 . Turunen , M . et al . Uterine leiomyoma - linked MED12 mutations disrupt mediator - associated CDK activity . Cell Rep . 7 , 654 – 660 ( 2014 ) . 27 . Donner , A . J . , Ebmeier , C . C . , Taatjes , D . J . & Espinosa , J . M . CDK8 is a positive regulator of transcriptional elongation within the serum response network . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 17 , 194 – 201 ( 2010 ) . 28 . Galbraith , M . D . et al . HIF1A employs CDK8 – Mediator to stimulate RNAPII elongation in response to hypoxia . Cell 153 , 1327 – 1339 ( 2013 ) . 29 . Alarcon , C . et al . Nuclear CDKs drive Smad transcriptional activation and turnover in BMP and TGF - β pathways . Cell 139 , 757 – 769 ( 2009 ) . 30 . Bancerek , J . et al . CDK8 kinase phosphorylates transcription factor STAT1 to selectively regulate the interferon response . Immunity 38 , 250 – 262 ( 2013 ) . 31 . Hirst , M . , Kobor , M . S . , Kuriakose , N . , Greenblatt , J . & Sadowski , I . GAL4 is regulated by the RNA polymerase II holoenzyme - associated cyclin - dependent protein kinase SRB10 / CDK8 . Mol . Cell 3 , 673 – 678 ( 1999 ) . 32 . Vincent , O . et al . Interaction of the Srb10 kinase with Sip4 , a transcriptional activator of gluconeogenic genes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Cell . Biol . 21 , 5790 – 5796 ( 2001 ) . 33 . Morris , E . J . et al . E2F1 represses β - catenin transcription and is antagonized by both pRB and CDK8 . Nature 455 , 552 – 556 ( 2008 ) . 34 . Zhao , X . et al . Regulation of lipogenesis by cyclin - dependent kinase 8 - mediated control of SREBP - 1 . J . Clin . Invest . 122 , 2417 – 2427 ( 2012 ) . 35 . Daniels , D . L . et al . Mutual exclusivity of MED12 / MED12L , MED13 / 13L , and CDK8 / 19 paralogs revealed within the CDK – Mediator kinase module . J . Proteomics Bioinform http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4172 / jpb . S2 - 004 ( 2013 ) . 36 . Muncke , N . et al . Missense mutations and gene interruption in PROSIT240 , a novel TRAP240 - like gene , in patients with congenital heart defect ( transposition of the great arteries ) . Circulation 108 , 2843 – 2850 ( 2003 ) . 37 . Mukhopadhyay , A . et al . CDK19 is disrupted in a female patient with bilateral congenital retinal folds , microcephaly and mild mental retardation . Hum . Genet . 128 , 281 – 291 ( 2010 ) . 38 . Toth - Petroczy , A . et al . Malleable machines in transcription regulation : the mediator complex . PLoS Comput . Biol . 4 , e1000243 ( 2008 ) . This study reveals that yeast and human Mediator contain a preponderance of predicted IDRs . 39 . Asturias , F . J . , Jiang , Y . W . , Myers , L . C . , Gustafsson , C . M . & Kornberg , R . D . Conserved structures of mediator and RNA polymerase II holoenzyme . Science 283 , 985 – 987 ( 1999 ) . This paper provides the first insights into Mediator structure and the nature of the Mediator – Pol II interaction . 40 . Cai , G . , Imasaki , T . , Takagi , Y . & Asturias , F . A . Mediator structural conservation and implications for the regulation mechanism . Structure 17 , 559 – 567 ( 2009 ) . 41 . Meyer , K . D . , Lin , S . , Bernecky , C . , Gao , Y . & Taatjes , D . J . p53 activates transcription by directing structural shifts in Mediator . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 17 , 753 – 760 ( 2010 ) . This study gives structural and functional evidence that TF - induced structural shifts in Mediator are required for the activation of transcription . 42 . Naar , A . M . , Taatjes , D . J . , Zhai , W . , Nogales , E . & Tjian , R . Human CRSP interacts with RNA polymerase II CTD and adopts a specific CTD - bound conformation . Genes Dev . 16 , 1339 – 1344 ( 2002 ) . 43 . Ebmeier , C . C . & Taatjes , D . J . Activator - Mediator binding regulates Mediator – cofactor interactions . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 11283 – 11288 ( 2010 ) . 44 . Tsai , K . L . et al . Subunit architecture and functional modular rearrangements of the transcriptional mediator complex . Cell 157 , 1430 – 1444 ( 2014 ) . 45 . Wang , X . et al . Redefining the modular organization of the core Mediator complex . Cell Res . 24 , 796 – 808 ( 2014 ) . References 44 and 45 redefine previous models of yeast Mediator subunit architecture ; reference 44 also provides the highest - resolution structure of yeast Mediator to date . 46 . Dotson , M . R . et al . Structural organization of yeast and mammalian mediator complexes . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 14307 – 14310 ( 2000 ) . 47 . Reeves , W . M . & Hahn , S . Activator - independent functions of the yeast Mediator Sin4 complex in preinitiation complex formation and transcription reinitiation . Mol . Cell . Biol . 23 , 349 – 358 ( 2003 ) . 48 . Sakurai , H . & Fukasawa , T . Functional connections between mediator components and general transcription factors of Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 37251 – 37256 ( 2000 ) . 49 . Sakurai , H . , Kim , Y . J . , Ohishi , T . , Kornberg , R . D . & Fukasawa , T . The yeast GAL11 protein binds to the transcription factor IIE through GAL11 regions essential for its in vivo function . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 93 , 9488 – 9492 ( 1996 ) . 50 . Ansari , S . A . et al . Distinct role of Mediator tail module in regulation of SAGA - dependent , TATA - containing genes in yeast . EMBO J . 31 , 44 – 57 ( 2012 ) . 51 . Lim , M . K . et al . Gal11p dosage - compensates transcriptional activator deletions via Taf14p . J . Mol . Biol . 374 , 9 – 23 ( 2007 ) . 52 . Guglielmi , B . et al . A high resolution protein interaction map of the yeast Mediator complex . Nucleic Acids Res . 32 , 5379 – 5391 ( 2004 ) . 53 . Cevher , M . A . et al . Reconstitution of active human core Mediator complex reveals a critical role of the MED14 subunit . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 21 , 1028 – 1034 ( 2014 ) . This study demonstrates that an active , partial Mediator complex can be reconstituted from the recombinant expression of individual subunits and reveals key roles for MED14 and MED26 . 54 . Imasaki , T . et al . Architecture of the Mediator head module . Nature 475 , 240 – 243 ( 2011 ) . 55 . Lariviere , L . et al . Model of the Mediator middle module based on protein cross - linking . Nucleic Acids Res . 41 , 9266 – 9273 ( 2013 ) . 56 . Lariviere , L . et al . Structure of the Mediator head module . Nature 492 , 448 – 451 ( 2012 ) . 57 . Robinson , P . J . , Bushnell , D . A . , Trnka , M . J . , Burlingame , A . L . & Kornberg , R . D . Structure of the mediator head module bound to the carboxy - terminal domain of RNA polymerase II . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 109 , 17931 – 17935 ( 2012 ) . R E V I E W S 164 | MARCH 2015 | VOLUME 16 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 58 . Bernecky , C . , Grob , P . , Ebmeier , C . C . , Nogales , E . & Taatjes , D . J . Molecular architecture of the human Mediator – RNA polymerase II – TFIIF assembly . PLoS Biol . 9 , e1000603 ( 2011 ) . 59 . Davis , J . A . , Takagi , Y . , Kornberg , R . D . & Asturias , F . A . Structure of the yeast RNA polymerase II holoenzyme : Mediator conformation and polymerase interaction . Mol . Cell 10 , 409 – 415 ( 2002 ) . 60 . Holstege , F . C . et al . Dissecting the regulatory circuitry of a eukaryotic genome . Cell 95 , 717 – 728 ( 1998 ) . This paper demonstrates a global requirement for Mediator and TFIIH for Pol II transcription in yeast . 61 . Myers , L . C . , Gustafsson , C . M . , Hayashibara , K . C . , Brown , P . O . & Kornberg , R . D . Mediator protein mutations that selectively abolish activated transcription . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 67 – 72 ( 1999 ) . 62 . Kim , Y . , Bjorklund , S . , Li , Y . , Sayre , M . H . & Kornberg , R . D . A multiprotein mediator of transcriptional activation and its interaction with the C - terminal repeat domain of RNA polymerase II . Cell 77 , 599 – 608 ( 1994 ) . 63 . Myers , L . C . et al . The Med proteins of yeast and their function through the RNA polymerase II carboxy - terminal domain . Genes Dev . 12 , 45 – 54 ( 1998 ) . 64 . Thompson , C . M . , Koleske , A . J . , Chao , D . M . & Young , R . A . A multisubunit complex associated with the RNA polymerase II CTD and TATA - binding protein in yeast . Cell 73 , 1361 – 1375 ( 1993 ) . 65 . Guermah , M . , Tao , Y . & Roeder , R . G . Positive and negative TAF ( II ) functions that suggest a dynamic TFIID structure and elicit synergy with traps in activator - induced transcription . Mol . Cell . Biol . 21 , 6882 – 6894 ( 2001 ) . 66 . Johnson , K . M . , Wang , J . , Smallwood , A . , Arayata , C . & Carey , M . TFIID and human mediator coactivator complexes assemble cooperatively on promoter DNA . Genes Dev . 16 , 1852 – 1863 ( 2002 ) . 67 . Marr , M . T . , Isogai , Y . , Wright , K . J . & Tjian , R . Coactivator cross - talk specifies transcriptional output . Genes Dev . 20 , 1458 – 1469 ( 2006 ) . 68 . Takahashi , H . et al . Human Mediator subunit MED26 functions as a docking site for transcription elongation factors . Cell 146 , 92 – 104 ( 2011 ) . This study shows a direct role for MED26 in binding the SEC and affecting transcription elongation in human cells . 69 . Xu , M . et al . Core promoter - selective function of HMGA1 and Mediator in Initiator - dependent transcription . Genes Dev . 25 , 2513 – 2524 ( 2011 ) . 70 . Baek , H . J . , Kang , Y . K . & Roeder , R . G . Human Mediator enhances basal transcription by facilitating recruitment of transcription factor IIB during preinitiation complex assembly . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 15172 – 15181 ( 2006 ) . 71 . Johnson , K . M . & Carey , M . Assembly of a mediator / TFIID / TFIIA complex bypasses the need for an activator . Curr . Biol . 13 , 772 – 777 ( 2003 ) . 72 . Jishage , M . et al . Transcriptional regulation by Pol II ( G ) involving mediator and competitive interactions of Gdown1 and TFIIF with Pol II . Mol . Cell 45 , 51 – 63 ( 2012 ) . 73 . Esnault , C . et al . Mediator - dependent recruitment of TFIIH modules in Preinitiation Complex . Mol . Cell 31 , 337 – 346 ( 2008 ) . 74 . Seizl , M . , Lariviere , L . , Pfaffeneder , T . , Wenzeck , L . & Cramer , P . Mediator head subcomplex Med11 / 22 contains a common helix bundle building block with a specific function in transcription initiation complex stabilization . Nucleic Acids Res . 39 , 6291 – 6304 ( 2011 ) . 75 . Hu , X . et al . A Mediator - responsive form of metazoan RNA polymerase II . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 9506 – 9511 ( 2006 ) . 76 . Cheng , B . et al . Functional association of Gdown1 with RNA polymerase II poised on human genes . Mol . Cell 45 , 38 – 50 ( 2012 ) . 77 . Wu , Y . M . et al . Regulation of mammalian transcription by Gdown1 through a novel steric crosstalk revealed by cryo - EM . EMBO J . 31 , 3575 – 3587 ( 2012 ) . 78 . Svejstrup , J . Q . et al . Evidence for a mediator cycle at the initiation of transcription . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 6075 – 6078 ( 1997 ) . 79 . Corden , J . L . RNA polymerase II C - terminal domain : tethering transcription to transcript and template . Chem . Rev . 113 , 8423 – 8455 ( 2013 ) . 80 . Eick , D . & Geyer , M . The RNA polymerase II carboxy - terminal domain ( CTD ) code . Chem . Rev . 113 , 8456 – 8490 ( 2013 ) . 81 . Boeing , S . , Rigault , C . , Heidemann , M . , Eick , D . & Meisterernst , M . RNA polymerase II C - terminal heptarepeat domain Ser - 7 phosphorylation is established in a mediator - dependent fashion . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 188 – 196 ( 2010 ) . 82 . Nair , D . , Kim , Y . & Myers , L . C . Mediator and TFIIH govern carboxy - terminal domain - dependent transcription in yeast extracts . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 33739 – 33748 ( 2005 ) . 83 . Jeronimo , C . & Robert , F . Kin28 regulates the transient association of Mediator with core promoters . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 21 , 449 – 455 ( 2014 ) . 84 . Wong , K . H . , Jin , Y . & Struhl , K . TFIIH phosphorylation of the Pol II CTD stimulates mediator dissociation from the preinitiation complex and promoter escape . Mol . Cell 54 , 601 – 612 ( 2014 ) . 85 . Rhee , H . S . & Pugh , B . F . Genome - wide structure and organization of eukaryotic pre - initiation complexes . Nature 483 , 295 – 301 ( 2012 ) . 86 . Lee , S . K . , Chen , X . , Huang , L . & Stargell , L . A . The head module of Mediator directs activation of preloaded RNAPII in vivo . Nucleic Acids Res . 41 , 10124 – 10134 ( 2013 ) . 87 . Core , L . J . , Waterfall , J . J . & Lis , J . T . Nascent RNA sequencing reveals widespread pausing and divergent initiation at human promoters . Science 322 , 1845 – 1848 ( 2008 ) . 88 . Seila , A . C . et al . Divergent transcription from active promoters . Science 322 , 1849 – 1851 ( 2008 ) . 89 . Guenther , M . G . , Levine , S . S . , Boyer , L . A . , Jaenisch , R . & Young , R . A . A chromatin landmark and transcription initiation at most promoters in human cells . Cell 130 , 77 – 88 ( 2007 ) . 90 . Muse , G . W . et al . RNA polymerase is poised for activation across the genome . Nature Genet . 39 , 1507 – 1511 ( 2007 ) . 91 . Zeitlinger , J . et al . RNA polymerase stalling at developmental control genes in the Drosophila melanogaster embryo . Nature Genet . 39 , 1512 – 1516 ( 2007 ) . 92 . Kremer , S . B . et al . Role of Mediator in regulating Pol II elongation and nucleosome displacement in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Genetics 191 , 95 – 106 ( 2012 ) . 93 . Malik , S . , Wallberg , A . E . , Kang , Y . K . & Roeder , R . G . TRAP / SMCC / mediator - dependent transcriptional activation from DNA and chromatin templates by orphan nuclear receptor hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 . Mol . Cell . Biol . 22 , 5626 – 5637 ( 2002 ) . 94 . Wang , G . et al . Mediator requirement for both recruitment and postrecruitment steps in transcription initiation . Mol . Cell 17 , 683 – 694 ( 2005 ) . 95 . Adelman , K . & Lis , J . T . Promoter - proximal pausing of RNA polymerase II : emerging roles in metazoans . Nature Rev . Genet . 13 , 720 – 731 ( 2012 ) . 96 . Lin , C . et al . AFF4 , a component of the ELL / P - TEFb elongation complex and a shared subunit of MLL chimeras , can link transcription elongation to leukemia . Mol . Cell 37 , 429 – 437 ( 2010 ) . 97 . Luo , Z . , Lin , C . & Shilatifard , A . The super elongation complex ( SEC ) family in transcriptional control . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 13 , 543 – 547 ( 2012 ) . 98 . Paoletti , A . C . et al . Quantitative proteomic analysis of distinct mammalian Mediator complexes using normalized spectral abundance factors . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 18928 – 18933 ( 2006 ) . 99 . Balamotis , M . A . et al . Complexity in transcription control at the activation domain – Mediator interface . Sci . Signal . 2 , ra20 ( 2009 ) . 100 . Park , J . M . , Werner , J . , Kim , J . M . , Lis , J . T . & Kim , Y . J . Mediator , not holoenzyme , is directly recruited to the heat shock promoter by HSF upon heat shock . Mol . Cell 8 , 9 – 19 ( 2001 ) . This is one of the first studies to suggest a role for Mediator in regulating paused or ‘post - initiated’ Pol II . 101 . Schaaf , C . A . et al . Genome - wide control of RNA polymerase II activity by cohesin . PLoS Genet . 9 , e1003382 ( 2013 ) . 102 . Kagey , M . et al . Mediator and cohesin connect gene expression and chromatin architecture . Nature 467 , 430 – 435 ( 2010 ) . This study uncovers a role for Mediator in regulating genome architecture , implicating Mediator and cohesin in the formation and / or maintenance of enhancer – promoter gene loops in mammalian cells . 103 . Lin , C . , Garruss , A . S . , Luo , Z . , Guo , F . & Shilatifard , A . The RNA Pol II elongation factor Ell3 marks enhancers in ES cells and primes future gene activation . Cell 152 , 144 – 156 ( 2013 ) . 104 . Guglielmi , B . , Soutourina , J . , Esnault , C . & Werner , M . TFIIS elongation factor and Mediator act in conjunction during transcription initiation in vivo . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 16062 – 16067 ( 2007 ) . 105 . Kim , B . et al . The transcription elongation factor TFIIS is a component of RNA polymerase II preinitiation complexes . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 16068 – 16073 ( 2007 ) . 106 . Nock , A . , Ascano , J . M . , Barrero , M . J . & Malik , S . Mediator - regulated transcription through the + 1 nucleosome . Mol . Cell 48 , 837 – 848 ( 2012 ) . 107 . Malik , S . , Barrero , M . J . & Jones , T . Identification of a regulator of transcription elongation as an accessory factor for the human Mediator coactivator . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 6182 – 6187 ( 2007 ) . 108 . Larson , D . R . et al . Direct observation of frequency modulated transcription in single cells using light activation . ELife 2 , e00750 ( 2013 ) . 109 . Sandaltzopoulos , R . & Becker , P . B . Heat shock factor increases the reinitiation rate from potentiated chromatin templates . Mol . Cell . Biol . 18 , 361 – 367 ( 1998 ) . 110 . Yudkovsky , N . , Ranish , J . A . & Hahn , S . A transcription reinitiation intermediate that is stabilized by activator . Nature 408 , 225 – 229 ( 2000 ) . This study provides evidence for a re - initiation ‘scaffold’ form of PIC that contains most PIC factors , including Mediator . 111 . Reid , G . et al . Cyclic , proteasome - mediated turnover of unliganded and liganded ER α on responsive promoters is an integral feature of estrogen signaling . Mol . Cell 11 , 695 – 707 ( 2003 ) . 112 . Andrau , J . et al . Genome - wide location of the coactivator Mediator : binding without activation and transient Cdk8 interaction on DNA . Mol . Cell 22 , 179 – 192 ( 2006 ) . This is one of the first studies to reveal colocalization of Cdk8 with Mediator across the yeast genome . 113 . Mo , X . , Kowenz - Leutz , E . , Xu , H . & Leutz , A . Ras induces mediator complex exchange on C / EBPb . Mol . Cell 13 , 241 – 250 ( 2004 ) . 114 . Kim , Y . K . et al . Recruitment of TFIIH to the HIV LTR is a rate - limiting step in the emergence of HIV from latency . EMBO J . 25 , 3596 – 3604 ( 2006 ) . 115 . Pavri , R . et al . PARP - 1 determines specificity in a retinoid signaling pathway via direct modulation of mediator . Mol . Cell 18 , 83 – 96 ( 2005 ) . This is the first study to reveal a potential means by which CDK8 module – Mediator interactions are regulated in mammalian cells . 116 . Ansari , S . A . et al . Mediator , TATA - binding protein , and RNA polymerase II contribute to low histone occupancy at active gene promoters in yeast . J . Biol . Chem . 289 , 14981 – 14995 ( 2014 ) . 117 . Gilchrist , D . A . et al . Pausing of RNA polymerase II disrupts DNA - specified nucleosome organization to enable precise gene regulation . Cell 143 , 540 – 551 ( 2010 ) . 118 . Sharma , V . M . , Li , B . & Reese , J . C . SWI / SNF - dependent chromatin remodeling of RNR3 requires TAF ( II ) s and the general transcription machinery . Genes Dev . 17 , 502 – 515 ( 2003 ) . 119 . Lin , J . J . et al . Mediator coordinates PIC assembly with recruitment of CHD1 . Genes Dev . 25 , 2198 – 2209 ( 2011 ) . 120 . Lemieux , K . & Gaudreau , L . Targeting of Swi / Snf to the yeast GAL1 UAS G requires the Mediator , TAF IIs , and RNA polymerase II . EMBO J . 23 , 4040 – 4050 ( 2004 ) . 121 . Vilar , J . M . & Saiz , L . DNA looping in gene regulation : from the assembly of macromolecular complexes to the control of transcriptional noise . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 15 , 136 – 144 ( 2005 ) . 122 . Levine , M . , Cattoglio , C . & Tjian , R . Looping back to leap forward : transcription enters a new era . Cell 157 , 13 – 25 ( 2014 ) . 123 . Fanucchi , S . , Shibayama , Y . , Burd , S . , Weinberg , M . S . & Mhlanga , M . M . Chromosomal contact permits transcription between coregulated genes . Cell 155 , 606 – 620 ( 2013 ) . 124 . Li , G . et al . Extensive promoter - centered chromatin interactions provide a topological basis for transcription regulation . Cell 148 , 84 – 98 ( 2012 ) . 125 . Deng , W . et al . Controlling long - range genomic interactions at a native locus by targeted tethering of a looping factor . Cell 149 , 1233 – 1244 ( 2012 ) . 126 . Kieffer - Kwon , K . R . et al . Interactome maps of mouse gene regulatory domains reveal basic principles of transcriptional regulation . Cell 155 , 1507 – 1520 ( 2013 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 16 | MARCH 2015 | 165 F O C U S O N T r a N S C r i p T i O N © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 127 . Sanyal , A . , Lajoie , B . R . , Jain , G . & Dekker , J . The long - range interaction landscape of gene promoters . Nature 489 , 109 – 113 ( 2012 ) . 128 . Phillips - Cremins , J . E . et al . Architectural protein subclasses shape 3D organization of genomes during lineage commitment . Cell 153 , 1281 – 1295 ( 2013 ) . 129 . Hnisz , D . et al . Super - enhancers in the control of cell identity and disease . Cell 155 , 934 – 947 ( 2013 ) . 130 . Muto , A . et al . Nipbl and Mediator cooperatively regulate gene expression to control limb development . PLoS Genet . 10 , e1004671 ( 2014 ) . 131 . Dobi , K . C . & Winston , F . Analysis of transcriptional activation at a distance in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Cell . Biol . 27 , 5575 – 5586 ( 2007 ) . 132 . Mukundan , B . & Ansari , A . Srb5 / Med18 - mediated termination of transcription is dependent on gene looping . J . Biol . Chem . 288 , 11384 – 11394 ( 2013 ) . 133 . Orom , U . A . et al . Long noncoding RNAs with enhancer - like function in human cells . Cell 143 , 46 – 58 ( 2010 ) . 134 . Lai , F . et al . Activating RNAs associate with Mediator to enhance chromatin architecture and transcription . Nature 494 , 497 – 501 ( 2013 ) . This study demonstrates that ncRNAs transcribed from distal sequence elements can interact with Mediator to regulate gene looping to the promoter and transcription activation . 135 . Wang , D . et al . Reprogramming transcription by distinct classes of enhancers functionally defined by eRNA . Nature 474 , 390 – 394 ( 2011 ) . 136 . Hah , N . , Murakami , S . , Nagari , A . , Danko , C . G . & Kraus , W . L . Enhancer transcripts mark active estrogen receptor binding sites . Genome Res . 23 , 1210 – 1223 ( 2013 ) . 137 . Lam , M . T . et al . Rev – Erbs repress macrophage gene expression by inhibiting enhancer - directed transcription . Nature 498 , 511 – 515 ( 2013 ) . 138 . Li , W . et al . Functional roles of enhancer RNAs for oestrogen - dependent transcriptional activation . Nature 498 , 516 – 520 ( 2013 ) . 139 . Hsieh , C . L . et al . Enhancer RNAs participate in androgen receptor - driven looping that selectively enhances gene activation . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 111 , 7319 – 7324 ( 2014 ) . 140 . Step , S . E . et al . Anti - diabetic rosiglitazone remodels the adipocyte transcriptome by redistributing transcription to PPAR γ - driven enhancers . Genes Dev . 28 , 1018 – 1028 ( 2014 ) . 141 . Bartolomei , M . S . , Halden , N . F . , Cullen , C . R . & Corden , J . L . Genetic analysis of the repetitive carboxyl - terminal domain of the largest subunit of mouse RNA polymerase II . Mol . Cell . Biol . 8 , 330 – 339 ( 1988 ) . 142 . Gerber , H . P . et al . RNA polymerase II C - terminal domain required for enhancer - driven transcription . Nature 374 , 660 – 662 ( 1995 ) . 143 . Oya , E . et al . Mediator directs co - transcriptional heterochromatin assembly by RNA interference - dependent and - independent pathways . PLoS Genet . 9 , e1003677 ( 2013 ) . 144 . Carlsten , J . O . et al . Mediator promotes CENP - a incorporation at fission yeast centromeres . Mol . Cell . Biol . 32 , 4035 – 4043 ( 2012 ) . 145 . Thorsen , M . , Hansen , H . , Venturi , M . , Holmberg , S . & Thon , G . Mediator regulates non - coding RNA transcription at fission yeast centromeres . Epigenetics Chromatin 5 , 19 ( 2012 ) . 146 . Lenstra , T . L . et al . The specificity and topology of chromatin interaction pathways in yeast . Mol . Cell 42 , 536 – 549 ( 2011 ) . 147 . Peng , J . & Zhou , J . Q . The tail - module of yeast Mediator complex is required for telomere heterochromatin maintenance . Nucleic Acids Res . 40 , 581 – 593 ( 2012 ) . 148 . Suzuki , Y . & Nishizawa , M . The yeast GAL11 protein is involved in regulation of the structure and the position effect of telomeres . Mol . Cell . Biol . 14 , 3791 – 3799 ( 1994 ) . 149 . Zhu , X . et al . Mediator influences telomeric silencing and cellular life span . Mol . Cell . Biol . 31 , 2413 – 2421 ( 2011 ) . 150 . Marr , S . K . , Lis , J . T . , Treisman , J . E . & Marr , M . T . The metazoan - specific Mediator subunit 26 ( Med26 ) is essential for viability and is found at both active genes and pericentric heterochromatin in Drosophila . Mol . Cell . Biol . 34 , 2710 – 2720 ( 2014 ) . 151 . Smallwood , A . , Black , J . C . , Tanese , N . , Pradhan , S . & Carey , M . HP1 - mediated silencing targets Pol II coactivator complexes . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 15 , 318 – 320 ( 2008 ) . 152 . Jiang , Y . W . et al . Mammalian mediator of transcriptional regulation and its possible role as an end - point of signal transduction pathways . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 8538 – 8543 ( 1998 ) . 153 . Gaarenstroom , T . & Hill , C . S . TGF - β signaling to chromatin : how SMADs regulate transcription during self - renewal and differentiation . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 32 , 107 – 118 ( 2014 ) . 154 . Kato , Y . , Habas , R . , Katsuyama , Y . , Naar , A . & He , X . A component of the ARC / Mediator complex required for TGF β / Nodal signalling . Nature 418 , 641 – 646 ( 2002 ) . 155 . Zhao , M . et al . Mediator MED15 modulates transforming growth factor β ( TGF β ) / Smad signaling and breast cancer cell metastasis . J . Mol . Cell . Biol . 5 , 57 – 60 ( 2013 ) . 156 . Huang , S . et al . MED12 controls the response to multiple cancer drugs through regulation of TGF - β receptor signaling . Cell 151 , 937 – 950 ( 2012 ) . 157 . Knuesel , M . T . , Meyer , K . D . , Donner , A . J . , Espinosa , J . M . & Taatjes , D . J . The human CDK8 subcomplex is a histone kinase that requires Med12 for activity and can function independently of Mediator . Mol . Cell . Biol . 29 , 650 – 661 ( 2009 ) . 158 . Gao , S . et al . Ubiquitin ligase Nedd4L targets activated Smad2 / 3 to limit TGF - β signaling . Mol . Cell 36 , 457 – 468 ( 2009 ) . 159 . Kahn , M . Can we safely target the WNT pathway ? Nature Rev . Drug Discov . 13 , 513 – 532 ( 2014 ) . 160 . Carrera , I . , Janody , F . , Leeds , N . , Duveau , F . & Treisman , J . E . Pygopus activates Wingless target gene transcription through the mediator complex subunits Med12 and Med13 . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 6644 – 6649 ( 2008 ) . 161 . Rocha , P . P . , Scholze , M . , Bleiss , W . & Schrewe , H . Med12 is essential for early mouse development and for canonical Wnt and Wnt / PCP signaling . Development 137 , 2723 – 2731 ( 2010 ) . 162 . Kim , S . , Xu , X . , Hecht , A . & Boyer , T . G . Mediator is a transducer of Wnt / β - catenin signaling . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 14066 – 14075 ( 2006 ) . 163 . Zhang , H . & Emmons , S . W . A C . elegans mediator protein confers regulatory selectivity on lineage - specific expression of a transcription factor gene . Genes Dev . 14 , 2161 – 2172 ( 2000 ) . 164 . Zhao , J . , Ramos , R . & Demma , M . CDK8 regulates E2F1 transcriptional activity through S375 phosphorylation . Oncogene 32 , 3520 – 3530 ( 2012 ) . 165 . Firestein , R . et al . CDK8 is a colorectal cancer oncogene that regulates β - catenin activity . Nature 455 , 547 – 551 ( 2008 ) . References 33 and 165 identify CDK8 as a colon cancer oncogene . 166 . Kasza , A . Signal - dependent Elk - 1 target genes involved in transcript processing and cell migration . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1829 , 1026 – 1033 ( 2013 ) . 167 . Wang , W . et al . Mediator MED23 links insulin signaling to the adipogenesis transcription cascade . Dev . Cell 16 , 764 – 771 ( 2009 ) . 168 . Yin , J . W . et al . Mediator MED23 plays opposing roles in directing smooth muscle cell and adipocyte differentiation . Genes Dev . 26 , 2192 – 2205 ( 2012 ) . 169 . Belakavadi , M . , Pandey , P . K . , Vijayvargia , R . & Fondell , J . D . MED1 phosphorylation promotes its association with Mediator : implications for nuclear receptor signaling . Mol . Cell . Biol . 28 , 3932 – 3942 ( 2008 ) . 170 . Pandey , P . K . et al . Activation of TRAP / Mediator subunit TRAP220 / Med1 is regulated by mitogen - activated protein kinase - dependent phosphorylation . Mol . Cell . Biol . 25 , 10695 – 10710 ( 2005 ) . 171 . Papantonis , A . & Cook , P . R . Transcription factories : genome organization and gene regulation . Chem . Rev . 113 , 8683 – 8705 ( 2013 ) . 172 . Han , T . W . et al . Cell - free formation of RNA granules : bound RNAs identify features and components of cellular assemblies . Cell 149 , 768 – 779 ( 2012 ) . 173 . Kato , M . et al . Cell - free formation of RNA granules : low complexity sequence domains form dynamic fibers within hydrogels . Cell 149 , 753 – 767 ( 2012 ) . 174 . Tompa , P . Hydrogel formation by multivalent IDPs : a reincarnation of the microtrabecular lattice ? Intrinsically Disordered Proteins 1 , e24068 ( 2013 ) . 175 . Takagi , Y . & Kornberg , R . D . Mediator as a general transcription factor . J . Biol . Chem . 281 , 80 – 89 ( 2006 ) . 176 . Bourbon , H . M . Comparative genomics supports a deep evolutionary origin for the large , four - module transcriptional mediator complex . Nucleic Acids Res . 36 , 3993 – 4008 ( 2008 ) . 177 . van der Lee , R . et al . Classification of intrinsically disordered regions and proteins . Chem . Rev . 114 , 6589 – 6631 ( 2014 ) . 178 . Madhani , H . D . The frustrated gene : origins of eukaryotic gene expression . Cell 155 , 744 – 749 ( 2013 ) . 179 . Kuuluvainen , E . et al . Cyclin - dependent kinase 8 module expression profiling reveals requirement of Mediator subunits 12 and 13 for transcription of Serpent - dependent innate immunity genes in Drosophila . J . Biol . Chem . 289 , 16252 – 16261 ( 2014 ) . 180 . Napoli , C . , Sessa , M . , Infante , T . & Casamassimi , A . Unraveling framework of the ancestral Mediator complex in human diseases . Biochimie 94 , 579 – 587 ( 2012 ) . 181 . Phillips , A . J . & Taatjes , D . J . Small molecule probes to target the human Mediator complex . Isr . J . Chem . 53 , 588 – 595 ( 2013 ) . 182 . Milbradt , A . G . et al . Structure of the VP16 transactivator target in the Mediator . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 18 , 410 – 415 ( 2011 ) . 183 . Vojnic , E . et al . Structure and VP16 binding of the Mediator Med25 activator interaction domain . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 18 , 404 – 409 ( 2011 ) . 184 . Yang , F . et al . An ARC / Mediator subunit required for SREBP control of cholesterol and lipid homeostasis . Nature 442 , 700 – 704 ( 2006 ) . 185 . Loven , J . et al . Selective inhibition of tumor oncogenes by disruption of super - enhancers . Cell 153 , 320 – 334 ( 2013 ) . 186 . Whyte , W . A . et al . Master transcription factors and mediator establish super - enhancers at key cell identity genes . Cell 153 , 307 – 319 ( 2013 ) . 187 . Gerstein , M . B . et al . Integrative analysis of the Caenorhabditis elegans genome by the modENCODE project . Science 330 , 1775 – 1787 ( 2010 ) . 188 . modENCODE Consortium et al . Identification of functional elements and regulatory circuits by Drosophila modENCODE . Science 330 , 1787 – 1797 ( 2010 ) . 189 . Li , Q . , Peterson , K . R . , Fang , X . & Stamatoyannopoulos , G . Locus control regions . Blood 100 , 3077 – 3086 ( 2002 ) . 190 . Darnell , J . E . Jr . Reflections on the history of pre - mRNA processing and highlights of current knowledge : a unified picture . RNA 19 , 443 – 460 ( 2013 ) . 191 . Grunberg , S . & Hahn , S . Structural insights into transcription initiation by RNA polymerase II . Trends Biochem . Sci . 38 , 603 – 611 ( 2013 ) . 192 . Thomas , M . C . & Chiang , C . M . The general transcription machinery and general cofactors . Crit . Rev . Biochem . Mol . Biol . 41 , 105 – 178 ( 2006 ) . 193 . He , Y . , Fang , J . , Taatjes , D . J . & Nogales , E . Structural visualization of key steps in human transcription initiation . Nature 495 , 481 – 486 ( 2013 ) . 194 . Murakami , K . et al . Architecture of an RNA polymerase II transcription pre - initiation complex . Science 342 , 1238724 ( 2013 ) . 195 . Muhlbacher , W . et al . Conserved architecture of the core RNA polymerase II initiation complex . Nature Commun . 5 , 4310 ( 2014 ) . 196 . Bieniossek , C . et al . The architecture of human general transcription factor TFIID core complex . Nature 493 , 699 – 702 ( 2013 ) . 197 . Bernecky , C . & Taatjes , D . J . Activator – Mediator binding stabilizes RNA polymerase II orientation within the human Mediator – RNA polymerase II – TFIIF assembly . J . Mol . Biol . 417 , 387 – 394 ( 2012 ) . 198 . Elmlund , H . et al . The cyclin - dependent kinase 8 module sterically blocks Mediator interactions with RNA polymerase II . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 15788 – 15793 ( 2006 ) . Acknowledgements The authors thank A . Shilatifard and the reviewers for com - ments on the manuscript . They apologize that they could not discuss other important and relevant research owing to space and citation limits . D . J . T . ’s laboratory is supported by the US National Science Foundation ( MCB - 1244175 ) and the US National Cancer Institute ( CA175849 ; CA1707041 ; CA175448 ) . B . L . A . has been supported in part by the US National Institutes of Health ( T32 GM08759 ) . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing interests . SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION See online article : S1 ( table ) ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF R E V I E W S 166 | MARCH 2015 | VOLUME 16 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved