38 Journal of College Science Teaching By George M . Bodner and Marcy H . Towns This paper examines what has happened over a period of 25 years since a separate Division of Chemical Education was created within the Department of Chemis - try at Purdue University . It argues that the faith in the chemical education graduate program that was demonstrated when the divi - sion was created was well - placed , and that chemical education has been shown to be a legitimate area of scholarly inquiry . The chemi - cal education program provides a useful model for other discipline - specific , content - based education research programs such as the School of Engineering Education at Purdue , which recently experi - enced its fifth anniversary . The Division of Chemical Education Revisited , 25 Years Later A bout 25 years ago , a paper appeared in the Journal of College Sci - ence Teaching ( JCST ; Bodner and Herron 1984 ) that re - ported the formation of a Division of Chemical Education within the Department of Chemistry at Pur - due University . This new division was generated to supplement the long - established divisions of ana - lytical , inorganic , organic , physi - cal chemistry , and biochemistry at Purdue . That paper noted that “In creating a division of chemical ed - ucation , the chemistry department showed a certain amount of faith that chemical education is an area of scholarship worthy of the status afforded established branches of chemistry” ( p . 179 ) . We believe that this faith has been shown to be well - placed and that chemical education has become a legitimate scholarly enterprise that deserves to be considered an equal partner among the various branches of the chemical sciences . The goal of this paper is to report to the com - munity of science educators what has happened in the years since the division’s inception , with the expectation that this information will serve as a useful reference for other , similarly intentioned divi - sions at other schools or in related disciplines . What is the Division of Chemical Education ? The term chemical education can mean different things to different people . Chemical educators have been involved in creating new ap - proaches to teaching chemistry at many levels , from high - school through upper - level graduate courses . They have also contribut - The Division of Chemical Education Revisited , 25 Years Later 39 July / August 2010 The Division of Chemical Education Revisited ed extensively to the development of curriculum materials , whether in the form of complete textbooks or individual lab experiments or activities . Some are involved in pre - service teacher training and / or run in - service workshops for mid - dle - school or high - school teachers . In recent years , however , chemical educators have become increas - ingly and deeply engaged in the scholarly investigation of the ef - ficacy of educational approaches , both formal and informal , at all levels of the chemical enterprise ( Bodner and Weaver 2008 ) . The chemical education program at Purdue was initially created to focus on the training of graduate students to become K – 12 teachers or college / university faculty in the chemical sciences . Because this program has focused on gradu - ate students identified as chem - ists , it has been actively involved in promoting discipline - specific , content - based research on the teach - ing and learning of chemistry that leads to MS and / or PhD degrees in chemical education . When the chemical education graduate program at Purdue was first created , only two tenured fac - ulty members ( the authors of the original JCST paper ) were associ - ated with this program . Each of the students in this nascent division was expected to earn an MS degree in one of the traditional divisions of chemistry . They then moved into the chemical education program to work toward a doctoral degree that was conferred from Purdue Univer - sity’s School of Education . At present , the division consists of five tenured faculty and ap - proximately 35 graduate students working toward MS and / or PhD degrees in chemical education . The majority of our PhDs graduate from the Department of Chemistry . As in earlier days , some of our chemical education PhD students come to us after they have earned an MS in one of the traditional research groups . Sometimes , however , the flow has occurred in the other direction ; students who began with an MS in chemical education have completed their PhD in a research group in one of the traditional branches of the chemical disciplines . Perhaps the most important outcome for a successful program is the placement of its graduates . Graduates of Purdue’s Division of Chemical Education have accepted faculty positions in chemistry departments at research - oriented institutions such as Clemson , Dela - ware , Iowa State , and Purdue . Other students have gone on to successful careers in comprehensive colleges and universities such as Akron ; Cleveland State ; Illinois State ; Texas Tech ; and the University of Puerto Rico , Mayaguez . Still oth - ers have gone to predominantly undergraduate institutions such as Grand Valley State , Lander , Manka - to State , and Southern Illinois University Edwardsville . Research interests and ongoing investigations within the division include learning theory , problem solving , improving the teaching / learning of advanced chemis - try courses , distributed cogni - tion , learning with technology , alternative pedagogies , alternative modes of assessment , miscon - ceptions in chemistry , computer - based instruction in chemistry , developing instructional materials , assessing instructional technol - ogy , cooperative learning , labo - ratory - based learning , and online cooperative learning . Growth of chemical education research One way to study the development of a discipline is through an analy - sis of papers or presentations in the field . At the time of our divi - sion’s inception , the few research studies in chemical education were reported primarily at meetings of science educators . Most often , these endeavors were presented at conferences sponsored by the National Association for Research in Science Teaching ( NARST ) . Although the National Science Teachers Association ( NSTA ) has a long history of active conferenc - es , most of NSTA’s work has cen - tered on K – 12 education in the sci - ences . Content - specific research in education is perhaps most ap - propriately disseminated through content - centered meetings , and the American Chemical Society ( ACS ) conferences are the center of the vast majority of presentations for active researchers within any of the traditional branches of chemi - cal research . In 1984 , a half - day symposium on research in chemi - cal education that featured a total of six papers was included for the first time at an ACS meeting . To - day , a chemical education research ( CER ) symposium is automatically scheduled for every ACS meeting , and an average of perhaps 50 CER papers are given at ACS meetings each year . Those engaged in the teaching of chemistry have traditionally gathered at conferences such as the Biennial Conference on Chemi - cal Education ( BCCE ) , which has existed for more than 40 years , but for a great deal of that time , presentations at the BCCE focused on the practical matters of teach - ing and professional development . In the summer of 1984 , however , a daylong chemical education re - search symposium was added to the program at the 8th BCCE hosted at the University of Connecticut . Ten years later , at the 13th BCCE at Bucknell University , the chemi - cal education research symposium lasted two days . Twenty years after that first half - day sympo - sium , at the 18th BCCE at Iowa State in 2004 , there were six half - day sessions devoted to chemical education research , with 35 papers 40 Journal of College Science Teaching from 20 different institutions . Presentations clearly involving chemical education research also appeared within 10 of the other conference symposia . At one time , papers on chemical education research were published in the Journal of Research in Sci - ence Teaching , or possibly Science Education . Although the Journal of Chemical Education has a long and distinguished history , few of the papers published in the early years of that journal included a fully developed research protocol . Eventually , a research in chemical education column was added to this journal . Today papers involv - ing active and effective research into chemical education appear in each of these journals , as well as in JCST ’s Research and Teaching column , The Chemical Educator , Chemical Education Research and Practice ( published by the Royal Society of Chemistry as a continu - ation of a journal once known as University Chemistry Education ) , Biochemistry and Molecular Biol - ogy Education ( published by the American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology ) , and other journals as well . Content - based education research The graduate students in our pro - gram who receive PhDs from the Department of Chemistry fulfill all of the requirements for that de - gree . This includes the successful completion of appropriate graduate - level coursework in the estab - lished areas of chemistry ( organic , inorganic , physical , analytical or biochemistry ) ; passing a series of cumulative exams in one of these traditional subdisciplines ; and suc - cessful development , presentation , and defense of an original research proposal , in addition to the comple - tion and successful defense of their PhD dissertation . A list of the re - search topics undertaken by the graduate students associated with the chemical education program at Purdue who have graduated in the last 30 years can be found in Table 1 . For clarity , these have been or - ganized into eight general themes : laboratory - based instruction , teach - ers’ understanding , students’ un - derstanding , problem solving , alternative modes of instruction , computer - based instruction , re - search in advanced - level courses , and content - based research in other disciplines . If one includes PhDs awarded by faculty in the Depart - ment of Chemistry at Purdue in the years before the chemical education was formally established , more than 60 PhD degrees have been awarded at Purdue in this emerging field . Some of the work on which these degrees are based could have been done in a traditional science education program by graduate students with a strong undergradu - ate background in chemistry . How - ever , the creation of a Division of Chemical Education within a large , research - oriented Depart - ment of Chemistry has facilitated the growth of effective , collabora - tive research on the teaching and learning of chemistry in advanced courses . This work requires both extensive graduate - level training of the investigator in one or more traditional areas of chemistry and access to practicing chemists and faculty members who are willing to collaborate on research of this nature ( Bodner and Weaver 2008 ) . Brief descriptions of several recent studies carried out at Purdue might best illustrate what can be achieved through collaborative , team - based , discipline - specific , content - based research . The following examples illustrate some of the contribu - tions that have stemmed from work in only one group within the chemical education program at Purdue . Similar stories , with similarly powerful outcomes , can be found in each of the research groups active within the chemical education division . David Gardner had majored in physics as an undergraduate . He came to graduate school in the De - partment of Chemistry at Purdue and wrote an MS thesis in solid - state chemistry ( Gardner 2000 ) before he started work toward his PhD in chemical education . His dis - sertation ( Gardner 2002 ) focused on the experiences of students learning quantum mechanics . The work in - volved extensive classroom obser - vations as well as both traditional qualitative interviews and more loosely organized tutor sessions / interviews with students enrolled in either a quantum mechanics course for junior physics majors , the sec - ond half of a physical chemistry course for chemistry majors , or a one - semester introduction to quan - tum mechanics taken by students from chemical engineering . The nature of this study required an interviewer with sufficient con - tent knowledge to act as a tutor in quantum mechanics and to analyze the data that eventually produced insight into the phenomenon known as a “problem - solving mindset” that many chemistry students bring to quantum mechanics courses ( Gardner and Bodner 2007 ) . Both the analysis of the data collected in this study and the validity of its con - clusions were significantly aided by the presence on the dissertation committee of four faculty who not only taught physical chemistry but were actively involved in research within this content domain . During the course of her PhD work , MaryKay Orgill had the opportunity to teach half of the lectures in both a junior - level bio - chemistry course and a graduate - level course on biotechnology . She was therefore in an excellent posi - tion to complete a study of the use 41 July / August 2010 The Division of Chemical Education Revisited TABLE 1 PhD dissertation topics . Laboratory - based instruction Designing general chemistry laboratory experiments that enhance cognitive development from a Piagetian perspec - tive ; the effect of structured writing on achievement , time and accuracy in the general chemistry laboratory ; the efficacy of computer - assisted labs ; what defines effective chemistry instruction in the laboratory ; the student’s perspective of the chemistry teaching laboratory ; the development and evalua - tion of a research - based undergraduate laboratory ; the effect of authentic research experience and inquiry on teachers and students Alternative modes of instruction A comparison of student - directed and teacher - directed modes of instruction for presentation of density to high school chemistry students ; an inquiry into what happens when the lecturer stops lecturing in organic chemistry courses ; a longitudinal study of Action Research as the vehicle for curriculum change in analytical chemistry Teachers’ understanding Prospective elementary school teachers’ understanding of the particulate nature of matter ; how teachers’ beliefs about science and science teaching shape their classroom instruction ; high school chemistry teachers’ perceptions and actions ; how science methods course can enrich the pedagogical content knowledge of prospective chemistry teachers ; the professional development of graduate teaching assistants in chemistry ; high school science teachers’ beliefs about the intended and actual impacts of standards - based reforms Computer - based instruction The effect of drill question sequencing on learning and user satisfaction in computer - assisted instruction in molecular geometry ; integrating the microcomputer into the high school chemistry classroom ; an investigation of the relationship between student cognitive characteristics and the use of hypermedia science tutorials ; an investigative look at the experiences of students using the computer in science classrooms ; student participation in worldwide web - based curriculum development of general chemistry ; investigation of student use of web - based tutorial materials and understanding of chemistry concepts Students’ understanding Use of the learning cycle to promote cognitive development ; students’ perceptions of academic dishonesty in a chemistry classroom ; assessment of the impact chemistry text and figures have on visually impaired students’ learning ; an investigation of students’ degree of concept links as a function of exposure to college chemistry courses ; a case study of a female preprofessional major’s perspective of learning chemistry ; case studies of concept maps from the perspectives of middle - school students ; a phenomenographic study of the beliefs and practices of general chemistry students and faculty members regarding knowledge transfer : a phenomenographic study , ontological categorization in chemistry : a basis for conceptual change in chemistry ; relating macroscopic observations of melting and mixing to microscopic explanations Research in advanced - level courses A study of undergraduate and graduate students’ conceptual understanding of thermodynamics ; learning in quantum me - chanics ; how students use spectrophotometric instruments to create understanding ; using spectral analysis to probe the continuum of problem - solving ability among practicing organic chemists ; the role of analogies in biochemistry ; un - derstanding arrow - pushing formalism from a student’s per - spective ; a cognitive model of second - year organic chemistry students’ conceptualizations of mental molecular rotation ; how students learn to solve organic synthesis problems Problem solving Problem - solving behaviors of concrete and formal operation - al high school chemistry students when solving chemistry problems requiring Piagetian formal reasoning skills ; inves - tigation of variables involved in chemistry problem solving ; implementing instruction to improve the problem - solving abilities of general chemistry students ; the role of beliefs in general chemistry problem solving ; the effect of interactive instruction and lectures on the achievements and attitudes of chemistry students ; a comparison of low spatial ability students’ and high spatial ability students’ representation and problem - solving processes on stoichiometry questions ; the role of multiple representation systems in problem solving in chemistry ; students’ understanding of chemical equilibrium as revealed by algorithmic and conceptual problems ; a phe - nomenographic analysis of how chemistry students study for an exam ; an investigation of the effective aspects of multiple external representations for students learning chemistry Content - based research across disciplines A critical Action Research approach to curriculum develop - ment in a lab - based chemical engineering course ; curricular reform in computer - based undergraduate laboratories via Action Research ; an investigation of the factors involved in self - efficacy belief modification in the first - year engineer - ing experience ; students’ conceptions and problem - solving ability in a modeling - based interactive engagement in an introductory physics course ; similarities and differences in design across disciplines 42 Journal of College Science Teaching of analogies in biochemistry that involved classroom observations , analysis of biochemistry textbooks , and extensive interviews with both students and faculty involved in undergraduate biochemistry courses ( Orgill 2003 ) . She found that analo - gies are useful in promoting under - standing , visualization , recall , and motivation in biochemistry students at all levels , and that students appre - ciate , pay attention to , remember , and use analogies their instructors provide . She found , however , that they would be even more useful if students understood what analogies are and how they can be used to im - prove understanding of biochemical concepts ( Orgill and Bodner 2004 , 2006 , 2007 ) . For more than 20 years , research - ers in chemical education at Purdue have been trying to understand why so many well - prepared , hard - working students struggle with or - ganic chemistry ( Pribyl and Bodner 1987 ) . In recent years , they have probed the cognitive structures that facilitate the mental rotation of a two - dimensional representation of the structure of an organic molecule ( Bodner and Briggs 2005 ) , and studied the factors that influence the ability of practicing organic chem - ists to solve problems that involve determining the structure of an or - ganic compound from 1 H NMR and IR spectra ( Cartrette and Bodner 2009 ) . Particular attention has been paid to understanding what the ar - row - pushing formalism that is used by practicing organic chemists to convey the mechanism of a chemi - cal reaction means to undergradu - ates ( Anderson and Bodner 2008 ; Ferguson and Bodner 2008 ) and graduate students ( Bhattacharyya and Bodner 2005 ) . This work on the teaching and learning of organic chemistry has been facilitated by the fact that Bhattacharyya , Cartrette , and Ferguson had all completed MS theses in synthetic organic chemis - try before they began their work in chemical education and that Briggs had been a practicing chemist in industry before returning to gradu - ate school . New directions in content - based educational research at Purdue It may be of interest to note that a major shift has recently begun in colleges of engineering in the United States that involves the de - velopment of research on the teach - ing and learning of engineering as another example of discipline - specific , content - based education - al research . The magnitude of the change in engineering education is best illustrated by noting that the Journal of Engineering Education was transformed after more than 90 years of existence as a reposi - tory of articles that described the “practice” of teaching applied to a particular course at a given insti - tution into “an archival record of scholarly research in engineering education” ( Lohmann 2003 , p . 1 ; Lohmann 2005 ) . In much the same way that Purdue University took an active role in the development of chemical education research at the tertiary level , Purdue has demonstrated a growing com - mitment to research in engineering education through the creation of a graduate program in engineering education ( Haghighi 2005 ) . Within the College of Engineering at Pur - due , the new School of Engineering Education was given status equal to that of traditional programs in the disciplines of aeronautical , agricultural , biomedical , chemical , civil , construction , electrical , in - dustrial , materials , mechanical , and nuclear engineering . When discussions of the creation of a graduate program in engineer - ing education began , there were five engineering faculty at Purdue whose primary interests were in research - based engineering educa - tion . By the beginning of the fall se - mester of the 2007 – 2008 academic year , there were 24 faculty with a full - time or part - time appointment in the new School of Engineering Education . It is interesting to note that one of these individuals is the dean of the College of Engineer - ing . In addition , faculty centered in other schools at Purdue held joint or courtesy appointments in this program . One of the authors of this paper ( Bodner ) is among this latter group . Currently , 20 students are working toward graduate degrees in this new program . Conclusion Neither chemical education nor engineering education is a new field of endeavor . The Journal of Chemical Education is in its 85th year , and chemical education is one of the largest divisions in the American Chemical Society , with more than 5 , 000 members . As not - ed earlier , the Journal of Engineer - ing Education has been published for almost 100 years , and the American Society of Engineering Education recently held its 115th annual conference and exposition . What has changed in the last few years is the definition of the terms chemical educator and engineer - ing educator . We noted 25 years ago that the term chemical educa - tor “can no longer be used exclu - sively to mean ‘those who teach chemistry’” ( Bodner and Herron 1984 , p . 179 ) . The term chemical educator increasingly encompass - es those who engage in active and disciplined research into the learn - ing and teaching of chemistry at all levels . We would like to suggest that a similar change is occurring in the meaning of the term engi - neering educator ( see Hutchison et al . 2006 ; Hutchison , Follman , and Bodner 2008 ) . 43 July / August 2010 The Division of Chemical Education Revisited In our paper published 25 years ago in JCST announcing the cre - ation of the Division of Chemical Education at Purdue , we noted “Only time will reveal whether what we have done represents a significant step in the growth and development of chemical educa - tion or merely an unimportant administrative reorganization in a single institution” ( Bodner and Herron 1984 , p . 179 ) . The best evidence that content - based educational research programs in chemistry now transcend the boundaries of a single institution can be found by noting that PhD programs in chemistry education exist at Akron , Arizona , Arizona State , Clemson , Colorado State , Connecticut , Georgia , Iowa State , Kansas , Massachusetts—Boston , Miami , Montana , New Hampshire , North Carolina State , North Texas , Northern Colorado , Oklahoma , Purdue , South Dakota State , South Florida , Texas , Texas Tech , and UNLV ( CER Resources 2010 ) . It is our hope that this consider - able success will encourage our colleagues in other science and related disciplines to develop and nurture similar programs . n References Anderson , T . L . , and G . M . Bodner . 2008 . What can we do about “Parker” ? A case study of a good student who didn’t “get” organic chemistry . Chemistry Educa - tion Research and Practice 9 ( 2 ) : 93 – 101 . Bhattacharyya , G . , and G . M . Bodner . 2005 . It gets me to the product : How students propose organic mechanisms . Journal of Chemical Education 82 ( 9 ) : 1402 – 1407 . Bodner , G . M . , and M . W . Briggs . 2005 . A model of molecular visu - alization . In Visualization in sci - ence education , ed . J . K . Gilbert , 61 – 72 . Dordrecht , the Netherlands : Springer . Bodner , G . M . , and J . D . Herron . 1984 . Completing the program with a division of chemical education . Journal of College Science Teach - ing 14 ( 2 ) : 179 – 180 . Bodner , G . M . , and G . Weaver . 2008 . Research and practice in chemical education in advanced courses . Chemical Education Research and Practice 9 ( 2 ) : 81 – 83 . Cartrette , D . P . , and G . M . Bodner . 2009 . Non - mathematical problem solving in organic chemistry . Jour - nal of Research in Science Teach - ing . Published online , December 4 , 2009 . CER Resources . 2010 . Retrieved from www . users . muohio . edu / bretzsl / CER _ Resources . html . Ferguson , R . L . , and G . M . Bodner . 2008 . Making sense of arrow - pushing formalism by chemistry majors enrolled in organic chemis - try . Chemistry Education Research and Practice 9 ( 2 ) : 102 – 113 . Gardner , D . E . 2000 . Combinatorial methods for hydrothermal zeolite synthesese . MS thesis , Purdue Uni - versity , West Lafayette , Indiana . Gardner , D . E . 2002 . Learning in quantum mechanics . PhD diss . , Purdue University , West Lafayette , Indiana . Gardner , D . E . , and G . M . Bodner . 2007 . The existence of a problem - solving mindset among students taking quantum mechanics and its implications . In ACS Symposium Series , 973 , Advances in Teach - ing Physical Chemistry , 155 – 173 . Oxford , England : Oxford Univer - sity Press . Haghighi , K . 2005 . Quiet no longer : Birth of a new discipline . Journal of Engineering Education 95 ( 4 ) : 351 – 353 . Hutchison , M . A . , D . K . Follman , and G . M . Bodner . 2008 . Providing a voice : Qualitative investigation of the impact of a first - year engineer - ing experience on students’ effi - cacy beliefs . Journal of Engineer - ing Education 97 ( 4 ) : 177 – 189 . Hutchison , M . A . , D . K . Follman , M . Sumpter , and G . M . Bodner . 2006 . Factors influencing the self - efficacy beliefs of first - year engineering students . Journal of Engineering Education 95 ( 1 ) : 39 – 48 . Lohmann , J . R . 2003 . Mission , mea - sures , and Manuscript Central ( TM ) . Journal of Engineering Education 92 ( 1 ) : 1 . Lohmann , J . R . 2005 . Building a com - munity of scholars : The role of the Journal of Engineering Education as a research journal . Journal of Engineering Education 94 ( 1 ) : 1 – 3 . Orgill , M . 2003 . Playing with a double - edged sword : Analogies in biochemistry . PhD diss . , Pur - due University , West Lafayette , Indiana . Orgill , M . , and G . M . Bodner . 2004 . What research tells us about us - ing analogies to teach chemistry . Chemical Education Research and Practice 5 ( 1 ) : 15 – 33 . Orgill , M . , and G . M . Bodner . 2006 . An analysis of the effectiveness of analogy use in college - level biochemistry textbooks . Journal of Research in Science Teaching 43 ( 12 ) : 1040 – 1060 . Orgill , M . , and G . M . Bodner . 2007 . Locks and keys : How analogies are used and perceived by bio - chemistry students . Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 35 ( 4 ) : 244 – 254 . Pribyl , J . R . , and G . M . Bodner . 1987 . Spatial ability and its role in organic chemistry : A study of four organic courses . Journal of Research in Science Teaching 24 ( 3 ) : 229 – 240 . George M . Bodner ( gmbodner @ purdue . edu ) is a professor of chemis - try and Marcy H . Towns is an associ - ate professor of chemistry ; both are members of the Division of Chemical Education at Purdue University in West Lafayette , Indiana .