Developmental Cell , Volume 36 Supplemental Information Pro ﬁ lin Interaction with Actin Filament Barbed End Controls Dynamic Instability , Capping , Branching , and Motility Julien Pernier , Shashank Shekhar , Antoine Jegou , Bérengère Guichard , and Marie - France Carlier Supplemental Information Profilin interaction with actin filament barbed end controls dynamic instability , capping , branching and motility Julien Pernier , Shashank Shekhar , Antoine Jegou , Bérengère Guichard and Marie - France Carlier Supplemental Figures Figure S1 . Profilin competes with CP for barbed end binding but does not uncap CP , related to Figure 3 . A . Time course of dilution - induced depolymerization of 2 % labeled pyrenyl - labeled F - actin in F buffer containing indicated amounts of CP alone ( left panel ) or CP + 100 µM profilin ( right panel ) . B . Time course of dilution - induced depolymerization of 2 % labeled pyrenyl - labeled , CP - capped , F - actin in F buffer containing the indicated amounts of profilin . Traces are shifted vertically for readability . C . Measurements of F - actin ( 2 . 15 µM total actin , 2 % pyrenyl - labeled ) at steady state in absence ( blue ) and presence of CP at 4 nM ( red ) and 50 nM ( green ) . The pyrenyl - actin fluorescence intensities are converted into mass amount of F - actin . A B C Figure S2 . Competition between profilin and formin , related to Figure 4 . A . Kymographs of filaments corresponding to Figure 4A . Filaments were grown off immobilized spectrin - actin seeds in the presence of profilin - actin and exposed to formin in the presence of 50 µM profilin for 10s , followed by profilin - actin only . Left panel shows a filament that has not bound formin during the short exposure period and resumes slow growth following removal of formin . Right panel shows a filament that has bound formin as appears from the fast growth following removal of formin . Note that during exposure to formin + profilin , the two filaments depolymerize to different extents , which is also an indication of whether formin is ( fast depolymerization , right panel ) or is not bound ( slower depolymerization , left panel ) B . Biphasic effect of profilin on formin . Profilin increases , then decreases the rate of processive elongation without causing dissociation of the filament from formin . The growth rate of filaments initiated from anchored formins was measured at 0 . 5 µM actin and profilin as indicated . Data are comparable to those obtained with filaments initiated from immobilized spectrin - actin seeds ( Figure 4B ) . Error bars are S . E . M . A B Figure S3 . Inhibition of filament branching by profilin , related to Figure 5 . A . Average velocity of N - WASP coated beads ( closed circles , left axis ) and fraction of motile beads ( open squares , right axis ) as a function of profilin ( conditions as in Figure 5A ) . Error bars are standard deviations . B . Inhibition of filament branching by profilin is not relieved by increasing amounts of VCA . Spectrin - actin seeded barbed end growth was monitored in the presence of 2 . 78 µM actin ( 2 % pyrenyl - labeled ) and 0 . 2 µM VCA and the following additions : none ( dim blue ) ; 32 µM profilin ( dim red ) ; 25 nM Arp2 / 3 ( dark blue without profilin , bright red with 32 µM profilin ; pale and dark green with 32 µM profilin and 0 . 1 or 1 µM VCA respectively ) . Changes in VCA did not affect growth rate in the presence of 32 µM profilin . A B Figure S4 . Filament branching is not facilitated off F - ADP - Pi , related to Figure 6 . Spontaneous assembly of actin in branched filaments is monitored using the pyrenyl - actin fluorescence assay , with or without 100 µM BeF 3 - . The time course of branched filament assembly is not modified by BeF 3 - , a structural analog of Pi . Note the 17 % lower fluorescence of pyrenyl - ADP - BeF 3 - - F - actin as compared to pyrenyl - ADP - F - actin ( Combeau and Carlier , 1989 ) . Normalization of the BeF3 curve restores a curve identical to the control in absence of BeF3 - , demonstrating that an identical number of branching events have occurred in both assays . Figure S5 . The barbed ends of filaments growing in a coverslip - tethered state via a streptavidin - biotin link display reduced reactivity and branching frequency , related to Figure 6 . Time lapse images of assembly of branched filaments with 0 . 9 µM actin ( 10 % Alexa 488 - labeled ) without ( A ) and with ( B ) 7 . 5 % biotinylated actin , 50 nM VCA and 12 . 5 nM Arp2 / 3 complex . Coverslips in A and B were identically treated with biotin - PEG - silane and streptavidin ( see Supplemental Experimental Procedures ) . Filaments grow at 9 su / s ( A ) and 6 su / s ( B ) . B A Supplemental Movies Movie S1 . Filament branching by VCA - Arp2 / 3 complex , related to Figure 6B . TIRFM visualization of the assembly of single filaments branching with 0 . 9 µM actin ( 10 % Alexa 488 - labeled ) , 50 nM VCA and 12 . 5 nM Arp2 / 3 ( corresponding to Figure 6B ) . Scale bar 2 µm . Time in s . Movie S2 . Filament branching by VCA - Arp2 / 3 complex , related to Figure 6C . TIRFM visualization of the assembly of single filaments branching with 0 . 9 µM actin ( 10 % Alexa 488 labeled ) , 50 nM VCA and 12 . 5 nM Arp2 / 3 ( analysis in Figure 6C ) Scale bar 10 µm . Time in s . Movie S3 . Filament side branching by VCA - Arp2 / 3 complex , related to Figure 6D . TIRFM visualization of the assembly of single filaments branching with 0 . 9 µM actin ( 10 % Alexa 488 labeled ) . At t = 0 , 0 . 9 µM actin ( 10 % Alexa 594 labeled ) was flown into the reaction chamber together with 50 nM VCA and 12 . 5 nM Arp2 / 3 . The boxed area is shown in Figure 6D . Scale bar 10 µm . Time in s . Movie S4 . Effect of barbed - end interacting proteins on filament branching , related to Figure 7 . Filament branching by VCA - Arp2 / 3 complex in the presence of 3 µM profilin . TIRFM visualization of the assembly of single filaments branching with 0 . 9 µM actin ( 10 % Alexa 488 labeled ) , 200 nM VCA and 50 nM Arp2 / 3 in presence of 3 µM profilin . The boxed area is shown in Figure 7B . Scale bar 10 µm . Time in s . Inhibition of filament barbed end branching by VopF . TIRFM visualization of the assembly of single filaments branching with 0 . 9 µM actin ( 10 % Alexa 488 labeled ) , 3 µM profilin , 200 nM VCA , 50 nM Arp2 / 3 , 200 nM VopF . The boxed area is shown in Figure 7B . Scale bar 10 µm . Time in s . Inhibition of filament barbed end branching by formin . TIRFM visualization of the assembly of single filaments branching with 0 . 9 µM actin ( 10 % Alexa 488 labeled ) , 3 µM profilin , 200 nM VCA , 50 nM Arp2 / 3 and 15 nM FH1 - FH2 mDia1 . The boxed area is shown in Figure 7B . Scale bar 10 µm . Time in s . Inhibition of filament barbed end branching by 80 µM profilin . TIRFM visualization of the assembly of single filaments branching with 0 . 9 µM actin ( 10 % Alexa 488 labeled ) , 200 nM VCA , 50 nM Arp2 / 3 and 80 µM profilin . The boxed area is shown in Figure 7B . Scale bar 10 µm . Time in s . Movie S5 . VASP competes with filament branching at barbed ends , related to Figure 7 . Phase contrast movies of ActA - coated beads in a reconstituted motility assay containing 7 µM F - actin , 2 µM profilin , 100 nM Arp2 / 3 , 3 . 5 µM ADF and 200 nM gelsolin , in absence or presence of 100 nM VASP . The boxed area is shown in Figure 7D . Scale bar 10 µm . Time in min . Movie S6 . Effect of filament anchoring on barbed end branching , related to Figure 6 and S5 . Filament branching by VCA - Arp2 / 3 complex using biotin - PEG passivation . TIRFM visualization of the assembly of single filaments branching with 0 . 9 µM actin ( 10 % Alexa 488 labeled ) , 50 nM VCA and 12 . 5 nM Arp2 / 3 ( corresponding to Figure S5A ) Scale bar 2 µm . Time in s . Inhibition of filament barbed end branching by filaments anchoring . TIRFM visualization of the assembly of single filaments branching with 0 . 9 µM actin ( 10 % Alexa 488 and 7 . 5 % labeled ) , 50 nM VCA and 12 . 5 nM Arp2 / 3 ( corresponding to Figure S5B ) Scale bar 2 µm . Time in s . Supplemental Table Table S1 . Parameters used in numerical simulations , related to Figure 1 . Rate Constant Value Unit Reference k onATP - actin 10 μM - 1 s - 1 ( Pantaloni et al . , 2000 ) k offATP - actin 1 s - 1 ( Pantaloni et al . , 2000 ) k offADP - Pi - actin 0 . 2 s - 1 ( Jegou et al . , 2011 ) k offADP - actin 5 . 8 s - 1 ( Jegou et al . , 2011 ) K Dprof - ATP - BE 29 . 25 µM this paper K Dprof - ADP - Pi - BE 5 . 9 µM ( Jegou et al . , 2011 ) K Dprof - ADP - BE 28 . 1 µM ( Jegou et al . , 2011 ) k offprof - ATP - actin 5 s - 1 this paper k offprof - ADP - Pi - actin 4 . 7 s - 1 ( Jegou et al . , 2011 ) k offprof - ADP - actin 51 . 6 s - 1 ( Jegou et al . , 2011 ) k cleave 0 . 3 s - 1 ( Blanchoin and Pollard , 2002 ) k BEcleave ≤ 0 . 3 s - 1 this paper k BE profcleave ≤ 0 . 3 s - 1 this paper k Pi release 0 . 007 s - 1 ( Jegou et al . , 2011 ) k BEPi release 1 . 8 s - 1 ( Jegou et al . , 2011 ) k BE profPi release 6 . 8 s - 1 ( Jegou et al . , 2011 ) Supplemental Experimental Procedures Kinetic measurements of barbed end growth rate and J ( C ) plots A filament solution ( 2 . 5 µM F - actin ) used as seeds was diluted into F buffer containing various concentrations of G - actin and profilin . The same 2 % pyrenyl - labeled actin solution was used to prepare the G - actin and the F - actin solution used as seeds ( Carlier et al . , 1984 ) . This low fraction of pyrenyl - actin reduced the bias in the interpretation of the fluorescence changes in terms of amounts of F - actin , which results from the low affinity of profilin for G - actin in which cysteine 374 is modified ( ( Malm , 1984 ) ) . As noted by Bubb et al . ( Bubb et al . , 2003 ) , the error is negligible in the depolymerization assays . Stock solutions of 10 µM MgATP - G - actin were prepared by addition of 20 µM MgCl 2 and 0 . 2 mM EGTA to CaATP - G - actin , and kept on ice for a few hours . MgADP - G - actin was prepared by adding 0 . 2 mM ADP , 20 µM MgCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM EGTA , 1 mM glucose , 1 µM Ap 5 A and 15 U / ml hexokinase to a solution of 10 µM CaATP - G - actin 1 : 1 complex freed from ATP by two consecutive Dowex - 1 treatments ( Mockrin and Korn , 1980 ) . MgAMPPNP - G - actin was prepared similarly except without Ap 5 A and replacing ADP by 1 mM AMPPNP . Hexokinase and glucose were maintained in all AMPPNP - containing G and F buffers to eliminate traces of ATP ( Motojima and Yoshida , 2003 ) , ( Montaville et al . , 2014 ) . Trace amounts of ATP in AMPPNP cause transient ATP - like behavior in bulk solution studies of actin assembly ( Romero et al . , 2004 ) , and are likely to introduce long term ATP effects in TIRF assays , in which the very low number of filaments fails to exhaust ATP rapidly . F - AMPPNP - actin seeds were prepared by adding 0 . 1 M KCl and 1 mM MgCl 2 to a 10 µM MgAMPPNP - G - actin solution . Single filament microscope observations using microfluidics Filament barbed end growth was initiated from immobilized spectrin - actin seeds , by flowing in 15 % Alexa - 488 labeled 1µM MgATP - G - actin in order to reach filaments of ~ 5µm in length . Filaments were then exposed to a solution of various actin , CP , formin and profilin concentrations for 5 minutes before the image acquisition is started in TIRF . Alternatively , filaments were initiated from immobilized biotinylated SNAP - tagged formin ( Shekhar et al . , 2015 ) . For length fluctuations measurements , images were acquired every 30 seconds in epifluorescence exposing anchored filaments for 27 seconds to a solution of a defined actin and profilin concentrations , using 15 % labeled actin , and for 3 seconds to a solution of identical actin and profilin concentrations but using unlabeled actin . Images are acquired during exposure to unlabeled actin , at maximum flow rate to ensure proper alignment of the filament relative to the glass surface and minimize background noise . Fluorescence exposure time is set to 500ms . Images are processed using ImageJ and the KymoToolbox plugin ( available upon request to fabrice . cordelieres @ u - bordeaux . fr ) to obtain length versus time kymographs . Filament length variations were measured by fitting the pixel intensity profile close to the barbed - end by Gaussian survival function ( 8 , 9 ) . Only filaments traces that last more than 5 consecutives images are kept for analysis . Using numpy / python , the mean square displacement is then computed MSD ( ∆t ) = < ( x ( t + ∆t ) - x ( t ) ) ^ 2 > and fitted by ( a * ∆t ) ^ 2 + 2 * b * ∆t + c , where a is the mean elongation rate , b the diffusion coefficient and c a constant that emerge from the experimental noise ( mainly from signal to noise ratio ( originating from actin labeling fraction of actin and background noise ) and unfocusing ) . We ensure that no drift of the setup that would artificially add - up to the mean elongation rate is present , by tracking the position of the pointed end . To analyze the inhibition of CP association to barbed ends by profilin , the elongation of filaments was monitored in epifluorescence using the method described above , exposing filaments to a solution of labeled actin , profilin , and Capping Protein , and to a solution of identical protein content but with unlabeled actin . Filament contrast was improved with KymoToolbox , and a kymograph was generated for each filament using MultipleKymograph in ImageJ . For each filament , the time of the first pausing event was observed directly on the kymograph . The actin concentrations varied , in order to have an elongation rate of approximately 10 subunit / second ( in the non - capped state ) , regardless of the profilin concentration . In the absence of profilin , the rate of capping at 1nM CP was found to be independent of the observed elongation rate ( comprised between 0 . 6 and 1 . 4 subunit / second , using different actin concentrations ) . Numerical simulations Simulations were performed using a Gillespie algorithm , which can be summarized as follows . Based on the simulated filament’s composition , and the nucleotide - state of its barbed end , all possible events ( addition / loss of subunit , cleavage of ATP , etc . ) are listed and their probabilities are computed according to their reaction rate constants . The time of occurrence of the next event is determined following the generation of a random number by the computer program , and the nature of the event that occurs is subsequently determined , following the generation of another random number . The composition of the filament is modified accordingly , and the process is then repeated . For each simulated filament , the total concentrations of profilin and ATP - actin are fixed , and the concentrations of profilin - actin , free actin and free profilin are computed analytically ( using K D = 0 . 1 µM for profilin - MgATP - G - actin ) . The effective reaction rate constants that depend on these concentrations are also computed , assuming that profilin is in rapid equilibrium with the barbed end ( Jégou et al . 2011 ) . For example , the effective ADP - actin off rate constant is v offADP - actin = k offADP - actin + ( k offprof - ADP - actin - k offADP - actin ) [ profilin ] / ( [ profilin ] + K Dprof - ADP - BE ) ( equation 1 ) where k offADP - actin is the barbed end off - rate constant for ADP - actin , k offprof - ADP - actin is the barbed end off - rate constant for profilin - ADP - actin , and K Dprof - ADP - BE is the dissociation constant for profilin at an ADP barbed end . The possible events that can occur are the following . The terminal subunit can dissociate from the barbed end . ATP - G - actin can bind to the barbed end . Profilin - ATP - G - actin can bind to the barbed end . If the terminal subunit is ATP - actin , it can cleave its ATP . If the terminal subunit is ADP - Pi - actin , it can release its Pi . All ATP - actin subunits within the filament can cleave their ATP . All ADP - Pi - actin subunits within the filament can release their Pi . The program keeps track of the nucleotide state of each subunit in the filament , throughout the simulation . Only barbed end dynamics were considered . The initial filament state in our simulations was an ADP - filament with 3 terminal ATP - subunits at the barbed end . In all the conditions that we have used in this article , steady - state was reached within a few seconds . The average elongation rates ( Fig . 1B ) were computed on a population of 50 filaments , for profilin concentrations multiple of 0 . 5 µM . For length fluctuations ( Fig . 2D ) the MSD analysis was applied to a population of 200 filaments , with the same time step as for experimental data . Measurements of unassembled actin at steady state as a probe of the regulated state of barbed end dynamics : barbed end capping , tracking and destabilization . In a physiological ionic strength solution containing ATP , actin is assembled at a steady state in which F - actin co - exists with G - actin . The steady state concentration of G - actin ( often called critical concentration ) is determined by monomer - polymer exchanges at the barbed end pointed ends , which in pure actin are dominated by barbed end dynamics . The concentration of G - actin at steady state is regulated in various ways .  Capping of barbed ends and resulting enhanced sequestration of G - actin Strong barbed end capping proteins like gelsolin bind very tightly to filament barbed ends ( K D lower than 10 - 10 M ) . The total blockage of barbed end dynamics leaves only pointed ends free for monomer - polymer exchanges . The concentration of G - actin co - existing with F - actin thus equals the critical concentration for actin assembly at the pointed end = 0 . 6 to 0 . 7 µM . Sequestration of G - actin ( non - polymerizable monomeric actin ) is determined by the equilibrium between free G - actin and the added sequestering protein . At a total concentration of sequestering agent [ S 0 ] , the amount of sequestered actin [ SA ] is expressed by : [ SA ] = [ S 0 ] . [ A SS ] / ( [ A SS ] + K S ) equation 2 where [ A SS ] represents the concentration of free G - actin at steady state , which itself is determined by monomer - polymer exchanges , and K S is the equilibrium dissociation constant for the SA complex ( K S = [ S ] . [ A ] / [ SA ] ) . The value of K S being generally in the submicromolar to micromolar range , the amount of sequestered actin varies with the value of [ A SS ] . Typically , the amount of sequestered actin increases upon capping the barbed ends . Profilin makes a complex with G - actin that participates in barbed end assembly but not in pointed end assembly . As a result , when barbed ends are not capped , profilin promotes a decrease in the contribution of free G - actin in monomer - polymer exchanges at barbed ends ( Pantaloni and Carlier , 1993 ) , while when 100 % barbed ends are strongly capped , it sequesters G - actin as described by equation 2 .  Destabilization of barbed ends by profilin Profilin at high concentration ( 10 to 100 µM ) binds and destabilizes barbed ends by increasing the dissociation rate of terminal actin subunits . As a result , profilin establishes a high steady state level of polymerizable profilin - actin monomers , and lowers the steady state level of F - actin ( this paper ) .  Barbed end tracking by formins and multimerized WH2 domains in Ena / VASP or VopF / VopL Barbed end trackers like formin and VopF change the kinetics of barbed end assembly - disassembly but by themselves do not affect the steady - state G - actin concentration which remains the same as for free barbed ends ( Pernier et al . , 2013 ; Romero et al . , 2004 ) .  Changes in the steady state level of actin assembly probe the competitive binding of regulators to barbed ends When two proteins that bind barbed ends in a competitive fashion and regulate monomer - polymer exchanges with different specific effects are present together with F - actin , the level of monomeric actin reached at steady state depends on the fraction of barbed ends bound to each protein , that is on the amount of each protein and on their respective affinities for the barbed end . Consistently , measuring how the steady state level of unassembled actin imposed by known barbed end regulator R1 varies upon addition of another R2 provides insight into competitive binding of R1 and R2 to barbed ends . This test is used in this work to analyze how profilin competes at barbed ends with Capping Protein , formins , VopF and VCA - Arp2 / 3 branching machinery . Modeling of polymerization in branched filaments and effect of profilin ( Figure 5C ) The amount of F - actin is computed numerically , for time increments of 0 . 2 seconds . The initial barbed end concentration is that of spectrin - actin seeds . Branching is modeled by considering a constant rate of formation of new barbed ends , per concentration of F - actin , and per concentration of G - actin . To illustrate what would be the effect of profilin on elongation alone , the rate of formation of new barbed ends was left unchanged , and the elongation rate was decreased by 55 % . Photobleaching was taken into account by considering a constant decrease of the pyrene fluorescence efficiency per unit of time and per concentration of F - actin . Analysis of live TIRF recordings of assembly of branched filaments with VCA and Arp2 / 3 complex . The kinetics of single filament assembly in branched structures was monitored by TIRF microscopy ( Olympus IX71 inverted microscope , 60X TIRF objective , cascade II EMCCD camera ) . Coverslips and glass slides were sequentially cleaned by sonication with H 2 O , ethanol , acetone , 1M KOH , H 2 O for 20 min . Flow chambers were assembled and passivated with mPEG - silane - or biotin - PEG - silane in Figure S5 ( Laysan Bio , Inc . ) . To anchor filaments for experiments with biotin - labeled actin ( Figure S5 ) , chambers were washed with G Buffer 0 . 1 % BSA and incubated 30 min with 1 mg / mL streptavidin ( Thermo Scientific ) . In all experiments , following passivation chambers were sequentially washed with G Buffer 0 . 1 % BSA , Fluo F buffer ( 5 mM Tris - HCl - pH 7 . 8 , 100 mM KCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM EGTA , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 10 mM DTT , 1 mM DABCO , 0 . 01 % NaN 3 ) . Assays were performed in Fluo F buffer supplemented with 0 . 3 % methylcellulose ( Sigma ) and with actin ( 10 % Alexa488 or Alexa594 , or 7 . 5 % Biotin labeled ) Arp2 / 3 , VCA , profilin , VopF , and formin at indicated concentrations . The filament being a chiral helical polymer , daughter filament growth following consecutive branching events develops in 3D . Evanescent wave microscopy provides a biased measurement of branching filaments in 2D . Only a minority of branches that grow within the 250 nm distance from the coverslip are fully seen . Filament observation has often been facilitated by anchoring using coverslips sparsely coated with myosin or using a biotin - streptavidin link to biotinylated actin . In this geometry , the rotational freedom and reactivity of barbed ends may be impaired , the growth of daughter filaments that point toward the glass surface is hampered and those that point away from the TIRF plane are not seen . To minimize these drawbacks , and optimize the rotational freedom of barbed ends , the coverslip surface was thoroughly passivated to avoid any adsorption of filaments . Addition of methylcellulose ( 0 . 32 % ) avoided the diffusion of filaments away from the observation plane without inducing detectable bundling . Spontaneous assembly of actin in branched filaments was recorded at 1 µM G - actin ( 5 to10 % Alexa488 - labeled ) , 5 - 10 nM Arp2 / 3 and 50 nM VCA , at 1 frame every 5 or 10 s . The growth and branching of individual filaments into dendritic structures was monitored . It was verified that the rate of filament growth remained constant during the whole recording , testifying that the concentration of actively polymerizing monomeric actin did not decline during the experiment . Due to brownian motion , some branches growing away from the plane of observation often flap down and become visible already with appreciable length at frame n , while only the branch junction was detectable as a bright dot or a kink on the mother filament at frame n - 1 , n - 2 …The bright dot at the origin of these branches was visible early in the closest visible vicinity of the barbed end ( Movie S2 ) . Conversely , sometimes visible daughter branches suddenly disappear due to rotation of the mother filament and re - appear later . These difficulties , linked to the phenomenology of the 3D - dendritic array , preclude an automatic quantitative analysis of the frequency of branching along the filament , and restrict the number of manually accessible parameters describing time dependent branching and growth . Therefore , the mechanisms of filament side branching and barbed end branching were tentatively discriminated using the following parameters ( see text for rationale ) . All movies were inspected frame by frame over periods of 10 min following assembly of the chamber to obtain reliable measurements of distances between consecutive branch junctions on the same mother filament as individual dendritic arrays develop from one filament nucleus . Due to the 2D geometry of observation of 3D branched filaments in TIRF , the ends of the growing filaments often fluctuate off the region of observation , making measurements of the lengths of mother and daughter branches unreliable , while this method was useful in EM observation of samples of branched filaments assembled in 3D in a test tube ( Pantaloni et al . , 2000 ) . We opted for measurements of distances between consecutive branching points as a more reliable parameter . We used Image J to measure first the distance d 0 from the pointed end at which the first branching event B 0 occurred on each primary , so - called « ancestor » mother filament . We similarly measured the distances d i between the consecutive branching points B i - B i + 1 ( i = 0 , 1 , 2 , 3 ) on each mother filament , when multiply branched structures have been formed . As dendritic arborescences develop , each daughter filament becomes a mother filament upon branching , and so on . The distance d 1 thus included i ) the distance between the first ( B 0 ) and the second ( B 1 ) branch junctions on the « ancestor » mother filament ; ii ) the distance between B 0 and the first branch junction ( B’ 1 ) on the first generation daughter filament following its initiation from the ancestor mother filament , the distance between B’ 1 and the first branch junction ( B’’ 1 ) on the second generation daughter filament , and so forth . Most measurements were performed on the first , second and third generation of branches , since the field of view later on became too crowded to extract reliable data . For the same reason , only values of d i ( i = 1 to 3 , sometimes 4 ) corresponding to four ( sometimes five ) consecutive branching events on a given mother filament could be collected with reasonable confidence . Statistical significance of the data was met by cumulating the measurements extracted from five movies of identical samples performed consecutively with the same proteins the same day . Distributions of distances d i collected in each movie ( 35 to 50 measurements of d1 in each movie ) were consistent with each other . The number of collected data declined from d 1 ( N = 200 to 250 ) to d 4 ( N = 40 to 50 ) . We finally measured , monitoring each individual filament frame by frame , how the value of d 1 varied between the time it was first recorded ( upon B1 event ) and the latest time it could be clearly observed before the field of view was obscured by too many branched filaments growing from neighboring arborescent structures ( generally between 7 and 10 min ) . At least 20 measurements of d 1 couples were recorded . These measurements had to be performed manually on a large number of movies ( 5 movies , see Movie S2 for example ) . Measured distances in pixels were converted in nm ( one pixel = 260 nm without zoom , and 162 nm with zoom ) . The three series of data obtained for d 0 , d 1 at early and late times and the d i values were used to discriminate between side - branching and barbed end branching ( see text for details ) . To evaluate the frequency of side branching only , two methods were used . In the first method , filaments pre - assembled from Alexa - 488 - G - actin ( green filaments ) were introduced in the flow cell together with VCA Arp2 / 3 and Alexa 594 - actin ( Red actin ) . For simplicity , the side branching reaction is described as a single step in which association of VCA - Arp2 / 3 complex with the side of a filament generates a branched junction . The frequency of side branching k sb was thus derived from the slope of the linear time dependence of the number of red filaments FY ( t ) initiated from the side of green filaments , using the following kinetic scheme : F + Y  FY d [ FY ] / dt = k sb . [ F ] . [ Y ] equation 3 where [ F ] represents the number of green F - actin subunits , derived from the total length of green filaments , [ Y ] represents the concentration of branching VCA - Arp2 / 3 complex and [ FY ( t ) ] the number of red filaments emerging from green filaments . [ F ] and [ Y ] are constant during the measurement period , hence [ FY ( t ) ] = k sb . [ F ] . [ Y ] t . The fact that the experimental data [ FY ( t ) ] varied linearly with time validates the proposed description of side branching . In the second method , filaments were assembled in the presence of either VopF or formin FH1 - FH2 from mDia1 , which both track barbed ends , and profilin - actin ( 1 µM 10 % Alexa 594 - labeled actin , 3 µM profilin ) , VCA and Arp2 / 3 . In this case filaments branch only from the side of growing filaments . The rate of barbed end growth of filaments d [ F ] / dt = k + B . ( C - Cc ) was measured and was constant , thus ( [ F ( t ) ] =  t , where  = k + B . ( C - Cc ) . Note that k + B differs with VopF and FH1 - FH2 . The number of side branching events was recorded and analyzed as above ( equation 3 ) , but taking into account the linear increase of [ F ] with time , which leads to a quadratic time dependence of [ FY ] . [ FY ( t ) ] = ( ½ ) .  k sb . [ Y ] t 2 equation 4 The value of k sb was derived from the slope of [ FY ( t ) ] versus t 2 . Again the linear experimental t 2 dependence validates the proposed description of side branching . Bead motility assays N - WASP - coated 2µm diameter polystyrene beads ( Wiesner et al . , 2003 ) ( ) are introduced in a motility chamber that contains 7µM F - actin , 50nM Arp2 / 3 , 10nM CP , 5µM ADF and varied amount of profilin . Bead movement is recorded for 40 minutes in phase contrast microscopy taking 1 frame every 20 seconds using Metamorph ( Molecular Devices , Sunnyvale , CA ) . To reconstitute bead trajectories and extract bead mean velocities , bead positions in movies were automatically tracked using ImageJ plugin 2D Particle Tracker from the MOSAIC group ( 10 ) . Only tracked trajectories that last for more than 10 consecutives images were kept for analysis . Beads that display an elongation rate lower than 0 . 1 µm / minute were considered as non - propelled beads . The same protocol was used with ActA - coated beads ( Boujemaa - Paterski et al . , 2001 ; Cicchetti et al . , 1999 ) . For double fluorescence experiments , images were acquired in Epi - fluorescence of motility assays with Alexa594 - Actin and Alexa488 - Arp2 / 3 . The images were processed in ImageJ using the rolling ball background subtraction algorithm to subtract the fluorescence background . The actin and Arp2 / 3 intensity profile was then measured along individual comets ( Wiesner et al . , 2003 ) . Branching density was calculated as a ratio of Arp2 / 3 and Actin along the comet length . For each condition , branching density was averaged over at least 10 comets . SDS - PAGE Analysis Quantitative analysis of amount of monomeric actin in supernatants in various biochemical conditions was quantified via ImageJ plugin for Gel Analysis and appropriate actin standards . Supplemental References Blanchoin , L . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2002 ) . Hydrolysis of ATP by polymerized actin depends on the bound divalent cation but not profilin . Biochemistry 41 , 597 - 602 . Boujemaa - Paterski , R . , Gouin , E . , Hansen , G . , Samarin , S . , Le Clainche , C . , Didry , D . , Dehoux , P . , Cossart , P . , Kocks , C . , Carlier , M . F . , et al . ( 2001 ) . Listeria protein ActA mimics WASp family proteins : it activates filament barbed end branching by Arp2 / 3 complex . Biochemistry 40 , 11390 - 11404 . Bubb , M . R . , Yarmola , E . G . , Gibson , B . G . , and Southwick , F . S . ( 2003 ) . Depolymerization of actin filaments by profilin . Effects of profilin on capping protein function . J Biol Chem 278 , 24629 - 24635 . Carlier , M . F . , Pantaloni , D . , and Korn , E . D . ( 1984 ) . Evidence for an ATP cap at the ends of actin filaments and its regulation of the F - actin steady state . J Biol Chem 259 , 9983 - 9986 . Cicchetti , G . , Maurer , P . , Wagener , P . , and Kocks , C . ( 1999 ) . Actin and phosphoinositide binding by the ActA protein of the bacterial pathogen Listeria monocytogenes . J Biol Chem 274 , 33616 - 33626 . Combeau , C . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 1989 ) . Characterization of the aluminum and beryllium fluoride species bound to F - actin and microtubules at the site of the gamma - phosphate of the nucleotide . J Biol Chem 264 , 19017 - 19021 . Jegou , A . , Niedermayer , T . , Orban , J . , Didry , D . , Lipowsky , R . , Carlier , M . F . , and Romet - Lemonne , G . ( 2011 ) . Individual actin filaments in a microfluidic flow reveal the mechanism of ATP hydrolysis and give insight into the properties of profilin . PLoS Biol 9 , e1001161 . Malm , B . ( 1984 ) . Chemical modification of Cys - 374 of actin interferes with the formation of the profilactin complex . FEBS Lett 173 , 399 - 402 . Mockrin , S . C . , and Korn , E . D . ( 1980 ) . Acanthamoeba profilin interacts with G - actin to increase the rate of exchange of actin - bound adenosine 5 ' - triphosphate . Biochemistry 19 , 5359 - 5362 . Montaville , P . , Jegou , A . , Pernier , J . , Compper , C . , Guichard , B . , Mogessie , B . , Schuh , M . , Romet - Lemonne , G . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 2014 ) . Spire and Formin 2 synergize and antagonize in regulating actin assembly in meiosis by a ping - pong mechanism . PLoS Biol 12 , e1001795 . Motojima , F . , and Yoshida , M . ( 2003 ) . Discrimination of ATP , ADP , and AMPPNP by chaperonin GroEL : hexokinase treatment revealed the exclusive role of ATP . J Biol Chem 278 , 26648 - 26654 . Pantaloni , D . , Boujemaa , R . , Didry , D . , Gounon , P . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 2000 ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex branches filament barbed ends : functional antagonism with capping proteins . Nature cell biology 2 , 385 - 391 . Pantaloni , D . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 1993 ) . How profilin promotes actin filament assembly in the presence of thymosin beta 4 . Cell 75 , 1007 - 1014 . Pernier , J . , Orban , J . , Avvaru , B . S . , Jegou , A . , Romet - Lemonne , G . , Guichard , B . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 2013 ) . Dimeric WH2 domains in Vibrio VopF promote actin filament barbed - end uncapping and assisted elongation . Nature structural & molecular biology 20 , 1069 - 1076 . Romero , S . , Le Clainche , C . , Didry , D . , Egile , C . , Pantaloni , D . , and Carlier , M . - F . ( 2004 ) . Formin Is a Processive Motor that Requires Profilin to Accelerate Actin Assembly and Associated ATP Hydrolysis . Cell 119 , 419 - 429 . Shekhar , S . , Kerleau , M . , Kuhn , S . , Pernier , J . , Romet - Lemonne , G . , Jegou , A . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 2015 ) . Formin and capping protein together embrace the actin filament in a menage a trois . Nat Commun 6 , 8730 . Wiesner , S . , Helfer , E . , Didry , D . , Ducouret , G . , Lafuma , F . , Carlier , M . - F . , and Pantaloni , D . ( 2003 ) . A biomimetic motility assay provides insight into the mechanism of actin - based motility . J Cell Biol 160 , 387 - 398 .