Artifacts in Design : Representation , Ideation , and Process Abstract Artifacts—representations that express properties or captured information—can serve to inspire , represent , and manage the decisions made throughout the design process . This workshop will explore how these artifacts are created , used , and reused during design projects , toward understanding the overall impact on the larger discipline of design . Through active engagement with novel design artifacts and methods , workshop participants will examine , categorize , and evaluate various design artifacts . Keywords design artifact , representation , ideation , process ACM Classification Keywords H5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . General Terms Design Introduction Design is a process of creation , and artifacts are leveraged in various ways throughout the process of design . These artifacts exist in various forms ; some are used as prompts for design research [ 12 ] , while others Copyright is held by the author / owner ( s ) . CHI 2010 , April 10 – 15 , 2010 , Atlanta , Georgia , USA . ACM 978 - 1 - 60558 - 930 - 5 / 10 / 04 . D . Scott McCrickard Department of Computer Science Virginia Tech mccricks @ cs . vt . edu Michael E . Atwood College of Information Science and Technology Drexel University atwood @ drexel . edu Gayle Curtis d . school Stanford University gcurtis @ gaylecurtis . com Steve Harrison Department of Computer Science Virginia Tech sharrison @ vt . edu Jon Kolko frog design jkolko @ gmail . com Erik Stolterman School of Informatics Indiana University at Bloomington estolter @ indiana . edu Shahtab Wahid Department of Computer Science Virginia Tech swahid @ cs . vt . edu CHI 2010 : Workshops April 10 – 15 , 2010 , Atlanta , GA , USA 4445 act as artificial organizational schema imposed as constraints to help the designer manage complexity [ 10 ] . Still others are used to manage both the design process itself and the various thoughts and reflections that occur during design . This workshop will explore how the use and reuse of artifacts in the design of interfaces . Workshop participants will outline the different ways artifacts can be defined and represented , toward understanding the role of artifacts in ideation . It is expected that participants will come to the workshop with expertise in one or more of the key areas of : definition and representation of artifacts , the role of artifacts in design ideation , and artifact - centric processes and tools for design . The Role of Artifacts Fundamentally , artifacts are representations that express characteristics such as the properties of the object itself or captured information such as design constraints . They can emerge naturally during the design process or be created and distributed to others to help inspire new design . As such , artifacts can serve as an ongoing record of what can be and is created through design . During the design process , especially early prototyping phases , designers collaboratively may take advantage of artifacts of different kinds that provide rationale to explain the consequences of design choices [ 11 ] , represent constraints of a possible solution , guide the process of design , or provide inspiration . figure 1 . A collaborative design activity in which the designers are using premade artifacts containing pictures and rationale to create a representation in the form of a storyboard . Pictures are one exemplary form of artifact . A designer might , for example , use pictures of interface elements in a particular context of use ( a car , a house , a boat ) ; this allows the design team to question how physical context affects use , and acts as a provocation to shift perspectives . Another form of artifact commonly used in design is a sketch ; a sketch might be thought of as low - fidelity picture , but another way of thinking about a sketch is as a focusing - tool . A sketch can emphasize particular characteristics while trivializing others [ 4 ] . Still another form of artifact is a video , which can articulate carefully crafted scenes that impact the design [ 7 ] . CHI 2010 : Workshops April 10 – 15 , 2010 , Atlanta , GA , USA 4446 figure 2 . A card from the Creative Whack Pack serves to encourage creative ways of thinking during design . Artifacts are often used in a collaborative sense , as is the case of note cards and post - it notes . Designers may gather insight informally and record these on a series of note cards , or they may formally transcribe an observational study onto a series of post - it notes [ 8 ] . This raw data can then be organized into certain design representations , often with the support of digital tools , such as affinity diagrams [ 2 ] allowing the entire design team to explore the relationships between the artifacts . Artifacts can also guide the process of design itself by representing steps or procedures that designers would like to consider . In such cases , the artifacts teach or remind the practitioners of the methods needed to create new systems , providing opportunities to potentially increase the quality of their designs . Artifacts can specifically be crafted with the intent of reuse . Pattern libraries act as reusable artifacts that identify common approaches to solving common design problems [ 1 ] [ 3 ] [ 5 ] . Claims , often stored in digital repositories , also strive to provide reusable knowledge to aid designers during early phases of design [ 9 ] [ 11 ] . The Workshop : Sharing and Learning Artifact - Based Methods This workshop is intended for designers and researchers who use , build , or study the use of artifacts in the process of design . Participants will have knowledge and experience with the definition and representation of artifacts , the role of artifacts in design ideation , and artifact - centric processes and tools for design . The goal of the workshop is to gain common experiences with artifact - centric design tools from industry and academia—such as IDEO’s Method cards [ 6 ] , Friedman’s design cards [ 5 ] , and methods submitted or cited by participants—toward reflecting on definitions and representations for artifacts and on characteristics of processes and tools that are useful to designers . There is a need to identify the characteristics of artifacts and their usage that contribute to how designers think , represent , and manage early design efforts . With these issues in mind , some of the questions to be examined during this workshop are : (cid:1) How does artifact - use differ in the context of an applied design problem ( in a consultancy ) as compared to in a research problem ( in an academic research context ) ? CHI 2010 : Workshops April 10 – 15 , 2010 , Atlanta , GA , USA 4447 (cid:1) What are the advantages and disadvantages of using certain kinds of artifacts ? (cid:1) What types of artifacts lead to increased ideation , either in quantity or quality ? (cid:1) How do designers find and learn about artifacts ? (cid:1) How can designers create novel artifacts out of existing ones ? (cid:1) How can artifacts be interpreted , especially those that are being reused , in creative ways ? (cid:1) What kinds of artifacts can be combined together into a design representation ? (cid:1) What collaborative design activities can benefit from the use of artifacts ? (cid:1) How can tools and online repositories of artifacts be best structured to facilitate design ? There are several intended outcomes of this workshop : 1 . To identify and bring together researchers interested in exploring the use of artifacts and their utility in early design work . 2 . To author a highly visible article or special issue of a widely dispersed magazine ( e . g . , interactions ) , toward promoting ways to capture and use artifacts in emerging design environments . 3 . To foster further collaboration on among researchers in academia and industry engaged in artifact - based design . References [ 1 ] Alexander , C . , Isikawa , S . , and Silverstein , M . ( 1979 ) A Pattern Language : Towns , Buildings , Construction . New York : Oxford University Press . [ 2 ] Beyer , H . and Holtzblatt , K . Contextual design . Interactions , 6 , 1 , ( 1999 ) , 32 - 42 . [ 3 ] Borchers , J . O . A pattern approach to interaction design . In Proc . of DIS ‘00 , ( 2000 ) , 369 - 378 . [ 4 ] Buxton , B . ( 2007 ) Sketching User Experiences . Morgan Kaufmann , San Francisco , California . [ 5 ] Friedman , B . and Borning , A . Value Sensitive Design as a pattern : Examples from informed consent in web browsers and from urban simulation . In Proc . of DIAC ‘02 , ( 2002 ) , 109 - 113 [ 6 ] IDEO Method Cards . ( 2003 ) [ S . I . ] : IDEO . [ 7 ] Mackay , W . E . , Ratzer , A . V . , and Janecek , P . Video artifacts for design : bridging the Gap between abstraction and detail . In Proc . of DIS ’00 , ( 2000 ) 72 - 82 . [ 8 ] Nielsen , J . Applying discount usability engineering . In IEEE Software , 12 , 1 , ( 1995 ) , 98 - 100 , [ 9 ] Payne , C . , Allgood , C . F . , Chewar , C . M . , Holbrook , C . , and McCrickard , D . S . Generalizing Interface Design Knowledge : Lessons Learned from Developing a Claims Library . In Proc . of IRI ' 03 , ( 2003 ) , 362 - 369 . [ 10 ] Schön , D . ( 1983 ) . The Reflective Practitioner . London : Temple Smith . [ 11 ] Sutcliffe , A . G . On the Effective Use and Reuse of HCI Knowledge . ACM TOCHI , 7 , 2 , ( 2000 ) , 197 - 221 . [ 12 ] Zimmerman , J . and Forlizzi , J . ( 2008 ) . The Role of Design Artifacts in Design Theory Construction . Artifact , in press . CHI 2010 : Workshops April 10 – 15 , 2010 , Atlanta , GA , USA 4448