CELL STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION 22 : 181 - 189 ( 1997 ) © 1997 by Japan Society for Cell Biology LowMolecular - weight G - actin Binding Proteins Involved in the Regulation of Actin Assembly during Myofibrillogenesis Takashi Obinata1 * , Rie Nagaoka - Yasuda1 * , Shoichiro Ono1 * * , Kenichi Kusano2 , Kurato Mohri1 , Yoshiharu Ohtaka1 , Sawako Yamashiro1 , Kyoko Okada1 , and Hiroshi Abe1 lDepartment of Biology , Faculty of Science , Chiba University , Yayoi - cho , Chiba , 263 and 2Department ofBio - logical Sciences , Graduate School of Science , University of Tokyo , Hongo , Bunkyo - ku , Tokyo 113 , Japan Key words : cofilin / ADF / profilin / thymosin / 3 / actin - binding proteins / myofibrillogenesis ABSTRACT . Wepreviously demonstrated that small G - actin binding proteins , cofilin , ADFand profilin , are involved in the actin dynamics during myofibrillogenesis ( OBINATA , T . ( 1993 ) . Int . Rev . Cytol . , 143 : 153 - 189 . ) . To better understand howthey are responsible for the regulation of actin assembly , the amounts of the ac - tin - binding proteins were quantified by means of quantitative immunoblotting and compared with that of G - ac - tin pool . The sum of the amounts of cofilin , ADFand profilin was insufficient at early developmental stages but sufficient at later stages to account for the pool of G - actin in muscle cells . Wedetected expression of thymosin fi4 at a considerable level in young embryonic but not in adult skeletal muscles . We , therefore , conclude that the G - actin pool in young embryonic skeletal muscle is mainly due to cofilin , ADF , profilin and thymosin fi4 . Switch - ing from a non - muscle - type ( NM - ) cofilin to a muscle - type ( M - ) cofilin was observed during muscle development of mammals . In order to clarify cofilin - dependent regulation of actin assembly in muscle cells , cofilin tagged with fluorescence dyes was introduced into C2 myoblasts by a micro injection method . The exogeneous cofilin , but not ADF , caused quick disassembly of actin filaments and accumulated in furrow region of dividing cells . The analogs of the unphosphorylated form ( A3 - cofilin ) and the phosphorylated form ( D3 - cofilin ) were prepared by converting Ser3 , a regulatory phosphorylation site , to Ala or Asp . WhenA3 - cofilin and D3 - cofilin were in - jected into hiving cells , the former was concentrated at the membrane ruffles and cleavage furrow , while the lat - ter showed only diffuse distribution in the cytoplasm . These results suggest that the subcellular distribution of cofilin as well as its interaction with actin in vivo is regulated by its phosphorylation and dephosphorylation . In young embryonic skeletal muscle , about 40 - 50 % of the total actin is pooled in a monomeric form in the cytoplasm ( 3 1 ) . Three G - actin - binding proteins , cofilin , ADF and profilin , have been isolated from chicken embryonic skeletal muscle as a complex with G - actin . Therefore , they have been postulated as being inhibi - tors for actin polymerization in developing muscle ( 1 , 2 , 25 ) . However , it has not yet been clarified whether the amountsof the three actin - binding proteins in embryo - nic skeletal muscle are sufficient to account for the G - ac - tin pool . Recently , thymosin / 34 , a G - actin - sequestering protein , has been detected in a variety of tissues ( 12 , 27 , 35 ) , and this protein is nowregarded as a primary candi - date for buffering G - actin in platelets and other non - muscle cells because of its abundance and its high affin - ity for actin monomer ( 27 , 35 ) . Therefore , thymosin / 34 might also be responsible for the G - actin pool in devel - oping muscle cells , but the presence of this protein in de - veloping skeletal muscle has scarcely been investigated . Amongthe actin - binding proteins , cofilin is of spe - cial interest as a regulator for reorganization of actin in developing and degenerating muscles , since this protein is expressed at a high level in embryonic ( 1 ) , denervated ( 32 ) , and dystrophic ( 13 ) skeletal muscles . In mammals , a cofilin characteristic of muscle ( M - cofilin ) ( 26 ) has been discovered in addition to a non - muscle - type cofilin ( NM - cofilin ) ( 17 ) . The activity of cofilin can be regu - lated in cytoplasm by several ways . Cofilin binds to both G - and F - actin and regulates actin assembly in a pH dependent manner ( 23 , 36 ) . Phosphoinositides , es - pecially PIP2 have been considered as a regulator for cofilin activity ( 20 , 37 ) . Phosphorylation is another ma - jor way to modulate the activity of cofilin and ADF , a homologue of cofilin . In the oocytes of Xenopus laevis , almost 100 % of Xenopus ADF / cofilin ( XAC ) is phos - phorylated , but more than 60 % of the protein is dephos - phorylated within 30 min after fertilization ( 6 ) . The phosphorylated form of cofilin is shownto be free from t To whomcorrespondence should be addressed . Abbreviations : M - cofilin , muscle - type cofilin isoform ; NM - cofilin , non - muscle - type cofilin isoform . 181 T . Obinata et al . actin filament in vivo , and lacking binding activity to pu - rified actin in vitro ( 4 , 18 ) . Biochemical analyses re - vealed that phosphorylated ADFneither binds to G - ac - tin nor affects the rate or extent of actin assembly , but removal of phosphate from phosphorylated ADFre - stores full activity to depolymerize F - actin ( 7 ) . Recent - ly , it has been demonstrated that the phosphorylation site of both ADFand cofilin is Ser # 3 in their amino acid sequences ( 7 , 18 ) . However , it remained to be clari - fied how phosphorylated and dephosphorylated cofilin behave in the cytoplasm in developing muscle cells . In this study , first of all , we measured the concentra - tions of cofilin , ADFand profilin in developing chicken skeletal muscle by a quantitative immunoblot assay with specific antibodies , and compared them with that of G - actin to clarify how they are responsible for the pool of G - actin in developing muscle . Next , we exam - ined the switching of the expression of cofilin isoforms , NM - cofilin to M - cofilin , during muscle development . Then , finally , to better understand the function of cofi - lin and the regulation of its activity by phosphorylation in the cytoplasm of myogeniccells , a wild - type cofilin as well as functional analogs of the unphosphorylated and phosphorylated forms , A3 - cofilin and D3 - cofilin respec - tively , were generated in an E . coli expression system . They were introduced into living cells to examine their function and their cellular distribution . MATERIALS AND METHODS Antibodies . Rabbit anti - serum to mouse M - cofilin was prepared with the purified recombinant M - cofilin which was produced in E . coli as an immunogen . The serum was exten - sively absorbed with NM - cofilin until the serum became nega - tive with NM - cofilin . The specific immunoglobulin was iso - lated by affinity chromatography using Sepharose 4B ( Pharma - cia ) coupled to M - cofilin . The polyclonal antibody to thymo - sin fi4 was a generous gift from Dr . Helen Yin ( University of Texas ) ( 38 ) . The other antibodies used were a polyclonal anti - body to chicken profilin ( 21 ) , a monoclonal antibody to chick - en cofilin ( MAB - 22 ) ( 1 ) , a monoclonal antibody to chicken ADF ( ADF - 1 ) ( 13 ) , and a monoclonal antibody to actin ( SkA - 04 ) ( 14 ) . Northern blotting . The CDNAprobes used were the 400 bp fragment of the CDNAof rat thymosin b4 including the en - tire coding region ( 38 ) and 0 . 5 kb fragments containing the coding region of mouse NM - cofilin or M - cofilin ( 26 ) . Total RNAwas prepared by the rapid one - step method ( 8 ) . 10 - 15 fig of RNAfor each lane was separated on 1 % agarose - formal - dehyde gel and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes . Hy - bridization was performed by the procedure of Thomas ( 34 ) , with probes labeled with 32P by the method of Feinberg and Vogelstein ( 10 ) . The filters were finally washed in 2 x SSC or 5 XSSC ( l xSSC = 150mMNaCl , 25 mMtrisodium citrate ) containing 0 . 1 % SDS at 55°C . Other methods . The procedures of gel electrophoresis and immunoblotting have been described in the previous paper ( 21 ) . Construction of mutant cofilin cDNAswith chicken cofi - lin CDNA ( 3 ) , expression and purification of recombinant cofi - lin have also been described elsewhere ( 20 , 22 ) . Microinjection of cofilin was carried out as described ( 20 ) . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Quantitative analysis of low molecular weight G - ac - tin - binding proteins involved in the G - actin pool in em - bryonic chicken skeletal muscle . The concentrations of cofilin , ADF and profilin in developing chicken skele - tal muscle were measured by quantitative immunoblot assay with specific antibodies to the respective proteins ( 21 ) . Purified proteins were used as standards for assay . As shown in Fig . 1 , in early stages of muscle develop - ment ( 10 - to 15 - days - old embryo ) , profilin was most abundant ( 0 . 38 - 0 . 55 % of total protein ) among the three G - actin - binding proteins . ADFwas next in abun - dance ( 0 . 37 % ) in 10 - days - old embryo , but declined re - markably as muscle developed , and became undetecta - ble in the muscle at 1 - day posthatch . Cofilin was also de - tected in a considerable amount ( 0 . 20 % ) in developing 0 . 6 - i 1 ^ Si ^ Cofilin jg ' jj IB ADF à " ^ H M Profilin " iJItP II ^ Thymosinp4 ^ 10E 15E AiPH 180PH 180PH Hatch ( Normal ) ( Denervated ) Developmental Stage Fig . 1 . The amounts of cofilin , ADF , profilin and thymosin / 3 ex - pressed in developing chicken skeletal muscle . The amounts were esti - mated by quantitative immunoblot assays ( 21 ) . In each immunoblot assay , the tissue extracts containing 2 . 8 - 50 / zg of total protein were ap - plied to SDS - PAGEtogether with purified standard proteins , 25 - 100 ng of cofilin , 25 - 200 ng ofADF , 38 - 250 ng of profilin , or 24 - 65 ng of thymosin / 34 , to make standard curves for each assay . They were blot - ted on nitrocellulose paper and reacted with the antibodies . The data for cofilin , ADFand profilin are the average of the values obtained in more than three separate experiments . Thymosin ^ 4 was roughly esti - mated only in 10 - day embryo . 182 G - actin Binding Proteins in Developing Muscle skeletal muscle . As judged by the sensitivity of the method used , the level of ADFwas estimated as below 0 . 01 % of total protein at 1 - day posthatch and below 0 . 007 % of total protein at 6 - months posthatch . Cofilin and profilin also diminished as muscle developed , but they could be detected even in adult muscle ; cofilin and profilin constituted approximately 0 . 028 and 0 . 019 % of the total protein , respectively . Their concentrations in 6 - months - old chicken were calculated as being about 3 . 5 and 3 . 0 / / M , respectively . Wealso quantitatively examined the changes in the ex - pression of cofilin , ADFand profilin in denervated and dystrophic chicken muscles in which myofibrillar disor - ganization is induced . The content of cofilin in the de - nervated breast muscle increased up to about 10 - fold of that in the control muscle , and we also found that the profilin content was increased in the denervated muscle by 7 - fold ( Fig . 1 ) . The increase in cofilin as well as profil - in expressions was detected in the dystrophic chicken muscle ; however , the alteration of their expressions was relatively unremarkable in comparison to that in the de - nervated muscle . In contrast , we could not detect any in - crease in ADFexpression in denervated or dystrophic muscles . In order to determine how the G - actin - binding pro - teins contribute to the G - actin pool in developing mus - cle , the molar concentration of G - actin was compared with those of cofilin , ADFand profilin . The concentra - tion of total actin was determined by quantitative immu - noblctting , and the G - actin concentrations were calcu - lated using the values of the monomer - polymerratio which was previously demonstrated ( 3 1 ) . The total actin in the skeletal muscle was about 57 / iM in 10 - days - old embryo and 620 fiM in adult , values consistent with those in the previous report ( 31 ) . The concentration of G - actin in 10 - days - old embryo was calculated as 22 fiM ( approximately 40 % of the total actin ) . In the same age of embryo , the total concentration of the three G - actin - binding proteins ( 19 . 5 / iM ) was a little lower than that of G - actin , but in later developmental stages , it became somewhat higher than that of G - actin . Since cofilin and ADFcan bind not only to G - actin but also to F - actin , we estimated the proportion of the actin - binding proteins which is present in the actin fila - ment fraction and in the soluble G - actin fraction of mus - cle homogenate of 10 - days - old chicken embryo . A con - siderable amount of cofilin , approximately 20 % of total cofilin , was detected in the filament fraction , while in the case of ADFand profilin , less amounts appeared in the same fraction ( 21 ) . The amounts of cofilin , ADF and profilin in the soluble fraction were estimated as 2 . 5 fiM , 5 . 0 / iM , 9 . 4 ftM , respectively . Since about 20 % of ADFin muscle may be inactivated by phosphoryla - tion at this age ( 16 ) , the concentration of functional Northern Blotting Mouse Chick Western Blotting Adult Embryo 1 S $ I £ Ii ! 111 lis * < p ill 211 à " a > * I i ' 4ii Fig . 2 . Western and Northern blot analysis of thymosin / 34 in chicken skeletal muscles . Left : Protein extracts from chicken breast muscle ob - tained from 10 - days - old embryo ( lOdE ) , 15 - days - old embryo ( 15dE ) , 1 - day posthatch ( ldPH ) and 180 - day posthatch ( adult ) were subjected to SDS - PAGE . Immunoblotting was performed using anti - thymosin / 34 antibody ( 38 ) . In one lane ( T / 34 ) , 24 ng of purified rat thymosin / 34 was ap - plied . The position of rat thymosin / 34 is indicated by an arrow . Right : Total RNAwas isolated from skeletal muscle , brain and spleen of adult mouse , skeletal muscle , brain and spleen of adult chicken , and skeletal muscle , brain and liver of chicken embryo . RNA ( 15 fig ) was electrophor - esed , blotted and hybridized with the 400 bp fragment of mouse thymosin £4 CDNAcoding region . After hybridization , the membranes were washed with 5 x SSC at 55°C . The positions of 18 S ribosomal RNAs ( small arrows ) and thymosin / 34 mRNA ( large arrows ) are indicated ( taken from21 ) . 183 T . Obinata et al . ADFmay be 4 fiM . Taking together , we assume that the sum of the amounts of cofilin , ADFand profilin which may be responsible for the G - actin pool is about 16 jjM . The affinities ( Kd ) of the G - actin - binding pro - teins for G - actin has been regarded as around 0 . 2 fiM ( 33 ) . Most of the barbed ends of thin filaments at early phase of myofibrillogenesis may be capped by CapZ and / or a - actinin ( 28 , 29 , 30 ) , while the pointed ends maybe uncapped ( 12 ) . In such case , the total amount of the three G - actin - binding proteins required for creating the 22 . fiM of G - actin pool present in the muscle of 10 - days - old embryo can be calculated as about 31 fiM9 as described by Fechheimer and Zigmond ( 9 ) . Therefore , the amounts of cofilin , ADFand profilin are not suffi - cient to account for the G - actin pool in young embryo - nic skeletal muscle . Thymosin / 3 is known to be primarily important for generating G - actin pool in non - muscle cells ( 12 , 26 , 29 ) . However , thymosin / 34 protein is not remarkable in mus - cle tissues , although the mRNAfor thymosin / 54 has been detected in heart and skeletal muscles ( ll ) . Thus , the role of / 3 - thymosins in skeletal muscle has remained to be clarified . The expression of thymosin / 34 in em - bryonic chicken skeletal muscle was detected by North - ern blotting using rat thymosin / 54 CDNAas a probe . As shown in Figure 2 ( right ) , mRNAof about 0 . 8 kb was detected clearly in brain and spleen of both chicken and mouse , as previously reported ( 1 1 ) , but the message was scarce in adult skeletal muscle . However , a clear signal wasdetectable in chicken embryonic skeletal muscle , when hybridization was carried out at low stringency . If 1 00T 1 1 m Ha 80 - 13 6° - MM M < g 40 - ^ L ^ a ~ å å u20 - H H ^ - ^ H ^ H Id 7d Ad Fig . 3 . Change in the expression of M - and NM - cofilins during de - velopment of mouse thigh muscle . Northern blot analysis of total RNA ( 15 fig ) from the muscle was performed using the CDNAprobes specific for M - and NM - cofilins and the relative proportion of the mes - sages for two cofilin isoforms were estimated by densitometry . we washedthe membraneat higher stringency , the mes - ssage became muchweaker . We also performed immunoblotting using anti - thymosin / 34 antibody in order to examine whether thymosin / 34 protein is present in developing skeletal muscle . Rat thymosin / 34 was used as a standard . In the muscle extract from 10 - days - old and 15 - days - old chick embryo , a peptide band with the same mobility as rat thymosin / 34 was detected by the antibody ( Fig . 2 , left ) . A protein band with lower mobility was also recognized by the antibody . In the adult skeletal muscle , protein bands were scarcely recognized by the antibody . Weas - sumed that the peptide with the same mobility as rat thymosin / 34 is chicken thymosin / 34 , and the concentra - tion of the protein was roughly estimated as about 20 - 30 fjtM in the embryonic skeletal muscle . Since the Kd of thymosin / 34 for G - actin is known to be 0 . 4 - 0 . 7 pM ( 29 ) , this amount of thymosin fi4 may sequester 8 - 16 Fig . 4 . Immunofluorescence staining of mouse C2 cells with the an - tibody specific for M - cofilin ( a ) and anti - cofilin monoclonal antibody ( MAB - 22 ) which recognizes both M - and NM - cofilin ( b ) . Myoblasts ( marked by arrowheads ) were scarcely stained with the anti M - cofilin antibody . Bar : 10 / am . 184 G - actin Binding Proteins in Developing Muscle fiM of G - actin . From such estimation , we suggest that the combination of thymosin / 34 , cofilin , ADFand pro - filin is sufficient to account for the G - actin pool in the embryonic muscle . Thymosin / 34 has been regarded as an ideal factor for generating the cytoplasmic G - actin pool in non - muscle cells . However , for the regulation of rather complicated actin dynamics in developing and degenerating muscle cells , ADF , cofilin and profilin might be preferable to thymosin / 54 , because they are not merely G - actin se - questering factors , but also possess the ability to pro - mote actin assembly under certain conditions . Profilin - actin complex can bind to the barbed end of a filament , and the subsequent rapid dissociation of profilin leads to elongation of the filament . ADFand cofilin can in - crease the free barbed end by severing the filaments . While this effect of ADFand cofilin may lead to further depolymerization of filaments , profilin - induced poly - merization can also be enhanced and the resultant frag - ments of the filaments mayserve as nuclei for the poly - merization of actin . Cofilin isoform expression during muscle develop - ment . Wepreviously demonstrated that two cofilin isoforms , muscle - type ( M - cofilin ) and non - muscle - type ( NM - cofilin ) , are present in mammals ( 24 ) , while a sin - gle isoform exists in chicken . As judged by the sequence homology , mouse M - cofilin is more like chicken cofilin ; M - cofilin exhibits 96 % identity in the amino acid se - quence with chicken cofilin , while the identity between M - and NM - cofilins is only 81 % . Among adult mouse tissues , the expression of the M - cofilin was restricted to skeletal muscle , heart and testis , although the mRNA for the NM - type was detected in a variety of non - mus - cle tissues . In order to understand how the two types of cofilin isoforms contribute to the regulation of actin assembly during muscle development , the expression of the iso - forms during development of mouse skeletal muscle was examined by Northern blotting by using the CDNA probes specific for M - cofilin ( 26 ) and NM - cofilin ( 17 ) . Figure 3 showsthe change in the relative proportion of the mRNAs encoding M - cofilin and NM - cofilin in mouse thigh muscle . The messages for both types were detected almost in the same level at the newborn stage , but the proportion of the M - cofilin message gradually increased during postnatal development and in adult , Fig . 5 . Effects of cofilin microinjection on actin filaments in C2myoblasts . IATMR - labeledcofilin was injected into C2 myoblasts at the con - centration of 4 mg / ml ( c and d ) and the cells were fixed and stained with anti - actin antibody at 2 hr after injections Control cells without injection ( a and b ) were dually stained with anti - cofilin ( a ) and anti - actin ( b ) antibodies , followed by treatment with rhodamine - labeled ( a ) or fluorescein - la - beled ( b ) second antibody . The location of cofilin , endogenous one in ( a ) and exogenous one in ( b ) , and the location of actin were compared in the same cells under an epifluorescence microscope . Bar : 20 fim ( Taken from 20 ) . 185 T . Obinata et al . the message for NM - cofilin became scarcely detectable . Whentheir expression was examinedin mouseembryo at earlier stages by in situ hybridization methods , a strong signal for NM - cofilin was detected in the entire embryo , but the message for M - cofilin was restricted to somite area in the beginning and then to muscle regions ( data not shown ) . During in vitro myogenesis of mouse C2 myogenic cells , expression of M - cofilin is upregulated ( 22 ) . To further clarify the expression of M - cofilin in individual muscle cells by immunocytochemical methods , we pre - pared an antibody specific for M - cofilin . C2 myotubes were stained clearly by the anti - M - cofilin antibody , but the majority of myoblasts were scarcely stained by the antibody , while a monoclonal antibody ( MAB - 22 ) which recognizes both M - and NM - cofilins stained myo - blasts as well as myotubes ( Fig . 4 ) . These results suggest that the expression of M - cofilin is coupled with muscle differentiation and that both NM - and M - cofilins are involved in the regulation of ac - tin assembly in the myotubes at early phase of myofibril - logenesis , while at later stages , M - cofilin becomes essen - tial for muscle cells . Intracellular regulation of actin assembly by cofilin . Cytoplasmic location of cofilin in myogeniccells have been examined by immunocytochemical methods to un - derstand the effects of cofilin on actin filamentous struc - tures in the cytoplasm ; we observed that the localization of cofilin drastically changes in response to environmen - tal stress , while it is mostly diffused in the cytoplasm of the resting cells ( 4 , 5 , 19 , 24 ) . In dividing cells , cofilin was detected in cleavage furrows ( 19 ) . Heat - shock or DMSOtreatment led to nuclear localization of cofilin and in addition , cofilin is concentrated in ruffled mem - branes ( 5 ) . It shoud be noted that cofilin becomes con - centrated in the regions where dynamicreorganization of actin occurs . To further understand howthe cofilin activity is regu - lated in the cytoplasm , we examined the function of cofi - lin in cytoplasm by microinjecting fluorescence - labeled cofilin into myogenic cells . In order to label cofilin with a fluorescent dye , we prepared a cofilin molecule having additional six amino acid residues including two cys - teine at the N - terminus by manipulating chicken cofilin CDNA ( 3 ) . The recombinant cofilin was labeled with either iodoacetamide tetramethylrhodamine ( IATMR ) Fig . 6 . Effects of ADFmicroinjection on actin filaments in C2 myoblasts . Recombinant ADFwhich was produced in E . coli was injected into C2 myoblasts at the concentration of 4 mg / mltogether with fluorescein - labeled dextran and the cells were fixed and stained with anti - actin anti - body at 2 hr after injection . Cells were stained with anti - ADF ( ADF - 1 ) ( c ) or anti - actin ( d ) antibody , followed by treatment with rhodamine - la - beled second antibody . The cells injected with the exogenous ADFwere identified under fluorescein channel ( a , b ) , and the location of ADFand actin in the cells with or without the exgenous ADFwere comparedunder an epifluorescence microscope . Bar : 20 fim . 186 G - actin Binding Proteins in Developing Muscle or 5 - iodoacetamide fluorescein ( 5 - 1AF ) . Weconfirmed that the labeled cofilin is functionally active just as the native protein ( 20 , 22 ) . When the fluorescence - labeled cofilin was injected into C2 myoblasts , the exogenous cofilin caused drastic reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton ( Fig . 5 , c and d ) , although in the control cells without injection , cofi - lin was diffused in the cytoplasm and actin filament bundles could be seen clearly ( Fig . 5 , a and b ) ; in the cofilin - injected cells , actin filaments were almost com - pletely disrupted and huge rod structures were formed and in the rod structures , both cofilin and actin were lo - calized ( Fig . 5 , c and d ) . However , the effects of the ex - ogenous cofilin on actin filaments were diminished with - in 24 hours ; the rod structures disappeared completely and actin filaments were recovered ( 20 ) . If we stimulate such cells with chemical agents , like NaCl ( 150 mM ) or 10 % DMSO , the actin / cofilin rods were formed again . Similar results were obtained with young developing my - otubes of primary muscle cultures ( 20 ) . These results strongly suggest that the activity of cofilin is controlled by some mechanismsin the cytoplasm . Interestingly , in contrast to the effects of cofilin , injec - tion of ADF , a homologue of cofilin , into C2 myoblasts did not cause the drastic change in actin cytoskeleton as observed by injection of cofilin . The exogenous ADF was mostly diffused in the cytoplasm and actin rod struc - tures were not formed ( Fig . 6 ) . Thus , cofilin and ADF seem to function somewhat differently in the cytoplasm of myogenic cells , although they are very similar in mo - lecular structure and exhibit similar functional proper - ties in a test tube . The expression of the two proteins are also differently regulated ( Fig . 1 ) . It remains to be clari - fied whether ADFand cofilin have different roles in de - veloping and degenerating muscles . The regulatory mechanisms of the possibly differential expressions of ADFand cofilin also represent an interesting and impor - tant subject for future studies . It is matter of particular interest howcofilin activity is controlled in cytoplasm . Although it is known that the activity of cofilin can be regulated by several ways , recently , phosphorylation has been regarded as one of the major ways to modulate the activity of cofilin in cytoplasm and Ser # 3 has been identified as the site of phosphorylation to modulate the functional activity ( 7 , 18 ) . Our previous results suggested that inisitolphos - phate functions as a regulator for cofilin activity in mus - cle cytoplasm ( 18 ) . Therefore , in order to clarify the function of the phosphorylated and unphosphorylated forms of cofilin in myogenic cells , we generated the ana - logs of the phosphorylated form ( D3 - cofilin ) and the un - phosphorylated form ( A3 - cofilin ) by converting the phosphorylation site ( Ser # 3 ) to asparatic acid or ala - nine , respectively . The mutated proteins were produced in an E . coli expression system , and conjugated with flu - orescent dyes ( 22 ) . In in vitro functional assay , A3 - cofilin retained the ability to bind to and disassemble F - actin , while labeled D3 - cofilin failed to interact with actin ( 22 ) . We then in - jected A3 - cofilin and D3 - cofilin into living C2 cells to ex - amine their cellular distribution . In spreading cells , A3 - cofilin was concentrated at the membraneruffles , but D3 - cofilin showed only diffused distribution both in the cytoplasm and nucleus ( Fig . 7 ) . In dividing cells , A3 - cofilin was concentrated at the cleavage furrow where endogenous cofilin is also known to be enriched , while D3 - cofilin was not localized in the furrow region ( 22 ) . These results suggest that the subcellular distribution of cofilin as well as its interacting with actin in the cells is regulated by its phosphorylation and dephosphoryla - tion . The present study strongly suggests that cofilin is a po - Fig . 7 . Injection of A3 - cofilin or D3 - cofilin into C2 myoblasts . IATMR - A3 - cofilin ( 3 mg / ml ) ( a ) or 5 - IAF - D3 - cofilin ( 3 mg / ml ) ( b ) was injected . After 9 hr incubation , cells were fixed , and the locations of A3 - cofilin ( a ) ( rhodamine channel ) and D3 - cofilin ( b ) ( FITC chan - nel ) in spreading cells were observed under an epifluorescence micro - scope . Bar : 20 / / m . 187 T . Obinata et al . tent regulator for the reorganization of cytoplasmic ac - tin filaments and actin assembly in developing muscle cells . Cofilin also seems to be involved in actin dynam - ics in degenerating muscle cells . Whenan active form of cofilin is accumulated in cytoplasm , it exerts drastic effects on actin filamentous structures . However , cofilin is not always active in the cytoplasm , and it becomes ac - tivated depending on physiological demand to reorgan - ize actin filaments . Wehave shown that phosphoryla - tion and dephosphorylation is involved in the regula - tion of cofilin activity . The regulatory mechanism ( s ) of phosphorylation / dephosphorylation of cofilin in the muscle cytoplasm remains for future studies . Acknowledgments . Wewish to thank Dr . Helen L . Yin ( Universi - ty of Texas ) for providing the CDNAof mouse thymosin / 34 , the anti - body to thymosin / 34 and the purified protein . Weexpress our appreci - ation to Dr . James R . Bamburgand Ms . Laurie Minamide for helpful advice in immunoblotting and solid phase dye - binding assay . This re - search was supported in part by research grants from the Ministry of Education , Science and Culture , the National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry ( NCPN ) of the Ministry of Health and Welfare of Japan , and the Tsuchiya Culture Foundation , Japan . REFEREN CES 1 . Abe , H . , Ohshima , S . , and Obinata , T . 1989 . A cofilin like protein is involved in the regulation of actin assembly in develop - ing skeletal muscle . / . Biochem . { Tokyo ) , 106 : 696 - 702 . 2 . Abe , H . and Obinata , T . 1989 . An actin - depolymerizing pro - tein in embryonic chicken skeletal muscle : purification and char - acterization . / . Biochem . { Tokyo ) , 106 : 172 - 180 . 3 . Abe , H . , Endo , T . , Yamamoto , K . , andObinata , T . 1990 . Se - quence of cDNAsencoding actin depolymerizing factor and cofi - lin of embryonic chicken skeletal muscle : two functionally dis - tinct actin - regulatory proteins exhibit high structural homology . Biochemistry , 29 : 7420 - 7425 . 4 . Abe , H . \ Okada , K . , and Obinata , T . 1992 . Localization of cofilin and \ its interaction with actin in cultured fibroblasts . Cell Struct . Funct . , 17 : 482 . 5 . Abe , H . , Nagaoka , R . , and Obinata , T . 1993 . Cytoplasmic localization and nuclear transport of cofilin in cultured myo - tubes . Exp . CellRes . , 206 : 1 - 10 . 6 . Abe , H . , Obinata , T . , Minamide , L . S . , and Bamburg , J . R . 1996 . Xenopus laevis actin - depolymerizing factor / cofilin : a phosphorylation - regulated protein essential for development . / . Cell Biol . , 132 : 871 - 885 . 7 . Agnew , B . J . , Minamide , L . S . , and Bamburg , J . R . 1995 . Re - activation of phosphorylated actin depolymerizing factor and identification of the regulatory site . / . Biol . Chem . , 270 : 17582 - 17587 . 8 . Chomczynski , P . and Sacchi , N . 1983 . Single - step method of RNAisolation by acid guanidinium thiocyanate - phenol - chloro - form extraction . Anal . Biochem . , 162 : 156 - 159 . 9 . Fechheimer , M . and Zigmond , ? . 1993 . Focusing on unpoly - merized actin . / . Cell Biol . , 132 : 1 - 5 . 10 . Feinberg , A . P . and Vogelstein , B . 1983 . A technique for ra - diolabeling DNArestriction endonuclease fragments to high spe - cific activity . Anal . Biochem . , 132 : 6 - 13 . ll . Gomez - Marquez , J . , Dosil , M . , Segade , F . , Bustelo , X . R . , Pichel , J . G . , Dominguez , F . , and Freire , M . 1987 . Thymo - sin - / 34 gene : Preliminary characterization and expression in tis - sues , thymic cells and lymphocytes . / . Immun . , 143 : 2740 - 2744 . Gregorio , C . C . and Fowler , V . M . 1995 . Mechanisms of thin filament assembly in embryonic chick cardiac myocytes : tropo - modulin requires tropomyosin for assembly . J . Cell Biol . , 129 : 683 - 695 . Hannappel , E . , Xu , G . - J . , Morgan , J . , Hempstead , H . , and Horecker , B . L . 1982 . Thymosin / 34 : a ubiquitous peptide in rat and mouse tissues . Biochemistry , 79 : 2172 - 2175 . Hayakawa , K . , Minami , N . , Ono , S . , Ogasawara , Y . , Totsuka , T . , Abe , H . , Tanaka , T . , and Obinata , T . 1993 . Increased expression of cofilin in dystrophic chicken and mouse skeletal muscle . / . Biochem . { Tokyo ) , 114 : 582 - 587 . Hayakawa , K . , Ono , S . , Nagaoka , R . , Saitoh , ? . , and Obinata , T . 1996 . Differential assembly of cytoskeletal and sarcomeric actins in developing skeletal muscle cells in vitro . Zool . Sci . , 13 : 509 - 517 . Morgan , T . E . , Lockerbie , R . O . , Minamide , L . S . , Browning , M . D . , and Bamburg , J . R . 1993 . Isolation and characteriza - tion of a regulated form of actin depolymerizing factor . / . Cell Biol . , 122 : 623 - 633 . Moriyama , K . , Matsumoto , S . , Nishida , E . , Sakai , H . , and Yahara , I . 1990 . Nucleotide sequence of mouse cofilin CDNA . Nucl . Acids Res . , 18 : 3053 . Moriyama , K . , Iida , K . , and Yahara , I . 1996 . Phosphoryla - tion of Ser - 3 of cofilin regulates its essential function on actin . Genes to Cells , 1 : 73 - 86 . Nagaoka , R . , Abe , H . , Kusanao , K . , and Obinata , T . 1995 . Concentration of cofilin , a small actin - binding protein , at the cleavage furrow during cytokinesis . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton , 30 : 1 - 7 . Nagaoka , R . , Kusano , K . , Abe , H . , and Obinata , T . 1995 . Effects of cofilin on actin filamentous structures in cultured mus - cle cells : intracellular regulation of cofilin action . / . Cell Sci . , 108 : 581 - 593 . Nagaoka , R . , Minami , N . , Hayakawa , K . , Abe , H . , and Obinata , T . 1996 . Quantitative analysis of low molecular weight actin - binding proteins , ADFand proprofilin , expressed in developing and degenerating chicken skeletal muscles . / . Mus - cle Res CellMotil . , 17 : 1 - ll . Nagaoka , R . , Abe , H . , and Obinata , T . 1996 . Site - directed mutagenesis of the phosphorylation site of cofilin : its role in cofi - lin - actin interaction and cytoplasmic localization . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton , 35 : 200 - 209 . Nishida , E . , Maekawa , S . , and Sakai , H . 1984 . Cofilin , a protein in porcine brain that binds to actin filaments and inhib - its their interactions with myosin and tropomyosin . Biochemis - try , 23 : 5307 - 5313 . Obinata , T . 1993 . Contractile proteins and myofibrillogene - sis . Int . Rev . Cytol , 143 : 153 - 189 . Ohshima , S . , Abe , H . , and Obinata , T . 1989 . Isolationofpro - filin from embryonic chicken skeletal muscle and evaluation of its interaction with different actin isoforms . / . Biochem . { Tokyo ) , 105 : 855 - 857 . Ono , S . , Minami , N . , Abe , H . , and Obinata , T . 1994 . Charac - terization of a novel cofilin isoform that is predominantly ex - pressed in mammalian skeletal muscle . J . Biol . Chem . , 269 : 15280 - 15286 . Safer , D . , Golla , R . , and Nachmias , V . T . 1990 . Isolation of a 5 - kilodalton actin - sequestering peptide from human blood platelets . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 87 : 2536 - 2540 . Sanger , J . M . , Mittal , B . , Pochappin , M . B . , and Sanger , 188 G - actin Binding Proteins in Developing Muscle J . W . 1986 . Myofibrillogenesis in living cells microinjected with fluorescently labeled alpha - actinin . / . Cell Biol . , 102 : 2053 - 2066 . Schafer , D . A . , Waddle , J . A . , and Cooper , J . A . 1993 . Lo - calization of capZ during myofibrillogenesis in cultured chicken muscle . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton . , 25 : 317 - 335 . Schultheiss , T . , Lin , Z . , Lu , M . - H . , Murray , J . , Fishman , D . A . , Weber , K . , Masaki , T . , Imamura , M . , and Holtzer , H . 1990 . Differential distribution of subsets of myofibrillar pro - teins in cardiac nonstriated and striated myofibrils . / . Cell Biol , 110 : 1159 - 1172 . Shimizu , N . and Obinata , T . 1986 . Actin concentration and monomer - polymer ratio in developing chicken skeletal muscle . / . Biochem . { Tokyo ) , 99 : 751 - 759 . Shinagawa , Y . , Abe , H . , Saiga , K . , and Obinata , T . 1993 . Increased expression of cofilin in denervated chicken skeletal muscle . Zool . ScL , 10 : 611 - 618 . Sun , H . - Q . , Kwiatkowska , K . , and Yin , H . L . 1995 . Actin monomer binding proteins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . , 7 : 102 - 110 . 34 . Thomas , P . S . 1980 . Hybridization of denatured RNA and small DNAfragments transferred to nitrocellulose paper . Proc . Natl . Acd . Sci . USA , 77 : 5201 - 5205 . 35 . Weber , A . , Nachmias , V . T . , Pennise , C . R . , Pring , M . , and Safer , D . 1992 . Interaction of thymosin / 34 with muscle and platelet actin : implications for actin sequestration in resting platelets . Biochemistry , 31 : 6179 - 6185 . 36 . Yonezawa , N . , Nishida , E . , and Sakai , H . 1985 . pH control of actin polymerization of cofilin . / . Biol . Chem . , 260 : 14410 - 14412 . 37 . Yonezawa , N . , Nishida , E . , Iida , K . , Yahara , I . , and Sakai , H . 1990 . Inhibition of the interactions of cofilin , destrin , and deoxyribonuclease I with actin by phosphoinositides . / . Biol . Chem . , 265 : 8382 - 8386 . 38 . Yu , F . - X . , Lin , S . - C , Morrison - Bogorad , M , Atkinson , M . A . L . , and Yin , H . L . 1993 . Thymosin blO and thymosin / 34 are both actin monomersequestering proteins . / . Biol . Chem . , 268 : 502 - 509 . 189