Infectious Entry Pathway of Influenza Virus in a Canine Kidney Cell Line KARL S . MATLIN , HUBERT REGGIO , ARI HELENIUS , and KAI SIMONS Division of Cell Biology , European Molecular Biology Laboratory , Heidelberg , Federal Republic of Germany ABSTRACT (cid:9) The entry of fowl plague virus , an avian influenza A virus , into Madin - Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) cells was examined both biochemically and morphologically . At low multi - plicity and 0°C , viruses bound to the cell surface but were not internalized . Binding was not greatly dependent on the pH of the medium and reached an equilibrium level in 60 - 90 min . Over 90 % of the bound viruses were removed by neuraminidase but not by proteases . When cells with prebound virus were warmed to 37°C , part of the virus became resistant to removal by neuraminidase , with a half - time of 10 - 15 min . After a brief lag period , degraded viral material was released into the medium . The neuraminidase - resistant virus was capable of infecting the cells and probably did so by an intracellular route , since ammonium chloride , a lysosomotropic agent , blocked both the infection and the degradation of viral protein . When the entry process was observed by electron microscopy , viruses were seen bound primarily to microvilli on the cell surface at 0° C and , after warming at 37°C , were endocytosed in coated pits , coated vesicles , and large smooth - surfaced vacuoles . Viruses were also present in smooth - surfaced invaginations and small smooth - surfaced vesicles at both temperatures . At physiological pH , no fusion of the virus with the plasma membrane was observed . When prebound virus was incubated at a pH of 5 . 5 or below for 1 min at 37° C , fusion was , however , detected by ferritin immunolabeling . At low multiplicity , - 90 % of the prebound virus became neuraminidase - resistant and was presumably fused after only 30 s at low pH . These experiments suggest that fowl plague virus enters MDCK cells by endocytosis in coated pits and coated vesicles and is transported to the lysosome where the low pH initiates a fusion reaction ultimately resulting in the transfer of the genome into the cytoplasm . The entry pathway of fowl plague virus thus resembles that earlier described for Semliki Forest virus . For enveloped animal viruses , two separate pathways of entry into the host cell have been recognized ( 1 ) . Sendai virus and other paramyxoviruses are known to fuse their membranes directly with the plasma membrane of the host cell at physio - logical pH ( 2 ) . Their nucleocapsids are thereby introduced into the cytoplasm . Fusion is mediated by a viral spike glycoprotein ( F ) which , to be active , must be present in a proteolytically cleaved form consisting of two sulfhydryl - linked polypeptide chains ( F 1 and F2 ) ( 3 , 4 ) . The second pathway , so far best exemplified by Semliki Forest virus ( an alphavirus ) , depends on adsorptive endocytosis and membrane penetration at an intracellular site ( 5 , 6 ) . After binding to the cell surface , Semliki Forest virus is rapidly internalized in coated vesicles and routed into secondary lysosomes via endosomes ( large prelysosomal vacuoles ) . The low pH in the lysosomes apparently triggers a fusion reaction between the virus membrane and the lysosomal THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 91 DECEMBER 1981 601 - 613 ©The Rockefeller University Press " 0021 - 9525 / 81 / 12 / 0601 / 13 $ 1 . 00 membrane that releases the nucleocapsid into the cytoplasm . Membrane fusion thus plays a central role in both pathways of virus entry but the site offusion and the pH required to activate it differ . In the case oforthomyxoviruses , the available data on entry are contradictory . A number of studies with influenza virus have shown that virus particles enter the cell by endocytosis ( 7 - 11 ) . Moreover , amantadine , an inhibitor of influenza virus infection ( 12 ) , has been shown to act at an intracellular location ( 13 - 16 ) . Other studies suggest , however , that influenza virus , like Sendai virus , may fuse directly with the plasma membrane of the cell ( 17 ) . Here we examine the entry of fowl plague virus , an avian influenza A virus , by combined biochemical and morphlogical approaches in an attempt to reconcile the contradictory obser - vations . The Madin - Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) cell line , 601 which resembles in culture a differentiated epithelium , has been used throughout . These cells possess distinct apical and basolateral surfaces separated by junctional complexes ( 18 ) . Our studies show that fowl plague virus infects MDCK cells primarily by endocytosis , using an entry pathway remarkably similar to the one we have earlier described for Semliki Forest virus . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cells MDCK cells , obtained from Dr . Daniel Louvard ofthis institute , were grown at 37°Cin 5 % COz and routinely passaged twice a week in 75 cm ' plastic bottles ( Falcon Plastics , Oxnard , Calif ) inEagle ' s minimalessential medium with Earle ' s salts ( Earle ' s MEM ) supplemented with 10 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 3 , 10 % ( vol / vol ) fetal calf serum ( FCS ) , penicillin ( 110 U / ml ) , streptomycin ( 100 jug / ml ) , and fungizone ( 0 . 025tag / ml ) . Cells were released from theplastic using trypsin - EDTA ( 0 . 5 gtrypsin and 0 . 2 gEDTA / l in Puck ' s saline ) . Viruses STOCK VIRUSES : (cid:9) Fowlplague virus , obtained from Dr . H . - D . Klenk ( Insti - tut fuer Virologie , Universitaet Giessen ) , was plaque purified three times on MDCK cells . Forvirus stock , MDCK cells were infected in a5 % COzatmosphere ( 0 . 01 plaque - forming units ( pfu ) / cell ) for 20 hat 37°C inEarle ' s MEMcontaining 0 . 2 % ( wt / vol ) bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) and penicillin / streptomycin . The stock virus was concentrated by centrifugation at 116 , 000 gma . for 90 minin an SW 27 rotor ( Beckman Instruments , Palo Alto , Calif . ) , resuspended at 4°C overnight in PBS ( Dulbecco formulation ) , containing 0 . 2 % BSA , and stored in aliquots at - 80°C . RADIOACTIVE VIRUS : (cid:9) Fowl plague virus labeled with [ ' SS ] methionine was prepared by infecting slightly subconfluent bottles of MDCK cells with stock virus ( 20 pfu / cell ) in Earle ' s MEMcontaining 0 . 2 % BSA andpenicillin / strepto - mycin at 37°C in 5 % COz . After l h , the inoculum wasaspirated and replaced witl ; 5 ml ofEarle ' s MEMcontaining 5RM methionine ( one - tenth ofthe amount present in normal MEM ) and 15 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 3 . In another 1 . 5 h , 1 mCi [ ' ' ' SS ] methionine wasadded to each flask andincubation continued for 7 . 5 h . The virus wasconcentrated by centrifugation ~ at , 116 , 000 gme . for 90 minin an SW 27 rotor and resuspended overnight at 0°C in 50 mM Tris - Cl ( pH 7 . 4 ) containing 100 mM NaCI ( TN ) . Finally , the virus waspurifiedon sucrosegradientsprepared by overlaying a 5 . 0 ml 25 - 50 % ( wt / vol ) gradient with an 8 . 0 ml 10 - 20 % ( wt / vol ) gradient , both in TN . Thegradients were centrifuged for 3 h at 284 , 000 gma . in a Beckman SW 40 rotor . The peak of radioactivity in the lower part of the gradient waspooled andstored in aliquots at - 80°C . This material wasidentified as virus andjudged free of contaminating labeled material by SDS PAGE and autoradiography . The titer of preparations was - 1 x 10 ' pfu / ml which corre - sponded to 1 pfu / cpm . UNLABELED VIRUS : (cid:9) Large quantities of fowl plague virus were grown in the allantoic cavity of 11 - d - old embryonated chicken eggs and purified as described earlier ( l9 ) . The purity was monitored by SDS PAGE . Preparations contained - - 3 x 10 ' pfu / tag protein and had a particle - to - pfu ratio of - 100 , assuming aparticle weight of 3 x 10 - ` s g ( 20 ) . Plaque Titrations Plaque titrations were performed in duplicate on MDCK cell monolayers ( 2l ) grown in 60 - mm plastic petri dishes . Experimental samples were serially diluted in PBS / 0 . 2 % BSA , and 0 . 25 ml aliquots were adsorbed to cell monolayers for I h at 37°C in 5 % COs . The inoculum was then removed and the cells were overlayed with 4ml of Earle ' s MEMcontaining 0 . 1 % BSA , 0 . 1 % FCS , penicillin , streptomycin , and 0 . 9 % ( wt / vol ) agarose ( Litex , Denmark ) . Aftera2 - d incubation at 37°C in 5 % COz , plaques were detected by staining with 0 . 02 % neutral red in PBS . Binding and Uptake Assays To measurevirus binding , MDCK cells were grown to confluence ( 1 - 2 x 106 cells / dish ) in 35 - mm diameter plastic petri dishes , washed twice with I ml of binding medium , and cooled for 10 - 15 min . Approximately 40 , 000 cpm of radioactive fowl plague virus in 200 ul of the appropriate ice - cold binding medium were added to each dish , andthe dishes were gently shaken for various times at 0°C . After this incubation , the free virus was removed and the cell monolayers were washed twice with I ml of cold binding medium . Cells were 602 (cid:9) THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 91 , 1981 then scraped from the dish , the dish waswashed twice with 1 ml of cold binding medium , and the cells were pelleted in a conical glass centrifuge tube at 2 , 000 rpm for 5 min at 4°C . Bound virus is defined as that virus which was cell - associated at this point . After removal ofthe supernate , pellets were solubilized directly in Rotiszint 22 ( Carl Roth KG , Karlsruhe , W . Germany ) a detergent - based scintillation fluid , and counted in a Mark III liquid scintillation counter ( Searle Analytic , DesPlaines , Ill . ) . Variable pH binding media were prepared by supplementing Earle ' s MEM containing 0 . 2 % BSAwith the series of buffers suggested by Eagle ( 22 ) . Media of pH < 6 . 0 were supplemented with 20 mM succinate . Bicarbonate was omitted from all media used at 0°C or at pH ' s other than 7 . 4 . Adjustment of pH was at foom temperature . All measurements of virus uptake were done after warming sample dishes for various periods at 37°C in media buffered to pH 7 . 4 containing sodium bicar - bonate . After incubation of labeled virus with cells , the medium was collected and the medium and cells were analyzed separately . The cells were washed , scraped from the dish , pelleted , and counted directly , or washed and incubated with neuraminidase to remove surface - associated virus . In most cases , the neur - aminidase wasadded at aconcentrationof5mg / ml in 1 . 0 ml PBS , andthe dishes were shaken at 0°Cfor90 min . Afterneuraminidasetreatment , the neuraminidase solution was removed and the monolayers were scraped and pelleted in PBS / 0 . 2 % BSA . Finally , the cell pellet waswashed twotimes with 5 ml ofPBS / 0 . 2 % BSA and counted . Medium samples were divided into twoaliquots . Onealiquot was counted directly , the other aliquot wasprecipitated with an equal volume of 10 % ( wt / vol ) trichloroacetic acid ( TCA ) on ice for 1 h , centrifuged for 5 min in a microfuge ( Eppendorf , Hamburg , W . Germany ) , and the supernate counted . Insoluble radioactivity was calculated by subtracting radioactivity in the TCA supernates from the total radioactivity in the medium . Infection by Internalized Virus To determine whether cell - associated , neuraminidase - resistant virus wasca - pable ofinfecting the host cell , MDCKcells were grown to confluence in two24 - well plastic trays ( 5 - 6 x 10 ' cells / well ) . The cells were washed with pH 7 . 4 binding medium andcooled to 0°C . Stock virus wassuspendedin 0 . 2 ml of ice - cold binding medium with or without 20 mM ammonium chloride at three different multiplicities and allowed to bind to the cells as described for binding assays above . After 1 h , the inocula were removed from one ofthe twotrays and 1 . 5 ml of prewarmed , pH 7 . 4 medium ( with bicarbonate and with or without ammonium chloride ) wasadded to each well . Thetray wasincubated for 20 min at 37°C in a5 % COz atmosphere and then cooled to 0°Cby placing it on ice and replacing the warm medium with cold medium . The second tray was not taken through this warming step . Both trays were then processed together through the rest of the experiment . To remove the remaining surface - associated viruses , neuraminidase ( 10 mg / mlin Earle ' s MEM with or without 20 mM ammonium chloride ) was added to each well , and the trays were shaken at 0°C for 90 min . After digestion , the neuraminidase solution was removed and the monolayers were washed three times in cold pH 7 . 4 medium with or without ammonium chloride . Next , prewarmed complete MDCK cell growth mediumwith or without ammonium chloride wasadded to each well for 1 h to help the cells recover and , finally , pH 7 . 4 medium with bicarbonatewasadded andthe trays were incubated for 5 h at 37°C in 5 % CO , . The amount of virus produced was determined by plaque titration . A diagrammatic description of this experiment is given in TableI . Antibodies Antibodies raised against fowl plague virus spike proteins were prepared by immunizing rabbits with spike protein complexes . These were prepared by the following modification ofaprocedure used for the preparation ofprotein micelles ( 23 ) . Fowl plague virus ( 1 . 5 mg ) was solubilized at room temperature in 2 % Triton X - 100 containing 50 mM Tris - Cl ( pH 8 ) and200mM NaCl , mixed for 15 min , andcentrifuged over a20 - 50 % sucrose gradient having a zone of 15 % ( wt / vol ) sucrose and 1 % ( wt / vol ) Triton X - 100 in the same buffer for 24 hat 284 , 000 gm in an SW 40 rotor at 20°C . The spike protein peak was located by gel electrophoresis , dialyzed against 500vol of50 mM ammonium carbonate at 5°C , and lyophilized . To purify the complexes further , they were redissolved in 50 mM Tris - Cl ( pH 8 ) containing 200 mM NaCl and centrifuged over a second gradient identical to the first except for the absence of the Triton X - 100 zone . Spike protein complexes isolated in this manner were judged free of M protein and other viral components by SDSPAGE . We injected 10 - 20 tag ofprotein in Freund ' s complete adjuvant directly into the popliteal lymph nodes of rabbits ( 24 ) , andboosted this injection subcutaneously 3wk later with the same amount ofprotein in Freund ' s incomplete adjuvant , bleedingthe rabbits after 10 d . Anti - fowl virus spike IgG was prepared by standard procedures of ion - exchange chromatography ( 25 ) . Immunofluorescence Immunofluorescence wasperformed by the indirect technique . MDCK cells were grown to slightly subconfluent density on glass cover slips in 35 - mm plastic dishes . The dishes ( one cover slip per dish ) were washed in pH 7 . 4 binding medium and cooled on ice . Fowl plague virus ( 3 , ug / dish ) in ice - cold binding medium wasadded andallowed to bind in the cold for 1 h . After removal of the free virus , twocoverslips were washed , covered with cold fixative , andbrought slowly to room temperature . The other dishes were warmed at 37°C for various times and fixed . To fix the cells , the cover slips were washed three times with PBS ( Eisen formulation ) , incubated for 20 min in formaldehyde ( 3 % ( wt / vol ) formaldehyde , 0 . 1 mM CaC12 , 0 . 1 mM MgC12 in PBS ) , andquenched for 10 min in 50 mM NHaCI in PBS . Viral antigens on the cell surface were visualized by inverting thecoverslips over 251x1ofanti - spike protein IgG ( 300Wg / ml ) , washing , and then staining with goat anti - rabbit IgG conjugated to rhodamine . To see both surface and intracellular antigens , fixed monolayers were freeze - thawed once on dry - ice andstained with antibodies ( 26 , 27 ) . Covershps were mounted in 90 % ( vol / vol ) glycerol in PBS and viewed through a Zeiss photomicroscope III equipped with a Planapo 63 oil immersion objective ( Zeiss , Oberkochen , W . Germany ) . The rhodamine conjugated antibody , a gift of Dr . Daniel Louvard , wasaffinity - purified andselected by ion - exchange chromatography to have two to three rhodamine molecules perIgG molecule ( 28 , 29 ) . Electron Microscopy GENERAL TECHNIQUES : (cid:9) To visualize virus bound to cells andinternalized , cells in 35 - mm petri dishes were washed , and60 pg of virus were allowed to bind at 0°C in 200 1x1 of binding medium , pH 7 . 4 , for 1 h . The samples were then either fixed directly with cold 2 . 5 % glutaraldehyde in 50 mM sodium cacodylate , pH 7 . 2 , 50 mM KCI , 2 . 5 mM MgC12 for - 30 min , or warmed at 37°C and then fixed at room temperature . Postfixation with osmium tetroxide , dehydration , and embedding were done as described earlier ( 30 ) , except that the cell monolayer was scraped with a teflon blade , osmium fixed , dehydrated , and embedded in Epon 812after centrifugation in BEEM capsules . IMMUNOLABELING WITH FERRITIN : (cid:9) Todetect fusion attheplasmamem - brane , MDCK cells were grown on microscope slides and the slides washed in binding medium and cooled on a metal plate fitted over an ice bath . A virus suspension containing 60 tag of virus in 2001rl of ice - cold binding medium was added to the cells , a cover slip was placed over the suspension , and the virus binding wasconducted for 1 h . After binding , the slides were plunged into 37°C medium at either pH 5 . 0 or pH 7 . 4 for 1 min or less andthen fixed immediately in formaldehyde ( 3 % formaldehyde , 0 . 1 mM CaCl2 , 0 . 1 mM MgC12 in PBS , pH 7 . 4 ) at room temperature for 30 min . Binding controls were placed in cold formaldehyde andslowly broughtto roomtemperature . After fixation , unreacted formaldehyde was quenched with 50 mM ammonium chloride in PBS for 10 min , andthe cellswere conditioned with 0 . 2 % ( wt / vol ) gelatin in PBSandstained with antibodies by the indirect method . Thefirst antibody was rabbit anti - fowl plague virus spike protein IgG ( 399 lag / ml in 0 . 2 % gelatin / PBS ) . This was followed by ferritin conjugated goat anti - rabbit IgG ( affinity purified ) prepared according to Kishida et al . ( 31 ) . After washing , the cells were fixed for l h at room temperature with 4 . 5 % glutaraldehyde in 0 . 1 M sodium cacodylate , pH 7 . 4 , scraped with ateflon blade , andcentrifuged for 5 minin a Beckman microfuge . Thepellet waspostfixed for 2hat 4°C in 2 % osmium tetroxide in 0 . 1 Msodium cacodylate , pH 7 . 4 , stained in block overnight in 0 . 5 % magnesium uranyl acetate , dehydrated in graded ethanol , andembedded in Epon . Thin sections were cut on a Reichert OmUa ultramicrotome ( Reichert - Jung , Vienna , Austria ) , double - stained with 2 % aqueous uranyl acetate andlead citrate ( 32 ) , and observed with a Philips 400 or Zeiss EM I0A electron microscope . Low pH - dependent Association To measure neuraminidase - resistant association of fowl plague virus with MDCK cells after lowpH treatment , radioactive fowl plague virus wasallowed to bind to the cells at 0°C and the monolayer washed free of unattached virus . The dishes were then transferred to the surface of a water bath at 37°C and flooded with warm medium at various pH ' s for different times . Themediumwas then aspirated and the monolayers were rapidly cooled on ice , treated with neuraminidase , washed , scraped , and counted as described above . Miscellaneous Techniques Solutions of ammonium chloride and chloroquine were freshly prepared before each experiment by dissolvingthe salts directly in the appropriate medium and , when necessary , correcting the pH to theoriginal value . Protein determi - nations were performed as described by Lowry et al . ( 33 ) . Virus preparations were analyzed on SDS polyacrylamide gels , using the Laemmli buffer system ( 34 ) . The gels were prepared with a 10 - 15 % ( wt / vol ) acrylamide gradient ( acrylamide / bisacrylamide = 75 ) andcontained 8Murea for improved resolution ( 35 ) . Sources of Reagents Cell culture media andreagents were purchased from Gibco Biocult ( Glasgow , Scotland ) . FCS was obtained from either Gibco or Boehringer / Mannheim ( Mannheim , W . Germany ) . Neuraminidase ( TypeVfrom Clostridiumperfringens , purified , 0 . 86 U / mg using NAN - lactose ) wasobtained from Sigma Chemical Co . ( St . Louis , Mo . ) . All buffers and chloroquine were also obtained from Sigma Chemical Co . Reagents for electron microscopy were purchased from either Serva Biochemicals ( Heidelberg , W . Germany ) or Ladd Research ( Burlington , Vt . ) . Otherchemicals were reagent grade . [ 35 S ] methionine ( > 600mCi / mmol ) was purchased from Amersham Corp . ( Amersham , England ) . RESULTS Association of Fowl Plague Virus with Cells at 0 oC To examine the association offowl plague virus with MDCK cells at 0°C , trace quantities ( 0 . 03 pfu / cell ) of [ 35 S ] methionine - labeled virus were incubated with monolayers for various periods of time at pH 7 . 4 . Since MDCK cells were used , binding was expected to occur only to the apical surface ( 18 ) . As shown in Fig . 1 , binding increased immediately upon addition of virus and reached a plateau of - 40 % of the added virus in 60 - 90 min . To assess the effect of pH on virus binding , trace quantities of labeled virus were incubated with MDCK cells at 0°C in medium buffered from pH 5 . 0 to 8 . 3 ( Fig . 2 ) . After 1 h , 35 - 55 % ofthe applied virus was cell - associated at all pH ' s tested , with somewhat higher binding at acidic than at neutral pH . As the effect of pH was not very dramatic , binding of fowl plague virus in all further experiments was conducted at pH 7 . 4 . Fowl plague virus was tightly and specifically associated with cells at 0°C and pH 7 . 4 . Incubation with cold medium or PBS failed to elute the virus ( Fig . 3 ) . Proteinase K , which efficiently removes Semliki Forest virus from the surface of baby hamster kidney 21 cells ( BHK - 21 ) ( 5 , 6 ) and vesicular stomatitis virus from MDCK cells ( unpublished observations ) , had no effect ( Fig . 3 ) ; nor did other proteases , such as trypsin and chymotrypsin . We found , however , that neuraminidase in the cold released up to 96 % of the cell - associated virus ( Fig . 3 ) without affecting the integrity or viability of the cells . In addition , MDCK cells pretreated with neuraminidase failed to bind virus . These results are consistent with the known role of sialic acid in the viral receptor ( 36 ) . The efficient release by FIGURE 1 (cid:9) Kinetics of fowl plague virus binding at pH 7 . 4 . Trace quantities of [ 35S ] - fowl plague virus ( 0 . 03 pfu / cell ) were added to MDCK cell monolayers at 0°C in Earle ' s MEM , pH 7 . 4 , with ( 0 - 0 ) or without ( 0 - - 0 ) 20 mM ammonium chloride for various times . At the end of the binding period , cell - associated radioactivity was determined . Data is expressed as percent of added radioactivity bound . MATLIN ET AI . (cid:9) Influenza Virus Entry (cid:9) 603 z 80 - 60 - P . - 40 0 mo 20 FIGURE 2 (cid:9) Binding of fowl plague virus at different pH ' s and 0°C . Trace quantities of [ 85S ] - fowl plague virus ( 0 . 03 pfu / cell ) were bound to MDCK cell monolayers at 0°C for 1 h and cell associated radioactivity determined . Data is expressed as percent of added radioactivity bound . I (cid:9) I (cid:9) I 6 . 0 70 8 . 0 pH 40 80 t ( min ) FIGURE 3 (cid:9) Effect of proteinase K and neuraminidase on cell - bound fowl plague virus . Trace quantities of [ 35S ] - fowl plague virus were bound to MDCK cell monolayers at 0°C for 1 h at pH 7 . 4 . After washing the cells with cold binding medium , they were incubated with either binding medium (cid:9) neuraminidase at 5 mg / ml in PBS ( 0 - 0 ) , proteinase K at 1 mg / ml in PBS ( " - " ) , or with PBS ( H ) at 0°C . At the indicated times cells were washed and scraped in PBS containing 0 . 2 % BSA and 1 mM PMSF , and cell - associated radioactivity determined . neuraminidase indicates that virtually all of the virus remains at the cell surface at 0°C . The radioactive virus which failed to dissociate after neuraminidase treatment was probably located on the surface as well , since prolonged neuraminidase treat - ment or higher neuraminidase concentrations further reduced the background radioactivity . Neuraminidase treatment using 5 mg of enzyme / ml for 90 min in the cold was routinely used in our further experiments to differentiate between surface - bound virus and either endocytosed or fused virus ( see below ) . Virus Association with Cells at 37 ' C When cells were incubated with virus at 37°C instead of 0°C , we expected to observe internalization of viruses and possibly fusion of virus with the plasma membrane . We first investigated the fate of prebound virus . Cells , to which trace quantities of [ 35S ] methionine - labeled fowl plague virus had 604 (cid:9) THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 91 , 1981 been bound for 1 h in the cold , were rapidly warmed to 37°C . At various times after warming , the medium was collected and aliquots were precipitated with TCA and counted . The cells were treated with neuraminidase to remove the surface - bound virus , washed , scraped , and counted . As shown in Fig . 4a , two effects were observed during the first 15 min at 37°C : ^ - 70 % of the viruses were converted into a form no longer releasable by neuraminidase treatment ; and - 30 % of the viruses dissociated into the medium in an acid - precipitable form . From 30 min onward , acid - soluble radioac - tivity appeared in the medium , increasing steadily throughout the experiment ( Fig . 4a ) . The most likely interpretation of these results is that , upon warming , part of the cell - bound virus became irreversibly associated with the cells by either endo - cytosis or fusion . Some of this virus was degraded after a short lag period . The release of acid - precipitable virus into the medium is probably a consequence of the viral neuraminidase activity . At 37°C , this neuraminidase may digest sialic acid from the viral receptors before internalization can occur . This interpretation is supported by the observation that the amount m X Ea8 m 12 0 X E 8 a 0 1 ~ 30 60 t ( min ) FIGURE 4 (cid:9) Synchronous uptake of fowl plague virus by MDCK cells . Trace amounts of [ 35S ] - fowl plague virus were bound for 1 h to MDCK cell monolayers at 0°C and then warmed rapidly to 37°C in medium without ( a ) or with ( b ) 20 mM ammonium chloride . At the indicated times , the medium was removed and the cells treated with 5 mg / ml neuraminidase for 90 min at 0°C . Cell associated and TCA soluble and precipitable radioactivities in the medium were determined . Binding in this experiment was 30 % of the added radioactivity . Cell associated , neuraminidase - resistant radioactivity ( F - 0 ) ; TCA - precipitable radioactivity in the medium ( 0 - 0 ) ; TCA - soluble radioactivity in the medium ( A - A ) ; total recovered radio - activity ( " - " ) . N 10 tY " - - ~ \ 12 - CD m WI 6 ~ - o _ X O E 4 JJW 2 lJ of TCA - precipitable material in the medium decreases during continued incubation at 37°C ( Fig . 4 ) , probably by rebinding of released virus to the cells and internalization . Since only trace quantities of virus were originally bound ( < I pfu or 100 particles / cell ) , many undigested viral receptors should be avail - able to the free virus . The previous experiment , using virus prebound to cells at 0°C , examined virus uptake into cells under synchronous conditions . We also examined the fate of virus simply added to cells at 37°C ( Fig . 5 ) . Trace quantities of labeled virus were incubated with cells at 37°C and , at various times , the medium was collected from two dishes and TCA - precipitated . The cells from one dish were washed , scraped , and counted to measure 0 x 12 E 0 - 4 ° - ° \ 0 30 60 90 f ( min ) FIGURE 5 (cid:9) Uptake of fowl plague virus at 37°C . Trace quantities of [ " S ] - fowl plague virus in MEM ( 0 . 5 ml / dish ) , pH 7 . 4 , were added to MDCK cells at 37°C . At various times , the medium was removed and the cells cooled on ice . One set of dishes was washed with cold medium and total cell - associated radioactivity determined . A sec - ond set of dishes was treated with 5 mg / ml neuraminidase at 0°C for 90 min , washed , and neuraminidase - resistantcounts determined . Aliquots of medium were TCA - precipitated to determine acid - sol - uble and - precipitable radioactivities . ( O - O ) Neuraminidase sen - sitive ; ( " - - 0 ) neuraminidase resistant ; ( " - " ) TCA precipitable ; TCA soluble counts were negligible . total cell - associated radioactivity . The second dish was incu - bated with neuraminidase , and the cells were counted to deter - mine the amount of internalized virus . The difference between the two dishes represented the amount of virus associated with the cell surface at each time - point . Neuraminidase - resistant radioactivity increased linearly for - 1 h . Concomitantly , an equivalent reduction in medium radioactivity was seen . No significant amount of TCA - soluble radioactivity could be de - tected in the medium during the experiment . The results ofexperiments described so far indicate that fowl plague virus associated with MDCK cells rapidly becomes neuraminidase - resistant at 37°C and is degraded into acid - soluble material after a lag period . These observations are consistent with virus entry by endocytosis , but they do not exclude fusion ofthe virus with the plasma membrane . To gain more information about the nature ofthe virus - cell association , virus uptake was examined by immunofluorescence and elec - tron microscopy . Morphology of Virus - Cell Association at 37°C Cells with prebound fowl plague virus were warmed to 37°C and examined at different times by indirect immunofluores - cence using anti - spike protein antibodies ( Fig . 6 ) . Observations were made of both surface staining and surface plus internal staining by freeze - thawing duplicate samples to permit access to intracellular antigens ( 27 ) . As illustrated in Fig . 6 , cells which were fixed immediately after binding virus at 0°C , and stained , were covered with bright spots . Freeze - thawing of equivalent samples did not change this pattern . After 1 h at 37°C , almost no stained material was evident on the cell surface . Internally , fluorescence was associated mainly with perinuclear vesicles . This experiment demonstrated that vir - tually all the virus antigens originally present on the cell surface had been removed after warming for 1 h , and that a large fraction ofthem had been internalized . Since no spike protein antigens were detected on the cell surface , extensive fusion of the viral membrane with the plasma membrane seemed un - likely . FIGURE 6 (cid:9) Binding and uptake of fowl plague virus into MDCK cells . Fowl plague virus ( 3 Wg ) was allowed to bind to MDCK cells grown on glass cover slips for 1 h at 0° C and pH 7 . 4 . Twocover slips were fixed immediately with cold formaldehyde solution . The remaining samples were warmed at 37°C for different times and then fixed . One sample from each time - point was stained with antibodies against fowl plague virus spike glycoproteins and with a rhodamine - conjugated second antibody to visualize viral antigens on the cell surface . A second sample from the same time - point was freeze - thawed to make viral antigens inside the cell also accessible to antibodies and then stained . ( a ) Surface stain after binding but before warming . ( b ) Surface stain after 1 h at 37° C . ( c ) Surface plus internal stain after 1 h at 37°C . ( d ) Nomarski optics of the field shown in c . Bar , 5 , um . x 2 , 200 . MATLIN El AL . (cid:9) Influenza Virus Entry (cid:9) 605 FIGURE 7 (cid:9) Binding of fowl plague virus to the MDCK plasma mem - brane . Fowl plague virus ( 601Lg ) was allowed to bind for 1 h in pH 7 . 4 binding medium at 0°C , and the cells were fixed with cold glutaraldehyde . Virus particles were bound to microvilli and other parts of the apical plasma membrane ( a and b ) . In many instances , microvilli were attached to each other by virus particles . Bar , 0 . 2 gym . a , x 45 , 000 ; b , x 50 , 000 . The localization of virus after binding to the cells and warming to 37°C was also investigated by transmission electron microscopy ( Figs . 7 and 8 ) . After binding at 0°C , viruses were observed to associate primarily with microvilli ( Fig . 7 ) . Often several microvilli were connected to each other by their inter - action with common virus particles ( Fig . 7 b ) , and the micro - villar membrane sometimes partially wrapped itself around the virus particles ( Fig . 7 b ) . Binding to other areas of the plasma membrane was also seen . Consistently , throughout the experi - ment , viruses were also observed bound to smooth - surfaced invaginations frequently localized at the bases of microvilli ( Fig . 8 a , b , and c ) . A characteristic of these was the close ( 16 - to 20 - nm ) apposition of the viral and plasma membranes all along the perimeter of the invagination . Upon warming to 37°C , the virus particles entered coated pits and coated vesicles ( Fig . 8d - i ) . The vesicles seen in Fig . 8 h and i are half - coated and half - smooth . Part of the smooth membrane of the vesicle illustrated in Fig . 8 i is in the form of a bleb . These vesicles may be in the process oflosing their coat and perhaps fusing with other vacuoles . Occasionally , viruses were also observed in small uncoated vesicles with the same membrane proximity seen in the smooth pits ( Fig . 8c ) . After 5 - or 10 - min warming , viruses were also visible in larger , smooth - surfaced vacuoles and multivesicular bodies ( Fig . 8j - 1 ) . The former may be endosomes , prelysosomal endocytotic 606 (cid:9) THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 91 , 1981 vacuoles devoid of lysosomal hydrolases ( 5 , 37 , 38 ) . At no time was virus fusion with the plasma membrane observed . Several earlier morphological studies ofinfluenza virus entry have also failed to detect fusion ( 7 - 11 ) . From observations of synchronous entry of Semliki Forest virus into BHK cells , it was previously concluded that the virus particles passed sequentially through coated pits , coated vesi - cles , endosomes , and lysosomes ( 5 ) . Although fowl plague virus probably follows a similar pathway , it is difficult to reach a definite conclusion from the morphological experiment de - scribed here because ofthe asynchrony imposed by the detach - ment and rebinding of the virus during the warming period . It is possible , however , to conclude that , at high multiplicities , entry occurs primarily by endocytosis and not by fusion at the plasma membrane . The neuraminidase - resistant viruses ob - served in the previous experiments with radioactive fowl plague virus were therefore most likely endocytosed . Inhibition by LysosomotropicAgents A number of studies have shown that lipophilic weak bases such as ammonium chloride and amantadine inhibit the entry ofinfluenza virus into their host cells and block infection ( 12 - 16 , 39 - 45 ) . Similar inhibitory effects oflipophilic amines have been reported in other virus systems ( 5 , 6 , 46 , 47 ) . On the basis ofour studies with Semliki Forest virus , we have suggested that the inhibition depends on the lysosomotropic character of the agents ( 5 , 6 , 47 ) ; they are known to accumulate in the lyso - somes , to elevate the lysosomal pH , and to inhibit many of the lysosomal hydrolases ( 48 , 49 ) . We have here studied the effects of ammonium chloride and chloroquine on fowl plague virus infection in MDCK cells , thereby confirming and extending the previous findings obtained with other influenza viruses ( 12 - 16 , 39 - 45 ) . As shown in Fig . 9 ammonium chloride inhibited infection as measured by virus production . The optimal inhibitory con - centration ofammonium chloride was 10 mM . To be effective , ammonium chloride had to be present during the first hour after virus - cell contact , indicating that its effect was mainly on an early stage of infection . Chloroquine also blocked infection at an optimal concentration of 0 . 5 mM , but was inhibitory when added one hour after the virus . The binding of the virus to the cell surface and its subsequent internalization ( conver - sion into neuraminidase - resistant form ) was not significantly affected by the presence of inhibitory concentrations of am - monium chloride ( Figs . 1 and 4b ) . The degradation of virus proteins into acid - soluble material was , however , totally in - hibited ( Fig . 46 ) , suggesting that the lysosome was important in this degradation . Lysosomal degradation of other endocy - tosed proteins such as low - density lipoprotein and polypeptide hormones is also blocked by ammonium chloride and other lysosomotropic weak bases ( 50 - 52 ) . The inhibition of viral production by lysosomotropic agents suggests that the lysosomes are involved in the early stages of influenza virus infection . The inhibitors provide , moreover , a convenient tool to study some of the features of the infective pathway . Infection by Internalized Virus In a previous section , it was shown that about half of the fowl plague virus bound to MDCK cells in the cold became neuraminidase - resistant after 10 min at 37°C . It was also established that the infection initiated by fowl plague virus was FIGURE 8 (cid:9) Stages of fowl plague virus entry into MDCK cells . Cells with prebound virus were warmed at 37°C for different times and then fixed with glutaraldehyde at room temperature . Within 5 min , virus particles were seen in smooth surfaced pits and vesicles ( a , b , and c ) , coated pits ( d , e , and f ) and coated vesicles ( g , h , and i ) . I n f , thesample wasstained with anti - fowl plague virus spike protein IgG and then with ferritin - goat anti - rabbit IgG after formaldehyde fixation ( see Materials and Methods ) . This imagedemonstrates that part of the virus particle was tightly associated with the membrane since only the exposed part is labeled with ferritin . After 10 min , viruses were observed in endosomes ( j ) and multivesicular bodies ( k and I ) . The images shown in a , b , and c were after 2 min warming ; in d , e , g , k , and i after 5 min warming , in f after 1 min warming , and in j , k , and / after 10 min warming . a - i , x 62 , 500 ; k - l , x 50 , 000 . sensitive to lysosomotropic drugs . To demonstrate directly that virus defined biochemically as neuraminidase - resistant was also capable of infecting MDCK cells through the route sen - sitive to the lysosomotropic agents , the following experiment was conducted . Confluent MDCK cells grown in two 24 - well plastic trays were cooled to 0°C , and fowl plague virus was allowed to bind at three different multiplicities ( 8 , 5 , and 2 pfu / cell ) in the presence of 20 mM ammonium chloride ( see Table I ) . One tray was warmed to 37°C for 20 min to allow some of the virus to enter the cells while the other was left in the cold . Both trays were then treated with neuraminidase in the cold to remove all virus which still remained on the cell surface . After several washes , warm medium without ammo - nium chloride was addedand the cells were incubated at 37°C E Cn 0J 6 Af 7 ~ ~ - _ - _ _ _ ( 20 ) 5 0 10 20 ( NH4C ( 1 ( I IM ) FIGURE 9 (cid:9) Inhibition of fowl plague virus infection by ammonium chloride . Fowl plague virus ( 20 pfu / cell ) was added to MDCK cell monolayers together with ammonium chloride at the indicated concentrations . After 6 h infection , the medium was removed and plaque titrations performed . The dotted line indicates the amount of virus produced when the agent was added at the concentrations given in parentheses 1 h after initial virus - cell contact . Bind 0°C , 60 min Warm 37°C , 20 min Neuramidase 0°C , 90 min Wash 0°C 1 2 3 MDCK - medium 37°C60 min pH 7 . 4 medium 37°C 5 h 608 (cid:9) THE JOURNAL Or CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 91 , 1981 TABLE I Infection by Internalized Fowl Plague Virus A warmed 2 for 6 h . Two controls were included in each tray : a positive control in which ammonium chloride was never present , and a negative control with ammonium chloride present throughout the experiment . One possible result of this experiment was that only cells which had been both warmed for 20 min and not incubated with ammonium chloride during the final 6 h would produce significant amounts of virus . Such a result would indicate that virus entering the cell during the 20 - min warming period was capable of infecting the cells , and that the entry pathway traversed the intracellular compartment sensitive to ammonium chloride . A second possibility was that the neuraminidase - resistant ( intemalized ) virus was not infectious . In this instance only low , background levels of virus would be produced . As shown in Table I , the first possibility was observed . Viruses which entered cells during the 20 - min warming period produced a high level of infection when ammonium chloride was absent throughout the experiment or absent during the last 6 h at 37°C . The infection was completely blocked when ammonium chloride was present throughout the experiment . Samples not warmed for 20 min produced a reduced level of virus infection which could also be abolished by ammonium chloride . The residual infection in the unwarmed tray probably resulted from viruses left on the cell surface after neuramini - dase treatment which then infected the cells by the intracellular route . This interpretation is supported by the observed reduc - tion in the background infection at lower multiplicities . This experiment shows , therefore , that viruses which entered cells during a brief warming period are capable ofinfecting the cells , and that the infectious pathway probably traverses the lysosome . It strongly suggests , therefore , that the fowl plague virus infection of MDCK cells is initiated by endocytosis of the virus . Virus Fusion at Low pH Semliki Forest virus , which infects cells through the endo - cytotic pathway , has been shown to possess a low pH - induced fusion activity ( 5 , 19 , 53 , 54 ) . This activity transfers the viral genome from the lysosome to the cytoplasm ( 5 , 6 , 54 ) . Semliki Forest virus can also be artificially fused at the plasma mem - Bnot warmed 3 (cid:9) 1 (cid:9) 2 (cid:9) 3 + (cid:9) ( No warming step ) * + and - are used to denote presence or absence of 20 mM ammonium chloride in the medium . $ Virus production is given as percent of the positive control A1 and as log pfu in the medium at the end of the experiment ( in parentheses ) . Virus production as percent of control $ ( Log pfu ) Multiplicity ( pfu / cell ) 8 100 ( 6 . 62 ) 1 ( 4 . 68 ) 120 ( 6 . 70 ) 41 ( 6 . 23 ) 1 ( 4 . 79 ) 46 ( 6 . 28 ) 5 100 ( 7 . 06 ) 0 . 5 ( 4 . 79 ) 76 ( 6 . 94 ) 12 ( 6 . 15 ) 0 . 5 ( 4 . 76 ) 10 ( 6 . 07 ) 2 100 ( 6 . 58 ) 0 . 5 ( 4 . 30 ) 69 ( 6 . 42 ) 7 ( 5 . 43 ) 0 . 5 ( 4 . 26 ) 6 ( 5 . 34 ) brane of cells by lowering the medium pH ( 5 , 19 , 54 ) . If fowl plague virus infects MDCK cells by an endocytotic pathway passing through the lysosomes , it might also be expected to fuse at the plasma membrane if exposed to low pH . This seemed especially likely since low pH - dependent hemolysis and cell - cell fusion had been recently demonstrated for influ - enza viruses ( 19 , 55 , 56 ) . To test this , cells with prebound virus were suspended in media of pH 5 . 0 and pH 7 . 4 for 1 min at 37°C and examined by transmission electron microscopy after indirect ferritin immunolabeling . In the cells kept at pH 7 . 4 , ferritin was associated only with virus particles and not with the cell surface . No fusion ofthe virus with the cell surface was observed . In contrast , ferritin was attached to the plasma membrane only in samples exposed to low pH ( Fig . 10 ) . In several cases , clear continuity between the cell and virus mem - branes was observed , with ferritin only bound to the protruding virus profile ( Fig . l0 a and b ) . Fusion of viruses to membrane vesicles apparently shed from the cells was also observed ( not shown ) . Low pH treatment of MDCK cells in the absence of virus produced some disturbance of the plasma membrane but did not induce artifactual ferritin binding . To quantitate low pH - induced fusion of fowl plague virus to the MDCK cell plasma membrane , cells with prebound radioactive virus were incubated for 30 s at 37°C with media FIGURE 10 (cid:9) Fusion of fowl plague virus at the MDCK plasma membrane . Fowl plague virus ( 60 j . g ) was bound to MDCK cells for 1 h at 0°C and fusion was induced by incubating the cells for 1 min at pH 5 . 0 and 37°C . The cells were then fixed with formaldehyde and immunolabeled with anti - fowl plague virus spike IgG and ferritin - conjugated goat anti - rabbit IgG . Viruses are clearly recognizable by the ferritin attached to their membrane . In a thenucleocapsid is still clearly visible . In bthecapsid is barely recognizable , but the virus shape and ferritin - labeled spikes are still obvious . In c the spike proteins have presumably diffused in the plane of the membrane away from the site of fusion . A virus profile is still detectable ( arrow ) . Bar0 . 2 jm . x 106 , 000 . MATUiv FT At . (cid:9) Influenza Virus Entry (cid:9) 609 buffered between pH 5 . 0 and 6 . 5 , and then treated with neur - aminidase . We expected both fused and endocytosed viruses to be resistant to removal by neuraminidase . As the results in Fig . I 1 illustrate , considerably more radioactivity became resistant to neuraminidase at pH ' s < 5 . 5 than at pH 7 . 4 . The amount of radioactivity cell - associated at pH 7 . 4 was presumably due only to endocytosis , since fusion was not seen at this pH by electron microscopy . In a second experiment , the rate of fusion was compared to the rate of endocytosis ( Fig . 12 ) . Within 30 s of warming at low pH , 90 % of the bound virus radioactivity was neuraminidase - resistant . At pH 7 . 4 the rate was much slower ( Fig . 12 , see also Fig . 4 ) . Semliki Forest virus can be made to infect cells by fusing it to the host cell plasma membrane at low pH ( 5 , 54 ) . Unlike the normal infection through the endocytotic pathway , infection by cell - surface fusion is resistant to lysosomotropic agents ( 5 , 54 ) . Several attempts to infect MDCK cells with fowl plague virus by low pH - induced fusion at the plasma membrane in the presence of ammonium chloride were , however , unsuccess - ful . These experiments clearly demonstrate that fowl plague virus is capable of fusing with the MDCK cell plasma membrane at mildly acidic pH . Furthermore , the fusion process is distinct in rate and extent from the uptake by endocytosis observed at physiological pH . DISCUSSION Our results suggest that fowl plague virus infects MDCK cells by the following entry pathway : ( a ) binding to the cell surface ; ( b ) endocytosis in coated and possibly smooth - surfaced vesi - cles ; ( c ) transport to endosomes and secondary lysosomes ; and ( d ) fusion between the virus membrane and the lysosomal membrane which results in release ofthe nucleocapsid into the cytoplasm . Binding Like other orthomyxoviruses ( 36 ) , fowl plague virus binds to sialic acid - containing molecules on the MDCK cell surface . At 0°C , the proteases tested do not remove attached viruses , but m 6 u 81 E4a 2 a O t I (cid:9) I IS . S (cid:9) 6 . 5 (cid:9) 7 . 5 pH FIGURE 11 Association of fowl plague virus with MDCK cells at acidic pH and 37°C . Trace quantities of [ 35S ] - fowl plague virus were bound to MDCK cells for 1 h at 0°C and pH 7 . 4 . After washing with cold binding medium , cells were treated with media buffered to the indicated pH ' s for 30 s at 37° C , incubated with 5 mg / ml neuramin - idase for 90 min at 0°C , and cell - associated radioactivity determined . In this experiment - - 25 % of the added radioactivity was bound and 62 % of the bound virus was neuraminidase resistant after pH 5 . 0 treatment . 610 (cid:9) TILE JOURNAL Or CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 91 , 1981 Endocytosis 0 10 r (cid:9) - , ~ - " - - . 8 4 2 0 40 80 120 tlsed FIGURE 12 Kinetics of low pH induced cell association of fowl plague virus . Trace quantities of [ " S ) - fowl plague virus were bound to MDCK cells for 1 h at 0°C and pH 7 . 4 . Binding in this experiment was 30 % . After washing with cold binding medium , cells were incubated for the indicated times with pH 5 . 0 medium or pH 7 . 4 medium at 37° C , rapidly cooled , treated with 5 mg / ml neuramini - dase for 90 min , and cell - associated radioactivity determined . About 90 % of the bound virus was neuraminidase - resistant after 30 s at pH 5 . 0 . " , pH 5 . 0 ; 0 - 0 , pH 7 . 4 . high concentrations of neuraminidase are effective . No virus enters the cells in the cold in contrast to earlier reports ( 57 ) . After warming to 37°C , large amounts of virus prebound at 0°C spontaneously fall off . This phenomenon is greater when more virus is bound and is probably due to digestion of the sialic acid on the virus receptor by the viral neuraminidase . Similar virus shedding has been seen when hemagglutination reactions with influenza virus are conducted at 37°C ( 58 ) . The binding of fowl plague virus to MDCK cells is not greatly pH dependent and reaches an equilibrium value of - 40 % at pH 7 . 4 in 60 - 90 min . In electron micrographs , viruses are bound primarily to microvilli . Our morphological results indicate that the surface - bound virus is quickly endocytosed . At early times ( < 10 min ) , virus particles are seen in coated pits and coated vesicles and , later , in large , smooth - surfaced vacuoles and multivesicular bodies ( Fig . 8 ) . These structures are probably endosomes or secondary lysosomes ( 5 , 37 , 38 ) . Our electron microscopy findings are in agreement with the previous results of Dales and Choppin ( 7 ) , Baechi ( 8 ) , Dourmashkin and Tyrrell ( 9 ) , and Patterson et al . ( I1 ) . These authors concluded that influenza virus enters cells of the chorioallantoic membrane and Ehrlich ascites tumor cells by engulfment into vesicles or viropexis ( 59 ) . Patterson et al . , in particular , observed influenza virus entering chick cells in coated pits and coated vesicles and found that the entry process was insensitive to a number of metabolic and cytoskel - etal inhibitors ( 11 ) . The latter study also demonstrated , by ruthenium red staining , that the virus - containing vacuoles were sealed off from the extracellular medium and were , therefore , true vesicles and not fortuitous sections through membrane pits . In addition to coated pits and vesicles , fowl plague virus is frequently seen in uncoated depressions in the membrane and smooth vesicles completely filled by the virus particle . Similar structures were also noted by Baechi ( 8 ) after influenza virus binding to cells at 0°C . The importance of these smooth - surfaced pits and vesicles to influenza entry is unclear . They are not observed during Semliki Forest virus endocytosis in BHK - 21 cells ( 5 , 6 ) or during infection of MDCK cells by vesicular stomatitis virus ( unpublished observations ) . They may be caused by the plasma membrane progressively wrap - ping itself around the virus particle as more spikes are bound . Their formation may therefore be induced by the virus particle . The possible involvement of smooth - surfaced vesicles in the antibody - induced endocytosis of histocompatibility antigens has been previously noted ( 60 ) . At pH 7 . 4 , we found no evidence for fusion between the virus and the plasma membrane such as clear bilayer conti - nuity . Indirect ferritin immunolabeling also failed to detect spike proteins in the plasma membrane when cell - bound virus was warmed for 1 min at physiological pH . The efficacy of the ferritin immunolabeling technique to detect membrane fusion was confirmed by our observations of fusion when it was artificially induced by low pH ( Fig . 11 ) . Our results are there - fore in disagreement with those of Morgan and Rose ( 17 ) who concluded that influenza virus enters cells by fusion at the plasma membrane at physiological pH . Others have also con - cluded that influenza viruses do not fuse with the host cell plasma membrane ( 7 - 11 ) . Dourmashkin and Tyrrell ( 9 ) , in particular , ruled out cell surface fusion as an entry mechanism after tilt analysis of the electron microscope specimens . The morphological observations that the majority of viruses are endocytosed are corroborated by our biochemical studies which show that fowl plague virus is rapidly internalized into MDCK cells . The half - life ofsurface - bound virus is 10 - 15 min . Uptake is not influenced by the presence of ammonium chlo - ride . Dourmashkin and Tyrrell ( 9 ) and Skehel et al . ( 15 ) previously demonstrated that the drug amantadine , which blocks influenza infections , does not inhibit endocytosis . Dour - mashkin and Tyrrell ( 9 ) and Patterson et al . ( 11 ) have also shown by electron microscopy that influenza virus endocytosis is unaffected by the cytoskeletal inhibitors colchicine and cytochalasin B . The endocytosis of influenza virus thus closely resembles the endocytosis of both Semliki Forest virus ( 5 , 6 ) and many physiological ligands such as low - density lipoprotein ( 61 ) , asi - aloglycoproteins ( 38 ) , polypeptide hormones , ( 62 ) a2 - macro - globulin ( 63 ) , and lysosomal enzymes ( 64 ) . Two types of en - docytosis are recognized : phagocytosis and pinocytosis ( 65 ) . Phagocytosis is particle dependent and is blocked by cytochal - asin B . Pinocytosis , on the other hand , is particle independent , occurs continuously in many cell types , and is not inhibited by cytoskeletal drugs . Pinocytosis is responsible for fluid - phase uptake , and the uptake of ligands bound to the cell surface . The latter process is termed receptor - mediated when a physi - ological ligand is endocytosed and adsorptive when a non - physiological ligand is taken up ( 6 ) . In the case of Semliki Forest virus , which enters ( BHK ) baby hamster kidney cells by adsorptive endocytosis , uptake is inhibited at low temperature , is not sensitive to colcemid and only marginally sensitive to cytochalasin B , and is partially dependent on oxidative phos - phorylation ( 6 ) . Influenza virus , therefore , like Semliki Forest virus , probably uses a constitutive cellular process to enter cells . Role of Lysosomes in Infection Several lines of evidence suggest that a large fraction of the virus particles enters the lysosome or a lysosome - related com - partment after endocytosis . Viral antigens are seen by immu - nofluorescence in perinuclear vacuoles , a distribution charac - teristic of lysosomes ( 5 ) . Viral particles are also detectable in various intracellular vacuoles and in multivesicular bodies by electron microscopy . Dourmashkin and Tyrrell ( 9 ) also ob - served influenza virus in large vacuoles . The structures they saw may , however , be endosomes because they failed to stain for acid phosphatase ( 5 , 37 , 38 ) . The participation of lysosomes in the infective pathway of fowl plague virus entry is suggested by the results with lysosom - otropic agents . We find that infection of MDCK cells by fowl plague virus is inhibited by ammonium chloride and chloro - quine . Similar results have been previously reported for am - monium chloride , alkylamines , and amantadine in other cell systems ( 12 - 16 , 39 - 45 ) . All these drugs are less effective if added 1 h after infection and do not significantly change virus binding or internalization . Because the major effect of these agents on the cells is to raise the intralysosomal pH ( 48 , 49 ) , it is reasonable to conclude that they affect a lysosome - dependent stage in the infectious process . This interpretation is supported by detailed studies on amantadine . Kato and Eggers ( 13 ) , using an assay for uncoating based upon dye sensitivity of the genome , determined that amantadine had slight effect on virus uptake but blocked release of the viral genome . In agreement with this , Skehel et al . ( 15 ) found that amantadine inhibits viral gene expression . Recently , rimantadine ( an analog of amantadine ) was shown to prevent viral RNA from becoming RNAse - sensitive after entry into MDCK cells ( 16 ) . In control experiments , the viral RNA became degraded by RNAse added to freeze - thawed lysates of cells to which influenza virus had been adsorbed for 90 min at 37°C . In addition to preventing infection , ammonium chloride also prevents degradation of [ 35S ] methionine - labeled fowl plague virus into acid - soluble radioactivity in the medium after inter - nalization ( Fig . 4 ) . This material appears after a lag of 30 min in a synchronous infection in the absence of ammonium chlo - ride and probably results from the action of lysosomal or cytoplasmic hydrolases on viral proteins . During Semliki For - est virus infection of BHK cells , acid - soluble radioactivity is also released into the medium after a similar lag period ( 5 , 6 ) . The study of Marsh and Helenius ( 6 ) demonstrated that the released material was , in this case , almost exclusively free methionine with [ " S ] methionine - labeled virus . Degradation of Semliki Forest virus was , however , only partially blocked by chloroquine . Lysosomotropic weak bases have been shown to prevent degradation of low - density lipoprotein , insulin , and epidermal growth factor ( 50 , 52 , 66 ) which enter lysosomes after receptor - mediated endocytosis . Further evidence that fowl plague virus infects the cell by way of an intracellular vacuole was obtained from an experi - ment which showed that infection could be traced primarily to endocytosed viruses ( Table I ) . After inhibiting virus entry by antibodies , Patterson et al . ( 11 ) also concluded that endocy - tosed influenza virus was infectious . Although the effects of ammonium chloride in blocking the infection and preventing degradation of the virus suggest crit - ical involvement of the lysosome in the infective process , our data do not allow us to exclude the participation of a prelyso - somal vacuole , This compartment must , however , have lyso - somal characteristics , such as low pH and a complement of degradative enzymes , to account for our observations . Membrane Fusion We have demonstrated here that fowl plague virus possesses MATUiv ET AL . (cid:9) Influenza Virus Entry (cid:9) 61 1 a lowpH - induced fusion activity which is capable ofintroduc - ing the nucleocapsid into the cytoplasm of MDCK cells . When virus bound to the cell surface is exposed to a pH of 5 . 5 or below , a fusion reaction is triggered between the virus mem - brane and the plasma membrane . This was demonstrated both biochemically ( Figs . 11 and 12 ) and morphologically ( Fig . 10 ) . This fusion capacity is probably related to the lowpH - depend - ent hemolytic and cell - cell fusion activities observed in several laboratories , including ourown ( 19 , 55 , 56 ) . These reports also showed that cleavage of the hemagglutinin ( HA ) spike to HA I and HA2 , which is necessary for infectivity ( 67 , 68 ) , is also required for fusion . Fusion at the plasma membrane under our conditions did not lead to productive infection of the cells . The reasons for this are unclear . It is possible that lowpH is enough to induce membrane fusion but insufficient to permit the genome to uncoat . Lysosomal enzymes , for example , may modify the spike glycoproteins so that their interactions with internal proteins are altered . The existence of a membrane fusion activity at low pH may explain both how the influenza genome is transferred to the cytoplasm and why lysosomotropic weak bases block uncoat - ing . When the virus particle enters the lysosome or related vacuole , the low pH triggers a fusion between the vacuole membrane and the viral membrane . The genome is thereby introduced into the cytoplasm and initiates replication . When the pH is raised by lysosomotropic drugs , no fusion and thus no uncoating is possible . Recent amino acid sequence determinations of the HA2 subunit of the influenza hemagglutinin from a number of strains have demonstrated that the aminoterminal segment is both hydrophobic and highly conserved ( 69 ) . The sequence is homologous to the hydrophobic aminoterminal end of the F1 protein responsible for fusion in Sendai virus ( 6 ) . Richardson et al . ( 70 ) have shown that a series of oligopeptides with amino acid sequences similar to those of the aminotermini of the HA2 and the F1 proteins block virus infection . Moreover , with the paramyxoviruses , cell - cell fusion and hemolysis induced by the viruses was also inhibited . This strongly implicates the hydro - phobic aminoterminal segments of HA2and F1 proteins in the fusion reaction . Maeda and Ohnishi ( 55 ) have pointed out that the only charged amino acids in the first 18 residues of the HA2protein in fowl plague virus are two glutamic acid residues ( 71 ) , whereas the corresponding positions in the F1 sequence of Sendai virus have uncharged amino acids . If the acidic residues of the HA2 protein were protonated , as might occur in the lysosome , the amino terminal segment would become uncharged and possibly hydrophobic enough to induce mem - brane fusion . At neutral pH , the acidic residues would be charged and might not allow the protein segment to interact with the lipid bilayer to initiate the fusion reaction . In the three - dimensional structure of the influenza hemagglutinin recently reported by Wilson et al . ( 72 ) , the aminoterminal region of the HA2 subunit is located near the base of the spike protein . The low pH may induce a conformational change in the hemagglutinin molecule that would move the aminoter - minal segment ofthe HA2 protein into a favorable position for fusion . The pathway used by fowl plague virus to enter and infect cells may indeed be the ` Achilles heel " by which a number of agents gain access to the cell interior . In addition to Semliki Forest virus , vesicular stomatitis virus also follows this route in MDCK cells ( manuscript in preparation ) . Recently , the effects ofdiphtheria toxin have been shown to be blocked by lysosom - 612 (cid:9) THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 91 , 1981 otropic agents and the inhibition overcome by low pH treat - ment ( 73 , 74 ) . Presumably , the toxin uses the endocytotic - lysosomal route to reach the cytoplasm . More detailed knowledge ofendocytosis and the mechanisms responsible for virus uncoating should lead to a greater under - standing of current antiviral therapies and permit the design of more specific drugs . From the work described here , for exam - ple , it seems possible that the clinically important compound amantadine ( 12 ) inhibits influenza virus infections by raising the lysosomal pH , thus preventing intracellular virus fusion and uncoating . Because this effect of amantadine is on a general cellular rather than specific viral function , use of the drug may cause clinical side effects . This possibility should be kept in mind when future therapeutic applications of amanta - dine are considered . Hilkka Virta , Barbara Skene , Shirley Robinson , and Paul Webster provided excellent technical assistance ; Eva Bolzau and Annamette Ohlsen performed the electron microscopy ; and Annie Biais and Wendy Moses typed the manuscript . The authors are also grateful to Mark Marsh , Barbara Skene , and Judy White for helpful discussions , to Kathryn Howell and Judy White for reading the manuscript , to Daniel Louvard for helping with immunological techniques , to Profes - sor Hans - Dieter Klenk for giving us the original fowl plague virus isolate , and to Mary Holmes and Susan Mottram for cheerfully and rapidly digging up many references . Receivedfor publication 19 May 1981 , and in revisedform 20 July 1981 . REFERENCES 1 . Dales , S . 1973 . Early events in cell - animal virus interactions . Bacteriol Rev . 37 : 103 - 135 . 2 . Poste , G . , and C . A . Pasternak . 1978 . Virus induced cell fusion . In Membrane Fusion G . Poste and G . C . Nicholson , editors . Elsevier / North Holland . 306 - 357 . 3 . Homma , M . , and M . Ohuchi . 1973 . Trypsin action on the growth ofSendai virus in tissue culture cells . III . Structural difference ofSendai viruses grown in eggs and tissue culture cells . J . Viral 12 : 1457 - 1465 . 4 . Scheid , A . , and P . W . Choppin . 1974 . Identification of biological activities ofparamyxo - virus glycoproteins . Activation of cell fusion , hemolysis , and infectivity by proteolytic cleavage ofan inactive precursor protein ofSendai virus . Virology . 57 : 475 - 490 . 5 . Helenius , A . , J . Kartenbeck , K . Simons , and E . Fries . 1980 . On the entryofSemliki Forest virus into BHK - 21 cells . J . Cell Biol . 84 : 404 - 420 . 6 . Marsh , M . , and A . Helenius . 1980 . Adsorptive endocytosis ofSemliki Forest virus . J . Mol . Biol . 142 : 439 - 454 . 7 . Dales , S . , and P . W . Choppin . 1962 . Attachment and penetration of influenza virus . Virology . 18 : 489 - 493 . 8 . Baechi , T . 1970 . Elektronenmikroskopische Untersuchungen uber den Infectionszyklus van Influenza A - Viren in Erhlich - Aszites - Tumor - Zellen . Pathol . Microbial . 36 : 81 - 107 . 9 . Dourmashkin , R . R . , and D . A . J . Tyrrell . 1974 . Electron microscopic observations on the entry ofinfluenza virus into susceptible cells . J Gen . Viral 24 : 129 - 141 . 10 . Dales , S . , and M . W . Pons . 1976 . Penetration of influenza examined by means ofvirus aggregates . Virology 69 : 278 - 286 . 11 . Patterson , S . , J . S . Oxford , and R . R . Dourmashkin . 1979 . Studies on the mechanism of influenza virus entry intocells . J . Gen . Viral . 43 : 223 - 229 . 12 . Oxford , J . S . , and A . Galbraith . 1980 . Antiviral activity of amantadine : a review of laboratory and clinical data . Pharmacol Ther . 11 : 181 - 262 . 13 . Kato , N . , and H . J . Eggers . 1969 . Inhibition of uncoating of fowl plague virus by 1 - adamantanamine hydrochloride . Virology . 37 : 632 - 641 . 14 . Long , W . F . , and1 . Olusanya . 1972 . Adamantanamineand early eventsfollowinginfluenza virus infection . Arch . Gesamte Virusforsch . 36 : 18 - 22 . 15 . Skehel , J . J . , A . 1 . Hay , and J . A . Armstrong . 1977 . On the mechanism of inhibition of influenza virus replication by amantadine hydrochloride . J . Gen . Viral 38 : 97 - 110 . 16 . Koff , W . C . , and V . Knight . 1979 . Inhibition ofinfluenza virus uncoating by rimantadine hydrochloride . J . Viral 31 : 261 - 263 . 17 . Morgan , C . , and H . M . Rose . 1968 . Structure and development of viruses as observed in the electron microscope VIII . Entry ofinfluenza virus . J Virol . 2 : 925 - 936 . 18 . Cerejido , M . , E . S . Robbins , W . J . Dolan , . C . A . Rotumo , and D . D . Sabatini . 1978 . Polarized monolayers formed by epithelial cells on a permeable and translucent support . J . Cell Biol . 77 : 853 - 880 . 19 . White , J . , K . Matlin , and A . Helenius . 1981 . Cell fusion by Semliki Forest virus , influenza virus and vesicular stomatitis virus . J . Cell Biol . 89 : 674 - 679 . 20 . White , D . O . 1973 . Influenza vital proteins : identification and synthesis . Curr . Top . Microbial Immunol . 63 : 1 - 48 . 21 . Gaush , C . R . , and T . F . Smith . 1968 . Replication and plaque assay of influenza virus in an established line ofcanine kidney cells . Appl Microbial . 16 : 588 - 594 . 22 . Eagle , H . 1971 . Buffet combinations for mammalian cell culture . Science ( Wash . D . C . ) . 174 : 500 - 503 . 23 . Simons ' K . , A . Helenius , K . Leonard , M . Sarvas , and M . J . Gething . 1978 . Formation of protein micelles from amphiphilic membrane proteins . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 75 : 5306 - 5310 . 24 . Goudie , R . B . , C . H . W . Home , and P . C . Wilkinson . 1966 . Asimplemethod for producing antibodyspecific to a single selected diffusibleantigen . Lancet 11 : 1224 - 1226 . 25 . Fahey , 1 . L . 1967 . Chromatographic separation of immunoglobulins . In Methods in Immunology and Immunochemistry , Volume I , Academic Press , Inc . , New York . 321 - 332 . 26 . Ash , J . F . , D . Louvard , and S . J . Singer . 1977 . Antibody induced linkages of plasma membraneproteins tointracellularactomyosincontainingfilaments in culturedfibroblasts . Proc . Nall . Acad Sci . U . S . A . 74 : 5584 - 5588 . 27 . Ash , J . F . , P . K . Vogt , and S . J . Singer . 1976 . Reversion from transformed to normal phenotype by inhibition ofprotein synthesis inratkidney cellsinfected withatemperature - sensitive mutant ofRous Sarcomavirus . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 73 : 3603 - 3607 . 28 . Brandtzaeg , P . 1973 . Conjugates of immunoglobulin G with different fluorochromes . I . Characterization by anionic exchange chromatography . Scand J . Immunol . 2 : 273 - 290 . 29 . Blakeslee , D . , and M . G . Baines , 1976 . Immunofluorescenceusing dichlonotriazinylamino Fuorescenne ( DTAF ) . I . Preparation and fractionation of labelled IgG . J . Immunol . Methods . 13 : 305 - 320 . 30 . Helenius , A . , E . Fries , and J . Kartenbeck . 1977 . Reconstitution of the Semliki Forest virus membrane . J . Cell Biol . 75 : 866 - 880 . 31 . Kishida , G . , B . Olsen , R . Berg , and D . Prockop . 1975 . Two improved methods for preparing ferritin - protein conjugates for electron microscopy . J . Cell Biol . 64 : 331 - 339 . 32 . Reynolds , E . S . 1963 . The use of lead citrate at high pH as an electron - opaque stain in electron microscopy . J . Cell Biol . 17 : 208 - 212 . 33 . Lowry , O . H . , K . J . Rosebrough , A . L . Far , and R . l . Randall . 1951 . Protein measurement with the Folin phenol reagent . J . Biol . Chem . 193 : 265 - 275 . 34 . Laemmli , U . K . 1970 . Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly ofthe head of bacteriophage T4 . Nature ( Land . ) . 227 : 680 - 685 . 35 . Matlin , K . 1979 . Studies on chloroplast protein synthesis in vivo and in vitro . PhD Thesis . The Rockefeller University , New York . 36 . Schulze , I . T . 1975 . The biologically active proteins ofinfluenza virus : the hemagglutinin . In The Influenza Viruses and Influenza E . D . Kilbourne , editor . Academic Press , Inc . , New York . 53 - 82 . 37 . Tolleshaug , H . , T . Berg , W . Frohlich , and K . R . Norum . 1979 . Intracellular localization and degradation of asialofetuin in isolated rat hepatocytes . Biochem . Biophys . Acla . 585 : 71 - 84 . 38 . Wall , D . A . , G . Wilson , and A . L . Hubbard . 1980 . The galactose - specific recognition system ofmammalian liver : the route ofligand internalization in rat hepacytes . Cell . 21 : 79 - 93 . 39 . Eaton , M . D . , and A . R . Scala . 1961 . Inhibitory effect of glutamine and ammonia on replication ofinfluenza virus in ascites tumor cells . Virology 13 : 300 - 307 . 40 . Jensen , E . M . , and O . C . Liu . 1961 . Studies of inhibitory effect of ammonium ions in several virus - tissue culture systems . Proc . Soc . Exp . Biol . Med . 107 : 834 - 838 . 41 . Jensen , E . M . , E . E . Force , and J . B . Unger . 1961 . Inhibitory effect ofammonium ions on influenza virus in tissue culture . Proc . Soc . Exp . Biol . Med . 107 : 447 - 451 . 42 . Jensen , E . M . , and O . C . Liu . 1963 . Inhibitory effect of simple aliphatic amines on influenza virus in tissue culture . Proc . Soc . Exp . Biol . Med . 112 : 456 - 459 . 43 . Davies , W . L . , R . R . Grunert , R . F . Haff , J . W . McGahen , E . M . Neumayer , M . Pa dshock , J . C . Watts , T . R . Wood , E . C . Hermann , and C . E . Hoffmann . 1964 , Antiviral activity of I - adamantanamine ( Amantadine ) . Science ( Wash . D . C . ) . 144 : 862 - 863 . 44 . Neumayer , E . M . , R . F . Haff , and C . E . Hoffmann . 1965 . Antiviral activity ofamantadine hydrochloride in tissue culture and in vivo . Proc . Soc . Exp . Biol . Med . 119 : 393 - 396 . 45 . Fletcher , R . D . , J . E . Hirschfield , and M . Forbes . 1965 . A common mode of antiviral action for ammonium ions and various amines . Nature ( Land . ) . 207 : 664 - 665 . 46 . Miller , D . K . , and J . Lenard . 1980 . Inhibition of vesicular stomatitis virus infection by spike glycoprotein . J . Cell Biol . 84 : 430 - 437 . 47 . Helenius , A . , M . Marsh , and J . White . 1981 . Inhibition ofSemliki Forest virus penetration by lysosomotropic weak bases , J . Gen . Viral . In press . 48 . De Dove , C . , T . De Barsy , B . Poole , A . Trouet , P . Tulkens , and F . Van Hoof . 1974 . Lysosomotropic agents . Biochem . Pharmacol . 23 : 2495 - 2531 . 49 . Ohkuma , S . , and B . Poole . 1978 . Fluorescence probe measurement of the intralysosomal pH and the perturbation ofpH byvaryingagents . Proc . Nall . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 75 : 3327 - 3331 . 50 . Goldstein , J . L . , G . Y . Brumschede , and M . S . Brown . 1975 . Inhibition ofthe proteolytic degradation oflow density lipoprotein in human fibroblastsby chloroquine , concanavalin A and Triton WR 1339 . J Biol . Chem . 250 : 7854 - 7862 . 51 . Seglen , P . O . , B . Grinde , and A . E . Solheim . 1979 . Inhibition of the lysosomal pathway of protein degradation in isolated rat hepatocytes by ammonia , methylamine , chloroquine and leupeptin . Eur . J . Biochem . 95 : 215 - 225 . 52 . Marshall , S . , and J . M . Olefsky . 1979 . Effects of lysosomotropic agents on insulin interactions with adipocytes . J . Biol . Chem . 254 : 10153 - 10160 . 53 . White , J . , and A . Helenius . 1980 . pH - dependent fusion between the Semliki Forest virus membrane and liposomes . Proc . Nail . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 77 : 3273 - 3277 . 54 . White , J . , 1 . Karlenbeck , and A . Helenius . 1980 . Fusion of Semliki Forest virus with the plasma membrane can be induced by low pH . J . Cell Biol . 87 : 264 - 272 . 55 . Maeda , T . , and S . Ohnishi . 1980 . Activation of influenza virus by acidic media causes hemolysis and fusion oferythrocytes . FEBS ( Fed . Eur . Biochem . Soc . ) Len . 122 : 283 - 287 . 56 . Huang , R . T . C . , R . Rott , and H . D . Klenk . 1981 . Influenza viruses cause hemolysis and fusion of cells . Virology . 110 : 243 - 247 . 57 . Stephenson , J . R . , J . B . Hudson , and N . J . Dimmock . 1978 . Early events in influenzavirus multiplication . II . Penetrationofvirus into cells at 4° . Virology . 86 : 264 - 271 . 58 . Davis , B . D . , R . Dulbecco , H . N . Eisen , H . S . Ginsberg , and W . B . Wood . 1973 . Microbiology Second Edition , Harper and Row Publishers , Inc . , New York 1036 . 59 . Fazekas De St . Groth , S . 1948 . Viropexis , the mechanism of influenza virus infection . Nature ( Loud . ) . 162 : 294 - 295 . 60 . Huet , C . , J . F . Ash , andS . J . Singer . 1980 . The antibody - inducedclusteringand endocytosis ofHLA antigens on cultured human fibroblasts . Cell . 21 : 429 - 438 . 61 . Goldstein , J . L . , R . G . W . Anderson , and M . S . Brown . 1979 . Coated pits , coated vesicles and receptor - mediated endocytosis . Nature ( Land . ) . 279 : 679 - 685 . 62 . Barazone , P . , M . A . Lesmiak , P . Gorder , E . V . Obberghen , J . - L . Carpentier , and L . Orci . 1980 . Binding , internalization , and lysosomal association of " ' I - human growth hormone in cultured human lymphocytes : a quantitative morphological and biochemical study . J . Cell Biol . 87 : 360 - 369 . 63 . Willingham , M . C . , F . R . Maxfield , and I . H . Pastan . 1979 , asMacroglobulin binding to the plasma membrane ofcultured fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 82 : 614 - 625 . 64 . Neufeld , E . F . , G . N . Sando , A . J . Garvin , and L . H . Rome . 1977 . The transport of lysosomal enzymes . J Supramol . Simci . 6 : 95 - 101 . 65 . Silverstein , S . C . , R . M . Steinman , and Z . A . Cohn . 1977 . Endocytosis . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 46 : 669 - 722 . 66 . King , A . C . , L . Hernaez - Davis , and P . Cuatrescasas . 1980 . Lysosomotropic amines cause intracellular accumulation ofreceptors for epidermal growth factor . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 77 : 3283 - 3287 . 67 . Klenk , H . - D . , R . Rots , M . Orlich , and J . Blodorn . 1975 . Activation ofinfluenza A viruses by trypsin treatment . Virology . 68 : 426 - 439 . 68 . Lazarowitz , S . G . , and P . W . Choppin . 1975 . Enhancement of the infectivity of influenza A and B viruses by proteolytic cleavage of the hemagglutinin polypeptide . Virology . 68 : 440 - 454 . 69 . Min Jou , W . , M . Verhoeyen , R . Devos , E . Saman , R . Fang , D . Huylebroeck , W . Fiers , G . Threlfall , C . Barber , N . Carey , and S . Emtage . 1980 . Complete structure ofthe hemagglu - tinin gene fromthe human influenzaA / Victoria / 3 / 75 ( H3N2 ) strain asdetermined from cloned DNA . Cell . 19 : 683 - 696 . 70 . Richardson , C . D . , A . Scheid , and P . W . Choppin . 1980 . Specific inhibition of paramyxo - virus and myxovirus replication by oligopeptides with amino acid sequences similar to those at the N - termini ofthe F , or HA , viral polypeptides . Virology . 105 : 205 - 222 . 71 . Porter , A . G . , C . Barber , N . H . Carey , R . A . Hallewell , G . Threlfall , and J . S . Emtage . 1979 . Completenucleotide sequenceofan influenza virus hemagglutinin genefrom cloned DNA . Nature ( Land ) . 282 : 471 - 477 . 72 . Wilson , I . A . , l . J . Skehel , and D . C . Wiley . 1981 . Structure of the hemagglutinin membrane glycoprotein of influenza virus at 3 A resolution . Nature ( Loud . ) . 289 : 366 - 373 . 73 . Sandvig , K . , and S . Olsnes . 1980 . Diptheria toxin entry into cells is facilitated by low pH . J . Cell Biol . 87 : 828 - 832 . 74 . Draper , R . K . , and M . 1 . Simon . 19 $ 0 . The entry of diptheria toxin into the mammalian cell cytoplasm : evidence for lysosomal involvement . J . Cell Biol . 87 : 849 - 854 . MATUN IT AL . (cid:9) Influenza Virus Entry (cid:9) 61 3