AwareMedia – A Shared Interactive Display Supporting Social , Temporal , and Spatial Awareness in Surgery Jakob E . Bardram , Thomas R . Hansen , and Mads Soegaard Centre for Pervasive Healthcare , University of Aarhus Aabogade 34 , 8200 Aarhus N , Denmark { bardram , thomasr , madss } @ daimi . au . dk ABSTRACT Several CSCW studies have shown that coordination of work in hospitals is particular challenging , and that clinicians put much ef - fort into maintaining mutual awareness on the ﬂow of work . De - spite these apparent challenges , very little work has been done to design technology which helps people coordinate highly coopera - tive work in such a critical setting . In this paper we propose a novel way of supporting coordination in this hectic and time - critical en - vironment . AwareMedia is a system which promotes social , spa - tial , and temporal awareness in combination with a shared messag - ing system . AwareMedia runs on large interactive displays situated around the hospital , and it is designed especially to support coor - dination at an operation ward . We present the design , implemen - tation , and deployment of AwareMedia and based on preliminary data from our on - going deployment , we discuss how AwareMedia is working in - situ . Categories and Subject Descriptors H . 5 . 3 [ Information Interfaces and Presentation ] : Group and Or - ganization Interfaces— Computer - supported cooperative work ; H . 5 . 2 [ Information Interfaces and Presentation ] : User Interfaces— graph - ical user interfaces ; J . 3 [ Computer Applications ] : Life and Med - ical Science— Medical information systems General Terms Design , Human Factors Keywords Context - aware computing , social awareness , ubiquitous comput - ing , pervasive healthcare 1 . INTRODUCTION The scheduling and coordination of surgeries at an operation ward is a particularly challenging task at any modern hospital . Per - forming surgery is a highly specialized and advanced procedure that involves surgeons , nurses , anesthesiologists , a patient , an op - erating room , and various equipment . In addition , cleaning , patient Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . To copy otherwise , to republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . CSCW’06 , November 4 – 8 , 2006 , Banff , Alberta , Canada . Copyright 2006 ACM 1 - 59593 - 249 - 6 / 06 / 0011 . . . $ 5 . 00 . transportation , recovery , etc . have to be coordinated . This means that all the people involved in surgical procedures must coordi - nate their work and constantly maintain an awareness about the on - going ﬂow of work in the involved wards . Furthermore , although a substantial effort is put into making advanced operating sched - ules , the work around a surgery is highly contingent and numerous events may affect and change the schedule . These might include the arrival of an injured patient , the delay of an operation due to unforeseen complications , illness among the staff , and patients not being ready for surgery . In all of these cases , the plan needs to be adjusted and the people involved must be notiﬁed and informed . Getting status information and information about the most recently adjusted schedule passed on to all affected personnel is difﬁcult due to a work environment where people are constantly moving around , talking to patients , performing surgeries , etc . The coordination tasks faced by medical personnel are even more difﬁcult due to the lack of good systems for supporting this type of scheduling and collaboration . In most operating wards , the main methods for notifying people about status or changes are requiring people to ‘keep an eye’ on operation schedule whiteboards or call - ing them over the telephone [ 1 , 18 ] . The telephone is an efﬁcient tool for communicating messages , but it has some major drawbacks by being highly interruptive and time - consuming [ 3 ] . In this paper , we present a novel design of digital coordination mechanisms to be used in a hospital setting . The overall motivation for this design is to maintain most of the desirable functionality of whiteboards , while improving them with computer technology . The central idea is to provide clinicians with a sense of awareness about the unfolding of work and what their colleagues are doing , combined with the use of messages to foster asynchronous and less disruptive ways of communicating . Based on our research into the coordination of work in a hospital , awareness information is fur - ther divided into three supplementary types of awareness : ( i ) social awareness where a person has an awareness about another person . This awareness may include knowing where he is , the kind of activ - ity he is engaged in , or some self - reported status ; ( ii ) spatial aware - ness where a person maintains an awareness about a speciﬁc place and can e . g . monitor what is happening there ; and ( iii ) temporal awareness which provides an awareness about past , present , and future activities that are signiﬁcant to a person . These three kinds of awareness are not comprehensive but the most important ones that we have observed in coordination in a hospital environment . To explore the above issues and concepts , we designed , devel - oped , and deployed AwareMedia which is a pervasive platform for supporting the close coordination and communication taking place in a hospital , with special focus on the work in an operating ward . AwareMedia provides a design for how to support the three types of awareness listed above as well as support for asynchronous , non - disruptive communication using a simple message functional - ity . AwareMedia runs on large interactive displays which are easily visible and accessible to all clinical personnel and , as such , de - signed to work like the frequently used whiteboards in hospitals ( see e . g . [ 1 , 18 ] ) . The system has been deployed since December 2005 in a large Danish hospital and is in continuous use daily . It is used for scheduling and coordination of all operations inside 3 op - erating rooms and is installed in several places around the hospital , including the operation rooms , bed wards , and recovery wards . The primary goal of this paper is to report on the design of AwareMedia including some of its unique features speciﬁcally tar - geted for supporting intense , temporal coordination of critical work . Although this paper speciﬁcally deals with hospital work , a hospi - tal is not the only place where this kind of coordination is relevant . In this sense , the design principles and features of AwareMedia may be useful in other settings . We demonstrate the usefulness of AwareMedia in coordination work by reporting our initial ﬁndings from the real - world deployment of the system . In this paper , our emphasis is on describing AwareMedia as a system and we thus concentrate our discussion on the more system - related issues of the deployment . This paper starts by describing the AwareMedia system , its core design principles , its key interactive features that enable a shared awareness , and its underlying context - awareness infrastructure . Next , the paper explains how AwareMedia has been deployed in a large operating wards and it discusses how the system and its features are used in this context . Finally , we discuss AwareMedia in relation to similar CSCW systems before concluding the paper . 2 . AWAREMEDIA The design , development , and deployment process of AwareMe - dia is illustrated in Figure 1 . Field studies of the work at operation wards have been going on for years . In these studies , coordination , collaboration , interruptions , and awareness continuously reappear as central , but challenging , issues . In the spring of 2005 , we de - cided to design AwareMedia as a distributed , computer - supported collaborative work system for addressing some of these issues . The design was done in close cooperation with a group of clinicians and involved a series of idea - generating design and evaluation work - shops . In November the system was installed and tested in the hos - pital , users were educated , and in December 2005 the system was put into use . Figure 1 : The design and deployment process of the AwareMe - dia system . The outcome of previous research , our own ﬁeld studies , and the cooperation with clinicians during the design process revealed a series of concepts and requirements for such temporal coordination technologies . The system should support : • Public and shared social awareness , in the sense that social awareness is not personal ( “I know what my colleagues are doing” ) , but rather publicly available among all cooperating users ( “We all know what we all are doing” ) . For example , at an operation ward all clinicians should be able to access information on the current status and whereabouts of each other from e . g . large public displays . • Temporal awareness , helping users to keep an awareness of past , present , and future activities . Temporal awareness is core in temporal coordination since it helps users align their own actions to a log of past activities , to current activities , and to the anticipated future ﬂow of work . For example , a surgeon scheduled for an operation in the afternoon can plan his ward round accordingly , and can adjust the timing of the round if he is aware of any rescheduling of the operation . Similarly , clinicians often consult the operation schedule to see what kind of operation has occurred during the day in order to see , for example , what kind of equipment is in the room or to see who operated a certain patient . • Spatial awareness , helping users to understand and be aware of activities taking place in a speciﬁc room . Hence , to a large degree awareness is not only tied to persons ( social aware - ness ) but also to places ( spatial awareness ) . For example , knowing what is happening in an operating room , the status of the operation , the people in there ( including the patient ) , and potential delays are of utmost importance in the coordi - nation of work at an operation ward . • Communication , supporting written or spoken communica - tion which can be shared among collaborating clinicians . For example , a party - line functionality between all clinicians in - volved in a speciﬁc operation would be useful because all of them are rarely in the room at the same time . This com - munication should be both synchronous and asynchronous , enabling clinicians both to e . g . phone each other and leave messages . 2 . 1 The System The AwareMedia system has been designed as a large publicly accessible interactive surface which allows clinicians to maintain a shared , temporal , spatial , peripheral awareness of the unfold - ing of work at an operation ward . The support for awareness is supplemented with some basic support for communication . The main design hypothesis is that the combined overview of people , place , and time will help clinicians be more efﬁcient in the coor - dination of work , including managing contingent and critical situ - ations . Furthermore , several studies of medical work in hospitals have revealed that large public whiteboards play an essential role in the coordination and scheduling of work ( including operations ) in hospitals [ 1 , 2 , 16 , 18 ] . Hence , a fundamental design goal was to get information typically stored in clinical booking and scheduling systems ‘back on the wall’ by designing a large interactive display technology which could combine the affordances of whiteboards with the beneﬁts of computer scheduling systems . AwareMedia is a distributed system consisting of a number of services and clients . The clients were designed to run on large in - teractive displays . Figure 2 shows an example of an AwareMedia client . The left - hand side provides an overview of the ‘coordination room’ , the people at work , the ‘reserves’ , and a list of people asso - ciated with the ward . The right - hand side provides an overview of one operating room . If more displays are available , as in Figure 3 , then more operating rooms can be shown on the additional screens . Under the hood , AwareMedia is composed of four main types of technologies : • Video streaming technology which broadcast video between all participating AwareMedia clients . Video from e . g . the Figure 2 : AwareMedia showing video connection between the different operating rooms , status information for an operation , and the operation schedule . operating room support a general spatial awareness on the unfolding of work during surgery . • Operation scheduling technology is responsible for showing an updated view of the surgeries currently scheduled . This system supports temporal coordination through scheduling and re - scheduling of operations . • Context - awareness technology provides information about the activities and whereabouts of the clinical staff . Awareness information is based on sensor technology revealing context information like location , status , and activity . The location information is gathered by a location tracking system , track - ing the location of medical staff and patients . • Instant messaging technology that provides a simple writ - ten and spoken communication pathway between cooperat - ing users . Two typical deployments of AwareMedia are shown in Figure 3 and 4 . In Figure 3 , AwareMedia is deployed in the ‘coordina - tion room’ used at most operation wards as the central place for planning and coordination of all operations . Here , AwareMedia runs on multiple large publicly accessible displays and provides an overview of the work in several operating rooms . These displays are designed to resemble the whiteboards normally used and allow for shoulder - to - shoulder collaboration and discussion . In Figure 4 , AwareMedia is deployed inside an operating room on a 20” touch screen . This conﬁguration allows people inside the operation room to ‘look out’ into the coordination room and into other operating Figure 3 : The deployment of AwareMedia on two 42” touch screens in the coordination room . rooms . It is quite normal that surgical staff is responsible for oper - ations in two operating rooms and it is hence important to maintain an awareness of the unfolding of work in another room . A core design principle in AwareMedia is to create redundant awareness information by making the same awareness information available in many places and in several forms . For example , status and location information for a person is displayed on that person’s icon , and location can also be seen from the placement of the icon in a speciﬁc place ( e . g . in an operating room ) , and from the video images . In this way , AwareMedia provides a broad avenue of sup - plementary awareness information which helps the user to quickly judge the status , activity , and location of a person . An important design decision was to allow access to the system without requiring users to identify themselves before using the sys - tem . During our design workshops it was decided to make a system Figure 4 : The deployment of AwareMedia on a 20” touch screen in an operating room ( to the left in the picture ) . which had the same public access as whiteboards have . Only au - thorized persons have access to the operating ward where the dis - plays in the coordination room and the operating rooms are located . Hence , only trusted people can access the system . It was also de - cided to deploy AwareMedia in the patient ward and in the recovery ward . These places are still restricted to authorized personnel , but for privacy reasons , video is not broadcasted outside the operating ward . 2 . 2 Spatial Awareness In a hospital , clinicians put a lot of effort into maintaining an awareness of ‘signiﬁcant’ locations such as patient wards or oper - ating rooms . In operation wards different sign systems are used to reveal the status of an operation [ 1 , 18 ] and whole patient wards can be augmented with signs and symbols that reveal the status of the work and the where - about of clinicians , patients , and artifacts [ 5 ] . These observations were conﬁrmed during our ﬁeld studies and de - sign process . The goal of designing for spatial awareness is , there - fore , to provide people with an awareness of distinctive features of a speciﬁc location . In the operating ward , providing spatial aware - ness of an operating room includes revealing what kind of operation is taking place in there ; the level of activity ; status of the operation ; the kind of professionals in the room , including the patient ; and any contingent issues , like delays or unforeseen troubles . Figure 5 : Support for spatial awareness in AwareMedia . Figure 5 shows how spatial awareness is provided in the top right corner of the AwareMedia interface . The purpose of the live video stream from the operating room is to provide an overall picture of what is going on in the room , including the types of activities and people in there . The video is deliberately kept in a low quality reso - lution ( 160 × 120 at 6 frames / sec ) which has turned out to be a good compromise between providing just enough information in order to convey what people in the room are doing ( e . g . preparing for opera - tion , operating , closing the patient , or cleaning the room ) while not being privacy invading by revealing details like the part of the pa - tient being operated . The status is wrapped around the video image bar which reveals the current status of the operation indicated by the text below the video image . “Patient bedøvet” means “Under anesthetics” , for example . The status bar is cyclic , resembling the cyclic nature of all operations . Status is set by pressing the status bar on the touch sensitive screen or by voice command . Hence , sta - tus can be set without touching the display , which is a nice feature in a sterile environment like the operating room . While the status indicator ( the small arrow ) is moving down on the right side of the image , the surgery is being prepared and the patient anaesthetized ; when it is moving across at the bottom , the patient is being operated on ; when it is moving up , the patient is being closed and wheeled out ; and when it is moving across the top , the room is being cleaned and prepared for the next operation . The combination of the video image and the status bar is designed to give a very concentrated view on the current status of the operation room . To the right of the video image there is a list of the clinical per - sonnel in the room . This view provides a more detailed awareness of exactly who is in the room right now . The name and type of the operation is located below the list of people , and below that , the name and social security number of the patient in the operat - ing room ( not visible in Figure 5 ) . Note that this view of people in the room reveals who is actually in there , including the patient , and not who is scheduled to be there . The location tracking is done by tracking the clinical staff’s mobile phones or special electronic tags . Thus , the patient’s name is only visible when the patient is actually in the room . Besides the support for awareness , this latter part also has some implications for patient safety since clinicians would immediately spot if a wrong patient would enter the room . 2 . 3 Temporal Awareness Temporality is core to medical work in hospitals [ 20 ] and studies have shown how scheduling , temporal rhythms , temporal patterns , and temporal cycles helps clinicians perform and coordinate their work [ 1 , 16 ] . Clinicians align their work according to the unfolding of the schedule and especially to changes , like delays or cancella - tions , to the schedule . Furthermore , our observations and design process revealed that temporal hindsight or awareness of events that do not take place can also be an important constituent of coordina - tion and scheduling . On the face of it , one should expect planning and coordinating to be about the future but that is not always the case . For example , information about past or cancelled operations was important in many situations , such as when determining who is most able to perform an extra operation , which relatives to in - form about delays or cancellations , which beds to release for other purposes , etc . One of the advantages of the former paper - based scheduling system is that you can easily spot changes to the pro - gram as they are hand written across the operation schedule printed by a computer system . We aimed at imitating this feature by mak - ing past and cancelled operations occupy a salient position in the UI . The goal of designing for temporal awareness is hence to pro - vide medical staff with an awareness of past , present , and future activities and events which may be relevant to them . In the op - erating ward , the operation schedule for each operating room is an important part in temporal coordination and hence in temporal awareness . Support for temporal coordination is evident in two places in AwareMedia . First , the status bar which runs around the video feed in AwareMedia ( see ﬁgure refﬁg : room ) directly supports re - current temporal cycles in an operation [ 1 ] . Second , ﬁgure 6 shows how the AwareMedia interface supports temporal awareness . This schedule shows the planned operations for the day , including the Figure 6 : Support for temporal awareness in AwareMedia . type of operation , the patient , allocated clinicians , and notes . In order to support an awareness on temporal changes , the schedule also reveals if an operation is delayed ( ﬂashing yellow ) , if an acute operation is scheduled ( highlighted as red ) , or if an operation is cancelled ( moved to the bottom of the schedule ) . During the design process , it was veriﬁed that these kinds of cues were sufﬁcient to help clinicians maintain an temporal awareness about the unfold - ing of activities in the operating ward , also from other remotely situated parts of the hospital . Thus , changes to the schedule needed no longer to be communicated using telephones , thereby saving a lot of disturbing phone calls . 2 . 4 Context - Mediated Social Awareness Maintain a mutual awareness about the activities and where - abouts within a team of clinicians has proven to be central to the unfolding and coordination of work in hospitals [ 10 , 3 ] . During our ﬁeld studies and design process we observed how clinicians working in the operating ward continuously was monitoring the ac - tivities of each other and correspondingly was rendering important part of their activities visible for others . The goal of designing for social awareness is hence to provide people with a general awareness of their colleagues , what they are doing and where they are . The goal is not necessarily to show ex - actly what other persons are doing , but to provide cues that can be pieced together to form an overview of what other people are most likely doing . Relevant context clues in a hospital environment are , for example , location , status , activity , and future plans . Figure 7 : User icons with status and location context cues . Figure 7 shows how all users are displayed in AwareMedia . Each user icon shows a range of condensed information . The icon shows a small image of the person and his or her initials ( the three cap - italized letters ) . Considering that 120 - 130 persons are associated with the operating ward , associating initials and images helps users become acquainted with the names and faces of people with whom they do not collaborate with daily . The two smaller labels reveal the location as reported by the location tracking system and a self - reported status , similar to an instant messaging application . Status includes more general items like ‘working’ or ‘away’ as well as more speciﬁc ( clinical ) items like ‘operating’ or ‘ward round’ . The small antenna on the icon indicates that the user is wearing a loca - tion tag and a small phone icon indicates that the person’s mobile phone is being tracked . The color of the small icon to the left indi - cates the person’s profession and the colored line - border under the picture shows information about working hours ( e . g . black means working from 7 . 00 - 16 . 30 ) . Finally , a ﬁlled yellow oval means that the person is a replacement , who is not scheduled for speciﬁc op - erations , but can roam around the ward and assist where needed . Overall , the icons are information heavy , but by using different types of visual means like text , colors , and icons , the information is kept easily readable . 2 . 5 Communication The support for spatial , temporal , and social awareness in Aware - Media provides an overview about what is going on in the work set - ting . The awareness information visible on the displays can reduce the number of explicit awareness requests like phone calls about delayed surgeries or calls requesting information about the status of the current surgery . However , in the spectrum between explic - itly calling a person to deliver a message and providing awareness information , we identiﬁed a need to deliver non - urgent informa - tion in an unobtrusive but direct manner . We chose to implement a messaging system to facilitate this type of communication . Figure 8 : The chat window for an operating room . Figure 8 shows the instant messaging available for each operat - ing room . The chat can be used to post messages to the operating room from other AwareMedia clients as well as sending messages from the operating room to other locations . The chat will ﬂash yellow until clicked to indicate the presence of a new unread mes - sage . People using a mobile phone are also able to send messages to the operating theatre and people with mobile phones can receive messages as well . For example , the messaging system can be used to notify a surgeon on his mobile phone that the patient has been anaesthetized and is ready for operation . 2 . 6 Underlying Architecture The overall system is based on a distributed architecture shown in Figure 9 . The AwareMedia architecture is an example of an hy - brid collaborative architecture , which uses a peer - to - peer architec - ture for routing video between participating clients , and a client - server architecture for distributing information on operations , sta - tus information , location , etc . The architecture extends the AWARE architecture [ 3 ] . The server side runs an AwareMedia server which contains information on scheduled operations , clinical personnel , patients , types of oper - ations , and other data used in the AwareMedia client . From the AWARE architecture , the server inherits an awareness service which is responsible for broadcasting awareness information on persons and locations , like the operating rooms ; a context - awareness ser - vice which is responsible for maintaining information on the con - text of people and locations ; and a message service responsible for relaying messages between people and locations . Context cues Figure 9 : The overall AwareMedia architecture . used in AwareMedia is the location , self - reported status , and the activity of people . Activity is mapped to the currently scheduled operation for a user . The client runs three separate processes : the AwareMedia client responsible for the user interface displayed in Figure 2 , a video server responsible for acquiring , distributing , and showing the video images ( realized through P2P multicasting ) , and a location monitor that constantly scans for Bluetooth devices and reports back to the context - awareness subsystem of the server . 3 . DEPLOYMENT In November 2005 the system was deployed at the operating ward of a local hospital and by December 1st 2005 it went into pilot use [ 9 ] . At the time of writing , the system runs continuously with very limited support . The operating ward employs in total ca . 130 clinicians with 30 - 50 people present at the department during a normal day shift . Most operations are scheduled from 7 am to 4 pm during weekdays , but emergency surgeries can occur on evening or night shifts . Figure 10 : The operating deparment with deployed clients . Figure 10 illustrates the current deployment of the system . At the operating ward , the system is deployed inside three of ten operating theatres ( OR 3 , 4 , 9 ) ; two of them used for orthopedic surgeries and one for obstetric surgeries . One operating theatre typically runs 3 - 6 operations a day which means that the system supports 10 - 15 surgeries a day . Outside the operating ward , the system is deployed in the pre - surgery ward , in the recovery ward , in the patient ward three ﬂoors up , and a number of ofﬁces like the secretaries’ ofﬁces . Figure 11 illustrates how these clients are distributed across the hospital . In total , there are 30 - 50 users outside the operating ward . In total , 10 clients are deployed in different places in the hospital ( see Figure 11 ) and 15 mobile phones have been handed out to selected clinicians . Figure 11 : An overview of the hospital and the wards involved . All servers and services in the infrastructure are deployed on one server host . Depending on the context , three kinds of client conﬁg - urations have been deployed : 1 . A 20” touch screen , a webcam , a PC running AwareMedia and the video server , and a location monitor . This setup was mainly used in the operating rooms where clinicians could look into the coordination room , change status , and use the chat ( see Figure 4 ) . 2 . The two 40” touch screens deployed in the coordinating room at the operating ward . The coordinating room needed to keep an overview of all the operating theatres and we provided two large screens for easy access and extra screen estate . 3 . A standard PC with the AwareMedia software and a location monitor . This setup was used in the patient ward and in the recovery ward . AwareMedia is a standard . NET application and can hence run on any Windows XP PC . All installations of AwareMedia are , how - ever , done on dedicated PCs with a dedicated touch screen . Further - more , AwareMedia runs as a full - screen application occupying the whole screen estate and cannot be closed , resized , or moved . Location tracking is based on Bluetooth . The location moni - tor uses a modiﬁed Bluetooth USB dongle to scan the local en - vironment for Bluetooth devices . This location mechanism is not very accurate but it has turned out to be sufﬁcient to locate peo - ple within rooms , which is the desired accuracy for our purpose . The advantages are that we can use the existing Bluetooth devices ( like a phone ) for tracking and that it is very cheap . We only track people near some of the installed clients shown in Figure 10 and avoid putting location monitors in places where tracking should be disabled , like bathrooms , the cantina , etc . Clinicians are tracked using their phone or by using a small Bluetooth tag . The tag can be reused by clinicians by reassigning it e . g . between two shifts . 4 . AWAREMEDIA IN USE Before and during the deployment we have collected data about the use of the system to evaluate if the AwareMedia system has an impact on the daily coordinating and collaborating activities . An extensive logging system register the daily interaction with the sys - tem , including sent messages . Structured observations have been used both before and during the deployment to capture the interac - tion context not accessible through log analysis . For example , the number of users using the system or the number of users visually referring to the system without actually interacting with it . Four - teen structured interviews were carried out with doctors , nurses and supporting staff after the system had been used for three months . In this section we will present and discuss some of these ﬁndings , fo - cusing on the users’ conception of the system . 4 . 1 Awareness , Interruptions , and Messages Upon installation , the use of the system underlined our line of reasoning that awareness information was particularly useful in co - ordination work . As an operating nurse put it : [ With the system ] people are starting to react earlier than before . We can see the surgery in theatre 4 is delayed so the last patient can be operated in theatre 4 instead . And that is a clear advantage because then the surgeon can just throw the gloves and move on to the next patient . That is a huge advantage because sometimes the last patient needed to be postponed to the next day . It seems that the spatial awareness of the unfolding of work inside an operating room allows people in other rooms to react quickly to a delayed surgery and to reschedule the surgery . Sim - ilarly , the social awareness about the whereabouts of the clinical staff was used extensively - typically , to locate replacement work - ers or specialized workers ( e . g . operating technicians ) , but also to ﬁnd the best time to contact e . g . a doctor . If I know where the doctor is located sometimes I will not call him , e . g . when he is talking to a patient . Then I say , okay , maybe this is not the right time and [ instead ] I prepare some equipment . The quote is from another nurse commenting on how social aware - ness information about doctors can be used to pick a more appro - priate moment to contact a doctor . Besides picking another time to communicate , social awareness was also used to prioritize between different people and to chose communication means according to the situation . For instance , if people on the video image seem to be busy , a message is more appropriated than a phone call . The ability to send messages was a highly appreciated feature and 50 - 150 messages were sent every week between operating rooms and the coordinating central . In particular , the unobtrusive nature of message communication was valued in passing messages that did not require immediate response and messages to people involved in other activities . A doctor comments on his use of messages . There was a colleague I needed to get in touch with . He was operating a hip and that takes between 1 12 - 2 hours , so there is no point in calling him because his phone is outside the theatre and you do not want to interrupt a person who is operating . Then I just wrote to him [ the operating theatre chat ] that he should call me when he was done . Interviewer : Did he do that then ? Yes , he did , that was great . Several interviewees emphasized that the main advantage of the awareness information and the messaging system is the system’s ability to guard against unnecessary interruptions . Interruptions in a surgical context are very serious , people may lose valuable con - centration , lose valuable seconds , or the sterile environment may be affected by a person opening the door to deliver a message or check a status . Even during panicky conditions , certain social codes for when to interrupt , and when not to , are to be kept . If acute patients need to be put on the schedule you can right away tell the operating room of the change in the order of patients and you can use the message function if there is something that needs to be done . [ . . . ] That is — you do not walk in and interrupt . Of course I can call from that thing [ points to the phone ] , but it is easier to say - ah , right now is a good time to interrupt because I can see how far they are with the surgery [ referring to the status bar and the video ] The ﬁrst quote , from a head nurse , illustrates the nurse’s ability to use the system to propagate messages or changes to the oper - ation program without interrupting . The second quote illustrates how she uses the system’s status bar and the live video to monitor her colleagues and use this information to plan her interaction and cooperation with them . In other words , she both uses the system to refrain from interrupting but also to time her interruptions , when such are necessary . 4 . 2 Redundant Information As explained above , an important design principle is to provide redundant awareness information . For instance , a person might be represented at up to four different locations on the interface ( as a replacement , in the room , on the schedule , and on the video ) . During use , this design principle was appreciated since the cor - relation of redundant information can provide a more accurate view of the current situation . At the same time as I am checking the status bar I am checking the video in the coordinating central to see if the two things match . Sometimes people forget to move the status bar . In this situation the nurse checks both the video and the status bar to make sure that they are consistent . In this case , inconsis - tency is mainly a result of the fact that the status bar has not yet been updated . But in some situations , inconsistency can provide valuable information . For example , if a doctor is scheduled to be performing a surgery , the video and status bar show that the surgery is half way , but the doctor is located in another part of the operating ward . These context clues can be used to deduce that there might be a break in the operation schedule while the laboratory is testing a sample and that the doctor has used this break to attend to other activities . 4 . 3 Simple , Stable , and Predictable Displays As explained above , one of the most fundamental deployment decisions was to install dedicated computers and displays for run - ning AwareMedia , even though it can run on any standard PC . As such , the useful awareness and communication information is per - sistently visible which means that it is always there for ad hoc coor - dination , scheduling , awareness , and communication . Such ‘persis - tent displays’ contribute to a stronger sense of simplicity and pre - dictability . A similar observation was done by studying a smaller display for revealing room scheduling information outside meeting rooms [ 14 ] . The stability and predictability of AwareMedia displays enable users to quickly learn how to use the awareness display and how to read the different available context cues . For example , the fact that all icons of users are identical in all places they are used , helps maintain a stable representation of a user and his context cues , like his location , status , activity , job role , etc . Also the fact that all instances of AwareMedia running in the hospital show the same display helped users to easily move between the coordination room and the different operating rooms . Furthermore , the system’s pre - dictable and stable interaction mechanisms allowed users to de - velop a reasonably well - deﬁned set of normative rules for using the system . For instance , the users in the operating ward developed a set of rules for using the messages and the procedures for doing rescheduling . This dedicated display of AwareMedia contributes to making a simple , stable , and predictable view which is useful in getting a quick overview during the otherwise hectic workday at the surgical ward . Although the system is a highly interactive display system , it was most of the time used passively . During three work days we observed and counted the amount of people using AwareMedia in the coordination room and it turned out that 54 % of the time , clinicians were using it by only looking at it . 4 . 4 Open Issues During the ﬁrst two month of the deployment , we were moni - toring the use of the system closely are were able to mend different problems which arose in use . This co - presence and co - development is the main reason for the positive sentiments toward the system . Even though this may constitute a methodological problem , we found it necessary in order to create a useful system for the users . Looking back on the more longitudinal use of the system , there are however four more challenging aspects of the system which we need to look closer into in the future . First , having messages posted to the OR as a bulletin board is not always an appropriate design . Often you want to supplement this with a more traditional point - to - point instant messaging approach , e . g . being able to send a message to a person or a place which is not a an OR . Secondly , the location system did not work properly because there were not sufﬁcient tags to give each person a personal tag . Tags had to be places in a recharge plug and re - assigned to dif - ferent persons each morning . We have observed that the clinicians stopped using these tags , which indicates that the beneﬁt of location tracking does not outweigh the cost of recharging and reassigning them every day . On the other hand , however , the use of personal mobile phones for location tracking was used continuously . Hence , it is important to use location tracking devices which are personal and which either runs for an extensive period of time , or are devices which are used for other purposes , like the mobile phone . In our future research , we will no longer use the Bluetooth tags but will rely primarily on the use of personal mobile phones . Thirdly , because the displays were designed to be open and easy accessible everybody can go and change information on them . This constitutes a wide range of problems . For example , we observed that people could accidentally move an operation in time by just leaning against the display . This particular problem was mended by adding a ‘lock’ icon to the interface , but this is not the right solution . More generally , the system need to incorporate access control since legally speaking , we need to track who is altering clinical information . Finally , there is an open issues regarding privacy in such public displays . The whole purpose of making public displays is to make information publicly available . However , patient data and e . g . sur - gical procedures are highly sensitive data where privacy concerns are important . Furthermore , when using video streams from an operating room , we are exposing patients in the most vulnerable situation you can imagine . Hence , privacy is an important issue . There is , therefore , an inherent contradiction at stake here – how can we make private data publicly available ? We cannot provide one answer to this challenge and we believe that it to a large degree depends on the concrete application and its deployment conditions . In our current deployment of AwareMedia , the large displays are only visible from inside the surgical ward and its operating rooms , which are only accessible by authorized personnel , and not by e . g . patients , relatives , or visitors . In addition , AwareMedia does not broadcast video outside the operating ward . However , there is a request from the clinicians to use AwareMedia in e . g . the waiting lounge of the hospital . The current design of AwareMedia cannot be used in such public places where personal medical data cannot be shown . We think that by making the system aware of its current deployment context may help accommodate such privacy concerns and we are currently pursuing this line of research . 5 . RELATED WORK Little work on the design of coordination and scheduling sys - tems for medical work has been reported . However , a wide range of systems have been proposed over the years for other settings , mostly ofﬁce and academic environments , or more public places in general . AwareMedia combines and extends the design of a wide range of these systems , including systems using large interactive public displays , systems for providing social awareness , video me - dia spaces , instant messaging ( IM ) systems , and scheduling and calendar systems . A wide range of research has been done to make systems for social awareness , including Elvin [ 7 ] , the ‘Awarenex’ which sup - ports a mutual awareness by listing people , their location , and their current online schedules [ 17 ] , and StudioBRIDGE which is an IM - based system that integrates individual presence information with additional awareness information about groups , locations , and events of the community [ 19 ] . Some work has also been done in the use of large displays for awareness purposes . Designed as a public bul - letin board , the Notiﬁcation Collage [ 8 ] allows distributed and co - located colleagues to post media elements onto a real - time collab - orative surface that all members can see , including live video from desktop cameras and activity indicators . Similarly , Kimura [ 12 ] provides users with an awareness on the progress on their work and colleagues , and display this on peripheral large displays . All of this research on social awareness has , however , primarily fo - cused on providing one user with a personal awareness on his or her colleagues current work , whereabouts , and status , and has mainly been tested in ofﬁce - like environments . Common to these systems is that they share awareness information for individual or personal use . The main distinction of AwareMedia from this previous work is that it integrates awareness information about people , places , and events in time ( operations ) into one publicly shared display where all relevant persons can see what their colleagues are doing , where they are , etc . Early projects on providing awareness to distributed workgroups gave a sense of remote participants , their locations , and their activ - ities through audio and video [ 6 , 4 ] . The use of video in Aware - Media is a direct successor to this early work . One small , but im - portant , difference is that video in AwareMedia is used for spa - tial awareness and not for social awareness , which was the pri - mary focus in Rave and Portholes . The media space in AwareMe - dia is , however , using modern webcam technology and is as such deeply integrated into the display , user interface , and architecture of AwareMedia . This use of a media space underlines the basic design principle of providing a rich picture on awareness having redundant awareness information available . The use of instant messaging ( IM ) has been exploding recently and IM is now an important source of awareness information for many ofﬁce workers [ 13 ] . Some work has been done to support IM on large shared displays for workgroup interaction which seeks to extend the beneﬁts of IM beyond people’s personal machines and into publicly accessible groupware [ 11 ] . Even though most IM systems support conferences with more than two participants , this continues to be the exception rather than the rule . In AwareMedia , in contrast , groupcast communication is always default in order to support the shared public awareness involving all persons in the operating ward . Furthermore , messages are not directed to persons but to locations , like the operating room . 6 . SUMMARY In this paper we have presented AwareMedia , which is a system designed to support social , spatial , and temporal awareness in a hospital and enables users to use simple , shared messaging for easy and asynchronous communication . Key features of the system in - clude the use of video media spaces for providing spatial awareness of e . g . an operating room ; using consistent user representations for social awareness ; displaying past , present , and future operations for temporal awareness ; using a location - and context - awareness subsystem for revealing context cues to users ; using a shared mes - saging system for broadcasting messages related to rooms ( as op - posed to sending messages to people ) ; and the use of stable , persis - tent , and predicable interactive displays situated in strategic places around the hospital . AwareMedia runs continuously at a operating ward and is de - ployed in ten different settings , including three operating rooms . After three months of deployment , the system handles all opera - tions in the three ORs and the clinicians have abandoned using the old paper - based operations schedules . The space in this paper did not allow for detailed reports from the deployment of AwareMe - dia , but there is substantial evidence that the system helps clini - cians to coordinate their work in new ways by providing a shared awareness . This helps them time interruptions appropriately , eases simple message communication , and helps locate people within the ward . The facts that AwareMedia shows the same contextual infor - mation in many redundant ways and that it is a stable , persistent , and predictive display for easy visual reference , was also reported as a major beneﬁt of the system . Acknowledgments This research has been supported by the Competence Centre ISIS Katrinebjerg . We thank the surgical staff at Horsens Sygehus who enthusiastically participated in this project . Christian Jonikeit has implemented a substantial part of AwareMedia and Martin Mo - gensen has helped deploy the context - awareness infrastructure . 7 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] J . E . Bardram . Temporal coordination – on time and coordination of collaborative activities at a surgical department . Computer Supported Cooperative Work . An International Journal , 9 ( 2 ) : 157 – 187 , 2000 . [ 2 ] J . E . Bardram and C . Bossen . A web of coordinative artifacts : collaborative work at a hospital ward . In GROUP ’05 : Proceedings of the 2005 international ACM SIGGROUP conference on Supporting group work , pages 168 – 176 , New York , NY , USA , 2005 . ACM Press . [ 3 ] J . E . Bardram and T . R . Hansen . The AWARE architecture : supporting context - mediated social awareness in mobile cooperation . In Proceedings of the 2004 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work , pages 192 – 201 . ACM Press , 2004 . [ 4 ] S . A . Bly , S . R . Harrison , and S . Irwin . Media spaces : bringing people together in a video , audio , and computing environment . Commun . ACM , 36 ( 1 ) : 28 – 46 , 1993 . [ 5 ] C . Bossen . The Parameters of Common Information Spaces : The Heterogeneity of Cooperative Work at a Hospital Ward . In Proceedings of the 2002 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , pages 176 – 185 . ACM Press , 2002 . [ 6 ] P . Dourish and S . Bly . Portholes : supporting awareness in a distributed work group . In CHI ’92 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , pages 541 – 547 , New York , NY , USA , 1992 . ACM Press . [ 7 ] G . Fitzpatrick , T . Mansﬁeld , S . Kaplan , D . Arnold , T . Phelps , and B . Segall . Augmenting the Workaday World with Elvin . In Proceedings of the Sixth European conference on Computer supported cooperative work ( ECSCW99 ) , pages 431 – 450 , Copenhagen , Denmarkj , Nov . 1999 . [ 8 ] S . Greenberg and M . Rounding . The notiﬁcation collage : posting information to public and personal displays . In CHI ’01 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , pages 514 – 521 , New York , NY , USA , 2001 . ACM Press . [ 9 ] T . R . Hansen , J . E . Bardram , and M . Soegaard . Moving Out of the Lab : Deploying Pervasive Technologies in a Hospital . IEEE Pervasive Computing , 5 ( 3 ) : 24 – 31 , July - September 2006 . [ 10 ] C . Heath , D . vom Lehn , J . Hindmarsh , M . Svensson , Sanchez , and P . Luff . Conﬁguring Awareness . Computer Supported Cooperative Work . An International Journal , 11 ( 3 - 4 ) : 317 – 347 , 2002 . [ 11 ] E . M . Huang , D . M . Russell , and A . E . Sue . Im here : public instant messaging on large , shared displays for workgroup interactions . In CHI ’04 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , pages 279 – 286 , New York , NY , USA , 2004 . ACM Press . [ 12 ] B . MacIntyre , E . D . Mynatt , S . Vodia , K . M . Hansen , J . Tullio , and G . M . Corso . Support for Multitasking and Background Awareness Using Interactive Peripheral Displays . In Proceeding of ACM User Interface Software and Technology 2001 ( UIST01 ) , pages 11 – 14 , Orlando , Florida , USA , Nov . 2001 . [ 13 ] B . A . Nardi , S . Whittaker , and E . Bradner . Interaction and outeraction : instant messaging in action . In CSCW ’00 : Proceedings of the 2000 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work , pages 79 – 88 , New York , NY , USA , 2000 . ACM Press . [ 14 ] K . O’Hara , M . Perry , and S . Lewis . Social coordination around a situated display appliance . In CHI ’03 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , pages 65 – 72 , New York , NY , USA , 2003 . ACM Press . [ 15 ] W . Prinz , M . Jarke , Y . Rogers , K . Schmidt , and V . Wulf , editors . Proceedings of the Seventh European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , Bonn , Germany , Sept . 2001 . Kluwer Academic Publishers . [ 16 ] M . Reddy , P . Dourish , and W . Pratt . Coordinating heterogeneous work : Information and representation in medical care . In Prinz et al . [ 15 ] , pages 239 – 258 . [ 17 ] J . C . Tang , N . Yankelovich , J . Begole , M . V . Kleek , F . Li , and J . Bhalodia . Connexus to awarenex : extending awareness to mobile users . In CHI ’01 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , pages 221 – 228 , New York , NY , USA , 2001 . ACM Press . [ 18 ] Y . Xiao , C . Lasome , J . Moss , C . Mackenzie , and S . Faraj . Cognitive properties of a whiteboard : A case study in a trauma centre . In Prinz et al . [ 15 ] , pages 259 – 278 . [ 19 ] S . Yee and K . S . Park . Studiobridge : using group , location , and event information to bridge online and ofﬂine encounters for co - located learning groups . In CHI ’05 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , pages 551 – 560 , New York , NY , USA , 2005 . ACM Press . [ 20 ] E . Zerubavel . Patterns of Time in Hospital Life : a Sociological Perspective . University of Chicago Press , Chicago , 1979 .