A neurocomputational system for relational reasoning Barbara J . Knowlton 1 , Robert G . Morrison 2 , John E . Hummel 3 and Keith J . Holyoak 1 1 Department of Psychology , University of California , Los Angeles , Los Angeles , CA 90095 , USA 2 Department of Psychology , Neuroscience Institute , Loyola University Chicago , Chicago , IL 60626 , USA 3 Department of Psychology , University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign , Champaign , IL 61820 , USA The representation and manipulation of structured rela - tions is central to human reasoning . Recent work in computational modeling and neuroscience has set the stage for developing more detailed neurocomputational models of these abilities . Several key neural ﬁndings appear to dovetail with computational constraints de - rived from a model of analogical processing , ‘Learning and Inference with Schemas and Analogies’ ( LISA ) . These include evidence that ( i ) coherent oscillatory activity in the gamma and theta bands enables long - distance commu - nication between the prefrontal cortex and posterior brain regions where information is stored ; ( ii ) neurons in prefrontal cortex can rapidly learn to represent abstract concepts ; ( iii ) a rostral - caudal abstraction gradient exists in the PFC ; and ( iv ) the inferior frontal gyrus exerts inhibi - tory control over task - irrelevant information . How is thinking realized in the human brain ? One of the deepest puzzles for cognitive neuroscience is to explain how the most distinctively human types of think - ing and reasoning are realized in the brain . Humans can grasp analogies between disparate situations , infer hidden causes of observed events , apply general rules to novel situations , and learn new abstractions from experience [ 1 – 3 ] . Such intellectual abilities , which exceed those of any other extant primate species ( perhaps in a qualitative manner [ 4 ] ) are difﬁcult to capture in any computational model , but pose particular challenges for those that aim for neural ﬁdelity . How does the brain organize neurons , which are basically simple computing devices , so as to achieve the kinds of complexity manifested in human thinking and reasoning ? Research over the past decade and a half has begun to address this challenge . Cognitive neuropsychological and neuroimaging studies have implicated various subregions of the prefrontal cortex ( PFC ; Figure 1 ) as critical parts of a larger network supporting higher cognition ( for reviews , see [ 5 – 9 ] ) . The most anterior lateral portion of the PFC , generally termed frontopolar or rostrolateral ( RLPFC ) , is activated by tasks that require integration of multiple relations , processing relatively abstract concepts , or nego - tiating hierarchical goal structures [ 10 – 22 ] . More dorsal and inferior areas of the PFC have also been implicated in the systematic control of representations necessary for these processes [ 10 , 13 , 20 , 23 – 25 ] . Over roughly the same time period , a number of compu - tational models [ 26 – 30 ] have attempted to explain aspects of human thinking and reasoning within neural systems , differing in their architectures and domains of application ( Table 1 ) . A substantial gap remains , however , between current theories of PFC function and computational mod - els capable of actually performing tasks involving thinking Opinion Glossary Active memory : information in a state of current readiness for use in processing ( including the active portion of LTM ) , typically over a time span of around 20 seconds . Analogical mapping : the process of identifying systematic correspondences between elements of two situations ( analogs ) based on relational structure . Cross - frequency coupling : interactions between different frequency bands , such as theta and gamma , which aid in integrating neural activity across different spatial and temporal scales . Driver : in LISA , an analog that is currently in active memory and serves as a generator of spreading activation . Phase set : in LISA , the set of mutually desynchronized role bindings represented by neuronal oscillations . The phase set corresponds to the current focus of attention and is the most significant bottleneck for reasoning with relations . The phase set is equivalent to working memory ( WM ) for relations . Proposition : a predicate instantiated by binding its role ( s ) to particular arguments ( objects or other propositions ) . A proposition is the smallest unit of representation that can have a truth value : intuitively , a ‘complete thought’ . In LISA , a proposition is represented by a hierarchy of structure units . Proxy unit : a transient representation of a structure unit , formed in prefrontal cortex in order to support structured reasoning , such as an analogical comparison . Recipient : in LISA , an analog that is currently receiving activation from the driver . There may be multiple recipients in long - term memory ( during retrieval ) or a single recipient in active memory ( during mapping , inference , and schema induction ) . Role - based relational reasoning : reasoning that depends on the active representation and manipulation of concepts involving roles and role binding ( see ‘proposition’ ) . Role binding : the binding of a single argument ( object or proposition ) to a single role associated with a predicate . Schema : a relatively abstract relational structure representing a category or class of situations ( e . g . , a schema for a type of problem ) . In LISA , schemas can be formed as a consequence of comparing two or more relatively specific analogs . Semantic unit : a unit that represents a simple element of meaning , associated with neurons in posterior cortex . In LISA , semantic units are the sole conduits for the transmission of activation between distinct analogs . Spike - timing - dependent plasticity : a phenomenon based on evidence that if a neuron is being driven at a high rate , as occurs in the high gamma band , the inputs driving it will be strengthened . It provides a neural mechanism by which the kind of synchronous activity that in the LISA model supports dynamic representations will also lead to synaptic strengthening . Structure unit : in LISA , a unit representing a component of a proposition within an analog : P ( proposition ) , RB ( role binding ) , O ( object ) , and R ( role ) ; or a correspondence between elements of two analogs ( M ) . Such units may be associated with neurons in posterior cortex ( when stored in LTM ) , but must also be associated with dynamically recruited neurons in prefrontal cortex ( see ‘proxy unit’ ) . Corresponding author : Knowlton , B . J . ( knowlton @ psych . ucla . edu ) . TICS - 1093 ; No . of Pages 9 1364 - 6613 / $ – see front matter ! 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tics . 2012 . 06 . 002 Trends in Cognitive Sciences xx ( 2012 ) 1 – 9 1 and reasoning . Functional theories often highlight very general concepts such as ‘abstraction’ and ‘relational inte - gration’ , which though potentially helpful remain ill - de - ﬁned in the absence of computational instantiations . Here we attempt to build an initial bridge across this gap . Focusing on computational mechanisms instantiated in a leading model of relational reasoning , ‘Learning and Inference with Schemas and Analogies’ ( LISA ; [ 27 , 31 ] ) , we review the neural literature to construct more speciﬁc hypotheses about how these mechanisms may be realized in the human brain . Even though our focus is on the LISA model , we will also note connections with other neurocom - putational models . Our opinion article reveals a remark - able convergence between constraints on models of human reasoning derived from computational analyses , behavior - al experiments , and neurophysiological investigations . Al - though necessarily preliminary , we hope that this effort will help the development of more detailed neural models of high - level cognition . Role - based relational reasoning in LISA The LISA model provides a computational account of role - based relational reasoning : inferences that depend on the roles that entities play , not just on perceptual similarity . For example , knowing that Sam is an enemy of Brian , and Dylan is a friend of Sam , a person might conjecture that Dylan may also be an enemy of Brian ( Figure 2 ) . This ‘mutual support’ schema may have itself been acquired through analogical reasoning , by comparing speciﬁc cases that share a common relational structure . LISA codes an analog by binding distributed repre - sentations of roles to distributed representations of their ﬁllers ( coded on separate pools of semantic units ; Figure 2 ) . Semantic units are assumed to be coded by neurons in posterior regions . For each individual analog , a hierarchy of localist structure units represents objects ( O ) , relational roles ( R ) , individual role bindings ( RB ) , and complete propositions ( P ) . Structure units may be coded in long - term memory ( LTM ) , but in order to be made available for active comparisons , they require a transient form ( proxy units ) in active memory [ 32 ] . Dur - ing mapping , the emerging correspondences are also coded by proxy units , called M ( mapping ) units , that connect structure units of a given type across the two analogs ( e . g . , P units to P units ) . These explicit learned correspondences allow LISA to assess the overall simi - larity between two analogs [ 33 ] and to generate sensible PC TPJ ACC MTL ATL U F DLPFC RLPFC V L P F C S LF TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences Figure 1 . Anatomy and connections related to relational reasoning . Areas of the prefrontal cortex ( PFC ) frequently identified in reasoning studies include the rostrolateral prefrontal cortex ( RLPFC ; anterior region of the inferior frontal gyrus , approximately Brodmann area 10 , sometimes referred to as frontopolar prefrontal cortex ) , the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex ( DLPFC ; anterior region of the middle frontal gyrus , approximately Brodmann areas 9 / 46 ) , and the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex ( VLPFC ; posterior region of the inferior frontal gyrus , approximately Brodmann areas 47 / 45 / 44 ) . The anterior temporal lobe ( ATL ; located on the anterior lateral surface of the temporal lobe , approximately Brodmann areas 20 , 31 , 38 ) is frequently associated with semantic memory ( see [ 72 ] ) and is important for reasoning about semantic relations [ 24 ] . The medial temporal lobe ( MTL ; located on the medial surface of the temporal lobe including the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex , approximately Brodmann areas 27 , 28 , 34 , 35 , 36 ) is critical for episodic memory [ 73 ] , and thus is important for relational reasoning about specific events . The ATL and MTL are connected to areas in the VLPFC via the uncinate fasiculus ( UF ) . Regions in the parietal lobe , such as areas around and including the precuneus ( PC ; approximately Brodmann area 7 ) and the temporal parietal junction ( TPJ ; approximately Brodmann area 39 ) have heavy reciprocal connections to the PFC via the superior longitudinal fasciculus ( SLF ) . These areas are frequently associated with tasks requiring relational reasoning about visuospatial entitites . The anterior cingulate cortex ( ACC ; located on the medial surface of prefrontal cortex approximately , Brodmann areas 24 , 32 , 33 ) is frequently active during relational reasoning and has reciprocal connections to the DLPFC . Table 1 . Major neurocomputational models of human thinking Model Architecture Domain ( s ) of Application Unique Characteristics SMRITI [ 28 ] Localist connectionist network using binding by synchrony Episodic memory encoding , storage , binding and retrieval Corresponds to known architecture of hippocampus LISA [ 27 , 31 ] Distributed connectionist network using binding by synchrony Relational reasoning Integrates dynamic binding in WM with static binding in LTM , enabling symbolic processing to arise from a neural architecture STAR - 2 [ 26 ] Connectionist network using tensor products to code bindings Relational reasoning Tensor rank ( number of basis vectors that together deﬁne the tensor ) corresponds to relational complexity , predicting difﬁculty of reasoning tasks ACT - R with neural modules [ 30 ] Production system integrated with modules for perception , motor responses , spatial representation , memory retrieval , and goal maintenance Solving algebraic equations and related laboratory tasks Provides a macro - level mapping between information - processing modules and brain areas , coupled with an analysis of the time course of activation for each module SAL ( Synthesis of ACT - R and Leabra ) [ 29 ] Production system with declarative memory ( ACT - R ) ; subsymbolic processes realized by a connectionist network based on a point - neuron activation function ( Leabra ) Spatial navigation and search Integration of symbolic control processes with subsymbolic representations and learning mechanisms , using a neurally - constrained architecture Opinion Trends in Cognitive Sciences xxx xxxx , Vol . xxx , No . x TICS - 1093 ; No . of Pages 9 2 structured inferences based on correspondences between elements of the two analogs . LISA exploits dynamic binding coded by neural synchro - ny [ 34 ] to impose a hierarchical temporal structure on knowledge representations within working memory ( WM ) . A small number of role bindings in one analog ( the driver ) can enter the phase set – the set of mutually desynchronized role bindings . The phase set corresponds to the current focus of attention , and is the most signiﬁcant bottleneck in the system . Each individual phase ( the smal - lest unit of WM ) corresponds to one role binding ( i . e . , an RB unit and its constituents ) . The size of the phase set is determined by the number of role - ﬁller bindings ( phases ) that can be simultaneously active but mutually out of synchrony . The maximum number is proportional to the length of time between successive peaks in a phase ( the period of the oscillation ) divided by the duration of each phase ( at the level of small populations of neurons ) and / or temporal precision ( at the level of individual spikes ) [ 35 ] . Binding may be accomplished by synchrony in the > 30 Hz ( gamma ) range , with a neuron or population of neurons generating one spike ( or burst ) approximately every 25 ms , implying WM capacity of approximately 4 - 6 role bindings ( roughly 2 - 3 propositions ) . This value is consistent with estimates of WM capacity based on behavioral evidence ( e . g . , [ 36 ] ) and may have roots in the mechanisms by which information is processed throughout the brain , including lower - level posterior cortex [ 37 ] . Because of the strong capacity limit on its phase set , LISA’s processing is necessarily highly sequential , Supported + Sam Supports + Dylan Supports + Dylan Supported + Sam T i m e Supported + Sam Supports + Dylan Semantic + units Structure units e1 e2 s1 s2 S B D e2 + B s2 + S S1 + D e2 + B e ( S , B ) s ( D , S ) Enemy - of ( Sam , Brian ) Semantic units Semantic units Structure units Enemy - of ( Sam , Brian ) Supports ( Dylan , Sam ) Enemy - of ( Dylan , Brian ) e1 e1 e2 e1 + S e1 + S RB units P units e2 + B e2 + B E1 + D e2 + B e ( D , B ) s ( D , S ) e ( S , B ) S1 + D s1 + R s2 + S e2 + B e ( R , B ) s ( R , S ) e ( S , B ) ( a ) ( b ) ( d ) ( c ) Enemy - of ( Sam , Brian ) Supports ( Dylan , Sam ) Enemy - of ( Dylan , Brian ) E1 + D s2 + S e2 s1 s1 s2 s2 S S B D B D R & O units S t r u c t u r e un i t s Supports ( Dylan , Sam ) Enemy - of ( Ralph , Brian ) e ( D , B ) e1 + S E1 + D TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences Figure 2 . Representation of propositions in the LISA model . ( a ) A pool of semantic units ( bottom ) , which are connected to localist structure units that capture bindings at successive levels of generality : individual roles and objects , bindings of objects to roles , and bindings of role / filler combinations into propositions . ( b ) In a single phase of the dynamic form of binding , one role binding of one proposition becomes active , along with its constituent O and R units and associated semantic units . ( c ) In a subsequent phase , a different role binding and its constituents are activated in synchrony with each other ( and out of synchrony with the first role binding ) . ( d ) The overall pattern in which structure units for the proposition fire across a series of temporal phases . Input Analogretrieval Mapping Analogicalinference Schemainduction Guidedpattern recognition Hebbianlearning Self - supervisedlearning Intersectiondiscovery TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences Figure 3 . Operations on LISA’s knowledge representations at major stages of relational reasoning and learning . Opinion Trends in Cognitive Sciences xxx xxxx , Vol . xxx , No . x TICS - 1093 ; No . of Pages 9 3 constituting a form of guided pattern recognition ( Figure 3 ) . At any given moment , one analog ( the driver ) is the focus of attention . As one or more driver propositions enter the phase set , synchronized patterns of activation are generated on the semantic units ( one pattern per RB ) . In turn , these patterns activate propositions in one or more recipient analogs in LTM ( during retrieval ) , or a single recipient in active memory ( during mapping , infer - ence and schema induction ) . LISA provides a natural account of the loss of relational reasoning in populations with forms of brain damage , such as patients suffering from either frontal - lobe or temporal - lobe variants of Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration [ 24 ] . The model has also been used to simulate changes in relational reasoning during cognitive development [ 38 – 40 ] and normal aging [ 41 ] . In the remainder of this article we review several key neural ﬁndings that appear to correspond to computational constraints that arise in LISA . Role of oscillatory activity in reasoning LISA fundamentally depends on the representation of information in a temporal structure . RB units must be activated in synchrony with O and P units ( and their associated semantic units ) to form dynamic representa - tions , while these different representational complexes must be kept out of synchrony with each other to maintain distinct , non - overlapping role - ﬁller bindings ( Figure 4a , b ) . Temporal structure in the form of oscillatory activity is in fact prominent in the brain [ 42 ] , although no direct evi - dence yet connects such activity to the coding of proposi - tions . Rhythmic neural activity , as reﬂected in the ﬁring of groups of neurons , can be detected throughout the central nervous system , both in local interactions within a neural ensemble , and across brain regions through long - distance connections between populations of neurons [ 43 ] . Oscillations can arise from the intrinsic circuit proper - ties of the central nervous system , as neurons tend to be interconnected with numerous excitatory and inhibitory neurons , resulting in entrainment of ﬁring of an ensemble of neurons at a speciﬁc frequency . These oscillations may reﬂect the ﬁring rates of individual neurons , such as those that show bursts of ﬁring in the gamma band . Slower oscillations , such as ﬁring in the theta band ( 4 – 8 Hz ) , generally do not arise from a group of individual neurons ﬁring at that frequency ; rather , summed over a large group of neurons , peaks of ﬁring will be apparent at this lower frequency due to slower feedback modulation . In LISA , the smallest unit of WM is essentially deﬁned as the synchronous ﬁring of representational units . Impor - tantly , LISA uses phase to maintain the separation of multiple role - ﬁller bindings . Behavioral experiments using a priming paradigm suggest that synchrony underlies the representations of perceptual relations for humans [ 44 ] . Likewise , a recent EEG study suggests that phase syn - chrony within the fronto - parietal network can bind object properties together in WM [ 45 ] . Electrophysiological stud - ies in nonhuman primates have revealed a link between WM and the synchronous ﬁring of neural ensembles . For example , pairs of neurons have been shown to ﬁre in synchrony in a task - dependent manner , consistent with the hypothesis that synchronous ﬁring dynamically repre - sents the representations needed in WM to perform the current task [ 46 ] . The fact that neural assemblies can S p i ke r a t e S p i ke r a t e Time Excitatory connection Key : ( 2 ) rb1 rb2 M Time M o4 o3 o1 o2 ( 1 ) ( 2 ) Inhibitory connection ( a ) ( c ) ( d ) ( b ) p ( rb1 , rb2 ) TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences Figure 4 . Oscillatory inhibition and cross - frequency coupling in LISA . ( a ) Oscillatory inhibition is central to LISA’s ability to exploit temporal synchrony to discover relational mappings in WM . Role - binding ( RB ) units for a single proposition [ e . g , p ( rb1 , rb2 ) ] are kept out of phase by pools of inhibitory neurons that inhibit competing RBs ( e . g . , rb1 and rb2 ) ( 1 ) , and also apply inhibition to an RB after it fires ( 2 ) . ( b ) Thus , ‘tonic’ excitation from a single proposition unit in the driver [ e . g , p ( rb1 , rb2 ) ] causes all attached RB units ( e . g . , rb1 and rb2 here ) to fire out of phase with each other , while allowing each RB an opportunity to fire as determined by accumulating mapping evidence ( via the mapping connections ) . Oscillatory inhibition is critical for determining LISA’s intrinsically limited WM capacity . ( c - d ) By using temporal synchrony as a binding mechanism , LISA is able to utilize cross - frequency coupling in conjunction with spike - timing - dependent plasticity to rapidly learn relational mappings ( i . e . , M units representing correspondences between objects in the driver and the recipient ) via Hebbian learning . In this example , semantic units represented by populations of neurons in posterior cortex ( blue units in panel ( c ) fire relatively slowly [ slower blue wave in panel ( d ) ] , sending activation to populations of neurons representing object1 [ red o1 unit in panel ( c ) ] . These neurons fire at a much higher collective frequency [ faster red waves in panel ( d ) ] . In LISA , similar types of units in the driver and recipient are connected via mapping units [ represented here by the dotted lines in panel ( c ) ] . Synchronous rapid firing of the populations of neurons representing o1 and o3 result in rapid changes to the mapping units via spike - timing - dependent plasticity . Thus , LISA quickly learns that o1 and o3 are firing at the same time , and hence correspond relationally . A similar correspondence exists between o2 and o4 [ orange units in panel ( c ) ] , which fire out of synchrony with o1 and o3 given their different roles in their respective propositions . Opinion Trends in Cognitive Sciences xxx xxxx , Vol . xxx , No . x TICS - 1093 ; No . of Pages 9 4 rapidly shift between different patterns of synchrony depending on the information being held in WM indicates that the method of representing propositions in LISA is neurally credible . LISA also depends on long - distance communication between prefrontal regions and posterior regions of the cortex , where semantic information is stored . In order for prefrontal RB units to be activated by semantic informa - tion , there must be a means by which oscillatory activity in the temporal lobes engages circuits in PFC that represent this information . In the brain , synchrony in lower frequen - cy bands , including theta , is detectable between sites separated by several millimeters , suggesting that entrain - ment of neural activity across brain regions occurs at lower frequency oscillations [ 47 – 49 ] . In contrast , synchronous activity within local neural circuits tends to be higher frequency , in the gamma range . Within the PFC , local circuits will require inhibition to maintain the phase rela - tionships of different role - ﬁller bindings . Studies of learning and memory have shown that brain oscillatory activity is relevant to behavior . For example , successful memory formation is associated with the tighter coupling of the ﬁring of individual neurons to the theta frequency [ 50 ] . In addition , stimulation during theta peaks is particularly effective in inducing long - term potentiation in the hippocampus , whereas blocking theta prevents the induction of long - term potentiation [ 51 , 52 ] . It thus appears that neural oscillations provide support for neural plastic - ity . Reasoning similarly requires the rapid formation of new representations . In LISA , M units are formed between structure units in the driver and recipient to capture correspondences between them . This type of rapid learning of connections has been observed in PFC , based on single - unit recordings with non - human primates [ 53 , 54 ] . It appears that , in addition to plasticity being related to the phase of the theta cycle , high gamma frequency itself can directly enhance neural plasticity through a Hebbian learning mechanism [ 55 ] . When neuronal circuits ﬁre at this high rate , inputs to a neuron arrive shortly before the neuron ﬁres , which thus becomes depolarized . In Hebbian plasticity , synaptic inputs that are active when the neuron is depolarized are strengthened . Thus , if the neuron is driven at a high rate , as occurs in the high gamma band , the inputs driving it will be strengthened . This phenome - non , termed ‘spike - timing - dependent plasticity’ [ 56 ] , implies that there is a neural mechanism by which the kind of synchronous activity postulated by LISA will also lead to synaptic strengthening . Such increases in synaptic strength may underlie the strengthening of M units during the mapping process . The facilitatory inﬂuences of theta - and gamma - band activity on neural plasticity appear to be related [ 47 , 48 ] . Through cross - frequency coupling ( see [ 57 ] ) , the phase of the low frequency theta wave modulates the power of the gamma band , such that the amplitude of EEG measured in the gamma band is greatest at a speciﬁc point in the theta wave ( Figure 4c , d ) . The theta wave may serve to entrain bursts at gamma frequency by shifting the probability of spike timing . By this mechanism , long - dis - tance communication across regions in the form of theta activity could modulate the timing of gamma bursts . It follows that information in regions of posterior cortex responsible for representing semantic information may inﬂuence local gamma activity in the PFC via theta fre - quency ﬁring . Additional evidence supports the hypothesis that the phase of neuronal oscillations in the PFC codes the repre - sentation of speciﬁc items in WM . Simultaneous recording of single units and the local - ﬁeld potential in monkeys have demonstrated that spikes in response to a speciﬁc stimulus occur at a characteristic point in a 32 - Hz cycle , correspond - ing to the gamma band . When the monkey’s task was to keep more than one item in mind at a time , spikes corre - sponding to the second item occurred at a different point in the wave [ 58 ] . Interestingly , spike synchronization was also observed at approximately 3 Hz , at the lower end of the theta band . The fact that both theta and gamma band oscillations are synchronized in the PFC is consistent with the possibility that cross - frequency coupling is a means to coordinate activity in distant regions with the rapid oscil - lations that support local processing . The ﬁnding that phase - speciﬁc spiking in the gamma phase is related to segregation of information in WM is consistent with LISA’s mechanism for representing propositions via temporal asynchrony of role bindings . Proxy units in prefrontal cortex In LISA , when propositions enter active memory , proxy units ( the transient form of structure units ) are rapidly formed in PFC . These proxy units that code individual analogs in turn connect to M units that represent corre - spondences between the elements of two analogs . The rapid learning required by these units could be supported by the spike - timing - dependent plasticity that can occur during high gamma - band activity synchronized to the theta rhythm [ 56 ] . The rapid changing of weights on these units makes them suitable to dynamically represent dif - ferent stimuli depending on the information being pro - cessed at the moment . Neurons with the properties ascribed to proxy units have been identiﬁed in the primate lateral PFC [ 53 , 54 , 59 ] . About a third of neurons in the lateral PFC respond to categories of stimuli , which means that the neuron will increase ﬁring rate when presented with members of a particular category ( e . g . , dogs ) . Impor - tantly , these neurons ﬁre based on the conceptual proper - ties of the stimuli , and not simply on the basis of their visual features . Unlike neurons in inferotemporal cortex , neurons in lateral PFC respect the sharp boundaries be - tween categories . These neurons respond similarly to typi - cal and atypical members of a category , which suggests that they are sensitive to the rules deﬁning the concept itself . This property is necessary for the proxy units in LISA , in that they must be able to represent high - level propositions that are abstract . Furthermore , neurons in the PFC appear to also be able to code abstract relational rules . Cromer et al . [ 54 ] had monkeys perform two different tasks : one in which they had to respond to matching stimuli and another in which they had to respond if the stimuli did not match [ 13 ] . The most common type of neuron recorded in the prefrontal cortex ( 41 % of all those recorded ) responded selectively to the current rule , regardless of the stimuli that were pres - ent . These neurons thus appear to represent the relation Opinion Trends in Cognitive Sciences xxx xxxx , Vol . xxx , No . x TICS - 1093 ; No . of Pages 9 5 between stimuli and a rule governing the current task – not the stimuli themselves – a major requirement for the proxy units posited by LISA . Although neurons responding to abstract rules could be found in all regions of the PFC , the majority were located in the lateral subregion . The apparent ﬂexibility of these neurons is another property that makes them suitable as instantiations of the proxy units postulated by LISA . Individual neurons do not simply respond to one type of stimulus ; rather , in the context of different tasks , they respond to different catego - ries [ 54 ] . A neuron’s response to the same stimulus can vary on a trial - by - trial basis depending on the task per - formed [ 60 ] . This ﬂexibility stands in stark contrast to the ﬁring properties of inferotemporal neurons , in which ﬁring to a complex visual stimulus is relatively static [ 61 ] . Al - though caution is warranted in extrapolating from studies of monkeys to more complex human reasoning , such ﬁnd - ings suggest that PFC neurons may act as representational elements for very different propositions depending on the task context . Such dynamic repurposing of neurons is consistent with the ﬂexible role played by proxy units in the LISA model . Proxy units are formed rapidly to represent propositions during reasoning . Spike - timing - dependent plasticity resulting from fast gamma - band activity in prefrontal neurons can support the kind of rapid changes in response properties that are necessary for proxy units . Importantly , synaptic strength can be rapidly decreased , as well as increased , based on the timing of presynaptic ﬁring and post - synaptic depolarization . Long - term depression of syn - aptic strength allows neurons to be returned to a pool from which they can be recruited for the representation of new propositions . Moreover , the shift from long - term potentia - tion to long - term depression occurs as the result of a shift in spike timing on the order of milliseconds [ 62 ] . These ﬁndings suggest that spike - timing - dependent plasticity can support the rapid binding and unbinding that is fun - damental to the LISA model . Rostral - caudal abstraction gradient in PFC Recently , an effort has been made to understand the sub - regions in PFC in terms of a hierarchy of action . Badre and D’Esposito [ 6 ] have argued that more caudal regions of the PFC are involved in generating speciﬁc stimulus - response motor actions , whereas progressively more rostral regions become more involved when actions must be based on more abstract information ( e . g . , a plan based on the integration of multiple subgoals ) [ 6 ] . For example , although caudal regions of the PFC are sufﬁcient to subserve the act of picking up a cup from which to drink , more rostral regions would become engaged in the act of deciding what to drink in order to satisfy more abstract goals ( e . g . , trying to be healthy ) . Similarly , Christoff et al . [ 16 ] have shown that a set to process more abstract concepts selectively activates RLPFC . In LISA , the highest level of hierarchical organization is reﬂected in the M units , which form rapid associations between elements of propositions in the analogs being com - pared . These mapping units represent very abstract infor - mation , speciﬁcally , shared relational roles that can make otherwise dissimilar propositions analogous . Moreover , the very process of identifying relational commonalities can trigger the acquisition of more abstract schemas for classes of situations . The LISA architecture is thus based on repre - sentations at successive levels of abstraction , an overall structure that appears to be reﬂected in the organization of the PFC . The role of inhibition in reasoning The nervous system is characterized by the interplay of excitation and inhibition . At the circuit level , the tight coupling of inhibitory interneurons and excitatory neurons results in oscillatory activity that allows for temporal coding of information in LISA’s WM . As discussed above , circuit - level inhibition is required to maintain role - ﬁller bindings mutually out of synchrony , and thus distinct in WM ( Figure 4a , b ) . In addition , inhibition plays a role in reducing interference from competing semantic concepts during analogical reasoning ( e . g . , [ 24 , 25 , 34 , 40 ] ) . Activation of propositions in the driver analog will trigger activation in related semantic units , which in turn will activate candidate recipient propositions . The most active recipient propositions will eventually enter WM and be available for analogical mapping . However , if task - irrelevant propositions are activated in the driver , these may bias the system to ﬁnd suboptimal correspondences . LISA postulates top - down inhibition of propositions tagged as low in goal - relevance , which helps prevent these propositions from entering the phase set . This selectivity increases the efﬁciency of the mapping process by enhancing the signal - to - noise ratio favoring goal - relevant matches . Regions in the PFC exhibit similar properties by selectively inhibiting semantic representations in posterior regions of cortex . The PFC has many reciprocal connections with posterior cortical regions , including in particular tem - poral and posterior parietal lobes ( see [ 63 ] ) , and thus is able to inﬂuence processing in these regions . The primary evi - dence for the role of the PFC in inhibition is that a major consequence of prefrontal lesions is behavioral disinhibi - tion . Patients with damage to the prefrontal cortex often fail to inhibit inappropriate behaviors and have difﬁculty main - taining cognitive control . By one view , the main role of the prefrontal cortex is the dynamic ﬁltering of activations in posterior cortical regions to facilitate behavior directed towards a goal [ 64 ] . Different subregions appear to support inhibition in different domains . In particular , damage to the right inferior prefrontal cortex impairs ability to inhibit a prepotent response in cognitive tasks whereas damage to orbitofrontal regions results in social and emotional disin - hibition [ 65 ] . Behavioral studies have shown that the presence of irrelevant relations in analogs can impact relational rea - soning , suggesting the inhibition is a necessary component of analogical reasoning [ 24 , 25 , 38 , 40 , 41 , 66 ] . Neuroimaging studies have produced even more direct evidence of the engagement of prefrontal inhibitory control during analog - ical reasoning . In a number of studies , activity was ob - served in the inferior frontal gyrus while subjects were solving analogy problems [ 23 , 67 ] . This same region has been shown to be active in a number of tasks of inhibitory control or semantic competition ( see [ 65 ] ) . Cho et al . ( 2010 ) found direct evidence for the involvement of this region in Opinion Trends in Cognitive Sciences xxx xxxx , Vol . xxx , No . x TICS - 1093 ; No . of Pages 9 6 inhibitory control during analogy , showing that activity in a region of right inferior frontal gyrus increased when the amount of interfering information increased [ 13 ] . Similar - ly , using recordings of scalp EEG , Sweis et al . ( 2012 ) found that when participants needed to ignore a distracting relation while solving a visual analogy , right PFC was modulated at late stages of processing , and the degree of modulation interacted with the reasoner’s WM capacity [ 20 ] . The inferior frontal gyrus thus may be the anatomical source of the active inhibition of competing units postulat - ed by the LISA model . Further directions Many open questions remain ( Box 1 ) . Although we have focused on implications of neural evidence for the LISA model , these ﬁndings have implications for other neurocom - putational models . Moreover , aspects of several of these models might be integrated to broaden coverage of high - level human cognition . LISA and SMRITI [ 28 ] both use patterns of neural timing to encode binding information , and can be viewed as complementary ( LISA focusing on prefrontal functions and reﬂective reasoning , SMRITI focus - ing on hippocampal functions ) . The macro - level neural mod - ules postulated by ACT - R [ 30 ] are compatible with LISA ; ACT - R can be viewed as a model of the control structure within which human relational reasoning may operate . There is reason to hope that advances in neuroimaging techniques [ 68 ] , combined with reﬁned methods for ana - lyzing temporal patterns of neural activity , will make it possible to directly test some of the hypotheses we have laid out concerning the neural basis of relational reason - ing . In addition , the general LISA architecture may be extended to incorporate additional factors related to PFC function . For example , in order to capture information processing in the PFC more fully , the LISA model would need to incorporate the inﬂuences of neuromodulators . Monoamine neurotransmitters , including dopamine , nor - epinephrine and serotonin , each have complex neuromo - dulatory roles . Depending on the conditions , these compounds have very large inhibitory or excitatory effects on neural transmission within the PFC ; moreover , their effects often seem to interact with one other [ 69 ] . A large number of psychiatric conditions that affect cognition in - volve monoamine dysregulation , and a suitably expanded LISA model could aid in understanding these disorders at the circuit level . It is likely that some individual differences in reasoning ability may be explained by polymorphisms in genes that code for monoamine receptors ( e . g . , [ 70 ] ) . In addition , the cognitive monitoring and evaluative func - tions of the anterior cingulate cortex may impact PFC processing via connections with neurons in the locus coer - ruleus that are the source of cortical noradrenergic modu - lation [ 71 ] . Thus , elaborating the LISA model to incorporate neuromodulatory effects could lead to further advances in understanding the conditions that lead to optimal ( and suboptimal ) reasoning in the human brain . Acknowledgements Preparation of this paper was supported by the Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity ( IARPA ) via Department of the Interior ( DOI ) contract number D10PC20022 . The U . S . Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for governmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright annotation thereon . The views and conclusions contained hereon are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the ofﬁcial policies or endorsements , either expressed or implied , of IARPA , DOI , or the U . S . Government . Additional support was provided by the American Federation of Aging Research and Arthur Gilbert Foundation , the Illinois Department of Public Health , the Loyola University Chicago Dean of Arts and Sciences and the Graduate School ( to R . G . M . ) . We thank Krishna Bharani for help in preparing the manuscript , and Paul Kogut and the rest of the Lockheed Martin FRAMES team for many helpful discussions . Two anonymous reviewers provided valuable comments on an earlier draft . References 1 Holyoak , K . J . ( 2012 ) Analogy and relational reasoning . In The Oxford Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning ( Holyoak , K . J . and Morrison , R . G . , eds ) , pp . 234 – 259 , Oxford University Press 2 Holyoak , K . J . and Cheng , P . W . ( 2011 ) Causal learning and inference as a rational process : the new synthesis . Annu . Rev . Psychol . 62 , 135 – 163 3 Penn , D . C . and Povinelli , D . J . ( 2007 ) Causal cognition in human and nonhuman animals : a comparative , critical review . Annu . Rev . Psychol . 58 , 97 – 118 4 Penn , D . C . et al . ( 2008 ) Darwin’s mistake : explaining the discontinuity between human and nonhuman minds . Behav . Brain Sci . 31 , 109 – 130 discussion 130 – 178 5 Badre , D . ( 2008 ) Cognitive control , hierarchy , and the rostro - caudal organization of the frontal lobes . Trends Cogn . Sci . 12 , 193 – 200 6 Badre , D . and D’Esposito , M . ( 2009 ) Is the rostro - caudal axis of the frontal lobe hierarchical ? Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 10 , 659 – 669 7 Koechlin , E . and Hyaﬁl , A . ( 2007 ) Anterior prefrontal function and the limits of human decision - making . Science 318 , 594 – 598 8 Knowlton , B . J . and Holyoak , K . J . ( 2009 ) Prefrontal substrate of human relational reasoning . In The Cognitive Neurosciences ( Gazzaniga , M . S . , ed . ) , pp . 1005 – 1017 , MIT Press 9 Morrison , R . G . and Knowlton , B . J . ( 2012 ) Cognitive neuroscience of higher cognition . In The Oxford Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning ( Holyoak , K . J . and Morrison , R . G . , eds ) , pp . 67 – 89 , Oxford University Press 10 Bunge , S . A . et al . ( 2005 ) Analogical reasoning and prefrontal cortex : evidence for separable retrieval and integration mechanisms . Cereb . Cortex 15 , 239 – 249 Box 1 . Questions for future research Recent work in the cognitive neuroscience of thinking and in computational modeling has raised new hypotheses about how thinking is realized in the human brain . Some current questions are : ! Can direct evidence be obtained to support the possible role of oscillatory neural activity in coding propositions in human PFC ? ! Can computational models employing oscillatory algorithms such as cross - cortical coupling be used to predict the brain’s complex network dynamics during relational reasoning as measured via electrophysiology ? ! How are the various types of inhibition necessary for a model such as LISA implemented in the brain throughout the time course of relational reasoning ? ! What functions does the RLPFC support in relational reasoning at a computational level and how do these relate to its functions in other tasks ? ! What is the relationship between dynamic role binding in the PFC and the binding operations subserved by the hippocampus and medial temporal cortex ? ! What roles do neurotransmitters play in relational reasoning and can their effects be mapped onto components of a computational model ? ! What learning processes are involved in creating the pools of semantic units that code the meanings of objects and relations ? ! What role do subcortical structures play in relational reasoning ? Are fronto - striatal circuits particularly important for mapping units , which must be maintained without continuous attention over short periods of time during reasoning ? Opinion Trends in Cognitive Sciences xxx xxxx , Vol . xxx , No . x TICS - 1093 ; No . of Pages 9 7 11 Bunge , S . A . et al . ( 2009 ) Left , but not right , rostrolateral prefrontal cortex meets a stringent test of the relational integration hypothesis . Neuroimage 46 , 338 – 342 12 Charron , S . and Koechlin , E . ( 2010 ) Divided representation of concurrent goals in the human frontal lobes . Science 328 , 360 – 363 13 Cho , S . et al . ( 2010 ) Common and dissociable prefrontal loci associated with component mechanisms of analogical reasoning . Cereb . Cortex 20 , 524 – 533 14 Christoff , K . et al . ( 2001 ) Rostrolateral prefrontal cortex involvement in relational integration during reasoning . Neuroimage 14 , 1136 – 1149 15 Christoff , K . et al . ( 2003 ) Evaluating self - generated information : anterior prefrontal contributions to human cognition . Behav . Neurosci . 117 , 1161 – 1168 16 Christoff , K . et al . ( 2009 ) Prefrontal organization of cognitive control according to levels of abstraction . Brain Res . 1286 , 94 – 105 17 Dumontheil , I . et al . ( 2010 ) Development of the selection and manipulation of self - generated thoughts in adolescence . J . Neurosci . 30 , 7664 – 7671 18 Green , A . E . et al . ( 2010 ) Connecting long distance : semantic distance in analogical reasoning modulates frontopolar cortex activity . Cereb . Cortex 20 , 70 – 76 19 Kroger , J . K . et al . ( 2002 ) Recruitment of anterior dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in human reasoning : a parametric study of relational complexity . Cereb . Cortex 12 , 477 – 485 20 Sweis , B . M . et al . ( 2012 ) The time course of inhibition in analogical reasoning : an event - related potential approach . In Proceedings of the 34th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( Miyake , N . et al . , eds ) , Cognitive Science Society 21 Wendelken , C . and Bunge , S . A . ( 2010 ) Transitive inference : distinct contributions of rostrolateral prefrontal cortex and the hippocampus . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 22 , 837 – 847 22 Wendelken , C . et al . ( 2008 ) ‘Brain is to thought as stomach is to ? ? ’ : investigating the role of rostrolateral prefrontal cortex in relational reasoning . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 20 , 682 – 693 23 Watson , C . E . and Chatterjee , A . ( 2012 ) A bilateral frontoparietal network underlies visuospatial analogical reasoning . Neuroimage 59 , 2831 – 2838 24 Morrison , R . G . et al . ( 2004 ) A neurocomputational model of analogical reasoning and its breakdown in frontotemporal lobar degeneration . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 16 , 260 – 271 25 Krawczyk , D . C . et al . ( 2008 ) Distraction during relational reasoning : the role of prefrontal cortex in interference control . Neuropsychologia 46 , 2020 – 2032 26 Wilson , W . H . et al . ( 2001 ) The STAR - 2 model for mapping hierarchically structured analogs . In The Analogical Mind ( Gentner , D . et al . , eds ) , pp . 125 – 159 , MIT Press 27 Hummel , J . E . and Holyoak , K . J . ( 2003 ) A symbolic - connectionist theory of relational inference and generalization . Psychol . Rev . 110 , 220 – 264 28 Shastri , L . ( 2002 ) Episodic memory and cortico - hippocampal interactions . Trends Cogn . Sci . 6 , 162 – 168 29 Jilk , D . J . et al . ( 2008 ) SAL : An explicitly pluralistic cognitive architecture . J . Exp . Theor . Artif . Intell . 20 , 197 – 218 30 Anderson , J . R . et al . ( 2007 ) Information - processing modules and their relative modality speciﬁcity . Cogn . Psychol . 54 , 185 – 217 31 Hummel , J . E . and Holyoak , K . J . ( 1997 ) Distributed representations of structure : a theory of analogical access and mapping . Psychol . Rev . 104 , 427 – 466 32 Hummel , J . E . and Landy , D . H . ( 2009 ) From analogy to explanation : relaxing the 1 : 1 mapping constraint very carefully . In New Frontiers in Analogy Research : Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Analogy ( Kokinov , B . et al . , eds ) , pp . 211 – 221 , New Bulgarian University 33 Taylor , E . G . and Hummel , J . E . ( 2009 ) Finding similarity in a model of relational reasoning . Cogn . Syst . Res . 10 , 229 – 239 34 Palva , J . M . et al . ( 2010 ) Neuronal synchrony reveals working memory networks and predicts individual memory capacity . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 107 , 7580 – 7585 35 Singer , W . and Gray , C . M . ( 1995 ) Visual feature integration and the temporal correlation hypothesis . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 18 , 555 – 586 36 Cowan , N . ( 2001 ) The magical number 4 in short - term memory : a reconsideration of mental storage capacity . Behav . Brain Sci . 24 , 87 – 114 discussion 114 – 85 37 Buschman , T . J . et al . ( 2011 ) Neural substrates of cognitive capacity limitations . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 , 11252 – 11255 38 Morrison , R . G . et al . ( 2011 ) A computational account of children’s analogical reasoning : balancing inhibitory control in working memory and relational representation . Dev . Sci . 14 , 516 – 529 39 Doumas , L . A . A . et al . ( 2008 ) A theory of the discovery and predication of relational concepts . Psychol . Rev . 115 , 1 – 43 40 Doumas , L . A . A . et al . ( 2009 ) The development of analogy : task learning and individual differences . In Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( Taatgen , N . et al . , eds ) , pp . 3133 – 3138 , Erlbaum 41 Viskontas , I . V . et al . ( 2004 ) Relational integration , inhibition , and analogical reasoning in older adults . Psychol . Aging 19 , 581 – 591 42 Uhlhaas , P . J . et al . ( 2009 ) Neural synchrony in cortical networks : history , concept and current status . Front . Integr . Neurosci . 3 , 17 43 Buzsaki , G . ( 2006 ) Rhythms of the Brain , Oxford University Press 44 Lu , H . et al . ( 2006 ) Role of gamma - band synchronization in priming of form discrimination for multiobject displays . J . Exp . Psychol . Hum . Percept . Perform . 32 , 610 – 617 45 Phillips , S . et al . ( 2012 ) Visual feature integration indicated by phase - locked frontal - parietal EEG signals . PLoS ONE 7 , e32502 46 Sakurai , Y . and Takahashi , S . ( 2006 ) Dynamic synchrony of ﬁring in the monkey prefrontal cortex during working - memory tasks . J . Neurosci . 26 , 10141 – 10153 47 Canolty , R . T . et al . ( 2006 ) High gamma power is phase - locked to theta oscillations in human neocortex . Science 313 , 1626 – 1628 48 Canolty , R . T . and Knight , R . T . ( 2010 ) The functional role of cross - frequency coupling . Trends Cogn . Sci . 14 , 506 – 515 49 Siegel , M . et al . ( 2012 ) Spectral ﬁngerprints of large - scale neuronal interactions . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 13 , 121 – 134 50 Rutishauser , U . et al . ( 2010 ) Human memory strength is predicted by theta - frequency phase - locking of single neurons . Nature 464 , 903 – 907 51 Berry , S . D . and Seager , M . A . ( 2001 ) Hippocampal theta oscillations and classical conditioning . Neurobiol . Learn . Mem . 76 , 298 – 313 52 Hyman , J . M . et al . ( 2003 ) Stimulation in hippocampal region CA1 in behaving rats yields long - term potentiation when delivered to the peak of theta and long - term depression when delivered to the trough . J . Neurosci . 23 , 11725 – 11731 53 Asaad , W . F . et al . ( 1998 ) Neural activity in the primate prefrontal cortex during associative learning . Neuron 21 , 1399 – 1407 54 Cromer , J . A . et al . ( 2010 ) Representation of multiple , independent categories in the primate prefrontal cortex . Neuron 66 , 796 – 807 55 Song , S . et al . ( 2000 ) Competitive Hebbian learning through spike - timing - dependent synaptic plasticity . Nat . Neurosci . 3 , 919 – 926 56 Markram , H . et al . ( 1997 ) Regulation of synaptic efﬁcacy by coincidence of postsynaptic APs and EPSPs . Science 275 , 213 – 215 57 Jensen , O . and Colgin , L . L . ( 2007 ) Cross - frequency coupling between neuronal oscillations . Trends Cogn . Sci . 11 , 267 – 269 58 Siegel , M . et al . ( 2009 ) Phase - dependent neuronal coding of objects in short - term memory . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 106 , 21341 – 21346 59 Freedman , D . J . et al . ( 2001 ) Categorical representation of visual stimuli in the primate prefrontal cortex . Science 291 , 312 – 316 60 Warden , M . R . and Miller , E . K . ( 2010 ) Task - dependent changes in short - term memory in the prefrontal cortex . J . Neurosci . 30 , 15801 – 15810 61 Freedman , D . J . et al . ( 2003 ) A comparison of primate prefrontal and inferior temporal cortices during visual categorization . J . Neurosci . 23 , 5235 – 5246 62 Sjostrom , P . J . and Hausser , M . ( 2006 ) A cooperative switch determines the sign of synaptic plasticity in distal dendrites of neocortical pyramidal neurons . Neuron 51 , 227 – 238 63 Fuster , J . M . ( 2008 ) The Prefrontal Cortex , Academic Press 64 Shimamura , A . P . ( 2000 ) Toward a cognitive neuroscience of metacognition . Conscious Cogn . 9 , 313 – 323 discussion 324 – 326 65 Aron , A . R . et al . ( 2004 ) Inhibition and the right inferior frontal cortex . Trends Cogn . Sci . 8 , 170 – 177 66 Richland , L . E . et al . ( 2006 ) Children’s development of analogical reasoning : insights from scene analogy problems . J . Exp . Child Psychol . 94 , 249 – 273 Opinion Trends in Cognitive Sciences xxx xxxx , Vol . xxx , No . x TICS - 1093 ; No . of Pages 9 8 67 Green , A . E . et al . ( 2006 ) Frontopolar cortex mediates abstract integration in analogy . Brain Res . 1096 , 125 – 137 68 Palva , S . and Palva , J . M . ( 2012 ) Discovering oscillatory interaction networks with M / EEG : challenges and breakthroughs . Trends Cogn . Sci . 16 , 219 – 230 69 Di Pietro , N . C . and Seamans , J . K . ( 2011 ) Dopamine and serotonin interactively modulate prefrontal cortex neurons in vitro . Biol . Psychiatry 69 , 1204 – 1211 70 Tan , H . Y . et al . ( 2007 ) Epistasis between catechol - O - methyltransferase and type II metabotropic glutamate receptor 3 genes on working memory brain function . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 104 , 12536 – 12541 71 Aston - Jones , G . and Cohen , J . D . ( 2005 ) Adaptive gain and the role of the locus coeruleus - norepinephrine system in optimal performance . J . Comp . Neurol . 493 , 99 – 110 72 Visser , M . et al . ( 2010 ) Semantic processing in the anterior temporal lobes : a meta - analysis of the functional neuroimaging literature . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 22 , 1083 – 1094 73 Squire , L . R . et al . ( 2004 ) The medial temporal lobe . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 27 , 279 – 306 Opinion Trends in Cognitive Sciences xxx xxxx , Vol . xxx , No . x TICS - 1093 ; No . of Pages 9 9