Planning the World’s Most Inclusive PD Project Aurora Constantin University of Edinburgh Edinburgh , UK aurora . constantin @ ed . ac . uk Gavin Sim University of Central Lancashire Preston , UK GRSim @ uclan . ac . uk Jessica Korte University of Queensland Brisbane , Queensland , Australia j . korte @ uq . edu . au Janet Read University of Central Lancashire Preston , UK JCRead @ uclan . ac . uk Cara Wilson Queensland Univ . of Technology Brisbane , Queensland , Australia cara . wilson @ qut . edu . au Jerry Alan Fails Boise State University Boise , ID , USA jerryfails @ boisestate . edu Cristina Adriana Alexandru University of Edinburgh Edinburgh , UK cristina . alexandru @ ed . ac . uk Eva Eriksson Aarhus University Aarhus , Denmark evae @ cc . au . dk Judith Good University of Sussex Brighton , UK j . good @ sussex . ac . uk Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Interaction Design and Children ( IDC ’20 Extended Abstracts ) , June 21 – 24 , 2020 , London , United Kingdom ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 8020 - 1 / 20 / 06 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3397617 . 3398066 Abstract Inclusivity is central to Participatory Design ( PD ) practice , but despite signiﬁcant efforts in IDC and beyond , it is still hard to achieve during PD , because of a series of barriers ( e . g . access to users , language ) . Such barriers increase especially when it comes to ensuring and supporting the participation of children with varying or complex needs , or when prospective participants are geographically dis - tributed . This workshop aims to create the basis of a dis - tributed PD ( DPD ) protocol to provide practical advice in overcoming the challenges of ensuring inclusivity for chil - dren with varying or complex needs around the world . The protocol will build on the participants’ prior experience and on a live PD design session with children and adults , and be guided by discussions around approaches to address a speciﬁc design problem while maximising inclusivity across geographical boundaries and research contexts . It is in - tended to become a springboard for the world’s most inclu - sive Distributed PD project . Author Keywords Participatory design ; PD ; children ; inclusion ; special needs ; diversity ; minority populations ; disability ; design ; co - design CCS Concepts • Human - centered computing → Accessibility design and evaluation methods ; HCI design and evaluation 118 methods ; Background Participation and inclusivity are core elements of PD prac - tice [ 16 , 9 ] . However , true inclusivity is difﬁcult to achieve , especially when working with children , due to barriers to re - cruitment and participation [ 8 ] . Such barriers have a range of causes , which researchers have attempted to address through the creation of unique design approaches . Exam - ples include disabilities [ 2 , 3 , 9 , 11 , 12 , 15 ] , neurodiver - sity [ 1 , 6 , 19 ] , language and cultural barriers [ 10 , 14 ] , socio - economic factors at domestic [ 17 ] and international [ 4 , 5 ] scales , lack of access to rural and remote locations [ 13 ] , and reliance on co - location of participants [ 7 , 18 ] . Currently , distributed PD ( DPD ) [ 7 , 18 ] is increasingly being adopted by PD researchers , because it enables people who are not co - located to participate to a project ( physical dis - tribution ) . In spite of coming with its own difﬁculties / barriers ( e . g . communication and knowledge sharing ) , we strongly believe that DPD should be encouraged especially because it increases inclusivity . Designing for the Future In keeping with IDC 2020’s theme “Designing for the Fu - ture” , we intend to explore how the nature of PD with chil - dren may change as the world becomes increasingly con - nected , globalised and digitised . Recent technological leaps in e . g . artiﬁcial intelligence and the Internet of Things have changed the goalposts of PD . What will the future of PD with children look like as conversational agents , moni - toring , tele - presence , autonomous travel , and augmented and virtual reality continue to move out of the prospective and into reality ? We adopt a global perspective , suggesting that PD will be - come a distributed [ 20 ] , perhaps asynchronous practice , and taking a critical look at how this may play out in the fu - ture of our work with children . In this workshop , we intend to problematise this concept ( in order to understand the challenges it comes with ) but , more importantly , to specu - late about how this distributed practice of PD may positively impact both our own design practices and , crucially , the digital lives of the children we design with . Beyond merely speculating , we will explore the opportunities presented by such a concept in a pragmatic sense , developing a baseline protocol which will be implemented across geographic lo - cations and design contexts , becoming the world’s largest inclusive PD project . Through this approach , this workshop will become the springboard from which we will bring the future PD practice with children to the present . The following topics may inspire position papers and dis - cussions : 1 . considerations for global distributed PD ( DPD ) ; 2 . legal and ethical requirements around the globe ; 3 . identiﬁcation and recruitment of children for PD ; 4 . preparation for PD ; 5 . building relationships with children and communities and ensuring reciprocity ; 6 . ethical engagement with children ; 7 . understanding consent / assent / dissent and how it may be communicated ; 8 . supporting a range of abilities ( including the need for ﬂexible , on - the - ﬂy adaptation ) ; 9 . drawing design data from PD sessions ; and 10 . ending PD relationships . 119 Workshop Aims This workshop follows from our previous IDC’19 workshop Pushing the Boundaries of Participatory Design with Chil - dren with Special Needs which was focused on identifying , synthesizing and collating PD best practices across con - texts and participant groups . This workshop has 2 aims : 1 . Run example DPD sessions with a small group of children , following a PD protocol developed by the organisers ; 2 . Based on outputs from the DPD sessions , evalu - ate and modify the protocol for use in a global DPD project , with consideration for children with special needs ( based on the experience and expertise of the organisers and attendees in this domain ) . Based on this protocol and through the lens of a design question which will be deﬁned within the proposed work - shop , we aim to build a global project , spanning across de - sign contexts , which focuses on inclusivity and DPD . Organizers Aurora Constantin is a University Teacher and postdoc - toral researcher at the University of Edinburgh School of In - formatics , UK . Her research focuses on designing technol - ogy for individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder ( ASD ) , PD , User - Centred Design ( UCD ) , and Action Research ( AR ) with various stakeholders . Currently she is working on designing a technology - based tool to support children with ASD to express their creativity during PD . She leads the CISA HCI group . Jessica Korte is a Postdoctoral Academic at The Uni - versity of Queensland’s Co - Innovation Group in Queens - land , Australia . She is passionate about PD’s potential to empower children . She developed a PD approach for de - signing with young Deaf children . She hopes to work with Deaf communities and Autistic adults to design language resources , language robots , and learning activities . Cara Wilson is a PhD student in HCI at Queensland Uni - versity of Technology , Brisbane , with an academic back - ground in Psychology and industry background in Autism and Mental Health . She co - designs digital and tangible technologies with minimally - verbal children on the autism spectrum , with particular focus on supporting self - expression , ’voice’ , and agency in participatory design . Cristina Adriana Alexandru is a Research Associate and University Teacher at the University of Edinburgh School of Informatics , UK . She specialises in UCD , development , and usability evaluation of healthcare systems and tools to cater for the needs of different healthcare practitioners . She has special interests in PD and consideration of the viewpoints of very different user groups . She is also inter - ested in automating usability evaluation of user interfaces in healthcare . Judith Good is Professor of Interaction Design and Inclu - sion in the Department of Informatics , University of Sus - sex , UK . Her research interests focus on the co - design of new technologies for children , with and without disabil - ities . She is also interested in developing new participa - tory methodologies for typically marginalised populations to have greater involvement in both the design and evaluation of new technologies . Gavin Sim is a Reader in Human Computer Interaction , he has worked at UCLan since 2002 . His research interests 120 are in the area of HCI and educational technology in par - ticular usability / user experience evaluation methods . He is an active researcher within the ChiCI group , where his focus has been on evaluating user experience and usability within games and educational technology . He has written method papers for IDC , and has worked with the BBC . Janet C . Read is a Professor in Child Computer Interac - tion and is the Director of the Child Computer Interaction ( ChiCI ) research group at UCLan . Internationally known for her work on designing and evaluating technologies for children as well as for her work on text input with digital ink , Prof . Read manages research grants and research stu - dents , teaches research methods and advanced HCI and contributes to SET activities in local schools . As a primary author of the textbook , ‘Evaluating Interactive Products with Children’ , Prof . Read has worked with industries including Vision Objects , France , SAPO , Portugal and the BBC , UK in the design and evaluation of products for children . The Fun Toolkit introduced by Read is known to be used by industry . Jerry Alan Fails is an Associate Professor in the Computer Science Department at Boise State University in Idaho , USA . He has designed technologies with and for children using PD methods for 15 years . His primary area of re - search is HCI , with a focus on technologies that engage children with one another , get them active , and encourage them to explore the world around them . Eva Eriksson is an Associate Professor at the Department of Information Studies at Aarhus University , Denmark . She was one of the founders of Gothenburg working group for Interaction Design And Children ( IDAC ) in Sweden , and is now part of the Center for computational thinking and design in Denmark . Her research focus is interaction design in public knowledge institutions and designing children’s technology specializing in PD with developmentally diverse children . Pre - Workshop Plans Multiple recruitment approaches will be used to attract par - ticipants who have experience or interest in PD with chil - dren , especially children with special needs . First , the orga - nizers will use professional networks to contact researchers who may be interested in participating in this workshop ( in - cluding the participants to their previous IDC‘19 workshop ) . As we have experience with PD and running workshops , we are conﬁdent we will be able to attract potential participants via word - of - mouth . Second , several organizers have access to research and professional email lists ( including University of Edinburgh’s CISA HCI group , PDworld and NordiCHI , CHI , CHI - Kids , Center for Participatory IT ( PIT ) ) which will be used to ad - vertise the workshop and recruit participants . Third , we will also use social media channels ( e . g . Twitter , Academic Facebook groups ) to announce the workshop . Finally , we will create a website that will be used to attract researchers’ and PD participants’ attention to our workshop . We aim to attract two types of workshop attendees : active participants , who have experience in PD , PD with children , and / or PD with children with special needs ; and observers , who are interested in learning about these PD domains . Active participants are invited to submit a position paper explaining their experiences . All attendees will be asked to ﬁll in an online form to identify their interests ( allowing groups and roles within the workshop to be pre - assigned ) . All attendees are asked to bring between two and four post - cards : one or two describing their research , and one or two from their home or institution’s location . The postcards will be used to stimulate group discussions . All attendees will also be asked to create a short introductory video , to be 121 shared with other attendees . Website We will use the workshop website to publish the call for participation , submission instructions , and news : https : / / sites . google . com / site / worldsmostinclusivepdproject / Workshop Structure The workshop will be presented online , in a drop - in , drop - out format to allow ﬂexibility of attendees from all around the world . The overarching goal of the workshop is to un - dertake hands - on activities focused on developing the glob - ally distributed PD protocol . The proposed schedule ( times in BST ) for the workshop is : 12 : 00 - 12 : 45 Session A : Initial introductions and DPD heuris - tics 12 : 45 - 13 : 00 Break and introductions to new attendees 13 : 00 - 13 : 45 Session B : Discussion of children’s PD out - puts 13 : 45 - 14 : 15 Networking break 14 : 15 - 15 : 00 Session C : Introduction to World’s Largest PD Project and planning DPD protocol 15 : 00 - 15 : 15 Break and introductions to new attendees 15 : 15 - 16 : 00 Session D : How to run DPD Resources This workshop be run online . The drop - in , drop - out format has been chosen to accommodate attendees who may not be able to attend the full four hours , such as those in sub - stantially different time zones . Post - Workshop Plans Workshop attendees will be invited to expand their position papers for inclusion in a special issue of the International Journal of Child - Computer Interaction ( IJCCI ) . All workshop attendees will be encouraged to return with the ﬁnal globally distributed PD protocol to their home in - stitution , to apply for required ethical clearance , and to un - dertake PD activities according to the protocol with one or more of their local communities . All workshop attendees who conduct ethically - approved PD using the protocol and report back with design data and / or adaptation data will be invited to co - author a paper written by the organisers . Call for Participation This 4 hour , drop - in / drop - out workshop will bring together researchers with experience in Participatory Design ( PD ) , children , parents and carers who will have the chance to work in a PD session and to contribute to the creation of a protocol for maximising inclusivity in a Distributed Participa - tory Design ( DPD ) world - wide project . If you are interested in PD , we invite you to join our workshop which aims to lead to the world’s most inclusive PD project . PD experience is not required , but is a bonus . We are reaching out to local schools to engage children in a PD session , to be run in advance of or in sync with the online Workshop . Attendees will engage with the children’s PD outputs ; discuss and evaluate key topics ; and create a new protocol for a globally distributed PD session . You will then have the opportunity to take the protocol back home , apply for ethics approval , and run PD session / s within your local community . We’ll ask you to report back with any de - sign data generated , and any reﬂections on adaptations to the protocol to address the needs of the children you work with . Everyone who provides data will be invited to 122 co - author a paper on the World’s Most Inclusive PD Project . We accept two types of participants : a ) active participants ( who have experience in PD ) ; b ) observers ( who are inter - ested in learning more about PD with children with special needs ) . To attend , please : 1 . ( for all attendees ) Fill in the online form at our website ( https : / / sites . google . com / site / worldsmostinclusivepdproject / ) , explaining your greatest interests and concerns from the workshop topics ; 2 . ( for active participants ) If you have experience run - ning PD , PD with children , or PD with children with special needs ( including disability , neurodiversity , cultural / language barriers , etc ) , you are invited to submit a 2 - page position paper via our website , ex - plaining your expertise and the most important thing you learned from your PD experience ; 3 . ( for active participants ) Write postcard - sized sum - maries describing your research ( not more than two ) ; 4 . ( for all attendees ) Bring postcards from home and / or your institution ( not more than two ) . Position papers will be evaluated based on their relevance to the workshop theme and topics , quality of presenta - tion and potential to encourage debate . Authors of ac - cepted position papers will be invited to extend their po - sition papers to submit to a special issue of the Interna - tional Journal of Child - Computer Interaction ( IJCCI ) . Ob - servers will be invited based on synergy with participants attending the workshop . At least one author of each ac - cepted position paper must attend the workshop . All par - ticipants and observers must register for both the work - shop and the main conference . Application submission and more information can be found online on our website ( https : / / sites . google . com / site / worldsmostinclusivepdproject / ) . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Muhammad Haziq Lim Abdullah and Margot Brereton . 2012 . A child led participatory approach for technology - based intervention . In 2012 Participatory Innovation Conference Digital Proceedings , Elizabeth Tunstall and Clausen Mads ( Eds . ) . Melbourne , Australia , 1 – 5 . [ 2 ] MJ Allsop , J Gallagher , R Holt , Bipinchandra Bhakta , and R . M . Wilkie . 2011 . Involving children in the development of assistive technology devices . Disability and Rehabilitation : Assistive Technology 6 , 2 ( 2011 ) , 148 – 156 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3109 / 17483107 . 2010 . 510178 [ 3 ] MJ Allsop , RJ Holt , MC Levesley , and Bipinchandra Bhakta . 2010 . The engagement of children with disabilities in health - related technology design processes : Identifying methodology . Disability and Rehabilitation : Assistive Technology 5 , 1 ( 2010 ) , 1 – 13 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 3109 / 17483100903323267 [ 4 ] Alissa N . Antle . 2017 . The ethics of doing research with vulnerable populations . Interactions 24 , 6 ( 2017 ) , 74 – 77 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3137107 [ 5 ] Alissa N . Antle and Allen Bevans . 2012 . Creative design : Exploring value propositions with urban Nepalese children . In Advances in Computer Entertainment , Anton Nijholt , Teresa Romão , and Dennis Reidsma ( Eds . ) . Springer Berlin Heidelberg , Kathmandu , Nepal , 465 – 468 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 34292 - 9 123 [ 6 ] Aurora Constantin , Hilary Johnson , Elizabeth Smith , Denise Lengyel , and Mark Brosnan . 2017 . Designing computer - based rewards with and for children with Autism Spectrum Disorder and / or Intellectual Disability . Computers in Human Behavior 75 ( 2017 ) , 404 – 414 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2017 . 05 . 030 [ 7 ] Karin Danielsson , Amir Naghsh , Dorina Gumm , and Andrew Warr . 2008 . Distributed participatory design . In CHI EA ’08 : CHI ’08 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Florence , Italy , 3953 – 3956 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1358628 . 1358965 [ 8 ] Christopher Frauenberger , Judith Good , and Wendy Keay - Bright . 2011 . Designing technology for children with special needs : bridging perspectives through participatory design . CoDesign 7 , 1 ( 2011 ) , 1 – 28 . [ 9 ] Mona Leigh Guha , Allison Druin , and Jerry Alan Fails . 2008 . Designing with and for children with special needs : An inclusionary model . In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children . ACM , 61 – 64 . [ 10 ] Foad Hamidi , Karla Saenz , and Melanie Baljko . 2014 . Sparkles of brilliance : Incorporating cultural and social context in co - design of digital artworks . In Proceedings of the 2014 Interaction Design and Children conference . 77 – 84 . [ 11 ] Anthony J . Hornof . 2008 . Working with children with severe motor impairments as design partners . In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , 69 – 72 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1463689 . 1463721 [ 12 ] Anthony J . Hornof . 2009 . Designing with children with severe motor impairments . In Proceedings of the 27th international conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI 09 . ACM Press , New York , New York , USA , 2177 – 2180 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1519032 [ 13 ] Matthew Kam , Divya Ramachandran , Anand Raghavan , Jane Chiu , U . Sahni , and J . Canny . 2006 . Practical Considerations for Participatory Design with Rural School Children in Underdeveloped Regions : Early Reﬂections from the Field . In Interaction Design and Children , Vol . June 7 – 9 . 25 – 32 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1139073 . 1139085 [ 14 ] Jessica Korte , Leigh Ellen Potter , and Sue Nielsen . 2017 . The Impacts of Deaf Culture on Designing with Deaf Children . In Proceedings of the 29th Australian Conference on Computer - Human Interaction . Brisbane , 135 – 142 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3152771 . 3152786 [ 15 ] Henrik Svarrer Larsen and Per - Olof Hedvall . 2012 . Ideation and ability : When actions speak louder than words . In Proceedings of the 12th Participatory Design Conference . Roskilde , Denmark , 37 – 40 . http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? id = 2348157 [ 16 ] Janet C Read , Daniel Fitton , and Matthew Horton . 2014 . Giving ideas an equal chance : inclusion and representation in participatory design with children . In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on Interaction design and children . 105 – 114 . [ 17 ] Greg Walsh . 2018 . Towards equity and equality in American co - design : A case study . IDC 2018 - Proceedings of the 2018 ACM Conference on Interaction Design and Children ( 2018 ) , 434 – 440 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3202185 . 3202768 124 [ 18 ] Greg Walsh , Allison Druin , Mona Leigh Guha , Elizabeth Bonsignore , Elizabeth Foss , Jason C . Yip , Evan Golub , Tamara Clegg , Quincy Brown , Robin Brewer , Asmi Joshi , and Richelle Brown . 2012 . DisCo : A Co - design Online Tool for Asynchronous Distributed Child and Adult Design Partners . Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children 87 ( 2012 ) , 11 – 19 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2307096 . 2307099 [ 19 ] Cara Wilson , Margot Brereton , Bernd Ploderer , and Laurianne Sitbon . 2019 . Co - Design Beyond Words : ’Moments of Interaction’with Minimally - Verbal Children on the Autism Spectrum . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 15 . [ 20 ] Panayiotis Zaphiris , Giorgos Zacharia , and Meenakshi Sundaram Rajasekaran . 2004 . Distributed construction through participatory design . In E - education applications : Human factors and innovative approaches . IGI Global , 164 – 179 . 125