3746 | A . M . Gleason et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell MBoC | ARTICLE Syndapin / SDPN - 1 is required for endocytic recycling and endosomal actin association in the Caenorhabditis elegans intestine ABSTRACT Syndapin / pascin - family F - BAR domain proteins bind directly to membrane lipids and are associated with actin dynamics at the plasma membrane . Previous reports also impli - cated mammalian syndapin 2 in endosome function during receptor recycling , but precise analysis of a putative recycling function for syndapin in mammalian systems is difficult be - cause of its effects on the earlier step of endocytic uptake and potential redundancy among the three separate genes that encode mammalian syndapin isoforms . Here we analyze the endocytic transport function of the only Caenorhabditis elegans syndapin , SDPN - 1 . We find that SDPN - 1 is a resident protein of the early and basolateral recycling endosomes in the C . elegans intestinal epithelium , and sdpn - 1 deletion mutants display phenotypes indicating a block in basolateral recycling transport . sdpn - 1 mutants accumulate abnormal endosomes positive for early endosome and recycling endosome markers that are normally separate , and such endosomes accumulate high levels of basolateral recycling cargo . Furthermore , we ob - served strong colocalization of endosomal SDPN - 1 with the F - actin biosensor Lifeact and found that loss of SDPN - 1 greatly reduced Lifeact accumulation on early endosomes . Taken together , our results provide strong evidence for an in vivo function of syndapin in endocytic recycling and suggest that syndapin promotes transport via endosomal fission . INTRODUCTION Enclosed by a membrane , cells establish and maintain their archi - tecture in part through a process called endocytosis . Endocytosis is a highly conserved trafficking pathway that begins with the vesicle - mediated internalization of proteins and lipids from the plasma membrane . Cells internalize receptors through clathrin - dependent endocytosis ( CDE ) and clathrin - independent endocytosis ( CIE ) path - ways ( Doherty and McMahon , 2009 ; Grant and Donaldson , 2009 ) . In CDE , clathrin adaptor proteins can recognize motifs within the cyto - plasmic tails of transmembrane proteins . On recognition , these adaptor proteins coassemble with clathrin at the plasma membrane , forming cage - like structures that produce plasma membrane – coated pits . As the process continues , the invaginated clathrin coated pits ( CCPs ) pinch off into vesicles , uncoat , and fuse with one another and preexisting early endosomes ( Doherty and McMahon , 2009 ) . Once in the early endosome , the reduced pH results in the dissociation of many ligand – receptor complexes . As fluid and mem - brane are added to the early endosome , membrane tubules begin to form and extend . At this point , many internalized receptors are recycled to the plasma membrane either directly ( rapid recycling ) or indirectly via the endocytic recycling compartment ( ERC ) ( slow recy - cling ) or Golgi ( retrograde recycling ) . Membrane proteins and lume - nal content that fail to recycle are transported to the late endosomes and eventually the lysosomes for degradation ( Doherty and McMahon , 2009 ; Grant and Donaldson , 2009 ) . Endocytic uptake and recycling are tightly regulated and func - tion in a diverse array of biological processes , including cell ad - hesion and junction formation , cell migration , cytokinesis , cell Monitoring Editor Anne Spang University of Basel Received : Feb 22 , 2016 Revised : Aug 18 , 2016 Accepted : Sep 8 , 2016 This article was published online ahead of print in MBoC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E16 - 02 - 0116 ) on September 14 , 2016 . * Address correspondence to : Barth D . Grant ( grant @ biology . rutgers . edu ) . © 2016 Gleason et al . This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell Biology under license from the author ( s ) . Two months after publication it is avail - able to the public under an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported Creative Commons License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 ) . “ASCB ® , ” “The American Society for Cell Biology ® , ” and “Molecular Biology of the Cell ® ” are registered trademarks of The American Society for Cell Biology . Abbreviations used : AMAN - 2 , alpha mannosidase ; ARF - 6 , ADP ribosylation factor - 6 ; CCPs , clathrin coated pits ; CDE , clathrin - dependent endocytosis ; CIE , clathrin - independent endocytosis ; DAF - 4 , dauer formation - defective - 4 ; ERC , endocytic recycling compartment ; GLUT1 , glucose - transporter 1 ; hTAC , human interleukin - 2 receptor ; hTfr , human transferrin receptor ; MICAL - L1 , molecules interacting with CAsL - like1 ; MIG - 14 , abnormal cell migration - 14 ; PGP - 1 , P - glyco - protein - 1 ; RME - 1 , receptor - mediated endocytosis - 1 ; SDPN - 1 , syndapin / pascin - family F - BAR domain protien ; SMA - 6 , small - 6 . Adenrele M . Gleason a , Ken C . Q . Nguyen b , David H . Hall b , and Barth D . Grant a , * a Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry , Rutgers University , Piscataway , NJ 08854 ; b Department of Neuroscience , Albert Einstein College of Medicine , Bronx , NY 10461 Volume 27 November 15 , 2016 Syndapin / SDPN - 1 in endocytic recycling | 3747 Mammals express three syndapin / pacsin genes encoding F - BAR – domain membrane - bending proteins ( Dharmalingam et al . , 2009 ) . Syndapin 1 is neuron specific and is required for activity - de - pendent bulk endocytosis at presynaptic membranes but not direct synaptic vesicle endocytosis via clathrin . Syndapin 2 is ubiquitously expressed and has been variously reported to function in CDE ( fibroblasts and apical membrane of epithelia ) , caveolae dynamics , Golgi traffic , endocytic recycling , actin dynamics , neuronal develop - ment , and cell migration ( Ritter et al . , 1999 ; Meng et al . , 2011 ; Quan and Robinson , 2013 ) . The first work linking syndapin 2 to endocytic recycling in mammalian cells showed that NPF motifs in syndapin 2 bind to the EH - domain of Ehd1 / mRme - 1 and that overexpression of the isolated NPF or EH domains interfered with transferrin recy - cling ( Braun et al . , 2005 ) . The syndapin 2 SH3 domain interacts with the recycling tubule protein MICAL - L1 , further implicating it in recy - cling regulation ( Giridharan et al . , 2013 ) . Syndapin 3 expression is up - regulated during adipocyte differentiation , and overexpression of syndapin 3 , which lacks NPF sequences , increased the recycling of Arf6 - dependent cargo GLUT1 in adipocytes ( Roach and Plomann , 2007 ) . Unlike syndapin 1 , for which mouse knockouts were used , many studies on syndapin 2 and syndapin 3 must be interpreted with cau - tion because they mainly tested syndapin function by injecting anti - syndapin antibodies and / or overexpressing the full - length protein or individual syndapin protein domains ( Andersson et al . , 2008 ; Clayton et al . , 2009 ) . In cases in which syndapin 2 function was stud - ied after knockdown , analysis of its function in recycling was ham - pered by its requirement in CDE . There is a general lack of knock - down / knockout data analyzing the recycling of cargo . Collectively these results implicate some syndapin family proteins in endocytic recycling but do not definitively establish such a role . Here we analyze the function of the C . elegans syndapin / pacsin - family protein SDPN - 1 , establishing its role in basolateral endocytic recycling in the context of the C . elegans intestine , a polarized epi - thelium . We previously found partial colocalization of SDPN - 1 with RME - 1 , and found that loss of RME - 1 or ALX - 1 / ALIX reduced the number and increased the average size of SDPN - 1 – labeled endo - somes in the C . elegans intestine ( Shi et al . , 2007 ; Pant et al . , 2009 ) . Here we show that SDPN - 1 is also enriched on a population of RAB - 5 – labeled early endosomes located close to the basolateral plasma membrane . We also find that loss of SDPN - 1 appears to block basolateral recycling of CIE and CDE cargo and results in accumula - tion of abnormal endosomes containing both early and recycling en - dosome markers . Our data suggest that SDPN - 1 is required for a step in endosome maturation that allows separation of early and recycling compartments , likely contributing to a fission step in this process . RESULTS Full - length recombinant SDPN - 1 tubulates acidic membranes in vitro Like its mammalian homologues , SDPN - 1 contains one conserved N - terminal F - BAR domain and a single C - terminal SH3 domain ( Figure 1 , A and B ) . Extensive reports show that the isolated F - BAR domain of syndapin 1 is capable of tubulating / vesiculating mem - branes in vitro ( Wang et al . , 2009 ; Rao et al . , 2010 ) . To test conserva - tion of function , we expressed and purified full - length recombinant SDPN - 1A and examined its function in vitro when reconstituted with negatively charged liposomes . SDPN - 1 protein created narrow membrane tubules with an average diameter of ∼ 40 nm ( Figure 1D and E ) . These results are similar to those reported for the purified F - BAR domain of mammalian syndapin 1 , indicating conservation of molecular function ( Wang et al . , 2009 ; Rao et al . , 2010 ) . polarity , and signal transduction ( Maxfield and McGraw , 2004 ; Grant and Donaldson , 2009 ) . In mammalian fibroblasts , the ERC is typically composed of a dense collection of juxtanuclear mem - brane tubules and vesicles that ultimately carry macromolecules back to the plasma membrane ( Maxfield and McGraw , 2004 ; Grant and Donaldson , 2009 ) . Important aspects of the mecha - nisms that mediate the return of cargo molecules to the plasma membrane remain to be elucidated . The Caenorhabditis elegans intestine—a polarized epithelium—is a powerful model system to characterize the molecular components required for endocytic recycling ( Chen et al . , 2006 ; Sato et al . , 2014 ) . This system allows for genetic manipulation and imaging analysis in the context of an intact living epithelial tube . The worm intestine is surprisingly simple , composed of 20 cells organized into a single layer , forming nine donut - like rings ( Leung et al . , 1999 ) . The apical domain faces the lumen and is specialized for nutrient uptake , covered in dense microvilli . As in mammalian intestinal epithelia , the C . elegans intestinal lumen is supported by an underlying terminal web and over - lying glycocalyx ( McGhee , 2007 ) . The basolateral surface faces the pseudocoelom and is responsible for the exchange of molecules be - tween the intestine and the rest of the body ( McGhee , 2007 ) . A number of key conserved recycling regulators were first discov - ered in C . elegans , including RAB - 10 and RME - 1 ( Grant et al . , 2001 ; Chen et al . , 2006 ) . Animals lacking RME - 1 accumulate gigantic en - dosomes that trap basolateral transmembrane recycling cargoes ( Grant et al . , 2001 ; Chen et al . , 2006 ) . These enlarged organelles are positive for ARF - 6 and lack RAB - 5 , placing RME - 1 function at a late step of endocytic recycling ( Chen et al . , 2006 ; Shi et al . , 2009 ) . Com - plementary studies in mammalian cell culture demonstrated that loss of mRme - 1 / EHD1 , a mammalian homologue of RME - 1 , greatly slows the recycling of transferrin and major histocompatibility class I pro - tein ( MHCI ) , trapping recycling cargo in the juxtanuclear ERC ( Lin et al . , 2001 ; Caplan et al . , 2002 ) . Whereas recycling tubules are con - centrated near the nucleus in cultured mammalian cells , in the C . elegans intestine RME - 1 labels a network of tubular recycling en - dosomes located just below the basolateral intestinal plasma mem - brane ( Grant et al . , 2001 ; Chen et al . , 2006 ) . Although superficially similar to the intestinal phenotype in rme - 1 mutants , animals defi - cient in RAB - 10 display an earlier block in basolateral recycling that is more cargo specific . The grossly enlarged endosomes in rab - 10 mutants are positive for RAB - 5 and ARF - 6 and accumulate the model CIE cargo green fluorescent protein – tagged α - chain of human inter - leukin - 2 receptor ( hTAC : : GFP ) but not the model CDE cargo GFP - tagged human transferrin receptor ( hTfR : : GFP ; Chen et al . , 2006 ; Shi et al . , 2010 ) . RAB - 10 appears to function just after the early endo - some master regulator RAB - 5 , with feedback from RAB - 10 acting to down - regulate RAB - 5 as cargo recycles ( Liu and Grant , 2015 ) . Little is known of recycling endosome biogenesis and its rela - tionship to early endosomes . Given the tubular nature of the recy - cling network , we sought to further analyze the role of BAR domain proteins in the sculpting of membrane tubules , potentially facilitat - ing the biogenesis of recycling cargo carriers . One BAR - domain pro - tein family suggested to work in the endocytic recycling pathway is syndapin / pacsin . Drosophila syndapin is important for embryonic cellularization , associating with anillin and septin proteins and influencing formin recruitment and actin dynamics on cleavage furrow tips ( Takeda et al . , 2013 ; Sherlekar and Rikhy , 2016 ) . Drosophila syndapin has also been shown to associate with postsynaptic membranes at the neuromuscular junction , affecting the formation of a specialized subsynaptic reticulum in muscle cells ( Kumar et al . , 2009 ; Koles et al . , 2015 ) . 3748 | A . M . Gleason et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell postinternalization trafficking routes expressed specifically in the C . elegans intestine ( Chen et al . , 2006 ; Shi et al . , 2007 , 2010 ; Sun et al . , 2012 ; Sato et al . , 2014 ) . The ok1667 allele is missing se - quences from within the second to eighth exons , deleting a sub - stantial fraction of the F - BAR – domain coding sequences and pro - ducing a predicted frameshift and premature stop codon predicted to remove the remainder of the protein in both predicted splice forms ( Figure 1 ) . Thus the ok1667 mutant should not produce any functional SDPN - 1 protein . The well - characterized basolateral car - goes that we tested included hTAC , DAF - 4 ( type II transforming growth factor β [ TGF - β ] receptor ) , hTFR ( human transferrin recep - tor ) , MIG - 14 / Wntless ( a transmembrane chaperone for WNT li - gands ) , SMA - 6 ( a type I TGF - β receptor ) , and CD4 - dileucine ( Chen et al . , 2006 ; Shi et al . , 2009 ; Gu et al . , 2013 ; Gleason et al . , 2014 ) . hTAC and DAF - 4 recycle via the recycling endosome in an ARF - 6 - dependent pathway ( Shi et al . , 2012 ; Gleason et al . , 2014 ) . MIG - 14 and SMA - 6 recycle via retrograde recycling in a retromer - de - pendent manner ( Shi et al . , 2009 ; Gleason et al . , 2014 ) . hTfR , MIG - 14 , SMA - 6 , and CD4 - dileucine are clathrin dependent in their endocytosis . hTAC is a clathrin - independent cargo . CD4 - dileucine does not appear to recycle and appears to enter the degradative pathway after endocytosis ( Gu et al . , 2013 ) . hTAC : : GFP , hTfR : : GFP , and DAF - 4 : : GFP displayed dramatic accu - mulations at internal sites within the intestinal cells of sdpn - 1 ( ok1667 ) mutants and did not accumulate on the cell surface ( Figure 2 , A – F , and Supplemental Figure S2 , A – C ) . The abnormal accumulation of recycling cargo hTFR : : GFP was rescued by intestine - specific expres - sion of SDPN - 1 : : tagRFP , further indicating that the cargo transport defect is caused by loss of SDPN - 1 ( Supplemental Figure S3 , A – C ) . The localization of MIG - 14 : : GFP , SMA - 6 : : GFP , and GFP : : CD4 - dileu - cine remained comparable to that of wild type in sdpn - 1 ( ok1667 ) mutants ( Figure 2 , G – I , and Supplemental Figure S2 , D - F ) . Taken to - gether , these results indicate that SDPN - 1 is not required for uptake from the basolateral plasma membrane or retrograde transport from endosomes to the Golgi . Instead , loss of SDPN - 1 appears to specifi - cally affect basolateral cargo proteins that recycle to the plasma membrane via the early endosome – to – recycling endosome route . We also examined the apical intestinal plasma membrane pro - tein PGP - 1 : : GFP in sdpn - 1 mutants ( Supplemental Figure S4 , A and B ) . PGP - 1 : : GFP in sdpn - 1 mutants did not accumulate intracellularly and appeared normally localized to the apical membrane , suggest - ing that apical secretion / recycling does not depend upon SDPN - 1 . However , the PGP - 1 : : GFP marker , and electron microcopy of un - marked strains , revealed that the intestinal lumen was expanded in sdpn - 1 mutants , with an unusual convoluted structure ( Supplemen - tal Figure S4 , B and D ) . Close inspection of electron micrographs suggested that although expanded , the apical membrane itself and the associated microvilli and terminal web appeared normal ( Sup - plemental Figure S4 , E and F ) . These results may indicate a role for SDPN - 1 in apical endocytosis , as suggested in other systems ( Da Costa et al . , 2003 ) . SDPN - 1 affects several endosome types Our transmembrane cargo data indicate a role for SDPN - 1 in endo - cytic recycling . To further investigate how SDPN - 1 affects endo - somes , we quantified the effects of SDPN - 1 loss of function using a group of well - established molecular markers for specific endosome types . Collectively such studies can help to determine the specific transport steps affected . We noted an increase in RAB - 5 – and RAB - 7 – labeled endosomal size and fluorescence intensity in sdpn - 1 mutants ( Figure 3 , A – F , and Supplemental Figure 5 , A and B ) , indicating strong effects on early and late endosomes . We also SDPN - 1 is broadly expressed in multiple tissues To characterize the expression pattern and subcellular localization of SDPN - 1 , we created low – copy number integrated transgenic C . elegans lines expressing GFP fused to the C - terminus of SDPN - 1 driven by sdpn - 1 promoter sequences ( Supplemental Figure S1 ) . We observed clear expression in the intestine and pharynx and some additional cells in the head region ( Supplemental Figure S1 ) . In the intestine , SDPN - 1 : : GFP localized to distinct puncta near the basolateral cortex , as well as on or near the apical intestinal plasma membrane ( Supplemental Figure S1 , B and C ) . SDPN - 1 is required for the transport of CDE and CIE cargo that recycles to the plasma membrane via the recycling endosome To test the requirements of SDPN - 1 in cargo trafficking , we as - sayed the effect of a sdpn - 1 deletion mutant , ok1667 , on a diverse panel of basolateral transmembrane cargo with well - characterized FIGURE 1 : ( A ) Genomic structure of the sdpn - 1 gene and the location of the ok1667 mutant deletion . ok1667 is a 2547 – base pair deletion from the second exon to the eighth exon . ( B ) The ok1667 allele deletes sequences encoding amino acids 90 – 351 , including the majority of the F - BAR domain , and places downstream sequences out of frame . ( C – E ) In vitro membrane tubulation of PtdSer liposomes by full - length SDPN - 1a . Electron micrographs of acidic PtdSer liposomes ( 0 . 05 mg / ml , average diameter 400 nm ) incubated with 2 . 5 μM ( C ) GST or ( D ) full - length SDPN - 1 . ( E ) Statistical analysis . Diameters of membrane tubules shown in D were quantified on at least three independently prepared electron microscopy grids . Scale bar , 200 nm . Volume 27 November 15 , 2016 Syndapin / SDPN - 1 in endocytic recycling | 3749 mutants , calculating Pearson’s r for accumu - lated hTfR : : GFP and several markers for dif - ferent steps in endosomal trafficking . In wild - type animals at steady state , we ob - serve a low correlation between intracellular hTFR : : GFP puncta positive for early endo - some marker tagRFP : : RAB - 5 , suggesting that hTfR traffics through early endosomes quickly ( Figure 4 , A – A ′′′ ) . On depletion of SDPN - 1 using RNA interference ( RNAi ) , we observed abnormal accumulation of hTFR , RAB - 5 , and RME - 1 , similar to what we ob - served in sdpn - 1 ( ok1667 ) mutants , further confirming the phenotypes associated with loss of SDPN - 1 ( Figure 4 , B – B ′′′ , and Sup - plemental Figure S7 , A – C ) . Of importance , quantification of the de - gree of colocalization between hTFR : : GFP and tagRFP : : RAB - 5 in sdpn - 1 ( RNAi ) animals revealed a significant increase in colocaliza - tion , indicating that loss of SDPN - 1 traps re - cycling cargo in RAB - 5 – positive endosomes ( Figure 4E ) . We detected only minor overlap between hTFR : : GFP and basolateral recy - cling endosome marker tagRFP : : RME - 1 in wild - type animals ( Figure 4 , C – C ′′′ ) but a sig - nificant increase in colocalization between hTFR : : GFP and tagRFP : : RME - 1 after sdpn - 1 RNAi ( Figure 4 , D – D ′′′ and E ) . Of importance , the site of hTFR accumulation coincided with redistribution of RME - 1 to endosomes that appear in the medial plane of the intestine , where RME - 1 is normally very sparse . By con - trast , the degree of overlap of hTfR : : GFP and tagRFP : : RAB - 7 or tagRFP : : RAB - 10 after sdpn - 1 RNAi was similar to that of wild type ( Supplemental Figure S8 , A – D ′′′ ) . Given the accumulation of recycling cargo hTfR : : GFP in the central cytoplasm with endosome markers that typically repre - sent two separate organelles along the recy - cling pathway , and particularly the accumula - tion of RME - 1 in this region of the cell where it is normally rare , we decided to test for changes in the colocalization of RAB - 5 and RME - 1 . As expected from our previous work , control animals dis - played very low correlation between GFP : : RAB - 5 and tagRFP : : RME - 1 signals ( Figure 5 , A – A ′′′ ) . However , upon sdpn - 1 knockdown , we ob - served a significant increase in the correlation of GFP : : RAB - 5 and tagRFP : : RME - 1 signals ( Figure 5 , B and C ) , suggesting that without SDPN - 1 , the cells accumulate abnormal endosomes that display mixed characteristics of early and recycling endosomes and such en - dosomes are defective in cargo recycling . SDPN - 1 predominately resides on early and recycling endosomes If SDPN - 1 functions along the early endosome – to – recycling endo - some pathway , we would expect to find SDPN - 1 protein enriched on early endosomes , recycling endosomes , or both . Intestine - spe - cific expression of GFP - tagged SDPN - 1 labels abundant cytoplas - mic puncta near the basolateral surface . Previous work indicated that SDPN - 1 : : GFP overlaps with RFP : : RME - 1 – labeled recycling observed an abnormal accumulation of RAB - 10 - labeled endo - somes ( Figure 3 , G – I , and Supplemental Figure 5C ) . RAB - 10 pro - motes basolateral recycling and partially overlaps RAB - 5 on endo - somes ( Chen et al . 2006 ; Liu and Grant , 2015 ) . We also examined effects on recycling regulator RME - 1 localiza - tion . Of importance , sdpn - 1 mutants caused striking accumulations of RME - 1 – positive endosomes in the deep cytoplasm far from the plasma membrane , best viewed in cross section of the intestine , where they are normally very sparse ( Figure 3 , J – M , and Supple - mental Figure S5D ) . Loss of SDPN - 1 function did not alter the distri - bution of RAB - 11 , a marker for apical recycling endosomes ( Supple - mentary Figure S6 , A – D ) . Loss of SDPN - 1 traps recycling cargo hTFR in abnormal endosomes To better understand SDPN - 1’s role in cargo recycling , we next ana - lyzed the localization of recycling cargo that accumulated in sdpn - 1 FIGURE 2 : sdpn - 1 mutants disrupt recycling cargo traveling along the early endosome / recycling endosome / plasma membrane route . Laser scanning confocal micrographs of about one cell length of the C . elegans intestine expressing GFP - tagged transmembrane cargo proteins . In wild - type animals , ( A ) hTfR : : GFP and ( D ) hTAC : : GFP predominantly label the basolateral plasma membrane and sparse intracellular puncta . In sdpn - 1 ( ok1667 ) mutants , both model cargo proteins accumulate intracellularly : ( B ) hTfR : : GFP and ( E ) hTAC - GFP . ( C , F ) Quantification of average intracellular fluorescence intensity . Total intensity was measured for six animals for each genotype sampled in three different regions of each intestine . Localization and signal intensity remained comparable to wild type in sdpn - 1 ( ok1667 ) mutants expressing MIG - 14 : : GFP ( G , H ) or the unrecycled model transmembrane cargo GFP : : CD4 - dileucine ( J , K ) . ( I , L ) Quantification of MIG - 14 : : GFP and GFP : : CD4 - dileucine average fluorescence intensity . Total intensity was measured in six animals of each genotype sampled in three different regions of each intestine . Error bars represent SEM . * * * * p < 0 . 0001 ( Student’s t test ) . Scale bar , 10 μm . 3750 | A . M . Gleason et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell RAB - 10 is important for SDPN - 1 endosomal recruitment Because the sdpn - 1 phenotype indicates a likely function at the intersection of early en - dosomes and recycling endosomes , a step in transport that we previously showed in - volves RAB - 10 , we sought to determine whether SDPN - 1 localization depends on RAB - 10 function . On depletion of RAB - 10 protein , SDPN - 1 : : GFP appeared more dif - fusive , with a reduction in the number of re - maining SDPN - 1 – labeled structures ( Figure 7 , B and C ) . This is similar to the diffusive GFP : : RME - 1 labeling in rab - 10 mutants , which is associated with concomitant loss of the tubulovesicular meshwork found near the basolateral plasma membrane ( Chen et al . , 2006 ; Shi et al . , 2010 ) . As noted ear - lier , wild - type animals displayed extensive colocalization between SDPN - 1 and RAB - 5 on cortical endosomes ( Figure 7 , A – A ′′′ ) . On loss of RAB - 10 , RAB - 5 positive - endosomes are more numerous and enlarged ( Chen et al . , 2006 ; Shi et al . , 2010 ; Liu and Grant , 2015 ) but fail to colocalize with the remain - ing SDPN - 1 puncta ( Figure 7 , C – C ′′′ ) , as de - termined by Pearson’s r ( Figure 7D ) . These results suggest that RAB - 10 functions up - stream or at the same step as SDPN - 1 to coordinate recycling events . Filamentous actin localizes to SDPN - 1 – positive endosomes Mammalian studies of syndapin function at the plasma membrane suggest that syndapin promotes actin polymerization ( Qualmann et al . , 1999 ; Qualmann and Kelly , 2000 ) . The syndapin 2 F - BAR domain has also been reported to bind directly to actin filaments ( Kostan et al . , 2014 ) . Because actin polymerization on endosomes could function to promote endosomal fission , we sought to determine whether SDPN - 1 – posi - tive endosomes display enrichment of F - ac - tin ( Kessels and Qualmann , 2006 ; Puthenveedu et al . , 2010 ; Girid - haran et al . , 2013 ; Granger et al . , 2014 ) . To test this , we quantified the localization of F - actin , as reported by tagRFP : : LifeAct , an F - actin biosensor , on SDPN - 1 : : GFP – positive endosomes in the intestine of living intact animals ( Figure 8 , A – A ′′′ ) . Under steady - state condi - tions , confocal micrographs revealed considerable colocalization of LifeAct and SDPN - 1 , with Pearson’s r = 0 . 6 ( Figure 8B ) . These data indicate that SDPN - 1 – positive endosome structures are enriched in filamentous actin . sdpn - 1 mutant early endosomes are depleted in filamentous actin If SDPN - 1 – mediated actin polymerization is necessary for efficient transport along the recycling pathway , we might expect to ob - serve reduced F - actin levels on early endosomes upon loss of SDPN - 1 . To test this , we analyzed colocalization of GFP - LifeAct and early endosome marker RFP : : RAB - 5 in the intestinal epithe - lium . As with SDPN - 1 , we found that LifeAct is enriched on early endosomes ( Shi et al . , 2007 ; Pant et al . , 2009 ) . To address this ques - tion in more depth , we used confocal microscopy to compare the localization of SDPN - 1 : : GFP with additional organelle markers . We found that SDPN - 1 : : GFP also colocalizes well with a subset of RAB - 5 – positive endosomes that reside close to the basolateral plasma membrane at the periphery of the adult intestinal cells ( Figure 6 , A – A ′′′ ) as judged by Pearson’s r ( Figure 6C ) . We also confirmed colo - calization of SDPN - 1 : : GFP with tagRFP : : RME - 1 ( Figure 6 , B – B ′′′ ) . Our results indicate that the F - BAR protein SDPN - 1 is a resident compo - nent of early and recycling endosomes , where it could function at the interface of early and recycling endosome separation . We also observed sparse colocalization of SDPN - 1 : : GFP with late endosomal marker RAB - 7 , and this was mainly restricted to puncta rather than large RAB - 7 rings , suggesting residence of some SDPN - 1 on early endosomes beginning to acquire RAB - 7 but not mature late endosomes ( Supplemental Figure S9 , A – A ′′ ) . Additional analysis indicated that SDPN - 1 : : GFP failed to colocalize with the Golgi marker AMAN - 2 : : mCherry ( Supplemental Figure S9 , B – B ′′ ) . FIGURE 3 : sdpn - 1 mutants affect early endosomes , basolateral recycling endosomes , and late endosomes . Laser scanning confocal micrographs of the worm intestine expressing GFP - tagged fusion proteins that are resident markers for distinct endosomal compartments . sdpn - 1 mutants show abnormal intracellular accumulation of early endosomes labeled with GFP : : RAB - 5 , late endosomes marked with GFP : : RAB - 7 , GFP : : RAB - 10 , which functions at the early endosome / basolateral recycling endosome interface , and basolateral recycling endosomes marked with GFP : : RME - 1 . Control micrographs in the wild type background are shown for ( A ) GFP : : RAB - 5 , ( D ) GFP : : RAB - 7 , ( G ) GFP : : RAB - 10 , and ( J ) GFP : : RME - 1 . Confocal images in the sdpn - 1 ( ok1667 ) mutant background are shown for ( B ) GFP : : RAB - 5 , ( E ) GFP : : RAB - 7 , ( H ) GFP : : RAB - 10 , and ( K ) GFP : : RME - 1 . Quantification of total fluorescence intensity for ( C ) GFP : : RAB - 5 , ( F ) GFP : : RAB - 7 , ( I ) GFP : : RAB - 10 , and ( L ) GFP : : RME - 1 . Error bars represent SEM : * * * p < 0 . 001 , * * * * p < 0 . 0001 ( Student’s t test ) . Scale bar , 10 μm ( B , E , H , K ) . Volume 27 November 15 , 2016 Syndapin / SDPN - 1 in endocytic recycling | 3751 FIGURE 4 : Loss of SDPN - 1 traps recycling cargo hTFR : : GFP in abnormal endosomes positive for early and recycling endosome markers . All micrographs are from deconvolved three - dimensional ( 3D ) confocal image stacks acquired in intact living animals expressing intestinal - specific GFP - and RFP - tagged proteins . White arrowheads depict positive colocalization . ( A – A ′′′ ) Under control conditions , recycling cargo hTFR : : GFP - and tagRFP : : RAB - 5 - labeled early endosomes displayed little overlap . ( B – B ′′′ ) A strong increase in colocalization of hTFR : : GFP and tagRFP : : RAB - 5 was observed in sdpn - 1 RNAi animals . ( C – D ′′′ ) hTFR : : GFP also displayed an increase in overlap with basolateral recycling endosome marker tagRFP : : RME - 1 in sdpn - 1 RNAi animals . In each image , autofluorescent lysosome - like organelles appear in in all three channels ( including blue ) , whereas GFP appears only in the green channel and RFP appears only in the red channel . Green and red signals that do not overlap with the blue channel represent pure GFP and RFP signals , respectively . ( E ) Pearson’s r for each endosomal compartment . Six animals . Error bars represent SEM : * * p < 0 . 01 . Scale bar , 10 μm . FIGURE 5 : Loss of SDPN - 1 results in the accumulation of abnormal endosomes containing markers of both early endosomes and basolateral recycling endosomes . All micrographs are from deconvolved 3D confocal image stacks acquired in intact living animals expressing intestinal - specific GFP - and RFP - tagged proteins . White arrowheads depict positive colocalization . ( A – A ′′′ ) In control animals , basolateral recycling endosome marker tagRFP : : RME - 1 ( A ) displays little overlap with early endosome marker GFP : : RAB - 5 ( A ′ ) . ( A ″ , A ′′′ ) Merged image and enlarged merge . ( B – B ′′′ ) In sdpn - 1 ( ok1667 ) mutant animals , enlarged pleiomorphic endosomes , many of which are positive for both markers , accumulate . ( C ) Pearson’s r for GFP and RFP signals under wild - type and mutant conditions . In each image autofluorescent lysosome - like organelles appear in in all three channels ( including blue ) , whereas GFP appears only in the green channel and RFP appears only in the red channel . Green and red signals that do not overlap with the blue channel represent pure GFP and RFP signals , respectively . Error bars represent SEM : * p < 0 . 05 . Scale bar , 10 μm . 3752 | A . M . Gleason et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell cling regulators EHD1 / mRme - 1 and MICAL - L1 ( Braun et al . , 2005 ; Giridharan et al . , 2013 ) . However , analysis of the requirement of syndapin in endocytic recycling in mammalian cells has been ham - pered by a requirement for syndapin in clathrin - mediated uptake from the plasma membrane and potential redundancy among the three separate genes encoding syndapins in mammals . To analyze more clearly the requirements for syndapin in recycling , we took advantage of an uncharacterized deletion mutant in the single syndapin / pacsin family gene encoded in the C . elegans genome . Although the sequence reported to link syndapin 2 to EHD proteins is not evolutionary conserved in worm SDPN - 1 , and C . elegans lacks a MICAL - L1 homologue , our analysis further indi - cates that SDPN - 1 indeed functions in endocytic cargo recycling . endosomes positive for RAB - 5 ( Figure 9 , A – A ′′′ ) . After sdpn - 1 RNAi , RAB - 5 – labeled endosomes were visibly enlarged and mainly depleted of LifeAct ( Figure 9 , B and C ) . RAB - 5 – labeled endosomes in rab - 10 ( RNAi ) animals were also depleted of the LifeAct reporter , consistent with a function for RAB - 10 upstream or at the same step as SDPN - 1 ( Supplemental Figure S11 , A – E ) . We were unable to detect enrichment of LifeAct on RAB - 7 – labeled or RME - 1 – labeled endosomes in wild - type animals ( Supplemental Figure 10 , A – B ′′ ) . DISCUSSION In mammalian cell culture , the syndapin 2 protein has been impli - cated in endocytic recycling , primarily because it binds to recy - FIGURE 6 : SDPN - 1 resides on early and basolateral recycling endosomes . All micrographs are from deconvolved 3D confocal image stacks acquired in intact living animals expressing intestinal - specific GFP - and RFP - tagged proteins . ( A – A ′′′ ) SDPN - 1 : : GFP colocalizes with RAB - 5 – labeled early endosomes . White arrowheads indicate endosomes labeled by both SDPN - 1 : : GFP and tagRFP - RAB - 5 . ( A ′′′ ) Magnified image designated by the rectangular outline in A ″ . ( B – B ′′′ ) SDPN - 1 : : GFP is also enriched on tagRFP - RME - 1 – labeled basolateral recycling endosomes . White arrowheads indicate positive colocalization between SDPN - 1 : : GFP and tagRFP : : RME - 1 . ( B ′′′ ) Magnified image designated by the rectangular outline in B ″ . ( C ) Pearson’s r for colocalization of SDPN - 1 : : GFP with tagRFP - RAB - 5 and tagRFP - RME - 1 . Six animals . Error bars represent SEM . FIGURE 7 : rab - 10 ( RNAi ) impairs SDPN - 1 recruitment to endosomes and segregates RAB - 5 from the remaining SDPN - 1 – labeled structures . All micrographs are from deconvolved 3D confocal image stacks acquired in intact living animals expressing intestinal - specific GFP - and RFP - tagged proteins . Under control conditions ( A – A ′′′ ) SDPN - 1 : : GFP and tagRFP : : RAB - 5 colocalize extensively on endosomes . White arrowheads indicate positive overlap . ( C – C ′′′ ) rab - 10 ( RNAi ) animals displayed more - diffusive SDPN - 1 : : GFP signal and a decrease in overlap between SDPN - 1 : : GFP and RAB - 5 : : GFP . Gray arrows indicate residual SDPN - 1 : : GFP - labeled structures lacking RAB - 5 . In each image , autofluorescent lysosome - like organelles appear in in all three channels ( including blue ) , whereas GFP appears only in the green channel and RFP appears only in the red channel . Green and red signals that do not overlap with the blue channel represent pure GFP and RFP signals , respectively . ( B ) Quantification of SDPN - 1 : : GFP puncta number . ( D ) Pearson’s r for SDPN - 1 : : GFP and tagRFP : : RAB - 5 . Six animals . Error bars represent SEM : * * p < 0 . 01 . Scale bar , 10 μm . Volume 27 November 15 , 2016 Syndapin / SDPN - 1 in endocytic recycling | 3753 endocytic transport at the level of the early endosome ( Naslavsky et al . , 2003 ) . Of importance , loss of SDPN - 1 did not perturb the localization of retrograde recycling cargo , suggesting that SDPN - 1 functions in the exit of specific recycling cargo from the endosome . sdpn - 1 mutants also did not perturb the trafficking of the model degradative cargo CD4 - dileucine , suggesting that SDPN - 1 is not required for the degradative function of late endosomes . Instead , we propose that the observed abnormal morphology of late endo - somes in sdpn - 1 mutants is a results of defects in maturation of endosomes and suggest that such late endosomes are still capable of membrane protein degradation and retromer - based recycling to the Golgi . We consider it likely that the observed accumulation of recycling cargo is a consequence of a defect in the separation of early endo - somes and recycling endosomes in sdpn - 1 mutants . This is sup - ported by our finding that sdpn - 1 mutants accumulate a class of abnormal endosomes positive for early endosome and recycling We defined the requirements for SDPN - 1 in recycling by analyz - ing a variety of recycling cargo proteins in an sdpn - 1 deletion mu - tant . Loss of SDPN - 1 did not appear to trap any of these cargo proteins at the plasma membrane , allowing a clearer analysis of syndapin function in endocytic recycling possible in mammalian cells . A specific group of cargo proteins that recycle along the early endosome / recycling endosome / plasma membrane route ( hTFR , hTAC , and DAF - 4 ) accumulated intracellularly in sdpn - 1 mutants , with trapped recycling cargo clearly accumulating in organelles positive for RAB - 5 and RME - 1 . These results suggested that SDPN - 1 functions at the interface of early endosomes and recycling endo - somes , an interpretation supported by our finding that tagged forms of SDPN - 1 are clearly enriched on endosomes that contain early and basolateral recycling endosome markers . Of interest , the cargo proteins trapped in sdpn - 1 mutants include examples inter - nalized by clathrin - dependent and clathrin - independent mecha - nisms , supporting the idea that these cargo types converge in their FIGURE 8 : Filamentous actin localizes to SDPN - 1 positive endosomes . All micrographs are from deconvolved 3D confocal image stacks acquired in intact living animals expressing intestinal - specific GFP - and RFP - tagged proteins . LifeAct - tagRFP , an F - actin biosensor containing 17 amino acids of the yeast actin - binding protein ABP - 140 , was used to report filamentous actin in intestinal cells . White arrowheads depict positive overlap . ( A – A ′′′ ) SDPN - 1 : : GFP - positive endosomes are enriched in filamentous actin . Arrowheads correspond to positive colocalization between SDPN - 1 : : GFP and Life Act : : tagRFP . ( A ′′′ ) Magnified image designated by the region in rectangular outline in A ″ . In each image , autofluorescent lysosome - like organelles appear in in all three channels ( including blue ) , whereas GFP appears only in the green channel and RFP appears only in the red channel . Green and red signals that do not overlap with the blue channel represent pure GFP and RFP signals , respectively . ( B ) Pearson’s r for colocalization of SDPN - 1 : : GFP with LifeAct - tagRFP . Six animals . Error bars represent SEM . Scale bar , 10 μm . FIGURE 9 : Loss of SDPN - 1 disrupts association of filamentous actin with early endosomes . All micrographs are from deconvolved 3D confocal image stacks acquired in intact living animals expressing intestinal - specific LifeAct - GFP and tagRFP - RAB - 5 in control RNAi ( A – A ′′′ ) and sdpn - 1 ( RNAi ) ( B – B ′′′ ) . In control animals , many tagRFP : : RAB - 5 - positive endosomes are positive for LifeAct : : GFP . White arrowheads indicate positive colocalization . ( B – B ′′′ ) A striking decrease in localization of LifeAct : : GFP and tagRFP : : RAB - 5 was seen in sdpn - 1 RNAi animals . Gray arrows indicate early endosomes depleted of filamentous actin . In each image , autofluorescent lysosome - like organelles appear in in all three channels ( including blue ) , whereas GFP appears only in the green channel and RFP appears only in the red channel . Green and red signals that do not overlap with the blue channel represent pure GFP and RFP signals , respectively . ( C ) Pearson’s r for colocalization of LifeAct : : GFP with tagRFP : : RAB - 5 . Six animals . Error bars represent SEM . * * * p < 0 . 001 ( Student’s t test ) Scale bar , 10 μm . 3754 | A . M . Gleason et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell RNAi studies were performed using the feeding method ( Timmons and Fire , 1998 ) . Feeding constructs were obtained from the Ahringer Library and sequence verified . For all experiments , L4 - stage animals were treated for 30 h , and F1 progeny were scored as adults . The extent of the sdpn - 1 ( ok1667 ) deletion mutation was deter - mined by PCR and DNA sequencing . For routine crosses , sdpn - 1 ( ok1667 ) was either balanced or kept homozygous / hemizygous , with final confirmation of genotype using either of two three - primer combinations : tacaccatcccaacgaatca sdpn1 extF , ttatgcacttcgat - gcctca sdpn1extR , and gtgtctccagatgcggcaacca sdpn1 intR ; or gggctactctttccgacatc ok1667 _ OF , cgttgatcgaacggtatctg ok1667 _ OR , and tgtatacatggaggcgatgg ok1667 _ IR . We found that sdpn - 1 animals displayed reduced fecundity , producing 141 ± 22 . 4 eggs , compared with wild - type controls producing 187 ± 39 . 2 . The U - shaped gonad arms of sdpn - 1 mutants remained comparable to wild type ( n = 30 ) , suggesting that this defect was not caused by mismigration of gonad arms . Plasmid and transgenic strains For intestinal - specific expression , GFP or red fluorescent protein ( tag RFP ) / mCherry fusion transgenes were cloned into a previously described vha - 6 promoter - driven vector modified with a Gateway cassette inserted at the Asp - 718I site just upstream of the GFP and RFP coding region ( Chen et al . , 2006 ) . All PCR products of the genes of interest were first cloned into the Gateway entry vector pDONR221 by BP reaction ( Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) . Isolation of pDONR221 plasmids carrying genes of interest was transferred into the intestinal expression vectors by Gateway recombination cloning in the LR clonase II ( Invitrogen ) reaction to generate N - terminal / C - terminal fu - sions . Low - copy integrated transgenic animals expressing all of these plasmids were obtained by microparticle bombardment ( Praitis et al . , 2001 ; Schweinsberg and Grant , 2013 ) . To construct the GFP - tagged sdpn - 1 transgene driven by its own promoter , sdpn - 1 genomic and promoter sequences were PCR am - plified from the C . elegans genomic DNA . Amplified PCR products were then cloned into the entry vector pDONR221 and then trans - ferred into the C . elegans pPD117 . 01 vector containing the Gateway cassette ( Invitrogen ) , followed by GFP coding sequences , let - 858 3 ′ untranslated region sequences , and the unc - 119 gene of Cae - norhabditis briggsae . The GFP - tagged construct was bombarded into unc - 119 ( ed3 ) mutant animals to establish low - copy integrated transgenic lines by particle bombardment ( Praitis and Maduro , 2011 ) . Protein expression A PreScission site was added to the full - length SDPN - 1A cDNA by standard PCR and cloned into a pGEX2T expression plasmid ( Amer - sham Pharmacia , Piscataway , NJ ) to yield an N - terminally glutathi - one S - transferase ( GST ) – PreScission fusion protein . Control GST ( Zwaagstra et al . , 2011 ) and GST - SDPN - 1A fusion proteins were expressed in Escherichia coli Artic Express cells ( Stratagene , La Jolla , CA ) . Bacterial cultures grown in Luria – Bertani broth were induced at an OD 600 of 0 . 8 with 0 . 1 mM isopropyl - β - d - thiogalactoside and grown overnight at 12°C . Bacterial cells were lysed in 50 mM 4 - ( 2 - hydroxyethyl ) - 1 - piperazineethanesulfonic acid ( HEPES ; pH 7 . 5 ) , 400 mM NaCl , 1 mM dithiothreitol ( DTT ) , and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) using an Avestin Emulsiflex - C3 ( Avestin , Ontario , Canada ) high - pressure homogenizer . Lysed cells were centrifuged at 10 , 000 × g for 30 min in a Sorvall SS - 34 rotor ( Sorvall , Geulph , ON , Canada ) . The soluble supernatant fraction was centrifuged for another 40 min at 4°C at 100 , 000 × g in a Beckman Ti - 70 ultracentrifuge rotor ( Beckman , Ful - lerton , CA ) . Equilibrated with lysis buffer , the supernatant was endosome markers that are normally separate . SDPN - 1 may sup - port fission of membranes of the early endosome that are acquiring recycling endosome characteristics , trapping recycling cargo when such fission fails . Although RAB - 10 and SDPN - 1 both seem to affect the interface of early endosomes and recycling endosomes , their relationship is unclear . RAB - 10 primarily affects recycling of CIE cargo , with little effect on CDE cargo , whereas SDPN - 1 strongly affects both types of recycling cargo . In addition , loss of SDPN - 1 causes intracellular ac - cumulation of RME - 1 – labeled structures , whereas loss of RAB - 10 causes a general loss of RME - 1 – labeled structures . RAB - 10 affects levels of phosphatidylinositol - ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate on endosomes , a phosphoinositide largely generated from phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate ( PI ( 4 ) P ) ( Shi et al . , 2012 ) . One possibility is that RAB - 10 affects the amount of PI ( 4 ) P on early endosomes acquiring recycling endosome characteristics , and such phosphoinositide levels may af - fect recruitment or activity of SDPN - 1 and RME - 1 on endosomal membranes . PI ( 4 ) P generation has been implicated in the exit of recycling cargo from early endosomes in other systems ( Jovic et al . , 2009 ; Ketel et al . , 2016 ) Local actin polymerization is also closely associated with mem - brane budding and fission ( Merrifield , 2004 ; Itoh et al . , 2005 ; Romer et al . , 2010 ) . Actin polymerization on vesicles has been proposed to provide mechanical tension needed to drive vesiculation from donor membrane compartments ( Merrifield , 2004 ; Itoh et al . , 2005 ; Romer et al . , 2010 ) . In fact , syndapin - dependent actin polymerization has been proposed to promote many actin - driven cellular processes , in - cluding release of clathrin - coated vesicles from the plasma mem - brane and their movement into the cytoplasm ( Qualmann and Kelly , 2000 ) . The SH3 domain of mammalian syndapin has been shown to bind to actin nucleation – promoting factors ( NPFs ) , including N - WASP and Cordon - Bleu ( Cobl ) , which in turn activate ARP2 / 3 to polymerize actin , although it is not clear whether the these known syndapin - inter - acting NPFs are found on endosomes ( Qualmann et al . , 1999 ; Qual - mann and Kelly , 2000 ; Modregger et al . , 2000 ; Ahuja et al . , 2007 ) . Another role proposed for membrane - associated actin is in the stabi - lization of tubular microdomains on endosomes , as demonstrated for the β 2 - adrenergic receptor , although syndapin is not known to par - ticipate in this process ( Puthenveedu et al . , 2010 ) . Studies in Drosophila report that syndapin localizes to the cleavage furrow and recruits actin regulators to mediate cytoskeletal remodeling during cytokinesis ( Takeda et al . , 2013 ; Sherlekar and Rikhy , 2016 ) . Because of the importance of actin - based mechanisms in various membrane - sculpting events and the association of syndapin with actin regulation , we considered it likely that early endosomal SDPN - 1 promotes endosome fission via actin polymerization or re - cruitment , concomitant with F - BAR – mediated membrane bending . Indeed , we observed a clear enrichment of filamentous actin on SDPN - 1 – positive endosomes and found that loss of SDPN - 1 or RAB - 10 disrupts the normal enrichment of F - actin on early endo - somes . Thus , although further analysis is required to determine the precise function of such syndapin - regulated endosomal actin , it is likely that syndapin - mediated endosomal cargo recycling depends on local F - actin accumulation . MATERIALS AND METHODS General methods and strains All C . elegans strains used in this study were derived from the wild - type Bristol strain N2 . Genetic crosses and other C . elegans hus - bandry were performed according to standard protocols ( Brenner , 1974 ) . Strains expressing transgenes were grown at 20°C . Supple - mental Table S1 gives a complete list of the strains used in this study . Volume 27 November 15 , 2016 Syndapin / SDPN - 1 in endocytic recycling | 3755 we viewed the anterior lumen at the level of INT 1 and INT2 , before the intestine is squeezed by the gonad , and behind the swollen lumen of the anteriormost portion of INT1 . Microscopy and image analysis Live worms were mounted on 10 % agarose pads with 10 mM le - vamisole as described previously ( Sato et al . , 2005 ) . Multiwave - length fluorescence colocalization images were obtained using the Axio Imager Z1 ( Carl Zeiss MicroImaging , Oberkochen , Germany ) equipped with a Yokagawa CSU - X1 spinning disk and a Photomet - rics Evolve 512 electron - multiplying charge - coupled device camera and captured using MetaMorph software ( Universal Imaging , West Chester , PA ) . Out - of - focus light from captured images was removed with a constrained iterative deconvolution algorithm using Auto - Quant X3 ( AutoQuant Imaging , Watervliet , NY ) . Images taken in the 4 ′ , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole channel were used to identify broad - spectrum intestinal autofluorescences caused by lipofuscin - positive , lysosome - like organelles ( Clokey and Jacobson , 1986 ; Hermann et al . , 2005 ) . Quantification of colocalization images was done using open source ImageJ ( Fiji ) software ( Schindelin et al . , 2012 ) . To ob - tain intestinal images of GFP fluorescence without interference from autofluorescence , we used argon 488 - nm excitation and the spec - tral fingerprinting function of the Zeiss LSM510 / 710 Meta confocal microscope system ( Carl Zeiss Micro Imaging ) as described previ - ously ( Chen et al . , 2006 ) . Quantification of images was performed with MetaMorph version 6 . 3r2 ( Universal Imaging ) . applied to the glutathione – Sepharose 4B column ( Amersham ) . The column with bound protein was washed thoroughly with wash buffer ( 20 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM DTT ) . The GST moiety was cleaved using 225 - μg PreScission protease ( Amersham ) . To check the purity of tagless protein , cleaved SDPN - 1A was analyzed by SDS – PAGE followed by Coomassie staining . Cleaved protein was eluted with several volumes of wash buffer , snap frozen in liquid nitrogen , and stored at − 80°C . For proteolipo - some assays , the frozen aliquots were rapidly thawed and then spun at 20 , 000 × g at 4°C to remove any aggregated protein . Protein con - centration was determined under denaturing conditions by absor - bance at 280 nm . Liposome preparation Phosphatidylserine ( PtdSer ) lipids were purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids ( Alabaster , AL ) . For liposome preparation , chloroform was evaporated under a continuous stream of argon gas and subjected to vacuum desiccation overnight . PtdSer lipids were then resus - pended at 1 mg / ml concentration in argon - purged liposome buffer ( 20 mM HEPES , pH 7 . 5 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 ) . Liposomes of 0 . 4 - μm average diameter were formed by using 0 . 4 - μm polycarbon - ate track - etched membrane filters ( Whatman ) with an Avanti Mini Extruder as per manufacturer’s instructions ( Polar Lipids ) . Liposome tubulation assays For proteoliposome tubulation assays , 2 . 5 μM SDPN - 1 was incu - bated with 0 . 5 mg / ml final concentration of 100 % PtdSer liposomes in liposome buffer . All samples were incubated on ice for 4 min , and 12 min after the start of protein addition , the samples were spotted on 300 mesh carbon - Formvar – coated copper grids . Grids were neg - atively stained with 1 % uranyl acetate at 25°C for 1 . 5 min . To exam - ine membrane morphologies , electron microscopy was performed using a JEOL 1200 EX or JEOL 100 CX transmission electron micro - scope at 80 kV . Images were obtained at 50 , 000 × magnification as indicated . Quantification of liposome tubule diameter was per - formed using Fiji ( National Institutes of Health [ NIH ] , Bethesda , MD ) . Measurement function Mean values were calculated and plotted on graphs . SEM was cal - culated and used as Y - error bars on graphs . Transmission electron microscopy Young adult wild - type animals were prepared for electron micros - copy by a standard immersion fixation protocol ( Hall , 1995 ) . Well - fed animals were moved from the culture plate into buffered alde - hyde fixative and immediately cut open with a razor blade to allow access to the fixative past the cuticle . After fixation in aldehydes , worms were rinsed in buffer and refixed in buffered osmium tetrox - ide , en bloc stained with uranyl acetate , and then dehydrated and embedded into Epon for thin sectioning . Mutant animals ( ok1667 ) prepared by high - pressure freezing and freeze substitution ( HPF / FS ) following a standard protocol ( Hall et al . , 2012 ) . Briefly , animals were moved from the culture plate into an HPF sample carrier in a slurry of E . coli , and the sample carrier was closed and fast frozen in a Baltec HM 010 high - pressure freezer . Frozen samples were freeze substituted into 2 % osmium tetroxide and 2 % water in acetone over 5 d and then rinsed in cold acetone and embedded in plastic . For all samples , thin sections were collected on a diamond knife , mounted on Formvar - coated slot grids , poststained with uranyl acetate , and examined in a Philips CM10 electron microscope fitted with an Olympus Morada digital camera . For best views of the intestinal lumen , we chose animals that had been sectioned lengthwise , and ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank David Lo , Tanvi Goyal , and Peter Schweinsberg for techni - cal assistance in making plasmid clones and biolistic transgenic lines and Michael Pierce and Joseph Kramer for help with confocal mi - croscopy . This work was supported by NIH Grants GM067237 and GM103995 ( to B . D . G . ) and 6R24OD010943 ( to D . H . H . ) and an Anne B . and James B . Leathem Fellowship ( to A . M . G . ) . REFERENCES Ahuja R , Pinyol R , Reichenbach N , Custer L , Klingensmith J , Kessels MM , Qualmann B ( 2007 ) . Cordon - bleu is an actin nucleation factor and con - trols neuronal morphology . Cell 131 , 337 – 350 . Andersson F , Jakobsson J , Low P , Shupliakov O , Brodin L ( 2008 ) . Perturba - tion of syndapin / PACSIN impairs synaptic vesicle recycling evoked by intense stimulation . J Neurosci 28 , 3925 – 3933 . Braun A , Pinyol R , Dahlhaus R , Koch D , Fonarev P , Grant BD , Kessels MM , Qualmann B ( 2005 ) . EHD proteins associate with syndapin I and II and such interactions play a crucial role in endosomal recycling . Mol Biol Cell 16 , 3642 – 3658 . Brenner S ( 1974 ) . The genetics of Caenorhabditis elegans . Genetics 77 , 71 – 94 . Caplan S , Naslavsky N , Hartnell LM , Lodge R , Polishchuk RS , Donaldson JG , Bonifacino JS ( 2002 ) . A tubular EHD1 - containing compartment involved in the recycling of major histocompatibility complex class I molecules to the plasma membrane . EMBO J 21 , 2557 – 2567 . Chen CC , Schweinsberg PJ , Vashist S , Mareiniss DP , Lambie EJ , Grant BD ( 2006 ) . RAB - 10 is required for endocytic recycling in the Caenorhabditis elegans intestine . Mol Biol Cell 17 , 1286 – 1297 . Clayton EL , Anggono V , Smillie KJ , Chau N , Robinson PJ , Cousin MA ( 2009 ) . The phospho - dependent dynamin - syndapin interaction triggers activity - de - pendent bulk endocytosis of synaptic vesicles . J Neurosci 29 , 7706 – 7717 . Clokey GV , Jacobson LA ( 1986 ) . The autofluorescent “lipofuscin granules” in the intestinal cells of Caenorhabditis elegans are secondary lyso - somes . Mech Ageing Dev 35 , 79 – 94 . Da Costa SR , Sou E , Xie J , Yarber FA , Okamoto CT , Pidgeon M , Kessels MM , Mircheff AK , Schechter JE , Qualmann B , Hamm - Alvarez SF ( 2003 ) . Impairing actin filament or syndapin functions promotes accumulation of clathrin - coated vesicles at the apical plasma membrane of acinar epithelial cells . Mol Biol Cell 14 , 4397 – 4413 . 3756 | A . M . Gleason et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell Pant S , Sharma M , Patel K , Caplan S , Carr CM , Grant BD ( 2009 ) . AMPH - 1 / Amphiphysin / Bin1 functions with RME - 1 / Ehd1 in endocytic recycling . Nat Cell Biol 11 , 1399 – 1410 . Praitis V , Casey E , Collar D , Austin J ( 2001 ) . Creation of low - copy integrated transgenic lines in Caenorhabditis elegans . Genetics 157 , 1217 – 1226 . Praitis V , Maduro MF ( 2011 ) . Transgenesis in C . elegans . Methods Cell Biol 106 , 161 – 185 . Puthenveedu MA , Lauffer B , Temkin P , Vistein R , Carlton P , Thorn K , Taunton J , Weiner OD , Parton RG , von Zastrow M ( 2010 ) . Sequence - dependent sorting of recycling proteins by actin - stabilized endosomal microdo - mains . Cell 143 , 761 – 773 . Qualmann B , Kelly RB ( 2000 ) . Syndapin isoforms participate in receptor - me - diated endocytosis and actin organization . J Cell Biol 148 , 1047 – 1062 . Qualmann B , Roos J , DiGregorio PJ , Kelly RB ( 1999 ) . Syndapin I , a synaptic dynamin - binding protein that associates with the neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein . Mol Biol Cell 10 , 501 – 513 . Quan A , Robinson PJ ( 2013 ) . Syndapin – a membrane remodelling and endo - cytic F - BAR protein . FEBS J 280 , 5198 – 5212 . Rao Y , Ma Q , Vahedi - Faridi A , Sundborger A , Pechstein A , Puchkov D , Luo L , Shupliakov O , Saenger W , Haucke V ( 2010 ) . Molecular basis for SH3 domain regulation of F - BAR - mediated membrane deformation . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107 , 8213 – 8218 . Ritter B , Modregger J , Paulsson M , Plomann M ( 1999 ) . PACSIN 2 , a novel member of the PACSIN family of cytoplasmic adapter proteins . FEBS Lett 454 , 356 – 362 . Roach W , Plomann M ( 2007 ) . PACSIN3 overexpression increases adipocyte glucose transport through GLUT1 . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 355 , 745 – 750 . Romer W , Pontani LL , Sorre B , Rentero C , Berland L , Chambon V , Lamaze C , Bassereau P , Sykes C , Gaus K , Johannes L ( 2010 ) . Actin dynamics drive membrane reorganization and scission in clathrin - independent endocy - tosis . Cell 140 , 540 – 553 . Sato K , Norris A , Sato M , Grant BD ( 2014 ) . C . elegans as a model for mem - brane traffic . WormBook 2014 ( Apr 25 ) , 1 – 47 . Sato M , Sato K , Fonarev P , Huang CJ , Liou W , Grant BD ( 2005 ) . Caenorhab - ditis elegans RME - 6 is a novel regulator of RAB - 5 at the clathrin - coated pit . Nat Cell Biol 7 , 559 – 569 . Schindelin J , Arganda - Carreras I , Frise E , Kaynig V , Longair M , Pietzsch T , Preibisch S , Rueden C , Saalfeld S , Schmid B , et al . ( 2012 ) . Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nat Methods 9 , 676 – 682 . Schweinsberg PJ , Grant BD ( 2013 ) . C . elegans gene transformation by microparticle bombardment . WormBook 2013 ( Dec 30 ) , 1 – 10 . Sherlekar A , Rikhy R ( 2016 ) . Syndapin promotes pseudocleavage furrow formation by actin organization in the syncytial Drosophila embryo . Mol Biol Cell 27 , 2064 – 2079 . Shi A , Chen CC , Banerjee R , Glodowski D , Audhya A , Rongo C , Grant BD ( 2010 ) . EHBP - 1 functions with RAB - 10 during endocytic recycling in Caenorhabditis elegans . Mol Biol Cell 21 , 2930 – 2943 . Shi A , Liu O , Koenig S , Banerjee R , Chen CC , Eimer S , Grant BD ( 2012 ) . RAB - 10 - GTPase - mediated regulation of endosomal phosphatidylinosi - tol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 , E2306 – 2315 . Shi A , Pant S , Balklava Z , Chen CC , Figueroa V , Grant BD ( 2007 ) . A novel requirement for C . elegans Alix / ALX - 1 in RME - 1 - mediated membrane transport . Curr Biol 17 , 1913 – 1924 . Shi A , Sun L , Banerjee R , Tobin M , Zhang Y , Grant BD ( 2009 ) . Regulation of endosomal clathrin and retromer - mediated endosome to Golgi retrograde transport by the J - domain protein RME - 8 . EMBO J 28 , 3290 – 3302 . Sun L , Liu O , Desai J , Karbassi F , Sylvain MA , Shi A , Zhou Z , Rocheleau CE , Grant BD ( 2012 ) . CED - 10 / Rac1 regulates endocytic recycling through the RAB - 5 GAP TBC - 2 . PLoS Genet 8 , e1002785 . Takeda T , Robinson IM , Savoian MM , Griffiths JR , Whetton AD , McMahon HT , Glover DM ( 2013 ) . Drosophila F - BAR protein Syndapin contributes to coupling the plasma membrane and contractile ring in cytokinesis . Open Biol 3 , 130081 . Timmons L , Fire A ( 1998 ) . Specific interference by ingested dsRNA . Nature 395 , 854 . Wang Q , Navarro MV , Peng G , Molinelli E , Goh SL , Judson BL , Rajashankar KR , Sondermann H ( 2009 ) . Molecular mechanism of membrane constric - tion and tubulation mediated by the F - BAR protein Pacsin / Syndapin . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 , 12700 – 12705 . Zwaagstra JC , El - Alfy M , O’Connor - McCourt MD ( 2001 ) . Transforming growth factor ( TGF ) - beta 1 internalization : modulation by ligand interaction with TGF - beta receptors types I and II and a mechanism that is distinct from clathrin - mediated endocytosis . J Biol Chem 276 , 27237 – 27245 . Dharmalingam E , Haeckel A , Pinyol R , Schwintzer L , Koch D , Kessels MM , Qualmann B ( 2009 ) . F - BAR proteins of the syndapin family shape the plasma membrane and are crucial for neuromorphogenesis . J Neurosci 29 , 13315 – 13327 . Doherty G , McMahon H ( 2009 ) . Mechanisms of endocytosis . Annu Rev Biochem 78 , 857 – 902 . Giridharan SS , Cai B , Vitale N , Naslavsky N , Caplan S ( 2013 ) . Cooperation of MICAL - L1 , syndapin2 , and phosphatidic acid in tubular recycling endosome biogenesis . Mol Biol Cell 24 , 1776 – 1790 . Gleason RJ , Akintobi AM , Grant BD , Padgett RW ( 2014 ) . BMP signaling requires retromer - dependent recycling of the type I receptor . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111 , 2578 – 2583 . Granger E , McNee G , Allan V , Woodman P ( 2014 ) . The role of the cytoskel - eton and molecular motors in endosomal dynamics . Semin Cell Dev Biol 31 , 20 – 29 . Grant BD , Donaldson JG ( 2009 ) . Pathways and mechanisms of endocytic recycling . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 , 597 – 608 . Grant B , Zhang Y , Paupard MC , Lin SX , Hall DH , Hirsh D ( 2001 ) . Evidence that RME - 1 , a conserved C . elegans EH - domain protein , functions in endocytic recycling . Nat Cell Biol 3 , 573 – 579 . Gu M , Liu Q , Watanabe S , Sun L , Hollopeter G , Grant BD , Jorgensen EM ( 2013 ) . AP2 hemicomplexes contribute independently to synaptic vesicle endocytosis . Elife 2 , e00190 . Hall DH ( 1995 ) . Electron microscopy and three - dimensional image recon - struction . Methods Cell Biol 48 , 395 – 436 . Hall DH , Hartwieg E , Nguyen KC ( 2012 ) . Modern electron microscopy methods for C . elegans . Methods Cell Biol 107 , 93 – 149 . Hermann GJ , Schroeder LK , Hieb CA , Kershner AM , Rabbitts BM , Fonarev P , Grant BD , Priess JR ( 2005 ) . Genetic analysis of lysosomal trafficking in Caenorhabditis elegans . Mol Biol Cell 16 , 3273 – 3288 . Itoh T , Erdmann KS , Roux A , Habermann B , Werner H , De Camilli P ( 2005 ) . Dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton cooperatively regulate plasma mem - brane invagination by BAR and F - BAR proteins . Dev Cell 9 , 791 – 804 . Jovic M , Kieken F , Naslavsky N , Sorgen PL , Caplan S ( 2009 ) . Eps15 homol - ogy domain 1 - associated tubules contain phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phos - phate and phosphatidylinositol - ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate and are required for efficient recycling . Mol Biol Cell 20 , 2731 – 2743 . Kessels MM , Qualmann B ( 2006 ) . Syndapin oligomers interconnect the machineries for endocytic vesicle formation and actin polymerization . J Biol Chem 281 , 13285 – 13299 . Ketel K , Krauss M , Nicot AS , Puchkov D , Wieffer M , Muller R , Subramanian D , Schultz C , Laporte J , Haucke V ( 2016 ) . A phosphoinositide conver - sion mechanism for exit from endosomes . Nature 529 , 408 – 412 . Koles K , Messelaar EM , Feiger Z , Yu CJ , Frank CA , Rodal AA ( 2015 ) . The EHD protein Past1 controls postsynaptic membrane elaboration and synaptic function . Mol Biol Cell 26 , 3275 – 3288 . Kostan J , Salzer U , Orlova A , Toro I , Hodnik V , Senju Y , Zou J , Schreiner C , Steiner J , Merilainen J , et al . ( 2014 ) . Direct interaction of actin filaments with F - BAR protein pacsin2 . EMBO Rep 15 , 1154 – 1162 . Kumar V , Fricke R , Bhar D , Reddy - Alla S , Krishnan KS , Bogdan S , Ramaswami M ( 2009 ) . Syndapin promotes formation of a postsynaptic membrane system in Drosophila . Mol Biol Cell 20 , 2254 – 2264 . Leung B , Hermann G , Priess J ( 1999 ) . Organogenesis of the Caenorhabditis elegans intestine . Dev Biol 216 , 114 – 134 . Lin S , Grant B , Hirsh D , Maxfield F ( 2001 ) . Rme - 1 regulates the distribution and function of the endocytic recycling compartment in mammalian cells . Nat Cell Biol 3 , 567 – 572 . Liu O , Grant BD ( 2015 ) . Basolateral endocytic recycling requires RAB - 10 and AMPH - 1 mediated recruitment of RAB - 5 GAP TBC - 2 to endosomes . PLoS Genet 11 , e1005514 . Maxfield F , McGraw T ( 2004 ) . Endocytic recycling . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 5 , 121 – 132 . McGhee JD ( 2007 ) . The C . elegans intestine . WormBook , 2007 ( Mar 27 ) , 1 – 36 . Meng H , Tian L , Zhou J , Li Z , Jiao X , Li WW , Plomann M , Xu Z , Lisanti MP , Wang C , Pestell RG ( 2011 ) . PACSIN 2 represses cellular migration through direct association with cyclin D1 but not its alternate splice form cyclin D1b . Cell Cycle 10 , 73 – 81 . Merrifield CJ ( 2004 ) . Seeing is believing : imaging actin dynamics at single sites of endocytosis . Trends Cell Biol 14 , 352 – 358 . Modregger J , Ritter B , Witter B , Paulsson M , Plomann M ( 2000 ) . All three PACSIN isoforms bind to endocytic proteins and inhibit endocytosis . J Cell Sci 113 , 4511 – 4521 . Naslavsky N , Weigert R , Donaldson JG ( 2003 ) . Convergence of non - clath - rin - and clathrin - derived endosomes involves Arf6 inactivation and changes in phosphoinositides . Mol Biol Cell 14 , 417 – 431 .