The Endosomal Sorting Complex ESCRT - II Mediates the Assembly and Architecture of ESCRT - III Helices William Mike Henne , 1 , 2 , 3 Nicholas J . Buchkovich , 1 , 2 , 3 Yingying Zhao , 1 , 2 and Scott D . Emr 1 , 2 , * 1 Weill Institute for Cell and Molecular Biology 2 Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics Cornell University , Ithaca , NY 14853 , USA 3 These authors contributed equally to this work * Correspondence : sde26 @ cornell . edu http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 08 . 039 SUMMARY The endosomal sorting complexes required for transport ( ESCRTs ) constitute hetero - oligomeric machines that mediate topologically similar mem - brane - sculpting processes , including cytokinesis , retroviral egress , and multivesicular body ( MVB ) biogenesis . Although ESCRT - III drives membrane remodeling that creates MVBs , its structure and the mechanism of vesicle formation are unclear . Using electron microscopy , we visualize an ESCRT - II : ESCRT - III supercomplex and propose how it medi - ates vesicle formation . We deﬁne conformational changes that activate ESCRT - III subunit Snf7 and show that it assembles into spiraling (cid:1) 9 nm protoﬁla - ments on lipid monolayers . A high - content ﬂow cy - tometry assay further demonstrates that mutations halting ESCRT - III assembly block ESCRT function . Strikingly , the addition of Vps24 and Vps2 transforms ﬂat Snf7 spirals into membrane - sculpting helices . Finally , we show that ESCRT - II and ESCRT - III coas - semble into (cid:1) 65 nm diameter rings indicative of a cargo - sequestering supercomplex . We propose that ESCRT - III has distinct architectural stages that are modulated by ESCRT - II to mediate cargo capture and vesicle formation by ordered assembly . INTRODUCTION The endosomal sorting complexes required for transport ( ESCRTs ) constitute the sorting machinery that delivers ubiquiti - nated transmembrane cargoes from the endosomal surface into its interior and ultimately into the vacuole lumen ( lysosome in mammals ) . To ensure vacuole delivery , cell - surface cargoes are ubiquitinated , endocytosed , and trafﬁcked to endosomes . There , the ESCRT machinery recognizes their ubiquitin moiety and mediates their deubiquitination before packaging them into intralumenal vesicles ( ILVs ) that bud into the interior of late endosomes , creating multivesicular bodies ( MVBs ) . MVB bio - genesis is achieved by the coordinated action of ﬁve distinct ESCRT complexes ( ESCRTs - 0 , - I , - II , - III , and the Vps4 - Vta1 complex ) ( Babst , 2011 ; Henne et al . , 2011 ) . The failure of ESCRTs to properly sort cargoes is associated with numerous pathologies , including cancer and various neurodegenerative diseases ( Saksena and Emr , 2009 ) . Furthermore , many viruses , including HIV - 1 , rely on ESCRT machinery to exit infected cells , highlighting the central role of the ESCRT pathway in the study of human disease . The ESCRT pathway executes MVB biogenesis through an exquisite division of labor . ESCRTs - 0 , - I , and - II are soluble hetero - oligomers that are recruited to cargo - laden endosomes by binding both the compartment - speciﬁc lipid phosphatidylino - sitol - 3 - phosphate ( PtdIns ( 3 ) P ) and ubiquitin - modiﬁed cargo . In addition , the ESCRT - II complex also initiates the assembly of ESCRT - III . This hetero - oligomeric complex is composed of four core subunits ( Vps20 , Snf7 / Vps32 , Vps24 , and Vps2 ; CHMPs in mammals ) and has recently been highlighted as the minimal machinery necessary to form ILVs in vitro ( Hanson et al . , 2008 ; Saksena et al . , 2009 ; Wollert and Hurley , 2010 ) . Previous studies indicate that ESCRT - III does not assemble into a stable complex . Rather , its subunits cycle between an inactive monomeric state in the cytoplasm and an assembled polymer at endosomes ( Babst et al . , 2002 ) . ESCRT - III assembly is thus both temporally ordered and transient . ESCRT - II engages Vps20 and triggers Snf7 homo - oligomerization . Snf7 then recruits Vps24 and Vps2 , which contain high - afﬁnity microtu - bule - interacting and trafﬁcking ( MIT ) - interacting motifs ( MIMs ) necessary to recruit the ATPases associated with diverse activities ( AAA ) ATPase Vps4 to immediately disassemble the complex ( Saksena et al . , 2009 ; Teis et al . , 2008 ) . Intralumenal vesicle formation is directly coupled to the ordered assembly of ESCRT - III . This is a biologically unique form of vesicle budding that is topologically inverted from ‘‘clas - sical’’ vesicle formation ( e . g . , clathrin and coat protein complex [ COP ] coated ) ( Doherty and McMahon , 2009 ) . As such , the mechanism for ILV formation is unclear . Furthermore , the molec - ular architecture that ESCRT - III adopts to drive ILV formation remains a key question in the ﬁeld . Previous studies indicate that ESCRT - III assembly is initiated by conformational changes 356 Cell 151 , 356 – 371 , October 12 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . in each of its subunits that promote their association with each other and the endosome . These conformational changes involve the disruption of intramolecular interactions between the basic N terminus with the acidic C - terminal region ( Shim et al . , 2007 ; Zamborlini et al . , 2006 ) . In agreement with this , recent X - ray crystal structures show that soluble ESCRT - III subunits exist in ‘‘closed’’ conformations with numerous intramolecular interac - tions between the highly structured N - terminal ‘‘core domain’’ and the more ﬂexible C terminus ( Bajorek et al . , 2009 ; Muzio 1 et al . , 2006 ) ( Figure 1A ) . Subunit truncations , which remove these autoinhibitory C - terminal regions , result in subunit autoactivation and the spontaneous assembly of ESCRT - III polymers in vivo and in vitro ( Hanson et al . , 2008 ; Lata et al . , 2008 ) . However , past studies display one or more limitations : ( 1 ) they rely on the extensive manipulation of ESCRT - III subunits , often deleting up to (cid:1) 48 % of subunits to drive polymer assembly ; ( 2 ) polymers are very heterogeneous and form linear protoﬁlaments , rings , domes , cylinders , and sheet - like lattices , making their physio - logical relevance unclear ; ( 3 ) they are not comprehensive and focus on only one or a few ESCRT subunits ; or ( 4 ) microscopic visualization of ESCRT - III on lipid membranes is generally limited to the resolution of light microscopy . Here , we elucidate the molecular architecture of the ESCRT - III complexes that assemble on lipid monolayers . Furthermore , by reconstituting and visualizing distinct subreactions of ESCRT - III assembly , we present a comprehensive structural explanation elucidating how transmembrane cargoes are ﬁrst sequestered and ultimately sorted into ILVs . RESULTS Experimental Rationale To investigate the molecular mechanism governing ESCRT - III assembly , we designed a three - stage research strategy . In the ﬁrst stage , we investigated the conformational changes that convert ESCRT - III subunits from inactive monomers into an assembled complex . We began by mapping regions shared by all four ESCRT - III core subunits , which are necessary for assembly into a complex , and then focusing on Snf7 , the most abundant subunit within ESCRT - III , as a model to indentify conformational changes that promote its activation . In the second stage , we reconstituted Snf7 assembly on lipid mono - layers and addressed the molecular mechanism governing Snf7 homo - oligomerization . In our ﬁnal stage , we visualized the coassembly of ESCRTs - II and - III and proposed a model describing how ESCRT - III is transformed from a cargo - capturing ring into a membrane - sculpting helix to achieve cargo sorting into MVBs . ESCRT - III ‘‘Core’’ Domains Mediate ESCRT - III Assembly Previous studies demonstrate that ESCRT - III subunits are sequentially recruited by ESCRT - II to the surface of endosomes ( Teis et al . , 2008 ) . ESCRT - II directly binds Vps20 , which promotes the sequential recruitment of Snf7 , Vps24 , and Vps2 to form the heterotetrameric ESCRT - III complex ( Figure 1A ) ( Teis et al . , 2008 ) . All four of these ESCRT - III subunits are pre - dicted to share a common domain architecture of four a helices bundled into an N - terminal core domain , followed by an unstruc - tured C - terminal region ( Figure 1A ) . To better understand the molecular architecture of the ESCRT - III complex , we ﬁrst wanted to deﬁne architectural regions shared by its subunits that govern protein - protein and protein - endosome interactions . To do this , we generated subunit truncations for each ESCRT - III subunit and asked whether they retained endosomal localization and could interact with other ESCRT subunits . The N - terminal core domains ( which lack their C - terminal regions and contain only a helices 1 – 4 ) of Vps20 , Snf7 , Vps24 , and Vps2 were fused to green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) and ectopi - cally expressed in yeast lacking an endogenous copy of each subunit . Like their full - length counterparts , the core domains of all four ESCRT - III subunits localize to distinct intracellular punc - tae ( Figures 1B – 1D and Figure S1A available online ) . We hypothesized that these punctae were class E compart - ments , aberrant endosome - derived structures generated when - ever the ESCRT pathway is blocked ( Raymond et al . , 1992 ) . To conﬁrm this , yeast were colabeled with the ﬂuorescent membrane dye FM4 - 64 , which accumulates in class E compart - ments . Vps20 core , Snf7 core , Vps24 core , and Vps2 core - GFP all co - localize with FM4 - 64 , conﬁrming their endosomal localization . We next asked whether each ESCRT - III core domain was sufﬁcient to recruit a downstream ESCRT - III subunit to endoso - mal membranes . To test this , we took advantage of the observation that Snf7 - GFP normally localizes to the class E compartment but is redistributed into the cytoplasm in vps20 D cells ( Figure 1E ) . Ectopic expression of Vps20 core rescues Snf7 - GFP endosomal localization , conﬁrming that Vps20 core is sufﬁcient to recruit Snf7 ( Figure 1E ) . Similar experiments in snf7 D and vps24 D yeast conﬁrm that both Snf7 core and Vps24 core are sufﬁcient to recruit their respective downstream subunits ( Vps24 and Vps2 , respectively ) to endosomal membranes ( Figures 1F and 1G ) . Further truncation of Snf7 to helices1 – 3 proved insufﬁcient to recruit Vps24 - GFP to class E compartments , although this truncation was sufﬁcient to localize to class E compartments ( Figure S1B ; W . M . H . and N . J . B . , unpublished data ) . This suggests the need for an intact Snf7 core domain for Vps24 recruitment . Altogether , this indicates that the molecular architecture of the ESCRT - III complex relies primarily on core - core interactions between its subunits and the endosome . Snf7 Is Activated by Displacement of helix5 Away from the Core Because all ESCRT - III N - terminal core domains are sufﬁcient to localize to endosomal membrane and recruit other subunits of the ESCRT - III complex , we reasoned that conformational changes displacing the autoinhibitory C terminus promote ESCRT - III assembly by exposing core contacts . We wanted to understand these conformational changes and chose to focus our investigation on Snf7 , the most abundant ESCRT - III subunit . Using crystal structures of hVps24 ( CHMP3 ) , we generated a three - dimensional model of Snf7 in its ‘‘closed’’ conformation by using the comparative protein structure modeling program Modeler ( Eswar et al . , 2006 ) ( Figure 2A ) . The Snf7 model adopts the same overall fold as hVps24 and has four discernable a helices composing its core domain , with a helix5 forming intra - molecular contacts with the core . Cell 151 , 356 – 371 , October 12 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 357 We hypothesized that Snf7 activation involves the conforma - tional displacement of helix5 away from its core contacts , allow - ing the core domain to be accessible for potential protein and membrane interactions . To investigate this conformational change , we developed a cysteine - based crosslinking assay that directly monitors the conformational state of Snf7 . We ﬁrst A B C D E F G Figure 1 . N - Terminal Core Domains Mediate ESCRT - III Assembly ( A ) Schematic of ESCRT - III subunit architectures . Helices are denoted as boxes . The MIT - interacting motif ( MIM ) is red . ( B – D ) Representative images of vps20 D , snf7 D , or vps24 D yeast expressing GFP - tagged full - length or core domains of ESCRT - III subunits ( green ) . Class E compartments are labeled with FM4 - 64 ( red ) . Merged panels include GFP , FM4 - 64 , and DIC images . ( E – G ) Yeast lacking an ESCRT - III subunit and stably expressing a GFP - tagged downstream subunit are ectopically expressing either full - length ( top ) , vector ( middle ) , or core domains ( bottom ) . E , class E compartment . Scale bar , 5 m m . See also Figure S1 . 358 Cell 151 , 356 – 371 , October 12 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . selected residues on both helix5 ( T179 ) and the core region closely juxtaposed to helix5 ( A51 ) ( Figure S2A ) . Taking advan - tage of the fact that endogenous Snf7 contains no cysteines , we converted these residues to cysteines and puriﬁed Snf7 T179C , Snf7 A51C , and the dicysteine mutant ( Snf7 redox ) from E . coli ( Table S1 ) . In the presence of the reducing agent dithiothreitol ( DTT ) , all Snf7 cysteine mutants migrated to (cid:1) 37 kDa on SDS - PAGE gels , which is consistent with cysteineless Snf7 ( Figures 2B and S2B ) . We next oxidized the cysteine - containing Snf7 mutants by adding the chemical oxidant copper ( II ) 1 , 10 - phena - throline ( Cu 2 + Phen ) and ran these samples on nonreducing SDS - PAGE gels . Strikingly , Snf7 redox underwent a migration shift from (cid:1) 37 kDa to (cid:1) 30 kDa in the presence of Cu 2 + Phen , suggest - ing intramolecular disulﬁde bond formation ( Figure 2B ) . Snf7 A51C and Snf7 T179C did not shift their migrations upon oxidization . The Snf7 redox migration shift indicates the disulﬁde crosslinking of Snf7 redox into an inactive ‘‘closed’’ conformation . Because the Snf7 redox migration shift may be correlated to its ‘‘open’’ and ‘‘closed’’ conformational states , we next asked whether ESCRT subunits that initiate Snf7 activation promote Snf7 redox ‘‘opening . ’’ Snf7 is activated by Vps20 , which is itself activated by the ESCRT - II subunit Vps25 ( Saksena et al . , 2009 ) . Thus , Vps25 , Vps20 , and liposomes were incubated with Snf7 redox in mildly reducing conditions to allow conforma - tional changes within Snf7 redox ( Table S2 ) . The samples were then oxidized with Cu 2 + Phen and run on nonreducing SDS - PAGE gels . The separate incubation of Snf7 with either large unilamellar vesicles ( LUVs ; (cid:1) 1 micron ) or small unilamellar vesicles ( SUVs ; < 1 micron ) failed to ‘‘open’’ Snf7 redox ( Figure 2C ) . Similarly , experiments adding SUVs together with either Vps20 or Vps25 separately or adding Vps25 and Vps20 together but without SUVs all failed to ‘‘open’’ Snf7 redox ( Figure S2C ) . However , the completeadditionofSUVs , Vps25 , andVps20causedadramatic shift of Snf7 redox from its ‘‘closed’’ to ‘‘open’’ conformational state ( Figure 2C ) . This effect was dose dependent , with increasing concentrations of Vps20 and Vps25 inducing more Snf7 redox to an ‘‘open’’ conformation . This indicates that Vps25 and Vps20 promote the conformational ‘‘opening’’ of Snf7 on membrane by displacement of helix5 away from the core domain . Structure - Based Mutations Promote Snf7 ‘‘Opening’’ Because Snf7 activation involves helix5 displacement , we reasoned that mutations disrupting helix5 - core contacts would promote Snf7 activation and consequently drive Snf7 to endo - somes . Using site - directed mutagenesis , we substituted resi - dues R52 and L67 on the Snf7 core domain with glutamates , which would disrupt helix5 - core contacts , but not add additional positive charge to Snf7 that may inadvertently promote membrane binding ( Figures S2A and S2D ) . To test whether these substitutions promoted Snf7 activation , we ﬁrst examined the endosomal localization of the mutant proteins by subcellular fractionation . Normally , (cid:1) 65 % of Snf7 molecules localize to the cytoplasmic supernatant fraction ( S13 ) after a 13 , 000 3 centrifugation spin ( Babst et al . , 2002 ) . The remaining (cid:1) 35 % resides in the membrane - enriched pellet fraction ( P13 ) . Snf7 R52E and Snf7 L67E displayed enhanced P13 fractionation ( (cid:1) 55 % for Snf7 R52E and (cid:1) 46 % for Snf7 L67E , respectively ) ( Figure 2D ) , which is consistent with enhanced Snf7 activation . We hypothesized that the R52E and L67E substitutions would promote Snf7 redox ‘‘opening . ’’ To test this , we introduced the R52E and L67E mutations into Snf7 redox constructs and oxidized the puriﬁed proteins with Cu 2 + Phen . As predicted , the R52E and L67E substitutions enhanced the percentage of Snf7 redox remaining in an ‘‘open’’ state after their oxidation by Cu 2 + Phen ( R52E : (cid:1) 40 % open ; L67E : (cid:1) 38 % open ; versus redox alone : (cid:1) 28 % open ) ( Figure S2E ) . This suggests that these mutations are disrupting the Snf7 closed conformation by increasing the physical separation between the core and helix5 . We next attempted to ‘‘open’’ Snf7 by mutating residues on or near helix5 that make contact with the core domain . Although helix5 primarily interacts with the core via weak hydrophobic contacts , we noticed a highly conserved acidic patch in the linker region immediately preceding helix5 . This patch contains the sequence motif EDEL ( D / M ) EE and is almost completely conserved between yeast and man ( Figure S2D ) . Several nega - tively charged residues within this motif form electrostatic contacts with positively charged residues along the core domain ( Figure S2A ) . Inversion of these negatively charged residues to positively charged lysines ( Snf7 K - linker ) signiﬁcantly enhanced Snf7 P13 fractionation ( 66 % P13 ) , suggesting that these muta - tions may drive Snf7 ‘‘opening’’ by displacing the linker and helix5 from contacting the core ( Figure 2D ) . Snf7 K - linker also changed its migration pattern , likely due to a net change in protein charge on SDS - PAGE gels . Because our Snf7 mutants displayed enhanced P13 localiza - tion , we wanted to directly assay their ability to interact with lipid membranes . To do this , we next performed liposomes ﬂotation experiments with puriﬁed Snf7 mutants to conﬁrm that theyinter - acted with membranes better than ‘‘closed’’ wild - type Snf7 . Whereas wild - type Snf7 displayed very low liposome binding ( (cid:1) 6 % ) , Snf7 R52E , Snf7 L67E , and Snf7 K - linker showed enhanced liposome binding ( 27 % , 38 % , and 32 % , respectively ) ( Figures 2E and S2F ) . As a positive control , the Snf7 core domain alone was puriﬁed and displayed the most robust membrane binding ( (cid:1) 56 % ) . Taken together , these observations indicate that Snf7 exists in an inactive ‘‘closed’’ conformation that involves intramolecular contacts between the core domain and the linker - helix5 region . We propose that when Vps20 is activated , it recruits Snf7 and induces conformational changes within Snf7 that promote the movement of the linker and helix5 away from the core . This exposes regions of the core that were buried , allowing them to interact with the endosome and other ESCRT - III subunits . Several highly conserved lysines line the core domain and form electrostatic contacts with the linker ( Figure S2A ) . Once exposed by conformational opening , they could potentially mediate Snf7 membrane binding ( W . M . H . and N . J . B . , unpublished data ) . Activated Snf7 Assembles into Protoﬁlaments Once activated , Snf7 homo - oligomerizes , forming the most abundant portion of the ESCRT - III complex ( Teis et al . , 2008 ) . Because Snf7 R52E appeared to be autoactivated , we Cell 151 , 356 – 371 , October 12 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 359 A B C D E Figure 2 . Snf7 Is Activated by Displacement of helix5 from Intramolecular Core Contacts ( A ) Ribbon diagrams ( side and top ) of modeled Snf7 ( residues 10 – 183 ) . ( B ) Coomassie - stained nonreducing SDS - PAGE gels ofSnf7 cysteine mutants . Cu 2 + Phen denotes copper ( II ) phenathroline . Thecartoonsare ‘‘closed’’Snf7 with cysteines ( orange ) . ( C ) Snf7 redox isconformationally‘‘opened’’byadditionofVps25 , Vps20 , andliposomes . LUV , largeunilamallarliposomes ; SUV , smallunilamallarliposomes . Gels are nonreducing . 360 Cell 151 , 356 – 371 , October 12 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . hypothesized that it would readily form higher - order structures visible by negative stain transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) . Whereas wild - type Snf7 does not assemble into ordered structures ( Figure 3A ) , we observed the robust assembly of Snf7 R52E into long protoﬁlaments 14 . 5 ± 3 . 7 nm in diameter ( Figures 3B and 3C and Table S3 ) . Protoﬁlament abundance and length were dependent on the period of time samples incubated on TEM grids prior to negative staining , suggesting that the Formvar grid was the site of proto - ﬁlament formation ( Figures S3A and S3C ) . Protoﬁlament forma - tion was also protein concentration dependent , with robust formation at 34 . 5 m M , reduced protoﬁlament formation at 12 . 5 m M , and no visible protoﬁlaments under 5 m M concentration ( Figure S3B ) . The protoﬁlaments were often ‘‘capped’’ by rings or spirals at one or both ends ( Figures 3B – 3F , red arrows ) . Longer incubation times led to more abundant ring / spiral ‘‘caps’’ on protoﬁlaments ( see Figure S3D for quantiﬁcation ) . To further examine the molecular architecture of Snf7 protoﬁ - laments , we used 2 % ammonium molybdate as a negative stain . Ammonium molybdate forms a ﬁne microcrystalline coat on bio - logical samples , preserving their ultrastructural detail at the cost of electron density . It had the general effect of sharpening the resolution of Snf7 protoﬁlaments and revealed that they are composed of two intertwining subﬁlaments with a diameter of 4 . 1 ± 0 . 6 nm ( Figures 3G – 3K ) . Using ammonium molybdate , the Snf7 protoﬁlament diameter decreased to 9 . 0 ± 1 . 3 nm ( Fig - ure 3L ) . In rare samples , single subﬁlaments could be observed but were generally short and broken ( Figure 3I ) . These observations indicate that the R52E mutation promotes the assembly of Snf7 into homo - oligomeric protoﬁlaments . The basic unit of this oligomer is the (cid:1) 4 nm diameter subﬁlament . Because the width of Snf7 monomers is (cid:1) 3 – 4 nm , we hypothe - size that this subﬁlament is composed of ‘‘open’’ Snf7 mono - mers arranged head to tail with one another ( Figure 3K ) . Two subﬁlaments then associate in parallel , forming a more stable (cid:1) 9 nm protoﬁlament . The Snf7 C - Terminal Region Stabilizes Protoﬁlaments Because the diameter of Snf7 subﬁlaments suggested that they were composed of Snf7 monomers packed head to tail into a chain , we hypothesized that Snf7 core would be sufﬁcient to form protoﬁlaments in vitro . Surprisingly , Snf7 core failed to assemble into protoﬁlaments ( Figures 4A and 4B ) . Consistent with this , when Snf7 core and Snf7 R52E were mixed at 1 : 1 stoichio - metric ratios , protoﬁlaments were formed , but their lengths were reduced dramatically ( Figures S3E and S3F ) . This suggested that Snf7 R52E was able to interact with Snf7 core , but Snf7 core nega - tively affected protoﬁlament elongation . Because Snf7 core appeared to be unable to polymerize , we hypothesized that the Snf7 C - terminal region may play a role in Snf7 homo - oligomerization . To test this , we generated several mutants that perturb the C - terminal region and evaluated these mutations with three different assays to test : ( 1 ) whether the mutants could assemble into protoﬁlaments in vitro ; ( 2 ) whether they retained the ability to interact with endogenous Snf7 in vivo by coimmunoprecipitation ; and ( 3 ) whether the mutants were able to complement ESCRT pathway function when expressed in snf7 D yeast . We ﬁrst investigated whether helix5 was involved in Snf7 olig - omerization . We deleted helix5 ( residues 170 – 183 ) on the R52E background and found that puriﬁed Snf7 R52E + D helix5 failed to form protoﬁlaments ( Figure 4D ) . To test whether mutating helix5 affected Snf7 oligomerization in vivo , we next expressed Snf7 D helix5 in yeast with a chromosomally integrated SNF7 - 3xFLAG gene and performed anti - FLAG immunoprecipitation . Whereas wild - type Snf7 efﬁciently coimmunoprecipitated with Snf7 - FLAG ( Figure 4C ) , Snf7 D helix5 failed to coimmunoprecipi - tate , indicating that the loss of helix5 attenuates Snf7 oligomeri - zation ( Figure 4D ) . This loss of function is not due to the nonspe - ciﬁc deletion of residues within the C - terminal region because deletion of residues immediately following helix5 ( residues 185 – 195 ) did not affect ESCRT - III - dependent cargo sorting ( Fig - ure S4J ) . Importantly , Snf7 R52E efﬁciently coimmunoprecipitated with Snf7 - FLAG , which is consistent with the ability of Snf7 R52E to assemble into protoﬁlaments ( Figure 4C ) . If helix5 interacts in trans with neighboring Snf7 monomers , then the highly conserved linker region would also be critical for providing helix5 with the molecular ‘‘reach’’ necessary to interact with another Snf7 monomer . Consistent with this , we deleted the linker region ( residues 151 – 170 ) and found that Snf7 D linker failed to form protoﬁlaments ( Figure 4E ) . Snf7 D linker also failed to coimmunoprecipitate with Snf7 - FLAG in vivo , suggesting that it is necessary for Snf7 oligomerization ( Figure 4E ) . Because we found that charge - inversion mutations within the linker region promote Snf7 activation , we examined Snf7 K - linker and found that it formed short ( 98 ± 73 nm length ) protoﬁlaments ( Figure 4F ) . In agreement , Snf7 K - linker efﬁciently coimmunopreci - pitated with Snf7 - FLAG , again indicating that it was capable of oligomerizing ( Figure 4F ) . Together , these observations suggest a role for the Snf7 C - terminal region in stabilizing Snf7 homo - oligomers . A pH - Sensitive ESCRT Cargo Quantitatively Scores Snf7 Function Previous studies have suggested that Snf7 homo - oligomeriza - tion promotes ILV formation and thus the delivery of cargoes to the vacuole lumen ( Teis et al . , 2008 , 2010 ) . Because we charac - terized mutations that impaired Snf7 oligomerization , we next developed an assay to quantitatively access their effects of ESCRT pathway function . This assay utilizes a pH - sensitive GFP variant ( pHluorin ) fused to the plasma membrane methio - nine transporter Mup1 ( Prosser et al . , 2010 ) ( see Figure 4K for conceptual model ) ( Table S4 ) . When extracellular methionine levels are low , Mup1 - pHluorin localizes to the plasma membrane and ﬂuoresces brightly ( D ) Subcellularfractionationsof snf7 D yeastectopicallyexpressingSnf7mutants . Histogramsrepresentaveragesofthreeindependentexperiments . SDsshown . ( E ) Liposome ﬂotation assays of reconstituted Snf7 , Snf7 R52E , and Snf7 core . Liposome - bound ( B ) and unbound ( U ) fractions are denoted . Histograms represent the percentage Snf7 bound to liposomes as B / ( B + U ) ( error bars denote mean ± SD ) . See also Figure S2 . Cell 151 , 356 – 371 , October 12 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 361 A B C D E F G H I J K L Figure 3 . Snf7 Assembles into Protoﬁlaments ( A ) TEM micrograph showing that Snf7 ( wild - type ) does not oligomerize . ( B – F ) Snf7 R52E assembles into long protoﬁlaments that terminate in rings ( red arrows ) . ( G ) Snf7 R52E protoﬁlaments are composed of intertwining subﬁlaments . 362 Cell 151 , 356 – 371 , October 12 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . when excited ( Figure 4G ) . In response to increased extracellular methionine , Mup1 is rapidly endocytosed and delivered to the vacuole lumen in an ESCRT - dependent manner ( Figure S4A ) ( Lin et al . , 2008 ) . At the vacuole , pHluorin ﬂuorescence is quenched due to the acidity of the vacuole lumen ( Figure 4H ) . Because ESCRT dysfunction results in a failure to sort Mup1 - pHluorin into ILVs , we predicted that cells with a defective ESCRT - III would display persistent pHluorin ﬂuorescence in the presence of methionine ( Figures 4I and 4J ) . In this way , pHluorin ﬂuorescence intensity is a quantiﬁable readout of the efﬁciency of ESCRT - III - mediated ILV formation . To quantitatively score mutations that affect Snf7 oligomeriza - tion , we ectopically expressed Snf7 mutants in Mup1 - pHluorin - expressing yeast lacking endogenous Snf7 and induced Mup1 - pHluorin endocytic uptake by adding methionine . We then used ﬂow cytometry to quantify the pHluorin ﬂuorescence intensities of at least 300 , 000 yeast expressing each mutant . When the ﬂuorescence distribution of the population was plotted , each Snf7 mutant exhibited a unique and highly repro - ducible sorting proﬁle ( Figure S4C ) . We then calculated the percent deviation of each mutant from the wild - type proﬁle to assign a ‘‘score’’ that reﬂects the severity of each mutation on ESCRT pathway function . The table in Figure 4L summarizes these calculations . Notably , (cid:1) 79 % of yeast expressing Snf7 R52E sort Mup1 - pHluorin as efﬁciently as wild - type cells , resulting in a sharply peaked sorting proﬁle that is only slightly brighter when compared to wild - type yeast ( Figure S4C ) . This indicates that Snf7 R52E retains functionality in vivo . Although the precise reason for the slight ﬂuorescence shift is unclear , it may be attributed to perturbing the assembly : disassembly equilibrium of ESCRT - III , which may affect ILV formation . Consistent with this , mutations localized within the helix5 - core contact site elicited Mup1 - pHluorin sorting defects ( L67E and A51E ) , whereas mutations outside this region had almost no effect on sorting ( K60E and K79E ) ( Figures S4B and S4C ) . Consistent with the need for helix5 to efﬁciently oligomerize in vitro , Snf7 D helix5 - expressing yeast displayed a signiﬁcant Mup1 - pHluorin sorting defect , resulting in only (cid:1) 32 % of the sort - ing efﬁciency of wild - type cells ( Figure 4L ) . Snf7 D linker - expressing yeast also failed to efﬁciently sort Mup1 - pHluorin , functioning at only (cid:1) 9 % of wild - type levels . This was similar to Snf7 core alone , which had a sorting phenotype similar to snf7 D yeast . Surpris - ingly , Snf7 K - linker also failed to sort Mup1 - pHluorin efﬁciently ( (cid:1) 7 % sorting efﬁciency ) . The reason for this is unclear but may be due to the inherent instability of the short ( (cid:1) 100 nm ) ﬁlaments this mutant formed ( Figure 4F ) . To conﬁrm that the sorting of Mup1 represents a general readout of ESCRT pathway function , we examined the sorting of another ESCRT - dependent cargo—the vacuolar protease Cps1 . Snf7 mutants were coexpressed in yeast expressing GFP - Cps1 , which is sorted from the Golgi to the vacuole in an ESCRT - dependent manner . The qualitatively scored ability of mutants to sort GFP - Cps1 closely matched the sorting proﬁles of Mup1 - pHluorin ( Figures S4D – S4K ) , suggesting that the Mup1 - pHluorin sorting proﬁle represents the general sorting capability of the ESCRT pathway . Altogether , these data underscore the involvement of the Snf7 C - terminal region in stabilizing Snf7 homo - oligomers . It suggests that this region , following subunit ‘‘opening , ’’ may form contacts with a neighboring Snf7 monomer to promote oligomerization . Furthermore , the use of Mup1 - pHluorin as a pH - sensitive cargo has allowed us to quantitatively access the effect of individual point mutations within the ESCRT pathway . Snf7 Assembles into Spirals on Lipid Monolayers Because we reconstituted Snf7 oligomerization and showed its importance in the sorting of cargoes to the vacuole , we next wanted to visualize Snf7 assembly directly on a lipid environ - ment . To directly visualize ESCRT - III assembly on lipids and to retain the high visual resolution of transmission electron microscopy , we generated supported lipid monolayers along the surface of Formvar - coated TEM grids ( Figures 5A and 5B ) . Monolayers of deﬁned lipid composition ( see Extended Experimental Procedures ) formed spontaneously across the surface of an aqueous buffer and were subsequently adhered to TEM grids . Proteins could then be injected , allowing the assembly of protein structures on the supported monolayer surface . We ﬁrst added puriﬁed Snf7 R52E to lipid monolayers and observed the robust assembly of Snf7 R52E into protoﬁlament spirals across the monolayer surface ( Figure 5C ) . Spirals were an average outer diameter of 50 . 4 ± 9 . 8 nm ( Figure S5A ) . By examining regions of grids that were not coated with monolayer , we noted that Snf7 spirals closely resemble the more elongated Snf7 protoﬁlaments formed on grids but were more tightly coiled into spirals when assembled on a lipid environment ( Figure 5C , top region ) . We hypothesized that the negatively charged phosphatidyl - serine ( PS ) and PtdIns ( 3 ) P lipids within the monolayer ( 30 % PS , 10 % PtdIns ( 3 ) P ) mediated electrostatic interactions with Snf7 and promoted spiral assembly . To test this , we generated lipid monolayers with a reduced electrostatically positive lipid composition ( now 5 % PS , 1 % PtdIns ( 3 ) P ) . As predicted , Snf7 failed to associate into tightly coiled spirals on this monolayer surface ( Figure S5B ) . Snf7 , Vps24 , and Vps2 Coassemble into Protein Helices Spirals are geometrically two - dimensional structures . In agree - ment with this , the Snf7 spirals we observed appeared ‘‘ﬂat’’ and thus ostensibly incapable of mediating the drastic three - dimensional membrane remodeling necessary for ILV formation . Because Snf7 oligomerization recruits ESCRT - III subunits Vps24 and Vps2 to endosomes , we hypothesized that these proteins ( H and I ) Zoom - ins of the Snf7 R52E protoﬁlament in ( G ) showing subﬁlament intertwining . ( J ) Snf7 R52E protoﬁlament terminating in a ring . The red arrow denotes subﬁlament hypercoiling in the ring . ( K ) Model of subﬁlament packing in the Snf7 protoﬁlament . ( L ) Quantitation of Snf7 ﬁlament diameters . Scale bars , 100 nm ( A – G ) and 50 nm ( H – J ) . See also Figure S3 . Cell 151 , 356 – 371 , October 12 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 363 R52E Δlinker R52E + Δ helix5 K - linker Mup1 - pHluorin Merged snf7 Δ Snf7 wildtype - m e t h i on i ne # o f c e ll s # o f c e ll s vacuolarsorting E E E E Snf7mutant snf7 Δ # o f c e ll s # o f c e ll s fluorescent intensity G Snf7 wildtype defect ( fluorescence ) no methionine + methionine + methionine + methionine + m e t h i on i ne A F B E D assembly no assembly no assembly no assembly assembly 10 % input IP : FLAG WB : Snf7 Snf7 - FLAG Snf7 Snf7 - FLAG Snf7 Δlinker Snf7 Δhelix5 Snf7 - FLAG Snf7 - FLAG Snf7 K - linker input IP input IP input IP H I J K R52E R52E K - linker Flow Cytometry Δlinker Wt R52E Wt R52E noFLAG noFLAG Yes No No Yes No Snf7core C anti - FLAGbead Snf7 - FLAG ( bait ) untaggedSnf7 ( query ) co - IP ? PM vacuole ESCRTs vesicle MVB / Class E quenched retained wildtype mutant fluorescence L Figure 4 . The Snf7 C - Terminal Region Stabilizes Snf7 Homo - Oligomers ( A and B ) TEM micrographs of Snf7 R52E and Snf7 core . ( C ) Anti - FLAG coimmunoprecipitations to detect Snf7 - Snf7 interaction . The schematic denotes the experimental design . ( D – F ) TEM micrographs of Snf7 mutants with their corresponding coimmunoprecipitations and assembly model to their right . ( G – J ) Representative images of yeast expressing Mup1 - pHluorin ( green ) and Snf7 constructs ( indicated ) in the absence of methionine ( G ) and after methionine induction ( H – J ) . FM4 - 64 is red . To the right of each image is the sorting proﬁle of (cid:1) 100 , 000 yeast plotted by FITC channel intensity and cell number . ( K ) Conceptual model for the pHluorin sorting assay . ( L ) Table summarizing the effect of ESCRT mutations on Mup1 vacuole delivery . SD is reported . Scale bars , 100 nm ( A – F ) and 5 m m ( G – J ) . See Figure S4 . 364 Cell 151 , 356 – 371 , October 12 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . may modulate the molecular architecture of Snf7 polymers ( Babst et al . , 2002 ; Teis et al . , 2008 ) . To test this , we reconsti - tuted full - length Vps24 and Vps2 from E . coli and incubated them with Snf7 R52E at cellular abundance levels ( (cid:1) 2 : 1 : 1 ratios ; Snf7 : Vps24 : Vps2 ) ( Figure S5C ) . We ﬁrst examined these coassembly experiments on TEM grids . As before , Snf7 R52E alone polymerized into long protoﬁla - ments capped with a ring or spiral ( Figure 5D ) . Strikingly , the simultaneous addition of Snf7 R52E , Vps24 , and Vps2 generated coiled helices ( a geometrically three - dimensional spiral ) that A C B D E G I H F J Figure 5 . Snf7 Assembles into Spirals on Lipid Monolayers and Coassembles with Vps24 and Vps2 into Helices ( A ) Schematic showing lipid monolayer creation . ( B ) TEM micrograph of lipid monolayer . The monolayer ‘‘edge’’ is marked by an arrow . ( C ) Snf7 R52E protoﬁlamentsassembleddirectlyonlipidmonolayers . Morelinearprotoﬁlamentsassembledonthe‘‘naked’’grid ( topregion ) . Thepanelstotheright are zoom - ins of several Snf7 spirals . ( D ) Snf7 R52E forming linear ﬁlaments on a grid . ( E and F ) Snf7 R52E , Vps24 , and Vps2 coassembling into helices ( arrows ) on a grid . ( G – I ) Snf7 R52E : Vps24 : Vps2 helices assembled on lipid monolayers . ( J ) Speculative model of a Snf7 spiral and Snf7 : Vps24 : Vps2 helix that may drive membrane invaginations . Scale bars , 100 nm . See also Figures S5 and S6 . Cell 151 , 356 – 371 , October 12 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 365 extended across the grid surface ( Figures 5E and 5F ) . The ﬁla - ments composing these helices were identical in diameter to Snf7 R52E protoﬁlaments ( (cid:1) 9 nm ) but were generally shorter and of variable length ( mean length : 290 ± 185 nm ) ( Figure S5G ) . These helical polymers are likely hetero - oligomers containing Snf7 R52E , Vps24 , and Vps2 because experiments including only two of the three subunits at 1 : 1 ratios did not produce helices ( Figures S5D and S5E ) . Similarly , coincubated Vps24 and Vps2 ( 1 : 1 ) failed to oligomerize , likely because there was no Snf7 present to induce Vps24 / Vps2 activation ( Figure S5F ) . We next added Snf7 R52E , Vps24 , and Vps2 to lipid mono - layers . The proteins again assembled into helices similar to those formed on TEM grids . High magniﬁcation of these helices indi - cated that they appeared to retain a three - dimensional coiling architecture indicative of protein helices like those formed by the membrane scission machine dynamin ( Carr and Hinshaw , 1997 ) ( Figures 5G – 5I ) . These helices projected across the mono - layer surface and were very distinct from the spirals that Snf7 R52E formed on its own . They displayed an average outer diameter of 85 . 4 ± 6 . 5 nm . Several were closely associated with liposomes that spontaneously form as a byproduct of monolayer biogen - esis , suggesting that the helices can readily interact with lipid membranes ( Figures 5G – 5I ) . Because Vps24 and Vps2 are recruited to endosomes after Snf7 , we next asked whether these proteins could remodel pre - existing Snf7 protoﬁlaments into helices . To do this , we assembled Snf7 into protoﬁlaments on TEM grids , washed unas - sembled protein away by droplet exchange , and added buffer containing Vps24 and Vps2 to the grids . We then examined the grids and qualitatively scored for the efﬁciency of helix formation relative to a control grid containing coincubated Snf7 : Vps24 : Vps2 . When Vps24 and Vps2 were added to preas - sembled Snf7 protoﬁlaments , they were able to efﬁciently induce helix formation ( Figure S5H , i and ii ) . Similarly , we also observed slightly less efﬁcient helix formation when Snf7 R52E and Vps24 were ﬁrst added to grids , followed by a wash and Vps2 ( Fig - ure S5H , iii ) . In contrast , sequential addition of Snf7 R52E , Vps24 , and Vps2 in three stages , or the addition of Vps24 and Vps2 ﬁrst , followed by Snf7 R52E led to drastically reduced helix formation ( Figure S5H , iv and v ) . These experiments imply that Vps24 and Vps2 could potentially remodel pre - existing Snf7 polymers into helices during the ordered assembly of ESCRT - III ( Figure 5J ) . Vps24 and Vps2 Promote ESCRT - III - Associated Membrane Invaginations on GUVs Although TEM imaging of lipid monolayers provides high - resolu - tion visualization of ESCRT - III assembly , the monolayers are adhered to a rigid grid support and thus cannot be deformed by ESCRT - III ( Figure S5I ) . Because Snf7 , Vps24 , and Vps2 coas - sembled into helices with implied membrane - sculpting potential , we next wanted to investigate whether these proteins could drive or be associated with membrane invaginations . Because we could not visualize membrane invaginations on SUVs or LUVs by light microscopy , we generated giant unilamellar vesicles ( GUVs ) labeled with the lipophilic dye DiI . We noted that some GUVs could spontaneously deform in solution , so we wanted to ensure that we could distinguish membrane invaginations that were speciﬁcally associated with ESCRT - III proteins . We ﬂu - orescently tagged Snf7 R52E by substituting a cysteine into its C terminus ( V187C ) to which we covalently attached a malei - mide - conjugatable Alexa488 ﬂuorophore ( Figure S6A ) . Although Snf7 R52E - A488 was able to interact with GUVs ( Figure S6B ) , we wanted to reconstitute full ESCRT - III assembly and so puriﬁed Vps20 core , which was sufﬁcient to recruit Snf7 to endosomal membranes ( Figure 1E ) . GUVs treated with Vps20 core and Snf7 R52E - A488 displayed punctal Snf7 R52E - A488 labeling across their surfaces but were notably devoid of ESCRT - III - associated invaginations ( Figures S6C and S6I ) . In striking contrast , the addition of all four ESCRT - III subunits ( now including Vps24 and Vps2 ) led to the formation of distinct membrane invaginations with which Snf7 R52E - A488 punctae associated ( Figures S6D – S6G ) . Snf7 R52E punctae stably associ - ated with these invaginations over time , and several invagina - tions were observed to form underneath sites of Snf7 R52E enrichment , suggesting that they may form as a consequence of ESCRT - III assembly ( Figure S6H and Movie S1 ) . Interestingly , Snf7 R52E - A488 remained at the top , neck region of these invag - inations and was mostly excluded from the bud that protruded into the GUV interior . This may indicate that ESCRT - III assem - blies containing Snf7 R52E may have afﬁnity for regions of high membrane curvature located at the necks of membrane invaginations . Together with our TEM - based observations , we propose that Vps24 and Vps2 induce structural rearrangements in Snf7 polymers that create helices with potential membrane - sculpting properties ( Figure 5J ) . We speculate that , because of the rigidity of TEM grid support , these helices cannot deform the lipid monolayer on which they assemble . Instead , they stably associate with the monolayer surface and extend across it ( Figure S5I ) . ESCRT - II Regulates the Assembly of Snf7 Rings We were intrigued by the architectural changes in Snf7 oligomers when we added downstream ESCRT - III subunits Vps24 and Vps2 to our reactions . Next , we wanted to investigate how upstream ESCRT machinery may affect Snf7 protoﬁlament architecture . Prior to vesicle formation , ESCRT - II initiates the assembly of ESCRT - III at sites enriched with ubiquitinated cargo . We wanted to investigate the structural relationship between ESCRT - II and ESCRT - III , so we next attempted to reconstitute the coassembly of complete ESCRT - II and ESCRT - III complexes . ESCRT - IIwaspuriﬁedasacomplexbyvirtueofahexahistidine ( His6 ) tag on Vps36 ( Figure 6A ) . ESCRT - II and Vps20 were then coincubated with Snf7 R52E at an (cid:1) 1 : 2 : 10 ratio ( ESCRT - II : Vps20 : Snf7 R52E ) and examined by TEM . This reaction yielded TEM grids covered with small rings instead of the linear protoﬁla - ments normally observed when Snf7 R52E was imaged alone ( Figures 6B and 6C ) . Rings measured 65 . 1 ± 22 . 1 nm in diameter ( Figures 6G and 6H ) , and many exhibited distinct globular densi - ties at one point along their circumference . The rings were composed of highly curved (cid:1) 9 nm diameter protoﬁlaments , suggesting that they were composed of two Snf7 subﬁlaments . Ring formation required the presence of ESCRT - II , Vps20 , and Snf7 R52E , as removal of either ESCRT - II or Vps20 drastically 366 Cell 151 , 356 – 371 , October 12 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . reduced ring formation in favor of linear protoﬁlaments ( Figures S7A – S7C ) . We hypothesized that the globular densities associated with these rings represented ESCRT - II complexes that were poten - tially modulating ESCRT - III ring formation . When ESCRT - II was examined by TEM , globular protein densities 14 . 6 ± 2 . 9 nm in diameter were observed that appeared very similar to the densi - ties associated with ESCRT - III rings ( Figure 6D ) . Crystallo - graphic studies suggest that this diameter is consistent with the predicted size of negatively stained ESCRT - II complexes ( Hierro et al . , 2004 ) . To conﬁrm that these densities were indeed ESCRT - II , the complex was preincubated with 5 nm Ni 2 + NTA - coated nanogold beads , which can bind His6 - tags with high afﬁnity . Single 5 nm nanogold beads now decorated A D E B C F G H Figure 6 . ESCRT - II Mediates ESCRT - III Ring Formation ( A ) Coomassie - stained gel of reconstituted ESCRT - II . ( B ) Snf7 R52E protoﬁlaments . ( C ) ESCRT - II , Vps20 , and Snf7 R52E ( 1 : 2 : 10 ratio ) coassemble into rings . ( D ) Labeling of His6 - ESCRT - II using 5 nm Ni 2 + NTA nanogold beads . ( E ) ESCRT - II : ESCRT - III ring supercomplexes with nanogold - labeled ESCRT - II . ( F ) Model of ESCRT - II : Vps20 : Snf7 ring complex . ( G ) Histogram of ESCRT - II : Vps20 : Snf7 R52E ring diameters . ( H ) Scatterplot of ring diameters measured in perpendicular x and y planes . Scale bars , 100 nm . See also Figure S7 . Cell 151 , 356 – 371 , October 12 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 367 the protein densities , conﬁrming that they were ESCRT - II ( Figure 6D ) . We next added Vps20 and Snf7 R52E with an ESCRT - II sample that was preincubated with 5 nm nanogold beads . We observed protein rings dotted by a single nanogold - labeled ESCRT - II ( Fig - ure 6E ) . These observations suggest that ESCRT - II and Vps20 may coordinate the polymerization of Snf7 polymers into highly curved ESCRT - II : ESCRT - III supercomplexes ( Figure 6F ) . Interestingly , when ESCRT - II , Vps20 , Snf7 R52E , Vps24 , and Vps2 were all coincubated at a 1 : 2 : 10 : 5 : 5 ratio , almost no helical protoﬁlaments were observed . Instead , we observed primarily rings with diameters 70 . 2 ± 18 . 6 nm , which are similar to those formed by only ESCRT - II , Vps20 , and Snf7 R52E ( Figures S7D – S7F ) . Altogether , these data suggest that ESCRT - II and Vps20 may coordinate the architecture of Snf7 polymerization , favoring the formation of highly curved rings . These rings provide a possible structural explanation for the physical sequestration of trans - membrane cargoes at distinct regions of the endosome surface prior to their packaging into vesicles . DISCUSSION The ESCRT pathway mediates the capture , sequestration , and sorting of transmembrane proteins into multivesicular bodies that are ultimately delivered to the vacuole for degradation . The sequential assembly of distinct ESCRT complexes suggests an exquisite division of labor to achieve cargo sorting . Whereas ESCRTs - 0 , - I , and - II form stable hetero - oligomeric complexes , the dynamic cycling of ESCRT - III subunits from inactive mono - mers into active polymers drives the formation of cargo - laden vesicles . Here , we have reconstituted distinct stages of this dynamic ESCRT - III assembly that provide structural insights for how ESCRT - III achieves both cargo capture and vesicle formation . Based on this work and the collective work of the ESCRT ﬁeld , we propose a comprehensive model for ESCRT - mediated MVB biogenesis : ( 1 ) ESCRT - 0 , - I , and - II engage ubiquitinated cargo and concentrate this cargo into a patch on the endosome surface ; ( 2 ) ESCRT - II initiates the assembly of an ESCRT - III ring - like polymer by directly binding Vps20 ; ( 3 ) ESCRT - III assem - bles by the sequential recruitment of its subunits , ultimately forming a helix ; and ( 4 ) the AAA ATPase Vps4 is recruited by ESCRT - III to recycle the ESCRT machinery off the MVB . In our present work , we engineered precise residue substitu - tions that drive the robust oligomerization of Snf7 . We then used a combination of TEM , biochemical , and cell biological techniques to elucidate the mechanism for Snf7 oligomeric assembly . Reconstituting Snf7 activation allowed us to charac - terize distinct subreactions that occur during the ordered assembly of ESCRT - III . Ultimately , we propose that ESCRT - II and ESCRT - III coassemble into cargo - capturing ring complexes that are transformed into membrane - sculpting helices to drive ILV formation . When assembled on an endosome , an (cid:1) 65 nm diameter protein ring would enclose (cid:1) 3 , 320 nm 2 of membrane surface . If this membrane area were remodeled into a sphere , it would form a vesicle (cid:1) 32 nm in diameter , which is consistent with the observed size of ILVs in yeast MVBs ( Wemmer et al . , 2011 ) . Thus , we propose that an ESCRT - II : ESCRT - III ring supercom - plex assembles on the endosome surface and simultaneously mediates ( 1 ) physical sequestration of transmembrane cargoes that will be packaged into the ILV and ( 2 ) demarcation of the membrane surface area that is sculpted into the cargo - laden ILV ( Figures 7A and 7B ) . Following Snf7 homo - oligomerization , Vps24 and Vps2 are recruited to the assembling ESCRT - III complex , potentially promoting the formation of an ESCRT - III helix with vesicle - sculpting properties ( Figures 7C and 7D ) . Recent studies using GUVs demonstrated that ESCRT - III constitutes the minimal machinery necessary to achieve ILV formation in vitro ( Wollert and Hurley , 2010 ) . Although these studies indeed highlighted the abilities of ESCRT - III to bind to and deform membranes , they were limited by the resolution of ﬂuorescence microscopy and therefore provided little informa - tion as to the architecture that ESCRT - III adopts during vesicle budding . Here , we have investigated the underlying molecular mechanism of ESCRT - III - mediated membrane sculpting by using the high visual resolution provided by TEM . Surprisingly , we ﬁnd that speciﬁc ESCRT subunits modulate distinct architec - tural stages of ESCRT - III assembly . This is consistent with the fact that all core ESCRT proteins are essential to MVB cargo sorting ; the loss of any subunit blocks cargo delivery to the vacuole . ESCRT - II and Vps20 Mediate Snf7 Ring Formation for Cargo Capture ESCRT - II and Vps20 , which physically links ESCRT - II to Snf7 , appear to regulate both the size and shape of Snf7 oligomers . As such , ESCRT - II and Vps20 promote the formation of rings (cid:1) 65 nm in diameter that are ideal for physically capturing and sequestering ubiquitinated cargoes at the endosome . Because ESCRT - II contains two Vps25 subunits that each interact with a Vps20 , a two - armed ESCRT - II may coordinate the formation of ESCRT - III rings by interacting with both Snf7 subﬁlaments simultaneously . This is consistent with previous studies indi - cating that a two - armed ESCRT - II was necessary for ILV forma - tion in yeast ( Teis et al . , 2010 ) . Although ESCRT - II promotes the formation of highly curved ESCRT - III rings , it is notable that Snf7 protoﬁlaments naturally spiral on lipid membranes . This intrinsic curvature is likely deter - mined on the molecular level by speciﬁc interactions between Snf7 monomers that set the curvature pitch of the polymer . The ﬂexibility of the Snf7 linker region , which has been shown in other ESCRT - III subunits to be associated with conformational changes , may also provide ﬂexibility that allows protoﬁlament bending ( Lata et al . , 2008 ) . Other protein polymers have been shown to undergo drastic changes in shape due to conformational changes within their monomers . FtsZ , a bacterial cytoskeletal protein , assembles into straight homo - oligomeric protoﬁlaments that are converted into spirals and rings by conformational changes within their monomers ( Lu et al . , 2000 ) . Furthermore , these architectural dynamics can generate mechanical force that bends lipid membranes ( Osawa et al . , 2009 ) . FtsZ and ESCRT - III have both been proposed to play direct roles in the membrane remod - eling necessary for cytokinesis , implying that there may be 368 Cell 151 , 356 – 371 , October 12 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . conceptual similarities shared between the dynamics of the pro - toﬁlaments they form . Vps24 and Vps2 Promote ESCRT - III Helix Formation Whereas ESCRT - II and Vps20 initiate ESCRT - III assembly that may promote capture cargo , we propose that Vps24 and Vps2 are recruited after cargo sequestration to transform ESCRT - III into a membrane - deforming helix . They achieve this by directly modulating the three - dimensional architecture of Snf7 ﬁlaments . By itself , Snf7 assembles into spirals that are ostensibly inca - pable of membrane deformation . The helices generated by the coassembly of Snf7 , Vps24 , and Vps2 are architecturally distinct from these spirals and closely resemble protein helices formed by the membrane - sculpting protein dynamin ( Carr and Hinshaw , 1997 ) . One intriguing hypothesis is that the Snf7 - dependent recruitment of Vps24 and Vps2 to endosomes causes Snf7 B C D A Figure 7 . Proposed Model for ESCRT - III - Mediated MVB Biogenesis ( A – C ) Speculative cartoons illustrating three stages in ESCRT - mediated vesicle budding from a ‘‘top’’ perspective over the endosome surface . ( D ) A ‘‘side’’ view of the proposed mechanism of ESCRT - mediated vesicle budding . Cell 151 , 356 – 371 , October 12 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 369 spirals to reorganize into helices , thus driving membrane invag - inations by a ‘‘molecular spring’’ - like mechanism . Protoﬁlament remodeling may generate mechanical force that ultimately leads to membrane bending and the formation of a vesicle that buds into the endosomal interior ( Figures 7C and 7D ) . The fact that Vps24 and Vps2 can remodel pre - existing Snf7 protoﬁlaments into helices supports this model ( Figure S5H ) . This is further supported by GUV - based experiments showing that Vps24 and Vps2 promote the association of ﬂuorescent Snf7 with membrane invaginations ( Figures S6D – S6H ) . This model also agrees with the proposed ordered assembly of ESCRT - III ( Teis et al . , 2008 ) . Recent studies observed (cid:1) 17 nm diameter ESCRT - III - depen - dent helical ﬁlaments along the plasma membrane of cells undergoing cytokinetic abscission ( Guizetti et al . , 2011 ) . Human Snf7 and Vps2 localized along these ﬁlaments and were neces - sary for their assembly . One intriguing hypothesis is that the ESCRT - III helices presented here represent structural analogs of the ﬁlaments that purportedly drive mammalian cytokinetic abscission , suggesting structural conservation in ESCRT func - tion between different biological processes . Although we observed that Vps24 and Vps2 promoted the formation of protein helices , we did not detect Vps24 / Vps2 ‘‘domes’’ in our assembly reactions , which have been previously implicated as mediators of ILV formation ( Lata et al . , 2008 ) . In these studies , ‘‘domes’’ formed in the absence of Snf7 and only through signiﬁcant truncation of Vps24 and Vps2 . The experiments presented here indicate that Snf7 , Vps24 , and Vps2 may coassemble into a hetero - oligomeric helix to achieve ILV budding . The Architecture of ESCRT - III Is Similar to Other Membrane - Sculpting Oligomers The ESCRT - III structures observed in this study are conceptually reminiscent of the membrane scission machines FtsZ and dynamin . Both of these proteins oligomerize during membrane remodeling , as well as interact with other proteins that modulate their architectural dynamics . Intriguingly , FtsZ interacts with FzlA , a protein recently shown to transform linear FtsZ protoﬁla - ments into spiraling helices in vitro ( Goley et al . , 2010 ) . Similarly , dynamin forms helices that work cooperatively with BAR and F - BAR proteins to mediate clathrin vesicle release . One obvious difference between FtsZ , dynamin , and ESCRT - III is that FtsZ and dynamin directly hydrolyze guanosine triphosphate ( GTP ) . This induces architectural changes that promote membrane scission . Although ESCRT - III subunits do not hydrolyze NTPs directly , they recruit the AAA ATPase Vps4 that provides energy via ATP hydrolysis . This energy may either be ‘‘stored’’ by ESCRT - III subunits in their ‘‘closed’’ conforma - tions or added directly to ESCRT - III through physical contact with ESCRT - III helices . Thus , the (cid:1) 85 nm diameter ESCRT - III helices presented here may represent a ‘‘relaxed’’ state that could be constricted or even broken by Vps4 . A Working Model : ESCRT - III Adopts Multiple Architectures to Achieve Cargo Sorting The existence of distinct architectural forms to ESCRT - III suggests that it matures through at least two stages during its ordered assembly : ( 1 ) early - stage assembly that creates a cargo - sequestering ring of deﬁned size and ( 2 ) late - stage assembly that generates a membrane - sculpting helix for ILV formation . Several in vivo observations support the existence of distinct stages to ESCRT - III assembly . Vps24 and Vps2 constitute a subcomplex and are recruited during or after Snf7 polymeriza - tion , which is consistent with their role as ‘‘late’’ modulators of ESCRT - III architecture . Furthermore , deletion of either Vps24 or Vps2 blocks ILV formation , but not cargo sequestration at endosomes ( Teis et al . , 2010 ) . Consistent with this are studies showing that blockage of late stages of the ESCRT pathway lead to receptor enrichment at late endosomes and sustained EGF signaling ( Babst et al . , 2000 ) . These phenomena could be explained by the formation of ESCRT - II : ESCRT - III rings that sequester cargo but fail to execute vesicle formation . Despite direct visualization of ESCRT - III oligomers , several key questions remain . The most pressing is the mechanism by which ESCRT - III mediates vesicle scission . The structures observed in this study indicate several possible mechanisms . Vps4 could engage the ESCRT - III helix and drive ﬁlament sliding or constriction . This would narrow the ILV neck to a point of spontaneous collapse at the helix base , liberating the vesicle without consuming ESCRT - III itself ( Figure 7D ) . Furthermore , the disassembly of ESCRT - III by Vps4 may destabilize the highly curved neck region , leading to membrane buckling and scission . In direct contrast to some previous studies , we noted that ESCRT - III often associates with membrane invaginations on GUVs for long periods of time ( often several minutes ) . The presence of ESCRT - III proteins did not lead to ‘‘efﬁcient’’ scission independent of Vps4 in these cases ( Fig - ure S6 ; W . M . H . , unpublished data ) . As such , conclusions concerning Vps4 - independent vesicle scission by ESCRT - III may need careful re - evaluation . No doubt future studies are needed to further reveal insights about the remarkable ESCRT - III pathway . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Negative Stain Transmission Electron Microscopy Samples were incubated for 30 min at room temperature and then added to carbon - coated Formvar grids ( EMS ) . Droplets were incubated for 10 min and then negative stained . All samples were examined on an FEI Morgnani Transmission Electron Microscope at 80 – 100kV . Digital images were taken using an AMT camera . Micrographs are representative of results from multiple experimentalsessions . Distance quantitation wasconducted by using ImageJ ( NIH ) . For additional information , see Supplemental Information . Liposome Flotation Assays 1 mg / ml of 60 % phosphatidylcholine ( PC ) : 30 % phosphatidylserine ( PS ) : 10 % phosphatidylinositol 3 - phosphate ( PtdIns ( 3 ) P ) ( Avanti ) liposomes were gener - ated by classical dehydration in a chloroform : methanol mix and then resus - pendedin500 m lBufferA . Liposomesweresonicatedfor1minandthenmixed with 14 m M protein and incubated for 30 min . Samples were resuspended in 30 % sucrose buffer layered with a 20 % and 0 % cushion and centrifuged in a TLS - 55 ultracentrifuge rotor ( Beckman Coulter ) for 1 hr at 55 , 000 rpm . The top ‘‘ﬂoat’’ fraction was separated from the bottom ‘‘unbound’’ fraction , TCA precipitated , run on SDS - PAGE gels , and Coomassie stained . For a detailed summary of the Snf7 redox assay , see Supplemental Information . 370 Cell 151 , 356 – 371 , October 12 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . Mup1 - pHluorin ESCRT Cargo - Sorting Assay and Flow Cytometry A yeast strain ( NBY44 ) stably expressing Mup1 - pHluorin and ectopically expressing various Snf7 constructs was incubated to early log growth . Mup1 - pHuorin endocytic uptake was induced by addition of methionine as previously described ( Lin et al . , 2008 ) . Yeast were reconstituted into PBS and analyzed by using a BD Bioscience LSRII cytometer . Approximately 100 , 000 yeast per experiment were evaluated in at least three independent experiments for each mutant . Sorting proﬁles were obtained by overlaying the composite wild - type trace on composite mutant traces . For additional information , see Supplemental Information . For a detailed summary of additional experimental procedures , see Extended Experimental Procedures . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION SupplementalInformationincludesExtendedExperimentalProcedures , seven ﬁgures , four tables , and one movie and can be found with this article online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 08 . 039 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS W . M . H . is supported by a Sam and Nancy Fleming Research Fellowship . N . J . B . is supported by an American Cancer Society Postdoctoral Fellowship ( PF - 12 - 062 - 01 - DMC ) . We thank Beverly Wendland for the Mup1 - pHluorin integrationplasmidandRogerWilliamsfortheESCRT - IIexpressionconstruct . The authors also thank Neil Adige and Bret Judson for all technical expertise . WealsothankChrisStefan , JasonMacGurn , JeremyThorner , TonyBretscher , Chris Fromme , Gerald Feigenson , David Teis , Suraj Saksena , Jeanne Quirit , and Abbie Davies for helpful discussions . Received : March 22 , 2012 Revised : June 16 , 2012 Accepted : August 9 , 2012 Published : October 11 , 2012 REFERENCES Babst , M . ( 2011 ) . MVB vesicle formation : ESCRT - dependent , ESCRT - inde - pendent and everything in between . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 23 , 452 – 457 . Babst , M . , Odorizzi , G . , Estepa , E . J . , and Emr , S . D . ( 2000 ) . Mammalian tumor susceptibility gene 101 ( TSG101 ) and the yeast homologue , Vps23p , both function in late endosomal trafﬁcking . Trafﬁc 1 , 248 – 258 . Babst , M . , Katzmann , D . J . , Estepa - Sabal , E . J . , Meerloo , T . , and Emr , S . D . ( 2002 ) . Escrt - III : an endosome - associated heterooligomeric protein complex required for mvb sorting . Dev . Cell 3 , 271 – 282 . Bajorek , M . , Schubert , H . L . , McCullough , J . , Langelier , C . , Eckert , D . M . , Stub - bleﬁeld , W . M . , Uter , N . T . , Myszka , D . G . , Hill , C . P . , and Sundquist , W . I . ( 2009 ) . Structural basis for ESCRT - III protein autoinhibition . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 16 , 754 – 762 . Carr , J . F . , and Hinshaw , J . E . ( 1997 ) . Dynamin assembles into spirals under physiologicalsaltconditionsupontheadditionofGDPandgamma - phosphate analogues . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 28030 – 28035 . Doherty , G . J . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2009 ) . Mechanisms of endocytosis . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 78 , 857 – 902 . Eswar , N . , Webb , B . , Marti - Renom , M . A . , Madhusudhan , M . S . , Eramian , D . , Shen , M . Y . , Pieper , U . , and Sali , A . ( 2006 ) . Comparative protein structure modeling using Modeller . In Current Protocols in Bioinformatics ( New York : John Wiley & Sons ) , pp . 5 . 6 . 1 – 5 . 6 . 30 . Goley , E . D . , Dye , N . A . , Werner , J . N . , Gitai , Z . , and Shapiro , L . ( 2010 ) . Imaging - based identiﬁcation of a critical regulator of FtsZ protoﬁlament curvature in Caulobacter . Mol . Cell 39 , 975 – 987 . Guizetti , J . , Schermelleh , L . , Ma¨ntler , J . , Maar , S . , Poser , I . , Leonhardt , H . , Mu¨ller - Reichert , T . , and Gerlich , D . W . ( 2011 ) . Cortical constriction during abscission involves helices of ESCRT - III - dependent ﬁlaments . Science 331 , 1616 – 1620 . Hanson , P . I . , Roth , R . , Lin , Y . , and Heuser , J . E . ( 2008 ) . Plasma membrane deformation by circular arrays of ESCRT - III protein ﬁlaments . J . Cell Biol . 180 , 389 – 402 . Henne , W . M . , Buchkovich , N . J . , and Emr , S . D . ( 2011 ) . The ESCRT pathway . Dev . Cell 21 , 77 – 91 . Hierro , A . , Sun , J . , Rusnak , A . S . , Kim , J . , Prag , G . , Emr , S . D . , and Hurley , J . H . ( 2004 ) . Structure of the ESCRT - II endosomal trafﬁcking complex . Nature 431 , 221 – 225 . Lata , S . , Roessle , M . , Solomons , J . , Jamin , M . , Gottlinger , H . G . , Svergun , D . I . , and Weissenhorn , W . ( 2008 ) . Structural basis for autoinhibition of ESCRT - III CHMP3 . J . Mol . Biol . 378 , 818 – 827 . Lin , C . H . , MacGurn , J . A . , Chu , T . , Stefan , C . J . , and Emr , S . D . ( 2008 ) . Arrestin - related ubiquitin - ligase adaptors regulate endocytosis and protein turnover at the cell surface . Cell 135 , 714 – 725 . Lu , C . , Reedy , M . , and Erickson , H . P . ( 2000 ) . Straight and curved conforma - tions of FtsZ are regulated by GTP hydrolysis . J . Bacteriol . 182 , 164 – 170 . Muzio 1 , T . , Pineda - Molina , E . , Ravelli , R . B . , Zamborlini , A . , Usami , Y . , Go¨ttlin - ger , H . , and Weissenhorn , W . ( 2006 ) . Structural basis for budding by the ESCRT - III factor CHMP3 . Dev . Cell 10 , 821 – 830 . Osawa , M . , Anderson , D . E . , and Erickson , H . P . ( 2009 ) . Curved FtsZ protoﬁla - ments generate bending forces on liposome membranes . EMBO J . 28 , 3476 – 3484 . Prosser , D . C . , Whitworth , K . , andWendland , B . ( 2010 ) . Quantitativeanalysisof endocytosis with cytoplasmic pHluorin chimeras . Trafﬁc 11 , 1141 – 1150 . Raymond , C . K . , Howald - Stevenson , I . , Vater , C . A . , and Stevens , T . H . ( 1992 ) . Morphological classiﬁcation of the yeast vacuolar protein sorting mutants : evidence for a prevacuolar compartment in class E vps mutants . Mol . Biol . Cell 3 , 1389 – 1402 . Saksena , S . , and Emr , S . D . ( 2009 ) . ESCRTs and human disease . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 37 , 167 – 172 . Saksena , S . , Wahlman , J . , Teis , D . , Johnson , A . E . , and Emr , S . D . ( 2009 ) . Functional reconstitution of ESCRT - III assembly and disassembly . Cell 136 , 97 – 109 . Shim , S . , Kimpler , L . A . , and Hanson , P . I . ( 2007 ) . Structure / function analysis of four core ESCRT - III proteins reveals common regulatory role for extreme C - terminal domain . Trafﬁc 8 , 1068 – 1079 . Teis , D . , Saksena , S . , andEmr , S . D . ( 2008 ) . OrderedassemblyoftheESCRT - III complex on endosomes is required to sequester cargo during MVB formation . Dev . Cell 15 , 578 – 589 . Teis , D . , Saksena , S . , Judson , B . L . , and Emr , S . D . ( 2010 ) . ESCRT - II coordi - nates the assembly of ESCRT - III ﬁlaments for cargo sorting and multivesicular body vesicle formation . EMBO J . 29 , 871 – 883 . Wemmer , M . , Azmi , I . , West , M . , Davies , B . , Katzmann , D . , and Odorizzi , G . ( 2011 ) . Bro1 binding to Snf7 regulates ESCRT - III membrane scission activity in yeast . J . Cell Biol . 192 , 295 – 306 . Wollert , T . , and Hurley , J . H . ( 2010 ) . Molecular mechanism of multivesicular body biogenesis by ESCRT complexes . Nature 464 , 864 – 869 . Zamborlini , A . , Usami , Y . , Radoshitzky , S . R . , Popova , E . , Palu , G . , and Go¨ttlin - ger , H . ( 2006 ) . Release of autoinhibition converts ESCRT - III components into potent inhibitors of HIV - 1 budding . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 19140 – 19145 . Cell 151 , 356 – 371 , October 12 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 371