An ultra - fast EOD - based force - clamp detects rapid biomechanical transitions Michael S . Woody a , Marco Capitanio b , c , E . Michael Ostap a , Yale E . Goldman a a Pennsylvania Muscle Institute , University of Pennsylvania , 415 Curie Blvd , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , USA 19104 ; b LENS - European Laboratory for Non - linear Spectroscopy , Via Nello Carrara 1 , 50019 Sesto Fiorentino , Italy ; c Department of Physics and Astronomy , University of Florence , Via Sansone 1 , 50019 Sesto Fiorentino , Italy ABSTRACT We assembled an ultra - fast infrared optical trapping system to detect mechanical events that occur less than a millisecond after a ligand binds to its filamentous substrate , such as myosin undergoing its 5 – 10 nm working stroke after actin binding . The instrument is based on the concept of Capitanio et al . 1 , in which a polymer bead - actin - bead dumbbell is held in two force - clamped optical traps . A force applied by the traps causes the filament to move at a constant velocity as hydrodynamic drag balances the applied load . When the ligand binds , the filament motion stops within 100 μs as the total force from the optical traps is transferred to the attachment . Subsequent translations signal active motions , such as the magnitude and timing of the motor’s working stroke . In our instrument , the beads defining the dumbbell are held in independent force clamps utilizing a field - programmable gate array ( FPGA ) to update the trap beam positions at 250 kHz . We found that in our setup , acousto - optical deflectors ( AODs ) steering the beams were unsuitable for this purpose due to a slightly non - linear response in the beam intensity and deflection angle vs . the AOD ultra - sound wavelength , likely caused by low - amplitude standing acoustic waves in the deflectors . These aberrations caused instability in the force feedback loops leading to artefactual ~ 20 nm jumps in position . This type of AOD non - linearity has been reported to be absent in electro - optical deflectors ( EODs ) 2 . We demonstrate that replacement of the AODs with EODs improves the performance of our instrument . Combining the superior beam - steering capability of the EODs , force acquisition via back - plane interferometry , and the dual high - speed FPGA - based feedback loops , we smoothly and precisely apply constant loads to study the dynamics of interactions between biological molecules such as actin and myosin . Keywords : optical trap , laser tweezers , acousto - optical deflector , electro - optical deflector , force - clamp , myosin powerstroke , myosin 1 . INTRODUCTION 1 . 1 Optical trapping Optical traps , a . k . a laser tweezers , can trap and exert forces on a dielectric particle , such as a 0 . 2 – 2  m spherical polymer bead , as a focused laser beam passes through the object . These forces act to pull the particle toward the beam center with a spring - like force proportional to the displacement of the bead from the trap center . By using techniques which can accurately determine the force on or position of the trapped particle , such as back - plane interferometry , and a calibration method which determines the effective linear ( Hookean ) stiffness of the trap’s potential well , it is possible to measure forces acting on the particle in the piconewton range . When the bead is coupled to a molecule of interest , such as a molecular motor capable of exerting force as it moves along a biological polymer track , the force and position changes produced by the molecule can be accurately recorded . 1 . 2 Feedback mechanisms and beam steering in optical trapping Because the position of the bead and the force exerted on it follow a linear relationship when the bead is close to the trap center , it is often useful to use a feedback mechanism to isolate the effects of force and movement on the instrument and the biological system . Such feedback systems operate to either hold ( clamp ) the force or bead position constant . While there are many ways to implement these types of feedback systems , they generally start by real - time monitoring of the bead position or force . A feedback loop is used to control the position of the trap with respect to the molecule of interest , which is often attached to the coverslip in an optical microscope . Position modulation can be accomplished either by moving the microscope stage , or the trapping beam within the observation chamber using various beam steering Optical Trapping and Optical Micromanipulation XIV , edited by Kishan Dholakia , Gabriel C . Spalding , Proc . of SPIE Vol . 10347 , 103470Q · © 2017 SPIE · CCC code : 0277 - 786X / 17 / $ 18 · doi : 10 . 1117 / 12 . 2277130 Proc . of SPIE Vol . 10347 103470Q - 1 techniques . The trap position can be controlled by altering the angular deflection of the incoming beam at a point that is conjugate to the back focal plane ( BFP ) of the microscope objective . This method results in a change of the angle of entry into the objective and a concomitant change in the trap position at the sample . The angular deflection can be induced by using a mirror controlled by a piezo element , galvanometer , or stepper motor which can offer a very large deflection ( up to 15 degrees ) , but with a relatively slow response time ( > 100 µs ) . Acousto - optical deflectors ( AODs ) are widely used because of their fast response time ( < 50 µs ) , and moderate deflection angle , e . g . 30 mrad ( 1 . 7 degrees ) . Electro - optical deflectors ( EODs ) have a smaller deflection range of only 3 mrad ( 0 . 17 degrees ) , but offer greater transmission and more uniform modulation of the beam along with a faster response time ( 2 µs ) . 3 Another option is a spatial light modulator , which can modulate the phase of the beam to produce multiple optical traps from one beam and to vary the position of these traps 4 , although the response time is slow , on the order of several milliseconds . The characteristics of the beam positioning approach , combined with the resolution and response time of position / force detection and the feedback electronics will determine the effectiveness and limitations of the feedback system . 1 . 3 Myosin : a biomolecule which rapidly generates force and displacement Myosins are a class of molecular motor proteins responsible for powering contraction of muscle and other motile and contractile processes in biology . A single myosin molecule is able to utilize the energy from the hydrolysis of adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) , to cause a displacement of its filamentous substrate , actin . In skeletal and cardiac muscle , arrays of thousands of myosins interact with actin filaments arranged in highly ordered structures known as sarcomeres , to cause shortening of the muscle cells leading to contraction of the entire tissue . While the molecular mechanisms of myosin’s force production have been studied for decades using biochemical , structural , and single - molecule biophysical techniques , there remain outstanding questions regarding the relationship between the release of adenosine diphosphate ( ADP ) and inorganic phosphate ( the products of ATP hydrolysis ) and the force producing conformational change of the myosin molecule known as the power stroke . It is generally agreed that the release of phosphate from actin - bound myosin is closely linked to a power stroke which displaces actin 5 - 10 nm or generates 1 - 10 pN of force . However , whether phosphate must first dissociate before the power stroke can occur or if the power stroke occurs first is controversial and relevant to the molecular mechanism of energy transduction . One reason why disagreements exists about this and other issues in the mechanochemical pathway is that the power stroke is believed to occur within a few milliseconds of myosin’s interaction with actin , making it very difficult to detect the exact timing and determine the force dependence of the stroke under physiological loads . The relationship between the power stroke and phosphate release may even differ among the 20 – 30 different myosin isoforms . The ultra - fast force - clamp under development should clarify this uncertainty . 2 . ULTRA - FAST FORCE - CLAMP OPTICAL TRAPPING We have worked to implement a force - clamp , three - bead optical trap feedback system which can detect the timing , amplitude , and force dependence of the myosin power stroke under constant , programmable load with sub - millisecond resolution . 2 . 1 Ultra - fast force - clamp concept A dual beam , force - clamp optical trapping system described by Capitanio et al . 1 is capable of independently maintaining a constant force on each bead in a bead - actin - bead dumbbell while the dumbbell position changes within a spatial range of several hundred nanometers . The system modulates the positions of the traps to maintain a constant force on each bead as detected by backplane interferometry of the trapping laser light scattered by the beads . During an experiment , an actin dumbbell is brought close to a myosin molecule on the surface of a pedestal bead affixed to a glass coverslip ( Figure 1 ) . The actin dumbbell is pre - stretched by approximately 5 pN of tension ( - F pre and F pre ) from both beads which limits the mechanical compliance of the assembly ( Figure 1A ) . The feedback system is activated and the force setpoint for the right bead is changed from F pre to F pre + F ( Figure 1B ) . The system quickly applies this excess force to the right bead by moving the position of the trap , resulting in an unbalanced force on the dumbbell assembly . The dumbbell then moves rightward at a constant velocity such that the excess force applied to the right bead is balanced by the force of hydrodynamic drag on the moving dumbbell . During this motion , the forces on both beads are maintained at their constant setpoints ( - F pre and F pre + F ) by the feedback loops . The dumbbell continues to travel at this constant velocity until the traps have moved a specified distance ( ~ 100 nm ) , at which point the setpoint for each bead is triggered to change to - F pre - F and F pre , switching the excess force to the left bead in the opposite direction , and leading to a constant velocity in the opposite direction ( Figure 1C ) . The applied force and direction of motion continue to alternate back and forth until the myosin interacts with the actin filament , at which point the force of the hydrodynamic drag is quickly ( within ~ 10s of Proc . of SPIE Vol . 10347 103470Q - 2 FPGA Feedback FPGAFeedback AOD or EOD AOD or EOD FPGAFeedback AOD or EOD _ v AOD or EOD FPGA Feedback FPGA Feedback AOD or EOD V v = 0 FPGA Feedback AOD or EOD AOD or EOD AOD or EOD FPGAFeedback FPGA Feedback µs ) transferred to the myosin molecule , which becomes loaded with the excess force , F or - F . This transfer of force abruptly stops the dumbbell’s motion , while the total forces on both beads are maintained constant by the feedback system ( Figure 1D ) . While the myosin interacts with actin , the force applied to it is held constant , and the motion of the actin filament is recorded from the position of the two traps . Thus the force - producing displacement of the power stroke can be observed under various pre - determined loads . When the myosin dissociates from actin , the dumbbell continues its earlier motion , the excess force is transferred back to hydrodynamic drag ( panel B or C ) . In a single 30 s long recording , the actin dumbbell switches its direction of travel thousands of times and myosin attaches to actin in dozens of interactions , depending on the particular myosin isoform and various experimental parameters . Figure 1 . Illustration of the sequence of events in the ultra - fast force clamp method as described in the main text . Changes between each frame are highlighted in yellow . This experimental approach conveys at least three main advantages over other optical trapping techniques that have been used for examining biomolecular interactions such as myosin with actin . First , very short interactions between myosin and actin can be observed since these events can be detected after the experiment is completed by analyzing the velocity of the actin dumbbell , whose motion stops and starts very quickly and abruptly at the beginning and end of each interaction . This event detection method allows events less than 1 millisecond to be identified , which is approximately an order of magnitude improvement over the 5 - 10 ms limit for previous event detection methods such as analysis of variance of the bead positions or covariance between the two beads . 1 Second , the moment of the beginning of the interaction between actin and myosin can be localized to within 100 µs , and the subsequent power stroke can be monitored to provide the precise timing between actin binding and force - bearing displacements generated by the motor protein . Finally , this force - clamp system applies a constant load to the actin - myosin interaction throughout the entire interaction , most importantly before and during the stroke . This enables determination of the force dependence of the primary power stroke , which has eluded previous studies . 2 . 2 Ultra - fast force - clamp optical trapping implementation To implement the ultra - fast force - clamp method , four key components are required : 1 ) a stable dual beam optical trap setup , 2 ) high bandwidth force detection electronics , 3 ) a high - speed feedback control system , and 4 ) low - latency , high precision beam steering . Proc . of SPIE Vol . 10347 103470Q - 3 Our optical trap setup adopts many of the widely used practices for maintaining mechanical stability and low optical fluctuations including a stiff , pneumatically isolated optical table , high quality optical component mounts , isolated and limited acoustical noise from instrument fans , and an enclosed the beam path to minimize beam fluctuations due to air currents . Additionally , to correct for sample drift , we use active 3 - dimensional stage - stabilization via a feedback loop and a nano - positioning piezo stage ( Mad City Labs , Inc . ) to maintain the position of the myosin - adsorbed pedestal bead at the coverslip . 5 The response time of the force - clamp feedback loop must be very rapid ( ≤ 10 µs ) to investigate the myosin power stroke , as it must maintain constant forces on both beads while the actin dumbbell is in motion . For a typical dumbbell made of two 500 nm diameter polystyrene beads and a ~ 10 µm actin filament , a 2 pN applied force is balanced by hydrodynamic drag at a dumbbell velocity of ~ 100 nm / ms . During 0 . 2 ms of dumbbell motion at 100 nm / ms , the dumbbell travels 20 nm and , with trap stiffness equal to 0 . 05 pN / nm , the force on the dumbbell would decrease by 1 pN if the trap position were not updated . To stably maintain the mean force on the beads to within 5 % of the set points under these conditions , we found it necessary to keep the feedback loop update rate less than 10 µs , which includes the time to 1 ) detect the instantaneous force on the beads , 2 ) perform the feedback calculations , and 3 ) update the position of the trapping beam . We optimized each of these three components of the setup to reach the 10 µs loop time . The force on each bead is monitored by back - focal plane interferometry of the 1064 nm trapping laser on two silicon quadrant photodiodes ( QPDs ) with an active area of 12 . 5 mm 2 for each quadrant ( JQ - 50P , Electro Optical Components Inc . ) . The time response of these QPDs for 1064 nm laser light is much slower than the 0 . 4 µs rise time specified at 850 nm due to the increased penetration of the light through the depletion layer of the detector , as has been previously described 6 . To counter this effect , a reverse bias voltage of 180 V is applied to the common cathode of the QPD . This is greater than the rated bias voltage of 20 V , but has not caused damage to the photodiodes over several years of use and improves the response time at 1064 nm from 20 µs to approximately 1 µs . The custom - built amplifier circuit , which adds and subtracts the signals from each quadrant detector , includes first order low - pass filters at 125 kHz , the Nyquist frequency for a 250 kHz acquisition rate , giving a rise time for the force detection system of about 2 µs . We utilize a National Instruments Multifunction I / O device ( PXI - 7851 ) equipped with a Field Programable Gate Array ( FPGA ) to perform the calculations , based on the QPD signals and the force setpoint , to update the control signal for the beam deflectors . This FPGA device digitizes analog input signals at up to 750 kHz , outputs analog control signals at 1 MHz , and reads and writes digital registers at 40 MHz . The FPGA is programmed in LabVIEW ( National Instruments , Inc . ) to perform the proportional or integral feedback calculations and to automatically switch the setpoint of each trap to reverse the direction of the dumbbell motion when the output signal reaches the limiting excursion distance . The force set point , feedback gain , and excursion limits are easily set within a custom - built LabVIEW virtual instrument ( vi ) which also controls data acquisition , trap calibration , and other instrument functions . The feedback calculations can operate up to 400 kHz , but in practice the feedback loop is operated at the same rate as the data acquisition rate , 250 kHz , leading to the update time for the feedback loop of 4 µs . The control signal from the feedback calculations must move the position of the beam in the sample chamber precisely and rapidly . Two methods of beam steering have been utilized in our setup , acousto - optical deflectors ( AODs ) and electro optical deflectors ( EODs ) . Each of these deflector systems was optimized to reposition the beam in less than 4 µs from the command signal input , allowing us to achieve the 10 µs loop time ( 2 µs force detection + 4 µs feedback calculation + 4 µs beam steering ) . We found , however , that the AODs introduced adverse effects to the laser beams which had highly detrimental consequences for the feedback loops ( as explained below ) . This led us to attempt the experiments with EODs , which did not exhibit such effects and allowed the system to behave more reliably . 3 . ACOUSTO - OPTICAL DEFLECTORS 3 . 1 Basic principle and response time limits AODs contain a transparent crystal with a piezo - element at its end that produces a radio frequency ( RF ) ultrasonic acoustic wave that travels across the crystal to the incident optical beam . As laser light interacts with the compressions and rarefactions of the acoustic waves , a portion of the beam’s energy ( typically ~ 50 - 70 % ) is diffracted into a deflected beam , where the wavelength of the ultrasonic waves sets the diffraction angle . Thus , the RF signal frequency modulates the diffraction angle of the beam . By placing the AOD at a conjugate plane to the back focal plane ( BFP ) of the objective , an angular change at the AOD produces a position change of the beam at the sample , the focal plane of the objective . Proc . of SPIE Vol . 10347 103470Q - 4 44444ldN14114 ) 14 The time response of a beam deflection system using AODs depends on the response time of the RF frequency generator and the time for the ultrasonic wave to travel across the optical beam . The RF generator used in our setup ( 64020 - 200 - 2ADSDFS - A - 2 , Gooch and Housego / NEOS ) accepts a 30 - bit digital input to set the frequency and has a response time of less than 250 ns . The response time of the beam deflection after the RF signal changes depends primarily on the speed of sound in the crystal and the size and position of the incident beam relative to the piezo element . In our AODs ( 45035 - 3 - 6 . 5DEG - 1 . 06 Gooch and Housego / NEOS ) , the tellurium dioxide crystal has a sound velocity of 620 m / s and 1 cm length along its transverse axis . Thus , it takes ~ 16 µs for the acoustic wave with an updated frequency to propagate across the entire crystal and about 10 µs for it to fill the optical window . To minimize this delay , we reduce the beam diameter to ~ 2 mm and position the beam very close to the piezo element . Reducing the beam size allows it to be positioned to one side of the aperture without clipping and limits the time when it encounters non - uniform wavelengths . With this approach , the response time of the AOD beam steering system is reduced to 3 µs . 3 . 2 Observed artefacts in feedback experiments While performing force - clamp experiments on myosin , we observed very rapid ( < 1 ms ) “jumps” in the trap position of 10 - 20 nm while the myosin was interacting with the actin filament ( Figure 2A ) . These jumps often were reversible , with the trap position alternating between two positions many times during a single interaction lasting 10 ms up to > 100 ms . The sizes of the jumps varied between each interaction and experiment , but within one actin - myosin binding event they were relatively constant in size and frequency . To test whether test motions were an artefact caused by the feedback system , we performed a control experiment replacing the myosin in the assay with alpha - actinin , a non - catalytic actin binding protein that should not displace actin during its interaction . In these experiments , we also observed fluctuations of our trap position with a similar 10 - 20 nm deflection , strongly suggesting these were experimental artefacts ( Figure 2B ) . As an additional control , we centered the laser over a large 2 . 5 µm diameter bead firmly attached by nitrocellulose to the surface of the coverslip . We engaged the force - clamp and observed the trap position . Similar fluctuations of the trap position were observed depending on the initial AOD deflection ( Figure 2C ) . Such fluctuations severely compromise measuring the 5 - 10 nm actin displacements expected to be produced by myosin . Figure 2 . A ) Example of artefactual ~ 20 nm jumps in the dumbbell position during an interaction between myosin and the actin filament while the force - clamp is engaged using AOD beam steering . Jumps are marked by red arrows . B ) A control experiment replacing myosin with alpha - actinin , which interacts with actin but is not expected to cause displacements . Similar jumps of 15 nm are marked ( red arrows ) . C ) Another control experiment placed the trapping laser over a pedestal bead stuck firmly to the surface and engaged the force - clamp feedback . Although the time scale of the feedback loop was different here , artefactual ~ 10 nm jumps of the trap position were observed . 3 . 3 Non - uniformities in AOD beam deflection due to standing acoustic waves We determined that the source of the artefactual jumps in trap position were due to non - uniform deflection of the beam by the AODs . It was reported previously that beams deflected by AODs can exhibit “wiggles” , which were shown to cause the position of a trapped bead , as measured by an independent tracking laser , to move with quasi - periodic variations from a linear path when the AOD RF frequency was linearly swept . 2 In our setup the force is directly measured via scattering of the trapping laser 7 without an independent position tracking beam . These non - linear effects present differently in this situation . We measured the non - uniform deflection by sweeping the beam position in the chamber , without a bead present , Proc . of SPIE Vol . 10347 103470Q - 5 rIFIT rI ` ril 0 . 3 0 . 25 0 . 2 0 . 15 0 . 1 0 - 15 - 10 - 5 0 5 10 Trap Position In Chamber ( microns ) 15 and monitored the differential QPD signal that usually indicates the force in the sweeping direction . This signal should remain quite constant as the beam position is swept , because the QPD is at a plane conjugate plane to the back focal planes of the objective and condenser lenses , where positional displacements at the sample are converted into angular changes . Periodic fluctuations corresponding to a ~ 20 nm period at the sample were recorded in the QPD signals as the beam was swept ( Figure 3A , red trace ) . This distance corresponds to a change of ~ 30 kHz in frequency of the AOD RF signal input . Similar fluctuations in the total beam intensity were also observed ( Figure 3B , red ) . When we damped the intensity variation by a feedback system controlling the RF signal amplitude ( Figure 3B , blue ) , the fluctuations in the QPD “force” signal remained ( Figure 3A , blue ) . Over the entire 25  m range of the AOD’s beam deflection at the sample , certain positions / RF frequencies exhibited smaller or larger variations ( Figure 3C ) . Figure 3 . A ) Example of variations in the force signal observed with the AOD beam steering system as a function of beam position . The y - axis shows the differential voltage from the QPD as the trap position was scanned in the chamber without any trapped bead . Similar variations were seen when the bead was present , but were visually masked by Brownian motions . The variations are shown without ( red ) and with ( blue ) intensity - maintaining feedback . The two signals overlay nearly perfectly , and are displayed with an offset for clarity . B ) The total intensity of the light reaching the QPD also varies with a similar periodicity ( RF frequency in B corresponds directly to position plotted in panel A ) . Using an independent feedback loop to maintain a constant total QPD illumination kept the light intensity at the QPD constant ( B , blue ) , but did not eliminate the variations in force signals . C ) The standard deviations of the fluctuations over a 100 nm window were calculated over the entire 25  m deflection range of the AOD . Some positions ( corresponding to particular RF frequencies ) exhibited much larger variations in the recorded force signal than the average . The y - axis scale in C is approximately in pN using typical experimental calibrations . The periodicity of these fluctuations matches that expected from standing waves in the crystal . Such a standing wave can arise from partial reflection of the acoustic wave from the far face of the crystal which interferes with the original wave , leading to a small amplitude of non - propagating nodes and internodes . The crystal is thus a weak resonator ( low quality factor , Q ) with resonant peaks at frequencies giving integral numbers of wavelengths in the crystal . The inverse of the round - trip time of the acoustic wave in the crystal is approximately 32 . 2 µs , giving an expected periodicity of 31 kHz for the applied RF signal , closely matching our observations . When the input RF frequency was swept across 20 kHz of RF variation at a very high rate ( 1 sweep per ms or faster ) , the pattern of the force signal variations was disrupted . At such fast RF update rates , the frequency of the acoustic wave in the crystal does not remain constant long enough for the reflected wave to interfere coherently and produce the standing wave . Besides previously published reports of these deflection variations occurring in several brands of AODs 2 , we have also tested four brands of AODs of various models and ages and have found that such non - linearities existed in all of them . Their magnitude and spacing seemed to depend on many factors such as the model and service age of deflector . The effects of the standing waves could be visualized by imaging the beam at the AOD crystal . We expanded the beam from its typical 2 mm diameter to about 4 mm , and projected an image of the 1064 nm light at the AOD crystal through neutral density filters onto a CCD camera . The beam profile was recorded while linearly sweeping the applied RF frequency 100 kHz over a period of 10 s , acquiring images at 10 frames per second ( Video 1 ) . We flattened the image and enhanced the contrast to better visualize changes in the beam during the sweep . Large variations in the overall intensity of the beam as well as localized fluctuations were detected . The overall fluctuations varied with a periodicity of ~ 30 kHz , Proc . of SPIE Vol . 10347 103470Q - 6 / IAA ti - Quadrant Photodiode Detector - Lateral Effect Photodiode in agreement with the total QPD voltage fluctuations ( Figure 4B ) . Wave - like variations are apparent that slowly move across the beam path as the RF frequency changes , supporting the idea that standing waves are present ( the ~ 35 MHz acoustic wave itself is not visible ) . If the intensity of each frame is scaled , so that the total intensity of each frame is normalized ( as in Video 1 ) , there are still local variations in the intensity of the beam ( Figure 4C ) . These fluctuations likely give rise to the artefactual force signals we observed , even when the total intensity of the beam was held constant by a feedback loop ( Figure 3C ) . Variations in both the global and local intensities are observed whether or not the images were flattened and contrast enhanced . We analyzed each frame of the video to simulate the signal that would be generated by projecting the intensity - normalized image onto the quadrant photodiodes . The plane of the AOD is conjugate to the QPD , so this simulated signal mimics the conditions of Figure 3 . Simulation of the QPD output was performed by dividing each frame horizontally in half , summing the intensity from each half , and subtracting the two sums . The simulation ( Figure 4D ) shows that the detected force signal on the simulated QPD ( red ) fluctuates due to the regional variations in the light intensity at an overall periodicity of 30 kHz , consistent with actual QPD recordings . Secondary , apparently random variations in the calculated force signal are superimposed . To investigate whether the observed deflections are due to the movement of fringes across the centerline of the image ( the simulated quadrant boundary of the QPD ) , we also calculated the 1 st moment of the image in the x dimension ( blue ) , simulating the signal from a lateral effect photodiode , which averages the beam position more faithfully than a QPD . The overall variations remained , with only the smaller , secondary deflections differing . This is consistent with observations using an actual lateral effect photodiode in the experimental system that gave results very similar to the QPD ( data not shown ) . Figure 4 . A ) Video 1 . Video of a 1064 nm wavelength ~ 4 mm dia . beam at the face of the AOD crystal . The applied RF signal was swept over a range of 100 kHz in 10 second period , corresponding to about 75 nm of displacement at the microscope stage . The video rate is 10 frames per second . The intensity of each frame has been normalized . Two regions of interest ( ROI ) were selected , shown in red ( ROI 1 ) and green ( RO1 2 ) . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1117 / 12 . 2277130 . 1 B ) The original mean frame intensity ( blue ) from the video of panel A shows an approximate periodicity of 25 kHz , corresponding to 20 nm at the sample . The intensity - normalized video ( orange ) has a constant mean intensity , as expected . This normalized video was used for analysis in panels C and D . C ) The mean intensity in each ROI in the normalized video shows pseudo - periodic fluctuations in its localized intensity with a similar period ( 25 kHz ) . The fluctuations in the different regions vary in amplitude and phase . D ) The signal that would be created from projecting the recorded images onto either a Quadrant Photodiode ( QPD , blue ) or a lateral effect photodiode ( LEP , red ) were simulated to see if the variations mainly arose as fringes crossed the quadrant boundary . The force signal varied for both types of detectors with similar periodicity , but with somewhat different secondary characteristics . 3 . 4 Effect of force variations on feedback system’s response To better understand how these variations in the detected force signal influence force - clamp experiments , we performed Monte - Carlo simulations of a feedback system acting to keep a constant force on a tethered bead undergoing Brownian motion ( Figure 5 ) . The detected error signal of the system was simulated by adding the error signal arising from moving the trap relative to a fixed bead ( yellow in panels A and C , the linear force response of the trap ) to the error signal arising Proc . of SPIE Vol . 10347 103470Q - 7 04400 mIAM Wrtiho i w solely from the non - linearities of the AOD ( blue ) , modeled as a sinusoid . The simulations were set to maintain zero load on the bead ( set point , purple lines in 5A and 5C ) . Visualizing the observed error signal of the system as a function of trap position under conditions similar to an experiment ( the sum of the yellow and blue curves , red in Figures 5A and 5C ) shows that there are multiple trap positions where the setpoint force would be observed ( Figure 5C , intersections of red and purple lines ) . Brownian motions would cause the trap to visit each of these positions while the feedback loop attempts to maintain a constant force . The trap position is not stable at 0 nm , due to the reversed slope of the error signal . However , the trap positions at - 7 nm and + 7 nm are stabilized by the feedback loop . This was observed in the simulations of the trap position over time , where rapid transitions between these stable positions were observed ( Figure 5B ) . The probability , timing , and size of these jumps depend on many of the simulation parameters , including the relative position between the bead and the peaks of the force variations . This situation , combined with the fact that the real non - linearities vary considerably in their positions and amplitude across the AOD deflection range , explains why the size and frequency of the jumps we observed in the experiments varied widely among myosin binding events . We simulated a “better” AOD , where the variations had half the amplitude and twice the spacing as found in our system ( Figure 5C , D ) . This combination did not exhibit the drastic jumps in position because the observed error signal crossed zero only once , but its sensitivity became lower ( Figure 5C , red , ) , effectively reducing the loop gain and leading to increased noise in the trap position ( Figure 5D , E , blue ) , as compared to a simulation without any superimposed AOD non - linearities ( Figure 5E , F , pink ) . Figure 5 . A ) Simulated error signals for a trapped bead undergoing Brownian motion . The total measured error signal as a function of trap position ( red ) includes the Hookean ( linear ) trap potential ( yellow ) and the imposed variations from the AOD ( blue ) modeled as a sinusoidal curve . Due to the influence of the AOD force variations , there are two possible trap positions ( - 7 nm and + 7 nm ) where the force will be stabilized at the set point ( zero error signal , purple ) . B ) Simulated trap positions for the potential in A using parameters similar to our experiments . The trap position quickly jumps between the values where the total measured force is equal to the set point ( horizontal dashed lines show intercepts of red and purple curves from A . C ) A reduction in the amplitude of the variations and doubling of their spacing changes the landscape of the measured error response ( red ) , effectively reducing the loop gain . D ) Simulated trap positions from the potentials in C show that large jumps are no longer observed , but the small AOD variations introduce added noise . E ) A comparison of the simulated trap positions with the low levels of non - linearity shown in Panel C ( blue histogram ) compared with simulated positions without non - linearities ( pink histogram ) . F ) Simulated trap positions under feedback when only the trap’s potential is present and non - linearities are absent . Proc . of SPIE Vol . 10347 103470Q - 8 es ww a C : I National Instruments FPGA HV Amp O S \ I F es t ia . , it 4 . ELECTRO - OPTICAL DEFLECTORS 4 . 1 Principles , time response , and previous use of electro - optical deflectors An electro - optical crystal generates a linear refractive index gradient proportional to an applied electric field . This gradient causes light propagating in it to be deflected from its straight path through the crystal . When zero voltage is applied , the beam passes straight through the device , simplifying alignment , and when the field is applied , all of the light ( except for small portions that are reflected or scattered ) is deflected the same amount . Because there is no traveling acoustic wave as is in an AOD , the response time of an EOD is mainly limited by the driver applying the high voltage signal to the device , which acts as a capacitive load . Our EODs ( LTA - 4 crystal , Conoptics ) and high voltage driver ( Model 412 , Conoptics ) have a combined response time of about 1 µs , well within the 4 µs requirement to maintain a total loop time < 10 µs . This same EOD system has previously been shown to work well in optical trap feedback systems , and not to exhibit the non - linearities in deflection that are found in AODs . 2 4 . 2 Implementation of ultra - fast force clamp with EODs The reduced angular displacement of the EODs and the location of the effective center of the deflection within the EOD device required special consideration in the optical path design . EODs can deflect the beam up to 3 milliradians peak - to - peak , which is ~ 10 - fold less than the AODs . In our system this corresponds to several hundred nanometers of trap translation at the sample , which is sufficient for our feedback experiments . However , to form actin dumbbells from filaments of various lengths that are pre - tensioned to 5 pN , > 3 µm of beam travel is required . This is accomplished via a remote - controlled gimbal mounted mirror ( PM1 in Figure 6 ) placed at another plane conjugate to the back focal plane ( BFP ) of the objective . Angular changes at this mirror produce displacement at the sample . The center of deflection of the EOD , which needs to be conjugate to the BFP of the objective , is located approximately 2 centimeters inside the 10 cm EOD device , as measured from the exit aperture . To ensure both this center of deflection and the mirror are conjugate to each other , a short focal length relay lens is used to image the center of rotation of the EOD onto the mirror as a 4f relay system . While only one of the traps is manipulated by this conjugate mirror , both traps contain corresponding relay lenses ( L6 and L7 in Figure 6 ) to produce similar beam characteristics once they are recombined . Figure 6 . A ) Schematic of the optical trap setup including EODs . Dashed blue lines indicate conjugate planes . L7 is necessary to create a conjugate plane at Picomotor Mirror 1 ( PM1 ) to properly control the position of EOD B’s beam relative to EOD A’s beam . A similar lens is included after EOD A to maintain homogeneity between the beam paths . HWP A is necessary to rotate the polarization of the incoming light to horizontal as required for deflection . A pair of lenses in front of each EOD ( L4 - L6 , and L3 - L5 ) acts to reduce the beam diameter during transit through the EOD crystals . The layout was like that used with the AODs , however without the lenses described above and slightly different positions of half waveplates and other lenses . PBS : Polarizing Beam Splitter , M : Mirror , L : Lens , HV Amp : High voltage amplifier . Proc . of SPIE Vol . 10347 103470Q - 9 4 . 3 Visualizing the myosin power stroke with EOD based feedback When the beam is carefully aligned inside the EODs , and all the conjugate planes are properly positioned , the response of the QPD force signals as the beam position is moved over a range of 700 nm is smooth ( Figure 7A ) . The EODs do not exhibit the variations and non - linearities detected from the AODs . It should be noted that in our case , when the beam was larger or slightly misaligned so that even a small amount of its power ( 1 % - 5 % ) struck the edges of the 2 mm diameter crystals and / or their electrodes , the effective position of beam imaged at the QPD was unstable . The improvements in beam steering from the EODs enable experiments on myosin to be accomplished without the artefactual jumps which had previously foiled analyzing myosin’s power stroke . When we use the force clamp system with EODs , we can observe the position of the actin dumbbell smoothing traveling under the feedback system , and coming to an abrupt and precise stop when the myosin interacts with actin . In some of these interactions , we can clearly see single ~ 10 nm displacements of the actin filament within a few milliseconds of binding , as expected for the cardiac myosin isoform under study . The position of the dumbbell does not exhibit the fluctuations seen in Figure 2A , and thus the power stroke of the myosin can be properly characterized . This will allow elucidation of the amplitude and kinetics of the power stroke under defined mechanical loads and biochemical conditions . Figure 7 . A ) Characterization of the deflection of the EODs as a function of trap position ( green ) shows a uniform detected force signal on the QPD . The corresponding signal using AODs from Figure 3 is shown offset at the same scale . B ) An enlarged view of the EOD data from Panel A shows that there are no detectable “wiggles” in the deflection of the beam by the EOD . C ) The actin dumbbell’s position is shown for the beginning of a single interaction between cardiac myosin and actin using the EOD - based force - clamp system . Red dashed lines guide the eye to the dumbbell’s motions . The dumbbell is traveling at a constant velocity under feedback before it quickly stops at t = 1 ms . There is one clear displacement of ~ 10 nm at 2 ms and no other large fluctuations . A similar figure for the AOD - based system is shown in Figure 2A without the initial motion of the filament at a constant velocity . 5 . CONCLUSIONS We have shown that using AODs for beam steering in a force clamp optical trap system , where force is directly measured by deflections of the trapping laser , can cause serious artefacts in the output signals . This builds on a previous report of a similar effect in a system using a separate position tracking laser . While it was not immediately obvious how the quasi - periodic variations in the deflected beam would cause jumps in the feedback control signals , a combination of control experiments and simulations , showed that they are the cause . The simulations emphasize that key parameters such as the spacing and amplitude of the force non - linearities and the stiffness of the trap have considerable qualitative and quantitative effects on a force feedback system . Thus , for some researchers using similar feedback systems with AODs , it is possible such variations may introduce spurious and difficult to trace noise into their experimental data . AOD devices are designed to reduce standing waves by including an absorptive material on the crystal opposite of the piezo element , but it seems that the specific design of the device and its service age may influence the amount of reflections . For high precision force feedback experiments , Proc . of SPIE Vol . 10347 103470Q - 10 researchers are recommended to test their systems to check that deflection variations from standing waves do not lead to artefacts in their experiments . Even if the effects do not manifest as large jumps in trap positions , smaller non - linearities may be adding additional noise to a system , as shown in Figure 5 . If such effects are found , changes to experimental or device parameters , or the use of EODs for beam steering may be advisable . We have found that using EODs for beam steering has reduced the noise and spurious jumps in our feedback signals which were masking the myosin power stroke phenomenon we set out to study . Although their deflection range is smaller than AODs , their faster time response and uniform deflection makes EODs more reliable for high speed , high precision experiments requiring precise beam control . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This work was funded by NIH grants R01 - GM086352 , R35 - GM118139 , P01 - GM087253 , R01 - HL133863 , a NSF Graduate Research Fellowship to MSW , the European Union ' s Horizon 2020 grant 654148 Laserlab - Europe , the Italian FIRB grant RBFR13V4M2 , and by Ente Cassa di Risparmio di Firenze . The authors would like to thank Henry Shuman and Steve Block for helpful discussions . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Capitanio , M . , Canepari , M . , Maffei , M . , Beneventi , D . , Monico , C . , Vanzi , F . , Bottinelli , R . and Pavone , F . S . , “Ultrafast force - clamp spectroscopy of single molecules reveals load dependence of myosin working stroke , ” Nat . Methods 9 ( 10 ) , 1013 – 1019 ( 2012 ) . [ 2 ] Valentine , M . T . , Guydosh , N . R . , Gutiérrez - Medina , B . , Fehr , A . N . , Andreasson , J . O . and Block , S . M . , “Precision steering of an optical trap by electro - optic deflection , ” Opt . Lett . 33 ( 6 ) , 599 – 601 ( 2008 ) . [ 3 ] Conoptics Inc . , “Optical Trapping Deflection Systems , ” Conoptics , < http : / / www . conoptics . com / optical - trapping - deflection - systems / > ( 28 July 2017 ) . [ 4 ] Grier , D . G . and Roichman , Y . , “Holographic optical trapping , ” Appl . Opt . 45 ( 5 ) , 880 – 887 ( 2006 ) . [ 5 ] Capitanio , M . , Cicchi , R . and Pavone , F . S . , “Position control and optical manipulation for nanotechnology applications , ” Eur . Phys . J . B - Condens . Matter Complex Syst . 46 ( 1 ) , 1 – 8 ( 2005 ) . [ 6 ] Berg - Sørensen , K . , Oddershede , L . , Florin , E . - L . and Flyvbjerg , H . , “Unintended filtering in a typical photodiode detection system for optical tweezers , ” J . Appl . Phys . 93 ( 6 ) , 3167 – 3176 ( 2003 ) . [ 7 ] Gittes , F . and Schmidt , C . F . , “Interference model for back - focal - plane displacement detection in optical tweezers , ” Opt . Lett . 23 ( 1 ) , 7 – 9 ( 1998 ) . Proc . of SPIE Vol . 10347 103470Q - 11