Can Online Reviews Reveal a Product’s True Quality ? Empirical Findings and Analytical Modeling of Online Word - of - Mouth Communication Nan Hu School of Information Systems Singapore Management University hunan @ smu . edu . sg Paul A . Pavlou Anderson Graduate School of Management University of California , Riverside paul . pavlou @ ucr . edu Jennifer Zhang College of Business Administration University of Toledo Jennifer . zhang @ utoledo . edu Abstract : As a digital version of word - of - mouth , online review has become a major information source for consumers and has very important implications for a wide range of management activities . While some researchers focus their studies on the impact of online product review on sales , an important assumption remains un - examined , that is , can online product review reveal the true quality of the product ? To test the validity of this key assumption , this paper first empirically tests the underlying distribution of online reviews with data from Amazon . The results show that 53 % of the products have a bimodal and non - normal distribution . For these products , the average score does not necessarily reveal the product’s true quality and may provide misleading recommendations . Then this paper derives an analytical model to explain when the mean can serve as a valid representation of a product’s true quality , and discusses its implication on marketing practices . Categories and Subject Descriptors J . 4 . [ Social and Behavioral Sciences ] : Economics . General Terms Measurement , Economics , Human Factors , Verification . Keywords Word - of - Mouth , Online Reviews , Bi - Modal Distribution 1 . Questions and Motivations Word of mouth ( WOM ) is defined as “all informal communications directed at other consumers about the ownership , usage , or characteristics of particular goods and services or their sellers . ” While WOM has been traditionally spread among acquaintances through personal “contagions , ” its value has also been recognized and used in practice . Pioneered by the seminal Bass ( 1969 ) paper , WOM is widely considered as a major driver of new product diffusion for non - adopters . The rapid development of the Internet with its enhanced communication capabilities has dramatically increased the scale and scope of WOM communication . As an Internet - based version of WOM , online reviews have become a major informational source for consumers . Online reviews have very important implications for a wide range of management activities , such as brand building , customer acquisition and retention , product development , and quality assurance . Some companies like Amazon . com and Circuitcity . com , provide convenient access for the customers to read and write review for the products sold on their websites . Other companies , such as Epinions . com and BizRate . com , instead of selling product directly to the consumers , specialize in providing a platform enabling people to share their opinions on products , besides searching and price comparison . Reichheld ( 2003 ) claimed that a customer ' s propensity to recommend a product to others – termed referral value - was the most important success measure in business today . Reichheld argued that referral value has a higher correlation to firm performance than such traditional measures as customer satisfaction . Whereas many studies have examined the importance and roles of online product reviews on sales ( e . g . , Chevalier and Mayzlin 2003 , Godes and Mayzlin 2003 , Zhang , Dellarocas and Awad 2004 ) , they made an important assumption that still remains untested : Can online reviews reveal a product’s true quality ? More specifically , an implicit assumption of all previous studies is that the mean ( average ) score of the online reviews is sufficient to represent a product’s true quality . However , this assumption has never been verified , neither theoretically nor empirically . If the underlying distribution of the online reviews does not satisfy this assumption , then simplifying the distribution to single point estimation might give incorrect and potentially misleading results . To verify this key assumption , this paper first empirically tests the underlying distribution of online reviews with data from Amazon . The results show that almost 53 % of the products have a bimodal , U - shaped distribution . For these products , the average score does not necessarily reveal the product’s true quality and Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . EC ' 06 , June 11 – 15 , 2006 , Ann Arbor , Michigan , USA . Copyright 2006 ACM 1 - 59593 - 236 - 4 / 06 / 0006 . . . $ 5 . 00 . may provide misleading recommendations . Then this paper derives an analytical model to explain when the mean can serve as a valid representation of a product’s true quality . In the end , we propose a new predictor model to measure the effect of online word - of - mouth . This new model is compared with the Chevalier and Mayzlin ( 2005 ) model to show our model has better interpreting power than theirs . 2 . Literatures There are a growing number of literatures on word - of - mouth . They provide theory - based view of digital word of mouth , as well as experimental and empirical verifications . Traditional Word - of - mouth literature studied its impact limited to a local social network ( e . g . , Brown and Reingen 1987 , Biyalogorsky , and Gerstner , and Libai 2001 ) . In contrast , the impact of online consumer reviews can reach far beyond the local community since any consumer all over the world can access a consumer review via the Internet . Most of the theoretical works analyzed how information is communicated through “word of mouth” and consumers’ choice given the word heard and consumers’ private information . Bass ( 1969 ) and other diffusion models looked at how information about new product was spread through word - of - mouth among non - adaptors . Anderson ( 1998 ) studied some empirical evidence of word - of - mouth in the offline world and found that people are more likely to engage in word - of - mouth if they feel strongly ( positively or negatively ) about a product than if they are indifferent . There were also a couple of recent experimental and empirical works that studied the role of digital word of mouth on a firm’s sales . Shapira , Kantor and Melamed ( 2001 ) reported on an experiment conducted using the ' ' AntWorld ' ' system , a collaborative information finding system for the Internet , to explore the effect of added motivation on users ' behavior . They found that for a system to be effective , users must be motivated either by the environment , or by incentives within the system . The findings suggest that relatively inexpensive extrinsic motivators can produce modest but significantly increases in cooperative behavior . There have been a number of recent studies investigating the impact of online word - of - mouth on product sales ( Chatterjee 2001 , Chen et al . 2004 , Dellarocas et al . 2004 , Godes and Mayzlin 2004 , and Zhang et al . 2004 ) . Chevalier and Mayzlin ( 2003 ) examined the effect of consumer reviews on relative sales of books on Amazon and Barns and Noble web sites . They found that an improvement in a book’s average review score leaded to an increase in relative sales , and the impact of 1 - star reviews was greater than the impact of 5 - star reviews . Godes and Mayzlin ( 2003 ) showed that dispersion - - - the extent to which conversations about the product were taking place across a range of communities — as a measure of online conversations , had explanatory power in a dynamic model of sales . Zhang , Dellarocas , and Awad ( 2004 ) built and calibrated a movie revenue forecasting model based on a variation of Bass model incorporating online word - of - mouth and traditional source of information , such as informediaries , offline word - of - mouth , and advertising . However , the results are mixed . Some of the research supports the view that online user review has significant impact on sales ( Chevalier and Mayzlin 2003 and Zhang et al . 2004 ) , while other research challenges such a view ( Chen et al . 2004 , Godes and Mayzlin 2004 ) . With the above papers addressed issues related to digital word of mouth , there are still important questions remain unsolved . For example , how does consumers’ learning from the reviews left by the others affect the review distribution ? Can online product review reveal the real quality of the product ? All the above empirical works take the average review score as a proxy for the true consumer’s evaluation of the product’s quality . If this assumption cannot be validated , then there might be a measurement error in those researches . This paper investigates this problem and hopes to provide insights to the researchers and the practitioners about online word of mouth marketing . 3 . Evidence of Online Word - of - Mouth To examine the nature and distribution of online reviews , a random sample of books , DVDs , and videos were chosen . Their product information and their corresponding online consumer reviews were collected from Amazon . com between February and April , 2005 using Amazon Web Service ( AWS ) . Table 1 provides the descriptive statistics of our sample . Our dataset includes review data for books , DVDs , and videos covering 11 years from 1995 to 2005 . The total numbers of books , DVDs , and videos are 19 , 556 , 8938 , and 2570 respectively . The total numbers of reviews are 237 , 086 for books , 289 , 754 for DVDs , and 58 , 323 for videos . Table 1 : Descriptive Statistics of Amazon Data Product _ Group # Review # of Items Avg _ Rating Book 237 , 086 19 , 566 4 . 211 DVD 289 , 754 8 , 938 4 . 023 Video 58 , 323 2 , 570 4 . 164 Since we are interested in documenting the distribution of the review score across different product categories , to make this comparison meaningful , we need to make sure that items included in our research have enough numbers of customer reviews . For each product category , we separate the items into 2 groups : class 0 includes items whose numbers of reviews are less than 20 , class 1 includes those with more than 20 reviews . For robustness test , we also try other separating point , such as 20 , 30 , 40 , and 50 . The results are qualitatively the same as what we get from using 20 as our separating point . Figure 1 shows that 84 % , 54 % , and 69 % of books , DVDs , and videos have less than 20 reviews respectively . Figure 1 : Cumulative Distribution of Number of Reviews for Each Item for Book , DVD , and Video 0 % 20 % 40 % 60 % 80 % 100 % 120 % 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 100 + Number of Reviews C u m u l a t i ve D i s t r i bu t i on Book DVD Video In our sample ( Figure 2 ) about 80 % , 75 % , and 78 % of the review scores of Book , DVD , and Video are greater or equal to four respectively . This is true for the whole sample as well as each individual category . This finding is consistent with Chevalier and Mayzlin ( 2003 ) ’s finding that for books at both Amazon and Barns and Noble web sites , reviews are overwhelmingly positive . Figure 2 : The Distribution of the Review Scores for Book , DVD , and Video 0 20000 40000 60000 80000 100000 120000 140000 160000 180000 1 2 3 4 5 Review Score N u m b e r o f R ev i e w s Book DVD Video To show the sample distribution of the online review scores , we randomly picked a music CD titled “Mr . A - Z” . Figure 3 shows the distribution of its online ratings on Amazon . com . The average rating for this CD is 3 . 5 from Amazon . com , but there are more consumers leaving extreme reviews ( either 1 or 5 ) than consumers leaving ordinary review ( score 3 ) . Therefore the average of the ratings does not reflect the aggregated opinion of all the consumers ; instead , it is a compromise of the two extreme opinions . We can fit this density function with a U - shaped curve on Figure 3 . Figure 3 : Distribution of the Ratings on Amazon . com ( fitted with a U - shaped curve ) for a Music CD ( Mr . A - Z ) 0 % 5 % 10 % 15 % 20 % 25 % 30 % 35 % 40 % 45 % 50 % 1 2 3 4 5 Rating F r equen cy To check whether this is just a special case or not , for each product category , we pull all the items with a 3 . 0 average review score together and plot the distribution ( Figure 4 ) 1 On Amazon . com , consumers can only leave an integer online review score on a 1 - 5 Likert - type scale anchored at 1 = least satisfied and 5 = most satisfied , etc . The most interesting finding of the data analysis is the existence of a bimodal distribution of the online reviews for products with an average review score around 3 . 0 ( Figure 4 ) , which is the median and the mean of the 5 - point scale . Specifically , for the products that have an average score roughly in the middle of the 1 - 5 Likert - type scale , the scores of the online reviews follow a bi - modal distribution . Figure 4 : The Review Distribution of Book , DVD , Video with Average Review Score 3 . 0 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 1 2 3 4 5 Review Score N u m b e r o f R ev i e w s Book DVD Video Bimodality of a sample distribution is often a strong indication that the distribution of a variable is not normal . In our case , bimodality of the sample distribution indicates a polarization of opinions . 2 1 Because the average rating can be decimal number such as 1 . 23 or 2 . 11 , we adopt the following classifications to aggregate the items together : if the Avg _ Rating is no less than 1 and no more than 1 . 5 , we classify that item into the average rating group 1 ; if the Avg _ Rating is greater than 1 . 5 and no less than 2 , we classify that item into the average rating 1 . 5 group , and so on . 2 The U - Shape graph is not driven by the truncated distribution ( consumer can’t leave review score higher than 5 or lower than 1 ) . Graphic plots of 1 ) Average review score other than 3 . 0 or 2 . 5 2 ) the review distribution For robustness test purpose , next , we pull all the items with 2 . 5 average review score together and show the distributions in Figure 5 . The same pattern exists . To conclude , the bi - modal phenomenon is far more general . It exists for different product categories and different average review scores . Figure 5 : The Review Distribution of Book , DVD , Video with Average Review Score 2 . 5 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 1 2 3 4 5 Review Score N u m b e r o f R ev i e w s Book DVD Video What we find here is that the average score of the online reviews does not reveal the “true ' ' product quality since the consumers ' opinions do not converge to , or concentrate on the mean , as commonly suggested in the literature . It rather reflects the balance point of very different opinions . In other words , when the average score of a book is around 3 , it does not suggest that consumers generally agree that this is a good book . What it really means is that there is an equal number of people who think this is a great book as those who think this is a really bad book . 4 . The Brag - and - Moan Model In this simple model , we explore one potential explanation for the empirical results we found for online reviews . Specifically , we seek to verify the motivation of consumers leaving reviews online . We assume that consumers only choose to write reviews when they are very satisfied with the products they purchased ( brag ) , or very disgruntled ( moan ) . This would give rise to a U - shaped curve we observed in the data . There are of course many other possible explanations , for example , the heterogeneous tastes of the consumers . But we exclude those obvious reasons and explore how incentive of leaving a review gives rise to this special distribution . Given the assumptions , it is easy to show that the online word of mouth will follow a U - shape distribution . Since we are interested in the impact of such consumer behavior on the efficiency of online word of mouth , we also would like to know whether the reviews can reveal the true quality , and how fast the expectation converges . change over time sometimes show that there are fewer consumers leaving review score 5 than those leaving review score 4 . But still , there are fewest consumers leaving review score 3 in those cases . Assume a product has an intrinsic quality following a uniform distribution [ 0 , 1 ] q U : . q is unobservable , and its distribution is common knowledge to all consumers . Consumer i ’s utility is given by : ( ) i i u q q v = + ( 1 ) in which 2 ( 0 , ) i v N σ : and is i . i . d . across consumers . v i represents the idiosyncratic shock consumer i may incur when consuming the product , for example , her mood , external conditions , etc . A consumer who purchases the product may or may not choose to write an online review , since the benefit of writing an online product review is not obvious , while at the same time , it certainly incurs time and other cost for a consumer to do so . It is well recognized that there is an incentive problem and we assume that the incentive for people to write reviews is to brag or moan . There exist psychological reasons to brag or to moan . Denote the probability a consumer chooses to write online review as ρ . We assume 1 if ( ) or ( ) 0 if ( ) i i i u q u q u q ⎧ δ > δ < ⎪ ρ = ⎨ δ < < δ ⎪⎩ ( 2 ) We did not consider the consumers’ self - selection problem . That is , not all consumers will purchase the product and leave online feedback . Presumably , those consumers have a low rating about the item will balk from purchasing and we expect to see those consumers’ ratings missing from the review distribution . However , this can cause the review distributions skew to the left , but it cannot explain the peak of a low review score in a U - shaped review distribution . Hence , it does not affect our results . Assume both δ and δ are constant and 0 1 ≤ δ ≤ δ ≤ . If δ = δ , it means that everyone writes a review ; otherwise it implies only very satisfied , or disgruntled consumers write reviews . We further assume everyone who writes a review always truthfully report their observed utility , so the expected value and variance of consumer i ' s review are q and 2 σ , respectively . As consumers write online reviews , they contribute more information about the quality of the product to the market . In the case that δ = δ , everyone reports her observed quality . n r is the average quality reported by n consumers . Using n to represent the number of reviews , and by Central Limit Theorem , we have 1 / 2 ( - ) limPr [ ] ( ) n n n r q x x →∞ ≤ = Φ σ ( 3 ) i . e . , the distribution of n r will be approximately a normal distribution with mean q and variance 2 / n σ . So consumers can indeed learn the true quality from online review . More generally , when δ < δ , the distribution of reported quality r i is a normal distribution 2 ( , ) N q σ with a window . The density function is given by : 0 ( ) / ( ) otherwise ( ) ( 1 ( ) ) i i i r r q r q q ⎧ δ ≤ ≤ δ ⎪ − ⎪ φ σ λ = ⎨ σ ⎪ δ − δ − ⎪Φ + − Φ σ σ ⎩ ( 4 ) The mean is ( ) r i i i r r dr q μ = λ = + Λσ ∫ ( 5 ) Where ( ) ( ) ( ) ( 1 ( ) ) q q q q δ − δ − φ − φ σ σ Λ = δ − δ − Φ + − Φ σ σ And the variance is 2 2 2 2 2 ( ) ( ) r i i i r r r dr q σ = λ − μ = σ + Λσ σ − − Λ σ ∫ ( 6 ) We apply Central Limit Theorem : 1 / 2 ( - ) limPr [ ] ( ) n r n r n r x x →∞ μ ≤ = Φ σ ( 7 ) So the distribution of the average report score still converges to a normal distribution , except that the mean and variance are r μ and 2 r σ respectively now . Note that r q μ = + Λσ . Therefore the sample mean unbiased converge to true quality q if and only if Λ = 0 , which in turn is true if and only if 1 . δ = δ or 2 . δ < δ and 0 q q ≤ − δ = δ − . This analysis leads to the following proposition Proposition 1 : if ( δ = δ ) or ( δ < δ and 0 q q ≤ − δ = δ − ) , n r converges to the true quality q . Otherwise , n r converges to q + Λσ , which depends on both δ and δ , and is not the true quality . Therefore the only way consumers can learn a product’s true quality from online reviews is to either have everyone write a review , or to have symmetry in the way consumers treat satisfaction and dissatisfaction when writing online reviews . Since both conditions are not likely to be satisfied in practice , this implies that the average online review score seldom reflects the true product quality . Specifically , if 0 q q ≤ − δ < δ − , that is , consumers are more likely to moan , the mean of the average reviews will be lower than the true product quality ; otherwise , if consumers are more likely to brag , the mean of the average reviews will be higher than the true product quality . The proposed model suggests that a consumer’s incentive to write an online review has important implications on whether online reviews can provide a product’s true quality . This study shows that the commonly - used factor in the literature - average review score - is mostly an incorrect proxy of a product’s true quality . Making this unwarranted assumption can possibly lead to erroneous conclusions about consumers’ online shopping behaviors and wrong marketing decisions . 5 . Empirical Verification of the Findings Graphically we show that the review distribution is not normal ( unimodal ) . To test whether the overall distribution for the items with average review score 3 . 0 is normal , we used the Kolmogorov - Smirnov , the Cramer - von Mises , and the Anderson - Darling tests . Since the significance level of these three tests is less than p < 0 . 01 , the normal assumption is rejected , which is consistent with our U - shaped graph results . Next we conduct the normal test on the item level and then aggregate the normal testing results over different average rating groups for each product category . For all the items with more than 20 reviews , we find that for Book , DVD , and Video , the review distribution is not normal for almost 100 % of items with average review score from 0 to 4 , while 93 . 49 % , 86 . 68 % , and 88 . 81 % items are not normal for Book , DVD , and Video with average review around 5 . To formally test the unimodal assumption , we conducted the DIP test ( Hartigan and Hartigan 1985 ) on individual item level as well to test whether the distribution is bimodal . DIP Test is a measure of departure from unimodality . This test measures the maximal difference between the empirical distribution function and the unimodal distribution function that minimizes this maximum difference . In other words , the DIP is the distance between the “tightest fitting” unimodal distribution function and the empirical kernel distribution . The DIP for a unimodal distribution approaches zero while the DIP of a multimodal distribution approaches a positive constant . The DIP therefore tests for multimodality against the null of a unimodal distribution . We obtained DIP statistics by using R , which is a language and environment for statistical computing and graphics developed at Bell Laboratories by John Chambers and colleagues ( http : / / www . r - project . org ) Following the normal test , we also conduct the dip test on individual item level . For all products with more than 20 reviews and have average review between 1 . 5 and 4 , almost 100 % of them are not unimodal . That means they have at least 2 modals . Even for products with an average review around 5 , 31 . 66 % , 47 . 85 % , and 44 . 03 % of Books , DVD , and Video are not unimodal . We summarize our normal and dip test results in Table 2 3 . There are 54 % items whose distributions are neither normal nor unimodal . There are 35 % items whose distribution are not normal , but are unimodal . The 4 . 28 % of the items are normal but not unimodal is driven by the items with less than 21 reviews . 3 For table 2 , t he 4 . 28 % of the items are normal but not unimodal is driven by the items with less than 25 reviews . Technically speaking , we cannot test normality for these groups of items . Technically speaking , we cannot test normality for these groups of items . Table 2 : Dip Test and Normal Test Statistic Normal Test Dip Test Accept Reject Total Accept 7 . 08 % 35 . 28 % 42 . 36 % Reject 4 . 28 % 53 . 36 % 57 . 64 % Total 11 . 36 % 88 . 64 % 100 % To further establish the U - shape property , we test the following a similar quadratic equation in Anderson ( 1998 ) : 2 0 1 2 , ijt ijt ijt m jt m ijt f s s x α α α β ε = + + + + ∑ ( 8 ) where ijt f is the number of reviews with score i , for item j , at period t , { 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 } ijt s ∈ is review score i , for item j , at period t , ijt ε is an error term . The null hypothesis to accept a U - shape distributed review scores is H 0 : 1 0 α < and 2 0 α > To take care of the potential difference across different groups , we ran separate regressions for different product categories ( Book , DVD , and Video ) with different mean review scores ( e . g . , 1 . 5 , 2 , and so on ) to get all the possible coefficients . We then estimated the mean coefficient and Fama - MacBeth t - statistic . The results hold for the Book , DVD , and Video product categories with significant negative 1 0 α < and significant positive 2 0 α > 4 . We also estimate the model with all the items and all the sub - groups pooled together and get similar results . The U - shape property has very important implications for both online WOM research and practice . For example , if the average score reveals a product’s true quality , a consumer would be better off by purchasing a product with an average score = 3 instead of one with an average score = 2 , other things being equal . However , when the average score does not reveal a product’s true quality in the traditional sense , this is not necessarily true . 6 . Conclusions and Limitations Digital word of mouth is becoming a popular and important source of information for the consumers . Researchers and marketers keep focusing their attentions on the impact of digital word of mouth on the consumer relationship management and further on sales without fully understanding the digital word of mouth itself . This paper raises the important question that whether and how online consumer review , which is one type of digital word of mouth , converges to the true quality of the product . 4 Since our condition number is smaller than 15 , multicollinearity is not a concern . Also , given the positive correlation between linear and square terms , our hypotheses test when multicollinearity doesn ' t exist will be even stronger . We collected online product review data from a popular online retailer Amazon . com to demonstrate the facts and empirically verify our findings . That is , for a single item , online reviews follow a bi - modal distribution : there are two masses of densities in the review score distribution . The results are tested for products belonging to different categories and with different average review score . We further propose a reason to this finding from consumers’ motivation ( brag and moan ) of leaving a review online . The reason is illustrated with a simple model to show the condition under which the average review will converge to the true quality . We find that unless all the consumers write product review or there is symmetric impact of bragging and moaning for consumers leaving reviews , the average review score does not converge to the true product quality . Our empirical finding and theoretical analysis bring the overlooked distribution of online word of mouth into attention . Ignoring this can possibly lead to erroneous results about consumers’ online shopping behaviors , and wrong marketing decisions can even be made based on an invalid assumption . We proposed one of the reasons that can explain the bi - modal distribution - - - the incentive of leaving a rating on the review website ( bragging and moaning ) . Besides this , other reasons could also cause the observed bi - modal review distribution . For example , consumers’ subjective tastes about a product , if different , may result in the multi - modal distribution . We exclude it from our model to study the net effect of the incentive and cost of writing reviews . It is worth studying the problem with the consideration of consumers’ heterogeneous tastes . References : Anderson , E . W . ( 1998 ) “Customer satisfaction and word of mouth , ” Journal of Service 1 ( 1 ) , 5 - 17 . Avery , Christopher & Paul Resnick & Richard Zeckhauser , 1999 . " The Market for Evaluations , " American Economic Review , American Economic Association , vol . 89 ( 3 ) , pages 564 - 584 . Banerjee A . and Fudenberg D . ( 2004 ) “Word - of - mouth Learning , ” Games and Economic Behavior 46 ( 1 ) 1 - 22 . Bass , F . M , " A New Product Growth Model for Consumer Durables " , Management Science Vol 15 , 1969 . Biyalogorsky , Eyal , Eitan Gerstner , and Barak Libai ( 2001 ) , " Customer Referral Management : Optimal Reward Programs , " Marketing Science , 20 ( 1 ) , 82 - 95 . Brown , Jacqueline J . and Peter H . Reingen ( 1987 ) , “Social Ties and Word - of - Mouth Referral Behavior , ” Journal of Consumer Research , 14 ( December ) , 350 - 362 . Chatterjee , P . 2001 . Online Review : Do Consumers Use Them ? Advances in Consumer Research 28 129 - 133 . Chen , P - Y . , S - Y . Wu , J . Yoon . 2004 . “The Impact of Online Recommendations and Consumer Feedback on Sales , ” Proceeding of International Conference on Information Systems ( ICIS 2004 ) , Washington , D . C . , 711 - 724 . Chevalier , J . and D . Mayzlin , the Effect of Word of Mouth on Sales : Online Book Reviews . Forthcoming in Journal of Marketing Research , 2005 . Dellarocas , C . ( 2003a ) , " The Digitization of Word - of - Mouth : Promise and Challenges of Online Reputation Mechanisms , " Management Science ( 49 : 10 ) , , pp . 1407 - 1424 . Dellarocas , C . ( 2003b ) , " The Impact of Online Opinion forums on Competition and Marketing Strategies , " Working Paper , MIT - Sloan . Dellarocas , C . , N . F . Awad and X . Zhang . 2004 . Exploring the Value of Online Reviews to Organizations : Implications for Revenue Forecasting and Planning . Proceedings of the International Conference on Information Systems . Washington D . C . Davidson R . and J . G . MacKinnon , “Several Tests for Model Specification in the Presence of Alternative hypotheses , ” Econometrica , Vol . 49 , 1981 . Godes , D . and D . Mayzlin , “Exploring the Value of Online Reviews to Organizations : Implications for Revenue Forecasting and Planning , ” 2004 . Hartigan , P . M . ( 1985 ) Computation of the Dip Statistic to Test for Unimodality ; Applied Statistics ( JRSS C ) 34 , 320 – 325 . Hartigan , J . A . and P . M . Hartigan ( 1985 ) The Dip Test of Unimodality ; Annals of Statistics 13 , 70 – 84 . Reichheld , Fred ( 2003 ) The One Number You Need to Grow , Harvard Business Review , 1 - 9 . Shapira , Bracha , Paul B . Kantor , Benjamin Melamed ( 2001 ) , The effect of extrinsic motivation on user behavior in a collaborative information finding system . JASIST 52 ( 11 ) : 879 - 887 .