Playing Unbound : Towards a Radically Intersectional HCI Johanna Brewer jbrewer @ smith . edu Smith College Northampton , MA , USA AnyKey Santa Ana , CA , USA ABSTRACT This short essay is a call to action for digital games researchers to positively transform the future of HCI by meaningfully adopting an explicitly intersectional approach to our work as a scholarly community . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → HCI theory , concepts and models . KEYWORDS intersectionality ; representation ; race ; gender ; sexuality ; disability ; indigeneity ACM Reference Format : Johanna Brewer . 2022 . Playing Unbound : Towards a Radically Intersectional HCI . In Extended Abstracts of the Annual Symposium on Computer - Human Interaction in Play ( CHI PLAY ’22 EA ) , November 2 – 5 , 2022 , Bremen , Germany . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3505270 . 3558362 As digital games research continues to grow it becomes more foun - dational to the study of human - computer interaction . But as this once emergent subfield matures , its scholars must reckon with the legacy of mainstream HCI which has historically marginalized the perspectives of women , people of color , disabled , and LGBTQIA + folks . The CHI community has long been resistant to open dis - cussion of gender and sexuality , with detractors arguing it is an irrelevant distraction to the field [ 5 ] . Though several scholars have made inroads with their explicitly feminist ( e . g . [ 3 ] ) , queer ( e . g . [ 34 ] ) , and trans contributions ( e . g . [ 11 ] ) , research on these topics remains an unspoken taboo . Likewise , matters of race have frequently been overlooked and unaddressed by many privileged white members of the community , but recently scholars of color have been calling attention to the pressing need to center BIPOC perspectives and account for intersectional experiences in HCI [ 7 , 23 ] . Participatory designers too have begun recognizing the urgency of reevaluating their practice to account for the inherent structural dynamics of their research methodology that , despite earnest intentions , still often perpetuates the exploitation of marginalized folks ( especially Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . CHI PLAY ’22 EA , November 2 – 5 , 2022 , Bremen , Germany © 2022 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9211 - 2 / 22 / 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3505270 . 3558362 Black , indigenous , disabled , and low - income participants ) in a way that benefits members of powerful academic institutions [ 13 , 26 , 27 ] . The CHI Play community has both an opportunity and a respon - sibility to shape itself into a more diverse and inclusive field than its older computer science progenitors . One of the best ways of doing so is to keep pace with the other discipline that CHI Play originates from , game studies , by fully committing to a fundamen - tally intersectional approach to scholarship . Notably , the call to embrace intersectionality within game studies predates both the similar discourse at CHI [ 32 ] , and the first convening of CHI Play , by a decade [ 18 ] . Since that time , ludology has grown to encompass rich areas of focus that fill edited volumes and convention halls to discuss queer game studies [ 12 , 20 , 30 ] , Black game studies [ 10 ] , and trans game studies [ 29 ] . And now under the heading of American game studies , researchers are collaborating to deepen the inclusion of perspectives from Asian , indigenous , Latinx , and disabled folks [ 15 ] . In tandem with game studies , CHI Play has , since its incep - tion , been advancing significant work to explore issues of gender [ 2 , 8 , 16 , 22 , 28 ] , race [ 6 , 21 , 24 , 25 , 37 ] , and disability [ 4 , 9 , 14 ] in the landscape of interactive gaming technology . However , apart from an important keynote speech [ 17 ] , the community has yet to meaningfully engage with the experiences of queer , trans , Lat - inx , or indigenous gamers . To decisively rebalance the problematic power dynamics inherited from HCI proper , CHI Play would do well to structurally prioritize the intersectional approach of game studies that some have begun adopt [ 31 , 36 ] . If we as scholars of digital games want to reimagine who is considered the default hu - man in those interactions with computers we study—if we want to change the status quo so that cis , white , hetero , able , and male are just some options among many , rather than the default setting of personhood—then we must be explicit in our effort to rewrite that stifling narrative . I offer that one important method to do so is by radically centering intersectional voices that break binary boundaries and decolonize racial hierarchies . We find ourselves at a point in history when technology is be - ing used to harass and oppress individuals in unforeseen and un - precedented ways , and trans folks of color are among those most likely to be targeted both online and in real life . Transness is of - ten painted as a new phenomenon in certain mainstream cissexist gaming and technology circles , but gender non - conforming folks , and the absence of a rigid gender binary , are defining features of many indigenous cultures [ 19 ] . From the hijra of India , the muxe of Mexico , the kathoey of Thailand , the mudoko dako of Uganda , or the twospirits of North America , we can learn how BIPOC folks around the world have long embraced an expansive view of gender . Perhaps it is unsurprising then , that white supremacy drew much 270 CHI PLAY ’22 EA , November 2 – 5 , 2022 , Bremen , Germany Johanna Brewer of its historic power from the notion that non - white “savages” were too androgynous , and only civilized white people could exhibit binary sex differentiation . As Schuller explains , " Within the logic of civilization , the two sexes represented a unique achievement of the civilized race . Evolutionists , anthropologists , and many others from across the life sciences and beyond determined that only the civilized had reached the stage of sexual dimorphism and that all other peoples had only one sex " [ 33 ] . The echoes of such Euro - supremacist logics still reverberate within our modern perceptions of the creation of knowledge and identification of truth . For example , much work on race and gender presentation in games involves close reads of primary sources ( i . e . games themselves ) , marketing materials , and declarations from stu - dio heads and developers regarding canon lore of characters and plot point clarifications . Yet , games studies scholars have demon - strated how traits like androgyneity are often used by designers to " reinforce rather than challenge the strictures of gender " [ 1 ] . Researchers , then , can do important work to rebalance the power between game creators and consumers by going beyond an anal - ysis of how a studio intends a character to function and instead addressing how that character is perceived by the public ( e . g . [ 35 ] ) . However , relatively little work has been conducted in our field thus far that explicitly explores , for example , the perceptions of trans folks of color regarding gender diverse representation in AAA titles . What role do we want the experiences of gamers with inter - sectional identities to play in the CHI community ? Are their play styles , artistic expressions , or lore interpretations less true or less valid than those of the cishet white men who are the oft imagined creator - consumers of game technology ? Do we want our research to reflect the rapidly changing world we study or to uncritically reenergize outmoded inequities ? Disproportionately focusing on the dominant opinions of straight white men reinforces a colonial logic of control , but we can halt the perpetuation of that harm - ful pattern by explicitly shifting our attention to those who are challenging the rigid gender binary and racial hierarchy that act as backstops for today’s technology - fueled capitalist exploitation . CHI Play has an opportunity to usher in a 21st century HCI that meets a long overdue moment by emphasizing the innumerable interpretations that diverse folks bring to their exploration of gam - ing . If our community can do one thing to support positive change then , it would be to shine a light on the seeds of transformation that have already been planted . To achieve a more perfect form of representation , we would do well to embrace the multitudes speak - ing from the margins and amplify their experiences . Unbound by the impulses of our predecessors to be disciplinary gatekeepers , we have an opportunity to use the growing importance of digital games research to position our collective work as a welcoming beacon of progress for HCI , one that is an intersectional prism through which the perspectives of all marginalized genders and races may shine . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Meghan Blythe Adams . 2018 . Bye , Bye , Birdo : Heroic Androgyny and Vil - lainous Gender - Variance in Video Games . In Queerness in Play , Todd Harper , MeghanBlytheAdams , andNicholasTaylor ( Eds . ) . PalgraveMacmillan , 147 – 163 . [ 2 ] Sarah AlSulaiman and Michael S . Horn . 2015 . Peter the Fashionista ? Computer Programming Games and Gender Oriented Cultural Forms . In Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computer - Human Interaction in Play ( CHI PLAY ’15 ) . ACM , 185 – 195 . [ 3 ] Shaowen Bardzell . 2010 . Feminist HCI : Taking Stock and Outlining an Agenda for Design . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Atlanta , GA ) ( CHI ’10 ) . ACM . [ 4 ] Mark C . Barlet . 2015 . A Frank Conversation about the " F " Wor . In Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computer - Human Interaction in Play ( CHI PLAY ’15 ) . ACM . [ 5 ] Johanna Brewer , Joseph ‘Jofish’ Kaye , Amanda Williams , and Susan Wyche . 2006 . SexualInteractions : WhyWeShouldTalk AboutSex InHC . In Extended Abstracts on International Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ‘06 ) . ACM . [ 6 ] Jaehee Cho , Yeongmin Won , Atit Kothari , Stephanie Fawaz , Zixu Ding , and Xu Cheng . 2016 . INJUSTICE : Interactive Live Action Virtual Reality Experience . In Extended Abstracts of the Annual Symposium on Computer - Human Interaction in Play ( CHI PLAY ’16 ) . ACM , 33 – 37 . [ 7 ] Sheena Erete , Yolanda A . Rankin , and Jakita O . Thomas . 2021 . I Can’t Breathe : Reflections from Black Women in CSCW and HCI . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 4 , CSCW , Article 234 ( 2021 ) . [ 8 ] Leya George . 2021 . Investigating the Role of Technology in Supporting Explo - ration of Gender Identity Through Games and Play . In Extended Abstracts of the Annual Symposium on Computer - Human Interaction in Play ( CHI PLAY ’21 ) . ACM , 399 – 400 . [ 9 ] Roland Graf , Pallavi Benawri , Amy E . Whitesall , Dashiell Carichner , Zixuan Li , Michael Nebeling , and Hun Seok Kim . 2019 . IGYM : An Interactive Floor Projection System for Inclusive Exergame Environments . In Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computer - Human Interaction in Play ( CHI PLAY ’19 ) . ACM , 31 – 43 . [ 10 ] Kishonna L . Gray and David J . Leonard ( Eds . ) . 2018 . Woke Gaming : Digital Challenges to Oppression and Social Injustice . University of Washington Press . [ 11 ] Oliver L . Haimson , Dykee Gorrell , Denny L . Starks , and Zu Weinger . 2020 . De - signing Trans Technology : Defining Challenges and Envisioning Community - Centered Solutions . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Honolulu , HI ) ( CHI ’20 ) . ACM . [ 12 ] Todd Harper , Meghan Blythe Adams , and Nicholas Taylor ( Eds . ) . 2018 . Queerness in Play . Palgrave Macmillan . [ 13 ] Christina Harrington , Sheena Erete , and Anne Marie Piper . 2019 . Deconstructing Community - Based Collaborative Design : Towards More Equitable Participatory Design Engagements . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( 2019 ) , 1 – 25 . [ 14 ] Catherine Holloway , Kathrin Gerling , Christopher Power , Katta Spiel , Giulia Barbareschi , Anna Cox , and Paul Cairn . 2019 . Disability Interactions in Digital Games : From Accessibility to Inclusion . In Extended Abstracts of the Annual Sym - posium on Computer - Human Interaction in Play ( CHI PLAY ’19 ) . ACM , 835 – 839 . [ 15 ] Patrick Jagoda and Jennifer Malkowski ( Eds . ) . 2022 . American Game Studies Special Issue . American Literature 94 , 1 ( 2022 ) . [ 16 ] Geof Kaufman , Mary Flanagan , and Gili Freedman . 2019 . Not Just for Girls : Encouraging Cross - Gender Role Play and Reducing Gender Stereotypes with a Strategy Game . In Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computer - Human Interaction in Play ( CHI PLAY ’19 ) . ACM , 481 – 493 . [ 17 ] Elizabeth LaPensée . 2020 . From Rivers to Stars : Indigenous Self - Determination in Games and XR . In Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computer - Human Interaction in Play ( CHI PLAY ’20 ) . ACM , 3 . [ 18 ] David J . Leonard . 2006 . Not a Hater , Just Keepin’ It Real : The Importance of Race - and Gender - Based Game Studie . Games and Culture 1 , 1 ( 2006 ) , 83 – 88 . [ 19 ] Kravitz M . 2020 . The Gender Binary Is a Tool of White Supremacy . An Injustice ! . July 14 , 2020 . https : / / aninjusticemag . com / the - gender - binary - is - a - tool - of - white - supremacy - db89d0bc9044 . [ 20 ] Jennifer Malkowski and TreaAndrea Russworm ( Eds . ) . 2017 . Gaming Representa - tion : Race , Gender , and Sexuality in Video Games . Indiana University Press . [ 21 ] Divine Maloney . 2018 . Mitigating Negative Effects of Immersive Virtual Avatars on Racial Bias . In Extended Abstracts of the Annual Symposium on Computer - Human Interaction in Play ( CHI PLAY ’18 ) . ACM , 39 – 43 . [ 22 ] Daphne A . Muller , Caro R . van Kessel , and Sam Janssen . 2017 . Through Pink and BlueGlasses : DesigningaDispositionalEmpathyGameUsingGenderStereotypes and Virtual Reality . In Extended Abstracts of the Annual Symposium on Computer - Human Interaction in Play ( CHI PLAY ’17 ) . ACM , 599 – 605 . [ 23 ] Ihudiya Finda Ogbonnaya - Ogburu , Angela D . R . Smith , Alexandra To , and Ken - taro Toyama . 2020 . Critical Race Theory for HCI . In Proceedings of the Interna - tional Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Honolulu , HI ) ( CHI ’20 ) . ACM . [ 24 ] Cale J . Passmore and Regan Mandryk . 2018 . An About Face : Diverse Represen - tation in Games . In Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computer - Human Interaction in Play ( CHI PLAY ’18 ) . ACM , 365 – 380 . [ 25 ] Cale J . Passmore , Rowan Yates , Max V . Birk , and Regan L . Mandryk . 2017 . Racial Diversity in Indie Games : Patterns , Challenges , and Opportunities . In Extended Abstracts of the Annual Symposium on Computer - Human Interaction in Play ( CHI PLAY ’17 ) . ACM , 137 – 151 . 271 Playing Unbound : Towards a Radically Intersectional HCI CHI PLAY ’22 EA , November 2 – 5 , 2022 , Bremen , Germany [ 26 ] Dorian Peters , Susan Hansen , Jenny McMullan , Teresa Ardler , Janet Mooney , and Rafael A . Calvo . 2018 . " Participation Is Not Enough " : Towards Indigenous - Led Co - Design . In Proceedings of the Australian Conference on Computer - Human Interaction ( OzCHI ’18 ) . ACM , 97 – 101 . [ 27 ] Jennifer Pierre , Roderic Crooks , Morgan Currie , Britt Paris , and Irene Pasquetto . 2021 . Getting Ourselves Together : Data - Centered Participatory Design Research & Epistemic Burden . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Yokohama , Japan ) ( CHI ’21 ) . ACM . [ 28 ] Katja Rogers , Maria Aufheimer , Michael Weber , and Lennart E . Nacke . 2018 . Exploring the Role of Non - Player Characters and Gender in Player Identification . In Extended Abstracts of the Annual Symposium on Computer - Human Interaction in Play ( CHI PLAY ’18 ) . ACM , 271 – 283 . [ 29 ] Bo Ruberg and Whit Pow ( Eds . ) . 2023 . Trans Game Studies Special Issue . Com - munication , Culture and Critique 16 , 1 ( 2023 ) . In Press . https : / / academic . oup . com / ccc / pages / trans - game - studies - cfp . [ 30 ] Bo Ruberg and Adrienne Shaw ( Eds . ) . 2017 . Queer Game Studies . University of Minnesota Press . [ 31 ] SergioSayago , JosepBlat , andBarbaraBarbosaNeves . 2020 . AttheIntersectionof Digital Games , Gender , and Age : A Participant Observational Study with Active Older Women . In Extended Abstracts of the Annual Symposium on Computer - Human Interaction in Play ( CHI PLAY ’20 ) . ACM , 360 – 364 . [ 32 ] Ari Schlesinger , W . Keith Edwards , and Rebecca E . Grinter . 2017 . Intersectional HCI : Engaging Identity through Gender , Race , and Class . In Proceedings of the International Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Denver , CO ) ( CHI ’17 ) . ACM . [ 33 ] Kyla Schuller . 2017 . The Biopolitics of Feeling : Race , Sex , and Science in the Nine - teenth Century . Duke University Press . [ 34 ] Katta Spiel , Ashley Marie Walker , Michael A . DeVito , Jeremy Birnholtz , Pınar Barlas , Alex Ahmed , Jed R . Brubaker , Os Keyes , Emeline Brulé , Ann Light , Jean Hardy , Jennifer A . Rode , and Gopinaath Kannabiran . 2019 . Queer ( Ing ) HCI : MovingForwardinTheoryandPractice . In ExtendedAbstractsoftheInternational Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Glasgow , Scotland ) ( CHI ’19 ) . ACM . [ 35 ] Sarah M . Stang . 2019 . ( Re - ) Balancing the Triforce : Gender Representation and Androgynous Masculinity in the Legend of Zelda Series . Human Technology 15 , 3 ( 2019 ) , 367 – 389 . [ 36 ] Judith Odili Uchidiuno , Jaemarie Solyst , Jonaya Kemper , Erik Harpstead , Ross Higashi , and Jessica Hammer . 2021 . Negotiating Systemic Racial and Gender Bias as a Minoritized Adult Design Researche . In Extended Abstracts of the An - nual Symposium on Computer - Human Interaction in Play ( CHI PLAY ’21 ) . ACM , 203 – 208 . [ 37 ] Asimina Vasalou , Rilla Khaled , Daniel Gooch , and Laura Benton . 2014 . Prob - lematizing Cultural Appropriation . In Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computer - Human interaction in Play ( CHI PLAY ’14 ) . ACM , 267 – 276 . 272