Co - citation in the Scientific literature : A New Measure of the Relationship Between Two Documents HENRY SfAAU lrwtzt . le / or . % cntijfc [ n / . rmatio . Philadelphia , Pemqdvmia 191W A now form of document coupling called co - citation is deffned as tfm frequency with which two documents are cifed togother . Th * co - citation frequency of two tci - entiflc papers can b . determined by comporing fists of citing documents in the Science Citafien Index and cwn $ ing identical enwics . Networks of co - cited poperi can be generated for speciffc scientific specialties , and an l xample it drawn from the fiteratum of particle physics . Co - cikttion potferns are found to differ tie . nincantly from bibliographic coupling potterns , but to ogree generally with patterns of direct citation . ChIsiorI of co - cited papers provide a new way to study the we - cialty structure of scietico . 7hay moy provida o new approach to indexing and to th . creation of SDI pro film . l Introduction B1bliographm mtatmns m smentdic pap + rs have bmn used by s mnety of researched to estahbsb relat iomhp among documents , Both direct citat ] on - the citing of an earlier document by a new document - and hiblio . gtaphic coupling - the aharmg of one or more references by Iwo documents - have received comidentble attention ( f , S , 9 , 4 ) A related measure , which bas been over . looked m earlier dkcu . wions , is co - citation Unhke blbbo - grapbic coupling wbicb links source documents , co - cit - a . tion hnks cited dmumcnts and IS , therefore , analogous to a measure of descriptor or word asomatlon ( 5 ) , Tbe purpme of thm paper IS to define th ~ new kind of “coupling” and to distingwh it from biblicgm . pbic coupling , using an actual example from the literature of pbys ] cs Co + tatwn patternt are found to dfler mgnifi - cantly fmm biblicgrapbic mupling patterns , but to agree generally with patterns of direct citation l Meaatmhg 4kektatS0n The strength of m - citation between two mted papers or books cm he ernsdy determined from a citation index mch M the Science Citation Indcz ( SC1 ) . Each of tbe two papers w located m the Cdatton Index section of tbe SCI , and them l ~ ts of cmng pop + rs are scanned The number of ident IcrIl mtmg items defines the strength of co - citation hefwwn the two cited papers An identical mttng item is mmply a new document wbicb has cited both ember papers , ! herefore , m - citation k tbe fre - quency with which two items of earlierliteratureare cited togetherby the later literature ( 6 ) . TObe stronglycc - cited , a fnrgenumberof authors mustmtethetwoearlierwork . Therefore , m - cttationis a refntmship wbicb is established by the citing authors . In measuring co - citation strength , we measure the degree of relationship or as # cintion between papem as percmved by tbe population of citing authom Futthetmore , & - cnuce of this dependence cm the citing authors , the - m pntterns can cbangc over time , just as vocabulary co - occurrenc - cm change as sub ] ect fiefds evolve Blblio - graph ! r muphng , on the otbcr hand , is a fixed and per - manent relahonship because It depends o ? references contained in tbe mup ) ed documents Co - citatmn pat - terns change as the interests and intellectual pntterna of the field change . When IWO papem me frequently co - cited , they are mlm newa = sardy frequently cited individually as wefl . If It can he aesumed that frequently cited papem repw sent the key conceptn , metbo & or experiments in c . field ( 7 ) , then co - cnation patternn can he used to map out in great detail the reketionships between these key ideas This may lead to a more objectwe way of mtiefbng the intellectual stmcturc of . wiemtbic speciaf - ticn . Cbangm in the co - citntkm @ @ ns , when viewed over a period of years , ma . v prov ] de cluca to under . standing tbe mechanmn of spedty development . l Example of CQC5tetbm An illustratmn of A cc - c ! t ~ tmn pattern wh , ch exwts m tbe scientific literature ! s 6hown m F ~ re 1 , Escb box in the network diagram repre + enta a cited IMper in a sfmmtty Of part ! cle pbysms wblcb might he roughly described as : ‘Theories of broken ch ] ml symmetry and current afgebrw “ ( The fuU blbfmgraphic citatmn for each of the artmlea in the network is gwen in Table 1 ) Tbe number of undirected Imes whlcb coonect the papers reflects , acccmdmg to tbe cede shown , the strength of co . cltatmn coupling Tbe two strongest hnkages arc & tw & n Imvelace ‘S8 and Venenano ‘IS , and between ( kfl - , kfann ‘W and Glashow ‘6S The network was drawn from data gwen in Table 2 , omitting cc - cuattan hnknges wh ] ch fall below tbe ! bresbold of seven . Tbe procedure known m “cychng” wan used m ident n . fymg the pawrs ( 8 ) . Tbe highly cKed paper by GeU - , Mann ( 19 $ S ) was used as a starting point . AU tbe papem wbwb cw ? d C , eU - Mann ‘5S m the first quarter 1971 SCf wme mxmmed All cttatlons for tbe papers in tbe h ] bfiog . raphies of tbc cmng papers were then located m the quarterly Xl . If any of tbe ] tems wan c ] ted ten or more TAWS 1 . Papeta 10 tbe network RJmKCK , J D . “ApPfIutIor @ of the Chwal U ( 6 ) @ U ( 6 ) Algebra of Current Denmtms , ” Phw I / e . MS : 1467 ‘M Gm . IoaowI ~ S . and D A , G - N TJleetn’e LqpanguM md Field Almbrna w ] th Chirnl Symmetry . ” Rev Mod PhV641 : 5S1 W CEL & M . ? JR , M . , % 3ymmetrwa of BUYOIM l uf MemMT Phv * Rev 125 . 1067 ‘6a GEU - MASN , M . , “’The Symme ! w Group of Vector sod Axml Vector Currents , ” Phvatc . 1 : 6S ’64 GKU . - MAZ + N , M , R J OAKSEmud B . Rsxxu , % ehsvtor of Curmn $ Dmerg . ncea under sL’ , xSUk Phus Re” 175 : Ztw UL7 GIASIIOW , S L . l nd S . WmNDERO , , Breaking Chwal Sym - metry ; Phw Re . IAt W : 224 ‘6s LovEI . Acz , C , ‘A Sovel Appbcation of Regge Trajectories , ” Phv . Mter . B z8B . 26656 VUJE21 . NO , G , , COnatmctiOn of a CrOssmg - Blmmetnc . Regge - ltehtwd Amphtude for Lmmrly Rising Tm - FtOrH , ” h’ . ot . o Cime . to 57 IW ‘8S WEISB * O , s ‘PmrI Scatterm4 Lmgths , ” Phv . Rcu Ml 17 : 616 ‘M WIuos , K G , ‘ , Xon - Lagrmgmn Moth + of CmrerIt Alge - bm ; Phut Rev 179 14W 84 Reprinted from Journal of the American Society for Information Science July - August 1973 Vol . 24 , No . 4 28 FlOvBsl G - citation Netwwk f - Frequently Cited Pspem in particle 3 % MM ( Khh from the 1 ? 71 SCM ) LOvelnce C Vfnesimo G Pbyn L . ettem B Nuovo Cunmto 38B ~ 8s 57 lm % s Gell - hkrm M I / Ghbow s Phy # kV , Pbys Rev Ml 1752195 W mmts / / , \ , / —————— Wm n K9y , WMOrJOUmd“01M yr times it became part of the cluster of key papas to be studied , Co4tation refationsh @ among all items in the cluster were determined in the manner describd earliir . The resulting network of ten papers m shown in FWre 1 . It should be emphasized that while these ten pnpers may not represent afI the frequmtly cited psp . mn in this Specirdty , they probably constitute the “mm” of that literature . How can we explain the strength of these co - citation hnkages ? In some cases , we are denliig with relstion - eA @ which are strongly recognized by physicists in this sw ~ lty . For example , 60 autbora of papers in 197I cited both Gell - Marm ’68 and Glashow ‘6S . Whenwe exanunethe Gell - hfann ‘6S paper , we hd that GeU - Mann not only directly cites the Gfashow pper , he also discusses Its hii sti ] larity to hw own work : “Many nutbors have taken step in the same dkction , and in part iculnr we should mention tbe work of Glasbow and Weinberg as bebg the moat cJo . sely related to mm” ( 9 ) ( Author’s ndics ) . Furthermore , thesepapers dwplay a strong bibliographic coupliig , citing five common prevl - oua papers . Based on thw example , one might he tempted to hypothesize that co - citation , hke blhl ~ mphic mu - pling , measurea subject sidarity . However , tbe we agreement between bibkiimpfic coupfii and m - citi - tion strength was wt ofxervd in other cases . Table 2 dkplap the a - of any dear relationsMp between bbliimphw coupfing strength l nd co - citation Scale : b - citation q 1 - 4 not shown 7 - 12 1 13 - 34 2 33 - 4s 3 49andup 4 frequency . Tbw is qmialky evident in the case of Love - Iace ‘1 ? and Veneziano ‘6s , the strongrst co - dation linkages on tbe dimgram , These Ppem had a bI ~ g ? aphc coupling strength of only One . Once again , m rmding of tbe Levelace paper reveals why it came to be m clcsely - iated with the Venezis . no paper , and , further , wby it was lied to tbe Gelk - Mann work . In the first p ~ rapb of h ~ pnper f . ovelace stated : “R . ? - cently Venexiano gave a simple formufa which exbibka the Regge pole . resonance duality . We show here how thin new development in Regge theory can be applied in a rather unexpected dmection , There is also reason , fmm at least seven pnrallel predktiona , ta Miive [ the Veneziano formuh ] connected with cbird symmetry . ” ( 10 ) Lovelace has applied the Venesiano fommfa in a new way wbicb succed in establishing a Iiik with tbe GelI - Mann work on cbiml symmetry . Thus , two papers which were timngly linked by co - citation were only weakly tied by bibliography coupling , all bough they were clearly related m content , Of the 36 pmsible couplings among tbe 9 papers im Table 2 , there are S instances of high m - citation between papem ( SIX or more times ) in which there wan no biblm - graphm muplmg at all . In 11 cases of very strong co - station ( M or more ) , eight bad blbliogmphic couplii atrengthn of either one or zem ( four bad couplii of one , and four had zero ) . Tk . e ramlts sugge ? . t tfmt bio - graphic coupling is a k reliable indication of subject 29 sg ~ ~ 3 . - ] jjj $ ; : 1 ~ j ~ i 3 i io E Bwrkca’88 1 9 7 tz 6 2 z z 11 m - citation 6 0 1 a 1 0 0 z 4 b ) bl coupbng m yY2 yea w no no W no yea dmect cttat , on G & mmrica W 6 9 11 10 1 1 9 1 9 z b 8 3 0 e 17 yea yea Y Y no no yea no Cell - Mmn 82 19 : 1 : 3 0 8 7 4 0 1 0 0 3 1 Yea Y no no no no Ym & ll - Msnn w ; 15 4 0 9 6 0 0 0 0 1 1 Yea Yw no no W4 00 fkll - Mann w Z41 7 7 19 18 s o 0 1 4 Yea no no no ye8 - GItiow w 1 0 10 7 1 0 z o no no ml “m t9veb . cc w 48 21 1 1 1 4 Yes Ym no Vmexiano 8S 17 1 0 0 M no WeuAera ’88 0 1 no . — simiinty than m - citation , although co - citation may , in addition , reflect “semantic” relatti among cited papers , - 0 ~ tO * * metf m patterm of co - Occur - reoce . Bibfiographlc muplii has bn used to assemble groupe of papers on perticufnr subjects ( J t ) , Ce - eitatlon mold nfm he used to form th - group after the fmpem have been cited , but the present dbta mggeat that the results of th = two 8muping pmcedum would dtier quite sgnihntfy . . 4 much better prechctor of strong co - citation Imkagm bet ween pa ~ m M provided by the direct cltatmn pat - terns , that m , the citing of one @ per by l other . Figure 1 shows that the strowest co - citation linb am between pnpem connmted by direct citation . Of the 11 ass of strong = itaticm ( 15 or more ) , eight me dmect cmmon eonnectiona . In faot , afl case - a of direct citatwn we represented by co - citation strengths of al least 5 , and many me much biiher . The avemge * citation fre quemcy for papero commted by direct citation was 17 . 8 , wbiie the avemge for Ppers not connected by direct citation was 4 . 9 0 n the other hand , there are mne x of co - citmon streogth of 6 or more which are not con - nected by direct citation . Tlms , direct citation does not predict SU 6tr0ng co - citat m Iin & e5 between papers m a field , althoogb it more c ! aoely ptmffefs such linkage than dcxe b ] blimgraph ] c coupbng l Com4usi011s It apepars that an mterpretataon of the sq @ cance of strong co - rotation links mwt rely both m the notion of subywt similarity and on the a & socmtmn or co - occurrence of ideas We have established , at any rite , that tb ! a measure m many cases reflects the ex % tence of dmct ckation links and correapon & to ugnithnt intellectual mnnectiom within tbe field Two appbcatiorw , in mfor - matjon retrietal are onmediately nppare : , t A secondary index based cm highly cc - cited pa ~ m would aUow srs + enttal senrcb ~ tbrougb a citation index , retrieving a bst of new documents at each co - mted entry point , Smond , co - citation could be used to entabbshed a cluster or “mm” of enrbcr bterature for a pnrmufar specudty Thk ‘core” could serve M a “profile” for that specmlty and , thus , the brms of an SDI system . Another area for the application of cc - citation w in the study of the specialty structure of science ( 1s ) . The pttem of finkeges amoog key papers estabbhca s stmcture m map for the apwiahy wh ] ch may then be obserwd to change throogh time . Through the study of tb - changing structure , m - citation provides a tool for monitormg the deve ! epment of saenufic fields , and for assmsmg tbe degree of interrelate ionship among spemltiu 30 l Arhowk $ s @ azM I would like to thank Professor Befver GriWI of Drexef Uoiveraity and Dm . Eugene Gu6efd and Morton Mafin , Institute for Bcbti6c Inf0rm6ti0n , for di9cu5i0m and valuable suggestions . Referen ~ 1 . Km . MQ , M . M . , “Bibfiogrnphic Coupling Between & i - entik Pspa % ” . Americun Lkmmaenta4 + 14 ( No . 1 ) : 10 - 25 ( KIB3 ) 2 GWmLO , E . , , ’CKatmn Indexen for Smrmce , ” Saen . e , In . Rl % lll [ 1 ? 55 ) 3 s . * Lmx G , , Amocut , \ , Document Retrwval Tech . mq”es “sing B ! bltogmphw Information , ” Journal of the AC’M , 10 ( So 4 ) : 44 & 457 ( 1963 ) 4 PUCE , X and S . Scm ~ JSovJcII , 3A Clustering ExperI . ment Fwsl Step Towards a Computf . r - Genemted Clas . mficatton Scheme , ” ! njormotion Slorqw and Re . tn ? lnf , 4 : ~ ~ - ~ [ ~ ~ ) 5 . . % cwxe , M E . , V . E G1l’U . t & O nnd ~ . B . Hm . rcm , Eda St . tt ; ltcal Aswcwtwt , , Mcthoda jor Mccha . tztd Docu , , $ C , IIITIKW ( Xational Bureau of Standard * Mts - cell . wwous Publmauon . 269 , lw ) 0 . W’e ran tibo gwe a more formal dehntt ton of co - am . t ) on m terms of set ! heory notatjon If A IS lhe set O ( papers wh ] ch c , tes document u amd B M the set whdi mtes b , then AnB w the @ t wh , ch cite Wh . and b The number cd element . m A n B , that M 7 . s 9 . 10 11 12 n ( An B ) . IS the co - citatkon frequency The mfatme co + tatmn frequency could be defined M n ( A n B ) ~ n ( Au B ) . G . ummm . E . , Cttatmn Indcxmg , HWono - B # hlmgraphy and the SOCIOIOWof Science , ” Pmcccdmga o ) ( hc Third Intertm ( wnol Conpwu 01 Medual l . dranu . - ahtp , Arnaterdm , S9 May 19S9 , ( fix & YF . 1 . bfedlca 1970 ) pp . 1s7 - 204 C . WKCU , A . E , < search Stmwgtes using the Saenw C ] tatmn Index , ” m Computer B - cd In formakm Re - 11’ICVQ1S @ cm8 , B . Hougtm , Ed . ( Lmdon , 1 % S ) PP 2744 GEWM . SS , M , R J . OAKM and B RExxm , , , B + - hm mr of Current Dtvergencses under SfL x StiI , ” The Phymcd ffctww , 175 ( SO . 5 ) 2196 - 2199 ( 1 % S ) . LOVEIACE , C , A Xovel Applwatmn of Regge TmIec - ( ones . ” Phwtc . ! kf ( ers , 2sB ( so . 4 ) . 264 - 26S { 196S ) % ilMIXOWCH , S ‘3A”tomattc CfaswficstmrI and Re - trmal of D @ umenta by Means of a Btblmgmphtc Pattern Recognmon Ducc . vwy Algorithm , ” In / cvmn . tm , b slorap . and R < fncwd , 6 41743S ( 1971 ) . Programs me currently bang developed for auto - m . ucally determmmg co + tauon and “S”S these d . ta as input 10 “ cluster gencmtmg pw + . ram The resadls of some prebmma ~ cxpemne”l , using thti $ system m . xnmmt . sm - nt tfic spetmlt , . s wdl lx reported m n forthmnnm ~ paper 31