Bridging the Information Gap : Collaborative Technology Design with Low - Income At - Risk Families to Engender Healthy Behaviors Katie A . Siek and Jeffrey S . LaMarche Wellness Innovation and Interaction Lab University of Colorado at Boulder 430 UCB Boulder , CO 80309 - 0430 USA { ksiek , Jeffrey . LaMarche } @ colorado . edu Julie Maitland People - Centered Technologies Group National Research Council Canada 46 Dineen Drive Fredericton NB E3B 2R4 julie . maitland @ nrc - cnrc . gc . ca ABSTRACT The leading cause of death in the United States is cardiovas - cular disease . Formative studies have shown that technolog - ical interventions may help effect lifestyle changes , however there has been minimal research to ascertain appropriate interventions for at risk , low - income populations . We con - ducted two participatory - based design workshops with nine caregivers and thirteen children to help determine suitable interventions for an at - risk low socioeconomic population . The major themes that emerged from the workshop for caregivers were their need for assistive systems that would help with everything from parenting to budgeting time and resources . Researchers in human computer interaction would beneﬁt from our ﬁndings by developing a holistic sense of barriers encountered by low - income families to im - prove their health . We conclude the paper with a discussion of design implications . Author Keywords wellness informatics , underserved , low - income caregivers , health behaviors , community - based participatory design , design workshops ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 5 . m Information Interfaces and Presentation : Miscella - neous . INTRODUCTION Chronic diseases ( CD ) are the leading causes of death and disability in the world ( National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion , 2008 ) . The most prevalent cases of CD occur in communities of low socioe - conomic status and in developing countries ( Albright et al . , 2005 ; Barton et al . , 2006 ) where they all share common risk factors ; namely unhealthy diets , lack of physical activity , c (cid:13) ACM , ( 2009 ) . This is the authors version of the work . It is posted here by permission of ACM for your personal use . Not for redistribution . The deﬁnitive version was published in OZCHI 2009 , VOL No . , ISS No . , 23 - 27 November 2009 http : / / doi . acm . org / 10 . 1145 / nnnnnn . nnnnnn and tobacco usage . Cardiovascular disease is the most prevalent chronic disease worldwide ( Yach et al . , 2004 ) . Many novel health promotion websites and technologies are emerging from the academic ( Mamykina et al . , 2006 ; Sevick et al . , 2005 ; Tsai et al . , 2006 ) , government ( Holden , 2009 ) , and commercial sectors ( dietmatepro . com , myfood - phone . com , calorieking . com ) , however the effectiveness of these interventions is limited for low - income communities because they have been designed with little consideration for the social and environmental context of health behaviors . With the exceptions of work by Campbell et al . ( 1999 ) and Grimes et al . ( 2008 ) , the design community does not have enough information about the needs of low - income communities to design effective interventions for health behavioral change . As a ﬁrst step towards designing health promotion tech - nology for a low socioeconomic community , we conducted focus groups and interviews with low - income caregivers at risk for cardiovascular disease . We found that the caregivers wanted to change their family’s dietary habits , but lacked the ﬁnancial , strategic , and social resources needed to do so ( Maitland et al . , 2009 ) . The current research goes beyond what caregivers say they do , by ﬁnding what they think about health and how they think technology can help . Two participatory - based design ( Israel et al . , 1998 ) work - shops with nine caregivers and thirteen children from low - income families were conducted to determine dominant themes and thoughts about health and exercise . We initiated a collaborative relationship with the Bridge Project 1 , a trusted community resource in the Denver public housing neighborhoods , to aid in recruiting and building a sense of trust with this population . We were motivated to study the issues faced by this particular population because Barton et al . ( 2006 ) reported that 87 % of children in the Bridge Project community were already exposed to at least one modiﬁable cardiovascular disease risk factor by preschool age ; poor diet being the most prevalent . In this paper we report only on our ﬁndings from the caregiver component of the workshop . 1 http : / / www . du . edu / bridgeproject / 89 The workshops consisted of separate engaging activities for both caregivers and their children . The caregivers took part in a word association activity , a storyboard activity , and an activity where they augmented an object . From these activities it was learned that : • Mental health was a major concern for the caregivers . • Caregivers’ lifestyles were so hectic that it dictated their ability to provide healthy options to their family . • Reminder based systems were desired . The major theme that emerged from the workshop for caregivers was their need for assistive systems that would help with everything from parenting to budgeting time and resources . Additionally , caregivers wanted technology to be convenient and ﬁt into their busy lifestyles . THE STUDY Our methods were motivated by participatory design re - search ( Kano and Read , 2005 ) that showed valuable feed - back can be collected when caregivers and their children were treated as knowledge experts and treated as equals in the workshop . Additionally , a community - based re - search ( Israel et al . , 1998 ) approach was used because it is well suited for marginalized populations that typically have limited access to resources and technology . The approach gives participants a long - term voice in the design process with the hope of lessening some of the marginalizing factors present in the community . The Bridge Project Founded in 1991 , The Bridge Project is a community out - reach project located in Denver , Colorado . It consists of ﬁve centers situated within public housing neighborhoods in which families are often below the poverty level and belong to a minority group . Afﬁliated with the School of Social Work at the University of Denver , but funded by public and private donations , the project provides after - school and summer - school programs for children within the neighborhoods . Additionally , college and trade school scholarships are available to successful students as part of their Scholarship Program . The Bridge Project has helped 29 students ﬁnish college since 1993 . In the after - school programs , children between the ages of 3 and 18 attend their local center between 3pm and 8pm each weeknight , and have the opportunity to participate in various activities including a literacy program , homework help , outdoor leadership , and technology education . There are additionally courses for caregivers in the evening , but the primary focus of the project is the education of the neighborhoods’ children . Participants English speaking caregivers with at least one child under 8 years old and their children were recruited from the public housing community near two different Bridge Project locations for the design workshops . Caregivers from our previous research ( Maitland et al . , 2009 ) were contacted if they indicated an interest in continued participation and Bridge Project administrative staff assisted in the identiﬁ - cation and recruitment of additional participants . A total of nine caregivers and thirteen children were recruited for the study . All of the caregivers were women between the ages of 24 and 51 years old ( average age = 33 . 11 ; s . d . = 9 . 35 ) . For the children , there were two boys and 11 girls between the ages of 4 and 10 years old . The women were the primary caregivers for between one and four children ( average number = 2 . 33 ; s . d . = 0 . 87 ) that ranged in age from 10 months old to 14 years old . Eight of the women were single and one was married . The number of people in the participants’ social networks that helped them care for their children ranged from zero ( four participants reported no one helped ) to four ( average social network size = 1 ; s . d . = 1 . 32 ) . From a technological standpoint , one participant owned a computer ; however seven participants had access to a computer either in their home or at a community center . Four of the participants had at least one year of experience with computers . They felt the most competent with using email , surﬁng the Internet , and instant messaging . Six of the participants owned mobile phones and used their phones daily . Those who owned mobile phones , had at least four years of experience using their phone and felt competent using their phones for making and receiving calls , sending and receiving text messages , and taking pictures . Study Design Primary caregivers of a child under eight years old and their children were invited to take part in a design workshop . In this study a primary caregivers is deﬁned as a person responsible for the primary care and upbringing of at least one child . For the ﬁrst design workshop three mothers , one grandmother , six girls , and one boy participated . There were two researchers present to conduct this workshop . At the second workshop there were ﬁve mothers , ﬁve girls , and one boy that participated . Additionally there were ﬁve researchers present to conduct this workshop . The design workshop was divided into four parts : an ice breaker and three activities speciﬁc to adults or children . Before beginning any of the activities the design workshop was explained in detail to the caregivers and they were allowed to ask questions regarding the workshop . Consent was attained from all caregivers for allowing themselves and their children to take part in the workshop and to be video recorded or photographed . The ice breaker portion of the workshop was designed to build a sense of community and common purpose before beginning any of the activities . After the ice breaker activity the caregivers and children were split into groups of approximately equal size to work together for the remainder of the design workshop . Borrowing techniques from the Interactive Thread design method ( Mackay , 2004 ) , we developed a set of activities to elicit an understanding of their thoughts on diet and exercise through brainstorming , insight , and design . Ad - ditionally , the activities were selected to allow the partici - pants to be creative through play ( Dix , 2003 ) . The parent activities consisted of a word association task , scenario - building through storyboards , and creating an augmented object . Brainstorming is a useful tool to start people 90 USDA Category # of Items ( % total food items ) Example of Words Categorized Fruits 9 16 . 7 % fruits , cantaloupe , and oranges Vegetables 6 11 . 1 % veggies , carrots , squash , and broccoli Grains 5 9 . 3 % breads and tortillas Meats & Beans 8 14 . 8 % eggs , hamburgers , and pork chops Milk 6 11 . 1 % cheese , milk , and yogurt Oils 3 5 . 5 % greasy and fatty Discretionary Calories 0 0 % No foods seemed to ﬁt the USDA deﬁnition Fats and Sweets * 9 16 . 7 % chips , ice cream , cake , and fast food Table 1 . Overview of the number of words , percentage of total food items , and examples of words categorized by the USDA Food Pyramid . * We used the older Fats and Sweets categorization to categorize in place of Discretionary Calories . thinking about the topic area freely without the constraints of being limited by a directed / particular question or having to construct an argument . Storyboards enable researchers to gain insight into the lives and experiences of the individuals in a non - confrontational manner , allowing participants to project events and emotions rather than refer to them in the ﬁrst person . The augmented object allowed participants to identify how technology should contribute , from their own perspective . Before the augmented object activity , there was a 30 minute break where refreshments were provided . At the end of each activity there was a “show and tell” period where the caregivers and children would show everyone else what they had done and explain it to the group . At the end of the workshop the caregivers and children were thanked for their help and compensation was provided . The caregivers each received a $ 20 gift card at a store they frequent . The children each received their choice of a sports ball or jump rope . Additionally , caregivers were asked if they could be contacted again for future research studies . The video recordings were transcribed and analyzed by the research team using an inductive approach based on Grounded Theory . Our analysis was informed by the constant comparative method where we iteratively analyzed transcripts and materials from the workshop ( e . g . , aug - mented object pictures ) individually ( analyst triangulation ) for thematic content . We met as a team to discuss the themes and debate inconsistencies until we reached a consensus . FINDINGS Here we present the detailed ﬁndings from the word associ - ation , storyboarding , and augmented object activities . The key ﬁndings are : • Fats and sweets made up the largest percentage ( 22 . 2 % ) of food words listed by caregivers when thinking about family diet . • Depression and mental health words had a high occur - rence in general health related words ( 20 % ) . • Fast food is often a quick dinner and time ﬁx for care - givers ( storyboards ) . • Reminder based systems had the largest role for aug - mented objects ( 81 . 3 % ) . Word Association In total , four groups consisting of nine caregivers wrote down 166 words or phrases into three categories ( food , exercise , and health ) for the word association activity . Par - ticipants brainstormed words and debated with each other about which category was most appropriate for each word . The research team found that within the speciﬁc , participant - deﬁned categories , there were 65 food words , 46 exercise words , and 55 health words . The research team further clas - siﬁed the words within each category to establish possible patterns . For instance , in the food category the research team chose to use the United States Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) food pyramid to classify words based on nutritional value . In addition , the research team chose to classify words in the exercise category using the American College of Sports Medicine ( ACSM ) Physical Activity Guidelines to establish the intensity level of each activity . Food Words Of the 65 food related words written by the caregivers , three were most frequently listed : fruits , pizza , and milk . Each of these words was written down a total of three times each . From conversations with the caregivers , fruit was something that they wanted to provide to their children , but often could not afford . Pizza was a nearby cheap food option that could feed their entire family . Milk was generally mentioned in respect to the children - not something that caregivers necessarily needed . The USDA Food Pyramid was a natural method for classify - ing the food words based on nutritional value . The seven categories in the new USDA Food Pyramid , the number of food items classiﬁed in this activity , and examples of the words caregivers used are shown in Table 1 . The Discretionary Calories category did not have any words that seemed to ﬁt the USDA deﬁnition , therefore the older Fats and Sweets category was used alternatively . Even with the USDA classiﬁcation there were still some food items ( 14 . 8 % of food items mentioned ) difﬁcult to classify because they did not seem to ﬁt nicely into one category ( e . g . , coffee or prepared foods such as chili and pizza ) or they were not sufﬁciently deﬁned ( e . g . , salad ) . Exercise Words Once again the most proliﬁc words were determined and in this case walking and running were both written down 91 ( a ) ( b ) Figure 1 . ( a ) Storyboard from P1 & P2 ; ( b ) Storyboard from P3 & P4 all four times . Additionally , running was mentioned as an activity that helped one of the caregivers become less stressed . In further categorizing the 46 words we used the ACSM intensity levels . The ACSM intensity level classiﬁcation has three categories : moderate , vigorous , and muscle - strengthening . The re - search team categorized 16 words in the moderate inten - sity level - including sex , cleaning , play with kids , and yoga . The vigorous category had ten words in it , includ - ing running and swimming . There were seven words for muscle - strengthening , including weight lifting , push - ups , and crunches . Since the caregivers worked in groups during this activity , each item was peer reviewed and agreed upon by the group before it was written down . An example of this peer review process is when one participant wanted to write down standing as an exercise word . The other two group members quickly voted down standing because although she stood for twelve hours straight as a cashier , they did not consider it to be enough exertion to deﬁne as exercise . Health Words With health related words , there was one word with a large occurrence , depression , which occurred four times . As there were only four groups for the word association , this shows that depression is something that the caregivers deal with enough to warrant including in their lists . One interesting observation from the analysis of the health words was that mental health is important to the caregivers . Ad - ditionally , the negative connotation words ( e . g . , stressful and disabilities ) had prevalence at almost a two - to - one rate as either positive ( e . g . , no stress , weight control , and live longer ) or neutral words ( e . g . , normal check - ups and birth control ! ! [ sic ] ) listed , which indicate caregivers are more aware of the negative aspects of health than the positive . Storyboard From the ﬁrst workshop two storyboards were created that showed two unique aspects of the caregiver lives . Because of time constraints , no storyboards were created at the second workshop , however personal stories were obtained during a short break . The two storyboards had a highly negative theme and from interactions with the caregivers it was apparent that they viewed their personal stories in a negative manner . The storyboards and personal anecdotes are presented here from four caregivers ( P1 , P2 , P3 , and P4 ) . The ﬁrst storyboard , shown in Figure 1 . a , dealt with pres - sures in the caregivers’ busy daily lives . An activity that they occasionally succumb too involves quickly picking up fast food on the way home from work and letting the kids eat the food while watching television so the caregiver can have a few moments of peace to herself . Both caregivers ( P1 and P2 ) created this storyboard from their collective experiences . During the discussion of the storyboard the caregivers let us know that the fast food ﬁx is okay for the kids , but not okay for either of them because of gastrointestinal issues . P3 did not identify with this storyboard because she cannot afford fast food . P4 did identify with this storyboard and during the break revealed that she probably picks up fast food for a family meal 3 - 4 times a week . All of the caregivers from workshop 2 identiﬁed with this storyboard - one caregiver who worked for a fast food restaurant said it described her everyday life . The second storyboard , shown in Figure 1 . b , was created by two caregivers ( P3 and P4 ) , although it was clear that P3 primarily inﬂuenced the story . It depicts a woman smoking while making chili with her 6 year old grandson in the room . He loves her pork chili and she loves her pork chili , which is why she makes it so often . She also smokes outside while her grandson plays . The last frame of the storyboard is a gravestone with her name and the acronym RIP ( Rest In Peace ) . From the verbal description of the storyboard , this is a snapshot of P3’s life . This caregiver knows smoking will kill her , but she does not care and indicates no desire to change her habits . P4 supports her decision to continue smoking because we will all die at some point and even though smoking makes it faster , so does obesity ( something that P4 struggles with ) . 92 ( a ) ( b ) Figure 2 . Examples of augmented objects that provide logging and coordination functionality : ( a ) an augmented phone that monitors diet and exercise and ( b ) an augmented cube that assisted with meal planning and monitored the family’s activities . Augmented Objects Caregivers were given four pre - made objects that they could augment : a cell phone , a computer , a portable video game system , and a blank 3D cube . The ﬁrst three items are common Information Communication Technology ( ICT ) that are available to the target population based on our previous work ( Maitland et al . , 2009 ) . The research team added the cube object to encourage participants to think outside of common ICT in their lives . In addition , they were given a blank piece of paper to create their own object if they wanted . From the augmented object activity there were 19 pictures turned in , however only 16 of the pictures were analyzed . The remaining three pictures only had notes from the participants that they did not own or know how to use the device , thus the object was not augmented . Of the sixteen objects that were analyzed , ﬁve were augmented computers , ﬁve were augmented cell phones , three were augmented portable video game systems , and one was a participant creation using a makeup compact as the basis . The major themes abstracted from the augmented objects were devices to assist users with reminders , health and wellness , and organizing their life . Reminders Reminders had the largest role in the augmented devices designed by the caregivers . Reminders were used to tell a user to drink more water , avoid fast food , and get out of the house and exercise . An example of this is in Figure 2 . b where the omniscient cube would send reminders to family members’ mobile phones if they had not exercised that day . Additionally , there were reminders that used “scare tactics” to deter behavior , such as a fat picture of a user would sporadically appear on a device screen , as shown in Figure 2 . a , as a reminder not to eat unhealthy foods and to exercise . Some reminder based systems were insulting as well ; in one instance a computer would display a message with the words , “I don’t want to look at you anymore ! ” It is questionable how effective scare tactic or insulting reminders would be en mass , but two caregivers fervently thought this method would be effective . Health and Wellness Augmented objects to improve health and wellness were the second most pervasive theme . Six of the devices helped the caregivers be healthier overall by encouraging them to take care of themselves with reminders and providing logging functionality for exercise and nutrition data . An example of an augmented cell phone , shown in Figure 2 . a , included a pedometer to track step counts towards a daily goal . Of the 16 augmented objects , three of them were focused on helping children lead healthier lives . All child - oriented augmented objects used the portable video game system design as shown in Figure 3 . b . The remaining 13 objects were more caregiver focused , however children could beneﬁt indirectly or use them in some instances depending on the child’s abilities . Perhaps the most surprising augmented object related to health was a custom created object - an augmented makeup compact shown in Figure 3 . a . The augmented compact would display messages on the mirror to the caregiver related to living healthier . The caregiver who created this device said that she made this because the only time she thought about herself and her own wellness was when she had a minute to put on makeup . Two of the other caregivers in the group agreed with the participant’s assessment of personal time . Organization Another important theme was organization , of which there were ﬁve objects . There were three sub - categories within the organization theme : diet , childcare , and time coordination , shown in Figure 2 . b . Three diet diary - like objects were created , that helped keep track of daily calorie content or food eaten for a day . Two of these devices were caregiver focused , while one was clearly targeted at children 93 ( a ) ( b ) Figure 3 . Examples of augmented objects that can detect if the user needs something : ( a ) an augmented makeup compact reminding the user to drink water and ( b ) an augmented gaming system reminding the user to drink milk . as it was on a portable video game system , as shown in Figure 3 . b . The two childcare coordination objects acted like a “virtual nanny” that assisted caregivers and their family with managing their busy lives in various ways . The object in Figure 2 . b limited the amount of television that a person could watch , helped plan out the daily meals , provided an exercise schedule , and provided a method to contact family members remotely . RELATION TO CURRENT LITERATURE During the word association exercise with caregivers , the food pyramid was only listed once , thus it may not be a high priority in caregivers minds or the message behind the food pyramid , as a visual indication of how to structure a healthy diet , may not be reaching this population . This ﬁnding is in stark contrast to previous ﬁndings with this population where when asked about dietary health , 11 of 17 participants mentioned the food pyramid or healthy eating metrics to ensure a healthy diet for their family ( Maitland et al . , 2009 ) . In both studies , caregivers were asked to deﬁne health through discussion or group activity . Half of the caregivers participated in both studies - thus it is surprising that what participants thought through these reﬂection activities was different from what they told us in the interviews . Increasing the visibility of nutritional guidelines alone is a very info - centric approach that we do not advocate in the previous paper . Rather than being given nutritional guidelines , we should provide users meaningful and actionable advice . Although the participants talked about dietary metrics , they were not referred to when reﬂecting on their own families’ health . The design community in health informatics must think about ways to integrate dietary metrics into assistive dietary programs that resonate with the everyday practices of the target population . Another interesting ﬁnding from the word association ac - tivity is that depression was mentioned in all groups , but was not brought up during previous interviews with care - givers ( Maitland et al . , 2009 ) . This ﬁnding is in line with researchers who found low - income mothers are more likely to suffer depression ( Belle , 2003 ; Bassuk et al . , 1998 ; Belle , 1982 ) . More investigation is needed to understand the sources of depression in low - income caregivers before we can identify if assistive applications can help them . The storyboard activity provides researchers with a glimpse of the caregivers’ lives . For two of the caregivers , they presented a busy schedule that provided little time for self re - ﬂection or family planning for healthy lifestyles . If assistive technology is going to be appropriated and accepted by this population , it must ﬁt into their busy schedules . Designers are encouraged to look into pervasive technologies that caregivers could use on - the - go and modularized tasks that they could quickly complete and get valuable feedback for continued encouraged use . In addition , persuasive technologies that help caregivers easily complete their tasks with enhanced social support could be valuable to the target population ( Fogg , 2003 ) - depending on the task . We have argued that persuasive technology aimed at helping moti - vated caregivers to change their nutritional health behavior may not be helpful because they already want to change - they just lack the resources and knowledge necessary to change ( Maitland et al . , 2009 ) . Another lesson learned from the storyboarding activity is that some people do not want to change ( e . g . , P3 smoking and cooking chili ) and no type of intervention will help them change . In the future , we will use the Transtheoretical Model of Change ( Prochaska and Velicer , 1997 ) to evaluate how interested participants are in improving the health of their family . Although the focus of our study was on the family and caregiver as a provider , the caregivers discussed how con - trolling what their children consume is difﬁcult because they have no control over what the children eat at school . Indeed , the caregivers shared that most of the children ate two meals a day at school ﬁve days a week . These feelings of lack of control in their children’s decisions and activities were also reﬂected in the augmented objects where care - givers created 5 objects to help monitor children’s activities . Further research in the design of assistive technologies for 94 dependents to make better health and wellness decisions is needed . In addition , more research is needed to investigate how dependents and caregivers want to share information within the family . Since our broader research is focusing on families with younger children , we will continue to work on technology to improve the caregiver and family’s wellness since the food choices of children are heavily inﬂuenced by their caregiver’s food choices and eating behaviors ( Temple et al . ; Whitaker et al . , 1997 ) . The augmented object activity for caregivers was difﬁcult to conduct because caregivers either did not have access to the technology or did not fully understand what was possible with technology and sometimes defaulted to what they have seen in their current environment . Researchers can provide low socioeconomic , underserved communities with services to aid in monitoring and maintaining their health by utilizing existing network infrastructures and ICT that the target population already has access to . In 2005 , only 36 % of low socioeconomic households had access to a personal computer and 27 % had Internet access . However , 65 % of low socioeconomic households had cable television and 50 % had mobile phone plans - these numbers are lower than what we found in the population we worked with in this paper , but it indicates the pervasiveness of these cellular and cable communication mediums . Indeed , mobile phone usage increased 27 % in low socioeconomic populations in four years ( http : / / www . eia . doe . gov / emeu / recs / ) ! Low socioeconomic communities can access the Internet and associated web services by using digital cable set top boxes as a two - way gateway to the Internet . In the United States , this will be possible when all full - powered television stations switch to 100 % digital broadcasting . New digital cable set top boxes are equipped to connect with ICT via short range radio links ( e . g . , Bluetooth ) or physical cables ( e . g . , gaming consoles , digital cameras ) , thus providing researchers with ample input and output options to develop appropriate assistive applications for this population . Of the 16 augmented objects , three of them were focused on helping children lead healthier lives . All child - oriented augmented objects used the portable video game system design . Although games for health have been widely re - searched from Dance Dance Revolution ( Hoysniemi , 2006 ) , to Wii ( Graves et al . , 2007 ) , to biathlon ( Nenonen et al . , 2007 ) and shadow boxing ( Masuko and Hoshino , 2006 ; Mueller et al . , 2008 ) , researchers have not investigated how child activities in the physical world ( e . g . , drink your milk or do your chores ) can beneﬁt them in their virtual game world . Games that integrate real world activities with gaming could increase physical activity and encourage better health decisions by children . Caregivers typically designed mobile phone and computer applications to encourage them to be healthier overall with reminders and logging functionality for exercise and nutri - tion data . An example of an augmented cell phone , shown in Figure 2 . a , included a pedometer to track step counts towards a daily goal . The keypad input mechanisms for the physical activity and dietary tracking was similar to what researchers have already evaluated ( Consolvo et al . , 2008 ; Toscos et al . , 2008 ; Tsai et al . , 2006 ) . When asked about alternative methods for tracking such as taking pictures of meals ( myfoodphone . com ) or sensors communicating step counts ( Anderson et al . , 2007 ) , caregivers were hesitant because of data transmission costs of sending pictures and trusting technology to do something for them through sen - sors . Overall , the caregivers wanted to remain in control of their information appliances and be active participants in logging their information . However , these design workshop activities did not relay the input intensive nature of logging applications that some researchers have found ( Siek et al . , 2009 ) , thus more research is needed to see how much input caregivers would be willing to do in their small periods of personal time . Although only one participant designed her own augmented object , a make - up compact that could sense if she needed to take better care of herself , the other study participants agreed with her when she said she had very little time to think about her own health . Her family’s health is always the priority and , more speciﬁcally , her children’s health . Since caregivers are the ’gatekeepers’ to family and community health ( Anderson et al . , 2007 ) , true health change must start with the caregivers . Thus , designing technology to en - courage caregivers to take care of themselves in the small periods of time they have for self - reﬂection is imperative before any larger changes can take place . We acknowledge that technology cannot help with all of the barriers low - income families experience when trying to adopt a healthy lifestyle . However , the technology that the caregivers currently possess ( e . g . , mobile phones and cable set top boxes ) could be utilized to provide personal - ized and appropriate information that could help improve their families’ health and wellness at no extra cost . We also acknowledge that this study is relatively small with nine caregivers and thirteen children , however the insights provided by these workshops have veriﬁed current research ﬁndings and extend the work by providing insights into how technologies need to ﬁt into families’ lives . We would be willing to share our protocol for researchers to use in other low - income communities . FUTURE WORK The previous work in our research group helped explore and determine what caregivers say about their views on health and exercise issues . The work presented in this paper shows what caregivers and their children think about these same issues through creative exercises , however it is not known whether caregivers actually follow what they say or think . We will study what caregivers actually do in their daily lives by conducting photo elicitation interviews ( Harper , 2002 ) . Ten caregivers from the Bridge Project population will be recruited to participate in the interview . Over a one week period the caregivers will be given a camera and asked to take pictures that remind them about health and wellness . Cameras will be collected during the second week and pictures will then be printed or developed . During the third and ﬁnal week the caregivers will be asked to explain what 95 meaning the photos have for them . The additional data from this study will help inform the designs for technologies that can ﬁt into the lives and help low socioeconomic minority families lead healthier lifestyles . CONCLUSION From our design workshops , we discovered that caregivers enthusiastically wanted reminder based systems to help them with their lives , from reminding them to drink more water to stop using the computer and going for a walk . Some of these reminder based systems were insulting , while most would sporadically provide messages to the users . Caregivers relied heavily at times on fast food to cheaply feed their families . Fast food also provided a quick and easy meal so that the caregiver could rest while the children ate and watched television . It was also discovered that caregivers think of fatty and sweet items more when thinking of food words and are more likely to participate in moderate intensity exercises . Lastly , depression was a major concern for the caregivers , which was surprising considering it was not a topic that was talked about during earlier interview studies . When developing health promotion technologies for low so - cioeconomic caregivers , the ﬁndings in our research provide useful insight into the needs and desires of the population . The results should be used as a foundation for designing assistive technologies . We encourage the design community to integrate dietary metrics into applications to help families reﬂect on how to improve their diets . In addition , we believe that caregivers are the ’gatekeepers’ to family health and hope that the interaction community can design assistive technologies that ﬁt into the busy lives of low - income caregivers . Assistive technology cannot help low - income families overcome all of the barriers they meet in transi - tioning to healthier lifestyles , but we believe systems can be designed to educate and promote good health and wellness practices by using existing ICT available to caregivers . ACKNOWLEDGEMENT We would like to thank the participants and staff from The Bridge Project . In addition , we thank Emanuela Mazzone and Janet Read for their advice on workshop design . This material is based upon work supported by the National Sci - ence Foundation under Grant No . 0846024 , the Engineering New Professor Award in the College of Engineering and Applied Science at the University of Colorado at Boulder , and the University of Glasgow’s Ken Browning Travel Scholarship . References Albright , C . , et al . Modifying physical activity in a multiethnic sample of low - income women : One - year results from the impact ( increasing motivation for physical activity ) project . Annals of Behavioral Medicine , 30 ( 3 ) : 191 – 200 , December 2005 . Anderson , I . , et al . Shakra : Tracking and sharing daily activity levels with unaugmented mobile phones . Mobile Networks and Applications , 12 ( 2 ) : 185 – 199 , June 2007 . Barton , A . J . , et al . Cardiovascular risk in hispanic and non - hispanic preschoolers . Nursing research , 55 ( 3 ) : 172 – 179 , 2006 . Bassuk , E . L . , et al . Prevalence of mental health and substance use disorders among homeless and low - income housed mothers . Am J Psychiatry , 155 : 1561 – 1564 , November 1998 . Belle , D . Lives in Stress : Women and Depression ( SAGE Focus Editions ) . Sage Publications , Inc , January 1982 . ISBN 0803917694 . Belle , D . Poverty , inequality , and discrimination as sources of depression among u . s . women . Psychology of Women Quarterly , pages 101 – 113 , June 2003 . Campbell , M . K . , et al . A tailored multimedia nutrition education pilot program for low - income women receiving food assistance . Health Educ . Res . , 14 ( 2 ) : 257 – 267 , 1999 . Consolvo , S . , et al . Activity sensing in the wild : a ﬁeld trial of ubiﬁt garden . In CHI ’08 : Proceeding of the twenty - sixth annual SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , pages 1797 – 1806 , New York , NY , USA , 2008 . ACM . Dix , A . Being playful : learning from children . In IDC ’03 : Proceedings of the 2003 conference on Interaction design and children , pages 3 – 9 , New York , NY , USA , 2003 . ACM . Fogg , B . J . Persuasive technology : using computers to change what we think and do . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers , 2003 . Graves , J . , et al . Comparison of energy expenditure in adolescents when playing new generation and sedentary computer games : cross sectional study . BMJ , 335 ( 7633 ) : 1282 – 1284 , December 2007 . Grimes , A . , et al . Eatwell : sharing nutrition - related memories in a low - income community . In CSCW ’08 : Proceedings of the ACM 2008 conference on Computer supported cooperative work , pages 87 – 96 , New York , NY , USA , 2008 . ACM . Harper , D . Talking about pictures : a case for photo elicitation . Visual Studies , 17 ( 1 ) : 13 – 26 , April 2002 . Holden , J . United states department of agriculture nutrient data . http : / / www . ars . usda . gov / nutrientdata , August 2009 . Hoysniemi , J . International survey on the dance dance revolution game . Comput . Entertain . , 4 ( 2 ) : 8 , 2006 . Israel , B . A . , et al . Review of community - based research : Assessing partnership approaches to improve public health . Annual Review of Public Health , 19 ( 1 ) : 173 – 202 , 1998 . Kano , A . and Read , J . C . Doing girly stuff in semi structured design activities - and the point is ? In Workshop on Child Computer Interaction : Methodological Research at Interact 2005 , Rome , Italy , 2005 . Mackay , W . E . The interactive thread : exploring methods for multi - disciplinary design . In DIS ’04 : Proceedings of the 5th conference on Designing interactive systems , pages 103 – 112 , New York , NY , USA , 2004 . ACM . Maitland , J . , Siek , K . A . , and Chalmers , M . Persuasion not required : Obstacles faced by low - income caregiers to improve dietary behaviour . In Pervasive Healthcare 2009 : Proceedings of the 3rd International ICST Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare 2009 , 2009 . Mamykina , L . , Mynatt , E . D . , and Kaufman , D . R . Investigating health management practices of individuals with diabetes . In CHI ’06 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing systems , pages 927 – 936 , New York , NY , USA , 2006 . ACM Press . Masuko , S . and Hoshino , J . A ﬁtness game reﬂecting heart rate . In ACE ’06 : Proceedings of the 2006 ACM SIGCHI international conference on Advances in computer entertainment technology , New York , NY , USA , 2006 . ACM Press . Mueller , F . F . , et al . Remote impact : shadowboxing over a distance . In CHI ’08 : CHI ’08 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems , pages 2291 – 2296 , New York , NY , USA , 2008 . ACM . National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion . Chronic disease prevention . http : / / www . cdc . gov / nccdphp / index . htm , June 2008 . Accessed : 14 July 2008 . Nenonen , V . , Lindblad , A . , H¨akkinen , V . , Laitinen , T . , Jouhtio , M . , andH¨am¨al¨ainen , P . Using heart rate to control an interactive game . In CHI ’07 : Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , pages 853 – 856 , New York , NY , USA , 2007 . ACM . Prochaska , J . O . , and Velicer , W . F . The transtheoretical model of health behavior change . Am J Health Promot , 12 ( 1 ) : 38 – 48 , 1997 . Sevick , M . A . , et al . A preliminary study of PDA - based dietary self - monitoring in hemodialysis patients . J Ren Nutr , 15 ( 3 ) : 304 – 311 , July 2005 . Siek , K . A . , et al . Evaluation of two mobile nutrition tracking applications for chronically ill populations with low literacy skills . In J . Tan and P . Olla , editors , Mobile Health Solutions for Biomedical Applications . IGI Global , 2009 . Temple , J . L . , et al . Relationship between sex of parent and child on weight loss and maintenance in a family - based obesity treatment program . International Journal of Obesity , aop ( current ) . Toscos , T . , et al . Encouraging physical activity in teens : Can technology help reduce barriers to physical activity in adolescent girls ? In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare ( Pervasive Healthcare ) , pages 218 – 221 , 2008 . Tsai , C . C . , et al . Usability and feasibility of PmEB : A mobile phone application for monitoring real time caloric balance . In Pervasive Health Conference and Workshops , 2006 , pages 1 – 10 , 2006 . Whitaker , R . C . , et al . Predicting obesity in young adulthood from childhood and parental obesity . N Engl J Med , 337 ( 13 ) : 869 – 873 , September 1997 . Yach , D . , et al . The Global Burden of Chronic Diseases : Overcoming Impediments to Prevention and Control . JAMA , 291 ( 21 ) : 2616 – 2622 , 2004 . 96