The recent discovery of nine new human polyoma­ viruses has re­invigorated the study of this group of DNA tumour viruses and their potential contributions to disease ( TABLE 1 ) . Several polyomaviruses have also been recently discovered in other primates , including chimpanzees , orangutans and gorillas 1 – 4 . This sudden burst of discovery has revealed that polyomaviruses rep­ resent a large genus with a high degree of divergence . Although all nine of the new human polyomaviruses have a genomic structure and gene organization simi­ lar to that of the canonical polyomavirus simian virus 40 ( SV40 ) ( FIG . 1a ) , there are significant differences in sequence that might have an impact on the life cycle and host cell tropism of the new human viruses . The increas­ ing number of human and animal polyomaviruses sug­ gests that there are many more to be discovered and raises key questions regarding their tropism , spread and disease­causing potential . More than 50 years of research on SV40 and murine polyomavirus ( MPyV ) have provided crucial insights into the cellular and molecular biology of these viruses and established a strong foundation for the study of the many newly discovered polyomaviruses 5 . The first two human polyomavirus species to be character­ ized , JC polyoma virus ( JCPyV ) and BK polyomavirus ( BKPyV ) , were identified in 1971 and named after the index case patients 6 , 7 . Both are benign infectious agents in most individuals , but are capable of causing severe pathological manifestations in individuals who are immunosuppressed . Epidemiological and clinical studies revealed that infection with JCPyV and BKPyV typically occurs at a young age , and the viruses establish a life­long persistent infection in sanctuary sites such as the proximal renal tubule 8 – 13 . However , in patients with HIV / AIDS and , more recently , in patients with multiple sclerosis who have been treated with nata­ lizumab , JCPyV is the causative agent of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy ( PML ) 14 , a frequently fatal disease of the central nervous system . Uncontrolled BKPyV infection contributes to polyomavirus­ associated nephropathy ( PVAN ) in patients who have received a renal transplant and to haemorrhagic cystitis in patients who have received a haematopoietic stem cell transplant 15 . Since 2007 , nine human polyomavirus species have been identified . These new viruses are named after the institution where the discovery was made ( Karolinska Institute polyomavirus ( KIPyV ) and Washington University polyomavirus ( WUPyV ) ) 16 , 17 ; after the source of the original virus isolate ( Malawi polyomavirus ( MWPyV ) and St Louis polyomavirus ( STLPyV ) ) 18 , 19 ; after the disease association ( Merkel cell polyomavirus ( MCPyV ) and trichodysplasia spinulosa­associated polyomavirus ( TSPyV ) ) 20 , 21 , 22 ; or in the temporal order of discovery ( human polyomavirus 6 ( HPyV6 ) , HPyV7 and HPyV9 ( REFS 23 , 24 ) ) ) The new viruses were identi­ fied using a variety of techniques . Most of the discovery protocols involved virion enrichment from samples by treatment with DNase to eliminate un­encapsidated DNA , followed by protease treatment to disrupt the virions , and then DNA sequencing . These techniques are now widely used in mining microbiome niches 25 . WUPyV and KIPyV were found by high­throughput sequencing of DNA from nasopharyngeal samples , fol­ lowed by comparison with known human and pathogen sequences 16 , 17 . Electron microscopy evidence of a hair follicle infected with a 38 nm diameter polyomavirus­ like particle in a patient with trichodysplasia spinulosa anticipated the discovery of a virus 20 ; TSPyV was sub­ sequently identified from trichodysplasia spinulosa lesions by a strategy that exploited the circular nature of A cornucopia of human polyomaviruses James A . DeCaprio 1 and Robert L . Garcea 2 Abstract | During the past 6 years , focused virus hunting has led to the discovery of nine new human polyomaviruses , including Merkel cell polyomavirus , which has been linked to Merkel cell carcinoma , a lethal skin cell cancer . The discovery of so many new and highly divergent human polyomaviruses raises key questions regarding their evolution , tropism , latency , reactivation , immune evasion and contribution to disease . This Review describes the similarities and differences among the new human polyomaviruses and discusses how these viruses might interact with their human host . 1 Department of Medical Oncology , Dana - Farber Cancer Institute ; Department of Medicine , Brigham and Women’s Hospital ; and Department of Medicine , Harvard Medical School , 450 Brookline Avenue , Mayer 440 , Boston , Massachusetts 02215 , USA . 2 Department of Molecular , Cellular , & Developmental Biology , and The Biofrontiers Institute , University of Colorado at Boulder , Jennie Smoly Caruthers Biotechnology Building , Room D212 , Campus Box 596 , Boulder , Colorado 80309 - 0596 , USA . e - mails : james _ decaprio @ dfci . harvard . edu ; robert . garcea @ colorado . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nrmicro2992 Published online 11 March 2013 R E V I E W S 264 | APRIL 2013 | VOLUME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved polyomavirus genomes by using rolling­circle amplifi­ cation by highly processive DNA polymerases followed by digestion with restriction enzymes that typically cut only once in polyomavirus genomes 21 , 26 . HPyV6 and HPyV9 were also identified using the rolling­circle amplification method 23 , 27 . HPyV7 was identified from DNA isolated from skin using degenerate PCR prim­ ers corresponding to WUPyV and HPyV6 ( REF . 23 ) . MWPyV was first isolated from stool specimens by enriching for potential virus­like particles ( VLPs ) 18 . Two other groups also identified MWPyV , from stool ( origi­ nally called MX polyoma virus ( MXPyV ) ) 28 and from a patient with WHIM ( warts , hypogammaglobulinaemia , infections and myelo kathexis ) syndrome ( originally called HPyV10 ) 29 . The most recent polyomavirus to be discovered , STLPyV 19 , was isolated from stool specimens obtained from both the Gambia and the United States , and its close relationship to MWPyV supports its tentative assignment as a new human polyomavirus . MCPyV was identified using digital transcrip­ tome subtraction , in which cDNA libraries pre­ pared from Merkel cell carcinoma ( MCC ) specimens were sequenced using pyrosequencing . The human sequences were subtracted to identify novel sequences , which were then aligned with known viral sequences by a BLAST homology search to detect polyomavirus­like genes 22 . Importantly , the initial discovery of MCPyV in these MCC specimens revealed that the viral genome was clonally integrated into the tumour cell DNA . Although MCPyV is a typical polyomavirus with an episomal circular double­stranded DNA ( dsDNA ) genome , this genome becomes stably integrated into a chromosome in MCC cells . Examination of the MCPyV genomes identified in MCC specimens revealed that they contain mutations and deletions that render the viral DNA incapable of supporting viral DNA replication and generating viable virions . With the discovery of so many new viruses , the nomenclature of polyomaviruses has continued to evolve 30 . The former family designation Papovaviridae included both the polyomaviruses and the papilloma­ viruses , but the new designation Polyomaviridae includes Polyomavirus as the only genus . The Polyomaviridae Study Group of the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses ( ICTV ) proposed several criteria for polyomavirus classification , includ­ ing dividing the polyomaviruses into three genera , with Orthopolyomavirus and Wukipolyomavirus contain­ ing all the mammalian species and Avipolyomavirus restricted to bird polyomaviruses 30 . In addition , the committee proposed that for a polyomavirus to be designated a unique species within the family , the whole­genome nucleotide sequence must have less than 81 % nucleotide identity to the sequence of known polyomavirus species . HPyV9 has been isolated from blood and urine , which are normally sterile , and this strongly supports the candidacy of this virus as a human polyomavirus . Table 1 | Human polyomaviruses Full name Abbreviation Alternative names Year of discovery NCBI RefSeq accession Associated disease Source of isolation Seroprevalence ( % ) BK polyomavirus 6 BKPyV BK , BKV 1971 NC _ 001538 . 1 Polyomavirus - associated nephropathy ( PVAN ) , haemorrhagic cystitis Urine 82 ( REF . 8 ) , 92 ( REF . 157 ) JC polyomavirus 7 JCPyV JC , JCV 1971 NC _ 001699 . 1 Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy Urine , brain 40 – 55 ( REFS 8 , 13 , 157 , 158 ) Karolinska Institute polyomavirus 16 KIPyV KI 2007 NC _ 009238 . 1 None Nasopharyngeal tissue 55 ( REF . 8 ) , 70 ( REF . 33 ) , 90 ( REF . 157 ) Washington University polyomavirus 17 WUPyV WU 2007 NC _ 009539 . 1 None Nasopharyngeal tissue 70 ( REF . 8 ) , 80 ( REF . 33 ) , 90 ( REF . 157 ) Merkel cell polyomavirus 22 MCPyV MCV 2008 NC _ 010277 . 1 Merkel cell carcinoma Lesion 60 ( REF . 157 ) , 65 ( REF . 159 ) Human polyomavirus 6 ( REF . 23 ) HPyV6 None 2010 NC _ 014406 . 1 None Skin 70 ( REF . 23 ) Human polyomavirus 7 ( REF . 23 ) HPyV7 None 2010 NC _ 014407 . 1 None Skin 35 ( REF . 23 ) Trichodysplasia spinulosa - associated polyomavirus 21 TSPyV None 2010 NC _ 014361 . 1 Trichodysplasia spinulosa , pilomatrix dysplasia Lesion 70 – 80 ( REF . 160 ) Human polyomavirus 9 ( REFS 24 , 27 ) HPyV9 Lymphotropic virus 2011 NC _ 015150 . 1 None Skin , blood , urine 25 – 50 ( REFS 161 , 162 ) Malawi polyomavirus 18 , 28 , 29 MWPyV MXPyV , HPyV10 2012 NC _ 018102 . 1 None Stool , wart Unknown St Louis polyomavirus 19 STLPyV None 2012 NC _ 020106 . 1 None Stool Unknown R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 11 | APRIL 2013 | 265 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Origin Polyomavirus A g n o V P 2 V P 1 V P 3 V P 4 L T ʹ L T ʹ L T ʹ S T L T L T Non - coding region b c a m i R N A E a r l y r e g i o n L a t e r e g i o n Nature Reviews | Microbiology However , as some of the human polyomavirus sequences ( HPyV6 , HPyV7 , MWPyV and STLPyV ) have been isolated from human stool , respiratory secretions or skin swab specimens , they could represent environ­ mental contaminants and be considered ‘potential’ human viruses . Evidence supporting their classification as human polyomaviruses includes isolation from an infected cell and detection of seropositivity , as has been described for HPyV6 and HPyV7 ( REF . 23 ) . The serology for BKPyV and JCPyV indicates that infection typically occurs at an early age , and persistent , sustained antibody titres throughout life indicate a per­ sistent infection . For many of the human polyoma viruses surveyed , the seroprevalence is high in the general popu­ lation 8 , 31 – 33 . Serological assays have evolved ( BOX 1 ) , and the use of recombinant viral VP1 capsid proteins ( FIG . 1b ) specific for each species has enabled the development of high­throughput screens and sensitive competition assays to distinguish between infections with the various polyomaviruses . The seroprevalence of the new polyoma­ viruses is as high as 90 % of individuals ( TABLE 1 ) , with the possible exceptions of HPyV7 and HPyV9 , although more data are needed . The seroprevalence of JCPyV also appears to be lower than this , in the 40 – 60 % range ; this incidence rate has important risk stratification conse­ quences for patients receiving natalizumab and related immunosuppressive drugs 34 . Given the increasing use of immunosuppressive therapy after renal and haematopoietic stem cell trans­ plantation and for multiple sclerosis , rheumatoid arthri­ tis and other autoimmune diseases , and the ability of some polyoma viruses to cause disease in some individu­ als receiving this therapy , it is likely that the frequency of diseases resulting from these viruses will increase . Although many questions remain unanswered , extrapo­ lation from the known biology of JCPyV and BKPyV allows a predictive framework for the study of the new viruses . In this article , we compare the similarities and differences among the new human polyomaviruses with respect to their evolution , possible disease relationships and host interactions . For additional reviews addressing some of these issues , see REFS 14 , 15 , 35 – 37 . Genomic organization and phylogeny Polyomaviruses are small viruses ( ~ 45 nm in diam­ eter ) containing a single circular dsDNA genome of ~ 5 . 2 kb ( FIG . 1a , c ) . There are two distinct transcriptional units within the genome ; the early region encodes the Figure 1 | Genomic organization and structure of polyomaviruses . a | The prototypical circular double - stranded DNA genome has three main regions : a non - coding control region containing the early and late promoters , their transcription start sites and the origin of replication ; an early region encoding large T antigen ( LT ) and small T antigen ( ST ) and an alternatively spliced LT ( LT ′ ) ; and a late region encoding the viral coat proteins VP1 , VP2 , VP3 and VP4 . The reading frames for VP2 , VP3 and VP4 are identical , but translation starts at successive initiating AUG codons to generate the different proteins . VP4 has been confirmed only in the primate species simian virus 40 ( SV40 ) . Agnoprotein ( Agno ) is encoded by a late transcript from JC polyomavirus and BK polyomavirus , but has yet to be confirmed in the new human polyomaviruses . b | Electron micrograph of purified recombinant VP1 pentamers ( from murine polyomavirus ) , which have a diameter of ~ 9 nm ( scale bar represents 100 nm ) . c | Electron micrograph of purified murine polyomavirus virions , which have a diameter of ~ 50 nm ( scale bar represents 200 nm ) . R E V I E W S 266 | APRIL 2013 | VOLUME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved alternatively spliced large tumour ( T ) and small T anti­ gens , named for their corresponding protein size , and the late region encodes the structural viral proteins VP1 , VP2 and VP3 , which form the viral capsid 38 . Alternatively spliced variants of large T antigen have been characterized for several polyomaviruses 39 ( an example , denoted LT ′ , is shown in FIG . 1a ) . STLPyV may express 229T , a third early transcript that shares the first 190 residues of small T antigen with an additional 39 res­ idues from an alternative reading frame of large T anti­ gen 19 . None of the human polyomaviruses appears to encode a middle T antigen , which is present in MPyV 40 . The late region transcript uses alternative translational start sites to encode VP1 , VP2 and VP3 . The late region of JCPyV and BKPyV , as well as that of several monkey polyomaviruses , including SV40 , also encodes agnopro­ tein , a small protein of unknown function . The early and late regions are separated by a non­coding regulatory region containing the early and late promoters ( with their corresponding transcriptional start sites ) and the origin of viral DNA replication 38 . Polyomavirus virions are non­enveloped , and the cap­ sid comprises 72 pentamers ( capsomeres ) of the major structural protein VP1 , each of which is associated with a single molecule of VP2 or VP3 . SV40 also encodes VP4 , which has been shown to act as a viroporin 41 . Because infectious viruses and permissive host cells have not yet been identified for the new human polyomaviruses , the prototypical gene products described in FIG . 1a have been for the most part deduced from their nucleotide sequences and have not yet been validated for each virus . Phylogeny . As more new polyomavirus sequences have been isolated , it has become clear , on the basis of sequence homologies , that there are distinct clades or species of polyomaviruses , and that within a species there are several sequence variants . It is currently unclear what the biological consequences of these variants are or whether these variants represent different serotypes . The amino acid relationships of the human and primate polyomavirus large T antigen and VP1 proteins of each species are shown in the simplified phylogenetic tree in FIG . 2 . The groupings are perhaps not surprising , as sev­ eral related species were isolated from the same tissue or sample types . For example , WUPyV and KIPyV , HPyV6 and HPyV7 , and MWPyV and STLPyV are seen paired in their own distinct branches , mirroring their isolation from nasopharyngeal , skin and stool sources , respec­ tively . The close protein homology between these pairs might reflect distinct viral protein – host protein interac­ tions that support their tissue tropism 42 . Many human polyomaviruses appear to be closely related to primate relatives : BKPyV and JCPyV most closely resemble SV40 and simian agent 12 ( SA12 ) , a baboon virus ; HPyV9 is very similar to African green monkey polyomavirus ( AGMPyV ; also known as B lymphotropic polyoma­ virus ( LPyV ) ) ; MCPyV resembles Gorilla gorilla gorilla polyomavirus 1 , as well as several isolates from chim­ panzees 4 ; and TSPyV resembles Bornean orangutan polyomavirus . It is difficult to assign the evolutionary derivation of these primate­related human virus species . Both co­evolution from a common ancestral polyoma­ virus and adaptation to a new host after zoonotic trans­ mission of each primate virus have been considered 43 – 45 . Data obtained from polyomaviruses found in other species might inform these evolutionary hypotheses . Polyomavirus proteins The polyomaviruses encode a limited number of pro­ teins , all of which are dependent on specific interactions with host cell proteins to promote viral replication and sustain viability . The history of polyomavirus research has repeatedly revealed that the identification of spe­ cific viral protein – host protein interactions leads to key insights into eukaryotic cell biology and mammalian tumour biology . T antigens All human polyomaviruses express distinct early or late mRNAs . The early mRNAs are expressed soon after infection and are alternatively spliced to yield large and small T antigens that share the amino­terminal 75 – 80 residues encoded by the first exon of the large T antigen gene ( FIG . 3a – c ) . The small T antigen mRNA reads through the first splice donor site of the large T antigen gene to encode a unique region that is not shared with large T antigen . The small T antigen unique region , stop codon and small T­specific splice donor site all reside within the intron of the large T antigen gene and use the splice acceptor of the large T antigen gene to make the complete small T antigen mRNA . Although all polyomaviruses produce an early mRNA that encodes the full­length large T antigen , several ( including MCPyV , BKPyV Box 1 | Serological methods for studying polyomavirus infection The serological analysis of polyomavirus infection has been facilitated by the recombinant production of the viral protein VP1 . Expressing VP1 in eukaryotic cells — for example , in the baculovirus expression system — results in the formation of assembled virus - like particles ( VLPs ) that can be isolated and bound directly to ELISA ( enzyme - linked immunosorbent assay ) plates . This assay can be further refined by subjecting borderline samples to a secondary screen using pre - incubation of the serum sample with VP1 VLPs in solution . In this competition step , specificity for the particular VP1 is confirmed . The production and purification of VLPs can be difficult , and expression of glutathione - S - transferase ( GST ) - conjugated VP1 in Escherichia coli has been used as a convenient alternative 150 . The GST – VP1 proteins are purified by affinity chromatography as pentameric capsomeres ( rather than assembled VLPs ) and then bound to ELISA wells that have been coated with casein - conjugated glutathione 8 . This method also allows the use of competition assays by first pre - incubating the sera with non - conjugated VP1 pentamers of the same or different polyomavirus . Using such competition assays , the human antibody response has been generally found to be specific to each polyomavirus species , although cross - reactivity has been detected 151 , 152 . This technique has been adapted to incorporate Luminex bead technology , in which the GST – VP1 proteins from different polyomaviruses are bound to glutathione - conjugated beads of varying colours , allowing for the simultaneous assay of up to 100 different species in a single serum sample ( of microlitre quantity ) for use in high - throughput screens 153 . Most recently , pseudovirus assays , similar to those developed for measuring papillomavirus serology , have been used to assess polyomavirus neutralizing antibody titres 31 . Pseudoviruses are generated by transfecting 293TT cells ( engineered to overexpress SV40 large T antigen ) with expression plasmids for the VP1 , VP2 and VP3 genes of the particular polyomavirus along with a reporter plasmid . VLPs are formed , and the reporter plasmid is packaged in a subset of particles . Sera incubated with the purified pseudoviruses before ‘infection’ of permissive target cells then give a semi - quantitative measure of the neutralizing antibody titre as measured by the decrease in colorimetric signal from the reporter . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 11 | APRIL 2013 | 267 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Microbiology GggPyV1 MCPyV TSPyV HPyV9 STLPyV MWPyV JCPyV BKPyV HPyV6 HPyV7 WUPyV KIPyV ChPyV OraPyV - Sum OraPyV - Bor AGMPyV SV40 SA12 0 . 2 and JCPyV ) produce alternatively spliced mRNAs in which regions encoding the central or carboxy­terminal domains of large T antigen have been deleted 39 ( such as the LT ′ mRNA in FIG . 1a ) . The MCPyV small T antigen mRNA can also undergo this alternative splicing , but this does not affect the small T antigen­coding region 39 . Large T antigen contains several intrinsic biochemi­ cal activities and binds specifically to cellular proteins required for polyomavirus replication ( FIG . 3b ) . The N terminus of all polyomavirus T antigens contains a DnaJ domain , or J domain , which contributes to effi­ cient viral DNA replication , although it is not clear how this is accomplished 46 . In addition to the J domain , all human polyomavirus large T antigens contain an LXCXE motif 47 . This motif binds directly to the tumour suppressor retinoblastoma­associated protein ( RB ) and to the RB­related proteins p130 ( also known as RBL2 ) and p107 ( also known as RBL1 ) . The J domain coop­ erates with the LXCXE motif to disrupt the interaction between RB and the E2F family transcription factors in order to promote cell cycle entry and progression 48 . In addition to RB , MCPyV large T antigen binds the endo­ somal protein VPS39 , although the biological conse­ quences of this interaction are not clear 49 . Following the LXCXE motif , all large T antigens contain a threonine – proline – proline – lysine ( TPPK ) motif , a nuclear locali zation sequence ( NLS ) , a DNA­binding domain ( DBD ) and a helicase domain . Polyomavirus DNA replication is initiated when two hexamers of large T antigen form in a head­to­head orientation on the origin of replication . These double hexamers twist in opposite orientations to each other , unwinding the viral DNA , and recruit cellular DNA polymerase – primase to initiate DNA rep­ lication 50 . Following initiation , the double hexamers sep­ arate from each other and move in opposite directions to replicate viral DNA in a bidirectional manner 51 ( FIG . 3d ) . The outside surface of the helicase domain of SV40 large T antigen binds to the tumour suppressor pro­ tein p53 ( REF . 52 ) . Large T antigen binding to p53 blocks p53­dependent gene expression in response to DNA damage signals . Some human polyomavirus large T anti­ gens , including those from JCPyV and BKPyV , bind to p53 in a similar manner to the SV40 protein . A recent report also provides evidence for a complex association between p53 and large T antigen from WUPyV , HPyV6 and HPyV7 ( REF . 42 ) ; however , it is unclear whether MCPyV large T antigen binds p53 . Furthermore , in Merkel cell carcinoma samples , the large T antigen gene has undergone mutations that result in expression of a truncated molecule which lacks the DBD and helicase domain , thereby rendering the virus unable to replicate the integrated viral origin of replication . This truncation deletes the region homologous to the p53­binding region of SV40 large T antigen and the resultant protein must therefore ne unable to bind p53 even if the wild­type , full­length version could bind 39 . After the helicase domain , JCPyV and BKPyV large T antigen contains a C­terminal region that bears some homology to the SV40 C­terminal domain ( FIG . 3b ) . This region of homology includes a threonine residue ( threo­ nine 701 in SV40 ) that , when phosphorylated in SV40 , serves as a phospho­degron decoy for the cullin RING ligase substrate adaptor FBXW7 . Large T antigen phos­ phorylated on threonine 701 competes with phospho­ rylated cyclin E and MYC for binding to FBXW7 . This competition interferes with the degradation of the G1 – S­ specific cyclin E1 and MYC , thereby increasing their overall levels and contributing to cellular growth and proliferation 53 . Recently , the C­terminal region of SV40 large T antigen was shown to bind to FAM111A , a previ­ ously uncharacterized protein that contributes to viral gene expression , host range restriction and adenovirus replication in monkey cells 54 ( FIG . 3b ) . It is not known whether FAM111A binds to any of the human polyoma­ virus large T antigens . All the human polyomavirus large T antigens except those of JCPyV and BKPyV contain much shorter C­terminal regions with little homology to each other or to that of SV40 . Figure 2 | Phylogenetic tree relating polyomaviruses from human and primate isolates . Viruses identified from human isolates are shown in yellow , and viruses identified from primate isolates are shown in red . This simplified tree was constructed by concatenating the amino acid sequences for the capsid protein VP1 and large T antigen from 19 separate isolates . Sequences were then aligned using MUSCLE 3 . 8 . 31 with default parameters 154 . Alignment positions containing more than 90 % gaps were filtered using filter _ alignment . py from QIIME 155 . The phylogenetic tree was then constructed using FastTree 2 . 1 . 4 with default parameters 156 . Branch length is in substitutions per site . Note that Washington University polyomavirus ( WUPyV ) , Karolinska Institute polyomavirus ( KIPyV ) , human polyomavirus 6 ( HPyV6 ) and HPyV7 all belong to the genus Wukipolyomavirus , and all other isolates shown belong to the genus Orthopolyomavirus 30 . The RefSeq accession numbers for the human viruses are listed in TABLE 1 . The primate viruses shown , and their GenBank or RefSeq accession numbers , are : Gorilla gorilla gorilla polyomavirus 1 ( GggPyV1 ; HQ385752 ) , chimpanzee polyomavirus ( ChPyV ; NC _ 014743 ) , Sumatran orangutan polyomavirus ( OraPyV - Sum ; FN356901 ) , Borneo OraPyV ( OraPyV - Bor ; NC _ 013439 ) , African green monkey polyomavirus ( AGMPyV ; NC _ 004763 ) , simian virus 40 ( SV40 ; NC _ 001669 ) and simian agent 12 ( SA12 ; NC _ 012122 ) . Merkel cell polyomavirus ( MCPyV ) is also related to a number of chimpanzee isolates ( not shown ) 4 . Tree constructed by D . McDonald , University of Colorado at Boulder , USA . BKPyV , BK polyomavirus ; JCPyV , JC polyomavirus ; MWPyV , Malawi polyomavirus ; STLPyV , St Louis polyomavirus ; TSPyV , trichodysplasia spinulosa - associated polyomavirus . R E V I E W S 268 | APRIL 2013 | VOLUME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved VPS39 IRS1 p107 p130 CREBBP RPA EP300 HSC70 BUB1 CUL7 J LXCXE J J J LXCXE Zn Zn Unique region Large T antigen a b c d Small T antigen Zn Zn DBD TPPK NLS DBD Helicase Helicase HR – AH HR – AH RB KPNA POLA PRIM TOP1 PP2AC FAM111A p53 FBXW7 PP2AA Nature Reviews | Microbiology Unique region TPPK NLS ( MCPyV ) All human polyomavirus small T antigens contain an N­terminal J domain followed by a unique region that contains two zinc­fingers which participate in binding to cellular protein phosphatase 2A ( PP2A ) . Normally , PP2A contains three subunits : the regulatory A subu­ nit , the substrate adaptor B subunit and the catalytic C subunit . Small T antigen binds the A and C subunits of PP2A and displaces the B subunit , thereby altering the substrate specificity or inhibiting the enzymatic activity of PP2A 55 , 56 . In addition to the highly conserved J domain and zinc­fingers , small T antigen contains a highly divergent region of 30 – 40 residues that links these two regions . It is highly likely that this uncharacterized small T antigen region can bind to additional cellular proteins , as it is oriented away from the PP2A­binding regions . Recently , it has been shown that MCPyV small T antigen can affect the phosphorylation state and activ­ ity of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E­binding protein 1 ( 4EBP1 ) in a manner that is independent of PP2A binding 57 . Several human polyomaviruses encode a microRNA ( miRNA ) . Evidence for an miRNA expressed by JCPyV , BKPyV and MCPyV has been obtained from infected tissues as well as from in vitro reporter constructs 58 – 60 . Figure 3 | The functional domains of polyomavirus large and small T antigens . a | The amino - terminal DnaJ ( J ) domain is shared between small and large T antigens . Large T antigen also contains a retinoblastoma - associated protein ( RB ) - binding LXCXE motif , a threonine – proline – proline – lysine ( TPPK ) motif , a nuclear - localization sequence ( NLS ) , a DNA - binding domain ( DBD ) , a helicase domain and a host range and adenovirus helper function ( HR – AH ) domain . Small T antigen contains an amino - terminal J domain followed by a unique region that is not shared with large T antigen and contains two zinc - fingers . b | Large T antigen binds to many cellular proteins . The J domain recruits heat shock cognate 71 kDa protein ( HSC70 ) homologues . The region between the J domain and LXCXE motif has been shown to bind independently to cullin 7 ( CUL7 ) , BUB1 and insulin receptor substrate 1 ( IRS1 ) . Merkel cell polyomavirus ( MCPyV ) large T antigen binds to the endosomal protein VPS39 . The LXCXE domain binds to retinoblastoma - associated protein ( RB ) and related proteins ( p107 and p130 ) . Phosphorylation of the threonine residue in the TPPK motif is required for large T antigen - mediated viral DNA replication . The nuclear localization signal ( NLS ) binds specifically to KPNA family importin homologues . The DBD and helicase domains are required for viral replication and recruit cellular DNA replication factors ( DNA polymerase - α catalytic subunit ( POLA ) , the replication protein A complex ( RPA ) and the DNA primase complex ( PRIM ) for DBD ; and EP300 , CREBBP , p53 and DNA topoisomerase 1 ( TOP1 ) for the helicase domain ) to the replicating simian virus 40 ( SV40 ) genome . The carboxyl termini of SV40 , JC polyomavirus ( JCPyV ) and BK polyomavirus ( BKPyV ) large T antigens each contain a threonine residue ( threonine 701 in SV40 , threonine 691 in BKPyV and threonine 684 in JCPyV ) that , when phosphorylated , competes with phosphorylated G1 – S - specific cyclin E1 and MYC for binding to the cullin RING ligase substrate adaptor FBXW7 . FAM111A has recently been implicated in the SV40 host range restriction and adenovirus helper function . c | Small T antigen binds specifically to the A and C subunits of protein phosphatase 2A ( PP2A ) . d | Polyomavirus genome replication . Replication begins when the large T antigen DBD binds to the origin of replication . Two hexamers of large T antigen form in a head - to - head orientation at the origin . The helicase domains of the large T antigen hexamers initiate unwinding of viral DNA followed by bidirectional replication . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 11 | APRIL 2013 | 269 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved The miRNA is encoded by the late transcript and con­ tains sequences that are complementary to the early region mRNA encoding large T antigen and small T antigen ( FIG . 1a ) . The miRNA from JCPyV , BKPyV and MCPyV targets the early mRNA for cleavage , result­ ing in reduced levels of large T antigen expression . As expression of large T antigen promotes the expression of the late mRNA and therefore of the miRNA , the miRNA is part of a negative feedback loop that modulates the expression levels of large T antigen , thereby reducing the host’s immune response 61 . It has also been suggested that the miRNAs from JCPyV , BKPyV and MCPyV tar­ get cellular genes involved in the immune response 60 , 62 . However , it is unclear whether this plays a part in latency or disease . VP1 structures and sialic acid binding VP1 capsomeres are the major structural subunit of the polyomavirus capsid ( FIG . 1b ) . Each of the 72 capsomeres in the capsid shell is associated with one copy of either VP2 or VP3 . Although recombinant VP1 capsomeres can self­assemble in vitro or in vivo into VLPs that resemble the viral capsid 63 , 64 , the minor capsid proteins are required for the formation of infectious virions but are not required for haemagglutination 65 . VP4 is not part of the virion but functions as a viroporin that can perforate membranes to promote virion release from the cell 66 . Many polyomaviruses use a ganglioside modified with a glycan terminating in sialic acid as a primary cell attachment molecule 67 , 68 . The preference for sialic acid was initially suggested by the ability of MPyV , JCPyV and BKPyV to haemagglutinate erythrocytes and by the loss of cell infectivity after neuraminidase treatment . Studies using liposomes mixed with specific synthetic gangliosides in flotation assays , and the addition of spe­ cific gangliosides to cells to restore infectivity , further defined the precise glycan linkages for each virus 69 . More recently , recombinant VP1 capsomeres have been used as reagents in glycan array binding screens to identify candidate glycans for subsequent validation . Structural studies have confirmed the glycan recognition of many of the new polyomaviruses . In one such study , research­ ers initially crystallized the MPyV capsomere , solved its structure to atomic resolution and then soaked the crys­ tals in sialyllactose , which led to the identification of the sugar­binding pocket on the VP1 capsomere 70 , 71 . This technique has allowed the subsequent crystallographic characterization of several new human polyomaviruses and their glycan receptors 72 , 73 ( FIG . 4 ) . These structures also demonstrate both the remarkable conservation of the core eight­stranded antiparallel β­barrel of the cap­ somere and the extensive elaboration of surface loops that represent the most disparate aspects of the capsid structure between viruses . There are exceptions to the general rule of VP1 bind­ ing to gangliosides and the ability of polyomaviruses to haemagglutinate . SV40 infectivity is insensitive to neur­ aminidase , and the virus does not haemagglutinate . These properties result from the narrow specificity of SV40 for the glycan GM1 ( monosialotetrahexosyl ganglioside ) , which is not present on erythrocytes , and the inability of neuraminidase to cleave the sialic acid modification from GM1 ( REF . 74 ) . MCPyV was found to haemagglu­ tinate erythrocytes and bind glycan GT1b in a liposome flotation assay 69 . However , it has been suggested that glycosaminoglycans are the primary cell attachment molecules for MCPyV and that sialylated­glycan bind­ ing occurs at a subsequent step 75 . JCPyV does not bind to a glycan­modified ganglioside , but rather binds to a linear pentasaccharide , LSTc ( N ­acetylneuraminic acid­ α2 , 6­galactose­β1 , 4­ N ­acetylglucosamine­β1 , 3­galactose­ β1 , 4­glucose ) , present on a glycoprotein 68 ; however , JCPyV variants have been identified that have lost recog­ nition of LSTc 76 . Thus , there are some caveats to the assays that have been used to identify putative binding molecules for the new polyomaviruses , and the results obtained from these assays should be validated with infectivity analyses . Sequence variants . Complicating the search for patho­ logical correlations is the occurrence of sequence vari­ ants within a species , some of which seem to arise in vivo during persistent infection . The number of reported variants has been increasing for the well­studied viruses JCPyV and BKPyV . In vivo , JCPyV seems to select for VP1 variants and agnogene deletions that might pre­ dispose to brain tropism and PML 76 – 79 . When isolated from diseased tissues , the JCPyV genome often contains rearrangements in the non­coding regulatory region that might favour higher expression levels of large T antigen 80 , 81 . BKPyV variants ( both in the non­coding region and VP1 ) also exist , but the pathophysiological differences of these variants are unclear 82 . BKPyV has been categorized into four genotypes that can be dis­ tinguished by serology as well as by viral­neutralization assays 83 . The ramifications of subtle changes in glycan recogni­ tion could be significant for polyomavirus pathogenesis . As first described for MPyV , a single amino acid sub­ stitution in the sialic acid­binding site can change the virus from having a ‘small plaque’ phenotype to hav­ ing a ‘large plaque’ phenotype 84 . This phenotype seems to result from an altered glycan recognition specificity that allows the virus to spread more rapidly by reducing the variety of glycans that can be bound 85 , 86 . Such behav­ iour can be anticipated in the human polyomaviruses . For example , JCPyV , which is latent in the kidney , can reactivate under conditions of immunosuppression and spread to the brain , causing PML . JCPyV isolated from PML lesions has been found to have mutations in VP1 that are thought to enable the virus to more effectively cross the blood – brain barrier and infect oligodendro­ cytes . Despite the fidelity of the host DNA polymerase involved in viral replication , over many years such mutant viruses could accumulate in the reservoir virus population in the host . In any case , given the appropriate selection pressure in culture , SV40 VP1 acquires mutations that alter receptor usage and cell tropism 74 . It is likely that additional factors other than glycan recognition will con­ tribute to the cellular tropism adopted by the new human viruses as they fill unique niches , particularly in the skin , for which the interaction between papillomaviruses and heparan sulphate serves as an example 87 , 88 . R E V I E W S 270 | APRIL 2013 | VOLUME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Microbiology Galactose ( Gal ) N - acetylgalactosamine ( GalNAc ) Glucose ( Glc ) N - acetylneuraminic acid ( NeuNAc ) HO NH H H O O β 1 – 3 β 1 – 4 Lac – Cer α 2 – 3 β 1 – 4 GM3 α 2 – 3 β 1 – 4 β 1 – 4 GM2 Cer Cer β 1 – 3 Cer α 2 – 3 β 1 – 4 β 1 – 4 GM1 α 2 – 8 α 2 – 3 β 1 – 4 Cer α 2 – 8 α 2 – 3 β 1 – 4 β 1 – 4 Cer Cer Cer GD3 GD2 α 2 – 8 α 2 – 3 β 1 – 4 β 1 – 4 GD1b β 1 – 3 α 2 – 3 α 2 – 3 Cer β 1 – 3 α 2 – 3 β 1 – 4 β 1 – 4 GD1a α 2 – 8 α 2 – 3 β 1 – 4 β 1 – 4 GT1b BKPyV SV40 MPyV MCPyV In vitro culture methods have not yet succeeded for any of the new human polyomaviruses , although stable , high­level expression of the corresponding large and small T antigens in cell lines might help support MCPyV virion production 89 , 90 . This method could be successful for other human polyomaviruses 91 . Alternatively , cell culture­adapted strains of the new human polyoma­ viruses might be identified , with rearrangements in the early promoter that support high levels of large T antigen expression similar to those found in SV40 and BKPyV . Human polyomavirus infection and disease The host cells and tissues that support infection by the new human polyomaviruses in vivo are unknown , and their identification is one of the most pressing research questions . On the basis of the sites where the polyomavirus DNA has been isolated , suspected sites of infection include the nasopharynx and lung for WUPyV and KIPyV , the skin for MCPyV , HPyV6 , HPyV7 , TSPyV and HPyV9 , and the gastrointestinal tract for MWPyV and STLPyV . We anticipate , by extrapo­ lation , that the new human polyomaviruses are trans­ mitted horizontally by direct contact or by aerosol or faecal – oral routes . However , the site of infection , the original site of polyoma virus identification and the dis­ tant organs in which the virus can be detected might be distinct and difficult to relate to any pathophysiology 92 . Although several of the new human polyoma viruses have been isolated from nasopharyngeal or stool sam­ ples , correlations between infection and respiratory symptoms or diarrhoeal illness remain circumstan­ tial 93 – 99 . The data remain confounded by the presence of numerous viral agents in the samples studied , such that no single entity has been singled out as the causative agent 100 – 103 . The clinical symptoms of primary infection with BKPyV and JCPyV have never been conclusively identi­ fied . Thus , it is perhaps not surprising that the new human Figure 4 | Glycan receptors used by polyomaviruses . Host glycans with different branching patterns are linked to lactosylceramide ( Lac – Cer ) , which provides anchorage in the cell membrane . Although the affinity constants for a single glycan – VP1 interaction are low , the avidity of multiple interactions on the viral surface provides a stable attachment . Subtle modifications of the glycan are used by different viruses , as indicated , and several glycans have been co - crystallized in complex with the specific VP1 pentamer ( see Functional Glycomics Gateway page for VP1 ) . Glycan GT1b has been suggested as one glycan receptor for Merkel cell polyomavirus ( MCPyV ) on the basis of in vitro binding studies and X - ray crystallography 69 , 73 . It is also possible that receptor recognition changes for a particular virus , as demonstrated by the glycan preferences of ‘large plaque’ and ‘small plaque’ murine polyomavirus ( MPyV ) 86 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 11 | APRIL 2013 | 271 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved polyomaviruses have not been associated with any clinical symptoms either . For example , in a recent study , serial col­ lections of serum from a cohort of men with HIV / AIDS were examined for signs of recent MCPyV infection . Despite careful surveillance and detailed questionnaires , none of the newly MCPyV­infected individuals developed any signs or symptoms of a primary MCPyV infection 104 . Attempts to link the new polyomaviruses to clini­ cal disease have focused on older individuals , in whom immunity is waning , or in the immunosuppressed 100 , 101 , 103 . In particular , immunocompromised individuals have been studied with respect to opportunistic diseases , but no specific correlations with human polyomaviruses have been identified as yet . JCPyV and BKPyV can cause a lytic infection that results in the destruction of tissue . JCPyV infection of oligodendrocytes in the central nerv­ ous system ( that is , PML ) and BKPyV infection of renal tubule cells ( that is , PVAN ) result in loss of these cells , similar to the well­described cytopathic effect of SV40 . However , except for MCPyV and TSPyV , there has been no obvious association of the new human polyomaviruses with a clinical syndrome 105 , 106 . Merkel cell carcinoma The key insight that prompted the hunt for a pathogen in MCC was the recognition that the incidence of MCC is higher in immunosuppressed recipients of organ transplants and in patients with HIV / AIDS than in non­immunocompromised individuals . MCC was first described in 1972 , followed by several reports that this rare cancer can occur in patients with a weakened immune status 107 . Patients with haematological malig­ nancies , especially chronic lymphocytic leukaemia , are at an increased risk of developing MCC 108 . There have been several reports of MCC developing in patients with autoimmune diseases such as psoriatic and rheuma­ toid arthritis , particularly when treated with immune­ suppressive therapy 109 . Additional risk factors for MCC include an age of greater than 60 years , and most MCCs occur in sun­exposed areas of the skin 110 . In addition , it has been reported that pharmacological use of statins and environmental exposure to arsenic increase the risk of developing MCC , although the mechanisms involved are unclear 111 , 112 . Clonal integration of the MCPyV genome has been nearly universally identified in MCC cells 22 , 113 , 114 . In addition to integration of the viral genome , the large T antigen gene is mutated , resulting in expression of a truncated molecule that lacks the DBD and the helicase domain , thereby inactivating its ability to replicate the integrated viral origin of replication 39 , 114 ( FIG . 5a , b ) . Thus , similar to cervical lesions , which often contain inte­ grated human papillomavirus genomes , MCC tumours arise from the selection of cells containing integrated polyomavirus genomes with mutations that eliminate viral replication while preserving expression of the onco­ genic viral proteins 39 . A few integration sites have been mapped for MCPyV ; it seems that the virus integrates near fragile sites in locations similar to those where inte­ grated human papillomavirus genomes have been found in cervical cancer 22 , 115 , 116 . The number of copies of the MCPyV viral genome found integrated in MCC can range from a single copy to several thousand copies 113 , 117 , 118 . Two distinct models could explain the sequence of events that transforms an infected cell containing a wild­type episomal MCPyV genome into a tumour cell containing multiple copies of tandemly arrayed integrated mutant viral genomes . The mutation that truncates large T antigen , as well as the amplification of the viral genome copy number , could occur either before or after integration into the host genome . If random integration of a wild­type genome occurs first , then this must be followed by mutation of the large T antigen gene to disable the ability of the encoded protein to initiate replication of the integrated genome 39 ( FIG . 5b , c ) . The integrated mutant genome would subsequently undergo amplification in a pro­ cess that is perhaps similar to that whereby a cellular oncogene such as MYC undergoes copy number ampli­ fication . Alternatively , mutation of the large T antigen gene could occur in the episomal viral genome before integration . This mutant genome would subsequently undergo rolling­circle amplification instead of the normal polyomavirus bidirectional genome replica­ tion ( FIG . 5d ) . Rolling­circle amplification could occur when the viral genome contains a single­stranded DNA break ; in this situation , one large T antigen hexamer would continue to replicate the intact strand , whereas the other hexamer would be unable to advance ( FIG . 5d ) . The extended , head­to­tail , mutated genome multimer would subsequently be integrated intact into the host genome . In both models , selection occurs for cancer cells that express the truncated large T antigen and intact small T antigen . Expression of the MCPyV T antigens in MCC tumour cells probably contributes to disease initiation and maintenance . The MCPyV truncated large T antigen expressed in MCC typically preserves the J domain and LXCXE RB­binding motif 49 , 113 , 114 ( FIG . 5a ) . Expression of the truncated large T antigen that binds RB is required for continued growth of several MCPyV­positive MCC cell lines 119 . Recently , it has been shown that the RB­binding motif of MCPyV large T antigen contributes to high levels of survivin ( also known as BIRC5 ) expression and that treatment with a small­molecule inhibitor of survivin reduces the growth rate of MCC cell line xenografts 120 . In addition to large T antigen , small T antigen is required for cellular transformation 57 . Although MCPyV small T antigen can bind to PP2A , this activity might not be suf­ ficient for the transforming functions of the virus . MCPyV small T antigen mutants with single amino acid substitu­ tions that reduce PP2A binding retain some transforming functions in vitro 57 . MCPyV small T antigen promotes hyperphosphorylation and inactivation of the translation inhibitor 4EBP1 and increases host gene expression 57 . Small T antigens from other polyoma viruses might bind to PP2A , as well as to additional cellular proteins that contribute to the viral life cycle . Studies using immunohistochemistry with anti­ bodies specific for MCPyV T antigens have indicated that T antigen expression occurs in up to 97 % of all MCCs 57 , 113 , 121 – 124 . MCC tumours exhibit a range of R E V I E W S 272 | APRIL 2013 | VOLUME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Microbiology J J LXCXE Unique region Host DNA Large T antigen Small T antigen a b c d Wild - type large T antigen Viral genome Viral genome Gene ampliﬁcation Mutation Rolling - circle replication Integration expression levels of the viral T antigens , from barely detectable to extremely high levels 57 , 113 , 118 . This raises the question of whether MCCs with low or negligible levels of MCPyV T antigen expression have specific mutations in cellular oncogenes or tumour suppressor genes that contribute to cancer formation and mainte­ nance . Mutations in TP53 ( encoding p53 ) and PIK3CA ( encoding phosphoinositide­3­kinase catalytic subunit α­isoform ) have been reported to occur in less than 10 % of all MCC studied to date 113 , 125 – 128 . Notably , mutations in TP53 might be more frequent in MCCs with low levels or even a complete lack of MCPyV T antigen expression . Recently , two groups reported that expression of p63 , a p53­related protein , is correlated with poor prognosis in MCC 129 – 131 ; by contrast , two other groups did not find a significant correlation between p63 expression and prognosis 132 , 133 . There has been some suggestion that high levels of MCPyV T antigen expression have a positive impact on the overall prognosis of MCC . The presence of serum antibodies against large T antigen correlates with disease status and might be useful as a biomarker 134 . A strik­ ing feature in some MCC tumours is the presence of an abundant T cell infiltration within the tumour itself 135 , 136 . A strong T cell infiltration of MCC is associated with better prognosis 136 . Other human polyomaviruses and cancer MCC is the only human cancer that contains clon­ ally integrated polyomavirus DNA . MCPyV has been detected in other human cancers such as chronic lympho cytic leukaemia ( CLL ) and squamous cell skin carcinomas , although at low levels and not integrated into the genome 108 , 137 – 139 . This situation is similar to that of JCPyV and BKPyV , which have been detected in a variety of gastrointestinal and genitourinary can­ cers 140 – 142 . However , there has been no evidence that the tumours contain integrated JCPyV or BKPyV genomes . SV40 has been considered as a zoonotic agent involved in human oncogenesis , but the low copy number ( < 1 / 1 , 000 cells ) , the inconsistent results between laboratories and the near­undetectable seroprevalence of the virus has not supported this hypothesis 8 , 143 , 144 . The presence of episomal polyomavirus DNA is insufficient to support a causal role of these viruses in the pathogenesis of a cancer , because the tumour itself might be permissive for high levels of viral replication . Interestingly , how­ ever , a polyomavirus was isolated as an episome from high­grade brain cancers in ten wild raccoons exhibiting abnormal behaviour 145 . In these brain tumours , the rac­ coon polyomavirus expressed large T antigen , and this was associated with high levels of host cell p53 . Conclusions Although the cornucopia of recently discovered human polyomaviruses might have unique cellular tropisms , it is likely that they will share certain characteristics with the well­studied species MPyV , SV40 , BKPyV and JCPyV . For example , we expect to find a ubiqui­ tous sero­epidemiological prevalence for these viruses , although the few viruses with limited prevalence could be of great interest . Of clinical importance are the 50 % of JCPyV­negative humans , who might be at a much­ reduced risk of developing PML after immunosuppres­ sion with natalizumab , owing to their lack of virus . The 50 % of patients who are serologically negative for BKPyV subtype IV and receive a renal transplant are also speculated to be at greater risk of developing PVAN resulting from infection with a BKPyV subtype IV­positive kidney . Another likely common theme is that an asymptomatic primary infection occurs at a young age and is followed by life­long persistence . The host cell reservoir for persistence might differ among polyomavirus species , but these cell types will be the source of reactivated virus and potentially also disease sites . Despite all these expectations , the real unknowns for polyomavirus researchers continue to be the mechanisms of persistence and reactivation , how the unique features of each viral protein contribute to these processes , and the precise cell types that serve as viral reservoirs . It would be useful to be able to define the latency state , even if it Figure 5 | Merkel cell polyomavirus and Merkel cell carcinoma . a | In Merkel cell carcinoma , the Merkel cell polyomavirus ( MCPyV ) DNA undergoes mutations , leaving small T antigen and the J domain and LXCXE motif of large T antigen intact , but typically deleting the DNA - binding domain and helicase domain of large T antigen . b | An MCPyV genome ( black ) undergoes random integration into the host cell DNA ( blue ) . If wild - type large T antigen is present in the cell , then repeated rounds of bidirectional viral DNA replication result in numerous copies of viral DNA , appearing as onion skinning , within the host chromosome . c | If a wild - type genome is integrated into the host and then obtains a mutation that inactivates large T antigen , the viral genome cannot be replicated bidirectionally and instead undergoes amplification in a manner analogous to amplification of cellular oncogenes such as MYC . d | An alternative model to explain the high copy number of integrated viral DNA is that rolling - circle amplification of an episomal MCPyV genome containing a mutation in the large T antigen gene results in a concatemer of mutant viral genomes . This concatemer then becomes randomly integrated into the host cell chromosome , resulting in a Merkel cell carcinoma containing a high copy number of viral genomes per cell . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 11 | APRIL 2013 | 273 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved is simply a low level of continuous lytic infection . Some progress has been made in understanding the host immunological response to polyomavirus infection in the mouse 146 , but latency remains a puzzle . One must also wonder whether infection and persistence with these nor­ mally benign viruses confers some advantage to the host . In addition to MCPyV , another polyomavirus with possible oncogenic manifestations is HPyV9 . HPyV9 is related to AGMPyV , which can infect and immortalize human B cells 27 , 24 , 147 , 148 . If the newly discovered HPyV9 has the same tropism , it might have a causal relationship with B cell lymphomas . However , except for MCPyV , the most common pathological manifestation of infection with the new viruses identified so far is a lytic infection following reactivation in an immunosuppressed host . These lytic reactivations can be serious or even fatal , as suggested by PVAN and PML . For these diseases , antiviral therapies are desperately needed . Possible therapeutic strategies include small­molecule inhibitors of virus – glycan binding or of T antigen functions , booster immunization in anticipation of immunosuppressive regimens to increase antibody levels , or enhancement of cell­mediated immunity in elderly patients . The increasing use of immunosuppressive therapies might lead to more cases of polyomavirus­induced disease and could create a market for effective therapeutics that inhibit polyomavirus rep­ lication . In addition , new therapeutics that target the oncogenic activity of the MCPyV T antigens or boost the immune response would be extremely beneficial in MCC . The evolution of polyomaviruses within and between species remains an active area of investigation . The close relationship with primate polyomaviruses also suggests that more human viruses might be discovered that are related to primate polyomaviruses which have yet to be associated with a human relative . The discovery of the skin­resident polyomaviruses HPyV6 and HPyV7 , with receptor specificities that extend to glycosaminoglycans as well as glycans , indicates that the polyomaviruses might be able to invade the papillomavirus niche . These two types of virus were once classified in a single family , Papovaviridae , and have many related features , so it would not be surprising if their infectious patterns intersect . Indeed , two of the most interesting species in this inter­ section are bandicoot papillomatosis carcinoma tosis viruses 1 and 2 , which are recombinant viruses with the early region of a polyomavirus and the late genes of a papillomavirus , and which occupy a skin niche 149 . The explosion in microbiome discovery will undoubt­ edly lead to the identification of more viruses and a growing family tree for the polyomaviruses . Much work lies ahead in filling in the biological and clinical data for each species and determining their relationship to human health . 1 . Johne , R . , Enderlein , D . , Nieper , H . & Muller , H . Novel polyomavirus detected in the feces of a chimpanzee by nested broad - spectrum PCR . J . Virol . 79 , 3883 – 3887 ( 2005 ) . 2 . Groenewoud , M . J . et al . Characterization of novel polyomaviruses from Bornean and Sumatran orang - utans . J . Gen . Virol . 91 , 653 – 658 ( 2010 ) . 3 . Deuzing , I . et al . Detection and characterization of two chimpanzee polyomavirus genotypes from different subspecies . Virol . J . 7 , 347 ( 2010 ) . 4 . Leendertz , F . H . et al . African great apes are naturally infected with polyomaviruses closely related to Merkel cell polyomavirus . J . Virol . 85 , 916 – 924 ( 2011 ) . 5 . Howley , P . M . & Livingston , D . M . Small DNA tumor viruses : large contributors to biomedical sciences . Virology 384 , 256 – 259 ( 2009 ) . 6 . Gardner , S . D . , Field , A . M . , Coleman , D . V . & Hulme , B . New human papovavirus ( BK ) isolated from urine after renal transplantation . Lancet 1 , 1253 – 1257 ( 1971 ) . 7 . Padgett , B . L . , Walker , D . L . , ZuRhein , G . M . , Eckroade , R . J . & Dessel , B . H . Cultivation of papova - like virus from human brain with progressive multifocal leucoencephalopathy . Lancet 1 , 1257 – 1260 ( 1971 ) . 8 . Kean , J . M . , Rao , S . , Wang , M . & Garcea , R . L . Seroepidemiology of human polyomaviruses . PLoS Pathog . 5 , e1000363 ( 2009 ) . The largest seroepidemiological study of the new viruses . 9 . Walker , D . L . & Padgett , B . L . The epidemiology of human polyomaviruses . Prog . Clin . Biol . Res . 105 , 99 – 106 ( 1983 ) . 10 . Stolt , A . , Sasnauskas , K . , Koskela , P . , Lehtinen , M . & Dillner , J . Seroepidemiology of the human polyomaviruses . J . Gen . Virol . 84 , 1499 – 1504 ( 2003 ) . 11 . Knowles , W . A . Discovery and epidemiology of the human polyomaviruses BK virus ( BKV ) and JC virus ( JCV ) . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 577 , 19 – 45 ( 2006 ) . 12 . Knowles , W . A . et al . Population - based study of antibody to the human polyomaviruses BKV and JCV and the simian polyomavirus SV40 . J . Med . Virol . 71 , 115 – 123 ( 2003 ) . 13 . Egli , A . et al . Prevalence of polyomavirus BK and JC infection and replication in 400 healthy blood donors . J . Infect . Dis . 199 , 837 – 846 ( 2009 ) . 14 . Ferenczy , M . W . et al . Molecular biology , epidemiology , and pathogenesis of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy , the JC virus - induced demyelinating disease of the human brain . Clin . Microbiol . Rev . 25 , 471 – 506 ( 2012 ) . 15 . Kuypers , D . R . Management of polyomavirus - associated nephropathy in renal transplant recipients . Nature Rev . Nephrol . 8 , 390 – 402 ( 2012 ) . 16 . Allander , T . et al . Identification of a third human polyomavirus . J . Virol . 81 , 4130 – 4136 ( 2007 ) . The discovery of KIPyV , the first new human polyomavirus to be discovered in 36 years . 17 . Gaynor , A . M . et al . Identification of a novel polyomavirus from patients with acute respiratory tract infections . PLoS Pathog . 3 , e64 ( 2007 ) . The discovery of WUPyV by next - generation sequencing . 18 . Siebrasse , E . A . et al . Identification of MW polyomavirus , a novel polyomavirus in human stool . J . Virol . 86 , 10321 – 10326 ( 2012 ) . 19 . Lim , E . S . et al . Discovery of STL polyomavirus , a polyomavirus of ancestral recombinant origin that encodes a unique T antigen by alternative splicing . Virology 436 , 295 – 303 ( 2012 ) . 20 . Haycox , C . L . et al . Trichodysplasia spinulosa – a newly described folliculocentric viral infection in an immunocompromised host . J . Investig . Dermatol . Symp . Proc . 4 , 268 – 271 ( 1999 ) . 21 . van der Meijden , E . et al . Discovery of a new human polyomavirus associated with trichodysplasia spinulosa in an immunocompromized patient . PLoS Pathog . 6 , e1001024 ( 2010 ) . The discovery of TSPyV using rolling - circle amplification to identify a virus that had been detected by electron microscopy . 22 . Feng , H . , Shuda , M . , Chang , Y . & Moore , P . S . Clonal integration of a polyomavirus in human Merkel cell carcinoma . Science 319 , 1096 – 1100 ( 2008 ) . The discovery of MCPyV as a result of the recognition that MCC occurs more frequently in immunocompromised patients than in non - immunocompromised individuals . Southern blotting also demonstrates the clonal integration of MCPyV in tumour cells . 23 . Schowalter , R . M . , Pastrana , D . V . , Pumphrey , K . A . , Moyer , A . L . & Buck , C . B . Merkel cell polyomavirus and two previously unknown polyomaviruses are chronically shed from human skin . Cell Host Microbe 7 , 509 – 515 ( 2010 ) . 24 . Scuda , N . et al . A novel human polyomavirus closely related to the African green monkey - derived lymphotropic polyomavirus . J . Virol . 85 , 4586 – 4590 ( 2011 ) . 25 . Reyes , A . , Semenkovich , N . P . , Whiteson , K . , Rohwer , F . & Gordon , J . I . Going viral : next - generation sequencing applied to phage populations in the human gut . Nature Rev . Microbiol . 10 , 607 – 617 ( 2012 ) . 26 . Rector , A . , Tachezy , R . & Van Ranst , M . A sequence - independent strategy for detection and cloning of circular DNA virus genomes by using multiply primed rolling - circle amplification . J . Virol . 78 , 4993 – 4998 ( 2004 ) . 27 . Sauvage , V . et al . Human polyomavirus related to African green monkey lymphotropic polyomavirus . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 17 , 1364 – 1370 ( 2011 ) . 28 . Yu , G . et al . Discovery of a novel polyomavirus in acute diarrheal samples from children . PLoS ONE 7 , e49449 ( 2012 ) . 29 . Buck , C . B . et al . Complete genome sequence of a tenth human polyomavirus . J . Virol . 86 , 10887 ( 2012 ) . 30 . Johne , R . et al . Taxonomical developments in the family Polyomaviridae . Arch . Virol . 156 , 1627 – 1634 ( 2011 ) . 31 . Pastrana , D . V . et al . Quantitation of human seroresponsiveness to Merkel cell polyomavirus . PLoS Pathog . 5 , e1000578 ( 2009 ) . 32 . Viscidi , R . P . et al . Age - specific seroprevalence of Merkel cell polyomavirus , BK virus , and JC virus . Clin . Vaccine Immunol . 18 , 1737 – 1743 ( 2011 ) . 33 . Nguyen , N . L . , Le , B . M . & Wang , D . Serologic evidence of frequent human infection with WU and KI polyomaviruses . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 15 , 1199 – 1205 ( 2009 ) . 34 . Gorelik , L . , Goelz , S . & Sandrock , A . W . Asymptomatic reactivation of JC virus in patients treated with natalizumab . N . Engl . J . Med . 361 , 2487 – 2488 ; author reply 2489 – 2490 ( 2009 ) . The worrisome reactivation of JCPyV in patients treated with immunomodulatory therapies . 35 . Feltkamp , M . C . , Kazem , S . , van der Meijden , E . , Lauber , C . & Gorbalenya , A . E . From Stockholm to Malawi : recent developments in studying human polyomaviruses . J . Gen . Virol . 94 , 482 – 496 ( 2013 ) . 36 . Dalianis , T . & Garcea , R . L . Welcome to the Polyomaviridae . Semin . Cancer Biol . 19 , 209 – 210 ( 2009 ) . 37 . Jiang , M . , Abend , J . R . , Johnson , S . F . & Imperiale , M . J . The role of polyomaviruses in human disease . Virology 384 , 266 – 273 ( 2009 ) . R E V I E W S 274 | APRIL 2013 | VOLUME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 38 . Tooze , J . & Acheson , N . H . DNA Tumor Viruses ( Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory , 1981 ) . 39 . Shuda , M . et al . T antigen mutations are a human tumor - specific signature for Merkel cell polyomavirus . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 105 , 16272 – 16277 ( 2008 ) . Mutations in MCPyV large T antigen , found in MCC , disable the ability of the virus to replicate viral origin - containing DNA . 40 . Cheng , J . , DeCaprio , J . A . , Fluck , M . M . & Schaffhausen , B . S . Cellular transformation by Simian Virus 40 and Murine Polyoma Virus T antigens . Semin . Cancer Biol . 19 , 218 – 228 ( 2009 ) . 41 . Raghava , S . , Giorda , K . M . , Romano , F . B . , Heuck , A . P . & Hebert , D . N . The SV40 late protein VP4 is a viroporin that forms pores to disrupt membranes for viral release . PLoS Pathog . 7 , e1002116 ( 2011 ) . 42 . Rozenblatt - Rosen , O . et al . Interpreting cancer genomes using systematic host network perturbations by tumour virus proteins . Nature 487 , 491 – 495 ( 2012 ) . 43 . Krumbholz , A . , Bininda - Emonds , O . R . , Wutzler , P . & Zell , R . Phylogenetics , evolution , and medical importance of polyomaviruses . Infect . Genet . Evol . 9 , 784 – 799 ( 2009 ) . 44 . Perez - Losada , M . et al . Comparing phylogenetic codivergence between polyomaviruses and their hosts . J . Virol . 80 , 5663 – 5669 ( 2006 ) . 45 . Warden , C . D . & Lacey , S . F . Updated phylogenetic analysis of polyomavirus - host co - evolution . J . Bioinfo . Res . 1 , 46 – 49 ( 2012 ) . 46 . Campbell , K . S . et al . DnaJ / hsp40 chaperone domain of SV40 large T antigen promotes efficient viral DNA replication . Genes Dev . 11 , 1098 – 1110 ( 1997 ) . 47 . DeCaprio , J . A . et al . SV40 large tumor antigen forms a specific complex with the product of the retinoblastoma susceptibility gene . Cell 54 , 275 – 283 ( 1988 ) . 48 . Stubdal , H . et al . Inactivation of pRB - related proteins p130 and p107 mediated by the J domain of simian virus 40 large T antigen . Mol . Cell . Biol . 17 , 4979 – 4990 ( 1997 ) . 49 . Liu , X . et al . Merkel cell polyomavirus large T antigen disrupts lysosome clustering by translocating human Vam6p from the cytoplasm to the nucleus . J . Biol . Chem . 286 , 17079 – 17090 ( 2011 ) . 50 . Sowd , G . A . & Fanning , E . A wolf in sheep’s clothing : SV40 co - opts host genome maintenance proteins to replicate viral DNA . PLoS Pathog . 8 , e1002994 ( 2012 ) . 51 . Yardimci , H . et al . Bypass of a protein barrier by a replicative DNA helicase . Nature 492 , 205 – 209 ( 2012 ) . 52 . Lilyestrom , W . , Klein , M . G . , Zhang , R . , Joachimiak , A . & Chen , X . S . Crystal structure of SV40 large T - antigen bound to p53 : interplay between a viral oncoprotein and a cellular tumor suppressor . Genes Dev . 20 , 2373 – 2382 ( 2006 ) . 53 . Welcker , M . & Clurman , B . E . The SV40 large T antigen contains a decoy phosphodegron that mediates its interactions with Fbw7 / hCdc4 . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 7654 – 7658 ( 2005 ) . 54 . Fine , D . A . et al . Identification of FAM111A as an SV40 host range restriction and adenovirus helper factor . PLoS Pathog . 8 , e1002949 ( 2012 ) . 55 . Pallas , D . C . et al . Polyoma small and middle T antigens and SV40 small t antigen form stable complexes with protein phosphatase 2A . Cell 60 , 167 – 176 ( 1990 ) . 56 . Pallas , D . C . et al . The third subunit of protein phosphatase 2A ( PP2A ) , a 55 - kilodalton protein which is apparently substituted for by T antigens in complexes with the 36 - and 63 - kilodalton PP2A subunits , bears little resemblance to T antigens . J . Virol . 66 , 886 – 893 ( 1992 ) . 57 . Shuda , M . , Kwun , H . J . , Feng , H . , Chang , Y . & Moore , P . S . Human Merkel cell polyomavirus small T antigen is an oncoprotein targeting the 4E - BP1 translation regulator . J . Clin . Invest . 121 , 3623 – 3634 ( 2011 ) . The finding that MCPyV small T antigen is expressed in most MCCs , is oncogenic and can promote phosphorylation of 4EBP1 . 58 . Seo , G . J . , Fink , L . H . , O’Hara , B . , Atwood , W . J . & Sullivan , C . S . Evolutionarily conserved function of a viral microRNA . J . Virol . 82 , 9823 – 9828 ( 2008 ) . 59 . Seo , G . J . , Chen , C . J . & Sullivan , C . S . Merkel cell polyomavirus encodes a microRNA with the ability to autoregulate viral gene expression . Virology 383 , 183 – 187 ( 2009 ) . 60 . Lee , S . et al . Identification and validation of a novel mature microRNA encoded by the Merkel cell polyomavirus in human Merkel cell carcinomas . J . Clin . Virol . 52 , 272 – 275 ( 2011 ) . 61 . Sullivan , C . S . , Grundhoff , A . T . , Tevethia , S . , Pipas , J . M . & Ganem , D . SV40 - encoded microRNAs regulate viral gene expression and reduce susceptibility to cytotoxic T cells . Nature 435 , 682 – 686 ( 2005 ) . 62 . Bauman , Y . et al . An identical miRNA of the human JC and BK polyoma viruses targets the stress - induced ligand ULBP3 to escape immune elimination . Cell Host Microbe 9 , 93 – 102 ( 2011 ) . 63 . Salunke , D . M . , Caspar , D . L . D . & Garcea , R . L . Self - assembly of purified polyomavirus capsid protein VP1 . Cell 46 , 895 – 904 ( 1986 ) . 64 . Montross , L . et al . Nuclear assembly of polyomavirus capsids in insect cells expressing the major capsid protein VP1 . J . Virol . 65 , 4991 – 4998 ( 1991 ) . 65 . Cole , C . N . , Landers , T . , Goff , S . P . , Manteuil - Brutlag , S . & Berg , P . Physical and genetic characterization of deletion mutants of simian virus 40 constructed in vitro . J . Virol . 24 , 277 – 294 ( 1977 ) . 66 . Giorda , K . M . , Raghava , S . & Hebert , D . N . The Simian virus 40 late viral protein VP4 disrupts the nuclear envelope for viral release . J . Virol . 86 , 3180 – 3192 ( 2012 ) . 67 . Neu , U . , Stehle , T . & Atwood , W . J . The Polyomaviridae : contributions of virus structure to our understanding of virus receptors and infectious entry . Virology 384 , 389 – 399 ( 2009 ) . An excellent review of the polyomavirus receptors . 68 . Neu , U . et al . Structure - function analysis of the human JC polyomavirus establishes the LSTc pentasaccharide as a functional receptor motif . Cell Host Microbe 8 , 309 – 319 ( 2010 ) . 69 . Erickson , K . D . , Garcea , R . L . & Tsai , B . Ganglioside GT1b is a putative host cell receptor for the Merkel cell polyomavirus . J . Virol . 83 , 10275 – 10279 ( 2009 ) . 70 . Stehle , T . & Harrison , S . C . High - resolution structure of a polyomavirus VP1 - oligosaccharide complex : implications for assembly and receptor binding . EMBO J . 16 , 5139 – 5148 ( 1997 ) . 71 . Stehle , T . , Yan , Y . , Benjamin , T . L . & Harrison , S . C . Structure of murine polyomavirus complexed with an oligosaccharide receptor fragment . Nature 369 , 160 – 163 ( 1994 ) . 72 . Neu , U . , Wang , J . , Macejak , D . , Garcea , R . L . & Stehle , T . Structures of the major capsid proteins of the human Karolinska Institutet and Washington University polyomaviruses . J . Virol . 85 , 7384 – 7392 ( 2011 ) . 73 . Neu , U . et al . Structures of Merkel cell polyomavirus VP1 complexes define a sialic acid binding site required for infection . PLoS Pathog . 8 , e1002738 ( 2012 ) . The latest data on structural differences in the VP1 proteins of the new human polyomaviruses . 74 . Magaldi , T . G . et al . Mutations in the GM1 binding site of simian virus 40 VP1 alter receptor usage and cell tropism . J . Virol . 86 , 7028 – 7042 ( 2012 ) . 75 . Schowalter , R . M . , Reinhold , W . C . & Buck , C . B . Entry tropism of BK and Merkel cell polyomaviruses in cell culture . PLoS ONE 7 , e42181 ( 2012 ) . 76 . Gorelik , L . et al . Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy ( PML ) development is associated with mutations in JC virus capsid protein VP1 that change its receptor specificity . J . Infect . Dis . 204 , 103 – 114 ( 2011 ) . 77 . Reid , C . E . et al . Sequencing and analysis of JC virus DNA from natalizumab - treated PML patients . J . Infect . Dis . 204 , 237 – 244 ( 2011 ) . 78 . Sunyaev , S . R . , Lugovskoy , A . , Simon , K . & Gorelik , L . Adaptive mutations in the JC virus protein capsid are associated with progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy ( PML ) . PLoS Genet . 5 , e1000368 ( 2009 ) . 79 . Dang , X . , Wuthrich , C . , Gordon , J . , Sawa , H . & Koralnik , I . J . JC virus encephalopathy is associated with a novel agnoprotein - deletion JCV variant . PLoS ONE 7 , e35793 ( 2012 ) . 80 . Major , E . O . , Amemiya , K . , Tornatore , C . S . , Houff , S . A . & Berger , J . R . Pathogenesis and molecular biology of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy , the JC virus - induced demyelinating disease of the human brain . Clin . Microbiol . Rev . 5 , 49 – 73 ( 1992 ) . 81 . Pfister , L . A . , Letvin , N . L . & Koralnik , I . J . JC virus regulatory region tandem repeats in plasma and central nervous system isolates correlate with poor clinical outcome in patients with progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy . J . Virol . 75 , 5672 – 5676 ( 2001 ) . 82 . Gosert , R . et al . Polyomavirus BK with rearranged noncoding control region emerge in vivo in renal transplant patients and increase viral replication and cytopathology . J . Exp . Med . 205 , 841 – 852 ( 2008 ) . 83 . Pastrana , D . V . et al . Neutralization serotyping of BK polyomavirus infection in kidney transplant recipients . PLoS Pathog . 8 , e1002650 ( 2012 ) . 84 . Freund , R . , Garcea , R . L . , Sahli , R . & Benjamin , T . L . A single - amino - acid substitution in polyomavirus VP1 correlates with plaque size and hemagglutination behavior . J . Virol . 65 , 350 – 355 ( 1991 ) . 85 . Bauer , P . H . et al . Genetic and structural analysis of a virulence determinant in polyomavirus VP1 . J . Virol . 69 , 7925 – 7931 ( 1995 ) . The demonstration that MPyV spread in the host is dependent on receptor usage . 86 . Bauer , P . H . et al . Discrimination between sialic acid - containing receptors and pseudoreceptors regulates polyomavirus spread in the mouse . J . Virol . 73 , 5826 – 5832 ( 1999 ) . 87 . Giroglou , T . , Florin , L . , Schafer , F . , Streeck , R . E . & Sapp , M . Human papillomavirus infection requires cell surface heparan sulfate . J . Virol . 75 , 1565 – 1570 ( 2001 ) . 88 . Johnson , K . M . et al . Role of heparan sulfate in attachment to and infection of the murine female genital tract by human papillomavirus . J . Virol . 83 , 2067 – 2074 ( 2009 ) . 89 . Buck , C . B . , Pastrana , D . V . , Lowy , D . R . & Schiller , J . T . Generation of HPV pseudovirions using transfection and their use in neutralization assays . Methods Mol . Med . 119 , 445 – 462 ( 2005 ) . 90 . Schowalter , R . M . , Pastrana , D . V . & Buck , C . B . Glycosaminoglycans and sialylated glycans sequentially facilitate Merkel cell polyomavirus infectious entry . PLoS Pathog . 7 , e1002161 ( 2011 ) . 91 . Broekema , N . M . & Imperiale , M . J . Efficient propagation of archetype BK and JC polyomaviruses . Virology 422 , 235 – 241 ( 2012 ) . 92 . Dalianis , T . , Ramqvist , T . , Andreasson , K . , Kean , J . M . & Garcea , R . L . K . I . WU and Merkel cell polyomaviruses : a new era for human polyomavirus research . Semin . Cancer Biol . 19 , 270 – 275 ( 2009 ) . 93 . Bialasiewicz , S . et al . Presence of the newly discovered human polyomaviruses KI and WU in Australian patients with acute respiratory tract infection . J . Clin . Virol . 41 , 63 – 68 ( 2008 ) . 94 . Bialasiewicz , S . , Whiley , D . M . , Lambert , S . B . , Nissen , M . D . & Sloots , T . P . Detection of BK , JC , WU , or KI polyomaviruses in faecal , urine , blood , cerebrospinal fluid and respiratory samples . J . Clin . Virol . 45 , 249 – 254 ( 2009 ) . 95 . Han , T . H . , Chung , J . Y . , Koo , J . W . , Kim , S . W . & Hwang , E . S . WU polyomavirus in children with acute lower respiratory tract infections , South Korea . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 13 , 1766 – 1768 ( 2007 ) . 96 . Neske , F . et al . WU polyomavirus infection in children , Germany . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 14 , 680 – 681 ( 2008 ) . 97 . Ren , L . et al . WU polyomavirus in fecal specimens of children with acute gastroenteritis , China . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 15 , 134 – 135 ( 2009 ) . 98 . Le , B . M . et al . Clinical and epidemiologic characterization of WU polyomavirus infection , St . Louis , Missouri . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 13 , 1936 – 1938 ( 2007 ) . 99 . Wattier , R . L . et al . Role of human polyomaviruses in respiratory tract disease in young children . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 14 , 1766 – 1768 ( 2008 ) . 100 . Rao , S . , Garcea , R . L . , Robinson , C . C . & Simoes , E . A . WU and KI polyomavirus infections in pediatric hematology / oncology patients with acute respiratory tract illness . J . Clin . Virol . 52 , 28 – 32 ( 2011 ) . 101 . Debiaggi , M . et al . Molecular epidemiology of KI and WU polyomaviruses in infants with acute respiratory disease and in adult hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients . J . Med . Virol . 82 , 153 – 156 ( 2010 ) . 102 . Dang , X . et al . Infrequent detection of KI , WU and MC polyomaviruses in immunosuppressed individuals with or without progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy . PLoS ONE 6 , e16736 ( 2011 ) . 103 . Mourez , T . et al . Polyomaviruses KI and WU in immunocompromised patients with respiratory disease . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 15 , 107 – 109 ( 2009 ) . 104 . Tolstov , Y . L . et al . Asymptomatic primary Merkel cell polyomavirus infection among adults . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 17 , 1371 – 1380 ( 2011 ) . 105 . Norja , P . , Ubillos , I . , Templeton , K . & Simmonds , P . No evidence for an association between infections with WU and KI polyomaviruses and respiratory disease . J . Clin . Virol . 40 , 307 – 311 ( 2007 ) . 106 . Payungporn , S . et al . Prevalence and molecular characterization of WU / KI polyomaviruses isolated from pediatric patients with respiratory disease in Thailand . Virus Res . 135 , 230 – 236 ( 2008 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | MICROBIOLOGY VOLUME 11 | APRIL 2013 | 275 © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 107 . Toker , C . Trabecular carcinoma of the skin . Arch . Dermatol . 105 , 107 – 110 ( 1972 ) . 108 . Koljonen , V . et al . Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia patients have a high risk of Merkel - cell polyomavirus DNA - positive Merkel - cell carcinoma . Br . J . Cancer 101 , 1444 – 1447 ( 2009 ) . 109 . de Giorgi , V . , Benemei , S . , Grazzini , M . , Lotti , T . & Geppetti , P . Rapid growth of Merkel cell carcinoma during etanercept treatment of psoriatic arthritis : cause or coincidence ? Acta Derm . Venereol . 91 , 354 – 355 ( 2011 ) . 110 . Paulson , K . G . , Iyer , J . G . & Nghiem , P . Asymmetric lateral distribution of melanoma and Merkel cell carcinoma in the United States . J . Am . Acad . Dermatol . 65 , 35 – 39 ( 2011 ) . 111 . Ohnishi , Y . et al . Merkel cell carcinoma and multiple Bowen’s disease : incidental association or possible relationship to inorganic arsenic exposure ? J . Dermatol . 24 , 310 – 316 ( 1997 ) . 112 . Sahi , H . et al . Increased incidence of Merkel cell carcinoma among younger statin users . Cancer Epidemiol . 36 , 421 – 424 ( 2012 ) . 113 . Rodig , S . J . et al . Improved detection suggests all Merkel cell carcinomas harbor Merkel polyomavirus . J . Clin . Invest . 122 , 4645 – 4653 ( 2012 ) . This study raises the possibility that all MCCs contain MCPyV . 114 . Schmitt , M . , Wieland , U . , Kreuter , A . & Pawlita , M . C - terminal deletions of Merkel cell polyomavirus large T - antigen , a highly specific surrogate marker for virally induced malignancy . Int . J . Cancer 131 , 2863 – 2868 ( 2012 ) . 115 . Kraus , I . et al . The majority of viral - cellular fusion transcripts in cervical carcinomas cotranscribe cellular sequences of known or predicted genes . Cancer Res . 68 , 2514 – 2522 ( 2008 ) . 116 . Duncavage , E . J . et al . Hybrid capture and next - generation sequencing identify viral integration sites from formalin - fixed , paraffin - embedded tissue . J . Mol . Diagn . 13 , 325 – 333 ( 2011 ) . 117 . Shuda , M . et al . Human Merkel cell polyomavirus infection I . MCV T antigen expression in Merkel cell carcinoma , lymphoid tissues and lymphoid tumors . Int . J . Cancer 125 , 1243 – 1249 ( 2009 ) . 118 . Bhatia , K . , Goedert , J . J . , Modali , R . , Preiss , L . & Ayers , L . W . Merkel cell carcinoma subgroups by Merkel cell polyomavirus DNA relative abundance and oncogene expression . Int . J . Cancer 126 , 2240 – 2246 ( 2010 ) . 119 . Houben , R . et al . An intact retinoblastoma protein - binding site in Merkel cell polyomavirus large T antigen is required for promoting growth of Merkel cell carcinoma cells . Int . J . Cancer 130 , 847 – 856 ( 2012 ) . 120 . Arora , R . et al . Survivin is a therapeutic target in Merkel cell carcinoma . Sci . Transl . Med . 4 , 133ra56 ( 2012 ) . 121 . Busam , K . J . et al . Merkel cell polyomavirus expression in merkel cell carcinomas and its absence in combined tumors and pulmonary neuroendocrine carcinomas . Am . J . Surg . Pathol . 33 , 1378 – 1385 ( 2009 ) . 122 . Schrama , D . et al . Merkel cell polyomavirus status is not associated with clinical course of Merkel cell carcinoma . J . Invest . Dermatol . 131 , 1631 – 1638 ( 2011 ) . 123 . Paik , J . Y . et al . Immunohistochemistry for Merkel cell polyomavirus is highly specific but not sensitive for the diagnosis of Merkel cell carcinoma in the Australian population . Hum . Pathol . 42 , 1385 – 1390 ( 2011 ) . 124 . Sihto , H . et al . Merkel cell polyomavirus infection , large T antigen , retinoblastoma protein and outcome in Merkel cell carcinoma . Clin . Cancer Res . 17 , 4806 – 4813 ( 2011 ) . 125 . Hafner , C . et al . Activation of the PI3K / AKT pathway in Merkel cell carcinoma . PLoS ONE 7 , e31255 ( 2012 ) . 126 . Nardi , V . et al . Activation of PI3K signaling in Merkel cell carcinoma . Clin . Cancer Res . 18 , 1227 – 1236 ( 2012 ) . 127 . Lill , C . et al . P53 mutation is a rare event in Merkel cell carcinoma of the head and neck . Eur . Arch . Otorhinolaryngol . 268 , 1639 – 1646 ( 2011 ) . 128 . Waltari , M . et al . Association of Merkel cell polyomavirus infection with tumor p53 , KIT , stem cell factor , PDGFR - alpha and survival in Merkel cell carcinoma . Int . J . Cancer 129 , 619 – 628 ( 2011 ) . 129 . Asioli , S . , Righi , A . , Volante , M . , Eusebi , V . & Bussolati , G . p63 expression as a new prognostic marker in Merkel cell carcinoma . Cancer 110 , 640 – 647 ( 2007 ) . 130 . Asioli , S . et al . Expression of p63 is the sole independent marker of aggressiveness in localised ( stage I – II ) Merkel cell carcinomas . Mod . Pathol . 24 , 1451 – 1461 ( 2011 ) . 131 . Hall , B . J . et al . Immunohistochemical prognostication of Merkel cell carcinoma : p63 expression but not polyomavirus status correlates with outcome . J . Cutan . Pathol . 39 , 911 – 917 ( 2012 ) . 132 . Lim , C . S . et al . Increasing tumor thickness is associated with recurrence and poorer survival in patients with Merkel cell carcinoma . Ann . Surg . Oncol . 19 , 3325 – 3334 ( 2012 ) . 133 . Higaki - Mori , H . et al . Association of Merkel cell polyomavirus infection with clinicopathological differences in Merkel cell carcinoma . Hum . Pathol . 43 , 2282 – 2291 ( 2012 ) . 134 . Paulson , K . G . et al . Antibodies to merkel cell polyomavirus T antigen oncoproteins reflect tumor burden in merkel cell carcinoma patients . Cancer Res . 70 , 8388 – 8397 ( 2010 ) . 135 . Iyer , J . G . et al . Merkel cell polyomavirus - specific CD8 + and CD4 + T - cell responses identified in Merkel cell carcinomas and blood . Clin . Cancer Res . 17 , 6671 – 6680 ( 2011 ) . 136 . Paulson , K . G . et al . Transcriptome - wide studies of merkel cell carcinoma and validation of intratumoral CD8 + lymphocyte invasion as an independent predictor of survival . J . Clin . Oncol . 29 , 1539 – 1546 ( 2011 ) . This study shows that patients with MCC who have a strong immune response have an improved prognosis compared with immunocompromised patients . 137 . Tolstov , Y . L . et al . Lack of evidence for direct involvement of Merkel cell polyomavirus ( MCV ) in chronic lymphocytic leukemia ( CLL ) . Blood 115 , 4973 – 4974 ( 2010 ) . 138 . Reisinger , D . M . et al . Lack of evidence for basal or squamous cell carcinoma infection with Merkel cell polyomavirus in immunocompetent patients with Merkel cell carcinoma . J . Am . Acad . Dermatol . 63 , 400 – 403 ( 2010 ) . 139 . Rollison , D . E . et al . Case - control study of Merkel cell polyomavirus infection and cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma . Cancer Epidemiol . Biomarkers Prev . 21 , 74 – 81 ( 2012 ) . 140 . Abend , J . R . , Jiang , M . & Imperiale , M . J . BK virus and human cancer : innocent until proven guilty . Semin . Cancer Biol . 19 , 252 – 260 ( 2009 ) . 141 . Pino , L . et al . Bladder transitional cell carcinoma and BK virus in a young kidney transplant recipient . Transpl . Infect . Dis . 15 , e25 – e27 ( 2012 ) . 142 . Vilkin , A . et al . Presence of JC virus DNA in the tumor tissue and normal mucosa of patients with sporadic colorectal cancer ( CRC ) or with positive family history and Bethesda criteria . Dig . Dis . Sci . 57 , 79 – 84 ( 2012 ) . 143 . Garcea , R . L . & Imperiale , M . J . Simian virus 40 infection of humans . J . Virol . 77 , 5039 – 5045 ( 2003 ) . 144 . Poulin , D . L . & DeCaprio , J . A . Is there a role for SV40 in human cancer ? J . Clin . Oncol . 24 , 4356 – 4365 ( 2006 ) . 145 . Dela Cruz , F . N . Jr et al . Novel polyomavirus associated with brain tumors in free - ranging Raccoons , Western United States . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 19 , 77 – 84 ( 2013 ) . 146 . Swanson , P . A . , Lukacher , A . E . & Szomolanyi - Tsuda , E . Immunity to polyomvirus infection : the polyomavirus – mouse model . Semin . Cancer Biol . 19 , 244 – 251 ( 2009 ) . 147 . zur Hausen , H . & Gissmann , L . Lymphotropic papovaviruses isolated from African green monkey and human cells . Med . Microbiol . Immunol . 167 , 137 – 153 ( 1979 ) . 148 . Kanda , T . & Takemoto , K . K . Monkey B - lymphotropic papovavirus mutant capable of replicating in T - lymphoblastoid cells . J . Virol . 55 , 96 – 100 ( 1985 ) . 149 . Woolford , L . et al . A novel virus detected in papillomas and carcinomas of the endangered western barred bandicoot ( Perameles bougainville ) exhibits genomic features of both the Papillomaviridae and Polyomaviridae . J . Virol . 81 , 13280 – 13290 ( 2007 ) . 150 . Sehr , P . , Zumbach , K . & Pawlita , M . A generic capture ELISA for recombinant proteins fused to glutathione S - transferase : validation for HPV serology . J . Immunol . Methods 253 , 153 – 162 ( 2001 ) . 151 . Viscidi , R . P . & Clayman , B . Serological cross reactivity between polyomavirus capsids . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 577 , 73 – 84 ( 2006 ) . 152 . Randhawa , P . et al . Identification of species - specific and cross - reactive epitopes in human polyomavirus capsids using monoclonal antibodies . J . Gen . Virol . 90 , 634 – 639 ( 2009 ) . 153 . Waterboer , T . et al . Multiplex human papillomavirus serology based on in situ - purified glutathione S - transferase fusion proteins . Clin . Chem . 51 , 1845 – 1853 ( 2005 ) . 154 . Edgar , R . C . MUSCLE : a multiple sequence alignment method with reduced time and space complexity . BMC Bioinformatics 5 , 113 ( 2004 ) . 155 . Caporaso , J . G . et al . QIIME allows analysis of high - throughput community sequencing data . Nature Methods 7 , 335 – 336 ( 2010 ) . 156 . Price , M . N . , Dehal , P . S . & Arkin , A . P . FastTree 2 – approximately maximum - likelihood trees for large alignments . PLoS ONE 5 , e9490 ( 2010 ) . 157 . Carter , J . J . et al . Association of Merkel cell polyomavirus - specific antibodies with Merkel cell carcinoma . J . Natl Cancer Inst . 101 , 1510 – 1522 ( 2009 ) . 158 . Gorelik , L . et al . Anti - JC virus antibodies : implications for PML risk stratification . Ann . Neurol . 68 , 295 – 303 ( 2010 ) . 159 . Faust , H . , Pastrana , D . V . , Buck , C . B . , Dillner , J . & Ekstrom , J . Antibodies to Merkel cell polyomavirus correlate to presence of viral DNA in the skin . J . Infect . Dis . 203 , 1096 – 1100 ( 2011 ) . 160 . van der Meijden , E . et al . Seroprevalence of trichodysplasia spinulosa - associated polyomavirus . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 17 , 1355 – 1363 ( 2011 ) . 161 . Nicol , J . T . et al . Seroprevalence and cross - reactivity of human polyomavirus 9 . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 18 , 1329 – 1332 ( 2012 ) . 162 . Trusch , F . et al . Seroprevalence of human polyomavirus 9 and cross - reactivity to African green monkey - derived lymphotropic polyomavirus . J . Gen . Virol . 93 , 698 – 705 ( 2012 ) . Acknowledgements This work was supported in part by US Public Health Service grants P01CA050661 , RO1CA93804 and R01CA63113 to J . A . D . and RO1CA37667 to R . L . G . The authors thank D . McDonald for assistance with the bioinformatics . Competing interests statement The authors declare no competing financial interests . FURTHER INFORMATION James A . Decaprio’s homepage : http : / / dms . hms . harvard . edu / BBS / fac / DeCaprio . php Robert L . Garcea’s homepage : http : / / garcealab . colorado . edu Functional Glycomics Gateway page for VP1 : http : / / www . functionalglycomics . org / CFGparadigms / index . php / Polyomavirus _ capsid _ protein _ ( VP1 ) ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF R E V I E W S 276 | APRIL 2013 | VOLUME 11 www . nature . com / reviews / micro © 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved