Journal of Leadership Education DOI : 10 . 12806 / V17 / I1 / A3 JANUARY 2018 APPLICATION 152 Using the Creative Cognition Approach in Essay Assignments in Leadership Education Tim Atkinson , Ed . D . University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences Abstract This application brief covers , “The Final Question” , an alternative essay design that encourages the learner to think creatively in Ph . D . Organization Theory or Leadership courses . “The Final Question” asks , “Do leaders change organizations or do organizations change leaders ? ” It is a simple question , but only the first in a series of prompts that guide Ph . D . learners on a path to become more creative thinkers . First , the learner must explore two knowledge domains in detail : Leadership Theory and Organization Theory . Next , the learner must combine information from each domain to create novel ideas about leadership action in organizational contexts . Finally , the learner must name the new concepts and share them with other learners . Issue Statement “The Final Question” asks , “Do leaders change organizations or do organizations change leaders ? ” It is indeed a simple question , but only the first in a series of prompts that guide Ph . D . learners on a path to become more creative thinkers . To answer the question , the learner must first explore two knowledge domains in detail : Leadership Theory and Organization Theory . Next , the learner must combine information from each domain to create novel ideas about leadership action in organizational contexts . The approach is backed by cognitive learning theory and taps Bloom’s taxonomy at the creativity level ( Anderson et al . , 2001 ; Bloom , 1956 ) . More specifically , the exercise is backed by creative cognition , concept combination , and concept modification theories ( Estes & Ward , 2002 ; Finke , Ward , & Smith , 1992 ; Steven , Ward , & Finke , 1995 ; Ward , 2001 ; Ward , Patterson , & Sifonis , 2004 ; Ward , 2008 ; Ward & Wickes , 2009 ) . Anecdotally , students found the exercise challenging with self - reports of better understanding of organizational dynamics . I took this approach because , first , when Ph . D . learners took my foundation course in Organizational Theory , they often had trouble recalling their Leadership Theory from the previous semester . I needed them to know Leadership Theory to make the Organization course more meaningful . Second , I believe a Ph . D . program should teach learners how to generate new concepts or modify existing concepts to create new knowledge from broad categories . After all , this is what learners do at the dissertation phase when they make the transition from didactics to independent scholars . This reinforces learning from previous courses and teaches learners to integrate ideas from across the curriculum . Finally , Priority I of the National Leadership Education Research Agenda ( NLERA ) encourages creativity by suggesting the combination of concepts from different disciplines and moving away from the taken - for - granted approaches to teaching and learning ( Jenkins & Dugan , 2013 ) . Journal of Leadership Education DOI : 10 . 12806 / V17 / I1 / A3 JANUARY 2018 APPLICATION 153 Learner Profile Most learners enter our Ph . D . program with a Master’s degree , most of them work either full or part - time , and most have families . I wanted to encourage their development by opening the class to these experiences , cognitive maps , and their desire to pursue learning at this stage of their lives . It was also important to entice them to transform their ways of thinking about static theories and assumptions . The “Final Question” includes the appropriate prompts for creative thinking , and provides the flexibility needed for the self - directed style of an adult Ph . D . learner . The tool is also grounded in the cognitive perspective that helps us understand how concepts are developed behind the scenes , so to speak , and to guide the learner to transform the way they know , how they know and how to change static concepts into modified or new ones ( Merriam & Bierema , 2014 ) . One of the prime objectives of a Ph . D . program is to guide the scholar toward independence and to equip them with the tools they need to create new knowledge or modify existing knowledge . The new taxonomy of learning replaces the word “synthesis” with the word “creativity” for excellent reason , because “creativity” explains the process of generating meaning and outcomes instead of the simple explanations of relationships in existing knowledge ( Krathwohl & Anderson , 2010 ) . We will touch on the theory of design , including self - directed learning ( Merriam & Bierema , 2014 ) , creative cognition , conceptual combination and concept modification theories . Literature Review Creativity in Leadership Education . Scholars in Leadership Education encourage creativity for leaders , followers , scholars , and learners ( Baublits , 2014 ; Paxton & Van Stralen , 2014 ) . Priority I of the National Leadership Education Research Agenda ( NLERA ) encourages creativity by suggesting the combination of concepts from different disciplines and moving away from the taken - for - granted approaches to teaching and learning ( Jenkins & Dugan , 2013 ) . We seem to do a great job with discussion , group activities , essays , research papers and critiques . Paxton and Van Stralen ( 2015 ) suggested teachers consider using “Practices that Foster a New Mindset” in learners such as collaboration in leadership , noting that collaboration builds the environment for creativity . Baublits ( 2014 ) reminds us that collaboration also brings leaders and followers together to participate in the activity of “organizing” which is a creative endeavor itself . The instructor can set the expectations of a collaborative environment providing some structure , and by allowing the leaner to self - direct some aspects of their learning . The “Final Question” exercise does both . Self - Directed Learning . The adult Ph . D . learner should be encouraged to pick the concepts at the beginning stage of the exercise and think independently . At the same time , learners of at all stages can still benefit from some structured prompts . The exercise involves both approaches . Synergy , therefore , is achieved because the learner selects some aspects of the learning , and the instructor provides the environment and tools they need to start and finish . In the end , learners make meaning of the process ( Merriam & Bierema , 2014 ) . Creative cognition , then , is also a component of transformation in the Final Question exercise because the learner must combine concepts and build a platform for new ideas ( Finke et al . , 1992 ; Steven et al . , Journal of Leadership Education DOI : 10 . 12806 / V17 / I1 / A3 JANUARY 2018 APPLICATION 154 1995 ) . What are the mechanisms , then , that make creativity work and what are some ways to encourage the development of creativity in the learning environment ? Creative Cognition . By using a creative cognition approach , we can encourage creativity in conjunction with other cognitive functions ( Finke et al . , 1992 ; Steven et al . , 1995 ; Ward , 2001 ; Ward et al . , 2004 ; Ward , 2008 ; Ward & Wickes , 2009 ) . Creative cognition encourages learners to create new ideas through concept combination , which is where learners are encouraged to play with existing concepts in a way that creates novel or new thoughts ( Ward , 2001 ) . Emergent thoughts stretch the creative brain to make the ideas mainstream . Concept modification , on the other hand , is also an avenue for creative thought leading to the modification or new use of existing concepts ( Estes & Ward , 2002 ; Ward , 2001 ; Ward et al . , 2004 ; Ward & Wickes , 2009 ) . Further , concept modification and concept combination seem to follow the same thought processes scholars use to code and categorize concepts in qualitative research or when naming the emergent factors in a factor analysis . For instance , Saldaña and Omasta ( 2018 ) note that the underlying principle of qualitative data analysis is “analytic synthesis” or the combination of concepts to create new categories . Also , Creswell and Poth ( 2018 ) describe axial coding as a method for organizing data in new and different ways in qualitative data analysis . Ward ( 2008 ) argues that we should not ignore domain knowledge either . In fact , it is important to expand knowledge in several fields to increase the repertoire of creative activity . More knowledge areas create more opportunities for concept combination and modification . But Ward ( 2008 ) makes it clear that the novel ideas that emerge in creativity are outside simple categorization . For instance , it ' s one thing to identify the type of leadership an individual expresses at the individual level of analysis , but it is quite a different kind of process to see how the leadership approach changes in various organizational contexts . The Final Question encourages the use of two important domains in Leadership Studies , Organizations and Leadership Theory , to promote this innovation . The knowledge dimensions and cognitive processes intersect in multiple areas of Bloom ' s taxonomy , but creativity , in particular , requires the learner to pull together different concepts , find gaps , and create new knowledge . The tool systematically guides the learner and the teacher through all these stages . Each step should help the learner see the learning in progress and help the instructor guide the learning process , which constitutes a metacognitive experience . Description of the Application “The Final Question” asks , “Do leaders change organizations or do organizations change leaders ? ” It is a simple question , but the first in a series of steps that guide Ph . D . learners on a path to become more creative problem solvers . To answer the question , the learner must first explore two knowledge domains in detail : Leadership Theory and Organization Theory . Next , the learner must combine information from each domain to create novel ideas about leadership action in organizational contexts . The framework I use for the Final Question comes in the following paragraphs . It is not necessary for to include Bloom’s learning dimensions , nor the Geneplore dimensions , in the instructions , but going forward I think it is a good idea as it encourages metacognition . The application follows the Geneplore model described by Finke , Ward and Smith ( 1992 ) , which involves a phase for generating ideas and then for exploring those ideas in different avenues . The following outline helps keep thoughts and the narrative organized Journal of Leadership Education DOI : 10 . 12806 / V17 / I1 / A3 JANUARY 2018 APPLICATION 155 and focused so learners do not go on tangents and the instructor has a standard by which to evaluate the work ( Finke , Ward , and Smith , 1992 ) . In Figure 1 the creative process can be prompted by a task , in this case the Final Question . After the prompt , I want the learner to generate pre - inventive structures or the start of new ideas . In the second phase , I want learners to explore and interpret these new structures , and focus the concepts until the concepts are somewhat solidified . Then , eventually , I want learners to explain the concepts to others . In the Final Question , ideas and pre - inventive structures are generated in Sections 1 - 4 ( see below ) . Because writing a paper is a creative process , learners will likely cycle through generative and exploration phases throughout the life of the exercise . In Section 4 , the learner is prompted to create a chart illustrating the convergence of their domain knowledge in leadership theory and their domain knowledge organization theory . The chart adds some constraints , but it keeps the project focused . The blanks spaces in the chart are where leadership theory and organization theory come together and these can be pre - inventive structures . Generation of pre - inventive structures Product Constraints Pre - inventive exploration and interpretation PROMPT Final Question Instructions limited to leadership and organizations Focus – Expand Concept Figure 1 . Finke , Ward and Smith’s ( 1992 , Page 18 ) Geneplore model for creativity applied to the Final Question exercise Journal of Leadership Education DOI : 10 . 12806 / V17 / I1 / A3 JANUARY 2018 APPLICATION 156 Section 1 : Introduction . Present The Issue  Introduce the question , “Do organizations change leaders , or do leaders change organizations ? ”  Explain why the issue is necessary for leadership and the study of organizations . Remember that Leadership is at the individual level of analysis and that institutional theory allows for the examination of multiple dimensions at the same time . Just be sure to let the reader know when you are changing the level of analysis from one stage to the next .  Provide a summary of the literature you will cover .  One paragraph . Section 2 : Opening Paragraph  Pick four leadership theories ( your choice from the literature ) . It does not matter if you pick a theory you think will fit the context below because you must analyze how the leadership approach works anyway . There will always be weaknesses . There will always be strengths , but I recommend that you use a random method for picking your theories .  Pick four organizational theories . Again , it does not matter if you pick a perfect match of organizational forms and leadership approaches , you will find strengths and weaknesses no matter what . The organization contexts are constantly changing anyway , and are only snapshots of how things work . A leadership approach will also have to shift . There is no clear pathway , but you will be discovering places where these leadership shifts might take place in context .  Describe how the leadership approaches might work in the organizational contexts . For example , if you picked rational , natural , open , mixed forms ( your choice , but maintain consistency throughout the paper ) , explain how those contexts might strengthen or weaken the leadership theory and vice versa .  You should be able to write one or two paragraphs . This is just a summary introduction . The meat of the approach comes in the next sections .  Bloom Knowledge Dimension : Known facts and concepts  Bloom Cognitive Dimension : Remembering , Understanding  Geneplore Phase : Generative Section 3 : Literature Review  Review the Four Leadership Theories in Detail  Consider the four forms of leadership you mentioned in the opening paragraph . Approach this as you would a literature review .  State the strengths and weaknesses of the theories . But you should avoid writing about the potential interactions with your organizational forms . It’s okay to think about them and journal your thoughts . Idea generation begins early and you should never ignore it . But for the sake of this paper , you’ll get to the specifics later so don’t get sidetracked here .  Do not write about the organizational theories yet . That comes next .  Don’t forget to cite the authors .  No Limit on Paragraphs  Review the Four Organizational Theories You Picked Journal of Leadership Education DOI : 10 . 12806 / V17 / I1 / A3 JANUARY 2018 APPLICATION 157  Consider the forms of organizations you mentioned in the opening paragraph , and approach this section just like a literature review as well .  You will still begin to generate ideas here , but journal about them . Your main task here is to review each organizational theory and its strengths and weaknesses . Remember , you will get to the specifics later so don’t get sidetracked here , either .  Don’t talk about leadership in context yet .  Don’t forget to cite the authors .  In the next section , you will create a concept chart illustrating the characteristics of each organizational type you discussed .  Bloom Knowledge Dimensions : Known facts and concepts  Bloom Cognitive Dimensions : Analyzing , Evaluating  Geneplore Phase : Generative Section 4 : Review of the Theories in Context  Move from literature review ( analyzing ) to evaluation and creation .  Create a Chart where you will combine concepts , and modify existing concepts from both your Leadership domain and Organization domain . See Figure 2 .  Don’t rehash the literature review here . Don’t evaluate anymore .  Now you are free to talk about the subjects of leadership and organizations as if we all know about them .  Evaluate or critique how each theory might work within various organizational forms and how the organizational structure affects the leader .  Evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the leadership forms in light of the organizational types .  No limits on paragraphs .  Bloom Knowledge Dimensions : Known facts and concepts , and procedures  Bloom Cognitive Dimensions : Applying , Analyzing , Evaluating  Geneplore Phase : Generative to Exploration transition Rational Natural Open Political Leader Member Exchange Transformational Leadership Ethical Leadership Trait Theory Figure 2 : Concept combination / modification chart ( examples ) Journal of Leadership Education DOI : 10 . 12806 / V17 / I1 / A3 JANUARY 2018 APPLICATION 158 Section 5 : Conclusion , New Concepts  Address the gaps in the literature . Which gaps could lead to novel approaches in research ? The articles and texts already note these methods .  Create a chart that shows strengths , weaknesses of organizational forms and leadership styles . Expand the chart you started in section 4 .  Make a statement about which leadership theory might be the strongest in light of the research you just did .  NAME THE NEW CONCEPT . It doesn’t have to be fancy , just make it logical .  Bloom Knowledge Dimension : Metacognitive  Bloom Cognitive Dimension : Create  Geneplore Phase : Generation and Exploration Outcomes This exercise has been an important part of the Organizational Theory course for about 5 years . I think it has become popular among learners . Most of my learners tell me later that the exercise was particularly challenging for them . Some learners reported that the exercise helped them understand the complexities of leadership . While evaluating the work , however , I noticed that the procedure didn’t click for all learners . I observed varying levels of creativity , but for the most part , learners created robust charts identifying overlap in theory and new leadership approaches . There were always learners who wrote a traditional report , and skirted the creative aspects of the exercise . There were always learners who avoided creating the chart in section 4 altogether , which was disheartening . They met the goals of the project , but left out the chart . I currently believe they would have used it more if they understood that the chart is actually a great tool for looking at which concepts to combine for a new idea , and which ones to modify . These learners seemed to show less creativity than the learners who took the time to create the chart . One learner told me how she couldn’t think about leadership without considering the organizational environment . I believe that is a great outcome . I once used the chart in section 4 to introduce the course . That seemed to be the best approach . Learners could see my goals and make a mental map about how to achieve the goals . At the same time , some learners wanted to modify the structure for their own understanding . I pushed back when this happened . I try to keep learners on track with the structure . One of my highly competitive learners later told me she was glad I pushed back , because the chart helped her complete the project when she ran into writer’s block . Finke , Ward , and Smith ( 1992 ) noted that structure is necessary , and though it seems contradictory to the nature of creativity , it is important to set the parameters of creativity when doing research and teaching . We need some standard to evaluate the outcomes anyway , and from my perspective , the chart provides sound evidence of many potential outcomes beyond what the learner creates just for this single paper . This advice seems extremely salient in a leadership and organizations course with a high level of domain knowledge . Journal of Leadership Education DOI : 10 . 12806 / V17 / I1 / A3 JANUARY 2018 APPLICATION 159 Reflections and Recommendations If you use this exercise , my suggestion would be to integrate it tightly into the course and to force communication about it whenever the class meets as a whole . I did not do this very well the first few times , and I think the learners might have missed some ideas . I also recommend having a brief discussion of Bloom’s taxonomy , learning theory , and creativity . If Ph . D . learners understand creativity as a higher order function , I think they might shoot for that goal . It wasn’t until recently that I began to believe this exercise provides a platform for metacognition . Most of our Ph . D . learners are motivated and interested , so some metacognitive exercise would be beneficial and interesting in the long run . It might also be a good idea to illustrate the Geneplore model to them to help them seek deeper understanding of the process . I have not done this because I thought it might only distract from the project . I don’t think there’s anything wrong with teaching Ph . D . learners to think about how to think . Also , when you provide the structured prompt , be sure to engage the learners in a discussion about which Bloom’s phase of learning they are in as they go through the exercise . It seems , in many cases , learners sometimes don’t understand that people can learn to be creative , and that it does not have to be an innate trait for only a select few . It would also be important for learners to understand concept modification and concept combination along with their learning or organizational theory . Even learners at this stage of their academic career have likely not thought about creativity as an academic discipline and how it could inform curriculum design . Journal of Leadership Education DOI : 10 . 12806 / V17 / I1 / A3 JANUARY 2018 APPLICATION 160 References Anderson , L . , Krathwohl , D . , Airasian , P . , Cruickshank , K . , Mayer , R . , Pintrich , P . ( Eds . ) . ( 2001 ) . A taxonomy for learning , teaching , and assessing : A revision of bloom ' s taxonomy of educational objectives ( Abridged ed . ) . New York : Longman . Baublits , J . ( 2014 ) . Promoting creative capacity in followership education . Journal of Leadership Education , 13 ( 4 ) , 146 - 155 . doi : DOI : 10 . 12806 / V13 / I4 / C15 Bloom , B . ( Ed . ) . ( 1956 ) . Taxonomy of educational objectives : Handbook I : Cognitive domain . New York : David McKay . Creswell , J . and Poth , C . ( 2018 ) . Qualitative inquiry and research design : Choosing among five approaches . Thousand Oaks . Sage . Estes , Z . , & Ward , T . ( 2002 ) . The emergence of novel attributes in concept modification . Creativity Research Journal , 14 ( 2 ) , 149 - 156 . Finke , R . , Ward , T . , & Smith , S . ( 1992 ) . Creative cognition : Theory , research , and applications . Cambridge , MA : The MIT Press . Jenkins , D . , & Dugan , J . ( 2013 ) . Context matters : An interdisciplinary studies interpretation of the national leadership Education research agenda . Journal of Leadership Education , 12 ( 3 ) , 15 - 29 . doi : DOI : 10 . 12806 / V12 / I3 / TF1 Krathwohl , D . , & Anderson , L . ( 2010 ) . Merlin C . Wittrock and the revision of bloom ' s taxonomy . Educational Psychologist , 45 ( 1 ) , 64 - 65 . doi : DOI : 10 . 1080 / 00461520903433562 Merriam , S . , & Bierema , L . ( 2014 ) . Adult learning : Linking theory and practice . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Paxton , D . , & Van Stralen , S . ( 2014 ) . Developoing collaborative and innovatie leadership : Practices for fostering a new mindset . Journal of Leadership Education , 14 ( 4 ) , 15 - 25 . Saldaña , J . and Omasta , M . ( 2018 ) . Qualitative research : Analyzing life . Thousand Oaks . Sage . Steven , S . , Ward , T . , & Finke , R . ( Eds . ) . ( 1995 ) . The creative cognition approach . Cambridge , MA : The MIT Press . Ward , T . ( 2001 ) . Creative cognition , conceptual combination , and the creative writing of Stephen R . Donaldson . American Psychologist , 56 ( 4 ) , 350 - 354 . doi : IO . 1O37 / / O003 - O66X . 56 . 4 . 35O Ward , T . ( 2008 ) . The role of domain knowledge in creative generation . Learning and Individual Differences , 18 , 363 - 366 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . lindif . 2007 . 07 . 002 Journal of Leadership Education DOI : 10 . 12806 / V17 / I1 / A3 JANUARY 2018 APPLICATION 161 Ward , T . , Patterson , M . , & Sifonis , C . ( 2004 ) . The role of specificity and abstraction in creative idea generation . Creativity Research Journal , 16 ( 1 ) , 1 - 9 . Ward , T . , & Wickes , K . ( 2009 ) . Stable and dynamic properties of category structure guide imaginative thought . Creativity Research Journal , 21 ( 1 ) , 15 - 23 . doi : DOI : 10 . 1080 / 10400410802633376 Author Biography Dr . Tim Atkinson is Assistant Professor and Director of Education in the Department of Internal Medicine , and Instructional Educational Specialist in the Division of Graduate Medical Education . Tim serves in a variety of roles within the Graduate Medical Education framework and the clinical learning environment including coaching medical residents and fellows in leadership , professionalism , learning , and research design . Tim has served in a number of leadership roles in higher education and government from Associate Director to President . Tim also serves as core faculty at the nearby University of Central Arkansas where he teaches Leadership in Complex Organizations and Advanced Qualitative Research .