Causal Systems Categories : Differences in Novice and Expert Categorization of Causal Phenomena Benjamin M . Rottman , a Dedre Gentner , b Micah B . Goldwater b a Department of Hospital Medicine , University of Chicago b Department of Psychology , Northwestern University Received 24 May 2011 ; received in revised form 7 October 2011 ; accepted 23 October 2011 Abstract We investigated the understanding of causal systems categories—categories deﬁned by common causal structure rather than by common domain content—among college students . We asked students who were either novices or experts in the physical sciences to sort descriptions of real - world phenomena that varied in their causal structure ( e . g . , negative feedback vs . causal chain ) and in their content domain ( e . g . , economics vs . biology ) . Our hypothesis was that there would be a shift from domain - based sorting to causal sorting with increasing expertise in the relevant domains . This predic - tion was borne out : The novice groups sorted primarily by domain and the expert group sorted by causal category . These results suggest that science training facilitates insight about causal structures . Keywords : Causal reasoning ; Categorization ; Relational categories ; Expertise Causality is of central importance in human cognition . We employ causal reasoning in explanation and prediction , in category organization , and in goal - based planning . For this reason , causal knowledge and reasoning has been a focus of cognitive science from the out - set ( Forbus , 1984 ; Hayes , 1979 ; de Kleer & Brown , 1981 ) . Recent research on causal reasoning has sought to capture the details of how people think about causality , with a variety of methodological approaches ( Sloman , 2005 ) . Some work focuses on capturing relations between variables in graphical representations such as qualitative process models ( Forbus , 1985 ; Forbus , Nielsen , & Faltings , 1991 ) or causal Bayesian networks ( e . g . , Gopnik et al . , 2004 ; Waldmann , Hagmayer , & Blaisdell , 2006 ) , while other work focuses on characterizing the kinds of experiences that lead people to infer a causal relationship , including particular kinds of statistical relations among variables ( Cheng , 2000 ) and evidence of causal mechanisms ( Ahn & Kalish , 2000 ; Ahn , Kalish , Medin , & Gelman 1995 ; Friedman & Forbus , 2008 ) . Researchers have also investigated the relation between causal Correspondence should be sent to Dedre Gentner , Psychology Department , Northwestern University , 2029 Sheridan Road , Evanston , IL 60208 . E - mail : gentner @ northwestern . edu Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) 919 – 932 Copyright (cid:2) 2012 Cognitive Science Society , Inc . All rights reserved . ISSN : 0364 - 0213 print / 1551 - 6709 online DOI : 10 . 1111 / j . 1551 - 6709 . 2012 . 01253 . x beliefs and explanation ( Lombrozo & Carey , 2006 ) , between causation and category struc - ture ( Ahn , Kim , Lassaline , & Dennis , 2000 ; Rehder & Burnett , 2005 ) , and between causal models and language ( Kuehne & Forbus , 2002 ; Wolff , 2003 ; Wolff & Song , 2003 ) . In gen - eral , this research has focused on how people learn and reason about a particular causal structure , such as learning that asbestos leads to DNA mutation , which leads to cancer ( e . g . , Ahn et al . , 2000 ; Lagnado , Waldmann , Hagmayer , & Sloman , 2007 ; Rehder & Hastie , 2001 ; Steyvers , Tenenbaum , Wagenmakers , & Blum , 2003 ) . Our focus here is different . We ask whether and to what extent people possess an abstract understanding of causal structure that allows recognition of common causal structures across disparate domains . For example , does understanding one positive feedback sys - tem—say audio feedback in an acoustic system—allow recognition of positive feedback in a different domain , such as a pricing bubble in economics ? Or to put it another way , what sort of experience is necessary in order for someone to see these two phenomena as sharing important causal structure ? In this paper , we examine the representation and use of causal system categories , of which positive feedback systems is an example . Causal systems categories are deﬁned by possessing common causal structure , irrespective of the particular domain . For example , the phenomena of population growth , economic bubbles , electronic audio feedback , and melting polar ice caps are all governed by positive feedback : a causal structure in which ( for exam - ple ) an event X positively inﬂuences another event Y , which in turn positively inﬂuences X , producing a cycle of increasing magnitude of effect in which the output becomes more and more extreme . There may be many more events than just two , but the principle is the same . Another causal category is a causal chain , in which an event X inﬂuences Y , which in turn inﬂuences Z . Although prior research has investigated how people learn and reason about particular causal structures such as causal chains or common cause structures ( e . g . , Fernbach & Sloman , 2009 ; Kim , Luhmann , Pierce , & Ryan , 2009 ; Rehder , 2003a , b ; Rehder & Burnett , 2005 ; Waldmann , 2000 ) , it has not addressed whether people mainly treat each phenomenon as an individual , or whether they recognize that the phenomena form a class based on common causal structure . We consider three possibilities . First , given the centrality of causal relations in human cognition , it may be that adults in general have an abstract understanding of causal system commonalities , and that they view multiple phenomena with the same structure as comprising a class . However , a second , equally plausible alternative is that people focus on causal patterns within a given domain and fail to perceive general patterns of causal structure across domains . After all , the causal learning literature shows that even seemingly simple causal structures like causal chains can be quite difﬁcult to learn ( Steyvers et al . , 2003 ) . Given the complexity of many causal phe - nomena—such as the feedback structures involved in global warming or diabetes—it could well be that people’s causal reasoning remains chieﬂy at a domain - speciﬁc level . The third possibility is that people begin with domain - speciﬁc causal models , but that with increasing education and experience , people can come to see abstract domain - general causal patterns . This third possibility gains credence from research on conceptual develop - ment . There is considerable evidence that relational information is acquired later than 920 B . M . Rottman , D . Gentner , M . B . Goldwater ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) concrete featural information . For example , when asked to interpret the comparison ‘‘A cloud is like a sponge , ’’ 4 – 5 - year - old children focus on common concrete properties , such as ‘‘both are round and ﬂuffy’’ while adults and older children focus on relational com - monalities , such as ‘‘both store water and then give it back to you’’ ( Gentner , 1988 ) . In the same vein , when asked to reenact a story with new characters , 6 - year - olds rely heavily on perceptual similarities among the characters , whereas 9 - year - olds can map the plot structure even to very different characters ( Gentner & Toupin , 1986 ) . In adults , a similar relational shift pattern also occurs with increases in domain knowl - edge . For example , Shafto and Coley ( 2003 ) found that while novices sorted ﬁsh by similar - ity of appearance , commercial ﬁsherman grouped them according to behavioral and causal ⁄ ecological relations ( see also , Medin et al . , 2006 ; Profﬁtt , Coley , & Medin , 2000 ) . Chi , Feltovich , and Glaser ( 1981 ) found that when expert and novice physics students were asked to sort physics problems , experts sorted the problems according to common principles ( e . g . , conservation of energy ) , which deﬁne the abstract structure of the problem , whereas novices sorted based on concrete similarities ( e . g . , problems containing ramps ) . Likewise , novice chemistry students classify chemical reactions in terms of concrete features of chem - ical reactions , such as whether a reaction produces water , whereas experts classify reactions by common chemical mechanisms , such as acid – base reactions ( Stains & Talanquer , 2008 ) . Analogously , we predicted that a shift from focusing on concrete domain properties to the more abstract causal relational structures would occur in the way people organize causal phenomena . In the current experiment , we examined ﬁve causal system categories ( see Fig . 1 ) . The ﬁrst is a common effect structure , a causal structure in which many factors inﬂuence one effect . The level of CO 2 in the atmosphere is a product of fossil fuel burning , plant photo - synthesis , and CO 2 absorption in oceans . Heart disease is caused by genetics , smoking , high blood cholesterol , high blood pressure , and obesity . A common cause structure is one in which a single cause has multiple effects . For example , an allergic reaction can cause multiple effects , including inﬂammation , rash , asthmatic reactions , and sneezing . Another A : CommonEffect B : Common Cause C : Positive Feedback D : Negative Feedback E : Chain 1 : Environ - mental Science2 : Economics 3 : Electrical Engineering4 : Mechanical Engineering Fig . 1 . Matrix of materials used in the study ( 5 causal categories · 5 domains ) . Cells with gray backgrounds designate the phenomena that served as seed cards . B . M . Rottman , D . Gentner , M . B . Goldwater ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) 921 example , from economics , is that the unemployment rate has causal effects on a number of phenomena , including the crime rate , suicide rate , general health conditions , and GDP . The third causal structure , deﬁned above , is a positive feedback structure—often described as a ‘‘vicious cycle . ’’ In a positive feedback structure , the output is ‘‘fed back’’ in such a way as to magnify the input . This in turn produces a greater output , resulting in a cycle of increasing magnitude of effect . For example , increased global temperatures cause polar ice to melt . Whereas ice reﬂects sunlight well , water absorbs more sunlight , which means that the earth warms faster . This in turn causes more polar ice to melt . Economic bubbles work in a similar way . People buy stocks or property because they assume the prices will increase . The buying itself causes the prices to increase , which causes yet more buying , and so on . Negative feedback is a causal structure in which the output of the struc - ture is fed back in such a way as to reduce the input . If the input is increased , the resulting output will also increase , and this will act to reduce the subsequent input . This results in a cycle that stabilizes the system . For example , in the domain of biology , humans regulate temperature by perspiring when they are too warm . When the body has cooled enough , it stops perspiring . Similarly , in the domain of economics , the Federal Reserve regulates the economy by raising , lowering , or keeping constant the interest rate . If the economy is slow , the FED will lower interest rates to stimulate borrowing and economic activity . If the econ - omy is growing too fast , the FED will raise interest rates to encourage saving . The last structure is a causal chain —a structure wherein an event A inﬂuences an event B , which in turn inﬂuences C , etc . The chain can be of any length ; the sequential nature is the chain’s deﬁning characteristic . For example , we can understand the way petroleum prices affect the price of consumer goods as a causal chain : the price of gas affects the price of transportation of goods , which affects the price of goods sold in stores . Another example of a causal chain , from neurobiology , is that synaptic transmission requires a series of steps , including an action potential , release of neurotransmitter , and binding on the postsynaptic neuron . Our interest here is in whether people organize their knowledge of causal phenomena according to these kinds of causal categories . To investigate this , we set up a design in which people could sort phenomena such as those described above either by domain content or by causal category . We created 25 descriptions of phenomena , organized into a 5 · 5 matrix deﬁned by crossing the ﬁve causal categories just described with ﬁve content domains : biology , environmental science , economics , electrical engineering , and mechani - cal engineering ( Fig . 1 ; see online supplement for full stimuli ) . Then we asked college stu - dents to sort the phenomena into categories , as described below . Our questions are ( 1 ) whether people will chose to sort by domain or by causal structure ; and ( 2 ) whether their preferred organization will be inﬂuenced by expertise . The participants were drawn from four populations of Northwestern University students differing in their expertise in physical science . Three groups were students majoring in different social sciences : economics , sociology , and psychology . The fourth group was made up of students majoring in the physical sciences , primarily physics majors and stu - dents in the Integrated Science Program . Many of the physical science students , particularly those in the Integrated Science Program , had been trained in multiple sciences . Thus , in 922 B . M . Rottman , D . Gentner , M . B . Goldwater ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) addition to broader knowledge of the physical sciences , they had another possible advan - tage : Their course work in different physical sciences could have encouraged them to com - pare and abstract across domains . For our four populations , we have two predictions and an open question . The psychology and sociology students were considered to be novices for purposes of the study , as their expertise does not match any of the ﬁve domains of phenomena used in the stimuli . We predicted these students would sort chieﬂy by content domain . At the other extreme , the physical science students served as the expert group . Because of their training in multiple relevant content domains , we expected that they would sort largely by causal category . The economics majors were chosen because they have experience in one of the content domains used in the study . If expertise in one domain is sufﬁcient to recognize and use cross - domain commonalities in organizing causal phenomena , then the economics majors should show more causal - category sorting than the psychology and sociology majors . 1 . Methods 1 . 1 . Participants Forty - four undergraduate students from Northwestern University were recruited from four populations : introductory psychology students ( 12 ) , sociology majors ( 9 ) , economics majors ( 11 ) , and physical science students ( primarily physics and Integrated Science Program majors ) ( 12 ) . The psychology students participated in exchange for course credit . The other three populations were compensated for their participation . 1 1 . 2 . Materials calibration The 25 phenomena descriptions varied orthogonally on two dimensions , causal system and content domain ( see Fig . 1 and Table 1 ) . By the nature of the design , passages coming from the same domain should share more semantic similarities than did those from the same causal system . To conﬁrm this , we use Latent Semantic Analysis ( LSA ) —a mathematical method for inducing the degree of relatedness between words in a large body of text on the basis of their contextual co - occurrence patterns—to generate pair - wise relatedness scores for the descriptions ( Landauer & Kintsch , 2006 ) . For each of the 25 phenomena , we calculated the mean LSA relatedness ratings to other cards within the same domain ( M = 0 . 21 , SD = 0 . 08 ) , within the same causal system cate - gory ( M = 0 . 10 , SD = 0 . 04 ) , and with neither of those relations ( M = 0 . 08 , SD = 0 . 02 ) . Pairwise t - tests revealed that pairs of descriptions from the same domain had signiﬁcantly higher relatedness ratings than pairs that shared the same causal system , t ( 24 ) = 5 . 59 , p < . 01 , and pairs that shared neither t ( 24 ) = 7 . 22 , p < . 01 . Additionally , the within causal system pairs had marginally higher relatedness ratings than the no relation pairs , t ( 24 ) = 2 . 10 , p = . 05 . Thus , as intended , the overall semantic relatedness is high for items from the same domain , but not for items that share causal structure . B . M . Rottman , D . Gentner , M . B . Goldwater ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) 923 1 . 3 . Procedure Each of the 25 phenomena was printed on a ﬁle card , and ﬁve cards ( the grayed cells in Fig . 1 ) were designated as ‘‘seed cards . ’’ Participants were told that they were to sort descriptions of real - world phenomena into categories that ‘‘go together . ’’ On the table before them there were ﬁve columns headed by the seed cards , plus one column labeled ‘‘Other . ’’ Participants were asked ﬁrst to read the seed cards , and then to sort the remaining 20 cards into the columns ‘‘based on how well the description on the card goes with the ini - tial card’’ already in the column . They could also place a card into the ‘‘Other’’ column if they did not think it ﬁtted with any of the seed cards . Because our goal was to pit the two sorting strategies ( content domain and causal system ) against one another , the seed cards were chosen to be equally applicable to either strategy . Speciﬁcally , the ﬁve seed cards each differed from one another both in content domain and in causal category . Thus , the columns could be taken to represent ﬁve different domains or ﬁve different causal systems , or some mixture of the two . The 20 cards to be sorted were arranged in a semi - random order such that two cards from the same domain were never in immediate sequence , with half the participants receiving the Table 1 Examples of two seed cards , each showing one domain match and one causal systems match Seed Card : ( Environmental Science , Common Effect ) Many processes are responsible for the level of CO 2 in the atmosphere such as fossil fuel burning , plant photo synthesis , and CO 2 absorption in oceans . When making public policy decisions about environmental issues , we must keep in mind the many complex factors that inﬂuence the level of CO 2 in the atmosphere . Same - Domain Match : ( Environmental Sci . , Positive Feedback ) Same Causal System Match : ( Biology , Common Effect ) In the process of global warming , as the temperature of the earth rises , polar ice begins to melt . Water absorbs more heat from sunlight than ice . Consequently , as ice is turned into water , the temperature of the earth begins to rise even faster , which in turn leads to increased ice - melt . Aside from genetics , the four main factors which increase the risk of heart disease are smoking , high blood cholesterol , high blood pressure , and obesity . Doctors advise people with any one , or a combination of these risk factors to improve their health to mitigate the risk of heart attack . Seed Card : ( Electrical Engineering , Negative Feedback ) A thermostat works by measuring temperature and turning on or off a furnace or air conditioner to reach a desired temperature . If the temperature is too cold , the thermostat will turn on the furnace until it becomes warm enough . Likewise , the thermostat on an air conditioner turns on when the house is too warm . Same - Domain Match : ( Elect . Engineering , Common Cause ) Same Causal System Match : ( Economics , Negative Feedback ) Internet routers work by distributing a data signal to multiple devices If the router is turned off , then all the computers loose signal . However , the functioning of one individual computer does not affect the functioning of other computers . Thus , if one computer is turned off , all the others still get the data signal from the router . The Federal Reserve has the ability to raise or lower the interest rates depending on the current state of the economy . If the economy is slow , the FED will lower interest rates to stimulate borrowing and economic activity . Raising interest rates will slow the economy by increasing the cost of borrowing . 924 B . M . Rottman , D . Gentner , M . B . Goldwater ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) reverse order . There was no time limit ; participants were told that they could work with the cards in any order and were allowed to rearrange previously sorted cards . 2 . Results Each of the 20 cards ( one ‘‘sorting’’ ) was coded according to whether it matched the seed card in its column by content domain or by causal system . On average , across all groups , 5 . 75 ( SD = 2 . 61 ) of the 20 cards either were placed in the ‘‘other’’ column or failed to match their seed card by either domain or causal system . This average was consistent for all four groups and there was no main effect of group in a one - way anova , F ( 3 , 44 ) < 1 . Since we were primarily interested in the cards sorted by domain or causal system , these cards were ignored in the following analyses . Out of the cards that a given participant sorted either by domain or by causal structure , we looked at the percentage that were sorted by causal structure . On average , the physical science students sorted 61 % of these cards ( SD = 39 % ) by causal structure . However , for the other two groups , the percentage of cards sorted by causal structure was smaller : M = 34 % , SD = 33 % for the psychology and sociology students , M = 36 % , SD = 33 % for the economics students . A t - test did not ﬁnd a difference between the group of psychology and sociology students versus the economics students , t ( 30 ) < 1 . Therefore , we considered psychology , sociology , and economics students as a group ( social science students ) for further analyses . Importantly the physical science students sorted signiﬁcantly more cards by causal structure than the combined social science group , M = 35 % , SD = 32 % , t ( 42 ) = 2 . 25 , p = . 03 To better understand the dominant sorting strategy used by participants of different groups , hierarchical cluster analysis ( HCA ) was performed based on a pairwise co - occur - rence matrix per group ( how many times participants sorted each pair of cards together ) . The HCA used the Euclidean squared distance metric and the between groups linkage agglomeration method . One beneﬁt of the HCA analysis compared to the previous analysis was that the previous analysis only identiﬁed whether a card was sorted with a same - domain seed or with a same - causal - system seed . The HCA analysis looks at all of the relationships between the 20 sorted cards , ignoring the seed cards . For the physical science students , HCA revealed ﬁve identiﬁable clusters of phenomena , closely matching the ﬁve causal system categories ( Fig . 2 ; cards with the same letter of the alphabet share the same causal structure category ) . Three cards were not generally sorted by causal structure . The card E1 ( a chain - environmental science card ) was generally sorted in the positive feedback group ( C ) , particularly with the card C1 ( a positive feedback - environ - mental science card ) . Both of these cards were about global warming . Likewise , A4 was sorted with E4 , and E2 with A2 . Thus , it appears that high domain relatedness may have overridden the dominant strategy of sorting by causal systems . In contrast , the HCA dendro - grams for the social science students ( Fig . 3 ; cards with the same number share the same domain ) , revealed that the social science students sorted primarily by common domain , with the domains of mechanical and electrical engineering somewhat conﬂated . B . M . Rottman , D . Gentner , M . B . Goldwater ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) 925 To further probe into the basis for students’ sorting decisions , we computed the LSA relatedness scores for the co - sorted cards . The mean LSA score for the co - sorted clusters for the combined social science group ( M = . 17 , SD = . 04 ) was nonsigniﬁcantly higher than that of the physical science group ( M = . 14 , SD = . 05 ) , t ( 42 ) = 1 . 93 , p = . 06 . It is possible that the social science students relied in part on local semantic connections between terms from the same content domain . 3 . Discussion The same patterns of causation occur across different domains . Our question is whether and to what degree people perceive these abstract causal structures . Speciﬁcally , we asked whether there are novice - expert differences in the degree to which students perceive the common causal structure underlying different phenomena , as assessed by their sorting behavior in a task that allows sorting either by causal system or by content domain . We pre - dicted that experts ( physical science students ) would show more causal sorting than novices ( psychology and sociology students ) . This prediction was conﬁrmed : Psychology and soci - ology students sorted primarily by content domain , and physical science students sorted primarily by causal system . Additionally , we asked whether economics students would pattern with the other social science students or with the physical science students . They 25 20 15 10 5 0 a4 e4 e3 b3 b4 b1 b5 a2 e2 a5 a3 c2 c5 e1 c1 c4 d1 d3 d5 d2 e : Chain b : Common Cause a : Common Effect c : Positive Feedback d : Negative Feedback Fig . 2 . Hierarchical cluster analysis for the physical science group . Note : Letters refer to the causal structures groups and numbers refer to the content domains ( see Fig . 1 ) . 926 B . M . Rottman , D . Gentner , M . B . Goldwater ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) behaved as the other social science students did , sorting primarily by content domain . Hier - archical Cluster Analysis provided additional support for the hypothesis : HCA revealed clusters based on the domains for the combined social science group ( including economics ) , and clusters based on causal systems for the physical science students . Having an abstract understanding of causality , as described here , might confer a number of advantages . Previous research ( Steyvers , Tenenbaum , Wagenmakers , & Blum 2003 ) has found signiﬁcant individual differences in peoples’ ability to learn causal structures in a bot - tom - up statistical fashion . It is possible that some of these differences stem from differences in people’s abstract understanding of how different classes of causal structures function ( see also Fernbach & Sloman , 2009 ) . Another advantage of having an abstract understanding of causal structures is that it might help people interpret scientiﬁc evidence . For example , after learning that two variables are correlated , people with an abstract understanding of how dif - ferent types of causal structures can produce a correlation between two variables might be more likely to search for a common cause instead of simply concluding that there must be a direct causal relation between the two variables . Why did the physical science students , but not the social science students , sort causally ? The most obvious explanation , as noted in the introduction , rests on differences in domain knowledge—speciﬁcally , in differences in the number of domains with which students were familiar . The physical science students typically had training in four of the ﬁve relevant domains—mechanical engineering , biology , electrical engineering , and environmental 25 20 15 10 5 0 e1 c1 b1 d1 c4 e3 a4 b4 e4 d3 b5 a5 c5 d5 b3 a3 e2 c2 a2 d2 1 : Environmental Science 2 : Economics 3 : Electrical Engineering 3 & 4 : Electrical & Mechanical Engineering 5 : Biology Fig . 3 . Hierarchical cluster analysis for the social science group . Note : Letters refer to the causal structures groups and numbers refer to the content domains ( see Fig . 1 ) . B . M . Rottman , D . Gentner , M . B . Goldwater ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) 927 science . In contrast , economics students had training in only one of the domains ( econom - ics ) , and psychology ⁄ sociology students in none of them . Domain experience might plausi - bly lead to a better articulation of general causal patterns within the domain . So perhaps the difference results simply from knowledge of more individual domains . Another possibility is that social science students could have perceived the causal com - monalties , but simply considered the domain - level commonalities more important . After all , reasoning well within a domain is important , and nothing about the task communicated that domain sorting was ‘‘wrong . ’’ However , a follow - up study ( Goldwater & Gentner , unpub - lished data ) suggests that there were real differences in the perception of causal systems . In this study , social science students were given two opportunities to sort and were asked to use a different strategy for the second . Consistent with the current ﬁndings , the majority of the students were domain sorters , but some sorted causally to a fair degree . These better cau - sal sorters went on to sort quite well by domain for their second sort . In contrast , the domain sorters did not adopt a causal strategy for their second sort . This suggests that the ability to perceive domain - level commonalities is widely available , but that perceiving common cau - sal systems is not . While this does not mean that causal sorting is necessarily the ‘‘right’’ answer , it does suggest it is a skill that does not come for free . What led the physical science students to show greater awareness of causal systems ? We speculate that this difference was not simply a matter of greater domain expertise in multiple disciplines . Rather , it seems likely that the physical science students ( particularly the Inte - grated Science students ) had also acquired a stock of cross - domain abstractions . That is , their multidisciplinary experience had provided them with opportunities to compare across different domains and to extract general patterns such as positive feedback and common - cause . These abstractions might then leap readily to mind as a natural way to organize phe - nomena in a sorting task . One indication that this might be the case is that the physical science students were more likely to produce causal sorts of economics phenomena than were the other groups , including the economists . Out of 4 economics cards to sort , the physi - cal science students sorted on average 1 . 37 of them causally , in contrast to only 0 . 73 for the economics students ( and 0 . 78 for the combined social science group ) . This suggests that the physical science students had formed abstract causal categories and were able to classify new phenomena from economics into those categories . This speculation that cross - domain comparison experience might support the formation of causal systems categories gains credence from prior work on the development and learn - ing of relational categories ( Gentner , Anggoro & Klibanoff , 2011 ; Goldwater & Markman , 2011 ; Kotovsky & Gentner , 1996 ) . Relational categories are categories such as catalyst and solvent , whose membership is determined by common relational structure ; they contrast with entity categories , which can be deﬁned by common intrinsic properties , such as beaker and pipette ( Asmuth & Gentner , 2005 , unpublished data ; Barr & Caplan , 1987 ; Gentner & Asmuth , 2008 ; Gentner & Kurtz , 2005 ; Goldwater , Markman , & Stilwell , 2011 ; Goldwater & Markman , 2011 ; Markman & Stilwell , 2001 ; Rein , Goldwater , & Markman , 2010 ; Ross & Murphy , 1999 ) . The causal systems categories considered here clearly qualify as rela - tional categories . 928 B . M . Rottman , D . Gentner , M . B . Goldwater ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) Developmental research shows that relational categories are slow to be acquired , relative to entity categories ( Gentner , 2005 ) . Further , earlier stages of learning are characterized by a focus on within - domain surface similarities ; the ability to recognize relational structures across different situations emerges later ( see Gentner & Rattermann , 1991 ; Doumas , Hummel , & Sandhofer , 2008 for reviews ) . There is also considerable evidence that analogi - cal comparison promotes learning relational categories ( Christie & Gentner , 2010 ; Gentner , Anggoro , & Klibanoff , 2011 ; Goldwater & Markman , 2011 ) . Thus , one explanation for the difference between physical science students and the other groups is that the physical sci - ence students had many opportunities to compare across domains and had thereby abstracted a rich stock of causal abstractions . An understanding of causal systems is crucial to explaining and predicting complex phe - nomena , both in the natural world and in social and economic spheres . The present work shows large differences in the ability to perceive common causal patterns across domains . Future work should reveal how people come to learn these causal patterns and to perceive abstract causal systems categories . Note 1 . No demographics were retained for the introductory psychology students . Out of 9 sociology majors , 6 were double - majors in other ﬁelds , including political science ( 2 ) , communication studies , legal studies , psychology , and a major called Mathematical Methods in the Social Sciences . Out of the 11 economics majors , 7 were double majors in other ﬁelds , including math , music , international studies , electrical , biomed - ical , and industrial engineering , and Mathematical Methods in the Social Sciences . Out of the 12 physical science students , 4 were obtaining triple majors , 5 were double majors , and 3 were obtaining one major . Their majors were in the following ﬁelds : inter - disciplinary Science Program ( 8 ) , physics ( 6 ) , math ( 5 ) , chemistry ( 3 ) , biology ( 2 ) , and classics ( 1 ) . Acknowledgments This research was supported by Ofﬁce of Naval Research grant N00014 - 92 - J - 1098 awarded to the second author . We are grateful to the Similarity and Analogy group at North - western University for many discussions of these issues , and to Kathleen Braun for help with the research and analyses . References Ahn , W . K . , & Kalish , C . W . ( 2000 ) . The role of mechanism beliefs in causal reasoning . In F . C . Keil & R . A . Wilson ( Eds . ) Explanation and cognition ( pp . 199 – 225 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . B . M . Rottman , D . Gentner , M . B . Goldwater ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) 929 Ahn , W . K . , Kalish , C . W . , Medin , D . L . , & Gelman , S . A . ( 1995 ) . The role of covariation vs . mechanism infor - mation in causal attribution . Cognition , 54 , 299 – 352 . Ahn , W . , Kim , N . S . , Lassaline , M . E . , & Dennis , M . J . ( 2000 ) . Causal status as a determinant of feature central - ity . Cognitive Psychology , 41 , 361 – 416 . Asmuth , J . , & Gentner , D . ( 2005 ) . Context sensitivity of relational nouns . In B . G . Bara , L . Barsalou , & M . Bucciarelli ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the twenty - seventh annual meeting of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 163 – 168 ) . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Barr , R . A . , & Caplan , L . J . ( 1987 ) . Category representations and their implications for category structure . Mem - ory and Cognition , 15 , 397 – 418 . Cheng , P . W . ( 2000 ) . From covariation to causation : A causal power theory . Psychological Review , 104 , 367 – 405 . Chi , M . , Feltovich , P . J . , & Glaser , R . ( 1981 ) . Categorization and representation of physics problems by experts and novices . Cognitive Science , 5 , 121 – 152 . Christie , S . , & Gentner , D . ( 2010 ) . Where hypotheses come from : Learning new relations by structural align - ment . Journal of Cognition and Development , 11 ( 3 ) , 356 – 373 . Doumas , L . A . A . , Hummel , J . E . , & Sandhofer , C . M . ( 2008 ) . A theory of the discovery and predication of rela - tional concepts . Psychological Review , 115 , 1 – 43 . Fernbach , P . M . , & Sloman , S . A . ( 2009 ) . Causal learning with local computations . Journal of Experimental Psy - chology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 35 , 678 – 693 . Forbus , K . D . ( 1984 ) . Qualitative process theory . Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 24 , 85 – 168 . Forbus , K . D . ( 1985 ) . The role of qualitative dynamics in naive physics . In J . Hobbs & R . Moore ( Eds . ) , Formal theories of the commonsense world ( pp . 185 – 226 ) . Palo Alto , CA : Tioga Press . Forbus , K . , Nielsen , P . , & Faltings , B . ( 1991 ) . Qualitative spatial reasoning : The CLOCK project . Artiﬁcial Intel - ligence , 51 ( 1 – 3 ) , 417 – 471 . Friedman , S . , & Forbus , K . ( 2008 ) . Learning causal models via progressive alignment and qualitative modeling : A simulation . In B . C . Love , K . McRae & V . M . Sloutsky ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 1123 – 1128 ) . Washington , DC : Cognitive Science Society . Gentner , D . ( 1988 ) . Metaphor as structure mapping : The relational shift . Child Development , 59 , 47 – 59 . Gentner , D . ( 2005 ) . The development of relational category knowledge . In L . Gershkoff - Stowe & D . H . Rakison , ( Eds . ) , Building object categories in developmental time ( pp . 245 – 275 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Gentner , D . , Anggoro , F . K . , & Klibanoff , R . S . ( 2011 ) . Structure - mapping and relational language support chil - dren’s learning of relational categories . Child Development , 82 , 1173 – 1188 . Gentner , D . , & Asmuth , J . ( 2008 ) . Can relationality be distinguished from abstractness in noun mutability ? In B . C . Love , K . McRae , & V . M . Sloutsky ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 30th annual conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 863 – 868 ) . Austin , TX : Cognitive Science Society . Gentner , D . , & Kurtz , K . ( 2005 ) . Relational categories . In W . K . Ahn , R . L . Goldstone , B . C . Love , A . B . Mark - man , & P . W . Wolff ( Eds . ) , Categorization inside and outside the laboratory ( pp . 151 – 175 ) . Washington , DC : APA . Gentner , D . , & Rattermann , M . J . ( 1991 ) . Language and the career of similarity . In S . A . Gelman & J . P . Byrnes ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on thought and language : Interrelations in development ( pp . 225 – 27 ) . London : Cambridge University Press . Gentner , D . , & Toupin , C . ( 1986 ) . Systematicity and surface similarity in the development of analogy . Cognitive Science , 10 , 277 – 300 . Goldwater , M . B . , & Markman , A . B . ( 2011 ) . Categorizing entities by common role . Psychonomic Bulletin and Review , 18 ( 2 ) , 406 – 413 . Goldwater , M . B . , Markman , A . B . , & Stilwell , C . H . ( 2011 ) . The empirical case for role - governed categories . Cognition , 118 , 359 – 376 . Gopnik , A . , Glymour , C . , Sobel , D . M . , Schulz , L . , Kushnir , T . , & Danks , D . ( 2004 ) . A theory of causal learning in children : Causal maps and Bayes nets . Psychological Review , 111 , 3 – 32 . Hayes , P . J . ( 1979 ) . The naive physics manifesto . In D . Michie ( Ed . ) , Expert systems in the micro - electronic age ( pp . 242 – 270 ) . Edinburgh , Scotland : Edinburgh University Press . 930 B . M . Rottman , D . Gentner , M . B . Goldwater ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) Kim , N . S . , Luhmann , C . C . , Pierce , M . L . , & Ryan , M . M . ( 2009 ) . The conceptual centrality of causal cycles . Memory & Cognition , 37 , 744 – 758 . de Kleer , J . , & Brown , J . S . ( 1981 ) . Mental models of physical mechanisms and their acquisition . In J . R . Ander - son ( Ed . ) , Cognitive skills and their acquisition ( pp . 285 – 309 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Kotovsky , L . , & Gentner , D . ( 1996 ) . Comparison and categorization in the development of relational similarity . Child Development , 67 , 2797 – 2822 . Kuehne , S . E . , & Forbus , K . D . ( 2002 ) . Qualitative physics as a component in natural language semantics : A pro - gress report . In W . D . Gray & C . D . Schunn ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the Twenty - Fourth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 554 – 560 ) . Fairfax , VA : George Mason University . Lagnado , D . A . , Waldmann , M . R . , Hagmayer , Y . , & Sloman , S . A . ( 2007 ) . Beyond covariation : Cues to causal structure . In A . Gopnik & L . Schultz ( Eds . ) , Causal learning : Psychology , philosophy , and computation ( pp . 154 – 172 ) . Oxford , England : Oxford University Press . Landauer , T . , & Kintsch , W . ( 2006 ) . Latent Semantic Analysis . [ Online Computer Software ] . Accessed January 27 , 2006 , from http : / / lsa . colorado . edu / Lombrozo , T . , & Carey , S . ( 2006 ) . Functional explanation and the function of explanation . Cognition , 99 ( 2 ) , 167 – 204 . Markman , A . B . , & Stilwell , C . H . ( 2001 ) . Role - governed categories . Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 13 ( 4 ) , 329 – 358 . Medin , D . L . , Ross , N . , Atran , S . , Cox , D . , Coley , J . , Profﬁtt , J . , & Blok , S . ( 2006 ) . Folkbiology of freshwater ﬁsh . Cognition , 99 ( 3 ) , 237 – 273 . Profﬁtt , J . B . , Coley , J . D . , & Medin , D . L . ( 2000 ) . Expertise and category - based induction . Journal of Experi - mental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 26 ( 4 ) , 811 – 828 . Rehder , B . ( 2003a ) . A causal - model theory of conceptual representation and categorization . Journal of Experi - mental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 29 , 1141 – 59 . Rehder , B . ( 2003b ) . Categorization as causal reasoning . Cognitive Science , 27 , 709 – 748 . Rehder , B . , & Burnett , R . C . ( 2005 ) . Feature inference and the causal structure of categories . Cognitive Psychol - ogy , 50 , 264 – 314 . Rehder , B . , & Hastie , R . ( 2001 ) . Causal knowledge and categories : The effects of causal beliefs on categoriza - tion , induction , and similarity . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 130 , 323 – 360 . Rein , J . R . , Goldwater , M . B . , & Markman , A . B . ( 2010 ) . What is typical about the typicality effect in category - based induction ? Memory and Cognition , 38 ( 3 ) , 377 – 38 . Ross , B . H . , & Murphy , G . L . ( 1999 ) . Food for thought : Cross - classiﬁcation and category organization in a com - plex real - world domain . Cognitive Psychology , 38 , 495 – 553 . Shafto , P . , & Coley , J . D . ( 2003 ) . Development of categorization and reasoning in the natural world : Novices to experts , naı¨ve similarity to ecological knowledge . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory & Cognition , 29 , 641 – 649 . Sloman , S . A . ( 2005 ) . Causal models : How people think about the world and its alternatives . Oxford , England : Oxford University Press . Stains , M . , & Talanquer , V . ( 2008 ) . Classiﬁcation of chemical reactions : stages of expertise . Journal of Research in Science Training , 45 , 771 – 793 . Steyvers , M . , Tenenbaum , J . , Wagenmakers , E . J . , & Blum , B . ( 2003 ) . Inferring causal networks from observa - tions and interventions . Cognitive Science , 27 , 453 – 489 . Waldmann , M . R . ( 2000 ) . Competition among causes but not effects in predictive and diagnostic learning . Jour - nal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 26 , 53 – 76 . Waldmann , M . R . , Hagmayer , Y . , & Blaisdell , A . P . ( 2006 ) . Beyond the information given : Causal models in learning and reasoning . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 15 ( 6 ) , 307 – 311 . Wolff , P . ( 2003 ) . Direct causation in the linguistic coding and individuation of causal events . Cognition , 88 , 1 – 48 . Wolff , P . , & Song , G . ( 2003 ) . Models of causation and the semantics of causal verbs . Cognitive Psychology , 47 , 276 – 332 . B . M . Rottman , D . Gentner , M . B . Goldwater ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 ) 931 Supporting Information Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article on Wiley Online Library : Table S1 . Causal System Category . Please note : Wiley - Blackwell is not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting materials supplied by the authors . Any queries ( other than missing material ) should be directed to the corresponding author for the article . 932 B . M . Rottman , D . Gentner , M . B . Goldwater ⁄ Cognitive Science 36 ( 2012 )