Mendeley – A Last . fm for Research ? Victor Henning Bauhaus - University of Weimar , Germany Mendeley Ltd . , London , UK victor . henning @ mendeley . com Jan Reichelt University of Cologne , Germany Mendeley Ltd . , London , UK jan . reichelt @ mendeley . com Abstract This paper aims to explore how the principles of a well - known Web 2 . 0 service , the world’s largest social music service “Last . fm” ( www . last . fm ) , can be applied to research , which potential it could have in the world of research ( e . g . an open and interdisciplinary database , usage - based reputation metrics , and collaborative filtering ) and which challenges such a model would face in academia . A real - world application of these principles , “Mendeley” ( www . mendeley . com ) , will be demoed at the IEEE e - Science Conference 2008 . 1 . Introduction Ways of how to turn Web 2 . 0 applications into productive social research tools are currently being discussed at major academic conferences ( e . g . European Science Open Forum 2008 , Science Blogging Conference 2008 , Science in the 21st Century Conference ) , and both multi - purpose social software , such as wikis , blogs , and social networks , and more specific services such as Twitter , Friendfeed , or CiteULike are currently being used and evaluated by a number researchers and academics . This paper aims to explore how the principles of a well - known Web 2 . 0 service , “Last . fm” , can be applied to the domain of academic research . 2 . How Last . fm works Last . fm ( www . last . fm ) , which bills itself as a “social music service” , has managed to create the largest ontological classification ( and the largest open database ) of music in the world , by aggregating the musical tastes of its 20 million users and then data - mining it for similar musical genres , artists , and songs . The users form a social network that is not based on pre - existing real - world relationships ; instead , Last . fm’s network emerges around data that describes its users’ listening behavior and musical preferences . The data is gathered as follows : Last . fm’s “Audioscrobbler” desktop software , after having been installed on a user’s PC , starts tracking a user’s music listening behavior . The listening data is sent to the Last . fm website , where a profile of the user’s musical tastes is created . Listening statistics for each song , album , artist , and genre are aggregated and made available online . In this way , Last . fm has created the world’s largest open music database , comprising over 80 million songs , accessible by everyone . The user - generated data also lays the foundation for personalization , collaborative filtering , and ontological classifications : · Users can view timelines and statistics about their own listening behavior , · view the most popular tracks for each of their favorite artists , and most popular artists for their favorite genre , · receive music recommendations based on the song library already existing on their PC , and · discover similar tracks / artists for every track / artist in the Last . fm database . 3 . The model of Last . fm applied to research Last . fm’s service is based on aggregating the users’ existing music libraries , relationships between artists writing songs in different genres , and the users’ music listening behavior . Similarly , a service for academic researchers could be based on aggregating scholars’ existing research paper libraries , relationships between researchers writing papers in different disciplines , and the scholars’ paper reading behavior . Along these lines , a “Last . fm for research” would be able to display statistics to each individual user about his personal library , to aggregate readership statistics about papers , authors , journals , and academic disciplines , and to recommend interesting articles and researchers to the user . We envision that such a tool consists of two parts : First , a desktop application which helps researchers Fourth IEEE International Conference on eScience 978 - 0 - 7695 - 3535 - 7 / 08 $ 25 . 00 © 2008 IEEE DOI 10 . 1109 / eScience . 2008 . 128 327 manage their academic papers and anonymously tracks their reading habits and literature usage . Second , a website where the users can discover aggregated statistics , top papers , trends and charts for each discipline , paper recommendations , and introductions to people with similar research interests . Adoption of such a service would have a number of advantages for academia at large , of which we will discuss three important ones . The creation of an open and interdisciplinary database : Similar to Last . fm’s efforts in the space of music , a tool which aggregates metadata , tags and article usage of a large number of researchers could lead to an open , interdisciplinary and ontological database of research , providing a free and invaluable source of information to every individual researcher . Working in conjunction with Open Access libraries , this would be another cornerstone in building alternatives to expensive pay - walled databases . Usage - based reputation metrics and real - time statistics : Usage - based reputation metrics , which could be described as “Nielsen ratings for science” , would alleviate many of these problems associated with traditional citation - based reputation metrics . A starting point for usage - based metrics would be to track the pervasiveness of research papers , i . e . whether they are present on the computers of a wide - ranging , distributed sample of academics . This would be a measure of the popularity or awareness that a paper – and by association , its author , publication journal , and topic – is enjoying . A second , more fine - grained usage metric would be the actual time spent reading each research paper ( on screen , e . g . in Adobe Reader ) , and the number of repeat readings per paper . This would be a measure of the intensity with which the paper ( its author , publication journal , topic ) is being examined – did readers only skim through a paper , or did they peruse it in detail ? Finally , these metrics could be augmented with quality ratings and tags that help differentiate mere measures of attention from explicit quality judgments . Collaborative filtering : Usage data would also be the basis for developing paper recommendation engines based on collaborative filtering ( CF ) principles . It has been argued that citations already act as reading recommendations , and recommendation models based on co - citations or citation networks ( “localized graph search” ) already exist . CF recommendations , however , have additional potential . First , they could increase the interdisciplinarity of research because they may be better in uncovering parallels between academic disciplines than citation networks . For example , when doing research on the psychology of emotion , a psychologist would typically also have read papers on emotion published in adjacent fields ( philosophy , literature , linguistics , neurophysiology ) . However , due to space constraints , he would mostly limit his citations to papers published in psychology journals . Picking up such patterns , CF recommendations would thus help researchers to discover literature that could be of interest to them , even though it is not found in the citation network of their existing library . Moreover , CF would enable researchers to identify people with similar research interests ( based on their paper libraries ) and thus foster collaboration and academic networking . Finally , CF would start generating a rich network of relationships for a paper as soon as it is published , rather than having to wait months or years to get cited . Of course , there are a number of obstacles to be overcome before such a model can be turned into reality in the field of academic research . Arguably the biggest obstacle is that a sufficient number of participants is needed to gather reliable usage data . So how could scholars be convinced of taking part in generating research paper usage data ? In our opinion , the answer is that doing so must confer some type of utility to them beyond the idea of contributing to a fuzzy “greater good of science” . More specifically , the tool that does the measuring on the researchers’ computers should do this only as a secondary purpose , and must have some other primary usage value . Moreover , whereas Last . fm openly displays each user’s listening behavior , privacy is critical in the space of research . While it isn’t much of a technical issue to hide a researcher’s library and reading data , a “Last . fm for research” would have to convince potential users that it can be trusted with such sensitive data , and that no personally identifiable data would ever be made public without the researcher’s explicit consent 4 . Mendeley – A Last . fm for research Mendeley is an application of Last . fm’s principles to the domain of research . Mendeley Desktop , a free and cross - platform desktop application , automatically extracts metadata , full - text and cited references from research papers to minimize manual data input when setting up a local research paper database . It then enables researchers to manage , tag , full - text search , cite in Word and LaTeX , and share research papers , thus providing researchers with usage value independent of any network effects . The companion website , Mendeley Web , can be used for backing up research papers , creating a public research profile , and connecting to like - minded researchers . Mendeley Web already displays the pervasiveness of research papers , authors , journals and tags as measured by Mendeley Desktop . Reading time and quality rating metrics as well as CF recommendation mechanisms will be implemented soon . 328