Participation is not a Design Fix for Machine Learning Mona Sloane * 1 Emanuel Moss * 2 Olaitan Awomolo * 3 Laura Forlano * 4 Abstract This paper critically examines existing modes of participation in design practice and machine learning . Cautioning against ”participation - washing” , it suggests that the ML community must become attuned to possibly exploitative and extractive forms of community involvement and shift away from the prerogatives of context - independent scalability . 1 . Introduction Over the past years , we have seen mounting evidence of the disparate impact of ML systems on already oppressed and disadvantaged groups ( Bolukbasi et al . ; Buolamwini & Gebru ; Eubanks ; Noble ; O’Neal ) . The ex - periences of oppression and privilege are structural chal - lenges that are incredibly complex , and they are not new particularly not to the communities that suffer from them . But they have heightened alongside the exponen - tial growth of wealth inequality alongside planetary de - struction ( Piketty ; Hickel ) . It is therefore both unsurpris - ing and promising that the ML community wishes to build “more democratic , cooperative , and participatory ML sys - tems” ( see workshop call ) . Whilst this is an honorable goal , we want to caution against a familiar - sounding impulse towards “participation - washing” that we have seen in other areas of design and technology . For example , in the international development sector where “participation” of local communities at the re - ceiving end of powerful agencies is based on manufactured consent and is based on ( post - ) colonial structures of global power ( Peet & Hartwick ) ; in the corporate sector where * Equal contribution 1 Institute for Public Knowledge , New York University , New York , USA ; T¨ubingen AI Center , Eber - hard Karls University of T¨ubingen , T¨ubingen , Germany 2 Data Society Research Institute , New York , USA ; Department of An - thropology , CUNY Graduate Center , New York , USA 3 Temple University , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania 4 Illinois Institute of Tech - nology , Chicago , Illinois . Correspondence to : Mona Sloane < ms11521 @ nyu . edu > . Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine Learning , Vienna , Austria , PMLR 119 , 2020 . Copyright 2020 by the author ( s ) . ”users” are invited into ”co - creation” sessions in order to create new product ideas ; in the philanthropic sector where ”the public” is challenged to join in deﬁning new problems and / or solutions to ”wicked problems” ; or in the urban de - sign or architecture sector where stakeholder engagement protocols often legitimize injustices in the ( material ) plan - ning of space and systematically devalue user needs as part of proﬁt - and scale - oriented design practices , or design in - equality ( Sloane , b ; c ) . 2 . Participatory Design Participatory design methods can be traced to the 1970s when workers in Scandinavia worked together collabora - tively to design the technologies that they would use in cor - porate settings ( Schuler & Namioka ; Sanders ; Spinuzzi ) . Over the past several decades , participatory design and related concepts such as codesign and co - creation have been introduced as a way of engaging with ethics , values in design ( Nissenbaum ) , value - sensitive design ( Friedman 1996 ) , and values levers in design ( Shilton ) . Participatory design with its rich history in socially democratic countries in Europe , has sought to engage multiple stakeholders in deliberative processes in order to achieve consensus . At the same time , other approaches have emphasized agonism and the importance of dissensus , friction and disagreement ( Keshavarz & Maze ; DiSalvo , a ; Mouffe ; Hansson et al . ) . In this tradition of participatory design , the focus has been on designing publics ( DiSalvo , b ) to engage in matters of concern around complex socio - technical systems . In order to facilitate the engagement of multiple stakeholders in par - ticipatory design processes , designers often use prototypes , games ( Flanagan & Nissenbaum ) and other structured ac - tivities . More recently , scholars have argued that nonhuman actors such as algorithms and machines ( Choi et al . ) as well as the multispecies ( microbes , plants , animals and the natu - ral environment ) be considered as stakeholders in partic - ipatory design processes ( Forlano & Halpern ; Forlano , b ; Heitlinger et al . ) . Finally , with the introduction of criti - cal and speculative design and experiential futures in the early 2000s , design researchers have become interested in the ways in which participatory design and design futures might come together to create new modes of experiential fu - Participation is not a Design Fix for Machine Learning tures ( Candy ; Candy & Dunagan ) , design ﬁction ( Bleecker ; Forlano & Mathew ) , speculative design ( Dunne & Raby ) , speculative civics ( DiSalvo et al . ) and critical futures ( Forlano & Halpern ; Forlano , c ) in order to think through the social consequences of emerging technologies . Participatory design methods have often been seen as a way of overcoming supposed difﬁculties that users have in un - derstanding ostensibly complex technologies , particularly in healthcare settings ( Neuhauser & Kreps ) . Participatory methods have also been employed where designers antic - ipate public resistance or skepticism to a product or ser - vice ( Asaro ) . The use of participatory methods in tech - nology settings follows the development of participatory methods in other domains , particularly international devel - opment ( Peet & Hartwick ) where participation was seen as a means for overcoming local resistance to international de - velopment schemes ( Goldman ) . ML already incorporates certain forms of participation throughout the design of models and their integration into society , however participatory design practices from other domains hold important lessons for ML . We will expand the notion of ”participation” beyond the forms of involve - ment that are commonly understood as participatory design . Following the review of key literature on participatory de - sign and ML , we will introduce three different forms of participation : participation as work , participation as con - sultation , participation as justice , each illustrated with a list of examples . Through this framing , it becomes possible to understand how participatory design , a necessarily situated and context - dependent endeavor , articulates with industrial prerogatives of context - independent scalability . It also be - comes possible to recognize where the discourse of partici - pation fails to account for existing power dynamics and ob - scures the extractive nature of collaboration , openness , and sharing , particularly in corporate contexts . We conclude the paper with a set of recommendations drawn from con - sidering a more expansive deﬁnition of participation in the context of ML . 3 . Different Forms of Participation 3 . 1 . Participation as Work Much of ML plays out upon what is an intensely par - ticipatory ﬁeld . Whether acknowledged or not , a broad range of participants play an important role in produc - ing the data that is used to train and evaluate ML mod - els . For example , ImageNet , which laid the foundations for deep learning and most image recognition applications and is still used for ML benchmarking , is an dataset of mil - lions of images , taken by hundreds of thousands of people , scraped from the open web and labeled by mTurk work - ers ( Krizhevsky et al . ) . Image classiﬁcation tools are of - ten built on top of models trained on the ImageNet dataset . Photographers , web designers , and mTurk workers all par - ticipate in every such application . A similar case presents itself for Natural Language Processing applications which , for over a decade , have sourced from Wikipedia for training language corpora ( Gabrilovich & Markovitch ) . Billions of ordinary web users also continually partici - pate in the production and reﬁnement of ML , as their online ( and ofﬂine ) activities produce neatly labeled rows of data on how they click their way around the web , navigate their streets , and engage in any num - ber of other commercial , leisure , or romantic activities ( Mayer - Sch¨onberger & Cukier ) . Users also improve the performance of ML models as they interact with them , a single unanticipated click can update a model’s parameters and future accuracy . This work sometimes is so deeply integrated into the ways in which users navigate the In - ternet that it is performed unconsciously , e . g . when us - ing Google Maps and producing data movement patterns that enable trafﬁc predictions . But other times it becomes more conscious , e . g . when classifying photos when com - pleting a reCAPTCHA ( O’Malley ) , or ranking Uber drivers ( Rosenblat ) . Where ML technology does not live up to it’s mythos , people work behind the veil to complete tasks as if by the magic of AI . Behind some mobile apps claim - ing to use AI are real people transcribing images of pa - per receipts and populating a purchase history database ( Gray & Suri ) , moderating content ( Roberts ) . The labor of integrating new technologies , such as AI applications , into everyday life and existing work processes and even out their rough edges , e . g . in healthcare ( Sendak et al . ) , is the “human infrastructure” without which the socio - technical system cannot function ( Elish & Mateescu ) . Labor , here , is multi - layered and includes affective and emotional labor , e . g . coping with stress and sleep - deprivation when inte - grating medical devices into everyday life ( Forlano , a ) , or social labor , e . g . when explaining ML outcomes to users or even out their glitches such as when chatbots fail . All this work often happens without consent or acknowledgement , and remains uncompensated . Such ML design processes are cases of “designing for” , i . e . processes that are void of a genuine integration of design users , relying on them to make the design product work ex post . 3 . 2 . Participation as Consultation In the case of participation as consultation , cf . ( Martin Jr . et al . , 2020 ) , designers and technologists engage in episodic , short - term projects in which diverse stakeholders might be consulted at various stages of the process . This model is most common in architecture and urban planning as well as among major philanthropic foundations and private corporations . Architecture and urban planning practices use citizen participation Participation is not a Design Fix for Machine Learning approaches to engage different stakeholder groups in project development . As these projects are complex and have signiﬁcant socio - economic impacts on communi - ties , participatory workshops can provide an integrated framework where experts work with stakeholder groups to identify context - speciﬁc needs ( Bratteteig & Verne ; Saad - Sulonen & Horelli ) . Here , participation might be facilitated through small , face - to - face workshops or larger design sprints or hackathons as well as through the use of online platforms for crowdsourcing ideas . There are several challenges that can limit the effectiveness of participation as consultation . For a variety of reasons in - cluding intellectual property concerns , in this model , long - term partnerships are either impossible , undesirable , unnec - essary or cost prohibitive . As this type of top - down de - sign process also takes the form of ”designing for” a par - ticular group without an ongoing commitment to their in - clusion in the process , systemic inequalities that can be hard - coded into consultation and representation protocols ( Sloane , c ) . Experts do not often have a good understand - ing of how to design effective participatory processes or engage the right stakeholders to achieve the desired out - comes . A third challenge occurs as cities begin to require participation workshops as part of the permitting and ap - provals process . Participation workshops can become per - formative , where experts do not actually take the needs or recommendations of the different stakeholder groups into consideration ( Crosby et al . ) . 3 . 3 . Participation as Justice In the case of participation as justice , designers and tech - nologists engage in more - long term partnerships with di - verse stakeholders . In order to build trust , it is impor - tant to create ongoing relationships based on mutual ben - eﬁt , reciprocity , equity and justice . Here , all members of the design process engage in more tightly coupled re - lationships with more frequent communication ( which of - ten happens through a blended communication and in - teraction approach , e . g . online / ofﬂine ) . The canon of participation as collaboration notably comprises participa - tory action research , which is focused on researchers and participants undertake action - oriented and self - reﬂexive practices that leads to them having more control over their lives ( Baum et al . ) ; infrastructuring , which centers designers’ locations , the materials and systems intrinsic to designing , as well as ( community ) capacity building ( Agid ; Hillgren et al . ; Le Dantec & DiSalvo ) ; design jus - tice , which goes beyond value - focused design and centers typically marginalized groups in collaborative and creative design processes that challenge and dismantle the matrix of domination , i . e . white supremacy , heteropatriarchy , capital - ism , and settler colonialism ( Costanza - Chock ) ; crip techno - science , which refuses demands to eliminate disability , un - derscores that disabled people are expert designers of every - day life , and centers technoscientiﬁc activism , critical de - sign practices , and disability justice ( Hamraie & Fritsch ) ; data feminism , which focuses on ideas of intersectional feminism ( D’Ignazio & Klein ) ; and tech activism and re - sistance , both from people affected by potentially harmful technology , such as the Atlantic Towers Resident Associa - tion in Brooklyn , NY ( Gagne ) and those designing it , see for example the Tech Worker Movement ( Tarnoff ) , or a mix of both , such as Data for Black Lives , Black in AI , or Lat - inX in AI . What ties these approaches together is favoring using language around ”designing with” in order to ensure that outcomes are valuable to people from diverse back - grounds and communities , including the disability commu - nity . Participation as justice has social and political impor - tance , but it may be difﬁcult to do it well , especially in a corporate context . Here , design justice can almost be seen as an oxymoron : given the extractive and oppressive capi - talist logics and contexts of ML systems , it appears impos - sible to design ML products that are genuinely “just” and “equitable” . 4 . Critiques of Participation The dominant mode of extraction within the ML industry is deeply entangled with the capitalist paradigm of scale , referring to the ability to gain revenue at a greater pro - portion per unit cost of inputs ( Chandler & Hikino ) . But as a tech industry buzzword , the verb ”to scale” refers to the ability of products to spread far beyond the context of development to new applications in new markets . Part of the promise of ML is that statistical generalizations learned from ﬁnite datasets will allow for inferences to be made across broader contexts , and that capabilities engendered by ML can be applied to additional settings without adding proportional costs . However , datasets are deeply context - bound , and that context , as well as the appropriateness of the use of those datasets , is lost in the scaling of ML appli - cations ( boyd & Crawford ) . Acknowledging the modes of participation that are already components of ML challenges understandings of how these tools are able to scale . As such technologies scale across contexts , the generalizations that are learned inevitably re - quire updating , by providing additional training data or cor - recting errors ( Selbst et al . ) . This often requires the partici - pation of users interacting with the system who experience the friction of providing additional information to the sys - tem ( as with CAPTCHAs ) or bearing the burden of system errors . As discussed above , representation / consultation is often prohibitively costly . Where a cost - beneﬁt analysis may encourage such forms of participation in the earlier stages of product development , in later stages that product is expected to scale without incurring additional costs . The Participation is not a Design Fix for Machine Learning initial utility of representative and consultative forms of participation are thus diluted as products scale beyond the context in which that mode of participation contributed to the overall design of the product in earlier stages . For ML products to simultaneously scale and engage in meaningful partnerships oriented toward justice , they also require addi - tional inputs of participation , and budgets must be set aside for that . This can be thought of as levelling the playing ﬁeld of futur - ing : product futures are often made very concrete for ven - ture capitalists . But what kind of imaginative work do en - trepreneurs do when it comes to the communities that they seek out as users ( or targets ) of their products ? There is an existing imbalance between market - ﬁt and community - ﬁt . To address that and pave the way for design justice processes to become integral to ML , it is key to expand the notion of value beyond monetary value and the extrac - tive logics underpinning the invasive data collection that is necessitated by most ML system designs . Promising devel - opments have recently been made in the context of Indige - nous data sovereignty which includes access , control and governance of Indigenous data ( Anderson & Hudson ) . Against that backdrop we suggest three cues for consider - ing participation in ML in a more equitable way : 1 . Recognize participation as work . Users already labor in , for , and through ML systems across a number of dimen - sions ( affective , social , emotional ) . This labor upholds and improves ML systems and therefore is valuable for the own - ers of the ML systems . To acknowledge that , users should be asked for consent , be provided with opt - out options or alternatives , and , if they chose to participate through labor , be offered compensation . This could mean to clarify when and how data generated by user behaviour is used for the training and improvement of ML systems ( e . g . via a ban - ner on the Wikipedia page , or in Google Maps ) ; to give an alternative security option for reCAPTCHA ; to not pun - ish users for refusing to leave reviews ; to provide appropri - ate support for content moderators ; to compensate “ghost workers” fairly ( Gray & Suri ) ; to develop reward systems for users that labor to integrate technologies into their lives and thereby provide rich data for proﬁt - oriented ML com - panies . 2 . Participation as consultation must be designed for speciﬁc contexts . If short - term participation is the most feasible and desired version for ML participation , then there needs to be a commitment to context - speciﬁcity , es - pecially in terms of how the participation is facilitated . Ev - ery context is different , so participation has to be designed to address these different contexts . Rather than a one - size - ﬁts - all approach , consultation and representation processes must be revisited and reexamined to ensure they are gath - ering the right information from the right people . As ML systems affect a wide range of groups , marginalized stake - holders should be given the space and voice to co - design and co - produce these systems ( Crosby et al . ) . Document - ing these processes and their contexts can form a knowl - edge base for long term , effective participation . 3 . Participation as justice must be genuine and long term . This means to engage in creating processes that pro - vide transparency and genuine knowledge sharing . This can be difﬁcult particularly for proprietary design cases . Further , using the language of design justice without ac - tually engaging in actual design justice processes and prac - tices can only lead to corporate co - optation . For example , the ML ﬁeld has seen a hype of “ethical AI” serving as a smokescreen for continuing with non - participatory and non - justice oriented ML design approaches ( Sloane , a ) , de - spite good intentions . To avoid that , it may be helpful to make the tensions that characterize the goal of long term participation in ML visible , acknowledging that partner - ships and justice do not scale in frictionless ways , but re - quire constant maintenance and articulation with existing social formation in new contexts ( Tsing ) . We argue that it is crucial to enhance the ability for lat - eral thinking across applications and academic disciplines ( “holistic futuring” ) , because harms can be produced by the same ways of thinking that produce the technology that causes the harms . This maps onto Vaughn’s ( Vaughan 1996 ) normalization of deviance and could beneﬁt from cross - checking or lateral thinking between disciplines and forms of expertise . Such an approach could facilitate the development of an ontology of ( design ) harms or “design inequalities” ( Sloane , a ) . To facilitate these efforts , we pro - pose to develop a searchable database of design precedents across applications and disciplines that highlights design failures , especially failures of design participation , cross - referenced with socio - structural dimension ( e . g . issues per - taining to racial inequality , or class - based inequity ) . This database should cover design projects across all sectors and domains , not just ML , and explicitly acknowledge de - liberate absences and outliers which often are the most interesting and relevant social phenomena we can learn from ( e . g . transgender identities ) . It may also acknowl - edge and educate on the deliberate refusal to “get counted” ( D’Ignazio & Klein ) . 5 . Conclusion In this paper , we have cautioned against “participation - washing” of ML by critically examining the existing kinds of participation in design practice and ML . Existing forms of participation can be classiﬁed as work , as consultation , and as justice , but we have argued that the notion of ”par - ticipation” should be expanded to acknowledge more sub - tle , and possibly exploitative , forms of community involve - Participation is not a Design Fix for Machine Learning ment in participatory ML design . This framing allows for understanding participatory design as a necessarily situated and context - dependent endeavor which is at odds with in - dustrial prerogatives of extraction and context - independent scalability . Against that backdrop , it is imperative to rec - ognize design participation as work ; to ensure that partic - ipation as consultation is context - speciﬁc ; and that partic - ipation as justice must be genuine and long term . There - fore , we argue that developing a cross - sectoral database of design participation failures that is cross - referenced with socio - structural dimensions and highlights “edge cases” that can and must be learned from . References Agid , S . ” . . . it’s your project , but it’s not necessarily your work . . . ” : infrastructuring , situatedness , and de - signing relational practice . In Proceedings of the 14th Participatory Design Conference on Full papers - PDC ’16 , pp . 81 – 90 . ACM Press . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4046 - 5 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 2940299 . 2940317 . URL http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? doid = 2940299 . 2940317 . Anderson , J . and Hudson , M . IP and indigenous data sovereignty : The traditional knowledge and biocultural labels and notice system . In NYU Engelberg Innovation Colloquium Paper . Asaro , P . M . Transforming society by transforming tech - nology : the science and politics of participatory design . 10 : 34 . Baum , F . , MacDougall , C . , and Smith , D . Partic - ipatory action research . 60 ( 10 ) : 854 – 857 . ISSN 0143 - 005X . doi : 10 . 1136 / jech . 2004 . 028662 . URL http : / / jech . bmj . com / cgi / doi / 10 . 1136 / jech . 2004 . 028662 . Bleecker , J . Design ﬁction : A short essay on design , science , fact and ﬁction . URL https : / / bit . ly / 2B9rqjg . Type : Journal Article . Bolukbasi , T . , Chang , K . - W . , Zou , J . Y . , Saligrama , V . , and Kalai , A . T . Man is to computer programmer as woman is to homemaker ? debiasing word embeddings . In Pro - ceedings of the 30th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , pp . 9 . boyd , d . and Crawford , K . Critical questions for big data : Provocations for a cultural , technological , and scholarly phenomenon . 15 ( 5 ) : 662 – 679 . ISSN 1369 - 118X , 1468 - 4462 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 1369118X . 2012 . 678878 . URL http : / / www . tandfonline . com / doi / abs / 10 . 1080 / 1369118X . 2012 . 678878 . Bratteteig , T . and Verne , G . Does AI make PD ob - solete ? : exploring challenges from artiﬁcial intel - ligence to participatory design . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference on Short Papers , Situated Actions , Workshops and Tutorial - PDC ’18 , pp . 1 – 5 . ACM Press . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 5574 - 2 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3210604 . 3210646 . URL http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? doid = 3210604 . 3210646 Buolamwini , J . and Gebru , T . Gender shades : Intersec - tional accuracy disparities in commercial gender classi - ﬁcation . In Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , volume 18 . Candy , S . The futures of everyday life : Politics and the design of experiential scenarios . Candy , S . and Dunagan , J . Designing an experiential sce - nario : the people who vanished . 86 : 136 – 153 . ISSN 0016 - 3287 . Type : Journal Article . Chandler , A . D . and Hikino , T . Scale and scope : the dy - namics of industrial capitalism . Belknap Press . ISBN 978 - 0 - 674 - 78994 - 4 . Choi , J . H . - j . , Forlano , L . , and Kera , D . Situated automa - tion : Algorithmic creatures in participatory design . In Proceedings of the Participatory Design Conference . Costanza - Chock , S . Design Justice . MIT Press . Type : Book . Crosby , Bryson , Quick , and Slotterback . Designing public participation processes . In Leadership for the common good : tackling public problems in a shared - power world , Public Administration Review . D’Ignazio , C . and Klein , L . F . Data Feminism . Strong ideas series . The MIT Press . ISBN 978 - 0 - 262 - 04400 - 4 . DiSalvo , C . Adversarial design . MIT Press , a . ISBN 0 - 262 - 01738 - 5 . Type : Book . DiSalvo , C . Design and the construction of publics . 25 ( 1 ) : 48 – 63 , b . Type : Journal Article . DiSalvo , C . , Jenkins , T . , and Lodato , T . Designing spec - ulative civics . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Con - ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , pp . 4979 – 4990 . ACM . ISBN 1 - 4503 - 3362 - 1 . Type : Con - ference Proceedings . Dunne , A . and Raby , F . Speculative Everything : Design , Fiction , and Social Dreaming . MIT Press . ISBN 0 - 262 - 01984 - 1 . Type : Book . Elish , M . C . and Mateescu , A . AI in context : The labor of integrating new technologies . Eubanks , V . Automating Inequality : How High - Tech Tools Proﬁle , Police , and Punish the Poor . St . Martin’s Press . Participation is not a Design Fix for Machine Learning Flanagan , M . and Nissenbaum , H . Values at Play in Digital Games . MIT Press . Type : Book . Forlano , L . The danger of intimate algorithms . a . Type : Magazine Article . Forlano , L . Posthumanism and design . 3 ( 1 ) : 16 – 29 , b . Type : Journal Article . Forlano , L . Stabilizing / destabilizing the driverless city : Speculative futures and autonomous vehicles . 13 , c . Type : Journal Article . Forlano , L . and Halpern , M . Reimagining work : Entangle - ments and frictions around future of work narratives . ( 26 ) : 32 – 59 . Type : Journal Article . Forlano , L . and Mathew , A . From design ﬁction to design friction : Speculative and participatory design of values - embedded urban technology . 21 ( 4 ) : 7 – 24 . Type : Journal Article . Gabrilovich , E . and Markovitch , S . Wikipedia - based semantic interpretation for natural lan - guage processing . 34 : 443 – 498 . ISSN 1076 - 9757 . doi : 10 . 1613 / jair . 2669 . URL https : / / jair . org / index . php / jair / article / view / 10595 . Gagne , Y . How we fought our landlord’s secre - tive plan for facial recognition—and won . URL https : / / bit . ly / 2Ce9ODt . Library Catalog : www . fastcompany . com . Goldman , M . Imperial Nature : The World Bank and Strug - gles for Social Justice in the Age of Globalization . Yale Agrarian Studies Series . Yale University Press . Gray , M . L . and Suri , S . Ghost Work : How to Stop Silicon Valley from Building a New Global Underclass . Houghton Mifﬂin Harcourt . ISBN 978 - 1 - 328 - 56624 - 9 . Hamraie , A . and Fritsch , K . Crip technoscience manifesto . 5 ( 1 ) : 1 – 33 . ISSN 2380 - 3312 , 2380 - 3312 . doi : 10 . 28968 / cftt . v5i1 . 29607 . URL https : / / catalystjournal . org / index . php / catalyst / article / view / 29607 . Hansson , K . , Forlano , L . , Choi , J . H . - j . , DiSalvo , C . , Pargman , T . C . , Bardzell , S . , Lindtner , S . , and Joshi , S . Provocation , conﬂict , and appropriation : the role of the designer in making publics . 34 ( 4 ) : 3 – 7 . ISSN 0747 - 9360 . Type : Journal Article . Heitlinger , S . , Foth , M . , Clarke , R . , DiSalvo , C . , Light , A . , and Forlano , L . Avoiding ecocidal smart cities : par - ticipatory design for more - than - human futures . In Pro - ceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Situated Actions , Workshops and Tutorial - Volume 2 , pp . 51 . ACM . ISBN 1 - 4503 - 5574 - 9 . Type : Conference Proceedings . Hickel , J . The Divide Global Inequality from Conquest to Free Markets . W . W . Norton & Company . Hillgren , P . - A . , Seravalli , A . , and Emilson , A . Prototyping and infrastructuring in design for social innovation . 7 ( 3 ) : 169 – 183 . ISSN 1571 - 0882 . Type : Journal Article . Keshavarz , M . and Maze , R . Design and dissensus : fram - ing and staging participation in design research . 11 ( 1 ) : 7 – 29 . ISSN 1448 - 7136 . Type : Journal Article . Krizhevsky , A . , Sutskever , I . , and Hinton , G . E . Im - ageNet classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks . 60 ( 6 ) : 84 – 90 . ISSN 0001 - 0782 , 1557 - 7317 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3065386 . URL https : / / dl . acm . org / doi / 10 . 1145 / 3065386 . Langley , P . Crafting papers on machine learning . In Lang - ley , P . ( ed . ) , Proceedings of the 17th International Con - ference on Machine Learning ( ICML 2000 ) , pp . 1207 – 1216 , Stanford , CA , 2000 . Morgan Kaufmann . Le Dantec , C . A . and DiSalvo , C . Infrastructuring and the formation of publics in participatory design . 43 ( 2 ) : 241 – 264 . ISSN 0306 - 3127 . Type : Journal Article . Martin Jr . , D . , Prabhakaran , V . , Kuhlberg , J . , Smart , A . , and Isaac , W . S . Participatory Problem Formulation for Fairer Machine Learning Through Community Based System Dynamics . arXiv : 2005 . 07572 [ cs , stat ] , May 2020 . Mayer - Sch¨onberger , V . and Cukier , K . Big Data : A Revolu - tion that Will Transform how We Live , Work , and Think . Houghton Mifﬂin Harcourt . ISBN 978 - 0 - 544 - 00269 - 2 . Mouffe , C . Pluralism , dissensus and democratic citizen - ship . pp . 1 – 10 . Type : Journal Article . Neuhauser , L . and Kreps , G . L . Participatory design and artiﬁcial intelligence : Strategies to improve health com - munication for diverse audiences . In AI and Health Com - munication — Papers from the AAAI 2011 Spring Sympo - sium ( SS - 11 - 01 ) , pp . 4 . AAAI . Nissenbaum , H . How computer systems embody values . 34 ( 3 ) : 117 – 119 . Type : Journal Article . Noble , S . U . Algorithms of Oppression : How Search En - gines Reinforce Racism . NYU Press . O’Malley , J . Captcha if you can : how you’ve been train - ing AI for years without realising it | TechRadar . URL https : / / bit . ly / 37H1esA . O’Neal , C . Weapons of Math Destruction : How Big Data Increases Inequality and Threatens Democracy . Crown . Participation is not a Design Fix for Machine Learning Peet , R . and Hartwick , E . Theories of Development : Con - tentions , Arguments , Alternatives . The Guildford Press . Piketty , T . Capital in the Twenty - ﬁrst Century . The Belk - nap Press of Harvard University Press . ISBN 978 - 0 - 674 - 43000 - 6 . Roberts , S . T . Behind the sSreen : Content Moderation in the Shadows of Social Media . Yale University Press . ISBN 978 - 0 - 300 - 23588 - 3 . OCLC : on1055263168 . Rosenblat , A . Uberland : How Algorithms are Rewriting the Rules of Work . Univ of California Press . Saad - Sulonen , J . and Horelli , L . The value of community informatics to participatory urban planning and design a case study in helsinki . 6 ( 2 ) . Sanders , E . B . - N . From user - centered to participatory de - sign approaches . pp . 1 – 8 . Type : Journal Article . Schuler , D . and Namioka , A . Participatory design : principles and practices . L . Erlbaum Associates . ISBN 0805809511 ( cloth ) 080580952X ( paper ) . URL http : / / www . loc . gov / catdir / enhancements / fy0745 / 92027297 - d . html . Type : Book . Selbst , A . D . , Boyd , D . , Friedler , S . A . , Venkatasubra - manian , S . , and Vertesi , J . Fairness and abstraction in sociotechnical systems . In Proceedings of the Confer - ence on Fairness , Accountability , and Transparency - FAT * ’19 , pp . 59 – 68 . ACM Press . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 6125 - 5 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3287560 . 3287598 . URL http : / / dl . acm . org / citation . cfm ? doid = 3287560 . 3287598 . Sendak , M . , Elish , M . C . , Gao , M . , Futoma , J . , Ratliff , W . , Nichols , M . , Bedoya , A . , Balu , S . , and O’Brien , C . ”the human body is a black box” : supporting clinical decision - making with deep learning . In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness , Accountability , and Transparency , pp . 99 – 109 . ACM . ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 6936 - 7 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3351095 . 3372827 . URL http : / / dl . acm . org / doi / 10 . 1145 / 3351095 . 3372827 . Shilton , K . Values levers : Building ethics into design . 38 ( 3 ) : 374 – 397 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0162243912436985 . URL http : / / sth . sagepub . com / content / 38 / 3 / 374 . abstract . Type : Journal Article . Sloane , M . Inequality is the name of the game : Thoughts on the emerging ﬁeld of technology , ethics and so - cial justice . a . doi : 10 . 34669 / WI . CP / 2 . 9 . URL https : / / www . ssoar . info / ssoar / handle / document / 62583 . Publisher : WI - Weizenbaum Institute for the Networked Society Version Number : 1 . Sloane , M . On the need for mapping design in - equalities . 35 ( 4 ) : 3 – 11 , b . ISSN 0747 - 9360 , 1531 - 4790 . doi : 10 . 1162 / desi a 00559 . URL https : / / www . mitpressjournals . org / doi / abs / 10 . 1162 / desi _ a _ 00559 Sloane , M . The shelves that won’t hold : Material politics and social inequality in spatial design practice . c . doi : 10 . 1162 / desi a 00565 . URL https : / / www . mitpressjournals . org / doix / abs / 10 . 1162 / desi _ a _ 00565 Publisher : MIT Press One Rogers Street , Cambridge , MA 02142 - 1209 USA journals - info @ mit . edu . Spinuzzi , C . The methodology of participatory design . 52 ( 2 ) : 163 – 174 . ISSN 0049 - 3155 . Type : Journal Article . Tarnoff , B . The Making of the Tech Worker Movement . Logic . URL https : / / logicmag . io / the - making - of - the - tech - worker - Library Catalog : logicmag . io . Tsing , A . Friction : An Ethnography of Global Connection . Princeton University Press .