Arabidopsis ACTIN - DEPOLYMERIZING FACTOR7 Severs Actin Filaments and Regulates Actin Cable Turnover to Promote Normal Pollen Tube Growth W Yiyan Zheng , a , b , 1 Yurong Xie , a , 1 Yuxiang Jiang , a , b , 1 Xiaolu Qu , a , b and Shanjin Huang a , c , 2 a Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Physiology , Institute of Botany , Chinese Academy of Sciences , Beijing 100093 , China b University of Chinese Academy of Sciences , Beijing 100049 , China c National Center for Plant Gene Research , Beijing 100101 , China ORCID ID : 0000 - 0001 - 9517 - 2515 ( S . H . ) . Actin ﬁ laments are often arranged into higher - order structures , such as the longitudinal actin cables that generate the reverse fountain cytoplasmic streaming pattern present in pollen tubes . While several actin binding proteins have been implicated in the generation of these cables , the mechanisms that regulate their dynamic turnover remain largely unknown . Here , we show that Arabidopsis thaliana ACTIN - DEPOLYMERIZING FACTOR7 ( ADF7 ) is required for turnover of longitudinal actin cables . In vitro biochemical analyses revealed that ADF7 is a typical ADF that prefers ADP - G - actin over ATP - G - actin . ADF7 inhibits nucleotide exchange on actin and severs ﬁ laments , but its ﬁ lament severing and depolymerizing activities are less potent than those of the vegetative ADF1 . ADF7 primarily decorates longitudinal actin cables in the shanks of pollen tubes . Consistent with this localization pattern , the severing frequency and depolymerization rate of ﬁ laments signi ﬁ cantly decreased , while their maximum lifetime signi ﬁ cantly increased , in adf7 pollen tube shanks . Furthermore , an ADF7 – enhanced green ﬂ uorescent protein fusion with defective severing activity but normal G - actin binding activity could not complement adf7 , providing compelling evidence that the severing activity of ADF7 is vital for its in vivo functions . These observations suggest that ADF7 evolved to promote turnover of longitudinal actin cables by severing actin ﬁ laments in pollen tubes . INTRODUCTION The actin cytoskeleton constantly undergoes dynamic assembly and disassembly . These dynamic changes allow cells to con - stantly remodel networks and build distinct structures needed for various physiological cellular processes , including cell mo - tility , cell division , cytokinesis , maintenance of cell polarity , and polarized cell growth ( Pollard and Cooper , 2009 ) , as well as responses to various stimuli ( Staiger , 2000 ) . How diverse cellular actin structures are generated and remodeled remains an open question in cell biology . The pollen tube extends rapidly through the style , searching for the ovule in order to deliver two nonmotile sperm cells , resulting in double fertilization in ﬂ owering plants . Growth of the pollen tube is highly dependent upon dynamic remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton ( Taylor and Hepler , 1997 ; Gibbon et al . , 1999 ; Hepler et al . , 2001 ; Vidali and Hepler , 2001 ; Vidali et al . , 2001 ) . It is widely accepted that the actin cytoskeleton is arranged into at least three distinct structures within pollen tubes ( Cheung and Wu , 2008 ; Chen et al . , 2009 ; Staiger et al . , 2010 ) . In the shank region , longitudinal actin cables are distributed throughout the cytoplasm . The consensus view regarding the function of longitudinal actin cables is that they provide molecular tracks to drive intracellular traf ﬁ cking events , such as organelle move - ment and vesicle traf ﬁ cking . Several actin binding proteins have been implicated in the generation of longitudinal actin cables in the pollen tube . For example , the formin protein Arabidopsis thaliana Formin3 nu - cleates actin assembly ( Ye et al . , 2009 ) , while bundling proteins , such as ﬁ mbrins , villins , and LIM - domain – containing proteins , decorate and stabilize actin cables , as well as maintaining their longitudinal arrangement ( Wang et al . , 2008 ; Papuga et al . , 2010 ; Wu et al . , 2010 ; Zhang et al . , 2010 ; Su et al . , 2012 ; Qu et al . , 2013 ) . However , the mechanisms that facilitate dynamic remod - eling of these longitudinal actin cables and the extent to which dynamics of longitudinal actin cables are related to pollen tube growth remain largely unknown . ACTIN - DEPOLYMERIZING FACTOR ( ADF ) / co ﬁ lin is a major factor involved in actin depolymerization and serves as a limiting factor in rapid actin turnover . ADF was originally puri ﬁ ed from embryonic chicken brain ( Bamburg et al . , 1980 ) and was sub - sequently shown to rapidly depolymerize ﬁ lamentous actin ( Giuliano et al . , 1988 ) . Homologs of ADF have been identi ﬁ ed in many different species , including plants . Although one ADF and one ADF and two co ﬁ lins are encoded in the genomes of uni - cellular eukaryotes and vertebrates , respectively , the number of ADF genes is signi ﬁ cantly expanded in ﬂ owering plants ( Maciver and Hussey , 2002 ; Feng et al . , 2006 ; Bamburg and Bernstein , 2008 ) . There are a total of 11 ADF genes encoded by the Arabi - dopsis genome , and these genes can be divided into four sub - classes ( Ruzicka et al . , 2007 ) . Arabidopsis ADF s have been implicated in numerous physiological processes , including etiolated 1 These authors contributed equally to this work . 2 Address correspondence to sjhuang @ ibcas . ac . cn . The author responsible for distribution of materials integral to the ﬁ ndings presented in this article in accordance with the policy described in the Instructions for Authors ( www . plantcell . org ) is : Shanjin Huang ( sjhuang @ ibcas . ac . cn ) . W Online version contains Web - only data . www . plantcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1105 / tpc . 113 . 117820 The Plant Cell , Vol . 25 : 3405 – 3423 , September 2013 , www . plantcell . org ã 2013 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved . hypocotyl growth , seedling development , ﬂ ower timing , root hair growth , and plant defense ( Dong et al . , 2001 ; Gilliland et al . , 2003 ; Burgos - Rivera et al . , 2008 ; Clément et al . , 2009 ; Tian et al . , 2009 ; Henty et al . , 2011 ) . ADF has also been implicated in polarized moss protonemal cell growth ( Augustine et al . , 2008 ) and pollen tube growth ( Chen et al . , 2002 ; Li et al . , 2010 ) . However , knowl - edge regarding potential functions of ADF in pollen tube growth has primarily been obtained from gain - of - function studies ( Chen et al . , 2002 ; Li et al . , 2010 ) . Due to the presence of several distinct actin arrays and coexistence of multiple ADF isovariants ( Bou Daher et al . , 2011 ; Daher and Geitmann , 2012 ) , loss - of - function analysis is needed to better understand the precise functions and mechanisms of action of each ADF isovariant during pollen tube growth . Arabidopsis ADF7 and ADF10 belong to the class IIa ADFs , which are expressed speci ﬁ cally in pollen ( Pina et al . , 2005 ; Ruzicka et al . , 2007 ) . Green ﬂ uorescent protein ( GFP ) fusions of both ADF7 and ADF10 were shown to decorate actin ﬁ laments and exhibit distinct localization patterns within pollen tubes ( Bou Daher et al . , 2011 ; Daher and Geitmann , 2012 ) . However , whether these GFP fusion proteins are fully functional in the pollen tube needs to be examined . Furthermore , their precise roles in regu - lation of actin dynamics during pollen tube growth remain to be determined . The biochemical activities of ADF / co ﬁ lins have been docu - mented extensively over the past several decades . ADF / co ﬁ lin is able to bind to both ADP - and ATP - loaded G - actin , but it prefers ADP - loaded G - actin and inhibits nucleotide exchange ( Carlier et al . , 1997 ; Tian et al . , 2009 ) . Therefore , ADF / co ﬁ lin was thought to target older actin ﬁ laments . Historically , ADF / co ﬁ lin was thought to be an actin - depolymerizing protein that promoted subunit dissociation from the pointed ends of actin ﬁ laments ( Carlier et al . , 1997 ) . However , more recent evidence suggests that ﬁ lament severing is the primary mechanism required for the function of ADF / co ﬁ lins ( Andrianantoandro and Pollard , 2006 ; Chen and Pollard , 2011 ; Henty et al . , 2011 ; Suarez et al . , 2011 ) . The most compelling evidence comes from the results showing that speci ﬁ c abolishment of the severing activity of co ﬁ lin through point mutations alters its function in vivo ( Chen and Pol - lard , 2011 ) . However , to date , no similar study has been reported in plants . Previous studies have shown that the biochemical activities of ADF isovariants can vary greatly ( Tholl et al . , 2011 ) , emphasizing the importance of characterizing the biochemical activity of each isovariant carefully before assessing its function in vivo . For exam - ple , a previous study showed that lily ( Lilium longi ﬂ orum ) pollen ADF1 binds to F - actin better and has less depolymerizing activity than the vegetative maize ( Zea mays ) ADF3 ( Smertenko et al . , 2001 ) . However , more evidence is needed to determine whether these differences in activity are a common phenomenon for pollen ADFs . In particular , careful comparison of pollen and vegetative ADF iso - variants from the same species is an ideal means to test this notion . Furthermore , careful determination of the interactions of pollen ADF with G - actin and F - actin and comparison of any differences in activity between pollen and vegetative ADF in regulation of the turnover of single actin ﬁ laments are necessary to better un - derstand the mechanism of action of pollen ADF within the pollen cellular context . To characterize the molecular mechanisms underlying the dynamic turnover of longitudinal actin cables in pollen tubes , we analyzed the role of pollen - speci ﬁ c ADF7 in Arabidopsis using a combination of live - cell imaging , reverse genetics , and state - of - the - art biochemical assays . Our results demonstrate that ADF7 is a typical ADF , but that it is less potent than the vege - tative ADF1 , consistent with several previous reports ( Lopez et al . , 1996 ; Smertenko et al . , 2001 ; Allwood et al . , 2002 ) . These observations suggest that weak depolymerizing activity may be commonly associated with pollen ADFs , implying that these proteins may have evolved to ful ﬁ ll pollen - speci ﬁ c requirements for actin dynamics . Real - time visualization of single ﬁ laments showed that ADF7 exhibits ﬁ lament severing activity , which was veri ﬁ ed in vivo by demonstrating that the average ﬁ lament sev - ering frequency was signi ﬁ cantly decreased in adf7 pollen tubes . The most compelling evidence supporting the importance of the severing activity comes from results showing that an ADF7 - EGFP ( for enhanced GFP ) fusion protein de ﬁ cient in severing activity that retains G - actin binding cannot complement adf7 . Thus , we provide direct evidence that ADF - mediated severing regulates the turnover of longitudinal actin cables to promote pollen tube tip growth . RESULTS Loss of ADF7 Increases Bundling of Actin Filaments in the Shanks of Pollen Tubes To dissect the in vivo functions of ADF7 , a T - DNA insertion line ( Salk _ 024576 ; adf7 ) was analyzed ( Figure 1A ) . No ADF7 tran - script was detected in adf7 plants ( Figure 1B ) , suggesting that the allele is a knockout . Pollen germination and tube elongation were initially assayed to determine the effects of loss of ADF7 . Although pollen germination was not affected in adf7 ( see Supplemental Figure 1 online ) , the pollen tube elongation rate was signi ﬁ cantly decreased in adf7 compared with that of the wild - type Columbia - 0 ( Col - 0 ) line ( Figure 1C ) . Pollen tube elon - gation was fully rescued in the gADF7 ; adf7 line ( Figure 1D ) , suggesting that this phenotype is indeed caused by loss of ADF7 . Thus , these data suggest that loss of ADF7 has no overt effect on pollen germination but inhibits tube elongation . We next sought to determine whether loss of ADF7 affects the organization and dynamics of the actin cytoskeleton in the pollen tube . Pollen tubes derived from wild - type and adf7 plants were subjected to F - actin staining with Alexa - 488 phalloidin . No overt defects in actin organization were detected in adf7 pollen tubes ( Figure 1Eb ) compared with wild - type pollen tubes ( Figure 1Ea ) . However , we did note that the ﬂ uorescence associated with F - actin staining was brighter in adf7 pollen tubes ( Figure 1Ed ) compared with wild - type pollen tubes ( Figure 1Ec ) . To quantitatively analyze this phenotype , we focused on the shank region and subapical region because the F - actin staining in shank region was quite uniform in both wild - type and adf7 pollen tubes ( Figure 1E ) and because ADF was implicated in regulating the construction of actin structures in subapical regions ( Chen et al . , 2002 ; Lovy - Wheeler et al . , 2006 ) . Analysis of the distri - bution of ﬂ uorescence pixel intensities revealed that larger in - tensity values were more frequent in adf7 pollen tubes compared with wild - type pollen tubes ( Figure 1F ) . Consequently , the average 3406 The Plant Cell Figure 1 . Loss of ADF7 Increases the Amount of Filamentous Actin and Inhibits Pollen Tube Growth . ( A ) Structure of the ADF7 gene . ADF7 contains three exons and two introns , which are indicated by black boxes and lines , respectively . Salk _ 024576 was inserted in the second intron to produce the adf7 allele . ( B ) adf7 is a knockout allele . No ADF7 transcripts were detected in adf7 plants ; however , ADF7 expression was restored in the gADF7 ; adf7 line . eIF4A served as the internal control . The number of cycles used to amplify PCR fragments is indicated in the ﬁ gure . WT , the wild type . ( C ) Pollen tube growth was inhibited in adf7 plants . Individual pollen tubes derived from wild - type , adf7 , and gADF7 ; adf7 plants are shown at 60 and 90 min after germination . Bar = 50 m m . ( D ) The pollen tube elongation rate was signi ﬁ cantly decreased in adf7 plants . Signi ﬁ cant differences were assessed via a one - way analysis of variance , followed by an LSD post - hoc multiple comparison test . Values represent mean 6 SE . Different capital letters indicate signi ﬁ cant differences ( P < 0 . 01 ) . The experiment was repeated ﬁ ve times . ( E ) No overt defect in the overall organization of actin ﬁ laments was detected in adf7 pollen tubes , although more prominent actin cables were present in adf7 pollen tubes . Representative images show wild - type ( a ) and adf7 ( b ) pollen tubes and the shank regions of ﬁ ve representative wild - type ( c ) and adf7 ( d ) pollen tubes . Images are the projections from all optical sections throughout pollen tubes . Bar = 10 m m . ( F ) Fluorescence pixel intensity distribution of F - actin staining spanning the length of the pollen tubes . The percentage of ﬂ uorescent pixels with higher gray values was increased in adf7 pollen tubes . ( G ) The amount of F - actin was increased in adf7 pollen tubes . The relative amount of F - actin was quanti ﬁ ed by measuring the ﬂ uorescence pixel intensity in the apexes , subapexes , and shanks of pollen tubes . The de ﬁ nition for these regions is described in the methods section . Values represent mean 6 SE . * P < 0 . 05 and * * P < 0 . 01 by a Student ’ s t test . ( H ) The skewness of actin ﬁ laments increased in the shanks of adf7 pollen tubes . Values represent mean 6 SE . * P < 0 . 05 by a Student ’ s t test . ( I ) The width of ﬁ lamentous structures increased in the shanks and subapexes of adf7 pollen tubes . Values represent mean 6 SE . * P < 0 . 05 by a Student ’ s t test . ADF7 Promotes Actin Cable Turnover 3407 ﬂ uorescence pixel intensity was signi ﬁ cantly increased in the shanks and subapexes of adf7 pollen tubes compared with that of wild - type pollen tubes ( Figure 1G ) . Since phalloidin speci ﬁ - cally binds to F - actin ( Cooper , 1987 ) , ﬂ uorescence intensity is positively correlated with the amount of F - actin . Thus , the data suggest that loss of ADF7 increases the amount of F - actin . Furthermore , measurement of skewness revealed that these values were signi ﬁ cantly increased in adf7 pollen tubes ( Figure 1H ) , along with the measurement showed that the average width of ﬁ lamen - tous structures increased in adf7 pollen tubes ( Figure 1I ) , sug - gesting that the extent of ﬁ lament bundling was increased in adf7 pollen tubes . However , no overt differences were observed in the organization or amount of F - actin in pollen grains from adf7 plants compared with wild - type plants ( see Supplemental Figure 2 online ) . Thus , these results suggest that ADF7 regulates pollen tube growth by promoting disassembly of actin ﬁ laments . Loss of ADF7 Renders Pollen Germination and Tube Elongation Resistant to Latrunculin B We next examined whether the organization and dynamics of actin ﬁ laments were differentially affected by actin - targeted drugs in adf7 pollen . We approached this question by analyzing the effects of the actin monomer sequestering agent latrunculin B ( LatB ) ( Coué et al . , 1987 ; Gibbon et al . , 1999 ) on pollen ger - mination and tube growth . Results from this analysis revealed that germination of adf7 pollen was resistant to treatment with 3 nM LatB compared with both wild - type and gADF7 ; adf7 pollen ( Figure 2A ; see Supplemental Figure 3 online ) . Further analysis of a series of LatB concentrations further con ﬁ rmed that the germination of adf7 pollen was resistant to LatB ( Figure 2B ) . This phenotype was fully reversed in gADF7 ; adf7 plants ( Figure 2B ) . Because 3 nM LatB was previously shown to result in half - maximum growth inhibition of wild - type Arabidopsis pollen tubes ( Zhang et al . , 2010 ) and was associated with LatB re - sistance in adf7 plants , two LatB concentrations ( 3 and 10 nM ) were selected for further analysis of the effects of LatB on adf7 pollen tube elongation . The average pollen tube elongation rates for wild - type ( 202 . 1 6 8 . 5 µ m / h ; n = 3 ; mean 6 SE ) and adf7 ( 159 . 6 6 6 . 2 µ m / h ; n = 3 ) plants were normalized to 100 % . Addition of 3 and 10 nM LatB to standard germination medium ( GM ) reduced pollen tube elongation rates to 41 . 4 % 6 3 . 7 % ( n = 3 ) and 25 . 7 % 6 1 . 5 % ( n = 3 ) for wild - type pollen tubes and 90 . 7 % 6 1 . 7 % ( n = 3 ) and 59 . 7 % 6 7 . 3 % ( n = 3 ) for adf7 pollen tubes , respectively ( Figure 2C ) . Thus , these data suggest that loss of ADF7 renders both pollen germination and tube elon - gation resistant to LatB . The Actin Cytoskeleton in adf7 Pollen Grains Is Resistant to Perturbation by LatB We next visualized the effect of LatB on the actin cytoskeleton of the pollen grain , since it has been shown to be a good experi - mental system for visualization of actin ﬁ laments and quanti ﬁ - cation of F - actin ( Huang et al . , 2006 ; Ye et al . , 2009 ; Zhang et al . , 2010 ) . Pollen grains were stained with Alexa - 488 phalloidin after treatment with 200 nM LatB for 30 min . Actin ﬁ laments became fragmented in both wild - type and adf7 pollen grains treated with LatB and were less abundant compared with untreated wild - type and adf7 pollen grains ( Figure 2D ) , consistent with previous re - ports demonstrating net actin depolymerization induced by LatB ( Gibbon et al . , 1999 ; Snowman et al . , 2002 ; Zhang et al . , 2010 ) . However , actin ﬁ laments in adf7 pollen grains appeared brighter than those of wild - type pollen grains after LatB treatment ( Figure 2D ) . To assess this difference , the relative amount of F - actin was quanti ﬁ ed by measuring the average ﬂ uorescence pixel intensity associated with F - actin staining as described previously ( Ye et al . , 2009 ; Zhang et al . , 2010 ) . The amount of F - actin in untreated wild - type and adf7 pollen grains was normalized to 100 % . The relative amount ( mean 6 SE ) of F - actin was determined to be 41 . 0 % 6 5 . 0 % ( n = 3 ) and 80 . 6 % 6 4 . 2 % ( n = 3 ) for LatB treated wild - type and adf7 pollen grains , respectively ( Figure 2E ) . These observations suggest that loss of ADF7 results in stabilization of actin ﬁ laments , implicating ADF7 in promotion of actin turnover . ADF7 Depolymerizes and Severs Actin Filaments , but to a Lesser Degree Than ADF1 To determine the biochemical basis for the function of ADF7 , recombinant ADF7 was produced ( Figure 3A , lane 1 ) , and its activity was compared with the well - characterized ADF1 protein ( Figure 3A , lane 2 ; Carlier et al . , 1997 ) . Although some ADF / co ﬁ lins have been shown to bind ADP - G - actin and ATP - G - actin with equal af ﬁ nity , such as chicken ADF and mouse co ﬁ lin - 2 ( Vartiainen et al . , 2002 ; Chen et al . , 2004 ) , most ADF / co ﬁ lins have been shown to prefer ADP - G - actin over ATP - G - actin ( Maciver and Hussey , 2002 ; Bamburg and Bernstein , 2008 ) . ADF7 quenched the ﬂ uorescence of both 7 - chloro - 4 - nitrobenzo - 2 - oxa - 1 , 3 - diazole ( NBD ) - ADP - G - actin and NBD - ATP - G - actin , but to a lesser degree than ADF1 ( Figures 3B and 3C ; see Supplemental Table 1 online ) . Similar to ADF1 , ADF7 preferen - tially bound ADP - actin ( see Supplemental Table 1 online ) . ADF7 also inhibited nucleotide exchange on ADP - G - actin under physio - logical conditions , but this activity was less potent than that of ADF1 ( Figure 3D ) . These data suggest that ADF7 is a typical ADF . As expected , it promotes actin depolymerization ( Figure 3E ; see Supplemental Figure 4A online ) and enhances the actin turnover rate ( Figure 3F ) . However , these effects were weaker than those of ADF1 . The depolymerizing activity of ADF7 was further con ﬁ rmed by visualizing its effect on shortening of actin ﬁ laments ( Figures 3Gb and 3Gc ) . ADF7 reduced the length of actin ﬁ laments in a dose - dependent manner , but to a lesser degree than ADF1 ( Figure 3Ge ) . To distinguish whether the ﬁ lament shortening effect was a result of monomer dissociation , ﬁ lament severing , or both , we directly visualized single ﬁ laments using time - lapse total internal re ﬂ ection ﬂ uorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy . In the absence of ADF proteins , few breaks were observed along actin ﬁ laments ( Figure 3Ha ; see Supplemental Movie 1 and Supplemental Movie Legends 1 online ) . By contrast , the addition of ADF7 resulted in increased ﬁ lament breakage ( Figure 3Hb ; see Supplemental Movie 2 online ) . Both ADF7 and ADF1 severed ﬁ laments in a dose - dependent manner , although ADF7 was less effective than ADF1 ( Figure 3Hc ) . We also measured monomer off - rate in the absence or presence of ADF proteins and found that both ADF7 and ADF1 enhanced monomer dissociation from the pointed ends of actin ﬁ laments ( see Supplemental Figure 4B online ) . Again , ADF7 was less ef ﬁ cient 3408 The Plant Cell Figure 2 . Loss of ADF7 Inhibits Actin Turnover . ( A ) Loss of ADF7 renders pollen germination resistant to LatB . Pollen grains derived from wild - type ( WT ) , adf7 , and gADF7 ; adf7 plants were germinated in standard GM for 3 h in the presence or absence of 3 nM LatB . Red arrows indicate the pollen tube protrusion sites . Bar = 50 m m . ( B ) Loss of ADF7 renders pollen germination resistant to a range of LatB concentrations . Values represent mean 6 SE . * * P < 0 . 01 by a Student ’ s t test . ( C ) Pollen tube elongation in adf7 plants is resistant to LatB . The average pollen tube elongation rate in standard GM was normalized to 100 % for the wild type and adf7 . The relative pollen tube elongation rate for wild - type and adf7 pollen tubes treated with 3 or 10 nM LatB were subsequently normalized to their untreated controls . The experiment was repeated three times . Values represent mean 6 SE . * P < 0 . 05 and * * P < 0 . 01 by a Student ’ s t test . ( D ) The actin cytoskeleton of adf7 pollen is resistant to LatB . Pollen grains derived from the wild type and adf7 were subjected to treatment with 200 nM LatB for 30 min , followed by staining with Alexa - 488 phalloidin . Images are the projections from all optical sections throughout the whole pollen grains . Bar = 10 m m . ( E ) Quanti ﬁ cation of the relative amount of F - actin in pollen grains . The amount of F - actin ﬂ uorescence presents prior to LatB treatment was normalized to 100 % for the wild type and adf7 . Values represent mean 6 SE . * * P < 0 . 01 by a Student ’ s t test . ADF7 Promotes Actin Cable Turnover 3409 Figure 3 . ADF7 Is a Typical ADF but Is less Ef ﬁ cient Than ADF1 . ( A ) SDS - PAGE analysis of puri ﬁ ed recombinant ADF proteins . Lane 1 , ADF7 ; lane 2 , ADF1 . ( B ) and ( C ) ADF7 has weaker binding af ﬁ nity for both ADP - G - actin ( B ) and ATP - G - actin ( C ) than ADF1 at pH 8 . 0 . NBD - ADP - G - actin or NBD - ATP - G - actin ( 0 . 2 m M ) was incubated with increasing concentrations of ADF7 or ADF1 for 1 min , and the changes in NBD ﬂ uorescence were monitored . The relative decrease in ﬂ uorescence over time was plotted . Dissociation constants ( K d ) values were calculated by ﬁ tting the data to Equations 1 to 3 in Methods . K d values for ADF7 and ADF1 binding to ADP - G - actin and ATP - G - actin were determined to be 0 . 92 and 0 . 38 m M ( B ) , and 29 . 6 and 13 . 7 m M ( C ) , respectively . ( D ) ADF7 inhibits nucleotide exchange on ADP - G - actin in the presence of 20 mM Tris - HCl , pH 8 . 0 , and 50 mM NaCl , but to a lesser degree than ADF1 . a . u . , arbitrary units . 3410 The Plant Cell than ADF1 ( see Supplemental Figure 4B online ) . Thus , these data suggest that ADF7 is a typical ADF but that its activity is weaker than that of ADF1 . ADF7 Decorates Actin Cables in the Shanks of Pollen Tubes To determine where ADF7 is localized to the pollen tube , we generated N - terminal , C - terminal , and several intramolecular ADF7 - EGFP fusion constructs according to published methods ( Okreglak and Drubin , 2007 ; Bou Daher et al . , 2011 ) . Expression of these constructs was driven by the native ADF7 promoter . ADF7 transcript levels were restored in transgenic plants carrying each of the different GFP fusion constructs ( see Supplemental Figure 5B online ) . Among these lines , only gADF7 - EGFP V10 ; adf7 fully rescued the LatB - resistant germination and tube elongation phenotypes ( see Supplemental Figures 5C and 5D online ) , in - dicating that ADF7 - EGFP V10 is functional and faithfully represents the subcellular localization of ADF7 in pollen . ADF7 - EGFP V10 decorated actin ﬁ laments throughout the pollen grain ( Figure 4A ) . In pollen tubes of different lengths , it primarily decorated actin ca - bles in the shank region ( Figures 4B to 4D ) , and the GFP signal was quite dim in the apical and subapical regions ( Figures 4B to 4D ) . We also examined the subcellular distribution patterns of other ADF7 - EGFP fusion proteins , revealing that these proteins did not localize to obvious ﬁ lamentous structures in either pollen grains or tubes ( see Supplemental Figure 5E online ) . Together , these data suggest that ADF7 decorates longitudinal actin cables in pollen tubes . ADF7 Promotes Turnover of Single Actin Filaments in the Shanks and Subapexes of Pollen Tubes To explore the mechanism by which ADF7 regulates the dynamics of longitudinal actin cables in the pollen tube , actin ﬁ laments were labeled with EGFP - lifeact , which has previously been shown to decorate actin ﬁ laments in the pollen tube ( Qu et al . , 2013 ; Zhu et al . , 2013 ) . To determine the underlying changes in single actin ﬁ laments dynamics , we initially wanted to de ﬁ ne the properties for single actin ﬁ laments by determining their ﬂ uorescence pixel intensities and widths . We found that the ﬂ uorescence pixel intensity positively correlates with the width for all measured ﬁ laments , and some ﬁ lamentous structures with smaller intensity values form a population with the intensity peak at 960 ( see Supplemental Figure 6 online ) . The ﬁ lamentous structures within this population with intensity values below 1200 were assumed to be single ﬁ laments and were selected from adf7 and wild - type pollen tubes for further analysis . Several dynamic parameters associated with single ﬁ laments were determined to see whether ADF7 contributes to the turnover of single ﬁ laments in shanks and subapexes . Filament severing ( Figures 5Aa and 5Ba ; see Supplemental Movies 3 and 4 online ) and depolymerization ( Figure 5Ab and 5Bb ; see Supplemental Movies 5 and 6 online ) events were traced and quanti ﬁ ed . Severing frequency was signi ﬁ cantly decreased in shanks and subapexes of adf7 pollen tubes compared with that of wild - type pollen tubes ( Figure 5C ) . Additionally , the depolymerization rate was signi ﬁ cantly de - creased in the shanks of adf7 pollen tubes , whereas no obvious difference was detected in subapexes of adf7 pollen tubes , com - pared with wild - type pollen tubes ( Figure 5C ) . Consequently , the maximum ﬁ lament lifetime signi ﬁ cantly increased in shanks and subapexes of adf7 pollen tubes , whereas no obvious difference was detected in maximum ﬁ lament length of adf7 pollen tubes , compared with wild - type pollen tubes ( Figure 5C ) . Additionally , we found that the elongation rate of actin ﬁ laments was signi ﬁ - cantly decreased in the shanks of adf7 pollen tubes , whereas no obvious difference was detected in the subapexes of adf7 pollen tubes compared with wild - type pollen tubes ( Figure 5C ) . At the moment , it is not clear why loss of ADF7 decreased the elonga - tion rate of actin ﬁ laments in shanks . Previous results showed that loss of ADF4 has differential effects on actin elongation in the epidermal cells from 5 - d - old seedlings and 11 - and 13 - d - old seedlings ( Henty et al . , 2011 ) . Thus , these data suggest that ADF7 promotes actin turnover by severing ﬁ laments and pro - moting monomer dissociation . Loss of ADF7 Decreases Debundling Frequency We next determined whether ADF7 contributes to the bundling and debundling events of actin ﬁ laments . We tried to trace the process of actin bundles formation and deformation . As shown in Figure 6A ( see Supplemental Movie 7 online ) , two adjacent actin bundles were zipped together to generate the heavy bundle in wild - type pollen tubes , which was supported by the measurement showing that the ﬂ uorescence pixel intensity in - creased while they were zipped together ( Figure 6B ) . We also noted that the heavy actin bundles can split into two small actin bundles ( Figure 6C ; see Supplemental Movie 8 online ) . We next quanti ﬁ ed the parameters associated with actin bundles dynamics in shanks . Surprisingly , we found that no obvious difference in Figure 3 . ( continued ) . ( E ) ADF7 depolymerized actin ﬁ laments but was less potent than ADF1 . Preassembled actin ﬁ laments ( 0 . 5 m M ) were incubated with either 4 m M ADF7 or 4 m M ADF1 to induce actin depolymerization at pH 7 . 0 . Actin depolymerization was monitored by measuring the changes in light scattering . Closed squares , 0 . 5 m M F - actin ; closed circles , 0 . 5 m M F - actin + 4 m M ADF7 ; open circles , 0 . 5 m M F - actin + 4 m M ADF1 . a . u . , arbitrary units . ( F ) ADF7 accelerates actin turnover but is less ef ﬁ cient than ADF1 . The actin turnover rate was measured by analyzing the change in ﬂ uorescence of actin after exchange of e - ATP for non ﬂ uorescent ATP . Open squares , 4 m M e ADP - actin ﬁ laments ; closed red circles , 4 m M e ADP - actin ﬁ laments + 5 m M ADF7 ; open circles , 4 m M e ADP - actin ﬁ laments + 5 m M ADF1 . a . u . , arbitrary units . ( G ) ADF7 reduces the lengths of actin ﬁ laments but to a lesser degree than ADF1 . Actin alone ( a ) , F - actin + 200 nM ADF ( b ) , F - actin + 500 nM ADF7 ( c ) , and F - actin + 500 nM ADF1 ( d ) . Bar = 5 m m . Mean length of actin ﬁ laments versus ADF ( e ) . Values represent mean 6 SE , n = 3 . ( H ) ADF7 is able to sever actin ﬁ laments , but is less ef ﬁ cient than ADF1 . The left panel shows time - series images of actin ﬁ laments in the absence ( a ) or presence of 500 nM ADF7 ( b ) at pH 7 . 0 . Red arrows indicate ﬁ lament severing events . Bar = 5 m m . ADF7 is less ef ﬁ cient than ADF1 at severing actin ﬁ laments ( c ) . Values represent mean 6 SE ; n = 3 . Lowercase letters indicate difference at * * P < 0 . 01 by a Student ’ s t test . ADF7 Promotes Actin Cable Turnover 3411 bundling frequency was detected in adf7 pollen tubes , whereas debundling frequency signi ﬁ cantly decreased in adf7 pollen tubes compared with wild - type pollen tubes ( Figure 6D ) . Therefore , the decrease in debundling frequency may at least partially account for the increase in the extent of ﬁ lament bundling in adf7 pollen tubes . The Severing Activity of ADF7 Is Vital for Its Function in Vivo Considering that ADF7 - EGFP fusion proteins act differentially in vivo , careful documentation of their biochemical activities in combination with meaningful comparisons can provide insight into speci ﬁ c mechanisms of action of ADF7 in vivo . In addition to ADF7 - EGFP V10 , we selected another intramolecular fusion pro - tein , ADF7 - EGFP D75 , to perform the in vitro biochemical analysis ( see Supplemental Figure 7A online ) . Results from F - actin high - speed cosedimentation experiments revealed that glutathione S - transferase ( GST ) - ADF7 - EGFP V10 binds to F - actin better than GST - ADF7 - EGFP D75 ( see Supplemental Figures 7B and 7C on - line ) . The 6His - ADF7 - EGFP V10 fusion protein had slightly less severing activity than ADF7 , although no signi ﬁ cant difference was detected ( see Supplemental Figure 7D online ) . By contrast , no severing activity was detected for 6His - ADF7 - EGFP D75 ( see Supplemental Figure 7D online ) . However , both 6His - ADF7 - muEGFP V10 and 6His - ADF7 - muEGFP D75 bind G - actin as well as ADF7 ( see Supplemental Figure 7E online ) . Thus , these data suggest that ADF7 - EGFP V10 retains levels of ﬁ lament severing and G - actin binding activity comparable to the wild - type protein . By contrast , though ADF7 - EGFP D75 retains G - actin binding ac - tivity , it is de ﬁ cient in ﬁ lament severing . Therefore , our data pro - vide compelling evidence that the severing activity of ADF7 is vital for its function in vivo . DISCUSSION ADF7 - Mediated Actin Dynamics Are Required for Pollen Tube Growth ADF has been shown to be crucial for the growth of several types of tip growing cells , including moss protonemal cells ( Augustine et al . , 2008 ) and root hairs ( Dong et al . , 2001 ) . ADF has also been implicated in pollen tube growth , primarily due to results from gain - of - function studies ( Chen et al . , 2002 ; Li et al . , 2010 ) . Here , we found that loss of function of a pollen - speci ﬁ c Arabidopsis ADF isovariant , ADF7 , inhibits pollen tube growth ( Figure 1C ) . The effect of loss of function of ADF7 on tip growth is similar to that of loss of function of ADF on moss protonemal cell growth ( Augustine et al . , 2008 ) but differs from a study showing that downregulation of ADF1 promotes root hair growth ( Dong et al . , 2001 ) . Loss of ADF7 increased the amount of actin ﬁ laments in pollen tubes ( Figure 1E ) , similar to the reported functions of ADF1 , ADF2 , ADF4 , and moss ADF ( Dong et al . , 2001 ; Augustine et al . , 2008 ; Clément et al . , 2009 ; Henty et al . , 2011 ) . These observations suggest that increases in the amount of ﬁ lamentous actin induced by downregulation of ADF are a common phenomenon , consistent with a role for ADF in depo - lymerizing actin ﬁ laments . On the other hand , these results also indicate that the net increase in the amount of ﬁ lamentous actin resulting from ADF loss of function has differential effects on the growth of various types of tip growing cells , suggesting that the relationship between ADF - mediated actin dynamics and tip growth requires further characterization . The effect of ADF loss of function on actin ﬁ lament bundling is very likely indirect and is probably due to a decrease in the rate of single actin ﬁ lament turnover . A previous study showed that single actin ﬁ lament dynamics are dominated by proli ﬁ c severing events that balance rapid polymerization ( Staiger et al . , 2009 ) . ADF was veri ﬁ ed as an important player in the stochastic dynamics Figure 4 . ADF7 - EGFP V10 Decorates Filamentous Structures in Pollen Grains and Tubes . gADF7 - EGFP V10 ; adf7 ﬂ uorescence was visualized in pollen grain and tubes . ( A ) ADF7 decorates actin ﬁ laments throughout the pollen grain . ( B ) and ( C ) ADF7 primarily decorates longitudinal actin cables within pollen tubes . Images in ( A ) to ( C ) are the maximum projections of all optical sections . Bar = 10 m m for ( A ) to ( C ) . ( D ) Four longitudinal optical sections for the pollen tube shown in ( C ) are displayed in left panel . The right panel shows the transverse sections of pollen tube taken at the position indicated by the white lines at speci ﬁ c distances from the tip . Different colored arrows indicate the decorated ﬁ lamentous structures at the indicated positions . Bar = 10 m m in the left panel and 5 m m in the right panel . 3412 The Plant Cell model ( Henty et al . , 2011 ) . Consistent with a role for ADF7 in this process , we demonstrated that the average severing frequency was signi ﬁ cantly decreased in adf7 pollen tubes ( Figure 5C ) , while the lifetime and maximum ﬁ lament length of single actin ﬁ l - aments were signi ﬁ cantly increased ( Figure 5C ) . These parameters may therefore increase the probability of single actin ﬁ laments being brought together by bundling factors , such as villins , ﬁ mbrins , LIMs , and formins , among others ( Thomas et al . , 2009 ; Thomas , 2012 ) . Certainly , it may also be possible that ADF7 directly competes for ﬁ lament side binding with bundling factors . Figure 5 . Time - Lapse Imaging of Actin Filaments Revealed a Reduction in the Severing Frequency in adf7 Pollen Tubes . Three - dimensional time - lapse spinning disk confocal microscopy was used to image actin ﬁ laments in pollen tubes expressing Lat52 : EGFP - Lifeact . Pollen tubes with an average length of ; 200 m m were selected for imaging . Bars = 3 m m for images in ( A ) and ( B ) . ( A ) Dynamics of single actin ﬁ laments in the shank of a wild - type ( WT ) pollen tube . The image presented is an optical section . The right panels show an enlarged view of the region from shank in the red box . ( a ) A ﬁ lament highlighted with orange dots underwent severing , and the green scissors indicate the severing events . See Supplemental Movie 3 online for the entire series . ( b ) Red and green dots indicate the ends of a ﬁ lament that underwent shrinkage . The image was from the same region as that in ( a ) but in a different optical section . See Supplemental Movie 5 online for the entire series . ( B ) Dynamics of single actin ﬁ laments in the shank of an adf7 pollen tube . The image presented is an optical section . ( a ) A ﬁ lament highlighted with orange dots underwent severing , and the green scissors indicate a severing event . The image corresponds to the red boxed region in the left panel . See Supplemental Movie 4 online for the entire series . ( b ) Red and green dots indicate the ends of a single ﬁ lament that underwent shrinkage . See Supplemental Movie 6 online for the entire series . ( C ) Quanti ﬁ cation of parameters associated with single actin dynamics in wild - type and adf7 pollen tubes . Actin ﬁ laments from the shanks and subapexes were analyzed . More than 27 pollen tubes from the wild type and adf7 were used . Values given are means 6 SE . ND , no signi ﬁ cant difference ; * P < 0 . 05 and * * P < 0 . 01 by a Student ’ s t test . ADF7 Promotes Actin Cable Turnover 3413 This is very likely the case , since ADF is a very abundant protein ( Chaudhry et al . , 2007 ) and mainly associates with ﬁ laments in the pollen tube ( Figure 4 ; discussed below ) . In support of this hypothesis , an elegant study from ﬁ ssion yeast showed that co ﬁ lin selectively competes with bundling factors for binding of actin ﬁ laments ( Skau and Kovar , 2010 ) . Therefore , it could be possible that loss of ADF7 increased the binding of bundling factors to ﬁ laments to consequently increase the extent of ﬁ la - ment bundling ( Figure 1 ) . Meanwhile , the increase in binding of bundling factors may impact the physical properties of actin bundles . The decrease in debundling frequency in adf7 pollen tubes , to some extent , supports this ( Figure 6 ) . Different mechanisms have been envisioned to understand the role of the actin cytoskeleton in pollen tube growth . In early days , the actin cytoskeleton was simply viewed as providing tracks for delivery of secretory vesicles containing materials necessary for membrane extension and cell wall synthesis to the tip ( Taylor and Hepler , 1997 ; Kost et al . , 1998 ) . In this model , alterations in the actin - bundling status in adf7 pollen tubes ( Figure 1E ) could matter for actin ’ s role as a molecular track for myosin motors . However , based on ﬁ ndings demonstrating that an extremely dynamic population of actin ﬁ laments is present at the apical region that is crucial for pollen tube growth ( Lin and Yang , 1997 ; Gibbon et al . , 1999 ; Geitmann et al . , 2000 ; Vidali et al . , 2001 ; Qu et al . , 2013 ) and root hair growth ( Miller et al . , 1999 ) , it is possible that ADF could be involved in regulation of actin dynamics at pollen tube tips , though it has been assumed to be inactive within this region ( Allwood et al . , 2001 ) . The role of the actin cytoskeleton in epidermal cell expansion is not well understood either . Parameters associated with single ﬁ lament dynamics in growing hypocotyl epidermal cells have been shown to be similar to that of nongrowing hypocotyl epi - dermal cells ( Staiger et al . , 2009 ) , implying that actin dynamics may not be directly coupled with cell elongation . In support of this , actin polymerization was favored in different types of cells but had opposite effects on the growth of cotyledon petiole cells and hypocotyl epidermal cells from adf4 plants ( Henty et al . , 2011 ) . These observations also suggest that the relationship between ﬁ lament bundling status and cell elongation might be organ , tissue , or cell type speci ﬁ c . Further supporting evidence Figure 6 . The Frequency of Debundling Is Signi ﬁ cantly Decreased in adf7 Pollen Tubes . To analyze the bundling and debundling events in the shanks of pollen tubes , a 6 3 10 - m m 2 region that was 20 m m away from the tip was selected . ( A ) The time - lapse process showing that two thin actin bundles form a think actin bundle by zipping in a wild - type pollen tube . Red and blue dots indicate two original thin actin bundles , and green dots indicate the newly generated thick actin bundles . Red asterisk indicates the start point of zipping . Bar = 3 m m . See Supplemental Movie 7 online for the entire series . ( B ) Measurement of the ﬂ uorescence pixel intensity of two original thin actin bundles and the new generated thick actin bundles . The ﬂ uorescence pixel intensity was measured at 44 s for both thin actin bundles and at 62 s for the thick actin bundles . a . u . , arbitrary units . ( C ) The time - series images indicate the process of debundling . Green dots indicate the original thick bundle , and red and yellow dots indicated two generate thin ﬁ lamentous structures via debundling . Bar = 3 m m . See Supplemental Movie 8 online for the entire series . ( D ) Debundling frequency signi ﬁ cantly decreased in adf7 pollen tubes . More than 20 bundles from 10 pollen tubes were measured for both the wild type ( WT ) and adf7 . Values represent mean 6 SE ; ND , no signi ﬁ cant difference ; * * P < 0 . 01 by a Student ’ s t test . 3414 The Plant Cell comes from a study showing that loss of function of VILLIN2 and VILLIN3 has different effects on the elongation of epidermal and interfascicular ﬁ ber cells ( Bao et al . , 2012 ; van der Honing et al . , 2012 ) . Henty et al . ( 2011 ) divided actin ﬁ laments into two pop - ulations in cells , comprising stable actin bundles and dynamic single actin ﬁ laments , and proposed that the ratio of single actin ﬁ laments to bundles is important for cell expansion . This may also apply to the pollen tube regarding the action mechanisms of the actin cytoskeleton , in which ADF7 may play an important role in the dynamic conversion between these two populations of actin ﬁ laments . Severing Is the Key Mechanism Underlying ADF - Mediated Regulation of Actin Dynamics in Pollen Tubes ADF / co ﬁ lin has been shown to be an important regulator of actin turnover among organisms ( Bernstein and Bamburg , 2010 ) . Consistent with this role , the actin turnover rate was decreased in adf7 pollen ( Figures 2D and 2E ) . However , the molecular mech - anisms underlying the regulation of actin turnover by ADF / co ﬁ lin remain quite controversial . Historically , ADF / co ﬁ lin was thought to depolymerize actin ﬁ laments by promoting dissociation of actin monomers from the pointed end , primarily based on results from in vitro biochemical characterization of Arabidopsis ADF1 ( Carlier et al . , 1997 ) . However , direct visualization of the effects of ADF / co ﬁ lin on single actin ﬁ lament dynamics has shown that ﬁ lament severing is the primary mechanism by which ADF / co ﬁ lins promote actin ﬁ lament turnover ( Andrianantoandro and Pollard , 2006 ; Chan et al . , 2009 ; Henty et al . , 2011 ; Suarez et al . , 2011 ; Shi et al . , 2013 ) . In support of this mechanism , mathematic modeling results based on the biochemical activity of ADF / co ﬁ lins also indicate that depolymerization alone cannot account for the rates of actin turnover mediated by ADF / co ﬁ lin in vitro ( Roland et al . , 2008 ; Berro et al . , 2010 ; Kueh et al . , 2010 ) . Direct visualization of single ﬁ lament dynamics in vivo have indeed veri ﬁ ed that ADF / co ﬁ lin contributes to ﬁ lament severing ( Henty et al . , 2011 ) . Spe - ci ﬁ c abolishment of the severing activity of co ﬁ lin through speci ﬁ c point mutations suggests that the severing activity of co ﬁ lin is essential ( Chen and Pollard , 2011 ) . However , to date , no similar study has been reported in plants . As ADF7 exhibits reasonable levels of ﬁ lament severing ac - tivity in biochemical assays ( Figure 3 ; discussed below ) , we propose that the ﬁ lament severing activity of ADF7 is important for its role in regulating cellular actin dynamics . Consistent with this hypothesis , we demonstrated that loss of ADF7 signi ﬁ cantly decreases the average severing frequency in pollen tubes ( Fig - ure 5C ) . Furthermore , we showed that an ADF7 - EGFP fusion protein defective in severing activity that retains G - actin binding cannot rescue adf7 - associated phenotypes ( see Supplemental Figures 5 and 7 online ) . Thus , these data suggest that severing activity is essential for the function of ADF7 in pollen tubes . Our data showed that the average severing frequency decreased in the subapical region as well ( Figure 5C ) . Considering that ADF7 also decorates ﬁ lamentous structures in subapical regions of pollen tubes , though it is less abundant compared with that in the shank ( Figures 4C and 4D ) , the effect is unlikely indirect . It was assumed that ADF participates in the construction of actin collars via severing ﬁ laments to generate more ends to boost polymerization via elongation and therefore build the prominent collar structures ( Lovy - Wheeler et al . , 2006 ) . If ADF7 contributes to the construction of actin collars via this manner , it was expected that the formation of actin collars will somehow be compromised . However , the actin collar structures became more prominent in adf7 pollen tubes ( Figures 1E and 1G to 1I ) , suggesting that we cannot simply ﬁ t the function of ADF7 to the previous model ( Lovy - Wheeler et al . , 2006 ) . Nonetheless , our data suggest that ADF7 plays a role in promoting the turnover of actin ﬁ laments within actin collars . Certainly , it could be possible that other ADF isovariants , such as ADF10 , may play distinct roles from ADF7 in the construction of actin collars . ADF7 Decorates Actin Cables in the Pollen Tube Considering that both ADF7 and ADF10 are expressed in mature pollen at roughly similar high levels ( Honys and Twell , 2003 ; Pina et al . , 2005 ) and multiple actin arrays are present in pollen tubes ( Cheung and Wu , 2008 ; Chen et al . , 2009 ; Staiger et al . , 2010 ) , the question is raised whether a particular ADF isovariant reg - ulates distinct actin arrays and / or multiple ADF isovariants co - ordinately regulate a particular actin array . One key piece of information needed to answer this question is determination of the precise subcellular localization of each ADF isovariant . Because different pollen ADFs share high amino acid sequence identity with one another ( Lopez et al . , 1996 ) , generation of isovariant - speci ﬁ c antibodies for immunostaining is problematic . Therefore , ﬂ uo - rescent protein tagging needs to become the strategy of choice to tackle this issue . However , since ADF is a small protein , either N - or C - terminal fusions may alter protein function . Indeed , fu - sion constructs containing co ﬁ lin with GFP fused either at its N or C terminus do not complement its loss of function phe - notypes in budding yeast ( Okreglak and Drubin , 2007 ) . However , a previous study undertook a very wise strategy , creating a fu - sion construct with GFP located within co ﬁ lin , and found that this construct fully rescued co ﬁ lin loss of function ( Okreglak and Drubin , 2007 ) . These results suggest that this intramolecular GFP fusion minimally affects ADF / co ﬁ lin function and likely provides a faithful probe that represents the intracellular localization of the endogenous protein . However , the authors did not test the ac - tivity of this fusion protein biochemically . Bou Daher et al . ( 2011 ) undertook a similar strategy to make intramolecular GFP fusions for both ADF7 and ADF10 , although GFP was inserted in a dif - ferent region , and found that both GFP fusion proteins decorated actin ﬁ laments in pollen grains and tubes . However , the authors did not test whether these constructs were fully functional . Hav - ing a null mutant for ADF7 in hand places us in the position to fully address this question . In addition to generating a construct with GFP fused at the same location as that of Bou Daher et al . ( 2011 ) , we also made several additional intramolecular GFP fusion con - structs with GFP fused near the region corresponding to the bud - ding yeast co ﬁ lin fusion ( Okreglak and Drubin , 2007 ) . We found that expression of gADF7 - EGFP V10 in adf7 plants fully rescued the LatB - resistant germination and pollen tube elongation phenotypes ( see Supplemental Figures 5C and 5D online ) , suggesting that ADF7 - EGFP V10 is fully functional and faithfully represents the subcellular localization of ADF7 . ADF7 - EGFP V10 primarily decorated longitudinal actin cables in pollen ADF7 Promotes Actin Cable Turnover 3415 tubes of different lengths ( Figures 4B to 4D ) , suggesting that ADF7 may regulate the dynamics of longitudinal actin cables . None of the other ADF7 - EGFP fusion proteins formed obvious ﬁ lamentous structures in pollen grains and tubes ( see Supplemental Figure 5E online ) , suggesting that decoration of ﬁ lamentous actin is vital for ADF7 function in vivo . Biochemical characterization of these ADF7 - EGFP fusions and careful comparisons between them and the wild - type protein can provide signi ﬁ cant insight into the mechanism of action of ADF7 . In addition to ADF7 - EGFP V10 , ADF7 - EGFP D75 was also selected for biochemical analysis be - cause this fusion was comparable to the previously characterized yeast co ﬁ lin fusion ( Okreglak and Drubin , 2007 ) . Both ADF7 - EGFP V10 and ADF7 - EGFP D75 retain reasonable levels of G - actin binding activity ( see Supplemental Figure 7D online ) , consistent with homology modeling results showing that the location of the GFP fusion is quite distal to the G - actin binding surface of ADF / co ﬁ lin and is therefore unlikely to affect G - actin binding ( see Supplemental Figure 8A online ) . This could be the reason that the authors initially selected that location to insert GFP ( Okre - glak and Drubin , 2007 ) . By contrast , we showed that none of the other constructs generated using a similar internal fusion strat - egy were functional in vivo ( see Supplemental Figures 5C and 5D online ) . Compared with ADF7 - EGFP V10 , ADF7 - EGFP D75 bound to F - actin poorly and could not sever actin ﬁ laments ( see Supplemental Figures 7B to 7D online ) , potentially due to prox - imity to the adjacent actin monomer at D75 compared with V10 ( see Supplemental Figure 8B online ) . This proximity may generate increased steric hindrance , affecting binding of the protein to F - actin . Certainly , it is also possible that this GFP fusion results in a conformational change in ADF7 and yeast co ﬁ lin that dif - ferentially affects activity . The localization pattern of ADF7 is different from that of to - bacco ( Nicotiana tabacum ) ADF1 ( Nt ADF1 ) . GFP - Nt ADF1 ( with GFP fused at its N terminus ) is concentrated at the subapical region of pollen tubes ( Chen et al . , 2002 ) , and similar localization was also observed by immunostaining using an ADF antibody in lily pollen tubes ( Lovy - Wheeler et al . , 2006 ) . However , we found that ADF7 - EGFP V10 was primarily concentrated on longitudinal actin cables ( Figure 4 ) . Our localization pattern of ADF7 - EGFP V10 is slightly different from that reported by Bou Daher et al . ( 2011 ) with the same fusion construct . The resulting difference could be due to the presence of wild - type ADF7 protein that may somehow interfere with the localization of ADF7 - EGFP V10 in pollen grains or tubes , since the construct was transformed into wild - type plants ( Bou Daher et al . , 2011 ) . Based on our results demonstrating that ADF7 - EGFP with EGFP fused at its N terminus cannot rescue adf7 phenotypes ( see Supplemental Figures 5C and 5D online ) , previous localization data for N - terminal ADF fusions must be cautiously interpreted . The subcellular lo - calization pattern of ADF7 is also different from that of LIADF1 , which has been shown to decorate actin ﬁ laments in pollen grains , but to be cytoplasmic in pollen tubes ( Allwood et al . , 2002 ) . ADF was found by immunostaining to concentrate at pollen tube tips in daffodil ( Narcissus pseudonarcissus ) ( Smertenko et al . , 2001 ) , which differs from the localization of ADF7 ( Figure 4 ; Bou Daher et al . , 2011 ) and ADF10 ( Bou Daher et al . , 2011 ) , as minimal localization to the apical regions of pollen tubes was observed for these proteins . Certainly , we cannot rule out the possibility that the localization pattern of ADFs in the pollen tube may vary between species . ADF7 Is Less Potent Than ADF1 in Promoting Actin Turnover Our study veri ﬁ ed that ADF7 is a typical ADF but found that it is less potent than ADF1 ( Figure 3E ; see Supplemental Figure 4 online ) . Side - by - side comparison of the activities of ADF7 and ADF1 showed that ADF7 has lower severing and monomer binding activities than ADF1 ( Figures 3B , 3C , and 3H ; see Supplemental Table 1 online ) , providing a detailed molecular explanation un - derlying their observed difference in activity . Our study , along with a previous report on pollen ADF1 in daffodil ( Smertenko et al . , 2001 ) , suggests that weak depolymerizing activity might be a common phenomenon for pollen ADFs and implies that the biochemical nature of pollen ADFs might be well suited for pollen - speci ﬁ c functions . On the other hand , this observation also implies that pollen ADFs may be structurally different from vegetative ADFs . In support of this idea , polyclonal antisera raised against vegetative Zm - ADF3 cannot cross - react with pollen ADFs ( Jiang et al . , 1997 ) , and amino acid sequence identity has been shown to be higher among pollen ADFs from different species than among ADFs from different tissues in the same plant ( Lopez et al . , 1996 ) . In addition to ADFs , a difference in activity between pollen pro ﬁ lin and vegetative pro ﬁ lin has also been reported ( Kovar et al . , 2000a ) . Furthermore , Arabidopsis actins were demonstrated to be functionally nonequivalent , as ectopic expression of a pollen actin in vegetative tissues resulted in dramatic phenotypes ( Gilliland et al . , 2002 ; Kandasamy et al . , 2002 ) that were partially suppressed by coexpression of either the pollen ADF or pro ﬁ lin ( Kandasamy et al . , 2007 ) . These data suggest that actin and its associated proteins coevolve to ful ﬁ ll speci ﬁ c functions in distinct cell types , tissues , and organs , supporting the isovariant dynamics model ( Meagher et al . , 1999 ) . An increase in the number and functional diversity of plant ADFs would be expected to be a part of this model . Within this framework , ADF7 evolved to ful ﬁ ll pollen - speci ﬁ c requirements for actin dynamics . ADF7 mainly deco - rates longitudinal actin cables ( Figure 4 ; Bou Daher et al . , 2011 ) , which have been demonstrated to be relatively stable in pollen tubes ( Gibbon et al . , 1999 ; Vidali et al . , 2001 ) . Thus , we propose that the biochemical activity of ADF7 is well suited for regulation of actin cable dynamics . Pro ﬁ lin and ADF have been demon - strated to act synergistically to increase actin turnover in vitro ( Blanchoin and Pollard , 1998 ; Didry et al . , 1998 ; Chaudhry et al . , 2007 ; Michelot et al . , 2007 ) . As pro ﬁ lin is a uniformly distributed cytosolic protein ( Vidali and Hepler , 1997 ) , the low monomer sequestering activity of pollen pro ﬁ lin ( Kovar et al . , 2000a ) along with the low actin depolymerizing activity of pollen ADFs ( Smertenko et al . , 2001 ; this study ) may at least partially explain the relative stability and long lifespan of longitudinal actin cables . METHODS Arabidopsis thaliana Growth Conditions and Complementation Arabidopsis plants ( Col - 0 ) were grown in a culture room at 22°C under a 16 - h - light / 8 - h - dark cycle . To complement the phenotypes associated 3416 The Plant Cell with adf7 ( Salk _ 024576 ) , a 4 . 6 - kb genomic DNA fragment harboring the ADF7 coding sequence ( CDS ) was ampli ﬁ ed from Arabidopsis wild - type Col - 0 genomic DNA using the primer pair G01 / G02 ( see Supplemental Table 2 online ) . The sequence of the cloned fragment was con ﬁ rmed by DNA sequencing , and the fragment was subcloned into pCAMBIA1301 vector cut with Sma I - Sal I to yield the complementation construct . The resulting construct was subsequently transformed into adf7 to generate the transgenic plants designated as gADF7 ; adf7 . RT - PCR Analysis To investigate ADF7 transcript levels , open ﬂ owers with mature pollens were collected . Total RNA was extracted using Trizol reagent ( Invitrogen ) , and cDNA was synthesized using M - MLV ( Promega ) according to the manufacturer ’ s instructions . ADF7 transcript levels were compared be - tween wild - type , adf7 , and gADF7 ; adf7 plants by amplifying a fragment using the primer pair R03 / R04 ( see Supplemental Table 2 online ) . To determine the levels of ADF7 transcripts in transgenic plants harboring different ADF7 - EGFP fusion constructs , two rounds of RT - PCR were performed . Initially , the relative amounts of ADF7 transcripts between the transgenicplantswereassessedbyamplifying EGFP usingtheprimerpair E01 / E02 ( see Supplemental Table 2 online ) . Subsequently , ADF7 tran - scripts were ampli ﬁ ed from transgenic plants harboring N - terminal and C - terminal EGFP fusion constructs using primer pairs R03 / R05 and R06 / R04 ( see Supplemental Table 2 online ) . These levels were compared with the relative amount of ADF7 transcripts in wild - type plants ampli ﬁ ed using the primer pair R03 / R04 ( see Supplemental Table 2 online ) . eIF4A was ampli ﬁ ed using primer pair R01 / R02 ( see Supplemental Table 2 online ) as the internal control for normalization . The bands on agarose gel were stained with ethidium bromide , photographed , and compared by den - sitometry using ImageJ software ( http : / / rsbweb . nih . gov / ij / ; version 1 . 38 ) . Pollen Germination and Observation of Pollen Tube Growth Pollen grains were cultured at 28°C on solid pollen GM [ 0 . 01 % ( w / v ) H 3 BO 3 , 1 mM CaCl 2 , 1 mM Ca ( NO 3 ) 2 , 1 mM MgSO 4 , 18 % ( w / v ) Suc , and 0 . 5 % ( w / v ) agar , pH 7 . 0 ] as previously described ( Wu et al . , 2010 ; Zhang et al . , 2010 ) . To determine the pollen germination rate , pollen grains were germinated on solid GM for 150 min . Pollen grains were subsequently observed under an Olympus IX71 microscope equipped with a 3 10 objective , andimageswereacquiredusingaRetigaEXiFast1394charge - coupleddevice ( CCD ) camera with Image - Pro Express 6 . 3 software . More than 500 pollen grains were counted for germination rate analysis per experiment , and each experiment was repeated ﬁ ve times for each ge - notype . To determine the effect of LatB on pollen germination , various concentrations of LatB were included in the solid GM . To determine the pollen tube growth rate , images of elongating pollen tubes were captured after germination for 60 and 90 min on GM . The average lengths of the pollen tubes at 60 min was subtracted from that at 90 min to obtain the average increase in length , which was then divided by the time interval to yield the average tube growth rate . More than 30 pollen tubes were chosen for tube elongation rate analysis for each experiment , and ﬁ ve and three independent experiments were performed for each genotype in the absence and presence of LatB , respectively . Plasmid Construction for Analyzing the Subcellular Localization of ADF7 Several GFP fusion constructs were generated to assess the subcellular localization of ADF7 . Initially , a 1 . 8 - kb genomic DNA fragment containing the promoter , 5 9 - untranslated region , and coding region of ADF7 was ampli ﬁ edusingtheprimerpairG03 / G04 ( seeSupplementalTable2online ) as described by Bou Daher et al . ( 2011 ) . This fragment was subsequently used as the template to amplify two consecutive upstream and down - stream fragments , allowing for the fusion of EGFP ( ampli ﬁ ed with primer pair E01 / E02 ; see Supplemental Table 2 online ) between them . The construct with EGFP fused after Val10 ( V10 ) of ADF7 ( designated as gADF7 - EGFP V10 ) was made exactly as described by Bou Daher et al . ( 2011 ) . Selection of the location of the EGFP insertion for several other ADF7 intramolecular fusion constructs was performed based on studies by Okreglak and Drubin ( 2007 ) . Brie ﬂ y , the structure of ADF7 was ﬁ rst generated using the structure of yeast co ﬁ lin as the template ( PDB code 1CFY ) . We performed a structural alignment with yeast co ﬁ lin in order to select amino acids of ADF7 corresponding to the previously described GFP fusion with yeast co ﬁ lin ( Okreglak and Drubin , 2007 ) . The selected amino acids were Ile - 73 , Thr - 74 , Asp - 75 , Glu - 76 , Asn - 77 , and Cys - 78 in ADF7 . The primers used to generate the constructs are shown in Supplemental Table 2 online . Actin Staining in Pollen Grains and Pollen Tubes Actin ﬁ laments in pollen grains and tubes were stained with Alexa - 488 phalloidin as previously described ( Ye et al . , 2009 ; Wu et al . , 2010 ; Zhang et al . , 2010 ) . To determine the effect of LatB on the actin cytoskeleton , pollen grains were treated with 200 nM LatB for 30 min , and the actin cytoskeleton was visualized by staining with Alexa - 488 phalloidin . To observe the actin cytoskeleton in pollen tubes , pollen grains were ger - minated for 75 min at 28°C on solid GM and were subsequently subjected to ﬁ xation and staining with Alexa - 488 phalloidin . Actin ﬁ laments were observed with a confocal laser scanning microscope ( Leica TCS SP5 ) equipped with a 3 100 oil objective ( 1 . 46 – numerical aperture HC PLAN ) . The ﬂ uorescent phalloidin was excited with the 488 - nm line of an argon laser , and optical sections were collected with a step size of 0 . 5 m m for both pollen grains and tubes . The images shown are projections from all optical sections . The architecture of actin cytoskeleton was analyzed within different regions of pollen tubes . The regions 0 to 3 m m , 3 to 10 m m , and more than 10 m m away from the tip were de ﬁ ned as apex , subapex , and shank , respectively . The relative amount of actin ﬁ laments in pollen grains or tubes was quanti ﬁ ed by measuring the ﬂ uorescence pixel in - tensity using ImageJ software ( http : / / rsbweb . nih . gov / ij / ; version 1 . 38 ) . Skewness of actin ﬁ lament staining was analyzed as described by Higaki et al . ( 2010 ) . The width of ﬁ lamentous structures was determined roughly according to the method described by Wu et al . ( 2010 ) . For a particular ﬁ lamentous structure , three vertical lines were drawn across it to obtain three values of width of ﬂ uorescence pixel intensity at the half height , and the ﬁ nal value of width for the particular ﬁ lament was yielded by averaging them . To avoid repetitive counting , three or four optical sections were excluded between sections used for analysis in each pollen tube . Live - Cell Imaging and Quanti ﬁ cation of Actin Filaments in Pollen Tubes Actin ﬁ laments were labeled with EGFP - lifeact expressed under control of the Lat52 promoter in pollen tubes as previously described by Vidali et al . ( 2009 ) . Pollen grains were cultured at 28°C on solid pollen GM for 2 h until the average length of the pollen tubes was ; 200 m m and were observed under an Olympus BX61 inverted microscope equipped with a 3 100 Universal Plan Super Apochromat Objective ( numerical aperture of 1 . 4 ) objective . Actin ﬁ laments were imaged using a spinning disk confocal microscope equipped with a Yokogawa CSU - X1 spinning disk head . Images were collected with a 512 3 512 Andor iXON electron multiplying CCD camera every 2 s . GFP was excited with a 488 - nm laser , and the emitted ﬂ uorescence was collected using a 525 / 50 - nm band - pass ﬁ lter . To measure the dynamic parameters associated with single ﬁ laments turnover , weinitiallyde ﬁ nedpropertiesforthem . Werandomlyhand - selected ADF7 Promotes Actin Cable Turnover 3417 more than300 ﬁ lamentous actinstructuresfrom 15 wild - type pollen tubes to measure their ﬂ uorescence pixel intensity and width . The ﬂ uorescence pixel intensity of each ﬁ lamentous structure was determined by drawing a line along it using the “ measure ” tool in ImageJ , and the average ﬂ uorescence pixel intensity was calculated in Kaleidagraph ( Synergy Software ; version 4 . 03 ) . The kernel density of ﬂ uorescence pixel intensity distribution was processed using R programming language ( http : / / www . R - project . org ; version 2 . 15 . 1 ) as previously described ( Qu et al . , 2013 ) . The width of ﬁ lamentous structures was determined as described above . The ﬁ lamentous structures with smaller intensity values form a population and are assumed to be single ﬁ laments . The ﬁ lamentous structures with intensity values fall within this population from wild - type and adf7 pollen tubes were selected for further analysis . For analyzing the stochastic dynamic parameters related to single ﬁ lament turnover , only ﬁ laments longer than 2 m m and existing for more than 10 s were selected . Severing frequency ( de ﬁ ned as the number of breaks per unit length per unit time ; breaks / m m / s ) , maximum ﬁ lament length , maximum ﬁ lament lifetime . and elongation and depolymerization rate were determined and calculated roughly as previously described ( Staiger et al . , 2009 ; Henty et al . , 2011 ) . Brie ﬂ y , the severing frequency was determined by counting all severing events from the ﬁ lament reaching its maximum length to its disappearance . If a ﬁ lament regrew after breaking , the length before breaking was taken as its maximum length and the time before breaking was taken as the valid time . The longest length of a tracked ﬁ lament during its growth and shrinking was taken as the maximum ﬁ lament length . Maximum ﬁ lament life time was de ﬁ ned as the elapsed time for a ﬁ lament from its appearance to its disap - pearance . Filament elongation and depolymerization rates were calcu - lated as the changes of length versus the time intervals ( D length / D time ) in Excel . Only ﬁ laments continuously growing or shrinking for at least 10 s were taken into account . To analyze the bundling and debundling frequency in shanks of pollen tubes , we selected a 10 3 6 - m m 2 region that was 20 m m away from the tip to perform the analysis . The dynamics of actin bundles in this region was tracked in a consecutive 60 s and analyzed . The bundling and debundling frequencies were de ﬁ ned as the number of these events per unit area per unit time ( events / m m 2 / s ) . Protein Production Total RNA was isolated from ﬂ owers of wild - type , gADF7 - EGFP V10 : adf7 , and gADF7 - EGFP D75 ; adf7 plants using Trizol reagent , and the corre - sponding cDNA was subsequently synthesized using M - MLV according to themanufacturer ’ s instructions . SincetheCDSs of ADF7 and ADF10 share 91 . 6 % nucleotide identity , one primer pair R03 / R04 ( see Supplemental Table 2 online ) derived from the ADF7 untranslated region was used to speci ﬁ cally amplify ADF7 cDNA using wild - type cDNA as the template . The resulting product was subsequently used as the template to amplify the CDS of ADF7 using the primer pair P01 / P02 ( see Supplemental Table 2 online ) . After veri ﬁ cation of the correct sequence by DNA sequencing analysis , the ADF7 CDS was subcloned into the pGEX - KG vector to generate the pGEX - KG - ADF7 construct . Similarly , the CDSs for ADF7 - EGFP V10 and ADF7 - EGFP D75 were ampli ﬁ ed using primer pair P01 / P02 ( see Supplemental Table 2 online ) and cDNA derived from gADF7 - EGFP V10 : adf7 and gADF7 - EGFP D75 ; adf7 as templates . The resulting prod - ucts were veri ﬁ ed by sequencing and subcloned into pGEX - KG cut with Eco RI - Nco ItoproducethepGEX - KG - ADF7 - EGFP V10 andpGEX - KG - ADF7 - EGFP D75 constructs . TheADF7 - EGFP V10 CDSandtheADF7 - EGFP D75 CDSwerealsoampli ﬁ edwithprimerpairP03 / P04 ( seeSupplementalTable2 online ) , veri ﬁ ed by DNA sequencing , and subcloned into the pET28a vector cut with Nde I - Hin dIII to generate the pET28a - ADF7 - EGFP V10 and pET28a - ADF7 - EGFP D75 constructs . Because EGFP interferes with the NBD - actin binding assay due to overlap of the wavelengths associated with absorption and emission of EGFP and NBD , we eliminated this effect by deleting three key amino acids ( 65T / 66Y / 67G ) within the ﬂ uorophore center ofEGFP . Thus , theplasmids , pET28a - ADF7 - EGFP V10 andpET28a - ADF7 - EGFP D75 , were used as templates to generate the mutant constructs , pET28a - ADF7 - muEGFP V10 and pET28a - ADF7 - muEGFP D75 , respectively , using primer pair P05 / P06 ( see Supplemental Table 2 on - line ) . To generate recombinant proteins , these expression constructs were transformed into the Escherichia coli BL21 ( DE3 ) strain . Expression of these recombinant proteins was induced by the addition of 0 . 4 mM isopropyl b - D - thiogalactopyranoside , followed by incubation at 37°C for 4 h . Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 4000 g for 10 min and lysed by sonication . GSTfusionproteinswerepuri ﬁ edusingglutathione - sepharose resin according to the manufacturer ’ s recommended protocol . To pro - duce ADF7 lacking a tag , GST - ADF7 was digested with thrombin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) overnight at 4°C to cleave GST . ADF7 was further puri ﬁ ed by Q - sepharose chromatography ( Amersham Biosciences ) . After loading onto a Q - sepharose column , ADF7 was eluted with elution buffer ( 10 mM Tris - HCl , pH 8 . 0 , 100 mM KCl , and 1 mM DTT ) after extensive washing with wash buffer ( 10 mM Tris - HCl , pH 8 . 0 , and 1 mM DTT ) . The 6His - ADF7 - EGFP V10 , 6His - ADF7 - EGFP D75 , 6His - ADF7 - muEGFP V10 , and 6His - ADF7 - muEGFP D75 fusion proteins were puri ﬁ ed with nickel - nitriloacetic acid resin ( Novagen ) according to the manufacturer ’ s instructions . All puri ﬁ edproteinsweredialyzedagainst5mMTris - HCl , pH8 . 0 , ﬂ ashfrozen inliquidnitrogen , andstoredat 2 80°C . ADF1waspuri ﬁ edasdescribedby Carlier et al . ( 1997 ) . Actin waspuri ﬁ ed from rabbit skeletal muscle acetone powder as previously described ( Spudich and Watt , 1971 ) , and mono - meric Ca 2 + - ATP - actin was puri ﬁ ed using Sephacryl S - 300 chromatog - raphy in buffer G ( 5 mM Tris - HCl , pH 8 . 0 , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 0 . 1 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 5 mM DTT , and 0 . 1 mM NaN 3 ) at 4°C ( Pollard , 1984 ) . F - Actin High - Speed Cosedimentation Assay A high speed cosedimentation assay was adapted from previously published methods ( Kovar et al . , 2000b ; Huang et al . , 2005 ) . All proteins , including G - actin , were preclari ﬁ ed at 160 , 000 g for 30 min at 4°C . Actin ﬁ laments ( 3 m M ) were incubated with increasing concentrations ( 1 to 30 m M ) of ADF7 or ADF1 or a constant concentration ( 5 and 10 m M ) of GST - ADF7 - EGFP V10 or GST - ADF7 - EGFP D75 . After incubation for 30 min at 25°C , the reaction mixtures were centrifuged at 100 , 000 g for 30 min at 4°C . Fractions containing the supernatants and pellets were resolved by SDS - PAGE , andthegelswerestainedwithCoomassieBrilliantBlueR250 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . The amount of actin in the supernatant or pellet was quanti ﬁ ed by densitometry using ImageJ ( http : / / rsbweb . nih . gov / ij / ; ver - sion 1 . 38 ) . Fluorescence Microscopy of Actin Filaments Actin ( 4 µ M ) was incubated at 25°C for 30 min in polymerization buffer ( 10 mM imidazole , pH 7 . 0 , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 50 mM KCl , 1 mM EGTA , 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 5 mM DTT , and 3 mM NaN 3 ) . The resulting actin ﬁ laments ( 4 m M ) were then incubated with varying concentrations of ADF7 or ADF1 for 3 min . An equimolar amount of Rhodamine - phalloidin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) was then added to label actin ﬁ laments and stop the reaction as described by Shi et al . ( 2013 ) . Finally , actin ﬁ laments were diluted to 10 nM with ﬂ uorescence buffer ( 10 mM imidazole - HCl , pH 7 . 0 , 50 mM KCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 100 mM DTT , 100 m g / mL Glc oxidase , 15 m g / mL Glc , 20 m g / mL catalase , and 0 . 5 % methylcellulose ) . A sample of 2 . 5 m L of the actin ﬁ lament mixture was then placed on a 22 3 22 - mm cover slip coated with 0 . 01 % poly - L - Lys . Actin ﬁ laments were visu - alized by epi ﬂ uorescence illumination under an Olympus IX71 micro - scope equipped with a 3 60 oil objective ( 1 . 42 numerical aperture ) . Images were captured using a Retiga EXi Fast 1394 CCD camera ( QImaging ) with Image - Pro Express 6 . 3 software . The length of individual 3418 The Plant Cell actin ﬁ laments was quanti ﬁ ed using ImageJ ( http : / / rsbweb . nih . gov / ij / ; version 1 . 38 ) . Light Scattering All proteins and buffers were clari ﬁ ed by centrifugation at 200 , 000 g for 60 min at 4°C prior to the assay . Actin ( 5 m M ) was polymerized at 25°C for 2 h in polymerization buffer ( described above ) . The resulting actin ﬁ laments ( 0 . 5 m M ) were then incubated with varying concentrations of ADF7 or ADF1 in 1 3 KMEI ( 10 mM imidazole - HCl , pH 7 . 0 , 50 mM KCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 , and 1 mM EGTA ) . The absorbance associated with light scattering was monitored for 30 min using a QuantaMaster Luminescence QM 3 PH ﬂ uorometer ( Photon Technology International ) with both emission and excitation wavelengths set at 450 nm . Direct Visualization of Actin Filament Severing and Depolymerization by TIRF Microscopy Actinwaslabeledwith5 - ( and - 6 ) - carboxytetramethylrhodamine - succinimidyl - ester , and the ﬂ ow cell was prepared as previously described ( Amann and Pollard , 2001 ) . The ﬂ ow cell was incubated with 25 nM N - ethylmaleimide - myosin for 2 min , followed by washing with 1 % BSA for 3 min . It was next injected with 1 3 TIRF microscopy buffer ( 10 mM imidazole , pH 7 . 0 , 50 mM KCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM EGTA , 50 mM DTT , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 50 m M CaCl 2 , 15 mM Glc , 20 m g / mL catalase , 100 m g / mL Glc oxidase , and 0 . 5 % methylcellulose ) . Actin ﬁ laments ( 100 nM ; 50 % rhodamine - la - beled ) were injected into the chamber , and the mixture was incubated for 3 min in the dark . Finally , the ﬂ ow cell was washed with 1 3 TIRF microscopy buffer to remove free actin ﬁ laments that were not attached to NEM - myosin . Single actin ﬁ laments were observed by TIRF illumi - nation with an Olympus IX81 microscope equipped with a 3 100 oil objective ( 1 . 49numericalaperture ) . Imageswerecollected for 5 min with an interval of 3 or 1 s using a Photometrics cascade II 512 CCD camera ( Major Instruments ) with microManager software . To determine the ﬁ lament severing activity of ADF7 , ADF1 , 6His - ADF7 - EGFP V10 , and 6His - ADF7 - EGFP D75 , varying concentrations of these proteins were injected into the chamber in 1 3 TIRF microscopy buffer . The ﬁ lament severing frequency was de ﬁ ned as breaks / m m / s as previously reported ( Andrianantoandro and Pollard , 2006 ) . More than 20 actin ﬁ laments with lengths > 10 m m were selected for quanti ﬁ cation of actin ﬁ lament severing frequency . The monomer dissociation rate ( subunits / s ) was determined assuming 1 - m m - length ﬁ lament equals 334 subunits . The de ﬁ nition for the pointed end and barbed end of each measured ﬁ lament in the absence or presence of ADF proteins was according to the description by Shi et al . ( 2013 ) . Binding of ADF to G - Actin G - actin binding activity of ADF7 or ADF1 was determined by mea - suring the decrease in ﬂ uorescence of NBD - labeled actin . NBD - G - actin was prepared as previously described ( Detmers et al . , 1981 ) . NBD - ATP - actin or NBD - ADP - actin was prepared as described by Chaudhry et al . ( 2007 ) . For the preparation of NBD - ATP - G - actin , 20 m M NBD - actin was incubated with 1 mM ATP for 70 min at 4°C in the dark . For the preparation of NBD - ADP - G - actin , 20 m M NBD - actin was incubated with 20 units / mL of hexokinase ( Sigma - Aldrich ) and 1 mM Glc for 3 h at 4°C in the dark . NBD - ATP - G - actin or NBD - ADP - G - actin ( 0 . 2 m M ) was then incubated with increasing concentrations of ADF7 , ADF1 , 6His - ADF7 - muEGFP D75 , or 6His - ADF7 - muEGFP V10 in 1 mM MgCl 2 and 100 mM KCl . The change in NBD ﬂ uorescence was ana - lyzed for 20 s using a QuantaMaster Luminescence QM 3 PH ﬂ uo - rometer with the excitation and emission wavelengths set to 475 and 530 nm , respectively . The resulting data were ﬁ tted using Kaleidagraph ( Synergy Software ; version 3 . 6 ) with the following equations ( Carlier et al . , 1997 ) : Q ¼ F 0 2 F ðþ ADF Þ F 0 ð 1 Þ 1 a ¼ 1 þ Kd ½ ADF (cid:2) ð 2 Þ ½ ADF (cid:2) ¼ ½ ADF (cid:2) 0 2 ½ G (cid:2) 0 2 K d 6 ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ(cid:3) ½ ADF (cid:2) 0 2 ½ G (cid:2) 0 2 K d (cid:4) 2 þ 4K d ½ ADF (cid:2) 0 q 2 ð 3 Þ where a = Q / Qmax , Q max is the maximum ﬂ uorescence quenching caused by the saturation of G - actin bound to ADF , [ ADF ] 0 is the total concentration of ADF , [ G ] 0 is the total concentration of G - actin , and K d is the equilibrium dissociation constant of the G - actin - ADF complex . Nucleotide Exchange Analysis The rate of G - actin nucleotide exchange was determined by measuring the increase in ﬂ uorescence upon binding of 1 , N 6 - ethenoadenosine 5 9 - triphosphate ( e - ATP ; Sigma - Aldrich ) . The experiment was performed asdescribed byChaudhryet al . ( 2010 ) . Brie ﬂ y , 2 m M ADP - actin in buffer G lacking ATP was incubated with Tris / NaCl buffer ( 20 mM Tris - HCl , pH 8 . 0 , and 50 mM NaCl ) alone or containing ADF7 or ADF1 . Next , 50 m M e - ATP ( Molecular Probes ) was added to the solution . The reaction was moni - tored using a QuantaMaster Luminescence QM 3 PH ﬂ uorometer for a minimum of 10 min with the excitation and emission wavelengths set at 350 and 410 nm , respectively . Determination of Actin Filament Turnover Rate The actin ﬁ lament turnover rate was quanti ﬁ ed as previously described ( Didry et al . , 1998 ; Chaudhry et al . , 2007 ) . Fluorescently labeled e - ADP - actin ﬁ laments were preassembled from e - ATP - actin subunits , and the turnover rate was determined by measuring the change in ﬂ uorescence caused by exchange of e - ADP for non ﬂ uorescent ATP . e ATP - G - actin was prepared as previously described ( Valentin - Ranc and Carlier , 1989 ) , and 15 m M e ATP - G - actin was assembled in the presence of 30 m M e ATP in 1 3 KMEI ( 50 mM KCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM EGTA , and 10 mM imidazol - HCl , pH 7 . 0 ) . Subsequently , 4 m M e ADP - actin ﬁ la - ments were incubated with 5 m M ADF7 or 5 m M ADF1 for 20 min in 1 3 KMEI . The change in the ﬂ uorescence at 25°C was analyzed after the addition of 1 mM ATP using a QuantaMaster Luminescence QM 3 PH ﬂ uorometer . The excitation and emission wavelengths were 350 and 410 nm , respectively . Sequence Alignment and Three - Dimensional Homology Modeling Sequence alignment was performed using the online software program ClustalW ( http : / / www . genome . jp / tools / clustalw / ) . The resulting data were saved as an . aln ﬁ le and submitted to the online server ESPript2 . 2 ( http : / / espript . ibcp . fr / ESPript / cgi - bin / ESPript . cgi ) to predict the secondary structures and calculate the amino acid similarity based on the Risler matrix method with the global score set to 0 . 7 . The crystal structure of yeast co ﬁ lin ( PDB ID : 1COF ) and a predicted three - dimensional structure of ADF7 that was generated by homology modeling using the crystal structure of ADF1 ( PDB ID : 1F7S ) as a template were used to improve the alignmentresults . The structure ofthe ADF7 ( pink ) / Actin1 ( green ) complex was generated by SWISS - MODEL ( http : / / swissmodel . expasy . org / SWISS - MODEL . html ) using the known crystal structure of rabbit alpha skeletal muscle actin / mouse twin ﬁ lin1 C - terminal ADF - H domain ( Twf - C ) ADF7 Promotes Actin Cable Turnover 3419 complex as the template ( PDB ID : 3DAW ) . The structure was displayed with PyMOL ( version 1 . 4 . 1 ; DeLano Scienti ﬁ c ) . A simulation model of an actin ﬁ lament decorated with ADF7 was generated based on the PDB ID 3J0S template , in which each human co ﬁ lin - 2 was replaced with ADF7 . Accession Numbers Sequence data from this article can be found in the Arabidopsis Genome Initiative and GenBank / UniProtKB under accession numbers At4g25590 ( ADF7 ) , AAA13256 . 1 ( Saccharomyces cerevisiae co ﬁ lin ) , Q39250 ( ADF1 ) , Q91YR1 ( Mus musculus Twi ﬁ lin1 ) , P68135 ( Oryctolagus cuniculus alpha skeletalmuscleactin ) , P0CJ46 ( Arabidopsis Actin1 ) , P60706 ( Gallusgallus cytoplasmic actin1 ) , and P23528 ( Homo sapiens co ﬁ lin2 ) . Supplemental Data The following materials are available in the online version of this article . Supplemental Figure 1 . Loss of ADF7 Does Not Affect Pollen Germination . Supplemental Figure 2 . No Change in F - Actin Levels Was Detected in adf7 Pollen Grains . Supplemental Figure 3 . Loss of ADF7 Renders Pollen Germination Resistant to LatB . Supplemental Figure 4 . ADF7 Depolymerizes Actin Filaments but Is less Potent Than ADF1 . Supplemental Figure 5 . ADF7 - EGFP V10 Is Fully Functional . Supplemental Figure 6 . The Distribution of Fluorescence Pixel Intensity and Width of Filamentous Structures in Wild - Type Pollen Tubes . Supplemental Figure 7 . ADF7 - EGFP V10 Retains Both G - Actin Binding and Filament Severing Activity , Whereas ADF7 - EGFP D75 Retains G - Actin Binding Activity but Is De ﬁ cient in Severing Actin Filaments . Supplemental Figure 8 . Homology Modeling of Three - Dimensional Structures of the ADF7 / Actin Complex and ADF7 - Decorated F - Actin . Supplemental Table 1 . The Binding Af ﬁ nity of ADF Proteins to NBD - ADP - Actin and NBD - ATP - Actin . Supplemental Table 2 . Primers Sequences Used in This Study . Supplemental Movie 1 . Time - Series Movie of Actin Filament Severing in the Absence of ADF7 . Supplemental Movie 2 . Time - Series Movie of Actin Filament Severing in the Presence of 200 nM ADF7 . Supplemental Movie 3 . Time - Series Movie Displaying the Severing Events of Single Filaments in a Wild - Type Pollen Tube . Supplemental Movie 4 . Time - Series Movie Displaying the Severing Events of Single Filaments in an adf7 Pollen Tube . Supplemental Movie 5 . Time - Series Movie Displaying the Depoly - merization of a Single Filament in a Wild - Type Pollen Tube . Supplemental Movie 6 . Time - Series Movie Displaying the Depoly - merization of a Single Filament in an adf7 Pollen Tube . Supplemental Movie 7 . Time - Series Movie Displaying the Formation of a Thick Bundle in a Wild - Type Pollen Tube . Supplemental Movie 8 . Time - Series Movie Displaying the Debundling Event of a Thick Bundle in a Wild - Type Pollen Tube . Supplemental Movie Legends 1 . Brief Descriptions of Supplemental Movies 1 - 8 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank the ABRC for providing the T - DNA insertion line and members of the Huang lab for stimulating discussions . We also thank Christopher J . Staiger ( Purdue University ) for the ADF1 expression clone . This work was supported by grants from the Ministry of Science and Technology of China ( 2013CB945100 and 2011CB944600 ) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China ( 31125004 and 31121065 ) . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS S . H . conceived the research . Y . Z . , Y . X . , Y . J . , and S . H . designed the research . Y . Z . , Y . X . , Y . J . , and X . Q . performed the experiments . Y . Z . , Y . X . , Y . J . , X . Q . , and S . H . analyzed the data . Y . Z . , Y . X . , Y . J . , and S . H . wrote the article . Received August 26 , 2013 ; revised August 26 , 2013 ; accepted Septem - ber 2 , 2013 ; published September 20 , 2013 . REFERENCES Allwood , E . G . , Smertenko , A . P . , and Hussey , P . J . ( 2001 ) . Phosphorylation of plant actin - depolymerising factor by calmodulin - like domain protein kinase . FEBS Lett . 499 : 97 – 100 . Allwood , E . G . , Anthony , R . G . , Smertenko , A . P . , Reichelt , S . , Drobak , B . K . , Doonan , J . H . , Weeds , A . G . , and Hussey , P . J . ( 2002 ) . Regulation of the pollen - speci ﬁ c actin - depolymerizing factor LlADF1 . Plant Cell 14 : 2915 – 2927 . Amann , K . J . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2001 ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex nucleates actin ﬁ lament branches from the sides of pre - existing ﬁ laments . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 : 306 – 310 . Andrianantoandro , E . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2006 ) . Mechanism of actin ﬁ lament turnover by severing and nucleation at different concentrations of ADF / co ﬁ lin . Mol . Cell 24 : 13 – 23 . Augustine , R . C . , Vidali , L . , Kleinman , K . P . , and Bezanilla , M . ( 2008 ) . Actin depolymerizing factor is essential for viability in plants , and its phosphoregulation is important for tip growth . Plant J . 54 : 863 – 875 . Bamburg , J . R . , and Bernstein , B . W . ( 2008 ) . ADF / co ﬁ lin . Curr . Biol . 18 : R273 – R275 . Bamburg , J . R . , Harris , H . E . , and Weeds , A . G . ( 1980 ) . Partial puri ﬁ cation and characterization of an actin depolymerizing factor from brain . FEBS Lett . 121 : 178 – 182 . Bao , C . , Wang , J . , Zhang , R . , Zhang , B . , Zhang , H . , Zhou , Y . , and Huang , S . ( 2012 ) . Arabidopsis VILLIN2 and VILLIN3 act redundantly in sclerenchyma development via bundling of actin ﬁ laments . Plant J . 71 : 962 – 975 . Bernstein , B . W . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 2010 ) . ADF / co ﬁ lin : A functional node in cell biology . Trends Cell Biol . 20 : 187 – 195 . Berro , J . , Sirotkin , V . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2010 ) . Mathematical modeling of endocytic actin patch kinetics in ﬁ ssion yeast : Disassembly requires release of actin ﬁ lament fragments . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 : 2905 – 2915 . Blanchoin , L . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1998 ) . Interaction of actin monomers with Acanthamoeba actophorin ( ADF / co ﬁ lin ) and pro ﬁ lin . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 25106 – 25111 . Bou Daher , F . , van Oostende , C . , and Geitmann , A . ( 2011 ) . Spatial and temporal expression of actin depolymerizing factors ADF7 and ADF10 during male gametophyte development in Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant Cell Physiol . 52 : 1177 – 1192 . 3420 The Plant Cell Burgos - Rivera , B . , Ruzicka , D . R . , Deal , R . B . , McKinney , E . C . , King - Reid , L . , and Meagher , R . B . ( 2008 ) . ACTIN DEPOLYMERIZING FACTOR9 controls development and gene expression in Arabidopsis . Plant Mol . Biol . 68 : 619 – 632 . Carlier , M . F . , Laurent , V . , Santolini , J . , Melki , R . , Didry , D . , Xia , G . X . , Hong , Y . , Chua , N . H . , and Pantaloni , D . ( 1997 ) . Actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF / co ﬁ lin ) enhances the rate of ﬁ lament turnover : Implication in actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 136 : 1307 – 1322 . Chan , C . , Beltzner , C . C . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2009 ) . Co ﬁ lin dissociates Arp2 / 3 complex and branches from actin ﬁ laments . Curr . Biol . 19 : 537 – 545 . Chaudhry , F . , Guérin , C . , von Witsch , M . , Blanchoin , L . , and Staiger , C . J . ( 2007 ) . Identi ﬁ cation of Arabidopsis cyclase - associated protein 1 as the ﬁ rst nucleotide exchange factor for plant actin . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 : 3002 – 3014 . Chaudhry , F . , Little , K . , Talarico , L . , Quintero - Monzon , O . , and Goode , B . L . ( 2010 ) . A central role for the WH2 domain of Srv2 / CAP in recharging actin monomers to drive actin turnover in vitro and in vivo . Cytoskeleton ( Hoboken ) 67 : 120 – 133 . Chen , C . Y . , Wong , E . I . , Vidali , L . , Estavillo , A . , Hepler , P . K . , Wu , H . M . , and Cheung , A . Y . ( 2002 ) . The regulation of actin organization by actin - depolymerizing factor in elongating pollen tubes . Plant Cell 14 : 2175 – 2190 . Chen , H . , Bernstein , B . W . , Sneider , J . M . , Boyle , J . A . , Minamide , L . S . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 2004 ) . In vitro activity differences between proteins of the ADF / co ﬁ lin family de ﬁ ne two distinct subgroups . Biochemistry 43 : 7127 – 7142 . Chen , N . , Qu , X . , Wu , Y . , and Huang , S . ( 2009 ) . Regulation of actin dynamics in pollen tubes : Control of actin polymer level . J . Integr . Plant Biol . 51 : 740 – 750 . Chen , Q . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2011 ) . Actin ﬁ lament severing by co ﬁ lin is more important for assembly than constriction of the cytokinetic contractile ring . J . Cell Biol . 195 : 485 – 498 . Cheung , A . Y . , and Wu , H . M . ( 2008 ) . Structural and signaling networks for the polar cell growth machinery in pollen tubes . Annu . Rev . Plant Biol . 59 : 547 – 572 . Clément , M . , Ketelaar , T . , Rodiuc , N . , Banora , M . Y . , Smertenko , A . , Engler , G . , Abad , P . , Hussey , P . J . , and de Almeida Engler , J . ( 2009 ) . Actin - depolymerizing factor2 - mediated actin dynamics are essential for root - knot nematode infection of Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 21 : 2963 – 2979 . Cooper , J . A . ( 1987 ) . Effects of cytochalasin and phalloidin on actin . J . Cell Biol . 105 : 1473 – 1478 . Coué , M . , Brenner , S . L . , Spector , I . , and Korn , E . D . ( 1987 ) . Inhibition of actin polymerization by latrunculin A . FEBS Lett . 213 : 316 – 318 . Daher , F . B . , and Geitmann , A . ( 2012 ) . Actin depolymerizing factors ADF7 and ADF10 play distinct roles during pollen development and pollen tube growth . Plant Signal . Behav . 7 : 879 – 881 . Detmers , P . , Weber , A . , Elzinga , M . , and Stephens , R . E . ( 1981 ) . 7 - Chloro - 4 - nitrobenzeno - 2 - oxa - 1 , 3 - diazole actin as a probe for actin polymerization . J . Biol . Chem . 256 : 99 – 105 . Didry , D . , Carlier , M . F . , and Pantaloni , D . ( 1998 ) . Synergy between actin depolymerizing factor / co ﬁ lin and pro ﬁ lin in increasing actin ﬁ lament turnover . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 25602 – 25611 . Dong , C . H . , Xia , G . X . , Hong , Y . , Ramachandran , S . , Kost , B . , and Chua , N . H . ( 2001 ) . ADF proteins are involved in the control of ﬂ owering and regulate F - actin organization , cell expansion , and organ growth in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 13 : 1333 – 1346 . Feng , Y . , Liu , Q . , and Xue , Q . ( 2006 ) . Comparative study of rice and Arabidopsis actin - depolymerizing factors gene families . J . Plant Physiol . 163 : 69 – 79 . Geitmann , A . , Snowman , B . N . , Emons , A . M . , and Franklin - Tong , V . E . ( 2000 ) . Alterations in the actin cytoskeleton of pollen tubes are induced by the self - incompatibility reaction in Papaver rhoeas . Plant Cell 12 : 1239 – 1251 . Gibbon , B . C . , Kovar , D . R . , and Staiger , C . J . ( 1999 ) . Latrunculin B has different effects on pollen germination and tube growth . Plant Cell 11 : 2349 – 2363 . Gilliland , L . U . , Kandasamy , M . K . , Pawloski , L . C . , and Meagher , R . B . ( 2002 ) . Both vegetative and reproductive actin isovariants complement the stunted root hair phenotype of the Arabidopsis act2 - 1 mutation . Plant Physiol . 130 : 2199 – 2209 . Gilliland , L . U . , Pawloski , L . C . , Kandasamy , M . K . , and Meagher , R . B . ( 2003 ) . Arabidopsis actin gene ACT7 plays an essential role in germination and root growth . Plant J . 33 : 319 – 328 . Giuliano , K . A . , Khatib , F . A . , Hayden , S . M . , Daoud , E . W . , Adams , M . E . , Amorese , D . A . , Bernstein , B . W . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 1988 ) . Properties of puri ﬁ ed actin depolymerizing factor from chick brain . Biochemistry 27 : 8931 – 8938 . Henty , J . L . , Bledsoe , S . W . , Khurana , P . , Meagher , R . B . , Day , B . , Blanchoin , L . , and Staiger , C . J . ( 2011 ) . Arabidopsis actin depolymerizing factor4 modulates the stochastic dynamic behavior of actin ﬁ laments in the cortical array of epidermal cells . Plant Cell 23 : 3711 – 3726 . Hepler , P . K . , Vidali , L . , and Cheung , A . Y . ( 2001 ) . Polarized cell growth in higher plants . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 17 : 159 – 187 . Higaki , T . , Kutsuna , N . , Sano , T . , Kondo , N . , and Hasezawa , S . ( 2010 ) . Quanti ﬁ cation and cluster analysis of actin cytoskeletal structures in plant cells : Role of actin bundling in stomatal movement during diurnal cycles in Arabidopsis guard cells . Plant J . 61 : 156 – 165 . Honys , D . , and Twell , D . ( 2003 ) . Comparative analysis of the Arabidopsis pollen transcriptome . Plant Physiol . 132 : 640 – 652 . Huang , S . , Gao , L . , Blanchoin , L . , and Staiger , C . J . ( 2006 ) . Heterodimeric capping protein from Arabidopsis is regulated by phosphatidic acid . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 : 1946 – 1958 . Huang , S . , Robinson , R . C . , Gao , L . Y . , Matsumoto , T . , Brunet , A . , Blanchoin , L . , and Staiger , C . J . ( 2005 ) . Arabidopsis VILLIN1 generates actin ﬁ lament cables that are resistant to depolymerization . Plant Cell 17 : 486 – 501 . Jiang , C . J . , Weeds , A . G . , and Hussey , P . J . ( 1997 ) . The maize actin - depolymerizing factor , ZmADF3 , redistributes to the growing tip of elongating root hairs and can be induced to translocate into the nucleus with actin . Plant J . 12 : 1035 – 1043 . Kandasamy , M . K . , Burgos - Rivera , B . , McKinney , E . C . , Ruzicka , D . R . , and Meagher , R . B . ( 2007 ) . Class - speci ﬁ c interaction of pro ﬁ lin and ADF isovariants with actin in the regulation of plant development . Plant Cell 19 : 3111 – 3126 . Kandasamy , M . K . , McKinney , E . C . , and Meagher , R . B . ( 2002 ) . Functional nonequivalency of actin isovariants in Arabidopsis . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 : 251 – 261 . Kost , B . , Spielhofer , P . , and Chua , N . H . ( 1998 ) . A GFP - mouse talin fusion protein labels plant actin ﬁ laments in vivo and visualizes the actin cytoskeleton in growing pollen tubes . Plant J . 16 : 393 – 401 . Kovar , D . R . , Drøbak , B . K . , and Staiger , C . J . ( 2000a ) . Maize pro ﬁ lin isoforms are functionally distinct . Plant Cell 12 : 583 – 598 . Kovar , D . R . , Staiger , C . J . , Weaver , E . A . , and McCurdy , D . W . ( 2000b ) . AtFim1 is an actin ﬁ lament crosslinking protein from Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant J . 24 : 625 – 636 . Kueh , H . Y . , Brieher , W . M . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 2010 ) . Quantitative analysis of actin turnover in Listeria comet tails : Evidence for catastrophic ﬁ lament turnover . Biophys . J . 99 : 2153 – 2162 . Li , X . B . , Xu , D . , Wang , X . L . , Huang , G . Q . , Luo , J . , Li , D . D . , Zhang , Z . T . , and Xu , W . L . ( 2010 ) . Three cotton genes preferentially expressed in ﬂ ower tissues encode actin - depolymerizing factors which are involved in F - actin dynamics in cells . J . Exp . Bot . 61 : 41 – 53 . ADF7 Promotes Actin Cable Turnover 3421 Lin , Y . , and Yang , Z . ( 1997 ) . Inhibition of pollen tube elongation by microinjected anti - Rop1Ps antibodies suggests a crucial role for Rho - type GTPases in the control of tip growth . Plant Cell 9 : 1647 – 1659 . Lopez , I . , Anthony , R . G . , Maciver , S . K . , Jiang , C . J . , Khan , S . , Weeds , A . G . , and Hussey , P . J . ( 1996 ) . Pollen speci ﬁ c expression of maize genes encoding actin depolymerizing factor - like proteins . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 93 : 7415 – 7420 . Lovy - Wheeler , A . , Kunkel , J . G . , Allwood , E . G . , Hussey , P . J . , and Hepler , P . K . ( 2006 ) . Oscillatory increases in alkalinity anticipate growth and may regulate actin dynamics in pollen tubes of lily . Plant Cell 18 : 2182 – 2193 . Maciver , S . K . , and Hussey , P . J . ( 2002 ) . The ADF / co ﬁ lin family : Actin - remodeling proteins . Genome Biol . 3 : reviews3007 . Meagher , R . B . , McKinney , E . C . , and Kandasamy , M . K . ( 1999 ) . Isovariant dynamics expand and buffer the responses of complex systems : The diverse plant actin gene family . Plant Cell 11 : 995 – 1006 . Michelot , A . , Berro , J . , Guérin , C . , Boujemaa - Paterski , R . , Staiger , C . J . , Martiel , J . L . , and Blanchoin , L . ( 2007 ) . Actin - ﬁ lament stochastic dynamics mediated by ADF / co ﬁ lin . Curr . Biol . 17 : 825 – 833 . Miller , D . D . , de Ruijter , N . C . A . , Bisseling , T . , and Emons , A . M . C . ( 1999 ) . The role of actin in root hair morphogenesis : Studies with lipochito - oligosaccharide as a growth stimulator and cytochalasin as an actin perturbing drug . Plant J . 17 : 141 – 154 . Okreglak , V . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2007 ) . Co ﬁ lin recruitment and function during actin - mediated endocytosis dictated by actin nucleotide state . J . Cell Biol . 178 : 1251 – 1264 . Papuga , J . , Hoffmann , C . , Dieterle , M . , Moes , D . , Moreau , F . , Tholl , S . , Steinmetz , A . , and Thomas , C . ( 2010 ) . Arabidopsis LIM proteins : A family of actin bundlers with distinct expression patterns and modes of regulation . Plant Cell 22 : 3034 – 3052 . Pina , C . , Pinto , F . , Feijó , J . A . , and Becker , J . D . ( 2005 ) . Gene family analysis of the Arabidopsis pollen transcriptome reveals biological implications for cell growth , division control , and gene expression regulation . Plant Physiol . 138 : 744 – 756 . Pollard , T . D . ( 1984 ) . Polymerization of ADP - actin . J . Cell Biol . 99 : 769 – 777 . Pollard , T . D . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2009 ) . Actin , a central player in cell shape and movement . Science 326 : 1208 – 1212 . Qu , X . , Zhang , H . , Xie , Y . , Wang , J . , Chen , N . , and Huang , S . ( 2013 ) . Arabidopsis villins promote actin turnover at pollen tube tips and facilitate the construction of actin collars . Plant Cell 25 : 1803 – 1817 . Roland , J . , Berro , J . , Michelot , A . , Blanchoin , L . , and Martiel , J . L . ( 2008 ) . Stochastic severing of actin ﬁ laments by actin depolymerizing factor / co ﬁ lin controls the emergence of a steady dynamical regime . Biophys . J . 94 : 2082 – 2094 . Ruzicka , D . R . , Kandasamy , M . K . , McKinney , E . C . , Burgos - Rivera , B . , and Meagher , R . B . ( 2007 ) . The ancient subclasses of Arabidopsis Actin Depolymerizing Factor genes exhibit novel and differential expression . Plant J . 52 : 460 – 472 . Shi , M . , Xie , Y . , Zheng , Y . , Wang , J . , Su , Y . , Yang , Q . , and Huang , S . ( 2013 ) . Oryza sativa actin - interacting protein 1 is required for rice growth by promoting actin turnover . Plant J . 73 : 747 – 760 . Skau , C . T . , and Kovar , D . R . ( 2010 ) . Fimbrin and tropomyosin competition regulates endocytosis and cytokinesis kinetics in ﬁ ssion yeast . Curr . Biol . 20 : 1415 – 1422 . Smertenko , A . P . , Allwood , E . G . , Khan , S . , Jiang , C . J . , Maciver , S . K . , Weeds , A . G . , and Hussey , P . J . ( 2001 ) . Interaction of pollen - speci ﬁ c actin - depolymerizing factor with actin . Plant J . 25 : 203 – 212 . Snowman , B . N . , Kovar , D . R . , Shevchenko , G . , Franklin - Tong , V . E . , and Staiger , C . J . ( 2002 ) . Signal - mediated depolymerization of actin in pollen during the self - incompatibility response . Plant Cell 14 : 2613 – 2626 . Spudich , J . A . , and Watt , S . ( 1971 ) . The regulation of rabbit skeletal muscle contraction . I . Biochemical studies of the interaction of the tropomyosin - troponin complex with actin and the proteolytic fragments of myosin . J . Biol . Chem . 246 : 4866 – 4871 . Staiger , C . J . ( 2000 ) . Signaling to the actin cytoskeleton in plants . Annu . Rev . Plant Physiol . Plant Mol . Biol . 51 : 257 – 288 . Staiger , C . J . , Poulter , N . S . , Henty , J . L . , Franklin - Tong , V . E . , and Blanchoin , L . ( 2010 ) . Regulation of actin dynamics by actin - binding proteins in pollen . J . Exp . Bot . 61 : 1969 – 1986 . Staiger , C . J . , Sheahan , M . B . , Khurana , P . , Wang , X . , McCurdy , D . W . , and Blanchoin , L . ( 2009 ) . Actin ﬁ lament dynamics are dominated by rapid growth and severing activity in the Arabidopsis cortical array . J . Cell Biol . 184 : 269 – 280 . Su , H . , Zhu , J . , Cai , C . , Pei , W . , Wang , J . , Dong , H . , and Ren , H . ( 2012 ) . FIMBRIN1 is involved in lily pollen tube growth by stabilizing the actin fringe . Plant Cell 24 : 4539 – 4554 . Suarez , C . , Roland , J . , Boujemaa - Paterski , R . , Kang , H . , McCullough , B . R . , Reymann , A . C . , Guérin , C . , Martiel , J . L . , De la Cruz , E . M . , and Blanchoin , L . ( 2011 ) . Co ﬁ lin tunes the nucleotide state of actin ﬁ laments and severs at bare and decorated segment boundaries . Curr . Biol . 21 : 862 – 868 . Taylor , L . P . , and Hepler , P . K . ( 1997 ) . Pollen germination and tube growth . Annu . Rev . Plant Physiol . Plant Mol . Biol . 48 : 461 – 491 . Tholl , S . , Moreau , F . , Hoffmann , C . , Arumugam , K . , Dieterle , M . , Moes , D . , Neumann , K . , Steinmetz , A . , and Thomas , C . ( 2011 ) . Arabidopsis actin - depolymerizing factors ( ADFs ) 1 and 9 display antagonist activities . FEBS Lett . 585 : 1821 – 1827 . Thomas , C . ( 2012 ) . Bundling actin ﬁ laments from membranes : Some novel players . Front . Plant Sci . 3 : 188 . Thomas , C . , Tholl , S . , Moes , D . , Dieterle , M . , Papuga , J . , Moreau , F . , and Steinmetz , A . ( 2009 ) . Actin bundling in plants . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 66 : 940 – 957 . Tian , M . , Chaudhry , F . , Ruzicka , D . R . , Meagher , R . B . , Staiger , C . J . , and Day , B . ( 2009 ) . Arabidopsis actin - depolymerizing factor AtADF4 mediates defense signal transduction triggered by the Pseudomonas syringae effector AvrPphB . Plant Physiol . 150 : 815 – 824 . Valentin - Ranc , C . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 1989 ) . Evidence for the direct interaction between tightly bound divalent metal ion and ATP on actin . Binding of the lambda isomers of beta gamma - bidentate CrATP to actin . J . Biol . Chem . 264 : 20871 – 20880 . van der Honing , H . S . , Kieft , H . , Emons , A . M . C . , and Ketelaar , T . ( 2012 ) . Arabidopsis VILLIN2 and VILLIN3 are required for the generation of thick actin ﬁ lament bundles and for directional organ growth . Plant Physiol . 158 : 1426 – 1438 . Vartiainen , M . K . , Mustonen , T . , Mattila , P . K . , Ojala , P . J . , Thesleff , I . , Partanen , J . , and Lappalainen , P . ( 2002 ) . The three mouse actin - depolymerizing factor / co ﬁ lins evolved to ful ﬁ ll cell - type - speci ﬁ c requirements for actin dynamics . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 : 183 – 194 . Vidali , L . , and Hepler , P . K . ( 1997 ) . Characterization and localization of pro ﬁ li n in pollen grains and tubes of Lilium longi ﬂ orum . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 36 : 323 – 338 . Vidali , L . , and Hepler , P . K . ( 2001 ) . Actin and pollen tube growth . Protoplasma 215 : 64 – 76 . Vidali , L . , McKenna , S . T . , and Hepler , P . K . ( 2001 ) . Actin polymerization is essential for pollen tube growth . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 : 2534 – 2545 . 3422 The Plant Cell Vidali , L . , Rounds , C . M . , Hepler , P . K . , and Bezanilla , M . ( 2009 ) . Lifeact - mEGFP reveals a dynamic apical F - actin network in tip growing plant cells . PLoS ONE 4 : e5744 . Wang , H . J . , Wan , A . R . , and Jauh , G . Y . ( 2008 ) . An actin - binding protein , LlLIM1 , mediates calcium and hydrogen regulation of actin dynamics in pollen tubes . Plant Physiol . 147 : 1619 – 1636 . Wu , Y . , Yan , J . , Zhang , R . , Qu , X . , Ren , S . , Chen , N . , and Huang , S . ( 2010 ) . Arabidopsis FIMBRIN5 , an actin bundling factor , is required for pollen germination and pollen tube growth . Plant Cell 22 : 3745 – 3763 . Ye , J . , Zheng , Y . , Yan , A . , Chen , N . , Wang , Z . , Huang , S . , and Yang , Z . ( 2009 ) . Arabidopsis formin3 directs the formation of actin cables and polarized growth in pollen tubes . Plant Cell 21 : 3868 – 3884 . Zhang , H . , Qu , X . , Bao , C . , Khurana , P . , Wang , Q . , Xie , Y . , Zheng , Y . , Chen , N . , Blanchoin , L . , Staiger , C . J . , and Huang , S . ( 2010 ) . Arabidopsis VILLIN5 , an actin ﬁ lament bundling and severing protein , is necessary for normal pollen tube growth . Plant Cell 22 : 2749 – 2767 . Zhu , L . , Zhang , Y . , Kang , E . , Xu , Q . , Wang , M . , Rui , Y . , Liu , B . , Yuan , M . , and Fu , Y . ( 2013 ) . MAP18 regulates the direction of pollen tube growth in Arabidopsis by modulating F - actin organization . Plant Cell 25 : 851 – 867 . ADF7 Promotes Actin Cable Turnover 3423 DOI 10 . 1105 / tpc . 113 . 117820 ; originally published online September 20 , 2013 ; 2013 ; 25 ; 3405 - 3423 Plant Cell Yiyan Zheng , Yurong Xie , Yuxiang Jiang , Xiaolu Qu and Shanjin Huang Cable Turnover to Promote Normal Pollen Tube Growth ACTIN - DEPOLYMERIZING FACTOR7 Severs Actin Filaments and Regulates Actin Arabidopsis This information is current as of July 8 , 2017 Supplemental Data / content / suppl / 2013 / 09 / 18 / tpc . 113 . 117820 . DC1 . html References / content / 25 / 9 / 3405 . full . html # ref - list - 1 This article cites 91 articles , 49 of which can be accessed free at : Permissions https : / / www . copyright . com / ccc / openurl . do ? sid = pd _ hw1532298X & issn = 1532298X & WT . mc _ id = pd _ hw1532298X eTOCs http : / / www . plantcell . org / cgi / alerts / ctmain Sign up for eTOCs at : CiteTrack Alerts http : / / www . plantcell . org / cgi / alerts / ctmain Sign up for CiteTrack Alerts at : Subscription Information http : / / www . aspb . org / publications / subscriptions . cfm is available at : Plant Physiology and The Plant Cell Subscription Information for ADVANCING THE SCIENCE OF PLANT BIOLOGY © American Society of Plant Biologists