The Fourth Paradigm : Data - Intensive Scientific Discovery Tony Hey Chief Data Scientist STFC The Data Deluge – Data - Intensive Science http : / / cordis . europa . eu / fp7 / ict / e - infrastructure / docs / hlg - sdi - report . pdf Much of Science is now Data - Intensive Number of Researchers Data Volume • Extremely large data sets • Expensive to move • Domain standards • High computational needs • Supercomputers , HPC , Grids e . g . High Energy Physics , Astronomy • Large data sets • Some Standards within Domains • Shared Datacenters & Clusters • Research Collaborations e . g . Genomics , Financial • Medium & Small data sets • Flat Files , Excel • Widely diverse data ; Few standards • Local Servers & PCs e . g . Social Sciences , Humanities Four “V’s” of Data • Volume • Variety • Velocity • Veracity ‘The Long Tail of Science’ The ‘Cosmic Genome Project’ : The Sloan Digital Sky Survey • Two surveys in one • Photometric survey in 5 bands • Spectroscopic redshift survey • Data is public • 2 . 5 Terapixels of images • 40 TB of raw data = > 120TB processed data • 5 TB catalogs = > 35TB in the end • Started in 1992 , ‘finished’ in 2008  SkyServer Web Service built at JHU by team led by Alex Szalay and Jim Gray The University of Chicago Princeton University The Johns Hopkins University The University of Washington New Mexico State University Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory US Naval Observatory The Japanese Participation Group The Institute for Advanced Study Max Planck Inst , Heidelberg Sloan Foundation , NSF , DOE , NASA The US National Library of Medicine • T he NIH Public Access Policy ensures that the public has access to the published results of NIH funded research . • Requires scientists to submit final peer - reviewed journal manuscripts that arise from NIH funds to the digital archive PubMed Central upon acceptance for publication . • Policy requires that these papers are accessible to the public on PubMed Central no later than 12 months after publication . Nucleotide sequences Protein sequences Taxon Phylogeny MMDB 3 - D Structure PubMed abstracts Complete Genomes PubMed Entrez Genomes Publishers Genome Centers Entrez cross - database search Thousand years ago – Experimental Science • Description of natural phenomena Last few hundred years – Theoretical Science • Newton’s Laws , Maxwell’s Equations… Last few decades – Computational Science • Simulation of complex phenomena Today – Data - Intensive Science • Scientists overwhelmed with data sets from many different sources • Data captured by instruments • Data generated by simulations • Data generated by sensor networks e - Science and the Fourth Paradigm 2 2 2 . 3 4 a c G a a              eScience is the set of tools and technologies to support data federation and collaboration • For analysis and data mining • For data visualization and exploration • For scholarly communication and dissemination With thanks to Jim Gray Centre for Environmental Data Analysis : JASMIN infrastructure Part data store , part supercomputer , part private cloud… Applications of Synchrotron Radiation e - Infrastructure and Experimental and Observational Data ( EOD ) UK e - Science Program : Six Key Elements for a Global e - Infrastructure ( 2004 ) 1 . High bandwidth Research Networks 2 . Internationally agreed AAA Infrastructure 3 . Development Centres for Open Software 4 . Technologies and standards for Data Provenance , Curation and Preservation 5 . Open access to Data and Publications via Interoperable Repositories 6 . Discovery Services and Collaborative Tools Plus : Supercomputing and HPC resources Training of Scientific Software Engineers and Data Scientists CAMERA : Center for Applied Mathematics for Energy Research Applications CAMERA Pilot Partners computing structure from imaging analyzing samples and proposed new materials designing new materials ALS Foundry & NCEM Goal : Build the applied mathematics that helps transform experimental data into understanding Tomorrow : More data . More quickly . High resolution . Today : Facilities data is time - consuming Critical need : algorithms and analysis for understanding LBNL approach : Focused teams of mathematicians / domain scientists New math to : Guide and optimize experiments Computational harmonic analysis Discrete Galerkin methods Machine learning Statistical sampling Clique analysis Representation theory Bayesian analysis PDE - based image segmentation Graph theory Spectral clustering Optimization methods Hamilton - Jacobi solvers Maximum likelihood estimators Discrete / continuous shape descriptors Voronoi methods Key : Leverage state - of - the - art mathematics Mori - Zwanzig theory Harwell Site Experimental Facilities ISIS CLF In - and Post - experimental support Scan Reconstruct Segment + Quantify 3D mesh + Image based Modelling Predict + Compare Some mage credit : Avizo , Visualization Sciences Group ( VSG ) Data Catalogue Petabyte Data storage Parallel File system HPC CPU + GPU Visualisation Infrastructure + Software + Expertise • Tomography : Dealing with high data volumes – 200Gb / scan , ~ 5 TB / day ( one experiment at DLS ) • MX : high data volumes , smaller files , but a lot more experiments • Hard to move the data – needs to be handled at the facility ? ISIS : IMAT DLS : I12 / I13 Erica Yang , Sri Nagella Ada Lovelace Centre Proposal Thanks to Brian Matthews and Barbara Montanari Data Science in the Future ? What is a Data Scientist ? Data Engineer People who are expert at • Operating at low levels close to the data , write code that manipulates • They may have some machine learning background . • Large companies may have teams of them in - house or they may look to third party specialists to do the work . Data Analyst People who explore data through statistical and analytical methods • They may know programming ; May be an spreadsheet wizard . • Either way , they can build models based on low - level data . • They eat and drink numbers ; They know which questions to ask of the data . Every company will have lots of these . Data Steward People who think to managing , curating , and preserving data . • They are information specialists , archivists , librarians and compliance officers . • This is an important role : if data has value , you want someone to manage it , make it discoverable , look after it and make sure it remains usable . What is a data scientist ? Microsoft UK Enterprise Insights Blog , Kenji Takeda http : / / blogs . msdn . com / b / microsoftenterpriseinsight / archive / 2013 / 01 / 31 / what - is - a - data - scientist . aspx The Data - Intensive Research Lifecycle Data Acquisition & Modelling Collaboration & Visualisation Analysis & Data Mining Dissemination & Sharing Archiving & Preserving Slide thanks to Bryan Lawrence Scientist career paths ? Jim Gray’s Vision : All Scientific Data Online • Many disciplines overlap and use data from other sciences . • Internet can unify all literature and data • Go from literature to computation to data back to literature . • Information at your fingertips – For everyone , everywhere • Increase Scientific Information Velocity • Huge increase in Science Productivity ( From Jim Gray’s last talk ) Literature Derived and recombined data Raw Data Data - Intensive Scientific Discovery The Fourth Paradigm Science @ Microsoft http : / / research . microsoft . com Amazon . com