PNAS title page Classification : Biological Sciences , Cell Biology Title : Self - Organization of Actin Filament Orientation in the Dendritic - Nucleation / Array - Treadmilling Model Authors : Thomas E . Schaus 1 , Edwin W . Taylor 1 , and Gary G . Borisy 1 , 2 1 Department of Cell and Molecular Biology , Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine , 303 East Chicago Avenue , Chicago , IL 60611 ; 2 Marine Biological Laboratory , 7 MBL Street , Woods Hole , MA 02543 Corresponding Author : E . W . Taylor ; ( p ) 312 . 503 . 2675 ; e - taylor3 @ northwestern . edu Manuscript : text , 5 figs . , and 2 tables ; model detail and 2 videos online Character Count : 46990 total char . equivalents Abbreviations Footnote : IC , SS initial conditions , steady state PM , LE plasma membrane , leading edge EM electron micrograph RF , FF rigid and flexible ( beam - bending ) filament model fil filament ( No Data Deposition ) The dendritic - nucleation / array - treadmilling model provides a conceptual framework for the generation of the actin network driving motile cells . We have incorporated it into a 2 - D , stochastic computer model to study lamellipodia via the self - organization of filament orientation patterns . Essential dendritic - nucleation sub - models were incorporated , including discretized actin monomer diffusion , Monte - Carlo filament kinetics , and flexible filament and plasma membrane mechanics . Model parameters were estimated from the literature and simulation , providing values for the extent of the leading edge branching / capping - protective zone ( 5 . 4 nm ) and the auto - catalytic branch rate ( 0 . 43 / s ) . For a given set of parameters the system evolved to a steady state filament count and velocity , at which total branching and capping rates were equal only for specific orientations ; net capping eliminated others . The standard parameter set evoked a sharp preference for the ±35 deg . filaments seen in lamellipodial electron micrographs , requiring ~ 12 generations of successive branching to adapt to a 15 deg . change in protrusion direction . This pattern was robust with respect to membrane surface and bending energies and to actin concentrations , but required protection from capping at the leading edge and branching angles greater than 60 deg . A + 70 / 0 / - 70 deg . pattern was formed with flexible filaments ~ 100 nm or longer and with velocities less than ~ 20 % of free polymerization rates . The polymerization of soluble actin monomers between filament “barbed ends” and the plasma membrane ( PM ) generates the force of protrusion in cell motility ( 1 , 2 ) . Other proteins required for lamellipodial motility ( 3 ) are : arp2 / 3 , which nucleates ( branches ) free barbed ends at ~ 70 deg . from existing ones ( 4 ) ; a PM - bound activator of arp2 / 3 ( 5 ) ; ADF / cofilin , which promotes the depolymerization of pointed ends ( 6 ) and perhaps debranching reactions ( 7 ) ; and capping protein , a terminator of barbed end growth ( 8 ) . The generation and persistence of lamellipodia from these elements is described in the “dendritic - nucleation / array - treadmilling” conceptual model ( 2 , 4 , 9 ) . This model can be sub - divided into three main processes : the kinetics of filament ( de ) polymerization , branching , and capping ; filament - PM interactions , which limit polymerization rates ; and the diffusion of actin monomers and other soluble components . Such a system is “complex” in the sense that many copies of each component type interact to exhibit “emergent” system properties not expected from the individual rules of interaction ( 10 ) . In contrast to “complicated” systems of many dissimilar components with precisely defined interactions , complex systems can self - organize and adapt to environmental change . An important emergent property is the self - organization of lamellipodial actin filaments into orientations at ±35 deg . with respect to the direction of protrusion ( 11 , 12 ) . Maly and Borisy predicted ±35 or + 70 / 0 / - 70 deg . patterns with a 2D mathematical model based on these dendritic - nucleation assumptions ( 11 ) . A model by Atilgan et al . allowed 3D branching , but required preferential arp2 / 3 orientation in the PM for pattern formation ( 13 ) . The numerical model described here extends the Maly and Borisy model , removing most of its simplifications and limitations . Reactions are treated stochastically , the elastic properties of the membrane and filaments are included , and the time dependence of the distribution’s evolution is obtained . We preserve the assumption that filaments remain oriented in the 2D lamellipodial plane . Our simulation exhibits orientational self - organization and permits the determination of a range of parameter values consistent with pattern stability . We reveal the transient development of the orientation pattern and the approach to steady state protrusion velocity and filament number . Several computer models of ( rigid ) bacterial propulsion by rigid filaments have been proposed ( 14 - 16 ) , with those of Carlsson demonstrating a flat force - velocity relationship under auto - catalytic branching ( 15 , 16 ) . Mogilner and Oster developed the basic theory of the actin - based elastic Brownian ratchet , which applies small - angle elastic beam theory to thermal filament fluctuations ( 17 , 18 ) . The present model combines stochastic propulsion and elastic filament models , adding a flexible PM load and thermodynamically realistic filament - membrane interactions . Assumptions and Methods A ~ 1 µ m wide ( X ) portion of a flexible lamellipodial leading edge ( LE ) was simulated , with cyclic boundary conditions for all components on the ~ 1 µ m Y - axis edges and a fixed actin monomer concentration [ A ] TE on the trailing edge . Every filament over the entire lamellipodial thickness was modeled , with 2D positions , orientations , and end states of each filament recorded individually . Over each small time step Δ t , the calculation algorithm performed spatially - discretized ( Fick’s Law ) diffusion and Monte - Carlo ( stochastic ) kinetics calculations for all components , with iterative calculations of PM and filament mechanics as required ( Fig . 1 , Tables 1 and 2 ) . Consistent with experimental indication that branching and anti - capping mechanisms operate very near the LE , free barbed ends within a Y - distance ε branched new filaments at rate R br and were blocked from the usual capping rate R cp . New filaments deviated from the parent filament barbed end orientation by a normal distribution about the mean branch angle ± ( θ br ± σ br ) . Polymerization occurred at a rate proportional to the local actin monomer concentration , reduced at the LE by a Boltzmann factor based on the total system energy required for that specific protrusive step . Filaments themselves were assumed either rigid or flexible - and - cantilevered from the nearest branch or pointed end . Values for the filament and PM mechanical properties and most of the reaction rate constants were available . The main unknowns were the effective rates of branching and capping , critical to the development of the filament distribution . With R cp available , ε and R br were determined from simulation as illustrated in Fig . 3 , completing the standard set of parameters listed in Table 2 . Model details and a simulation video depicting individual protrusive steps can be found in the online Supporting Information . Results and Discussion Self - organization of filament orientation arose under any initial conditions . We first asked under what initial conditions ( IC’s ) the model system would organize filament orientation . A set of filaments at random position , orientation , and length has no order , with only the position of the branch - inducing and capping - protective LE to generate directionality . A simulation was run under these IC’s ( Fig . 2a ) with the branch angle standard deviation ( σ br ) equal to zero and otherwise standard parameter conditions ( Table 2 ) . Results show the disappearance over 120 s of total filament length ( mass ) in most orientations , with one pair of very sharp orientations at ±35 deg . dominating ( Fig . 2b and Supporting Information video ) . Because the branch angle did not vary , filament populations always occurred in strictly complementary families ( related by exactly 70 deg . ) and were not able to drift into other orientation families over successive generations of branching . This shows that from IC’s without order , very narrow populations of filaments oriented at 35 deg . show net growth while others show net depolymerization . When , instead of the total filament length in each direction , the number of filaments in each direction is plotted , we see a similar pattern with the addition of backward - facing filaments at ±105 deg . ( Fig . 2c ) . Other orientations showed a net decrease in the number of filaments , showing that the total capping rate outpaced the total generation rate for those orientations until their numbers reached zero . Domination by length at ±35 deg . thus did not represent a system in which ±35 deg . filaments became particularly long , but instead one in which other filament families were not viable . Filaments which faced backwards at ±105 deg . were generated at nearly the same rate as forward - facing filaments , but rapid capping away from the LE kept their total lengths ( and non - productive monomer depletion ) very low ( Fig . 2b ) , and subsequent debranching and depolymerization reduced their count moderately ( Fig . 2c ) . It remained to be shown that the model could adapt from initial orientation patterns devoid of 35 deg . filaments into the steady state ( SS ) ±35 deg . patterns . This is necessary because a feature of motile cells is their ability to reorganize filament orientations in response to changes in the direction of protrusion , without which we would not observe the ±35 deg . pattern in cells which turn . Initial conditions of filaments oriented near _ 70 / 0 deg . simulated a sudden , 35 deg . clockwise turn in protrusive direction from a previous SS pattern ( Fig . 2d ) . The standard σ br of 7 deg . was used allowing the population to drift into new orientations , but no 35 deg . filaments existed initially . Orientations became symmetrical within 1 min . , with a broader distribution of orientations about ±35 deg . ( Fig . 2e ) . The SS distribution compared favorably to those measured via digital image processing techniques ( Radon transform ) from lamellipodial EM’s ( electron micrographs ) ( 11 ) ( Fig . 2e , with an image at SS shown in Fig . 2f ) . We conclude that IC’s of all protrusive simulations with standard parameter values evolve and adapt into ±35 deg . patterns consistent with EM’s . Simulation indicated plausible branching parameters . The standard parameter set used in Fig . 2 and the rest of this study came from both the literature and simulation . While experimental data provided relatively direct estimates for N fb , R cp , and [ A ] values , R br and ε were more difficult to estimate . Modeling allowed us to determine R br , ε , and the filament bending length parameter f ts , consistent both with estimates for N fb , R cp , and [ A ] and with experimentally accessible values such as orientation pattern and filament length . A particular N fb is set only indirectly , through filament turnover parameters R br , R cp , and ε . For a given V PM / V free the profile of N fb with distance from the LE is similar ( Fig . 3a , the exact shape of which will be considered in a subsequent publication ) . At SS , a fraction of these free barbed ends , f ε , are within the ε - demarcated region , and the total rates of filament branching and capping are balanced : ( N fb f ε ) R br = ( N fb [ 1 _ f ε ] ) R cp . The SS f ε therefore equals R cp / ( R br + R cp ) , the setpoint for a negative feedback loop controlling N fb and V PM / V free : A low V PM relative to V free allows filaments to keep up with the LE more often , raising f ε above the setpoint . The resulting net branching increases V PM / V free . Conversely , a high V PM / V free results in net capping and a decrease in N fb and V PM / V free . Plots were made of the R br values required to sustain a steady N fb at a given ε , with two values each of N fb , R cp , f ts , and [ A ] specified and the diffusion coefficient ( D ) set very high to maintain [ A ] uniformly ( Fig . 3b ) . The value of [ A ] was not a factor in the required R br ; it affected both V PM and V free ( = k on , brb [ A ] δ ) equally and curves are superimposed . ( Comparison is therefore by V PM / V free throughout this study . ) In contrast , maintaining higher N fb values required a higher R br , since the associated increase in V PM / V free diminished f ε . A decrease in R cp was associated with an approximately proportional decrease in required R br , as expected . Filament flexibility was allowed in three parameter sets , and moderately raised the required R br . The most sensitive parameter was ε itself . Decreasing ε dramatically decreased f ε , requiring a compensatory increase in R br . In order to narrow the range of acceptable values of ε and R br , the quality of the SS orientation distribution was assessed . Quality was quantified as the mean absolute deviation ( α d ) from the mean orientation angle . The α d values for all parameter sets were very similar at the same ε ( and R br ) values , with some increase in α d with filament flexibility ( Fig 3c ) . Polar histograms of orientation distributions over a range of α d showed focused distributions at high ε and noisy and distorted distributions – incompatible with EM data – at very low ε ( Fig . 3d ) . These results are compatible with ε values as low as 1 monomer length ( δ = 2 . 7 nm ) , but not less . To limit the upper values of ε , we analyzed average filament lengths and orientation pattern development times . Again , because large ε values were associated with low R br , filaments turned over slowly and thus grew very long before being capped . Using EM’s , conservative visual estimates of average filament length within 1 µ m of the LE range from 50 to 500 nm ( not shown ) . In simulations , the number of filaments was a decaying function of length , with all parameter sets consistent with a maximum 500 nm average length when ε was held below 2 . 5 δ ( Fig . 3e ) . Supporting this limit were measurements of the half - time of orientation pattern development ( t 1 / 2 ) from a 15 deg . simulated turn ( i . e . IC’s of a distribution about + 20 and _ 50 deg . ) , with full recovery defined as a SS α d value . At ε = 3 . 0 δ , all parameter sets yielded a t 1 / 2 of 60 s or more ( Fig . 3f ) , corresponding to ~ 3 min . recovery times for a minor 15 deg . turn . In comparison , fibroblasts have lamellipodial protrusion persistence times on the order of 1 - 2 min . before retraction ( 28 ) . Length and recovery time considerations thus limited by two criteria to ε < 2 . 5 δ . Of related importance to t 1 / 2 is the number of branching generations required for network self - organization . The product of t 1 / 2 and R br yields the number of generations required for a 50 % recovery in α d after a rapid , 15 deg . turn ( Fig . 3g ) . Regardless of parameter conditions , this N 1 / 2 value was consistently ~ 5 generations for ε = 2 . 0 δ . Three half - times ( 87 . 5 % recovery ) required 15 generations . For ε = 3 . 0 δ , three half times still required ~ 9 generations . These generations must be largely successive ( i . e . parents branching children , then children branching grandchildren ) in order for adaptation to occur . Based on these studies , we chose a standard set of parameter values consisting of : ε = 2 . 0 δ ; R cp = 6 . 0 / s ; and [ A ] = 12 µ M , with which reasonable protrusion rates of 8 µ m / min were achieved . Furthermore , an N fb of 200 fil / µ m was compatible with measurements of filament barbed end count ( 20 ) and length , and required an R br of 0 . 43 / s . Filaments were held rigid ( f ts = 0 ) for simplicity except where noted . The SS orientation pattern is sensitive to several model parameters . In the standard model , the same ε value limited capping protection and branching initiation . When branching was allowed at any free barbed end , regardless of position , but capping protection maintained within ε , orientation distributions remained unchanged ( Fig . 4a ) . These conditions were effectively similar to standard conditions , since the high intrinsic capping rate quickly removed free barbed ends arising beyond ε . ( While we did not simulate branching from the sides of filaments away from their barbed ends , we predict a similar result . ) In contrast , when branching was only allowed within ε and capping was allowed anywhere , the orientation pattern changed dramatically . Cases in which N fb and R br were maintained at standard values required a greatly diminished R cp of 0 . 22 / s , while those with standard N fb and R cp required a greatly elevated R br of 12 / s . Both cases resulted in distributions with most filament mass facing backward , incompatible with EM results . Protection from capping near the LE is thus essential for the formation of the ±35 deg . distribution . Membrane model parameters were not found to significantly affect orientation distributions over a wide range of values . Given a constant R br , runs varying the resistance to protrusion ( γ se ) retained the same V PM and ±35 deg . distribution due to the compensating effect of N fb ( Figs . 3a and 4b ) . This flat force - V PM relationship is a characteristic of unrestrained auto - catalytic branching , observed by Carlsson ( 16 ) . Membrane flexibility , specified by the bending energy coefficient , κ b , had a significant effect on the LE shape over length scales of < 200 nm . Though the pattern is formed with respect to the LE perpendicular , this had no effect on the orientation distribution , with the same pattern attained over two orders of magnitude of κ b variation ( Fig . 4c ) . We attribute this stability to the LE’s horizontal average orientation and rapid fluctuations relative to filament lifetime . Conversely , filament bending stiffness had a large influence on the orientation pattern . This stiffness is dependent on the third power of effective filament bending length ( [ f ts l ts ] 3 , with the fraction f ts simulating cross - linking ) . Standard parameter simulations with effective filament lengths averaging 0 ( f ts = 0 , equivalent to rigid ) or 41 nm ( f ts = 0 . 25 ) yielded ±35 deg . distributions , but 99 or 139 nm lengths ( f ts = 0 . 50 or 0 . 75 , respectively ) resulted in distributions similar to + 70 / 0 / _ 70 deg . triplets ( Fig . 4d ) . These length limits are consistent with Mogilner and Oster’s force generation calculations ( 17 ) . Triplets were a result of barbed - end “splaying” to higher angles under load . The branch angle itself ( θ br ) was not important to the final ± θ br / 2 distribution over 70 - 110 deg . , but smaller θ br values resulted in a single uniform mass spanning θ br ( Fig . 4e ) . Allowing splaying by filament flexibility did not revive the two - peak distribution ( not shown ) . Note that filaments branching from θ br / 2 no longer face backward at θ br = 60 deg . , but rather 30 + 60 = 90 deg . This allows them an increased opportunity to further branch and disperse the population orientation . Among θ br values that form two - peak distributions , the t 1 / 2 from IC’s ( uniformly distributed over the range ±90 deg . ) is also sharply minimized at θ br = 70 to 80 deg . ( not shown ) . A 70 deg . branch angle is therefore optimized for rapid generation of a stable two peak orientation pattern . Changes in V free had no effect on the orientation pattern ( not shown ) , but the ratio V PM / V free is important . Holding V free constant , the SS V PM was diminished by decreasing R br ( this raises the SS f ε requirement , see Fig 3a ) . An R br of 0 . 06 / s yielded V PM / V free = 0 . 20 and a ±35 deg . distribution ( Fig . 4f ) . Decreasing R br to 0 . 03 / s lowered the SS V PM / V free to 0 . 16 and produced a SS triplet distribution , but also lowered N fb to 80 fil / µ m . Raising γ se to restore N fb had no effect on the distribution or V PM / V free ( plotted ) . Note that low R br can lead to long filament lengths and slow self - organization ( Fig . 3 ) , and triplet patterns in vivo would be more suggestive of a small ε value ( which instead lowers V PM to reach the same required f ε ) . Note also that , on average , a 70 deg . filament advances at V free cos ( 70 ) = 0 . 34 V free , but that stochastically - growing filaments bounded ahead by the PM do not maintain a high f ε at this velocity and in fact require V PM / V free < 0 . 20 to dominate under standard values . The evolution of the final orientation pattern and the development of the SS V PM were interdependent . From IC’s of a small number of filaments at random orientation , Fig . 5a tracks the total number of filaments in each of three complementary - orientation “families” over time . At the low N fb and V PM values early in the simulation , the + 70 / 0 / _ 70 deg . triplet multiplied at the highest rate . With increasing V PM , however , the number of filaments decreased in turn for each family until only the ±35 deg . pair remained at SS V PM . Following Maly and Borisy’s evolutionary “fitness” concept , fitness = ( rate of change of N fb ) / ( N fb ) for each orientation . The value is positive if a population is growing in number , zero if constant , and negative if decreasing toward extinction . Figure 5b shows the fitness landscape for standard branching parameters as a function of φ fil and V PM / V free , with the two symmetric patterns , + 70 / 0 / _ 70 and ±35 deg . , having maximum fitness at low and high velocities , respectively . When either pattern is rotated slightly , the capping rate of the filament with the largest φ fil increases faster than the branching rate of its parent , causing a net decrease in fitness . Because ~ 2 / 3 of new filaments branching from the triplet contribute to the pattern ( 1 / 2 each of branches from ±70 deg filaments , and 2 / 2 branches from 0 deg . filaments ~ 4 of 6 new filaments ) , while only 1 / 2 of branches from ±35 deg . filaments contribute to their pattern , the triplet has a superior reproductive rate and fitness at low velocities . At higher protrusion rates , this effect is overcome by the low f ε of slow 70 deg . filaments . In order to identify the SS condition from Fig . 5b , we note that , under any model context , an increase in SS N fb always increases SS V PM / V free due to the higher net rate of protrusive kinetic events ( Fig 5c ) . A typical path through the fitness landscape can therefore be shown as a Darwinian evolution of patterns through the flattened landscape representation in Fig . 5d . At low N fb , all forward - facing orientations interact with the same low - velocity PM and exhibit net branching ( f ε R br > [ 1 _ f ε ] R cp for every φ fil ) . This leads to an increase in N fb and V PM and to an environment in which filaments at orientations near 0 and ±70 deg . decrease in count ( i ) . Because any V PM with orientations of positive fitness will ultimately result in an increased total N fb , this cycle will continue ( ii ) until reaching the equilibrium V PM and its only viable orientations , near ±35 deg . There , f ε R br = [ 1 _ f ε ] R cp for 35 deg . filaments ( i . e . fitness = 0 ) but all other orientations are driven to extinction by net capping . Given different branching parameter values consistent with a low V PM , the triplet reproduces itself at a higher rate than the two - peak distribution , consequently mandating a slightly higher equilibrium V PM and the extinction of the ±35 deg . pattern . In either case , populations of orientations reproduce and drive environmental changes ( V PM / V free ) which lead to changes in fitness and , ultimately , to a single symmetric pattern and velocity . Conclusions We have developed a comprehensive 2D model of lamellipodial protrusion based on the dendritic - nucleation / array - treadmilling mechanism , incorporating diffusion , stochastic kinetics , and elastic filament and PM models . A “standard” set of model parameter values were determined both directly from the literature and indirectly , using the criteria that model results of filament length , orientation patterns , and development times must be consistent with observed properties . Following these criteria , free barbed ends were protected from capping and allowed to branch at R br = 0 . 43 / s within a distance ε of 5 . 4 nm from the leading edge . This conferred the only directionality to the system . The model accounts for the essential dynamic properties of the network , including a negative feedback loop , controlling the fraction of free barbed ends within ε , that maintained a constant SS protrusion rate V PM regardless of load . Under standard parameter values , the system converged from any IC’s . to a SS V PM / V free of 0 . 38 and a free barbed end count N fb of 200 / µ m . The filament orientation pattern also self - organized , with only a ±35 deg . pattern remaining at this “terminal” V PM . The system in fact displayed the hallmark adaptation to this pattern from distributions initially devoid of ±35 deg . filaments . Any deviation from the symmetrical orientation increased the capping rate at the larger angle more than it increased the branching rate at the smaller angle . Changes in the direction of protrusion were thus corrected for by preferential reproduction of newly - symmetrical patterns generated via branching angle “errors . ” Alternate parameter values which resulted in a SS V PM / V free < 0 . 20 ( e . g . very low R br ) resulted in a _ 70 / 0 / 70 deg . pattern . Altering V free alone had no effect . Protection from capping within ε was absolutely required for realistic pattern formation , although branching localization was not . The pattern was robust with respect to PM surface and bending energies , but sensitive to filament bending lengths longer than ~ 50 nm . These robustness and sensitivity traits describe a self - organizing filament network that resists environmental pressures in maintaining a characteristic orientation pattern and protrusion velocity . We thank the reviewers for valuable comments . This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health ( GM 62431 to GGB ) and the Northwestern University Pulmonary and Critical Care Division ( T32 to TES ) . 1 . Miyata , H . & Hotani , H . ( 1992 ) Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 89 , 11547 - 11551 . 2 . Pollard , T . D . & Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) Cell 112 , 453 - 465 . 3 . Loisel , T . P . , Boujemaa , R . , Pantaloni , D . , & Carlier , M . F . ( 1999 ) Nature 401 , 613 - 616 . 4 . Mullins , R . D . , Heuser , J . A . , & Pollard , T . D . ( 1998 ) Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95 , 6181 - 6186 . 5 . Stradal , T . E . & Scita , G . ( 2006 ) Curr Opin Cell Biol 18 , 4 - 10 . 6 . Carlier , M . F . , Laurent , V . , Santolini , J . , Melki , R . , Didry , D . , Xia , G . X . , Hong , Y . , Chua , N . H . , & Pantaloni , D . ( 1997 ) J Cell Biol 136 , 1307 - 1322 . 7 . Blanchoin , L . & Pollard , T . D . ( 1999 ) J Biol Chem 274 , 15538 - 15546 . 8 . Wear , M . A . , Yamashita , A . , Kim , K . , Maeda , Y . , & Cooper , J . A . ( 2003 ) Curr Biol 13 , 1531 - 1537 . 9 . Blanchoin , L . , Amann , K . J . , Higgs , H . N . , Marchand , J . B . , Kaiser , D . A . , & Pollard , T . D . ( 2000 ) Nature 404 , 1007 - 1011 . 10 . Ottino , J . M . ( 2004 ) Nature 427 , 399 . 11 . Maly , I . V . & Borisy , G . G . ( 2001 ) Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 98 , 11324 - 11329 . 12 . Verkhovsky , A . B . , Chaga , O . Y . , Schaub , S . , Svitkina , T . M . , Meister , J . J . , & Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) Mol Biol Cell 14 , 4667 - 4675 . 13 . Atilgan , E . , Wirtz , D . , & Sun , S . X . ( 2005 ) Biophys J 89 , 3589 - 3602 . 14 . Alberts , J . B . & Odell , G . M . ( 2004 ) PLoS Biol 2 , e412 . 15 . Carlsson , A . E . ( 2001 ) Biophys J 81 , 1907 - 1923 . 16 . Carlsson , A . E . ( 2003 ) Biophys J 84 , 2907 - 2918 . 17 . Mogilner , A . & Oster , G . ( 1996 ) Biophys J 71 , 3030 - 3045 . 18 . Mogilner , A . & Oster , G . ( 2003 ) Biophys J 84 , 1591 - 1605 . 19 . McGrath , J . L . , Tardy , Y . , Dewey , C . F . , Jr . , Meister , J . J . , & Hartwig , J . H . ( 1998 ) Biophys J 75 , 2070 - 2078 . 20 . Abraham , V . C . , Krishnamurthi , V . , Taylor , D . L . , & Lanni , F . ( 1999 ) Biophys J 77 , 1721 - 1732 . 21 . Boal , D . ( 2002 ) Mechanics of the Cell ( Cambridge University Press , Cambridge ) . 22 . Isambert , H . , Venier , P . , Maggs , A . C . , Fattoum , A . , Kassab , R . , Pantaloni , D . , & Carlier , M . F . ( 1995 ) J Biol Chem 270 , 11437 - 11444 . 23 . Pollard , T . D . ( 1986 ) J Cell Biol 103 , 2747 - 2754 . 24 . Pollard , T . D . & Cooper , J . A . ( 1984 ) Biochemistry 23 , 6631 - 6641 . 25 . Blanchoin , L . , Pollard , T . D . , & Mullins , R . D . ( 2000 ) Curr Biol 10 , 1273 - 1282 . 26 . Schafer , D . A . , Jennings , P . B . , & Cooper , J . A . ( 1996 ) J Cell Biol 135 , 169 - 179 . 27 . Mejillano , M . R . , Kojima , S . , Applewhite , D . A . , Gertler , F . B . , Svitkina , T . M . , & Borisy , G . G . ( 2004 ) Cell 118 , 363 - 373 . 28 . Bear , J . E . , Svitkina , T . M . , Krause , M . , Schafer , D . A . , Loureiro , J . J . , Strasser , G . A . , Maly , I . V . , Chaga , O . Y . , Cooper , J . A . , Borisy , G . G . , et al . ( 2002 ) Cell 109 , 509 - 521 . Fig . 1 . Lamellipodia were simulated using three sub - models : ( lower left ) A fixed rectangular grid demarcated regions of uniform actin concentration , subject to Fick’s diffusion relation between them . ( right ) Within each time step , kinetic reactions were carried out stochastically for every filament . ( top ) Minimization of plasma membrane and filament potential energies yielded quasi - steady - state geometries between kinetic states . Fig . 2 . Filaments in the model spontaneously self - organized from any initial conditions ( IC’s ) into preferential orientations ±35 deg . from the leading edge perpendicular . ( a ) IC’s of simulations in ( b , c ) , showing random filament barbed - end position , orientation ( 0 - 360 deg . ) , and length ( 0 - 150 nm ) over 0 . 5 x 0 . 35 µ m of a 1 x 1 µ m simulation . Fifty percent of filaments shown ; standard parameter set of Table 2 , except σ br = 0 deg . ; free barbed ends labeled green . ( b ) Polar histogram plots of total filament length versus orientation displayed a sharp preference for ±35 deg . orientations , with loss of others . ( c ) Plotted by number of filaments , a similar pattern was observed but with backward - facing filaments made obvious . ( d ) IC’s of standard parameter simulations ( σ br = 7 deg . ) in ( e , f ) , showing orientations near _ 70 / 0 deg . ( e ) Polar plots of total length over time show adaptive behavior , and compare favorably with EM measurements at SS . ( f ) Image of a 0 . 5 x 0 . 5 µ m section at SS . Capped barbed ends labeled red , blue dots denote branches . At SS , the 1 x 1 µ m simulation contained 700 filaments totaling 250 µ m in length , with 200 free barbed ends . Fig . 3 . Orientation pattern and filament length were examined for several parameter sets to determine standard branching parameters . ( a ) The distribution of Y - distances from free barbed ends to the LE is shown for standard conditions ( R br = 0 . 43 / s , f ε = 0 . 93 , and V PM / V free = 0 . 36 , blue ) and a reduced N fb of 140 fil / µ m ( R br = 0 . 21 / s , f ε = 0 . 97 , and V PM / V free = 0 . 28 , red ) . ( b ) For all conditions , the R br required to sustain the specified N fb increased sharply at low ε . ( c ) The extent of filament deviation from the average orientation ( α d ) increased from near σ br to above 30 deg . at ε = 0 . 5 δ under all conditions . ( d ) Orientation patterns for 3 α d values plotted , with backward - facing filaments rotated by 180 deg . to make them comparable to EM data , suggested a lower limit of ε ~ 1 . 0 δ . ( e ) High ε resulted in unreasonably long filament lengths , restricting ε to < 2 . 5 δ . ( f ) The half - time to develop a SS pattern ( t 1 / 2 ) from an initial 15 deg . asymmetry also increased with ε , supporting ε < 3 δ . ( g ) The characteristic number of branching generations required to approach SS ( N 1 / 2 ) was similar for all parameter sets at a given ε ( 2 . 0 δ shown ) . Fig . 4 . Sensitivity of patterns to non - branching parameters further suggested limits to in vivo values . Polar plots include all filaments in a LE 1 x 1 µ m area . ( a ) Deviating from standard conditions , maintaining branching pressure but allowing capping anywhere resulted in a non - physiologic , high backward - filament mass . ( b ) Altering surface energy ( γ se ) values alone did not affect orientation pattern . ( c ) Varying PM bending energy ( κ B ) altered the variability in LE shape but did not alter the pattern . ( d ) Simulations with varying filament flexibility all had average terminal segment lengths ( l ts ) of ~ 200 nm . When effective bending lengths exceeded ~ 41 nm , orientation patterns similar to + 70 / 0 / _ 70 deg . distributions resulted . ( e ) Setting the mean branching angle ( θ br ) near or under 60 deg . resulted in a single distribution . ( f ) Velocities of at least ~ 20 % of V free were required for ±35 deg . orientation patterns . Fig . 5 . The orientations of maximum fitness vary with V PM / V free , but the SS pattern is that with zero fitness at the equilibrium V PM . ( a ) The sum of + 70 / 0 / _ 70 deg . filaments grew fastest in number at low N fb and V PM , but only the ±35 deg . population remained at SS V PM . ( standard conditions with σ br = 0 deg . and a rigid PM for clarity ) ( b ) The 3D fitness landscape for standard conditions . ( c ) V PM / V free rises with N fb . ( d ) A 2D representation of ( b ) shows positive ( green ) or negative ( red ) fitness at a given velocity and orientation . At low V PM / V free , all orientations undergo net reproduction , raising N fb and V PM / V free . The “terminal” V PM is achieved by – and limited to – the ±35 deg . family . ( The figures follow this page , in order ) actin cp arp2 / 3 [ A ] i , j m e c h a n i c s k i n e t i c s d i f f u s i o n X Y ( p r o t r u s i on ) φ fil Bezier segment actively - adjusted central control point shared end control point 2 . membrane bending ∫ = length b lam b ds R κ t E 2 1 2 1 . membrane surface energy + = ∫ ∫ area length lam se se ds t dA E 2 γ 3 . filament bending ( ) sin 2 3 3 y ( l ts f ts ) kT L E p fil ∆ = ( ) 2 φ fil y ∆ ( ) sin φ fil membrane and filament shape : minimize sum of 3 energies dA ds pointed ends : - de - branch : R dbr - bind monomer : R pol , p - lose monomer : R dpol , p ε = k on , brb [ A ] i , j = R e - ∆ E / kT = k off , brb = k on , cp [ cp ] = 0 = k off , cp = k br [ arp2 / 3 ] = 0 barbed ends : - bind monomer : ( near LE ) - lose monomer : - bind capper : ( at < ε ) - lose capper : - branch : ( at > ε ) R pol , b R dpol , b R cp R uncp R br θ br + / - σ br = k dbr = k on , ptd [ A ] i , j = k off , ptd ∆ [ A ] i , j ∆ l α D ∆ l ∆ l ∆ t ∆ [ A ] i , j f e 0 [ s ] 60 [ s ] EM total length orientation d number of filaments orientation c 0 [ s ] 30 [ s ] 120 [ s ] total length orientation b 0 [ s ] 30 [ s ] 120 [ s ] a b f e c d g N 1 / 2 condition set 8 4 0 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 a v g . f il l eng t h µ m ε δ 0 200 400 600 0 1 2 3 4 5 ε δ t 1 / 2 o r i en t . s [ A ] µ M 121212121212126666 Nfb fil / µ m 200200200200200140140200200140140 Rcp s - 1 66662626262 fts 0 ( RF ) 0 . 250 . 5 1 . 0 0 ( RF ) 0 ( RF ) 0 ( RF ) 0 ( RF ) 0 ( RF ) 0 ( RF ) 0 ( RF ) orientation total length α d = 32 deg . α d = 16 deg . α d = 8 deg . α d deg . 0 10 20 30 ε δ 0 1 2 3 4 5 0 2 4 6 8 0 1 2 3 4 5 ε δ R b r s - 1 Rbr + Rcp Rcp a 0 2 4 distance from LE δ f r a c t i on o f N f b f ε ~ 0 . 93 f ε ~ 0 . 97 ε = 2 δ N fb f ε V PM V free + - + + - ε = 2 δ key for b , c , e , & f a b c d e f orientation total length VPM / Vfree = 0 . 20 VPM / Vfree = 0 . 16 total length orientation θ br = 50 deg . θ br = 70 deg . θ br = 90 deg . θ br = 110 deg . avg . fts lts = 41 nm avg . fts lts = 99 nm avg . fts lts = 139 nm orientation total length κ b = 8 pN nm ( 1 / 10x std ) κ b = 80 pN nm ( std ) κ b = 800 pN nm ( 10x std ) total length orientation γ se = 25 pJ / nm2 ( 1 / 2 std ) γ se = 50 pJ / nm2 ( std ) γ se = 100 pJ / nm2 ( 2x std ) orientation total length len . cap pressure only branch p . only : Rbr = 0 . 43 / s branch p . only : Rcp = 6 . 0 / s φ fil 0 . 4 0 . 3 0 . 2 0 . 1 - 70 - 35 0 70 35 V P M / V f r ee φ fil deg . initial conditions i ii SS conditions d c N fb fil / µ m V P M / V f r ee standardconditions 200 0 . 38 b - 70 - 35 0 35 70 0 . 10 . 20 . 30 . 4 φ fil deg . f i t ne ss s - 1 V PM V free 0 . 0 0 . 3 a 0 . 4 0 . 0 V P M / V f r ee VPM / Vfree - 35 / 35 family - 85 / - 15 / 55 family - 70 / 0 / 70 family N f b ( f a m il y ) time s 0 70 Table 1 . Symbols R radius of curvature of the LE in the plane of simulation V PM ; V free velocity of the LE center of mass ; free polymerization velocity Δ E thermal energy required for intercalating a monomer between LE and barbed end = Δ ( Σ E b + Σ E se + Σ E fil ) over successive potential states E b ; E se ; E fil PM bending , PM surface , and filament bending potential energies ds ; dA differential length along LE ; differential area of plasma membrane l ts filament terminal segment length , from barbed end to first branch φ fil filament orientation angle , with respect to the direction of protrusion α d mean absolute fil . deviation angle , measured from population mean [ A ] ; [ A ] i , j ATP - G - actin concentration , in general ; local conc . at position ( i , j ) f ε avg . fraction of all free barbed ends within the ε - demarcated LE zone t 1 / 2 ; N 1 / 2 half - time ; no . of branching generations to develop orientation pattern Table 2 . Model parameters and standard values symbol value description ref’s δ 2 . 7 nm extension length of polymerizing actin monomer - D 6 . 0 µ m 2 / s cytoplasmic actin monomer diffusion coefficient 19 [ A ] TE 12 µ M fixed , trailing edge actin monomer concentration 20 γ se 50 pJ / nm 2 plasma membrane surface energy coefficient 18 , 21 κ b 80 pN nm bending energy coefficient , ~ 20 kT 21 L p 10 µ m persistence length of actin filaments 22 t lam 200 nm lamellipodial thickness 20 k on , brb 12 / µ M / s on - rate of actin to barbed end _ R pol , b / [ A ] 23 k off , brb 1 . 4 / s off - rate of actin from barbed end _ R dpol , b 23 k on , ptd 0 / µ M / s on - rate of actin to ptd . end , profilin - adj . _ R pol , p / [ A ] 24 k off , ptd 8 . 0 / s off - rate of actin from ptd . end , cofilin - adj . _ R dpol , p 6 ε 2 . 0 δ LE cap - protection / branch zone ( Y ) length 15 R br 0 . 43 / s ( total ) rate of barbed end branching _ k br [ arp2 / 3 ] 18 , 20 R dbr 0 . 05 / s rate of debranching for any branch point 25 R cp 6 . 0 / s rate of barbed end capping _ k on , cp [ cp ] 26 R uncp 0 / s uncapping rate for any capped barbed end _ k off , cp 26 , 27 N fb 200 fil / µ m free barbed ends per LE width ( indirectly spec . ) 20 θ br 70 deg . average branch angle 4 σ br 7 deg . branch angle standard deviation 4 Δ t 0 . 0004 s simulation time step - f ts 0 ( _ rigid ) fraction of terminal segment length in fil bending text Supporting Information Video 1 ( see PNAS site ) Small , 0 . 2 x 0 . 2 µ m simulation under standard conditions ( of Table 1 ) and 10 initial filaments . Red dots denote capped barbed ends , green dots denote free barbed ends , and blue dots denote arp2 / 3 branch points . Video shows the interaction of individual , polymerizing , barbed ends of rigid - filaments and a flexible plasma membrane . Note also the branching and depolymerization reactions . Video 2 ( see PNAS site ) Larger , 1 x 1 µ m simulation ( of Fig . 2a - c ) , from initial conditions of random filament length , orientation , and position . The polar histogram shows the number of filaments at each orientation . The red histogram denotes only filaments with ε of leading edge , while the black histogram accounts for all filaments in the simulation area . Model Details A rectangular portion of a lamellipodial leading edge ( LE ) was simulated , measuring up to 5 µ m wide ( “X” direction ) by 5 µ m long ( “Y” direction ) . Cyclic boundary conditions coupled the Y - axis edges for diffusion exchange , membrane shape , and filament continuity . This eliminated potential edge effects , in essence mapping the rectangular simulation onto a cylinder . A flexible plasma membrane ( PM ) bounded all filaments and soluble monomers at the LE , and the trailing edge of the simulation was fixed at a free actin monomer concentration , [ A ] TE , and absorptive to filaments crossing the boundary . Given the small relative thickness of the lamellipodium ( ~ 0 . 2 µ m in the dorsal - ventral “Z” direction ( 1 ) ) , no values were resolved in the Z direction . Every filament in the entire lamellipodial thickness was modeled , with 2D positions , orientations , and end states of each filament recorded individually . Because filaments typically take only ~ 5 % of the lamellipodial volume ( 1 ) , steric hindrance between filaments was neglected . The calculation algorithm was a hybrid of dissimilar sub - models , with spatially - discretized diffusion calculations , Monte - Carlo ( stochastic ) filament kinetics , and iterative calculations of PM and filament mechanics based on analytical energy relationships ( Fig . 1 ) . The simulations were divided into small time - steps ( Δ t ) , each of which consisted of diffusion calculations over the entire simulated area , kinetics calculations for each filament individually , and membrane and filament mechanics calculations as needed . The small Δ t served to both maintain stability in diffusion calculations and to impart randomness to the order of kinetic events on different filaments . Diffusion of actin monomers was calculated using a discretized Fick’s relationship ( Fig . 1 ) . The rectangular simulation area was subdivided into a grid of smaller rectangles ( ~ 100 nm per side ) , each of which was assumed to have a single , spatially - averaged actin monomer concentration , [ A ] i , j . Filament ( de ) polymerization reactions were immediately accompanied by appropriate concentration adjustments to the grid rectangle at which the filament end was located . Although the LE shape was allowed to change in flexible PM simulations , the grid remained fixed with respect to the LE . All other soluble components were assumed constant spatially and temporally . Filament kinetics were simulated using only well - established kinetic reactions . At each time step , a Monte - Carlo algorithm processed each filament in turn for the probability of branching , debranching , capping , polymerization , and depolymerization reactions at both pointed and barbed ends , as appropriate ( Fig . 1 , Table 1 for constants ) . Free barbed end tip positions within a Y - distance ε from the LE branched new filaments at a constant rate ( auto - catalytic branching ) , but any temporary tethering between arp2 / 3 and the membrane - bound activator was neglected ( 2 ) . New filament orientation deviated from the parent filament barbed end orientation by a normal distribution about the average branch angle ( θ br ± σ br ) , and was equally likely to face more toward or away from the LE ( i . e . no “intelligent” branching ) . As suggested by the existence of electron micrograph ( EM ) orientation patterns ( 3 ) , branching was restricted to the plane of simulation . Monomer orientation within the filament and its effect on branching orientation about the axis of the parent filament was thus neglected . Debranching at a constant rate released the pointed end of the daughter filament to a free state ( 4 ) . Because productive , forward - facing barbed ends are thought to be protected from capping by the VASP protein ( 5 ) , or are uncapped by PM - supplied PIP or PIP 2 ( 6 ) , protection from capping was applied within the same distance ε from the LE as used for branching . We assumed capped ends remained effectively capped for the lifetime of the filament , as evidence shows either capped end lifetimes are long compared to filament lifetimes ( 6 ) , or capping protein is removed rapidly but replaced by another capper ( 7 ) . Filament polymerization occurred at a rate proportional to the local G - actin concentration [ A ] i , j , and F - actin nucleotide states were neglected . When filament polymerization required an increase in system potential energy ( i . e . protrusion ) , the kinetic rate was multiplied by a Boltzmann term ( e _ Δ E / kT , where kT = 4 . 13E - 21 J ) , accounting for the probability that the required thermal energy ( Δ E ) was available to create at least a monomer - size space between the filament and the PM ( 8 ) . No regard was thus paid to the path taken between kinetic states . As is usually done in similar kinetics simulations ( 9 , 10 ) , and in the absence of data , the entire Boltzmann probability factor was applied to the kinetic on - rate , while the off - rate ( of depolymerization ) remained fixed . Note that this method did not require nor use any system - level force - velocity relationship ; the protrusion rate , V PM , resulted directly from the sum of protrusive reactions , each occurring according to fundamental energetic principles . The probability of each ( de ) polymerization event was treated independently for each free barbed end at each time step . This was possible because the average time between unimpeded monomer additions ( ( k on , brb [ A ] ) - 1 ~ 7000 µ s ) is much longer than the correlation times for filament tip and local PM position under thermal motion ( < 1 µ s each ( 11 ) ) . The entire system was therefore able to come to a new quasi - equilibrium geometry between successive polymerization events , and probabilities based on energy differences could be calculated independently . The equilibrium geometry and total potential energy of the simulated system ( all filaments and the entire PM ) between kinetic states were attained by vertically moving nodes controlling local PM ( LE ) positions ( see below ) . Given the positions of the rigid filament bases and their bending energies , as well as PM bending and surface energies , all PM nodes were adjusted until the total system potential energy was minimized . Adjustment of the nodes altered not only PM energy , but required filament bending under the constraint that all filament tips must remain in the “cytoplasm . ” When considering a polymerization event , the same calculation was then repeated with a “test” monomer added to the filament of interest , and the difference in total system energies ( Δ E ) was used in the Boltzmann probability term . In the simpler of two mechanical filament models , filaments were assumed to be straight and fixed in position with respect to the substrate . This implied perfect rigidity and connection to substrate adhesions , realized by treating filaments as unyielding constraints supporting the PM . In the second model , filament bending was allowed according to a cantilever beam - bending energy relationship with small - angle approximations ( Fig . 1 ) . Here , filament barbed ends supported and protruded the LE with a stiffness inversely proportional to their bending length cubed ( [ l ts * f ts ] 3 ) . Bending lengths were assumed to be the length of the terminal filament segment ( l ts ) , spanning from the growing barbed end to the nearest arp2 / 3 branch point ( or pointed end if un - branched ) , beyond which the filament was assumed anchored in position and orientation . This length was decreased by a constant factor ( 0 < f ts < 1 ) to account for stiffening by cross - links to other filaments . Assignment of f ts = 0 is equivalent to specifying rigid filaments , as done in the standard conditions of Table 1 . Both models neglected myosin - mediated network distortion , not required for motility ( 8 ) . We regard the model as simulating near the LE any combination of protrusive or retrograde flow , and any distinction between them a matter of coordinate system . The shape of the LE represented an equilibrium between PM bending and surface energy forces for a given set of filament constraints ( Fig . 1 ) . The surface energy was taken as proportional to the total membrane surface area with a proportionality constant γ se . It served to minimize both in - plane ( X - Y ) and edge ( X - Z ) components of PM area , consequently distorting the LE . While live cells are approximately spherical in suspension , they increase their surface area by an order of magnitude upon substrate adhesion . Because this is far more expansion than is possible from stretching inter - lipid distances before membrane tearing , and cells appear to operate similarly under a wide range of surface areas , we assumed than the cell under consideration has a mechanism of supplying extra membrane for protrusion under a constant tension . That is , we assumed that γ se was insensitive to the total surface area changes encountered over cycles of LE protrusion ( modeled ) and trailing edge retraction ( assumed ) . The tendency of this surface energy to bend the LE was countered by a bending energy term , inversely proportional to the square of the local radius with a stiffness constant κ B , which acted to straighten the LE . Only in - plane flexibility was considered ; the stiffness added by the dorsal - ventral curvature of the LE was neglected . Computationally , the LE shape was modeled as a contiguous series of quadratic Bezier spline curves , with control points spaced equally in the X - direction . End - control points were shared and taken as the midpoint between central control points of adjacent curves , ensuring that all adjacent splines were continuous in both position and slope . Thirty splines per micron were typically used , allowing for a generalized shape , and no discernable change in simulation results were obtained by increasing this number . At each call , the mechanics subroutines adjusted the Y - positions of all central control points iteratively to achieve the global minimum potential energy . ( See video 1 in the online Supporting Information , recorded in high temporal and spatial resolution . ) References 1 . Abraham , V . C . , Krishnamurthi , V . , Taylor , D . L . , & Lanni , F . ( 1999 ) Biophys J 77 , 1721 - 1732 . 2 . Marcy , Y . , Prost , J . , Carlier , M . F . , & Sykes , C . ( 2004 ) Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101 , 5992 - 5997 . 3 . Maly , I . V . & Borisy , G . G . ( 2001 ) Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 98 , 11324 - 11329 . 4 . Blanchoin , L . , Pollard , T . D . , & Mullins , R . D . ( 2000 ) Curr Biol 10 , 1273 - 1282 . 5 . Bear , J . E . , Svitkina , T . M . , Krause , M . , Schafer , D . A . , Loureiro , J . J . , Strasser , G . A . , Maly , I . V . , Chaga , O . Y . , Cooper , J . A . , Borisy , G . G . , et al . ( 2002 ) Cell 109 , 509 - 521 . 6 . Schafer , D . A . , Jennings , P . B . , & Cooper , J . A . ( 1996 ) J Cell Biol 135 , 169 - 179 . 7 . Mejillano , M . R . , Kojima , S . , Applewhite , D . A . , Gertler , F . B . , Svitkina , T . M . , & Borisy , G . G . ( 2004 ) Cell 118 , 363 - 373 . 8 . Theriot , J . A . ( 2000 ) Traffic 1 , 19 - 28 . 9 . Mogilner , A . & Oster , G . ( 1996 ) Biophys J 71 , 3030 - 3045 . 10 . Mogilner , A . & Oster , G . ( 2003 ) Biophys J 84 , 1591 - 1605 . 11 . Howard , J . ( 2001 ) Mechanics of Motor Proteins and the Cytoskeleton ( Sinauer Associates , Inc . , Sunderland ) .