INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS AND GROUP PROCESSES Social Loafing : A Meta - Analytic Review and Theoretical Integration Steven 1 Karau and Kipling D . Williams Social loafing is the tendency for individuals to expend less effort when working collectively than when working individually . A meta - analysis of 78 studies demonstrates that social loafing is robust and generalizes across tasks and S populations . A large number of variables were found to moderate social loafing . Evaluation potential , expectations of co - worker performance , task meaningfulness , and culture had especially strong influence . These findings are interpreted in the light of a Collec - tive Effort Model that integrates elements of expectancy - value , social identity , and self - validation theories . Many of life ' s most important tasks can only be accom - plished in groups , and many group tasks are collective tasks that require the pooling of individual members ' inputs . Govern - ment task forces , sports teams , organizational committees , symphony orchestras , juries , and quality control teams provide but a few examples of groups that combine individual efforts to form a single product . Because collective work settings are so pervasive and indispensable , it is important to determine which factors motivate and demotivate individuals within these col - lective contexts . Intuition might lead to the conclusion that working with others should inspire individuals to maximize their potential and work especially hard . Research on social loafing , however , has revealed that individuals frequently exert less effort on collective tasks than on individual tasks . Formally , social loafing is the reduction in motivation and effort when individuals work collectively compared with when they work individually or coactively . When working collectively , individuals work in the real or imagined presence of others with whom they combine their inputs to form a single group prod - uct . When working coactively , individuals work in the real or imagined presence of others , but their inputs are not combined with the inputs of others . Determining the conditions under which individuals do or do not engage in social loafing is a problem of both theoretical and practical importance . At a practical level , the identification of moderating variables may Parts of this article were presented at the 1992 Midwestern Psycho - logical Association convention in Chicago . We thank Martin Bourgeois , Donal Carlston , Alice Eagly , Rebecca Henry , Janice Kelly , Norbert Kerr , Brian Mullen , Kristin Sommer , and several anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments on drafts of this article . We also thank Jeffrey Jackson and William Gabrenya for providing unpublished data . Correspondence should be addressed to Steven J . Karau , Depart - ment of Psychology , Clemson University , Clemson , South Carolina 29634 - 1511 or to Kipling D . Williams , Department of Psychology , University of Toledo , Toledo , Ohio 43606 - 3390 . Electronic mail may be sent to skarau @ clemson . edu or kipling @ uoft02 . utoledo . edu . suggest means for devising interventions by which social loaf - ing may be reduced or overcome in everyday groups and organi - zations . Latane , Williams , & Harkins ( 1979 ) even suggested that social loafing is a type of social disease , having " negative consequences for individuals , social institutions , and societies " ( p . 831 ) . Perhaps as a result of this characterization , social loaf - ing research has been focused on identifying conditions under which the effect can be reduced or eliminated . No studies have been designed to determine what factors increase social loaf - ing . This emphasis on eliminating the effect is understandable , given the potential applicability of social loafing research to real - world contexts . However , this emphasis on studying condi - tions in which the effect is not likely to occur may also result in an underestimation of the magnitude of social loafing across a wider range of situations . At a theoretical level , specifying which variables moderate social loafing is central to developing a fuller understanding of the dynamics underlying the performance and motivation of both individuals and groups . The social loafing literature offers a host of findings relevant to theorists interested in evaluation processes , the self , and group dynamics . Indeed , in a recent review of social motivation , Geen ( 1991 ) regarded social loafing as one of only three dominant phenomena addressing this issue in the 1980s . Despite the theoretical importance of this topic , surprisingly little attention has been devoted to systematically reviewing or integrating the social loafing research . Although a number of researchers have discussed social loafing or have presented theories of particular causes of social loafing ( e . g . , Harkins , 1987 ; Harkins & Szymanski , 1987 ; Jackson & Wil - liams , 1985 ; Latane , 1981 ; Mullen , 1983 ; Paulus , 1983 ; Shep - perd , 1993 ; Stroebe & Frey , 1982 ) , they have drawn their conclu - sions from only small portions of the available empirical stud - ies , which were selected by unspecified criteria . Presently , the magnitude and consistency of social loafing across studies has never been estimated , and the extent to which particular vari - ables moderate social loafing has remained unclear . Given the large empirical literature that is now available , a thorough inte - gration and analysis of this research is long overdue . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 1993 . Vol . 65 . No . 4 , 681 - 706 Copyright 1993 by the American Psychological Association , Inc . 0022 - 3514 / 93 / $ 3 . 00 681 682 STEVEN J . KARAU AND KIPLING D . WILLIAMS The current review has three major purposes . First , we pres - ent a model that integrates expectancy theories with theories of group - level social comparison and social identity to account for the findings of studies examining individual effort in collective settings . This model , the Collective Effort Model ( CEM ) , is then used to generate predictions for the meta - analysis . Sec - ond , we systematically review the available empirical findings . Meta - analytic methods ( Cooper , 1989 ; Glass , McGaw , & Smith , 1981 ; Hedges & Olkin , 1985 ; Rosenthal , 1991 ) are used to esti - mate the overall magnitude of social loafing and to compare it with the magnitude of the effects of other variables on social behavior . This quantitative method also allows for an examina - tion of the consistency of social loafing across studies and ac - counts for inconsistencies by identifying moderating variables that affect the tendency for individuals to engage in social loaf - ing . The empirical status of such moderating variables is criti - cal to a sophisticated understanding of the dynamics of motiva - tion losses in groups . Third , we use the results of the meta - ana - lysis to identify gaps and ambiguities still existing in the social loafing literature and discuss the potential of the CEM for gen - erating novel predictions to guide future research toward an - swering these questions . Brief History of Social Loafing Research and Paradigms The first experiment to suggest a possible decrement in indi - vidual motivation as a result of working in a group was con - ducted over a hundred years ago by Ringelmann ( cited in Kra - vitz & Martin , 1986 ) . Male volunteers were asked to pull on a rope , tug - of - war fashion , as hard as they could in groups of varying sizes . The rope was connected to a strain gauge that measured the group ' s total effort . The results showed that as group size increased , group performance was increasingly lower than would be expected from the simple addition of indi - vidual performances . However , Steiner ( 1972 ) proposed two possible causes for this performance decrement : ( a ) reduced individual motivation or ( b ) coordination loss . Steiner favored the latter cause as most parsimonious , concluding that individ - uals may fail to synchronize their efforts in a maximally effi - cient manner ( e . g . , pulling while others are pausing ) , thus evi - dencing less productivity , but not necessarily less effort . To separate effort reduction from coordination loss , Ingham , Levinger , Graves , and Peckham ( 1974 ) had subjects perform a rope - pulling task both in actual groups and in pseudogroups in which blindfolded male students believed they were pulling with other group members but were actually pulling alone . Data for the pseudogroup trials showed that performance still decreased as perceived group size increased , suggesting that individuals exerted less effort when working in groups than when working individually . However , group size covaried in - versely with audience size in Ingham et al . ' s studies , leaving open the possibility that effort was facilitated by larger au - diences in the individual trials . Latane et al . ( 1979 ) conceptually replicated these findings while holding audience size constant . They had subjects shout and clap as loudly as they could , both individually and with others . Blindfolded and wearing headphones that masked the noise , college men shouted both in actual groups and in pseu - dogroups in which they shouted alone but believed they were shouting with others . Latane et al . demonstrated that a substan - tial portion of the decreased performance of groups was attrib - utable to reduced individual effort , distinct from coordination loss , and that audience size did not account for these results . They also coined the term social loafing for the demotivating effects of working in groups . Since 1974 , nearly 80 studies on social loafing have been conducted in which individuals ' coactive efforts were com - pared with individuals ' collective efforts . These studies have used a wide variety of tasks , including physical tasks ( e . g . , shout - ing , rope - pulling , and swimming ) , cognitive tasks ( e . g . , generat - ing ideas ) , evaluative tasks ( e . g . , quality ratings of poems , edito - rials , and clinical therapists ) , and perceptual tasks ( e . g . , maze performance and vigilance tasks on a computer screen ) . Both laboratory experiments and field studies have been conducted using a range of subject populations varying in age , gender , and culture . Theoretical Accounts for Social Loafing Although several researchers have offered theories of social loafing , these viewpoints have typically been restricted to ex - plaining only one of several possible causal mechanisms and generally do not attempt to include the wide range of variables that moderate social loafing . In contrast , social loafing re - search has adopted an orientation toward isolating conditions under which the effect can be reduced or eliminated . As a re - sult , despite the tendency of researchers to manipulate a wide array of moderating variables across individual studies , there has not been a concerted attempt to integrate all of these moder - ators into a single theoretical model . Indeed , each moderating variable is frequently associated with a separate theory . Never - theless , the theories that have been advanced do provide some insight into the nature and possible causes of social loafing . Therefore , before presenting the CEM , we first present an over - view of viewpoints offered by prior researchers and discuss the need for an integrative model . Social Impact Theory According to Latane ' s ( 1981 ) social impact theory , people can be viewed as either sources or targets of social impact . The amount of social impact experienced in a situation is thought to be a function of the strength , immediacy , and number of sources and targets present . In the collective condition of the typical social loafing experiment , the experimenter serves as a single source of social impact , whereas the group members usually serve as multiple targets of social impact . Social impact theory suggests that the experimenter ' s request to try as hard as possible on the task should be divided across targets , resulting in reduced effort as group size increases . The division of impact is predicted to follow an inverse power function , with a negative exponent having an absolute value less than 1 , thereby resulting in marginally decreasing impact as group size increases . In the coactive condition , however , in which inputs are not combined , each individual feels the full impact of the experimenter ' s re - quest and works hard . The strength of social impact theory appears to be its ability to specify group size effects . The strength and immediacy factors , however , have been neglected SOCIAL LOAFING 683 by researchers , and the theory itself has been criticized for not addressing the underlying psychological processes that it de - scribes ( e . g . , Mullen , 1985 ) . Arousal Reduction Jackson and Williams ( 1985 ) proposed a drive explanation to accompany a social impact theory explanation of social loaf - ing . They argued that the presence of other co - workers is drive reducing because these others serve as cotargets of an outside source of social impact . Citing studies in which people faced with a fearful situation tended to prefer being in the company of others ( e . g . , Schachter , 1959 ; Wrightsman , 1960 ) , they reasoned that the presence of others is not necessarily drive inducing ( as has been repeatedly demonstrated in social facilitation re - search ) . Instead , the presence of others should only be drive inducing when those others serve as sources of impact , but should be drive reducing when they serve as cotargets . Jackson and Williams ( 1985 ) found support for this logic in an experi - ment that combined features of the social loafing and social facilitation paradigms . Subjects completed simple and complex computer mazes either alone , coactively , or collectively . On sim - ple tasks , subjects performed better coactively than collectively . On complex tasks , however , subjects performed better collec - tively than coactively . Jackson and Williams argued that work - ing collectively led to reduced drive and effort , resulting in de - creased performance on simple tasks ( where the dominant re - sponse is likely to be correct ) and increased performance on novel , difficult tasks ( where the dominant response is likely to be in error ) . Evaluation Potential Many interpretations of social loafing invoke the concept of evaluation potential ( e . g . , Harkins , 1987 ; Harkins & Jackson , 1985 ; Williams et al , 1981 ) . Some researchers ( Harkins , 1987 ; Harkins & Szymanski , 1987 , 1989 ; Kerr & Bruun , 1983 ) have even defined social loafing as motivation loss in groups caused by reduced identifiability or evaluation . 1 They argue that social loafing occurs because , in most studies , individuals ' inputs can only be evaluated in the coactive condition . In the collective condition , of course , individual inputs are combined into one group product . When working on collective tasks , individuals can " hide in the crowd " ( Davis , 1969 ) and avoid taking the blame for a poor group performance . Collective tasks may also lead individuals to feel " lost in the crowd " ( Latane et al . , 1979 ) such that they cannot receive their fair share of the credit for a good group performance . The role of identifiability in social loafing is illustrated in a study by Williams , Harkins , and La - tane ( 1981 ) . Individuals performed a shouting task coactively and collectively . Evaluation potential was manipulated such that individual inputs were either always identifiable , never identifiable , or identifiable only in the coactive condition . Indi - viduals only loafed when identifiability and the coactive - col - lective variable were confounded . Recent research by Harkins and colleagues ( Harkins , 1987 ; Harkins & Jackson , 1985 ; Har - kins & Szymanski , 1987 , 1989 ) has suggested that making indi - viduals ' collective inputs evaluable to anyone ( including one - self ) may be enough to eliminate social loafing in many situa - tions . This research has also demonstrated that two requirements must be met for evaluation by any source ( the experimenter , one ' s co - workers , or oneself ) to be possible : ( a ) the participant ' s output must be known or identifiable , and ( b ) there must be a standard ( personal , social , or objective ) with which this output can be compared . Dispensability of Effort Kerr and his colleagues ( e . g . , Kerr , 1983 ; Kerr & Bruun , 1983 ) have suggested another possible cause of social loafing : Individ - uals may exert less effort when working collectively because they feel that their inputs are not essential to a high - quality group product ( i . e . , are dispensable ) . In their " free rider " para - digm , these researchers have found that individuals tend to reduce their collective efforts when working on threshold tasks that use a disjunctive rule whereby if any one of the group members reaches a certain performance criterion , the group succeeds and further effort is unnecessary . Moreover , this re - duction in individual effort occurs even though each group member ' s contribution is made identifiable to themselves , their partner , and the experimenter . Thus , on some tasks individuals may be unwilling to exert effort if they feel their input will have little impact on the resulting group product . Matching of Effort Jackson and Harkins ( 1985 ) proposed that people tend to match their co - workers ' efforts when working collectively . Ac - cording to this position , social loafing occurs because individ - uals expect others to slack off in groups and , therefore , reduce their own efforts to maintain equity . In Jackson and Harkins ' s ( 1985 ) experiment , participants ' expectations of how hard their co - worker would work were manipulated such that participants expected their co - worker either to try hard or not to try hard on a shouting task . Social loafing was eliminated and participants matched their co - worker ' s anticipated effort . However , in this study , the confederate co - worker ' s statement of her intended effort was confounded with her evaluation of the experiment ' s worth . In the high - effort condition , she said that she thought the experiment was interesting and that she was going to try hard . In the low - effort condition , however , she said that she thought the experiment was boring , and that she was not going to try hard . Research on job attitudes ( see Zalesny & Ford , 1990 ) suggests that workers ' perceptions of and motivations toward their task are highly influenced by co - workers ' task as - sessments . Thus , the confederate ' s assessment of the worth of the task could have alone accounted for Jackson and Harkins ' s 1 Although evaluation is likely to play an important role in social loafing , it seems premature to define social loafing in these terms because ( a ) defining the phenomenon in terms of its causes prevents , by definition , the discovery of new causes for the same effect , and ( b ) evidence suggests that there are other causes of social loafing , such as redundancy of contributions ( Harkins & Petty , 1982 ) and dispensabi - lity of effort ( Kerr & Bruun , 1983 ) . Therefore , the present review adopts a less restrictive definition of social loafing consistent with the original formulation : the tendency to reduce one ' s effort when working collectively compared with coactively on the same task . 684 STEVEN J . KARAU AND KIPLING D . WILLIAMS results . Moreover , recent research by Williams and Karau ( 1991 ) has demonstrated that individuals may actually increase their collective effort when they expect their co - workers to per - form poorly on a meaningful task , an effect referred to as social compensation . Self - Attention Mullen ( 1983 ) proposed that self - attention underlies social loafing . According to this self - attention perspective , working on a collective task leads to a decrease in self - awareness , lead - ing individuals to disregard salient performance standards and to engage in less self - regulation . Thus , collective performance is lower than coactive performance , because participants are more attentive to task demands and performance standards when working alone . Mullen has found evidence consistent with the notion that self - attention may influence aspects of social behavior in various meta - analyses ( see Mullen , 1991 , for a summary ) , but there is currently no evidence that reduced self - attention causes social loafing ( see Jackson , 1986 ) . Only one study ( Stevenson , 1990 ) has manipulated self - attention across coactive and collective conditions , and the results did not support the self - attention interpretation . Therefore , although the self - attention hypothesis is provocative , it is in need of em - pirical support . Conclusions Prior theories advanced to explain social loafing all appear to have some limitations . The most significant limitation com - mon to all of these viewpoints is that they tend to offer explana - tions and make predictions about conditions under which so - cial loafing will occur within a limited domain . For example , Harkins ( 1987 ) offered an excellent analysis of the impact of evaluation on social loafing , and Kerr ( 1983 ) contributed an equally effective analysis of the role that dispensability plays . However , although current theories of social loafing provide insights as to why the effect occurs at all , they do not provide a framework that can clearly specify which particular factors should moderate social loafing under different conditions . When possible in the current review , we quantitatively examine the adequacy of some of these viewpoints for explaining social loafing . More important , we present a unified theory that pro - poses to envelop most if not all of the findings in the existing social loafing literature and that offers specific predictions for future research . Integrative Model of Individual Effort on Collective Tasks The integrated model of individual effort on collective tasks , the CEM , adapts individual - level expectancy - value models of effort to collective contexts to highlight the most likely threats to motivation and uses recent theories of self - evaluation in group contexts to clarify which outcomes are likely to be valued by individuals when working collectively . The resulting model provides a framework for clearly specifying the implications of any key attribute of a given collective setting ( e . g . , group size and nature of task ) for the motivation of individuals in that setting . We propose that expectancy - value models of effort ( e . g . , Heckhausen , 1977 ; Porter & Lawler , 1968 ; Vroom , 1964 ) can be extended to collective contexts by specifying how working in a group influences individuals ' perceptions of the relationship between their effort and their expected outcomes . We believe that social loafing occurs because there is usually a stronger perceived contingency between individual effort and valued outcomes when working individually . When working collec - tively , factors other than the individual ' s effort frequently deter - mine performance , and valued outcomes are often divided among all of the group members . The notion that expectancy - value models can be applied to motivation in group contexts is not entirely new . For example , several researchers have implic - itly used expectancy - value logic to cast light on the findings of social dilemma and social loafing studies ( e . g . , Kerr , 1983 ; Ol - son , 1965 ; Shepperd , 1993 ; Williams & Karau , 1991 ) . Naylor , Pritchard , and Ilgen ( 1980 ) have also suggested that expec - tancy - value logic can be extended into a model that can account for organization - level motivational phenomena . Similarly , sev - eral researchers have discussed the potential implications of self - evaluation for individual motivation ( e . g . , Goethals & Dar - ley , 1987 ; Taylor & Brown , 1988 ; Tesser , 1988 ) . The CEM , how - ever , is unique in specifying additional contingencies between effort and outcomes that are distinctive to collective contexts , and in using group - level social comparison and self - evaluation theories to specify which factors should influence individual motivation in collective contexts . This combination allows for the clear specification of potential threats to collective motiva - tion in a way that is not restricted to mere task - performance outcomes . The key features of the CEM are shown in Figure 1 . The model suggests that individuals will be willing to exert effort on a collective task only to the degree that they expect their efforts to be instrumental in obtaining valued outcomes . Thus , a number of factors must be perceived as existing before individ - uals will be willing to exert high levels of effort . Individual effort must relate to individual performance , which must in turn have some impact on the group ' s performance . The group ' s performance must then lead to a favorable group outcome , which must be related to a favorable individual outcome . If the task performance setting disrupts any of these relationships in a way that is salient to individuals , then they will not be likely to view their efforts as useful and will not work as hard on the task . Similarly , individuals will not work as hard when the avail - able outcomes are not valued , even if these outcomes are di - rectly related to individual effort . Relevant individual out - comes include things such as objective outcomes ( such as pay ) , self - evaluation information , and feelings of purpose or belong - ing in one ' s group . The relative value of these outcomes depends on a number of factors , including the meaningfulness and in - trinsic value of the task , the task ' s importance to the individual and group , the degree to which the individual is dispositionally predisposed to view collective outcomes as important , and the degree to which the outcome provides information relevant to the individual ' s self - evaluation . Like traditional expectancy - value models of effort , the CEM assumes that individuals behave hedonistically and try to max - imize the expected utility of their actions . In Vroom ' s ( 1964 ) original model , individuals ' motivational force is dependent on SOCIAL LOAFING 685 Expectancy » § 3 > o a * I Instrumentality | X | Valence of Outcome | = | Motivational Force Individual Effort | - » | Individual Performance ^ - > flridividual Outcomes | — j , Individual Effort [ » [ individual Performance | | Individual Outcomes • Self - evaluation • Feelings of Belonging • Intrinsic Rewards • Extrinsic Rewards T | Group Performance | - »j Group Outcomes • Group Evaluation • Group Cohesiveness • Extrinsic Rewards Figure 1 . The Collective Effort Model ( CEM ) . - > | Outcome Valence | • Task Importance • Task & Reward Meaningfulness • Individual Differences ( e . g . , collectivism , culture , gender ) • Evaluation Apprehension three factors : ( a ) expectancy , or the degree to which high levels of effort are expected to lead to high levels of performance , ( b ) instrumentality , or the degree to which high - quality perfor - mance is perceived as instrumental in obtaining an outcome , and ( c ) valence of the outcome , or the degree to which the out - come is viewed as desirable . The CEM expands on this logic by specifying that instrumentality on collective tasks is deter - mined by three factors : ( a ) the perceived relationship between individual performance and group performance , ( b ) the per - ceived relationship between group performance and group out - comes , and ( c ) the perceived relationship between group out - comes and individual outcomes . Thus , the model suggests that working on a collective task introduces additional contingen - cies between individuals ' efforts and their outcomes . For this reason , an analysis of individual effort is by necessity more complex for collective tasks than for coactive tasks . The CEM also acknowledges that , although individual and group performance are strongly related to many of the valued outcomes in performance settings , there are some valued out - comes that do not depend on performance . For example , when working on intrinsically meaningful tasks or when working with highly respected co - workers , exerting high levels of effort may lead to self - satisfaction , approval from the group , or other important outcomes , even if such high effort has little or no impact on tangible performance outcomes . However , the model emphasizes performance - related outcomes because many of the most important outcomes available in a perfor - mance context are contingent on actual performance . The CEM can be described as " cognitive " both because per - ceived rather than actual contingencies are hypothesized to in - fluence behavior and because individuals are hypothesized to either consciously or subconsciously select a level of effort to exert on the task . However , the model is not necessarily deliber - ative because individuals are unlikely to systematically process all of the available information about the task performance situation , unless they are particularly motivated to process it because of situational constraints or individual differences . Therefore , some situations may lead individuals to respond au - tomatically to a preexisting effort script , whereas other situa - tions may lead individuals to strategically increase or decrease their collective effort . The CEM suggests that individuals gener - ally consider salient features of the task setting when attempt - ing to maximize the expected utility of their actions . The CEM also expands on prior expectancy - value frame - works by specifying which outcomes are likely to be valued in collective settings . Valued outcomes can consist of either objec - tive outcomes such as pay or subjective outcomes such as enjoy - ment , satisfaction , feelings of group spirit and belonging , and feelings of self - worth . In the case of objective outcomes , how - ever , it is the individual ' s evaluation of the outcome rather than the outcome itself that determines its valence ( e . g . , Deci , 1975 ; Lepper & Greene , 1978 ) . Because the CEM is oriented to ex - plaining collective phenomena , the model places particular em - phasis on group - level outcomes that have implications for the individual ' s self - evaluation . Research has repeatedly demon - strated that individuals are quite concerned with maintaining a 686 STEVEN J . KARAU AND KIPLING D . WILLIAMS favorable self - evaluation ( e . g . , Brown , Collins , & Schmidt , 1988 ; Greenwald , 1982 ; Greenwald & Pratkanis , 1984 ; Suls & Miller , 1977 ; Tesser , 1988 ) . Group performance situations produce the potential for self - evaluation from a variety of relevant sources ( Crocker & Luhtanen , 1990 ; Leary & Forsyth , 1987 ) . Breckler and Greenwald ( 1986 ) proposed that the self has distinct moti - vational facets that are influenced most strongly by three corre - sponding audiences . They distinguished between ( a ) a private self that responds primarily to internal values , ( b ) a public self that responds mainly to others ' evaluations , and ( c ) a collective self that is sensitive primarily toward fulfilling one ' s role within the context of the goals of important reference groups . Al - though most social loafing research has been focused on the motivation produced by the experimenter ' s evaluation of perfor - mance ( for prominent exceptions , see Harkins & Szymanski , 1988 , 1989 ) , Breckler and Greenwald ' s analysis suggests that individuals can be motivated by appeals to any of the three motivational facets of the self ( see also Crocker & Luhtanen , 1990 ) . With respect to the CEM , task situations that provide clear information relevant to self - evaluation , whether from one - self , one ' s co - workers , reference groups , or others , should be more inherently motivating than situations that do not provide such information or that make such information ambiguous and less potent . Social identity theory and group - level versions of social com - parison theory lead to similar conclusions . Social identity theory ( e . g . , Abrams & Hogg , 1990 ; Tajfel & Turner , 1986 ) pro - poses that individuals gain positive self - identity through the accomplishments of the groups to which they belong ( see also Cialdini et al . , 1976 ; Levine & Moreland , 1987 ) . Indeed , several recent analyses suggest that some social motivations , such as a need for belonging or a need for social communication , can only be fulfilled in a collective setting ( e . g . , Brewer , 1991 ; Capor - ael , Dawes , Orbell , & van de Kragt , 1989 ) . Similarly , Goethals and Darley ' s ( 1987 ) group - level revision of social comparison theory suggests that individuals not only compare themselves with other individuals to obtain self - evaluation information , but that they also compare the groups to which they belong to other groups for the same reason . Goethals and Darley further stated that individuals may seek such group - level comparison information both to obtain self - knowledge ( information about the actual level of one ' s performance compared with others ) and self - validation ( information that level of one ' s performance is superior to that of others ) . Taken as a whole , the recent theories of group level self - evaluation processes all suggest that collec - tive contexts that provide a great deal of information relevant to one ' s self - validation should be more important to individuals than contexts that provide less information ( or none ) . These perspectives also suggest that self - evaluation information can come from a variety of sources and that information relevant to one ' s role in valued reference groups may be especially influen - tial . Predictions for Meta - Analysis On the basis of the preceding logic , the CEM provides a number of predictions for our meta - analysis . First , because the model suggests that individuals ' outcomes are frequently less reliant on their efforts when working collectively than coacti - vely , we predicted that individuals would generally tend to en - gage in social loafing and that this effect would be reliable across studies . Second , the CEM suggests that individuals will work harder on a collective task when they expect their efforts to be instrumental in obtaining valued outcomes . Therefore , we predicted that , holding other factors constant , social loafing should be reduced when individuals : ( a ) believe that their col - lective performances can be evaluated by the experimenter , their co - workers , themselves , or others ; ( b ) work in smaller rather than larger groups ; ( c ) perceive that their contributions to the collective product are unique , rather than redundant with the inputs of others ; ( d ) are provided with a standard with which to compare their group ' s performance ; ( e ) work on tasks that are either intrinsically interesting , meaningful to the individual , important to one ' s reference group or to valued others , or high in personal involvement ; ( f ) work with respected others ( high group valence ; friends , teammates , partners , and respected co - workers ) or in a situation that activates a salient group identity ; ( g ) expect their co - workers to perform poorly ; and ( h ) have a dispositional tendency to view favorable collective outcomes as valuable and important . Regarding the final prediction , several factors are likely to influence the degree to which an individual values collective outcomes relative to individual outcomes . Two especially prom - inent factors may be gender and culture . Recent gender re - search seems to suggest that women tend to be more group - or collectively - oriented than men . For example , research on gender stereotypes ( e . g . , Broverman , Vogel , Broverman , Clark - son , & Rosenkrantz , 1972 ; Eagly & Steffen , 1984 ) has demon - strated that men are expected to possess high levels of agentic qualities ( such as being independent and assertive ) , whereas women are expected to possess high levels of communal quali - ties ( such as being friendly , unselfish , and concerned with others ; see Bakan , 1966 ) . Similarly , research conducted in small - group settings has found that men tend to specialize in activity oriented toward task completion , whereas women tend to specialize in activity oriented toward meeting interpersonal demands within the group ( Anderson & Blanchard , 1982 ; Carli , 1982 ) . Taken together , these findings suggest that men appear to be oriented toward individualistic and competitive concerns , whereas women appear to be oriented toward inter - personal and cooperative concerns . An extension of this logic to social loafing suggests that women are more likely than men to view performing well on collective tasks as important . Thus , we predicted that , although both sexes are likely to engage in social loafing , women should tend to loaf less than men . In a similar manner , the degree to which the dominant cul - ture from which subject populations were selected emphasizes individualistic versus collectivistic concerns may moderate the social loafing effect . Eastern or Oriental culture is often de - picted as group - or socially oriented , whereas Western or Amer - ican culture is often depicted as individualistically oriented ( e . g . , Hsu , 1970 ; Triandis , 1989 ; Wheeler , Reis , & Bond , 1989 ) . Therefore , subjects from Eastern cultures are more likely to view performance on collective tasks as important than are subjects from Western cultures . Thus , we predicted that sub - jects in countries such as Japan , Taiwan , and China should loaf less than subjects in the United States and Canada . Finally , as discussed earlier , Jackson and Williams ( 1985 ) SOCIAL LOAFING 687 proposed that the presence of others is drive reducing when other group members serve as cotargets of an outside source of social influence . According to drive models of anxiety , working collectively should lead to reduced drive , resulting in decreased performance on simple tasks and increased performance on novel , difficult , tasks . In our meta - analysis , we addressed the adequacy of this viewpoint by classifying studies according to whether they used simple or complex tasks . Some of our predictions mirror well - established effects in the social - loafing literature , whereas other predictions have ei - ther been examined only sporadically , if at all , or have produced conflicting evidence . For example , researchers generally accept the conclusion that individuals tend to engage in social loafing when working collectively , and a number of studies have found that social loafing can be reduced or eliminated when evalua - tion is provided in the collective condition . However , the effects of group - level comparison standards , task meaningful ness , and task uniqueness have only been examined in a handful of studies . The degree to which these variables consistently influ - ence social loafing across studies is not known , and only tenta - tive conclusions about their effects can currently be drawn . Fi - nally , contradictory results have emerged from studies examin - ing gender , culture , expectations of co - worker performance , group size , and group valence . In the present review , we quanti - tatively examine the influence of all of these variables on social loafing , using all available comparisons , to provide a clearer understanding of what factors moderate social loafing in differ - ent situations . With respect to well - established findings , our meta - analytic methods allowed us to estimate the magnitude of social loafing and examine its consistency across studies . Simi - larly , we were able to assess quantitatively the impact of evalua - tion on social loafing and compare it with the influence of other variables affecting collective effort . Method Sample of Studies Computer - based information searches were conducted using the key words social loafing , free - rider , Ringelmann , motivation loss , motiva - tion decrement , collective task , and collective performance . These key words were searched in the following databases : Psychological Ab - stracts ( PsycINFO ) , Dissertation Abstracts International ( DISS ) , Socio - logical Abstracts ( SOCA ) , Educational Resources Information Center ( ERIC ) , and a worldwide business and management database ( ABI / INFORM ) . In addition , the reference lists of numerous review articles and chapters , as well as the reference lists of all located studies , were searched . Finally , several researchers provided data from unpublished studies that had been presented at regional or national meetings . Three key criteria were adopted for including studies in the sample . First , the study had to compare the effort of individuals working either individually or coactively with the effort of individuals working collec - tively . Collective performance was denned as a situation in which indi - viduals ' inputs were combined into one group score . Thus , studies were excluded if they merely compared the effort of individuals across dif - ferent group sizes without including a coactive control condition ( e . g . , Kerr & Bruun , 1983 , Experiments 1 and 2 ; Zaccaro , 1984 ) : Theindivid - ual - versus - group work context , which is central to the social loafing construct , is not manipulated in such studies . This criterion also ex - cluded studies in which only evaluation potential was manipulated , without providing subjects with an expectation that their inputs would be combined with those of other subjects ( e . g . , Price , 1987 , Experi - ment 1 ) . Second , studies were excluded if the number of task performers ( i . e . , coactors or co - workers ) present was confounded across coactive and collective conditions ( e . g . , Huddleston , Doody , & Ruder , 1985 ; Kerr & Bruun , 1981 , Experiment 1 , between - subjects comparisons ) . In such studies , effort cannot be separated from distraction and mere presence effects . Of course , this criterion excluded most social facilitation stud - ies , because they intentionally varied the number of individuals pres - ent in the alone and group conditions . 2 Studies were also omitted if individual effort could not be separated from coordination loss ( e . g . , Ingham et al . , 1974 , Experiment 1 ; see introduction ) . This criterion excluded studies that merely compared the average individual performance with the average group perfor - mance without measuring individual performances under collective conditions . Variables Coded From Each Study The following general information was coded for each study : ( a ) date of publication , ( b ) publication form ( journal article , meeting paper , dissertation or master ' s thesis , or unpublished document ) , ( c ) number of subjects , ( d ) age of subjects , and ( e ) status of subjects ( third grade students or younger , fourth through sixth grade students , junior high or high school students , college students , or organizational employees ) . The following methodological characteristics were also coded : ( a ) set - ting of study ( laboratory or field ) , ( b ) type of coactive - collective com - parison ( within - subjects or between - subjects ) , and ( c ) type of cover story used ( effort or performance related or other , e . g . , studying the effects of " sensory sound dynamics , " improving writing in a college journalism department , or obtaining evaluations of clinical thera - pists ) . In addition , the following attributes of the task were coded : ( a ) com - plexity of task ( simple or well - learned , complex or novel , or unknown or unclear ) ; ( b ) type of effort required by task ( physical , e . g . , shouting or rope - pulling ; cognitive , e . g . , generating ideas ; perceptual , e . g . , vigi - lance , maze performance ; or evaluative , e . g . , quality rating of poems or editorials ) ; ( c ) quantity or quality emphasis of task using Steiner ' s ( 1972 ) typology ( maximizing , optimizing , and mixed or unclear ) ; and ( d ) method of combining individual inputs , again using Steiner ' s typology ( additive , compensatory , disjunctive , and mixed or unclear ) . Finally , the following predictors relevant to the CEM were also coded : ( a ) the conditions under which individual inputs could be evalu - ated , that is , evaluation potential ( none , coactive condition only , coac - tive and collective conditions , and unclear ) ; ( b ) task valence ( high , low , and unclear or unspecified ) ; ( c ) group valence ( high , e . g . , close friends or couples , group cohesiveness manipulation , or teammates ; moder - ate , e . g . , mere acquaintances ; low , e . g . , strangers ; unknown or unclear , e . g . , clear possibility that subjects might be acquainted but not stated in report ) ; ( d ) opportunity for group evaluation ( present or absent ) ; ( e ) expectations of co - worker performance ( high , low , or unclear or un - specified ) ; ( f ) uniqueness of individual task contributions ( unique , e . g . , brainstorming tasks in which each subject generates uses for a different 2 Several studies ( e . g . , Harkins & Szymanksi , 1988 ; Weldon & Gar - gano , 1985 ) had subjects perform a task " alone " in the collective condi - tion by leading these individuals to believe that their inputs would be combined with those of others who would participate at different ses - sions , thus holding group size constant across individual and collective conditions . There were no significant differences between studies that had subjects work alone ( across individual and collective conditions ) and studies that had subjects work in the presence of others ( across coactive and collective conditions ) . 688 STEVEN J . KARAU AND KIPLING D . WILLIAMS object or vigilance tasks in which each subject watches for randomly occurring blips in different quadrants of a video terminal ; potentially redundant , e . g . , brainstorming tasks in which all subjects generate uses for the same object , evaluative tasks that use a compensatory method of combining inputs ; completely redundant , e . g . , pulling on a rope , shouting and clapping , or pumping air ) ; ( g ) group size ( i . e . , number of individual inputs combined into the group product ) ; ( h ) number of task performers present at session ; ( i ) sex of subjects ( men , women , or both ) ; and ( j ) culture of subjects ( Eastern , i . e . , China , Japan , or Taiwan or Western , i . e . , United States or Canada ) . Participants ' efforts were only coded as evaluable if ( a ) their output was identifiable either to the experimenter , their co - workers , or them - selves , and ( b ) a personal , social , or objective standard was available with which their outputs could be compared . This treatment is consis - tent with widely accepted interpretations of evaluation potential ( e . g . , Harkins , 1987 ; Harkins & Szymanski , 1988 , 1989 ) . Task valence was coded as high ( or low ) if researchers manipulated task importance , task meaningfulness , or personal involvement in such a way that subjects were provided with a clear rationale for view - ing the task as especially important or trivial ( e . g . , Brickner , Harkins , & Ostrom , 1986 ; Williams & Karau , 1991 ) . Task valence was also coded as high ( or low ) if subjects were selected on a personality variable that would make them likely to view the task used as especially involving ( or aversive ) , or were selected on the basis of their probable intrinsic interest ( or disinterest ) in the task ( e . g . , subjects high and low in need for cognition performing an idea - generation task—Petty , Cacioppo , & Kasmer , 1985 ; collegiate swimmers at a competitive meet—Williams , Nida , Baca , & Latane , 1989 ) . In all other cases , task valence was scored as unclear or unspecified . For practical purposes , tasks that were scored as unclear or unspecified are likely to fall somewhere between high - and low - valence tasks , and therefore can reasonably be regarded as somewhat moderate in valence . Expectations of co - worker performance were coded as high ( or low ) on the basis of researchers ' manipulations of co - worker ability or co - worker effort , as well as on the basis of subjects ' selection on interper - sonal trust scores ( low trusters may expect others to engage in social loafing , cf . Williams & Karau , 1991 ) . Expectations of co - worker perfor - mance were also coded as high if subjects were experts at the task ( e . g . , collegiate swimmers ) . In all other cases , expectations were coded as unclear or unspecified . The categories listed for some of these variables were simplified from an initially more detailed set of categories either because ( a ) some categories had few or no entries or ( b ) prediction of the effect sizes was not improved by the more detailed categories . The variables for which the initial coding was more detailed are the following : status of sub - jects , culture of subjects , type of effort measured , method of combin - ing individual inputs , and evaluation potential . All variables were coded by Steven j . Karau . To estimate reliability , Kipling D . Williams independently coded a subsample of 19 studies ( 24 % ) . The median agreement was 100 % ( M agreement = 98 % , kappa = . 95 ) . " Complexity of task " yielded the lowest agreement , 83 % ( kappa = . 71 ) . Disagreements were resolved by discussion . A complete list of the studies included in the meta - analysis , along with their characteristics and effect sizes , is presented in Table 1 . Computation and Analysis of Effect Sizes The effect size calculated is g , the difference between individual effort in the coactive and collective conditions , divided by the pooled standard deviation ( see Hedges & Olkin , 1985 ) . A positive sign indi - cates that subjects exerted more effort coactively than collectively ( i . e . , engaged in social loafing ) , and a negative sign indicates that subjects exerted more effort collectively than coactively . The effect sizes were calculated by Steven J . Karau with the aid of a computer program ( Johnson , 1989 ) . Although objective effort measures are of central con - cern to this meta - analysis , effect sizes based on self - report measures of effort were also calculated so that supplementary analyses could be conducted . Several studies provided data for more than one relevant dependent variable . When this occurred , separate effect sizes were computed for each dependent variable , and these separate effect sizes were then combined using Rosenthal and Rubin ' s ( 1986 ) suggested formula . 3 Multiple effect sizes from single studies . Under some circum - stances , studies were partitioned and separate effect sizes were com - puted within levels of an independent variable . This partitioning was undertaken when ( a ) subjects of different status or from different cul - tures were used ( 7 studies ) ; ( b ) group size varied ( 11 studies ) ; ( c ) differ - ent tasks were used that varied either in their complexity , the unique - ness of individual inputs to the collective product , or the method used to combine individual inputs ( 10 studies ) ; ( d ) evaluation potential var - ied ( 17 studies ) ; ( e ) task valence varied ( 6 studies ) ; ( f ) group valence differed ( 5 studies ) ; or ( g ) expectations of co - worker performance were manipulated ( 7 studies ) . Although this partitioning of studies created some nonindependence in the data , the strategy was necessary to al - low theory - relevant interactions in the studies to be represented and to test the CEM ' s predictions about moderating variables . A study that manipulated one of these variables was partitioned only if its reported findings were sufficient to allow the computation of effect sizes within the levels of the variable or to determine the direction or significance of findings within the levels . By this strategy , the original sample of 78 studies obtained from 59 documents produced 166 units , 26 of which were intact studies and 140 of which were subdivided parts of studies . For simplicity of exposition , these units are referred to as studies in the remainder of this manuscript . For some analyses , the 166 units were further partitioned by sex of subject when data were separately re - ported for male and female subjects . When this latter partitioning was undertaken , 178 units were available for analysis . Analysis of effect sizes . The analysis was based on the methods detailed by Hedges and Olkin ( 1985 ) . The gs were converted to ds by correcting them for bias . To obtain an overall estimate of the differ - ence in individuals ' coactive and collective effort reported in the avail - able research , the relevant study outcomes were then combined by averaging the ds . All such means were computed with each effect size weighted by the reciprocal of its variance , a procedure that gives more weight to effect sizes that are more reliably estimated . 4 A homogeneity statistic , Q , was also calculated to determine whether each set of ds shared a common effect size ( i . e . , was consistent across the studies ) . To test the CEM ' s predictions about moderating variables , we accounted for variability in the effect sizes by relating them to attributes of the studies using both categorical and continuous models . The categorical models , which are analogous to analyses of variance ( ANOVAs ) , pro - vide a between - classes effect , Q B ( analogous to a main effect in an { text continues on page 694 ) 3 The between - measures correlations that were used when imple - menting this formula were estimated from correlations ( a ) given in several studies in the sample and ( b ) estimated from data provided by Williams ( from Williams & Williams , 1981 , Experiment 1 ) and Ga - brenya ( from Gabrenya , Latane , & Wang , 1983 ) . The resulting correla - tions were . 82 for subjective effort , . 71 for objective measures based on shouting and clapping tasks , and . 49 for objective measures based on evaluative tasks . 4 Because some studies used the group as the unit of analysis , whereas others used individuals or individuals across repeated factors as the unit of analysis , the number of subjects in the coactive and col - lective conditions were used in all cases to represent sample size in these calculations in an attempt to avoid arbitrarily weighting some effect sizes dramatically higher than others despite comparable num - bers of subjects . SOCIAL LOAFING 689 fN CN CN fN co " co " fN CN m r m © © . . gn - L - L ^ . ci J ^ - L fN CN fN fN CN CN 8888 ^ 8 88 TTTT 888 ^ • " ^ •• ^ •Tt— ( N t / " > v ~ i ^ - ^ ^ ^ p ^ - fN CN CN . ©pop© pp ooo© 999 • ^ Tj - ' ^ - rJ - ' Tt - fN v - iV ) — — . - ^ —i ( NfNCN 8888 fN CN CN CN 8888 llslsi oogopp © p ~ ™ CN r4 I I 88 o H I CN CN CN fN CN J " fN fN fN fN fN IfN CNfS CNfNCNCS fNfNfN ( NCNfNCN CNCNCNfNCNCN CNCN CNfNfNCN CNtNfN CNCNCNCN f ^ CO CO CO CO CO CO ^ J fN CN fN CN * ^ ^ ^ " ^ f fN fN CN ^ ^ rN ( N ( N fS ( N ( N fN ( N ( N fS ( N ( N fN ( N ( N < N < N fN fN fN fN fN fN fN fN CN fN fN ? T fN " fN " $ • — ' fN r * ir * " i ^ ^ ^ - — - ^ H ^ - —H ^ - —H ^ - —i ^ - _ * _ - _ . ^ - - _ ^ ^ - ^ ^ - . . ^ M ^ H fNfNfNCNCNfN fNfN " TT ' ^ ' mr * 1 fN fN fN fN fN — " fNfN fNfNfNfN —•• ~ < —« - • ^ ^ _ ^ —H r ^ mr ^ ifomr * * ! — > CN mm ^ - i — > »« _ ^ —• ^ _ _ - ^ ^ — — c i m m ci — —• ^ - - ^ — , _ * « f ^ imf ^ f ^ ir ^ r ^ fN fN fN fN — < —• r«1 fN - ^ fN fN < N fN fN fN — CN fN fN —« —« — ~ ^ — . - ^ — . — , ^ ^ ( NfNfN fNfN r - lfN ( NfS - ^ — - H fNfN fNfN — fN - ^ —• CN - ^ —• CNCNCNfN —• —• — ( N fN fN fN O ^ o — O O c o O < — fN Cl — 188 O O P oo O OPOOO QO qpp ^ p poppp ^ P ' •» — Tt < NO O O O OO OO fo OOfNOO \ O ^ O ^ D ^ O — O OO O O I O n O O a \ N O o rn rs r - ^ OOO— " OO o o I I OCNCT \ vi fNrn — o \ OfNf ^ fN O ( 1 f u ' B . c c•5 c ' 5 . a2 II si 00 c ' 8 . Q , C l ! •ac C4 OO c 3 o C / 5 SO c S , a " u •a c cd 00 c 3O in o 5 I I o " Soc s 15 " 2 ' S . o g . s 3 II | I ' ll * E & * - * * — gsl - s ••2 3 - 5 • a ' ; - 11 R s s 11 5 s § § " - PDOCJ o CO UCJ 690 STEVEN J . KARAU AND KIPLING D . WILLIAMS fN rN rN rN rN rN rN ci rN rN c " i c ^ ci ci rN fN < N fN fN TJ - Tf 8 88 88 88 fN rN rN rN * rN ^ fr - ^ - ci ci ci rN —• rN — ' ( N < N ci ci rN fN rN rN CI CI CI CI > O O O _ . . . > p p p — — co co i ci ci ci co co ci ci O O , _ O O — — " " oo oo ci m ci ci ci ci — m 88 888 ci ci rn ci ci 88 888 r - j fN r ~ - i rsi c ^ m m ci fN rN rN fN fN fN cN rN fN fN fN rN rN fN CI —— CI CI CI CI CI fsj — — rN rN rN rN ( N " fN " rN " fN ~ - ^ " f N " ^ CNCNfN < NM fNfN t ^ JfN fN fN fNfNfN fN fN fNfN fNfN fNfN cVc ^ c ^ cnm " cVm mm mm fNfNCN ( NfN fNfN fNfN r - lfN fNfNfN fNfN rNfN fNfN fNfN fN fS ( N fN fNfN fNfNfN fNfNfNfN — fN — fNfN m m m m c ~ ici m m m fNfNfNfN fNfN ( NfNfN CifNCIfN fNfN fNfNfN fN N tN ( N fN — CI rN fN fN rNfNfNfN < N CH rN fN rN rN ci ci ci ci ci ci ci ci ci ci rNrNfNfNrN — ci < N rN rN ( N * rT CN " rN " fN ~ rT rN CN " fN * rN fN fN fN fN fN fN ci m fN CN fN fN m m ci r * i fN fN m m I — . - ^ - ^ fN fN fN fN —• fN —« — fN — fN fN fN fN — fN fN rN fN rN fN fN fN < N fN 8 88 88 88 S . S . 5L5L S . 5L oo oo oo " do o " oo " < oo oo oo oo pop < oo oo fNfN rNfN oo oooo 88 o o oo d d oo fN rjq do — ' o ( NO O ' fN — d CI ; CI ^ O d — CI— O oo — ' < rNrN d —• ci — ' • ootN [ oo odd— ' d do D . Q . T3 - O C C OO 00 B C 3 3 O O C / 3 C / 2 E 2 in C " 2 a . o . U oo c 1 o 2 aa 0i c ' 1 o c r a i oa •a Eo C " 2oa a i o a : o o V3 C / 5 I ( 2 I . 1 ^ ^ P s 8 = I " P . O u ts . if II •g , CTv ? « _ . u - ^ - t * w . « E = a 5 u ass ill § ( 0 > • OT 3333 ^ - CS " - CS ; U oo a a 135 c J < 3 3 3 3 3 5 x : | w £ 2 2 2 2 j . 2P • § , OOOOOo SOCIAL LOAFING 691 •3 Sa , CN CN fN CN 88 88 888888 888 CN CN tTf CN CN CN CN CN CN * CN CN CN | | | | I l l l ll HI CNCN CN ^ f CN CN CN * CN CN CN CN CN CN * CNCN mm CNCNCNCNCNCN mrnm CN CN m m 88 II CN CN m m 88 CN CN CN CN 8888 II m rn m m 8888 888 ^ 8 . 0 CN m CN cn m m m m m m CN rn m CN CN CN m m I ! 888 odo — , f — — — — . I CNCN CNCN CNCNfNCNCNCN ^ - _ — com mm - ^ — - ^ mmm mmc ^ CNCN MM ^ ^ — - ^ — — . — . CNfNCN CNTCN " CNCN " CN " CN " CN " CN " CN " ? T m " mm " CNfNCN ( N mm CNCNCN " CN " CNCNCNCN mm CNCN CNCNCNCN mmmm ( NCNCNCN CN CN CN CN CN CN C - J CN CN — * CN CN CN CN CN CN CN CN CN CN CN m CN CN CN CN CN CN CN CN CN CN CN CN CN CN mi * i m m r ^ en — ' m CN CN CN < N CN CN CN CN CN CN CN CN CN CN Cvl CN CN CN CN CN fir ^ m mm CN ( N CN CN CN < N " oo — — CNCN — « — < ^ - — < — _ ^ _ ^ - CNCN — ' - ^ CNCNCNCNCNCN CNCNCN —•CN — ' — - CN CN CN — CN - ^ — — * CN - CN CN CN CN CN fN CN CN CN CN CN ( N CN CN CN — ' — CN CN CN CN CN | | | | Illlll HI | i 8 | 8888 888888 88 88 88 888 8 CN CN CN CN CN CN OO oooo oo oo oo oo • * • * CNCN O O OO CN CN CN CN CN CN do do C N rj CN — • ^ O — — d o — oo — — — O O CN J O & ) O O OO - ^ O p ^ q r - # odd O oo d o a a o Eo C 5 c •5 . a . E 3D . oo c c a ti o f o r m co 00 [ uno : « u 3 O D . C 00 OO c c E E o o c c •3 3XI •c •a a 1 •I . s W BJ W 1 s 2 2 33 P P n I D , o E I 2 & c W EP c 00 UJ O " " CN m . B . N . N II | | " if Is ' aI * ScN - ' f 2 - So ( 986 Q 1985 D — 1 - 2 1980 ) " — ' L a t a n CO E 692 STEVEN J . KARAU AND KIPLING D . WILLIAMS — —• m r 88 i 00 " p p — — - — CO 888 3 d 6 88 M M 88 M M M m m m ( N ( N NrifN 88 SI M M O ^ M — ( N M S88 O ' O ^ O ^ O ^ C ^ C1CL CiCl Tf ^ i " mm mm mm — m M < N — — < m m m m CNMtN ( NfNM N ( N ( N Ol ( N ( N ( N m rO —« ^ — — > mm oo P9P ^ O O O O Q ^ _ ' M M M — ' rsl ^ ^ ^ O MM M M M 8 ooo 88 — M ^ f T ^ 2 88 8888 00000c O O O O O < • O tN o o . - \ O O — ^ - o — o — ' • 1 1 p o o f ~ i O o — ' • OOO O— —O O — OO ( N ( N _ - — c aa 3O C / 3 OD EE 00 00 g s t o c B r a o x : 00 S 00 11 ( 2 - . , o E ^ OO o u •p > . c •S ' 3i o M U U M OO 00 MIL • ^ s ON , 2 " " | | •a 01 ! in — o • ^ ' 5 - S - - ^ •BE . I on - - c ^ 7T ^ ' ss ' § § f f i ii S ! 5 § ^ ^ 5 ^ £S W ' •S " ^ * ? 2 * * 3 ^ ^ M 1 > U C 1 K K C M n ! • " * ' " " ^ iiiiiifSIIfl ~ , m SOCIAL LOAFING 693 I ( 5 o I V I H o XI C / 3 fg £ T3Ct3 Si iS8 § 8 88 88 O O Q O OOOO 8888 o o oo 88 00 m o - - — < < N 8S 888 88 f ^ 4 ( N ( N f ^ i o rn ci ci r4 ( N ( N fN ( N •• * ~ * * ^ ^ . ^ ^ » ^ ^ » ~ »»» . ^ ^ » ^ ^ fc ^ * * 8 88 8888 81 OOO r * 1 — ( N ' 00 ~ ' • o OOOO OOOO O O O O O vi i ng E£ oo c a a * OCed00 c •£3 S ho r c l ' o c I D r a oo c pp i c oo c o x : en OD Xi t / 5 3 cx c O 3 II H u i > rt : S " = = 5 S rt - 9 ^ g S ' E . S « < g III « - < > O : E i - s g 3 c c c - •3 E E ! ' • c c E E H I , 1 ^ = OJ LU BJ g UJ W " I O I •a c •o g c op VI u " O b l e i s r i a > t h i r d tt o c 3 L * O c , o i c t " O D . O c II o " c II < N < A m < LT ' 2 % O II fN V ) 1 ' 3 u 3 •o li n i ng c o : ^ - fj E • ^ ^ V JD rt v a : o 0 > In & ) a . 52 ia _ ca c I - " 2 op II ce ( l = l e n v a : t a s k s ca o u 5 r ) ; l ea i o o c 1 ! rt C O S ) rt ao > i d o tJj Q U a > a 4 > B I . > i r tt n ec i f " 5 i v i du •g cS J2 Xi rt > * - s e t o n t a t s 1 U i on e rf rt ^ 5 u ^ & cc 1 > - a ! 5 o o 1 2 . 5 ( N «• 5 o 2 § ifiHii g x > ill mum ' . lllilll ; . « . „ ^ _ i > 694 STEVEN J . KARAU AND KIPLING D . WILLIAMS ANOVA ) and a test of the homogeneity of the effect sizes within each class , Q m . The continuous models , which are least squares linear re - gressions calculated with each effect size weighted by the reciprocal of its variance , provide a test of the significance of the predictor as well as a test of model specification ( Hedges & Olkin , 1985 ) . Finally , as a supplementary procedure , we conducted outlier analyses to determine whether the effect sizes were relatively homogeneous aside from the presence of a limited number of aberrant values ( see Hedges , 1987 ; Hedges & Olkin , 1985 ) . Results and Discussion Characteristics of Studies Before considering the findings of the social loafing litera - ture , we first present the characteristics of the studies from which our conclusions will be drawn . As shown by the central tendencies of the characteristics presented in Table 2 , studies generally ( a ) were published recently , ( b ) were published as jour - nal articles , ( c ) used a moderate number of subjects , ( d ) used college - age samples , and ( e ) only occasionally included organiza - tional or nonadult samples . In addition , studies ( a ) were gener - ally laboratory experiments with some field studies , ( b ) used both within - and between - subjects comparisons of individuals ' effort across coactive and collective conditions , and ( c ) typically informed subjects that the purpose of the experiment was to examine effort or task performance . Regarding task character - istics , studies ( a ) typically used simple tasks , ( b ) tended to mea - sure either physical or cognitive effort with some studies of perceptual or evaluative effort , and ( c ) generally used maximiz - ing , additive tasks . Finally , regarding key theory - relevant predictors , the last 10 variables in Table 1 show that studies generally ( a ) varied evalua - Table 2 Summary of Study Characteristics Variable and class Median date of publication Publication form Journal article Meeting paper Dissertation or master ' s thesis Unpublished document Median number of subjects Median age of subjects ( years ) Status of subjects Third grade students or younger Fourth through sixth grade students Junior high or high school students College students Organizational employees Setting of study LaboratoryField Type of coactive - collective comparison Within - subjects Between - subjects Type of cover story used Effort or performance related Other Complexity of task SimpleComplexUnknown or unclear Type of effort measured PhysicalCognitivePerceptualEvaluative Quantity or quality emphasis of task MaximizingOptimizingMixed or unclear Method of combining individual inputs Additive CompensatoryOther , mixed , or unclear Value 1985 121231484820 656 1436 14224 6997 11551 135724 70532914 127 309 147 118 Variable and class Conditions under which individual outputs can be evaluated NoneCoactive condition only Coactive and collective conditions Unclear Task valence HighModerate or no basis for determining Low Group valence HighModerateLowUnknown or unclear Opportunity for group evaluation PresentAbsentExpectations of co - worker performance HighModerate or no basis for determining LowUniqueness of individual contributions to collective outcome UniquePotentially redundant Completely redundant Median group size Median number of task performers present at sessionSex of subjects 3 MenWomenBoth Culture of subjects EasternWestern Value 5 1172816 301315 91112917 12151 141448 864943 3 2812126 17148 Note . For categorical variables , numbers in table represent frequency of effort comparisons in each class . Summaries of continuous variables are based on reports for which information was available on each variable . * When studies were subdivided on sex of subjects , the frequencies were 40 for men , 24 for women , and 114 for both . SOCIAL LOAFING 695 tion potential across the coactive and collective conditions , ( b ) did not manipulate task valence , ( c ) studied low - valence groups of strangers , ( d ) did not provide an opportunity for group evalua - tion , ( e ) did not manipulate expectations of co - worker perfor - mance , ( f ) used tasks in which individuals ' inputs to the collec - tive product were either potentially redundant or completely redundant with the inputs of other group members , ( g ) had a relatively small median group size , ( h ) tended to have all task performers physically present at the experimental session , ( i ) typically included both male and female subjects , and ( j ) gener - ally examined subjects from Western cultures . Overall Magnitude of Social Loafing The summary provided in Table 3 allows one to determine whether , on the whole , individuals tended to engage in social loafing and exert less effort collectively than coactively . An overall difference in effort across coactive and collective condi - tions is shown by a mean effect size that differed significantly from the 0 . 00 value that indicates exactly no difference ( i . e . , by a confidence interval that does not include 0 . 00 ) . Consistent with the CEM and with prior reviewers ' conclusions , individ - uals tended to engage in social loafing , producing lower effort levels in the collective condition than in the coactive condition . The weighted mean was very similar to the unweighted mean , whereas the median was somewhat lower . As shown by the homogeneity statistic given in Table 3 , the effect sizes were not homogeneous ( i . e . , consistent ) across the studies . A very large proportion ( 39 % ) of the effect sizes had to be removed to attain homogeneity , and the removal of outliers substantially de - creased the value of the weighted mean . Inspection of the out - Table 3 Summary of Effect Sizes ( ds ) Criterion ds with outliers Sample size ( « ) Mean weighted d { d + f 95 % CI for d + Homogeneity ( Q ) ofds making up d± b Mean unweighted d 95 % CI for mean unweighted d Median d Differences indicating social loafing ds excluding outliers Sample size ( n ) n removed outliers 0 Mean weighted d ( d + ) 95 % CI for d + Homogeneity ( Q ) of ds making up d + Value 163 0 . 44 0 . 39 / 0 . 48 964 . 70 * * 0 . 48 0 . 36 / 0 . 61 0 . 41 128 / 163 ( . 79 ) 99 64 ( . 39 ) 0 . 24 0 . 19 / 0 . 29 125 . 79 Note . Positive effect sizes indicate that subjects worked harder coac - tively than collectively ( i . e . , engaged in social loafing ) . CI = confidence interval ; d = effect size ; d + = mean weighted effect size ; Q = homogene - ity of ds . " Effect sizes were weighted by the reciprocal of the variance . b Signi - ficance indicates rejection of the hypothesis of homogeneity . c The proportion appears in parentheses . * * ; ? < . 001 . Hers revealed that among the 64 effect sizes removed , 49 were above and only 15 were below the median d computed for the original sample . The confidence interval for the weighted mean after outlier removal showed that the overall tendency toward decreased collective effort was still significant after outliers were removed . The implication of the finding that people tend to engage in social loafing when working collectively depends in part on its magnitude . The several measures of central tendency reported in Table 3 are relevant to this issue . Taken together , these fig - ures indicate approximately a four - tenths standard deviation in the direction of reduced collective effort . One means for inter - preting the magnitude of the mean social loafing effect size is to compare it with effect sizes produced by other quantitative re - views in similar domains . Eagly ' s ( 1987 ) overview of a variety of mean effect sizes found in meta - analyses of social psychologi - cal research topics suggested that they ranged from about 0 . 00 to 1 . 20 . In a particularly relevant comparison , Bond and Titus ' s ( 1983 ) review of the social facilitation literature reported that effect sizes ranged between - 0 . 23 and 0 . 21 , depending on the complexity of the task and the type of performance measure . Another standard is provided by Cohen ( 1977 ) , who suggested that ds of 0 . 20 be labeled as small , ds of 0 . 50 be labeled as moderate , and ds of 0 . 80 be labeled as large . On the basis of these standards , social loafing might be regarded as small to moderate in magnitude , within the middle range of effects in the domain of social behavior , and larger than social facilita - tion . However , it should be recognized that the tendency of re - searchers to focus on isolating conditions under which social loafing can be reduced or eliminated is likely to lead to an underestimation of the magnitude of the effect . Most studies were designed to test the potential of one or more factors for eliminating social loafing . Therefore , many of the coactive - col - lective comparisons included in our meta - analysis were drawn from situations in which social loafing was not predicted . Thus , the mean effect size of d = 0 . 44 may not necessarily provide the best measure of the overall magnitude of social loafing . Indeed , a categorical model computed for whether social loafing was predicted by the original researcher ( s ) was highly significant , < 2 B ( 2 ) = 310 . 86 , p < . 001 . Effect sizes were substantially larger ( 4 + . = 0 . 76 , 95 % CI = 0 . 70 to 0 . 81 , n = 89 ) when social loafing was predicted than when social loafing was not predicted ( d * = - 0 . 01 , 95 % CI = - 0 . 08 to 0 . 06 , n = 59 , contrast p < . 001 ) and when researchers did not specify a prediction ( d ^ = 0 . 19 , 95 % CI = 0 . 09 to 0 . 29 , n = 15 , post - hoc contrast p < . 005 ) . 5 The " predicted " and " not predicted " values may represent esti - mates of upper and lower bounds for the magnitude of social loafing . In view of these comparisons , the available research seems to suggest that there is at least a moderate tendency for individuals to engage in social loafing and to reduce their effort when working on collective tasks . Finally , with regard to the robustness of social loafing , an 5 Contrasts were a priori , unless otherwise indicated . The post - hoc contrast procedure is modeled after Scheffe ' s method for multiple com - parisons in an analysis of variance ( see Hedges & Olkin , 1985 ) . 696 STEVEN J . KARAU AND KIPLING D . WILLIAMS examination of the consistency of findings across studies is worthwhile . The direction of the effect was very consistent , evidenced by 79 % of the comparisons being in the direction of reduced collective effort . However , outlier analyses showed that the effect sizes were highly inconsistent in magnitude : 39 % of these effect sizes had to be removed to attain homogeneity . This figure is substantially larger than that reported in other meta - analyses of social behavior . It is possible that the focus of social loafing research on limiting conditions , combined with the wide range of tasks and subject populations used , contributed to this relative inconsistency . It is also possible that this incon - sistency reflects the complex nature of the phenomenon and suggests that social loafing may represent a class of effects with psychologically distinct causal mechanisms . Theory - Relevant Predictors of Social Loafing The study attributes were examined as predictors of differ - ences in individuals ' coactive versus collective effort . Categori - cal models that yielded significant between - classes effects are presented in Table 4 , and significant continuous models are presented in Table 5 . Evaluation potential . Consistent with the CEM and with evaluation accounts , the tendency for individuals to engage in social loafing decreased when evaluation potential was held constant across the coactive and collective conditions . Thus , individuals were more likely to loaf when their outputs could only be evaluated in the coactive condition than when their outputs could not be evaluated at all ( p < . 001 ) or when their outputs could be evaluated in both the coactive and collective conditions ( p < . 001 ) . In fact , social loafing was eliminated when evaluation potential was not varied across coactive and collective conditions , as evidenced by the confidence intervals presented in Table 4 . These findings are consistent with the claim made by Harkins ( 1987 ) and others that evaluation po - tential is a mediator of social loafing . Task valence . As hypothesized , the tendency to engage in social loafing decreased as task valence increased . Contrasts showed that the tendency to loaf was greater when task valence was low than when task valence was either high ( p < . 001 ) or unspecified ( p < . 06 , post - hoc contrast ) . Also , the tendency to loaf was greater when task valence was unspecified than when task valence was high ( p < . 001 , post - hoc contrast ) . An examina - tion of confidence intervals shows that individuals loafed when task valence was low or unspecified , but not when it was high . This suggests that high levels of task meaningfulness or per - sonal involvement might eliminate loafing . Also , given that the unspecified tasks were likely relatively moderate in valence , these results suggest a direct relationship between task valence and individual effort on collective tasks . Group valence and group - level comparison standards . Individuals did not loaf when group valence was high , but loafed in all other conditions . Thus , as predicted by the CEM and prior theories of self - validation processes in groups , the tendency to loaf was lower when group valence was high than when it was moderate ( p < . 01 ) , unknown or unclear ( p < . 05 , post - hoc contrast ) , or low ( p < . 001 ) . Individuals also loafed less when group valence was either moderate ( p < . 001 ) or un - known ( p < . 005 , post - hoc contrast ) than when it was low . Fi - nally , individuals loafed less when group valence was high than when it was low ( p < . 001 ) . Similarly , the tendency to engage in social loafing was reduced when participants were provided with a group - level comparison standard . Taken together , these findings suggest that enhancing group cohesiveness or group identity might reduce or eliminate social loafing and that group - level outcomes are indeed valued by individuals in cer - tain situations . Expectations of co - worker performance . Consistent with the predictions of the CEM , individuals loafed when they expected their co - workers to perform well or when no expectations were provided , but did not loaf when they expected their co - workers to perform poorly ( low vs . high contrast , p < . 005 ; low vs . unspecified contrast , p < . 001 , post hoc ) . These findings , how - ever , do not completely resolve the controversy between the matching of effort ( Jackson & Harkins , 1985 ) and social com - pensation ( Williams & Karau , 1991 ) views . The basic pattern of findings is consistent with both the CEM and the social compensation research , which both suggest that individuals ' outcomes are more contingent on their efforts when working with others who are expected to perform poorly . However , ef - fort levels were not significantly higher collectively than coacti - vely when participants expected their co - workers to perform poorly , as has been found in the prior social compensation work . Nevertheless , a resolution is possible when the role of task meaningfulness is considered . Because social compensation represents a motivation gain , individuals must not only in - crease their usual collective effort , they must actually work harder than they would ordinarily work alone . The logic of the CEM suggests that individuals would be unlikely to exert such extraordinary effort unless they viewed the task as meaningful and therefore highly valued a favorable outcome . In support of this notion , when the interaction between expectations of co - worker performance and task meaningfulness was considered , a significant motivation gain was found only for the four com - parisons in which individuals worked on a meaningful task with co - workers who were expected to perform poorly ( d i + = - 0 . 69 , 95 % CI = - 1 . 11 to - 0 . 27 ) . These results highlight the potential of the CEM for predicting situations in which motiva - tion gains might emerge on collective tasks . Uniqueness of individual inputs . Individuals worked just as hard collectively as coactively when their individual inputs to the collective product were unique , but loafed when their inputs were either potentially redundant or completely redundant ( ps < . 001 ) . Consistent with the CEM and with the results of Kerr ( 1983 ; Kerr & Bruun , 1983 ) and Harkins and Petty ( 1982 ) , individuals may perceive that their efforts are less instrumental in obtaining valued outcomes when their inputs to the collec - tive product are either dispensable or largely overlapping with those of others . 6 6 Although uniqueness and dispensability are often closely related , they are conceptually distinct . A group member ' s inputs can be indis - tinguishable from the inputs of others , yet essential to group perfor - mance . For example , on an additive rope - pulling task , group members ' SOCIAL LOAFING 697 Group size . Simple linear regressions showed that both group size and the number of task performers present were positively related to social loafing : Effect sizes were larger for studies that combined more individual inputs into the collec - tive product and for studies that had more individuals perform the task at each session . Most of the theories discussed in the introduction would predict group size effects , albeit for differ - ent reasons . Social impact theory and self - attention theory de - vote particular attention to group size effects relative to other aspects of social loafing . Gender and culture . Consistent with the CEM , the magni - tude of social loafing was larger in studies that used samples of only male subjects than for studies that used either mixed sam - ples ( p < . 05 , post - hoc contrast ) or samples of only female sub - jects ( p < . 001 ) . If this difference were indeed attributable to a greater tendency by men to focus on individualistic outcomes , the CEM would predict that men would be more attentive to strategic concerns than women when working on collective tasks . Consistent with this reasoning , the group size effect re - ported earlier was only reliable for comparisons involving groups of men ( b = . 13 , b * = . 36 , p < . 001 ) . This finding sug - gests that men may be particularly attentive to the reduced efficacy of their inputs when working in larger groups , whereas women may tend to exert more consistent levels of collective effort across various group sizes . Also as predicted , the magnitude of social loafing was larger for subjects from Western cultures than for subjects from East - ern cultures . These provocative findings suggest that both women and individuals in Eastern cultures are less likely to engage in social loafing , presumably because they have more group - oriented priorities than do men and individuals in West - ern cultures . Task complexity . Individuals performed better coactively than collectively when working on simple tasks , but performed at least as well collectively as coactively when working on com - plex tasks ( p < . 001 ) . This pattern is consistent with the reason - ing presented by Jackson and Williams ( 1985 ) and provides initial , tentative support for the arousal - reduction viewpoint . 7 Models Relevant to Evaluating the Generality of Social Loafing The status of subjects produced a significant between - classes effect . Contrasts showed that third graders and younger stu - dents tended to loaf less than either fourth through sixth graders ( p < . 05 , post - hoc contrast ) or college students ( p < . 005 , post - hoc contrast ) . In addition , adult nonstudents tended to loaf less than fourth through sixth graders ( p < . 01 , post - hoc contrast ) , or college students ( p < . 01 , post - hoc contrast ) . It is possible that the prior finding may be indicative of a develop - mental trend whereby children do not become attentive to stra - tegic concerns in task performance until they reach a certain age ( see Williams & Williams , 1981 , for a discussion ) . The latter trend is relatively uninterpretable , because the six comparisons based on adult nonstudents involved diverse samples . 8 The responses are completely redundant in form , but the effort of each member still contributes to the total group performance . magnitude of social loafing was also larger in laboratory experi - ments than in field studies . Interestingly , the magnitude of the effect did not vary depending on whether ( a ) the coactive - col - lective comparison was made within - subjects or between - sub - jects . This finding suggests that social loafing does not occur simply because subjects allocate greater effort to coactive trials than to collective trials ( see Harkins , Latane , & Williams , 1980 ; Kerr & Bruun , 1981 ) . Finally , the magnitude of social loafing was not dependent on whether ( a ) maximizing or optimizing tasks were used , ( b ) tasks were additive or compensatory , and ( c ) physical , cognitive , evaluative , or perceptual effort was mea - sured , suggesting that social loafing is robust across tasks . Impact of Other Variables on Social Loafing The trend toward decreased collective effort was enhanced when a deceptive cover story was used . Thus , subjects were more likely to loaf when they were not informed that the pur - pose of the study was to examine effort or performance , sug - gesting that telling subjects the purpose of the experiment may inhibit their usual tendency to engage in social loafing . Social loafing was also greater for studies reported in journal articles than for dissertations and master ' s theses or for unpublished documents ( ps < . 05 , post - hoc contrasts ) . Finally , as shown in Table 5 , a simple linear regression showed that date of publica - tion was negatively related to the magnitude of social loafing such that effect sizes were larger for earlier studies . However , interpretation of this time trend is clouded when it is recog - nized that the earlier studies both ( a ) tended to use fewer experi - mental paradigms that were more easily controlled , possibly resulting in smaller error terms and larger effect sizes and ( b ) tended to focus on documenting the effect rather than isolating moderating variables and were thus more likely to find larger effect sizes across all comparisons . Multiple Regression Models Although most of the theory - relevant predictor variables were relatively independent ( rs ranging from — . 14 to . 33 ) , we estimated several multiple regression models to examine the 7 However , individuals did not perform significantly better collec - tively than coactively when working on complex tasks , as arousal re - duction would predict . Yet , only seven comparisons involving complex tasks were available , creating low power to detect a difference . More - over , four of the studies coded as using a complex task used manipula - tions of high task difficulty ( Bartis , Szymanski , & Harkins , 1988 ; Har - kins & Petty , 1982 ) . Although these tasks were not simple , by defini - tion , they may not have been difficult enough to create an inverse relationship between effort and performance . For these studies , the mean weighted effect size was - 0 . 09 . For the remaining three compari - sons that directly manipulated complexity ( Griffith , Fichman , & Mor - eland , 1989 ; Jackson & Williams , 1985 ) , the mean weighted effect size was - 0 . 18 . 8 One comparison involved adult residents who worked on a labora - tory brainstorming task ( Cooley , 1991 ) , four comparisons involved ei - ther American or Chinese adult managerial trainees working on an in - basket exercise ( Earley , 1989 ) , and one comparison involved Japa - nese business managers working on a noise - production task ( Wil - liams , Williams , Kawana , & Latane , 1984 , Experiment 4 ) . 698 STEVEN J . KARAU AND KIPLING D . WILLIAMS Table 4 Categorical Models for Objective Effort Effect Sizes Variable and class Evaluation potential 1 * None Coactive condition only Coactive and collective conditions Unclear Task valence HighModerate or no basis for determining Low Group valence HighModerateLowUnknown or unclear Opportunity for group evaluation PresentAbsent Expectations of co - worker performance HighModerateLow Uniqueness of individual contributionsUniquePotentially redundant Completely redundant Sex of subjects 0 MenWomenBoth Culture of subjects EasternWestern Complexity of task SimpleComplexUnclear Status of subjects Third grade students or younger Fourth through sixth grade students Junior high or high school students College students Organizational employees Setting of study LaboratoryField Type of cover story used Effort or performance related Other Publication form Journal article Meeting paper Dissertation or master ' s thesis Unpublished document Between - classes effect 136 . 22 * * * 91 . 52 * * * 45 . 19 * * * 42 . 24 * * * 20 . 54 * * * 16 . 77 * * * 29 . 61 * * * 15 . 44 * * * 21 . 37 * * * 29 . 25 * * * 15 . 39 * * * 10 . 83 * * * 21 . 11 * * * n 5 1152716 301285 9 1112716 12151 141418 86491 3923113 15148 133723 556 1416 14023 11251 11823148 Mean weighted effect size ( d i + ) - 0 . 12 0 . 59 0 . 08 0 . 32 - 0 . 100 . 49 0 . 90 - 0 . 170 . 25 0 . 50 0 . 28 0 . 03 0 . 48 0 . 33 0 . 45 - 0 . 17 0 . 03 0 . 49 0 . 44 0 . 57 0 . 22 0 . 44 0 . 19 0 . 46 0 . 47 - O . li 0 . 36 0 . 14 0 . 51 0 . 38 0 . 47 - 0 . 19 0 . 47 0 . 25 0 . 39 0 . 52 0 . 50 0 . 36 0 . 31 0 . 05 95 % Lower - 0 . 33 0 . 55 - 0 . 010 . 20 - 0 . 220 . 45 0 . 57 - 0 . 410 . 08 0 . 46 0 . 18 - 0 . 100 . 44 0 . 14 0 . 41 - 0 . 45 - 0 . 180 . 41 0 . 39 0 . 48 0 . 13 0 . 39 0 . 06 0 . 42 0 . 42 - 0 . 370 . 25 - 0 . 020 . 35 0 . 19 0 . 42 - 0 . 53 0 . 43 0 . 16 0 . 34 0 . 46 0 . 45 0 . 28 0 . 20 - 0 . 22 CI for d i + Upper 0 . 08 0 . 64 0 . 17 0 . 45 0 . 02 0 . 541 . 22 0 . 08 0 . 42 0 . 55 0 . 38 0 . 16 0 . 52 0 . 53 0 . 50 0 . 10 0 . 24 0 . 56 0 . 49 0 . 65 0 . 32 0 . 49 0 . 32 0 . 50 0 . 51 0 . 14 0 . 47 0 . 30 0 . 68 0 . 58 0 . 51 0 . 15 0 . 51 0 . 35 0 . 44 0 . 59 0 . 54 0 . 45 0 . 43 0 . 32 Homogeneity within each class ( & J " 8 . 17 616 . 34 * * * 96 . 30 * * * 107 . 68 * * * 12 . 86 * * * 743 . 32 * * * 2 . 99 5 . 48 129 . 91 * * * 719 . 46 * * * 64 . 75 * * * 66 . 50 * * * 855 . 96 * * * 65 . 54 * * * 853 . 48 * * * 25 . 14 * * 3 . 05 355 . 14 * * * 589 . 75 * * * 261 . 22 * * * 34 . 66 655 . 40 * * * 103 . 96 * * * 845 . 31 * * * 771 . 08 * * * 3 . 49 168 . 76 * * * 17 . 58 * * 24 . 32 * * * 12 . 13 809 . 28 * * * 72 . 14 * * * 794 . 46 * * * 154 . 85 * * * 614 . 62 * * * 339 . 25 * * * 801 . 62 * * * 52 . 86 * * * 70 . 79 * * * 18 . 32 * Note . Positive effect sizes indicate that subjects exerted more effort coactively than collectively ( i . e . , engaged in social loafing ) . CI = confidence interval . " Significance indicates rejection of the hypothesis of homogeneity . b Evaluation potential refers to the conditions under which individual outputs can be evaluated . c Calculated on effect sizes that were , whenever possible , partitioned by sex of subject . * p < . 05 . * * p < . 01 . * * * / ? < . 001 . SOCIAL LOAFING 699 Table 5 Continuous Models for Objective Effort Effect Sizes Predictor or outcome Continuous variables Date of publication Group size * Number of task performers present b Categorical variables Publication form c Culture of subjects 11 Setting of study * Task valence f Expectations of co - worker performance 8 Evaluation potential 11 Additive constant Multiple R SE of estimate GE 1 Simple linear regressions b - 0 . 02 * * 0 . 01 * 0 . 02 * * b * - . 15 . 07 . 12 Multiple regression b - 0 . 01 * 0 . 01 * - 0 . 37 * * 0 . 33 * * - 0 . 21 * * - 0 . 51 * * 0 . 54 * * 0 . 67 * * 22 . 19 . 59 2 . 09 607 . 41 * * b * - . 07 . 07 - . 28 . 15 - . 12 - . 26 . 12 . 46 Note . Models are weighted least squares simple linear and multiple regressions calculated with weights equal to the reciprocal of the variance for each effect size . In the multiple regression model , the predictors were entered simultaneously . Positive effect sizes indicate higher effort coactively than collectively , b = unstandardized regression coefficient ; b * = standardized regression coefficient ; n = 163 . a Number of individual inputs combined into collective outcome ; n = 156 . " n = 156 . c 0 = journal article ; 1 = unpublished document . d 0 = Eastern ; 1 = Western . " 0 = laboratory ; 1 = field . f 0 = low , moderate , or no basis for determining ; 1 = high . % 0 = low ; 1 = moderate , no basis for determining , or high . h Refers to the conditions under which individual inputs can be evaluated ; 0 = none , or coactive and collective conditions ( evaluation potential constant across conditions ) ; 1 = coactive only ( evaluation potential confounded across conditions ) or unclear . ' Significance indicates model not correctly speci - fied . * p < . 0 \ . * * p < . 001 . simultaneous impact of several of the continuous and categori - cal variables . For these analyses , categorical variables were dummy coded . The relatively large number of categorical and continuous variables that produced significant one - way models ( and the presence of three or more classes for several of the categorical variables ) restricted the viability of the multiple re - gression models because the number of potential predictors was large in relation to the number of effect sizes . Although none of these models was correctly specified , one particularly informative model is presented in Table 5 . This model entered a number of the most central predictors—namely , date of publi - cation , group size , publication form , culture of subjects , setting of study , task valence , expectations of co - worker performance , and evaluation potential . All of the predictors in this model were significant , with task valence , expectations of co - worker performance , and evaluation potential producing especially large effects . As reflected in the R of . 59 , this model was moder - ately successful in accounting for variability in the objective effort effect sizes . Self - Reported Effort Although our meta - analysis was primarily concerned with objective effort measures , effect sizes based on subjects ' self - re - ported effort were also included so that supplementary analyses could be conducted . As shown by the measures of central ten - dency in Table 6 , subjects ' self - reports were in the direction of social loafing , although the magnitude of this effect was very small and was only significantly different from 0 . 00 when ef - fect sizes were weighted by the reciprocal of the variance and when outliers were excluded . Moreover , when nonsignificant reports were considered , the effect became even smaller and was not significantly different from 0 . 00 . Only slightly more than half of the reported differences were in the direction of reduced collective effort . This finding suggests that partici - pants are either unaware of the fact that they engage in social loafing or are unwilling to report that they engage in social loafing . 9 9 A number of factors had a significant impact on the magnitude of the self - reported effort effect sizes . Further information on these analy - ses can be obtained from Steven J . Karau . In general , however , individ - uals were less likely to report that they had engaged in social loafing when ( a ) the cover story informed subjects that the study was interested in effort or performance , ( b ) a within - subjects rather than a between - subjects design was used , ( c ) maximizing rather than additive tasks were used , ( d ) group size was smaller , and ( e ) studies were conducted more recently . 700 STEVEN J . KARAU AND KIPLING D . WILLIAMS Table 6 Summary of Self - Reported Effort Effect Sizes Criterion Value ds with outliers Sample size ( « ) Mean weighted d ( d + f 95 % CI for d + Homogeneity ( Q ) of ds making up d + b Mean unweighted d 95 % CI for mean unweighted d Median d ds excluding outliers Sample size ( n ) n removed outliers 0 Mean weighted d ( d + ) 95 % CI for d + Homogeneity ( Q ) aids making up d + All reports Sample size ( « ) Mean unweighted d Differences indicating reduced collective effort 28 0 . 11 0 . 00 - 0 . 22 55 . 01 " 0 . 10 - 0 . 09 - 0 . 290 . 00 253 0 . 16 0 . 04 - 0 . 27 33 . 10 42 0 . 07 13 / 24 ( . 54 ) Note . Positive effect sizes indicate that subjects worked harder coac - tively than collectively ( i . e . , engaged in social loafing ) . CI = confidence interval ; d = effect size ; d + = mean weighted effect size ; Q = homogene - ity of ds . * Effect sizes were weighted by the reciprocal of the variance . b Sig - nificance indicates rejection of the hypothesis of homogeneity . c The proportion appears in parentheses . * p < . Q \ . Conclusions Overview of findings and implications . Our meta - analysis shows that individuals tend to engage in social loafing when working in groups . Social loafing appears to be moderate in magnitude and generalizable across tasks and subject popula - tions . The CEM suggests that social loafing occurs because individuals expect their effort to be less likely to lead to valued outcomes when working collectively than when working coacti - vely . The tendency to engage in social loafing was moderated by a large number of variables , and the CEM was quite successful in accounting for the empirical status of these moderators . The findings of this review have a number of implications for future research and practice . In particular , the review highlights a number of conditions under which social loafing should be more or less likely to occur . For example , individuals are more likely to engage in social loafing when their individual outputs cannot be evaluated collectively , when working on tasks that are perceived as low in meaningfulness or personal involvement , when a group - level comparison standard is not available , when working with strangers , when they expect their co - workers to perform well , and when their inputs to the collective outcome are redundant with those of other group members . In addition , social loafing is robust across gender , culture , and tasks , al - though the effect is smaller for women and for subjects from Eastern cultures . A superficial evaluation of these findings might imply that social loafing is not a very serious problem in the real world , but instead is restricted to artificially constrained laboratory studies that use trivial tasks . However , a closer examination reveals that social loafing could indeed have serious conse - quences for a variety of everyday collective settings . First , the effect was robust across both maximizing and optimizing tasks and across tasks demanding different types of effort ( e . g . , cogni - tive , physical , or perceptual ) . Thus , social loafing is not re - stricted to additive , maximizing tasks . Second , although the magnitude of the effect was reduced for field studies , for women , and for subjects in Eastern cultures , social loafing was still significant under all of these conditions . Thus , the effect is not restricted to laboratory studies of American men . Third , although social loafing was eliminated when participants ' scores could be evaluated collectively and when highly mean - ingful tasks were used , it is important to recognize that , in many real - world contexts , individual inputs cannot be reliably identified or evaluated and people are frequently asked to work on mundane or uninspiring tasks . Even within occupations that appear to have a great deal of intrinsic value , at least some important aspects of the work are likely to be repetitive or dull ( e . g . , writing memos or performing accounting and other main - tenance activities ) . Finally , although social loafing was elimi - nated when participants worked with close friends or team - mates , mere acquaintance with one ' s co - workers was not suffi - cient to eliminate the effect . In many ( but not all ) work contexts , individuals do not necessarily know their co - workers or do not interact with them frequently enough to develop high levels of cohesiveness . Thus , social loafing appears to be a prob - lem that is likely to manifest itself in a variety of settings . The tendency of social loafing research ( but not theory ) to focus on limiting conditions for the effect , rather than on un - derlying process , may have led inevitably to the erroneous view that social loafing is inconsequential . Nevertheless , this ten - dency to focus on moderating variables does have the positive consequence of suggesting a number of ways in which social loafing might be reduced or overcome in natural settings : Pro - viding individuals with feedback about their own performance or the performance of their work group , monitoring individual performance or making such performance identifiable , assign - ing meaningful tasks , making tasks unique such that individ - uals feel more responsibility for their work , enhancing the cohe - siveness of work groups , and making individuals feel that their contributions to the task are necessary and not irrelevant might all serve , under some conditions , to reduce or eliminate social loafing . Moreover , the specification of these moderating vari - ables has theoretical as well as practical importance . Although each moderating variable may be associated with a distinct set of psychological processes , the CEM suggests that all of these variables have one thing in common , that is , they influence individuals ' perceptions of either the instrumentality of their efforts for obtaining valued outcomes or the degree to which outcomes in a particular setting are likely to be valued . Summary of novel findings . Because this meta - analysis in - tegrates a rich research literature in which several hypotheses are well - established , some of our findings confirm long - stand - ing predictions . However , our meta - analysis also uncovered a number of novel findings , some of which are directly relevant to areas of controversy among prior researchers . In particular , SOCIAL LOAFING 701 only a handful of prior studies have directly examined gender , culture , expectation of co - worker performance , and group va - lence , and those studies have produced contradictory results . However , our meta - analysis revealed that ( a ) the relative magni - tude of social loafing was reduced for women and for subjects from Eastern cultures , ( b ) individuals were more likely to loaf when they expected their co - workers to perform well , and ( c ) social loafing was reduced when individuals worked with ac - quaintances and was eliminated when individuals worked in highly valued groups . Similarly , although group - level compari - son standards , task meaningfulness , and task uniqueness have only been directly examined in a small handful of studies , mak - ing previous conclusions about these factors tentative , we found strong , consistent effects for these variables across studies . The meta - analysis also identified some key methodological factors influencing the magnitude of social loafing , including the type of cover story used and the setting of the study ( laboratory versus field ) . In addition , despite mixed results from a few prior studies , we found that individuals were generally either unwill - ing or unable to acknowledge that they loafed on collective tasks . Our findings also highlighted the potential of the CEM for generating predictions about interactions among moderat - ing variables . For example , group size interacted with gender such that the magnitude of social loafing increased in larger groups for men , whereas group size did not influence the mag - nitude of social loafing for women . With regard to prior hypotheses , our meta - analysis confirms the conclusion of many previous researchers that individuals tend to engage in social loafing when working collectively and reveals that the effect is consistently obtained and moderate in magnitude . Our findings also support prior conclusions that individuals are more likely to loaf when the potential for evalua - tion is absent . In summary , our meta - analysis contributed a number of new findings and also showed that several previously established findings are reliable . In addition , the CEM success - fully accounted for the empirical status of the vast majority of moderators of social loafing , both old and new . Future directions . Future research could profitably proceed at a number of levels . An especially pressing need is to further substantiate social loafing outside of the laboratory in real - world settings such as industry , committees , juries , partner - ships , and interpersonal relationships . Once the effect has been documented in such settings , attempts could be made to deter - mine whether the moderating variables isolated in laboratory studies apply to other contexts as well . Additional research could further address the generalizability of social loafing , both in terms of dispositional and situational factors . Among the questions that might be more directly addressed are the following : What are the long - term effects of working collec - tively ? Do people ( in general , or particular subclasses ) prefer tasks on which they can loaf ? Is social loafing adaptive in some cases ? Does loafing allow individuals to devote their energies more fully to aspects of tasks that are within their particular domains of mastery and expertise ? How might social loafing manifest itself within interacting groups such as decision - mak - ing teams or juries , and how might individual efforts be mea - sured in these contexts ? Is it necessarily the case that the quality of the work suffers when people loaf ? How aware are people of their social loafing in different settings ? Does knowledge that one loafs in collectives affect the likelihood of loafing ? The CEM generates a number of additional predictions about how various factors might interact to determine effort . Unfortunately , these predictions could not be examined in the current data set because of an insufficient number of compari - sons ( or none at all ) in crucial comparison cells . For example , the CEM suggests that making individual inputs identifiable or providing a comparison standard or performance feedback should have a stronger impact when this information has direct implications for the individual ' s self - evaluation . Thus , the ef - fects of identifiability of inputs , availability of comparison standards , and presence of feedback may interact with factors such as personal relevance of the task , task meaningfulness , perceived importance of the task to significant others or to reference groups , and amount of identification with the group . Similarly , the model suggests that the effects of group size on collective effort may depend on factors such as relative atten - tion to strategic versus cooperative outcomes , task type , and identifiability . In particular , whereas increased group size might increase the magnitude of social loafing when individ - uals place greater value on strategic considerations ( due per - haps to individual differences , cultural or situational norms , importance of the group to the individual , or competition ) , group size might actually decrease social loafing when individ - uals attach greater value to collective outcomes ( as might occur when working in highly cohesive groups , or when a strong so - cial desirability or cooperation norm is salient ) . Increases in group size are likely to lead to decreased perceptions that one ' s inputs are related to one ' s outcomes on most additive , compen - satory , and discretionary tasks . However , they may actually in - crease such perceptions on disjunctive ( or conjunctive ) tasks for high ability ( or low ability ) group members ( cf . Kerr & Bruun , 1983 ) . In addition , when inputs are identifiable , increases in group size might enhance rather than inhibit performance under many conditions . The CEM generates similar predictions regarding possible interactions among additional factors such as expectations of co - worker performance ( see Williams & Karau , 1991 ) , group valence , and task valence . Among some of the more intriguing implications of the CEM are the following : 1 . Identifiability should enhance effort on superficially aversive tasks that are nevertheless important , but should be less likely to enhance effort , and may even undermine effort , on intrinsically meaningful tasks . 2 . Gender , culture , and individual differences in collecti - vism should influence the degree to which individual outcomes are valued relative to group outcomes . Thus , men , individuals in Western cultures , and individuals low in collectivism and need for belonging should attach greater importance to out - comes such as pay , competitive intragroup recognition , and others ' evaluations of one ' s individual performance . However , women , individuals in Eastern cultures , and individuals high in collectivism and need for belonging should be more likely to attach at least moderate importance to outcomes such as group harmony , group success , satisfaction of other group members , others ' evaluations of the group ' s performance , and other group members ' evaluations of one ' s individual contributions to the group . 702 STEVEN J . KARAU AND KIPLING D . WILLIAMS 3 . Even if outcomes are highly valued , high levels of effort are unlikely when individual behaviors are not instrumental in obtaining those outcomes . For example , when individual ef - forts are dispensable , gender , culture , and individual differ - ences in collectivism and need for belonging should have less impact . 4 . Communication among group members should enhance collective effort when it enhances perceptions of task impor - tance or social responsibility , but should hinder collective effort when it relays negative task attitudes or contributes to feelings of dispensability . 5 . Group structural factors and member roles may pro - foundly influence collective effort in ongoing groups by affect - ing perceptions of the instrumentality of one ' s inputs and the value of various outcomes . For example , leaders and high - sta - tus group members may view their inputs as more instrumental to group outcomes , and norms encouraging social responsibil - ity and hard work within groups should have a positive effect on collective effort , especially in cohesive or highly valued groups . These are just a few of the questions that future research can attempt to answer . The research reviewed in this article sup - plies a consistent and robust foundation from which to con - tinue this investigation . References Abrams , D . , & Hogg , M . ( 1990 ) . Social identity theory : Constructive and critical advances . New York : Springer - Verlag . Anderson , L . R . , & Blanchard , P . N . ( 1982 ) . Sex differences in task and social - emotional behavior . Basic and Applied Social Psychology , 3 , 109 - 139 . Bakan , D . ( 1966 ) . The duality of human existence : An essay on psychol - ogy and religion . Chicago : Rand McNally . Bartis , S . , Szymanski , K . , & Harkins , S . G . ( 1988 ) . Evaluation and per - formance : A two - edged knife . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 14 , 242 - 251 . Bond , C . E , & Titus , L . J . ( 1983 ) . Social facilitation : A meta - analysis of 241 studies . Psychological Bulletin , 94 , 265 - 292 . Breckler , S . J . , & Greenwald , A . G . ( 1986 ) . Motivational facets of the self . In R . M . Sorrentino & E . T . Higgins ( Eds . ) , Handbook of motiva - tion and cognition ( Vol . 1 , pp . 145 - 164 ) . New York : Guilford Press . Brewer , M . B . ( 1991 ) . The social self : On being the same and different at the same time . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 17 , 475 - 482 . Brickner , M . A . , Harkins , S . G , & Ostrom , T . M . ( 1986 ) . Effects of personal involvement : Thought - provoking implications for social loafing . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 51 , 763 - 769 . Brickner , M . A . , & Wingard , K . ( 1988 ) . Social identity and self - motiva - tion : Improvements in productivity . Unpublished manuscript . Akron , OH : University of Akron . Broverman , I . K . , Vogel , S . R . , Broverman , D . M . , Clarkson , F . E . , & Rosenkrantz , P . S . ( 1972 ) . Sex - role stereotypes : A current appraisal . Journal of Social Issues , 25 ( 2 ) , 59 - 78 . Brown , J . D . , Collins , R . L . , & Schmidt , G . W . ( 1988 ) . Self - esteem and direct versus indirect formsof self - enhancement . Journal of Personal - ity and Social Psychology , 55 , 445 - 453 . Caporael , L . , Dawes , R . , Orbell , J . , & van de Kragt , A . ( 1989 ) . Selfish - ness examined : Cooperation in the absence of egoistic incentives . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 12 , 683 - 699 . Carli , L . L . ( 1982 ) . Are women more social and men more task oriented ? A meta - analytic review of sex differences in group interaction , reward allocation , coalition formation , and cooperation in the prisoners di - lemma game . Unpublished manuscript . Cates , K . H . ( 1986 ) . The effects of evaluation , identifiability , and task uniqueness on task performance . Dissertation Abstracts Interna - tional , 47 , 1326B . ( University Microfilms No . 86 - 11258 ) . Cialdini , R . B . , Borden , R . J . , Thorne , A . , Walker , M . R . , Freeman , S . , & Sloan , L . R . ( 1976 ) . Basking in reflected glory : Three ( football ) field studies . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 34 , 366 - 375 . Cohen , C . J . ( 1988 ) . Social loafing and personality : The effects of indi - vidual differences on collective performance ( Doctoral disserta - tion , Fordham University ) . Dissertation Abstracts International , 49 , 1430B . Cohen , J . ( 1977 ) . Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences ( rev . ed ) . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Cooley , R . J . ( 1991 ) . Adult children of alcoholics : Interpersonal trust and social compensation . Unpublished master ' s thesis , University of To - ledo . Cooper , H . M . ( 1989 ) . Integrating research : A guide for literature re - views ( 2nd ed . ) . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Crocker , J . , & Luhtanen , R . ( 1990 ) . Collective self - esteem and ingroup bias . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 58 , 60 - 67 . Davis , J . H . ( 1969 ) . Group performance . Reading , MA : Addison - Wesley . Deci , E . L . ( 1975 ) . Intrinsic motivation . New York : Plenum Press . Eagly , A . H . ( 1987 ) . Sex differences in social behavior : A social - role interpretation . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Eagly , A . H . , & Steffen , V J . ( 1984 ) . Gender stereotypes stem from the distribution of women and men into social roles . Journal of Personal - ity and Social Psychology , 46 , 735 - 754 . Early , P . C . ( 1989 ) . Social loafing and collectivism : A comparison of the United States and the People ' s Republic of China . Administrative Science Quarterly , 34 , 565 - 581 . Gabrenya , W K . , Jr . , Latane , B . , & Wang , Y . E . ( 1981 , August ) . Social loafing among Chinese overseas and U . S . students . Paper presented at the Asian Conference of the International Association for Cross - Cultural Psychology , Taipei , Taiwan . Gabrenya , W K . , Jr . , Latane , B . , & Wang , Y . E . ( 1983 ) . Social loafing in cross - cultural perspective : Chinese in Taiwan . Journal of Cross - Cul - tural Psychology , 14 , 368 - 384 . Geen , R . G . ( 1991 ) . Social motivation . Annual Review of Psychology , 42 , 377 - 399 . Glass , G . V , McGaw , B . , & Smith , M . L . ( 1981 ) . Meta - analysis in social research . Beverly Hills , CA : Sage . Goethals , G , & Darley , J . ( 1987 ) . Social comparison theory : Self - eva - luation and group life . In B . Mullen & G . Goethals ( Eds . ) , Theories of group behavior ( pp . 21 - 47 ) . New York : Springer - Verlag . Greenwald , A . G . ( 1982 ) . Ego task analysis : An integration of research on ego - involvement and self - awareness . In A . H . Hastorf & A . M . Isen ( Eds . ) , Cognitive social psychology ( pp . 109 - 147 ) . New York : Elsevier North - Holland . Greenwald , A . G , & Pratkanis , A . R . ( 1984 ) . The self . In R . S . Wyer & T . K . Srull ( Eds . ) , Handbook of social cognition ( pp . 129 - 178 ) . Hills - dale , NJ : Erlbaum . Griffith , T L . , Fichman , M . , & Moreland , R . L . ( 1989 ) . Social loafing and social facilitation : An empirical test of the cognitive - motiva - tional model of performance . Basic and Applied Social Psychology , 70 . 253 - 271 . Hackman , J . R . , & Lawler , E . E . , III . ( 1971 ) . Employee reactions to job characteristics . Journal of Applied Psychology , 55 , 259 - 285 . Hallmark , J . R . , & Downs , T . M . ( 1987 , November ) . Group participation in the organization : Social loafing as a limitation of group effective - ness . Paper presented at the annual meetingof the Speech Communi - cation Association , Boston . Harcum , E . R . , & Badura , L . L . ( 1990 ) . Social loafing as a response to an appraisal of appropriate effort . Journal of Psychology , 124 , 629 - 637 . SOCIAL LOAFING 703 Hardy , C , & Latane , B . ( 1986 ) . Social loafing on a cheering task . Social Science , 77 , 165 - 172 . Hardy , C . J . , & Latane , B . ( 1988 ) . Social loafing in cheerleaders : Effects of team membership and competition . Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology , 10 , 109 - 114 . Harkins , S . G . ( 1987 ) . Social loafing and social facilitation . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 23 , 1 - 18 . Harkins , S . G . , & Jackson , J . M . ( 1985 ) . The role of evaluation in elimi - nating social loafing . Personality and Social Psychology , 11 , 575 - 584 . Harkins , S . G . , Latane , B . , & Williams , K . D . ( 1980 ) . Social loafing : Allocating effort or taking it easy ? Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 16 , 457 - 465 . Harkins , S . G , & Petty , R . E . ( 1982 ) . Effects of task difficulty and task uniqueness on social loafing . Journal of Personality and Social Psy - chology , 45 , 1214 - 1229 . Harkins , S . G , & Szymanski , K . ( 1987 ) . Social loafing and social facili - tation : New wine in old bottles . In C . Hendrick ( Ed . ) , Review of personality and social psychology ( Vol . 9 , pp . 167 - 188 ) . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Harkins , S . G . , & Szymanski , K . ( 1988 ) . Social loafing and self - evalua - tion with an objective standard . Journal of Experimental Social Psy - chology , 24 , 354 - 365 . Harkins , S . G . , & Szymanski , K . ( 1989 ) . Social loafing and group evalu - ation . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 56 , 934 - 941 . Heckhausen , H . ( 1977 ) . Achievement motivation and its constructs : A cognitive model . Motivation and Emotion , 1 , 283 - 329 . Hedges , L . V ( 1987 ) . How hard is hard science , how soft is soft science ? The empirical cumulativeness of research . American Psychologist , 42 , 443 - 455 . Hedges , L . V , & Olkin , I . ( 1985 ) . Statistical methods for meta - analysis . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Hsu , F . L . K . ( 1970 ) . Americans and Chinese : Purposes and fulfillment in great civilization ( 2nd ed . ) . Garden City , NY : Natural History Press . Huddleston , S . , Doody , S . G , & Ruder , M . K . ( 1985 ) . The effect of prior knowledge of the social loafing phenomenon on performance in a group . International Journal of Sport Psychology , 16 , 176 - 182 . Ingham , A . G , Levinger , G , Graves , J . , & Peckham , V ( 1974 ) . The Ringelmann effect : Studies of group size and group performance . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 10 , 371 - 384 . Jackson , J . M . ( 1986 ) . In defense of social impact theory : Comment on Mullen . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 50 , 5 11 - 513 . Jackson , J . M . , & Harkins , S . G . ( 1985 ) . Equity in effort : An explanation of the social loafing effect . Journal of Personality and Social Psychol - ogy , 49 , 1199 - 1206 . Jackson , J . M . , & Latane , B . ( 1982a , May ) . Obedience : Strength and immediacy of authority and social loafing . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Midwestern Psychological Association , Min - neapolis . Jackson , 1 M . , & Latane , B . ( 1982b , May ) . Experimenter immediacy and social loafing . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Midwestern Psychological Association , Minneapolis . Jackson , J . M , & Williams , K . D . ( 1985 ) . Social loafing on difficult tasks : Working collectively can improve performance . Journal of Per - sonality and Social Psychology , 49 , 937 - 942 . Jackson , J . M . , Williams , K . D . , & Latane , B . ( 1978 , May ) . The effects of sexual composition and group size on individual effort . Paper pre - sented at the annual meeting of the Midwestern Psychological Asso - ciation , Chicago . Johnson , B . T . ( 1989 ) . DSTAT : Software for the meta - analytic review of research literatures . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Karau , S . J . , & Williams , K . D . ( 1993 ) . The effects of group cohesiveness on social loafing and social compensation . Manuscript submitted for publication . Kerr , N . L . ( 1983 ) . Motivation losses in small groups : A social di - lemma analysis . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 45 , 819 - 828 . Kerr , N . L . , & Bruun , S . ( 1981 ) . Ringelmann revisited : Alternative explanations for the social loafing effect . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin . 7 , 224 - 231 . Kerr , N . L . , & Bruun , S . ( 1983 ) . The dispensability of member effort and group motivation losses : Free rider effects . Journal of Personal - ity and Social Psychology , 44 , 78 - 94 . Kravitz , D . A . , & Martin , B . ( 1986 ) . Ringelmann rediscovered : The original article . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 50 , 936 - 941 . Latane , B . ( 1981 ) . The psychology of social impact . American Psycholo - gist , 36 , 343 - 356 . Latane , B . , Williams , K . , & Harkins , S . ( 1979 ) . Many hands make light the work : The causes and consequences of social loafing . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 37 , 822 - 832 . Leary , M . R . , & Forsyth , D . R . ( 1987 ) . Attributions of responsibility for collective endeavors . InC . Hendrick ( Ed . ) , Review of personality and social psychology : Group processes ( Vol . 8 , pp . 167 - 188 ) . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Lepper , M . , & Greene , D . ( Eds . ) . ( 1978 ) . The hidden costs of reward . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Levine , J . M . , & Moreland , R . L . ( 1987 ) . Social comparison and out - come evaluation in group contexts . In J . C . Masters & W P . Smith ( Eds . ) , Social comparison , social justice , and relativedeprivation : The - oretical , empirical , and policy perspectives . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Martin , L . L . , Seta , J . J . , & Crelia , R . A . ( 1990 ) . Assimilation and con - trast as a function of people ' s willingness and ability to expend effort in forming an impression . Journal of Personality and Social Psychol - ogy , 59 , 27 - 37 . Matsui , T , Kakuyama , X , & Onglatco , M . U . ( 1987 ) . Effects of goals and feedback on performance in groups . Journal of Applied Psychol - ogy , 72 , 407 - 415 . McGovern , J . M . ( 1986 ) . The role of insight in the reduction of social loafing . Unpublished master ' s thesis , Florida Institute of Technol - ogy . Mullen , B . ( 1983 ) . Operationalizing the effect of the group on the indi - vidual : A self - attention perspective . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 19 , 295 - 322 . Mullen , B . ( 1985 ) . Strength and immediacy of sources : A meta - analytic evaluation of the forgotten elements of social impact theory . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 48 , 1458 - 1466 . Mullen , B . ( 1991 ) . The phenomenology of being in a group : Integra - tionsof social cognition and group processes . Journal of Experimen - tal Social Psychology , 27 , 297 - 323 . Naylor , J . C , Pritchard , R . D . , & Ilgen , D . R . ( 1980 ) . A theory of behavior in organizations . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Olson , M . ( 1965 ) . The logic of collective action : Public goods and the theory of groups . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Paulus , P . B . ( 1983 ) . Group influences on individual task performance . In P . B . Paulus ( Ed . ) , Basic group processes ( pp . 97 - 120 ) . New York : Springer - Verlag . Peterson , C , Zaccaro , S . J . , & Daly , D . C . ( 1986 ) . Learned helplessness and the generality of social loafing . Cognitive Therapy and Research , 10 , 563 - 569 . Petty , R . E . , Cacioppo , J . T , & Kasmer , J . A . ( 1985 , May ) . Individual differences in social loafing on cognitive tasks . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Midwestern Psychological Association , Chi - cago . Petty , R . E . , Harkins , S . G , & Williams , K . D . ( 1980 ) . The effects of diffusion of cognitive effort on attitudes : An information processing view . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 38 , 81 - 92 . Petty , R . , Harkins , S . , Williams , K . , & Latane , B . ( 1977 ) . The effects of 704 STEVEN J . KARAU AND KIPLING D . WILLIAMS group size on cognitive effort and evaluation . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 3 , 579 - 582 . Porter , L . W , & Lawler , E . E . ( 1968 ) . Managerial attitudes and perfor - mance . Homewood , IL : Dorsey Press . Price , K . H . ( 1987 ) . Decision responsibility , task responsibility , identi - fiability , and social loafing . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 40 , 330 - 345 . Quintanar , L . R . , & Pryor , J . B . ( 1982 , August ) . Group diffusion of cogni - tive effort as a determinant of attribution . Paper presented at the an - nual meeting of the American Psychological Association , Washing - ton , DC . Rosenthal , R . ( 1991 ) . Meta - analylic procedures for social research ( 2nd ed . ) . Newbury Park , CA : Sage . Rosenthal , R . , & Rubin , D . B . ( 1986 ) . Meta - analytic procedures for combining studies with multiple effect sizes . Psychological Bulletin , 99 , 400 - 406 . Schachter , S . ( 1959 ) . The psychology of affiliation : Experimental stud - ies of the sources ofgregariousness . Stan ford , CA : Stanford University Press . Shepperd , J . A . ( 1993 ) . Productivity loss in performance groups : A motivation analysis . Psychological Bulletin , 113 , 67 - 81 . Shepperd , J . A . , & Wright , R . A . ( 1989 ) . Individual contributions to a collective effort : An incentive analysis . Personality and Social Psy - chology Bulletin , 15 , 141 - 149 . Shirakashi , S . ( 1985 ) . Social loafing of Japanese students . Hiroshima Forum for Psychology , 10 , 35 - 40 . Sorrentino , R . M . , & Sheppard , B . H . ( 1978 ) . Effects of affiliation - re - lated motives on swimmers in individual versus group competition : A field experiment . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 36 , 704 - 714 . Steiner , I . D . ( 1972 ) . Group process and productivity . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Stevenson , C . ( 1990 ) . Motivating effort under social loafing condi - tions : The effects of private self - awareness on task effort . Disserta - tion Abstracts International , 50 , 482IB . ( University Microfilms No . 90 - 06796 ) Stroebe , W , & Frey , B . S . ( 1982 ) . Self - interest and collective action : The economics and psychology of public goods . British Journal of Social Psychology , 21 , 121 - 137 . Suls , J . M . , & Miller , R . L . ( Eds . ) . ( 1977 ) . Social comparison processes : Theoretical and empirical perspectives . Washington , DC : Hemi - sphere . Szymanski , K . , & Harkins , S . G . ( 1987 ) . Social loafing and self - evalua - tion with a social standard . Journal of Personality and Social Psychol - ogy , 53 , 891 - 897 . Tajfel , H . , & Turner , J . ( 1986 ) . The social identity theory of intergroup behavior . In S . Worchel & W Austin ( Eds . ) , Psychology of intergroup relations ( pp . 33 - 48 ) . Chicago : Nelson - Hall . Taylor , S . E . , & Brown , J . ( 1988 ) . Illusion and well - being : Some social psychological contributions to a theory of mental health . Psychologi - cal Bulletin , 103 , 193 - 210 . Tesser , A . ( 1988 ) . Toward a self - evaluation maintenance model of so - cial behavior . In L . Berkowitz ( Ed . ) , Advances in experimental social psychology ( Vol . 21 , pp . 181 - 227 ) . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Thompson , J . , Jackson , J . , Williams , K . , & Latane , B . ( 1980 ) . The ef - fects ofcoactor ability on social loafing . Paper presented at the annual Graduate Student Conference in Personality and Social Psychology , Columbus , OH . Triandis , H . C . ( 1989 ) . The self and social behavior in differing cultural contexts . Psychological Review , 96 , 506 - 520 . Vroom , V H . ( 1964 ) . Work and motivation . New York : Wiley . Waller , J . E . ( 1989 ) . Developmental aspects of self - evaluation and so - cial loafing in children ( Doctoral dissertation , University of Ken - tucky ) . Dissertation Abstracts International , 49 , 5574B . Weldon , E . , & Gargano , G . M . ( 1985 ) . Cognitive effort in additive task groups : The effects of shared responsibility on the quality of multiat - tribute judgments . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 36 , 348 - 361 . Weldon , E . , & Gargano , G . M . ( 1988 ) . Cognitive loafing : The effects of accountability and shared responsibility on cognitive effort . Person - ality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 14 , 159 - 171 . Weldon , E . , & Mustari , E . L . ( 1988 ) . Felt dispensability in groups of coactors : The effects of shared responsibility and explicit anonymity on cognitive effort . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 41 , 330 - 351 . Wheeler , L . , Reis , H . T , & Bond , M . H . ( 1989 ) . Collectivism - individual - ism in everyday social life : The middle kingdom and the melting pot . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 57 , 79 - 86 . Williams , K . D . ( 1981 , May ) . The effects of group cohesiveness on social loafing . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Midwestern Psychological Association , Detroit . Williams , K . D . , & Burmont , S . C . ( 1981 , June ) . A look at social loafing in a cognitive task : Individual effort in advertising evaluations . Paper presented at the First Annual Nags Head Conference , Kill Devil Hills , NC . Williams , K . , Harkins , S . , & Latane , B . ( 1981 ) . Identifiability as a de - terrent to social loafing : Two cheering experiments . Journal of Per - sonality and Social Psychology , 40 , 303 - 311 . Williams , K . D , & Karau , S . J . ( 1991 ) . Social loafing and social com - pensation : The effects of expectations of co - worker performance . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 61 , 570 - 581 . Williams , K . D , Nida , S . A . , Baca , L . D , & Latane , B . ( 1989 ) . Social loafing and swimming : Effects of identifiability on individual and relay performance of intercollegiate swimmers . Basic and Applied Social Psychology , 10 , 73 - 81 . Williams , K . D , & Williams , K . B . ( 1981 , August ) . The development of social loafing in America . Paper presented at the Asian Conference of the International Association for Cross - Cultural Psychology , Tai - pei , Taiwan . Williams , K . D , & Williams , K . B . , Kawana , Y , & Latane , B . ( 1984 , May ) . Collective effort in small groups in the United Stales and Japan . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Midwestern Psycholog - ical Association , Chicago . Wrightsman , L . S . ( 1960 ) . Effects of waiting with others on changes in level of felt anxiety . Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 61 , 216 - 222 . Yamaguchi , S . , Okamoto , K . , & Oka , T . ( 1985 ) . Effects of coactor ' s presence : Social loafing and social facilitation . Japanese Psychologi - cal Research , 27 , 215 - 222 . Zaccaro , S . J . ( 1984 ) . Social loafing : The role of task attractiveness . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 10 , 99 - 106 . Zalesny , M . D , & Ford , J . K . ( 1990 ) . Extending the social information processing perspective : New links to attitudes , behaviors , and per - ceptions . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 47 , 205 - 246 . SOCIAL LOAFING 705 Appendix Studies Used in the Meta - Analysis Bartis , S . , Szymanski , K . , & Harkins , S . G . ( 1988 ) . Evaluation and per - formance : A two - edged knife . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 14 , 242 - 251 . Brickner , M . A . , Harkins , S . G . , & Ostrom , T , M . ( 1986 ) . Effects of personal involvement : Thought - provoking implications for social loafing . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 51 , 763 - 769 . Brickner , M . A . , & Wingard , K . ( 1988 ) . Social identity and self - motiva - tion : Improvements in productivity . Unpublished manuscript . Akron , OH : University of Akron . Cates , K . H . ( 1986 ) . The effects of evaluation , identifiability , and task uniqueness on task performance . Dissertation Abstracts Interna - tional , 47 , 1326B . ( University Microfilms No . 86 - 11258 ) Cohen , C . J . ( 1988 ) . Social loafing and personality : The effects of indi - vidual differences on collective performance ( Doctoral disserta - tion , Fordham University ) . Dissertation Abstracts International , 49 , 1430B . Cooley , R . 1 ( 1991 ) . Adult children of alcoholics : Interpersonal trust and social compensation . Unpublished master ' s thesis , University of To - ledo . Earley , P . C . ( 1989 ) . Social loafing and collectivism : A comparison of the United States and the People ' s Republic of China . Administrative Science Quarterly , 34 , 565 - 581 . Gabrenya , W K . , Jr . , Latane , B . , & Wang , Y . E . ( 1981 , August ) . Social loafing among Chinese overseas and U . S . students . Paper presented at the Asian Conference of the International Association for Cross - Cultural Psychology , Taipei , Taiwan . Gabrenya , W K . , Jr . , Latane , B . , & Wang , Y . E . ( 1983 ) . Social loafing in cross - cultural perspective : Chinese in Taiwan . Journal o ] Cross - Cul - tural Psychology , 14 , 368 - 384 . Gabrenya , W K . , Wang , T . E . , & Latane , B . ( 1985 ) . Social loafing on an optimizing task : Cross - cultural differences among Chinese and Americans . Journal of Cross - cultural Psychology , 16 , 223 - 242 . Griffith , T . L . , Fichman , M . , & Moreland , R . L . ( 1989 ) . Social loafing and social facilitation : An empirical test of the cognitive - motiva - tional model of performance . Basic and Applied Social Psychology , 10 , 253 - 271 . Hallmark , J . R . , & Downs , T . M . ( 1987 , November ) . Group participation in the organization : Social loafing as a limitation of group effective - ness . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Speech Communi - cation Association , Boston . Harcum , E . R . , & Badura , L . L . ( 1990 ) . Social loafing as a response to an appraisal of appropriate effort . Journal of Psychology , 124 , 629 - 637 . Hardy , C , & Latane , B . ( 1986 ) . Social loafing on a cheering task . Social Science , 77 , 165 - 172 . Hardy , C . J . , & Latane , B . ( 1988 ) . Social loafing in cheerleaders : Effects of team membership and competition . Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology , 10 , 109 - 114 . Harkins , S . G . ( 1987 ) . Social loafing and social facilitation . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 23 , 1 - 18 . Harkins , S . G . , & Jackson , J . M . ( 1985 ) . The role of evaluation in elimi - nating social loafing . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 11 , 575 - 584 . Harkins , S . G . , Latane , B . , Williams , K . D . ( 1980 ) . Social loafing : Allo - cating effort or taking it easy ? Journal of Experimental Social Psy - chology , 16 , 457 - 465 . Harkins , S . G . , & Petty , R . E . ( 1982 ) . Effects of task difficulty and task uniqueness on social loafing . Journal of Personality and Social Psy - chology , 43 , 1214 - 1229 . Harkins , S . G . , & Szymanski , K . ( 1988 ) . Social loafing and self - evalua - tion with an objective standard . Journal of Experimental Social Psy - chology , 24 , 354 - 365 . Harkins , S . G . , & Szymanski , K . ( 1989 ) . Social loafing and group evalu - ation . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 56 , 934 - 941 . Ingham , A . G , Levinger , G . , Graves , J . , & Peckham , V ( 1974 ) . The Ringelmann effect : Studies of group size and group performance . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 10 , 371 - 384 . Jackson , J . M , & Harkins , S . G . ( 1985 ) . Equity in effort : An explanation of the social loafing effect . Journal of Personality and Social Psychol - ogy , 49 , 1199 - 1206 . Jackson , J . M . , & Latane , B . ( 1982a , May ) . Obedience : Strength and immediacy of authority and social loafing . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Midwestern Psychological Association , Min - neapolis . Jackson , J . M . , & Latane , B . ( 1982b , May ) . Experimenter immediacy and social loafing . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Midwestern Psychological Association , Minneapolis . Jackson , J . M . , & Williams , K . D . ( 1985 ) . Social loafing on difficult tasks : Working collectively can improve performance . Journal of Per - sonality and Social Psychology , 49 , 937 - 942 . Jackson , J . M . , Williams , K . D , & Latane , B . ( 1978 , May ) . The effects of sexual composition and group size on individual effort . Paper pre - sented at the annual meeting of the Midwestern Psychological Asso - ciation , Chicago . Karau , S . J . , & Williams , K . D . ( 1993 ) . The effects of group cohesiveness on social loafing and social compensation . Manuscript submitted for publication . Kerr , N . L . ( 1983 ) . Motivation losses in small groups : A social di - lemma analysis . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 45 , 819 - 828 . Kerr , N . L . , & Bruun , S . ( 1981 ) . Ringelmann revisited : Alternative explanations for the social loafing effect . Personality and Social Psy - chology Bulletin , 7 , 224 - 231 . Kerr , N . L . , & Bruun , S . ( 1983 ) . The dispensability of member effort and group motivation losses : Free rider effects . Journal of Personal - ity and Social Psychology , 44 , 78 - 94 . Latane , B . , Williams , K . , & Harkins , S . ( 1979 ) . Many hands make light the work : The causes and consequences of social loafing . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 37 , 822 - 832 . Martin , L . L . , Seta , J . J . , & Crelia , R . A . ( 1990 ) . Assimilation and con - trast as a function of people ' s willingness and ability to expend effort in forming an impression . Journal of Personality and Social Psychol - ogy , 59 , 27 - 37 . Matsui , X , Kakuyama , T . , & Onglatco , M . U . ( 1987 ) . Effects of goals and feedback on performance in groups . Journal of Applied Psychol - ogy , 72 , 407 - 415 . McGovern , J . M . ( 1986 ) . The role of insight in the reduction of social loafing . Unpublished master ' s thesis , Florida Institute of Technol - ogy . Peterson , C , Zaccaro , S . I , & Daly , D . C . ( 1986 ) . Learned helplessness and the generality of social loafing . Cognitive Therapy and Research , 10 , 563 - 569 . Petty , R . E . , Cacioppo , J . T , & Kasmer , J . A . ( 1985 , May ) . Individual differences in social loafing on cognitive tasks . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Midwestern Psychological Association , Chi - cago . Petty , R . E . , Harkins , S . G . , & Williams , K . D . ( 1980 ) . The effects of diffusion of cognitive effort on attitudes : An information processing view . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 38 , 81 - 92 . Petty , R . , Harkins , S . , Williams , K . , & Latane , B . ( 1977 ) . The effects of 706 STEVEN J . KARAU AND KIPLING D . WILLIAMS group size on cognitive effort and evaluation . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 3 , 579 - 582 . Price , K . H . ( 1987 ) . Decision responsibility , task responsibility , identi - fiability , and social loafing . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 40 , 330 - 345 . Quintanar , L . R . , & Pryor , J . B . ( 1982 , August ) . Group diffusion of cogni - tive effort as a determinant of attribution . Paper presented at the an - nual meeting of the American Psychological Association , Washing - ton , DC . Shepperd , J . A . , & Wright , R . A . ( 1989 ) . Individual contributions to a collective effort : An incentive analysis . Personality and Social Psy - chology Bulletin , 15 , 141 - 149 . Shirakashi , S . ( 1985 ) . Social loafing of Japanese students . Hiroshima Forum for Psychology , 10 , 35 - 40 . Sorrentino , R . M , & Sheppard , B . H . ( 1978 ) . Effects of affiliation - re - lated motives on swimmers in individual versus group competition : A field experiment . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 36 , 704 - 714 . Stevenson , C . ( 1990 ) . Motivating effort under social loafing condi - tions : The effects of private self - awareness on task effort . Disserta - tion Abstracts International , 50 , 482 IB . ( University Microfilms No . 90 - 06796 ) Szymanski , K . , & Harkins , S . G . ( 1987 ) . Social loafing and self - evalua - tion with a social standard . Journal of Personality and Social Psychol - ogy , 53 , S91 - 897 . Thompson , J . , Jackson , J . , Williams , K . , & Latane , B . ( 1980 ) . The ef - fects of coactor ability on social loafing . Paper presented at the annual Graduate Student Conference in Personality and Social Psychology , Columbus , OH . Waller , J . E . ( 1989 ) . Developmental aspects of self - evaluation and so - cial loafing in children ( Doctoral dissertation , University of Ken - tucky ) . Dissertation Abstracts International , 49 , 5574B . Weldon , E . , & Gargano , G . M . ( 1985 ) . Cognitive effort in additive task groups : The effects of shared responsibility on the quality of multiat - tribute judgments . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 56 , 348 - 361 . Weldon , E . , & Gargano , G . M . ( 1988 ) . Cognitive loafing : The effects of accountability and shared responsibility on cognitive effort . Person - ality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 14 , 159 - 171 . Weldon , E . , & Mustari , E . L . ( 1988 ) . Felt dispensability in groups of coactors : The effects of shared responsibility and explicit anonymity on cognitive effort . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 41 , 330 - 351 . Williams , K . D . ( 1981 , May ) . The effects of group cohesiveness on social loafing . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Midwestern Psychological Association , Detroit . Williams , K . D , & Burmont , S . C . ( 1981 , June ) . A look at social loafing in a cognitive task : Individual effort in advertising evaluations . Paper presented at the 1st Annual Nags Head Conference , Kill Devil Hills , NC . Williams , K . , Harkins , S . , & Latane , B . ( 1981 ) . Identifiability as a de - terrent to social loafing : Two cheering experiments . Journal of Per - sonality and Social Psychology , 40 , 303 - 311 . Williams , K . D , & Karau , S . J . ( 1991 ) . Social loafing and social com - pensation : The effects of expectations of co - worker performance . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 61 , 570 - 581 . Williams , K . D , Nida , S . A . , Baca , L . D , & Latane , B . ( 1989 ) . Social loafing and swimming : Effects of identifiability on individual and relay performance of intercollegiate swimmers . Basic and Applied Social Psychology , 10 , 73 - 81 . Williams , K . D . , & Williams , K . B . ( 1981 , August ) . The development of social loafing in America . Paper presented at the Asian Conference of the International Association for Cross - Cultural Psychology , Tai - pei , Taiwan . Williams , K . D , & Williams , K . B . , Kawana , Y , & Latane , B . ( 1984 , May ) . Collective effort in small groups in the United States and Japan . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Midwestern Psycholog - ical Association , Chicago . Yamaguchi , S . , Okamoto , K . , & Oka , T . ( 1985 ) . Effects of coactor ' s presence : Social loafing and social facilitation . Japanese Psychologi - cal Research , 27 , 215 - 222 . Received February 18 , 1992 Revision received May 3 , 1993 Accepted May 11 , 1993