Ethics for Studying Online Sociotechnical Systems in a Big Data World Abstract The evolution of social technology and research methods present ongoing challenges to studying people online . Recent high - profile cases have prompted discussion among both the research community and the general public about the ethical implications of researching humans , their information , and their activities in large - scale digital contexts . Examples of scientific and market research involving Facebook users and OKCupid clients exemplify the ethical complexities of both studying and manipulating online user behavior . When does data science become human subjects research , and what are our obligations to these subjects as researchers ? Drawing from previous work around the ethics of digital research , one goal of this workshop is to work towards a set of guiding principles for CSCW scholars doing research online . Workshop Theme With greater numbers of people relying on Internet - enabled services in their daily lives , their accumulated traffic and communication patterns leave seemingly endless digital traces . Online services , including social networking sites , online dating sites , and online gaming platforms , are awash in behavioral data , both individual and aggregate . This provides sociotechnical researchers with unique access to large - scale data that can be used Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the Owner / Author . Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . CSCW ' 15 Companion , Mar 14 - 18 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 2946 - 0 / 15 / 03 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2685553 . 2685558 Casey Fiesler Georgia Tech casey . fiesler @ gatech . edu Alyson Young University of Maryland , Baltimore County alyson1 @ umbc . edu Tamara Peyton The Pennsylvania State University tamara @ psu . edu Amy S . Bruckman Georgia Tech asb @ cc . gatech . edu Mary Gray Microsoft Research mlg @ microsoft . com Jeff Hancock Cornell University Jth34 @ cornell . edu Wayne Lutters University of Maryland , Baltimore County lutters @ umbc . edu Workshop CSCW ' 15 Companion , March 14 – 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 289 to better understand and challenge traditional theories of human behavior [ 14 ] . However , this kind of access also raises ethical concerns about conducting big data research in online spaces . This , in turn , has spurred a body of work around ethics in digital contexts [ 3 , 10 , 11 , 14 , 15 , 19 ] , as well as a number of guiding documents intended to direct sociotechnical researchers towards ethical behaviors [ 9 , 16 ] and previous CSCW workshops about the ethics of digital design [ 4 , 7 ] . As both social technology and research methods evolve , traditional research ethics continue to be challenged by online settings . There are a number of issues worthy of continued dialogue , such as informed consent [ 10 ] , the role of Institutional Review Boards [ 8 ] , appropriate and effective anonymization of participants [ 6 , 16 ] relationships with and dissemination of findings to participants [ 2 ] , the definition of public spaces , [ 5 ] and public data [ 19 ] , and the collaboration between academic and corporate researchers . How can we apply the ACM ethical codes of “avoiding harm to others” and “being honest and trustworthy” to newer methods for human subjects research and design ? Recent high - profile cases have prompted a great deal of discussion about research conducted for both business practices and scientific knowledge . Announcements about data manipulation in Facebook for experimental purposes [ 12 ] and OKCupid’s manipulation of dating matches on their for - profit website [ 1 , 18 ] have brought with them public awareness to issues of research ethics . Coupled with the outcry about privacy violations in a post - Snowden world , many Internet users are suddenly more aware of who might be watching their digital footprints . Under what ethical expectations should sociotechnical researchers be operating when partnering with corporations that collect , aggregate , and manage large scale datasets drawn from a customer base ? Should there be a distinction between scientific and business research ? When does data science become human subjects research ? These open questions have spurred both public response and discussion within our own community ; what can we learn from these reactions ? Activities and Contributions This one - day workshop will be structured to facilitate deep discussion of current ethical dilemmas faced by CSCW researchers . The first half of the workshop will frame this discussion with a set of case studies presented by participants and organizers . We will use these case studies to identify a set of ethical issues as particularly pressing to current researchers . In the second half of the workshop , we will synthesize themes that emerged from the preceding discussion , and use these as a starting point to discuss best practices for researching online sociotechnical systems . We will brainstorm ideas for ethical guidelines for CSCW researchers , as well as ideas for interaction with Institutional Review Boards and industry ethical standards . We will discuss methods for disseminating information among our research community as well as facilitating public awareness of sociotechnical research . The outcome of this workshop will be to generate a workshop report that identifies key issues and future actions . These will be drawn from our collaborative ideas for best practices , illustrative case studies , Workshop CSCW ' 15 Companion , March 14 – 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 290 recommendations for IRB submissions , and proposals for future collaborations and dialogue with individuals across industry and academia . Workshop Organizers Casey Fiesler is a PhD candidate in Human - Centered Computing at Georgia Tech . She has a law degree from Vanderbilt University , and her dissertation work focuses on the role of copyright law in online communities , particularly in the context of legal and ethical gray areas . Alyson Young is a PhD candidate in Human - Centered Computing , in the Department of Information Systems , at the University of Maryland , Baltimore County . Through a background in communications and social media research , she focuses broadly on the uses and implications of ICTs on individuals , communities and organizations , with a particular focus on privacy concerns and on the impacts of large scale e - science systems on scientific collaboration and knowledge production . Tamara Peyton is a PhD candidate in the Health Information Technologies Lab ( HInT - L ) , in the College of Information Sciences and Technology , at The Pennsylvania State University . Drawing on a social sciences background and former career as an IT professional , her research considers the health impact of mobile technology interventions on life transition challenges . Amy Bruckman is a professor in the School of Interactive Computing at the Georgia Institute of Technology , where she does research on social computing , particularly for educational applications . Bruckman received her PhD from the MIT Media Lab’s Epistemology and Learning group in 1997 , and a B . A . in Physics from Harvard University in 1987 . Mary Gray is a senior researcher at Microsoft Research and an associate professor in the Media School at Indiana University , where she studies the everyday uses of digital media among people with marginalized access to it . Gray is currently researching the lives of crowdsourcing platform workers based in India and the United States . Gray trained in anthropology , Native American studies , and sociology . She received her PhD from UCSD ' s Communication Department in 2004 . Jeff Hancock is a Professor of Communication and of Information Science at Cornell University , where he does research on the psychological aspects of social media . Hancock received his PhD from Dalhousie University in 2002 . Wayne Lutters is an Associate Professor of Information Systems in the College of Engineering and Information Technology at the University of Maryland , Baltimore County . Dr . Lutters ' research interests are at the nexus of computer - supported cooperative work , social computing , and knowledge management . He specializes in field studies of IT - mediated work , from a socio - technical perspective , to better inform the design and evaluation of collaborative systems . Acknowledgments The ideas for this workshop arose out discussions at the 2014 Consortium for the Science of Socialtechnial Systems Summer Institute , as well as the ethics panel at the 2014 Microsoft Faculty Summit . Workshop CSCW ' 15 Companion , March 14 – 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 291 References [ 1 ] Anderson , M . OKCupid , Facebook Not Alone in Studying Consumers . ABC News , ( 2014 ) . http : / / abcnews . go . com / Technology / wireStory / okcupid - facebook - studying - consumers - 24762549 [ 2 ] Beaulieu , A . and Estallea , A . Rethinking research ethics for mediated settings . Information , Communication and Society , 15 ( 1 ) ( 2012 ) , 23 - 42 . [ 3 ] Boellstorff , T . , Nardi , B . , Pearce , C . , and Taylor , T . L . Ethnography and Virtual Worlds : A Handbook of Method . Princeton University Press , 2012 . [ 4 ] Branham , S . M . , Thieme , A . , Nathan , L . P . , Harrison , S . , Tatar , D . , and Olivier , P . Co - creating & Identity - making in CSCW : Revisiting Ethics in Design Research . Proceedings of the Companion Publication of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & # 38 ; Social Computing , ACM ( 2014 ) , 305 – 308 . [ 5 ] Bromseth , J . C . H . Public places – public activities ? Methodological approaches and ethical dilemmas in research on computer - mediated communication contexts . In A . Morrison ( Ed . ) , Researching ICTs in Context ( pp . 33 - 61 ) . Inter / Media Report 3 / 2002 . University of Oslo , 2002 . [ 6 ] Bruckman , A . Studying the amateur artist : A perspective on disguising data collected in human subjects on the Internet . Ethics and Information Technology , 4 ( 2002 ) , 217 - 231 . [ 7 ] Bruckman , A . Karahalios , K . , Kraut , R . E . , Poole , E . , Thomas , J . C . , and Yardi . Revisiting research ethics in the Facebook Era : Challenging in Emerging CSCW Research . CSCW’10 Workshop , ( 2010 ) . [ 8 ] Buchanan , E . , & Ess . C . Internet research ethics and the Institutional Review Board : Current practices and issues . Computers and Society 39 ( 2009 ) , 43 - 49 . [ 9 ] Ess , C . Digital Media Ethics . Polity , 2009 . [ 10 ] Hudson , J . M . and Bruckman , A . “Go Away” : Participant Objections to Being Studied and the Ethics of Chatroom Research . The Information Society 20 , 2 ( 2004 ) , 127 – 139 . [ 11 ] Kadushin , C . Who benefits from network analysis : ethics of social network research . Social Networks 27 , 2 ( 2005 ) , 139 – 153 . [ 12 ] Klemmer , R . S . , Thomsen , M . , Phelps - Goodman , E . , Lee , R . and Landay , J . A . Where do web sites come from ? Capturing and interacting with design history . In Proc . CHI 2002 , ACM Press ( 2002 ) , 1 - 8 . [ 13 ] Kramer , A . D . I . , Guillory , J . E . and Hancock , J . T . Experimental evidence of massive - scale emotional contagion through social networks . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 ( 24 ) ( 2014 ) , 8788 - 8790 . [ 14 ] Kraut , R . , Olsen , J . , Banaji , M . , Bruckman , A . , Cohen , J . , and Couper , M . Psychological Research Online : Report of Board of Scientific Affairs ' Advisory Group on the Conduct of Research on the Internet . American Psychologist , 59 ( 2 ) ( 2004 ) , 105 - 117 . [ 15 ] Markham , A . Fabrication as ethical practice : Qualitative inquiry in ambiguous internet contexts . Information , Communication , and Society , 5 ( 3 ) ( 2012 ) , 334 - 353 . [ 16 ] Markham , C . and Buchanan , E . Ethical decision - making and Internet research : Recommendations from the aoir ethics working committee v2 . 0 . Idea Group Publishing , 2002 . [ 17 ] Mather , B . D . Making up titles for conference papers . Ext . Abstracts CHI 2000 , ACM Press ( 2000 ) , 1 - 2 . [ 18 ] Rudder , C . We Experiment On Human Beings ! OkTrends : Dating research from OKCupid , ( 2014 ) . http : / / blog . okcupid . com / index . php / we - experiment - on - human - beings / . [ 19 ] Zimmer , M . But the data is already public : On the ethics of research in Facebook . Ethics & Information Technology , 12 ( 4 ) ( 2010 ) , 313 - 325 . Workshop CSCW ' 15 Companion , March 14 – 18 , 2015 , Vancouver , BC , Canada 292