401 correspondence MaxQuant goes Linux To the Editor : We report a Linux version of MaxQuant 1 ( http : / / www . biochem . mpg . de / 5111795 / maxquant ) , our popular software platform for the analysis of shotgun proteomics data . One of our main intentions in developing MaxQuant was to ‘take the pain out of’ quantifying large collections of protein profiles 2 . However , unlike , for instance , the Trans - Proteomic Pipeline 3 , the original version of MaxQuant could be run only on Microsoft Windows , and thus its use was restricted in high - performance computing environments , which very rarely use Windows as an operating system . When we began developing MaxQuant , Windows was the only operating system supported by vendor - provided raw data access libraries . Therefore , we wrote MaxQuant in the C # programming language on top of the Windows - only . NET framework . Windows support for cloud platforms is more expensive , and the operating system is harder to use and less scalable compared with Linux . We recently carried out a major restructuring of the MaxQuant codebase , and we made it compatible with Mono ( https : / / www . mono - project . com / ) , an alternative cross - platform implementation of the . NET framework . Furthermore , we now provide an entry point to MaxQuant from the command line without the need to start its graphical user interface , which allows execution from scripts or other processing tools . Meanwhile , Thermo Fisher Scientific has released its platform - independent and Mono - compatible implementation of its raw data access library ( http : / / planetorbitrap . com / rawfilereader ) , and hopefully more vendors will follow soon . Together , this leads to a situation in which large - scale computing of proteomics data with MaxQuant becomes feasible on all common platforms . When we parallelized the MaxQuant workflow over only a few central processing unit ( CPU ) cores , we hardly noticed a difference in performance between Linux and Windows ( Fig . 1 ) . However , in benchmarking of a highly parallelized MaxQuant run on 120 logical cores , we observed that the Linux version showed highly superior parallelization performance , with speed 64 % faster than that observed under a Windows server operating system using identical hardware . MaxQuant uses operating system processes , rather than the intrinsic multi - threading mechanism of C # , to realize parallel execution , and it manages the load - balancing of an arbitrarily large set of raw data files over a specified number of processors by itself . We hypothesize that this allows Linux to optimize parallel execution to the high extent that we observed . A larger benchmark study is under way , in which we will investigate the dependence of the increased speed on hardware such as , for instance , the type of CPU and storage systems . MaxQuant has already been adapted in several forms for cloud and high - performance computing applications , as described , for instance , by Judson et al . 4 and on the Chorus platform ( https : / / chorusproject . org ) . We expect that the number of applications will increase with our Linux - compatible MaxQuant version . We envision that proteomics core facilities , for instance , will benefit from the combination of command - line access and Linux compatibility , which enables standardized high - throughput data analysis . The MaxQuant code base is identical for Windows and for Linux ; thus there is only a single distributable running on both operating systems , which can be downloaded from http : / / www . maxquant . org ( version 1 . 6 . 1 . 0 ) . MaxQuant is freeware , and contributions to new functionality are collaboration - based . The code of open source parts is available at https : / / github . com / JurgenCox / compbio - base . ❐ Pavel Sinitcyn , Shivani Tiwary , Jan Rudolph , Petra Gutenbrunner , Christoph Wichmann , Şule Yılmaz , Hamid Hamzeiy , Favio Salinas and Jürgen Cox * Computational Systems Biochemistry , Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry , Martinsried , Germany . * e - mail : cox @ biochem . mpg . de Published online : 31 May 2018 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41592 - 018 - 0018 - y References 1 . Cox , J . & Mann , M . Nat . Biotechnol . 26 , 1367 – 1372 ( 2008 ) . 2 . Azvolinsky , A . , DeFrancesco , L . , Waltz , E . & Webb , S . Nat . Biotechnol . 34 , 256 – 261 ( 2016 ) . 3 . Deutsch , E . W . et al . Proteomics Clin . Appl . 9 , 745 – 754 ( 2015 ) . 4 . Judson , B . , McGrath , G . , Peuchen , E . H . , Champion , M . M . & Brenner , P . In Proc . 8th Workshop on Scientific Cloud Computing ( eds . Chard , K . et al . ) 17 – 24 ( ACM , New York , 2017 ) . Acknowledgements This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program ( grant agreement no . 686547 to J . C . , J . R . and S . Y . ) and from the FP7 ( grant GA ERC - 2012 - SyG _ 318987 – ToPAG to S . T . and F . S . ) . Author contributions P . S . , S . T . , J . R . , P . G . , C . W . , S . Y . , H . H . , F . S . and J . C . developed the software . P . S . conducted the performance analysis . J . C . wrote the manuscript . Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests . 800 0 600 400 200 1 , 000 R unn i ng t i m e ( m i n ) . NET on Windows Mono on Linux Feature detection ( 44 % ) First search ( 61 % ) Main search ( 31 % ) Second peptide search ( 23 % ) Protein assembly ( 118 % ) LFQ normalization ( 94 % ) Write output tables ( 52 % ) Mass recalibration ( 41 % ) 61 % 100 % Fig . 1 | Benchmarking MaxQuant on Linux and Windows . We analyzed 300 LC - MS runs with MaxQuant using 120 logical cores in parallel , once with Ubuntu Linux ( version 16 . 04 . 3 ) and once with Windows server 2012 R2 as the operating system . We used identical hardware in both cases : four Intel Xeon E7 - 4870 CPUs and 256 GB of DDR3 RAM . The total running times are shown , and several long - running sub - workflows are highlighted . Percentages indicate the amount of time needed to complete the relevant process in Linux as a percentage of the total time required for the same process in Windows . Nature Methods | VOL 15 | JUNE 2018 | 401 | www . nature . com / naturemethods © 2018 Nature America Inc . , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved .