J . S . Linsey Mechanical Engineering Department , Texas A & M University , 224 Engin . Physics , 3123 TAMU College Station , TX 77843 e - mail : jlinsey @ tamu . edu I . Tseng e - mail : iht @ andrew . cmu . edu K . Fu e - mail : katherine . fu @ gmail . com J . Cagan e - mail : cagan @ tamu . edu Mechanical Engineering Department , Carnegie Mellon , Scaife Hall 214 , 5000 Forbes Avenue , Pittsburgh , PA 15213 K . L . Wood Mechanical Engineering Department , The University of Texas at Austin e - mail : wood @ utexas . edu C . Schunn Department of Psychology , University of Pittsburg , LRDC 821 , 3939 O’Hara St . , Pittsburgh , PA 15260 e - mail : schunn @ pitt . edu A Study of Design Fixation , Its Mitigation and Perception in Engineering Design Faculty The bridge between engineering design and cognitive science research is critical to understand the effectiveness of design methods as implemented by human designers . The study reported in this paper evaluates the effects of design ﬁxation in a group of engi - neering design faculty , and also provides evidence for approaches to overcome design ﬁxation . Three conditions are compared , a control , a ﬁxation group whom were provided with an example solution , and a deﬁxation group whom were also given materials to mitigate their design ﬁxation . Measures include indicators of design ﬁxation and partici - pant perceptions . The study demonstrates that the engineering design faculty show sta - tistically signiﬁcant evidence of design ﬁxation , but only partially perceive its effects . This study also indicates that design ﬁxation can be mitigated . The group of participants in this study , due to their background in engineering design research and experience with student design teams , was expected to have more accurate perceptions or awareness of design ﬁxation than the typical participant . Understanding the incongruities between participant perceptions and quantitative design outcomes are particularly of interest to researchers of design methods . For this study , clear evidence exists that designers , even those that study and teach design on a regular basis , do not know when they are being inﬂuenced or ﬁxated by misleading or poor information . (cid:1) DOI : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4001110 (cid:2) Keywords : design ﬁxation , analogy , conceptual design 1 Introduction Engineering design was rigorously studied , arguably since Si - mon’s Sciences of the Artiﬁcial was published in 1968 (cid:1) 1 (cid:2) . The ﬁeld has explored formal and heuristic approaches to design re - ﬁnement , manufacturing , generation , and computation (cid:1) 2 – 4 (cid:2) . A critical part of engineering design is how designers think about the problem , how they reason about problem - relevant information , and how they are able to generate novel problem solutions . The study of such questions falls in the ﬁeld of cognitive - based inno - vation and requires methods and knowledge from the ﬁeld of cog - nitive psychology , integrated with process knowledge and partici - pants from the ﬁeld of engineering design . The ﬁeld of researchers who have actively pursued cognitive - based engineering is small but diverse , examples falling into the following ﬁve nonexhaus - tive categories . (cid:127) Representation—the means to reason about and search for a solution to a design problem (cid:1) 5 – 13 (cid:2) ; (cid:127) Fixation—barriers to solution based on real and perceived constraints (cid:1) 14 – 17 (cid:2) ; (cid:127) Analogy—the mapping of knowledge from one domain to another supported by abstract representations (cid:1) 9 , 18 – 29 (cid:2) ; (cid:127) Computational models—models for cognitive simulation and generative tools (cid:1) 30 – 32 (cid:2) ; (cid:127) Teams—effective negotiation strategies , compatible repre - sentations , effective communication , trust among team members (cid:1) 7 , 33 – 42 (cid:2) . Results in this ﬁeld have begun to bear fruit , and the time is ripe for rigorous research efforts in this area . As such , in January 2008 , an NSF sponsored workshop was held in Knoxville , TN , as part of the CMMI Grantees Meeting . The workshop , entitled “Discussion on Individual and Team - Based Innovation , ” brought approximately 50 educators and re - searchers from the ﬁeld of engineering design together for a day to learn about the current work and discuss potential directions for new research in the area of cognitive - based engineering design . As part of the workshop , participants took part in a formal cogni - tive study on the role of ﬁxation and the use of analogies to overcome ﬁxation . The experiment was formally developed , pi - loted , approved by the lead institution’s Internal Review Board , and then run during the workshop . This paper presents the results of this study . One goal of the study was to allow participants to experience a formal and rigorous cognitive experiment . Since most of the participants had only engineering backgrounds , it was unlikely that many had participated in such studies . Another goal of the study was to advance the state of the ﬁeld of cognitive - based engineering design by learning (cid:3) 1 (cid:4) if engineer - ing educators experience design ﬁxation during a design problem solving exercise , (cid:3) 2 (cid:4) how design ﬁxation can be overcome , adding to the current knowledge base of the ﬁeld , and (cid:3) 3 (cid:4) whether the Contributed by the Design Education Committee of ASME for publication in the J OURNAL OF M ECHANICAL D ESIGN . Manuscript received June 19 , 2009 ; ﬁnal manuscript received January 24 , 2010 ; published online April 13 , 2010 . Assoc . Editor : Janis Terpenny . Journal of Mechanical Design APRIL 2010 , Vol . 132 / 041003 - 1 Copyright © 2010 by ASME Downloaded 14 Apr 2010 to 130 . 49 . 138 . 239 . Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright ; see http : / / www . asme . org / terms / Terms _ Use . cfm participants accurately perceive the effects of provided examples and materials to mitigate design ﬁxation . On one hand , the study group is interesting because they have experience in design , as demonstrated by survey results showing considerable industrial projects and patents , but on the other hand , they think about the process of design through teaching courses in design and through research in the broader ﬁeld of design . It is interesting to see whether this cohort is susceptible to aspects of ﬁxation that have been prevalent in other studies of design students or practitioners . What follows is a discussion of the current state of the art of cognitive - based engineering relevant to this work , a presentation of the experiment , results , discussion , and insights from the study . 2 Background / Previous Work A number of studies showed that design ﬁxation effects can occur when example solutions are introduced to participants (cid:1) 15 , 43 – 47 (cid:2) . Jansson and Smith (cid:1) 15 (cid:2) were the ﬁrst to apply an experimental approach to study engineering design ﬁxation . They found that showing example solutions can reduce the range of design solutions generated by a designer , and that aspects of the example solution , including aspects that were shown to violate goals of the problem statement , can ﬁnd their way into the design - ers’ solutions . A number of later experiments by others used the same and similar design problems to further investigate the issue of design ﬁxation (cid:1) 47 , 48 (cid:2) . Purcell and Gero (cid:1) 47 (cid:2) suggested that the susceptibility of a designer to ﬁxation may depend on the discipline of the designer , and that design ﬁxation is more likely if the example problem embodies principles that are in line with the knowledge base of that discipline . These studies , as a whole , dem - onstrate that introducing examples can cause design ﬁxation , re - sulting in less creativity during ideation . 2 . 1 Possible Approaches to Overcoming Design Fixation . Some approaches to reducing design ﬁxation have been identiﬁed . Using the same ﬁxating examples as Jansson and Smith , Chrysikou and Weisberg (cid:1) 48 (cid:2) found that including deﬁxation in - structions can negate the ﬁxating effects of the examples . Another possible approach to breaking or mitigating design ﬁxation , be - yond deﬁxation instructions , is to assist the designer in ﬁnding a new way to frame the problem , which may lead to new and im - proved solutions . The power of analogical inspiration , as part of problem framing , is supported by empirical evidence , as well as by examples of professional designers using analogies to solve problems (cid:1) 9 , 49 – 51 (cid:2) . Within the literature , a number of approaches for enhancing analogical retrieval and use have been noted . Some of these de - pend on the expertise of the participants , and some are more gen - eral ﬁndings . Casakin and Goldschmidt (cid:1) 49 (cid:2) found that visual analogies can improve design problem solving for both novice and expert architects . Ball et al . (cid:1) 52 (cid:2) found experts use more analogies than novices do , so experience seems to increase re - trieval frequency . Expertise also enhances the ability to retrieve high - level principles derived from sets of analogies (cid:3) schema - driven (cid:4) . Novices tended to use more case - driven analogies (cid:3) analo - gies where a speciﬁc concrete example was used to develop a new solution (cid:1) 29 (cid:2)(cid:4) rather than schema - driven analogies (cid:3) more general design solution derived from a number of examples (cid:1) 53 , 54 (cid:2)(cid:4) . This difference can be explained because novices have more difﬁculty retrieving relevant information when needed and have more difﬁ - culty mapping concepts from disparate domains due to a lack of experience (cid:1) 55 (cid:2) . Tseng et al . (cid:1) 17 (cid:2) found that the effectiveness of analogical in - spiration in design was dependent on the timing of when the in - spiring information is given , as well as how apparently similar the information is to the problem being solved . More speciﬁcally , information that shares similar keywords or domains can be ap - plied to problem solving , even if the information is given before the designer has begun work on the problem , while information that is relevant but does not share similarity of keywords or do - mains only affects problem solving when the designer has already begun work on the problem . Additionally , Dahl and Moreau (cid:1) 56 (cid:2) demonstrated that subjects exposed to within - domain examples employed fewer far - domain analogies in generating solutions , and that the originality of the solutions produced was increased when subjects were encouraged to use analogies extensively and given no example solutions . Marsh et al . (cid:1) 57 (cid:2) found that within - domain examples caused sub - jects to be biased toward generating solutions that had similar features to those found in the examples . These ﬁndings led to the expectation for our experiment that a within - domain example so - lution given to participants prior to ideation would cause design ﬁxation , as exhibited through fewer solutions generated and the appearance of features from the example in the solutions gener - ated . 2 . 1 . 1 Breaking or Mitigating Fixation : Formal Design - by - Analogy Methods . Analogy is a likely candidate for alleviating design ﬁxation . A few formal methods have been developed to support design - by - analogy . These include Synectics (cid:1) 58 (cid:2) , French’s work on inspiration from nature (cid:1) 59 , 60 (cid:2) , Biomimetic concept gen - eration (cid:1) 26 , 27 (cid:2) , the WordTree Design - by - Analogy method (cid:1) 20 , 61 (cid:2) , and analogous design through the use of the function and ﬂow basis (cid:1) 24 (cid:2) . Synectics is a group idea generation method that uses four types of analogies to solve problems : personal (cid:3) be the problem (cid:4) , direct (cid:3) functional or natural (cid:4) , symbolic , and fantasy (cid:1) 58 (cid:2) . Synectics gives little guidance to designers about how to ﬁnd successful analogies . Other methods also base analogies on the natural world . French (cid:1) 59 , 60 (cid:2) highlights powerful examples that nature provides for design . Biomimetic concept generation pro - vides a systematic tool to index biological phenomena (cid:1) 26 , 62 (cid:2) . In biomimetic concept generation , the functional requirements of the problem and the keywords are ﬁrst derived . The keywords are then referenced and relevant entries can be found . Like biomi - metic concept generation , the WordTree method is also based on keywords . The WordTree method takes the key functions or cus - tomer needs of a design problem , and systematically rerepresents them through the intuitive knowledge of the designers and through the WordNet database , particularly with synonyms known as hypernyms and troponyms . Analogous concepts can be also identiﬁed by creating abstracted functional models of concepts and comparing the similarities between their functionality . Analo - gous and nonobvious products can be explored using the func - tional and ﬂow basis (cid:1) 24 (cid:2) . Other database supported computation tools for design - by - analogy have been recently developed . Examples of such tools are the work by Kurtoglu and Campbell (cid:1) 63 (cid:2) , Chui and Shu (cid:1) 26 (cid:2) , and Chakrabarti et al . (cid:1) 64 (cid:2) . Each has created an automated tool to provide inspiration to designers as part of the idea generation process . Based on the function or behavior of a device , analogies from nature or other devices are provided as potential sources of inspiration to the designer . 2 . 2 The Perception of Being Fixated . One reason why de - sign ﬁxation is difﬁcult to overcome is that designers are often not conscious of the fact that they are ﬁxated . Ward and co - workers (cid:1) 45 , 65 (cid:2) found that the examples were not constraining the subjects consciously by causing them to believe that they should produce solutions similar to the given examples , but rather subconsciously constraining them ; when participants were asked to avoid produc - ing solutions that were similar to the examples , the similarity between the examples and generated solutions did not signiﬁ - cantly decrease when compared with participants’ solutions who were not told to avoid solutions similar to the given examples . In general , participants did not have control over their use of the knowledge gained from the examples . These results suggest that designers are unaware that they are being inﬂuenced by example solutions or previously generated solutions (cid:1) 44 , 45 , 65 (cid:2) . Consistent 041003 - 2 / Vol . 132 , APRIL 2010 Transactions of the ASME Downloaded 14 Apr 2010 to 130 . 49 . 138 . 239 . Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright ; see http : / / www . asme . org / terms / Terms _ Use . cfm with this ﬁnding , Linsey et al . (cid:1) 19 (cid:2) also observed that engineers were unaware that they were implementing prior examples to which they had been exposed . 2 . 3 Summary and Breaking New Ground . It is clear from this literature review that experiments have been deployed for studying ﬁxation and the underlying causes within designers . We build on these studies and the associated results in this paper . Mitigating strategies for alleviating ﬁxation have been studied , but much fertile ground has yet to be explored , especially in the do - main of engineering and for the use of analogies . It is also clear , to the best of our knowledge , that academics from engineering de - sign research have not been a focal group as part of ﬁxation stud - ies . Our cognitive - based study here addresses these limitations , and constructs a framework on the foundation of the previous research . 3 Research Questions Design ﬁxation is a common problem for both inexperienced and experienced designers . In this study , we seek to answer three fundamental research questions : (cid:3) 1 (cid:4) Do engineering academicians , both design researchers and educators , experience design ﬁxation ? (cid:3) 2 (cid:4) How can design ﬁxation be overcome or mitigated ? (cid:3) 3 (cid:4) Do the participants accurately perceive the effects of provided example solutions and of the materials to mitigate design ﬁxation ? These three research questions , our associated hypotheses , and our mo - tivation for answering these questions are discussed in the follow - ing sections . In our study , three experimental conditions are implemented : a control , a ﬁxation condition in which a negative example solution is presented , and a deﬁxation condition in which the negative example solution is given along with a list of possible solution directions to consider ; these conditions are referred to in presenting our hypotheses and deﬁned in Sec . 4 . In addition , all participants ﬁlled out a survey prior to the workshop that obtained demographic information and perceptions about the design pro - cess . 3 . 1 Evidence of Design Fixation . For this study , we explore the effects of ﬁxation on experienced academic engineering de - signers . The group of participants for this experiment has a unique background that makes them interesting to study . All of the par - ticipants attended a workshop on the cognitive aspects of engi - neering design and developing cognitive experiments in engineer - ing design . They have clear interest in design and cognition . In addition , most of this group has experience teaching design and most are researchers in design . Therefore , this group is aware of design methods , they have spent time thinking about many of the issues related to design , particularly the “fuzzy - front end , ” and they are likely to be aware of some of the difﬁculties that design - ers have during idea generation . They are also aware of methods such as design - by - analogy and some of the short - comings of tra - ditional group brainstorming . Overcoming design ﬁxation is a dif - ﬁcult task . Yet , because of this group’s background in design theory and methods , with their knowledge and skills , might they be able to more effectively overcome design ﬁxation ? We there - fore seek to answer the following research question and contem - plate the following hypothesis : Research Question 1 : Do academic engineering design educa - tors show evidence of design ﬁxation ? Hypothesis 1 : Academic engineering design educators will show evidence of design ﬁxation . They will produce fewer total ideas when provided with example solutions and repeat ideas from provided examples as compared with the control group . 3 . 2 Overcoming / Mitigating Design Fixation . Prior research has shown that it is possible to reduce design ﬁxation by instruct - ing participants to not focus on the negative aspects of the design and describing those short - comings (cid:1) 48 (cid:2) . This is clearly one ap - proach for reducing ﬁxation , but based on anecdotal commentary in the design literature , it is likely that there are other approaches to mitigating ﬁxation . Many product design books describe the beneﬁts of functions , analogies , categories , and back - of - the - envelope calculations in the design process (cid:1) 66 – 69 (cid:2) . In addition , analogy is noted as a tool for innovative design and a proliﬁcally implemented strategy by designers (cid:1) 9 , 19 , 70 (cid:2) . These observations lead to the following research question and hypothesis : Research Question 2 : What can engineers do to reduce their ﬁxation on particular design solutions ? Can analogies , functions , categories of energy sources , and back - of - the - envelope calcula - tions assist in overcoming design ﬁxation ? Hypothesis 2 : Design ﬁxation can be reduced . The deﬁxation group will produce more ideas and repeat fewer ideas from the provided example solution than the ﬁxation group . The deﬁxation group will implement more analogies than the other two condi - tions . 3 . 3 Participant Perceptions . Participants’ perceptions fre - quently are not consistent with quantitative outcomes of their per - formance (cid:1) 37 , 44 , 45 (cid:2) . Unfortunately , perceptions are easily obtain - able and may be the basis that an individual or a company uses to choose to implement a particular method . For example , one of the reasons for group brainstorming’s popularity , in spite of numerous studies contradicting its purported effectiveness , is that individu - als feel more productive during group brainstorming than when generating ideas alone (cid:1) 37 (cid:2) . In contrast to the participant’s percep - tions of productivity , numerous studies quantitatively demonstrate a reduction in the number of ideas per person when comparing brainstorming in a group to individual brainstorming (cid:3) see Ref . (cid:1) 71 (cid:2) for a review (cid:4) . The basic group brainstorming method must be adapted to produce the quantity of results greater than the sum of the individuals (cid:1) 64 (cid:2) . The group of participants in this study has experience with design methods and is at least somewhat familiar with their short - comings . In addition , the majority of this group has taught design classes and observed their students’ performance . Therefore , it is likely that the participants in this study will be much more aware of the effects of a provided example solution and additional de - ﬁxation materials on their performance than participants who do not study design . In contrast , the prior literature indicates that participants are likely to inaccurately perceive the effects of an introduced example solution and the associated deﬁxation materi - als , if they are introduced . Therefore , we seek to answer the fol - lowing research question and test the related hypothesis : Research Question 3 : How well do participant perceptions of design results correspond to quantitative assessment of the results ? Hypothesis 3 : Participants will inaccurately perceive the effects of a provided example solution and associated deﬁxation materi - als . Results from survey questions collecting the participants’ per - ceptions will be inconsistent with the quantitative metrics . 4 Experimental Method The experiment evaluates the effects of ﬁxation on experienced academic engineering designers . To answer the research questions and hypotheses , we implement three experimental conditions : a control , a ﬁxation , and a deﬁxation condition . All participants are given the same experimental procedure and documentation media . Participants in the ﬁxation condition are provided with an ex - ample solution . Participants in the deﬁxation condition are also provided with the same example solution , but also with additional materials to potentially break or mitigate the design ﬁxation (cid:3) de - tailed below in Sec . 4 . 4 (cid:4) . All participants are told that the goal of the experiment is to generate as many solutions to the design problem as possible , where a prize will be given to participants with the greatest number of solutions . This prize is an incentive for participants to devote serious effort to the design activity . All conditions end with a short post - experiment survey , which mea - sures prior exposure to the design problem , perceptions of partici - pants’ performance and perceived inﬂuence of a provided example Journal of Mechanical Design APRIL 2010 , Vol . 132 / 041003 - 3 Downloaded 14 Apr 2010 to 130 . 49 . 138 . 239 . Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright ; see http : / / www . asme . org / terms / Terms _ Use . cfm solution . In the case of the deﬁxation condition , participations are asked questions regarding the deﬁxation materials and their per - ceptions of these materials . 4 . 1 Description of the Design Problem . All participants are provided with the same design problem . The design problem is to design a device to quickly shell peanuts for use in places like Haiti and West African countries , and is based on a real - world problem posted on ThinkCycle (cid:1) 72 (cid:2) . Participants are told that no electrical energy sources are available and are given customer needs (cid:3) Fig . 1 (cid:4) . This problem is chosen because it is a real world problem that is appropriate for an engineer , it has intrinsic incentive for solu - tions given its need - based nature , and the problem has a diverse set of available solutions . This problem has also been used in previous research on idea generation (cid:1) 35 , 73 , 74 (cid:2) . It is very unlikely that any of the participants would have extensive prior experience in solving this problem , yet shelling a peanut is a task that all of the participants have likely experienced . 4 . 2 Control Group . The control group is given the design problem as stated in Fig . 1 . They are not provided with an ex - ample solution or alternative representation of the problem . 4 . 3 Experimental Fixation Group . The ﬁxation group is given the design problem as stated in Fig . 1 and an additional negative solution example (cid:3) Fig . 2 (cid:4) . They are not given an alterna - tive representation of the problem . The example solution uses a gasoline powered press to crush the shell , and does not separate the nut from the shell . The example solution focuses exclusively on a mechanical concept that crushes the shell and uses external fuel energy . This solution is difﬁcult to control in terms of dam - aging the peanut , complex , and costly to manufacture for the West African environment . The participants all have graduate degrees in engineering , so these short - comings should be obvious to them . In addition , these particular process solutions are many of the common solutions found by participants in a prior experiment (cid:1) 35 , 73 (cid:2) . Common solutions to design problems were shown to create greater ﬁxation (cid:3) fewer total solutions (cid:4) than unusual solu - tions (cid:1) 14 , 75 (cid:2) . 4 . 4 Experimental Deﬁxation Group . The deﬁxation group is presented with the design problem , as in Fig . 1 , and also alterna - tive representations of the problem (cid:3) Fig . 3 (cid:4) . The alternative rep - resentations provide a brief functional description , useful analo - gies , a list of available energy sources , and a quick back - of - the - envelope calculation result . Some of the analogies were identiﬁed using the WordTree Design - by - Analogy method with the key word of “remove” and “shell” to ﬁnd the associated hypernyms and troponyms from WordNet (cid:1) 20 (cid:2) . 4 . 5 Participants . Fifty engineering academics expressed in - terest in attending the NSF sponsored workshop : “Discussion on Individual and Team - Based Innovation . ” 38 from this group ﬁlled out the online presurvey for the workshop , and 34 actually at - tended the workshop . These thirty - four participants are randomly assigned to one of three conditions prior to the workshop , equally distributing the senior (cid:3) associate and full professors (cid:4) and junior faculty (cid:3) assistant professors (cid:4) . The study serves to demonstrate to the workshop participants an example cognitive study in engineer - ing design , while at the same time , providing useful experimental data . Based on the preworkshop survey results , which are only partially presented here , participants are faculty members (cid:3) 85 % (cid:4) , plus a few research scientists and graduate students (cid:3) 12 % (cid:4) , and federal government employees (cid:3) 3 % (cid:4) . There were no participants from industry . Almost half the participants are assistant professors (cid:3) 45 % (cid:4) ; 12 % are associate professors and 27 % are full professors . Most participants have mechanical engineering backgrounds . Most have at least 1 year of industrial experience (cid:3) 64 % (cid:4) and have consulted with industry at least once (cid:3) 79 % (cid:4) . There is also a high representation of women relative to the ﬁeld of engineering (cid:3) 33 % females (cid:4) . A number of preregistered intended participants did not attend the beginning of the workshop so three participants were switched to different groups to compensate . Unintentionally , they were switched from the deﬁxation condition to a different condition , and they therefore had brieﬂy seen the deﬁxation materials . These three participants were removed from the data set . Fig . 1 Design problem description Fig . 2 Example solution provided to the participants in the ﬁxation group 041003 - 4 / Vol . 132 , APRIL 2010 Transactions of the ASME Downloaded 14 Apr 2010 to 130 . 49 . 138 . 239 . Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright ; see http : / / www . asme . org / terms / Terms _ Use . cfm 5 Metrics To understand the effects of design ﬁxation and evaluate the research questions , a set of measures are employed . To quantify the degree of ﬁxation , ﬁve metrics are implemented : (cid:3) 1 (cid:4) number of ideas , (cid:3) 2 (cid:4) number of times features from the example solution appear in generated concepts , (cid:3) 3 (cid:4) percentage of features from the example solution that appear at least once in participant solutions , (cid:3) 4 (cid:4) number of energy domains , and (cid:3) 5 (cid:4) percentage of the solutions that employ a gas engine . To evaluate the effects of providing deﬁxation materials , along at least one dimension , the number of analogies is also measured . To provide inter - rater reliability , one of the authors evaluated all of the data for each metric , while a second rater evaluated two from each condition or at least 18 % of the data . 5 . 1 Quantity of Ideas . Building from the procedure devel - oped by Shah et al . (cid:1) 76 (cid:2) , a set of procedural rules are deﬁned for what constitutes a single idea , see Ref . (cid:1) 77 (cid:2) for more details . Our basic deﬁnition for an idea is something that solves one or more functions of the design , as deﬁned by the functional basis (cid:3) a clearly deﬁned and tested language for expressing design func - tions (cid:1) 78 , 79 (cid:2)(cid:4) . The total number of unique (cid:3) nonredundant , nonre - peated (cid:4) ideas is calculated for each person . Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient (cid:1) 80 (cid:2) was 0 . 97 , indicating that the measure is highly reliable . A high degree of Pearson’s correlation indicates that if one evaluator had a higher score , then the other evaluator also tended to give a higher score . 5 . 2 Repeated Example Solution Features and Percentage of Features Used . Figure 4 illustrates the example solution pro - vided to the participants and all of the design ideas contained within it (cid:3) number of ideas (cid:4) , categorized by function . The number of times each participant employs one of the design features from the example solution is counted . This procedure results in two metrics , which indicate the degree of ﬁxation : the total number of times a feature is repeated and the total percentage of features from the example that is implemented at least once . One of the authors evaluated all of the data , while a second rater measured two from each condition or 18 % of the data . In half of the cases , Fig . 3 Deﬁxation materials Fig . 4 Example solution provided to participants Journal of Mechanical Design APRIL 2010 , Vol . 132 / 041003 - 5 Downloaded 14 Apr 2010 to 130 . 49 . 138 . 239 . Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright ; see http : / / www . asme . org / terms / Terms _ Use . cfm the two raters had identical scores for the number of repeated features , and their Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient (cid:1) 80 (cid:2) was 0 . 97 , indicating that the measure is highly reliable . Cohen’s Kappa (cid:1) 80 (cid:2) is not used since the metric of interest is the relative number of repeated features across conditions , not whether or not the partici - pants use a particular feature or the absolute number of repeated features in this setting . To calculate the percentage of the features that each participant reused from the example , the number of fea - tures used at least once is divided by the total number of ideas within the example solution (cid:3) eight ideas , Fig . 4 (cid:4) . 5 . 3 Energy Domains and Percentage of Solutions Employ - ing a Gas Engine . In addition to recording the quantity of ideas , the number of energy sources used by each participant is analyzed (cid:3) Table 1 (cid:4) . These energy sources are categorized into 16 energy categories (cid:3) wind , solar , water streams , captured rain water at a height , water (cid:3) other (cid:4) , human , animal , nuclear , electrical outlet , ﬁre , gas engine , engine (cid:3) other (cid:4) , fuel cell , ﬂuid density difference , chemical , and genetic (cid:4) . The original tally included 18 categories , but it was found , due to the universality of gravity that the two gravity driven categories are difﬁcult to measure reliably between raters , and were thus removed . The total of all energy sources used by each participant is recorded . Since the goal is to deter - mine the breath of energy sources spanned , a participant receives the same score , regardless of whether they use an energy source once or multiple times . Since the deﬁxation materials provided a list of energy sources to directly break ﬁxation on the gas engine , the percentage of solutions using a gas engine is also calculated . 5 . 4 Analogies - Breaking Fixation . After 45 min of ideation , analogies were identiﬁed by the participants by going back through their solutions , and circling or labeling any analogies used with a red permanent marker . The total number of unique analo - gies identiﬁed by each participant is measured . Some participants circled components of their designs , some drew arrows with tex - tual descriptions , and others described the analogies they used while also circling them . Initially , all of this information is tabu - lated . If a participant circled something and wrote no textual de - scription , this analogy is counted for that participant toward the total number of analogies they used . If a participant wrote a de - scription , the analogy is counted for that participant toward their total number of analogies . If the participant both circles and writes text , it is determined if the two pertained to separate analogies . One participant stated that they believed all of their ideas were analogies since all their ideas came from things they had seen before . Although this statement that most of an engineers’ design ideas come from prior exposure is true , this is not a working use of the concept of analogy , where a speciﬁc idea is borrowed or mapped onto the current problem ; thus , this participant’s data are not included in the analogy analysis . Due to the fact that each participant’s deﬁnition of “analogy” is unique , the analogies identiﬁed by the participant are counted as valid analogies . This reduces the amount of biases introduced by the researchers , but there is still subjectivity due to differing par - ticipants’ deﬁnitions . However , the participants’ deﬁnitions of analogy , as provided in the presurvey , are surprisingly consistent across the participants . Prior studies have used indication of analogies such as “device X is like device Y” to identify analogies in concurrent think - aloud protocols or recorded team conversa - tions (cid:1) 9 , 23 , 52 (cid:2) . This study did not include concurrent think - aloud descriptions as the participants were working , nor was there any other indication of which ideas were based on analogies , there - fore , the participants’ identiﬁcation of analogy had to be used . Since participants did not provide details on the analogies , it was not possible to further classify analogies along common dimen - sions such as analogical distance . In tabulating the analogies metric , as with all other metrics , an inter - rater agreement analysis is performed to ensure objectivity and consistency . In tallying the total number of analogies remov - ing any repeats , the raters achieved 99 % agreement and a Pear - son’s Correlation of 0 . 99 . These measures indicate that the metric is highly reliable , and there is strong consistency between the two evaluators . 6 Results : Design Fixation A key outcome of this study is on understanding design ﬁxa - tion , participants’ perception of it and how to break or mitigate ﬁxation when it occurs . Figures 5 and 6 illustrate examples of typical participant results with high and low degrees of ﬁxation (cid:3) samples sizes are in Table 2 (cid:4) . Four measures are implemented to assess each participant’s degree of ﬁxation . From these measures , a participants’ ﬁxation may be ascertained and the hypotheses tested . The number of nonredundant ideas varies across the three con - ditions (cid:3) Fig . 7 (cid:4) . An ANOVA (cid:3) analysis of variance (cid:4) shows a statis - tically signiﬁcant effect across the ﬁxation conditions (cid:3) F = 3 . 7 , p Table 1 Energy source categories Wind Anything powered by naturally occurring wind . Includes using a wind generator to generate electricity , a windmill to directly turn a mechanism , and naturally allowing the wind to blow peanut shells away . Does not include a fan or other wind source powered by another energy source . Solar Anything powered by the sun . Includes both solar panels to generate electricity and using the sun directly to heat water or roast the peanuts . Water streams Uses naturally existing water streams such as a water wheel in a river to power the system , either by generating electricity or directly powering the mechanical system . Captured rain water at a height Capturing rain water at a height to accomplish much the same as the previous category . Water (cid:3) other (cid:4) Can include the soaking of peanuts to soften them , and many other uses . Human Includes manual shelling , turning a hand crank , and any other human power . Animal Includes using animals to motivate a mechanical system , training or genetically manipulating animals to shell peanuts . Nuclear Nuclear power station to provide energy . Electrical outlet Any solution where the concept involves plugging into a wall socket for electricity . Fire Anything that uses a ﬁre to generate power , excludes internal combustion or steam engines , but includes using a ﬁre to roast peanuts or burn off shells . Gas engine Gasoline powered internal combustion engine . Engine (cid:3) other (cid:4) Any other type of fuel engine . Fuel cell Hydrogen or other type fuel cell . Fluid density difference Concepts based on whether something ﬂoats or sinks , often used to sort peanuts and their shells . Chemical Any chemical process to generate power that is different than seen above , or to burn or dissolve the peanut shell off . Genetic Genetically altering the peanut itself . Does not include genetic manipulations on animals (cid:3) which should be categorized as animal (cid:4) . 041003 - 6 / Vol . 132 , APRIL 2010 Transactions of the ASME Downloaded 14 Apr 2010 to 130 . 49 . 138 . 239 . Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright ; see http : / / www . asme . org / terms / Terms _ Use . cfm (cid:1) 0 . 04 (cid:4) . 1 A t - test shows that the control group produces more ideas than the ﬁxation group (cid:3) t = 2 . 94 , p (cid:1) 0 . 02 (cid:4) . The other pair - wise comparisons are not statistically signiﬁcant . The variation in the number of nonredundant ideas indicates that the example did cause design ﬁxation , resulting in fewer ideas being generated . The trend in this data is that the deﬁxation group produces more ideas on average than the ﬁxation group , indicating that the additional materials assist in reducing their ﬁxation . 6 . 1 Number of Example Solution Features Used . Another indicator of the degree of ﬁxation is the number of times that the participants reuse features from the provided example solution . This metric differs across the three conditions and ranges from 1 to 43 repeated features (cid:3) Fig . 8 (cid:4) . The control group did not see the example solution , but they still may think of the same features that are present in the example solution . These data do not satisfy the assumptions for a standard ANOVA since Shapiro – Wilk’s test of normality shows the data are not normally distributed and Lev - ene’s test for equality of variances shows that the variances are not homogenous ; therefore , a Kruskal – Wallis ANOVA is imple - mented instead . ANOVA can be used when there are only small departures from normality , but if there are also unequal variances across the groups , a different approach is required . A Kruskal – Wallis ANOVA is analogous to a standard ANOVA , but is the nonparametric statistical equivalent and evaluates the relative ranks of the data points . Implementing a Kruskal – Wallis ANOVA , there is a statistically signiﬁcant difference across the three con - ditions (cid:3) H = 7 . 3 , df = 2 , p = 0 . 03 , N = 31 (cid:4) . 1 The data are not normally distributed but ANOVA is robust for departures from normality . The remaining assumptions for ANOVA are met . To conﬁrm the ANOVA results , a Kruskal – Wallis ANOVA is also completed on the data (cid:3) H = 5 . 7 , p (cid:1) 0 . 06 (cid:4) . Table 2 Sample size for each condition Group Sample Size Control 9 Fixation 12 Deﬁxation 10 Fig . 5 A set of solutions showing a low degree of ﬁxation on the provided example solution Fig . 6 A set of solutions showing a high degree of ﬁxation on the provided example solution Fig . 7 The ﬁxation group produced fewer ideas , on average , than either the control group or the deﬁxation group . Each er - ror bar is ±1 standard error . Journal of Mechanical Design APRIL 2010 , Vol . 132 / 041003 - 7 Downloaded 14 Apr 2010 to 130 . 49 . 138 . 239 . Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright ; see http : / / www . asme . org / terms / Terms _ Use . cfm The “number of features” data also indicate that the example solution caused ﬁxation , as the features from the example (cid:3) the ﬁxation condition (cid:4) are reused more often than for the control . This data indicate that the additional materials are effective in mitigat - ing or reducing the design ﬁxations , since the deﬁxation condition reuses fewer features from the example solution than the ﬁxation condition . In the case of the control group , participants generated features in their concepts corresponding to the example solution . This result is to be expected since some of the features , as shown in Fig . 4 , are perfectly acceptable solutions , whereas others , such as the gas - press are not . The control group , however , did not overly use the solutions of the provided example for the ﬁxation condition , whereas the ﬁxation group did offer solutions powered by gasoline or similar fuel - based systems . 6 . 2 Percentage of Features Used . The three conditions also caused the participants to implement different percentages of the features from the example solution (cid:3) Fig . 9 (cid:4) , another indicator of ﬁxation . The number of times that the participants implemented one of the features from the example solution was counted . Again , these data do not satisfy the assumptions for a standard ANOVA . The Shapiro – Wilk’s test of normality shows that the data is not normally distributed , and Levene’s test for equality of variances shows that the variances are not homogenous ; therefore , a Kruskal – Wallis ANOVA is completed instead . There is a statisti - cally signiﬁcant difference across the three conditions (cid:3) H = 7 . 3 , df = 2 , p = 0 . 03 , N = 31 (cid:4) . A Wilcoxon’s Rank - sum test shows that the ﬁxation group incorporated more of the features from the ex - ample in their solutions than the deﬁxation group (cid:3) W s = 85 . 5 , n 1 = 10 , n 2 = 12 , p = 0 . 08 (cid:4) and the control (cid:3) W s = 67 . 5 , n 1 = 9 , n 2 = 12 , p = 0 . 02 (cid:4) . Again the “percentage of features” measure shows that the ex - ample solution causes designer ﬁxation . The deﬁxation condition is different from the ﬁxation condition , based on statistical signiﬁ - cance , again showing that the deﬁxation materials are assisting the designers in overcoming the ﬁxation induced by the presented example . 7 Results : Energy Sources Fixation In addition to the number of solutions , the energy source used in the design can be another indicator of design ﬁxation . The deﬁxation condition contained a categorical list of energy sources , Fig . 3 . Participants in the ﬁxation condition were given an example that is powered by a gas engine . It is expected that this example would ﬁxate individuals on using a gas engine . Participants in this condition were given information in addition to the gas engine powered example that is intended to aid in breaking the induced ﬁxation . Individuals in the control condition were given no ex - ample on which to ﬁxate . Both predicted effects are observed in the results (cid:3) Fig . 10 (cid:4) . Again , these data do not meet the assump - tions for a standard ANOVA , as the data are not normally distrib - uted and the variances are not homogenous . The Kruskal – Wallis ANOVA compares the data based on the relative rank of the re - sults , but this approach is not accurate when there are a large number of equal outcomes as there are with this data set . For this data set , one - way ANOVA via randomization is implemented (cid:1) 81 , 82 (cid:2) . This approach is analogous to the other approaches , but does not make any assumptions about the distribution or the rank - ing of the data . Based on the graphical results shown in Fig . 10 , the ﬁxation group is clearly different and distinct from the other two groups . One might expect the other two conditions not to use gas engines at all , but in this study , gas engines were occasionally used . Using a one - way ANOVA via randomization , there is statistically signiﬁ - cant difference across the groups (cid:3) p = 0 . 05 (cid:4) (cid:1) 83 , 84 (cid:2) . The ﬁxation group produced a larger percentage of gas powered designs than the control group , indicating that the example solution caused ﬁxation . The ﬁxation group also showed a strong trend for pro - ducing a larger percentage of gas powered designs than the deﬁx - ation group (cid:3) t = 1 . 97 , p (cid:1) 0 . 08 (cid:4) , suggesting that the deﬁxation in - formation is effective in breaking or mitigating the induced ﬁxation . Similar to the other measures of design ﬁxation , the re - sults show that ﬁxation is occurring , and the deﬁxation materials are having a statistically signiﬁcant impact . The total number of energy sources used in all stages of peanut shelling differed across the three conditions (cid:3) Fig . 11 (cid:4) . Again , these data do not satisfy the assumptions for a standard ANOVA (cid:3) data are not normally distributed and the variances are not homog - enous (cid:4) so a Kruskal – Wallis ANOVA is implemented . There is not a statistically signiﬁcant difference across the three conditions Fig . 8 The ﬁxation group repeated , on average , features from the example solution more often than the other two groups . Each error bar is ±1 standard error . Fig . 9 The ﬁxation group used , on average , a higher percent - age of the features from the example solution in their concepts . Each error bar is ±1 standard error . Fig . 10 The deﬁxation group produced more designs powered by a gas engine than individuals in the other conditions . The error bars are ±1 standard error . 041003 - 8 / Vol . 132 , APRIL 2010 Transactions of the ASME Downloaded 14 Apr 2010 to 130 . 49 . 138 . 239 . Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright ; see http : / / www . asme . org / terms / Terms _ Use . cfm (cid:3) H = 3 . 28 , df = 2 , p = 0 . 194 , N = 31 (cid:4) . However , the ﬁxation condi - tion produced , on average , fewer energy sources than the deﬁx - ation condition (cid:3) Wilcoxon’s Rank - sum test , W s = 112 . 5 , n 1 = 10 , n 2 = 12 , p = 0 . 09 (cid:4) , suggesting that the deﬁxation materials are ef - fective in breaking the induced ﬁxation . The other pair - wise com - parisons are not statistically signiﬁcant . Consistent with other results from the study , these results sug - gest that the deﬁxation materials are assisting in mitigating or reducing design ﬁxation . The additional categories of available energy sources are assisting the designers in identifying solutions . 8 General Fixation Results Discussion The various measures related to ﬁxation clearly illustrate that the example solution causes design ﬁxation . This result is shown by the lower number of ideas generated , by a higher number of features from the example being used in the solutions , and by fewer energy categories being implemented in the participants’ concepts . This ﬁxation is of particular interest since these partici - pants are not novice designers . All participants have the required domain knowledge to identify short - comings in the presented ex - ample solution . Design ﬁxation is experienced by the engineering design faculty . Providing participants with analogies and rerepresentations of the problem through categories did assist in reducing their ﬁxation on the example solution , but it did not completely eliminate it . Participants in the control group still outperformed both the ﬁxa - tion and the deﬁxation group in total number of concepts , whereas the deﬁxation group employed a greater diversity of energy - based solutions . 9 Results : Analogies Many designers employ analogies to inspire solutions to a given problem . The focal metric to consider in this study when examining analogies is simply the quantity identiﬁed by the par - ticipants across the three conditions . The analogies were identiﬁed by the participants after the 45 min of ideation by revisiting their solutions , circling and labeling any analogies used with a red marker . The number of reported analogies employed did not vary sta - tistically across the conditions (cid:3) Fig . 12 (cid:4) . Again , the data are non - normally distributed with unequal variances , requiring nonpara - metric tests . A Kruskal – Wallis ANOVA shows there is a not statistically signiﬁcant difference across the three conditions (cid:3) H = 1 . 4 , df = 2 , p = 0 . 5 , N = 30 (cid:4) . The deﬁxation group did , however , use slightly more analogies , on average , implementing many of the analogies provided in the deﬁxation materials in a variety of ways . 9 . 1 Analogies Results Discussion . The three conditions implemented in this study produced distinct levels of analogy use . The ﬁxation group and the control have a similar level of analogy use . However , the deﬁxation group , given both the example solu - tion and the extra information , used slightly more analogies , on average , than that given just the example solution . This could be a result of the ﬁxation caused by the example solution , or further indication that more supplemental information is better for a broader search of the design space . Many of the analogies used by the group given extra information were directly inspired by the key word list supplied in the materials . Future work , with more participants per condition , should investigate whether the ob - served trend replicates . An important obstacle to note is the subjectivity of identifying analogies . In order to remove the experimenters’ interpretations and biases , a red marker was given to each participant after the ideation session , with which they were to circle and label any analogies used . This removed subjectivity from the experiment - ers’ perspectives , however , not from the participant’s perspective . Many participants showed signs of a broader understanding of the deﬁnition of analogy , often times circling mechanisms or pro - cesses that were taken directly from industry , for example , press . Since the press was being used in an identical way to that which is used in practice , it is not legitimately considered an analogy for the purposes of this study , but more an application of a technol - ogy . Despite this discrepancy , all analogies identiﬁed by partici - pants were counted as analogies because omitting these would create too much uncertainty in the analysis . 10 Results from Post - Experiment Survey A post - experiment survey measures a variety of items including the following : participants’ opinions about the design problem ; perceptions about the effect of the example solution and the addi - tional material ; and if they had exposure to the design problem and its solutions prior to the experiment . These measures serve to provide further insights and validity to the experimental results . The participants’ overall opinions of the design problem and activity indicate that , on average , they found it interesting and seriously committed themselves to the task . The participants , on a semantic difference scale , felt that they worked hard on the activ - ity (cid:3) mean (cid:3) SD (cid:4) : 1 . 8 (cid:3) 0 . 90 (cid:4) 1 = worked hard , 5 = minimal effort (cid:4) and found the activity to be somewhat motivating but not inspiring (cid:3) mean (cid:3) SD (cid:4) : 2 . 2 (cid:3) 0 . 86 (cid:4) (cid:3) 1 = motivating and 5 = demotivating (cid:4) and 2 . 6 (cid:3) 0 . 78 (cid:4) (cid:3) 1 = inspiring and 5 = frustrating (cid:4)(cid:4) . None of these results show a mean shifted substantially to the right of the scales mid - point . For the validity of this study , it is important that the partici - pants were motivated and put in a substantial effort since in a more realistic design setting , it is expected that engineers are gen - erally well motivated to solve a given design problem . Since the presented design problem is an actual existing issue , it is possible that the participants may have had prior exposure to Fig . 11 The deﬁxation group used , on average , more energy sources in total than participants in the other two groups . Each error bar is ±1 standard error . Fig . 12 All groups used analogies in developing solutions to the design problem . The deﬁxation group , on average , em - ployed slightly more analogies during ideation . The error bars are ±1 standard error . Journal of Mechanical Design APRIL 2010 , Vol . 132 / 041003 - 9 Downloaded 14 Apr 2010 to 130 . 49 . 138 . 239 . Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright ; see http : / / www . asme . org / terms / Terms _ Use . cfm the problem and to the solutions . A total of seven participants , evenly distributed across the conditions , had prior exposure to the design problem , with four of them also having exposure to solu - tions to the design problem . These four participants believed their prior exposure had an insigniﬁcant to only some inﬂuence on their results (cid:3) the four responses were 1—insigniﬁcant , 2—minor , and 1—some inﬂuence (cid:4) . Due to the low level of prior exposure and that the participants were evenly distributed across the conditions , we do not believe that the prior exposure affects the results of this experiment . The key outcome of the survey is the participants’ perception about their performance . The ﬁxation and the deﬁxation groups were asked , using a Likert scale question , if they felt the provided example solution had inﬂuenced them , and then if it had posi - tively or negatively inﬂuenced them (cid:3) Figs . 13 – 15 , error bars are 1 standard error (cid:4) . Both groups felt that the provided example solu - tion had inﬂuenced them . The participants are recognizing the fact that they are being inﬂuenced by the provided design example . The ﬁxation group tended to believe that the effect of the ex - ample solution is positive whereas the deﬁxation group is unsure of the inﬂuence . The differences between the groups are not sta - tistically signiﬁcant , although this lack of statistical signiﬁcance may reﬂect the moderate group sizes of this study . The partici - pants’ perceptions are in contrast to the quantitative ﬁxation re - sults that indicate that the example is having a strong negative effect on the ﬁxation group , meaning that the designer may not be aware of the negative inﬂuence . In addition , the participants’ perceptions of the effects of the deﬁxation materials were also measured (cid:3) Table 3 (cid:4) . In this case , participants’ correctly believe that the additional information is beneﬁting them with a mean of only agree to somewhat agree (cid:3) 2 . 7 (cid:4) and a fairly high standard deviation (cid:3) 1 . 33 (cid:4) . This high stan - dard deviation may indicate the some of the participants are more accurate in their perceptions . The quantitative results indicate that there is a very strong positive effect in overcoming the ﬁxation due to the provided deﬁxation materials . While the participant perceptions are generally accurate , in this case , they do not strongly match the quantitative results . This indicates that partici - pant perceptions are not an accurate tool for evaluating design methods . 11 Addressing the Research Questions Research Question 1 : Do academic engineering design educa - tors show evidence of design ﬁxation ? Academic engineering design educators do show evidence of design ﬁxation . The ﬁxation group produced fewer ideas , reused more of the features from the example solution , and implemented fewer categories of energy sources than the control group . Design ﬁxation is evidenced by the presence of a considerable number of solution elements that are clearly not appropriate for the context of the design problem . This group of participants has a high de - gree of knowledge and can clearly recognize the short - comings of the presented design . Qualitatively compared with undergraduate students in a previous study (cid:1) 73 (cid:2) , the design educators produced a larger number of highly novel solutions not identiﬁed by the stu - dents , providing some validation of their status as design experts . It should be noted , however , that the students did produce a range of novel ideas for the design problem . Question 2 : What can engineers do to mitigate their ﬁxation on design solutions ? Can analogies , functions , categories of energy sources , and back - of - the - envelope calculations assist in overcom - ing design ﬁxation ? Some of the strategies that may mitigate design ﬁxation are analogies , a functional decomposition , rerepresentation of the problem , categories of solutions (cid:3) such as energy sources (cid:4) , and Table 3 Participant perceptions of the effect of the deﬁxation materials Survey question Deﬁxation group mean (cid:3) SD (cid:4) The provided additional information (cid:3) functions , analogies , calculation , energy domains (cid:4) beneﬁted me . 2 . 7 = agree / somewhat agree (cid:3) 1 . 33 (cid:4) The provided additional information (cid:3) functions , analogies , calculation , energy domains (cid:4) hindered me . 5 . 1 = somewhat disagree (cid:3) 1 . 45 (cid:4) Scale : 1 = strongly agree , 2 = agree , 3 = somewhat agree , 4 = neutral , 5 = somewhat disagree , 6 = disagree , 7 = strongly disagree Fig . 13 Participants believe they were inﬂuenced by the pro - vided example solution Fig . 14 Participants in the ﬁxation and the deﬁxation group felt the example solution had a positive inﬂuence or at least were unsure that the inﬂuence was positive or not Fig . 15 Participants were undecided if the example solution negatively inﬂuenced them 041003 - 10 / Vol . 132 , APRIL 2010 Transactions of the ASME Downloaded 14 Apr 2010 to 130 . 49 . 138 . 239 . Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright ; see http : / / www . asme . org / terms / Terms _ Use . cfm back - of - the envelope calculations . Results from this study clearly indicate that design ﬁxation can be mitigated or reduced through these means . The deﬁxation group did produce more ideas , on average , than the ﬁxation group . In addition , they repeated fewer features from the example solution and implemented a greater number of different energy categories than the ﬁxation group . The results do not indicate which materials are most effective for de - ﬁxation , but that this set , as a whole , is effective . Future studies will need to consider particular categories of deﬁxation materials and strategies . Unlike previous studies on design ﬁxation , this study directed participants toward the use of analogy to break design ﬁxation . Participants in past studies likely implemented analogies since analogy is a common and effective design strategy , but our study is much more literal about analogy use . Our study provides further but somewhat indirect support for the importance and impact of analogical reasoning in the design process . Additional research is needed to fully understand the type of information that eliminates design ﬁxation , including the numer - ous representations currently existing in the design literature , and how these materials may be generated for novel design problems . Design methods currently exist for functional decomposition (cid:1) 63 , 66 , 79 (cid:2) and for analogies (cid:1) 26 , 62 , 64 , 74 , 85 (cid:2) . As more ap - proaches to reducing design ﬁxation are discovered , new design methods will need to be developed to assist designers . Research Question 3 : How well do participant perceptions of design results correspond to quantitative assessment of the re - sults ? Consistent with other studies on idea generation (cid:1) 37 (cid:2) , partici - pants’ perceptions of effectiveness during idea generation do not always match the quantitative outcome . Participants in the ﬁxation group inaccurately believe , in general , that the example solution has a positive inﬂuence on their idea generation process , or they are unsure as to this inﬂuence . It is clear from the ﬁxation results that the example reduces the number of ideas generated , but this is not perceived by the participants . The deﬁxation group felt that the example solution inﬂuenced them , but are not sure if it was positive or negative . The deﬁxation group also correctly perceived that they are assisted by the addi - tional information that is provided , but they do not feel strongly about this . By contrast , the solution data demonstrate that the deﬁxation group is strongly supported by the additional materials . These participant perception results strongly warn against their use as an accurate measurement of ideation effectiveness . 12 Conclusions This study evaluates design ﬁxation , the use of mitigation strat - egies , and the perception of design ﬁxation in a group of mostly engineering design faculty . Results show that design ﬁxation is a difﬁculty encountered even by this group , indicating the strength and importance of this effect in the design process . The partici - pants’ perceptions of the effects of the provided ﬁxation example solution and deﬁxation materials are generally not accurate , ex - cept with respect to deﬁxation materials . This result is not ex - pected for a group of individuals who study design . This incon - gruity in perception presents a unique obstacle to engineering design methods research since one of the simplest measures to obtain is the users’ perceptions of the method’s effectiveness . Based on this study and past work , the participants’ evaluation of a method are frequently inconsistent with the quantitative mea - sures and not suitable for accurate evaluation or assessment . This study compared three groups of participants : (cid:3) 1 (cid:4) a control group , which only received the design problem , (cid:3) 2 (cid:4) a ﬁxation group , which also was provided a negative example solution , and (cid:3) 3 (cid:4) a deﬁxation group , which , in addition to the negative solution , also received a set of materials to mitigate or reduce ﬁxation . The example solution caused design ﬁxation , as demonstrated by a reduction in the number of ideas generated , a greater number of design features from the example being reused and fewer catego - ries of energy sources considered . Consistent with prior studies , design ﬁxation can be mitigated . The unique ﬁxation mitigation materials , which included functions , energy sources , and analo - gies , increased the number of ideas generated . It also reduced the frequency of design solutions that were highly similar to the ex - ample , and increased the number of energy categories spanned . Fixation is a commonplace during the idea generation process and warrants much further investigation . Solutions presented or the individuals’ own ideas can cause ﬁxation , thus limiting the ideas that are considered . The situations that tend to increase de - sign ﬁxation need to be identiﬁed , and more approaches for miti - gating or reducing ﬁxation should be created . Acknowledgment The authors would like to thank all participants of the 2008 NSF Workshop : Discussion on Individual and Team - Based Inno - vation and NSF for supporting the workshop and this paper under Grant No . CMMI0740529 . The authors speciﬁcally thank Judy Vance for proposing the workshop . Support is also acknowledged from University of Texas at Austin College of Engineering , the Cullen Trust Endowed Professorship in Engineering No . 1 , with Grant Nos . NSF SBE0738058 and NSF BCS0717957 . A version of this paper and some of the data was previously presented at the ICED Conference : Linsey , J . , Tseng , I . , Fu , K . , Cagan , J . , and Wood , K . , 2009 , “Reducing and Perceiving Design Fixation : Ini - tial Results from a NSF - Sponsored Workshop , ” Proceedings of the 2009 International Conference on Engineering Design , Stan - ford , CA . References (cid:1) 1 (cid:2) Simon , H . A . , 1968 , The Sciences of the Artiﬁcial , MIT , Cambridge , MA . (cid:1) 2 (cid:2) Antonsson , E . K . , and Cagan , J . , 2001 , Formal Engineering Design Synthesis , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , England . (cid:1) 3 (cid:2) Chakrabarti , A . , 2002 , Engineering Design Synthesis : Understanding , Ap - proaches and Tools , Springer - Verlag , London . (cid:1) 4 (cid:2) Stone , R . B . , Wood , K . L . , and Crawford , R . H . , 2000 , “A Heuristic Method to Identify Modules From a Functional Description of a Product , ” Des . Stud . , 21 , pp . 5 – 31 . (cid:1) 5 (cid:2) Gero , J . S . , 1990 , “Design Prototypes : A Knowledge Representation Schema for Design , ” AI Mag . , 11 (cid:3) 4 (cid:4) , pp . 26 – 36 . (cid:1) 6 (cid:2) Shah , J . J . , Smith , S . M . , and Vargas - Hernandez , N . , 2003 , “Metrics for Mea - suring Ideation Effectiveness , ” Des . Stud . , 24 (cid:3) 2 (cid:4) , pp . 111 – 134 . (cid:1) 7 (cid:2) Shah , J . J . , Vargas - Hernández , N . , Summers , J . S . , and Kulkarni , S . , 2001 , “Collaborative Sketching (cid:3) C - Sketch (cid:4) —An Idea Generation Technique for En - gineering Design , ” J . Creat . Behav . , 35 (cid:3) 3 (cid:4) , pp . 168 – 198 . (cid:1) 8 (cid:2) Yang , M . C . , and Epstein , D . J . , 2005 , “A Study of Prototypes , Design Activ - ity , and Design Outcomes , ” Des . Stud . , 26 , pp . 649 – 669 . (cid:1) 9 (cid:2) Christensen , B . T . , and Schunn , C . , 2007 , “The Relationship of Analogical Distance to Analogical Function and Pre - Inventive Structures : The Case of Engineering Design , ” Mem . Cognit . , 35 (cid:3) 1 (cid:4) , pp . 29 – 38 . (cid:1) 10 (cid:2) Hirschi , N . W . , and Frey , D . D . , 2002 , “Cognition and Complexity : An Ex - periment on the Effect of Coupling in Parameter Design , ” Res . Eng . Des . , 12 , pp . 123 – 131 . (cid:1) 11 (cid:2) Gero , J . S . , and Kannengiesser , U . , 2004 , “The Situated Function - Behavior - Structure Framework , ” Des . Stud . , 25 (cid:3) 4 (cid:4) , pp . 373 – 391 . (cid:1) 12 (cid:2) Yang , M . C . , and Charm , J . G . , 2007 , “An Analysis of Sketching Skill and Its Role in Early Stage Engineering Design , ” ASME J . Mech . Des . , 129 , pp . 476 – 482 . (cid:1) 13 (cid:2) Schunn , C . , Lovell , M . , Wang , Y . U . , and Yang , A . , 2008 , “Measuring Inno - vative Apples and Oranges : Towards More Robust and Efﬁcient Measures of Product Innovation , ” Proceedings of the Design Creativity Conference . (cid:1) 14 (cid:2) Perttula , M . , and Sipila , P . , 2007 , “The Idea Exposure Paradigm in Design Idea Generation , ” J . Eng . Design , 18 (cid:3) 1 (cid:4) , pp . 93 – 102 . (cid:1) 15 (cid:2) Jansson , D . , and Smith , S . , 1991 , “Design Fixation , ” Des . Stud . , 12 (cid:3) 1 (cid:4) , pp . 3 – 11 . (cid:1) 16 (cid:2) Moss , J . , Kotovsky , K . , and Cagan , J . , 2007 , “The Inﬂuence of Open Goals on the Acquisition of Problem - Relevant Information , ” J . Exp . Psychol . Learn . Mem . Cogn . , 33 (cid:3) 5 (cid:4) , pp . 876 – 891 . (cid:1) 17 (cid:2) Tseng , I . , Moss , J . , Cagan , J . , and Kotovsky , K . , 2008 , “The Role of Timing and Analogical Similarity in the Stimulation of Idea Generation in Design , ” Des . Stud . , 29 (cid:3) 3 (cid:4) , pp . 203 – 221 . (cid:1) 18 (cid:2) Linsey , J . , Laux , J . , Clauss , E . F . , Wood , K . , and Markman , A . , 2007 , “Increas - ing Innovation : A Trilogy of Experiments Towards a Design - by - Analogy Method , ” Proceedings of the ASME Design Theory and Methodology Confer - ence . (cid:1) 19 (cid:2) Linsey , J . , Wood , K . , and Markman , A . , 2008 , “Modality and Representation in Analogy , ” Artif . Intell . Eng . Des . Anal . Manuf . , 22 (cid:3) 02 (cid:4) , pp . 85 – 100 . (cid:1) 20 (cid:2) Linsey , J . , Wood , K . , and Markman , A . , 2008 , “Increasing Innovation : Presen - Journal of Mechanical Design APRIL 2010 , Vol . 132 / 041003 - 11 Downloaded 14 Apr 2010 to 130 . 49 . 138 . 239 . Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright ; see http : / / www . asme . org / terms / Terms _ Use . cfm tation and Evaluation of the Wordtree Design - by - Analogy Method , ” Proceed - ings of the ASME IDETC Design Theory and Methodology Conference . (cid:1) 21 (cid:2) Schunn , C . D . , and Dunbar , K . , 1996 , “Primary , Analogy , and Awareness in Complex Reasoning , ” Mem . Cognit . , 24 (cid:3) 3 (cid:4) , pp . 271 – 284 . (cid:1) 22 (cid:2) Dunbar , K . , 1997 , “Creative Thought : An Investigation of Conceptual Struc - tures and Processes , ” How Scientists Think : On - Line Creativity and Concep - tual Change in Science , American Psychological Association , Washington , DC . (cid:1) 23 (cid:2) Eckert , C . M . , Stacey , M . , and Earl , C . , 2005 , “References to Past Designs , ” Studying Designers ‘05 , Sydney , Australia , J . S . Gero and N . Bonnardel , eds . Key Centre of Design Computing and Cognition , pp . 3 – 21 . (cid:1) 24 (cid:2) Mcadams , D . , and Wood , K . , 2002 , “A Quantitative Similarity Metric for Design by Analogy , ” ASME J . Mech . Des . , 124 (cid:3) 2 (cid:4) , pp . 173 – 182 . (cid:1) 25 (cid:2) Nagel , R . L . , Midha , P . A . , Tinsley , A . , Stone , R . B . , Mcadams , D . , and Shu , L . , 2008 , “Exploring the Use of Functional Models in Biomimetic Conceptual Design , ” J . Mech . Des . , 130 (cid:3) 12 (cid:4) , p . 121102 . (cid:1) 26 (cid:2) Chiu , I . , and Shu , L . H . , 2007 , “Biomimetic Design Through Natural Lan - guage Analysis to Facilitate Cross - Domain Information Retrieval , ” Artif . In - tell . Eng . Des . Anal . Manuf . , 21 (cid:3) 1 (cid:4) , pp . 45 – 59 . (cid:1) 27 (cid:2) Hacco , E . , and Shu , L . H . , 2002 , “Biomimetic Concept Generation Applied to Design for Remanufacture , ” Proceedings of the ASME IDETC , Montreal , Quebec , Canada . (cid:1) 28 (cid:2) Hey , J . , Linsey , J . , Agogino , A . , and Wood , K . , 2008 , “Analogies and Meta - phors in Creative Design , ” Int . J . Eng . Educ . , 24 (cid:3) 2 (cid:4) , pp . 283 – 294 . (cid:1) 29 (cid:2) Goel , A . K . , 1997 , “Design , Analogy , and Creativity , ” IEEE Expert , 12 (cid:3) 3 (cid:4) , pp . 62 – 70 . (cid:1) 30 (cid:2) Campbell , M . , Cagan , J . , and Kotovsky , K . , 2003 , “TheA - DesignApproach to Managing Automated Design Synthesis , ” Res . Eng . Des . , 14 (cid:3) 1 (cid:4) , pp . 12 – 14 . (cid:1) 31 (cid:2) Olson , J . , and Cagan , J . , 2004 , “Inter - Agent Ties in Computational Conﬁgu - ration Design , ” Artif . Intell . Eng . Des . Anal . Manuf . , 18 (cid:3) 2 (cid:4) , pp . 135 – 152 . (cid:1) 32 (cid:2) Davies , J . , Goel , A . , and Nersessian , N . , 2009 , “A Computational Model of Visual Analogies in Design , ” Cognitive Systems Research , Special Issue on Analogies - Integrating Cognitive Abilities , 10 , pp . 204 – 215 . (cid:1) 33 (cid:2) Leung , P . , Ishii , K . , Abell , J . , and Benson , J . , 2008 , “Distributed System De - velopment Risk Analysis , ” J . Mech . Des . , 130 (cid:3) 5 (cid:4) , p . 051403 . (cid:1) 34 (cid:2) Paulus , P . B . , and Nijstad , B . A . , 2003 , Group Creativity : Innovation through Collaboration , Oxford University Press , New York . (cid:1) 35 (cid:2) Linsey , J . , Clauss , E . F . , Kurtoglu , T . , Murphy , J . T . , Wood , K . L . , and Mark - man , A . B . , “An Experimental Study of Group Idea Generation Techniques , ” Understanding the Roles of Idea Representation and Viewing Methods . (cid:1) 36 (cid:2) Yang , M . C . , and Jin , Y . , 2008 , “An Examination of Team Effectiveness in Distributed and Co - Located Engineering Teams , ” Int . J . Eng . Educ . , 24 (cid:3) 2 (cid:4) , pp . 400 – 408 . (cid:1) 37 (cid:2) Paulus , P . B . , and Yang , H . C . , 2000 , “Idea Generation in Groups : A Basis for Creativity in Organizations , ” Org . Behav . Hum . Decis . Process , 82 (cid:3) 1 (cid:4) , pp . 76 – 87 . (cid:1) 38 (cid:2) Dong , A . , and Agogino , A . M . , 1997 , “Text Analysis for Constructing Design Representations , ” Artif . Intell . Eng . , 11 (cid:3) 2 (cid:4) , pp . 65 – 75 . (cid:1) 39 (cid:2) Cronin , M . A . , and Weingart , L . R . , 2007 , “Representational Gaps , Informa - tion Processing , and Conﬂict in Functionally Diverse Teams , ” Acad . Manage . Rev . , 32 (cid:3) 3 (cid:4) , pp . 761 – 773 . (cid:1) 40 (cid:2) Weingart , L . R . , Cronin , M . A . , Houser , C . S . , Cagan , J . , and Vogel , C . M . , 2005 , “Functional Diversity and Conﬂict in Cross - Functional Product Devel - opment Teams : Considering Representational Gaps and Task Characteristics , ” Understanding Teams , IAP , Greenwich , CT . (cid:1) 41 (cid:2) Hanna , L . , and Cagan , J . , 2009 , “Evolutionary Multi - Agent Systems : An Adaptive and Dynamic Approach to Optimization , ” J . Mech . Des . , 131 (cid:3) 1 (cid:4) , p . 011010 . (cid:1) 42 (cid:2) Dong , A . , Hill , A . W . , and Agogino , A . M . , 2004 , “A Document Analysis Method for Characterizing Design Team Performance , ” J . Mech . Des . , 126 (cid:3) 3 (cid:4) , pp . 378 – 385 . (cid:1) 43 (cid:2) Smith , S . M . , and Blankenship , S . E . , 1991 , “Incubation and the Persistence of Fixation in Problem Solving , ” Am . J . Psychol . , 104 , pp . 61 – 87 . (cid:1) 44 (cid:2) Ward , T . B . , 1994 , “Structured Imagination : The Role of Category Structure in Exemplar Generation , ” Appl . Cognit . Psychol . , 27 (cid:3) 1 (cid:4) , pp . 1 – 40 . (cid:1) 45 (cid:2) Marsh , R . L . , Ward , T . B . , and Landau , J . D . , 1999 , “The Inadvertent Use of Prior Knowledge in a Generative Cognitive Task , ” Mem . Cognit . , 27 (cid:3) 1 (cid:4) , pp . 94 – 105 . (cid:1) 46 (cid:2) Jaarsveld , S . , and Leeuwen , C . , 2005 , “Sketches From a Design Process : Cre - ative Cognition Inferred From Intermediate Products , ” Cogn . Sci . , 29 , pp . 79 – 101 . (cid:1) 47 (cid:2) Purcell , A . T . , and Gero , J . S . , 1996 , “Design and Other Types of Fixation , ” Des . Stud . , 17 (cid:3) 4 (cid:4) , pp . 363 – 383 . (cid:1) 48 (cid:2) Chrysikou , E . G . , and Weisberg , R . W . , 2005 , “Following the Wrong Foot - steps : Fixation Effects of Pictorial Examples in a Design Problem - Solving Task , ” J . Exp . Psychol . Learn . Mem . Cogn . , 31 (cid:3) 5 (cid:4) , pp . 1134 – 1148 . (cid:1) 49 (cid:2) Casakin , H . , and Goldschmidt , G . , 1999 , “Expertise and the Use of Visual Analogy : Implications for Design Education , ” Des . Stud . , 20 (cid:3) 2 (cid:4) , pp . 153 – 175 . (cid:1) 50 (cid:2) Leclercq , P . , and Heylighen , A . , 2002 , Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Design ‘02 , 5 , 8 Analogies Per Hour . (cid:1) 51 (cid:2) Chiu , I . , and Shu , L . H . , 2007 , “Using Language as Related Stimuli for Con - cept Generation , ” Artif . Intell . Eng . Des . Anal . Manuf . , 21 (cid:3) 2 (cid:4) , pp . 103 – 121 . (cid:1) 52 (cid:2) Ball , L . J . , Ormerod , T . C . , and Morley , N . J . , 2004 , “SpontaneousAnalogising in Engineering Design : AComparativeAnalysis of Experts and Novices , ” Des . Stud . , 25 (cid:3) 5 (cid:4) , pp . 495 – 508 . (cid:1) 53 (cid:2) Gick , M . L . , and Holyoak , K . J . , 1983 . (cid:1) 54 (cid:2) Gick , M . L . , and Patterson , K . , 1992 , “Do Contrasting Examples Facilitate Schema Induction and Analogical Transfer ? , ” Can . J . Psychol . , 46 , pp . 539 – 550 . (cid:1) 55 (cid:2) Kolodner , J . L . , 1997 , “Educational Implications of Analogy : A View from Case - Based Reasoning , ” Am . Psychol . , 52 (cid:3) 1 (cid:4) , pp . 57 – 66 . (cid:1) 56 (cid:2) Dahl , D . W . , and Moreau , P . , 2002 , “The Inﬂuence and Value of Analogical Thinking During New Product Ideation , ” J . Mark . Res . , 39 (cid:3) 1 (cid:4) , pp . 47 – 60 . (cid:1) 57 (cid:2) Marsh , R . L . , Landau , J . D . , and Hicks , J . L . , 1996 , “How Examples May (cid:3) and May Not (cid:4) Constrain Creativity , ” Mem . Cognit . , 24 (cid:3) 5 (cid:4) , pp . 669 – 680 . (cid:1) 58 (cid:2) Gordon , W . J . J . , 1961 , Synectics : The Development of Creative Capacity , Harper , New York . (cid:1) 59 (cid:2) French , M . , 1996 , Conceptual Design , Springer - Verlag , London . (cid:1) 60 (cid:2) French , M . , 1988 , Invention and Evolution : Design in Nature and Engineering , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , England . (cid:1) 61 (cid:2) Linsey , J . , Markman , A . , and Wood , K . , 2008 , “Wordtrees : A Method for Design - by - Analogy , ” Proceedings of the 2008 American Society for Engineer - ing Education Annual Conference , Pittsburg , PA . (cid:1) 62 (cid:2) Shu , L . H . , Hansen , H . N . , Gegeckaite , A . , Moon , J . , and Chan , C . , 2006 , “Case Study in Biomimetic Design : Handling and Assembly of Microparts , ” Proceedings of theASME IDETC , International Design and Engineering Tech - nical Conferences . (cid:1) 63 (cid:2) Kurtoglu , T . , and Campbell , M . , 2008 , “Automated Synthesis of Electrome - chanical Design Conﬁgurations From Empirical Analysis of Function to Form Mapping , ” J . Eng . Des . , 18 (cid:3) 6 (cid:4) , pp . 83 – 104 . (cid:1) 64 (cid:2) Chakrabarti , A . , Sarkar , P . , Leelavathamma , B . , and Nataraju , B . S . , 2005 , “A Functional Representation for Aiding Biomimetic and Artiﬁcial Inspiration of New Ideas , ” Artif . Intell . Eng . Des . Anal . Manuf . , 19 (cid:3) 2 (cid:4) , pp . 113 – 132 . (cid:1) 65 (cid:2) Smith , S . M . , Ward , T . B . , and Schumacher , J . S . , 1993 , “Constraining Effects of Examples in a Creative Generation Task , ” Mem . Cognit . , 21 (cid:3) 6 (cid:4) , pp . 837 – 845 . (cid:1) 66 (cid:2) Pahl , G . , and Beitz , W . , 1996 , Engineering Design—A Systematic Approach , Springer , New York . (cid:1) 67 (cid:2) Otto , K . , and Wood , K . , 2001 , Product Design : Techniques in Reverse Engi - neering and New Product Development , Prentice - Hall , Upper Saddle River , NJ . (cid:1) 68 (cid:2) Ullman , D . , 1997 , The Mechanical Design Process , McGraw - Hill , New York . (cid:1) 69 (cid:2) Ulrich , K . , and Eppinger , S . , 2004 , Product Design and Development , McGraw - Hill , New York . (cid:1) 70 (cid:2) Ahmed , S . , and Christensen , B . T . , 2008 , “Use of Analogies by Novice and Experienced Design Engineers , ” Proceedings of the ASME IDETC 2008 . (cid:1) 71 (cid:2) Mullen , B . , Johnson , C . , and Salas , E . , 1991 , “Productivity Loss in Brain - storming Groups : A Meta - Analytic Integration , ” J . Appl . Soc . Psychol . , 12 (cid:3) 1 (cid:4) , pp . 3 – 23 . (cid:1) 72 (cid:2) 2004 , Thinkspace : Peanut Sheller , March 2004 , http : / / www . thinkcycle . org / tc - space / tspace ? tspace _ id (cid:2) 41963 (cid:1) 73 (cid:2) Linsey , J . , Green , M . G . , Murphy , J . T . , Wood , K . L . , and Markman , A . B . , 2005 , “Collaborating to Success : An Experimental Study of Group Idea Gen - eration Techniques , ” Proceedings of the ASME Design Theory and Methodol - ogy Conference . (cid:1) 74 (cid:2) Linsey , J . , Markman , A . , and Wood , K . , 2008 , “Wordtrees : A Method for Design - by - Analogy , ” Proceedings of the 2008 American Society for Engineer - ing Education Annual Conference . (cid:1) 75 (cid:2) Dugosh , K . L . , and Paulus , P . B . , 2005 , “Cognitive and Social Comparison Processes in Brainstorming , ” J . Exp . Soc . Psychol . , 41 , pp . 313 – 320 . (cid:1) 76 (cid:2) Shah , J . J . , Kulkarni , S . V . , and Vargas - Hernández , N . , 2000 , “Evaluation of Idea Generation Methods for Conceptual Design : Effectiveness Metrics and Design of Experiments , ” ASME J . Mech . Des . , 122 , pp . 377 – 384 . (cid:1) 77 (cid:2) Linsey , J . S . , Green , M . G . , Murphy , J . T . , Wood , K . L . , and Markman , A . B . , 2005 , “Collaborating to Success : An Experimental Study of Group Idea Gen - eration Techniques , ” Proceedings of the ASME Design Theory and Methodol - ogy Conference . (cid:1) 78 (cid:2) Stone , R . , and Wood , K . , 2000 , “Development of a Functional Basis for De - sign , ” J . Mech . Des . , 122 (cid:3) 4 (cid:4) , pp . 359 – 370 . (cid:1) 79 (cid:2) Hirtz , J . , Stone , R . B . , and Mcadams , D . A . , 2002 , “A Functional Basis for Engineering Design : Reconciling and Evolving Previous Efforts , ” Res . Eng . Des . , 13 , pp . 65 – 82 . (cid:1) 80 (cid:2) Clark - Carter , D . , 1997 , Doing Quantitative Psychological Research : From De - sign to Report , Psychology Press , United Kingdom . (cid:1) 81 (cid:2) Howell , D . C . , 2002 , Statistical Methods for Psychology , Duxbury , Paciﬁc Grove , CA . (cid:1) 82 (cid:2) Howell , D . C . , 2007 , Resampling Statistics : Randomization and the Bootstrap , 3 / 2009 , http : / / www . uvm . edu / ~ dhowell / StatPages / Resampling / Resampling . html (cid:1) 83 (cid:2) Howell , D . C . , 2000 , Resampling Procedures (cid:3) Software (cid:4) , 3 / 2009 , http : / / www . uvm . edu / ~ dhowell / StatPages / Resampling / Resampling . html (cid:1) 84 (cid:2) Good , P . I . , 2005 , Resampling Methods : A Practical Guide to Data Analysis , Birkhauser , Boston , MA . (cid:1) 85 (cid:2) Chakrabarti , A . , Sarkar , P . , Leelavathamma , B . , and Nataraju , B . S . , 2005 , “A Behavioural Model for Representing Biological and Artiﬁcial Systems for In - spiring Novel Designs , ” Proceedings of the International Conference on Engi - neering Design . 041003 - 12 / Vol . 132 , APRIL 2010 Transactions of the ASME Downloaded 14 Apr 2010 to 130 . 49 . 138 . 239 . Redistribution subject to ASME license or copyright ; see http : / / www . asme . org / terms / Terms _ Use . cfm