ARTICLE Escaping optimization traps : the role of cultural adaptation and cultural exaptation in facilitating open - ended cumulative dynamics James Winters 1 * ABSTRACT Explaining the origins of cumulative culture , and how it is maintained over long timescales , constitutes a challenge for theories of cultural evolution . Previous theoretical work has emphasized two fundamental causal processes : cultural adaptation ( where tech - nologies are re ﬁ ned towards a functional objective ) and cultural exaptation ( the repurposing of existing technologies towards a new functional goal ) . Yet , despite the prominence of cultural exaptation in theoretical explanations , this process is often absent from models and experiments of cumulative culture . Using an agent - based model , where agents attempt to solve problems in a high - dimensional problem space , the current paper investigates the relationship between cultural adaptation and cultural exaptation and produces three major ﬁ ndings . First , cultural dynamics often end up in optimization traps : here , the process of optimization causes the dynamics of change to cease , with populations entering a state of equilibrium . Second , escaping these optimization traps requires cultural dynamics to explore the problem space rapidly enough to create a moving target for optimization . This results in a positive feedback loop of open - ended growth in both the diversity and complexity of cultural solutions . Finally , the results helped delineate the roles played by social and asocial mechanisms : asocial mechanisms of innovation drive the emergence of cumulative culture and social mechanisms of within - group transmission help maintain these dynamics over long timescales . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41599 - 019 - 0361 - 3 OPEN 1 Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History , Jena , Germany . * email : winters @ shh . mpg . de PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2019 ) 5 : 149 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41599 - 019 - 0361 - 3 | www . nature . com / palcomms 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 89 0 ( ) : , ; Introduction H umans are prodigious problem solvers . Unlike many non - human animals , humans seem particularly adept at incrementally discovering and exploiting solutions with higher payoffs ( Acerbi et al . , 2016 ; Tennie et al . , 2009 ) , as evident in the bewildering growth of technological sophistication over the last several thousand years . Access to increasingly complex solutions allowed human groups to enter into and thrive across a variety of niches via cultural as opposed to biological adaptations ( Henrich , 2015 ; Laland , 2018 ; Richerson and Boyd , 2005 ) . No better is this illustrated than in our use of clothing and weapons as technological solutions for environmental challenges . While polar bears evolved thick layers of blubber , large paws , and spe - cialized carnassials to survive and hunt in Arctic environments , the Inuit achieved comparable outcomes by modifying and extending existing technologies to invent parkas , mukluks , and harpoons . These distinct advantages are often attributed to the ability of cultural evolutionary dynamics to facilitate a cumulative process : here , solutions with higher payoffs need not be independently rediscovered , but can instead be transmitted from individual - to - individual via social learning mechanisms ( Boyd and Richerson , 1985 ; Dean et al . , 2014 ; Mesoudi and Thornton , 2018 ) . Whilst non - human animals have culture ( Hunt and Gray , 2004 ; Kawa - mura , 1959 ; Krützen et al . , 2005 ; Whiten et al . , 1999 ) , and exhibit a high level of cognitive and behavioral sophistication ( Emery and Clayton , 2004 ; Penn and Povinelli , 2007 ; Piantadosi and Cantlon , 2017 ) , humans are alone in their capacity to modify cultural traditions in a direction of open - ended complexity ( Boyd and Richerson , 1996 ; Heyes , 1993 ; Mesoudi and Thornton , 2018 ; Tomasello et al . , 1993 ) . As with biological evolution , this cumu - lative process provides a powerful explanation for the ﬁ t between technological solutions and ecological problems via cultural adaptation : by generating different solutions for a given problem , a population can gradually select from this pool of variation and move closer to an optimal solution ( Boyd and Richerson , 1985 , 1995 ; Enquist et al . , 2007 ; Henrich , 2015 ; Laland , 2018 ; Richerson and Boyd , 2005 ) . Less attention has been paid to another prominent process in the evolution of technology : cultural exaptation ( Andriani and Cohen , 2013 ; Arthur , 2009 ; Johnson , 2011 ; Kauffman , 1993 ; Mokyr , 1998 ; Solée et al . , 2013 ) . Initially coined by Gould and Vrba ( 1982 ) , although the concept itself dates back to Darwin ( 1859 ) in biology ( see preadaptation ) and to Schumpeter ( 1939 ) in economics , exaptation is when a biological or cultural trait originally adapted for use in one functional role is co - opted and repurposed towards a new function . Whereas cultural adaptation follows from a search over the pool of possible solutions , cultural exaptation inverts the causality of this process : it searches the space of possible problems in an effort to ﬁ nd a novel problem for a given solution . Viagra , for instance , was originally invented as a potential solution for angina , but during clinical trials it was discovered to be a far more effective remedy for erectile dys - function ( Andriani et al . , 2015 ) . The history of technology is replete with similar instances : from Gutenberg co - opting the screw - driven wine press in the creation of the printing press ( Solée et al . , 2013 ) to the repurposing of iron door hinges as ship rudders ( Boyd et al . , 2013 ) and the discovery that safely disposing of radioactive or biological hazards is achievable via the high temperatures required for vitri ﬁ cation ( Dew et al . , 2004 ) . How do these two processes of cultural adaptation and cultural exaptation interact to shape and constrain cultural evolutionary dynamics ? In biological evolution , Darwin envisaged adaptation and exaptation as part of a cycle of open - ended novelty and re ﬁ nement : it is a process of taking an already adapted trait , repurposing it for a new function , and then adaptively tuning this trait for its new functional role via natural selection . An oft - cited example of exaptation is the evolution of feathers , which were originally used for thermoregulation , as a means of facilitating ﬂ ight ( Gould and Vrba , 1982 ) . Theoretical frameworks in cultural evolution have also recognized the importance of exaptation in the domains of technology ( Boyd et al . , 2013 ) and language ( Lass , 1990 ) . Yet , despite the prominence of cultural exaptation in these frameworks , this process is curiously absent from models and experiments into cumulative culture ( Mesoudi and Thornton , 2018 ) . One reason for this omission is the focus on speci ﬁ c types of cumulative culture . Debates over what constitutes cumulative culture , as well as questions over its presence in non - human animals , is the source of much consternation ( for recent reviews , see Mesoudi and Thornton ( 2018 ) ; Miton and Charbonneau ( 2018 ) ) . Social transmission experiments , for instance , tend to investigate processes of functional re ﬁ nement . In these cases , the dynamics of change are more akin to a cumulative optimization process , whereby an experimental population moves closer to an optimal solution within the bounds of its input problem ( s ) and the available resources . An example of this is found in a recent experimental study of pigeon ﬂ ight path optimization ( Sasaki and Biro , 2017 ) : here , pigeons are only able to discover the quickest route when information about ﬂ ight routes are socially trans - mitted . Similar experiments with human participants , such as transmission chains of paper aeroplanes , spaghetti towers , and arti ﬁ cial languages , all reach comparable outcomes ( Caldwell et al . , 2016 ; Caldwell and Millen , 2008 ; Kirby et al . , 2008 ) . As others have suggested ( Mesoudi and Thornton , 2018 ) , cumulative optimization in this sense quali ﬁ es as an instance of cumulative culture , but it is insuf ﬁ cient to produce the open - ended dynamics inherent to human cultural domains ( such as technological evolution ) . Pigeons do not apply insights from the optimization of ﬂ ight paths to other domains and the cumulative dynamics only persist until an optimal ﬂ ight path is reached ( a fact recognized by Sasaki and Biro ( 2017 ) ) . The only available options in such instances are to remain in the current state or transition to a less - optimal con ﬁ guration . In essence , populations become stuck in an optimization trap where the dynamics of change cease and enter a state of equilibrium . By contrast , inventions such as writing or the steam engine are capable of changing the bounds within which cultural dynamics operate , introducing populations to novel problems , as well as allowing them to more readily generate novel solutions . Much of the emphasis in computational models is on the open - endedness of cumulative culture . In recent models , this often corresponds to cumulative growth in either the diversity ( Creanza et al . , 2017 ; Kolodny et al . , 2015 ; Mesoudi , 2011 ) or complexity ( Derex et al . , 2018 ; Enquist et al . , 2011 ; Lewis and Laland , 2012 ) of cultural traits . In many ways , these models suffer from the opposite problem to that found in experiments : the absence of any overt functional target . Functional constraints , such as the task requirements for gathering termites , are often not explicitly modeled . In cases where function is modeled , it forms a single ﬁ tness proxy and is assumed to be an intrinsic feature of a cul - tural trait ( e . g . , via a utility function ; see Lewis and Laland ( 2012 ) ) . As such , there is no notion of how different functional constraints shape the evolution of these traits . Even though this simplifying assumption proves useful in many circumstances , it overlooks the role played by functional constraints and margin - alizes the contributions of cultural exaptation in driving open - ended cumulative culture . Computationally - inspired theories offer a promising avenue for addressing such issues by modeling cultural dynamics as search processes over solution and problem spaces . In the next ARTICLE PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41599 - 019 - 0361 - 3 2 PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2019 ) 5 : 149 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41599 - 019 - 0361 - 3 | www . nature . com / palcomms section , a computational framework of cultural evolution is outlined , and used to demonstrate that high - dimensional pro - blem spaces introduce constraints rarely considered in standard cultural evolutionary approaches . Then , using an agent - based model where agents attempt to solve problems in this high - dimensional problem space , the current paper investigates the relationship between cultural adaptation and cultural exapta - tion in shaping cultural evolutionary dynamics . Two general parameters , corresponding to the extent to which solutions undergo optimization ( λ ) and the rate with which agents explore the problem space ( Θ ) , are manipulated . Four impor - tant ﬁ ndings follow from the inclusion of a high - dimensional problem space : ( i ) Strong optimization pushes populations into optimization traps with low complexity solutions ; ( ii ) Escaping these optimization traps requires increasingly high rates of exploration - driven exaptation relative to the strength of optimization ; ( iii ) The emergence of open - ended cumulative dynamics relies on high rates of innovation relative to within - group transmission ; ( iv ) As solutions grow in complexity and problems become more dif ﬁ cult to solve , the selection of socially transmitted solutions plays an increasingly prominent role in main - taining this open - ended cumulative dynamic . Model Approaching cultural evolutionary dynamics in this model starts from the premise that cultural information is algorithmic . The term algorithm is used in a general sense to mean a procedure or recipe that consists of an input problem ( which may be empty ) and an organized series of steps that results in a solution ( Christian and Grif ﬁ ths , 2016 ; May ﬁ eld , 2013 ) . Computer pro - grams are algorithmic because they provide a set of speci ﬁ c instructions for transforming a given input into an output that can then be stored . Sorting algorithms , for instance , take a list of randomly ordered elements and transform this into a new sequence based on some prede ﬁ ned order ( such as numerical or lexicographic ) . Similarly , cultural information stored in recipes , grammars , and motor sequences is algorithmic ; a set of mental instructions can be used to cook tomato soup , learn a language , and produce Oldowan ﬂ akes ( Arthur , 2009 ; Charbonneau , 2015 ) . In this sense , cultural information exists as generative proce - dures inside the minds of individuals , and is manifest in popu - lations as observable behaviors or tangible artifacts . Through a repeated process of production and learning , individual minds are causally linked across space and time to form traditions ( Ferdi - nand , 2015 ; Kirby and Hurford , 2002 ; Morin , 2016 ; Sperber , 1996 ) . Thinking of cultural information as algorithmic allows us to formulate constraints on cultural evolutionary dynamics in terms of solutions and input problems . Solutions exist as the physical manifestations of culture and input problems are the speci ﬁ c functional challenges . Cultural evolutionary dynamics can therefore be modeled as a process of searching and sampling the space of both solutions and problems . If a search process is biased to ﬁ nd solutions that better approximate a given input problem , then we can think of this optimization process as cultural adaptation . Alternatively , if the search process seeks out novel input problems for a speci ﬁ c solution , then this process of repurposing solutions is a form of cultural exaptation . To capture these processes , a model is con - structed in which solutions and problems are represented as binary strings of N - length . Modeling solutions and problems in this way affords ( potentially ) unbounded searches over solution and problem spaces . Cultural adaptation . Input problems are a key constraint on cultural evolutionary dynamics via cultural adaptation : a search optimization process over the space of solutions that results in an improved ﬁ t between a solution and an input problem . Limita - tions on the design of a solution exist in the form of functional constraints , i . e . , how well adapted a solution is at solving a pro - blem . This refers to the speci ﬁ cation of the input problem ( building a solution for cutting meat ) and the ways in which it constrains the possible outcomes by creating an adaptive target ( useful meat cutting solutions need to induce a certain level of sheer stress ) . Cultural adaptation is conceptualized here as a process of improving the ﬁ t between an input problem and a solution string . The Levenshtein distance ( LD ) allows us to formally measure this ﬁ t : LD s ; p ð i ; j Þ ¼ max ð i ; j Þ if min ð i ; j Þ ¼ 0 ; min LD s ; p ð i (cid:2) 1 ; j Þ þ 1 LD s ; p ð i ; j (cid:2) 1 Þ þ 1 LD s ; p ð i (cid:2) 1 ; j (cid:2) 1 Þ þ 1 s i ≠ b j 8 > < > : otherwise : 8 > > > < > > > : ð 1 Þ where LD s ; p ð i ; j Þ is the distance between the i th element of solution s and the j th element of problem p . As such , the Levenshtein distance between two strings tells us the minimum number of single - element edits ( insertions , deletions or substitutions ) required to transform one string into the other . Fewer transforma - tions between a problem and a solution acts as a proxy for higher levels of optimization . Solution - problem mappings needing more transformations are less optimized than those with lower values . A fully optimized solution therefore corresponds to min s ; p LD ð s ; p Þ ¼ 0 : 0 as a solution and its input problem are identical . Cultural exaptation . Cultural exaptation was de ﬁ ned earlier as a process where solutions used for one problem are repurposed to solve a novel problem . It was also argued that this can be framed as a search process over the space of possible problems . One recurrent observation is that exaptation normally occurs in domains where there are functional overlaps between the original and novel input problems ( Arthur , 2009 ; Mastrogiorgio and Gilsing , 2016 ) . Co - opting technology in such a way also implies that repurposed solutions are to some extent optimized for sol - ving their original input problem . In some senses , Viagra was well - designed for the purpose of inducing vasodilation ; it just happened to be better suited for encouraging blood ﬂ ow to cer - tain regions as opposed to others . Introducing a high - dimensional problem space is required if we are to simulate the process of cultural exaptation as a search process over the space of problems . The problem space here forms a connected graph consisting of all possible permutations of an N - length binary string . Connected nodes represent problems that differ from one another by a single Levenshtein distance ( e . g . , 001 is a neighbor of 00 , 011 , and 0010 , but not 111 ) . Movement through this space is therefore restricted : agents only have the option of moving to a single neighboring problem at a given time - step ( see Fig . 1 ) . Structure of model . All model runs took place over 100 gen - erations and every generation comprised of 10 time steps . A single run was initialized with a ﬁ xed population of agents ( N ¼ 100 ) who were randomly assigned to input problems of length ‘ ð p Þ ¼ 2 and provided with randomly generated starting PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41599 - 019 - 0361 - 3 ARTICLE PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2019 ) 5 : 149 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41599 - 019 - 0361 - 3 | www . nature . com / palcomms 3 algorithms that produced solutions in the range ‘ ð s Þ ¼ ½ 2 ; 4 (cid:3) . The agents in the model attempt to solve their current input problem by searching for possible solutions . As previously described , the success of any given ﬁ t between a solution and a problem is operationalized as the Levenshtein distance . At each time step , an agent generates a pool of possible solutions from asocial and social sources ( see Fig . 2 ) . On the basis of the optimization strength ( λ ) , as well as the current input problem , one of these solutions is then adopted and assigned to an agent ’ s memory as their stored solution . The exploration threshold ( Θ ) interacts with the current ﬁ t between a solution and an input problem to determine whether or not an agent moves to a new problem . If the solution is well - ﬁ tted to the problem , then an agent will remain with the current input problem . Otherwise , if the solution is a poor ﬁ t for the problem , then an agent will relocate and attempt to solve a new problem . Following 10 time steps , all agents in a population die and their currently stored solution is inherited by newly created offspring agents ( i . e . , a 1 : 1 replacement rate ) . Crucially , this re ﬂ ects the intergenerational transfer of cultural information , as inherited solutions also undero transmission from parent - to - child , which additionally means these solutions are subject to simplicity constraints during reconstruction ( see section 2 . 3 . 4 ) . Topology of the problem space . In the model , input problems are procedurally generated and stored on the basis of the movements by individual agents . The topology of this problem space is decomposable into three general properties : the dif ﬁ culty of speci ﬁ c input problems , the size of the problem space , and the interconnectedness between problems . Differences in dif ﬁ culty re ﬂ ect a general observation that not all problems are equal in terms of tractability . Getting from the Earth to the Moon requires solutions that are orders of magnitude more complex than ﬁ shing for termites with a stick ( unless the Fig . 1 An illustration of movement through a small portion of the problem space . Here , an agent starts at input problem 10 , and moves to other problems within the space ( black directional lines ) . Gray lines and problems represent possible problems an agent could move to given their current input problem . Fig . 2 The process an individual agent performs within a single time - step . Step 1 : Agents use a series of mechanisms to indirectly alter a solution via the underlying algorithm . The stored algorithm refers to the graph that currently occupies an agent ’ s memory ( as determined by the previous time step ) . This stored algorithm is acted upon by three asocial mechanisms of modi ﬁ cation , invention , and subtraction . Asocial mechanisms can only make single modi ﬁ cations per time - step . Transmission occurs when an agent receives an algorithm from another agent within the population . Step 2 : Each of these mechanisms generate a pool of solutions by translating the algorithm into a bit string ( i . e . , a solution ) . Step 3 : Which of these solutions is adopted depends on whether optimization is biased or stochastic ( as determined by λ ) . If optimization is biased , an agent compares each solution to their input problem and chooses the one with the best ﬁ t ( otherwise , if the choice is stochastic , then a solution is randomly chosen from the pool ) . Step 4 : An agent uses their current solution - problem mapping to motivate whether or not they consider a novel problem ( as determined by the exploration threshold Θ ) . Step 5 : This movement is restricted to local problems ( i . e . , those that differ from the current input problem by single - edit substitutions ) . ARTICLE PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41599 - 019 - 0361 - 3 4 PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2019 ) 5 : 149 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41599 - 019 - 0361 - 3 | www . nature . com / palcomms termites happen to be on the Moon ) . Dif ﬁ culty , in this sense , is indirectly referencing constraints on the search process over solutions , i . e . , termite ﬁ shing is easier to learn and more readily innovated than a Moon - capable rocket . For this model , longer input problems ‘ ð p Þ increase the number of permutations in the space of possible solutions , which translates into a more computationally intensive search process for ﬁ nding an optimal solution . Furthermore , even in instances where there are two problems of the same length , one problem can be more predictable than the other . By containing computable regularities , predictable problems are more amenable to concise descriptions than less predictable counterparts ( for fuller formal treatments , see : Cover and Thomas ( 2012 ) ; Li and Vitányi ( 2008 ) ) . Computational constraints are also relevant for our second topological property : that the size of the problem space grows as a function of ‘ ð p Þ . Enumerating all possible permutations for ‘ ð p Þ ¼ 4 results in a smaller space ( 16 problems ) than when ‘ ð p Þ ¼ 10 ( 1024 problems ) . Whereas input problem dif ﬁ culty acts as a computational constraint on the search process over solutions , the size of the problem space is a computational constraint on searching across problems : Exhaustively traversing a problem space becomes less tractable as the size increases . To illustrate , two maximally distant problems in ‘ ð p Þ ¼ 4 ( e . g . , 0000 and 1111 ) are more distant than two maximally distant problems in ‘ ð p Þ ¼ 8 ( e . g . , 00000000 and 11111111 ) . Finally , the third topological property recognizes that the relatedness between input problems introduces a source of path - dependency . As movement through this space is restricted to single edit jumps , the current input problem limits what problems will be considered in the immediate future . For instance , a problem of 0100 is nearer to 0101 than 0111 in terms of the minimal number of substitutions required to transform one problem into another . Movement between input problems of different lengths is additionally constrained by a ﬁ xed probability . In particular , movement to a longer problem has a ﬁ xed probability of P ð Longer Þ ¼ 0 : 3 , which can be thought of as a cost on unconstrained movement towards increasingly longer input problems . Without this cost , movement through the problem space would be heavily biased towards longer input problems ( because there are generally more longer input problems than problems of the same or shorter length ) . Representing solutions . Solutions in this model represent tech - nological artifacts and are generated using directed graphs ( for a similar approach , see Enquist et al . ( 2011 ) ) . This approximates two features of technological solutions : the cultural artifact ( a bit string ) and the underlying algorithm ( a graph ) . Graphs were initially constrained so that agents start with solutions of lengths ‘ ð s Þ ¼ ½ 2 ; 3 ; 4 (cid:3) . Formally , a graph G consists of a triple ð V ; E ; Ω Þ where V is the set of nodes v 2 V , E is the set of edges e 2 E , and Ω is a function mapping every edge to an ordered set of values Ω : E ! N . Each node comprises of a value in the interval ½ 0 ; 1 (cid:3) and each edge is assigned a bit of either 0 or 1 . A single bit is derived from the average of two nodes that are connected via an edge and rounded the nearest integer . As edges are directed , any node can connect to another node within V . Two exceptions are no loops ( i . e . , nodes that connect to themselves ) and no duplicate edges ( i . e . , a directed connection can only exist once ) . Ω arranges the set of edges to produce the bit string ( the solution ) and is determined by an ordinal value ( Fig . 3 ) . Agents have access to two general processes for generating solutions : asocially ( via mechanisms of innovation ) and socially ( via within group transmission ) . Asocial generative mechanisms . Generating solutions refers to the introduction of novelty and diversity into a population via asocial mechanisms . In this model , changes to a solution are done indirectly via the graph - based procedure , with agents having access to three general mechanisms for innovating ( see Fig . 2 ) : ● Invention introduces a new bit by creating and then connecting a new node to an existing one . New nodes are assigned a randomly generated value in the range ½ 0 ; 1 (cid:3) . ● Modi ﬁ cation changes a pre - existing solution by connecting two existing nodes to form a new edge . ● Subtraction shortens a bit string by randomly removing an existing edge and ensures that innovation is not unidirectional . A general assumption is that these generative mechanisms are restricted : Agents can only create or remove a single bit . Imposing such limitations approximates the idea that innovations are often introduced via limited experimentation within a restricted search space . Some solutions are easier to discover than others because they require less time and resources to produce ( given a starting state ) . Similar notions are present in Tennie and colleagues ’ Zone of Latent Solutions ( Tennie et al . , 2009 ) : here , solutions that are reachable via asocial means have a high probability of being independently ( re - ) invented . Social transmission mechanisms . Transmission is the movement of information between individuals and corresponds to how individuals learn from others via observation and teaching ( Gergely and Csibra , 2006 ) . Two types of social transmission are present in this model : a vertical transmission process of inheri - tance and a within - group process of horizontal transmission . Vertical transmission happens at each generation ( every 10 time - steps ) and takes place between a parent agent ( who dies ) and a newly created child agent . The choice of 10 time - steps is arbitrary , but it does capture the ﬁ nite lifetimes of individuals and recog - nizes that the contributions of a single individual in a given generation are generally circumscribed ( especially when con - sidering long timescales ) . As the name suggests , within - group transmission takes place between individuals at a given genera - tion , and involves one agent learning a cultural algorithm from another randomly selected agent within the population . Both forms of transmission are indirect ( agents transmit algorithms , not solutions ) , reconstructive ( solutions are generated using the underlying algorithm ) , and biased ( reconstructions are Fig . 3 An example of cultural algorithm . Black circles represent nodes and the arrows connecting nodes represent directed edges . Each edge has a pair of numbers : the ﬁ rst denotes the order of that edge in the set and the second corresponds to the value of that edge . An edge value is the average of its two nodes . This value is rounded to the nearest integer ( either 0 or 1 ) to produce a single bit . Edge order is an ordinal value that represents the position of a bit in a solution string . PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41599 - 019 - 0361 - 3 ARTICLE PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2019 ) 5 : 149 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41599 - 019 - 0361 - 3 | www . nature . com / palcomms 5 biased towards ef ﬁ cient representations ) . This aligns with the general idea that transmission is an inductive process guided by both the input data and the prior cognitive biases of learners ( Chater and Vitányi , 2003 ; Culbertson and Kirby , 2016 ; Grif ﬁ ths and Kalish , 2007 ; Kirby et al . , 2007 ) . Transmitting an algorithm is thus analogous to learning a recipe or procedure and is instantiated here as a process of reconstructing the shortest path between nodes . Dijkstra ’ s algorithm is used to construct a graph distance matrix ð d ij Þ that computes all distances from v i to node v j . The shortest path is one which visits all connected nodes in the shortest number of steps . This assumes graphs are directed with equally weighted edges and that the starting point is the ﬁ rst node in the graph ( as determined by Ω , see section Representing solutions ) . Strength of optimization ( λ ) . Optimization is modeled as an individual - level decision making process over the pool of solu - tions derived from social and asocial sources . The goal for agents is to ﬁ nd a solution that improves the ﬁ t with the current input problem . One advantage of the approach used here is that it explicitly builds a bridge between individual - level processes and population - level outcomes ( Derex et al . , 2018 ) . This presents a notable departure from some recent cultural evolutionary models of cumulative culture in which individual - level processes are ignored in favor of solely focusing on the population - level dis - tribution of cultural traits ( Enquist et al . , 2011 ; Lewis and Laland , 2012 ) . Manipulating the strength of optimization ( λ ) allows us to directly investigate the extent to which this decision - making process is biased or stochastic . The current model examined the following parameter values for λ : ½ 0 : 0 ; 0 : 2 ; 0 : 5 ; 0 : 8 ; 1 : 0 (cid:3) . When the strength of optimization is at maximum ( λ ¼ 1 : 0 ) , agents choose a solution based solely on its ability to optimally solve the current input problem . The pool from which these solutions are chosen is restricted to the currently stored solution and variants generated via asocial or social means . A maximally biased choice is one where an agent compares the Levenshtein distance of an input problem ( p ) with each solution ( s ) in the pool X and selecting the most optimized one : min s 2 X LD ð s ; p Þ As the strength of optimization is decreased , stochastic factors play an increasingly prominent role in determining which solution is or is not adopted . If the strength of optimization is λ ¼ 0 : 0 , the process of choosing solutions is purely stochastic , i . e . , there is no preference for solutions based on the Levenshtein distance , whereas a λ ¼ 0 : 8 means that on average 80 % of agent ’ s productions will be biased and 20 % will be stochastic . Exploration threshold ( Θ ) . An exploration threshold ( Θ ) is introduced to capture how the level of optimization limits exploration of the problem space . This aims to model situations where solutions resist repurposing due to pressures on main - taining existing functionalities . Agents consider alternative pro - blems if the ( normalized ) Levenshtein distance between a solution and the current input problem is above this threshold : Repurpose ¼ P pos ; if norm LD ð s ; p Þ > Θ Stay ; otherwise : (cid:2) ð 2 Þ where P pos is the set of possible problems an agent can explore in a localized region of the problem space . Possible problems are those which are a single Levenshtein distance from the current input problem . Exploration of alternative problems takes place when the norm LD of the current solution S and input problem P is greater than the exploration threshold Θ . The following para - meter values were examined : Θ ¼ ½ 0 : 2 ; 0 : 4 ; 0 : 6 ; 0 : 8 ; 1 : 0 (cid:3) . Considering a range of parameter values allows us to investigate how the strength of optimization interacts with these different thresholds . When the threshold is high ( e . g . , Θ ¼ 0 : 8 ) , exploration of the problem space is restricted to a narrow range of poorly optimized solutions , as agents only repurpose solutions for solution - problem mappings with an norm LD > 0 : 8 . Having a high Θ makes it relatively easy for optimization dynamics to inhibit the rate of exploration : a minimal amount of optimization is required to maintain the current function of a solution . Conversely , lower thresholds ( e . g . , Θ ¼ 0 : 2 ) encompass a wider range of possible ﬁ ts , as agents now repurpose solutions for mappings with a norm LD > 0 : 2 . Due to the demands for more optimized solutions , and the increased rates of exploration , low thresholds make it dif ﬁ cult to maintain an existing function . Solution complexity H L ð S Þ . Solution complexity is measured as the product of Shannon Entropy ( Cover and Thomas , 2012 ; Shannon and Weaver , 1949 ) and the length of a solution : H L ð S Þ ¼ (cid:2) X n n ¼ 1 P ð S i Þ log 2 P ð S i Þ ‘ ð S Þ ð 3 Þ where S i is a binary value found within a solution , P ð S i Þ is the probability of value i given a solution string S , and ‘ ð S Þ is the length of the solution . H L ð S Þ is therefore the average amount of information within a speci ﬁ c solution string of N - length . In this sense , H L ð S Þ acts as a proxy for solution complexity : lower H L ð S Þ strings are less complex than ones with a higher H L ð S Þ . This assumes complex solutions are longer strings where the distribution of bits is close to uniform ( i . e . , 1 bit ) and provides a relatively simple way of capturing simple solutions ( i . e . , those that are closer to 0 bit ) . However , a well - recognized limitation of this approach is that it fails to discriminate between strings of equal length , where one forms a highly ordered sequence ( e . g . , 01010101 or 00001111 ) and the other approximates an algorithmically irregular sequence ( e . g . , 01101001 ) . Results Strong optimization leads to optimization traps . One challenge facing cultural evolutionary dynamics is to avoid optimization traps . An optimization trap occurs when the exploration process is inhibited due to an ef ﬁ cient ﬁ t between a solution and a pro - blem . What constitutes an ef ﬁ cient ﬁ t is modulated by the exploration parameter ( Θ ) . Optimization traps are most frequent when the strength of optimization is at maximum ( λ ¼ 1 : 0 ) : here , the dynamics of change rapidly reach a stable equilibrium , where exploration halts and populations converge on highly optimized solutions ( Fig . 4 ) . One consequence is that these are also the regions of the parameter space where open - ended cumulative culture never emerges — solutions remain forever stuck in states of low complexity and minimal diversity . Two factors suf ﬁ ciently slow the exploration process to trap agents in these optimization cul - de - sacs . First , the topology of the problem space means that agents start out solving simpler input problems , which makes it easier for populations to converge on ef ﬁ cient ﬁ ts . Second , if the exploration threshold is high ( e . g . , Θ ¼ 0 : 8 ) and optimization is strong ( e . g . , λ ¼ 1 : 0 ) , then the slow exploration of the problem space provides a stable enough target for optimization . Both the simplicity and stability of the input problems increase the probability of agents ﬁ nding solutions below the exploration threshold : simpler input problems are computationally more tractable and stable problems provide more opportunities for agents to discover optimized solutions . ARTICLE PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41599 - 019 - 0361 - 3 6 PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2019 ) 5 : 149 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41599 - 019 - 0361 - 3 | www . nature . com / palcomms A key question concerns the extent to which collective dynamics amplify this optimization process . One possibility is that within group transmission simply accelerates the rate of convergence in a population . If so , we should expect populations lacking within group transmission to eventually converge on similarly optimized solutions when compared to those popula - tions utilizing within group transmission . As Fig . 5 shows , when within group transmission is removed the optimizing potential of Fig . 4 Top : Heatmap showing the average level of optimization at Generation ¼ 100 . Cells represent a speci ﬁ c parameter combination of λ and Θ and colors corresponds to the ( normalized ) Levenshtein distance . Lighter colors denote solution - problem mappings with a lower Levenshtein distance . The x - axis is the strength of optimization ( λ ) and the y - axis is the range of exploration thresholds ( Θ ) . Bottom : The average ( normalized ) Levenshtein distance of solution - problem mappings for a maximum optimization strength ( λ ¼ 1 : 0 ) and an exploration threshold of Θ ¼ 0 : 4 . Colored lines correspond to single runs over 100 generations ( 1000 time - steps ) . Fig . 5 Comparing runs with ( gold ) and without ( turquoise ) group transmission over 100 generations when λ ¼ 1 : 0 and Θ ¼ 0 : 6 . Lines correspond to the average ( normalized ) Levenshtein distance and dots represent individual runs at a given generation . PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41599 - 019 - 0361 - 3 ARTICLE PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2019 ) 5 : 149 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41599 - 019 - 0361 - 3 | www . nature . com / palcomms 7 cultural evolution is diminished : populations asymptotically converge on sub - optimal solutions . It seems that having access to the pool of collective solutions not only accelerates convergence , but also leverages the collective computational potential of a population to discover and disseminate more optimized solutions . Open - ended cumulative dynamics require increasingly high rates of exploration relative to the strength of optimization . Escaping these optimization traps requires increasingly high rates of exploration relative to the strength of optimization . An example of this is shown in Fig . 6 where the strength of opti - mization is at λ ¼ 0 : 6 and the exploration threshold corresponds to Θ ¼ 0 : 2 . Having a low exploration threshold facilitates rapid exploration of the problem space and allows agents to avoid optimization traps . Whereas optimization processes increase the ﬁ t between a solution and its input problem , exploration creates a moving target for optimization by repeatedly seeking out novel problems . The result is a positive feedback loop where there is a concomitant growth in the diversity and complexity of solutions . Increases in solution complexity re ﬂ ect a general tendency towards solution strings that are longer and more entropic , whereas increases in diversity tell us that successive generations are host to more unique solution strings . Considering both measures together , the results suggest that populations settle into a division of labor where growth is driven by agents exploring a wider range of increasingly dif ﬁ cult input problems . Harder input problems tend to be longer and less predictable and the probability of encountering such problems grows with ‘ ð p Þ . The intractability of harder input problems places a hard ( computational ) constraint on the extent to which populations can optimize and inhibits individual agents from dipping below low exploration thresholds . Optimization must therefore be strong enough to keep apace with the dif ﬁ culty of the input problem , but not so strong that populations end up in an optimization trap . As Fig . 6 shows , when optimization strength is increased ( λ ¼ 1 : 0 ) relative to exploration ( Θ ¼ 0 : 2 ) , the process of optimization dominates the ampli ﬁ ca - tion dynamics and is suf ﬁ cient to stop open - ended cumulative culture from emerging . Relaxing the strength of optimization ( λ ¼ 0 : 6 ) allows stochastic factors to play a role . With the rate of Fig . 6 Time series of the average solution complexity ( top row ) and the average solution diversity ( bottom row ) for 100 generations . Solution complexity refers to H L ð S Þ and solution diversity is the number of unique solutions in a population s 2 S . As the population is ﬁ xed ( N ¼ 100 ) , there exists an upper bound on the total number of unique solutions a population can entertain . Each graph corresponds to a batch of 30 runs ( colored lines ) for a speci ﬁ c parameter combination of λ and Θ . Middle : Outcomes where the strength of optimization is at λ ¼ 0 : 6 and the exploration threshold is at Θ ¼ 0 : 2 result in open - ended cumulative culture . Left : If the strength of optimization is increased ( λ ¼ 1 : 0 ) , then the exploration threshold ( Θ ¼ 0 : 2 ) is insuf ﬁ cient for open - ended cumulative culture to emerge . Right : Lowering the strength of optimization ( λ ¼ 0 : 6 ) and increasing the exploration threshold ( Θ ¼ 0 : 2 ) results in slower growth for both solution complexity and diversity . ARTICLE PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41599 - 019 - 0361 - 3 8 PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2019 ) 5 : 149 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41599 - 019 - 0361 - 3 | www . nature . com / palcomms optimization slowed , ampli ﬁ cation dynamics lead to an initial growth in diversity and complexity , which facilitates open - ended cumulative dynamics . However , if the exploration threshold is too high ( Θ ¼ 0 : 6 ) , then growth in diversity is slowed and the complexity of solutions eventually stagnates in the long run . Social transmission plays an increasingly prominent role in maintaining open - ended cumulative dynamics . Optimization alone is not suf ﬁ cient to fully explain why we observe open - ended cumulative dynamics in some parameter combinations and not others . To understand why , we must also consider the contributions of different individual - level mechanisms . Previous theoretical and empirical studies have argued that open - ended cumulative culture requires asocial mechanisms for generating variation and social mechanisms for transmitting variation ( Tomasello , 2009 ) . The results here build on this by speci ﬁ cally delineating the contribu - tions of these mechanisms in the origin of cumulative dynamics and how such processes are maintained over long timescales . Fig . 7 shows the etiology of solutions for the same three parameter combinations as in the previous section . Runs where open - ended cumulative culture ( λ ¼ 0 : 6 ; Θ ¼ 0 : 2 ) emerges show a distinct dynamic to situations where solutions are either highly optimized ( λ ¼ 1 : 0 ; Θ ¼ 0 : 2 ) or are bounded at a certain level of complexity ( λ ¼ 0 : 6 ; Θ ¼ 0 : 6 ) . Initially , asocial mechanisms are necessary and suf ﬁ cient to bridge the gap between problem dif ﬁ culty and solution complexity , with invention and modi ﬁ ca - tion providing the main contributions to the emergence of open - ended cumulative culture . However , following this initial phase of growth , optimization increasingly relies on within - group transmission dynamics . Within - group social transmission allows a population to leverage its collective computational potential and bypass individual limitations in searching the space of possible solutions . Innova - tions by one individual can be disseminated to others in a population far quicker than an individual independently arriving at an equivalent solution . This bene ﬁ t is particularly apparent when optimization needs to track increasingly dif ﬁ cult input problems : unbounded growth in complexity is only maintained when a signi ﬁ cant proportion of solutions are transmitted between agents . To test this assumption , with ﬁ xed optimization ( λ ¼ 0 : 6 ) and exploration ( Θ ¼ 0 : 2 ) parameters , an additional simulation was run where within - group transmission was removed as a mechanism . When compared to simulation runs where within - group transmission is present ( see Fig . 8 ) , the levels of complexity are far lower in runs for agents who solely rely on asocial generative mechanisms . What this tells us is that the potential of asocial mechanisms is fundamentally capped at a certain level of solution complexity . Overcoming this upper bound on complex - ity requires within - group social transmission . Discussion Two general processes are usually invoked as explanatory con - cepts of technological evolution : the ﬁ rst is an optimizing process where technologies are re ﬁ ned towards a functional objective ( cultural adaptation ) and the second is a repurposing of existing technologies towards a new functional goal ( cultural exaptation ) . The current paper modeled cultural adaptation as an optimizing search over a solution space and cultural exaptation as a local search over the space of possible problems . By manipulating two general parameters , corresponding to the strength of optimization ( λ ) and an exploration threshold ( Θ ) , this model helps delineate the contributions of these processes to cultural evolutionary dynamics . In particular , this paper showed that : ( i ) Cultural dynamics often lead to optimization traps when the strength of optimization is strong relative to the rate of exploration ; ( ii ) Escaping these optimization traps relies on a feedback loop between exploration and optimization that results in a concomitant growth in the complexity and diversity of solutions ; ( iii ) This initial emergence of open - ended cumulative culture is reliant on asocial generative mechanisms of innovation ; ( iv ) But maintaining these open - ended dynamics increasingly requires social transmission . Optimization traps and the strength of optimization ( λ ) . Cul - tural evolutionary dynamics are often envisaged as an Fig . 7 Average selection probability of solutions from social and asocial sources over 100 generations . Colored lines represent the speci ﬁ c social or asocial source . Middle : Proportion of chosen solutions when strength of optimization is at λ ¼ 0 : 6 and the exploration threshold corresponds to Θ ¼ 0 : 2 ( resulting in open - ended cumulative culture ) . Left : Proportion of chosen solutions when the strength of optimization is at λ ¼ 1 : 0 and the exploration threshold is Θ ¼ 0 : 2 ( resulting in highly optimized cultures ) . Right : Proportion of chosen solutions when the strength of optimization is at λ ¼ 0 : 6 and the exploration threshold is Θ ¼ 0 : 6 ( resulting in cultures where complexity stagnates ) . PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41599 - 019 - 0361 - 3 ARTICLE PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2019 ) 5 : 149 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41599 - 019 - 0361 - 3 | www . nature . com / palcomms 9 optimization process ( Kirby et al . , 2014 ; Lewandowsky et al . , 2009 ; Reali and Grif ﬁ ths , 2009 ) . The results here build on the existing literature by clearly delineating where cumulative dynamics lead to open - ended growth in complexity and where populations end up in optimization traps . Generally , when the strength of optimization is at maximum ( λ ¼ 1 : 0 ) , and the col - lection of input problems form a stable target , populations are able to reach highly optimized solutions . Having stable input problems increases the probability of populations dipping below the exploration threshold and limits any further exploration of the problem space . Optimization traps might help explain why open - ended cumulative culture is rare in nature . If populations are restricted to a limited set of stable input problems , and populations have high levels of within - group transmission , then strong optimiza - tion pressures will inhibit exploration of novel problems and trap cultures in local regions of the solution space . Such insights complement existing explanations for periods of relative stasis ( Powell et al . , 2009 ) or reversals ( Henrich , 2004 ) in the technological complexity of toolkits during human pre - history . It also mirrors , in some respect , what we observe in social transmission experiments : a stable target and a cultural evolu - tionary process will tend to converge on highly optimized outcomes . Within - group transmission acts a strong ampli ﬁ er on optimi - zation : optimal solutions more rapidly disseminate between individuals , drastically reducing the search load on asocial mechanisms ( and inheritance ) . In the absence of within - group transmission , the optimizing potential of cultural evolution is greatly diminished , with populations tending to stabilize around sub - optimal solutions . High levels of within - group transmission seem to act as a barrier to the emergence of open - ended cumulative culture . Further work is required to establish whether this ﬁ nding generalizes empirically . However , if accurate , we are left with a curious conundrum : within - group transmission needs to be inhibited for open - ended cumulative culture to emerge , but it is central to maintaining these dynamics over long timescales . Open - ended cumulative culture and the exploration threshold ( Θ ) . Relaxing the strength of optimization allows populations to escape optimization traps by facilitating growth in both the diversity and complexity of solutions . Reaching open - ended cumulative culture also requires increasingly high rates of exploration . Motivating this search over the problem space is the extent to which solutions are already optimized . Lower thresholds generally correspond to increased rates of exploration as agents are continually seeking out new opportunities for repurposing . Importantly , for open - ended cumulative culture to emerge , optimization dynamics must be able to chase this movement through the problem space . Maintaining this dynamic requires that the exploration threshold be low enough for agents to discover harder input problems and create a pressure for more complex solutions . The topology of the problem space plays an outsized role in this process . In particular , harder input problems place greater constraints on the potential for optimization . Having a suf ﬁ ciently low exploration threshold , as well as an increased probability of encountering harder input problems , results in an exploration rate that is quick enough to slow down the optimization process and stops populations from becoming trapped in certain regions of the problem space . Crucially , these ﬁ ndings come from separating out the search processes over solution and problem spaces . Doing so also allows us to more readily classify problems based on their dif ﬁ culty and recognizes that ﬁ nding an optimal solution is intractable for certain classes of problem . Characterizing the dynamics of culture in terms of computation also raises an important yet rarely appreciated point : that the properties of a given input problem can act as a constraint independently of speci ﬁ c cognitive , ecological , or culturally endogenous factors . One general hypothesis that follows from this is that cultural exaptation is driven by differences in the level at which solutions are optimized . This predicts that highly optimized solutions resist repurposing and lead to optimization traps . Why might highly optimized solutions have a lower repurpos - ing potential than suboptimal ones ? One possibility , which is considered here , is that optimization can be likened to over ﬁ tting in statistical models . Relative to optimized solutions , which are ﬁ nely tailored to their input problem , suboptimal solutions have a latent potential for ﬁ nding a range of more appropriate ﬁ ts . Optimized solutions , by contrast , are less generalizable to novel problems due to a high degree of specialization : any movement to a new problem has a high probability of signi ﬁ cantly reducing the ﬁ t . Fig . 8 Solution complexity over 100 generations when λ ¼ 0 : 6 and Θ ¼ 0 : 2 for runs with ( gold ) and without ( turquoise ) group transmission . Lines correspond to the average level of solution complexity and dots represent individual runs at a given generation . ARTICLE PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41599 - 019 - 0361 - 3 10 PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2019 ) 5 : 149 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41599 - 019 - 0361 - 3 | www . nature . com / palcomms Case studies of technological exaptation note that repurposing is sometimes correlated with limitations in a solution ’ s existing functional role ( Arthur , 2009 ) . Today , the main use of cavity magnetrons is in microwave ovens , but originally they were a vital component of radar technology . Yet , even in their heyday , a well - documented limitation of radar - driven magnetrons was an inability to easily remove clutter on displays ( Brookner , 2010 ) . Eventually , this led to magnetrons being replaced in radar by more suitable alternatives . Still , it remains an open question as to whether or not some technologies differ in their underlying capacity to be repurposed , and more empirical work is needed to establish if the potential of cultural exaptation is linked to the degree of optimization . Asocial and social mechanisms in the emergence and main - tenance of open - ended cumulative culture . Considerable debate exists over the underlying capacities for cumulative culture and the respective roles played by individual creativity and social transmission ( Charbonneau , 2015 ; Enquist et al . , 2011 ; Lewis and Laland , 2012 ; Tomasello , 2009 ; Zwirner and Thornton , 2015 ) . The ﬁ ndings here suggest that asocial mechanisms of innovation ( speci ﬁ cally invention and modi ﬁ cation ) are generally more important than within - group transmission in the emergence of cumulative culture . However , asocial mechanisms are insuf ﬁ cient to maintain open - ended growth past a certain level of solution complexity . Once individuals reach this complexity ceiling , dif - ferences between the input problem and the current solution are large enough that most single - edit changes fail to improve the ﬁ t , and agents will instead choose to remain with their current solution . By distinguishing between the emergence and maintenance of open - ended cumulative culture , the model here presents a more nuanced role for both within - group transmission and asocial mechanisms of innovation . Initially , within - group transmission plays a marginal role in the emergence of open - ended cumulative culture , with solutions from asocial sources providing the principle gains in diversity and complexity . Besides the inherent advantages of asocial sources , socially transmitted solutions are disadvantaged at this early stage for two reasons . First , at the individual level , the reconstructive nature of learning means that solutions are prone to information loss , which was modeled here as a bias for ef ﬁ cient representations . Second , the adoption of socially transmitted solutions generally promotes convergence at a population level , resulting in a homogenizing process where diversity is lost and searches are con ﬁ ned to local regions of the solution space . Only when populations are faced with diverse and increasingly dif ﬁ cult problems are the bene ﬁ ts of within - group social transmission unmasked . By rapidly spreading solutions between individuals , transmission stops individual agents from becoming trapped in local regions of the solution space , and provides populations with the opportunity to breach the complexity ceiling faced by solutions from asocial sources . Such bene ﬁ ts cannot be understated : populations become increasingly reliant on within - group transmission even though the process is biased against complexity . Part of the rationale for this is that the upside of convergence is enough to mitigate the simplifying effects of information loss . All that is required is for transmission to raise the average level of complexity enough for asocial mechanisms and optimization to keep apace with the high rates of exploration . Moreover , the fact that transmission is distinctly non - faithful runs contrary to claims that cumulative culture requires preservative mechanisms , such as imitation ( Richerson and Boyd ( 2005 ) ; Tennie et al . ( 2009 ) ; for similar arguments against high - ﬁ delity transmission , see : Claidière et al . ( 2018 ) ; Morin ( 2016 ) ) . Assumptions . Examining the assumptions of this model is important for future work to critically assess and empirically test the robustness and generalizability of these claims . Optimization is conceptualized here as an individual - level decision - making process . One advantage of this approach is it provides us with a means of directly comparing the contributions of social and asocial mechanisms . A key assumption is that making a decision is solely focused on discovering a locally optimal solution . However , as documented in behavioral economics ( Gigerenzer and Gaissmaier , 2011 ) , there are many other factors at work in shaping the choices of individuals . Furthermore , these biasing factors can act antagonistically to functional pressures . For instance , in the now almost - forgotten format war over the de facto video cassette standard , the success of VHS over the technically superior Betamax was driven by economic and social factors . A second assumption concerns the constraints on innovation and transmission . Nearly all models of cognition introduce some means of transformation on the way agents produce and process information . Innovation mechanisms were assumed to be incremental and derivative : individual agents can only perform single - edit changes to existing solutions . The goal here was to approximate limitations on innovation by restricting trial and error tinkering to local regions of the solution space . Of course , it is often the case that innovations are not constrained to incremental searches , and instead make large jumps via revelatory insights ( Villani et al . , 2007 ) or recombination ( Charbonneau , 2016 ) . Social transmission , on the other hand , was biased towards parsimonious representations . This links with prominent and strongly supported models both in cognitive science ( Chater and Vitányi , 2003 ) and cultural evolution ( Culbertson and Kirby , 2016 ) , but there are numerous other factors that bias the reconstructive process ( Acerbi et al . , 2019 ; Sperber , 1996 ) . The third major assumption is that the population dynamics were relatively impoverished . The process of within - group transmission was determined by randomly sampling a single solution of another agent from the population . Restricting the pool of solutions meant that a single agent only samples a small proportion of the total culture at any given time step . Furthermore , there was no consideration of population growth , and agents did not take into account non - functional information when sampling from individuals ( e . g . , social status ) . Yet , we know that the network topology of human populations are not randomly connected graphs ( Albert and Barabási , 2002 ) , population size is not a static feature ( Creanza et al . , 2017 ) , and the sampling of individuals and solutions is often socially biased ( e . g . , conformity Richerson and Boyd ( 2005 ) ) . Alternative models of network structure , which incorporate growth ( see Barabási - Albert model Barabási and Albert ( 1999 ) ) and rewiring ( see Watts and Strogatz model Watts and Strogatz ( 1998 ) ) , provide potential avenues for future work to provide a richer link between individual - level processes and population - level dynamics . Finally , several assumptions were made with respect to the exploration threshold , how the problem space was structured , and the way in which agents move between different input problems . For instance , there are several alternative ways the exploration threshold could have been approached . The simplest formulation is one where a parameter determines a ﬁ xed rate of movement . One issue with this speci ﬁ c formulation is that agents would move irrespective of whether a solution was perfectly or poorly optimized . Crucially , it precludes the possibility that populations can become trapped in regions of the space . Coupling the exploration process to optimization allows us to observe how different strengths of optimization interact with exploration in in ﬂ uencing cultural evolutionary dynamics . Nevertheless , it is likely that changes to the exploration threshold , as well as PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41599 - 019 - 0361 - 3 ARTICLE PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2019 ) 5 : 149 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41599 - 019 - 0361 - 3 | www . nature . com / palcomms 11 manipulations to the ability with which agents can traverse the problem space , are necessary steps for future work . Conclusion Explaining the origins of cumulative culture , and how it is maintained over long timescales , constitutes a fundamental challenge for theories of cultural evolution . Previous theoretical work has emphasized two fundamental causal processes : cultural adaptation ( where technologies are re ﬁ ned towards a functional objective ) and cultural exaptation ( the repurposing of existing technologies towards a new functional goal ) . Yet , despite the prominence of cultural exaptation in these theoretical explana - tions , this process is often absent from models and experiments investigating cumulative culture . Using an agent - based model , where agents attempt to solve problems in a high - dimensional problem space , this paper found that open - ended cumulative culture only emerges under a restricted set of parameters . In many cases , cultural dynamics push populations into opti - mization traps : here , excessive optimization of solutions cause the dynamics of change to cease , with populations entering a state of equilibrium . Escaping these optimization traps requires cultural dynamics to explore the problem space rapidly enough to create a moving target for selection . This sets in motion a positive feed - back loop where there is open - ended growth in the complexity of cultural solutions . Finally , the results helped delineate the roles played by social and asocial mechanisms , with asocial mechan - isms of innovation driving the emergence of cumulative cultural evolution and social mechanisms of within - group transmission helping maintain these dynamics over long timescales . Data availability All code and data is available at the following GitHub repository under under a Creative Commons Attribution 4 . 0 license : https : / / github . com / j - winters / cumulative . Received : 31 March 2019 ; Accepted : 5 November 2019 ; References Acerbi A , Charbonneau M , Miton H , Scott - Phillips T ( 2019 ) Cultural stability without copying . OSF Preprints https : / / doi . org / 10 . 31219 / osf . io / vjcq3 Acerbi A , Tennie C , Mesoudi A ( 2016 ) Social learning solves the problem of narrow - peaked search landscapes : experimental evidence in humans . R Soc Open Sci 3 ( 9 ) : 160215 Albert R , Barabási A - L ( 2002 ) Statistical mechanics of complex networks . Rev Mod Phys 74 ( 1 ) : 47 Andriani P , Ali AH , Mastrogiorgio M ( 2015 ) Measuring exaptation in the phar - maceutical industry . Acad Manag Proc 2015 : 17085 Andriani P , Cohen J ( 2013 ) From exaptation to radical niche construction in biological and technological complex systems . Complexity 18 ( 5 ) : 7 – 14 Arthur B ( 2009 ) The nature of technology : what it is and how it evolves . Simon and Schuster Barabási A - L , Albert R ( 1999 ) Emergence of scaling in random networks . Science 286 ( 5439 ) : 509 – 512 Boyd R , Richerson PJ ( 1985 ) Culture and the evolutionary process . University of Chicago Press Boyd R , Richerson PJ ( 1995 ) Why does culture increase human adaptability ? Ethol Sociobiol 16 ( 2 ) : 125 – 143 Boyd R , Richerson PJ ( 1996 ) Why culture is common , but cultural evolution is rare . Proc Br R Soc 88 : 77 – 93 Boyd R , Richerson PJ , Henrich J ( 2013 ) The cultural evolution of technology : facts and theories . Cult Evol 12 : 119 – 142 Brookner E ( 2010 ) From $ 10 , 000 magee to $ 7 magee and $ 10 transmitter and receiver ( t / r ) on single chip . In 2010 international conference on the origins and evolution of the cavity magnetron . pp . 1 – 2 , IEEE . Caldwell CA , Atkinson M , Renner E ( 2016 ) Experimental approaches to studying cumulative cultural evolution . Curr Directions Psychol Sci 25 ( 3 ) : 191 – 195 Caldwell CA , Millen AE ( 2008 ) Experimental models for testing hypotheses about cumulative cultural evolution . Evol Hum Behav 29 ( 3 ) : 165 – 171 Charbonneau M ( 2015 ) All Innovations are equal , but some more than others : ( re ) integrating modi ﬁ cation processes to the origins of cumulative culture . Biol Theory 10 ( 4 ) : 322 – 335 Charbonneau M ( 2016 ) Modularity and recombination in technological evolution . Philos Technol 29 ( 4 ) : 373 – 392 Chater N , Vitányi P ( 2003 ) Simplicity : a unifying principle in cognitive science ? Trends Cogn Sci 7 ( 1 ) : 19 – 22 Christian B , Grif ﬁ ths T ( 2016 ) Algorithms to live by : the computer science of human decisions . Macmillan Claidière N , Amedon GK - k , André J - B , Kirby S , Smith K , Sperber D , Fagot J ( 2018 ) Convergent transformation and selection in cultural evolution . Evol Hum Behav 39 ( 2 ) : 191 – 202 Cover TM , Thomas JA ( 2012 ) Elements of information theory . John Wiley & Sons Creanza N , Kolodny O , Feldman MW ( 2017 ) Greater than the sum of its parts ? Modelling population contact and interaction of cultural repertoires . J R Soc Interface 14 ( 130 ) : 20170171 Culbertson J , Kirby S ( 2016 ) Simplicity and speci ﬁ city in language : domain - general biases have domain - speci ﬁ c effects . Front Psychol 6 : 1964 Darwin C ( 1859 ) On the origin of species . John Murray Dean LG , Vale GL , Laland KN , Flynn E , Kendal RL ( 2014 ) Human cumulative culture : a comparative perspective . Biol Rev 89 ( 2 ) : 284 – 301 Derex M , Perreault C , Boyd R ( 2018 ) Divide and conquer : intermediate levels of population fragmentation maximize cultural accumulation . Philos Trans R Soc B 373 ( 1743 ) : 20170062 Dew N , Sarasvathy SD , Venkataraman S ( 2004 ) The economic implications of exaptation . J Evol Econ 14 ( 1 ) : 69 – 84 Emery NJ , Clayton NS ( 2004 ) The mentality of crows : convergent evolution of intelligence in corvids and apes . Science 306 ( 5703 ) : 1903 – 1907 Enquist M , Eriksson K , Ghirlanda S ( 2007 ) Critical social learning : a solution to rogersas paradox of nonadaptive culture . Am Anthropol 109 ( 4 ) : 727 – 734 Enquist M , Ghirlanda S , Eriksson K ( 2011 ) Modelling the evolution and diversity of cumulative culture . Philos Trans R Soc B 366 ( 1563 ) : 412 – 423 Ferdinand VA ( 2015 ) Inductive evolution : cognition , culture , and regularity in language . Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation Gergely G , Csibra G ( 2006 ) Sylvia ’ s recipe : the role of imitation and pedagogy in the transmission of cultural knowledge . In : Roots of human sociality : culture , cognition , and human interaction . pp 229 – 255 Gigerenzer G , Gaissmaier W ( 2011 ) Heuristic decision making . Annu Rev Psychol 62 : 451 – 482 Gould SJ , Vrba ES ( 1982 ) Exaptation | a missing term in the science of form . Paleobiology 8 ( 1 ) : 4 – 15 Grif ﬁ ths TL , Kalish ML ( 2007 ) Language evolution by iterated learning with bayesian agents . Cogn Sci 31 ( 3 ) : 441 – 480 Henrich J ( 2004 ) Demography and cultural evolution : how adaptive cultural processes can produce maladaptive losses – the tasmanian case . Am Antiquity 69 ( 2 ) : 197 – 214 Henrich J ( 2015 ) The secret of our success : how culture is driving human evolution , domesticating our species , and making us smarter . Princeton University Press Heyes CM ( 1993 ) Imitation , culture and cognition . Anim Behav 46 ( 5 ) : 999 – 1010 Hunt GR , Gray RD ( 2004 ) Direct observations of pandanus - tool manufacture and use by a new caledonian crow ( Corvus moneduloides ) . Anim Cogn 7 ( 2 ) : 114 – 120 Johnson S ( 2011 ) Where good ideas come from : the natural history of innovation . Penguin Kauffman SA ( 1993 ) The origins of order : self - organization and selection in evo - lution . Oxford University Press Kawamura S ( 1959 ) The process of sub - culture propagation among Japanese macaques . Primates 2 ( 1 ) : 43 – 60 Kirby S , Cornish H , Smith K ( 2008 ) Cumulative cultural evolution in the labora - tory : an experimental approach to the origins of structure in human language . Proc Natl Acad Sci 105 ( 31 ) : 10681 – 10686 Kirby S , Dowman M , Grif ﬁ ths TL ( 2007 ) Innateness and culture in the evolution of language . Proc Natl Acad Sci 104 ( 12 ) : 5241 – 5245 Kirby S , Grif ﬁ ths T , Smith K ( 2014 ) Iterated learning and the evolution of lan - guage . Curr Opin Neurobiol 28 : 108 – 114 Kirby S , Hurford JR ( 2002 ) The emergence of linguistic structure : an overview of the iterated learning model . In Simulating the evolution of language . Springer , pp 121 – 147 Kolodny O , Creanza N , Feldman MW ( 2015 ) Evolution in leaps : the punctuated accumulation and loss of cultural innovations . Proc Natl Acad Sci 112 ( 49 ) : E6762 – E6769 Krützen M , Mann J , Heithaus MR , Connor RC , Bejder L , Sherwin WB ( 2005 ) Cultural transmission of tool use in bottlenose dolphins . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102 ( 25 ) : 8939 – 8943 Laland KN ( 2018 ) Darwinas un ﬁ nished symphony : how culture made the human mind . Princeton University Press ARTICLE PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41599 - 019 - 0361 - 3 12 PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2019 ) 5 : 149 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41599 - 019 - 0361 - 3 | www . nature . com / palcomms Lass R ( 1990 ) How to do things with junk : exaptation in language evolution . J Linguist 26 ( 1 ) : 79 – 102 Lewandowsky S , Grif ﬁ ths TL , Kalish ML ( 2009 ) The wisdom of individuals : exploring people ’ s knowledge about everyday events using iterated learning . Cogn Sci 33 ( 6 ) : 969 – 998 Lewis HM , Laland KN ( 2012 ) Transmission ﬁ delity is the key to the build - up of cumulative culture . Philos Trans R Soc B 367 ( 1599 ) : 2171 – 2180 Li M , Vitányi PMB ( 2008 ) An introduction to Kolmogorov complexity and its applications , 3rd edn . Springer - Verlag , New York Mastrogiorgio M , Gilsing V ( 2016 ) Innovation through exaptation and its deter - minants : the role of technological complexity , analogy making and patent scope . Res Policy 45 ( 7 ) : 1419 – 1435 May ﬁ eld JE ( 2013 ) The engine of complexity : evolution as computation . Columbia University Press Mesoudi A ( 2011 ) Variable cultural acquisition costs constrain cumulative cultural evolution . PLoS ONE 6 ( 3 ) : e18239 Mesoudi A , Thornton A ( 2018 ) What is cumulative cultural evolution ? Proc R Soc B 285 ( 1880 ) : 20180712 Miton H , Charbonneau M ( 2018 ) Cumulative culture in the laboratory : metho - dological and theoretical challenges . Proc R Soc B 285 ( 1879 ) : 20180677 Mokyr J ( 1998 ) Induced technical innovation and medical history : an evolutionary approach . J Evolut Econ 8 ( 2 ) : 119 – 137 Morin O ( 2016 ) How traditions live and die . Oxford University Press Penn DC , Povinelli DJ ( 2007 ) Causal cognition in human and nonhuman animals : a comparative , critical review . Annu Rev Psychol 58 : 97 – 118 Piantadosi ST , Cantlon JF ( 2017 ) True numerical cognition in the wild . Psychol Sci 28 ( 4 ) : 462 – 469 Powell A , Shennan S , Thomas MG ( 2009 ) Late pleistocene demography and the appearance of modern human behavior . Science 324 ( 5932 ) : 1298 – 1301 Reali F , Grif ﬁ ths TL ( 2009 ) The evolution of frequency distributions : relating regularization to inductive biases through iterated learning . Cognition 111 ( 3 ) : 317 – 328 Richerson PJ , Boyd R ( 2005 ) . Not by genes alone : how culture transformed human evolution . University of Chicago Press Sasaki T , Biro D ( 2017 ) Cumulative culture can emerge from collective intelligence in animal groups . Nat Commun 8 ( April ) : 15049 Schumpeter JA ( 1939 ) Business cycles : a theoretical , historical , and statistical analysis of the capitalist process ( Vol . 2 ) . McGraw - Hill , New York Shannon CE , Weaver W ( 1949 ) A mathematical model of communication . Uni - versity of Illinois Press Solée RV , Valverde S , Casals MR , Kauffman SA , Farmer D , Eldredge N ( 2013 ) The evolutionary ecology of technological innovations . Complexity 18 ( 4 ) : 15 – 27 Sperber D ( 1996 ) Explaining culture : a naturalistic approach . Cambridge , Cambridge Tennie C , Call J , Tomasello M ( 2009 ) Ratcheting up the ratchet : on the evolution of cumulative culture . Philos Trans R Soc B 364 ( 1528 ) : 2405 – 2415 Tomasello M ( 2009 ) The cultural origins of human cognition . Harvard University Press Tomasello M , Kruger AC , Ratner HH ( 1993 ) Cultural learning . Behav Brain Sci 16 ( 3 ) : 495 – 511 Villani M , Bonacini S , Ferrari D , Serra R , Lane D ( 2007 ) An agent based model of exaptive processes . Eur Manag Rev 4 ( 3 ) : 141 – 151 Watts DJ , Strogatz SH ( 1998 ) Collective dynamics of ‘ small - world ’ networks . Nature 393 ( 6684 ) : 440 Whiten A , Goodall J , McGrew WC , Nishida T , Reynolds V , Sugiyama Y , Boesch C ( 1999 ) Cultures in chimpanzees . Nature 399 ( 6737 ) : 682 – 685 Zwirner E , Thornton A ( 2015 ) Cognitive requirements of cumulative culture : teaching is useful but not essential . Sci Rep 5 : 16781 Acknowledgements The author would like to thank Maria Brackin , Olivier Morin , and Oleg Sobchuk for helpful and insightful comments on earlier versions of this paper . Competing interests The author declares no competing interests . Additional information Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J . W . Reprints and permission information is available at http : / / www . nature . com / reprints Publisher ’ s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional af ﬁ liations . Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4 . 0 International License , which permits use , sharing , adaptation , distribution and reproduction in any medium or format , as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author ( s ) and the source , provide a link to the Creative Commons license , and indicate if changes were made . The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article ’ s Creative Commons license , unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material . If material is not included in the article ’ s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use , you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder . To view a copy of this license , visit http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / . © The Author ( s ) 2019 PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41599 - 019 - 0361 - 3 ARTICLE PALGRAVE COMMUNICATIONS | ( 2019 ) 5 : 149 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1057 / s41599 - 019 - 0361 - 3 | www . nature . com / palcomms 13