OCTOBER 2022 | VOL . 65 | NO . 10 | COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM 27 V V viewpoints I M A G E B Y D N A I A M P O NN D A N A I storytelling intentionally into our cul - ture and operations . 4 By doing so , we have amplified our impact across the organization through increasing em - pathy with our customers , generating clarity with our partners , and build - ing diverse teams . 7 Our transforma - tive experiences within this emerging storytelling culture have inspired us to share these stories with you , stories that have deeply connected us—not just as professional researchers and engineers—but at a human level . The Science Behind Storytelling During the past decade , the conven - tional view of storytelling in technical I N THE SPIRIT of this Viewpoint , we begin with a story . One of the authors—Sumit Gulwani— struggled to teach his pre - school - aged son—Sumay—a simple conceptual math theorem : Odd plus odd equals even . When dia - grams and toys did not work , Sumit re - alized he had to meet Sumay where he was and not push to a level he was not ready for . a So , he told a story . An odd number , he began , is like a group of kids who are all paired up , except one . That person is “the lonely kid . ” And he is happy when they meet another odd number because he gets a friend : the other lonely kid . Now , there are no lonely kids , and that makes them an even number . The look on Sumay’s face told Sumit that the concept had landed immediately . “What is odd plus even ? ” Sumit asked . In a sad voice , Sumay answered , “Odd , be - cause there is no one to pair up with the lonely kid . ” “What is even plus even ? ” Sumay asked . “Even , because there is no lonely kid to begin with ! ” Sumit realized his son would best comprehend the abstract theorem when it was couched in a relatable narrative—in this case , one that reso - nated with a young child’s preoccu - pation with socialization , friendship , and inclusion . As well , this experi - ence happily turned out to be the seed for Sumay’s love for mathematics and computing . a Which is often akin to our experiences deliver - ing scientific presentations to nonexperts . Sumit’s experience with Sumay shows how even young children use sto - ries to understand , interpret , and con - struct meaning about the world around them—and earlier evidence suggests stories are in fact fundamental to hu - man cognitive processing . 10 Sadly , as professionals we overwhelmingly dis - miss the importance of storytelling in our day - to - day work , relegating our pro - fessional discomfort of “telling stories” to something that is only for children . Our organization , the Microsoft Developer Division ( DevDiv ) , has un - dertaken a bold initiative to make story telling a “professional compe - tency” and incorporate the science of Viewpoint Storytelling and Science Incorporating storytelling into organizational culture . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 3526100 Titus Barik , Sumit Gulwani , and Mario Juarez 28 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM | OCTOBER 2022 | VOL . 65 | NO . 10 viewpoints hand in a chance encounter that ulti - mately led to a career - defining achieve - ment . On a transcontinental flight , he met a woman who , upon learning he worked for Microsoft , sought his help on a problem that had long been frus - trating her . Opening Microsoft Excel on her laptop , she pointed to a col - umn of names that were listed in the format : “First - Name , Last - Name . ” She asked , “How do I reformat this so that the last names are listed first instead of the first names ? ” Stumped by this simple request and unfamiliar with the Excel programming model , Sumit had to excuse himself out of the situ - ation . Returning home , Sumit scoured Excel help forums to find a solution for her and noticed that people en - gaging experts for programming help often communicated their intent with just a few input / output examples . It was an ah - ha moment that inspired Sumit to conceive a programming - by - examples technology for automating string transformations such as these , leading to his invention of the popular Flash Fill feature in Excel . 5 Connecting with partners . There is a common tension in technology - fo - cused organizations between engineers who strive to minimize uncertainty and researchers who embrace it . This tension can either stifle innovation or inspire it . The difference is often de - termined by how well the parties trust each other and share a sense of com - and professional circles has evolved from a “soft skill” to a must - have com - petency , as the need to influence peo - ple has become more important in a world of information overload and re - mote connections . In organizations , research has found storytelling can act as a springboard to ignite unified action . 3 High - tech corporations have used stories as a medium for sharing culture , to “identify heroes and vil - lains , attitudes and values , beliefs , and practices of the organization . ” 6 And in software engineering , craft - ing stories together with stakeholders builds a common vision of a system— “a good story is much more powerful than any UML diagram can ever be . ” 12 Stories are powerful because they are universal , mirror human thought , define who we are , and build and preserve a group’s sense of commu - nity . 11 We now know from neurology and psychology that humans think in narrative structures . 10 Research - ers seeking to identify the dynamics of the storytelling process have not - ed increased brain activity in people reading stories , as compared to those reading raw data or facts , with accel - erated neural activity in regions as - sociated with emotion , memory , and sensory stimulation . 9 These insights reveal a set of es - sential factors—people , problems , places—which must be present for a story to work . These play out upon a universal narrative structure , often called the “dramatic arc , ” which maps the journey of a relatable character through an experience of struggle or challenge . Humans are born with a mastery of this arc ( no one need ex - plain storytelling to a toddler ) , 1 and it fortunately provides a basis for build - ing and presenting story - rich commu - nications that connect all of us . Using Stories to Build Connections Even brilliant practitioners run the risk of cultivating isolated islands of excel - lence , missing out on the greater impact they might enjoy if they were connected to a broader world of stakeholders . Here are just a few ways storytelling can build these connections : Connecting with customers . Con - necting with the people we aim to serve can help us identify highly relevant problems . Sumit experienced this first - Humans are optimized for pattern recognition , and the dramatic arc is a metapattern of narrative structure , beneath which are many familiar story forms and personality types called archetypes . Regional Special Section : India Rethinking Silicon Valley : Stewart Brand’s Lost Journal Reliability of Multiple Stages in the Data Pipeline Hummingbird : An Energy Efficient GPS Receiver for Small Satellites Intent - based Networking for the Enterprise Intelligent Futures in Task Assistance Plus , the latest news about precomputation for energy storage , metaverse applications , and the impact of virtual meetings . C o m i n g N e x t M o n t h i n C O M M U N I C A T I O N S OCTOBER 2022 | VOL . 65 | NO . 10 | COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM 29 viewpoints abstract concept . A dry data analysis , for example , can be made far more engaging when presented as a mystery to be solved or a hero to be rescued— such as our story to help our compu - tational notebook users escape their “absolute nightmare . ” Identify and integrate the human connection . Stories generate interest by conferring subjective meaning upon objective content . Meaning is imbued by highlighting human factors ( for example , personal , physical , or socio - logical circumstances ) surrounding an inanimate subject . A simple technique is to explore ways in which human ac - tivities intersect with or influence the topic or work being presented . This can take the form of a story about user pain / resolution , an ah - ha moment that sparked an idea , or a backstory about a research or development effort . While “automating string pro - cessing in spreadsheets using input - output examples” would have come across as incomprehensible jargon to Sumay who had often wondered , “Dad , what have you invented as a scientist ? ”—Sumit found a surreal moment last year . When Sumay’s re - mote - school teacher communicated credentials to digital applications by emailing an example of how to de - rive them from students names and IDs , Sumit showed him how Flash Fill could solve that challenge too ! Use sensory - rich experiences . Vir - tually any presentation or artifact can be enhanced by experiences rich in physicality , motion , and sensation , as the human brain tends to mirror what is experienced . We have found in our own presentations , for example , the immediacy of “live” demonstrations for a tool or feature—and the thrill of being able to see the storyteller per - form right in front of them—brings substantially more audience engage - ment than a prerecorded video . When Sumit recently presented new inno - vations in Flash Fill to leadership , he took a very unconventional approach . Sumit wore a t - shirt with an image of an Excel spreadsheet ( from a vi - ral tweet poking fun at Excel ) , using the first version of Flash Fill shipped more than a decade previously . After much laughter from the leadership team , Sumit then showed new in - novations in Flash Fill that properly mon purpose . Here , storytelling can play a pivotal role , as it uniquely gener - ates empathy and tribalism . For instance , co - author Titus Barik recently conducted a study on pain points in computational notebooks . 2 He could have presented his insights in a traditional way , for example , a thematic analysis or conventional tab - ular reporting . But he knew his prod - uct team colleagues lacked the band - width ( or , perhaps , interest ) to readily digest turgid academic prose . So Titus turned to stories told by participants who had been recorded as part of the study . He shared selected clips of us - ers as they expressed their frustra - tions and needs . This engaged his audience emotionally to the people in the recordings—and to one another . A key product manager , after watch - ing the clip , immediately remarked , flustered : “That was excruciatingly painful to watch . This is an absolute nightmare for our users ! ” They were now motivated , across functional and organizational boundaries , to take ac - tion and resolve the storylines . Connecting with hiring and fund - ing committees . Students will be - come the next generation of practi - tioners and researchers . Every year , employers struggle to hire the best candidates , and multitalented can - didates struggle to find career paths that resonate with their ambitions . Today , many organizations , even for roles beyond research , now value can - didates who can showcase not just their technical skills , but also their storytelling skills . When Titus first applied to Micro - soft , he had difficulty differentiating himself from other new researchers , many of whom had , on paper , very similar technical accomplishments . Rather than presenting only the tech - nical minutiae of his own work , Titus shared a series of stories about others , centering his talk through the voices and videos of participants who used his prototypes and tools , and even asking the audience to share their own interesting stories around his re - search topic . Through these stories , it became apparent the way Titus could add value to the organization was as an interpreter , bridging multiple dis - ciplines and roles to help teams ob - tain resources and funding . Storytelling Guidelines In working with thousands of engi - neers and other technical profession - als at Microsoft , we have developed a set of principles that have proven ef - fective in advancing storytelling skills . Here , we highlight some of the most important . Cultivate empathy . Compelling stories are just as much about the sto - ryteller as the story being told . To en - gage and influence , storytellers should be keenly attuned to their audience’s dispositions , values , and needs . This involves more than merely recognizing circumstances ; it requires understand - ing people’s lives at a subjective level . The knowledge gained helps guide the presenter to deliver the story in terms that resonate and foster a sense of common experience . Both Sumit’s story of the woman in the airplane , and Titus’ stories of computational notebook users persuade us to “walk a mile in someone’s shoes . ” Effective storytellers can harvest this power of stories over statistics , taking otherwise impersonal numbers and calculations and bringing these essential elements of empathy into central focus . 8 Find relevant archetypes and meta - phors . Humans are optimized for pat - tern recognition , and the dramatic arc is a metapattern of narrative structure , beneath which are many familiar story forms and personality types called ar - chetypes . People universally recognize a set of familiar dramatic struggles— odysseys , tragedies , love affairs , to name a few—which resonate with dai - ly human challenges . Likewise , a well - chosen metaphor can quickly create a concrete association to an otherwise Virtually any presentation or artifact can be enhanced by experiences rich in physicality , motion , and sensation . 30 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM | OCTOBER 2022 | VOL . 65 | NO . 10 viewpoints what to do . ’’ Sumay’s eyes lit up and thus began his programming journey . When Sumay shared this story with his teacher , she got inspired to connect the math and programming curricu - lum in the classroom . Stories allow us to take everyday , ordinary experiences and transform them into something memorable and remarkable that can inspire action . Within organizations , our stories reveal the warm shadings of discovery , empathy , and invention in a way that purely technical reports and objec - tive data cannot . Storytelling plays an increasingly important role as a necessary professional competency to not only to elevate research con - tributions in the broader machinery of technological innovation—but also to nurture the appropriate envi - ronment for conducting impactful research in the first place by bringing together diverse stakeholders . References 1 . Boyd , R . L . et al . The narrative arc : Revealing core narrative structures through text analysis . Science Advances 6 , 32 ( 2020 ) , eaba2196 . 2 . Chattopadhyay , S . et al . What’s wrong with computational notebooks ? Pain points , needs , and design opportunities . In Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ) ( 2020 ) , 1 – 12 . 3 . Dennehy , R . F . The springboard : How storytelling ignites action in knowledge - era organizations . Journal of Organizational Change Management 14 1 , 12 ( 2001 ) , 609 – 614 . 4 . Gallo , C . How Southwest , KPMG and Wynn turn employees into crusaders . Forbes ( 2016 ) . https : / / bit . ly / 3PkofW9 5 . Gulwani , S . The story of the Flash Fill feature in Excel ; https : / / bit . ly / 3BTD8fj 6 . Kelly , J . W . Storytelling in high tech organizations : A medium for sharing culture . Journal of Applied Communication Research 13 , 1 ( Jan . 1985 ) , 45 – 58 . 7 . Lowdermilk , T . , and Hammontree , M . The Customer - Driven Culture : A Microsoft Story . O’Reilly Media , 2020 . 8 . Newman , T . B . The power of stories over statistics . The BMJ 327 , 7429 ( 2003 ) , 1424 – 1427 . 9 . Paul , A . M . Your brain on fiction . New York Times 17 ( 2012 ) ; https : / / nyti . ms / 3bJ6AtA 10 . Read , S . J . , and Miller , L . C . Stories are fundamental to meaning and memory : For social creatures , could it be otherwise ? Knowledge and Memory : The Real Story ( 1995 ) , 139 – 152 . 11 . Roche , L . , and Sadowsky , J . The power of stories ( i ) : A discussion of why stories are powerful . International Journal of Information Technology and Management 2 , 4 ( 2003 ) , 377 – 388 . 12 . Uittenbogaard , A . Storytelling for software professionals . IEEE Software 30 , 3 ( May 2013 ) , 9 – 12 . Sumit Gulwani ( sumitg @ microsoft . com ) is a computer scientist connecting ideas , people , and research with practice and recipient of three test - of - time paper awards and the Max Planck - Humboldt medal for program synthesis research , Microsoft , Redmond , WA , USA . Titus Barik ( tbarik @ acm . org ) is a Research Scientist at Microsoft , where he builds tools for software engineers and data scientists , in Redmond , WA , USA . Mario Juarez ( mario @ mario - juarez . com ) is founder of StoryCo , a storytelling - focused communications consultancy in Seattle , WA , USA . Copyright held by author . handled the tweet’s date and time scenarios , and demonstrated in a very memorable way the importance of continued investment in both re - search and product . 5 Make it a practice . Co - author Mario Juarez worked closely with Microsoft DevDiv leadership to develop a variety of skill - building efforts worthy of con - sideration : ˲ Storytelling workshops , augment - ed with personalized coaching and featuring deep dives into topics such as “Storytelling with Data” and “Movie Making” for technical presentations ; ˲ Internal TED Talk - style presenta - tions , where we first ask team mem - bers to watch online TED Talks , after which team members work with a coach to author highly polished talks of their own and deliver them in spe - cial events ; ˲ A Storytelling Mentors group , which matches skilled presenters with individuals who are eager to advance their skills , providing personalized tu - torials and training to grow the com - petency ; and ˲ Participation in academic venues emphasizing nontraditional and cre - ative approaches to communicating about science , such as Onward ! es - says , which uniquely explore specific topics , and the < Programming > con - ference , which focuses on program - ming experiences across multiple per - spectives . For small teams , consider starting with informal weekly presen - tations , even for non - technical topics . When we first started our storytell - ing journey , we asked different team members to share stories about any topic they were interested in : some - thing fascinating they read in the news , their favorite vacations , or even one of their treasured childhood tales . As participants become more com - fortable with storytelling—and with each other—the organization will nat - urally grow its storytelling culture . Conclusion One day Sumay enthusiastically , but tediously , enumerated all the 40 solu - tions to his second - grade math chal - lenge : Find all tuples ( a , b , c , d ) where a × b = c × d and a , b , c , d are distinct digits . Sumit teased him , “You know what , a computer could have done it for you , all you have to do is to tell the computer Peer - reviewed Resources for Engaging Students EngageCSEdu provides faculty - contributed , peer - reviewed course materials ( Open Educational Resources ) for all levels of introductory computer science instruction . engage - csedu . org