Biochimica e t Bioph y sica Acta 940 ( 1988 ) 275 - 287 Elsevier BBA 74000 Reversible electrical breakdown of lipid bilayers : formation and evolution of pores Ralf W . Glaser a , b , S ergei L . Leikin b , L eonid V . Chernomordik b , Vasili F . Pastushenko and Artjom I . Sokirko a Humboldr - Uni v ersi t y of Berlin . Depar t men t of Biology , Berlin ( G . D . R . ) and Frumkijn Ins t i t u t e of Elec t rochemisr t y of t he Academy of Sciences of the USSR , Moscow ( U . S . S . R . ) ( Received 23 November 1987 ) Key words : Lipid bilayer ; Electrical breakdown ; Hydrophobic pore ; Hydrophilic pore ; Pore formation The mechanism of reversible electric breakdown of lipid membranes is studied . The following stages of the process of pore development are substantiated . Hydrophobic pores are formed in the lipid bilayer by spontaneous fluctuations . If these water - filled defects extend to a radius of 0 . 3 to 0 . 5 nm , a hydrophilic pore is formed by reorientation of the lipid molecules . This process is favoured by a potential difference across the membrane . The conductivity of the pores depends on membrane voltage , and the type of this dependence changes with the radius of the pore . Hydrophilic pores of an effective radius of 0 , 6 up to more than 1 n m are formed , which account for the membrane conductivity increase observed . The characteristic times of changes in average radius and number of pores during the voltage pulse and after it are investigated . Introduction Under the action of high potential differences cell membranes transiently lose their barrier func - tions ( electric breakdown ) . In the last decade many papers dealt with this phenomenon and its appli - cations in biotechnology and medicine [ 1 , 2 ] . Elec - tric breakdown occurs in the course of electro - stimulated fusion and electrotransfection of cells [ 1 , 2 ] . The possible role of this phenomenon , in - duced by the diffusion potential of the cell mem - brane , in some pathological process is also dis - cussed [ 3 ] . It is generally accepted now that elec - trical breakdown is based on the formation of pores in the lipid areas of the membrane . How - Correspondence : R . W . Glaser . Humboldt - Universitat zu Berlin , Institut fü r Medizinische Immunologi e , Schumannstrasse 20 / 21 , Berlin , 1040 G . D . R . ever , there is no common view on their structure and on the mechanism of their formation [ 1 - 10 ] . From our point of view in this situation the study of electroporation mechanism and phenomenol - ogy by means of simple model systems based on planar lipid bilayers is especially important . In this paper the results of theoretical and experimental studies of reversible electric break - down of lipid bilayers are presented . The forma - tion of short - living small hydrophobic por e s is shown to be a first stage of electroporation . Then inversion of the pore edge occurs . As a result hydrophilic pores , determining the membrane conductivity are formed . The evolution of these pores is investigated . The dependence of the rate of hydrophilic pore creation on the voltage ap - plied is quantitatively described . The time course of the changes in number and average size of hydrophilic pores during and after voltage pulses is studied by means of quantitative analysis of the membrane current - voltage characteristics . 0005 - 2736 / 88 / $ 03 . 50 0 1988 Elsevier Science Publishers B . V . ( Biomedical Division ) Theory Energy of a hydrophobic pore We assume that the mechanism of electropora - tion is the following : Owing to thermal motion of lipid molecules hydrophobic pores are sponta - neously formed in the lipid matrix ( Fig . la ) . The probability of the existence of a hydrophobic pore is determined by the dependence of pore energy on pore radius . When these pores exceed the criti - cal size , a reorientation of the lipids converts the pores into hydrophilic ones with the head groups forming the pore walls ( Fig . 1 b ) . Let us determine the change of free energy resulting from the formation of a cylindrical hy - drophobic pore of the radius R in a lipid bilayer . This free energy E , , is termed the energy of the pore . The pore is filled with water . Earlier papers used to calculate Eo from [ 4 ] where h is the thickness of the membrane and uo ( co ) is the interface tension between hydro - phobic lipid tails and water . From Eqn . 1 the energy of a hydrophobic pore of 0 . 5 nm radius was calculated in the order of 200 kT ( with h = 5 nm and uo ( co ) = 0 . 05 N / m ) . It was concluded that the spontaneous formation of hydrophobic pores as a stage of hydrophilic pores arising was highly unprobable [ 4 ] . In Eqn . 1 , however , the interaction between the walls of the pore has not been regarded . Recently , lsraelachvili and Pashley [ ll ] showed experimen - tally that the interaction of two hydrophobic surfaces separated by a thin layer of water signifi - cantly reduces the interface tension 0 , . The reduc - tion of uo was attributed to changes in water structure near the interface with hydrophobic sub - stances as follows . . From the interface to the bulk phase the properties of water undergo a gradual nn i nnm nnnn i Ulll JUWl llll @ ! a ) hydrophobls pore b ) hydroph ilic pore Fig . 1 . Types of pore in lipid membranes . I ! , , , , , 1 2 3 4 5 radius [ nm ] Fig . 2 . Effective interface tension between hydrophobic pore wall and water as a function of pore radius . The data are calculated from Eqn . 2 with o , , ( oc ) = 5 . 10 - ' N / m and r = 1 nm . The dashed line shows the interface tension o , ( oo ) without hydrophobic interaction . transition with a characteristic length r of 1 nm [ 1 1 ] . The high interface tension originates from the excess energy of this thin layer with disturbed water structure . When two hydrophobic surfaces come to a distance of a few nanometers the over - lapping of these layers reduces the effective surface tension uo and causes hydrophobic attraction be - tween the surfaces [ 11 , 12 ] . Based on the theoretical model that was sug - gested by Marcelja [ 12 ] we calculated the effective value of u , ( R ) and the pore energy Eo ( R ) ( see Appendix ) , where I , ( x ) are modified Bessel functions of n - th ord e r . a , , as a function of R is shown in Fig . 2 . At R > > p is uo ( R ) = po ( oo ) , while at R < < r is uo ( R ) = Ruo ( co ) / 2p with uo ( R = 0 ) = 0 . In Fig . 3 the pore energy Eo is shown as a function of R according to Eqn . 1 and Eqn . 3 . It is obvious that the interaction of the pore walls significantly reduces the energy of the hydro - phobic pores . For example , at R = 0 . 5 nm the energy is reduced to one fifth . pore radius [ n m ] Fig . 3 . Energy of hydrophobic pores as a function of pore radius . - - - , without consideration of hydrophohrc interac - tion between pore walls ; - , under consideration of hy - drophobic interaction according to Eqn . 3 . Energy of a hydrophilic pore The energy of a hydrophilic pore is generally calculated from [ 13 , 14 ] where y is the edge energy of the pore walls and s b , is the effective mechanical tension of the mem - brane . R is understood as the radius of the nar - rowest part of the channel in the membrane ( Fig . 1 b ) . However , for pores with small radius ( R < < h ) Eqn . 4 with constant y is inapplicable [ 4 , 5 , 15 , 16 ] . The packing of lipids along the wallside of a narrow pore leads to s ubstantial deformation of the molecular order . The contribution of this de - formation to pore energy steeply rises when R approaches the size of the lipid heads [ 4 , 16 ] . In addition , strong hydration interaction [ 17 ] causes repulsive forces between the hydrophilic com - pounds of the pore wall . Both effects lead to an increase of Ei at small radius . Since the precise dependence of Ei on small radii is unknown , we can only give the qualitative description . The de - pendence is assumed to have the form shown in Fig . 4 [ 4 ] . The local minimum of El is expected around R , = 1 nm . Hydrophilic pore formation The comparison of E , ( R ) and E , ( R ) shows that the formation of hydrophobic pores in the bilayer is energetically more favourable if the radius is very small ( Fig . 4 ) . These hydrophobic . rm I . , pore radius Fig . 4 . Comparison of the energy of hydrophobic and hydro - philic por es at different pore radii . ( a ) hydrophohic pores ; ( b ) hydrophilic pores . A hydrophobic pore of zero radius is identi - cal with the undisturbed state of the membrane - the energy is zero . Hydrophilic pores of small radius have high energies . At a radius r , the energies of hydrophobic and hydrophilic pores are equal ; this energy E , is the minimal energy that has to be overcome to form a hydrophilic pore . The radius r , , where hydrophilic pores have minimal energy , may be larger than r , ; under these conditions hydrophilic pores can exist in a meta - stable state . If the radius of the pore becomes larger than r , the pore will grow indefinitely and destroy the membrane . pores are formed spontaneously by lateral thermal fluctuations of the lipid molecules . But when their radius exceeds a critical value R * , at which E , ( R , ) equals E , ( R , ) , a reorientation of the lipids be - comes energetically favourable . This reorientation , resulting in the formation of a hydrophilic pore , will be called the inversion of the pore . The life time of the hydrophobic pores is in the order of the lipid fluctuations ; they are only intermediate stages in the formation of hydrophilic pores . Accumulation of hydrophilic pores in the mem - brane due to an electric field is considered to be the reason for reversible electric breakdown [ 9 ] . Assuming additional energy of intermediate steps of the inversion to be negligible we find the energy barrier which has to be overcome for hydrophilic pore formation , The rate K , , at which metastable pores are spontaneously formed , is calculated according to Ref . 13 , where S is the area of the membrane , u , , the area per lipid molecule , and v the frequency of lateral fluctuations of the lipid molecules , since the rate at which the pore can open is mainly determined by lipid fluctuations . Equations 5 and 6 are valid as well when the voltage across the membrane differs from zero . The dependence of cylindrical hydrophobic pore energy on membrane voltage can be expressed in the form [ 5 , 14 ] , where E , is the relative permittivity of water in - side the pore . E , the relative permittivity of the membrane and E ~ the dielectric constant of the vacuum . From Eqns . 4 - 7 we get If we assume , according to Ref . 14 , that the dependence of Ei ( R ) on U is also described by Eqn . 7 , we obtain that R * is constant and inde - pendent of U . However , for real noncylindrical hydrophilic pores we should expect that the de - pendence E i ( U ) slightly differs from Eqn . ( 7 ) . Nevertheless , the steep decrease in Ei ( R ) for R > R * ( Fig . 4 ) allows us to neglect the influence of U on R , caused by this difference . The fact that R * is independent of U allows us the experimental verification of Eqn . 8 and the theory developed . Let us briefly discuss the ways of further evolu - tion of hydrophilic pores in planar lipid bilayer membranes . When U = 0 , it follows from Eqn . 4 that the pore growth is hindered by an energy barrier ( Fig . 4 ) [ 13 , 14 ] . The height D W , and the coordinate R , of the barrier top can be estimated as AW , = ny2 / a , - and Rd = y / ub An electric field reduces the barrier . To estimate W , ( U ) and R , ( U ) Eqn . 7 is usually applied to Ei ( R ) [ 14 ] . Taking for R > R , y 3 lo - ' ' N [ 18 , 19 ] ; E , = 80 ; and h 3 5 nm , we find that for high voltages ( U 3 0 . 5 - 1 V ) the energy barrier for pore growth disappears . This , in principle , means that hydrophilic pores should grow infinitely and that the breakdown should b e irreversible . So the question arises why some planar lipid bilayer membranes of special composition demonstrate the reversible break - down at high voltages . One reason of such be - haviour can be very high viscosity of this mem - branes preventing fast growth of the pore [ 20 ] . The other reason can be crucial as well . The situation changes drastically for membranes with s b < < y / h . Eqn . 7 is valid only for narrow pores ( R < < h ) , and can not be applied , even qualita - tively , for R > h . Consequently , Eqn . 7 can not be applied in the region of R = y / a , , where the energy barrier for pore growth is situated accord - ing to the equation . It has been shown that in this case the energy barrier can remain high enough to prevent the irreversible rupture of the membrane even at high voltages [ 21 ] . It is natural to suggest that this is the case where reversible breakdown is observed . Pore co n duc t i v ity The dynamics of pore development are of sub - stantial interest for understanding the mechanism of reversible electric breakdown . Information on pore size can be drawn from the dependence of membrane conductivity on membrane voltage [ 22 ] . The character of this dependence is determined by the pore size . While the conductivity of small pores rapidly grows when the voltage rises , large pores are nearly ohmic . Thus it appears to be possible to estimate the number and the size of the pores from conductiv - ity measurements at different voltages ( Fig . 6 ) . These calculations are based on the model pro - posed in Ref . 22 , which is presented below . ' We assume that the conductivity of the mem - brane is produced by pores of identical size and shape . Such an ' average ' pore is shown in Fig . 5 . The external radius of the channel entrance is R , . The inner radius R , i . e . the radius of the pore is small in comparison with the membrane thickness h . The conductivity of the pore G can be calcu - lated as the conductivity of a cylindrical channel of the radius R , that represents an energetic bar - rier for ions . The shape of this barrier is determined by the real structure of the pore walls ( Fig . 5 ) . The maximum height of the barrier is produced by the interaction of an ion with the surrounding mem - brane material at the narrowest part of the pore . Fig . 5 . Simplified energy profile of a hydrophilic pore : energy of an ion crossing the membrane as a function of its position along the axis of the hydrophilic pore . Inside the pore the energy of the ion is increased due to the interaction of the ionic charge with the low permittivity areas of the membrane . The energy profile can be approximated by a trapezium ( A ) , this enables the calculation of pore conductivity by Eqn . 10 . If a voltage is applied to the membrane , the energy barrier for ions will decrease ( B ) . According to Ref . 22 the conductivity of the membrane in the solution of an 1 : 1 electrolyte is calculated from where U is the potential difference across the membrane , N the number of pores , H the specific conductivity of the bulk solution , / 3 = e / k T and W ( X ) = W ( x ) / kT , where e is the electron charge and W ( x ) the energy of an ion inside the pore in dependence on the distance from one surface of the membrane . We assume that the shape of the energy barrier is a trapezium [ 22 ] ( Fig . 5 ) . For / 3U > > 1 ( U > > 25 mV ) we get where n = d / h is the relative size of the entrance region of the pore ( Fig . 5 ) and w , the energy of an ion in the center of the pore in units of kT . Eqn . 10 is in accordance with the experimentally observed dependence of In G on U [ 22 ] . According to Eqn . 10 the membrane conductiv - ity depends on the three parameters ~ R : X N / I I , n , and w 0 . As long as the radius of the pores is small in comparison with the membrane thickness ( R < < h ) , one can assume that R 0 = h / 2 is inde - pendent of R ( Fig . 5 ) . Changes in the first param - eter P R : A ' N / ~ , therefore , are mainly due to a change in the number of pores in the membrane . These changes only cause a vertical shift of the l n G - curve without affecting the shape of this curve . The second parameter - the relative en - trance length n - affects the shape of the In G ( U ) curve . Particularly , n determines the slope of In G ( U ) at small voltages . For nflU < < w , and w , > > k T Equation ( 10 ) provides When we suppose that R < < h , the relative en - trance length n is basically defined by the shape of the pore wall ( Fig . 5 ) and is nearly independent of the radius . Consequently , n can be assumed as a constant at membranes of the same type . Thus the maximum energy of an ion in the pore w , is the only parameter influencing the course of In G ( U ) for a given membrane . On the other hand w , is immediately connected with the radius of the narrowest part of the pore R . When the radius of the pore is decreased , the energy of an ion inside the pore increases because of the interaction with the surrounding membrane of low dielectric constant [ 23 ] . For example , for infinitely long cylindrical pores with E , = 2 and E , = 80 , R can be approximated by as it has been shown by Parsegian [ 23 ] . Consequently , it is possible to obtain informa - tion about the dynamics of pore size and pore number from w , and N which are provided by fitting Eqn . 10 to the measured dependence of membrane conductivity on voltage . Materials and Methods Membranes Membranes were formed from 10 mg asolectin ( Sigma ) per ml decane in the usual way on the orifice of a two - compartment teflon chamber filled with 100 mM KCI . The temperature was 30 " C . After the membrane had grown black , uranyl ions were added in small portions of UO , ( CH , COO ) , solution to both compartments up to a final con - centration of M . Experiments were carried out 15 to 30 h after the preparation of the mem - brane . The current flowing through the membrane was measured during voltage pulses consisting of two or more rectangular parts . Details of the device have been described by Chernomordik et al . [ 20 ] . Pulses were given in intervals of at least 2 minutes . Rate of pore creation We determined the dependence of the rate of formation of metastable hydrophilic pores K , on the voltage U , of the test pulse . The membrane was exposed to pulses com - posed of three rectangular parts ( Fig . 6 ) . The first part and the third part were measuring pulses of equal voltage Urn , which was not changed during a set of experiments . The second part was the test pulse with variable voltage I / , and length At . The difference of current AI = I , ( Urn ) - I , ( Urn ) im - mediately after and before the test pulse was analysed under the measuring voltage Urn ( see Results ) . The value of I , was obtained by extrapo - lation of the current I ( t ) of the third part to the end of the test pulse . Determination of pore size and number The membrane was exposed to pulses com - posed of a test pulse and a measuring part . The conductivity of the membrane that was induced by the test pulse was determined as a function of the measuring voltage . Therefore , series of experi - ments were performed in which immediately after an identical test pulse a short measuring pulse of variable voltage was given ( Fig . 7 ) . The conductiv - ity was extrapolated to the beginning of the mea - suring pulse to remove capacitive currents and conductivity changes during the measuring pulse . Such series of experiments were carried out time ( ms ) Fig . 6 . Experimental determination of the rate of pore crea - tion : oscillogram of membrane current and voltage pulse ap - plied to the membrane . The current tracks of six pulses and a zero line are shown in one oscillogram . Each pulse consists of three parts : ( 1 ) 5 ms of U , , , = 900 mV , ( 2 ) 2 ms of variable voltage ( U , = 900 - 1450 mV ) and ( 3 ) 9 ms of Urn = 900 mV . While the traces of the first parts fall together the different voltages of the second parts causes different current traces of the third parts . At 7 - 9 ms the current is influenced by changes in pore size , therefore the linear part is extrapolated to 7 ms . The difference between this extrapolation and the current of the first part at 5 ms provides the increase of membrane current D I resulting from pore creation by the second part of the pulse . with test pulses of different length and voltage . In addition , experiments were performed in which the measuring pulses were given at various inter - vals after the test pulse . In all cases the conductiv - ity during the test pulses was controlled to exclude changes in the electric properties of the membrane that might arise from extensive pulsation . From the relation between membrane conduc - tivity and voltage the energy w , and the number of pores N were derived . These parameters were fitted in a way that Eqn . 10 satisfied the measured data with least - square deviations in l n G . The other parameters were set h = 5 nrn , R , = h / 2 , and X ' = 1 . 3 S / m . time [ ms ] Fig . 7 . Measurement of the voltage dependence of pore con - ductivity for the determination of pore size : oscillogram of membrane current and voltage pulses applied to the mem - brane . Pulses consist of a 10 ms part of constant voltage ( 1 350 mV ) to put the membrane to the desired state for investigation and of a 4 ms part of variable voltage ( 900 - 1300 mV ) to investigate the current - voltage characteristic of the membrane in this state . In these experiments only the first 0 . 2 ms of the second part ( capacitive currents ) are neglected by extrapo - lation . The first pulse ( 1350 , 4300 mV ) is repeated after the experiment to estimate the extent of membrane damage due to the pulses . The relative entrance length n was supposed to be constant . The best correspondence between experimental and theoretical data was achieved with n = 0 . 15 . Lysophosphatidylcholine treatment Uranylized membranes were made as described above . After 15 to 20 h , under continuous stirring , lysophosphatidylcholine from egg yolk ( Serva ) was added to both sides of the membrane up to a final concentration of 5 pg / rnl . The current flowing through the membrane , which was the response to identical rectangular voltage pulses , was studied after different time intervals and compared with the response before lysophosphatidylcholine was added . Lysophosphatidylcholine was used in a solution of 2 mg per ml ethanol . Addition of an adequate amount of ethanol without lysophosphatidylcho - line did not have any effect on membrane proper - ties . Results and Discussion Characterisation of the ener gy burrier for h y dro - philic pore for mation We found the dependence of In ( Al / At ) on u , ' by the application of pulses of a voltage U , from 0 . 65 to 1 . 9 V ( Fig . 8 ) . In the range between 0 . 65 and 1 . 5 V the current through the membrane increased linearily during the test pulse . Thus the rate of pore death was low in comparison with the rate of pore formation and could be neglected . We assumed that Al ( U , ) = c w P 2 - 5 t - t - 10 " F - / ' / / 0 O I 0 . 5 o / 6 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 . 5 2 - 15 L , ' oO voltl age [ V ] Fig . 8 . Dependence between the logarithm of the rate of current increase D 1 / 41 and the square of the voltage U , of the test pulse . The current was measured in two individual mem - branes at a constant voltage of Urn = 900 mV and 800 mV , respectively . Increasing the voltage U , from 0 . 65 to 1 . 9 V the length D r of the test pulse was decreased from 100 ms to 0 . 1 ms . Linear regression of the data at U , 6 1 . 45 V provided for l n ( d I / ~ r ) = ~ + B . u , * A = - 15 . 9 . B = 4 . 8 V - ' and A = - 16 , B = 4 . 7 V - ' , resp ectively . D N ( U , ) . V , , g ( U , ) , where D N ( U , ) is the number of hydrophilic pores that were formed in the bi - layer by the test pulse and g ( U , ) is the average conductivity of the pores at U = Urn . Accordingly , the rate of pore formation is where D t is the length of the test pulse . From Eqn . 13 we find that for co m parison with the experi - mental data the theoretical Eqn . 8 can be pre - sented as where and Here we assume the pore conductivity g ( Urn ) to be independent of the amplitude U , and duration D t of the test pulse . The value of g ( Urn ) is determined by the average pore size , which depends on U , and on At . ( At was varied from 100 ms at U , = 0 . 65 - 0 . 7 V to 0 . 1 ms at U , = 1 . 7 - 1 . 9 V ) . However , the dependence of In ( Al / At ) on g ( Um ) is very weak i n c o mparison with the dependence on U , ' . For example , changes in g ( U , , , ) by a factor of 3 - 5 lead to changes in In ( Al / At ) which are within the experimental accuracy ( Fig . 8 ) . Besides , to de - termine D I the current I ( ? ) of the second measur - ing pulse was extrapolated to the end of the test pulse ( Fig . 6 ) . Thus , g ( Urn ) corresponds to the pore size after about 10 ms relaxation under standard measuring conditions ( U = Urn ) . This re - laxation significantly reduces the influence of U , and D t on g ( Urn ) . Fig . 8 shows that in the range 0 . 65 V < U , < 1 . 5 V the dependence of ln ( AI / At ) on u12 is linear as predicted theoretically . By linear regression of ln ( AI / At ) against u12 the parameters A and B were calculated : A = - 15 . 9 , B = 4 . 8 v - ~ at U , = 900 mV ( membrane I ) and A = - 16 . 0 , B = 4 . 7 V - * at Urn = 800 mV ( membrane II ) . From parameter B the critical radius R * can be determined , at which the energy barrier for the formation of hydrophilic pores is situated . With T = 300 K , h = 5 nm and E , = = 80 , Eqn . 16 provided R , = 0 . 3 nm . We are aware , however , that this is a rough determination . The uncertainty arises from the simplification of the model : the continuous description is applied to the discrete molecular structure . In addition , the dielectric properties of the water inside the pore differ form the bulk phase , and E , is probably below 80 . From parameter A the energy of the barrier for the formation of hydrophilic pores was calculated . Assuming that g ( U , ) = lo - " S ( see below ) , v = 10 ' ' s - ' , S = 1 mm 2 , and a 0 = 0 . 6 nm 2 , Eqn . 15 provided D W , ( U = 0 ) = 45 kT . Although g and v are only known by the order of magnitude , the error of AW , can hardly exceed 10 kT , because D W is proportional to the logarithm of these parameters . Since AW , ( U = O ) = E , ( U , Re ) , Eqn . 3 could be employed for an independent determination of the critical radius with R * = 0 . 5 nm ( Fig . 3 ) . Con - sidering the limited accuracy mentioned above this result is in accordance with the value calcu - lated from parameter B . It should be noted that the parameters A and B refer to quite different aspects of the pore formation process . The two determinations of R , are independent and thus their correspondence supports the proposed model of pore formation . At test pulses above 1 . 5 V In ( Al / At ) more and more deviated from the linear dependence ( Fig . 8 ) . Simultaneously the current increase during the test pulse became non - linear . These divergences result from voltage drop in the bathing solutions pro - duced by the high membrane currents . When the current flowing through the membrane exceeded A the membrane voltage was reduced by more than 100 mV because the resistance of the bath in g solutions was 1 . 5 kS2 . The divergences do not reflect any changes in the pore formation properties of the membrane . An additional information can be obtained from the experiments described . From Fig . 6 one can draw that the membrane has a substantial back - ground conductivity ( about 3 . 10 - 7 S ) . We obtain this value by extrapolation of I ( t ) to the begin - ning of the first measuring pulse with U = Urn ( Fig . 6 ) . The high background conductivity of the mem - brane can not arise from hydrophobic pores be - cause of their short life time . The probability that the membrane has a 0 . 5 nm hydrophobic pore is very small ( about lop6 in an area of 1 mm 2 ) . Let us assume that the high background conductivity of the membrane is due to an equilibrium popula - tion of hydrophilic pores existing in the mem - brane [ 16 ] . The mean number of such pores at U = 0 is equal to Ne = 7 , Kp ( U = 0 ) , where 7 , is the mean time of pore resealing . This relation can be used to estimate the value of t r . N , is given by Ne = Ib / ( Umg ( Um ) ) , where g ( Um ) is the mean pore conductivity at U = Urn . From Eqns . 13 - 16 we find that K , ( U = 0 ) = exp ( A ) / ( Urn . g ( Um ) ) . Therefore 7 , can be expressed as Substituting I , = 3 . lo - ' A and A = - 16 we get t r = 3 s . Note that to obtain Eqn . 17 only two model assumptions have been used : ( i ) that the back - ground conductivity is determined by pores ; and ( ii ) that the conductivity of background pores and pores created by the test pulse are nearly equal at U = urn . Further evolution of the pores By special experiments Chernomordik et al . [ 22 ] have shown that the dependence of conductiv - ity on voltage , obtained by the method described , is based on nonohmic behaviour of hydrophilic pores rather than on changes of their mean size or number . Fig . 9 shows the dependence of l n G on U measured after pulses of various length . Obvi - ously , Eqn . 10 is able to describe these experimen - tal data quite exactly . The parameters w , and N , wh i ch are deiermined from the fits , give us an understanding of the evolution of the population of pores in the membrane during and after the pulse . In the following the dependence of w , and N on length and voltage of the pulse will be discussed in detail . voltag e [ V ] Fig . 9 . Relationship b etween m emb ran e current and voltage immediately after pulses of 1 . 6 V and a duration of 0 . 1 ms ( D ) , 0 . 2 ms ( 0 ) . and 0 . 5 ms ( 0 ) ( experimental data ) . The experi - ment was performed as demonstrated in Fig . 7 . - , fitted according to Eqn . 10 . Parameters drawn from the fit see right column of Table I . An increase of the pulse length D t leads to a proportional increase of the number N of pores in the membrane ( Table 1 ) . This is in good agree - ment with the results obtained above . Simulta - neously , the energy of an ion in the pore w , is decreased ( Table I ) , i . e . , the radius of the pore increases during the pulse . Rough estimation by TABLE 1 DEPENDENCE OF PORE SIZE AND NUMBER ON THE PARAMETERS OF THE PULSE The energy barrier w 0 for univalent ions crossing the mem - hrane and the number of pores N a re co m pil e d in dependence on the pulse length . The current - voltage ch a racter i stic of a n uranylized membrane was measured as described in Fig . 7 and both parameters were calculated by a nonlinear regression program based on Eqn . 10 . The data after 1 . 45 V and 1 . 6 V pulses were measured in the same membrane while the 1 . 35 V data were measured in another preparation . Pulse Pore size and number , voltage of the pulse 1 . 35 V 1 . 45 V 1 . 6 V means of Eqn . 12 shows that the mean pore radius is in the order of 0 . 6 - 1 nm ( w , = 5 - 8 kT ) . The modification with increasing pulse length of the dependence of In G on U is shown in Fig . 9 and Fig . 10 . It is worth mentioning that a change of w , of 1 kT leads to a substantial increase of the pore conductivity . According to Eqn . 11 the conductivity under low voltages ( nPU < w , ) is increased to the 3 - fold . Nevertheless , the observed pores can be regarded as small : the conductivity is strongly dependent on voltage ( Fig . 9 ) . The forma - tion of large pores , which practically show an ohmic behaviour was observed only after very long pulses . In Fig . 10 the dependence of In G on U is shown after a pulse of 100 ms and 1 Volt . Under these conditions the conductivity is nearly inde - pendent of voltage . The pore radius is much big - ger in comparison with the conditions described above . This is also shown by the decrease of w , to about 2 kT . An increase of the voltage of the pulse increases the rate of pore creation in the membrane ( Table I ) . This effect was discussed in detail above . Fig . 11 shows how the dependence of In G on U is modified in the process of pore resealing after the pulse . In the course of a few milliseconds the membrane conductivity is significantly reduced . Nevertheless the number of pores in the mem - brane , calculated according to the model consid - ered above , remains constant , indicating that the decrease of conductivity results from a reduction of pore size rather than from a decrease of the number of pores . 10 seconds after the test pulse voltag e [ V ] Fig . 10 . Relationship between membrane current and voltage immediately after a pulse of 1 V , 100 ms . The conductivity undergoes only little changes . The fit provides an energy barrier of only 1 . 8 kT . 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 1 . 4 voltage [ V ] . Fig . 11 . Relationship between membrane current and voltage at different times after pulses of 1 . 45 V , 2 ms . - , fitted according to Eqn . 10 . Symbol O O A Unit Resealing time a 0 2 20 10000 ms Energy barrier wo 5 . 3 6 . 6 7 . 4 8 . 4 kT Number of pores 2 2 2 2 xloS a Interval between the end of the test pulse and the beginning of the measuring pulse . Data provided by least - squares fit . the conductivity measured at low voltages is re - duced to less than 10 % of the value measured immediately after the test pulse . The mean pore radius reduces to R 5 : 0 . 5 nm ( w , = 8 . 4 kT ) . The decrease of the number of pores in the membrane has rather long time constants 7 , ( up to more than 10 s ) . It is much slower than the initial decrease of pore size ( 1 - 10 ms ) . This result is in a good agreement with the estimation of 7 , = 3 s made above . The formation of long - living small ( R 5 : 0 . 5 nm ) pores after reversible electric breakdown was reported also by other authors [ 22 , 24 ] who observed resealing times rr from sec - onds to hours . The long rr are due to an energy bamer which prevents the gradual decrease of pore size leading the pore to disappear . The existence of this barrier is obviously connected with the increase of the energy of a hydrophilic pore at small radii ( Fig . 4 ) . A reorientation has to take place as in the case of pore formation . Since 7 , depends exponentially on the height of the energy barrier , it is extremely sensitive to the composition and structure of the membrane . Consequently , variations in T , for dif - ferent membranes may be very large . Action of lysophosphatidylcholine The question about the structure of pores de - termining membrane conductivity in the course of reversible electric breakdown is repeatedly dis - cussed in the literature [ 1 , 4 - 10 ] . This paper is based on the assumption that the increase in membrane conductivity is caused by hydrophilic rather than hydrophobic pores . Hydrophobic pores play the role of short - living intermediate struc - tures only . The increase of the rate of lipid ex - change between the two monolayers observed dur - ing breakdown [ 25 ] , and long life times of pores after breakdown [ 22 , 24 ] support the hypothesis about the hydrophilic structure of the pores . An additional evidence is obtained in the present paper by means of lysophosphatidylcholine treat - ment of the membranes . After the addition of less than 0 . 5 pg / ml lysophosphatidylcholine to the membrane bathing solutions a significant acceleration of the current increase was observed when identical voltage pulses were applied to the membrane . 30 minutes after the addition of 5 pg lysophosphatidylcholine per ml the rate of current increase during pulses of 1 . 25 V was about 50 - times higher than in the untreated membrane . The acceleration of the current increase is ex - plained by a higher rate of pore creation resulting from a decrease of the energetic barrier for hydro - philic pore formation . Involvement of lysophosphatidylcholine in hy - drophilic pores is energetically favourable because the hydrophobic tail is small in comparison to the hydrophilic head so that the lipid fits to the high curvature of the monolayer in the pore . This effect was predicted ' theoretically [ 16 , 19 ] and demon - strated experimentally [ 19 ] in other systems . When the energy of small hydrophilic pores is decreased , the energetic barrier for the formation of these pores is also decreased . General aspects Let us summarize the basic statements of the presented description of reversible electric break - down in uranyl modified BLM . The increase in conductivity during and after breakdown results from the formation of hydrophilic pores . The de - fects are formed as a result of inversion of sponta - neously arising hydrophobic pores when their sizes grow up to a critical value of about 0 . 5 nm . To form hydrophilic pores an energy barrier corre - sponding to the energy of the critical - size hydro - phobic pore has to be overcome . The height of this barrier decreases by an amount proportional to the square of membrane voltage . As a result the rate of pore formation is exponentially dependent on lJ2 . The voltage applied also causes a gradual increase of the mean size of the hydrophilic pores . Ions crossing the membrane through narrow pores have to overcome an energetic barrier the height of which also depends on membrane volt - age . Consequently , the conductivity of the mem - brane is a non - linear function of voltage . Besides , the current - voltage characteristic significantly de - pends on the mean size of the pores . The voltage influences the number , the mean size , and the conductivity of the pores , thus . There are three processes with different time constants determining the changes in membrane conductivity after breakdown . Instantaneously ( < 2 ps [ 20 ] ) with the change of the applied voltage a steep conductivity decrease ( or increase ) occurs due to the nonlinear , nonohmic character of pore resistance . The number and size of pores remains constant . Then , within approximately 1 - 10 ms , the mean radius of the pores gradually decreases to R - 0 . 5 nm . The resultant small pores are long - living due to an energy barrier preventing their closing . The disappearance of pores takes seconds . The simplified theory presented is not able to describe all special aspects of the breakdown and resealing behaviour observed in the experiments [ 28 ] . Most deviations from ' ideal ' membrane prop - erties result from limitations of the model : The membrane is described as a continuous laterally homogeneous film although the number of lipids forming a pore is very small . Metastable pore formation is described by first - order kinetics . The possibility of a multistep character of the process has not been taken into account . We should stress that the presented description of pore formation is not restricted to artificial membranes . There is convincing evidence now that the reversible electric breakdown of cell mem - branes proceeds mainly through formation of hy - drophilic pores in the lipid matrix [ 22 , 25 , 26 ] . The evidence has been obtained by comparison of main features of breakdown in cell and lipid mem - branes . Although the consequences of electric breakdown observed in cell and lipid membranes may differ widely , at potential differences of a few 100 mV the electric properties are analogous [ 22 ] because of the common mechanism of pore forma - tion . In cells , however , it need not be the only mech - anism ; e . g . the Naf / K + - ATPase was found under certain cond it ions to be responsible for up to a third of the voltage - dependent conductivity in - crease in erythrocyte membranes [ 27 ] . Proteins also influence the electric properties indirectly . They stabilize cell membranes against breakdown , but becoming involved into the pore edge proteins slow down resealing . Pore formation may be facilitated at lipid - protein junctions [ 25 ] . The breakdown characteristics described ( ex - ponential dependence on U * etc . ) are not antagon - istic to the appearance in the membrane system of a critical ' breakdown voltage ' which was found in most natural objects . In turn , an exponential de - pendence of the rate of pore formation on voltage necessarily results in a sharp break in the electric behaviour of the system at a certain current den - sity [ 29 ] . This break in the electric behaviour is produced by the rapid increase of voltage drop in the solutions around the membrane . Other authors interpreted the experimental findings of this critical voltage as sudden changes in the properties of the membrane [ 1 , 10 , 26 ] and concluded that it should be caused by other mech - anisms of pore formation [ 10 ] . However , it has been shown theoretically and experimentally that qualitative changes of membrane properties at the ' breakdown voltage ' are an artifact [ 28 , 29 ] . The realization of these relations is of considerable importance for the interpretation and practical application of electroporation techniques . The dif - ferences between natural membranes and the artificial membranes employed seem to be quantitative rather than qualitative ones ; they re - sult from interaction with membrane proteins in cellular membranes as well as from influences of solvent and uranyl ions in the membranes investigated in this study . The given theory of pore formation and devel - opment gains practical relevance to understand the fundamental mechanisms of electric break - down in electrofusion and electroincorporation techniques . Appendix The theoretical model of hydrophobic interac - tion , proposed by Marcelja [ 12 ] is applied to the calculation of a , and E , . It is assumed that the water structure near the hydrophobic surface can be described by a scalar parameter q : at the interface q = qo , but in the bulk phase . rl = 0 . The energy of interaction between hydrophobic sur fa ce and water can be expressed as [ 12 ] , with integration over the volume of water in the pore . 7 is determined by the minimum of E at fixed boundary conditions . We introduced cylindric coordinates ( 2 , r , cp ) where z is the axis of symmetry of the pore . In small pores ( R e h ) one can assume that q differs from zero only inside the pore , where q = q ( r ) . Thus , from conditions of minimal Eo we get , Solving Eqn . 2 with the boundary conditions q ( R ) = qo we get q inside the pore , where I n are modified Bessel functions of n - th order : I , ( r ) = i - " J , ( ir ) . From Eqns . A1 and A3 the energy of the hydrophobic pore Eo is Determined in an analogous way the energy of interaction of an - isolated planar hydrophobic surface with water is pqi = u , , ( m ) . Accordingly , Eqn . ( A4 ) can be written in the form where Expression ( A6 ) provides the change in the effec - tive value of a , , that results from hydrophobic interaction of the pore walls . Acknowledgements We wish to thank Professor Yu . A . Chizmadz - hev , Dr . I . G . Abidor , Dr . S . I . Sukharev and Dr . E . Donath for continuous support and helpful dis - cussions . References 1 Zimmermann , U . and Vienken , J . ( 1982 ) J . Membrane Biol . 67 , 165 - 182 . 2 Bates , G . , Saunders , J . and Sowers , A . E . ( 1987 ) in Cell Fusion ( Sowers , A . E . , ed . ) , pp . 367 - 395 , Plenum Press , New York . 3 Vladimirov , Yu . A . , Putvinsky , A . V . , Puchkova , T . V . and Parnev , O . M . ( 1983 ) Stud . Biophys . 94 , 115 - 116 . 4 Petrov , A . G . , Mitov , M . D . and Derzhnansky , A . I . ( 1980 ) in Advances in Liquid Crystal Research and Applications , pp . 695 - 737 , Oxford / Budapest . 5 Pastushenko , V . F . and Petrov , A . G . ( 1984 ) in 7th School on Biophysics of Membrane Transport , pp . 70 - 91 , School Proc . Wroclaw . 6 Dimitrov , D . S . ( 1984 ) J . Membr . Biol . 78 , 53 - 60 . 7 Powell , K . T . , Derrick , E . G . and Weaver , J . C . ( 1986 ) Bio - electrochem . Bioenerg . 15 , 243 - 255 . 8 Sugar , I . P . and Neumann , E . ( 1984 ) Biophys . Chem . 19 , 21 1 - 225 . 9 Chernomordik , L . V . , Sukharev , S . I . , Abidor , I . G . , Ch i z - madzhev , Yu . A . ( 1983 ) Biochim . Biophys . Acta 736 , 203 - 213 . 10 Benz , R . , Beckers , F . and Zimmermann , U . ( 1979 ) J . Membr . Biol . 48 , 181 - 204 . 11 Israelachvili , J . N . and Pashley , R . M . ( 1984 ) J . Coll . Inter - face Sci . 98 , 500 - 514 . 12 Marcelja , S . ( 1977 ) Croat . Chem . Acta 49 . 347 - 357 . 13 Taupin . C . , Dvola i tzky , M . and Sautery . C . ( 1975 ) Bio - chemistry 14 , 4771 - 4775 . 14 Abidor , I . G . , Arakelyan , V . B . , Chernomordik , L . V . , Chiz - m ad z hev , Yu . A . , P astu s h e nko , V . F . an d Tarase vich . M . R . ( 1979 ) Bioelectrochem . Bi o e n e rg . 6 . 37 52 . 15 Pastushe nko , V . F . , Chernomordik L . V and Chizmadzhev , Yu . A . ( 1985 ) Biologicheskie M embrany ( in Russian ) 2 . 813 - 819 . 16 Markin , V . S . and Kozlov , M . M . ( 1985 ) Biologiceskie Mem - brany ( in Russian ) 2 . 205 - 223 . 17 Rand , R . P . ( 1981 ) Annu . Rev . Biophys . Bioeng . 10 , 277 - 314 . 18 Harbich , W . and Helfrich , W . ( 1979 ) Z . Naturforsch . 34a , 1063 - 1065 . 19 Chernomordik , L . V . , Kozlov , M . M . , Melikyan , G . B . , Abidor , I . G . , Markin , V . S . and Chizmadyhev , Yu . A . ( 1985 ) Blochim . Biophys . Acta 812 , 643 - 655 . 20 Chernomordik . L . V . , Sukharev , S . I . , Abidor , I . G . and Chizmadzhev , Yu . A . ( 1982 ) Bioelectrochem . Bioenerg . 9 , 149 - 155 . 21 Pastushenko , V . F . and Chizmadzhev . Yu . A . ( 1982 ) Gm . Physiol . Biophys . 1 , 43 - 52 . 22 Chernomordik , L . V . , Sukharev , S . I . . Popov . S . V . , Abidor , I . G . , Pa s tush e nko . V . F . , So k ir k o . A . V . and Chirmad z hev , Yu . A . ( 1987 ) B i ochim . Biophys . Acta 902 . 360 - - 373 . 23 Parsegian , V . A . ( 1975 ) Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 264 , 161 - 174 . 24 Kinosita , K . and Tsong , T . Y . ( 1977 ) Biochim . Biophys . Acta 471 , 227 - 242 . 25 Dr e ssler , V . , Schwis t er , K . , Haest . C . W . M . and Deutickr . B . ( 1983 ) Biochim . Biophys . Acta 732 , 304 - 307 . 26 Benz . R . and Zimmermann , U . ( 1980 ) Bioelectrochem . Bio - energ . 7 , 723 - 739 . 27 Teissi e , J . and Tsong , T . Y . ( 1980 ) J . Membr . Biol . 55 , 133 - 140 . 28 Glaser , R . W . ( 1986 ) Thesis , Humboldt - University of Berlin . G . D . R . 29 Glaser , R . W . ( 1986 ) Stud . Biophys . 116 . 77 - 86 .