Bioengineered niches that recreate physiological extracellular matrix organisation to support long - term haematopoietic stem cells Hannah Donnelly 1 , Ewan Ross 1 , Yinbo Xiao 1 , Rio Hermantara 2 , Aqeel Taqi 2 , Annie Cheng 3 , Nikhil Jain 4 , Christopher West 5 , Bruno Peault 5 , Adam G . West 2 , Manuel Salmeron - Sanchez 3 * , Matthew J . Dalby 1 * . 1 Centre for the Cellular Microenvironment , School of Molecular Biosciences , College of Medical , Veterinary and Life Sciences , Joseph Black Building , University of Glasgow , Glasgow , G12 8QQ , United Kingdom . 2 School of Cancer Sciences , Wolfson Wohl Cancer Research Centre , University of Glasgow , Glasgow , G61 1QH , United Kingdom . 3 Centre for the Cellular Microenvironment , Division of Biomedical Engineering , School of Engineering , University of Glasgow , Glasgow , G12 8QQ , United Kingdom . 4 Institute of Inflammation and Ageing , University of Birmingham , Queen Elizabeth Hospital , Birmingham , B15 2WB , United Kingdom . 5 MRC Centre for Regenerative Medicine , The University of Edinburgh , Edinburgh , EH16 4UU , United Kingdom . * Corresponding authors : matthew . dalby @ glasgow . ac . uk manuel . salmeron - sanchez @ glasgow . ac . uk Abstract Long - term reconstituting haematopoietic stem cells ( LT - HSCs ) are used to treat blood disorders via allogeneic stem cell transplantation ( alloSCT ) , to engraft and repopulate the blood system . The very low abundance of LT - HSCs and their rapid differentiation during in vitro culture hinders their clinical utility . Previous developments using stromal feeder layers , defined media cocktails , and bioengineering have enabled HSC expansion in culture , but of mostly short - term HSCs ( ST - HSC ) and progenitor populations at the expense of naïve LT - HSCs . Here , we report the creation of a bioengineered LT - HSC maintenance niche that recreates physiological extracellular matrix organisation , using soft collagen type - I hydrogels to drive nestin expression in perivascular stromal cells ( PerSCs or pericytes ) . We demonstrate that nestin , which is expressed by HSC - supportive bone marrow stromal cells , is cytoprotective and , via regulation of metabolism , is important for HIF - 1  expression in PerSCs . When CD34 + ve HSCs were added to the bioengineered niches comprising nestin / HIF - 1  expressing PerSCs , LT - HSC numbers were maintained with normal clonal ability and without media supplementation . We provide proof - of - concept that our bioengineered niches can support the survival of CRISPR edited HSCs . Successful editing of LT - HSCs ex vivo can have potential impact on the treatment of blood disorders . Haematopoietic diseases are a major healthcare burden , costing the UK economy £4B pa 1 , with leukaemia therapy typically requiring multiple courses of intensive chemotherapy , often followed by allogeneic haematopoietic stem cell ( HSC ) transplant ( alloSCT ) . AlloSCT transplantation replaces a patients hematopoietic cells through myeloablation of host bone marrow , followed by reconstitution with transplanted donor cells to restore normal immune function 2 . Given that alloSCT has been demonstrated to be an increasingly efficacious therapy for not only leukaemias but also for primary immuno - deficiencies and autoimmune conditions , there is an increasing demand for HSC transplantation and for matched donors 3 , particularly in the context of an aging and ethnically diverse population . However , we currently cannot meet the clinical demand as there is no defined and regulated expansion methodologies for bone marrow ( BM ) HSCs meaning that we are reliant on donation . Furthermore , engraftment of HSCs can be limited following alloSCT , leading to prolonged haemopoietic recovery time post - transplantation which is a major cause of transplant failure and patient mortality 2 . Long - term ( LT ) - HSCs are critically important for therapy as they engraft long - term to repopulate the blood system following alloSCT 4 . However , LT - HSCs represent just 0 . 01 - 0 . 04 % of the mononuclear bone marrow population 5 and they rapidly differentiate towards short - term ( ST ) - HSCs and progenitor cells upon their culture in vitro , which provide only temporary engraftment and myeloid / lymphoid progenitors 4 , 5 . Therefore , maintaining and , ultimately , expanding LT - HSCs ex vivo has become a major focus of research . Several culture systems , such as Dexter cultures 6 , and the use of cytokines 7 and small molecules 8 , have successfully expanded heterogenous CD34 + HSCs in vitro but with the concomitant loss of naïve LT - HSCs , producing populations with clonal heterogeneity 9 . Subsequent transplantation studies and phase I / II clinical trials ( with e . g . the small molecule SR1 ) have shown that most engrafted cells are ST - HSCs and their subsequent progenitors 10 . The inability to maintain LT - HSCs , or to support their self - renewal , in these systems is likely to be related to the lack of the many physical and functional signalling components of the highly complex bone BM microenvironment , where the expansion and differentiation of HSCs and other hematopoietic cells are regulated 11 . To maintain LT - HSCs ex vivo , there needs to be defined conditions which allow activation and proliferation without inducing differentiation to ST - HSC and subsequent committed progenitors 4 . This has proven to be difficult to achieve in a heterogenous BM cell population , especially when a single parameter , such as one signalling pathway , is targeted with small molecules 8 . Multiple cell types also interact in the BM and co - operate with each other through cell - cell adhesion and paracrine signals , such as mesenchymal stromal cells ( MSCs ) and perivascular stromal cells ( PerSCs ) 12 – 16 . Other critical cellular factors in the BM stem cell niche are C - X - C motif chemokine 12 ( CXCL12 , also known as stromal cell - derived factor 1 ( SDF1 ) ) abundant reticular ( CAR ) cells 17 , and bone - forming osteoblasts 15 , 16 . All are implicated in LT - HSC maintenance , while nestin + ve perivascular stromal cells are specifically implicated in LT - HSC self - renewal in murine studies 12 , 13 , 18 . This observation of nestin + ve stromal cells being important to LT - HSC phenotype is interesting as soft materials , such as hydrogels , have been implicated in the expression of nestin in MSCs 19 . While originally this was ascribed to a neural phenotype 19 , we hypothesise this seminal observation can be important in engineering of a niche - stromal phenotype and that stromal nestin expression will provide key niche functionalities . Indeed , the BM itself is a soft material , comprising extracellular matrix ( ECM ) 20 with a Young’s modulus of 1 – 10 4 Pa 21 , that interfaces with hard materials , such as the bone lining ( endosteal ) surfaces 22 and the arterioles and sinusoidal capillaries , to which PerSCs adhere , affecting their mechanotransductive signalling and phenotype 13 , 23 . Growth factors ( GFs ) and cytokines interact with ECM’s structural proteins , such as fibronectin ( FN ) , facilitating synergistic signalling between ECM - adhering integrin receptors and GF receptors , further influencing the stromal phenotype 24 . The BM niche also features hypoxic environments 25 . The endosteal niche was traditionally considered to be highly hypoxic , but it has been shown that the endosteal surface is perfused with a network of oxygenated arterioles 13 , 25 . By contrast , the central cavity is filled with more hypoxic sinusoids 13 , 25 . Hypoxic conditions can influence cell phenotypes , with hypoxic culture conditions reducing stromal cell proliferation and maintaining their stem cell phenotype 26 . Indeed , hypoxia inducible factor ( HIF ) expression by stromal cells is believed to be important for their HSC regulatory capacity 27 . We propose that multiple elements of t he BM’ s complexity needs be recapitulated in vitro to maintain LT - HSCs . Numerous in vitro models of the BM niche are currently in development . Some integrate multiple types of support cells 18 , 28 , 3D hydrogels 29 , 30 and scaffolds 31 , while others employ perfusion cultures 32 , and combine different approaches on organ - on - chip devices 33 . While these emerging models inform our understanding of the human BM during injury or neoplasia 33 , and of CD34 + ve HSC expansion 18 , 28 , they have their limitations . Many use murine CD34 + ve cells , despite the notable differences between human and murine HSC regulation 34 , others measure expansion based on CD34 + ve numbers rather than on the LT - HSC population , while some models are complex or hard to use or recover cells from 4 . To our knowledge , there is no reported system that focuses on enhancing human LT - HSC maintenance in a simple - to - use , practical , system . Such a system could inform on both maintenance of LT - HSCs for therapeutic use as well as providing a platform to test novel drugs or gene editing of HSCs in vitro , that can offer novel therapeutic cell based therapies to treat malignant and non - malignant blood disorders . In this study , we employ bioengineering approaches in order to direct the physiology of the stromal feeder layer and enhance its ability to support and maintain LT - HSC in culture . We provide a polymeric surface that controls FN fibril formation allowing both an adhesive and direct GF signal to stromal cells 35 , 36 , as well as a soft material to induce nestin expression to stimulate the stromal HSC - supportive phenotype 12 , 13 , 18 . Our findings show that nestin expression , linked to changes in respiration , are central to enhanced LT - HSC maintenance . We further demonstrate that our bioengineered niches have the potential to support improved survival of CRISPR edited HSCs in this clinically important population . Results Recapitulating the endosteal surface in vitro The BM niche has different putative regions with different roles in HSC regulation . The sinusoidal ( central marrow cavity ) niche is associated with sinusoidal capillaries and is more hypoxic relative to other BM regions 25 , and self - renewing HSCs are considered to reside there 14 . The endosteal surface , which is in close proximity to a large network of oxygenated arterioles , is believed to retain a more quiescent pool of HSCs 12 , 13 , 25 , 37 , 38 . The BM also has a dense ECM network , the constituents of which are exchanged between the endosteal and sinusoidal niches . At the endosteal surface , the ECM is stiffer and fibronectin ( FN ) rich . Towards the sinusoidal niches in the central BM cavity , the ECM becomes progressively less stiff and more collagen - and laminin - rich 39 , 40 . The conformation of ECM proteins , as well as their type and density , all strongly influence BM cell interactions 41 . Our previous work has shown that fibrillar FN can efficiently bind and present BMP - 2 ( bone morphogenetic protein 2 , an osteogenic GF ) to promote osteogenesis in MSCs in vitro 35 and fracture healing in vivo 36 . We have adapted these findings here to recreate the ECM properties of the more - quiescent endosteal niche . Poly ( ethyl acrylate ) ( PEA ) leads to the spontaneous unfolding of FN ( Figure 1a ) , as visualised with AFM ( Figure 1b ) . This cell - driven unfolding process leads to the exposure of key binding domains in the FN molecule 42 . Chemically similar poly ( methyl acrylate ) ( PMA ) is used as a reference polymer here , on which FN is adsorbed and maintained in a globular conformation ( Figure 1b ) . PMA behaves similarly to PEA in terms of surface wettability and stiffness 43 , but with increased adsorption of FN ( Figure 1c ) . The fluorescent detection of antibodies that recognise total FN ( Figure 1d ) , FN’s arginine - glycine - aspartic acid ( RGD ) - containing HFN7 . 1 integrin - binding domain ( Figure 1e ) , and its P5F3 GF - binding domain ( Figure 1f ) demonstrates the significantly increased availability of these FN domains when absorbed on PEA , relative to PMA . The P5F3 domain of FN in particular has high binding affinity for several GF families 44 . Here , we show that BMP - 2 binds to PEA - FN ( Figure 1g ) . Although similar amounts of BMP - 2 also bind to PMA , our previous work has shown that BMP - 2 does not co - localise with FN on PMA , leading to its faster release 35 , 36 . Thus , in this study , we use PEA to present FN and BMP - 2 to recreate the milieu of the endosteal surface that supports HSC quiescence ( maintenance ) in our BM model . Figure 1 | Control of the protein interface using acrylate polymers . a , Schematic of the PEA system . b , AFM images showing fibronectin ( FN ) spontaneously forms networks on PEA surfaces but not on PMA . c , Surface density of FN on surfaces coated with 20  g / mL solution of PEA and PMA , showing that more FN adsorbs to PMA ( n = 7 ) . The availability of d , total FN ; e , FN HFN7 . 1 domain ( RGD - binding ) ; and f , P5F3 domain ( growth factor ( GF ) - binding ) , was assessed using in - cell western analysis . Data shows the increased availability of RGD - and GF - binding FN domains on PEA . g , Surface density of BMP - 2 on PEA - FN and PMA - FN , as assessed by ELISA . 50 ng / mL of BMP - 2 was loaded onto the surface , leading to ~ 8 ng / cm 2 of BMP - 2 sequestered on both PEA and PMA ( d - g , n = 3 ) . c – g , Graphs show mean ± SEM , * = p < 0 . 05 , * * * = p < 0 . 001 determined by Mann - Whitney t - test , n = 3 material replicates . Control of PerSC phenotype The stromal population of the BM niche is highly heterogeneous 11 . Reported expression of markers , such as nestin , neural - glial antigen 2 ( NG - 2 ) and leptin receptor ( LepR ) , indicate that perivascular and mesenchymal stromal cells have a phenotype that supports HSC regulation 12 – 14 . Here , we focus on the LT - HSC regulating perivascular stromal cells that line the endosteal arterioles 12 , 13 , 18 , and on nestin . Nestin is a cytoskeletal intermediate filament ( IF ) protein traditionally associated with neural progenitor cells 45 . In vivo murine BM studies have shown that nestin + ve PerSCs express high levels of factors involved in HSC maintenance , such as CXCL12 and stem cell factor ( SCF ) 38 . Previous seminal work has also shown that stromal cells express nestin in response to soft materials 19 . We therefore used low - stiffness collagen hydrogels , a major constituent of the BM ECM 39 , to study the role of nestin expression in human PerSCs and to investigate how this influences their interactions with HSCs in vitro . The collagen gels , with a Young’s modulus of ~ 80 Pa to mimic BM HSC niche stiffness 21 , were overlayed onto PerSCs cultured on PEA / FN / BMP - 2 surfaces ( Figure 2a , b ) . We also used PEA / FN / BMP - 2 with a lowered oxygen tension ( 1 % O 2 , hypoxia ) , since hypoxia is considered to be important for maintaining the stromal HSC supporting phenotype in the BM environment 25 ( Figure 2a ) . We observed in our bioengineered PEA / FN / BMP - 2 niches with hydrogels ( denoted as + gel ) that nestin was significantly upregulated by day 7 in PerSCs ( Figure 2c ) , with enhanced nestin expression continuing to day 14 ( supplementary Figure 1a ) . By contrast , nestin was expressed at a basal level in PEA / FN / BMP - 2 niches without hydrogels ( denoted as - gel ) , in the PEA / FN / BMP - 2 hypoxic niches and in PMA / FN / BMP - 2 niches with and without gels ( supplemetary Figure 1a ) . We used PerSCs on glass coverslips as a culture control since they do not attach to highly hydrophobic PEA without a protein interface ( Fig 2c , d , e and f ) . Thus , nestin expression was induced only when the gel was included on PEA - unfolded FN . Nestin is a type IV IF protein incapable of self - polymerisation . It , therefore , co - polymerises with other type II and IV IFs 45 . We therefore examined vimentin expression , as an IF protein expressed in mesenchymal - lineage cells , and found no significant differences in vimentin expression or its morphology ( Figure 2d ) . Next , PerSCs were treated with brefeldin A for the final 24h of culture to prevent protein export and SCF levels were monitored by immunofluorescence . SCF production correlated with the observed increase in nestin expression in PEA + gel niches ( Figure 2e , supplementary figure 1b ) . CXCL12 expression was also detected in PerSCs on all substrates , with no significant differences between the bioengineered models ( supplementary Figure 1c ) . Phenotypic analysis by flow cytometry of the different environments showed that PerSCs in + gel niches expressed important stromal niche markers CD90 , NG2 , CD146 and CD51 , but that expression was lost in - gel niches 13 , 16 , 18 ( Figure 2f ) . Interestingly , the introduction of hypoxia also led to expression of these markers , and also increased expression of LepR . LepR is a marker of stromal cells that line hypoxic sinusoids , and supports our attempt to recreate an arteriolar / endosteal niche in which stromal cells are reported to be nestin + ve / LepR - ve 12 , 14 , 38 ( Figure 2f ) . Next , we performed RNA - seq on PerSCs cultured in the PEA / FN / BMP - 2 - gel , + gel and hypoxic niches . RNA - seq identified transcripts related to niche ( Figure 2g ) or regulation of differentiation ( Figure 2h ) . Importantly , cells from the + gel niche had an up - regulation of niche genes and a concomitant down - regulation of differentiation genes , compared to control and other conditions ( - gel and hypoxia ) ( Figure 2g , h ) . The known functions of these genes are listed in supplementary Tables 1 & 2 . Figure 2 | Investigating bioengineered niches that support BM stromal phenotypes . a , Schematic of niche model set - up . b , Young’s modulus of collagen type I gels used in + gel niches . I - iii represent 3 independent batches of gels formulated . The average Young’s modulus was 78 . 8 Pa ; no statistical significance was observed , as determined by one - way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison . c , Representative images of changes in nestin expression evaluated by immunofluorescence at day 7 . S cale bar is 100 μm , magenta = nestin , cyan = DAPI . D , Representative images of vimentin expression , as evaluated by immunofluorescence microscopy at day 7 , shows no significant difference between models . , scale bar is 100 μm , magenta = vimentin , cyan = DAPI . e , SCF production in bioengineered models , in which PerSCs were cultured for 14 days , with brefeldin A added for the final 24h to inhibit intracellular protein transport . Graphs in c - e show mean integrated intensity of marker as fold change to glass control ; - gel = blue , + gel = purple , hypoxia = grey . Each point represents an individual field . N = 3 - 4 material replicates , for 3 independent experiments with different donor cells ( each donor represented by a different shape ) , * = p < 0 . 05 , ns = non - significant , determined by one - way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison test . f , Assessment of PerSC phenotype after 14 days culture in niche models . Heatmap shows fold change over control ( glass ) of median fluorescent values obtained by flow cytometry from 6 pooled material replicates from 3 independent experiments with different donor cells . At least 5000 cells were collected per sample . g and h , RNA - seq was performed on PerSCs from niche models after 7 days and fold changes in gene expression relative to glass control are shown as a heatmap . N = 6 pooled material replicates from 1 donor . Using principal component analysis ( PCA ) , the - gel / + gel / hypoxic conditions were clearly distinguishable from each other by RNA - seq ( Supplementary Figure 2a ) . Analysis of significant gene changes revealed that most unique changes occurred in the + gel niche , and that the + gel and hypoxic models had more changes in common , relative to the - gel model ( Figure 3a ) . Gene ontology ( GO ) clustering analysis indicates that a range of changes occurred in response to the different engineered ECM environments ( - gel / + gel ) . Changes in integrins , adhesion molecules , ECM interactions , cytoskeleton and to the BMP - 2 milieu , were evident in response to these ECM changes , as were changes to members of the canonical BMP signalling family , including TGF  s and SMADs ( Figure 3b ) . Clustering analysis of the four top networks of actin cytoskeleton , cell adhesion and ECM , illustrated that in the + gel niches , the PerSCs had decreased levels of cytoskeletal transcripts and increased levels of cell adhesion and ECM transcripts , compared to the - gel models ( Figure 3c ) . The hypoxic niche , however , both up - regulated and down - regulated ECM transcripts , and strongly repressed adhesion and actin related transcripts , relative to the other models ( Figure 3c ) . Another feature of the naïve stromal stem cell phenotype is the ability to modulate the immune system 46 . We therefore compared the expression profiles of inflammation - related marker genes across the three different niches . Several markers up - regulated in PerSCs in the + gel niche , compared to the - gel model , are implicated in immunomodulatory properties of the stromal phenotype , including interleukin 6 ( IL - 6 ) 47 , prostaglandin - endoperoxide synthase 2 ( PTGS2 ) , prostaglandin E2 receptor 2 ( PTGER2 ) 48 , CD44 , tumour necrosis factor  - induced protein 3 ( TNFAIP3 ) 49 and ephrin type - A receptor 2 ( EPHA2 ) 50 ( Figure 3d ) . PerSCs in the hypoxic and - gel models showed reduced expression of these immunomodulatory transcripts , with little difference between them , whereas + gel niches led to enhanced expression of these transcripts when compared to both - gel and hypoxic niches ( Figure 3d ) . Together , these findings help demonstrate that a naïve perivascular stromal cell phenotype is retained in the + gel niches . Figure 3 | Investigating bioengineered niches that support PerSC phenotype . RNA - seq was performed on PerSCs isolated from the bioengineered models at day 7 . a , Venn plot shows differentially expressed genes ( based on passing a threshold of adjusted p - value < 0 . 05 and log2 fold change > 1 ) . b , GO enrichment analysis for differentially expressed transcripts based on false discovery rate ( FDR ) ≤0 . 05 linked to pathways involved in ECM , cell adhesion and cytoskeleton . Results indicate that the cells differentially re - organise ECM relevant gene expression in response to the + gel niche or hypoxic environments . Differentially expressed genes in each of these pathways were extracted and z - scored changes are shown in the heatmaps . c , Expression profiles of genes involved in ECM , cell adhesion and cytoskeleton . In the hypoxic model , ECM - related transcripts are increased while adhesion - and cytoskeleton - related transcripts are decreased . In the + gel niche , ECM and adhesion related transcripts are more subtly increased while cytoskeleton transcripts are decreased . d , Immunomodulatory transcript expression , showing similar expression profiles in the hypoxic and - gel models , and up - regulated transcripts in the + gel niches . For RNA - seq , n = 3 6 pooled material replicates from 1 donor . Metabolic regulation in the BM niche In order to elucidate further the role of hypoxia in the BM niche , we investigated the role of hypoxia and stiffness on stromal niche phenotypes by using our modular platform to compare the effects of hypoxia in our bioengineered models . HIF1  is a master regulator of metabolism . It regulates both glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation , including anaerobic glycolysis 51 . As such , we evaluated the expression pattern of HIF1  in PerSCs in our bioengineered niches after 3 days of culture . HIF1  is constitutively produced but is hydroxylated in normoxia that inhibits its transcriptional activity and targets it for ubiquitination and degradation in most cells 51 . However , in hypoxia , it becomes stable , translocates to the nucleus and activates the transcription of hypoxia - responsive genes . We , therefore , chose to investigate nuclear expression of HIF1  ( Figure 4a ) . By this measure , all three bioengineered models led to increased nuclear expression of HIF1  protein in PerSCs . Interestingly , however , cells in the + gel niches displayed significantly more nuclear HIF1  , expression compared to the - gel and hypoxic models ; the + gel niche also supported PerSCs with the most niche - like phenotype ( Figure 2c - h ) . Although some hypoxic response genes are up - regulated in PerSCs in the + gel niches ( supplementary Figure 2c ) , our investigation of HIF1  downstream targets , such as of VEGF ( Figure 4b ) , lactate and lactate dehydrogenase ( LDH ) ( supplementary Figure 3 ) , did not reveal an increase in expression . To determine if the PerSCs in the + gel niches were experiencing low oxygen tension , we next used pimonidazole , a hypoxia probe . The probe revealed that while PerSCs cultured in the low oxygen tension models are clearly hypoxic , cells in the - gel models and + gel niches were not ( Figure 4c ) . This indicates that PerSCs in the + gel niche that were expressing nuclear HIF1  were not doing so in response to lowered oxygen tension . To identify changes in the metabolism of PerSCs in the niche models , liquid chromatography - mass spectrometry ( LC - MS ) was performed to identify alterations in the metabolome at 7 and 14 days of culture . PCA of all metabolites demonstrated that all three culture conditions clustered with no overlap ( Figure 4d ) . Then , focussing only on glycolysis and TCA cycle metabolites ( Figure 4e ) , revealed an expected increase in clusters of glycolytic metabolites in the hypoxic model , as well as the upregulation of TCA - associated metabolites in the - gel model , as would be expected with active differentiation 52 . Interestingly , for the + gel niche , we observed a general down - regulation of glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation rather than an increase in glycolysis ( Figure 4e ) . HIF activity in non - hypoxic conditions is a distinguishing feature of the Warburg effect , in which cancer cells switch to rely on oxidative glycolysis to generate energy 53 . The metabolic profile of PerSCs cultured in the + gel niche appears to be more quiescent than glycolytic , however . This finding was confirmed by tracing the conversion of C 13 labelled glucose using LC - MS in PerSCs ( Figure 4f ) . In the + gel niches , PerSCs still retained significantly more labelled glucose compared to other conditions , indicative of lowered respiration . In the - gel models , significantly less glucose was detected at the end of the analysis , and it was not reduced to pyruvate or lactate but there was an increase in ATP levels , indicative of more normal respiration ( Figure 4e ) . In hypoxic models , significant levels of C 13 labelled pyruvate and lactate remained in the PerSCs , indicative of anaerobic respiration , as would be expected 53 . Taken together , these observations indicate that PerSCs in the + gel niche are not responding as if in hypoxic conditions , but are attenuating respiration . This is despite the increased expression and prolonged nuclear presence of HIF1  , which may be acting in a BM niche - specific role . Figure 4 | Bioengineered niches promote a hypoxic - like metabolic phenotype . a , Nuclear HIF1  levels were compared at day 3 by immunofluorescence microscopy . HIF1  levels increased in cells in all models , and significantly increased in + gel niches . Representative images are shown , magenta = HIF1  , white shows nuclei outline based on DAPI staining , scale bar = 20 µm . Graph shows means from 3 material replicates for 3 independent experiments with different donor cells . Each individual point represents 1 nuclei measurement with shape corresponding to mean . b , HIF1  downstream analysis , in which VEGF was measured from cell supernatant by ELISA on day 7 and 14 , graph shows mean + SEM for 3 material replicates . c , Hypoxia was indicated when PerSCs were cultured in hypoxic but not in the + gel niches . Integrated intensity of hypoxyprobe for immunofluorescence images shown on graph , bar is mean ±SEM , each point represents 1x image field / number nuclei , n = 4 material replicates . d , LC - MS metabolome analysis . Principal component analysis ( PCA ) of PEA / FN / BMP - 2 models . PerSCs were cultured for 7 and 14 days . All detectable metabolites were subject to PCA . Each point represents 1 replicate ( n = 3 or 4 material replicates ) . The PCA plot shows distinct clustering based on model and time point . PC1 separates both time points , whereas PC2 separates model condition . Hypoxic and + gel niches showed similar clustering in PC1 . e , Glycolytic and TCA cycle metabolite profile in the bioengineered models . Heatmap shows group averages of log 10 transformed peak intensities Ward clustered of each replicate at 7 and 14 days from LC - MS . Glycolysis related metabolites show increased abundance in PEA / FN / BMP - 2 hypoxic conditions at 7 and 14 days , whereas TCA cycle metabolites are increased in - gel conditions at 7 and 14 days . The + gel niches show a similar down regulation of TCA cycle - associated metabolites as for hypoxic samples , but glycolysis associated metabolites are also down - regulated . N = 3 for + gel 7 d , n = 4 for all other samples . f , PerSCs were seeded for 7 days in the bioengineered models in the presence of 13 C 6 - glucose for 72h and LC - MS was then used to measure the conversion and abundance of 13 C 6 - labelled metabolites in the glycolysis pathway . Graphs show a fold change relative to 13 C 6 - labelled metabolites in PerSCs cultured in the - gel model . Graphs show means ± SEM , n = 4 material replicates . All statistics by one - way ANOVA with Tukey multiple comparisons test * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 001 , * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . Nestin is required for metabolic regulation in niches Little is known about why nestin is highly expressed in BM niche stromal cells . We have already shown that while nestin levels are increased in + gel niches ( Figure 2c ) , IFs ( as measured using vimentin ) are not ( Figure 2d ) . To confirm this observation , we assessed the incorporation of nestin into IF networks using an antibody against p ( Thr316 ) - nestin . This site , when phosphorylated , drives disassembly of nestin from IF fibres 54 . We observed a significant up regulation of p ( Thr316 ) nestin in PerSCs in the + gel niche , indicating that not all nestin is incorporated into the cytoskeleton . This suggests that the function of nestin in stromal cells in our engineered BM niche does not entirely depend on its structural involvement in the cytoskeleton ( Figure 5a ) . Because of our HIF1  observation and because soluble nestin has been linked to cytoprotection in other cell types 54 – 56 , we next investigated two possibilities : ( 1 ) that nestin expression is linked to the HIF1  positive PerSC phenotype , and ( 2 ) that nestin is linked to cytoprotection . Linking PerSC nestin expression and cytoprotection is perhaps important as naïve stromal cells are linked to increased caspase expression ( involved in regulation of apoptosis ) , and enhanced killability 57 and so perhaps these cells need to be protected by their niche . We further note that enhanced killability has been linked to better immunosuppressive outcomes when using stromal cells in transplant procedures 57 . To address these questions , nestin expression was reduced by siRNA knock - down in PerSCs to test links between HIF1  expression and cytoprotective effects ( Figure 5b ) . Interestingly , in the + gel niche , nestin knock - down led to a concomitant decrease in the levels of nuclear - localised HIF1  , demonstrating a link between nestin and HIF1  ( Figure 5c ) . We note that a recent study indicated that nestin binds to HIF1  to protect it from degradation and showed nestin knockdown leads to loss of HIF1  , as we show here 58 . To evaluate if this link was involved in cytoprotection , oxidative stress and apoptosis was induced in PerSCs by exposure to hydrogen peroxide and changes in viability measured using propidium iodide ( PI ) uptake . In the + gel niches , where PerSCs express high levels of nestin , cell death in response to oxidative stress was low ( Figure 5d ) . Reducing nestin by siRNA knock - down resulted in an increased sensitivity to oxidative stress , with a significant increase in PI positive cells observed , even for cells in + gel niches ( Figure 5e ; note that all conditions are with H 2 O 2 ) . These results align with reports on the effects of oxidative stress on neuronal progenitors , where nestin positive cells were more resistant to oxidative stress driven by H 2 O 2 - induced apoptosis 56 . Figure 5 | Nestin is cytoprotective . a , Immunofluorescent detection of nestin phosphorylation at Th ( 316 ) indicates it is not incorporated into intermediate filament networks , but is instead soluble . Graph is mean ±SEM , each point represents 1ximage field / number nuclei , n = 4 material replicates . b , siRNA knock - down of nestin in PerSCs was confirmed using immunofluorescence , n = 3 material replicates , graph shows mean ±SEM . c , siRNA knock - down of nestin leads to the loss of activated HIF1  co - localisation to PerSC nuclei in + gel niches ; no effect on HIF1  localisation was observed in hypoxia or - gel models ( where PerSCs were nestin low / negative ) . N = 4 material replicates from 3 independent experiments with different donor cells . Scr = scrambled siRNA ( control ) , lipo = lipofectamine only ( control ) . d , Nestin protects from oxidative stress . PerSCs in the bioengineered models were treated with H 2 O 2 to mimic oxidative stress . N = 3 material replicates , representative images shown , scale bar is 100 µm . e , siRNA knock - down of nestin in PerSCs and susceptibility to oxidative stress was assessed . In the + gel niches , nestin knockdown led to similar levels of cell death as in the - gel niches ( nestin low / negative systems ) . All conditions were + H 2 O 2 , dead CTRL + 10 mM H 2 O 2 . N = 4 material replicates . D and e measured by the % of propidium iodide ( PI ) positive cells vs total Hoechst stained nuclei . Statistics by one - way ANOVA with Tukey multiple comparisons * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 005 , * * * p < 0 . 0005 , * * * * p < 0 . 0001 , ns = non - significant . Engineered Niches Maintain LT - HSCs ex vivo . Next , we investigated whether our bioengineered niches could maintain LT - HSCs . Typically , HSC expansion media contains a cocktail of GFs . Here , we used a defined basic media ( 0 % HSC Media ; see Methods ) , which we supplemented with three necessary GFs ( Flt3L ( FMS like tyrosine kinase 3 ligand , 50 ng / mL ) ; SCF ( 20 ng / mL ) ; and TPO ( 25 ng / mL ) ) to make a standardised HSC media ( called 100 % HSC media ) . When HSCs were cultured in 100 % media in standard tissue culture well plates , we refer to it as the ‘gold standard’ condition . To test the niche conditions on maintenance of the CD34 + ve / CD38 - ve HSC population , PerSCs were first cultured in the bioengineered models for 14 days in stromal cell media ( see Methods ) . CD34 + ve HSCs from human bone marrow were then added to the niches when the media was changed to either 0 % HSC media , or 100 % HSC media . The cells were co - cultured for a further 5 days ( Figure 6a ) , and then released with collagenase for flow cytometry analysis . Our strategy ( as shown in Figure 6b ) excluded PerSCs from this analysis , by gating on CD45 positive cells and then defining and quantifying the CD34 + ve / CD38 - ve population . This population is commonly referred to as HSCs , but , in fact , contains both LT and ST - HSC populations . Gold - standard culture conditions showed a 6 - fold increase in CD34 + ve / CD38 - ve cell numbers after 5 days of culture in the bioengineered models ( Figure 6c ) . When CD34 + ve HSCs were co - cultured with PerSCs in - gel models , they expanded to a similar extent in both 0 % and 100 % HSC media , indicating that the PerSCs could support HSC expansion ( Figure 6c ) . However , when CD34 + ve HSCs were co - cultured with PerSCs in hypoxic models or in the + gel niches , no expansion was observed in the CD34 + ve / CD38 - ve population ( Figure 6c ) . As previously noted , LT - HSCs are inherently quiescent , making the expansion of this population , without differentiation , difficult 4 . Thus , strategies that robustly maintain LT - HSC functional properties in vitro are still unresolved . We therefore investigated if our bioengineered niches could maintain LT - HSC numbers rather than just a CD34 + ve / CD38 - ve heterogenous population . To enumerate LT - HSCs , long - term culture - initiating cell ( LTC - IC ) assays were performed to identify the number of naïve LT - HSCs within a CD34 + mixed population . In this assay , defined culture conditions ( feeder layers and media ) are used in which ST - HSCs and progenitors die over 6 weeks . The potency of the remaining LT - HSCs was then tested using a colony forming unit assay ( CFUs ) , in which the differentiation potential of individual LT - HSCs were tested in methylcellulose cultures for a further 7 days . BM CD34 + ve cells were co - cultured in engineered niches , and subsequently FACS sorted for CD45 + ve / Lin - ve / CD34 + ve markers to remove committed progenitors and PerSCs ( supplementary Figure 5a ) . In the - gel condition with 0 % or 100 % HSC media , increased numbers of CD34 + ve / CD38 - ve HSCs were observed compared to the starting population ( i . e . expansion ) ( Figure 6c ) ; however , fewer LT - HSCs were preserved compared to the gold - standard conditions ( Figure 6d ) . In the + gel niches with 100 % HSC media , no CD34 + ve / CD38 - ve expansion was noted ( Figure 6c ) and LT - HSC numbers were reduced demonstrating phenotypic drift ( Figure 6d ) . Importantly , the + gel niche with 0 % HSC media maintained both total CD34 + ve / CD38 - ve cell numbers ( Figure 6c ) and there was an increase in LTC - IC numbers as shown by an increase in CFUs ( Figure 6d ) . This indicates that the CD34 + ve / CD38 - ve expansion observed in the gold standard condition must have been in the ST - HSC / progenitor population as it did not lead to an increased number of LT - HSCs compared to + gel 0 % ( Figure 6c & d ) . It is noteworthy that the subsequent differentiation profile of LT - HSCs from the + gel niche with 0 % HSC media mimics that of the gold standard cultures , with no loss of lineage commitment , as indicated by the ability to reconstitute all blood cell progenitors ( Figure 6e , supplementary Figure 5b ) . To demonstrate the therapeutic potential of our engineered niches , we also investigated their ability to support CRISPR edited HSCs . The cellular repair of CRISPR - mediated double - strand DNA breaks in dividing cells primarily occurs via canonical non - homologous end - joining ( C - NHEJ ) or alternative end - joining processes like microhomology - mediated end - joining ( MMEJ ) . It has previously been shown that quiescent LT - HSCs can be CRISPR edited primarily via C - NHEJ , while retaining engraftment potential 59 . As a proof of concept , we targeted the neutral AAVS1 ( PPP1R12C intron 1 ) locus ( Figure 6f ) , which can be edited in HSCs without loss of phenotype 59 . Using a NHEJ CRISPR strategy , we transfected primary human CD34 + ve BM cells with ribonuclear protein ( RNP ) complexes of Cas9 and AAVS1 _ A1 single guide RNA ( sgRNA ) and seeded the cells into our bioengineered niches immediately after transfection . We then assessed if the different niche microenvironments could improve the survival of CRISPR edited cells by assessing the fractions of edited HSCs after standard culture , or in the - gel and + gel niches , with either 100 % or 0 % HSC media . As expected , mutagenesis levels were low in these primary human HSCs . We achieved just  5 - 6 % mutagenesis in 100 % HSC media (  2 % in 0 % HSC media ) in both standard and - gel conditions ( Figure 6g ) . However , notably higher levels of CRISPR edited HSCs were retained in the + gel niche , in both 100 % and 0 % HSC media conditions at ~ 10 % and ~ 9 % respectively ( Figure 6g ) . Figure 6 | Engineered niches support LT - HSC maintenance and CRISPR editing . a , Schematic of the experimental set up . b , Representative gating strategy used for HSC identification . Forward ( FSC - A ) versus side scatter area ( SSC - A ) plots were used to identify viable cells ; FSC - A versus FSC width ( FSC - W ) plots were used to identify single cells . A gate was added on CD45 + ve cells to exclude any PerSCs and 3 gates were used to identify CD34 + ve / CD38 - - ve , CD34 + ve / CD38 + ve and CD34 - ve / CD38 + ve populations . The CD34 + ve / CD34 - ve population represents both LT - and ST - HSCs , whereas the CD34 + ve / CD38 + ve and CD34 - ve / CD38 + ve populations represent haematopoietic stem and progenitor cells and committed progenitors , respectively . c , Fold change in CD34 + ve / CD38 - ve cell number after 5 days of culture in 100 % or 0 % HSC media relative to the number at day 0 . Each data point = 1 donor cell line from 3 independent experiments ( with 6 pooled material replicates / donor ) . d , Total number of colonies maintained in the bioengineered models . CD34 + ve cells were harvested from niche models after 5 days co - culture in 0 % or 100 % HSC media . Sorted CD34 + ve cells were then added to LTC - IC assays for 6 weeks , and the resulting cells assessed using a CFU differential assay . Total colony numbers were counted and are represented as CFUs per 1 x 10 4 CD34 + ve cells as fold change to control = ‘gold standard’ , HSC only in 100 % media without PerSCs . Statistics by one - way ANOVA with Tukey multiple comparisons , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 005 , * * * p < 0 . 0005 , * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . , cells from 2 donors ( donor 1 = circles , donor 2 = squares ) . e , Lineage specification state of CFUs from bioengineered models were identified and enumerated ; Colony forming unit ( CFU ) - granulocyte , erythrocyte , macrophage , megakaryocyte ( - GEMM ) , - macrophage ( - M ) , - granulocyte , macrophage ( - GM ) , - granulocyte ( - G ) , - erythroid ( - E ) , burst forming unit - erythroid ( BFU - E ) . f , Schematic showing the AAVS1 _ A1 CRISPR target site at the PPP1R12C gene locus . g , Increased retention of AAVS1 CRISPR edited HSCs following culture in the + gel niches with 100 % or 0 % media , relative to culture in gold standard or - gel conditions . The heatmap shows the level of % AAVS1 mutagenesis , n = 2 donors , 3 pooled material replicates . Discussion In this study we set out to show that a combination of materials could be used to organise the ECM , GF presentation and elastic environment of a putative BM niche . In vivo , the BM endosteum is densely perfused with a network of thin - walled arterioles 13 , 25 . These arterioles are closely associated with nestin + ve PerSCs 12 , 13 , 18 , and HSCs isolated from this area show greater engraftment potential than their central marrow ( sinusoidal ) counterparts 60 . Here , we report a first attempt to bioengineer this endosteal / arteriolar region of the BM niche , by promoting a niche - like phenotype in PerSCs that can support and maintain LT - HSCs , the HSC population that resembles those isolated from this niche region in vivo . The + gel niche model developed here supports the expression of nestin in PerSCs , a phenotype that has been well - reported to be critical for the stromal - HSC supportive phenotype in vivo 12 , 13 , 18 , 28 and has been shown to have increased expression in stromal cells in soft environments 19 . Indeed , expression of nestin by PerSCs correlates with increased expression of other important niche factors , such as HSC maintaining cytokines , decreased oxidative phosphorylation / respiration 38 , 61 , and increased cytoprotection 54 – 56 . We demonstrate that nestin - linked changes in PerSC respiration were central to the LT - HSC supportive phenotype . Nestin was further implicated in the persistent expression of nuclear HIF1  in the absence of low oxygen tension and without changes in the expression of hypoxia - signalling targets . This has parallels to cancer cells using HIF metabolism without hypoxia in the Warburg effect 53 . This new approach towards LT - HSC maintenance is important , as most studies focus on expansion of the total heterogenous HSC population in vitro , and do not separate naïve LT - HSCs from other committed progenitor populations 10 , 29 , 31 . Currently , expansion of LT - HSCs and the mechanisms required remain elusive . It is likely that clinically relevant expansions ( e . g . 1 donor to multiple recipients ) will require genetic manipulations / perturbation as naturally quiescent LT - HSCs will be required to enter the cell cycle and proliferate , then return to the resting state 62 . Until these fundamental principles of LT - HSC dynamics are understood and can be harnessed , systems that focus on their effective maintenance are required to help understand these dynamics and to improve therapeutic applications such as drug development , alloSCT or gene editing . Here , our data suggests that the use of common exogenous GF supplementation in combination with these niche co - cultures provides excessive stimulation to the HSC population and results in the loss of quiescence . However , by manipulating microenvironments to tune stromal cell physiology , LT - HSCs can be maintained in vitro without any exogenous supplementation . The CFU data ( Figure 6d ) indicates that the CD34 + ve / CD38 - ve expansion ( Figure 6c ) observed in the gold standard condition must have been in the ST - HSC / progenitor population , as it did not lead to an increase in the number of CFUs ( i . e . LT - HSCs ) , in fact , CFUs decreased compared to culture in the + gel niche . As such , we suggest that the use of the optimised + gel niche avoids the unwanted ST - HSC / progenitor expansion that comes with the concomitant sacrifice of LT - HSC numbers . Furthermore , once we had established a LT - HSC maintenance niche and investigated a role for nestin in PerSC support phenotype , we went on to investigate a potential use for the niches in supporting CRISPR editing . Using a NHEJ - based CRISPR approach that facilitates the targeting of quiescent cells , such as LT - HSCs 59 , we demonstrated that our bioengineered niches improve the survival of CRISPR edited HSCs . This is important because of the very low abundance of LT - HSCs and shows that our niches can maintain these cells . For such approaches to be used successfully to gene edit HSCs for therapeutic purposes , CRISPR editing rates in LT - HSCs , and LT - HSC survival , will need to be as high as possible to ensure that enough of the edited population can engraft and rebuild the blood system . Our study has limitations in that it uses a natural hydrogel , collagen . Changing to use of a synthetic hydrogel would have advantages in increased reproducibility / control of viscoelasticity , degradability and biological milieu 63 . Further , while we advocate an approach of LT - HSC maintenance , the ability to robustly expand this population is deeply alluring . In the BM niche , the LT - HSCs are produced or , perhaps , dedifferentiated from ST - HSCs / progenitor cells 62 . Looking to bioengineer the sinusoidal niche , with different ECM constiuents 39 , 40 , different stromal support 13 and different oxygen tension 25 , could thus be interesting and rewarding . Acknowledgements We thank Dr Gillian Higgins for provision of adipose tissue to isolate PerSCs and Dr Mark Sprott for help with ethyl acrylate synthesis . We thank Carol - Anne Smith for technical assistance . We also thank the University of Glasgow Polyomics Facility , particularly Dr Karl Burgess and Dr Gavin Blackburn . This work was supported by BBSRC grant BB / N018419 / 1 , EPSRC grant EP / P001114 / 1 , MRC grant MR / R005567 / 1 and the Carnegie Trust grant number RIG009892 . Methods Preparation of materials and ECM interfaces Polymer sheets were obtained by radical polymerization of a solution of either MA ( methyl acrylate ) or EA ( ethyl acrylate ) ( Sigma - Aldrich , UK ) , using 1 and 0 . 35 weight percent benzoin ( 98 % pure ; Scharlau ) as the photoinitiator . Polymerization carried out up to limiting conversion . After polymerization , low molecular mass substances extracted by drying under vacuum to constant weight . PMA and PEA were dissolved in toluene at a concentration of 6 % or 9 % and 2 . 5 % or 12 % dependent on batch . Spin casting was performed on glass coverslips at 2000 rpm for 30 s . Samples dried under vacuum at 60°C for 2 h , and sterilised under UV light for 30 min before use 35 . FN from human plasma ( Sigma - Aldrich , F2006 ) was adsorbed from solutions of 20 µg / ml for 1 h a room temperature ( RT ) then washed thrice with phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) . For GF adsorption , BMP - 2 ( 50 ng / ml , ; Sigma - Aldrich , H4791 ) in PBS was used for 2 h at RT . Finally , samples were rinsed in PBS to eliminate non - adsorbed protein . Atomic force microscopy FN was prepared in PBS ( 20 µg / ml ) and a 200 µl droplet placed on surface of PEA and PMA coated coverslips . The protein was adsorbed for 10 min and remaining liquid removed from the surface . Surfaces were then washed twice in PBS , once with deionised water and then dried under a stream of nitrogen before imaging . A JPK Nanowizard 4 ( JPK Instruments ) was used for imaging in tapping mode , using antimony - doped Si cantilevers with a nominal resonant frequency of 75 kHz ( MPP - 21 220 , Bruker ) . The phase signal was set to 0 at a frequency 5 - 10 % lower than the resonant frequency . Height and phase images were acquired from each scan , the JPK data processing software version 5 was used for image analysis . FN adsorption assays To quantify amount of FN adsorbed onto PEA or PMA surfaces substrates were coated with 20 µg / ml FN / PBS solution for 1 h , aspirate was collected and FN quantified using the Pierce ™ BCA Protein Assay Kit ( Thermo Fisher , UK ) . Quantitative immunofluorescence assays were carried out using the LI - COR in - cell western ™ platform . FN ( 20 µg / ml ) was adorbed as previously described , samples were washed with PBS , blocked with 1 % milk protein in PBS , and incubated with primary antibodies for total FN ( polyclonal rabbit , Sigma Aldrich ) , HFN7 . 1 ( monoclonal mouse , Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank , USA ) , and P5F3 ( monoclonal mouse , Santa Cruz Biotechnology , sc - 18827 ) for 2 h . Substrates were washed 5x 0 . 5 % Tween20 in PBS ( PBST ) , followed by incubation o / n at 4 o C with LI - COR secondary antibodies ( IRDye 800CW / 700CW anti - rabbit / mouse secondary antibody , LI - COR , UK ) . Samples were washed 5x with PBST , followed by a final wash in PBS and dried before imaging on LI - COR Sa Odyssey scanner . BMP - 2 adsorption For quantification of BMP - 2 adsorption , ( 50 ng / ml ) BMP - 2 solution was added to FN coated polymers and after 2 h incubation solution was aspirated and collected in Protein LoBind Tubes ( Eppendorf ™ ) . Enzyme - linked immunosorbent assays ( ELISA ) was then carried out as per manufacturer’s instructions ( R & D Systems , BMP - 2 DuoSet ELISA kit , DY355 ) . Briefly , ELISA plates were coated with capture antibody overnight , then blocked for 1 h with BSA . Standards , original solution , original solution at 20x dilution and sample aspirates were then added to the plate , and bound BMP - 2 was detected with biotinylated anti - human BMP - 2 . Streptavidin - HRP was added to plates for 20 min in the dark , followed by substrate solution ( tetramethylbenzidine and peroxide ) for 20 min , the reaction was then stopped by adding stop solution . Absorbance measured at 450 nm with wavelength correction at 570 nm . PerSC isolation PerSCs were isolated from the adipose tissue of healthy adult donors undergoing cosmetic lipectomy procedures with prior written consent , or from patients undergoing breast reconstruction procedure , using deep inferior epigastric perforators ( DIEP ) , from adult donors . Ethical approval for the collection of tissue and subsequent research was granted by the South - East Scotland Research Ethics Committee 3 ( SESREC03 , reference no . 10 / S1103 / 45 ) . Incisions were made in the adipose tissue using a scalpel to divide the Scarpa’s fascial layer , then tissue was mechanically disrupted , combined with PBS and centrifuged at 445 g for 10 mins at RT , causing phase separation . The 3 phases include the top phase ( liquid fat / oil ) , central phase containing the tissue of interest ( adipose tissue ) , and the bottom phase ( blood / fluid ) . Middle layer was removed and mixed with equal volumes of PBS / 2 % ( v / v ) fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) and centrifuged at 445 g for 10 mins . Supernatant was discarded and the remaining Stromal Vascular Fraction ( SVF ) pellet , was enzymatically digested with type II - S collagenase 1 mg / ml in DMEM / 0 . 5 % ( v / v ) BSA for 45 mins at 37 o C . Samples were centrifuged and supernatant discarded ( containing oil and adipocytes ) and pellets resuspended and strained through 400 µm , 100 µm and 70 µm cell pluristrainers to remove undigested material . Red blood cell lysis buffer was added to eliminate erythroid cells and SVF pellet resuspended in Fluorescent Activated Cell Sorting ( FACS ) buffer . Cells sorted on CD146 + ve / CD45 - ve / CD34 - ve / CD31 - ve phenotype ( anti - CD146 clone P1H12 , BV711 , 563186 ; anti - CD45 clone H130 , V450 , 560367 ; anti - CD34 clone 581 , FITC , 555821 ; anti - CD31 clone WM59 , PE - Cy7 , 563651 . All BD Biosciences ) , using BD FACSAria cell sorter ( BD Biosciences ) . Immediately after sorting , cells were then cultured as previously described 16 . Briefly , cells were cultured in endothelial growth medium ( EGM - 2 , Lonza ) on 0 . 1 % gelatin - coated plates in a humidified incubator with 5 % CO 2 at 37 o C until passage 1 . Cell culture PerSCs , after passage 1 , were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium ( DMEM , Sigma - Aldrich ) with 20 % FBS ( Thermo Fisher ) , 1 % nonessential amino acids ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 1 % 100 mM sodium pyruvate ( Sigma - Aldrich ) and an antibiotic mix consisting of 10 mg / ml penicillin / streptavidin ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 200 nM L - glutamate ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , and 0 . 5 % Fungizone ( Thermo Fisher ) . Cells were incubated in a 5 % humidified CO 2 atmosphere at 37°C . For cell culture on polymer substrates , cells were seeded at 1 . 5 x10 3 / cm 2 on 13 mm coverslips in 24 well - plates and cultured in DMEM containing 2 % with human AB serum ( HS ; Sigma Aldrich , H4522 ) in a 5 % humidified CO 2 atmosphere at 37°C . Hypoxic culture carried out in hypoxic workstation ( Ruskinn ) at an oxygen tension of 1 % , CO 2 5 % and 37 o C . Medium was exchanged every 3 days . CD34 + ve cells from human BM were purchased from CalTag Medystems ( experiments related to Figure 6b - e ) and STEMCELL Technologies ( Figure 6f ) . CD34 + ve cells were cultured in serum free medium ; Iscove’s Modified Dulbecco Medium ( IMDM ) containing 20 % BIT 9500 serum substitute ( STEMCELL Technologies ) , 1 % 200 mM L - glutamine ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , 1 % 10 mg / ml penicillin / streptomycin ( Invitrogen ) supplemented with Flt3L ( 50 ng / ml ) , SCF ( 20 ng / ml ) and TPO ( 25 ng / ml ) ( all recombinant human , Peprotech , 300 - 19 , 300 - 07 , 300 - 18 ) ( 100 % medium ) . CD34 + ve cells were thawed , counted and rested overnight in 100 % medium at a density of 0 . 5x10 6 / ml , then recounted , suspended in 100 % or 0 % media , and seeded into niche models at a density of 5x10 4 cells / ml , with 0 . 5 ml added to each well of 24 well plate . For conditions containing gels , the HSCs were seeded on top of the gel . Control ( 100 % media only ) were seeded into 24 well - plates . Seeded cells were then cultured for 5 days . At least 1x10 3 cells were transferred to an Eppendorf tube and phenotyped at day 0 using flow cytometry . Collagen gel preparation and rheological measurement Collagen type I gels were added to relevant ( + gel ) conditions after either 24h ( for short term culture ) or 72h ( for long term culture ) . Rat tail collagen type I solution in 0 . 6 % acetic acid ( First Link , UK ) was combined with human AB serum ( HS ; Sigma - Aldrich , H4522 ) , 10x DMEM , 2 % HS DMEM , adjusted to pH 8 . 2 using 0 . 1 M NaOH . 1 ml of solution was then added to 24 well - plates containing PEA coated 13 mm coverslips . Resulting gels were ~ 1 cm thick . Rheological measurements were carried out using an Anton Paar Physical MCR301 rheometer . A parallel plate geometry ( 25 mm diameter , sandblasted ) and 1 . 0 mm gap were used to measure time sweeps . The dynamic modulus of the hydrogel was measured as a frequency function , with frequency sweeps carried out between 0 . 1 – 15 Hz to measure the dynamic shear of the modulus as a function of strain . Measurements were repeated 3 times on gels from 3 different batches . Storage moduli ( G ˊ ) values were extracted from the accompanying Kinexus software . The Young’s modulus was then determined by taking the G ˊ and multiplying by 3 , assuming a Poisson’s ratio of 0 . 5 in accordance with Hooke’s law . Immunocytochemistry PerSCs were cultured in niches for times indicated and fixed using 10 % formaldehyde for 15 mins . For SCF and CXCL12 analysis , cells were cultured with 5 µg / ml brefelndin A ( Sigma - Aldrich , B6542 ) , for the final 24h of culture before fixation . Cells were then permealized with 0 . 5 % Triton - X for 5 mins and blocked using 0 . 5 % BSA / PBS for 2 h at RT . Primary antibodies were then added in blocking buffer : anti - nestin [ 10C2 ] 1 : 200 ( mouse monoclonal , Abcam , ab22035 ) ; anti - p ( Th316 ) - nestin [ a - 4 ] at 1 : 200 ( mouse monoclonal , Santa Cruz Biotechnology , sc - 377538 ) ; anti - HIF1α [ EP1215Y ] 1 : 300 ( rabbit monoclonal , Abcam , ab51608 ) ; anti - vimentin [ SP20 ] 1 : 300 ( rabbit monoclonal , Thermo Fischer , MA5 - 16409 ) ; anti - CXCL12 1 : 200 ( monoclonal mouse , R & D Systems , MAB350 ) ; anti - SCF 1 : 200 ( rabbit polyclonal , Abcam , ab64677 ) . Cells were then washed 5 x 5 mins with PBST and biotinylated secondary antibodies ( 1 : 50 ; Vector Laboratories ) were added in blocking buffer for 2h at RT . Cells were again washed 3 x 5 mins in PBST and incubated with fluorescein isothiocyanate - conjugated streptavidin ( 1 : 50 ; Vector Laboratories ) in blocking buffer for 30 mins at RT . Nuclei were stained using VECTASHIELD mountant with 5’ , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole nuclear stain ( DAPI ; Vector Laboratories ) . Samples were then mounted onto glass slides and visualised using an Axiophot microscope or Evos Cell imaging system ( Thermo Fischer ) and analysed using ImageJ software ( National Institute of Health ) . HIF1α nuclear co - localisation was analysed using a custom developed pipeline on CellProfiler software ( version 2 . 1 . 1 ) . Flow cytometry To phenotype PerSCs and HSCs after culture , cells were harvested from niche systems using collagenase D ( 2 . 5 mg / mL in PBS ; Sigma - Aldrich ) and TripLE ™ ( Thermo Fisher ) . Cells were passed through a 70 µm filter , and stained on ice for 30 mins , using antibodies outlined in Supplementary Table 4 and 5 for PerSC and HSC markers , in flow cytometry buffer ( PBS supplemented with 0 . 5 % BSA and 0 . 5 mM EDTA ) . Cells were then washed twice with PBS and analysed using an BD FACSCanto ll ( BD Biosciences ) . The BD FACSAria Cell sorter was used for CD34 + ve sorting for LTC - IC assays . The gating strategy is shown in supplementary Figure 4 . Flow cytometry files were analysed using FlowJo software ( version 10 . 5 . 3 , FlowJo LLC , USA ) . RNA - seq Sequencing libraries then prepared from total RNA using the Illumina TruSeq Stranded mRNA Sample Preparation Kit . Libraries were sequenced in 75 base , paired end mode on the Illumina NextSeq 500 platform . Raw sequence reads were trimmed for contaminating sequence adapters and poor quality bases using the program Cutadapt 64 . Bases with an average Phred score lower than 15 were trimmed . Reads that were trimmed to less than 54 bases were discarded . The quality of the reads were checked using the FastQC program ( http : / / www . bioinformatics . babraham . ac . uk / projects / fastqc / ) before and after trimming . The reads were “pseudo aligned” to the transcriptome using the program Kallisto 65 . The differential expression for the analysis groups were assessed using the Bioconductor package DESeq2 66 . This was provided as a service by Glasgow Polyomics Facility . One hypoxic sample failed RNA quality control . Heatmaps in Figure 2g & h were subsequently generated using Cluster 3 . 0 and Java Treeview 3 . 0 software , with average linkage clustering method . To assess expression of transcripts related to an immunomodulatory phenotype , the distribution of reads across genomic features was quantified using the R package Genomic Ranges from Bioconductor Version 3 . 065 . Differentially expressed genes were identified using the R package edgeR from Bioconductor Version 3 . 066 . For Figure 3a - c and supplementary Figure 2 , analyses were performed within the R statistical computing framework using packages from BioConductor . Feature counts were utilized to quantify reading counts . Human ENSEMBL gene ID to gene symbol conversion was performed in BioTools ( https : / / www . biotools . fr ) . The DEseq2 BioConductor package was used for outlier detection , normalisation and differential gene expression analyses . Genes passing a threshold of adjusted p - value < 0 . 05 and a log2 fold change > 1 were considered as differentially expressed . The names of differentially expressed genes along with their respective log2fold changes were inputted into PathfindR package . Gene Ontology ( GO ) enrichment was conducted with PathfindR . Only pathways with FDR < = 0 . 05 were considered as differentially enriched . The differentially expressed genes involved in every pathway were extracted and their z - scored fold changes in expression were presented as heatmaps . In - cell western assay for LDH PerSCs were cultured in niches for 7 days then fixed using 10 % formaldehyde for 15 min . The cells were then permealized with 0 . 5 % Triton - X for 5 mins and blocked using 0 . 5 % milk protein in 1X PBS . Anti - lactate dehydrogenase ( LDH ) [ EP1566Y ] ( rabbit monoclonal , Abcam , ab52488 ) was added at 1 : 200 in 0 . 5 % milk PBS and incubated at 4 o C overnight , followed by 5 washes in PBST . CellTag 700 stain ( LI - COR , 926 - 41090 ) was used as the reference control , and was added with LI - COR anti - rabbit secondary antibody ( 926 - 32211 ) , at 1 : 2000 in 0 . 5 % milk PBST and incubated at RT on a shaker for 2 h , followed by 5 x 5 min washes with PBST . The quantitative spectroscopic analysis was the carred out using the LI - COR Odyssey Sa . VEGF ELISA PerSCs were cultures in niche systems and media supernatant was collected in Protein LoBind Tubes ( Eppendorf ™ ) at day 7 and 14 and stored at - 20 o C . ELISA for VEGF was then carried out as per manufacturer ’s instructions ( R & D Systems , VEGF Quantikine ELISA kit , DVE00 ) . Standards and media aspirate were added to the ELISA plate in duplicate . Absorbance measured at 450 nm with wavelength correction at 570 nm . Hypoxyprobe ™ assay PerSCs were cultured in niche models for 6 days , medium was then changed to fresh medium containing 200 µM pimonidazole ( Hypoxyprobe™ , HP1 - 200kit ) , and cultured for a further 24h . Cells were then fixed , permealised and blocked as described for immunocytochemistry . Mouse monoclonal anti - pimonidazole ( 1 : 200 ; Hypoxyprobe™ , HP1 - 200kit ) was added in blocking buffer and incubated overnight at 4 o C . Cells were washed 3 x 5 mins in PBST and incubated with anti - mouse secondary ( 1 : 50 , Texas Red ; Vector Laboratories ) for 2 h at RT . Cells were washed 3 x 5 mins in PBST and mounted onto glass slides with DAPI nuclei stain VECTASHIELD mountant ( Vector Laboratories ) . Samples were visualised on Evos Cell imaging system ( Thermo Fischer ) and analysed using ImageJ software ( National Institute of Health ) . Lactate assay PerSCs were cultured in niche systems in DMEM with 2 % dialyzed FBS ( Thermo Fischer , A3382001 ) , cell media supernatant was aspirated at 7 and 14 days and stored at - 20 o C . Lactate levels in supernatant were then measured using the Lactate - Glo™ assay ( Promega , J5021 ) as per manufacturers protocol . Briefly , samples were diluted 1 : 100 and mixed 1 : 1 with Lactate Detection Reagent in 96 - well plate and incubated for 1 h at RT . Luminescence was read using PHERAstar FSX microplate reader ( BMG Labtech ) . Metabolomics Whole cell metabolomic analysis was performed on cell lysates isolated from PerSCs cultured in niche systems for 7 or 14 days . Substrates were washed with ice - cold PBS , and cells lysed in extraction buffer ( PBS / methanol / chloroform at 1 : 3 : 1 ratio ) for 60 mins at 4°C with constant agitation . Lysates were then transferred to cold Eppendorfs ™ and spun at 13000 g at 4°C for 5 mins to remove debris and stored at - 80°C . Cleared extracts were used for hydrophilic interaction LC / MS analysis ( UltiMate 3000 RSLC , ( Thermo Fisher ) , with a 6 150 x 4 . 6 mm ZIC - pHILIC column running at 300 µl / min - 1 and Orbitrap Exactive ) . A standard pipeline , consisting of XCMS ( peak picking ) , MzMatch ( filtering and grouping ) and IDEOM ( further filtering , post - processing and identification ) was used to process the raw mass spectrometry data . Identified core metabolites were validated against a panel of unambiguous standards by mass and predicted retention time . Further putative identifications were generated by mass and predicted retention times . Heatmaps of selected metabolites and principle component analysis ( PCA ) plots were generated using MetaboAnalyst software ( version 4 . 0 ) . This was provided as a service by Glasgow Polyomics Facility . 13 C 6 - Glucose metabolomic tracing PerSCs were seeded onto PEA / FN / BMP - 2 niche systems and allowed to grow for 72 h . Cells were then washed and media was changed to basal media comprising 25 % normal glucose and 75 % 13 C 6 - Glucose ( Cambridge Isotopes Ltd ) . Extraction performed in PBS / methanol / chloroform at 1 : 3 : 1 ratio , after 3 days incubation and prepared for LC - MS . The LC - MS platform consisted of an Accela 600 HPLC system combined with an Exactive ( Orbitrap ) mass spectrometer ( Thermo Fisher ) . Two complementary columns were used ; the zwitterionic ZICpHILLIC column ( 150 mm x 4 . 6 mm ; 3 . 5 µm , Merck ) and the reversed phase ACE C18 - AR column ( 150 mm x 4 . 6 mm ; 3 . 5 µm Hichrom ) and in both cases sample volume was 10 µl at a flow rate of 0 . 3 ml / min . Eluted samples were then analysed by mass spectrometry . Raw data from LC - MS of 13 C - labelled extracts was processed to generate a combined PeakML file 67 . Further analysis using mzMatch - ISO in R 68 generated a PDF file containing chromatograms used to check peak - shape and retention time , and a tab delineated file detailing peak height for each isopotologue , which was used to calculate percentage labelling . Samples normalised to cell number . Total 13 C 6 - Glucose incorporation was calculated by totalling incorporation excluding up to C2 to eliminate natural incorporation . This was provided as a service by Glasgow Polyomics Facility . siRNA NES silencing NES PerSCs were seeded into niche models in antibiotic free 2 % HS DMEM , after 24 h media was changed to Opti - MEM ™ ( Thermo Fisher ) and siRNA transfection was carried out 24 h later . Pre - designed Silencer ™ Select siRNA NES ( ID : 21141 ) , or Silencer ™ Select negative control number 1 siRNA ( both Thermo Fischer ) , was incubated at RT for 20 mins with Lipofectamine ™ RNAiMAX ( Thermo Fisher ) in Opti - MEM ™ and added to PerSCs in niches . 6 hours later , Opti - MEM ™ + 2 % HS was added to control and - gel conditions . For + gel , media containing siRNA was collected and used to prepare collagen gels as described above . Once collagen had set , Opti - MEM ™ + 2 % HS was added . Cells were then cultured for 72h and either fixed for immunofluorescence analysis or cytotoxicity assays carried out . Cytotoxity assay Cells were cultured in niche models for time points indicated . Collagen gels were removed and 1000 µm H 2 O 2 added for the final 6 h of culture . Hoechst ( 33342 ) nuclear stain ( Thermo Fischer , R37605 ) and Propidium Iodide ( PI ) ( Biolegend , 421301 ) viability stain was then added and imaged on EVOS M7000 imaging system using the on - stage incubator . LTC - IC assay LTC - IC assays were carried out on sorted CD45 + ve / Lineage - ve / CD34 + ve cells harvested after 5 days of culture in niche systems . Engineered stromal fibroblast feeder layers were first established . M2 - 10B4 ( overexpressing IL - 3 and G - CSF ) and Sl / Sl ( overexpressing IL - 3 and SCF ) were passaged at ~ 90 % confluence ( cell lines gifted from STEMCELL Technologies ) . Cells were grown for 2 weeks prior to use in selection agents to select stromal cells expressing long - term cell maintenance factors ( M2 - 10B4 , 0 . 4mg / ml G418 and 0 . 06mg / ml Hygromycin B ; Sl / Sl , 0 . 8 mg / ml G418 and 0 . 15 mg / ml Hygromycin B ) G418 and Hyfromycin B both STEMCELL Technologies ( 03812 , 03812 ) . Cells at ~ 80 % confluence were irradiated with 8000 cGy , trypsinised . M2 - 10B4 and Sl / Sl were mixed at 1 : 1 ratio at a final concentration of 1 . 5x10 6 / ml . Cells were then seeded into collagen coated 24 well plates ( Thermo Fisher , A1142802 ) for 24 hours before adding sorted cells . Cultures were then maintained for 6 weeks in MyeloCult ™ ( STEMCELL Technologies , 05150 ) supplemented with 1x10 - 6 M hydrocortisone ( StemCell Technologies , 74142 ) , with half media exchanges twice per week . CFU Assay Cells were harvested and resuspended in MethoCult  ( STEMCELL Technologies , 04435 ) from LTC - IC assays after 6 weeks . 2 replicates were seeded for each condition in 35 mm dishes and incubated at 37 o C in 5 % CO 2 for 5 days . After 7 days total colonies were counted and phenotyped using a light microscope . CRISPR CD34 + ve cells were thawed 24 h before electroporation and cultured in IMDM + BIT + 100 % cytokine media without antibiotics . Ribonucleoprotein ( RNP ) complexes were prepared by mixing Cas9 ( IDT ) at 12 µM and AAVS1 _ A1 sgRNA ( GTCACCAATCCTGTCCCTAG , Synthego ) at 12 µM , in electroporation buffer R ( Thermo Fisher ) with 2 % glycerol 59 , and incubated for 15 min at RT immediately before electroporation . Electroporation was performed using the Neon ™ transfection system , with 10 µl tips ( Thermo Fisher ) , as per manufacturers protocol . The optimal electroporation conditions for CD34 + ve cells was 1700 V , 20 ms , one pulse . CD34 + ve cells were resuspended in buffer R and mixed with assembled RNPs . Electroporated cells were resuspended in either 100 % or 0 % cytokine IMDM + BIT and 0 . 5 ml added into niche models at a density of 5x10 4 cells / ml . Cells were then cultured for 5 days , and harvested as previously described using collagenase D , with final resuspension into 30 µl of Quick Extract ™ reagent ( Lucigen ) . For mutagenesis analysis , Quick Extract samples were diluted 1 : 1 with fresh QuickExtract and heated to 65 o C for 6 mins , vortexed for 15 s , and heated to 98 o C for 2 mins . Genomic PCR was carried out using Herculase II Fusion DNA Polymerase ( Agilent ) ( Forward primer : CCCCGTTCTCCTGTGGATTC , Reverse primer : ATCCTCTCTGGCTCCATCGT ) . PCR products were run on 1 . 2 % UltraPure ™ Agarose ( Invitrogen ) gels , purified ( QIAquickPCR Purification Kit , Qiagen ) and Sanger Sequenced ( Eurofins Genomics ) . Mutagenesis analysis was carried out by TIDE analysis 69 ( http : / / shinyapps . datacurators . nl / tide / ) ( supplementary figure 5 ) . Data availability Raw data is available at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 5525 / gla . researchdata . 1326 . References 1 . Burns , R . , Leal , J . , Sullivan , R . & Luengo - Fernandez , R . Economic burden of malignant blood disorders across Europe : a population - based cost analysis . Lancet Haematol . 3 , e362 – e370 ( 2016 ) . 2 . Granot , N . & Storb , R . History of hematopoietic cell transplantation : Challenges and progress . Haematologica 105 , 2716 – 2729 ( 2020 ) . 3 . Registry , T . A . N . and N . S . C . State of the Registry 2020 - 2021 . 1 – 10 ( 2022 ) . 4 . Zon , L . I . Intrinsic and extrinsic control of haematopoietic stem - cell self - renewal . Nature 453 , 306 – 313 ( 2008 ) . 5 . Yang , L . et al . Identification of Lin - Sca1 + kit + CD34 + Flt3 - short - term hematopoietic stem cells capable of rapidly reconstituting and rescuing myeloablated transplant recipients . Blood 105 , 2717 – 2723 ( 2005 ) . 6 . Dexter , T . . , Moore , M . A . . & Sheridan , A . P . . Maintenance of hemopoietic stem cells and production of differentiated progeny in allogeneic and semiallogeneic bone marrow chimeras in vitro . J . Exp . Med . 145 , 1612 – 1616 ( 1977 ) . 7 . Nakauchi , H . , Sudo , K . & Hideo , E . M . A . Quantitative assessment of the stem cell self - renewal capacity . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 938 , 18 – 25 ( 2001 ) . 8 . Li , J . et al . Development and clinical advancement of small molecules for ex vivo expansion of hematopoietic stem cell . Acta Pharm . Sin . B 12 , 2808 – 2831 ( 2021 ) . 9 . Fares , I . et al . EPCR expression marks UM171 - expanded CD34 + cord blood stem cells . Blood 129 , 3344 – 3351 ( 2017 ) . 10 . Wagner , J . E . et al . Phase I / II Trial of StemRegenin - 1 Expanded Umbilical Cord Blood Hematopoietic Stem Cells Supports Testing as a Stand - Alone Graft . Cell Stem Cell 18 , 144 – 155 ( 2016 ) . 11 . Pinho , S . & Frenette , P . S . Haematopoietic stem cell activity and interactions with the niche . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . ( 2019 ) doi : 10 . 1038 / s41580 - 019 - 0103 - 9 . 12 . Méndez - Ferrer , S . et al . Mesenchymal and haematopoietic stem cells form a unique bone marrow niche . Nature 466 , 829 – 834 ( 2010 ) . 13 . Kunisaki , Y . et al . Arteriolar niches maintain haematopoietic stem cell quiescence . Nature 502 , 637 – 643 ( 2013 ) . 14 . Ding , L . & Morrison , S . J . Haematopoietic stem cells and early lymphoid progenitors occupy distinct bone marrow niches . Nature 495 , 231 – 235 ( 2013 ) . 15 . Sacchetti , B . et al . Self - Renewing Osteoprogenitors in Bone Marrow Sinusoids Can Organize a Hematopoietic Microenvironment . Cell 131 , 324 – 336 ( 2007 ) . 16 . Crisan , M . et al . A Perivascular Origin for Mesenchymal Stem Cells in Multiple Human Organs . Cell Stem Cell 3 , 301 – 313 ( 2008 ) . 17 . Sugiyama , T . , Kohara , H . , Noda , M . & Nagasawa , T . Maintenance of the Hematopoietic Stem Cell Pool by CXCL12 - CXCR4 Chemokine Signaling in Bone Marrow Stromal Cell Niches . Immunity 25 , 977 – 988 ( 2006 ) . 18 . Pinho , S . et al . PDGFR A and CD51 mark human stem cells capable of hematopoietic progenitor cell expansion . J . Exp . Med . 210 , 1351 – 1367 ( 2013 ) . 19 . Engler , A . J . , Sen , S . , Sweeney , H . L . & Discher , D . E . Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage specification . Cell 126 , 677 – 89 ( 2006 ) . 20 . Klamer , S . & Voermans , C . The role of novel and known extracellular matrix and adhesion molecules in the homeostatic and regenerative bone marrow microenvironment . Cell Adhes . Migr . 8 , 563 – 577 ( 2014 ) . 21 . Chen , X . et al . Mechanical Heterogeneity in the Bone Microenvironment as Characterized by Atomic Force Microscopy . Biophys . J . 119 , 502 – 513 ( 2020 ) . 22 . Calvi , L . M . et al . Osteoblastic cells regulate the haematopoietic stem cell niche . Nature 425 , 841 – 846 ( 2003 ) . 23 . Shen , B . et al . A mechanosensitive peri - arteriolar niche for osteogenesis and lymphopoiesis . Nature 2020 , ( 2021 ) . 24 . Salmerón - Sánchez , M . & Dalby , M . J . Synergistic growth factor microenvironments . Chem . Commun . 52 , 13327 – 13336 ( 2016 ) . 25 . Spencer , J . A . et al . Direct measurement of local oxygen concentration in the bone marrow of live animals . Nature 508 , 269 – 273 ( 2014 ) . 26 . Estrada , J . C . et al . Culture of human mesenchymal stem cells at low oxygen tension improves growth and genetic stability by activating glycolysis . Cell Death Differ . 19 , 743 – 55 ( 2012 ) . 27 . Guarnerio , J . et al . Bone Marrow Endosteal Mesenchymal Progenitors Depend on HIF Factors for Maintenance and Regulation of Hematopo . Stem Cell Reports 2 , 794 – 809 ( 2014 ) . 28 . Nakahara , F . et al . Engineering a haematopoietic stem cell niche by revitalizing mesenchymal stromal cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 21 , 560 – 567 ( 2019 ) . 29 . Leisten , I . et al . 3D co - culture of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells and mesenchymal stem cells in collagen scaffolds as a model of the hematopoietic niche . Biomaterials 33 , 1736 – 1747 ( 2012 ) . 30 . Gilchrist , A . E . & Harley , B . A . C . Connecting secretome to hematopoietic stem cell phenotype shifts in an engineered bone marrow niche . Integr . Biol . 12 , 175 – 187 ( 2020 ) . 31 . Bourgine , P . E . et al . In vitro biomimetic engineering of a human hematopoietic niche with functional properties . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 115 , E5688 – E5695 ( 2018 ) . 32 . Rödling , L . et al . 3D models of the hematopoietic stem cell niche under steady - state and active conditions . Sci . Rep . 1 – 15 ( 2017 ) doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 04808 - 0 . 33 . Chou , D . B . et al . On - chip recapitulation of clinical bone marrow toxicities and patient - specific pathophysiology . Nat . Biomed . Eng . 4 , ( 2020 ) . 34 . Doulatov , S . , Notta , F . , Laurenti , E . & Dick , J . E . Hematopoiesis : A human perspective . Cell Stem Cell 10 , 120 – 136 ( 2012 ) . 35 . Llopis - hernández , V . et al . Material - driven fibronectin assembly for high - efficiency presentation of growth factors . Sci . Adv . 1 – 11 ( 2016 ) doi : 10 . 1126 / sciadv . 1600188 . 36 . Cheng , Z . A . et al . Nanoscale Coatings for Ultralow Dose BMP - 2 - Driven Regeneration of Critical - Sized Bone Defects . Adv . Sci . 1800361 , 1800361 ( 2018 ) . 37 . Itkin , T . et al . Distinct bone marrow blood vessels differentially regulate haematopoiesis . Nature 1 – 19 ( 2016 ) doi : 10 . 1038 / nature17624 . 38 . Asada , N . et al . Differential cytokine contributions of perivascular haematopoietic stem cell niches . ( 2017 ) doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3475 . 39 . Nilsson , S . K . et al . Immunofluorescence characterization of key extracellular matrix proteins in murine bone marrow in situ . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 46 , 371 – 377 ( 1998 ) . 40 . Choi , J . S . & Harley , B . A . C . Marrow - inspired matrix cues rapidly affect early fate decisions of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells . Sci . Adv . 3 , ( 2017 ) . 41 . Früh , S . M . , Schoen , I . , Ries , J . & Vogel , V . Molecular architecture of native fibronectin fibrils . Nat . Commun . 6 , 7275 ( 2015 ) . 42 . Klotzsch , E . et al . Fibronectin forms the most extensible biological fibers displaying switchable force - exposed cryptic binding sites . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 106 , 18267 – 18272 ( 2009 ) . 43 . Bieniek , M . , Llopis - Hernandez , V . , Douglas , K . , Salmeron - Sanchez , M . & Lorenz , C . Minor chemistry changes alter surface hydration to control fibronectin adsorption and assembly into nanofibrils . Adv . Theory Simulations 1900169 , 1 – 13 ( 2019 ) . 44 . Martino , M . M . & Hubbell , J . A . The 12th - 14th type III repeats of fibronectin function as a highly promiscuous growth factor - binding domain . FASEB J . 24 , 4711 – 4721 ( 2010 ) . 45 . Park , D . et al . Nestin is required for the proper self - renewal of neural stem cells . Stem Cells 28 , 2162 – 2171 ( 2010 ) . 46 . Le Blanc , K . & Mougiakakos , D . Multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells and the innate immune system . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 12 , 383 – 396 ( 2012 ) . 47 . Dorronsoro , A . et al . Intracellular role of IL - 6 in mesenchymal stromal cell immunosuppression and proliferation . Sci . Rep . 10 , 1 – 12 ( 2020 ) . 48 . Haghighitalab , A . et al . Investigating the effects of IDO1 , PTGS2 , and TGF - β1 overexpression on immunomodulatory properties of hTERT - MSCs and their extracellular vesicles . Sci . Rep . 11 , 1 – 19 ( 2021 ) . 49 . He , Y . et al . Mesenchymal stem cell deficiency influences megakaryocytopoiesis through the TNFAIP3 / NF - κB / SMAD pathway in patients with immune thrombocytopenia . Br . J . Haematol . 180 , 395 – 411 ( 2018 ) . 50 . Shen , S . P . et al . EphA2 is a biomarker of hMSCs derived from human placenta and umbilical cord . Taiwan . J . Obstet . Gynecol . 54 , 749 – 756 ( 2015 ) . 51 . Weidemann , A . & Johnson , R . S . Biology of HIF - 1 a . 621 – 627 ( 2008 ) doi : 10 . 1038 / cdd . 2008 . 12 . 52 . Pattappa , G . , Heywood , H . K . , de Bruijn , J . D . & Lee , D . A . The metabolism of human mesenchymal stem cells during proliferation and differentiation . J . Cell . Physiol . 226 , 2562 – 2570 ( 2011 ) . 53 . Vander Heiden , M . G . , Cantley , L . C . & Thompson , C . . Understanding the Warburg Effect : the metabolic requirements of cell proliferation . Science ( 80 - . ) . 324 , 1029 – 1033 ( 2009 ) . 54 . Sahlgren , C . M . et al . Cdk5 regulates the organization of Nestin and its association with p35 . Mol . Cell . Biol . 23 , 5090 – 5106 ( 2003 ) . 55 . Pallari , H . - M . et al . Nestin as a regulator of Cdk5 in differentiating myoblasts . Mol . Biol . Cell 22 , 1539 – 1549 ( 2011 ) . 56 . Sahlgren , C . M . et al . A nestin scaffold links Cdk5 / p35 signaling to oxidant - induced cell death . EMBO J . 25 , 4808 – 4819 ( 2006 ) . 57 . Galleu , A . et al . Apoptosis in mesenchymal stromal cells induces in vivo recipient - mediated immunomodulation . Sci . Transl . Med . 9 , 1 – 12 ( 2017 ) . 58 . Shentu , Y . et al . Nestin Promotes Peritoneal Fibrosis by Protecting HIF1 - α From Proteasomal Degradation . Front . Physiol . 11 , 1 – 11 ( 2020 ) . 59 . Wu , Y . et al . Highly efficient therapeutic gene editing of human hematopoietic stem cells . Nat . Med . 25 , 776 – 783 ( 2019 ) . 60 . Grassinger , J . , Haylock , D . N . , Williams , B . , Olsen , G . H . & Nilsson , S . K . Phenotypically identical hemopoietic stem cells isolated from different regions of bone marrow have different biologic potential . Blood 116 , 3185 – 3196 ( 2010 ) . 61 . Ross , E . A . et al . Nanotopography reveals metabolites that maintain the immunosuppressive phenotype of mesenchymal stem cells . BioRxiv ( 2019 ) . 62 . Wilson , A . et al . Hematopoietic Stem Cells Reversibly Switch from Dormancy to Self - Renewal during Homeostasis and Repair . Cell 135 , 1118 – 1129 ( 2008 ) . 63 . Chaudhuri , O . et al . Hydrogels with tunable stress relaxation regulate stem cell fate and activity . Nat . Mater . ( 2015 ) doi : 10 . 1038 / nmat4489 . 64 . Martin , M . Cutadapt removes adapter sequences from high - throughput sequencing reads . EMBnet . journal 17 , 10 ( 2011 ) . 65 . Bray , N . L . , Pimentel , H . , Melsted , P . & Pachter , L . Near - optimal probabilistic RNA - seq quantification . Nat . Biotechnol . 34 , 525 – 527 ( 2016 ) . 66 . Love , M . I . , Huber , W . & Anders , S . Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA - seq data with DESeq2 . Genome Biol . 15 , 1 – 21 ( 2014 ) . 67 . Westrop , G . D . et al . Metabolomic profiling and stable isotope labelling of Trichomonas vaginalis and Tritrichomonas foetus reveal major differences in amino acid metabolism including the production of 2 - hydroxyisocaproic acid , cystathionine and S - methylcysteine . PLoS ONE vol . 12 ( 2017 ) . 68 . Chokkathukalam , A . et al . MzMatch - ISO : An R tool for the annotation and relative quantification of isotope - labelled mass spectrometry data . Bioinformatics 29 , 281 – 283 ( 2013 ) . 69 . Brinkman , E . K . , Chen , T . , Amendola , M . & Van Steensel , B . Easy quantitative assessment of genome editing by sequence trace decomposition . Nucleic Acids Res . 42 , 1 – 8 ( 2014 ) . Supplementary Information Supplementary Figure 1 | Perivascular stromal cell niche phenotype . a , Nestin expression measured by immunofluorescence at day 7 and 14 of culture . Nestin expression significantly increased in perivascular stromal cells on the PEA system only in the presence of low stiffness gels ( + gel niche ) . PMA is used as a control polymer and shows some increase with gel only by day 14 . Glass with soluble BMP - 2 ( 50 ng / ml ) added to the media is used as a further control and shows the addition of soluble , not matrix bound , BMP - 2 does not induce nestin expression . Graph shows mean integrated intensity as fold change to glass control ± SEM , * * * * = p < 0 . 001 , * * = p < 0 . 005 , determined by one - way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison test . n = 4 material replicates . b , SCF and c , CXCL12 production in niche models . Cells were cultured in niche systems for 14 days with brefeldin A treatment ( 5  g / ml in culture media ) added for the final 24h to inhibit intracellular protein transport . Quantification of immunofluorescence staining with b , anti - SCF shows significant increase only in the PEA / FN / BMP - 2 + gel condition . Graph shows mean ± SEM , * * * * = p < 0 . 001 , determined by one - way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison test . Each point represents integrated SCF intensity of 1ximage field / number nuclei , from 4 material replicates . For c , CXCL12 revealed all conditions expressed CXCL12 , but with no significant differences . Graph shows mean integrated intensity CXCL12 as fold change to glass control ( n = 3 material replicates , for 3 independent experiments with different donor cells ) , each point represents 1x image field / number nuclei . Non - significant , determined by one - way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison test . Supplementary Figure 2 | RNA - seq analysis of PerSC niche phenotype at day 7 . a , Principal component analysis ( PCA ) shows transcripts from conditions PEA / FN / BMP - 2 - gel / + gel / hypoxia samples cluster independently . b , Heatmap of z - scored changes in transcript levels . c , z - scored changes in transcript levels of genes involved in GO enrichment pathw ay ‘response to hypoxia’ . Genes with FDR < = 0 . 05 were considered as differentially enriched . N = 3 material replicates , for hypoxia n = 2 material replicates as one replicate failed RNA quality control . Supplementary Figure 3 | Lactate dehydrogenase and lactate levels are not raised with PEA / FN / BMP - 2 + gel . a , in - cell western analysis of lactate dehydrogenase ( LDH ) levels in cells detected by immunofluorescence at day 7 . Cell in PEA / FN / BMP - 2 with hypoxia had significantly increased levels of the enzyme . Graph shows fluorescent intensity of LDH normalised to cell number ( CellTag800 ) ± SEM , * = p < 0 . 05 , * * = p < 0 . 005 , determined by one - way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison test . N = 4 material replicates . b , Lactate levels in cell supernatant at day 14 measured by luminescence . Glass and PEA / FN / BMP - 2 hypoxia samples had significantly raised levels . Graph shows n = 4 material replicates , ± SEM , * * = p < 0 . 005 , * * * = p < 0 . 001 , * * * * = p < 0 . 001 determined by one - way ANOVA followed by Tu key’s multiple comparison test . Supplementary Figure 4 | LTC - IC FACS gating strategy and colony phenotyping . a , Sample data taken from - gel conditions , patient 1 . FSC - A versus SSC - A plot used to identify viable cells ; gate added on CD45 + ve cells to remove any PerSCs ; Lin - ve gate used to remove any committed progenitors and final gate added on CD34 + ve population . These cells were collected and used in the LTC - IC assay . b , Representative colony types in colony forming unit ( CFU ) assay after 7 days . CFU - E ; contain ~ 8 - 200 haemoglobinised erythroblasts . BFU - E ; clusters of erythroid progenitors with high proliferative capacity . CFU - G ; homogenous population of granulocyte progenitors . CFU - M ; homogenous population of macrophage progenitors . CFU - GM ; heterogenous population of macrophages and granulocytes . CFU - GEMM ; multilineage progenitors that give rise to erythroid , granulocyte , macrophage and megakaryocyte lineages . Supplementary Figure 5 | TIDE analysis of CRISPR - edited HSCs after co - culture in niches . CD34 + cells were edited using CRISPR targeting the AAVS1 locus and co - cultured in control gold standard media , or in niche models , for 5 days post - editing . Culture in PEA + gel niches enhanced editing , a & c , shows indel spectrum for PEA + gel and PEA - gel HSCs cultured in 0 % media , respectively . b & d , show aberrant sequence signal of PEA + gel and PEA - gel 0 % media , respectively . Supplementary table 1 | Differentiation - related genes of interest . TGF , transforming growth factor ; MSC , mesenchymal stem cell ; BMP , bone morphogenetic protein , SMAD , mothers against decapentaplegic ; ERK , extracellular related kinase . Gene Definition Summary Supp refs BDNF Brain - Derived Neurotrophic Factor Neurogenesis modulator . 1 , 2 BMP2 Bone Morphogenetic Protein - 2 TGF - β superfamily member signalling molecules , involved in bone formation . 3 – 5 RUNX2 Runt - Related Transcription Factor - 2 Transcriptional master regulator of osteogenesis in MSCs . 6 – 8 SMAD4 SMAD Family Member 4 Involved in canonical BMP signalling . 9 BMP6 Bone Morphogenetic Protein - 6 TGF - β superfamily member signalling molecules , expressed in hypertrophic cartilage . 5 , 10 GFAP Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein Intermediate filament protein found in astroglia cytoskeleton . 11 , 12 BGLAP Osteocalcin Expressed and secreted by osteoblasts . 8 , 13 – 15 BMP4 Bone Morphogenetic Protein 4 TGF - β superfamily member , role in embryogenesis and osteogenesis . 5 , 16 , 17 ALPP Alkaline Phosphatase Metalloenzyme , catalyses hydrolysis of phosphoric acid monoesters . Involved in bone formation . 7 , 8 SP7 Osterix Bone - specific transcription factor . Required for osteoblast differentiation . 18 ADIPOQ Adiponectin Adipocyte - specific secretory protein . 19 – 21 TGFB3 Transforming Growth Factor Beta 3 Bind TGF - β receptors and activate SMAD signalling . 9 , 22 EGF Epidermal Growth Factor Role in growth , proliferation and differentiation of several cell types . 23 VWF Von Willebrand Factor Haemostatic plasma glycoprotein , expressed by endothelial cells and some HSCs . 22 , 24 , 25 SPARC Osteonectin Matrix - associated protein required for collagen calcification in bone . 26 BMPR1A Bone Morphogenetic Protein Receptor Type 1A Transmembrane serine / threonine kinase receptors for TGF - β superfamily ligands . Involved in bone formation . 7 , 27 ALPL Alkaline Phosphatase , Biomineralization Associated Metalloenzyme , catalyses hydrolysis of phosphoric acid monoesters . Involved in bone formation . 7 , 8 PPARG Peroxisome Proliferator Activated Receptor Gamma Master regulator of adipocyte differentiation . 28 BMPR2 Bone Morphogenetic Protein Receptor Type 2 Transmembrane serine / threonine kinase receptors for TGF - β superfamily ligands . Involved in SMAD signalling . 29 , 30 COL1A1 Collagen Type I Alpha Chain Pro - alpha chains of type I collagen . 7 SOX9 SRY - Box Transcription Factor 9 Master regulator of chondrogenic differentiation in MSCs . 31 BMP7 Bone Morphogenetic Protein 7 TGF - β superfamily member signalling molecule , promotes osteoblast differentiation . 32 , 33 FGF10 Fibroblast Growth Factor 10 Role in cell division , proliferation , differentiation and survival . Important in development . 34 BMPR1B Bone Morphogenetic Protein Receptor Type 1B Transmembrane serine / threonine kinase receptors for TGF - β superfamily ligands . Involved in SMAD signalling . 35 SPP1 Osteopontin Non - collagenous protein present in bone matrix . 8 , 36 , 37 FGF2 Fibroblast Growth Factor 2 Role in cell division , proliferation , differentiation and survival . Can signal through ERK to activate RUNX2 . 38 Supplementary table 2 | Niche - related genes of interest . BM , bone marrow ; HSC , hematopoietic stem cell ; MSC , mesenchymal stem cell ; ECM , extracellular matrix ; VEGF , vascular endothelial growth factor ; ESC , embryonic stem cell . Gene Definition Summary Supp refs CDH2 Cadherin 2 Expressed by osteolineage cells in the BM niche . 39 – 43 ALCAM Activated Leukocyte Cell Adhesion Molecule MSC / PerSC marker . 24 , 44 ITGAV Integrin Subunit Alpha V Expressed by nestin + perivascular stromal cells in the BM niche . 44 CSPG4 Chondroitin Sulphate Proteoglycan 4 ( NG2 ; Nerve / Glial antigen 2 ) Expressed by arteriole lining PerSCs in the BM niche . 45 – 47 JAG1 Jagged Canonical Notch Ligand 1 Expressed by BM stromal cells and osteoblasts . May activate Notch signalling in HSCs . 47 , 48 KITLG KIT Ligand Stem Cell Factor ( SCF ) ; HSC maintenance growth factor produced by Lepr + and Nestin + stromal and endothelial cells in the niche . 49 LIF Leukaemia Inhibitory Factor Interleukin - 6 family cytokine , important in haematopoietic differentiation and regulation . 50 , 51 ITGB1 Integrin Subunit Beta 1 Expressed by HSCs and MSCs in the BM niche . 4 , 52 , 53 PDGFRA Platelet Derived Growth Factor Receptor Alpha Expressed by a subset of CD51 + stromal cells in the BM niche that correspond to increased nestin expression . 44 MMP2 Matrix Metallopeptidase 2 Shown to release CXCL12 from the ECM . 54 – 56 ICAM1 Intercellular Adhesion Molecule 1 Expressed by immunomodulatory MSCs and by sinusoidal endothelial cells in the BM niche . 22 , 57 CXCL12 C - X - C Motif Chemokine Ligand 12 Stromal Cell - Derived Factor 1 ( SDF - 1 ) . HSC regulatory cytokine produced by nestin + perivascular cells in the BM niche . 46 ITGAX Integrin Subunit Alpha X Expressed in the BM niche by lymphocytes . 58 PDGFRB Platelet Derived Growth Factor Receptor Beta Expressed by endothelial cells lining BM arterioles and sinusoids . 49 LEPR Leptin Receptor Expressed by sinusoid - associated cells in the bone marrow niche . 45 – 47 VCAM1 Vascular Cell Adhesion Molecule 1 Involved in blood cell retention in the BM niche , ligands is integrinβ1 . 46 , 49 NOTCH1 Notch Receptor 1 Roles in osteoblast and hematopoietic cell differentiation and maturation . 59 – 61 MCAM Melanoma Cell Adhesion Molecule ( CD146 ) Marker for PerSCs and stromal stem cells . 24 , 44 NCAM1 Neural Cell Adhesion Molecule 1 Considered an early neural progenitor marker – correlated with nestin expression . 62 NES Nestin Nestin + PerSCs and stromal cells regulate HSC activity in the BM niche . 44 , 45 , 47 , 63 – 65 THY1 Thy - 1 Cell Surface Antigen CD90 ; Involved in early BM niche development , used as MSC / HSC marker . 66 – 68 CSF2 Colony Stimulating Factor 2 Granulocyte macrophage - colony stimulating factor ( GM - CSF ) . Produced in multiple cell types the BM niche . 69 , 70 KDR Kinase Insert Domain Receptor VEGF receptor . MSC marker . 71 , 72 THPO Thrombopoietin Osteoblast - derived HSC maintenance cytokine . 73 NGFR Nerve Growth Factor Receptor MSC marker . 74 VIM Vimentin Intermediate filament protein expressed in mesenchymal cells . Polymerisation partner of nestin . 75 POU5F1 Octamer - Binding Protein 4 Regulates self - renewal and differentiation in MSCs . Shown to be regulated by hypoxia in cultured ESCs . 76 , 77 VEGFA Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A Regulator of blood vessel formation . Required for HSC survival . Produced in hypoxia . 78 Supplementary table 3 | Flow cytometry antibodies for PerSC phenotyping . Marker Fluorophore Clone Supplier Lepr APC ( panel 1 ) REA361 Miltenyi Biotech CD51 APC ( panel 2 ) NKI - M9 Biolegend CD90 APC - Cy7 ( panel 1 ) 5E10 Thermo Fisher , eBioscience CD31 APC - Cy7 ( panel 2 ) WM59 Thermo Fisher , eBioscience CD29 FITC ( panel 1 ) TS2 / 16 Thermo Fisher , eBioscience NG2 PE ( panel 1 ) 7 . 1 Thermo Fisher , eBioscience CD140a PE ( panel 2 ) 16A1 Thermo Fisher , eBioscience CD146 PerCP - Cy5 . 5 ( panel 1 ) P1H12 Biolegend CD166 PerCP - eFluor710 ( panel 2 ) 3A6 Thermo Fisher , eBioscience CD140b PE - Cy7 ( panel 2 ) APB5 Thermo Fisher , eBioscience CD105 eFluor 450 ( panel 2 ) SN6 Thermo Fisher , eBioscience Supplementary table 4 | Flow cytometry antibodies for HSC phenotyping and LTC - IC assay sorting . Marker Fluorophore Clone Supplier CD34 PE 4H11 Thermo Fisher , eBioscince CD45 APC - Cy7 2D1 BD Biosciences CD38 PE - Cy7 HB7 Thermo Fisher , eBioscince Lineage cocktail FITC - Thermo Fisher , eBioscince Supplementary references 1 . Reyes , J . H . et al . Glutamatergic neuronal differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells after transient expression of neurogenin 1 and treatment with BDNF and GDNF : In vitro and in vivo studies . J . Neurosci . 28 , 12622 – 12631 ( 2008 ) . 2 . Fuentealba , L . C . , Obernier , K . & Alvarez - Buylla , A . Adult neural stem cells bridge their niche . Cell Stem Cell 10 , 698 – 708 ( 2012 ) . 3 . Dobre , O . et al . A Hydrogel Platform that Incorporates Laminin Isoforms for Efficient Presentation of Growth Factors – Neural Growth and Osteogenesis . Adv . Funct . Mater . 31 , ( 2021 ) . 4 . Martino , M . M . et al . Engineering the growth factor microenvironment with fibronectin domains to promote wound and bone tissue healing . Sci . Transl . Med . 3 , 100ra89 ( 2011 ) . 5 . Chen , D . , Zhao , M . & Mundy , G . R . Bone morphogenetic proteins . Growth Factors 22 , 233 – 241 ( 2004 ) . 6 . Bruderer , M . , Richards , R . G . , Alini , M . & Stoddart , M . J . Role and regulation of runx2 in osteogenesis . Eur . Cells Mater . 28 , 269 – 286 ( 2014 ) . 7 . Long , F . Building strong bones : Molecular regulation of the osteoblast lineage . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 13 , 27 – 38 ( 2012 ) . 8 . Yang , J . et al . Nanotopographical Induction of Osteogenesis through Adhesion , Bone Morphogenic Protein Cosignaling , and Regulation of MicroRNAs . ACS Nano 8 , 9941 – 9953 ( 2014 ) . 9 . Heldin , C . - H . , Kohei , M . & Peter , D . TFG - beta signalling from cell membrane to nucleas through SMAD proteins . Nature 390 , 465 – 71 ( 1997 ) . 10 . Kugimiya , F . et al . Involvement of endogenous bone morphogenetic protein ( BMP ) 2 and BMP6 in bone formation . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 35704 – 35712 ( 2005 ) . 11 . Hol , E . M . & Pekny , M . Glial fibrillary acidic protein ( GFAP ) and the astrocyte intermediate filament system in diseases of the central nervous system . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 32 , 121 – 130 ( 2015 ) . 12 . Yamazaki , S . et al . Nonmyelinating schwann cells maintain hematopoietic stem cell hibernation in the bone marrow niche . Cell 147 , 1146 – 1158 ( 2011 ) . 13 . Moser , S . C . & van der Eerden , B . C . J . Osteocalcin — A versatile bone - derived hormone . Front . Endocrinol . ( Lausanne ) . 10 , 4 – 9 ( 2019 ) . 14 . Dalby , M . J . , Gadegaard , N . & Oreffo , R . O . C . Harnessing nanotopography and integrin - matrix interactions to influence stem cell fate . Nat . Mater . 13 , 558 – 569 ( 2014 ) . 15 . Curran , J . M . , Chen , R . & Hunt , J . A . The guidance of human mesenchymal stem cell differentiation in vitro by controlled modifications to the cell substrate . Biomaterials 27 , 4783 – 4793 ( 2006 ) . 16 . Goldman , D . C . et al . BMP4 regulates the hematopoietic stem cell niche . Blood 114 , 4393 – 4401 ( 2009 ) . 17 . Re’Em , T . , Witte , F . , Willbold , E . , Ruvinov , E . & Cohen , S . Simultaneous regeneration of articular cartilage and subchondral bone induced by spatially presented TGF - beta and BMP - 4 in a bilayer affinity binding system . Acta Biomater . 8 , 3283 – 3293 ( 2012 ) . 18 . Nakashima , K . et al . The Novel Zinc Finger - Containing Transcription Factor Osterix Is Required for Osteoblast Differentiation and Bone Formation . Cell 108 , 17 – 29 ( 2002 ) . 19 . Yokota , T . et al . Adiponectin , a new member of the family of soluble defense collagens , negatively regulates the growth of myelomonocytic progenitors and the functions of macrophages . Blood 96 , 1723 – 32 ( 2000 ) . 20 . Maeda , K . et al . cDNA Cloning and Expression of a Novel Adipose Specific Collagen - like Factor , apM1 ( dioseost Abundant Gene Transcript 1 ) . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 221 , 286 – 289 ( 1996 ) . 21 . Saraiva , L . R . et al . Adipocyte Accumulation in the Bone Marrow during Obesity and Aging Impairs Stem Cell - Based Hematopoietic and Bone Regeneration . Cell Stem Cell 20 , 771 - 784 . e6 ( 2017 ) . 22 . Xu , C . et al . Stem cell factor is selectively secreted by arterial endothelial cells in bone marrow . Nat . Commun . 9 , 1 – 13 ( 2018 ) . 23 . Krampera , M . et al . HB - EGF / HER - 1 signaling in bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells : Inducing cell expansion and reversibly preventing multilineage differentiation . Blood 106 , 59 – 66 ( 2005 ) . 24 . Crisan , M . et al . A Perivascular Origin for Mesenchymal Stem Cells in Multiple Human Organs . Cell Stem Cell 3 , 301 – 313 ( 2008 ) . 25 . Pinho , S . et al . Lineage - Biased Hematopoietic Stem Cells Are Regulated by Distinct Niches . Dev . Cell 44 , 634 - 641 . e4 ( 2018 ) . 26 . Termine , J . D . et al . Osteonectin , a bone - specific protein linking mineral to collagen . Cell 26 , 99 – 105 ( 1981 ) . 27 . Cheng , Z . A . et al . Nanoscale Coatings for Ultralow Dose BMP - 2 - Driven Regeneration of Critical - Sized Bone Defects . Adv . Sci . 1800361 , 1800361 ( 2018 ) . 28 . Lehrke , M . & Lazar , M . A . The many faces of PPARγ . Cell 123 , 993 – 999 ( 2005 ) . 29 . Lowery , J . W . et al . Loss of BMPR2 leads to high bone mass due to increased osteoblast activity . J . Cell Sci . 128 , 1308 – 1315 ( 2015 ) . 30 . Lavery , K . , Swain , P . , Falb , D . & Alaoui - Ismaili , M . H . BMP - 2 / 4 and BMP - 6 / 7 differentially utilize cell surface receptors to induce osteoblastic differentiation of human bone marrow - derived mesenchymal stem cells . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 20948 – 20958 ( 2008 ) . 31 . Bi , W . , Deng , J . M . , Zhang , Z . , Behringer , R . R . & De Crombrugghe , B . Sox9 is required for cartilage formation . Nat . Genet . 22 , 85 – 89 ( 1999 ) . 32 . Piccolo , S . , Sasai , Y . , Lu , B . & De Robertis , E . M . Dorsoventral patterning in Xenopus : Inhibition of ventral signals by direct binding of chordin to BMP - 4 . Cell 86 , 589 – 598 ( 1996 ) . 33 . Ducy , P . , Zhang , R . , Geoffroy , V . , Ridall , A . L . & Karsenty , G . Osf2 / Cbfa1 : A transcriptional activator of osteoblast differentiation . Cell 89 , 747 – 754 ( 1997 ) . 34 . Watson , J . & Francavilla , C . Regulation of FGF10 Signaling in Development and Disease . Front . Genet . 9 , 1 – 10 ( 2018 ) . 35 . Shi , C . et al . Deletion of BMP receptor type IB decreased bone mass in association with compromised osteoblastic differentiation of bone marrow mesenchymal progenitors . Sci . Rep . 6 , 1 – 13 ( 2016 ) . 36 . Noda , M . & Denhardt , D . T . Chapter 18 - Osteopontin . Princ . Bone Biol . 351 – 366 ( 2008 ) . 37 . Mark , M . P . et al . Immunohistochemical Phosphoprotein Demonstration of a 44 - lcD in Developing Rat Bones1 that picture . J . Histochem . Cytochem ( 1987 ) . 38 . Park , O . , Kim , H . , Woo , K . , Baek , J . & Ryoo , H . FGF2 - activated ERK Mitogen - activated Protein Kinase Enhances Runx2 Acetylation and Stabilization * . 285 , 3568 – 3574 ( 2010 ) . 39 . Zhang , J . et al . Identification of the haematopoietic stem cell niche and control of the niche size . Nature 425 , 836 – 841 ( 2003 ) . 40 . Haug , J . S . et al . Article N - Cadherin Expression Level Distinguishes Reserved versus Primed States of Hematopoietic Stem Cells . 367 – 379 ( 2008 ) doi : 10 . 1016 / j . stem . 2008 . 01 . 017 . 41 . Hosokawa , K . et al . Cadherin - Based Adhesion Is a Potential Target for Niche Manipulation to Protect Hematopoietic Stem Cells in Adult Bone Marrow . Stem Cell 6 , 194 – 198 ( 2010 ) . 42 . Kiel , M . J . , Acar , M . , Radice , G . L . & Morrison , S . J . Hematopoietic Stem Cells Do Not Depend on N - Cadherin to Regulate Their Maintenance . Cell Stem Cell 4 , 170 – 179 ( 2009 ) . 43 . Greenbaum , A . M . , Revollo , L . D . , Woloszynek , J . R . , Civitelli , R . & Link , D . C . N - cadherin in osteolineage cells is not required for maintenance of hematopoietic stem cells . Blood 120 , 295 – 302 ( 2012 ) . 44 . Pinho , S . et al . PDGFR A and CD51 mark human stem cells capable of hematopoietic progenitor cell expansion . J . Exp . Med . 210 , 1351 – 1367 ( 2013 ) . 45 . Kunisaki , Y . et al . Arteriolar niches maintain haematopoietic stem cell quiescence . Nature 502 , 637 – 643 ( 2013 ) . 46 . Asada , N . et al . Differential cytokine contributions of perivascular haematopoietic stem cell niches . ( 2017 ) doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb3475 . 47 . Baccin , C . et al . Combined single - cell and spatial transcriptomics reveal the molecular , cellular and spatial bone marrow niche organization . Nat . Cell Biol . 22 , 38 – 48 ( 2020 ) . 48 . Calvi , L . M . et al . Osteoblastic cells regulate the haematopoietic stem cell niche . Nature 425 , 841 – 846 ( 2003 ) . 49 . Ding , L . , Saunders , T . L . , Enikolopov , G . & Morrison , S . J . Endothelial and perivascular cells maintain haematopoietic stem cells . Nature 481 , 457 – 62 ( 2012 ) . 50 . Escary , J . , Perreau , J . , Dumenilt , D . , Ezine , S . & Brulet , P . Leukaemia inhibitory factor is necessary for maintenance of haematopoietic stem cells and thymocyte stimulation . 363 , 361 – 364 ( 1993 ) . 51 . Ranga , A . et al . 3D niche microarrays for systems - level analyses of cell fate . Nat . Commun . 5 , 1 – 10 ( 2014 ) . 52 . Hadland , B . et al . Engineering a niche supporting hematopoietic stem cell development using integrated single - cell transcriptomics . Nat . Commun . 13 , 1 – 17 ( 2022 ) . 53 . Williams , D . A . , Rios , M . , Stephens , C . & Patel , V . P . Fibronectin and VLA - 4 in haematopoietic stem cell - microenvironment interactions . Nature 352 , 438 – 441 ( 1991 ) . 54 . Nyman , J . S . et al . Differential Effects Between the Loss of MMP - 2 and MMP - 9 on Structural and Tissue - Level Properties of Bone . 26 , 1252 – 1260 ( 2011 ) . 55 . Clutter , S . D . , Fortney , J . & Gibson , L . F . MMP - 2 is required for bone marrow stromal cell support of pro – B - cell chemotaxis . 33 , 1192 – 1200 ( 2005 ) . 56 . Saw , S . , Weiss , A . , Khokha , R . & Waterhouse , P . D . Metalloproteases : On the Watch in the Hematopoietic Niche . Trends Immunol . 40 , 1053 – 1070 ( 2019 ) . 57 . Ghannam , S . , Pène , J . , Torcy - moquet , G . , Jorgensen , C . & Yssel , H . Mesenchymal Stem Cells Inhibit Human Th17 Cell Differentiation and Function and Induce a T Regulatory Cell Phenotype . ( 2022 ) doi : 10 . 4049 / jimmunol . 0902007 . 58 . Villani , A . C . et al . Single - cell RNA - seq reveals new types of human blood dendritic cells , monocytes , and progenitors . Science ( 80 - . ) . 356 , ( 2017 ) . 59 . Maillard , I . et al . Article Canonical Notch Signaling Is Dispensable for the Maintenance of Adult Hematopoietic Stem Cells . 1 , ( 2006 ) . 60 . Butler , J . M . et al . Endothelial Cells Are Essential for the Self - Renewal and Repopulation of Notch - Dependent Hematopoietic Stem Cells . Cell Stem Cell 6 , 251 – 264 ( 2010 ) . 61 . Mancini , S . J . C . et al . Jagged1 - dependent Notch signaling is dispensable for hematopoietic stem cell self - renewal and differentiation . Blood 105 , 2340 – 2342 ( 2005 ) . 62 . Engler , A . J . , Sen , S . , Sweeney , H . L . & Discher , D . E . Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage specification . Cell 126 , 677 – 89 ( 2006 ) . 63 . Ding , L . & Morrison , S . J . Haematopoietic stem cells and early lymphoid progenitors occupy distinct bone marrow niches . Nature 495 , 231 – 235 ( 2013 ) . 64 . Ding , L . , Saunders , T . L . , Enikolopov , G . & Morrison , S . J . Endothelial and perivascular cells maintain haematopoietic stem cells . Nature 481 , 457 – 62 ( 2012 ) . 65 . Méndez - Ferrer , S . et al . Mesenchymal and haematopoietic stem cells form a unique bone marrow niche . Nature 466 , 829 – 834 ( 2010 ) . 66 . Chan , C . K . F . et al . Endochondral ossification is required for haematopoietic stem - cell niche formation . Nature 457 , 490 – 494 ( 2009 ) . 67 . Notta , F . et al . Isolation of Single Human Hematopoietic . Science ( 80 - . ) . 333 , 218 – 222 ( 2011 ) . 68 . Maleki , M . , Ghanbarvand , F . & Behvarz , M . R . Comparison of Mesenchymal Stem Cell Markers in Multiple Human Adult Stem Cells . 7 , 118 – 126 ( 2014 ) . 69 . Taichman , R . , Reilly , M . J . & Emerson , S . G . Human osteoblasts support human hematopoietic progenitor cells in vitro bone marrow cultures . Blood 87 , 518 – 524 ( 1996 ) . 70 . Trapnell , B . C . & Abe , S . Colony stimulating factors . 540 – 546 ( 2004 ) . 71 . Cortés , F . , Debacker , C . , Péault , B . & Labastie , M . C . Differential expression of KDR / VEGFR - 2 and CD34 during mesoderm development of the early human embryo . Mech . Dev . 83 , 161 – 164 ( 1999 ) . 72 . Blaber , E . A . et al . Mechanical unloading of bone in microgravity reduces mesenchymal and hematopoietic stem cell - mediated tissue regeneration . Stem Cell Res . 13 , 181 – 201 ( 2014 ) . 73 . Yoshihara , H . et al . Thrombopoietin / MPL Signaling Regulates Hematopoietic Stem Cell Quiescence and Interaction with the Osteoblastic Niche . Cell Stem Cell 1 , 685 – 697 ( 2007 ) . 74 . Kumar , A . et al . Specification and Diversification of Pericytes and Smooth Muscle Cells from Mesenchymoangioblasts . Cell Rep . 19 , 1902 – 1916 ( 2017 ) . 75 . Johnson , C . P . , Tang , H . , Carag , C . , Speicher , D . W . & Discher , D . E . Forced Unfolding of Proteins Within Cells . Science ( 80 - . ) . 317 , 663 – 667 ( 2007 ) . 76 . Forristal , C . E . , Wright , K . L . , Hanley , N . A . , Oreffo , R . O . C . & Houghton , F . D . Hypoxia inducible factors regulate pluripotency and proliferation in human embryonic stem cells cultured at reduced oxygen tensions . Reproduction 139 , 85 – 97 ( 2010 ) . 77 . Tsai , C . C . , Su , P . F . , Huang , Y . F . , Yew , T . L . & Hung , S . C . Oct4 and Nanog Directly Regulate Dnmt1 to Maintain Self - Renewal and Undifferentiated State in Mesenchymal Stem Cells . Mol . Cell 47 , 169 – 182 ( 2012 ) . 78 . Gerber , H . , Malik , A . K . , Solar , G . P . & Sherman , D . VEGF regulates haematopoietic stem cell survival by an internal autocrine loop mechanism . Nature 417 , 6 – 10 ( 2002 ) .