Socially Embedded Work : A Study of Wheelchair Users Performing Online Crowd Work in China Xianghua Ding 1 , Patrick C . Shih 2 , Ning Gu 1 1 School of Computer Science Fudan University Shanghai 201201 , China { dingx , ninggu } @ fudan . edu . cn 2 School of Informatics and Computing Indiana University Bloomington Bloomington , IN 47408 , USA patshih @ indiana . edu ABSTRACT Information and Communications Technology ( ICT ) affords new opportunities for people with disabilities to participate in the workforce . However , little research has investigated how people with disabilities access and perform work through ICT . This paper presents a study of how people with disabilities , particularly those who are wheelchair users , perform online crowd work in China . We highlight an online crowd work practice that is highly embedded in social relationships that are developed through ICT over time . We call this socially embedded work to distinguish it from previous studies describing online crowd work as being devoid of social relationships . Our study uncovers the unique developmental dynamics of the online crowd work community self - organized by wheelchair users in China . Findings suggest that an ecosystem that focuses on fostering social relationships among the stakeholders can potentially address the wide range of issues of online crowd work reported in current crowd work literature . Author Keywords Online crowd work ; crowdsourcing ; wheelchair users ; people with disabilities ; socially embedded work ; embeddedness . ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . INTRODUCTION In CSCW and related fields , research related to people with disabilities has focused almost exclusively on accessibility . Only recently has research turned attention on how the workers socialize , collaborate , and perform online work [ 7 , 26 , 37 ] . Paid work is found to be important in enhancing one’s financial security , control of life , and self - worth , and is as such considered to be a key to addressing marginalization and social exclusion [ 34 ] . In addition , it has been reported that having a productive role can also help the mental wellbeing of people with disabilities [ 18 ] . Today , the development of ICT provides people with new flexibility by allowing them to work wherever and whenever they want . This is especially important for people with mobility disabilities ( e . g . , wheelchair users ) as they may have difficulties commuting to work [ 1 , 37 ] . More so , enabled by the Internet , there emerged new socio - economic systems of production such as “peer production” [ 5 ] and crowdsourcing [ 14 ] . Unlike traditional organizational work that is characterized by clear hierarchical structure and social institutions , these newly emerged socio - economic production systems are based on self - organizing communities or a large crowd of individuals producing goods and services over the Internet . These provide even more freedom and flexibility for individuals , particularly people with disabilities , to participate and work online . However , although there has been surging interest in research on peer production [ 28 , 35 ] as well as online crowd work [ 19 , 23 ] , research has yet to focus on how people with disabilities participate in it beyond issues of accessibility [ 37 ] . Existing efforts on studying peer production and online crowd work , such as Open Source Software , Wikipedia , and Amazon Mechanical Turk ( AMT ) , primarily focus on themes such as motivations [ 4 , 8 ] , demographics of workers [ 31 ] , tensions and conflicts in the peer production process [ 16 , 21 ] , incentives to encourage sustainable participation and high quality output [ 36 ] , and ethical issues and concerns [ 15 , 32 ] . In general , issues related to how people with disabilities participate in peer production or perform online work are largely underexplored . Where paid online work is concerned , the most commonly explored form is online crowd work , defined as “the performance of tasks online by distributed crowd workers who are financially compensated by requesters” [ 20 ] . Online crowd work is commonly described as being devoid of social relationships in which workers gather around crowdsourcing platforms , such as AMT and oDesk , to work independently and anonymously [ 14 , 16 ] . Some distinguish peer production from crowdsourcing this way [ 6 ] : while peer production such as the Wikipedia and Open Source Software projects is an organizational innovation from a Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . CSCW ' 17 , February 25 - March 01 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4335 - 0 / 17 / 03… $ 15 . 00 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2998181 . 2998282 Session : Overcoming Barriers CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 642 community of individuals cooperating and coordinating towards a shared outcome , crowdsourcing is based on a crowd of independent individuals completing highly regimented , discrete , and pre - specified tasks . As such , Haythornthwaite conceptualizes online crowdsourcing as lightweight , with weak - tie attachment , and enacted through authority - determined rules in contrast with online communities that develop strong attachment and connections [ 13 ] . The existence of collaborations among workers around these crowdsourcing platforms has only recently been reported [ 12 ] . This paper presents an interview study of 11 wheelchair users who regularly perform paid online work in China . Previous study shows that the younger generation of people with disabilities in China tends to be fluent with ICT use , and many—mainly wheelchair users—perform online work to earn a living wage [ 26 ] . In this study , we would like to explore online work by wheelchair users in more depth , particularly by focusing on the following research questions :  How do wheelchair users access online work ?  What tools or mechanisms are used for wheelchair users to perform online work , and how are they used ?  What challenges do they experience , and how can they be better supported ? In this study , we uncover a new online crowd work practice that is quite different from what has been reported in literature . In particular , far from being devoid of social relationships , we found online crowd work by wheelchair users in China to be largely facilitated by social relationships developed around social media ( e . g . , online chat rooms , online forums , and instant messenger – QQ ) . Moreover , we identified an online work community structure self - organized by wheelchair users that consists of gatekeepers ( i . e . , client - facing and risk - shielding ) , managers ( i . e . , task coordination , quality control , and time management ) , and workers ( i . e . , people who complete the tasks ) . We found that workers depend on reliable gatekeepers instead of crowdsourcing platforms to access , coordinate , and perform online work—crowdsourcing platforms are only sometimes used to ease task coordination , such as distributing tasks and collecting results . In other words , the wheelchair - user community in China follows a people - oriented approach , as opposed to the task - oriented one reported in current crowd work literature , to organize online crowd work . Drawing on Granovetter’s notion of embeddedness [ 11 ] , we refer to this form of online crowd work as social embedded work . Granovetter’s influential work on embeddedness argues that economic behavior does not operate in a separate sphere independent from ongoing social relations and structures but rather is highly embedded in them . His notion of embeddedness is then a departure from the classic and neo - classic economics that assume rational and self - interested behavior with minimal influence of social relations ( a case of “under - socialization” ) . It also deviates from the more recent economic theories that attempt to incorporate social influences but views them merely as actors acting upon customs , norms , and habits after these are internalized ( a case of “over - socialization” ) . These two schools of thought treat social relations as atomized behaviors and ignore the influence of the dynamic nature of ongoing social relations and structures . This similarly applies to the current research in online crowd work in which atomized behavior is often assumed , and the influence of the dynamic nature of ongoing social relations and structures are often ignored . The role of concrete and ongoing social relations , emphasized by Granovetter’s notion of embeddedness , is similarly found in the online work practice we uncovered in the wheelchair user community in China . In this paper , we use the notion of social embeddedness to emphasize that online work by wheelchair users in China is neither devoid of social relationships nor simply consisting of workers who collaborate as independent agents around crowdsourcing platforms . Instead , they are fundamentally reliant on ongoing social relationships and structures . We report how the organization , access , distribution , coordination , and performance of online work are fundamentally centered around ongoing social relationships and are community - developed over a long period of time . We also illustrate how various issues of online crowd work including trust , work organization , quality control , delivery , and other logistics are addressed in the self - organized social structures . The unique developmental dynamics of the online work community self - organized by wheelchair users uncovered in our study contributes a new perspective for understanding how social embeddedness may work for online crowd work . RELATED WORK Online work , mainly online crowd work through crowdsourcing platforms , has been widely explored in CSCW and related fields in these years . Mainly based on a task - oriented approach , online crowdsourcing is commonly depicted as being devoid of social relationships and collaborations , carried out by a set of distributed , disaggregated , and independent workers who use crowdsourcing platforms to access and perform online work . Relationship in the context of crowdsourcing is limited to the passing of task - related information between anonymous workers and requesters mediated by crowdsourcing platforms [ 15 ] . Research such as TurKit [ 25 ] and Turkomatic [ 23 ] focuses on adding support for coordination and collaboration on crowdsourcing platforms by leveraging iterative processes and splitting workflows between different sets of workers . However , it relies more on algorithms ( also called engineering coordination [ 12 ] ) rather than on humans for Session : Overcoming Barriers CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 643 coordination . As crowdsourcing platforms increasingly focus on using algorithms for matching , coordination , quality control , and so on , there is a general concern that human workers will be rendered as nameless and faceless resources in crowdsourcing [ 3 ] . A recent study , however , shows that although some popular crowdsourcing platforms do not provide built - in collaborative features , crowd workers , far from being independent and disaggregated as commonly assumed , collaborate within a social network of crowd workers off the platforms by leveraging forums , social media , and phone calls as well as face - to - face meetings [ 12 ] . The collaborations they identified include helping each other manage administrative work such as signing up , finding reputable employers , and recreations while doing work . These findings primarily draw on data from crowd workers in India , but it is suggested that American workers engaged in similar collaborations through online forums such as TurkNation [ 12 ] . In recent years , there has been increasing interest in adding collaborative features to enhance crowdsourcing platforms . For example , crowdsourcing platforms such as LeadGenius [ 38 ] ( formerly MobileWorks [ 24 ] ) have incorporated real - time chat tools to allow workers to communicate with each other . It is also reported that work on these platforms is centrally managed and distributed , with some taking leadership and management roles [ 12 ] . However , there is yet a study on how crowd work is collectively carried out on these sites . For people with disabilities , research has generally pointed to ICT as having the potential of addressing employment for the disabled [ 1 , 37 ] . It is also suggested that compared to “know how” ( human capital ) , it is the dearth of “know who” ( social capital ) that puts people with disabilities at a significant disadvantage with respect to finding employment [ 1 ] . Recently , researchers have started to pay attention to how ICT is used to foster social capital for economically distressed communities in terms of helping members of those communities find jobs [ 9 , 17 ] . However , research in this space mainly focuses on employment in traditional settings instead of online work . METHODS We started with ZiQiang ( 自 强 ) , the largest online forum for people with disabilities in China , to find access to people with disabilities doing online work . From ZiQiang and other media reports , we learned that Shen , the founder of ZiQiang who himself also suffered from mobility disability due to AS ( ankylosing spondylitis ) , was well connected with the disability community and was very active in promoting employment for the community . We initiated contact with Shen via social media to begin informal conversations and to establish rapport . We asked Shen to suggest contacts of those who had performed online work , and he connected us to six participants—all were wheelchair users—who had years of experience doing online work . We continued to recruit via snowball sampling through these contacts . We eventually recruited 11 wheelchair users from all over the country . Table 1 shows the profiles of the 11 study participants . Most of our participants were in their 30s and 40s . They became disabled from different causes at different stages in their lives , but all of them were experienced online workers—they had worked online for at least three years , and some had worked for over 10 years , coinciding with the time when the Internet infrastructure expanded beyond major metropolitan cities in China in 2005 . The types of online work they had performed includes online posting ( posting articles and comments on community sites for product or service promotion ) , online account registration ( as a way to promote a platform or an online game ) , book transcription , copywriting , customer service , online content monitoring and editing , running online e - commerce stores ( e . g . , Taobao ) , and others . Essentially , they perform the kind of behind - the - scene work that creates the look of the Internet in China , frequently described as “the brick layers of the Internet” among online workers . These were by no means representative of the entire disability community or all of the wheelchair users in China . Adopting a qualitative research approach , we hope to uncover a rich and nuanced understanding of worker conditions based on in - depth interviews with a smaller set of not - necessarily representative but experienced online workers in the wheelchair user community . Starting with Shen as the first contact point , we got in touch with a relatively more experienced group of online workers—four of them were gatekeepers , suggesting the active leader roles they took in the community ( we will elaborate more on the role of gatekeepers in the subsequent sections ) . This particular group gave us a unique perspective to understand the developmental dynamics of the disability work community over the years . The interviews were semi - structured and conducted using phone calls , QQ voice , and text messages . Each interview lasted for about an hour . We asked the participants about the type of online work that they did , how they got access to online work , and how they performed the tasks . When interesting information arose , we followed up with questions and asked for specific examples . Except for Long and Niao , who were relatively reserved and only accepted text chat through QQ , all of our participants were friendly , supportive , and open in sharing their experiences through phone calls or QQ voice chat . Some explicitly expressed their appreciation for our attention to them . Each voice - based interview was audio recorded and later transcribed . We applied the grounded theory approach [ 33 ] throughout data collection and analysis . We took copious notes during the interviews . The first author conducted the initial coding , and the emerged themes were discussed and iteratively refined among all the authors . As themes began to emerge , we steered the questions around the emerged themes in Session : Overcoming Barriers CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 644 subsequent interviews . All interviews were conducted in Mandarin . Representative quotes were translated into English and provided in the results for illustrative purposes . All participants’ names used in this paper are pseudonyms . In our interviews , our participants did not differentiate populations experiencing different types of disability conditions but collectively refer to themselves as “people with disabilities” or “friends with disabilities” ( 残 友 ) . Unless otherwise specified , we refer to wheelchair users as people with disabilities in the remainder of this paper to preserve the original content of the interviews . SOCIALLY EMBEDDED ONLINE WORK Overall , we found online work by these wheelchair users was primarily done through ICT tools such as QQ , which supports text , audio and video chat , video conferencing , and group chat , as well as file sharing , instead of a crowdsourcing platform like AMT . Payment is mainly managed through Alipay , a widely used online payment platform in China . In the sections below , we will describe how people formed social relationships using ICT , how the relationship grew into a self - organized network of online workforce among wheelchair users in China or the gatekeeper structure as we described in this paper , and how social relationships and the gatekeeper structure helped address various issues of online work . The Emergence of Social Network and Online Work From Online Chatting to Online Work Although their physical limitations prohibited our participants from socializing more widely offline , our participants reported that once they gained access to the Internet they naturally sought out and gathered around social media platforms dedicated to people with disabilities , such as online chat rooms ( e . g . , Sina UC ) , online forums ( e . g . , ZiQiang ) , and instant messaging ( e . g . , QQ ) to socialize with other people with similar conditions . Our participants reported that they spent a considerable amount of time engaging in open and intensive social interactions with each other over the Internet when most of them first connected to the Internet around 2005 . For example , they described how they spent days singing and chatting with other people with disabilities on Sina UC . As similarly reported in previous work [ 26 ] , people with disabilities tend to develop strong bonds because they are empathic of each other’s physical limitations and day - to - day challenges . Around 2005 and 2006 , some IT companies began to outsource simple information work , such as online posting ( to promote products or services through the Internet ) , to online workers . Some companies specifically recruited people with disabilities , provided training , and organized them into small teams to work collectively . Our participants reported that small and simple tasks provided by these companies were the first instances in which people with disabilities began to participate in online work in China . Through online socialization , increasingly more and more people with disabilities began to gain awareness of the possibility of earning wages by doing online work . Our participants described to us that “work” was among the most discussed topics that came up in the chat rooms . As a group , they started to actively reach out to other people with disabilities to share their experiences with them . For example , Shen , the founder of ZiQiang , organized online seminars about employment that took place in online chat rooms . Mao , who had several months of online work experiences at the time , shared her experiences through one Participants Sex Age Type of Disability Online Work Experience Education / Pre - Occupation Location Online Work Type Bi M 30s Spine Injury ( in age 12 ) 10 years Primary school Shanxi online posting , copy - writing ( gatekeeper ) Tie M 30s Spine Injury ( in age 15 ) 10 years N / A Guangdong book transcription , game registration Mao F 50s Spine Injury ( in her 40s ) 10 years Accountant Hubei online posting , game registration , content filling , etc . ( gatekeeper ) Mo F 30s OI 10 years Middle School Shanghai online posting ; customer service Gu M 40s AS 7 years High school Jilin online posting , online content filling , customer service Yuan M 40s Polio 9 years Real Estate Agent Hubei MutualAid Net founder , ( gatekeeper ) Cun M N / A AS 9 years N / A Zhejiang online posting ( gatekeeper ) Long M N / A AS N / A N / A Shanghai customer service Tian M 40s RA 3 years Middle School Teacher Jiangxi online posting , copy - writing Ling M 30s AS 8 years Worker Shanxi Taobao store Niao F 30s Spine Injury N / A N / A Fujian online posting AS : ankylosing spondylitis ; OI : osteogenesisimperfecta ; Polio : Poliomyelitis ; RA : rheumatoid arthritis ; Table 1 . Demographics of Interview Participants . Session : Overcoming Barriers CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 645 of the seminars and later became a forum moderator for the topic of employment on ZiQiang . Online forums and chat rooms for people with disabilities became an effective way of sharing work opportunities among them . More so , to avoid risks of wage theft or scams , we found that people with disabilities also mainly chose their disability friends over public job platforms to find reliable online work , similar to what was reported in [ 12 ] . Although online chat rooms and forums were where our participants formed friendships and were introduced to online work , today it was reportedly rare for them to go back to these places to simply “hang out” anymore—mainly because they were so occupied by their participation in online work today . For example , Ling explained how work took away time from socializing : “ Like me , they all had their own things to be busy with . We will not go there [ ZiQiang ] to boast , chat , and talk about this and that anymore . ” With more and more former friends moving away from online forums towards online work , the shift quickly escalated and drove others away . What is more , instant messenger groups , such as QQ group chat , that provide instantaneity as well as advanced features such file transferring , video chat , and others , quickly became more popular and began to replace online forums and online chat rooms as the main place for people to work and socialize . For instance , Bi pointed out to us that he and his friends had moved away from online forums or chat rooms to QQ groups , where online work is also distributed , coordinated , and managed . As mentioned , online work by people with disabilities is mainly mediated through QQ groups , which afforded voice , video , text - based chatting , file transferring , etc . In this context , a QQ group is usually formed when a new online work task begins . Since online work of this kind is typically labor intensive , tedious , and boring , chatting over QQ groups while they work also becomes a way for them to entertain each other . Tie , for instance , reported how a QQ group presented both opportunities for socialization and work : “ After the task was completed , this work group became a chatting group , and then someone introduced new work opportunities later on . ” In this sense , QQ worked not only as a platform for work distribution and coordination , but also as a platform for socialization . Significance of Online Work for People with Disabilities To understand why online work was developed so quickly among people with disabilities to the extent that it almost took away mere “online chatting , ” we need to develop a better understanding of what work means to our subjects . Mainly , we found online work brings to them a great sense of empowerment and self - efficacy . Many of our participants expressed excitement when they were able to participate in online work , even when they only made a few Chinese Yuans per day initially ( Approximately 6 Chinese Yuans are equivalent to 1 U . S . dollar ) . Bi said : At the beginning , I made 1 Yuan a day , and 30 Yuan a month . I was so excited when I found out that I could make money all by myself without depending on others to arrange it for me . This was something that I had always wanted to do . This excitement is shared by many of our participants . Tie , who started online work doing book transcription , said : “ Several Yuans a day . Still quite happy then . ” Previous studies questioned why people would willingly perform micro - work despite the low wages [ 27 ] . Our data suggests that despite the low wages , the ability to gain financial independence without relying on other people’s help or charity was key for people with disabilities . Our participants further reported that it was very difficult for them to gain acceptance in traditional workplaces . The support provided by government welfare programs in most parts of the country also did not provide regular and sustainable income , making them appreciate even more the online work opportunities presented to them . Our study also confirms that engaging in online work is helpful for the well - being of people with disabilities [ 18 ] . Tie told us that besides earning wages , simply being busy and mentally occupied was beneficial : “You have something to do , so you will not have random , depressing , and negative thoughts . ” Through work , they also started to expand their social network . For instance , several participants reported that their social circle expanded beyond people with disabilities through online work . In general , our participants reported that earning wages through online work increases their sense of autonomy and freedom , as similarly suggested in previous literature [ 1 ] . We also found that significance for people with disabilities to perform online work in China varies highly by the participants’ location and socioeconomic status . Shen pointed out that people from the coastal regions of China ( e . g . , the relatively more affluent areas in China such as Shanghai ) have the privilege of receiving better government welfare packages and would be less willing to do online work that pays low wages . Since online crowd work wages are normalized independent of the worker’s location , the earnings are comparable to the average income of regular jobs in rural areas that have lower income levels . This is similar to previous findings that crowdsourcing platforms attract many workers from developing countries such as India [ 31 ] . Bi , a copywriter from the countryside in ShanXi , offered similar observations : I found that there were people from Xinjiang ( a province in the north west of China ) and a lot of people from the northeast , and then , a lot of people from Shanxi , but I rarely saw Shanghainese do work online . In our study , two participants were from Shanghai , and both of them now have found full - time customer service jobs that were relatively more stable and better paid compared to other types of online work . Mo , located in Shanghai , was Session : Overcoming Barriers CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 646 one of them . Although she used to do online posting , Mo mostly focused on her full - time customer service job today . She explicitly emphasized that , unlike many workers she had encountered while doing online work , she did not have the pressure to work hard to earn wages . She explained that many online workers are stressed because “ they suffered from bad financial conditions , for the lack of government subsidies and others . ” She herself did not have that financial pressure , and she mostly worked online out of personal interests to learn and socialize . Career Development , Challenges , and Social Network It is important to note that the low wage rate previously mentioned is only acceptable for entry - level workers . The participants that we interviewed are relatively more experienced and had advanced far beyond the entry level . When asked whether they would be willing to do image tagging tasks , a common type of online crowd work mediated with crowdsourcing platforms such as AMT , many refused because they felt it to be work for beginners . Ling described that simple and mundane tasks are for “ those who just began accessing the Internet — those people with disabilities with ages around 26 and 27 , older than 18 , 19 . ” Most our participants had developed a form of career path through online work over time . The case of Bi was telling . Bi suffered a spinal injury in a car accident in the fifth grade , and he was forced to drop out of school as a result . He still loved Chinese literature , and he continued to develop his reading and writing skills on his own . He started doing labor - intensive online work such as game profile registrations and online posting 10 years ago , but then he quickly gained recognition as a good writer , which earned him the opportunity to do copywriting , which became the form of online work that he does full time today . He currently manages a small team of wheelchair users who are copywriters because he receives many more job requests than he could handle by himself . Similarly , Mo , Gu , and Long also used to do labor - intensive work such as online posting , and now they are all working in customer service , which means more job security and higher salaries . With experiences and social capital accumulated over the years , Mao , Yuan , and Cun all advanced from online work to working as gatekeepers ( the role of gatekeepers will be discussed in more detail in subsequent sections ) . In general , our participants moved from performing low - end , labor - intensive work , such as online posting or book transcription , to more skill - based work such as copywriting as they accumulated experiences and grew their social capital over time . They also advanced from doing unstable part - time work to more stable full - time jobs , or they moved from merely laboring to managing . However , despite their deep expertise performing online work , people from outside of the disability community continue to hold prejudice against them . For example , Mo described an incident in which they were looked down upon by a government official , who was organizing employment trainings for them : The one who is in charge of outsourcing projects , his attitude is really nasty . I remembered once he said to me that “although the work ( that he wants us to do ) is boring and pays low , why can’t you be more hardworking and take more initiative ? For people like you ( with motor disability ) who do not leave the house , it is pretty good already for you to be able to make money . ” And I was thinking , with my current income level in the online work community , I will not be interested in working for a few Yuans . As a result , Mo refused to attend the training workshop . When getting work from providers , gatekeepers also carefully managed their impressions . Yuan reported that when he seeks work from providers , he tends to hide the fact that his group is composed of people with disabilities . Instead , he emphasizes the value of the services they provide and how they could help solve problems for his clients , as he believes that to be the key for their sustainable development . For people with disabilities , interactions mediated by ICT are helpful in mitigating the impact resulting from negative stereotypes and their ability to manage client impressions and expectations . Bi said that some of his clients think that he works in Beijing despite the fact that he lives in a rural area . Mao said that she prefers to meet with her clients over the Internet instead of face - to - face because she wants to avoid the impact of being judged by stereotypes typically held against people with disabilities : People like us who are lame with hands and legs do not look good . The first response that we get from people is , typically , “Can you do it well ? ” So it is difficult for us to talk business with others in person , and we would rather do it over the Internet . At the same time , they also face challenges of dynamic labor market changes , such as strong competition from other online worker populations . For example , Cun reported that online posting was a lucrative job between 2005 and 2012 . However , the competition between different groups drove the price down and drove many groups out of that line of work . Even for book transcription , Tie reported that his work ended and his QQ group for book transcription tasks disbanded after just half a year because “ more and more people joined , and that job was taken by others who are willing to accept lower wages . ” The competition did not always come from other online worker groups . Technological advancements can also displace jobs in online work . For example , Mao reported that book transcriptions recently disappeared from the online work space because “ some software can directly turn pictures into text now , and it only takes a little work to edit it . ” Facing these challenges , many people with disabilities also seek opportunities to actively learn and develop new skills so that they can stay competitive in the online workforce . Ling was a typical example . He was running an online Session : Overcoming Barriers CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 647 store , and he had been thinking of developing new knowledge and skills because it had become so competitive to operate an online store due to more and more people joining the field . At the time of the interview , Ling had already closed his online store and started to focus on studying financial knowledge : I am not living for just making money . I can still make a living now , as I had some savings from the previous years doing online work . I have saved up enough to live even if I do not make money for the next three years . Besides self - education , social network or social capital among people with disabilities is also the key to seeking new work opportunities and for advancing their careers . In Mo’s case , she transitioned several times to “ better online work opportunities ” that were introduced to her through her social network of people with disabilities . Long also pointed out that , usually when there were new openings , they would invite their disability friends to fill the positions . Ling explicitly emphasized the importance of the social aspects in QQ groups in seeking online work opportunities : You need to make friends through QQ groups . When you have good connections , when you are good at it , you can get related information of different things , which might bring you to another industry that has better job opportunities . As such , our participants acknowledged that their social network played a critical role in introducing them to new work and career development opportunities . Previous literature has shown that a social network is beneficial for seeking employment [ 10 ] . What we found in this work is that social networking , combined with ICT , also offers other benefits such as protection that could shield people with disabilities from discrimination and outside competition . A Gatekeeper Structure for Online Work One striking fact we learned from this study is how much people rely on social relationships to get work done . That is , not only do people rely on social networks for accessing trustworthy and reliable work sources and for career advancement , social relationships are at the core of how online work is organized and carried out by and for people with disabilities . The Gatekeeper Structure In the study , we found that more experienced participants began to manage teams to do work collectively—we refer to these as gatekeepers in this paper . People with disabilities primarily find online work through gatekeepers as opposed to public crowdsourcing platforms . A gatekeeper is typically experienced and reputable in the online work circle , and s / he is usually financially rewarded with a commission for taking on this role . We will describe in this section how a gatekeeper plays a vital role for people with disabilities and for a variety of reasons . Among our participants , Mao , Bi , Cun , and Yuan can all be considered as gatekeepers . Mao was probably the most well - known gatekeeper in the disability community . She was an accountant in a factory and was running a restaurant after her early retirement ( which is common for people in her generation due to the economic reforms during the 1990s in China ) . After being injured in an accident , she sold her restaurant and began to perform online work . She was among the first group of people with disabilities to start earning wages over the Internet in 2005 , and she now has thousands of members working for her—90 percent of them are people with disabilities . After she discovered online work as a possibility to improve her personal condition , she spent her time reaching out to those in need and introduced them to online work as a form of social inclusion . In our study , she was commonly mentioned by our participants as “Mother Mao” or “Sister Mao” out of respect for her contribution to the disability community . Mo described Mao this way , She mainly wants to help more people . To her , she does not care whether you are experienced or not , she will help you . . . Mother Mao will teach you step by step and show you the ropes along the way . It is important to note that bringing more people with disabilities to do online work was not as simple and easy as it may appear on the surface . As mentioned , our participants are relatively more experienced online workers , and some have grown to take on leader roles in the community . However , they all started with no online work experiences , and it took them a long time to learn and improve their online work skills while developing their social network . According to our participants , people with disabilities in China , in general , lack education and technical literacy , which creates additional challenges for involving them in online work . Yuan , who has suffered from Polio since childhood , is another gatekeeper who tries to promote employment for more people with disabilities . He shared with us the hard work behind this mission : You may need to spend five hours teaching them how to take a screenshot… It is not only that they do not know how to use computers . Their ability to comprehend the meaning of computers… Most of them do not possess the most basic knowledge of what computers do , so it feels so very hard to do that . … It took much more effort to achieve the same effects than with other groups . The training challenges to work with new members were also confirmed by Gu , another gatekeeper . Although members such as Bi and Mo grew out from Mao’s group and had moved into doing relatively higher - level online work , Mao continued to focus on entry - level work and providing one - on - one training to get new members started in literacy and computer usage so they could participate in online work . That is , as a gatekeeper , Mao not only tries to make a living herself but also has the goodwill to reach out Session : Overcoming Barriers CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 648 and bring more people with disabilities to do online work and earning a living . In addition , it takes time to build experience and a reputation in the online work circle . When reflecting how she began to assume this position in the community , Mao pointed to her effort on being credible and trustworthy to others . Indeed , we also learned from other participants that , in many cases when the clients failed to deliver payment , Mao absorbed the losses and paid the workers out of her own savings . The payment could sometimes amount to thousands of Chinese Yuans in total . She said her positive attitude also helped her get through times of adversity . For instance , she shared the story of a job in which a payment failed to come through during her early days of doing online work , but she decided to stay positive : “ At least I didn’t spend money on it , so I just treated it as time spent playing games . ” Her positive attitude towards online work as well as her credibility and trustworthiness were why clients and workers gathered around her to facilitate online work . Eventually , Mao became an established gatekeeper as she started to get more work than she could handle : As I couldn’t finish work myself , I gave some to others I know . Gradually , with more and more work , I started to manage groups of workers . Bi , who used to work for Mao and later started his own copy - writing studio with six to seven other writers , reported a similar story : I have done this for some years . At the beginning , I could handle the workload without any troubles . But then I started to get too many work requests , so I found one of my friends — we knew each other in 2006 through ZiQiang — to do it together . And then we added more people to the group . Bi used to maintain an online Taobao store for publicity , but later closed the store because he “ got too much business already ” from his social connections . Similarly , Mao did not advertise publicly . Despite the fact that she is currently managing thousands of workers and many job requests , her primary sources of clients continue to be based on referrals and word of mouth today . This way , in the gatekeeper structure , online work flows to those with high reputation , who then in turn organize people to do the work collectively or delegate it to others in their social network . When the group becomes large , such as in the case of Mao , it is common for the group to have managers to help manage the work . Managers are usually selected and assigned by the gatekeeper to be responsible for forming teams from a pool of workers , providing task - oriented training , distributing tasks , collecting task deliverables , generating job reports , and so on , and are usually financially compensated with a monthly salary . With managers , gatekeepers could focus more on soliciting work from clients . Quality Control and Delivery Management through Social Relationships For building a reputation in the online work circle , quality control and timely delivery are crucial . As mentioned , centralized training was commonly provided in these groups : both Mao and Yuan provided basic training for new workers . Training is important not simply for social inclusion but also for quality assurance . In addition to centralized training , we also learned that training was done through friends and social networks in the disability community similar to the help people provided to their friends as reported by Gray et al . [ 12 ] . Tie described how people passed along useful tutorial information and assisted their friends through initial jobs when they first introduced them to online work . Mo had completed different kinds of online work , but she emphasized that she had not received any formal training and learned all the ropes from her friends : It was all through my friends , who taught me step - by - step . When I encountered something I did not know — we communicated with voice chat [ QQ ] . Besides training , working with trusted friends also makes it easier for quality control and management . When asked why he maintained long - term relationships with his workers instead of simply recruiting new workers from QQ writing groups for new projects like what some online work populations would do , Bi answered that it was more reliable to work with people he knows well . He further pointed out several benefits of working with long - term connections , including predictability , low - overhead , etc . : The clients usually give a short time to finish the writing , and I can’t ask those who I am unsure of to do the work . When I assign something , I must know when he could finish . . . For those writers I trust , if I think there will be no problem then I just skim over the deliverable quickly and then submit it . For those ( with whom ) I often find problems , I will usually take a closer look , revise , and then submit . I only do limited management with people I trust… . Besides maintaining long - term relationships among workers , long - term relationships with clients are also helpful as it made it easier to achieve agreement and address misunderstandings or disputes . Tian put it this way : “We generally understand well what existing clients expect from us , so it is easy for us to prepare the manuscripts up to the expected standards . ” Maintaining social relationships was also a way to overcome some delivery difficulties . For example , projects posted during holidays usually create problems because most workers are unavailable . Gu told us how that could cause anxiety . Interestingly , Tie reported a case in which social capital was used as a way to mitigate a worker shortage during busy times : Session : Overcoming Barriers CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 649 During the Spring Festivals when there are not many workers available , several of us who get along well with the manager will stay around and try our best to do it . As these cases demonstrate , maintaining good social relationships not only helps reduce the overhead for management and quality control , but also helps mitigate special challenges such as worker shortage during holidays . For these reasons , many gatekeepers relied on RenMai ( 人 脉 , “social connections” ) to find both work and workers , instead online marketplace platforms . Crowdsourcing Platforms Embedded in the Gatekeeper Structure From the interviews , we learned that although work was largely organized around people including gatekeepers and managers , crowdsourcing platforms were sometimes employed to coordinate work . For example , Mao maintained a private crowdsourcing platform , and Yuan ran a public online crowdsourcing platform called HuBang ( 互 帮 , “help each other” ) . ErMu ( 耳 目 ) was another crowdsourcing platform mentioned by our participants that also targets people with disabilities . Mao used her private site mostly to distribute tasks and collect results from workers as a way to enhance efficiency of management . She also used QQ groups to keep contact with her workers and to inform them when work was available on the site . That is , while work was distributed using the crowdsourcing platform , coordination and communication were mostly done through QQ groups . In this context , crowdsourcing platforms were primarily used to track task progress and collect deliverables , which used to be done by managers manually . According to our participants , although ErMu was a public crowdsourcing platform , it was also used as a way to facilitate work distribution and management instead of allowing clients to make job requests directly . Although HuBang allowed anyone online to submit work requests directly , the majority of work on this platform still came from direct contracts with private companies . This allowed Yuan to continue to provide training , management , and quality assurance behind the scenes . Despite the availability of the crowdsourcing platforms , online work is still mainly organized around the gatekeepers as a way to coordinate work distribution and quality assurance rather than around these platforms as an open marketplace to seek online work tasks as reported in most prior work . The crowdsourcing platforms in this context , then , are not simply third - party public platforms that are independent to anonymous clients and workers , but rather act as facilitating agents for gatekeepers to organize work collectively . None of the participants we interviewed went directly to work on other public crowdsourcing platforms , mainly because most of them could find better wages through their social network . For example , our participants reported that they would not use BaJie ( 八戒 ) , a crowdsourcing platform for design - oriented tasks such as webpage and graphic designs , for work . BaJie typically asks dozens of workers to submit completed work to a job request , and only one of them will be selected and get paid . As such , most BaJie workers do not get paid . Bi considered this as the key difference between the disability community network ( people - oriented ) vs . open crowdsourcing platforms ( task - oriented ) : “ Because the open crowdsourcing platforms do not consider who does it well in the long term , or on established relationships . It is more task - driven for every task . ” Being people - vs . task - oriented explains clearly what distinguishes socially embedded online work from the online work in open crowdsourcing platforms in general . Limitations of the Gatekeeper Structure Although the self - organized gatekeeper structure addresses a number of issues associated with the current online crowd work practices , including training , quality control [ 36 ] , delivery management , dispute resolution [ 15 , 16 ] , and more humane work environments and worker experience [ 32 ] , it also faces certain challenges . Both Bi and Mao had realized the limitations of this people - oriented approach that is highly dependent on personal connections and word of mouth . One big issue is scalability , in which the personal capability and physical limitations of an effective gatekeeper could limit the reach and spread of the network . Mao , for example , had already realized the limit of this approach , but this seems to be the only way she could manage for now : The way we do things is not right ( no advertisement , no publicity ) . This is not helpful for us to get more business because , after all , clientele based on ‘word of mouth’ grows very slowly . But to be honest , I can’t be busier . I could not afford to have additional workload due to my current health conditions . Another issue is that it is not easy to rely on a single person—the gatekeeper—to consistently produce good work . Bi had encountered such a problem . After his online work business peaked in 2013 , the market shrank in 2014 and 2015 , and he became depressed . At the same time , due to the worsening of his health conditions , he was thinking of taking a break for a year to rethink his future direction . He declined several opportunities , and then he realized the risks of doing that : When you often reject someone , people will not contact you anymore , especially for online work . In the end , he decided to persist despite his worsening health conditions , and he delegated more work to other writers as a way to keep his business going . DISCUSSIONS In this paper , we present a study of how people with disabilities in China , particularly those who are wheelchair users , engaged in online work . Unlike open marketplace platforms reported in previous literature on crowdsourcing , Session : Overcoming Barriers CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 650 we uncover a unique online work structure self - organized by wheelchair users in China that is established based on social relationships with clients , gatekeepers , coworkers , and friends . As they continued to face challenges and issues , such as trustworthy work sources , quality control , delivery management , training , career development , dispute resolution , and protection from discriminations and outside competitions , social embeddedness played a critical role in dealing with these challenges and issues . In this section , we review our findings and discuss how they contribute to current literature on online crowd work and social network . Role of Social Relationships and ICTs in Online Work Participation Existing literature has identified the importance of social relationships to employment seeking in traditional settings [ 10 ] , particularly as an effective means for disseminating information , knowledge , and expertise [ 22 ] , and seeking employment [ 10 ] . But it has been understudied in the online work literature . In current crowdsourcing literature , the role of social relationships primarily focuses on finding reputable clients or seeking for recreation [ 12 ] . Our interviews illustrate how wheelchair users were introduced to online work and received work opportunities through preexisting relationships instead of public crowdsourcing platforms , and how online work is essentially structured around social relationships . This is in great contrast with the current view of online crowd work , in which clients and workers anonymously and independently gather around crowdsourcing platforms to distribute and access work . We found that social relationships or social embeddedness are fundamental for online work among people with disabilities . Granovetter focuses malfeasance and trust to illustrate how embeddedness functions [ 11 ] . He argues malfeasance can be discouraged through the mechanisms of social relations and trust , not institutional arrangement ( e . g . , contracts ) or generalized morality . This is due to the fact that people relate better through personal history or a known reputation established within a social network instead of through generalized reputation information . As such , Granovetter argues that it is social relations that “are mainly responsible for the production of trust in the economic life” [ 11 ] . Similarly , in the socially embedded online work self - organized by people with disabilities in China , social relationships not only help workers find reputable clients , they also help clients find reputable workers , and it comes all through word - of - mouth or personal history rather than the generalized reputation information as commonly employed in crowdsourcing platforms and peer services . We also illustrate that the social relationships around which online work is carried out among wheelchair users are mainly developed through ICT . Research has raised concerns that the sense of community is declining as traditional social activities ( e . g . , going to the church , clubs , etc . ) that produce social capital continue to decline [ 29 ] . People with mobility disabilities are at a greater disadvantage in terms of social capital and employment because they often experience difficulties in traveling and participating in offline activities [ 26 ] . However , as argued by Resnick [ 30 ] as well as demonstrated in our study , ICT is capable of affording new means of social interactions and opportunities when it is well integrated within existing social practices . Our study provides a strong case to illustrate that ICT plays a critical role in fostering social capital , which is especially significant for people with disabilities [ 1 ] and other economically distressed communities to find jobs [ 9 , 17 ] . Role of the Gatekeeper Structure in Online Work Organization In this study , we uncovered a people - oriented gatekeeper structure in which online work is carried out that has not been reported in previous literature on peer production , or online crowd work . The gatekeeper provides training , coordination , management , and so on , and crowdsourcing platforms are only used to coordinate work distribution and quality assurance . The people - oriented approach holds several advantages over the more task - oriented approach in the open crowdsourcing platforms reported in previous literature because it helps with reducing overhead of management , timely delivery in the time of worker shortage , quality control , and more . At the same time , we also identify some disadvantages of this approach . First , social relationships and reputation through word of mouth take time to develop . And once a worker is established as a gatekeeper , this structure is limited by the gatekeeper’s individual capabilities . For the disability community , many of them suffer from a variety of health conditions , and they are not always able to handle a high work volume , manage a large number of workers , and consistently recruit clients . An important aspect of the online disability workforce is that people with disabilities have the desire to reach out to help others in similar situations . The gatekeepers we identified in our study—those who are usually more experienced and reputable—play a critical role in advocating for participation of people with disabilities in online workforce and facilitating social inclusion . An important function that the gatekeeper structure is able to provide is the protection from external challenges such as various forms of stereotypes , discriminations , and prejudices that are frequently experienced by people with disabilities , and competition from other online worker populations , and so on . The pay - it - forward attitude members in the disability community share in this context also affords a career development mechanism that has not been reported in prior literature . Experienced gatekeepers dedicate extra efforts to recruit and train new members in overcoming a lack of education and technical literacy to participate in online work . Through the skills , knowledge , and social capital that new workers develop through community organized Session : Overcoming Barriers CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 651 trainings and self - learning , some progress from doing mundane work , such as online posting tasks , to more advanced information and knowledge - based online work , some grow into managerial roles that support and manage teams of workers to carry out online work collectively , and others move into more stable full time jobs ( e . g . , customer services ) . As those who received help and gained experience over time transition to more advanced roles in the structure , they continue to seek out new members to offer them advice , training , and support in seeking work opportunities . This self - organized gatekeeper structure allows the disability community to cope with their disadvantages collectively . Design Considerations of Future Online Work Platforms The comparisons between the socially embedded , people - oriented approach uncovered in our study and the platform - centered , task - oriented approach related in prior literature point to the inherent tensions of dependencies on social capital and human values in online work . In the people - oriented approach , individual and community values are preserved , and worker and client relationships can be more nuanced and customized . The structure , however , depends highly on the experiences and abilities of the gatekeepers that hold it in place . In contrast , in the task - oriented approach , the parties who are engaged in online work transactions are anonymized , and individual and community values are neglected , but it is more scalable and efficient at processing tasks that require less nuance , customization , and sophistication . We believe that the future challenge of online work lies in the ability to offer more humane and socially embedded environments for online workers , as well as to provide efficient and scalable means for work distribution and organization . Designs to support social embeddedness have the potential to bring people together with the focus on helping each other and making online work affordable , manageable , and enjoyable . In this regard , it is possible that the future of online work may consist of a hybrid mix of crowdsourcing and online communities . That is , the key to sustainable online work would involve a combination of computing automation and human organization . For example , a dynamic task routing system combined with community management , supervising , training , and socializing functions can potentially be an effective way of enabling social embeddedness in online work platforms . Just as some companies would use internal enterprise social networks as a way to increase social capital for knowledge management and expertise finding [ 2 ] , social network in online crowdsourcing platforms could also help address various issues that people face in these platforms . CONCLUSION In this paper , we present findings from a qualitative study of 11 wheelchair users who perform online crowd work in China . Starting from Shen , who was a founder of a popular online forum for people with disabilities , as the first contact point , we gained access to a relatively experienced group of online workers . With this more experienced group of online workers , we are able to gain insights on how the disability community came to participate in online work and how the community evolved over time . Specifically , our findings show that online work provides people with disabilities with a sense of purpose and self - worth , financial security , self - efficacy , and autonomy . More importantly , we highlight how relationships among these workers are fundamental in organizing and structuring the work—people with disabilities organize themselves around a gatekeeper structure to engage in online work and ensure quality of work , and online crowdsourcing platforms are only used for coordinating tasks already in progress . This online work practice , or social embeddedness , revealed in our study is distinct from what has been previously reported about online crowd work which presumed worker independence and anonymity [ 3 ] . We illustrate how this form of social embeddedness helps address various issues associated with online crowd work , such as trustworthy work sources , quality control , delivery management , training , career development , dispute resolution , and protection from discriminations and outside competitions . We believe that the future of online crowd work lies in further integrations of both crowdsourcing and online communities , and lessons learned from both the crowdsourcing and online community literature can be used to enhance future designs of online work platforms . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank all our participants and collaborators in this research . The work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China ( NSFC ) under the awards No . 61300201 , the National Key Research and Development Plan of China under Grant No . 2016YFB1001200 , and Mellon Innovating International Research , Teaching and Collaboration Fellowship . REFERENCES 1 . US National Council . 2011 . The Power of Digital Inclusion ： Technology’s Impact on Employment and Opportunities for People with Disabilities . Retrieved May 26 , 2016 from http : / / www . ncd . gov / publications / 2011 / Oct042011 . 2 . Paul S Adler and Charles C Heckscher . 2006 . The firm as a collaborative community : Reconstructing trust in the knowledge economy . Oxford University Press Oxford , UK . 3 . Benjamin B Bederson and Alexander J Quinn . 2011 . Web Workers Unite ! Addressing Challenges of Online Laborers . CHI ’11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 97 – 106 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1979742 . 1979606 4 . Victoria Bellotti , Alexander Ambard , Daniel Turner , Christina Gossmann , Kamila Demkova , and John M Session : Overcoming Barriers CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 652 Carroll . 2015 . A muddle of models of motivation for using peer - to - peer economy systems . Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1085 – 1094 . 5 . Yochai Benkler . 2006 . The wealth of networks : How social production transforms markets and freedom . Yale University Press . 6 . Yochai Benkler . 2016 . Peer production and cooperation . Handbook on the Economics of the Internet : 91 . 7 . Stacy M Branham and Shaun K Kane . 2015 . Collaborative Accessibility : How Blind and Sighted Companions Co - Create Accessible Home Spaces BT - Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 2373 – 2382 . 8 . Dana Chandler and Adam Kapelner . 2013 . Breaking monotony with meaning : Motivation in crowdsourcing markets . Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 90 : 123 – 133 . http : / / doi . org / http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jebo . 2013 . 03 . 0 03 9 . Tawanna R Dillahunt . 2014 . Fostering Social Capital in Economically Distressed Communities . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 531 – 540 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557123 10 . Mark S Granovetter . 1973 . The Strength of Weak Ties . The American Journal of Sociology 78 , 6 : 1360 – 1380 . 11 . Mark S Granovetter . 1985 . Economic Action and Social Structure : The Problem of Embeddedness . American Journal of Sociology : 481 – 510 . 12 . Mary L Gray , Siddharth Suri , Syed S Ali , and Deepti Kulkarni . 2016 . The Crowd is a Collaborative Network . Proceedings of Computer - Supported Cooperative Work . 13 . Caroline Haythornthwaite . 2009 . Crowds and communities : Light and heavyweight models of peer production . System Sciences , 2009 . HICSS’09 . 42nd Hawaii International Conference on , 1 – 10 . 14 . Jeff Howe . 2006 . The Rise of Crowdsourcing . Wired Magazine 14 , 6 . 15 . Lilly C Irani and M Six Silberman . 2013 . Turkopticon : Interrupting Worker Invisibility in Amazon Mechanical Turk . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , 611 – 620 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2470742 16 . Lilly Irani . 2015 . The cultural work of microwork . New Media & Society 17 , 5 : 720 – 739 . 17 . Benjamin Jen , Jashanjit Kaur , Jonathan De Heus , and Tawanna R Dillahunt . 2014 . Analyzing employment technologies for economically distressed individuals . CHI’14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 1945 – 1950 . 18 . Matson L . Johnny and Rusch R . Frank . 1986 . Quality of Life : Does Competitive Employment Make a Difference ? In Competitive Employment Issues and Strategies . , Frank R . Rusch ( ed . ) . Paul H . Brookes , Baltimore . 19 . Aniket Kittur , Ed H Chi , and Bongwon Suh . 2008 . Crowdsourcing user studies with Mechanical Turk . Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems , 453 – 456 . 20 . Aniket Kittur , Jeffrey V Nickerson , Michael Bernstein , et al . 2013 . The Future of Crowd Work . Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , ACM , 1301 – 1318 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2441776 . 2441923 21 . Aniket Kittur , Bongwon Suh , Bryan A Pendleton , and Ed H Chi . 2007 . He says , she says : conflict and coordination in Wikipedia . Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems , 453 – 462 . 22 . Robert Kraut , Carmen Egido , and Jolene Galegher . 1988 . Patterns of contact and communication in scientific research collaboration . Proceedings of the 1988 ACM conference on Computer - supported cooperative work , 1 – 12 . 23 . Anand Kulkarni , Matthew Can , and Björn Hartmann . 2012 . Collaboratively Crowdsourcing Workflows with Turkomatic . Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , ACM , 1003 – 1012 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2145204 . 2145354 24 . Anand Kulkarni , Philipp Gutheim , Prayag Narula , David Rolnitzky , Tapan Parikh , and Björn Hartmann . 2012 . MobileWorks : Designing for Quality in a Managed Crowdsourcing Architecture . IEEE Internet Computing 16 , 5 : 28 – 35 . http : / / doi . org / http : / / doi . ieeecomputersociety . org / 10 . 110 9 / MIC . 2012 . 72 25 . Greg Little , Lydia B Chilton , Max Goldman , and Robert C Miller . 2010 . TurKit : Human Computation Algorithms on Mechanical Turk . Proceedings of the 23Nd Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology , ACM , 57 – 66 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1866029 . 1866040 26 . Peng Liu , Xianghua Ding , and Ning Gu . 2016 . “Helping Others Makes Me Happy” : Social Interaction and Integration of People with Disabilities . Proceedings of the 19th ACM conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work . 27 . David Martin , Benjamin V Hanrahan , Jacki O’Neill , and Neha Gupta . 2014 . Being a Turker . Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Session : Overcoming Barriers CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 653 Cooperative Work & Social Computing , ACM , 224 – 235 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2531602 . 2531663 28 . Reid Priedhorsky , Jilin Chen , Shyong Tony K Lam , Katherine Panciera , Loren Terveen , and John Riedl . 2007 . Creating , destroying , and restoring value in Wikipedia . Proceedings of the 2007 international ACM conference on Supporting group work , 259 – 268 . 29 . Robert D Putnam . 2001 . Bowling Alone : The Collapse and Revival of American Community . Simon & Schuster . 30 . Paul Resnick . 2001 . Beyond bowling together : Sociotechnical capital . HCI in the New Millennium , 77 : 247 – 272 . 31 . Joel Ross , Lilly Irani , M Silberman , Andrew Zaldivar , and Bill Tomlinson . 2010 . Who are the crowdworkers ? : shifting demographics in mechanical turk . CHI’10 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2863 – 2872 . 32 . M Six Silberman , Lilly Irani , and Joel Ross . 2010 . Ethics and Tactics of Professional Crowdwork . XRDS 17 , 2 : 39 – 43 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1869086 . 1869100 33 . Anselm Strauss and Juliet M Corbin . 1998 . Basics of Qualitative Research : Techniques and Procedures for Developing Grounded Theory . SAGE Publications . 34 . Ronayne Tom and Tyrrell Tony T . 2005 . “ Motive , Means and Opportunity : An Argument for Changed Policy and Practice in Relation to the Employment of People with Disabilities . ” Disability and Employment : What the Research Tells Us . NDA 4th Annual Disability Research Conference Proceedings . , 67 – 87 . 35 . Yutaka Yamauchi , Makoto Yokozawa , Takeshi Shinohara , and Toru Ishida . 2000 . Collaboration with Lean Media : how open - source software succeeds . Proceedings of the 2000 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work , 329 – 338 . 36 . Lixiu Yu , Paul André , Aniket Kittur , and Robert Kraut . 2014 . A Comparison of Social , Learning , and Financial Strategies on Crowd Engagement and Output Quality . Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing , ACM , 967 – 978 . http : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2531602 . 2531729 37 . Kathryn Zyskowski , Meredith Ringel Morris , Jeffrey P Bigham , Mary L Gray , and Shaun K Kane . 2015 . Accessible Crowdwork ? : Understanding the Value in and Challenge of Microtask Employment for People with Disabilities BT - Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing . ACM , 1682 – 1693 . 38 . LeadGenius - The Most Efficient Way To Target And Connect With Your Ideal Customers . Retrieved May 26 , 2016 from https : / / www . leadgenius . com / Session : Overcoming Barriers CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 654