(cid:0)(cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:3)(cid:6) (cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:2)(cid:12)(cid:13)(cid:4)(cid:5) Increasing the Crowd’s Capacity to Create : How Alternative Generation Affects the Diversity , Relevance and Effectiveness of Generated Ads Jie Ren , Jeffery V . Nickerson , Winter Mason , Yasuaki Sakamoto , Bruno Graber PII : S0167 - 9236 ( 14 ) 00149 - 3 DOI : doi : 10 . 1016 / j . dss . 2014 . 05 . 009 Reference : DECSUP 12494 To appear in : Decision Support Systems Please cite this article as : Jie Ren , Jeﬀery V . Nickerson , Winter Mason , Yasuaki Sakamoto , Bruno Graber , Increasing the Crowd’s Capacity to Create : How Alterna - tive Generation Aﬀects the Diversity , Relevance and Eﬀectiveness of Generated Ads , Decision Support Systems ( 2014 ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . dss . 2014 . 05 . 009 This is a PDF ﬁle of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication . As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript . The manuscript will undergo copyediting , typesetting , and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its ﬁnal form . Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could aﬀect the content , and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain . A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 1 Increasing the Crowd’s Capacity to Create : How Alternative Generation Affects the Diversity , Relevance and Effectiveness of Generated Ads Jie Ren 1 renjie1218 @ gmail . com Jeffery V . Nickerson 2 jnickerson @ stevens . edu Winter Mason 3 m @ winteram . com Yasuaki Sakamoto 4 ysakamot @ stevens . edu Bruno Graber 5 bruno . graber . sit @ gmail . com 1 Fordham University 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 Stevens Institute of Technology ABSTRACT Crowds can generate ideas by searching for new designs . A model for such crowd - based search is proposed consisting of three major forces : the problem domain , the actors , and the process . One particular process that can perform such search is that described by human based genetic algorithms , in which crowds are responsible for creating , modifying , and combining designs . This study looks at one aspect of the process : the alternative generation algorithm . Three systems were built that performed greenfield , modification and combination - based alternative generation . These were compared in an experiment involving 2220 participants who played different roles in creating and evaluating advertisements . The results favor the modification system . This suggests for domains like advertising , crowd - based design systems should encourage a series of modifications of initial ideas . For designers of other crowd - based systems in other problem domains , this study suggests that both modification and combination processes should be tested and their ratio of use adjusted according to the results obtained , much as the ratio of mutation and crossover are adjusted in genetic algorithms . Keywords creativity , human based genetic algorithms , advertisement , crowdsourcing , design , evolutionary computing A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 2 1 Introduction Facilitated by advances in web - related technologies , crowdsourcing has become a new technique for practicing open innovation [ e . g . , 2 , 16 , 18 , 45 , 56 , 63 , 64 , 94 ] . Crowdsourcing is a form of search [ 2 ] , in which many individuals , with diverse experiences , simultaneously explore a problem space for novel and practical solutions . Although crowdsourcing is new , the concept of search has a long history in the management literature , and is based on an analogy with evolution : companies search for new products or services in a competitive landscape . Their success or failure will depend on their ability to find new ideas and refine existing ideas , to explore and exploit [ 20 , 22 , 66 , 80 ] . The current work focuses on examining how processes should be designed to improve the effective generation of ideas by crowds , building on past research that identified when crowdsourcing is likely to be useful [ 2 ] . One contribution of the present work is a model for crowd - based search . A second contribution is the description of a set of systems that can be used to perform this search . The evolutionary theory of product development as a search through a fitness landscape has been instantiated as a set of systems , a set of repeatable processes that can be measured , compared , and augmented . These systems constitute a practical contribution , in that they can be used to organize thousands of people to generate ideas . They are also useful as an experimental apparatus , allowing different kinds of crowd - based search to be compared . We illustrate the theoretical value of these systems by performing an experiment in which three alternative generation systems are compared . Specifically , these systems are based on genetic algorithms , a machine - based implementation of evolutionary processes often used to explore design space in the decision support literature [ 3 , 9 , 54 , 59 , 68 ] . These algorithms are adapted by substituting human cognitive processing for computer processing [ 52 ] . While machine - based algorithms are suited for problems that can be readily formalized , human - based algorithms can address alternative generation and other informal , ill - defined , or wicked problems that are hard to formalize . A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 3 These human - based genetic algorithms were implemented using a crowdsourcing platform . In particular , three crowd - based systems were designed to generate advertisements for a Facebook application . In one system , initial ideas were fed into human based genetic algorithms , in which each new idea was produced through the modification of a single idea , akin to the genetic operator of mutation . The second system was built identically to the first except that new ideas were generated through the combination of two ideas , akin to the genetic operator of crossover . In the third system , new ideas were generated from scratch . The ideas generated via these three crowd - based systems were compared on three dimensions of creativity used to judge advertisements : divergence , effectiveness , and relevance . The remainder of this paper is structured as follows . First , a model for crowd - based search is presented . Then , theories of genetic algorithms are introduced , and evidence from creativity research reviewed in order to form hypotheses about the relative merits of the three systems of alternative generation . These hypotheses are tested , and the results discussed . 2 Background 2 . 1 A Model of Crowd - based Search Suppose a company wanted to generate a set of ideas with certain qualities . For example , designers may want to generate a range of ideas that fulfill certain constraints of a problem , and in particular , designers will search for solutions that are both original and practical . Three forces determine these qualities , as illustrated in Figure 1 . A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 4 Figure 1 . A model of crowd - based search , showing the major categories that affect the qualities of crowd generated ideas . Alternative generation , the main focus of this study , is italicized . The first force is the problem domain : the kind of design problem will have an effect on the types of ideas generated [ 2 ] . Creative thinking is domain specific [ 7 , 82 ] . For example , empirical evidence [ 4 ] shows that individuals’ ideas vary significantly on the creativity dimension depending upon their field . Similar results have been obtained when particular problem spaces have been studied [ 51 ] . For example , Baer [ 8 ] found that training in task specific skills only increases creative performance on the tasks related to the training . In other words , someone who learns how to write highly original software does not at the same time learn how to write a highly original novel – the creative skills do not carry over into different domains . In addition , design methods can also be domain - specific . For example , the creativity template approach is an effective tool in generating ads , but not in creating art [ 38 ] . The second force is the set of actors involved , the crowd . The characteristics of the crowd , including their individual experiences , will affect the eventual ideas . Specifically , crowd members that differ in their A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 5 depth of domain knowledge will self - select different problems and provide different solutions [ 2 . 5 ] . For example , given a problem of designing a mobile app , an Odesk crowd assembled for their deep knowledge may be able to design a complete app , while a non - specialized Mechanical Turk crowd most likely can only provide ideas about the app . The third force is the process used . Specifically , the way alternatives are generated will affect the quality of the final ideas [ e . g . , 27 , 32 , 23 , 40 , 41 , 47 , 79 , 80 ] . And , if ideas become cues for other ideas , the way these cues are selected will affect the quality of ideas [ 73 , 74 ] , as will the way the crowd is selected [ e . g . , 29 , 76 ) and the way evaluation is performed [ 10 ] . Together , these forces make up a high level model of crowd - based search . This model suggests a research program that requires many studies : each aspect of each force may directly affect idea outcomes , or may interact with each other . In this paper , the focus will be on process , and specifically on the sub - process of alternative generation . Before the specifics are explained , the relevant background theories from evolutionary computation and creativity are discussed . 2 . 2 Genetic Algorithms and Human - Based Genetic Algorithms Genetic algorithms [ 19 , 23 , 36 , 37 , 43 ] are formal models of evolution in design [ 46 , 87 , 100 ] based on evolutionary processes seen in natural evolution . In genetic algorithms , different solutions to a search optimization problem are treated as genes that evolve toward better ones through selection and reproduction [ e . g . , 23 , 37 , 43 ] . The evolution starts with a population of seeded genes . The fitness of every gene is then evaluated in each generation . Similar to natural evolution , fitter genes are more likely to be chosen to produce children . One selection process is tournament selection : genes are compared randomly in pairs and the fitter gene in each pair is then selected . Another selection process is elitism , in which the fittest genes are selected to populate the next generation . Genetic algorithms breed the next generation of genes through crossover and mutation . In crossover , two genes are selected as parents from the previous generation through tournament selection and features of A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 6 these two genes get combined . Thus , their child carries traits from both parents . In mutation , individual features are randomly altered [ 85 ] . Both genetic operators serve to create more diversity in the next generation based on the genes of the successful parents . In other words , mutation and crossover generate alternatives . They are ways of leveraging existing ideas . The initial pool of ideas fed to a genetic algorithm are often generated at random : they constitute the initial population [ 23 ] . While genetic algorithms were designed for computers , they have been adopted and performed by people [ 58 , 70 , 71 , 102 ] . By directing the functions of genetic algorithms to humans [ 36 , 58 ] , human - based genetic algorithms make it possible for information systems to be successful in areas that were considered the exclusive domain of human expertise – in particular , creative design [ 58 , 71 , 102 ] . In the idea evolution process , a human - based genetic algorithm uses both human evaluation and human ability to explore the space of possible ideas [ 19 , 58 , 71 , 103 ] . That is , the crowd searches for creative ideas , employing three techniques – creating ideas for the initial population , modifying ideas , or combining two ideas . 2 . 3 Alternative Generation from the Creativity Literature These three techniques are also discussed in the creativity literature . Specifically , research on design and brainstorming suggests three alternative generation techniques for producing creative ideas [ 5 , 11 , 27 , 31 , 57 ] : ideas can be generated from scratch ( greenfield ideas ) ; single ideas can be presented for modification ; or multiple ideas can be presented for combination [ 96 ] . Combination and modification have also been discussed in the innovation literature [ e . g . , 27 , 32 , 33 , 40 , 41 , 47 , 79 , 80 ] . These three ways of generating ideas are now described in detail . 2 . 3 . 1 Greenfield Generating ideas from scratch produces a diverse population [ 33 ] . On the one hand , since there are no prior ideas to fixate on , independent thinking can make ideas creative – that is , ideas both original and practical [ 42 ] . On the other hand , without building on previous ideas , especially from others , designers A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 7 who lack sufficient prior knowledge and the ability to acquire , store , transform and use this knowledge can perform poorly in generating creative ideas [ 6 , 15 , 33 , 91 , 101 ] . These studies suggest that greenfield ideas are highly contingent on the designer’s expertise . 2 . 3 . 2 Combination Combination helps generate creative ideas [ e . g . , 34 , 40 , 47 , 80 ] , especially original ideas [ 33 ] . Idea combination triggers divergent thinking that explores many possible solutions [ 95 ] . Studies of conceptual combination describe a similar process : to bridge two separate concepts , people first activate the concepts ( nodes ) in their semantic network ; if the concepts have no local bridge , the activation spreads further to search more deeply in the network , leading to many unfamiliar combinations [ 21 ] . These new and unexplored combinations are usually original and radical [ 33 ] , and consequently , novel properties emerge [ 40 , 47 , 80 ] . For example , a novel property , such as “sharp front appendages used for digging holes in trees to bury nuts” , emerges from the combination of “hatchet” and “squirrel” [ 32 , p . 77 ] . From candle and electricity came Edison’s invention of the light bulb [ 97 ] . These studies suggest combination helps designers generate original ideas , because they are searching in places they may not have searched otherwise . However novel ideas tend to be difficult to adopt because deep knowledge is required to recognize and appreciate them [ 20 , 25 ] . It may be that there is no clear point of contact in the adopter’s semantic web of concepts – that is , no bridging association . Even if there are several such bridges , evaluating each requires energy . This suggests combination , even though it might be a source of original ideas , might produce ideas less acceptable to the end consumer , and hence less feasible and less practical . 2 . 3 . 3 Modification Modification , by contrast , may produce ideas that are high in practicality [ e . g . , 27 , 41 , 79 ] . Modifying ideas helps generate incremental ideas that are easy to adopt [ 25 ] . Specifically , modification helps narrow down the focus of the outcome [ 15 ] . People search locally through their accessible knowledge stores in A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 8 order to modify ideas : they replace or reconfigure one element relative to others at a time [ 22 , 33 , 99 ] . As a result , errors are corrected and good features in the old ideas are selected to remain , making the resulting idea incrementally better [ 27 , 33 , 41 , 79 ] and ready for implementation [ 25 ] . Yet this process of idea modification can also constrain individuals : designers fixate , unable to move away from their previous ideas [ 15 ] . Originality may suffer [ 49 ] . This evidence in sum suggests that modification will yield practical ideas , but ideas that may not be original . Table 1 summarizes these ideas . Table 1 . Summary of Alternative Generation Techniques Greenfield Combination Modification Pros Provides fresh ideas [ 33 , 42 ] Integrates separate ideas [ 21 , 33 ] . Improves ideas [ 25 , 27 ] . Cons Ideas may be dependent on individuals’ expertise [ e . g . , 6 ] Ideas may be less feasible and less practical [ e . g . , 20 , 21 ] . Ideas may be less original [ e . g . , 15 , 49 ] . 2 . 4 Crowd - based Alternative Generation The counterparts of these three kinds of alternative generation techniques can be found in the genetic algorithms literature [ 1 , 23 , 37 ] . Designing from scratch – greenfield alternative generation – is analogous to seeding independent solutions into genetic algorithms . Modification is analogous to the genetic operator of mutation . Combination is analogous to the genetic operator of crossover . In the field of genetic algorithms , much work has been conducted in order to understand the relative virtues of mutation and crossover . Both can be effective , but some problems are more suited to one technique than the other [ 23 , 85 ] . Specifically , problems in fitness landscapes that are rugged [ 52 , 64 ] may benefit more from mutation , and those in smoother landscapes from crossover [ 30 ] . Recent research suggests that recombination works best when populations are diverse , but can lower diversity over generations unless both mutation and combination are combined [ 61 ] . Since research with computational algorithms have yielded useful insights in comparing crossover and mutation , it is sensible to ask if experiments A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 9 performed with human - based algorithms might also yield valuable insights into the merits of different alternative generation techniques . While we have shown a close analogy between the computationally based and the human based techniques , there are differences that justify empirical testing . Humans generate ideas from scratch , or modify ideas , or combine ideas based on the experiences of a lifetime , and these experiences are difficult to ignore . By contrast , machines can be programmed to ignore everything but the data presented . Even though evolutionary computing presents us with an operationalized model of alternative generation , its findings may not hold . Because of this , we propose hypotheses that are suggested by both the theories of evolutionary computing and those of creativity research . The hypotheses below focus specifically on the relative merits of the different forms of alternative generation while holding the other factors constant . 3 Hypotheses The greenfield system allows participants to generate ideas independently and from scratch . On the one hand , such a system is not as susceptible to fixation as the other proposed systems , because participants will not see previous results that might influence future thinking . On the other hand , participants will not have the advantage of seeing previous results that cue associations that lead to novelty , nor will participants benefit from a review process that corrects errors and thereby increases practicality [ 6 , 15 , 33 , 91 , 101 ] . By contrast , both the modification and combination systems allow people to build on each other’s ideas . In addition , these systems also allow for idea selection techniques that eliminate poor ideas and retain good ideas . Thus , even if people initially produce very poor ideas , these ideas are unlikely to remain in subsequent generations . Therefore , we expect the resulting ideas using either modification or combination will be more creative – original and practical – than the ideas generated from the greenfield system [ 23 , 35 , 37 , 43 ] . A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 10 In addition , prior studies suggest that ideas generated from combination tend to be more original and less practical ; on the other hand , modified ideas are incremental innovations , practical but maybe not original . Thus , among these three systems , we expect the combination system will generate more original ideas than the modification system . In generating practical ideas , however , the modification system will perform better than the combination system . This paper uses the domain of advertisements to test our hypotheses on the three creativity dimensions : ad divergence , ad relevance and ad effectiveness [ e . g . , 13 , 14 , 39 , 83 , 84 , 90 ] . In the marketing literature , originality is referred to as ad divergence [ e . g . , 13 , 14 ] . Practicality is expressed along two dimensions . Ad relevance is the extent to which ads are useful and relevant to consumers . Ad effectiveness is the extent to which an ad achieves its goal [ e . g . , 39 , 83 , 84 , 90 ] . The hypotheses that we test in the domain of ads are the following ( See Table 2 ) . Table 2 . Hypotheses H1 ( Ad Divergence ) Ads generated from the combination system are more divergent than those from the modification system , which are more divergent than those from the greenfield system . H2 ( Ad Relevance ) Ads generated from the modification system are more relevant than those from the combination system , which are more relevant than those from the greenfield system . H3 ( Ad Effectiveness ) Ads generated from the modification system are more effective than those from the combination system , which are more effective than those from the greenfield system . 4 . Apparatus A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 11 In order to test these hypotheses , we designed three idea - generation systems in which individuals in the crowd modify or combine each other’s ideas or generate ideas from scratch . Every idea is evaluated on the dimensions of creativity as a measure of fitness , and based on these evaluations we use both tournament selection and elitism to select which ideas to retain in the idea pool for combination and modification . Tournament selection compares ideas in pairs and selects the winning one , which ensures that bad ideas are removed from the idea pool ; and elitism , on the other hand , selects the top ideas , which ensures that good ideas remain . Figure 2a shows the combination system . In each generation , two ideas are selected as parents to be combined by tournament selection ; at the same time , a set of strongest ideas propagates to the next generation through elitism . Figure 2b shows the modification system , where ideas are chosen through tournament selection to be modified while elitism causes the strongest ideas to remain in the next generation . In addition , in order to test whether or not individuals in the crowd generate more creative ideas interactively than independently , we also compare the final ideas from these two systems with the greenfield system , in which a set of ideas are generated without reference to previous ideas . Figure 2a . The combination system . Vertical lines indicate ideas retain through elitism ; solid lines indicate combination . Figure 2b . The modification system . Dashed lines indicate modification . A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 12 These systems are used to generate advertisements . This domain was selected for four reasons . First , individuals in the crowd see ads every day and they probably have accumulated domain - relevant knowledge , one of the components of creativity [ 5 ] . Moreover , these individuals are also customers and they arguably have knowledge about what ad attracts them [ e . g . , 17 ] . Second , the systems can develop advertisements from ideation to production . With the proper tools , crowd members could learn to function not only as idea generators , but as user innovators [ 89 , 92 , 93 ] . Moreover , advertisement design has been used before in creativity studies : it is field that rewards both originality and practicality [ 26 ] . Third , while at least one system has used computer - based genetic algorithms to produce ads [ 44 ] , to the best of our knowledge , no human - based genetic algorithm has been used for this purpose . Fourth , the domain of advertisement design is distinct from the domains explored in previous human based evolutionary algorithm experiments [ 58 , 103 ] , and thus may provide new insights into the domain applicability of such algorithms . 5 An Experiment on Amazon Mechanical Turk We used the design of Facebook ads to test the three systems and these hypotheses . Participants were asked to design ads for a Facebook game in which players can customize rock paper scissors and invite their friends to play the variants . Facebook ads require a title with a 25 - character limit , a text with a 135 - character limit and an image ( 110 pixels wide and 80 pixels tall ) . 5 . 1 Stimulus - set Construction : the Greenfield System , the Combination System and the Modification System We provided the participants with a set of Facebook ad generation tools that we developed , shown in Figures 3 - 5 . In our experiment , before asking participants to create an ad , we described a new Rock - Paper - Scissors Facebook game , and specified the tasks corresponding to the three different systems . For example , in the greenfield system , the prompt was : “We have developed a new Rock - Paper - Scissors A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 13 Facebook Game in which you can invent new rules of the game . So that it is no longer Rock - Paper - Scissors , but instead is something like Cat - Bird - Flea . . . or some other combination . Your task is to design a Facebook advertisement for this game . To design the ad , you need to create a title , a text body and an image . The winning ad will be displayed on Facebook . So please make sure that you are creating an original ad . ” Across the three systems , we kept the introductions consistent and elaborated the tasks of alternative generation differently based on these systems . Figure 3 . The greenfield system . This interface was also used in the initial stage in the combination and modification systems to generate the seed ads . Figures 3 – 5 illustrate the tasks of alternative generation shown to participants in the experiment . In the greenfield system participants were asked to create a Facebook ad from scratch with a title and a text A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 14 ( Figure 3 ) . They also were required to draw an image for the Facebook ad they were creating . For that , a drawing tools based on SVG - edit 1 were provided , including the pencil tool , the select tool , the text took and several shapes , such as rectangles and circles . The combination system ( Figure 2a ) has three ad generation stages : greenfield , combination and combination . In between these stages are three ad evaluation stages where both tournament selection and elitism were used . In the first stage ( greenfield ) , Facebook ads were generated from scratch using the system shown in Figure 3 . These same ads were used in the first stage in the modification system . By doing this , we could compare the outputs of these two systems ( combination versus modification ) while controlling the seed population . In the combination stages , each participant was asked to combine two of the selected Facebook ads ( Figure 4 ) . In order to make sure that participants were truly combining ads and the combination condition was distinct from the greenfield and modification conditions , we forced participants to select at least a portion of elements from both parent ads . Specifically , to combine titles , each participant was asked to select at least 10 % of words from each title to combine the two titles into one ; to combine the two texts , each participant was required to select at least 10 % of words from each text as well . Each participant was required to keep 10 % of the content from each parent . The same drawing tools for participants were provided for combining the two images with the addition of a new feature . The images of the two Facebook ads were broken down into elements ( shown on the right side of the canvas in Figure 4 ) ; participants could select the elements from each image and click these elements to import them directly onto the canvas without redrawing them . 1 SVG - edit is a web - based , Javascript - driven SVG editor under the MIT license , and the current version is available at https : / / code . google . com / p / svg - edit / . A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 15 Figure 4 . Two ideation stages in the combination system Figure 5 . Two ideation stages in the modification system In the modification system ( Figure 2b ) , similarly , there were three ideation stages in this sequence : greenfield , followed by two modification stages . In between each of the three ideation stages was an ad evaluation stage ( Figure 2b ) . In the modification stages , the participants were first offered a Facebook ad created by others and then required to use 10 % of words from the title of this ad as well as at least 10 % of words from the text ( Figure 5 ) . Using the assistance tools on the canvas , participants could also modify the image of this ad directly ( Figure 5 ) . This way , we insured that participants were truly modifying ads . 5 . 2 Measuring Ad Creativity To measure ad creativity , we asked for preferences along three dimensions : ad divergence , ad relevance and ad effectiveness . In order to rank the ads within the combination and modification system , a prerequisite for tournament selection , we measured ad creativity with a five - point Likert scale rating . To compare across the three systems and determine which system produced better ads , we used a preference evaluation method A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 16 based on pair - wise comparisons . This method , called a wiki - survey , takes advantage of the normally skewed distribution of online participation , and has been employed to evaluate crowd - based creative search in realistic settings [ 77 , 78 ] . 5 . 2 . 1 The Ad Creativity Questionnaire To evaluate ad divergence and ad relevance , we borrowed Smith et al . ( 2007 ) ’s measurement scale , which is designed to measure ad creativity , but not specifically for online ads [ 83 ] . Since the factor loadings for measurement items are similar in this scale we chose those items that could be applied to the online ads in our experiment ( Table 3 ) . The factor loadings for these items are high ( ranging from 0 . 79 to 0 . 92 ) in Smith et al . ( 2007 ) ’s measurement scale . However , the measurement scale doesn’t include items to measure ad effectiveness , so four items were designed to measure this dimension . Since ad effectiveness has been linked with an ad’s impact on customers’ behaviors [ 90 , 98 ] , we asked participants for their intended actions toward the game after they see the ad . Moreover , we asked participants to answer from two perspectives – self and others – to compensate for the possibility that their self - reports may be inflated [ 12 ] ( see Table 3 ) . Table 3 . The ad evaluation questions Ad divergence Item Statements Originality " This ad is out of the ordinary . " or " This ad is not out of the ordinary . " Flexibility " This ad contains different ideas . " or " This ad does not contain different ideas . " Synthesis " This ad brings unusual items together . " or " This ad does not bring unusual items together . " Elaboration " This ad contains more details than expected . " or " This ad does not contain more details than expected . " A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 17 Artistic Value " This ad is artistically produced . " or " This ad is not artistically produced . " Ad relevance Item Statements Ad - to - consumer relevance " This ad is appropriate to me . ” or “This ad is not appropriate to me . " Brand - to - consumer relevance " I do NOT care about this Facebook game . " 2 Ad effectiveness Item Statements Ad - to - consumer effectiveness ( self perspective ) " I will click this Facebook ad in the future . ” or “I will not click this Facebook ad in the future . " Brand - to - consumer effectiveness ( self perspective ) " I will play this Facebook game in the future . ” or “I will not play this Facebook game in the future . " Ad - to - consumer effectiveness ( others’ perspective ) " Other people will click this Facebook ad in the future . ” or “Other people will not click this Facebook ad in the future . " Brand - to - consumer effectiveness ( others’ perspective ) " Other people will play this Facebook game in the future . ” or “Other people will not play this Facebook game in the future . " We validated the measurement scale for ad effectiveness . In a separate test , we asked 100 subjects from Mechanical Turk 3 to rate 20 greenfield ads ( 5 subjects rated 1 ad ) using this scale and then we ran principal component analysis on the ratings . Based on the scree test , two factors were identified with two items loaded on “self - perspective” ( 0 . 96 and 0 . 94 ) and two items loaded on “others’ perspective” ( 0 . 75 and 0 . 84 ) . 2 We used this negative sentence to measure this item to preserve consistency with the original negative item in Smith et al . ( 2007 ) ’s ad creativity measurement scale [ 83 ] . 3 Mechanical Turk is a crowdsourcing marketplace , www . mturk . com . Mturk workers from around the world perform tasks in return for money . A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 18 In sum , we created the ad creativity questionnaire with three dimensions and eleven items . Each item is measured on a five - point Likert scale ( with 1 as strongly disagree and 5 as strongly agree ) . We asked participants to indicate to what degree they agree with the statements . To ensure that participants pay attention , for each statement , we created both positive and negative sentences and then randomly selected one sentence from these two in the rating phases of the experiment ( Table 3 ) . For example , to measure originality , every time a participant rated an ad we randomly selected one sentence between “the ad is out of the ordinary” and “the ad is not out of the ordinary” . In addition , these rating questions were prefaced with the statement “many of these ads will be run on Facebook . If your rating of the ad is accurate within 5 % of its actual performance on Facebook , you will receive a bonus of $ 5 . ” Each ad was rated 5 times by 5 separate participants in order to reduce the effects of individual bias . 5 . 2 . 2 Ad Evaluation Across the Systems In evaluating the ads across systems using pair comparison , three questions ( Table 4 ) were selected from the ad creativity measurement scale ( Table 3 ) to measure ad divergence , ad relevance and ad effectiveness . The questionnaire was kept short because previous work has shown that if the questionnaire is lengthy the crowd evaluators may lose focus and this in turn can affect the reliability of ratings [ 77 , 78 , 10 ] . Originality and ad - to - consumer effectiveness ( self perspective ) questions were selected that had the highest factor loadings for their respective ad dimensions . We also selected an ad - to - consumer relevance question over a brand - to - consumer relevance question . Each ad pair was compared 5 times . Table 4 . Preference elicitation through voting on pair - wise comparisons Ad divergence Item Questions Originality " Out of the two following ads , which one do you think is more “out of the ordinary” ? " Ad relevance Item Questions A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 19 Ad - to - consumer relevance " Out of the two following ads , which one is more appropriate to you ? " Ad effectiveness Item Questions Ad - to - consumer effectiveness ( self perspective ) " Out of the two following ads , which one are you more likely to click ? " 6 Sampling and Data collection To test three systems and compare end ads from these systems , we conducted an experiment on Mechanical Turk ( Mturk ) . Our pool of participants consisted of 2220 participants located in the U . S . , mainly novices in copywriting and graphic design , between 18 and 61 years of age ( average 26 . 02 years old ) , consistent with demographic results from other studies [ 55 , 76 ] . The participants were United - States based Turkers who had approval rates , as tabulated by Amazon , higher than 95 % . Some participants were assigned tasks to create , combine or modify ads ; others were assigned to express their preferences for ads . Participants were randomly assigned to the three alternative generation conditions , and all three conditions ran simultaneously . Overall , 120 participants created Facebook ads in this experiment . Specifically , 20 participants used the greenfield system , 100 used either the combination system or the modification system . Among these 100 subjects , 20 generated the initial 20 greenfield ideas that were used as seed ideas in the combination and modification systems . In other words , both systems share the initial 20 greenfield ideas . Subsequently , 40 subjects used the combination system and 40 used the modification system . Also , 2100 subjects answered the rating questions . Among these subjects , 300 rated ads on the five - point Likert scale ( Table 3 ) that were used within each system and 1800 compared two ads on one ad creativity dimension from different systems . To create an ad , either from scratch , combination or modification , we A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 20 paid each Turker $ 2 to work for up to 30 minutes ; and to evaluate ads , we paid 20 cents for up to 10 minutes . To test the nine hypotheses , we ran the systems for three generations . Parallel with the third generation , we ran the greenfield system . The following sections describe the allocation of ideas per system in detail . 6 . 1 Generation 1 in the Combination and Modification systems Twenty Turkers created 20 Facebook ads from scratch to seed both systems . Another 100 Turkers evaluated these ads on a five - point Likert scale ( See Table 2 ) . Since each ad’s ratings had three dimensions , These 20 ads were ranked using non - dominated sorting , a technique that finds a series of Pareto - optimal fronts [ 23 ] 4 . 6 . 2 Generation 2 in the Combination and Modification systems Since elitism counterbalances the disruptive effects of combination and modification , but also can blur the distinction between systems , we promoted 10 % of designs in stage 2 and 3 ( see [ 23 ] for elitism norms in genetic algorithms ) . Thus , in stage 2 , we kept 2 top - ranked ads out of 20 ads from generation 1 through elitism and selected 9 pairs of ads based on tournament selection . In the combination system , 18 Turkers were asked to combine these 9 pairs and each pair was combined twice , while in the modification system , 18 Turkers were assigned to modify these 18 ads . As a result , in stage 2 , combination produced 20 ads , 18 of which were created by combination and 2 of which selected from the top ads in stage 1 , and modification generated 20 ads , 18 of which were modified and 2 of which were the top 2 ads from stage 1 . Another 200 Turkers evaluated the 40 ads generated from combination and modification using the measurement scale in Table 3 as well . All 40 ads were then ranked using non - dominated sorting . 4 Fronts are established by finding sets of designs that are better than other sets with respect to all criteria . The set which dominates all other sets is on Pareto - optimal front . The algorithm is described in detail by Deb ( 2000 ) [ 24 ] . A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 21 6 . 3 Generation 3 in the Combination and Modification Systems and the Only Generation for the Greenfield System Stage 3 repeated the steps in stage 2 , in either the combination or modification system drawing from the 20 ads in the selected pool to generate another 20 ads . At the same time , in the greenfield system 20 Turkers were asked to create 20 ads from scratch . Thus , in the end , 60 Turkers generated 60 ads in the three systems . The preference evaluation method based on pair - wise comparisons was used to compare ads across the three systems ( See Table 3 ) . It was not feasible to evaluate all possible pairs , so a subset was selected at random : 40 pairs of ads were selected at random in the combination and modification systems , 40 in the combination and greenfield systems , and 40 in the modification and greenfield systems . A separate group of Turkers then compared ads in pairs and voted for one of the two ads based on one of the three questions in Table 4 . Specifically , 5 different Turkers compared each of the 120 pairs on one ad creativity dimension . 7 Results On each dimension of ad creativity , 600 votes in total were received using the measurement scale in Table 4 . As shown in Figure 6 , proportion tests were run to examine the voting difference between systems . Ad Divergence Ad Relevance Ad Effectiveness P r opo r t i on o f V o t e s 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 The Modification System The Combination System The Greenfield System * * * * * * * * * A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 22 Figure 6 . Results Note : * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 ; Error bars represent 95 % confidence intervals . The ad divergence hypothesis was not supported . On the ad divergence dimension , the modification system received 37 % of votes , significantly more than the combination system ( 30 % ) . But the modification system didn’t outperform the greenfield system , which received 33 % of votes . In addition , the difference in the number of votes between the combination system and the greenfield system was not significant for ad divergence ( 30 % vs . 33 % out of 600 votes ) . The ad relevance hypothesis was partially supported ( See Figure 6 ) . Consistent with our prediction , on the ad relevance dimension , the modification system received 47 % of votes . This proportion was significantly higher than what the greenfield and combination system received ( 29 % and 25 % ) . However , the combination system didn’t significantly outperform the greenfield system on this dimension ( 29 % vs . 25 % ) The ad effectiveness hypothesis was partially supported ( See Figure 6 ) . As expected , the modification system outperformed the other two on this dimension ( 42 % for the modification system vs . 31 % for the combination system vs . 27 % for the greenfield system ) . Inconsistent with our prediction , there was no significant difference between the proportions of votes from the combination system and the greenfield system ( 31 % vs . 27 % ) . 8 Discussion Our findings show that in the domain of ad design , the modification system performed the best in generating divergent , relevant and effective ads . We expected that the modification system would generate the most relevant and effective ads , and we expected that it would be better than greenfield along A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 23 all dimensions . We did not expect it to be better than combination with respect to generating divergent ads . We also did not expect greenfield to do as well as combination along all three dimensions . One possible explanation for the unexpected findings is the domain . What is different about the ad generation domain from other domains that have been studied to date ? Many of the design domains studied to date involve physical objects . These objects , in many cases , can be combined by simply cutting part of one and attaching it to another . For example , work on combining designs using computers studied chairs , tables , aircraft , and ships [ 50 ] . Work combining designs using the crowd studied chairs [ 102 ] and clocks [ 103 ] . In many cases , there is an obvious way to combine physical objects of the same type . But , there is often no obvious way to combine two advertisements . Ads are based on concepts , and concepts are not modular in the same way physical objects are . Thus combination may be difficult . By contrast , ads can usually benefit from modification . Consistent with work on creativity [ 27 , 41 , 79 ] , modification helped generate better ads in three ways . First , good elements of a design propagated . For example , the three animal shapes in the image of the initial ad also occurred in ads in generations 2 and 3 ( See Ad 1 in Table 5 ) . Second , new elements were added . Table 5 ( Ad 1 ) shows that in generation 2 , a boxing ring was added to the image of the initial ad , vividly expressing the concept of competition . Third , errors were corrected . An example is ad 2 in Table 5 . When modifying an ad , a participant corrected the error made by another participant : the letters of “C” and “A” were put back into the frame . These edits refined the ads , making them more effective . Table 5 . Evolution of ads in the modification system Generation 1 Generation 2 Generation 3 Ad 1 A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 24 Ad 2 NA From these results , we conjecture that the effectiveness of combination will be contingent on the domain . For example , physical domains , such the design of furniture , will be conducive to combination , but more abstract domains , such as the design of ads , will not be as conducive . This conjecture is consistent with work in genetic algorithms , in which domains with smooth fitness landscapes are more conducive to combination than those with rugged landscapes [ 30 ] . As these techniques are used more often , and more research is performed , it is possible that a body of knowledge will accumulate that makes it possible to predict , for particular evaluation criteria in a particular domain , which techniques will be most effective . For practitioners designing crowd - based systems , this study , in combination with previous studies , suggests the following . Many current forms of crowd work today are greenfield processes . For example , contests in which crowd members submit designs in order to win prizes by their nature encourage many independent efforts . These greenfield processes work by searching large design spaces in parallel , generating a diversity of ideas . Once the ideas are generated , the techniques of modification and combination should be considered to further improve the ideas . In some domains , such as those that involve the design of physical products , the use of combination has been shown effective at improving the quality of ideas [ 102 , 103 ] . In the domain studied here – ad design – modification , but not combination , was effective at improving quality . For new domains , a starting workflow might involve a greenfield process to seed a set of ideas , and then a mixture of modification and combination processes to improve the ideas . As results are evaluated , the ratio of modification and combination might be adjusted to more quickly yield designs of interest . In this way , practitioners may utilize one of the main affordances of crowd - based work – the ability to create flexible work processes , and adjust these processes as results emerge . A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 25 9 Limitations and Challenges In the experiment of this study , we forced crowd members to select at least some elements ( 10 % ) from parent ads to make sure that they were truly combining or modifying ads . However , in most creative settings , no such forcing will normally take place . It will be important to observe more natural instances of modification and recombination . For example , in some remixing communities , members choose to generate afresh , modify , or combine ideas [ 60 ] . The outcomes of these strategies in natural settings might be compared with the outcomes from experiments . A challenge is posed by the lack of expertise of the crowd . By definition , crowds usually do not have expert - level skill in the task they are performing . But in a domain such as advertising design , it may take many years to acquire skills related to copywriting and illustration . Moreover , an illustrator and a copywriter might both be employed to generate an advertisement . This study has shown that modification can increase the quality of crowd ads , but not that crowd ads can surpass the quality of expert ads . While experiments will doubtless find domains in which experts will surpass crowds , and perhaps domains in which crowds can surpass experts ( see , for example , [ 72 ] ) , there is another possible direction for future research : designing systems , that , through practice and coaching , train the crowd , so that expertise develops as work is performed [ 28 ] . Alternatively , crowds can be used together with experts and machines , with each performing the task they are most suited to [ 69 ] . 10 Conclusions Three forces can influence a crowd - based search – the domain , the actors , and the process . This paper focuses on alternative generation , a particular sub - process . Using human - based genetic algorithms , we compared alternative generation processes that involve modification and combination , along with a control process in which ideas were generated independently . The crowd applied these different techniques to the design of advertisements . For this particular problem , with this particular crowd , modification produced better results than the other two techniques . A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 26 We think these results should be interpreted cautiously , as initial steps toward a greater understanding of crowd - based search . Only a handful of empirical studies of this sort have been performed , and there are many more studies needed . In another area with a longer history , computer - based genetic algorithms , results suggest that the method of combining , the nature of the fitness landscape , the ratio of modification to recombination , and the size of the starting population all play a role in the success of a search . Moreover , crowd - based search introduces other factors . When performing modification or combination , people , unlike machines , may decide according to context how much of an idea to modify , how much to combine . Considering this and previous studies , we think that all three alternative generation strategies will end up being useful components of crowd - based search . Some strategies will work better for particular domains than others , and mixtures may do better than pure strategies . This paper has suggested a general model for investigating crowd - based search , and applied it through an experiment in which the crowd generated advertisements . The results underscore the need for more experiments and more observational studies . As a community , we are just beginning to map out the territory of crowd - based search by trying different techniques in different domains . Continued exploration may help us gain an understanding of how crowds can best be organized to search design space , to create and innovate . Acknowledgements This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under grants IIS - 0855995 and IIS - 0968561 . References [ 1 ] M . Affenzeller , and S . Winkler , Genetic algorithms and genetic programming : modern concepts and practical applications . Boca Raton , FL : Chapman & Hall / CRC ( 2009 ) . [ 2 ] A . Afuah , and C . L . Tucci , Crowdsourcing As a Solution to Distant Search . Academy of Management Review 37 , NO . 3 ( 2012 ) , [ pp . 355 - 375 ] . A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 27 [ 3 ] G . Alexouda , A user - friendly marketing decision support system for the product line design using evolutionary algorithms , Decision support systems , 38 , NO . 4 ( 2005 ) , [ pp . 495 - 509 ] . [ 4 ] T . M . Amabile , Social psychology of creativity : A consensual assessment technique . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 43 , ( 1982 ) , [ pp . 977 - 101 ] [ 5 ] T . M . Amabile , The social Psychology of Creativity , New York : Spring - Verlag ( 1983 ) . [ 6 ] J . R . Anderson , The architecture of cognition , Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press ( 1983 ) . [ 7 ] J . Baer , Generality of creativity across performance domains , Creativity Research Journal , NO . 4 , ( 1991 ) , [ pp . 23 - 29 ] . [ 8 ] J . Baer , Divergent thinking is not a general trait : A multidomain training experiment , Creativity Research Journal 7 , NO . 1 , ( 1994 ) , [ pp . 35 - 46 ] . [ 9 ] P . V . Balakrishnan , and S . J . Varghese , Triangulation in decision support systems : algorithms for product design . Decision Support Systems 14 , NO . 4 ( 1995 ) , [ pp . 313 - 327 ] . [ 10 ] J . Bao , Y . Sakamoto , and J . V . Nickerson . Evaluating design solutions using crowds , in Proceedings of Seventeenth Americas Conference on Information Systems , ( 2011 ) . [ 11 ] J . Baruah , and P . B . Paulus , Category assignment and relatedness in the group ideation process , Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 47 , ( 2011 ) , [ pp . 1070 - 1077 ] . [ 12 ] C . D . Batson , Self - other merging and the empathy - altruism hypothesis : Reply to Neuberg et al . ( 1997 ) . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 73 , No . 3 ( 1997 ) , [ pp . 517 - 522 ] . [ 13 ] S . P . Besemer , and K . O ' Quinn , Analyzing creative products : Refinement and test of a judging instrument , Creative Behavior 20 , No . 2 , ( 1986 ) , [ pp . 115 - 126 ] . [ 14 ] S . P . Besemer , and D . J . Treffinger , Analysis of creative products : Review and synthesis , Creative Behavior 15 , NO . 3 , ( 1981 ) , [ pp . 158 - 178 ] . [ 15 ] B . Buxton , Sketching User Experiences : Getting the Design Right and the Right Design , Morgan Kaufmann , ( 2007 ) . [ 16 ] M . Cardoso , and I . Ramos , Open innovation and the solver community , in Proceedings of the ACM international conference on supporting group work , New York , ( 2009 ) , [ pp . 373 - 374 ] . [ 17 ] T . Chan , and J . Lee , A comparative study of online user communities’ involvement in product innovation and development , in Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Management of Technology ( IAMOT ) , Washington D . C , ( 2004 ) . A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 28 [ 18 ] V . Chanal , and M . Caron - Fasan , How to invent a new business model based on crowdsourcing : the Crowdspirit ® case , in Proceedings of the 17th Conference of International Management Strategy , Sophia - Antipolis , ( 2008 ) . [ 19 ] C . D . Cheng , and A . Kosorukoff , Interactive one - max problem allows to compare the performance of interactive and human - based genetic algorithms , in Proceedings of Genetic and Evolutionary Computational Conference , GECCO , ( 2004 ) . [ 20 ] M . Cohen , and D . A . Levinthal , Absorptive capacity : a new perspective on learning and innovation . Administrative science quarterly , ( 1990 ) , [ pp . 128 - 152 ] . [ 21 ] M . Collins , and E . F . Loftus . A spreading - activation theory of semantic processing . Psychological review 82 , NO . 6 , ( 1975 ) , [ pp . 407 - 428 ] . [ 22 ] R . M . Cyert , and J . G . March , A behavioral theory of the firm . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . ( 1963 ) . [ 23 ] K . Deb , Multi - Objective Optimization using Evolutionary Algorithms , Wiley , Chichester , UK , ( 2001 ) . [ 24 ] K . Deb , S . Agrawal , A . Pratap , and T . Meyarivan . A fast elitist non - dominated sorting genetic algorithm for multi - objective optimization : NSGA - II . Lecture notes in computer science 1917 ( 2000 ) , [ pp . 849 - 858 ] . [ 25 ] R . D . Dewar , and J . E . Dutton . The adoption of radical and incremental innovations : an empirical analysis . Management science 32 , NO . 11 , 1986 , [ pp . 1422 - 1433 ] . [ 26 ] S . P . Dow , A . Glassco , J . Kass , M . Schwarz , D . L . Schwartz , and S . R . Klemmer . Parallel prototyping leads to better design results , more divergence , and increased self - efficacy . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 17 , NO . 4 ( 2010 ) , [ pp . 18 ] . [ 27 ] S . P . Dow , K . Heddleston , and S . R . Klemmer , The efficacy of prototyping under time constraints , in Proceeding of the 7th ACM Conference on Creativity and Cognition , ( 2009 ) , [ pp . 165 – 174 ] . [ 28 ] S . P . Dow , A . Kulkarni , S . Klemmer , and B . Hartmann , Shepherding the crowd yields better work . Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) , ( 2012 ) . A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 29 [ 29 ] J . S . Downs , B . Mandy , S . S . Holbrook , and F . C . Lorrie . Are your participants gaming the system ? : screening mechanical turk workers , in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , ( 2010 ) , [ pp . 2399 - 2402 ] . [ 30 ] Á . E . Eiben , and C . A . Schippers , Multi - parent ' s niche : Nary crossovers on NK - landscapes . Parallel Problem Solving from Nature - PPSN IV . Springer Berlin Heidelberg , ( 1996 ) , [ pp . 319 - 328 ] . [ 31 ] Z . Estes , and T . B . Ward , The Emergence of Novel Attributes in Concept Modification , Creativity Research Journal 14 , NO . 2 , ( 2002 ) , [ pp . 149 - 156 ] . [ 32 ] R . Finke , T . Ward , and S . Smith , Creative Cognition : Theory , Research , and Applications , MIT Press Cambridge , MA ( 1996 ) . [ 33 ] L . Fleming , Breakthroughs and the " Long Tail " of innovation , MIT Sloan Management Review 49 , NO . 1 , ( 2007 ) , [ pp . 69 - 74 ] . [ 34 ] L . Fleming , S . Mingo , and D . Chen , Collaborative Brokerage , Generative Creativity , and Creative Success , Administrative Science Quarterly 52 , NO . 3 , ( 2007 ) , [ pp . 443 - 475 ] . [ 35 ] D . B . Fogel , An introduction to simulated evolutionary optimization . Neural Networks , IEEE Transactions on 5 , NO . 1 , ( 1994 ) , [ pp . 3 - 14 ] . [ 36 ] J . S . Gero , Creativity , emergence and evolution in design . Knowledge - Based Systems 9 , NO . 7 , ( 1996 ) , [ pp . 435 - 448 ] . [ 37 ] D . E . Goldberg , Genetic Algorithms in Search , Optimization and Machine Learning , Kluwer Academic Publishers , Boston , MA , ( 1989 ) . [ 38 ] J . Goldenberg , D . Mazursky , and S . Solomon , The fundamental templates of quality ads , Marketing Science 18 , NO . 3 , ( 1999 ) , [ pp . 333 - 351 ] . [ 39 ] G . S . Haberland , and P . A . Dacin , The Development of a Measure to Assess Viewer s’ Judgments of the Creativity of an Advertisement : A Preliminary Study , Advances in Consumer Research 19 , NO . 1 , ( 1992 ) , [ pp . 817 - 825 ] . [ 40 ] A . Hargadon , How Breakthroughs Happen : The Surprising Truth About How Companies Innovate , Harvard Business School Press , ( 2003 ) [ 41 ] B . Hartmann , S . R . Klemmer , M . Bernstein , L . Abdulla , B . Burr , A . Robinson - Mosher , and J . Gee , Reflective physical prototyping through integrated design , test , and analysis , in Proceedings of the A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 30 19th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology , ACM , ( 2006 ) , [ pp . 299 – 308 ] . [ 42 ] J . R . Hayes , Cognitive Processes in Creativity , in Handbook of Creativity : Assessment , Theory , and Research , G . Clover , R . Ronning , and C . Reynolds ( eds . ) , New York : Plenum , ( 1989 ) . [ 43 ] J . H . Holland , Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems , University of Michigan Press , Ann Arbor , ( 1975 ) . [ 44 ] G . S . Hornby , and T . Kurtoglu , Toward a Smarter Web , Science 17 , NO . 325 , ( 2009 ) , [ pp . 277 - 278 ] . [ 45 ] J . Howe , Crowdsourcing : Why the power of the crowd is driving the future of business . New York : Crown , ( 2008 ) . [ 46 ] I . Hybs , and J . S . Gero , An evolutionary process model of design . Design Studies 13 , NO . 3 , ( 1992 ) , [ pp . 273 - 290 ] . [ 47 ] S . Im , The Model of Effect of Creativity on New Product Success , PhD Dissertation , Kenan - Flagler Business School , University of North Carolina T . ( 1999 ) [ 48 ] P . W . Jackson , and S . Messick , The person , the product , and the response : Conceptual problems in the assessment of creativity , Journal of Personality 33 , NO . 3 , ( 1965 ) , [ pp . 309 - 329 ] . [ 49 ] D . G . Jansson , and S . M . Smith . Design fixation . Design Studies 12 , NO . 1 ( 1991 ) , [ pp . 3 - 11 ] . [ 50 ] E . Kalogerakis , S . Chaudhuri , D . Koller , and V . Koltun , A probabilistic model for component - based shape synthesis . ACM Transactions on Graphics ( TOG ) 31 , NO . 4 , ( 2012 ) , [ pp . 55 ] . [ 51 ] A . Karmiloff - Smith , Beyond Modularity : A Developmental Perspective on Cognitive Science , MIT press , ( 1995 ) . [ 52 ] S . Kauffman , and S . Levin , Towards a general theory of adaptive walks on rugged landscapes , Journal of Theoretical Biology 128 , NO . 1 , ( 1987 ) , [ pp . 11 – 45 ] . [ 53 ] B . Kijkuit , and J . van den Ende , The Organizational Life of an Idea : Integrating Social Network , Creativity and Decision Making Perspectives , Journal of Management Studies 44 , NO . 6 , ( 2007 ) , [ pp . 863 - 882 ] . [ 54 ] Y . Kim , and W . N . Street , An intelligent system for customer targeting : a data mining approach . Decision Support Systems 37 , NO . 2 , ( 2004 ) , [ pp . 215 - 228 ] . A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 31 [ 55 ] A . Kittur , E . H . Chi , and B . Suh , Crowdsourcing user studies with Mechanical Turk , in Proceedings of ACM CHI 2008 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM Press , ( 2008 ) , [ pp . 453 - 456 ] . [ 56 ] F . Kleemann , and G . Günter Voß , Un ( der ) paid Innovators : The Commercial Utilization of Consumer Work through Crowdsourcing , Science , Technology & Innovation Studies 4 , NO . 1 , ( 2008 ) , [ pp . 5 - 26 ] . [ 57 ] N . W . Kohn , P . B . Paulus , and Y . H . Choi , Building on the ideas of others : An examination of the idea combination process , Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 47 , NO . 3 , ( 2011 ) , [ pp . 554 - 561 ] . [ 58 ] A . Kosorukoff , Human - based genetic algorithm , in Proceedings of IEEE Transactions on Systems , Man , and Cybernetics , SMC 5 , ( 2001 ) , [ pp . 3464 - 3469 ] . [ 59 ] R . J . Kuo , J . L . Liao , and C . Tu . Integration of ART2 neural network and genetic K - means algorithm for analyzing web browsing paths in electronic commerce . Decision Support Systems 40 , NO . 2 , ( 2005 ) , [ pp . 355 - 374 ] . [ 60 ] H . Kyriakou , S . Englehardt , and J . V . Nickerson . Networks of Innovation in 3d Printing . In Workshop on Information in Networks . ( 2012 ) . [ 61 ] T . Kötzing , D . Sudholt , and M . Theile , How crossover helps in pseudo - Boolean optimization , in Proceedings of the 13th annual conference on Genetic and evolutionary computation , ACM , ( 2011 ) , [ pp . 989 - 996 ] . [ 62 ] D . Lazer , and A . Friedman , The Network Structure of Exploration and Exploitation , Administrative Science Quarterly 52 , NO . 4 , ( 2007 ) , [ pp . 667 - 694 ] . [ 63 ] J . Leimeister , M . Huber , U . Bretschneider , and H . Krcmar , Leveraging Crowdsourcing : Activation - Supporting Components for IT - Based Ideas Competition , Journal of Management Information Systems 26 , NO . 1 , ( 2009 ) , [ pp . 197 – 224 ] . [ 64 ] D . A . Levinthal , Adaptation on Rugged Landscapes . Management Science 43 , NO . 7 , ( 1997 ) , [ pp . 934 - 950 ] . [ 65 ] S . W . Mahfoud , Niching Methods for Genetic Algorithms , Ph . D . Dissertation , University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign . Department of General Engineering , ( 1995 ) . A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 32 [ 66 ] G . March , Exploration and exploitation in organization learning . Organization Science , 2 , ( 1991 ) , [ pp . 71 – 87 ] . [ 67 ] P . L . McLeod , and S . A . Lobel , The effects of ethnic diversity on idea generation in small groups . In Academy of Management Proceedings Academy of Management , NO . 1 , ( 1992 , August ) , [ pp . 227 - 231 ] . [ 68 ] K . Mehta , and S . Bhattacharyya , Adequacy of training data for evolutionary mining of trading rules , Decision support systems 37 , NO . 4 ( 2004 ) , [ pp . 461 - 474 ] . [ 69 ] R . Nallapati , S . Peerreddy , and P . Singhal . Skierarchy : Extending the Power of Crowdsourcing Using a Hierarchy of Domain Experts , Crowd and Machine Learning . In Online Proceedings of TREC . ( 2012 ) . [ 70 ] J . V . Nickerson , Human - Based Evolutionary Computing , Handbook of Human Computation , P . Michelucci , ed . , Springer , Forthcoming ( 2014 ) . [ 71 ] J . V . Nickerson , and Y . Sakamoto , Crowdsourcing Creativity : Combining Ideas in Networks , Workshop on Information in Networks , New York , NY ( 2010 ) . [ 72 ] Page , Aggregation in agent - based models of economies . The Knowledge Engineering Review 27 , NO . 2 , ( 2012 ) , [ pp . 151 - 162 ] . [ 73 ] S . J . Parnes , and A . Meadow . Effects of " brainstorming " instructions on creative problem solving by trained and untrained subjects , Journal of Educational Psychology 50 , NO . 4 ( 1959 ) , [ pp . 171 ] . [ 74 ] P . B . Paulus , T . Nakui , V . L . Putman , and V . R . Brown . Effects of task instructions and brief breaks on brainstorming , Group Dynamics : Theory , Research , and Practice 10 , NO . 3 , ( 2006 ) , [ pp . 206 ] . [ 75 ] J . E . Perry - Smith , and C . E . Shalley , The Social Side of Creativity : A Static and Dynamic Social Network Perspective , Academy of Management Review 28 , NO . 1 , ( 2003 ) , [ pp . 89 - 106 ] . [ 76 ] J . Ross , L . Irani , M . S . Silberman , A . Zaldivar , and B . Tomlinson , Who are the Crowdworkers ? Shifting Demographics in Mechanical Turk , in Proceedings of the 28th of the international conference extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems , ACM Press , ( 2010 ) , [ pp . 2863 - 2872 ] . [ 77 ] M . J . Salganik , and K . E . C . Levy , Wiki surveys : Open and quantifiable social data collection , arXiv : 1202 . 0500v1 ( 2012 ) . A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 33 [ 78 ] M . J . Salganik , and D . J . Watts , Web - based Experiments for the Study of Collective Social Dynamics in Cultural Markets , Topics in Cognitive Science 1 , ( 2009 ) , [ pp . 439 - 468 ] . [ 79 ] M . Schrage , Serious Play : How t he World’s Best Companies Simulate to Innovate , Harvard Business School Press . MA , ( 1999 ) . [ 80 ] J . A . Schumpeter , The process of creative destruction in Capitalism , Socialism and Democracy , in , Scott Shane ( ed . ) , The Foundations of Entrepreneurship 1 , Edward Elgar Publishing , Inc , ( 1961 ) , [ pp . 178 - 184 ] . [ 81 ] H . A . Simon , A behavioral model of rational choice . Quarterly Journal of Economics , 69 , ( 1955 ) , [ PP . 99 – 118 ] . [ 82 ] D . K . Simonton , Scientific creativity as constrained stochastic behavior : the integration of product , person , and process perspectives , Psychological Bulletin 129 , NO . 4 , ( 2003 ) , [ pp . 475 ] . [ 83 ] R . E . Smith , S . B . MacKenzie , X . Yang , L . M . Buchholz , and W . K . Darley , Modeling the Determinants and Effects of Creativity in Advertising , Marketing science 26 , NO . 6 , ( 2007 ) , [ pp . 819 - 833 ] . [ 84 ] R . E . Smith , and X . Yang , Toward a General Theory of Creativity in Advertising : Examining the Role of Divergence , Marketing Theory 4 , NO . 1 / 2 , ( 2004 ) , [ pp . 31 - 58 ] . [ 85 ] W . M . Spears , Crossover or Mutation ? , in Foundations of Genetic Algorithms 2 . L . D . Whitley ( ed ) . Morgan Kaufmann , CA , ( 1993 ) . [ 86 ] Srinivas , and L . M . Patnaik . Adaptive probabilities of crossover and mutation in genetic algorithms . Systems , Man and Cybernetics , IEEE Transactions on 24 , NO . 4 , ( 1994 ) , [ pp . 656 - 667 ] . [ 87 ] P . Steadman , The Evolution of Designs , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , ( 1979 ) . [ 88 ] G . J . Tellis , Advertising and Sales Promotion Strategy , Addison - Wesley , Reading , MA , ( 1998 ) . [ 89 ] S . Thomke , and E . von Hippel , Customers as Innovators : A New Way to Create Value , Harvard Business Review 80 , NO . 4 , ( 2002 ) , [ pp . 74 - 81 ] . [ 90 ] E . Thorson , and X . Zhao , Television Viewing Behavior as an Indicator of Commercial Effectiveness , in Measuring Advertising Effectiveness , W . D . Wells ( eds ) , Lawnrence Erlbaum Associates , Chap 13 . ( 1997 ) , [ pp . 221 - 237 ] . A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 34 [ 91 ] J . S . Valacich , J . H . Jung , and C . A . Looney , The Effects of Individual Cognitive Ability and Idea Stimulation on Idea - Generation Performance , Group Dynamics : Theory , Research , and Practice 10 , NO . 1 , ( 2006 ) , [ pp . 1 - 15 ] . [ 92 ] E . von Hippel , Lead Users : A Source of Novel Product Concepts , Management Science 32 , NO . 7 , ( 1986 ) , [ pp . 791 - 805 ] . [ 93 ] E . von Hippel , Shifting Innovation to Users via Toolkits , Management Science 48 , NO . 7 , ( 2002 ) , [ pp . 821 - 833 ] . [ 94 ] L . von Ahn , and L . Dabbish , Labeling images with a computer game , in Proceedings of ACM CHI on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ( 2004 ) , [ pp . 319 - 326 ] . [ 95 ] T . B . Ward , Creative cognition , conceptual combination , and the creative writing of Stephen R . Donaldson . American Psychologist 56 , NO . 4 ( 2001 ) , [ pp . 350 - 354 ] . [ 96 ] T . B . Ward , Cognition , creativity , and entrepreneurship , Journal of Business Venturing 19 , NO . 2 , ( 2004 ) , [ pp . 173 - 188 ] . [ 97 ] L . Weitzman , Recombinant growth , The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 , NO . 2 , ( 1998 ) , [ pp . 331 - 360 ] . [ 98 ] W . D . Wells , Planning for R . O . I . : Effective Advertising Strategy . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Wiley , ( 1989 ) . [ 99 ] S . G . Winter , G . Cattani , and A . Dorsch . The value of moderate obsession : Insights from a new model of organizational search . Organization Science 18 , NO . 3 , ( 2007 ) , [ pp . 403 - 419 ] . [ 100 ] R . F . Woodbury , Design genes , Preprints Modeling Creativity and Knowledge - Based Creative Design , Design Computing Unit , Department of Architectural and Design Science , University of Sydney , Sydney , ( 1989 ) , [ pp . 133 154 ] . [ 101 ] R . W . Woodman , J . E . Sawyer , and R . W . Grifﬁn , Toward a theory of organizational creativity , Academy of Management Review 18 , NO . 2 , ( 1993 ) , [ pp . 293 - 321 ] . [ 102 ] L . Yu , and J . V . Nickerson , Cooks or Cobblers ? Crowd Creativity through Combination , in CHI ' 11 Proceedings of the 2011 Annual Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ( 2011 ) , [ pp . 1393 - 1402 ] . [ 103 ] L . Yu , and J . V . Nickerson , An internet - scale idea generation system , ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems , 3 , 1 , Article 2 , ( 2013 ) . A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 35 Jie Ren will be an assistant professor in the Information Systems department at Fordham University , starting Fall 2014 . She received her Ph . D . in information management from Stevens Institute of Technology . Her research focuses on online collective behaviors . She is interested in understanding the business impact of these behaviors , especially in the field of marketing and innovation . She currently studies crowdsourcing , social media and open innovation . Jeffrey Nickerson is Professor and the Director of the Center for Decision Technologies in the Howe School of Technology Management at Stevens Institute of Technology . His research and teaching interests include social media analytics , information systems design , and collective intelligence . He is the principal investigator of an NSF - funded project researching crowd creativity . He has published in MISQ , Decision Support Systems , ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction , and ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems . Winter Mason is a Data Scientist at Facebook and on leave as Assistant Professor at Stevens Institute of Technology . He received his Ph . D . in social psychology and cognitive science in 2007 , and currently studies social networks and social media , including crowdsourcing , group dynamics , and social influence . A CC EP T E D M A N U S CR I P T ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 36 Yasuaki Sakamoto is an assistant professor in the Howe School of Technology Management at Stevens Institute of Technology , in Hoboken , N . J . He received his B . A . in Psychology from Indiana University at Bloomington , and his Ph . D . in Cognitive Science from the University of Texas at Austin . His research focuses on designing and analyzing crowd - based technologies for augmenting social and cognitive processes . He teaches courses in social media analysis , social network analysis , statistics , and research methods . Bruno Graber is a French software engineer . After 5 years studying Computer Science in France , he came to United States in 2012 to study the management of information systems at Stevens Institute of Technology . While studying there , Professor Jeffrey V . Nickerson offered him a possibility to work as a research assistant . This opportunity has truly revealed Bruno ' s interest in research . Bruno is now working at Deloitte Consulting Innovation in the iLab where innovative ideas are transformed into products .