Alternative splicing is a crucial mechanism for gene regu lation and for generating proteomic diversity . Recent estimates indicate that the expression of nearly 95 % of human multi - exon genes involves alternative splicing 1 , 2 . In metazoans , alternative splicing plays an important part in generating different protein products that func - tion in diverse cellular processes , including cell growth , differentiation and death . Splicing is carried out by the spliceosome , a massive structure in which five small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles ( snRNPs ) and a large number of auxiliary pro - teins cooperate to accurately recognize the splice sites and catalyse the two steps of the splicing reaction 1 , 2 ( BOX 1 ) . Spliceosome assembly ( BOX 1 ) begins with the recognition of the 5 ′ splice site by the snRNP U1 and the binding of splicing factor 1 ( SF1 ) to the branch point 3 and of the U2 auxiliary factor ( U2AF ) heterodimer to the polypyrimi - dine tract and 3 ′ terminal AG 4 , 5 . This assembly is ATP independent and results in the formation of the E com - plex , which is converted into the ATP - dependent , pre - spliceosomal A complex after the replacement of SF1 by the U2 snRNP at the branch point . Further recruitment of the U4 / U6 – U5 tri - snRNP complex leads to the forma - tion of the B complex , which is converted into to the cata - lytically active C complex after extensive conformational changes and remodelling . The decision as to which exon is removed and which exon is included involves RNA sequence elements and protein regulators . Depending on the position and func - tion of the cis - regulatory elements , they are divided into four categories : exonic splicing enhancers ( ESEs ) , exonic splicing silencers ( ESSs ) , intronic splicing enhancers ( ISEs ) and intronic splicing silencers ( ISSs ) . ESEs are usually bound by members of the SR ( Ser – Arg ) protein family 6 – 8 ( BOX 2 ) . ISSs and ESSs are commonly bound by hetero geneous nuclear RNPs ( hnRNPs ; TABLE 1 ) , which have one or more RNA - binding domains and protein – protein interaction domains 9 , 10 . ISEs are not as well characterized as the other three types of element , although recently several proteins , such as hnRNP F , hnRNP H , neuro - oncological ventral antigen 1 ( NOVA1 ) , NOVA2 , FOX1 and FOX2 ( also known as RBM9 ) , have been shown to bind ISEs and to stimulate splicing 11 – 14 . Choices of alternative splicing have long been thought to be made at the stages of splice site recognition and early spliceosome assembly , and indeed this is frequently the case 1 . However , several recent studies have shown that the decision can be made at different stages of spliceo - some assembly , and even during conformational changes between the two transesterification steps 15 – 17 . In addi - tion , there has been accumulating evidence showing the coupling of RNA transcription to splicing regulation 18 – 22 . Alternative splicing contributes to genomic diversity and tissue specificity 23 . Comprehending tissue - specific alternative splicing requires an understanding of the regulatory network of protein – protein , protein – RNA and RNA – RNA interactions that are involved in this pro - cess 1 , 24 . Tissue - specific alternative splicing is thought to be controlled by differentially expressed splicing regulators 1 , 25 and / or ubiquitously expressed splicing factors of different concentrations and / or activity 26 , 27 . In addition , tremen - dous progress has been made using high - throughput Department of Biological Sciences , Columbia University , New York , New York 10027 , USA . Correspondence to J . L . M . e - mail : jlm2 @ columbia . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2777 Published online 23 September 2009 Corrected online 12 October 2009 Small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particle ( snRNP ) . A protein , including U1 , U2 , U4 , U5 and U6 , which contains U - rich small nuclear RNAs ( snRNAs ) and both small nuclear ribonucleoprotein ( snRNP ) - specific and common proteins , and is a core component of the spliceosome . Branch point A nucleotide , usually an adenosine , within a variably conserved branch point sequence upstream of the 3 ′ splice site , the 2 ′ hydroxyl group of which attacks the 5 ′ splice site in the first step of splicing . Mechanisms of alternative splicing regulation : insights from molecular and genomics approaches Mo Chen and James L . Manley Abstract | Alternative splicing of mRNA precursors provides an important means of genetic control and is a crucial step in the expression of most genes . Alternative splicing markedly affects human development , and its misregulation underlies many human diseases . Although the mechanisms of alternative splicing have been studied extensively , until the past few years we had not begun to realize fully the diversity and complexity of alternative splicing regulation by an intricate protein – RNA network . Great progress has been made by studying individual transcripts and through genome - wide approaches , which together provide a better picture of the mechanistic regulation of alternative pre - mRNA splicing . Post - transcriPtional control REVIEWS NATURE REVIEwS | Molecular cell Biology VOlUME 10 | NOVEMBER 2009 | 741 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved SF1 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology 5 ′ ss 3 ′ ss 5 ′ ss 3 ′ ss U1 U1 Branch point Polypyrimidine tract AG E ′ complex SF1 U1 U1 E complex U2AF U1 U1 A complex Intron definition Exon definition Exon definition U1 B complex Intron definition Rearrangement to C complex and catalysis U1 ? ? ? U2AF U2AF U2AF U2AF U2 U2 tri - snRNP U2 SF1 SR ( Ser – Arg ) protein family A family of nuclear factors that have many important roles in splicing mRNA precursors in metazoan organisms , functioning in both constitutive and alternative splicing . methods , which has not only revealed many more new alternative splicing events 28 – 30 , but has also accelerated the process of understanding its regulation in different tissues by examining the expression levels of protein regu - lators and helping to define cis - regulatory elements 31 , 32 . In this Review , we discuss mechanisms of alternative splicing control from different perspectives . At which stage of spliceo some assembly is the decision of whether to include an alternative exon made ? what protein factors are involved ? How does RNA polymerase II ( RNAP II ) function in alternative splicing regulation ? Are the kine - tics of spliceosome assembly important for this process ? which mechanisms control tissue - specific alternative splicing ? we address these questions and conclude by summarizing the diversity of the mechanisms of alter - native splicing regulation and speculate on the future directions of alternative splicing research . splice site recognition and selection Most human genes contain multiple exons , and the aver - age length of exons ( 50 – 250 bp ) is much shorter than that of intervening sequences ( frequently thousands of bps ) . Early stages of spliceosome assembly occur around the exons owing to the large size of introns 33 . This type of exon - centred splice site recognition is referred to as ‘exon definition’ ( REf . 34 ) ( BOX 1 ) . Exon definition must even - tually be converted to intron definition , which occurs by cross - intron interactions between the U1 and U2 snRNPs 35 , 36 . The best - studied mechanisms of alternative splicing regulation involve controlling splice site recogni - tion by facilitating or interfering with the binding of the U1 or U2 snRNP to the splice sites . Facilitating splice site recognition . SR proteins have important roles in facilitating splice site recognition . For example , they recruit the U1 snRNP to the 5 ′ splice site and the U2AF complex and U2 snRNP to the 3 ′ splice site by binding to an ESE and directly interacting with protein targets 37 – 40 ( fIG . 1a ) . These interactions are mediated by their RS ( Arg – Ser repeat - containing ) domains 41 , 42 , which have to be properly phosphorylated and dephosphorylated 1 , 43 , 44 . SR proteins also cooperate with other positive regulatory factors to form larger splicing enhancing complexes by interacting with other RS domain - containing proteins , such as transformer 2 ( TRA2 ) and the SR - related nuclear matrix proteins SRm160 ( also known as SRRM1 ) and SRm300 ( also known as SRRM2 ) 45 – 47 ( fIG . 1a ) . Binding and recruiting can also be achieved by intronic bind - ing proteins : for example , T cell - restricted intracellular antigen 1 ( TIA1 ) binds a U - rich sequence downstream of weak 5 ′ splice sites to recruit the U1 snRNP 48 , 49 ; and Src - associated in mitosis 68 kDa protein ( SAM68 ; also known as KHDRBS1 ) binds and recruits U2AF to the 3 ′ splice site of exon V5 of the transmembrane glycoprotein CD44 pre - mRNA 50 . The SR protein SRp38 ( also known as TASR 51 , NSSR 52 , FUSIP1 and SRrp40 ( REf . 53 ) ) has been characterized as a general splicing repressor that is activated by dephos - phorylation 54 , 55 ( see below ) . However , recent studies indicate that it also functions as a sequence - dependent splicing activator when phosphorylated 39 . It was found that in vitro SRp38 activates the formation and splicing of the A complex by facilitating the recruitment of the U1 and U2 snRNPs to the pre - mRNA and stabilizing the 5 ′ splice site and branch site recognition ( fIG . 2a ) . Notably , SRp38 , unlike other SR proteins , cannot comple - ment cytoplasmic S100 extracts ( which contain all factors required for splicing except SR proteins ) to activate splicing 56 . Although an A - like complex is formed in the presence of S100 and SRp38 , it is stalled or inactive and requires a specific ( and currently unknown ) coactivator Box 1 | splicing and spliceosome assembly Pre - mRNA splicing is a process in which intervening sequences ( introns ) are removed from an mRNA precursor . Splicing consists of two transesterification steps , each involving a nucleophilic attack on terminal phosphodiester bonds of the intron . In the first step this is carried out by the 2 ′ hydroxyl of the branch point ( usually adenosine ) and in the second step by the 3 ′ hydroxyl of the upstream ( 5 ′ ) exon 1 , 2 . This process is carried out in the spliceosome , a dynamic molecular machine the assembly of which involves sequential binding and release of small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles ( snRNPs ) and numerous protein factors as well as the formation and disruption of RNA – RNA , protein – RNA and protein – protein interactions . The basic mechanics of spliceosome assembly are well known . Briefly , the process begins with the base pairing of U1 snRNA to the 5 ′ splice site ( ss ) and the binding of splicing factor 1 ( SF1 ) to the branch point 3 in an ATP - independent manner to form the E ′ complex ( see the figure ; double - headed arrows indicate an interaction ) . The E ′ complex can be converted into the E complex by the recruitment of U2 auxiliary factor ( U2AF ) heterodimer ( comprising U2AF65 and U2AF35 ) to the polypyrimidine tract and 3 ′ terminal AG 158 . The ATP - independent E complex is converted into the ATP - dependent pre - spliceosome A complex by the replacement of SF1 by U2 snRNP at the branch point . Further recruitment of the U4 / U6 – U5 tri - snRNP leads to the formation of the B complex , which contains all spliceosomal subunits that carry out pre - mRNA splicing . This is followed by extensive conformational changes and remodelling , including the loss of U1 and U4 snRNPs , ultimately resulting in the formation of the C complex , which is the catalytically active spliceosome . R E V I E W S 742 | NOVEMBER 2009 | VOlUME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved to proceed 39 ( fIG . 2a ) . In vivo , SRp38 was shown to favour inclusion of the Flip exon of the GRIA2 ( glutamate receptor , ionotropic , AMPA 2 ; also known as GluRB ) pre - mRNA 52 , whereas the mutually exclusive Flop exon is included when SRp38 is absent 39 . Interestingly , both exons contain SRp38 - binding sites , and it was proposed that the intracellular concentrations of SRp38 as well as differential binding to the exons ( that is , stronger binding to the Flip exon ) influence the decision to include either the Flip or Flop exon 39 . Inhibiting splice site recognition . Inhibition of splice site recognition can be achieved in many ways . First , when splicing silencers are located close to splice sites or to splic - ing enhancers , inhibition can occur by sterically blocking the access of snRNPs or of positive regulatory factors . For example , polypyrimidine - tract binding protein ( PTB ; also known as PTB1 and hnRNP I ) , binds the polypyrimidine tract and blocks the binding of U2AF to regulated exons 57 – 59 . In addition , hnRNP A1 binds ISSs that are located upstream of exon 3 in HIV Tat pre - mRNA and prevents binding of the U2 snRNP 60 . Finally , tissue - specific splicing factors FOX1 and FOX2 inhibit the formation of the E ′ complex by binding to an intronic sequence to prevent SF1 from binding to the branch site of CAlCA ( calcitonin - related polypeptide - α ) pre - mRNA 61 ( fIG . 1b ) . Splicing inhibitors also sterically block the binding of activators to enhancers . Hu / ELAV family proteins inhibit U1 snRNP binding by competing with the binding of TIA1 to an AU - rich sequence downstream of the 5 ′ splice site of exon 23a of neurofibromatosis type 1 pre - mRNA 62 . FOX1 and FOX2 also inhibit E complex formation by binding to an exonic sequence in the CAlCA pre - mRNA close to the ESE that TRA2 and SRp55 bind to , prevent - ing the recruitment of U2AF by the activators 61 ( fIG . 1b ) . Finally , hnRNP A1 binds an ESS upstream of the TRA2 - dependent ESE in exon 7 in the SMN2 ( survival of motor neuron 2 ) pre - mRNA , possibly inhibiting the formation or stabilization of the U2 snRNP complex 63 , 64 ( fIG . 1c ) . Some silencers can be over 100 – 200 bp away from enhancers , and a simple ‘bind and block’ model thus cannot explain their inhibitory effect . One explanation for the activity of such splicing inhibitors is that they function by masking splice site recognition through multimerization along the RNA 58 . Another model pro - poses that the alternative exon might be ‘looped out’ in a process involving protein – protein interactions between RNA - binding proteins bound at sites spanning the alter - native exon 58 , 65 – 67 , and that this loop formation may steri - cally interfere with further spliceosome assembly , even though splice site recog nition may not be inhibited 67 . For example , hnRNP A1 binds to elements upstream and downstream of exon 7B in its own pre - mRNA to pro - mote skipping of exon 7B 68 . hnRNP A1 has also been shown to bind to exonic and intronic silencers in SMN2 exon 7 and intron 7 , and it is proposed that an inter - action between hnRNP A1 mole cules is required to fully suppress the inclusion of SMN2 exon 7 ( REfS 64 , 69 , 70 ) . In addition , PTB has been shown to bind sites flanking the SRC N1 exon , and mutating one of the PTB sites affects the binding of PTB to the other site 58 , 71 . Box 2 | sr proteins The SR ( Ser – Arg ) proteins are a family of nuclear factors that have many important roles in the splicing of mRNA precursors in metazoan organisms , functioning in both constitutive and alternative RNA splicing 7 . They are involved in many steps of splicing regulation , by binding exonic splicing enhancers ( ESEs ) through their RNA recognition motifs ( RRMs ) and mediating protein – protein 41 , 42 , and perhaps protein – RNA 159 , interactions through their RS ( Arg – Ser repeat - containing ) domains . All canonical SR proteins have common characteristics ( see the table ) . They have a similar structure , with one or two ribonucleoprotein particle ( RNP ) - type RNA - binding domains at their amino termini and a variable - length domain enriched in Arg – Ser dipeptides at their carboxyl termini ( the RS domain ) . RS domains are extensively phosphorylated and they function in splicing , usually as activators . Most SR proteins function as pivotal regulators in multiple aspects of mRNA metabolism , such as mRNA nuclear export 160 , nonsense - mediated mRNA decay 161 and translation 162 . Numerous additional RS domain - containing proteins have been identified ; proteins known to be involved in alternative splicing are listed in the table . Name * Domains Binding sequence Target genes Canonical SR proteins SRp20 ( SFRS3 ) RRM and RS GCUCCUCUUC SRP20 , CALCA and INSR SC35 ( SFRS2 ) RRM and RS UGCUGUU AChE and GRIA1 – GRIA4 ASF / SF2 ( SFRS1 ) RRM , RRMH and RS RGAAGAAC hIPK3 , CAMK2D , HIV RNAs and GRIA1 – GRIA4 SRp40 ( SFRS5 ) RRM , RRMH and RS AGGAGAAGGGA hIPK3 , PRKCB and FN1 SRp55 ( SFRS6 ) RRM , RRMH and RS GGCAGCACCUG TNNT2 and CD44 SRp75 ( SFRS4 ) RRM , RRMH and RS GAAGGA FN1 , E1A and CD45 9G8 ( SFRS7 ) RRM , zinc finger and RS ( GAC ) n TAu , GNRh and SFRS7 SRp30c ( SFRS9 ) RRM , RRMH and RS CUGGAUU BCL2L1 , TAu and hNRNPA1 SRp38 ( FUSIP1 ) RRM and RS AAAGACAAA GRIA2 and TRD Other SR proteins SRp54 RRM and RS ND TAu SRp46 ( SFRS2B ) RRM and RS ND NA RNPS1 RRM and Ser - rich ND TRA2B SRrp35 RRM and RS ND NA SRrp86 ( SRrp508 and SFRS12 ) RRM and RS ND NA TRA2 α RRM and two Arg - rich GAAARGARR dsx TRA2 β RRM and two RS ( GAA ) n SMN1 , CD44 and TAu RBM5 RRM and RS ND CD95 CAPER ( RBM39 ) RRM and RS ND VEGF * Alternative names are provided in brackets . AChE , acetylcholine ; BCL2L1 , BCL - 2 - like 1 ; CAMK2D , calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II - δ ; CALCA , calcitonin - related polypeptide - α ; CAPER , coactivator of activating protein 1 and oestrogen receptors ; FN1 , fibronectin 1 ; FUSIP , FUS - interacting serine - arginine - rich protein 1 ; GNRh , gonadotropin - releasing hormone ; GRIA , glutamate receptor , ionotropic , AMPA ; hIPK3 , homeodomain - interacting protein kinase 3 ; hNRNPA1 , human nuclear RNP A1 ; INSR , insulin receptor ; PRKCB ; protein kinase C β ; RBM , RNA - binding protein ; RNPS1 , RNA - binding protein with Ser - rich domain 1 ; RRMH , RRM homology ; NA , not applicable ; ND , not determined ; SFRS , splicing factor , Arg - and Ser - rich ; SMN1 , survival of motor neuron 1 ; TNTT2 , troponin T type 2 ; TRA2 , transformer 2 ; TRD , tradin ; VEGF , vascular endothelial growth factor . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEwS | Molecular cell Biology VOlUME 10 | NOVEMBER 2009 | 743 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Heterologous nuclear RNP ( hnRNP ) . A pre - mRNA - or mRNA - binding protein that associates with transcripts during or after transcription and influences their function and fate . Some hnRNPs shuttle in and out of nuclei , whereas others are constitutively nuclear . Alternative exon An exon that is included in mature mRNA in certain cellular contexts but excluded in others . RS ( Arg – Ser repeat - containing ) domain A protein domain that is variable in length and enriched in Arg – Ser dipeptides and seems to be involved in protein – protein and protein – RNA interactions . Hu / ELAV family protein A protein belonging to a family of nervous system - specific RNA - binding proteins that specifically bind to AU - rich sequences . CLIP A method that combines cross - linking and immunopre - cipitation to identify in vivo targets of RNA - binding proteins . Combinatorial effects of activators and inhibitors . Splicing of individual pre - mRNAs is frequently con - trolled by combinatorial or competitive effects of both activ ators and inhibitors . The final decision of whether an alternative exon is included is determined by the concentration or activity of each type of regulator , often by SR proteins and hnRNPs 72 – 74 . For example , the SR protein 9G8 ( also known as SFRS7 ) and hnRNP F and hnRNP H regulate the splicing of α - tropomyosin exon 2 by competing for binding to the same element 75 ; hnRNP A1 and the SR proteins ASF / SF2 ( also known as SFRS1 ) and SC35 ( also known as SFRS2 ) have antago - nistic functions in splicing of β - tropomyosin exon 6B 76 ; and CElF ( CUGBP - and ETR3 - like factor ) - family pro - teins ETR3 ( also known as CElF2 ) and CUGBP1 acti - vate the splicing of exon 5 of TNTT2 ( troponin T type 2 ; also known as cTNT ) by displacing PTB 77 . A recent study showed that at least some Drosophila melanogaster SR proteins and hnRNPs do not have as many common targets as had been thought 78 . Using small interfering RNAs ( siRNAs ) to deplete individual splicing factors followed by splicing - sensitive microarray analysis , the authors compared genes regulated in opposite direc - tions by hnRNPs and two SR proteins ( dASF and BC52 ) . Surprisingly , less than 5 % of the genes overlap . However , a systematic analysis of more SR and hnRNPs will be necessary to decide whether antagon izing effects between these proteins is a main mode of alternative splicing regulation . Position - dependent splicing regulation . The nature of the activity of cis - acting elements and their cognate binding proteins in some cases depends on their posi - tion relative to regulated exons . Several proteins , such as NOVA1 , NOVA2 , FOX1 , FOX2 , hnRNP l , hnRNP l - like , hnRNP F and hnRNP H , have been shown to act as either repressors or activators depending on the loca - tion of their binding site 11 – 14 , 79 – 83 . For example , NOVA1 binds to an ISE in GABRG2 ( GABA A receptor , γ2 ) pre - mRNA and promotes inclusion of exon 9 ( REf . 84 ) , but it binds to the ESS in the alternative exon 4 of its own pre - mRNA and prevents exon 4 from being included 81 . Similarly to NOVA1 , hnRNP l can activate or repress upstream alternative exons , and this probably depends on the location of its binding site relative to the regu - lated 5 ′ splice site 12 . hnRNP H promotes the formation of ATP - dependent spliceosomal complexes when it binds to G - rich sequences ( G runs ) downstream of the 5 ′ splice site 85 , but it inhibits splicing when the G - rich sequences are located in exons 86 . By using information from mRNA transcripts that are know to be targeted by NOVA1 and NOVA2 and by searching for YCAY clus - ters ( which are NOVA1 and NOVA2 binding sequences ) around regulated exons , one group 11 drew an ‘mRNA map’ that includes the location of NOVA1 and NOVA2 binding sites and the consequence of each binding event . This map provides insight into the mechanisms under - lying the effects of NOVA1 and NOVA2 on splicing . For example , binding of NOVA1 and NOVA2 to an ESS inhibits the formation of the pre - spliceosomal E com - plex by altering its composition before the binding of hnRNPs and inhibits the binding of U1 snRNP 11 . By contrast , NOVA1 and NOVA2 binding to an ISE down - stream of the alternative exon promotes the formation of spliceosomal complexes A , B and C 11 . A new tech - nique that combines CLIP and high - throughput sequenc - ing , known as HITS - ClIP 80 ( ClIP - seq ) 13 , 87 , 88 , not only verified the reproducibility of this mRNA map , but Table 1 | ribonucleoproteins that are involved in pre - mrna splicing Name other names Domains * Binding sequences Target genes hnRNP A1 NA RRM , RGG and G UAGGGA / U SMN2 and RAS hnRNP A2 hnRNP B1 NA RRM , RGG and G ( UUAGGG ) n HIV tat and IKBKAP hnRNP C1 hnRNP C2 AUF1 RRM U rich APP hnRNP F NA RRM , RGG and GY GGGA and G rich PLP , SRC and BCL2L2 hnRNP G NA RRM and SRGY CC ( A / C ) and AAGU SMN2 and TMP1 hnRNP H hnRNP H ′ DSEF1 RRM , RGG , GYR and GY GGGA and G rich PLP , HIV tat and BCL2L1 hnRNP I PTB RRM UCUU and CUCUCU PTB , nPTB , SRC , CD95 , TNTT2 , CALCA and GRIN3B hnRNP L NA RRM C and A rich NOS and CD45 hnRNP LL SRRF RRM C and A rich CD45 hnRNP M NA RRM and GY ND FGFR2 hnRNP Q NA RRM and RGG ND SMN2 * Domains are enriched in particular amino acids , as indicated by their names . APP , amyloid - β precursor protein ; BCL2L1 , BCL - 2 - like 2 ; CALCA , calcitonin - related polypeptide - α ; GRIN3B , glutamate receptor , ionotropic , NMDA 3B ; FGFR2 , fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 ; hnRNP , heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein particle ; hnRNP LL , hnRNP L - like ; IKBKAP , inhibitor of κ - light polypeptide gene enhancer in B cells , kinase complex - associated protein ; NA , not applicable ; ND , not determined ; NOS , nitric oxide synthase ; SMN2 , survival motor neuron protein 2 ; PLP , proteolipid protein ; PTB , polypyrimidine - tract binding protein ; RRM , RNA recognition motif ; TNTT2 , troponin T type 2 ; TPM1 , α - tropomyosin . R E V I E W S 744 | NOVEMBER 2009 | VOlUME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology U1 U1 ESEs ESEs 5 ′ ss 3 ′ ss 5 ′ ss 3 ′ ss Constitutive exon Alternative exon 5 ′ ss 3 ′ ss Exon 1 Exon 4 Constitutive exon ISEsPTB - and ETR3 - binding site U 2 A F U 2 A F U 2 A F U2 TRA2 TIA 1 TRA2 ETR3 PTB SRm160 – SRm300 SF1 U1 FOX1andFOX2 FOX1andFOX2 FOX1andFOX2 ESEs 5 ′ ss 3 ′ ss Exon 1 Exon 4 S F 1 b c a U1 ESEs 5 ′ ss 3 ′ ss Exon 1 Exon 4 SF1 U1 ESEs 5 ′ ss 3 ′ ss Exon 1 Exon 4 TRA2 S R p 55 S R p 55 E ′ complex E complex ESEs U 2 A F U2 TRA2 TRA2 T R A 2 U1 ESEs ESS U 2 A F U2 TRA2 TRA2 U1 ESS h n R N P A 1 h n R N P A 1 Inclusion of exon 7 in SMN1 Exclusion of exon 7 in SMN2 S F 1 SR SR SR SR SR SR FOX1andFOX2 Branchpoint also provided genome - wide information on the target genes of NOVA1 , NOVA2 and FOX2 as well as possibly mechanisms by which these proteins are regulated 80 . why does the position of splicing regulatory ele - ments determine the action of cognate splicing factors ? It is possible that enhancers are positioned so that when the splicing factors bind to them , the splice sites of the alternative exon are better presented to the splicing machinery by changing the local mRNA structure . By contrast , silencing elements function in the opposite manner , by competing with components of the splicing machinery or by changing the structure of the mRNA to impede splice site recognition . Roles for RNA in alternative splicing regulation . The selection of the splice site can also be influenced by sec - ondary structures in the pre - mRNA . Perhaps the most striking example of this is the complex alter native splicing that is observed in D . melanogaster Dscam pre - mRNA . The exon 6 cluster of Dscam consists of 48 mutually exclusive exons . Pairing between a conserved sequence located downstream of constitutive exon 5 ( the docking site ) and another conserved sequence , a variant of which is located upstream of each exon 6 variant ( the selector sequence ) , allows the inclusion of only one exon 6 vari - ant 89 ; the other variants are excluded by the binding of hrp36 , a D . melanogaster hnRNP A homologue , to the selector sequence 90 . Secondary structures can affect alternative splicing by masking splice sites 91 or by binding sites for splicing fac - tors 92 , 93 . For example , a stem and loop secondary structure was shown to sequester alternative exon 6B of the chicken β - tropomyosin pre - mRNA , leading to its exclusion 94 . The IDX exon of RAS can form a secondary structure with an ISS ( RASISS1 ) , preventing the binding of hnRNP H to RASISS1 . Unwinding this secondary structure by the RNA helicase P68 exposes the binding site , partially explain - ing the exclusion of IDX 93 . Riboswitches , which control gene expression in prokaryotes 95 , also have the potential to modulate alternative splicing . Splicing of the NMT1 ( N - tetradecanoyltransferase 1 ) pre - mRNA in Neurospora crassa was found to respond to the co enzyme thiamine pyrophosphate through a riboswitch - like structure 96 . It remains to be seen , however , whether this intriguing mechanism operates in higher eukaryotes . In mammals , small nucleolar RNAs ( snoRNAs ) have also been impli - cated in alternative splicing regulation 97 . For example , the snoRNA HBII 52 regulates the alternative splicing of HTR2C pre - mRNA by binding to a silencing element in exon Vb to promote its inclusion 98 . regulation by U1 and U2 snrnP pairing After the 5 ′ and 3 ′ splice sites are recognized and exons are defined , exon definition must be converted to intron definition , which involves cross - intron inter - action between U1 and U2 snRNPs , to form a functional spliceosome . Precisely when this occurs and when the commitment to splice site pairing happens have been intensively investigated over the past few years . Several studies have shown that the commitment to splicing of at least some alternative exons occurs during splice site pairing in the A complex 35 , 36 . For example , ATP hydro - lysis is required for splice site pairing , which locks splice sites into a splicing pattern after U2 snRNP binding to the branch site 36 . Additional studies , discussed below , also provided evidence that binding of U1 and U2 snRNPs to splice sites to define an exon does not necessarily commit the exon to splicing 15 , 16 , 99 . Figure 1 | Mechanisms of alternative splicing by splice site selection . Schematic depicting mechanisms of splicing activation . a | SR ( Ser – Arg ) proteins bind to exonic splicing enhancers ( ESEs ) to stimulate the binding of U2AF to the upstream 3 ′ splice site ( ss ) or the binding of the U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein ( snRNP ) to the downstream 5 ′ ss . SR proteins function with other splicing co - activators , such as transformer 2 ( TRA2 ) and the SR - related nuclear matrix proteins SRm160 – SRm300 . T cell - restricted intracellular antigen 1 ( TIA1 ) binds to U - rich sequences ( intronic splicing enhancers ( ISEs ) ) immediately downstream of 5 ′ splice sites to facilitate U1 binding . CELF ( CUGBP - and ETR3 - like factor ) proteins , such as ETR3 , bind to similar sequences as polypyrimi - dine - tract binding protein ( PTB ) , thereby activating splicing by competing with PTB . b | Fox1 and Fox2 inhibit the inclusion of CALCA ( calcitonin - related polypeptide - α ) exon 4 by blocking the binding of splicing factor 1 ( SF1 ) to the branch point ( top panel ) and of TRA2 and SRp55 to ESEs ( bottom panel ) , thereby inhibiting spliceosome assembly at two stages , the E ′ and E complexes . The arrow indicates that SRp55 and TRA2 promote binding of the U2AF complex . c | Single - nucleotide differences in SMN2 ( survival of motor neuron 2 ) compared with SMN1 create binding sites for heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein particle A1 ( hnRNP A1 ) ( or hnRNP A2 ) in exon 7 and in the downstream intron in SMN2 pre - mRNA . hnRNP A1 ( or hnRNP A2 ) may then inhibit the formation or stabilization of the U2 snRNP complex , either directly or indirectly by blocking the activity of the downstream TRA2 - dependent ESE . Note that it has also been suggested that the base change in exon 7 destroys an ASF / SF2 - dependent ESE 163 , 164 ( but see also REf . 69 ) . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEwS | Molecular cell Biology VOlUME 10 | NOVEMBER 2009 | 745 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved U2 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology ESE 5 ′ ss 3 ′ ss 1 2 13 GRIA2 14 15 16 ESE 5 ′ ss 3 ′ ss 1 U1 U2 + S100 + NF40 - 60 ESE 5 ′ 5 ′ 3 ′ ss ESE 3 ′ ss 1 U1 U1 U2 U2 SRp38 SRp38 SRp38 A complex 5 ′ ss ESE 3 ′ ss U1 U2 SRp38 + 2 1 1 2 2 2 Co - activator ? Catalytically active spliceosome Weak Strong 13 14 15 U1 U1 U2 U2 16 13 Flop 14 16 13 14 15 U1 U1 U2 16 13 Flip 15 16 SRp38 Co - activator SRP38 – / – DT40 cells Wild - type DT40 cells SRp38 P P P 14 - 3 - 3 SRp38 SRp38 PP1 PP1 PP1 NIPP1 NIPP1 P P P P P P 14 - 3 - 3 Heat shock or M phase of cell cycle Kinases a b c Figure 2 | Phosphorylation switches the general splicing repressor Srp38 into a sequence - specific activator . a | Phosphorylated SRp38 ( Ser – Arg protein 38 ) activates splicing by recruiting the U1 and U2 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles ( snRNPs ) to splice sites ( ss ) . SRp38 binds SRp38 - dependent exonic splicing enhancers ( ESEs ) in target transcripts and facilitates the association of U1 and U2 snRNPs with the pre - mRNA to stabilize 5 ′ ss and branch site recognition by interacting with U1 and U2 snRNPs , respectively . However , the spliceosomal A complex formed is stalled in S100 extract , in which an SRp38 - specific cofactor from NF40 - 60 is absent , which is required to proceed through the splicing pathway . b | SRp38 enhances the inclusion of the Flip exon of GRIA2 ( glutamate receptor , ionotropic , AMPA 2 ) pre - mRNA relative to the mutually exclusive Flop exon . Both exons contain SRp38 - binding sites ( indicated by black bars under exon 14 ( Flop ) and exon 15 ( Flip ) ) , but the site in Flip is stronger ( indicated by the thicker bar ) , and Flip inclusion is therefore favoured in the presence of SRp38 . c | Protein phosphatase 1 ( PP1 ) dephosphorylates SRp38 on heat shock . Under normal conditions , phosphorylated SRp38 is associated with 14 - 3 - 3 proteins , which help to protect SRp38 from dephosphorylation , and PP1 activity is inhibited by PP1 - associated proteins , including nuclear inhibitor of PP1 ( NIPP1 ) . During heat shock , PP1 dissociates from NIPP1 and directly binds to and dephosphorylates SRp38 , which has dissociated from 14 - 3 - 3 proteins . Part a of the figure modified , with permission , from Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . REf . 39 © ( 2008 ) Macmillan Publishers Ltd . All rights reserved . Part c of the figure modified , with permission , from REf . 151 © ( 2007 ) Elsevier . R E V I E W S 746 | NOVEMBER 2009 | VOlUME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Regulation by protein factors . A new splicing inhibition mechanism was demonstrated recently by a study show - ing that binding of hnRNP l to an ESS can inhibit the pairing of U1 and U2 snRNPs 15 . An ATP - dependent spli - ceosome - like complex , known as A - like exon - definition complex ( AEC ) , was found to form across alternative exon 4 of the CD45 pre - mRNA , even when its inclusion was inhibited . The AEC contains U1 and U2 snRNPs and displays the same gel mobility as the A complex , but progression into the B complex is inhibited . They pro - posed a model in which an A - like complex forms across exons when hnRNP l is not present , after which the U4 / U6 – U5 tri - snRNP complex is recruited to the intron - defined A complex to form the B complex . However , when hnRNP l is present , an hnRNP l - containing AEC prevents the U1 or U2 snRNPs bound to the splice sites of exon 4 from cross - intron pairing with the adjacent U2 or U1 , resulting in exon 4 skipping . There are two possible ways in which the binding of hnRNP l might interfere with snRNP pairing . One is that binding of hnRNP l physically shields the interaction between the snRNPs . Another possibility is that hnRNP l induces a change in the conformation of the pre - mRNA that pre - vents cross - intron pairing of the snRNP - bound alternative exon . It is intriguing that the AEC , at least superficially , resembles the stalled A complex formed by SRp38 in S100 extract ( see above ) . Although the importance of this is unknown , the following example suggests that such complexes may be more widespread than realized . PTB is another inhibitory splicing factor that has been shown to function , in some cases , by blocking the transition from exon definition to intron definition 16 , 65 ( fIG . 3a ) . One group 16 studied the mechanism of PTB inhibition by comparing the active and inactive spliceo - somal complexes from neuronal wERI - 1 cell nuclear extracts , in which the SRC N1 exon is included , and from Hela cell nuclear extracts , in which the SRC N1 exon is excluded . PTB is highly expressed by Hela cells , whereas a less repressive brain paralogue , nPTB ( also known as PTB2 and brPTB ) , is expressed by wERI - 1 cells 100 – 103 ( see below ) . Similarly to the example provided by hnRNP l , ATP - dependent exon definition complexes form in nuclear extracts from both cell lines . The protein compositions of the exon definition E and A complexes ( EDE and EDA , respectively ) that formed on constitu - tive exon 4 on nuclear extracts from both cell lines were similar , and PTB was found only in complexes formed in Hela nuclear extracts . By contrast , the EDE and EDA complexes that formed on the substrate containing both exon N1 and exon 4 in wERI - 1 nuclear extracts and in Hela nuclear extracts differed in their properties and protein compositions . The wERI - 1 EDE can move on to functional A , B and C complexes following ATP addi - tion , whereas the EDE formed in Hela nuclear extracts can only localize to a ‘dead end’ A complex . Several proteins only exist in the functional A complex formed in wERI - 1 nuclear extracts , such as the PRP19 com - plex 104 , 105 and SRm160 – SRm300 complex 46 , 106 , which are might be important for 3 ′ and 5 ′ splice site bridging and exon N1 inclusion , and are excluded from the spliceo - some by PTB . This study provides a new mechanism for how different protein compositions in different tissues can help to determine the alternative splicing pattern through a silencing factor and its interactions with other splicing factors to prevent intron definition . This study also reveals for the first time that the protein composi - tion of different exon and intron definition complexes can vary , and thus begins to decipher a new mechanism for alternative splicing regulation and tissue specificity . RBM5 ( RNA - binding protein 5 ; also known as lUCA15 and H37 ) is a putative tumour suppressor pro - tein 107 , 108 that promotes the exclusion of exon 6 of CD95 ( also known as FAS ) pre - mRNA 109 . RBM5 was found to interact with sequences in exon 6 but to not affect the association of U1 and U2 snRNPs to the adjacent splice sites . Instead , RBM5 inhibited the incorporation of the U4 / U6 – U5 tri - snRNP complex on the introns flanking exon 6 , thereby blocking the maturation of pre - spliceosome s . RBM5 also promoted the pairing of U1 and U2 at the distal splice sites , contributing further to the exclusion of exon 6 ( REf . 109 ) ( fIG . 3b ) . In addition to alternative splicing regulation by the inhibition of intron definition , it is also possible that alternative splicing is stimulated by the activation of intron definition . In vitro experiments with substrates containing expanded introns have shown that the pres - ence of binding sites for hnRNPs near intron boundaries can facilitate splicing 82 . This presumably involves cross - intron interactions between hnRNPs that help to bring together the ends of the introns , indicating a possible positive regulatory role for hnRNPs in splicing . Cis - acting elements that affect U1 and U2 snRNP pairing by modulating 5 ′ splice site competition have recently been identified . In one study an in vitro screen was carried out for splicing silencers ( ESSs and ISSs ) that alter the selection of the 5 ′ splice site by choosing a distal , weak 5 ′ splice site over a proximal , strong 5 ′ splice site 99 . The isolated silencers did not affect whether U1 snRNP bound to the 5 ′ splice site , but instead somehow altered the conformation of the proximal U1 snRNP – 5 ′ splice site complex so that it lost its advantage to compete with the distal U1 snRNP – 5 ′ splice site complex for the pair - ing with the U2 snRNP – 3 ′ splice site complex . This study suggests a new mechanism by which silencers can subtly affect splice site selection that does not involve sequester - ing splice sites , but instead entails changing the conform - ation of the snRNP – pre - mRNA complex . Moreover , the silencers do not affect the rate - limiting step of splicing but instead affect how well U1 and U2 snRNPs pair , which in turn can influence splice site choice . transcription - coupled alternative splicing Two models have been proposed to explain the role of RNAP II in the regulation of alternative splicing 110 . The first model is known as the recruitment model , in which RNAP II and transcription factors interact , directly or indi - rectly , with splicing factors 22 , 111 , 112 , thereby increasing or decreasing the efficiency of splicing . One study has shown that the structure of the promoter can affect the splicing pattern of the FN1 ( fibronectin 1 ) pre - mRNA by facili - tating the differential recruitment of ASF / SF2 ( REf . 113 ) . It is conceivable that this reflects the ability of different R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEwS | Molecular cell Biology VOlUME 10 | NOVEMBER 2009 | 747 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved U1 Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology 5 ′ ss 5 ′ ss U1 U1 SRC Exon 3 Exon N1 Exon 4 U2 U2 Branch point Intron definition Intron definition Exon definition a b Exon definition U1 5 ′ ss 5 ′ ss U1 CD95 Exon 5 Exon 6 Exon 7 U2 U2 Exon definition U1 Exon 5 U2 WERI - 1 and Hela cells U1 5 ′ ss 5 ′ ss U1 U1 Exon 3 Exon N1 Exon 4 U2 U2 nPTB nPTB Intron definition Intron definition Intron definition Intron definition Intron definition U1 5 ′ ss 5 ′ ss U1 U1 Exon 3 Exon N1 Exon 4 Exon 4 Exon 3 U2 U2 PTB PTB Exon 3 Exon N1 Exon 4 WERI - 1 cells HeLa cells U1 Exon 6 U2 Exon 7 tri - snRNP tri - snRNP U1 Exon 5 U2 Intron definition U1 Exon 6 U2 Exon 7 tri - snRNP tri - snRNP tri - snRNP RBM5 RRM domain ( RNA recognition motif domain ) . A protein domain that is frequently involved in sequence - specific single - stranded RNA binding . Also known as an RNP - type RNA - binding domain . transcription factors to influence the recruitment of dis - tinct splicing factors to the nascent pre - mRNA , result - ing in the inclusion or exclusion of the alternative exon . For example , PGC1 ( peroxisome proliferator - activated receptor - γ coactivator 1 ) , a transcription co - activator that is recruited to target genes by specific transcription factors , can modulate the alternative splicing of nascent RNA transcripts by interacting with other splicing factors through its RS domain 114 . Another study showed that differential recruitment of transcription co - activators to progesterone - and oestrogen - responsive elements upstream of reporter genes , such as CD44 , alters the alternative splicing of the resultant mRNA transcripts 112 . Specifically , recruitment of activating signal cointegrator 1 ( ASC1 ) and ASC2 and their associated proteins to these elements was found to both activate the transcription of the reporter genes and affect splicing , but in opposite ways . The ASC1 - associated protein CAPER ( coactivator of activating protein 1 and oestrogen receptors ; also known as RBM39 ) contains an RS domain and two RRM domains , similarly to SR proteins , whereas the ASC2 - associated protein COAA ( also known as RBM14 ) is structurally related to hnRNP A1 . It was suggested that the anta - gonistic effects of the ASC1 and ASC2 complexes are mediated by these factors . A second , kinetic model proposes that the rate of transcription elongation influences the inclusion of alter - native exons by affecting whether the splicing machin - ery is recruited sufficiently quickly for spliceosome Figure 3 | Mechanisms of alternative splicing regulation at the transition from exon definition to intron definition . a | Polypyrimidine - tract binding protein ( PTB ) inhibits the inclusion of SRC exon N1 by inhibiting the interactions of the U1 and U2 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles ( snRNPs ) and intron definition . In both WERI - 1 and HeLa cells , the N1 exon is defined by the binding of U1 snRNP to the 5 ′ splice site ( ss ) and of U2 snRNP to the branch point . In WERI - 1 cells , in the absence of PTB , U1 and U2 snRNPs bound to the N1 exon interact with the U2 and U1 snRNP on adjacent constitutive exons , respectively , thereby allowing efficient spliceosome assembly on introns flanking exon N1 . In HeLa cells , PTB binds to sequences flanking exon N1 and prevents the cross - intron interactions that occur in WERI - cells , thereby excluding exon N1 . b | RBM5 ( RNA - binding protein 5 ) regulates alternative splicing of CD95 by inhibiting the inclusion of exon 6 . It does so not at the stage of U1 and U2 snRNP binding , but instead by promoting tri - snRNP assembly on the intron - defined spliceosomal complex between exon 5 and exon 7 , while blocking tri - snRNP recruitment to complexes that would result in inclusion of exon 6 . Double - headed arrows indicate intron and exon definition . R E V I E W S 748 | NOVEMBER 2009 | VOlUME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved assembly and splicing to occur . In support of this model , an RNAP II with a reduced elongation rate caused by a point mutation was found to greatly stimulate the inclu - sion of an alternative exon that has weak splice sites 115 . Specifically , it was found that slow transcription favours the inclusion of FN1 EDI exon , which was excluded when transcription was more rapid . Consistent with this , a recent study showed that changes in the RNAP II elong ation rate following ultraviolet irradiation could lead to changes in alternative splicing that occur in response to DNA damage 116 . One way of changing the transcription rate is through changing the phosphorylation status of RNAP II . The carboxy - terminal domain of the largest subunit of RNAP II consists of up to 52 tandem repeats of the heptapeptide consensus sequence YSPTSPS 117 . Excess phosphorylation on Ser5 of the C - terminal domain is associated with RNAP II stalling downstream of the promoter region , whereas phosphorylation on Ser2 is associated with elongation through the gene 117 , 118 . One group 18 showed that a subunit of the human SwI – SNF ( switching - defective – sucrose non - fermenting ) com - plex , BRM , regulates changes in the alternative splicing of CD44 pre - mRNA that are stimulated following T cell activation . On T cell stimulation , RNAP II phosphoryl - ated on Ser5 pauses at the variant exon region of CD44 by a mechanism requiring its association with BRM . Interestingly , this also results in increased association of BRM with components of the splicing machinery and splicing factor SAM68 , leading to inclusion of the V5 exon . This study not only provides direct support of the kinetic model , but also shows that the mecha - nism for alternative splicing regulation by transcrip - tion can result from a combination of transcription elongation - related effects and differential recruitment of splicing factors . alternative splicing and tissue specificity Alternative splicing regulation by tissue - specific splicing factors . Alternative splicing has an important role in defin - ing tissue specificity . Recent high - throughput studies have shown that , of the human tissues examined , 50 % or more of alternative splicing isoforms are differently expressed among tissues 29 , indicating that most alternative splicing is subject to tissue - specific regulation . Tissue - specific alternative splicing events can be explained in part by tissue - specific expression of splic - ing factors , and the corresponding regulation of their target mRNA transcripts 31 , 119 , 120 . In keeping with this , numerous tissue - specific alternative splicing regulators have now been identified ( TABLE 2 ) . Among all human tissues , brain is the most functionally diverse tissue , as it has the highest occurrence of tissue - specific alter - native splicing isoforms . Accordingly , several brain - specific factors have been identified , such as nPTB 101 , 121 , NOVA1 , NOVA2 ( REfS 81 , 84 , 122 ) and Hu / Elav proteins 123 – 125 . In addition , region - and cell type - specific expression of most of the > 300 RNA - binding proteins examined was observed in proliferating and post - mitotic mouse brain cells 126 . PTB is expressed in neural progenitor cells , but its expression levels are greatly downregulated in differentiated neurons , where nPTB is upregulated 100 , 101 . Recent experiments provided evidence that the PTB - to - nPTB switch pro - vides a post - transcriptional mechanism that is impor - tant for programming neuronal differentiation 101 . Using microarray analysis , it was shown that siRNA - mediated PTB depletion in N2A neuroblastoma cells caused the upregulation of nPTB and an altered alternative splic - ing pattern . Most of the observed changes were also detected when P19 cells ( derived from an embryonal carcinoma ) were differentiated into neuronal cells . In neuronal cells , expression of nPTB and downregulation of PTB explains ~ 25 % of nervous system - specific alter - native splicing 101 . However , the molecular mechanism that allows nervous system - specific alternative exons to be included in neuronal cells even when bound by nPTB is still unclear . It may reflect differences in the ability of nPTB and PTB to interact with other splic - ing factors and / or in the presence or absence of other splicing factors ( for example , in the presence of Nova proteins ) in neuronal and non - neuronal cells . Other brain - specific factors , including Nova pro - teins , may be involved in fine tuning the programming of different types of neuronal cell . NOVA1 and NOVA2 are differentially expressed in post - natal mouse brain , with NOVA2 being highly expressed in the neocortex and hippocampus , and NOVA1 being expressed prima - rily in the hindbrain and spinal cord 127 . NOVA1 - null mice die shortly after birth from a motor defect that is associated with apoptotic cell death of spinal and brain - stem neurons . Furthermore , studies in mice in which NOVA2 has been conditionally knocked out showed that NOVA2 regulates ~ 7 % of brain - specific splicing in the neocortex and that NOVA2 - dependent alternative splicing regulates the expression of mRNA transcripts that encode synaptic functions 122 . These findings indi - cate that Nova proteins regulate alternative splicing events that result in transcripts with specific functions in the brain . Similarly to the roles of PTB and nPTB in helping to define non - neuronal and neuronal tissues , the expression of NOVA1 and NOVA2 may contrib - ute to different functions of different brain regions . However , owing to the limited number of exons ana - lysed and the overlap between PTB or nPTB and Nova targets , more detailed studies are needed to obtain a complete understanding of tissue - specific alternative splicing regulation by these factors . Tissue - specific alternative splicing factors have recently been shown to be important in controlling the expression of epithelial cell - specific exons . One study 128 identified two paralogues , RBM35a ( also known as ESRP1 ) and RBM35b ( also known as ESRP2 ) , that are important for the inclusion of epithelial cell - specific exons in several mRNA transcripts 128 . In addition , downregulation of RBM35a was found to coincide with the loss of epithelial splicing during the epithelial - to - mesenchymal cell transition , and ectopic expression of RBM35a in mesenchymal cells restored epithelial splicing . These data show that RBM35a and RBM35b contribute to defining the distinguishing characteristics of epithelial cells . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEwS | Molecular cell Biology VOlUME 10 | NOVEMBER 2009 | 749 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Alternative splicing regulation by constitutive splicing factors . SR proteins were originally discovered by bio - chemical methods as general , or non - sequence - specific , splicing activators 7 . However , more recent findings indicate that individual SR proteins can act as specific alternative splicing regulators in different cell types and tissues . Disruption of the genes that encode ASF / SF2 and SC35 specifically in the heart have shown that they have important but distinct roles in tissue development 129 , 130 . In addition , a recent study showed that mice with complete ablation of SRp38 survived through early embryogenesis and , strikingly , displayed only cardiac defects ; these mice showed differences in alternative splicing 131 . Core spliceosomal proteins ( CSPs ) are also involved in alternative splicing regulation . Analysis of micro array - based expression profiles from mouse , chimpanzee and human tissues revealed that snRNPs are differentially expressed in particular tissues 132 . This is consistent with results from an RNA interference ( RNAi ) screen in D . melanogaster , which showed that changing levels of CSPs leads to changes in alternative splicing 26 . These CSPs include components of U1 , U2 and U4 / U6 snRNPs , as well as the U2AF heterodimer . Further evidence was provided by RNAi knockdown of the isoforms of U2AF35 , U2AF35a and / or U2AF35b , and a subunit of splicing factor SF3B , SAP155 ( also known as SF3B1 ) , in human cells 44 , 133 , 134 . Knockdown of these CSPs was found to affect only alternative splicing of a subset of transcripts : for example , mRNAs encoding cell cycle phosphatases in the case of U2AF35 and 5 ′ splice site selection of BCl2l1 ( BCl - 2 - like 1 ; also known as BClX ) pre - mRNA in response to ceramide in the case of SAP155 . In addition , evidence from budding yeast that showed differences in splicing patterns in response to different kinds of stress also suggests that CSPs are involved in alternative splicing regulation 135 . Table 2 | tissue - specific alternative splicing factors Name other names Binding domain Binding motif Tissue expression Target genes nPTB brPTB and PTBP2 RRM CUCUCU Neurons , myoblasts and testes BIN1 , GLyR α 2 , ATP2B1 , MEF2 , NASP , SPAG9 and SRC NoVA1 NA KH YCAY Neurons of the hindbrain and spinal cord GABRG2 , GLyRA2 and NOVA1 NoVA2 NA KH YCAY Neurons of the cortex , hippocampus and dorsal spinal cord KCNJ , APLP2 , GPhN , JNK2 , NEO , GRIN1 and PLCB4 Fox1 A2BP1 RRM ( U ) GCAUG Muscle , heart and neurons ACTN , EWSR1 , FGFR2 , FN1 and SRC Fox2 RBM9 RRM ( U ) GCAUG Muscle , heart and neurons EWS , FGFR2 , FN1 and SRC RBM35a ESRP1 RRM GU rich Epithelial cells FGFR2 , CD44 , CTNND1 and ENAh RBM35b ESRP2 RRM GU rich Epithelial cells FGFR2 , CD44 , CTNND1 and ENAh TIA1 mTIA1 RRM U rich Brain , spleen and testes MyPT1 , CD95 , CALCA , FGFR2 , TIAR , IL8 , VEGF , NF1 and COL2A1 TIAR TIAL1 and mTIAR RRM U rich Brain , spleen , lung , liver and testes TIA1 , CALCA , TIAR , NF1 and CD95 SLM2 KHDRBS3 and TSTAR KH UAAA Brain , tests and heart CD44 and VEGFA Quaking QK and QKL KH ACUAAY [ … ] UAAY Brain MAG and PLP HUB HUC , HUD and ELAV2 RRM AU rich Neurons CALCA , CD95 and NF1 MBNL NA CCCH zinc finger domain YGCU ( U / G ) Y Muscles , uterus and ovaries TNTT2 , INSR , CLCN1 and TNNT3 CELF1 BRUNoL2 RRM U and G rich Brain TNTT2 and INSR ETR3 CELF2 and BRUNoL3 RRM U and G rich Heart , skeletal muscle and brain TNTT2 , TAu and COx 2 CELF4 BRUNoL4 RRM U and G rich Muscle MTMR1 and TNTT2 CELF5 BRUNoL5 and NAPoR RRM U and G rich Heart , skeletal muscle and brain ACTN , TNTT2 and GRIN1 CELF6 BRUNoL6 RRM U and G rich Kidney , brain and testes TNTT2 A2BP1 , ataxin 2 - binding protein 1 ; ACTN , α - actinin ; APLP2 , amyloid - β precursor - like protein 2 ; ATP2B1 , ATPase , Ca 2 + transporting , plasma membrane 1 ; BIN1 , bridging integrator 1 ; CALCA , calcitonin - related polypeptide - α ; CELF , CUGBP - and ETR3 - like factor ; CLCN1 , chloride channel 1 ; COL2A1 , collagen , type II , α 1 ; COx2 , cytochrome c oxidase II ; CTNND1 , catenin δ 1 , EWSR1 , Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1 ; FGFR2 , fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 ; FN1 , fibronectin 1 ; GABRG2 , GABA A receptor , γ 2 ; GLyRA2 , glycine receptor , α 2 subunit ; GPhN , gephyrin ; GRIN1 , glutamate receptor , ionotropic , NMDA 3B ; IL8 , interleukin - 8 ; INSR , insulin receptor ; JNK2 , Jun N - terminal kinase 2 ; KCNJ , potassium inwardly - rectifying channel , subfamily ; KHDRBS3 , KH domain - containing , RNA - binding , signal transduc - tion - associated protein 3 ; MAG , myelin associated glycoprotein ; MBNL , muscleblind ; MEF2 , myocyte enhancing factor 2 ; MTMR1 , myotubularin - related protein 1 ; NASP , nuclear autoantigenic sperm protein ; NEO , neogenin ; NF1 , neurofibromin 1 ; NOVA , neuro - oncological ventral antigen ; PLCB4 , phospholipase C β 4 ; PLP , proteolipid protein ; PTB , polypyrimidine - tract binding protein ; RBM , RNA - binding protein ; RRM , RNA recognition motif ; SLM2 , SAM68 - like mammalian protein 2 ; SPAG9 , sperm associated antigen 9 ; TIA1 , T cell - restricted intracellular antigen 1 ; TIAR , TIA1 - related protein ; TNTT2 , troponin T type 2 ; VEGF , vascular endothelial growth factor . R E V I E W S 750 | NOVEMBER 2009 | VOlUME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 14 - 3 - 3 protein A protein belonging to a family of conserved proteins that bind to phosphorylated serine and threonine residues and that are encoded by seven genes in most mammals . They bind diverse regulatory proteins , including kinases , phosphatases and transmembrane receptors . SMN , which is part of the SMN complex , has recently been shown to regulate alternative splicing in many mouse tissues 27 . The SMN complex is important for effi - cient assembly of snRNPs , and depletion of SMN in Hela cells leads to a decrease in snRNP levels . SMN - deficient mice showed tissue - specific alterations in snRNAs , and different snRNPs were affected in different tissues , lead - ing to an altered stoichiometry of snRNPs 27 . In addition , microarray analysis of total RNA samples from different tissues of SMN - deficient mice revealed changes in several alternative splicing events in various tissues 27 . The mecha - nism of alternative splicing alteration by SMN deficiency is unknown , but it is probable that the resulting changes in snRNP levels directly affected alternative splicing of specific pre - mRNAs . It will be important to understand how , and whether , these changes in alternative splicing contribute to spinal muscular atrophy , which is caused by SMN deficiency 136 , 137 . Alternative splicing regulation by post - translational modifications of splicing factors . Differences in pro - tein expression levels of either tissue - specific splicing regu lators or CSPs may not fully explain how cells can change alternative splicing patterns rapidly , for example in response to cellular stress . Mounting evidence has shown that post - translational modification of splicing factors can affect alternative splicing . The best studied modification is phosphorylation , and consistent with this , several well - studied cell signalling pathways have been shown to be involved in alternative splicing regulation ( reviewed in REfS 138 , 139 ) . Phosphorylation has been shown to affect the local concentration of splicing factors that are adjacent to pre - mRNA substrates , by altering their intracellular localization 140 – 144 , protein – protein 43 and protein – RNA interactions 50 , 145 and even intrinsic splicing activity 39 , 54 . Phosphorylation can change the ability of splic - ing factors to interact with other proteins or mRNA substrates , leading to changes in splice site selection . Phosphorylation of RS domains in SR proteins affects their inter action with CSPs 43 and is necessary for sequence - specific mRNA binding in vitro 146 . Phosphorylation of TIA1 and TIA1 - related protein ( TIAR ) by Fas - activated serine / threonine kinase ( FASTK ) enhances TIA1 and TIAR - mediated recruitment of U1 snRNP to a sub - optimal 5 ′ splice site , leading to the inclusion of CD95 exon 6 ( REf . 147 ) . Tyrosine phosphorylation of SAM68 by Fyn protein kinase favours the formation of the anti - apoptotic BClXl ( B cell lymphoma Xl ) mRNA by interfering with the interaction between SAM68 and hnRNP A1 , and with the interaction of both proteins with the pre - mRNA 148 . Phosphorylation of RS motifs of PTB - associated splicing factor PSF ( also known as SPFQ ) by SR kinases inhibits the binding of PSF to mRNA 145 . Phosphorylation can also change the intracellular localization of splicing factors . Osmotic shock stresses cells and activates the signalling pathway involving MEK3 ( also known as MAPKK3 ) , MEK6 ( also known as MAPKK6 ) and p38 , which leads to the relocalization of hnRNP A1 to the cytoplasm as a result of hyperphosphorylation . This change in hnRNP A1 localization can alter the alter - native splicing pattern of an adenovirus E1A reporter transcript 141 , 144 . Furthermore , ischaemia triggers changes in Ca 2 + concentration , leading to hyperphosphorylation of a TRA2 isoform , TRA2β1 , and to its localization to the cytoplasm 143 . In addition , protein kinase A phosphoryl - ates PTB on Ser16 , which leads to its translocation to the cytoplasm 149 , 150 . Phosphorylation status can also , in one case , deter - mine whether a splicing factor functions as a splicing repressor or activator . SRp38 acts as a global splicing repressor when dephosphorylated in the M phase of the cell cycle and following heat shock 54 , 55 . However , it becomes a sequence - specific activator when phospho - rylated 39 . Shi and Manley 151 elucidated the detailed regu - latory mechanism of SRp38 phosphorylation in response to heat shock . Specifically , at normal temperatures two mechanisms ensure that SRp38 remains phosphorylated ( fIG . 2c ) : first , SRp38 is bound and protected by 14 - 3 - 3 proteins , and second , protein phosphatase 1 ( PP1 ) , which has been shown to target SRp38 , is masked by associated proteins , including nuclear inhibitor of PP1 ( NIPP1 ) , which had previously been implicated in splicing control 152 , 153 . At increased temperatures 14 - 3 - 3 proteins dissociate from SRp38 , and PP1 is released from NIPP1 , thereby freeing PP1 and allowing it to dephosphorylate SRp38 . Unlike other SR proteins , SRp38 is a poor substrate for the SR protein kinases ClK1 ( CDC - like kinase ; also known as STY ) and SRPK1 . Therefore , after dephospho - rylation SRp38 remains dephosphorylated and can thus repress splicing events , unlike other SR proteins , which are rapidly rephosphorylated . conclusions and perspectives The studies described here reveal the complexity of alter - native splicing regulation . Alternative splicing can be regulated at different steps of spliceosome assembly by different splicing factors , both general and specific , and by many mechanisms that rely on cis - acting elements . Although alternative exons are shorter than constitutive exons and are flanked by longer introns , alternative exons are more conserved than constitutive exons , especially the exon – intron junctions , and these conserved regions often extend into flanking introns for 80 – 100 nucleotides 154 , where cis - regulatory elements are embedded . Correct alternative splicing also depends on the stoichiometry and interactions of positive and negative regulatory proteins , including CSPs . Each cell type has a unique repertoire of SR proteins and hnRNPs , and moderate changes in their relative stoichiometry can have great effects on the pattern of alternative splicing 1 , 63 . It is possible that changes in the stoichiometry of snRNPs perturb the complex network of splicing factors and the interactions between splicing fac - tors and CSPs . Therefore , alternative splicing regulatory networks have such an exquisite architecture that pertur - bation of any single step can lead to alternative splicing misregulation . Diverse mechanisms are used to ensure tissue and cell type - specific splicing regulation . Accumulating evidence has shown that alternative splicing plays an important part in defining tissue specificity . The action of sequence - specific transcription factors has been thought to be the most robust way of defining tissue specificity 155 . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEwS | Molecular cell Biology VOlUME 10 | NOVEMBER 2009 | 751 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved SELEX A technique to determine the DNA or RNA sequence that is specifically recognized by a protein . The method involves multiple rounds of binding to an initially random sequence until a high - affinity consensus sequence emerges . Importantly , > 2 , 500 transcription factors have been identified in humans 156 , whereas the reported number of sequence - specific alternative splicing factors is < 50 . Given that it now seems that alternative splicing is as prevalent and perhaps as important a mechanism as transcriptional control , what might be the explanation for this ? One possi - bility is that many more splicing regulators remain to be discovered . However , the total number of putative RBPs in mice has been estimated to be less than 400 ( REf . 126 ) , and some fraction of these proteins will not be involved in splicing . Another possibility is that there are fundamental differences in how splicing and transcription are regu - lated . For example , individual splicing regulators control much larger groups of genes than specific transcription factors . This is consistent with the large numbers of neu - ronal transcripts that are thought to be controlled by PTB and Nova proteins 80 , 101 , 103 , 122 . It is also probable that consid - erable regulation is achieved by combinations of abundant regulators with limited sequence - specificity ( that is , the SR proteins and hnRNPs ) , which act in concert to regulate different mRNA transcripts in different tissues depending on their relative concentrations . Important goals of future studies of alternative splicing regulation include understanding how regulators switch key splicing events during development and in response to environmental stimuli , and how misregulation of alter - native splicing leads to disease . Complete characteriza - tion of tissue - specific patterns of expression is of great importance to defining mechanisms of alternative splicing regulation in different cell types . De novo identification of regulatory motifs 31 and HITS - ClIP 80 are two comple - mentary approaches to achieve this goal . However , until now only a limited number of alternative splicing regu - lators and tissues have been studied by these methods . In addition to Nova proteins and FOX2 , ClIP - seq also provided a landscape of potential ASF / SF2 target mRNA transcripts and characterized a purine - rich consensus motif 87 , 88 that is nearly identical to a consensus sequence obtained previously by an in vitro SELEX ( systematic evo - lution of ligands by exponential enrichment ) approach 157 . A database that includes more comprehensive informa - tion on the expression patterns of proteins that regulate alternative splicing , definition of potential target mRNA transcripts and positions of binding motifs on these trans - cripts will facilitate searches for regulatory proteins that control specific splicing events , such as of genes that are involved in disease , and possibly provide insights into underlying mechanisms . Owing to the dynamic nature of spliceosome assembly and the potential for regulation at multiple points , detailed proteomic analysis will be important in completely eluci - dating the molecular mechanisms of alternative splicing regulation . For example , how do RNA - binding proteins interact with other factors and core splicing factors ? when and where do splicing factors function to regulate the spliceo some ? How do post - translational modifications influence these events ? Obtaining a full understanding of the mechanisms underlying alternative splicing and its role in defining tissue specificity will require multiple approaches and methods . 1 . Black , D . L . Mechanisms of alternative pre - messenger RNA splicing . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 72 , 291 – 336 ( 2003 ) . 2 . Wahl , M . C . , Will , C . L . & Luhrmann , R . The spliceosome : design principles of a dynamic RNP machine . Cell 136 , 701 – 718 ( 2009 ) . 3 . Berglund , J . A . , Chua , K . , Abovich , N . , Reed , R . & Rosbash , M . The splicing factor BBP interacts specifically with the pre - mRNA branchpoint sequence UACUAAC . Cell 89 , 781 – 787 ( 1997 ) . 4 . Zamore , P . D . & Green , M . R . Identification , purification , and biochemical characterization of U2 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein auxiliary factor . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . U S A 86 , 9243 – 9247 ( 1989 ) . 5 . Nelson , K . K . & Green , M . R . Mammalian U2 snRNP has a sequence - specific RNA - binding activity . Genes Dev . 3 , 1562 – 1571 ( 1989 ) . 6 . Graveley , B . R . Sorting out the complexity of SR protein functions . RNA 6 , 1197 – 1211 ( 2000 ) . 7 . Tacke , R . & Manley , J . L . Determinants of SR protein specificity . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 11 , 358 – 362 ( 1999 ) . 8 . Long , J . C . & Caceres , J . F . The SR protein family of splicing factors : master regulators of gene expression . Biochem . J . 417 , 15 – 27 ( 2009 ) . 9 . Smith , C . W . & Valcarcel , J . Alternative pre - mRNA splicing : the logic of combinatorial control . Trends Biochem . Sci . 25 , 381 – 388 ( 2000 ) . 10 . Dreyfuss , G . , Kim , V . N . & Kataoka , N . Messenger - RNA - binding proteins and the messages they carry . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 3 , 195 – 205 ( 2002 ) . 11 . Ule , J . et al . An RNA map predicting Nova - dependent splicing regulation . Nature 444 , 580 – 586 ( 2006 ) . 12 . Hui , J . et al . Intronic CA - repeat and CA - rich elements : a new class of regulators of mammalian alternative splicing . EMBO J . 24 , 1988 – 1998 ( 2005 ) . 13 . Yeo , G . W . et al . An RNA code for the FOX2 splicing regulator revealed by mapping RNA - protein interactions in stem cells . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 16 , 130 – 137 ( 2009 ) . 14 . Mauger , D . M . , Lin , C . & Garcia - Blanco , M . A . hnRNP H and hnRNP F complex with Fox2 to silence fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 exon IIIc . Mol . Cell . Biol . 28 , 5403 – 5419 ( 2008 ) . 15 . House , A . E . & Lynch , K . W . An exonic splicing silencer represses spliceosome assembly after ATP - dependent exon recognition . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 13 , 937 – 944 ( 2006 ) . 16 . Sharma , S . , Kohlstaedt , L . A . , Damianov , A . , Rio , D . C . & Black , D . L . Polypyrimidine tract binding protein controls the transition from exon definition to an intron defined spliceosome . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 15 , 183 – 191 ( 2008 ) . This study shows that PTB inhibits Src exon N1 inclusion by preventing the transition from an exon - definition to an intron - definition complex and analyses the protein composition of different complexes . 17 . Lallena , M . J . , Chalmers , K . J . , Llamazares , S . , Lamond , A . I . & Valcarcel , J . Splicing regulation at the second catalytic step by Sex - lethal involves 3 ′ splice site recognition by SPF45 . Cell 109 , 285 – 296 ( 2002 ) . 18 . Batsche , E . , Yaniv , M . & Muchardt , C . The human SWI / SNF subunit Brm is a regulator of alternative splicing . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 13 , 22 – 29 ( 2006 ) . This study shows that Brm promotes the inclusion of variable exons of cD44 pre - mrNA by stalling rNAP II at the variable exon - containing region of the cD44 gene . It also shows that Brm interacts with splicing factor SAm68 . 19 . de la Mata , M . & Kornblihtt , A . R . RNA polymerase II C - terminal domain mediates regulation of alternative splicing by SRp20 . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 13 , 973 – 980 ( 2006 ) . 20 . Sims , R . J . 3rd et al . Recognition of trimethylated histone H3 lysine 4 facilitates the recruitment of transcription postinitiation factors and pre - mRNA splicing . Mol . Cell 28 , 665 – 676 ( 2007 ) . 21 . Lin , S . , Coutinho - Mansfield , G . , Wang , D . , Pandit , S . & Fu , X . D . The splicing factor SC35 has an active role in transcriptional elongation . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 15 , 819 – 826 ( 2008 ) . 22 . Moldon , A . et al . Promoter - driven splicing regulation in fission yeast . Nature 455 , 997 – 1000 ( 2008 ) . 23 . Graveley , B . R . Alternative splicing : increasing diversity in the proteomic world . Trends Genet . 17 , 100 – 107 ( 2001 ) . 24 . Blencowe , B . J . & Graveley , B . R . ( eds ) Alternative Splicing in the Postgenomic Era . ( Springer , the Netherlands , 2007 ) . 25 . Grabowski , P . J . & Black , D . L . Alternative RNA splicing in the nervous system . Prog . Neurobiol . 65 , 289 – 308 ( 2001 ) . 26 . Park , J . W . , Parisky , K . , Celotto , A . M . , Reenan , R . A . & Graveley , B . R . Identification of alternative splicing regulators by RNA interference in Drosophila . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . U S A 101 , 15974 – 15979 ( 2004 ) . 27 . Zhang , Z . et al . SMN deficiency causes tissue - specific perturbations in the repertoire of snRNAs and widespread defects in splicing . Cell 133 , 585 – 600 ( 2008 ) . This paper shows that SmN deficiency regulates snrNP levels in a tissue - specific manner , and this was reflected in altered alternative splicing patterns in different mouse tissues . 28 . Blencowe , B . J . Alternative splicing : new insights from global analyses . Cell 126 , 37 – 47 ( 2006 ) . 29 . Wang , E . T . et al . Alternative isoform regulation in human tissue transcriptomes . Nature 456 , 470 – 476 ( 2008 ) . 30 . Pan , Q . , Shai , O . , Lee , L . J . , Frey , B . J . & Blencowe , B . J . Deep surveying of alternative splicing complexity in the human transcriptome by high - throughput sequencing . Nature Genet . 40 , 1413 – 1415 ( 2008 ) . 31 . Castle , J . C . et al . Expression of 24 , 426 human alternative splicing events and predicted cis regulation in 48 tissues and cell lines . Nature Genet . 40 , 1416 – 1425 ( 2008 ) . A transcriptome study that analyses alternative splicing events from 48 tissues and identifies tissue - specific regulatory motifs and cognate binding proteins . 32 . Sultan , M . et al . A global view of gene activity and alternative splicing by deep sequencing of the human transcriptome . Science 321 , 956 – 960 ( 2008 ) . 33 . Sterner , D . A . , Carlo , T . & Berget , S . M . Architectural limits on split genes . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . U S A 93 , 15081 – 15085 ( 1996 ) . R E V I E W S 752 | NOVEMBER 2009 | VOlUME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 34 . Berget , S . M . Exon recognition in vertebrate splicing . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 2411 – 2414 ( 1995 ) . 35 . Lim , S . R . & Hertel , K . J . Commitment to splice site pairing coincides with A complex formation . Mol . Cell 15 , 477 – 483 ( 2004 ) . 36 . Kotlajich , M . V . , Crabb , T . L . & Hertel , K . J . Spliceosome assembly pathways for different types of alternative splicing converge during commitment to splice site pairing in the A complex . Mol . Cell . Biol . 29 , 1072 – 1082 ( 2009 ) . This study shows that the commitment to splicing of some alternative exons occurs during splice site pairing in the A complex and that ATP hydrolysis is required for splice site paring , thereby locking splice sites into a splicing pattern after U2 snrNP binding to the branch site . 37 . Bourgeois , C . F . , Popielarz , M . , Hildwein , G . & Stevenin , J . Identification of a bidirectional splicing enhancer : differential involvement of SR proteins in 5 ′ or 3 ′ splice site activation . Mol . Cell . Biol . 19 , 7347 – 7356 ( 1999 ) . 38 . Zuo , P . & Maniatis , T . The splicing factor U2AF35 mediates critical protein – protein interactions in constitutive and enhancer - dependent splicing . Genes Dev . 10 , 1356 – 1368 ( 1996 ) . 39 . Feng , Y . , Chen , M . & Manley , J . L . Phosphorylation switches the general splicing repressor SRp38 to a sequence - specific activator . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 15 , 1040 – 1048 ( 2008 ) . This paper shows that phosphorylation switches Srp38 from a general repressor to a sequence - specific activator that functions by recruiting and stabilizing U1 and U2 snrNP at splice sites . 40 . Graveley , B . R . , Hertel , K . J . & Maniatis , T . The role of U2AF35 and U2AF65 in enhancer - dependent splicing . RNA 7 , 806 – 818 ( 2001 ) . 41 . Kohtz , J . D . et al . Protein – protein interactions and 5 ′ - splice - site recognition in mammalian mRNA precursors . Nature 368 , 119 – 124 ( 1994 ) . 42 . Wu , J . Y . & Maniatis , T . Specific interactions between proteins implicated in splice site selection and regulated alternative splicing . Cell 75 , 1061 – 1070 ( 1993 ) . 43 . Xiao , S . H . & Manley , J . L . Phosphorylation of the ASF / SF2 RS domain affects both protein - protein and protein - RNA interactions and is necessary for splicing . Genes Dev . 11 , 334 – 344 ( 1997 ) . 44 . Pacheco , T . R . , Coelho , M . B . , Desterro , J . M . , Mollet , I . & Carmo - Fonseca , M . In vivo requirement of the small subunit of U2AF for recognition of a weak 3 ′ splice site . Mol . Cell . Biol . 26 , 8183 – 90 ( 2006 ) . 45 . Longman , D . et al . Multiple interactions between SRm160 and SR family proteins in enhancer - dependent splicing and development of C . elegans . Curr . Biol . 11 , 1923 – 1933 ( 2001 ) . 46 . Blencowe , B . J . et al . The SRm160 / 300 splicing coactivator subunits . RNA 6 , 111 – 120 ( 2000 ) . 47 . Tacke , R . & Manley , J . L . Functions of SR and Tra2 proteins in pre - mRNA splicing regulation . Proc . Soc . Exp . Biol . Med . 220 , 59 – 63 ( 1999 ) . 48 . Izquierdo , J . M . et al . Regulation of Fas alternative splicing by antagonistic effects of TIA - 1 and PTB on exon definition . Mol . Cell 19 , 475 – 484 ( 2005 ) . 49 . Forch , P . , Puig , O . , Martinez , C . , Seraphin , B . & Valcarcel , J . The splicing regulator TIA - 1 interacts with U1 - C to promote U1 snRNP recruitment to 5 ′ splice sites . EMBO J . 21 , 6882 – 6892 ( 2002 ) . 50 . Tisserant , A . & Konig , H . Signal - regulated pre - mRNA occupancy by the general splicing factor U2AF . PLoS ONE 3 , e1418 ( 2008 ) . 51 . Yang , L . , Embree , L . J . , Tsai , S . & Hickstein , D . D . Oncoprotein TLS interacts with serine - arginine proteins involved in RNA splicing . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 27761 – 27764 ( 1998 ) . 52 . Komatsu , M . , Kominami , E . , Arahata , K . & Tsukahara , T . Cloning and characterization of two neural - salient serine / arginine - rich ( NSSR ) proteins involved in the regulation of alternative splicing in neurones . Genes Cells 4 , 593 – 606 ( 1999 ) . 53 . Cowper , A . E . , Caceres , J . F . , Mayeda , A . & Screaton , G . R . Serine - arginine ( SR ) protein - like factors that antagonize authentic SR proteins and regulate alternative splicing . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 48908 – 48914 ( 2001 ) . 54 . Shin , C . & Manley , J . L . The SR protein SRp38 represses splicing in M phase cells . Cell 111 , 407 – 417 ( 2002 ) . 55 . Shin , C . , Feng , Y . & Manley , J . L . Dephosphorylated SRp38 acts as a splicing repressor in response to heat shock . Nature 427 , 553 – 558 ( 2004 ) . 56 . Krainer , A . R . , Conway , G . C . & Kozak , D . Purification and characterization of pre - mRNA splicing factor SF2 from HeLa cells . Genes Dev . 4 , 1158 – 1171 ( 1990 ) . 57 . Singh , R . , Valcarcel , J . & Green , M . R . Distinct binding specificities and functions of higher eukaryotic polypyrimidine tract - binding proteins . Science 268 , 1173 – 1176 ( 1995 ) . 58 . Spellman , R . & Smith , C . W . Novel modes of splicing repression by PTB . Trends Biochem . Sci . 31 , 73 – 76 ( 2006 ) . 59 . Sauliere , J . , Sureau , A . , Expert - Bezancon , A . & Marie , J . The polypyrimidine tract binding protein ( PTB ) represses splicing of exon 6B from the β - tropomyosin pre - mRNA by directly interfering with the binding of the U2AF65 subunit . Mol . Cell . Biol . 26 , 8755 – 8769 ( 2006 ) . 60 . Tange , T . O . , Damgaard , C . K . , Guth , S . , Valcarcel , J . & Kjems , J . The hnRNP A1 protein regulates HIV - 1 tat splicing via a novel intron silencer element . EMBO J . 20 , 5748 – 5758 ( 2001 ) . 61 . Zhou , H . L . & Lou , H . Repression of prespliceosome complex formation at two distinct steps by Fox - 1 / Fox - 2 proteins . Mol . Cell . Biol . 28 , 5507 – 5516 ( 2008 ) . 62 . Zhu , H . , Hinman , M . N . , Hasman , R . A . , Mehta , P . & Lou , H . Regulation of neuron - specific alternative splicing of neurofibromatosis type 1 pre - mRNA . Mol . Cell . Biol . 28 , 1240 – 1251 ( 2008 ) . 63 . Kashima , T . & Manley , J . L . A negative element in SMN2 exon 7 inhibits splicing in spinal muscular atrophy . Nature Genet . 34 , 460 – 463 ( 2003 ) . 64 . Martins de Araujo , M . , Bonnal , S . , Hastings , M . L . , Krainer , A . R . & Valcarcel , J . Differential 3 ′ splice site recognition of SMN1 and SMN2 transcripts by U2AF and U2 snRNP . RNA 15 , 515 – 523 ( 2009 ) . 65 . Sharma , S . , Falick , A . M . & Black , D . L . Polypyrimidine tract binding protein blocks the 5 ′ splice site - dependent assembly of U2AF and the prespliceosomal E complex . Mol . Cell 19 , 485 – 496 ( 2005 ) . 66 . Damgaard , C . K . , Tange , T . O . & Kjems , J . hnRNP A1 controls HIV - 1 mRNA splicing through cooperative binding to intron and exon splicing silencers in the context of a conserved secondary structure . RNA 8 , 1401 – 1415 ( 2002 ) . 67 . Nasim , F . U . , Hutchison , S . , Cordeau , M . & Chabot , B . High - affinity hnRNP A1 binding sites and duplex - forming inverted repeats have similar effects on 5 ′ splice site selection in support of a common looping out and repression mechanism . RNA 8 , 1078 – 1089 ( 2002 ) . 68 . Hutchison , S . , LeBel , C . , Blanchette , M . & Chabot , B . Distinct sets of adjacent heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein ( hnRNP ) A1 / A2 binding sites control 5 ′ splice site selection in the hnRNP A1 mRNA precursor . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 29745 – 29752 ( 2002 ) . 69 . Kashima , T . , Rao , N . , David , C . J . & Manley , J . L . hnRNP A1 functions with specificity in repression of SMN2 exon 7 splicing . Hum . Mol . Genet . 16 , 3149 – 3159 ( 2007 ) . 70 . Kashima , T . , Rao , N . & Manley , J . L . An intronic element contributes to splicing repression in spinal muscular atrophy . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . U S A 104 , 3426 – 3431 ( 2007 ) . 71 . Chou , M . Y . , Underwood , J . G . , Nikolic , J . , Luu , M . H . & Black , D . L . Multisite RNA binding and release of polypyrimidine tract binding protein during the regulation of c - src neural - specific splicing . Mol . Cell 5 , 949 – 957 ( 2000 ) . 72 . Mayeda , A . , Helfman , D . M . & Krainer , A . R . Modulation of exon skipping and inclusion by heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A1 and pre - mRNA splicing factor SF2 / ASF . Mol . Cell . Biol . 13 , 2993 – 3001 ( 1993 ) . 73 . Zahler , A . M . , Damgaard , C . K . , Kjems , J . & Caputi , M . SC35 and heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A / B proteins bind to a juxtaposed exonic splicing enhancer / exonic splicing silencer element to regulate HIV - 1 tat exon 2 splicing . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 10077 – 10084 ( 2004 ) . 74 . Zhu , J . & Krainer , A . R . Pre - mRNA splicing in the absence of an SR protein RS domain . Genes Dev . 14 , 3166 – 3178 ( 2000 ) . 75 . Crawford , J . B . & Patton , J . G . Activation of α - tropomyosin exon 2 is regulated by the SR protein 9G8 and heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins H and F . Mol . Cell . Biol . 26 , 8791 – 802 ( 2006 ) . 76 . Expert - Bezancon , A . et al . hnRNP A1 and the SR proteins ASF / SF2 and SC35 have antagonistic functions in splicing of β - tropomyosin exon 6B . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 38249 – 59 ( 2004 ) . 77 . Charlet , B . N . , Logan , P . , Singh , G . & Cooper , T . A . Dynamic antagonism between ETR - 3 and PTB regulates cell type - specific alternative splicing . Mol . Cell 9 , 649 – 658 ( 2002 ) . 78 . Blanchette , M . et al . Genome - wide analysis of alternative pre - mRNA splicing and RNA - binding specificities of the Drosophila hnRNP A / B family members . Mol . Cell 33 , 438 – 449 ( 2009 ) . 79 . Hung , L . H . et al . Diverse roles of hnRNP L in mammalian mRNA processing : a combined microarray and RNAi analysis . RNA 14 , 284 – 296 ( 2008 ) . 80 . Licatalosi , D . D . et al . HITS - CLIP yields genome - wide insights into brain alternative RNA processing . Nature 456 , 464 – 469 ( 2008 ) . This paper introduces a method that combines CLIP and high - throughput sequencing to identify targets of Nova proteins . 81 . Dredge , B . K . , Stefani , G . , Engelhard , C . C . & Darnell , R . B . Nova autoregulation reveals dual functions in neuronal splicing . EMBO J . 24 , 1608 – 1620 ( 2005 ) . 82 . Martinez - Contreras , R . et al . Intronic binding sites for hnRNP A / B and hnRNP F / H proteins stimulate pre - mRNA splicing . PLoS Biol . 4 , e21 ( 2006 ) . 83 . Wang , Z . & Burge , C . B . Splicing regulation : from a parts list of regulatory elements to an integrated splicing code . RNA 14 , 802 – 813 ( 2008 ) . 84 . Dredge , B . K . & Darnell , R . B . Nova regulates GABA A receptor γ 2 alternative splicing via a distal downstream UCAU - rich intronic splicing enhancer . Mol . Cell . Biol . 23 , 4687 – 4700 ( 2003 ) . 85 . Schaub , M . C . , Lopez , S . R . & Caputi , M . Members of the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein H family activate splicing of an HIV - 1 splicing substrate by promoting formation of ATP - dependent spliceosomal complexes . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 13617 – 13626 ( 2007 ) . 86 . Caputi , M . & Zahler , A . M . Determination of the RNA binding specificity of the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein ( hnRNP ) H / H ′ / F / 2H9 family . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 43850 – 43859 ( 2001 ) . 87 . Sanford , J . R . et al . Identification of nuclear and cytoplasmic mRNA targets for the shuttling protein SF2 / ASF . PLoS ONE 3 , e3369 ( 2008 ) . 88 . Sanford , J . R . et al . Splicing factor SFRS1 recognizes a functionally diverse landscape of RNA transcripts . Genome Res . 19 , 381 – 394 ( 2009 ) . 89 . Graveley , B . R . Mutually exclusive splicing of the insect Dscam pre - mRNA directed by competing intronic RNA secondary structures . Cell 123 , 65 – 73 ( 2005 ) . 90 . Olson , S . et al . A regulator of Dscam mutually exclusive splicing fidelity . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 14 , 1134 – 1140 ( 2007 ) . 91 . Grover , A . et al . 5 ′ splice site mutations in tau associated with the inherited dementia FTDP - 17 affect a stem - loop structure that regulates alternative splicing of exon 10 . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 15134 – 15143 ( 1999 ) . 92 . Hiller , M . , Zhang , Z . , Backofen , R . & Stamm , S . Pre - mRNA secondary structures influence exon recognition . PLoS Genet . 3 , e204 ( 2007 ) . 93 . Camats , M . , Guil , S . , Kokolo , M . & Bach - Elias , M . P68 RNA helicase ( DDX5 ) alters activity of cis - and trans - acting factors of the alternative splicing of H - Ras . PLoS ONE 3 , e2926 ( 2008 ) . 94 . Libri , D . , Balvay , L . & Fiszman , M . Y . In vivo splicing of the beta tropomyosin pre - mRNA : a role for branch point and donor site competition . Mol . Cell . Biol . 12 , 3204 – 3215 ( 1992 ) . 95 . Henkin , T . M . Riboswitch RNAs : using RNA to sense cellular metabolism . Genes Dev . 22 , 3383 – 3390 ( 2008 ) . 96 . Cheah , M . T . , Wachter , A . , Sudarsan , N . & Breaker , R . R . Control of alternative RNA splicing and gene expression by eukaryotic riboswitches . Nature 447 , 497 – 500 ( 2007 ) . 97 . Kishore , S . & Stamm , S . Regulation of alternative splicing by snoRNAs . Cold Spring Harb . Symp . Quant . Biol . 71 , 329 – 334 ( 2006 ) . 98 . Kishore , S . & Stamm , S . The snoRNA HBII - 52 regulates alternative splicing of the serotonin receptor 2C . Science 311 , 230 – 232 ( 2006 ) . 99 . Yu , Y . et al . Dynamic regulation of alternative splicing by silencers that modulate 5 ′ splice site competition . Cell 135 , 1224 – 1236 ( 2008 ) . The authors screen for splicing silencers that favour the inclusion of a distal 5 ′ splice site and provide evidence that the silencers work by changing the conformation of the pre - mrNA – U1 snrNP complex and promoting pairing of the distal U1 snrNP with U2 snrNP . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEwS | Molecular cell Biology VOlUME 10 | NOVEMBER 2009 | 753 © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 100 . Makeyev , E . V . , Zhang , J . , Carrasco , M . A . & Maniatis , T . The microRNA miR - 124 promotes neuronal differentiation by triggering brain - specific alternative pre - mRNA splicing . Mol . Cell 27 , 435 – 448 ( 2007 ) . 101 . Boutz , P . L . et al . A post - transcriptional regulatory switch in polypyrimidine tract - binding proteins reprograms alternative splicing in developing neurons . Genes Dev . 21 , 1636 – 1652 ( 2007 ) . Using sirNA and microarray analysis , the authors show that the PTB - to - nPTB switch provides a post - transcriptional mechanism that is important for programming neuronal differentiation . 102 . Coutinho - Mansfield , G . C . , Xue , Y . , Zhang , Y . & Fu , X . D . PTB / nPTB switch : a post - transcriptional mechanism for programming neuronal differentiation . Genes Dev . 21 , 1573 – 1577 ( 2007 ) . 103 . Spellman , R . , Llorian , M . & Smith , C . W . Crossregulation and functional redundancy between the splicing regulator PTB and its paralogs nPTB and ROD1 . Mol . Cell 27 , 420 – 434 ( 2007 ) . 104 . Ohi , M . D . et al . Structural and functional analysis of essential pre - mRNA splicing factor Prp19p . Mol . Cell . Biol . 25 , 451 – 460 ( 2005 ) . 105 . Bessonov , S . , Anokhina , M . , Will , C . L . , Urlaub , H . & Luhrmann , R . Isolation of an active step I spliceosome and composition of its RNP core . Nature 452 , 846 – 850 ( 2008 ) . 106 . Eldridge , A . G . , Li , Y . , Sharp , P . A . & Blencowe , B . J . The SRm160 / 300 splicing coactivator is required for exon - enhancer function . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . U S A 96 , 6125 – 6130 ( 1999 ) . 107 . Edamatsu , H . , Kaziro , Y . & Itoh , H . LUCA15 , a putative tumour suppressor gene encoding an RNA - binding nuclear protein , is down - regulated in ras - transformed Rat - 1 cells . Genes Cells 5 , 849 – 858 ( 2000 ) . 108 . Mourtada - Maarabouni , M . , Sutherland , L . C . & Williams , G . T . Candidate tumour suppressor LUCA - 15 can regulate multiple apoptotic pathways . Apoptosis 7 , 421 – 432 ( 2002 ) . 109 . Bonnal , S . et al . RBM5 / Luca - 15 / H37 regulates Fas alternative splice site pairing after exon definition . Mol . Cell 32 , 81 – 95 ( 2008 ) . 110 . Kornblihtt , A . R . Chromatin , transcript elongation and alternative splicing . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 13 , 5 – 7 ( 2006 ) . 111 . Das , R . et al . SR proteins function in coupling RNAP II transcription to pre - mRNA splicing . Mol . Cell 26 , 867 – 881 ( 2007 ) . 112 . Auboeuf , D . et al . Differential recruitment of nuclear receptor coactivators may determine alternative RNA splice site choice in target genes . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 2270 – 2274 ( 2004 ) . 113 . Cramer , P . et al . Coupling of transcription with alternative splicing : RNA pol II promoters modulate SF2 / ASF and 9G8 effects on an exonic splicing enhancer . Mol . Cell 4 , 251 – 258 ( 1999 ) . 114 . Monsalve , M . et al . Direct coupling of transcription and mRNA processing through the thermogenic coactivator PGC - 1 . Mol . Cell 6 , 307 – 316 ( 2000 ) . 115 . de la Mata , M . et al . A slow RNA polymerase II affects alternative splicing in vivo . Mol . Cell 12 , 525 – 532 ( 2003 ) . 116 . Munoz , M . J . et al . DNA damage regulates alternative splicing through inhibition of RNA polymerase II elongation . Cell 137 , 708 – 720 ( 2009 ) . 117 . Phatnani , H . P . & Greenleaf , A . L . Phosphorylation and functions of the RNA polymerase II CTD . Genes Dev . 20 , 2922 – 2936 ( 2006 ) . 118 . Lin , P . S . , Marshall , N . F . & Dahmus , M . E . CTD phosphatase : role in RNA polymerase II cycling and the regulation of transcript elongation . Prog . Nucleic Acid Res . Mol . Biol . 72 , 333 – 365 ( 2002 ) . 119 . David , C . J . & Manley , J . L . The search for alternative splicing regulators : new approaches offer a path to a splicing code . Genes Dev . 22 , 279 – 285 ( 2008 ) . 120 . Ohno , G . , Hagiwara , M . & Kuroyanagi , H . STAR family RNA - binding protein ASD - 2 regulates developmental switching of mutually exclusive alternative splicing in vivo . Genes Dev . 22 , 360 – 374 ( 2008 ) . 121 . Li , Q . , Lee , J . A . & Black , D . L . Neuronal regulation of alternative pre - mRNA splicing . Nature Rev . Neurosci . 8 , 819 – 831 ( 2007 ) . 122 . Ule , J . et al . Nova regulates brain - specific splicing to shape the synapse . Nature Genet . 37 , 844 – 852 ( 2005 ) . 123 . Perrone - Bizzozero , N . & Bolognani , F . Role of HuD and other RNA - binding proteins in neural development and plasticity . J . Neurosci . Res . 68 , 121 – 126 ( 2002 ) . 124 . Zhu , H . , Hasman , R . A . , Barron , V . A . , Luo , G . & Lou , H . A nuclear function of Hu proteins as neuron - specific alternative RNA processing regulators . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 5105 – 5114 ( 2006 ) . 125 . Soller , M . , Li , M . & Haussmann , I . U . Regulation of the ELAV target ewg : insights from an evolutionary perspective . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 36 , 502 – 504 ( 2008 ) . 126 . McKee , A . E . et al . A genome - wide in situ hybridization map of RNA - binding proteins reveals anatomically restricted expression in the developing mouse brain . BMC Dev . Biol . 5 , 14 ( 2005 ) . 127 . Yang , Y . Y . , Yin , G . L . & Darnell , R . B . The neuronal RNA - binding protein Nova - 2 is implicated as the autoantigen targeted in POMA patients with dementia . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 13254 – 13259 ( 1998 ) . 128 . Warzecha , C . C . , Sato , T . K . , Nabet , B . , Hogenesch , J . B . & Carstens , R . P . ESRP1 and ESRP2 are epithelial cell - type - specific regulators of FGFR2 splicing . Mol . Cell 33 , 591 – 601 ( 2009 ) . The authors identify ESrP1 and ESrP2 as epithelial cell - specific alternative splicing factors and find that they regulate several epithelial cell - specific exons . They also show that ESrP1 and ESrP2 expression levels correlate with the splicing pattern change that is observed during the epithe - lial - to - mesenchymal cell transition . 129 . Ding , J . H . et al . Dilated cardiomyopathy caused by tissue - specific ablation of SC35 in the heart . EMBO J . 23 , 885 – 896 ( 2004 ) . 130 . Xu , X . et al . ASF / SF2 - regulated CaMKII δ alternative splicing temporally reprograms excitation - contraction coupling in cardiac muscle . Cell 120 , 59 – 72 ( 2005 ) . 131 . Feng , Y . et al . SRp38 regulates alternative splicing and is required for Ca 2 + handling in the embryonic heart . Dev . Cell 16 , 528 – 538 ( 2009 ) . This study shows that mice lacking Srp38 die perinatally and have multiple cardiac defects , and that the mrNA encoding cardiac triadin is a direct target of Srp38 . 132 . Grosso , A . R . et al . Tissue - specific splicing factor gene expression signatures . Nucleic Acids Res . 36 , 4823 – 4832 ( 2008 ) . 133 . Massiello , A . , Roesser , J . R . & Chalfant , C . E . SAP155 binds to ceramide - responsive RNA cis - element 1 and regulates the alternative 5 ′ splice site selection of Bcl - x pre - mRNA . FASEB J . 20 , 1680 – 1682 ( 2006 ) . 134 . Pacheco , T . R . , Moita , L . F . , Gomes , A . Q . , Hacohen , N . & Carmo - Fonseca , M . RNA interference knockdown of hU2AF 35 impairs cell cycle progression and modulates alternative splicing of Cdc25 transcripts . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 4187 – 4199 ( 2006 ) . 135 . Pleiss , J . A . , Whitworth , G . B . , Bergkessel , M . & Guthrie , C . Rapid , transcript - specific changes in splicing in response to environmental stress . Mol . Cell 27 , 928 – 937 ( 2007 ) . 136 . Monani , U . R . Spinal muscular atrophy : a deficiency in a ubiquitous protein ; a motor neuron - specific disease . Neuron 48 , 885 – 896 ( 2005 ) . 137 . Gabanella , F . et al . Ribonucleoprotein assembly defects correlate with spinal muscular atrophy severity and preferentially affect a subset of spliceosomal snRNPs . PLoS ONE 2 , e921 ( 2007 ) . 138 . Shin , C . & Manley , J . L . Cell signalling and the control of pre - mRNA splicing . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 , 727 – 738 ( 2004 ) . 139 . Tarn , W . Y . Cellular signals modulate alternative splicing . J . Biomed . Sci . 14 , 517 – 522 ( 2007 ) . 140 . Huang , Y . , Yario , T . A . & Steitz , J . A . A molecular link between SR protein dephosphorylation and mRNA export . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . U S A 101 , 9666 – 9670 ( 2004 ) . 141 . van der Houven van Oordt , W . et al . The MKK ( 3 / 6 ) - p38 - signaling cascade alters the subcellular distribution of hnRNP A1 and modulates alternative splicing regulation . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 307 – 316 ( 2000 ) . 142 . Habelhah , H . et al . ERK phosphorylation drives cytoplasmic accumulation of hnRNP - K and inhibition of mRNA translation . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 325 – 330 ( 2001 ) . 143 . Daoud , R . et al . Ischemia induces a translocation of the splicing factor tra2 - beta 1 and changes alternative splicing patterns in the brain . J . Neurosci . 22 , 5889 – 5899 ( 2002 ) . 144 . Guil , S . , Long , J . C . & Caceres , J . F . hnRNP A1 relocalization to the stress granules reflects a role in the stress response . Mol . Cell . Biol . 26 , 5744 – 5758 ( 2006 ) . 145 . Huang , C . J . , Tang , Z . , Lin , R . J . & Tucker , P . W . Phosphorylation by SR kinases regulates the binding of PTB - associated splicing factor ( PSF ) to the pre - mRNA polypyrimidine tract . FEBS Lett . 581 , 223 – 232 ( 2007 ) . 146 . Tacke , R . , Chen , Y . & Manley , J . L . Sequence - specific RNA binding by an SR protein requires RS domain phosphorylation : creation of an SRp40 - specific splicing enhancer . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . U S A 94 , 1148 – 1153 ( 1997 ) . 147 . Izquierdo , J . M . & Valcarcel , J . Fas - activated serine / threonine kinase ( FAST K ) synergizes with TIA - 1 / TIAR proteins to regulate Fas alternative splicing . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 1539 – 1543 ( 2007 ) . 148 . Paronetto , M . P . , Achsel , T . , Massiello , A . , Chalfant , C . E . & Sette , C . The RNA - binding protein Sam68 modulates the alternative splicing of Bcl - x . J . Cell Biol . 176 , 929 – 939 ( 2007 ) . 149 . Ma , S . , Liu , G . , Sun , Y . & Xie , J . Relocalization of the polypyrimidine tract - binding protein during PKA - induced neurite growth . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1773 , 912 – 923 ( 2007 ) . 150 . Xie , J . , Lee , J . A . , Kress , T . L . , Mowry , K . L . & Black , D . L . Protein kinase A phosphorylation modulates transport of the polypyrimidine tract - binding protein . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . U S A 100 , 8776 – 8781 ( 2003 ) . 151 . Shi , Y . & Manley , J . L . A complex signaling pathway regulates SRp38 phosphorylation and pre - mRNA splicing in response to heat shock . Mol . Cell 28 , 79 – 90 ( 2007 ) . 152 . Van Eynde , A . et al . Molecular cloning of NIPP - 1 , a nuclear inhibitor of protein phosphatase - 1 , reveals homology with polypeptides involved in RNA processing . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 28068 – 28074 ( 1995 ) . 153 . Cohen , P . T . Protein phosphatase 1— targeted in many directions . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 241 – 256 ( 2002 ) . 154 . Kim , E . , Goren , A . & Ast , G . Alternative splicing : current perspectives . Bioessays 30 , 38 – 47 ( 2008 ) . 155 . Hallikas , O . et al . Genome - wide prediction of mammalian enhancers based on analysis of transcription - factor binding affinity . Cell 124 , 47 – 59 ( 2006 ) . 156 . Babu , M . M . , Luscombe , N . M . , Aravind , L . , Gerstein , M . & Teichmann , S . A . Structure and evolution of transcriptional regulatory networks . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 14 , 283 – 291 ( 2004 ) . 157 . Tacke , R . & Manley , J . L . The human splicing factors ASF / SF2 and SC35 possess distinct , functionally significant RNA binding specificities . EMBO J . 14 , 3540 – 3551 ( 1995 ) . 158 . Kent , O . A . , Ritchie , D . B . & Macmillan , A . M . Characterization of a U2AF - independent commitment complex ( E ′ ) in the mammalian spliceosome assembly pathway . Mol . Cell . Biol . 25 , 233 – 40 ( 2005 ) . 159 . Shen , H . & Green , M . R . RS domains contact splicing signals and promote splicing by a common mechanism in yeast through humans . Genes Dev . 20 , 1755 – 1765 ( 2006 ) . 160 . Huang , Y . , Gattoni , R . , Stevenin , J . & Steitz , J . A . SR splicing factors serve as adapter proteins for TAP - dependent mRNA export . Mol . Cell 11 , 837 – 843 ( 2003 ) . 161 . Zhang , Z . & Krainer , A . R . Involvement of SR proteins in mRNA surveillance . Mol . Cell 16 , 597 – 607 ( 2004 ) . 162 . Sanford , J . R . , Gray , N . K . , Beckmann , K . & Caceres , J . F . A novel role for shuttling SR proteins in mRNA translation . Genes Dev . 18 , 755 – 768 ( 2004 ) . 163 . Cartegni , L . & Krainer , A . R . Disruption of an SF2 / ASF - dependent exonic splicing enhancer in SMN2 causes spinal muscular atrophy in the absence of SMN1 . Nature Genet . 30 , 377 – 384 ( 2002 ) . 164 . Cartegni , L . , Hastings , M . L . , Calarco , J . A . , de Stanchina , E . & Krainer , A . R . Determinants of exon 7 splicing in the spinal muscular atrophy genes , SMN1 and SMN2 . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 78 , 63 – 77 ( 2006 ) . Acknowledgements Work from the authors’ laboratory was supported in part by grants from the National Institutes of Health . We thank C . David for comments on the manuscript . DataBasEs UniProtKB : http : / / www . uniprot . org Fox1 | Fox2 | hnRNP A1 | hnRNP F | hnRNP H | hnRNP L | NoVA1 | NoVA2 | nPTB | PTB | RBM5 | SAM68 | SRp38 FUrtHEr inForMation James L . Manley’s homepage : http : / / www . columbia . edu / cu / biology / faculty / manley all liNkS are acTive iN The oNliNe PDf R E V I E W S 754 | NOVEMBER 2009 | VOlUME 10 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio © 2009 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved