Class I and II Small Heat Shock Proteins Together with HSP101 Protect Protein Translation Factors during Heat Stress 1 [ OPEN ] Fionn McLoughlin 2 , 3 , Eman Basha 2 , 4 , Mary E . Fowler , Minsoo Kim , Juliana Bordowitz 5 , Surekha Katiyar - Agarwal 6 , and Elizabeth Vierling * Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , University of Massachusetts , Amherst , Massachusetts 01003 ( F . M . , M . E . F . , M . K . , E . V . ) ; Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry , University of Arizona , Tucson , Arizona 85721 ( E . B . , M . K . , J . B . , S . K . - A . ) ; and Department of Botany , Tanta University , Tanta 31527 , Egypt ( E . B . ) ORCID IDs : 0000 - 0002 - 2430 - 5074 ( F . M . ) ; 0000 - 0002 - 0066 - 4881 ( E . V . ) . The ubiquitous small heat shock proteins ( sHSPs ) are well documented to act in vitro as molecular chaperones to prevent the irreversible aggregation of heat - sensitive proteins . However , the in vivo activities of sHSPs remain unclear . To investigate the two most abundant classes of plant cytosolic sHSPs ( class I [ CI ] and class II [ CII ] ) , RNA interference ( RNAi ) and overexpression lines were created in Arabidopsis ( Arabidopsis thaliana ) and shown to have reduced and enhanced tolerance , respectively , to extreme heat stress . Af ﬁ nity puri ﬁ cation of CI and CII sHSPs from heat - stressed seedlings recovered eukaryotic translation elongation factor ( eEF ) 1B ( a - , b - , and g - subunits ) and eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4A ( three isoforms ) , although the association with CI sHSPs was stronger and additional proteins involved in translation were recovered with CI sHSPs . eEF1B subunits became partially insoluble during heat stress and , in the CI and CII RNAi lines , showed reduced recovery to the soluble cell fraction after heat stress , which was also dependent on HSP101 . Furthermore , after heat stress , CI sHSPs showed increased retention in the insoluble fraction in the CII RNAi line and vice versa . Immunolocalization revealed that both CI and CII sHSPs were present in cytosolic foci , some of which colocalized with HSP101 and with eEF1B g and eEF1B b . Thus , CI and CII sHSPs have both unique and overlapping functions and act either directly or indirectly to protect speci ﬁ c translation factors in cytosolic stress granules . As sessile organisms , plants require robust mecha - nisms to sense and respond to adverse growth condi - tions during their life cycle . A well - de ﬁ ned response of plants , as well as other organisms , to high temperatures involves the enhanced production of molecular chape - rones , including the heat shock proteins HSP100 and HSP70 , which are ATPases , and the small heat shock proteins ( sHSPs ; Kotak et al . , 2007 ) . These HSPs and other molecular chaperones are believed to prevent or reverse the inactivation and aggregation of heat - sensitive proteins , thereby contributing to restoring cellular protein homeostasis disrupted by environ - mentally challenging conditions ( Basha et al . , 2012 ; Doyle et al . , 2013 ) . The sHSPs are proposed to be a ﬁ rst line of defense , interacting with denaturing proteins to prevent their further aggregation and presenting them to the ATP - dependent HSP100 and HSP70 chaperones that can disaggregate and refold nonnative proteins ( Haslbeck and Vierling , 2015 ) . However , despite con - siderable evidence to support this model for sHSP function , a full understanding of the importance of sHSPs to plant heat tolerance and what critical cellular components they may protect is lacking . Although sHSPs are found in all kingdoms of life , they are uniquely diverse in land plants , with 11 or more gene families found in monocots and eudicots ( Waters , 2013 ) . sHSP families are distinguished by conserved sequence features and intracellular localiza - tion ; they are found in virtually all membrane - bound plant cell compartments , the chloroplast , mitochon - drion , endoplasmic reticulum , peroxisome , and nu - cleus , along with several families of sHSPs in the cytosol ( for review , see Santhanagopalan et al . , 2015 ) . All sHSPs have monomer M r values between 12 to 1 This work was supported by the U . S . Department of Agriculture National Research Initiative Competitive Grants Program ( grant no . 96 – 351003232 ) , the National Science Foundation ( grant no . DBI 0820047 ) , the Department of Energy ( grant no . DE – SC0006646 ) , the National Institutes of Health ( grant no . RO1 GM42761 ) , and the Mas - sachusetts Life Sciences Center ( New Faculty Research Award to E . V . ) . 2 These authors contributed equally to the article . 3 Present address : Department of Biology , Washington University , St . Louis , MO 63130 . 4 Present address : Biology Department , Faculty of Science , Al - Taif University , Al - Taif 21974 , Saudi Arabia . 5 Present address : Kavli Institute for Brain and Mind , University of California at San Diego , La Jolla , CA 92093 . 6 Present address : Department of Plant Molecular Biology , Univer - sity of Delhi South Campus , New Delhi 110021 , India . * Address correspondence to vierling @ biochem . umass . edu . The author responsible for distribution of materials integral to the ﬁ ndings presented in this article in accordance with the policy de - scribed in the Instructions for Authors ( www . plantphysiol . org ) is : Elizabeth Vierling ( vierling @ biochem . umass . edu ) . E . B . , F . M . , and E . V . conceived the original research plans ; E . B . , F . M . , and E . V . supervised and F . M . and E . B . performed most of the experiments together with M . E . F . , J . B . , S . K . - A . , M . K . , and E . V . ; F . M . , E . B . , M . F . , and E . V . analyzed data ; F . M . wrote the article with input from all the coauthors ; E . V . supervised and complemented the writing . [ OPEN ] Articles can be viewed without a subscription . www . plantphysiol . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1104 / pp . 16 . 00536 Plant Physiology (cid:1) , October 2016 , Vol . 172 , pp . 1221 – 1236 , www . plantphysiol . org (cid:3) 2016 American Society of Plant Biologists . All Rights Reserved . 1221 www . plantphysiol . org on July 22 , 2017 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2016 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved . 42 kD and constitute a signature a - crystallin domain ﬂ anked by a variable - length , divergent N - terminal arm and a short C - terminal tail ( de Jong et al . , 1998 ) . The majority of sHSPs assemble into oligomers of 12 to over 24 subunits , speci ﬁ c to the protein ( Delbecq and Klevit , 2013 ) . In higher plants , the most extensive structural and biochemical characterization is available for two classes of cytosolic sHSPs , class I ( CI ) and class II ( CII ) , which become highly abundant during heat stress , ac - cumulating together to over 1 % of total cell protein within a few hours ( Derocher et al . , 1991 ; van Montfort et al . , 2001 ; Basha et al . , 2010 ) . The CI and CII proteins likely evolved through gene duplication over 400 mil - lion years ago , as both classes are found already in mosses ( Waters and Vierling , 1999 ) . Although both CI and CII sHSPs form dodecameric oligomers , the two classes do not coassemble to form heterooligomers , but they will heterooligomerize with members of the same class from the same or different species ( Basha et al . , 2010 ) . Thus , CI and CII cytosolic sHSPs have evolved to be structurally distinct , but how they may have di - verged functionally is not known . Studies of the CI and CII plant sHSPs have made major contributions to the current model for sHSP chaperone activity . Recombinant , dodecameric CI and CII sHSPs form high - M r complexes with heat - sensitive denaturing substrates ( Lee et al . , 1997 ; Basha et al . , 2004b , 2010 ) . Model heat - sensitive substrates such as ﬁ re ﬂ y luciferase can be readily renatured and reac - tivated from sHSP complexes by the HSP70 chaperones and cochaperones present in wheat germ or reticulo - cyte lysate extracts or even by the prokaryotic HSP70 homolog DnaK and cochaperones ( Lee et al . , 1997 ; Lee and Vierling , 2000 ) . Addition of the disaggregase ClpB , the prokaryotic homolog of the HSP100 chaperones , accelerates the release and reactivation of substrate from sHSP - substrate complexes ( Mogk et al . , 2003 ) . A number of in vivo experiments are consistent with these in vitro biochemical studies . CI and CII proteins from extracts of heat stress plant tissues migrate on nondenaturing gels in the size range of dodecamers ( Helm et al . , 1997 ; Kirschner et al . , 2000 ; Smykal et al . , 2000 ) . After severe stress , CI and CII sHSPs are ob - served in cytosolic aggregates ( Kirschner et al . , 2000 ) that have been termed heat stress granules ( Nover and Scharf , 1997 ; Weber et al . , 2008 ) , and a portion of the sHSPs transit to an insoluble cell fraction presumably in association with heat - damaged proteins ( Lee et al . , 2005 ) . Notably , recovery of sHSPs from the insoluble fraction is impaired in Arabidopsis ( Arabidopsis thaliana ) mutants of the disaggregase HSP101 ( Lee et al . , 2005 ) , which is essential for heat acclimation ( Hong and Vierling , 2000 ; Queitsch et al . , 2000 ) . Analogous studies with yeast ( Cashikar et al . , 2005 ; Haslbeck et al . , 2005 ) and Escherichia coli ( Mogk et al . , 2003 ) sHSPs and ATP - dependent chaperones parallel these ﬁ ndings in plants , supporting the chaperone model for sHSP function . CI sHSPs typically comprise the largest family of sHSP genes in higher plants ( Waters , 2013 ) , and there are six CI genes in Arabidopsis . The CII gene family is typically smaller , with only two CII genes in Arabi - dopsis ( Scharf et al . , 2001 ; Siddique et al . , 2008 ) . The absence of T - DNA insertion lines for all of the Arabi - dopsis CI genes ( probably due in part to the small size of these intronless genes ) and the tandem chromosomal arrangement of the Arabidopsis CII genes ( Waters et al . , 2008 ) have so far limited genetic studies of mu - tants that might aid in de ﬁ ning the functions of these cytosolic sHSPs . Individual mutants of three CI sHSPs were reported to have wild - type growth at different temperatures and after heat shock at 40°C , although dark - grown seedlings showed reduced hypocotyl elongation compared with the wild type after acclima - tion at 38°C followed by heat stress at 45°C ( Dafny - Yelin et al . , 2008 ) . The same study reported that double mutants of the CI proteins could not be obtained . However , only single alleles were tested , and no complementation experiments were performed . Further evidence for the stress - protective role of CI and CII sHSPs in plants has primarily involved constitutive expression or overexpression of a single sHSP in dif - ferent plant species , including Arabidopsis , rice ( Oryza sativa ) , maize ( Zea mays ) , and carrot ( Daucus carota ) , as well as others ( Malik et al . , 1999 ; Ahn and Zimmerman , 2006 ; Jiang et al . , 2009 ; Sun et al . , 2012 ; Zhou et al . , 2012 ; Mu et al . , 2013 ; Wang et al . , 2015 ) . A very restricted set of stress - resistant phenotypes has been reported for sHSP - overexpressing transgenic materials , and these studies have not provided mechanistic insight into sHSP function or distinguished differences between CI and CII sHSPs . To gain insight into the in vivo function of CI and CII sHSPs and potentially differentiate their speci ﬁ c roles during heat stress , we developed transgenic Arabi - dopsis RNA interference ( RNAi ) lines to knock down the expression of the CI and CII sHSP families , along with lines that overexpress a CI or CII sHSP , and evaluated their phenotypes at different growth stages under different heat stress regimes . Arabidopsis lines expressing af ﬁ nity - tagged CI or CII proteins also were created and used to recover proteins associated with sHSPs during heat stress , and the behavior of speci ﬁ c sHSP - interacting proteins was evaluated in the RNAi lines and an HSP101 null mutant . In total , the results indicate that CI and CII sHSPs have both unique and overlapping functions and act in conjunction with HSP101 to either directly or indirectly protect speci ﬁ c translation factors in cytosolic stress granules . RESULTS CI and CII sHSPs Are Important for Heat Stress Tolerance To examine the roles of CI and CII sHSPs in vivo , RNAi lines were constructed against either the CI ( six members ) or CII ( two members ) sHSP family . In addi - tion , CI HSP17 . 4 and CII HSP17 . 6 were transformed into wild - type plants under the control of the consti - tutive cauli ﬂ ower mosaic virus ( CaMV ) 35S promoter , creating CI and CII sHSP overexpression ( OE ) lines , 1222 Plant Physiol . Vol . 172 , 2016 McLoughlin et al . www . plantphysiol . org on July 22 , 2017 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2016 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved . respectively . The empty RNAi and overexpression vectors also were transformed as controls . At 22°C , no CI or CII sHSPs were detected in any of the lines except in the corresponding OE lines ( Fig . 1A ) . Both CI and CII sHSPs accumulate at 38°C in wild - type plants , the empty vector controls , and the null mutant of the cha - perone HSP101 ( hsp101 ) , originally annotated as hot1 - 3 ( Hong and Vierling , 2001 ) . In RNAi plants , the accu - mulation of CI sHSPs was estimated to be repressed at least 60 % in different independently transformed plants under the heat stress conditions tested . RNAi - mediated repression of CII sHSPs was more effective , showing up to an estimated 95 % decrease in total CII sHSP protein levels ( Fig . 1A ; Supplemental Fig . S1A ) . Knocking down CI sHSPs did not in ﬂ uence total CII sHSP abundance and vice versa ( Supplemental Fig . S1A ) . In addition , none of the sHSP RNAi or OE lines showed signi ﬁ cant differences in growth rate , seed yield , or ﬂ owering time and otherwise appeared morphologi - cally like the wild type when grown under optimal conditions ( Supplemental Fig . S2 , A – D ) . The effect of reduced CI or CII sHSP levels on basal thermotolerance was tested by heat stressing dark - grown seedlings at 43°C for 90 min without prior ac - climation and analyzing the percentage of seedlings subsequently capable of developing green cotyledons after transfer to the light compared with unstressed seedlings ( Fig . 1B ) . All unstressed seedlings showed 100 % greening after 24 h of illumination . Heat - stressed wild - type seedlings showed 90 % greening 24 h after the transfer to light , while both CI and CII sHSP RNAi seedlings showed a reduced percentage of greening . Thus , both CI and CII sHSPs are important for basal thermotolerance in this assay . Acquired thermotolerance was tested in soil - grown plants ( Fig . 1C ) . Ten - day - old CI and CII sHSP RNAi plants , along with wild - type plants , the vector control , and the hsp101 mutant , were acclimated at 38°C , returned to 22°C for 2 h , and then heat stressed at 45°C for 10 h in the growth chamber under illuminated conditions . Plants were photographed 5 , 10 , and 22 d after the stress was applied . Two independently trans - formed CI RNAi lines exhibited reduced growth , and several leaves showed partial or complete necrosis . CII sHSP RNAi lines showed a more severe heat sensitivity and were essentially not able to recover growth , similar to hsp101 plants . The ability of the constitutive expression of CI and CII sHSPs to enhance basal and acquired thermotol - erance also was tested ( Fig . 1 , D and E ) . Dark - grown seedlings of CI and CII OE lines were heat stressed at 43°C for 105 min without prior acclimation , and OE lines of both sHSPs showed increases in the percentage of seedlings that developed green cotyledons after heat stress ( Fig . 1D ) . Thus , constitutively expressing sHSPs effectively increased basal thermotolerance , consistent with the loss of tolerance seen in this assay with the RNAi plants . Although sHSPs accumulate to high levels at 38°C , which is the temperature we used for acclimation in tests of acquired thermotolerance , we nonetheless tested the additive effect of the constitu - tively expressing sHSPs on seedling survival rates after acclimation and severe heat stress . For comparison , a previously generated transgenic line that overexpresses Arabidopsis HSP101 also was included ( Queitsch et al . , 2000 ) . Wild - type , vector , hsp101 , and CI , CII , and HSP101 OE plants were grown on plates , heat accli - mated ( 38°C for 1 . 5 h , plus 2 h at 22°C ) , and then stressed at 45°C for 1 . 5 h ( Fig . 1E ) . The percentage of seedlings that survived the heat stress was determined after 7 d . Wild - type and vector control seedlings showed 45 % to 50 % survival after heat stress , while none of the hsp101 seedlings survived . In contrast , CI and CII sHSP OE lines , as well as the HSP101 OE line , showed a survival rate of close to 100 % ( Fig . 1E ) . Not only were the survival rates higher after heat stress , but also all OE lines grew signi ﬁ cantly better ( Supplemental Fig . S3A ) , showing that constitutive expression or overexpression of sHSPs increases heat stress tolerance to a similar extent to HSP101 over - expression . In total , these data support a clear and distinct role for CI and CII sHSPs in heat tolerance . Capturing Proteins Associated with sHSPs during Heat Stress To better understand the mechanism by which CI and CII sHSPs provide enhanced heat tolerance , sHSP - interacting proteins were identi ﬁ ed using coaf ﬁ nity puri ﬁ cation with both CI and CII sHSPs . Transgenic Arabidopsis lines were created to express a CI or CII sHSP with a C - terminal StrepII af ﬁ nity tag ( Strep ) , be - ing driven by the sHSP native , heat - inducible promoter . In addition , because CI and CII sHSPs are not expressed at detectable levels under nonstressed conditions , transgenic lines were created that expressed CI and CII Strep - tagged proteins under the control of the consti - tutive CaMV 35S promoter , which facilitates the iden - ti ﬁ cation of proteins that interact with either sHSP class speci ﬁ cally during heat stress . It has been shown previously that the addition of a Strep tag to the C terminus of an sHSP from Synechocystis sp . PCC 6803 fully complements an sHSP deletion strain of this cyanobacterium ( Basha et al . , 2004a ) . Additionally , the oligomeric state and in vitro chape - rone activity of puri ﬁ ed CI sHSPs are unchanged by the addition of a C - terminal Strep tag ( Friedrich et al . , 2004 ) . Therefore , C - terminally fused Strep - tagged CI and CII sHSPs were constructed and transformed to Arabidopsis . Constitutive expression of both the CI and CII sHSP - Strep recombinant protein increased the basal thermotolerance , similar to their nontagged equivalents ( Supplemental Fig . S3B ) . To test further if the intro - duced sHSP - Strep behaved similarly to untagged , na - tive sHSPs in vivo , the oligomeric state of the wild - type and Strep - tagged proteins was monitored by size - exclusion chromatography of native leaf protein ex - tracts followed by immunoblot analysis ( Fig . 2 ) . In the absence of stress , the constitutively expressed sHSPs Plant Physiol . Vol . 172 , 2016 1223 In Vivo Role of Class I and II sHSPs www . plantphysiol . org on July 22 , 2017 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2016 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved . Figure 1 . CI and CII sHSPs are important for basal and acquired thermotolerance . A , Two independent CI and CII RNAi lines and two independent OE lines display corresponding sHSP protein levels . Total protein extracts were obtained from 2 . 5 - d - old wild - type ( WT ) , vector , hsp101 , CIorCIIOE , andCIorCIIRNAiseedlingsmaintainedat22˚Cortreatedat38˚Cfor90minandallowed to recover at 22˚C for 2 h . Samples were separated using SDS - PAGE and analyzed by immunoblotting using the polyclonal antibodies indicated . Staining with Coomassie Brilliant Blue ( CBB ) was used as a loading control . B , CI and CII sHSPs are im - portant for basal thermotolerance in Arabidopsis seedlings . Dark - grown seedlings ( 2 . 5 - d ) were maintained at 22˚C or heat stressed at 43˚C for 90 min in the dark , followed by recovery for 24 h at 22˚C in illuminated conditions , at which time the percentage of green cotyledons was scored . Results are from a single experiment ( n = 18 per line ) and are consistent with ob - servations from three experiments . Error bars represent SD . C , CI and CII sHSPs are important for acquired thermotolerance . Soil - grown , 10 - d - old wild type , hsp101 , vector , and CI and CII RNAi plants were pretreated at 38˚C for 90 min , recovered for 2 h , and exposed to 45˚C for 10 h . The development of the plants was monitored 5 , 10 , and 22 d after the heat stress . D , Constitutive expression of CI and CII sHSPs increases basal thermotolerance . Dark - grown seedlings ( 2 . 5 - d ) were maintained at 22˚C or heat stressed at 43˚C for 105 min in the dark , followed by recovery for 24 h at 22˚C in illuminated conditions , at which time the percentage of green cotyledons was scored . Error bars represent SD ( n = 24 per line ) . E , Overexpressing CI and CII sHSPs enhance acquired thermotolerance . The wild type , vector , hsp101 , two independent OE lines of CI or CII sHSPs , and an HSP101 OE line were grown on plates for 10 d . Plantswere acclimated at 38˚C , recovered for 2 h , and exposedto 45˚Cfor 90 min . The percentage of surviving seedlings was determined on day 7 . Error bars represent SD ( n = 60 per line ) . 1224 Plant Physiol . Vol . 172 , 2016 McLoughlin et al . www . plantphysiol . org on July 22 , 2017 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2016 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved . and the CI and CII sHSP - Strep proteins elute as oligo - mers centered around 200 kD , as do their untagged counterparts , consistent with the known dodecameric structure of CI and CII sHSPs ( Basha et al . , 2010 ; Fig . 2 ) . In extracts from heat - stressed plants , the CI sHSPs elute in higher M r fractions , as seen in vitro when CI sHSPs are bound to heat - denatured model substrates ( Basha et al . , 2010 , 2012 ) ; presumably , in vivo , the CI sHSPs are associated with substrates or partner proteins . The CII sHSPs behave somewhat differently in vivo ; only a portion elutes in higher M r fractions , while a majority elutes in fractions smaller than the dodecameric size of the native protein . On recovery from heat stress , both the CI and CII wild - type and Strep - tagged sHSPs again elute at a position corresponding to their native mo - lecular mass around 200 kD . In total , in all cases , the Strep - tagged sHSPs behaved like their wild - type counterparts . In addition to this biochemical analysis , all plants expressing the Strep - tagged proteins showed normal growth phenotypes . Based on these data and previous work cited above , we concluded that the sHSP - Strep proteins behave like the endogenous sHSPs and could be used for af ﬁ nity experiments . Coaf ﬁ nity puri ﬁ cations from native protein extracts were conducted on wild - type plants and plants expressing the sHSP - Strep either constitutively or un - der the control of the native , heat - inducible promoter ( Fig . 3A ) . No differences in recovered proteins were observed in experiments with wild - type plants com - paring control and heat - stressed conditions ( lanes 1 , 2 , 6 , and 7 ) , showing that heat stressing plants did not in ﬂ uence the background of proteins recovered with the Strep - af ﬁ nity resin . The same protein banding pat - tern was observed in unheated plants carrying the heat - inducible sHSP - Strep constructs ( lanes 3 and 8 ) . In contrast , after heat stress , a number of proteins were recovered in the CI and CII sHSP af ﬁ nity isolates ( lanes 4 and 9 ) , with signi ﬁ cantly more proteins bound to CI sHSPs . Constitutively expressed sHSP - Strep also bound to a number of proteins under control conditions ( lanes 5 and 10 ) , but clearly to fewer proteins , and with only partial apparent overlap with proteins bound during heat stress . Identifying sHSP - Associated Proteins To identify proteins speci ﬁ cally associated with the sHSPs during heat stress , the af ﬁ nity isolates from samples in Figure 3A , lanes 4 and 5 for CI and lanes 9 and 10 for CII , sHSPs were separated using 2D - PAGE ( Fig . 3 , B and C ) . Protein spots that were more abundant in heat - stressed plant samples and observed in two or more independent experiments were excised and ana - lyzed by mass spectrometry . A total of 36 CI - associated and 16 CII - associated proteins yielded peptide identi - ﬁ cations as listed in Supplemental Tables S1 and S2 and indicated in Supplemental Figure S4 , A and B . A major fraction of the sHSP - associated proteins is involved in translation : 12 for CI sHSPs and seven for CII sHSPs , all of which overlap with the CI - associated proteins , in - cluding translation elongation factor eEF1B ( subunits a , b , and g ) , translation initiation factor eIF4A ( three iso - forms ) , and translationally controlled tumor protein . In all experiments , more proteins were recovered associ - ated with CI sHSPs than CII sHSPs , consistent with the observation that less CII protein was seen in higher M r complexes ( Fig . 2 , A versus B ) . Other proteins associ - ated with CI sHSPs included HSP70 , other CI sHSPs , peptidyl prolyl isomerases , glutathione S - transferases , CDC48 , jacalin - related lectins , and some metabolic en - zymes ( e . g . Fru bisphosphate aldolase and ascorbate peroxidase ) . Of these , only the jacalin - related lectin ( At3g16460 ) and ascorbate peroxidase also were posi - tively identi ﬁ ed among the CII - associated proteins . None of these proteins are strongly heat regulated , in - dicating that their association with sHSPs during heat stress and not under control conditions is not due simply to increased levels of these proteins . Thus , it Figure 2 . The C - terminal sHSP - Strep proteins behave similarly to wild - type sHSPs in vivo . Fourteen - day - old seedlings of the wild type ( WT ) or transgenic lines carrying either the CI or CII sHSP - Strep ( S ) driven by the corresponding native promoter were either control ( C ) or heat ( H ) treated ( 38˚C for 2 h , allowed to recoverat 22˚Cfor 2 h , and then given anotherheat treatmentfor 30 min at 45˚C ) or heat treated and then allowed to recover for 12 h at 22˚C ( R ) . Total soluble proteins were extracted in native buffer and fractionated by size - exclusion chromatography . Fractions were collected , and an equal proportion of each fraction was analyzed by immunoblotting . Elution standards from the column are indicated in kD . Asterisks indicate the locations of the sHSP - Strep bands . Plant Physiol . Vol . 172 , 2016 1225 In Vivo Role of Class I and II sHSPs www . plantphysiol . org on July 22 , 2017 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2016 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved . appears from both the size - exclusion analysis and af - ﬁ nity puri ﬁ cation experiments that CI sHSPs are more tightly associated with translation factors and other proteins during heat stress . To verify some of the observed associations and to further study the behavior of sHSP - associated proteins during heat stress , we chose to focus on translation factor eEF1B subunits . Each of the two homologs of the three eEF1B subunits ( a 1 and a 2 , b 1 and b 2 , and g 1 and g 2 ) were expressed as recombinant proteins and used to raise polyclonal antibodies . Antibodies raised against the eEF1B a - , b - , or g - subunits recognized both isoforms . ImmunoblotanalysisusingeEF1B a - , b - , and g - antibodies was conducted on af ﬁ nity isolates from wild - type and CI or CII sHSP - Strep plants ( Fig . 3D ) . As expected , no sHSPs or eEF1B subunits were detected in the wild - type samples ( lanes 1 and 5 ) . Isolates from control plants constitutively expressing either CI or CII sHSPs contain only the corresponding sHSP - Strep protein ( lanes 2 and 6 ) . In contrast , after heat stress , the CI sHSP - Strep iso - late contains all three eEF1B subunits , along with the endogenous CI sHSPs , which could be associated either through heterooligomerization or indirectly through binding to interacting proteins ( lane 3 ) . Coisolation of a small amount of CII sHSPs also is observed , although CI and CII proteins are not known to heterooligomerize ( Basha et al . , 2010 ) . Notably , interaction with the eEF1B subunits , but not the sHSPs , is decreased signi ﬁ cantly after recovery from heat stress ( Fig . 3D , lane 4 ) , con - sistent with the shift of the sHSPs out of a high - M r form Figure 3 . CI and CII sHSPs bind to putative substrates speciﬁcally during heat stress . CI and CII sHSP - Strep constructs , either under the control of PCaMV35S ( P35S : 17 . 4 - S and P35S : 17 . 6 - S , respectively ) or their heat - induced , native promoter ( P17 . 4 : 17 . 4 - S and P17 . 6 : 17 . 6 - S , respectively ) , were transformed into Arabidopsis . A , Many proteins copuriﬁed with the sHSPs in a heat - dependent fashion . Total soluble protein extracts were obtained from 14 - d - old seedlings that were kept at 22˚C ( control [ C ] ) or heat treated for 2 h at 38˚C , recovered for 2 h , and then exposed to 45˚C for 30 min ( H ) . Extracts were subjected to Strep - Tactin afﬁnity isolation , elutedwith SDS sample buffer , separated by SDS - PAGE , and stainedwith silver . The asterisks indicate the sHSP - Strep protein that was used for the afﬁnity puriﬁcation . B , 2D - PAGE of CI sHSP - interacting proteins corresponding to samples in lanes 5 ( control ) and 4 ( heat stressed ) in A , visualized by silver staining . Proteins enriched in the heat - stressed sample were excised , and their identities were determined using mass spectrometry ( Supplemental Fig . S4 ; Supplemental Tables S1 and S2 ) . C , CII sHSPs interact with a partially overlapping set of proteins compared with CI sHSPs . 2D SDS - PAGE shows CII sHSP - interacting proteinscorresponding tosamplesinlanes10 ( control ) and 9 ( heatstressed ) inA , visualizedbysilverstaining . Proteins enriched in the heat - stressed sample were excised , and their identities were determined using mass spectrometry ( Supplemental Fig . S4 ; Supplemental Tables S1 and S2 ) . D , A subset of identiﬁed , sHSP - interacting proteins primarily bind CI sHSPs speciﬁcally during heat stress . Polyclonal antibodies were raised against each of the subunits of eEF1B ( a , b , and g ) that were identiﬁed as interacting with the sHSPs . Immunoblot analysis was conducted on the eluates of afﬁnity - isolated proteins from wild - type ( WT ) , PCaMV35S : HSP17 . 4 or PCaMV35S : 17 . 6 - Strep , and PHSP17 . 4 : HSP17 . 4 or PHSP17 . 6 : 17 . 6 - Strep plants that were maintained at 22˚C ( C ) , acclimated and heat stressed as above ( H ) , or allowed to recover for 3 h after heat stress ( R ) . Immunoblots were pro - cessed with the antibodies indicated . 1226 Plant Physiol . Vol . 172 , 2016 McLoughlin et al . www . plantphysiol . org on July 22 , 2017 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2016 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved . back to the native approximately 200 - kD oligomeric state ( Fig . 2A ) . All three eEF1B subunits also were de - tectable in Strep - tagged CII sHSP isolates ( lane 7 ) and decreased during recovery ( lane 8 ) , but the interaction was not nearly as strong as that observed for CI sHSPs , as expected . Similar to the CI , the CII sHSP - Strep also pulled down the endogenous CII sHSPs expressed during heat stress ( lanes 7 and 8 ) . CII sHSP interaction with the eEF1B subunits was reduced after heat stress recovery ( lane 8 ) . As noted above , increased association of these proteins with the sHSPs during heat stress is not due to an increase in the level of eEF1B subunits ; none of these proteins accumulates to higher levels during heat stress ( Supplemental Fig . S1 , A and B ) . These data con - ﬁ rm the identi ﬁ cation of the eEF1B subunits as proteins that interact directly or indirectly with the sHSPs during heat stress . CI and CII sHSPs Are Important for the Resolubilization of eEF1B Subunits during Recovery from Heat Stress To obtain additional evidence that sHSP interaction with eEF1B subunits is signi ﬁ cant in vivo , the solubility of eEF1B subunits during heat stress and recovery was examined in wild - type and sHSP CI and CII RNAi plants . Because sHSPs are proposed to prevent the heat - induced , irreversible aggregation of proteins , we hy - pothesized that sHSP substrates should become at least partially insoluble during heat stress and that more substrate would be found in the insoluble fraction after heat stress or during recovery in the RNAi lines com - pared with the wild type . To test this hypothesis , the insoluble cell fraction of wild - type and CI and CII sHSP RNAi seedlings was tested for the accumulation of sHSPs , eEF1B subunits , HSP70 , and two control proteins , S - nitrosoglutathione reductase ( At5g43940 ; GSNOR ) and cytosolic glyc - eraldehyde 3 - phosphate dehydrogenase ( At3g04120 ; GAPDH ; Fig . 4 ) . Soluble , insoluble , and total protein fractions were analyzed by immunoblotting , and the percentage of insoluble protein was estimated directly after acclimation , following a subsequent severe heat stress , or after 5 h of recovery from the severe stress treatment ( Fig . 4 ; Supplemental Fig . S1A ) . None of the proteins tested was signi ﬁ cantly insoluble after accli - mation . Directly after heat stress , approximately 60 % and somewhat less than 70 % of the total CI sHSPs ac - cumulated in the insoluble fraction in wild - type and CII sHSP RNAi plants , respectively . As expected , the increase in the insoluble fraction coincides with a reduction in the soluble fraction . After recovery , ap - proximately 55 % of the CI sHSPs remained insoluble in the CII RNAi line , compared with only an estimated 34 % in the wild type . CII sHSPs remained largely sol - uble during heat stress , although more CII sHSPs were insoluble in the CI sHSP RNAi line ( approximately 12 % ) after recovery in comparison with the wild type ( approximately 6 % ) . Thus , both sHSP classes hyper - accumulate in the insoluble fraction when the other class is knocked down , although CII sHSPs do not be - come insoluble to a similar extent as CI sHSPs . The insolubility of sHSPs under these conditions in vivo is consistent with interaction with other thermally labile proteins , as sHSPs alone do not become insoluble in vitro after similar temperature treatments ( Lee et al . , 1997 ; Basha et al . , 2010 ) . Considering potential sHSP - interacting proteins , a proportion of all eEF1B subunits became insoluble during heat stress , suggesting that these proteins are thermally labile or associated with other thermally la - bile components . The percentage of insoluble eEF1B subunits after this treatment varied between 20 % and 60 % for the different subunits , and the amount of in - soluble protein was slightly higher in both the CI and CII sHSP RNAi plants compared with the wild type ( Fig . 4 ) . Following recovery , a much larger percentage of the eEF1B subunits remained insoluble in both the CI and CII sHSP RNAi lines compared with the wild type , with both RNAi lines showing a similar level of insol - uble protein . Depending on the fraction that remains soluble during heat stress , it can be hard to discern subtle differences in the amount of protein returning to the soluble fraction during recovery , but there was a higher amount of most eEF1B subunits in the soluble fraction after heat stress recovery . We also examined the solubility of cytosolic HSP70 , because HSP70 is re - quired to refold proteins bound to sHSPs ( Lee and Vierling , 2000 ) and was associated with the CI sHSPs . A greater proportion of cytosolic HSP70 remained insol - uble in both CI and CII sHSP RNAi lines compared with the wild type after heat stress recovery , which was most clear in the CI sHSP RNAi line . The solubility of other proteins also was tested to determine if the sHSP dependence of resolubilization speci ﬁ cally occurs with eEF1B subunits or if it is due to general disaggregation activity in the cell . One protein that becomes insoluble during heat stress but was not identi ﬁ ed to interact with either class of sHSPs is GSNOR . No difference in solu - bility during heat stress and recovery in either sHSP RNAi line compared with the wild type was observed . This indicates that knocking down either sHSP class does not simply change the cellular environment but speci ﬁ cally impacts a subset of proteins . Furthermore , although GAPDH was detected in the CII sHSP af ﬁ nity puri ﬁ cation , its solubility was not affected by heat stress , indicating that proteins do not randomly become trapped in protein aggregates . The Solubility of sHSP - Associated Proteins Requires HSP101 We have shown previously that sHSPs remain in - soluble following heat stress in HSP101 mutants ( Lee et al . , 2005 ) , and in vitro , the E . coli HSP101 homolog , ClpB , works together with the prokaryotic HSP70 sys - tem to disaggregate and refold sHSP - bound substrates ( Mogk et al . , 2003 ) . To test further the possibility that the sHSP - interacting proteins could be sHSP substrates , Plant Physiol . Vol . 172 , 2016 1227 In Vivo Role of Class I and II sHSPs www . plantphysiol . org on July 22 , 2017 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2016 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved . we examined whether their solubility would be affected in the absence of the HSP101 disaggregase . The solu - bility of the sHSPs , eEF1B subunits , and a number of control proteins ( chloroplast - targeted HSP21 , GSNOR , and GAPDH ) was tested in the wild type , the hsp101 null mutant , and the hsp101 mutant complemented with HSP101 translationally fused to GFP ( Fig . 5 ) . The HSP101 - GFP fusion protein fully complements the hsp101 phenotype ( Supplemental Fig . S5A ) and migrates at the expected size by SDS - PAGE ( Supplemen - tal Fig . S5B ) . Seedlings were unheated , acclimated , heat stressed at 45°C for 1 h ( a severe but nonlethal stress for the hsp101 mutant ; Supplemental Fig . S1C ) , or allowed to recover at room temperature for 5 h after heat stress , as for Figure 4 ( Fig . 5 ) . Levels of HSP101 and all sHSPs were very low in control conditions and were induced but remained soluble during acclima - tion . Although HSP70 is expressed in control condi - tions , HSP70 levels increased approximately 45 % after acclimation . No signi ﬁ cant effect of heat treatments on the total amount of protein accumulated was observed for eEF1B subunits , GSNOR , or GAPDH ( Supplemental Fig . S1 , A and B ) . HSP101 remained soluble during all treatments , indicating that HSP101 is not thermally labile and does not stably interact with sHSPs or sHSP - interacting proteins . A proportion of HSP70 became in - soluble during heat stress , similar to the observation in Figure 4 and consistent with detection in CI af ﬁ nity isolates , and remained insoluble in the hsp101 mutant after heat stress recovery . Both during heat stress and after recovery , more CI and CII sHSPs accumulated in the insoluble fraction in the hsp101 mutant , as expected from previous experiments ( Lee et al . , 2005 ) . In addition , a much larger amount of eEF1B subunits remained in the insoluble protein fraction during recovery in the hsp101 mutant , consistent with the conclusion that these pro - teins are heat labile and require sHSP cooperation with HSP101 for solubility . To determine if the retention of proteins in the in - soluble fraction in the hsp101 plants is due to a general inability of the mutant to cope with heat stress , rather than a speci ﬁ c effect on these sHSP - interacting proteins , we also examined the solubility of GSNOR , which be - comes insoluble during heat stress ( Fig . 4 ) , and of HSP21 , which is located exclusively in plastids ( Chen and Vierling , 1991 ) . A little under half of the HSP21 Figure 4 . Reduction of CI , and to a lesser ex - tent CII , sHSPs leads to increased retention of speciﬁc proteins in the insoluble cell fraction after heat stress . The solubility of several sHSP - interacting proteins was determined during acclimation ( A ) , heat stress ( H ) , and recovery ( R ) . A , The soluble and insoluble protein frac - tions were isolated from 14 - d - old wild - type ( WT ) plants and CI and CII sHSP RNAi lines . Samples were loaded using an equivalent percentage of the fractions and separated using SDS - PAGE . Immunoblot analysis was con - ducted using the antibodiesindicated . Loading controls were stained using Coomassie Bril - liant Blue ( Soluble ) or silver ( Insoluble ) . B , The percentage of insoluble protein was deter - mined for each protein by quantifying the soluble and insoluble protein fractions . The data were repeated in three biological repli - cates . Immunoblots for the total protein frac - tion are shown in Supplemental Figure S1A , and the values for an independent biological replicate are shown in Supplemental Table S4 . 1228 Plant Physiol . Vol . 172 , 2016 McLoughlin et al . www . plantphysiol . org on July 22 , 2017 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2016 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved . became insoluble during heat stress , which was re - duced to approximately 25 % after 5 h of recovery from heat stress . Notably , the absence of HSP101 had no ef - fect on the abundance of GSNOR or HSP21 in the in - soluble fraction during heat stress or recovery . Altogether , the data support the conclusion that HSP101 is specif - ically important for the disaggregation of cytosolic sHSPs and their interacting proteins . CI and CII sHSPs Are Recruited to Distinct Cytosolic Foci during Acclimation To address further the extent to which HSP101 and CI and CII sHSPs interact with eEF1B subunits in vivo , the localization of these proteins was examined . Im - munolocalization experiments were conducted using CI and CII sHSP and eEF1B b and eEF1B g polyclonal antibodies to determine where in the cell and to what extent colocalization occurs and to determine if the CI and CII sHSPs behave similarly during heat stress . We focused on the behavior of proteins during the heat acclimation treatment , as we were not able to obtain consistent immunolocalization data with severely heat - stressed tissues ( Fig . 6 ) . To observe HSP101 , we took advantage of the HSP101 - GFP line used in Figure 5 . Imaging was performed in roots to more readily study intracellular protein localization ; roots of sHSP RNAi lines exhibit a reduced growth phenotype after heat stress ( Supplemental Fig . S2E ) . Both CI sHSPs and HSP101 - GFP were detected in punctate structures after acclimation ( Fig . 6A , white arrowheads ) , and all HSP101 - GFP structures colocalized with CI sHSP structures . However , in addition , CI sHSPs also accu - mulated in smaller punctate structures that did not colocalize with HSP101 - GFP ( blue arrowheads ) . HSP101 - GFP also colocalized with CII sHSPs ( Fig . 6B , white arrowheads ) , but there were more , smaller punctate structures containing CII sHSPs that did not colocalize with HSP101 - GFP ( blue arrowheads ) . This indicates that CI and CII show related localization patterns , but there is more overlap between CI sHSPs and HSP101 - GFP - containing structures . Unheated control plants , which do not express detectable sHSPs or HSP101 , were used to verify the antibody speci ﬁ city ( Fig . 6 , F and G ) and did not show any signal in the red Figure 5 . CI sHSP - interacting proteins remain insoluble during recovery from heat stress in an hsp101 null mutant . The wild type ( WT ) , the hsp101 null mutant ( ko ) , and the hsp101 mutant complemented with HSP101 - GFP ( G ) were heat stressed , and the total , soluble , and insoluble protein fractions were isolated . A , Samples were loaded using an equivalent percentage of the soluble and insoluble frac - tions and separated using SDS - PAGE . Immu - noblot analysis was conducted using the antibodies indicated . Loading controls were stained using Coomassie Brilliant Blue ( Solu - ble ) or silver ( Insoluble ) . B , The percentage of insoluble protein was determined for each protein by quantifying the soluble and insol - uble protein fractions . The data were repeated in four biological replicates . Immunoblots for the total protein fraction are shown in Supplemental Figure S1A , and the values for anindependent biologicalreplicateareshown in Supplemental Table S4 . Plant Physiol . Vol . 172 , 2016 1229 In Vivo Role of Class I and II sHSPs www . plantphysiol . org on July 22 , 2017 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2016 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved . or green channel with the microscope settings used . HSP101 - GFP also formed analogous punctate struc - tures during heat acclimation in live tissue , which was not observed for free yellow ﬂ uorescent protein ( YFP ; Supplemental Fig . S5C ) , supporting the physiological signi ﬁ cance of the structures observed by immunolo - calization . We then examined the localization of the sHSP - interacting proteins eEF1B b and eEF1B g compared with the localization of GSNOR , which shows no sHSP interaction . Both eEF1B b and eEF1B g colocalize in punctate structures with HSP101 - GFP ( Fig . 6 , C and D , white arrowheads ) , and no additional punctate struc - tures were observed that did not colocalize with HSP101 - GFP , indicating that CI and CII punctate structures that are not colocalized with HSP101 ( Fig . 6 , A and B , blue arrowheads ) are not associated with eEF1B subunits . The speci ﬁ city of the eEF1B antibodies was veri ﬁ ed using T - DNA insertion lines for both ho - mologs of eEF1B b and eEF1B g ( Supplemental Fig . S6A ) . The eef1b g 1 and eef1b b 2 plants showed a clear reduction in antibody reactivity on immunoblots ( Supplemental Fig . S6B ) , and both the b and g mutants showed reductions in ﬂ uorescence signal with the cor - responding antibodies ( Fig . 6 , H and I ) , indicating that the immune reactivity seen in wild - type plants repre - sents the eEF1B subunits . As an additional control , immunolocalization of GSNOR also was performed ; GSNOR becomes insoluble during heat stress , but the solubility is not dependent on either sHSPs or HSP101 . GSNOR did appear in some condensed areas ( orange arrowheads ) but did not colocalize with HSP101 - GFP Figure6 . CIandCIIsHSPsand eEF1B b - and g - subunitscolocalizewithHSP101 - GFP . ArabidopsisrootsexpressingHSP101 - GFP were heat acclimated ( 90 min , 38˚C plus 2 h , 21˚C ) , ﬁxed , and processed for immunolocalization using the indicated polyclonal antibodies . HSP101 - GFP was localized based on GFP ﬂuorescence , and all other proteins were detected using secondary an - tibodiescoupledtoAlexa594 . A , CIsHSPslocalizetosmallbrightcytosolicfoci ( bluearrowheads ) andtolargeraggregates ( white arrowheads ) that colocalize with HSP101 - GFP . B , CII sHSP localization was similar to CI sHSPs , but there are a larger number of small bright cytosolic foci with CII sHSPs ( blue arrowheads ) . C and D , eEF1B g and eEF1B b show partial colocalization with HSP101 - GFP - containing aggregates . E , GSNOR is more uniformly distributed in the cell and did not colocalize with HSP101 - GFP - containing aggregates ( orange arrowheads ) . F and G , Plants kept in control conditions were treated similarly to those in A and B and did not show any detectable signal in the red and green channels , verifying the speciﬁcity of the signal . H and I , The eEF1B g 2 and eEF1B b 1 T - DNA insertion lines displayed a reduced signal with the corresponding antibodies . J , The gsnor mutant did not show any detectable signal when using the GSNOR antibody , verifying the speciﬁcity of the signal . 1230 Plant Physiol . Vol . 172 , 2016 McLoughlin et al . www . plantphysiol . org on July 22 , 2017 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2016 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved . ( Fig . 6E ) . A gsnor protein null mutant ( Lee et al . , 2008 ) was used to verify the speci ﬁ city of the GSNOR im - mune signal ( Fig . 6J ) . DISCUSSION Although sHSPs are ubiquitous stress proteins that are well documented to prevent the irreversible ag - gregation of model , heat - sensitive proteins in vitro ( Basha et al . , 2012 ; Haslbeck and Vierling , 2015 ) , the in vivo activities of sHSPs are far from clear . This is especially true in land plants , which express multiple classes of sHSPs that are targeted to different cellular compartments and that often constitute several iso - forms . Using RNAi , it was possible here to examine the effects of dramatically reducing the heat - induced ac - cumulation of either CI or CII cytosolic sHSPs in stable transgenic lines of Arabidopsis . Reduction of CI sHSPs did not impact the level of CII sHSPs and vice versa , and the HSP70 and HSP101 chaperones also accumu - lated to wild - type levels in the RNAi lines . However , the severe reduction of either the CI or CII sHSPs was suf ﬁ cient to compromise the ability of dark - grown seedlings to green after direct heat stress and for soil - grown plants to recover from extended heat treatment after acclimation . The phenotype of the CII RNAi plants was generally more severe , which we suggest is due to the more effective reduction of CII proteins , rather than to any difference in the relative requirement of the different sHSPs for survival . Thus , these two classes of sHSPs clearly perform nonredundant functions , as predicted from their evolutionary history . A previous report indicating that complete loss of only a single CI sHSP reduces the heat tolerance of hypocotyl elonga - tion suggests that there could even be speci ﬁ c require - ments for individual CI paralogs ( Dafny - Yelin et al . , 2008 ) . However , this requires further investigation . Despite the apparent requirement of both CI and CII HSPs for optimal heat tolerance , as demonstrated by the RNAi experiments , constitutive expression of either class alone enhanced the greening of dark - grown seedlings after direct heat stress ( basal thermotol - erance ) , consistent with previous reports using dif - ferent assays to test the heat stress tolerance of plants constitutively expressing CI or CII sHSPs ( Sun et al . , 2012 ; Zhou et al . , 2012 ; Wang et al . , 2015 ) . We also ob - served that , even though endogenous sHSPs are highly expressed in heat - acclimated plants , the individual sHSP OE lines had a still higher survival rate than the wild type after heat stress following acclimation . These results , along with the RNAi data , indicate that both sHSP classes have a dose - dependent effect on heat stress tolerance and protective functions independent of each other . We note that relatively severe heat treatments were required to observe signi ﬁ cant , immediate differences in the growth phenotypes of plants with reduced or in - creased sHSP expression . It remains untested whether treatments at more moderate high temperatures , which also induce sHSPs ( e . g . 30°C or higher ; Derocher et al . , 1991 ) , would have more subtle effects on the growth and reproduction of plants with these altered levels of sHSPs . However , regulated combinatorial enhancement of sHSP and HSP101 expression in speci ﬁ c target tissues could be a valuable strategy for enhancing plant heat tolerance , given the increase in incidents of severe high temperature ( Lesk et al . , 2016 ) . Both CI and CII sHSPs exhibit what is now consid - ered to be classical chaperone activity when recombi - nant sHSPs are assayed in vitro ; they capture denaturing , heat - sensitive proteins in large sHSP - substrate complexes that remain soluble , preventing the formation of large insoluble substrate aggregates , which presumably would be detrimental if formed in cells ( Basha et al . , 2012 ) . However , to date , in vitro assays have failed to distinguish any class - speci ﬁ c dif - ferences in substrate protection , although recombinant CI and CII sHSPs exhibit distinct biochemical proper - ties , will not form heterooligomers ( Basha et al . , 2010 ) , and , as shown here , it is clear they have nonredundant roles in vivo . Tripp et al . ( 2009 ) reported that the ex - pression of CI sHSPs , but not CII sHSPs , could enhance the protection of introduced ﬁ re ﬂ y luciferase during heat stress of tomato ( Solanum lycopersicum ) proto - plasts , suggesting that CII sHSPs might have an entirely different function from chaperone activity . It should be noted , however , that CII sHSPs from different species interact with and protect luciferase in vitro ( Basha et al . , 2010 ) . Altogether , it is clear that in vitro or in vivo assays with heterologous , heat - sensitive proteins do not capture essential aspects of sHSP function . To probe the in vivo function of CI and CII sHSPs , we identi ﬁ ed proteins associated with either class speci ﬁ - cally during heat stress . Size fractionation of plant cell extracts demonstrated that CI and CII sHSPs elute at an increased size after severe heat stress , consistent with heat - dependent interaction and the protection of other cellular components . Interestingly , the CII proteins also appeared in fractions smaller than their expected dodecameric size after heat stress , a behavior not ob - served for CI sHSPs in the same extracts , and the CII af ﬁ nity puri ﬁ cations recovered fewer proteins . While the signi ﬁ cance of this differential behavior is unclear , it further distinguishes proteins of the two sHSP classes . A striking result from af ﬁ nity puri ﬁ cation of both sHSPs from these extracts was the recovery of proteins involved directly in translation , including initiation factor eIF4A , an RNA helicase ( three isoforms ) , and the three subunits ( a , b , and g ) of elongation factor eEF1B , which is the GDP - exchange factor for eEF1A ( Janssen and Möller , 1988 ) . We validated the signi ﬁ cance of sHSP interaction with eEF1B subunits in vivo in four distinct ways . First , using subunit - speci ﬁ c antibodies to probe af ﬁ nity isolates , the interactions were con ﬁ rmed to occur after heat stress and to decline during recovery , with greater interaction with CI than with CII sHSPs . Second , compared with the wild type , more of the eEF1B subunits remained in the insoluble fraction during heat stress recovery in the RNAi lines , consistent Plant Physiol . Vol . 172 , 2016 1231 In Vivo Role of Class I and II sHSPs www . plantphysiol . org on July 22 , 2017 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2016 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved . with a requirement of the sHSPs for the optimal solu - bility of these proteins . Third , the eEF1B subunits also were retained in the insoluble fraction during heat stress recovery in an HSP101 mutant , supporting the idea that these proteins are in an aggregated state that must be resolved by the HSP101 disaggregase , which is known to cooperate with sHSPs ( Cashikar et al . , 2005 ; Haslbeck et al . , 2005 ) . Finally , immunocytochemistry colocalized the eEF1B b - and g - subunits with both the CI and CII sHSPs and with HSP101 in cytosolic foci after heat stress . Thus , there is a direct or indirect functional interaction of CI and CII sHSPs with eEF1B . Interestingly , it was reported recently that eEF1B g becomes insoluble during heat stress in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and mammalian cells ( Grousl et al . , 2013 ; Cherkasov et al . , 2015 ; Wallace et al . , 2015 ) , and we found previously that EF - Ts , the prokaryotic nucleotide - exchange factor for elongation factor EF - Tu , was recovered in af ﬁ nity isolates with HSP16 . 6 from the cyanobacte - rium Synechocystis sp . 6803 ( Basha et al . , 2004a ) . Thus , the sensitivity of this translation component to stress ( or involvement in translational regulation during stress ) , along with its association with sHSPs , may extend from prokaryotes to eukaryotes . In addition , in yeast and mammalian cells , eEF1B g colocalized with the stress granule marker PolyA - Binding Protein1 ( Cherkasov et al . , 2015 ; Wallace et al . , 2015 ) . Stress granules are a type of cytoplasmic mRNP that forms when translation initiation is impaired by a wide variety of different stress conditions , but their exact composition can vary depending on the stress ( Buchan et al . , 2011 ) . They har - bor nontranslating mRNAs and are distinct from P - bodies , other cytosolic mRNPs where mRNA degra - dation occurs ( for review , see Franks and Lykke - Andersen , 2008 ) . sHSPs in plants have long been known to be associated with heat stress - induced cyto - plasmic structures termed heat stress granules by Nover et al . ( 1989 ) . Plant heat stress granules have been pro - posed to be distinct from both stress granules and P - bodies ( Weber et al . , 2008 ) . However , it is signi ﬁ cant that , in addition to eEF1B and eIF4A , other proteins re - covered in association with CI sHSPs were identi ﬁ ed recently as components of yeast and / or human stress granules ( Rinnerthaler et al . , 2013 ; Cherkasov et al . , 2015 ; Wallace et al . , 2015 ; Walters et al . , 2015 ; Jain et al . , 2016 ) , including eIF5A , a translationally controlled tumor protein ( also recovered with CII sHSPs ) that is putatively an important component of the target of rapamycin signaling pathway ( Berkowitz et al . , 2008 ) , aminoacyl tRNA synthetase complex - interacting multifunctional protein1 , and Obg - like ATPase1 ( all proteins involved in translation ) , the chaperones HSP70 , peptidyl prolyl isomerases , and CDC48 , as well as pro ﬁ lin2 and S - adenosyl - Met synthase ( Supplemental Table S3 ) . We question the nature of the distinction between heat stress granules and stress granules and conclude that it is very likely that at least some of the sHSP - containing struc - tures we observed include mRNA . Indeed , work in yeast and Drosophila spp . has concluded that chaperones are associated with stress granules and are necessary for the resumption of translation after severe heat stress ( Cherkasov et al . , 2013 ) . While our experiments point to a clear interaction between sHSPs , speci ﬁ c translation factors , and HSP101 , we also observed distinct cytosolic foci of CI and CII sHSPs that did not colocalize with either the identi ﬁ ed translation factors or HSP101 . The relationship of these structures to the stress granules remains to be determined . CONCLUSION CI and CII sHSPs are both important for tolerance to severe heat stress and interact with a partially over - lapping set of heat - aggregating proteins during heat stress , many of which are known components of mRNA - containing stress granules in yeast and humans . The association of sHSPs with many stress granule proteins , their apparent requirement for the complete solubility of these proteins , along with colocalization in cytosolic foci with HSP101 suggest that these chaperones are involved in processes required for the resumption of normal translation activity following heat stress . While it is tempting to suggest that the proteins found associated with sHSPs represent speci ﬁ c heat - sensitive sHSP sub - strates , further work is required to demonstrate direct interactions and to connect the in vitro chaperone model of sHSP activity with these in vivo data . MATERIALS AND METHODS Plant Growth Conditions and Heat Treatments Seeds for Arabidopsis ( Arabidopsis thaliana ) plants grown on soil were strati ﬁ ed before planting in 0 . 1 % agar at 4°C for 2 to 3 d , or alternatively , strati ﬁ edat4°Cfor3dafterplantingondampsoil . Plantsweregrowningrowth chambers on a 16 / 8 - h day / night cycle at 21°C / 18°C with 80 m mol m 2 2 s 2 1 pho - tons on average with regular watering . Seeds that were sown on plates were surface sterilized in a 1 . 6 - L desiccator using 20 mL of household bleach and 600 m L of 40 % HCl for 3 h . Alternatively , seeds were surface sterilized in 70 % ethanol for 1 min followed by 50 % bleach for 10 min with occasional inversion . Seeds were washed six times with sterile water to remove residual bleach . Seeds were sown on 5 - mm - thick PNS plates [ 5 m M KNO 3 , 2 m M MgSO 4 , 2 m M Ca ( NO 3 ) , 50 m M FeEDTA , 2 . 5 m M KPO 4 ( pH 5 . 5 ) , 70 m LofH 3 BO 3 , 14 m M MnCl 2 , 0 . 5 m M CuSO 4 , 1 m M ZnSO 4 , 0 . 2 m M Na 2 MoO 4 , 10 m M NaCl , and 0 . 01 m M CoCl 2 ] supplemented with 0 . 8 % agar and 0 . 5 % Suc . All heat stress treatments were conducted in a calibrated hot air incubatorin thedarkunlessindicatedotherwise . Seedlingsoradultplantswereshieldedfrom incubator air currents to reduce any variability of temperature within the in - cubator . The duration and severity of the heat stress are speci ﬁ ed for each ex - periment . Theinternaltemperatureofplatesthatweretransferredfromto21°Cto 45°C typically ramped up to 40°C after 10 min , reached an internal temperature of 44°C after 17 min , and stabilized at 45°C after 22 min . SDS - PAGE and Immunoblot Analysis Protein samples for immunoblot analysis of denatured proteins were pre - pared by grinding tissue directly in 1 3 SDS sample buffer ( 2 % [ w / v ] SDS , 12 % [ v / v ] glycerol , 5 % [ v / v ] b - mercaptoethanol , 62 . 5 m M Tris , pH 6 . 8 , and 0 . 0025 % [ w / v ] Bromophenol Blue ) in a 5 : 1 ( v / w ) buffer : tissue ratio , and protein con - centrations were determined using a Coomassie Brilliant Blue dye - binding assay ( Ghosh et al . , 1988 ) . Proteins were separated by SDS - PAGE on 7 . 5 % to 15 % ( w / v ) polyacrylamide gels . For immunoblot analysis , proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose ( Bio - Rad ) and processed for either ﬂ uorescent or chemiluminescent detection . Primary antibodies were all raised in rabbits and 1232 Plant Physiol . Vol . 172 , 2016 McLoughlin et al . www . plantphysiol . org on July 22 , 2017 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2016 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved . are available at Agrisera unless stated otherwise . Antibody dilutions and Agrisera order numbers were as follows : CI sHSPs ( 1 : 3 , 000 ; AS07 254 ) ; CII sHSPs ( 1 : 3 , 000 ; AS07 255 ) , eEF1B a ( 1 : 3 , 000 ; AS10 679 ) , eEF1B b ( 1 : 3 , 000 ; AS10 677 ) , eEF1B g ( 1 : 3 , 000 ; AS10 676 ) , HSP70 ( 1 : 5 , 000 ; AS08 371 ) , GSNOR ( 1 : 1 , 000 ; AS09 647 ) , GAPC ( Dr . Ming - Che Shih , University of Iowa ; 1 : 5 , 000 ) , N - ter HSP101 ( 1 : 5 , 000 ; AS07 253 ) , C - ter HSP101 ( 1 : 1 , 000 ; AS08 287 ) , and HSP21 ( 1 : 1 , 000 ; AS08 285 ) . Blots prepared for ﬂ uorescent detection were incubated with IRDye 700CW donkey a - rabbit antibody ( 1 : 20 , 000 ) and detected using a Li - Cor Odyssey CLx . For chemiluminescent detection , blots were incubated with ECL donkey a - rabbit IgG ( 1 : 10 , 000 ; GE Healthcare ) , visualized using Pierce ECL immunoblot substrate , and detected using a G : Box ( Syngene ) . Root Growth and Hypocotyl Elongation Assay Seedlings were grown on PNS plates in illuminated or dark conditions for the root growth or hypocotyl elongation assay , respectively . For the root growth assay , seeds were strati ﬁ ed for 1 to 3 d on the plates and placed at an angle approximately 15° from vertical in the growth chamber on a 16 / 8 - h day / night cycle at 21°C / 18°C with 80 m mol m 2 2 s 2 1 photons on average . After 4 d of growth , heat treatments were applied as described , and the location of the root tip was marked . Plates were returned to the growth chamber , and further root growth was measured after 9 d . For the hypocotyl elongation assays , plates were wrapped in aluminum foil and seeds were strati ﬁ ed at 4°C for 3 d before being placed vertically in a dark cabinet at room temperature . After 2 . 5 d of growth , the location of the hypocotyl tip was marked by brie ﬂ y removing the foil , and then heat treatments were applied as described . After an additional 2 . 5 d of growth , plates were photographed , and hypocotyl elongation after the treatment was measured using ImageJ ( http : / / imagej . nih . gov / ij / ) . Construction of Plant Transformation Vectors CI and CII sHSP - Strep and OE Lines Plant transformation vectors were created to express the Arabidopsis CI HSP17 . 4 ( At3g46230 ) with a C - terminal af ﬁ nity tag driven by either its native promoteroraCaMV35Spromoter , alongwithavectortoconstitutivelyexpress the native , untagged protein . A clone containing the promoter ( 720 bp ) , the 5 9 untranslated region ( UTR ) , the genomic coding sequence , and the 3 9 UTR ( 249 bp ) of CI HSP17 . 4 was kindly provided by Dr . Y . Komeda ( Takahashi and Komeda , 1989 ) . A StrepII tag ( Trp - Ser - His - Pro - Gln - Phe - Glu - Lys ) was added C terminallyofthecodingregionusingaround - the - worldPCRwithprimers1and 2 ( Supplemental Table S4 ) , resulting in PHSP17 . 4 : HSP17 . 4 - Strep : 3 9 UTR , which was digested using Xba I and Sal I and ligated into the pBin19 binary vector ( kanamycin [ Kan ] resistant ) also digested with Xba I and Sal I . PCaMV35S : HSP17 . 4 - Strep was created by amplifying the coding region and the Strep tag from the above construct , using primers 3 and 4 , and ligating into the PRT plasmid ( Amp resistant ; Töpfer et al . , 1987 ) containing a CaMV 35S promoter with Eco RI and Xba I . The PCaMV : HSP17 . 4 - Strep : 3 9 UTR fragment was moved into theBin19 binary vector ( Kan resistant ) using Kpa I and Sac I sites . To express HSP17 . 4constitutivelywithoutaStreptag , PCaMV : HSP17 . 4 : 3 9 UTRwascreated by inserting the coding region of the HSP17 . 4 cDNA into the PRT vector using Eco RI and Xba I sites and further processing as explained for the PCaMV : HSP17 . 4 - Strep : 3 9 UTRcloning . ThesamesetofplasmidsalsowascreatedforCII HSP17 . 6II ( AT5G12020 ) . The promoter ( 1 , 382 bp ) , 5 9 UTR , genomic sequence , and 3 9 UTR ( 464 bp ) of HSP17 . 6II were ampli ﬁ ed from genomic DNA using primers5and6andclonedintothepBSKSvector ( Ampresistant ; Stratagene ) in the Sma I position . The Strep tag was added C terminally using around - the - world PCR using primers 7 and 9 and was inserted into Hin dIII and Bam HI sitesinBin19 ( Kanresistant ) . TheconstructcontainingPCaMV35S : HSP17 . 6was kindly provided by Marc Kirschner ( Forreiter et al . , 1997 ) . The insert including theterminator wasdigestedusing Hin dIIIandligatedinthepBin19vector ( Kan resistance ) . The Strep tag was then added using primers 8 and 9 , and PCaMV : HSP17 . 6 - Strep : 3 9 UTR was digested using Hin dIII and ligated into pBin19 ( Kan resistant ) . All constructs were veri ﬁ ed by DNA sequencing . CI and CII sHSP Double - Stranded RNA Lines To obtain small interfering RNA lines , vectors to express double - stranded RNAweredesignedforboththeCIandCIIsHSPgenefamilies . Conservedgene regions were selected for CI HSP17 . 4 ( bp 95 – 589 ) and for CII HSP17 . 6II ( bp 63 – 553 ) and ampli ﬁ ed using primers 10 and 11 or 12 and 13 , respectively . The inserts were digested with Asc I and Swa I for insertion in the 5 9 → 3 9 orientation and with Bam HI and Spe I for insertion in the 3 9 → 5 9 orientation and then ligated into the pFGC1008 vector ( ABRC stock no . CD3 - 446 ; Kan resistant ) . HSP101 - GFP Plasmids containing either the promoter region of HSP101 ( At1g74310 ; 734bp ) ortheHSP101codingsequencewereobtainedfromUngLee ( University ofArizona ; HongandVierling , 2000 ) . GFPwasampli ﬁ edfrompMDC83 ( Curtis and Grossniklaus , 2003 ) using primers 14 and 15 to add ﬂ anking Xho I and Xba I restriction sites . The fragment was digested with Xho I and Xba I and inserted C terminally of the HSP101 promoter . The Xho I fragment ﬂ anking the HSP101 coding sequence was excised with Xho I and ligated between the HSP101 pro - moter and GFP , creating PHSP101 : HSP101 ( CDS ) - GFP . This construct was digestedusing Kpn Iand Xba IandligatedintopBIN19 ( Kanresistant ) , infrontof the CaMV 35S poly ( A ) transcription terminator . Generation of Transgenic Plants Vectors were transformed via the Agrobacterium tumefaciens strain GV3103 into wild - type Columbia - 0 for all sHSP constructs or into the HSP101 protein null mutant hot1 - 3 ( Hong and Vierling , 2001 ) in the case of HSP101 - GFP by ﬂ oral dip transformation ( Clough and Bent , 1998 ) . Plants transformed using pBIN19 were selected using 50 m g mL 2 1 Kan , and plants transformed using pFGC1008 were selected using 30 m g mL 2 1 hygromycin . Expression levels of the sHSPs or HSP101 - GFP were con ﬁ rmed by immunoblot analysis using the correspondingantibodies . PCaMV35S : YFPwasobtainedfromtheUniversityof Amsterdam ( van Leeuwen et al . , 2007 ) . Cloning and Expression of eEF1B a 1 , eEF1B b 1 , and eEF1B g 1 The cDNA clones of eEF1B a 1 ( At5g12110 ) , eEF1B b 1 ( At1g30230 ) , and eEF1B g 1 ( At1g57720 ) were obtained from the Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center . The coding regions were ampli ﬁ ed while adding 5 9 and 3 9 ﬂ anking restriction sites : Nde I and Bam HI for eEF1B a 1 ( primers 16 and 17 ) and Nde I and Xho I for eEF1B b 1 and eEF1B g 1 ( primers 18 / 19 and 20 / 21 , respectively ) . The PCR products were digested , ligated into the expression vector pJC20 , and transformed to DH5 a Escherichia coli cells . After sequence con ﬁ rmation , clones were transformed into Rosetta II E . coli cells for protein production . Cells con - taining the plasmids of interest were grown in 2xYT at 24°C to an OD 600 of 1 . 6 ( approximately 36 h ) , at which point 1 m M isopropylthio - b - galactoside was addedtoinduce protein expressionfor 12h . Cellswerespundownat3 , 020 g for 15 min and resuspended in TE buffer ( 25 m M Tris - HCl , 1 m M , EDTA , 5 m M « - caproicacid , and 1 m M benzamidine ) . Cells were lysed using eight 30 - s cycles of sonication followed by 30 - s rest periods on ice . Cell lysates were spun for 15min10 , 000 g , andeEF1B a 1 , eEF1B b 1 , andeEF1B g 1remainedsoluble . Lysates weresubjectedtoammoniumsulfateprecipitation . TheeEF1B a 1 , eEF1B b 1 , and eEF1B g 1 proteins were enriched in the 0 % to 50 % ( w / v ) ammonium sulfate fraction . Fractionscontainingtheproteinsweredialyzedin50m M Tris - HCland 1 m M EDTA , pH 7 . 5 , applied onto an 8 - cm - long 3 1 . 5 - cm - radius DEAE - Sepharose column at 4°C , and eluted using 0 to 1 M NaCl . The protein - enriched fractions were pooled and dialyzed as described before , concentrated , appliedtoanS - 200HRSephacrylsize - exclusioncolumn , andelutedwith25m M NaPO 4 buffer and 100 m M NaCl , pH 7 . 5 . Antibodies against the puri ﬁ ed pro - teins were raised in rabbits by Agrisera . Strep - Tactin Af ﬁ nity Chromatography and 2D Electrophoresis Fifteen - day - old , light - grownseedlingsoftheindicatedgenotypesweregrown onplates and heatstressedfor 30 min at38°C , recoveredfor2 hat22°C , and then exposed to 45°C for 30 min . Seedlings were ground in IP buffer ( 25 m M HEPES , 200 m M NaCl , 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 , 1 m M benzamidine , 5 m M « - aminocaproic acid , and 1 m M EDTA , pH 7 . 5 ) in a 5 : 1 ratio ( buffer volume : tissue weight ) . Samples were centrifuged at 16 , 100 g for 15 min at 4°C , and total soluble protein was quanti ﬁ ed using the Coomassie Brilliant Blue dye - binding assay ( Ghosh et al . , 1988 ) . Atotalof3mgofsolubleproteinwasincubatedfor2hat4°Cwith30 m Lof Strep - Tactin Sepharose ( IBA ; catalog no . 2 - 1201 - 010 ) that had been preequili - brated in IP buffer . Resin was washed with IP buffer as described ( Basha et al . , 2004a ) . ElutionofproteinsfromtheStrep - TactinresinforSDS - PAGEanalysiswas performed by boiling the resin with 60 m L of 1 3 SDS sample buffer . For silver Plant Physiol . Vol . 172 , 2016 1233 In Vivo Role of Class I and II sHSPs www . plantphysiol . org on July 22 , 2017 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2016 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved . staining , 30 m Lperlanewasseparated , while3 m Lwasseparatedforimmunoblot analysis . For2D - PAGEanalysis , thesampleswereelutedwithisoelectricfocusing rehydration buffer , according to the manufacturer ’ s instructions , in 7 M urea , 2 M thiourea , 2 % CHAPS , 2 % IPG focusing buffer pH 3 – 10 NL ( Amersham Biotech ) , and 3 mg mL 2 1 2 1 DTT . The isoelectric focusing dimension separation was per - formed using 3 – 10 NL strips ( 18 cm ; Amersham Biotech ) as described ( Basha etal . , 2004a ) . Therunningconditionswere8hat150V , 5hat500V , 5hat1 , 000V , 5 h at 2 , 500 V , and then 20 h at 3 , 500 V . The SDS - PAGE dimension used 11 % to 17 % ( w / v ) polyacrylamide gradient gels . Gels were silver stained as described ( Rabilloud et al . , 1988 ) . HPLC - Tandem Mass Spectrometry of sHSP - Interacting Proteins Proteins of interest were excised from 2D gels and digested with trypsin , and peptides were prepared for mass spectrometry as described ( Basha et al . , 2004a ) . Peptideextractswereintroducedontoa100 - m mi . d . 3 5 - cmC18columnusingan autosampler and separated with a 25 - min gradient of 2 % to 100 % acetonitrile in 0 . 5 % formic acid . The column eluate was directed into a Thermo Finnigan LCQ Decaiontrapmassspectrometer . Themassrangescannedwas400to1 , 500atomic mass units ( amu ) , and data - dependent scanning was used to select the top - three mostabundantionsinaparentscanfortandemmassspectrometry . Tandemmass spectrometry scans were searched using SEQUEST against a database of Arabi - dopsis sequences from TAIR ( June 2005 version ) . The gene names were updated using the nomenclature annotated by TAIR ( March 2016 version ) . The search allowed for static modi ﬁ cation of Cys ( 57 amu ; iodoacetamidation ) , and differ - ential modi ﬁ cation of Met ( 16 amu ; oxidation ) was considered . X correlation cutoffsof2 . 0for2 + ions , 3 . 0for3 + ions , anddeltaXcorr . 0 . 05wereapplied , and data were sorted using DTASelect ( Tabb et al . , 2002 ) . Immunolocalization Arabidopsis seedlingswere grown vertically on PNS plates in the light for6 d . Seedlings were exposed to 38°C for 90 min , allowed to recover for 2 h at room temperature , and subsequently ﬁ xedusing4 % paraformaldehydeinPBS , pH7 . 2 , for 1 h with gentle shaking . Seedlings were transferred to Superfrost Plus ad - hesive slides ( Fisherbrand ) , rinsed with water , and dried for 1 h at 38°C . A hydrophobicbarrierwascreatedencompassingtherootsusingaSuperPappen ( DaidoSangyo ) . SeedlingswererehydratedinPBS , andcellwallsweredigested using a 2 % Driselase cocktail ( Sigma - Aldrich ) for 45 min at 37°C . Seedlings were washed using PBS and permeabilized with 10 % dimethyl sulfoxide and 3 % Nonidet P - 40 ( Sigma - Aldrich ) for 1 h at room temperature . The seedlings were washed and blocked using 2 % BSA in PBS for 2 h at 37°C . All primary antibodieswerediluted 1 : 400 ( or1 : 200for anti - GSNOR ) in2 % BSA , and 300 m L was put on the slides and incubated overnight at 4°C . The next day , samples with primary antibody were incubated for an additional 1 h at 37°C prior to being washed and incubated in donkey anti - rabbit antibody conjugated to Alexa 594 ( Life Science Technologies ) at a 1 : 600 dilution in 2 % BSA and incu - bated for 3 h at 37°C . 4 9 , 6 - Diamino - phenylindole was used as a nuclear counterstain at a 1 : 1 , 000 dilution in PBS , and following washing , seedlings were covered with Citi ﬂ uor . Images were obtained with a Fluoview 1000MPE , IX81 motorized inverted research microscope ( Olympus ) equipped with a HamamatsuC8484 - 05Gcamera . Allimmunolocalizationimageswereacquired with a Plapon 60 3 oil , numerical aperture 1 . 42 lens . The excitation / emission wavelengths were as follows : 4 9 , 6 - diamino - phenylindole , 405 / 461 nm ; GFP , 473 / 520 nm ; and Alexa 594 , 559 / 618 nm . To visualize HSP101 - GFP , living tissue was imaged by exposing roots to 10 m g mL 2 1 propidium iodide in water before mounting on slides , and images were acquired using a UPLSAPO 60 3 water , numerical aperture 1 . 20 lens . The excitation / emission wavelengths used were as follows : GFP , 473 / 510 nm ; and propidium iodide , 559 / 619 nm . Line Kalman was used as an averaging factor , and the images were processed using FV10 - ASW and ImageJ . Preparation of Soluble and Insoluble Protein Fractions Two - week - oldseedlingsgrownonPNSplateswereeitheruntreated ( control ) orheatstressedasdescribed . Foreachsample , 0 . 7gofplanttissuewasharvested , and a crude protein extract was prepared using 1 mL of protein isolation buffer ( 25 m M HEPES , pH 7 . 5 , 200 m M NaCl , 0 . 5 m M EDTA , 5 m M « - amino - N - caproic acid , and 1 m M benzamidine ) . Crude protein samples were never frozen and were kept on ice whenever possible throughout the procedure . Protein con - centrations were determined using a Coomassie Brilliant Blue dye - binding assay ( Ghosh et al . , 1988 ) . After grinding the sample using a mortar and pes - tle , samples were further homogenized with a Cole - Parmer PTFE glass tissue grinder for 1 min on ice . The crude protein extract was transferred to a microcentrifuge tube , and 500 m L was used for separation into soluble and insoluble fractions , while300 m L was added to 100 m L of 4 3 SDS sample buffer ( 8 % [ w / v ] SDS , 46 % [ v / v ] glycerol , 20 % [ v / v ] b - mercaptoethanol , 250m M Tris , pH 6 . 8 , and 0 . 01 % [ w / v ] Bromophenol Blue ) to monitor total protein content . For fractionation , samples were spun in a tabletop centrifuge at 16 , 100 g for 15 min . The supernatant was removed , and 300 m L was added to 100 m L of 4 3 SDS sample buffer for immunoblot analysis . To facilitate washing of the in - soluble fraction , 0 . 1 g of quartz salt ( Sigma - Aldrich ) was added to the pellet fraction , and samples were washed six times with 1 mL of protein isolation buffer . For each wash , the pellet was resuspended by pipetting and vortexing , and the samples were centrifuged subsequently at 16 , 100 g for 15 min . After the washes , the insoluble fraction was washed once more in 25 m M Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 5 . The pellet fraction was resuspended in 2 3 sample buffer , creating a total volume of 500 m L . Samples were spun for 30 s at 1 , 500 g , and the soluble fraction was transferred to a new microcentrifuge tube . Isolating Homozygous T - DNA Insertion Lines Homozygous lines carrying a T - DNA insertion in the coding region of eEF1B b 1 ( Salk _ 046102 ; primers 22 and 23 ) , eEF1B b 2 ( Salk _ 107994 ; primers 24 and 25 ) , eEF1B g 1 ( Salk _ 047484 ; primers 26 and 27 ) , and eEF1B g 2 ( Salk _ 033274 ; primers 28 and 29 ) were isolated . Primer 30 was used as the borderprimer , andimmunoblot analysiswasconductedtodetermine theeffect of the T - DNA insertion on the expression of the corresponding protein ( Supplemental Fig . S6 ) . Size - Exclusion Chromatography Seedlingsweregrownonplatesfor15dinthelightandthengroundinaCole - Parmer PTFE glass tissue grinder using a 2 . 5 : 1 ( w / v ) tissue : buffer ratio con - taining 25 m M NaPO 4 , 200 m M NaCl , 1 m M benzamidine , 5 m M aminocaproic acid , and1m M EDTA , pH7 . 5 . Sampleswerecentrifugedat16 , 100 g for15minat 4°C . A total of 100 m L of the supernatant ( protein concentration approximately 3 mg mL 2 1 ) was loaded onto a Bio - Rad 250 size - exclusion column and eluted with 25 m M NaPO 4 and 200 m M NaCl , pH 7 . 5 . Elution fractions ( 11 fractions of 0 . 5mL ) werecollected , phenolprecipitatedasdescribed ( Faurobert etal . , 2007 ) , and solubilized in 100 m L of 1 3 SDS sample buffer . Samples ( 20 m L ) were an - alyzed using 11 % to 17 % gradient SDS - PAGE and immunoblot analysis . Accession Numbers Sequence data from this article can be found in the GenBank / EMBL data libraries under the following accession numbers : HSP17 . 4 ( At3g46230 ) , HSP17 . 6II ( At5g12020 ) , HSP101 ( At1g74310 ) , eEF1B a 1 ( At5g12110 ) , eEF1B b 1 ( At1g30230 ) , and eEF1B g 1 ( At1g57720 ) . Supplemental Data The following supplemental materials are available . Supplemental Figure S1 . Abundance of sHSP - interacting proteins remains unaltered during heat stress , and hsp101 mutant seedlings are able to survive the heat stress treatment . Supplemental Figure S2 . CI and CII sHSP RNAi and OE lines develop normally under control conditions and show reduced root growth after heat stress . Supplemental Figure S3 . Overexpression of sHSPs increases heat stress tolerance . Supplemental Figure S4 . sHSP - interacting proteins for which peptide data were obtained by mass spectrometry . Supplemental Figure S5 . PHSP101 : HSP101 - GFP is heat induced , comple - ments the hsp101 null phenotype , and accumulates in cytosolic foci dur - ing heat stress . Supplemental Figure S6 . Location of T - DNA insertions in eEF1B b 1 and eEF1B b 2 , eEF1B g 1 and eEF1B g 2 , and the speci ﬁ city of the EF1B b - and g - antibodies . 1234 Plant Physiol . Vol . 172 , 2016 McLoughlin et al . www . plantphysiol . org on July 22 , 2017 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2016 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved . Supplemental Figure S7 . CI sHSPs accumulate in punctate structures in the CII sHSP RNAi during heat stress acclimation . Supplemental Table S1 . CI sHSP - interacting proteins . Supplemental Table S2 . CII sHSP - interacting proteins . Supplemental Table S3 . CI / CII sHSP - interacting proteins for which the orthologs are present in stress granules in S . cerevisiae and human cells . Supplemental Table S4 . Percentage of insoluble proteins from an indepen - dent experiment . Supplemental Table S5 . Primers . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Dr . Y . Komeda from the University of Tokyo and Marc Kirschner from Goethe University for supplying the vectors harboring CI and CII sHSP coding regions , respectively ; Dr . Joop Vermeer at the University of Amsterdam for the P35S : YFP line ; Dr . M . C . Shih at the University of Iowa for the GAPDH antibody ; and Matthew Grimes for his honor ’ s thesis studies of eEF1B g . Received April 3 , 2016 ; accepted July 25 , 2016 ; published July 29 , 2016 . LITERATURE CITED Ahn YJ , Zimmerman JL ( 2006 ) Introduction of the carrot HSP17 . 7 into potato ( Solanum tuberosum L . ) enhances cellular membrane stability and tuberization in vitro . Plant Cell Environ 29 : 95 – 104 Basha E , Jones C , Wysocki V , Vierling E ( 2010 ) Mechanistic differences between two conserved classes of small heat shock proteins found in the plant cytosol . J Biol Chem 285 : 11489 – 11497 Basha E , Lee GJ , Breci LA , Hausrath AC , Buan NR , Giese KC , Vierling E ( 2004a ) The identity of proteins associated with a small heat shock protein during heat stress in vivo indicates that these chaperones protect a wide range of cellular functions . J Biol Chem 279 : 7566 – 7575 Basha E , Lee GJ , Demeler B , Vierling E ( 2004b ) Chaperone activity of cytosolic small heat shock proteins from wheat . Eur J Biochem 271 : 1426 – 1436 Basha E , O ’ Neill H , Vierling E ( 2012 ) Small heat shock proteins and a - crystallins : dynamic proteins with ﬂ exible functions . Trends Biochem Sci 37 : 106 – 117 Berkowitz O , Jost R , Pollmann S , Masle J ( 2008 ) Characterization of TCTP , the translationally controlled tumor protein , from Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant Cell 20 : 3430 – 3447 Buchan JR , Yoon JH , Parker R ( 2011 ) Stress - speci ﬁ c composition , assembly and kinetics of stress granules in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Cell Sci 124 : 228 – 239 Cashikar AG , Duennwald M , Lindquist SL ( 2005 ) A chaperone pathway in protein disaggregation : Hsp26 alters the nature of protein aggregates to facilitate reactivation by Hsp104 . J Biol Chem 280 : 23869 – 23875 Chen Q , Vierling E ( 1991 ) Analysis of conserved domains identi ﬁ es a unique structural feature of a chloroplast heat shock protein . Mol Gen Genet 228 : 328 Cherkasov V , Grousl T , Theer P , Vainshtein Y , Glässer C , Mongis C , Kramer G , Stoecklin G , Knop M , Mogk A , et al ( 2015 ) Systemic control of protein synthesis through sequestration of translation and ribosome biogenesis factors during severe heat stress . FEBS Lett 589 : 3654 – 3664 Cherkasov V , Hofmann S , Druffel - Augustin S , Mogk A , Tyedmers J , Stoecklin G , Bukau B ( 2013 ) Coordination of translational control and protein homeostasis during severe heat stress . Curr Biol 23 : 2452 – 2462 Clough SJ , Bent AF ( 1998 ) Floral dip : a simpli ﬁ ed method for Agrobacterium - mediated transformation of Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant J 16 : 735 – 743 Curtis MD , Grossniklaus U ( 2003 ) A Gateway cloning vector set for high - throughput functional analysis of genes in planta . Plant Physiol 133 : 462 – 469 Dafny - Yelin M , Tz ﬁ ra T , Vainstein A , Adam Z ( 2008 ) Non - redundant functions of sHSP - CIs in acquired thermotolerance and their role in early seed development in Arabidopsis . Plant Mol Biol 67 : 363 – 373 de Jong WW , Caspers GJ , Leunissen JA ( 1998 ) Genealogy of the alpha - crystallin – small heat - shock protein superfamily . Int J Biol Macromol 22 : 151 – 162 Delbecq SP , Klevit RE ( 2013 ) One size does not ﬁ t all : the oligomeric states of a B crystallin . FEBS Lett 587 : 1073 – 1080 Derocher AE , Helm KW , Lauzon LM , Vierling E ( 1991 ) Expression of a conserved family of cytoplasmic low molecular weight heat shock pro - teins during heat stress and recovery . Plant Physiol 96 : 1038 – 1047 Doyle SM , Genest O , Wickner S ( 2013 ) Protein rescue from aggregates by powerful molecular chaperone machines . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 14 : 617 – 629 Faurobert M , Pelpoir E , Chaïb J ( 2007 ) Phenol extraction of proteins for proteomic studies of recalcitrant plant tissues . Methods Mol Biol 355 : 9 – 14 Forreiter C , Kirschner M , Nover L ( 1997 ) Stable transformation of an Arabidopsis cell suspension culture with ﬁ re ﬂ y luciferase providing a cellular system for analysis of chaperone activity in vivo . Plant Cell 9 : 2171 – 2181 Franks TM , Lykke - Andersen J ( 2008 ) The control of mRNA decapping and P - body formation . Mol Cell 32 : 605 – 615 Friedrich KL , Giese KC , Buan NR , Vierling E ( 2004 ) Interactions between small heat shock protein subunits and substrate in small heat shock protein - substrate complexes . J Biol Chem 279 : 1080 – 1089 Ghosh S , Gepstein S , Heikkila JJ , Dumbroff EB ( 1988 ) Use of a scanning densitometer or an ELISA plate reader for measurement of nanogram amounts of protein in crude extracts from biological tissues . Anal Bio - chem 169 : 227 – 233 Grousl T , IvanovP , MalcovaI , Pompach P , FrydlovaI , Slaba R , Senohrabkova L , Novakova L , Hasek J ( 2013 ) Heat shock - induced accumulation of trans - lation elongation and termination factors precedes assembly of stress gran - ules in S . cerevisiae . PLoS ONE 8 : e57083 Haslbeck M , Miess A , Stromer T , Walter S , Buchner J ( 2005 ) Disassem - bling protein aggregates in the yeast cytosol : the cooperation of Hsp26 with Ssa1 and Hsp104 . J Biol Chem 280 : 23861 – 23868 Haslbeck M , Vierling E ( 2015 ) A ﬁ rst line of stress defense : small heat shock proteins and their function in protein homeostasis . J Mol Biol 427 : 1537 – 1548 Helm KW , Lee GJ , Vierling E ( 1997 ) Expression and native structure of cytosolic class II small heat - shock proteins . Plant Physiol 114 : 1477 – 1485 Hong SW , Vierling E ( 2000 ) Mutants of Arabidopsis thaliana defective in the acquisition of tolerance to high temperature stress . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97 : 4392 – 4397 Hong SW , Vierling E ( 2001 ) Hsp101 is necessary for heat tolerance but dispensable for development and germination in the absence of stress . Plant J 27 : 25 – 35 Jain S , Wheeler JR , Walters RW , Agrawal A , Barsic A , Parker R ( 2016 ) ATPase - modulated stress granules contain a diverse proteome and substructure . Cell 164 : 487 – 498 Janssen GM , Möller W ( 1988 ) Kinetic studies on the role of elongation factors 1 beta and 1 gamma in protein synthesis . J Biol Chem 263 : 1773 – 1778 Jiang C , Xu J , Zhang H , Zhang X , Shi J , Li M , Ming F ( 2009 ) A cytosolic class I small heat shock protein , RcHSP17 . 8 , of Rosa chinensis confers resistance to a variety of stresses to Escherichia coli , yeast and Arabi - dopsis thaliana . Plant Cell Environ 32 : 1046 – 1059 Kirschner M , Winkelhaus S , Thierfelder JM , Nover L ( 2000 ) Transient expression and heat - stress - induced co - aggregation of endogenous and heterologous small heat - stress proteins in tobacco protoplasts . Plant J 24 : 397 – 411 Kotak S , Larkindale J , Lee U , von Koskull - Döring P , Vierling E , Scharf KD ( 2007 ) Complexity of the heat stress response in plants . Curr Opin Plant Biol 10 : 310 – 316 Lee GJ , Roseman AM , Saibil HR , Vierling E ( 1997 ) A small heat shock protein stably binds heat - denatured model substrates and can maintain a substrate in a folding - competent state . EMBO J 16 : 659 – 671 Lee GJ , Vierling E ( 2000 ) A small heat shock protein cooperates with heat shock protein 70 systems to reactivate a heat - denatured protein . Plant Physiol 122 : 189 – 198 Lee U , Wie C , Escobar M , Williams B , Hong SW , Vierling E ( 2005 ) Genetic analysis reveals domain interactions of Arabidopsis Hsp100 / ClpB and cooperation with the small heat shock protein chaperone system . Plant Cell 17 : 559 – 571 Lee U , Wie C , Fernandez BO , Feelisch M , Vierling E ( 2008 ) Modulation of nitrosative stress by S - nitrosoglutathione reductase is critical for ther - motolerance and plant growth in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 20 : 786 – 802 Lesk C , Rowhani P , Ramankutty N ( 2016 ) In ﬂ uence of extreme weather disasters on global crop production . Nature 529 : 84 – 87 Plant Physiol . Vol . 172 , 2016 1235 In Vivo Role of Class I and II sHSPs www . plantphysiol . org on July 22 , 2017 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2016 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved . Malik MK , Slovin JP , Hwang CH , Zimmerman JL ( 1999 ) Modi ﬁ ed ex - pression of a carrot small heat shock protein gene , hsp17 . 7 , results in increased or decreased thermotolerance . Plant J 20 : 89 – 99 Mogk A , Schlieker C , Friedrich KL , Schönfeld HJ , Vierling E , Bukau B ( 2003 ) Refolding of substrates bound to small Hsps relies on a disag - gregation reaction mediated most ef ﬁ ciently by ClpB / DnaK . J Biol Chem 278 : 31033 – 31042 Mu C , Zhang S , Yu G , Chen N , Li X , Liu H ( 2013 ) Overexpression of small heat shock protein LimHSP16 . 45 in Arabidopsis enhances tolerance to abiotic stresses . PLoS ONE 8 : e82264 Nover L , Scharf KD ( 1997 ) Heat stress proteins and transcription factors . Cell Mol Life Sci 53 : 80 – 103 Nover L , Scharf KD , Neumann D ( 1989 ) Cytoplasmic heat shock granules are formed from precursor particles and are associated with a speci ﬁ c set of mRNAs . Mol Cell Biol 9 : 1298 – 1308 Queitsch C , Hong SW , Vierling E , Lindquist S ( 2000 ) Heat shock protein 101 plays a crucial role in thermotolerance in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 12 : 479 – 492 Rabilloud T , Carpentier G , Tarroux P ( 1988 ) Improvement and simpli ﬁ - cation of low - background silver staining of proteins by using sodium dithionite . Electrophoresis 9 : 288 – 291 Rinnerthaler M , Lejskova R , Grousl T , Stradalova V , Heeren G , Richter K , Breitenbach - Koller L , Malinsky J , Hasek J , Breitenbach M ( 2013 ) Mmi1 , the yeast homologue of mammalian TCTP , associates with stress granules in heat - shocked cells and modulates proteasome activity . PLoS ONE 8 : e77791 Santhanagopalan I , Basha E , Ballard KN , Bopp NE , Vierling E ( 2015 ) Model chaperones : small heat shock proteins from plants . In RM Tan - guay , LE Hightower , eds , The Big Book on Small Heat Shock Proteins . Springer International Publishing , Cham , Switzerland , pp 119 – 153 Scharf KD , Siddique M , Vierling E ( 2001 ) The expanding family of Ara - bidopsis thaliana small heat stress proteins and a new family of proteins containing alpha - crystallin domains ( Acd proteins ) . Cell Stress Chape - rones 6 : 225 – 237 Siddique M , Gernhard S , von Koskull - Döring P , Vierling E , Scharf KD ( 2008 ) The plant sHSP superfamily : ﬁ ve new members in Arabidopsis thaliana with unexpected properties . Cell Stress Chaperones 13 : 183 – 197 Smykal P , Masin J , Hrdy I , Konopasek I , Zarsky V ( 2000 ) Chaperone activity of tobacco HSP18 , a small heat - shock protein , is inhibited by ATP . Plant J 23 : 703 – 713 Sun L , Liu Y , Kong X , Zhang D , Pan J , Zhou Y , Wang L , Li D , Yang X ( 2012 ) ZmHSP16 . 9 , a cytosolic class I small heat shock protein in maize ( Zea mays ) , confers heat tolerance in transgenic tobacco . Plant Cell Rep 31 : 1473 – 1484 Tabb DL , McDonald WH , Yates JR III ( 2002 ) DTASelect and Contrast : tools for assembling and comparing protein identi ﬁ cations from shot - gun proteomics . J Proteome Res 1 : 21 – 26 Takahashi T , Komeda Y ( 1989 ) Characterization of two genes encoding small heat - shock proteins in Arabidopsis thaliana . Mol Gen Genet 219 : 365 – 372 Töpfer R , Matzeit V , Gronenborn B , Schell J , Steinbiss HH ( 1987 ) A set of plant expression vectors for transcriptional and translational fusions . Nucleic Acids Res 15 : 5890 Tripp J , Mishra SK , Scharf KD ( 2009 ) Functional dissection of the cytosolic chaperone network in tomato mesophyll protoplasts . Plant Cell Environ 32 : 123 – 133 van Leeuwen W , Vermeer JE , Gadella TW Jr , Munnik T ( 2007 ) Visuali - zation of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate in the plasma mem - brane of suspension - cultured tobacco BY - 2 cells and whole Arabidopsis seedlings . Plant J 52 : 1014 – 1026 van Montfort RL , Basha E , Friedrich KL , Slingsby C , Vierling E ( 2001 ) Crystal structure and assembly of a eukaryotic small heat shock protein . Nat Struct Biol 8 : 1025 – 1030 Wallace EW , Kear - Scott JL , Pilipenko EV , Schwartz MH , Laskowski PR , Rojek AE , Katanski CD , Riback JA , Dion MF , Franks AM , et al ( 2015 ) Reversible , speci ﬁ c , active aggregates of endogenous proteins assemble upon heat stress . Cell 162 : 1286 – 1298 Walters RW , Muhlrad D , Garcia J , Parker R ( 2015 ) Differential effects of Ydj1 and Sis1 on Hsp70 - mediated clearance of stress granules in Sac - charomyces cerevisiae . RNA 21 : 1660 – 1671 Wang AQ , Yu XH , Mao Y , Liu Y , Liu GQ , Liu YS , Niu XL ( 2015 ) Over - expression of a small heat - shock - protein gene enhances tolerance to abiotic stresses in rice . Plant Breed 134 : 384 – 393 Waters ER ( 2013 ) The evolution , function , structure , and expression of the plant sHSPs . J Exp Bot 64 : 391 – 403 Waters ER , Aevermann BD , Sanders - Reed Z ( 2008 ) Comparative analysis of the small heat shock proteins in three angiosperm genomes identi ﬁ es new subfamilies and reveals diverse evolutionary patterns . Cell Stress Chaperones 13 : 127 – 142 Waters ER , Vierling E ( 1999 ) The diversi ﬁ cation of plant cytosolic small heat shock proteins preceded the divergence of mosses . Mol Biol Evol 16 : 127 – 139 Weber C , Nover L , Fauth M ( 2008 ) Plant stress granules and mRNA pro - cessing bodies are distinct from heat stress granules . Plant J 56 : 517 – 530 Zhou Y , Chen H , Chu P , Li Y , Tan B , Ding Y , Tsang EW , Jiang L , Wu K , Huang S ( 2012 ) NnHSP17 . 5 , a cytosolic class II small heat shock protein gene from Nelumbo nucifera , contributes to seed germination vigor and seedling thermotolerance in transgenic Arabidopsis . Plant Cell Rep 31 : 379 – 389 1236 Plant Physiol . Vol . 172 , 2016 McLoughlin et al . www . plantphysiol . org on July 22 , 2017 - Published by Downloaded from Copyright © 2016 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved .