[ CANCER RESEARCH59 , 5376 – 5385 , October 15 , 1999 ] Signaling Pathways and Structural Domains Required for Phosphorylation of EMS1 / Cortactin 1 Douglas H . Campbell , Robert L . Sutherland , and Roger J . Daly 2 Cancer Research Program , Garvan Institute of Medical Research , St . Vincent’s Hospital , Sydney , New South Wales 2010 , Australia ABSTRACT The structural characteristics of EMS1 ( human cortactin ) suggest that it may link signaling events to reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton . Interestingly , the EMS1 gene is commonly amplified and overexpressed in several human cancers , which may alter their invasive or metastatic properties . An 80 to 85 - kDa mobility shift of EMS1 correlates with an alteration in subcellular distribution and is likely to represent an impor - tant regulatory event . In HEK 293 cells , epidermal growth factor treat - ment or cell detachment induced this shift , and this was blocked by the mitogen - activated protein / extracellular signal - regulated kinase kinase ( MEK ) inhibitor PD98059 . Furthermore , expression of a constitutively active form of MEK induced the shift , indicating that MEK activation was both sufficient and necessary for this modification . The epidermal growth factor - induced shift correlated with increased phosphorylation on serine and threonine residues of the same tryptic phosphopeptides detected under basal conditions . Deletion of the helical - proline - rich region of the protein blocked the mobility shift and EMS1 phosphorylation . In vitro kinase assays demonstrated that the extracellular signal - regulated kinases represent candidate kinases for this region , although other MEK - regu - lated enzymes must also participate . These data identify MEK as an important intermediate involved in EMS1 phosphorylation and highlight the helical - proline - rich region as a key regulatory domain . INTRODUCTION The EMS1 gene encodes the human homologue of cortactin , an 80 - to 85 - kDa multidomain actin - binding protein that is a target of both growth factor - and adhesion - regulated signaling pathways ( 1 , 2 ) . The N - terminal region of EMS1 contains six and one - half tandemly re - peated copies of a 37 amino acid motif that mediates binding to actin filaments in vitro ( 3 ) , and EMS1 co - localizes with cortical actin in a variety of cell types , but not with actin stress fibers ( 1 , 3 – 5 ) . Further - more , recombinant cortactin cross - links actin filaments in vitro , a process that is down - regulated by c - Src - mediated tyrosine phospho - rylation of cortactin ( 6 ) . COOH - terminal to the repeat region is a predicted helical domain followed by a region rich in serine , threo - nine , and proline residues . At the COOH terminus is a SH3 3 domain . These modules mediate binding to specific proline - rich peptide se - quences exhibiting a consensus P XX P core motif ( 7 ) and are found in a variety of signaling and cytoskeletal proteins . The binding selectiv - ity of the cortactin SH3 domain has been defined ( 8 ) , and three proteins that interact with it in vivo have recently been identified ; two brain - specific proteins termed CortBP1 and CBP90 , the functions of which are currently unknown , and the cell - cell adhesion complex protein ZO - 1 ( 9 – 11 ) . The nature and function of these subdomains , coupled with the presence of multiple consensus sites for phospho - rylation by tyrosine and serine / threonine kinases support the hypoth - esis that EMS1 may act to integrate activation of specific signaling pathways with cytoskeletal organization . The EMS1 gene localizes to chromosome locus 11q13 , a region that also contains the CCND1 gene encoding the cell cycle regulatory protein cyclin D1 and that is commonly amplified in a number of human cancers , including those of the breast ( 12 , 13 ) and squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck ( 14 ) . 11q13 - amplified breast cancers may exhibit an increased invasive potential ( 15 ) . In a recent study of approximately 1000 breast cancer patients , EMS1 amplifica - tion occurred in 15 % of the patients tested and was associated with earlier relapse in the lymph node - negative and the ER - negative , but not ER - positive , subgroups ( 16 ) . This may reflect a role for this protein downstream of the EGFR and erbB2 , which are commonly overexpressed in ER - negative breast cancers ( 17 , 18 ) . The tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin is increased by diverse stimuli including receptor tyrosine kinase activation ( 19 , 20 ) , integrin - mediated cell adhesion ( 21 ) , oncogenic transformation ( 1 , 22 ) , and platelet aggregation ( 23 , 24 ) and is strongly linked to activation of Src - family kinases . Many of these processes result in extensive cy - toskeletal rearrangement , suggesting that tyrosine - phosphorylated cortactin is involved in regulation of the actin cytoskeleton . This is supported by studies using v - src - transformed fibroblasts and throm - bin - activated platelets , in which tyrosine - phosphorylated cortactin partitions into the detergent - insoluble cytoskeletal fraction ( 4 , 5 , 24 ) . Furthermore , upon v - src transformation , cortactin localizes into ab - normal focal adhesions termed rosettes or podosomes ( 1 ) . In addition to cytoskeletal reorganization induced by stimuli resulting in EMS1 tyrosine phosphorylation , the subcellular localization of EMS1 is also controlled by the small GTPases Ras and Rac1 . In untransformed NIH 3T3 cells , EMS1 is found complexed with myosin II and actin , and this complex is disrupted after Ras transformation ( 25 ) . After growth factor - induced Rac1 activation in Swiss 3T3 cells , cortactin localizes to membrane ruffles , a process that can also be induced by activated Rac1 ( 26 ) . These findings suggest that the subcellular localization of cortactin may be regulated by mechanisms that are independent of cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation . Recently , it has become clear that the EMS1 protein is involved in the regulation of cell motility and invasion . Overexpression of EMS1 in NIH 3T3 cells resulted in increased cell motility and invasiveness without changing the growth rate or anchorage dependence of the cells ( 27 ) . Similarly , overexpression of cortactin in endothelial cells resulted in enhanced cell migration in a monolayer wound - healing assay ( 28 ) . Furthermore , the role of c - Src - mediated cortactin tyrosine phosphorylation in regulation of cell motility has been defined . Mu - tation of tyrosines 421 , 466 , and 482 to phenylalanine abolished the ability of cortactin to cross - link actin filaments in vitro , and transfec - tion studies indicated that these tyrosine residues are also required for the elevated motility seen in cortactin - transfected endothelial cells ( 28 ) . However , both mutant and wild - type cortactin localized to the same subcellular regions , indicating that tyrosine phosphorylation did not control subcellular localization . Received 5 / 6 / 99 ; accepted 8 / 17 / 99 . The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges . This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance with 18 U . S . C . Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact . 1 Supported by the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia . D . H . C . is a recipient of a National Health and Medical Research Council Dora Lush Postgraduate Research Scholarship . 2 To whom requests for reprints should be addressed , at Cancer Research Program , Garvan Institute of Medical Research , St . Vincent’s Hospital , Darlinghurst , Sydney , New South Wales 2010 , Australia . Phone : 61 - 2 - 9295 - 8333 ; Fax : 61 - 2 - 9295 - 8321 ; E - mail : r . daly @ garvan . unsw . edu . au . 3 The abbreviations used are : SH3 , Src homology 3 ; ER , estrogen receptor ; Erk , extracellular signal - regulated kinase ; MEK , mitogen - activated protein / ERK kinase ; EGF , epidermal growth factor ; EGFR , EGF receptor ; GST , glutathione S - transferase ; MBP , myelin basic protein ; HP , helical - proline rich ; ECL , enhanced chemiluminescence ; PVDF , polyvinylidene difluoride ; CMV , cytomegalovirus ; RIPA , radioimmunoprecipitation assay . 5376 Research . on April 20 , 2017 . © 1999 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from In addition to tyrosine phosphorylation , serine and threonine phos - phorylation may regulate cortactin function . EMS1 is phosphorylated on serine and threonine residues in untransformed chick embryo fibroblast cells ( 1 ) and in two human squamous carcinoma cell lines ( 29 ) . Two cortactin species of 80 and 85 kDa are present in many cell types ( 1 , 2 , 11 , 29 ) . Recent evidence suggests that the 85 - kDa form of EMS1 results from serine and threonine phosphorylation of the 80 - kDa form ( 29 ) . In cells amplified at the 11q13 locus , EGF , serum , or vanadate treatment caused increased serine and threonine phospho - rylation of EMS1 , resulting in a mobility shift from 80 to 85 kDa . EGF - or vanadate - induced serine and threonine phosphorylation of EMS1 also resulted in a change in localization from the cytoplasm to the cell - substratum junctions . In this report , we have analyzed the signaling pathways triggered by growth factor treatment or cell adhesion events that regulate EMS1 serine / threonine phosphorylation and also defined the protein domains required . These studies demonstrate that EMS1 phosphorylation is regulated by both MEK - dependent and - independent mechanisms and that the HP region is essential for these events . The latter domain is therefore likely to play a major role in regulation of EMS1 function . MATERIALS AND METHODS Plasmid Manipulations . The EMS1 cDNA containing the entire coding region ( 2 ) was obtained from Dr RJAM Michalides ( Netherlands Cancer Institute ) as an Eco RI - Bam HI fragment cloned into the pGEM3Z vector ( Promega ) . This fragment was excised , end - filled with Klenow fragment , and ligated into pRcCMV ( InVitrogen ) that had been digested with Hin dIII , end - filled with Klenow fragment , and treated with alkaline phosphatase . Plasmid DNA suitable for transfection was obtained by cesium - chloride gradient pu - rification ( 30 ) . Plasmids encoding MEK S217E , S221E ( activated MEK ) , or S221A ( dominant negative MEK ; Ref . 31 ) were kindly provided by Dr . C . J . Marshall ( Chester Beatty Laboratories , Institute of Cancer Research , London , United Kingdom ) and were purified using the Qiagen Maxiprep system . Site - directed mutagenesis to insert stop codons was performed using the Stratagene Quickchange system according to the manufacturer’s instructions . Oligonucleotides used to generate the mutations were as follows . For the D SH3 mutant , the sense oligonucleotide was 5 9 - AACGATCTGGGG TAG ACAGC - CGTCGCC - 3 9 , and the antisense oligonucleotide was 5 9 - GGCGACGGCT - GT CTA CCCCAGATCGTT - 3 9 , generating a construct encoding amino acids 1 – 494 . For the D HPSH3 mutant , the sense oligonucleotide was 5 9 - AG - CAAAACAAGTAACATCTGAGCTAACTT TGA AAACCTCGT - 3 9 , and the antisense oligonucleotide was 5 9 - AGCGAGGTTAACAAAGTTAGG TCA - GATGTTACTTGTTTTGCT - 3 9 , generating a construct encoding amino acids 1 – 350 . Plasmid vectors encoding these proteins were sequenced to ensure the presence of the mutation . Plasmids encoding GST - EMS1 fusion proteins were constructed using the following primers . For the GST - HP protein , the N - terminal sense primer was 5 9 - GGATCCGCTAACTTTGAAAACCTCG - 3 9 , and the COOH - terminal primer was 5 9 - GACTGAATTCTCACTCGTACT - CATGTAGGTG - 3 9 , incorporating residues 352 – 490 . For the GST - SH3 fusion protein , the N - terminal primer was 5 9 - ACATGGATCCACCTACGATGAG - TACGAGAAC - 3 9 , and the COOH - terminal primer was 5 9 - GACTGAATTCT - CACTGCCGCAGCTCCACTAGTTGGC - 3 9 , incorporating residues 485 – 550 . Following PCR using the EMS1 cDNA as template , the resulting DNA fragments were digested with Eco RI and Bam HI and ligated into a Eco RI / Bam HI digested pGEX 2T vector ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech ) . Cell Culture and Generation of Transfectants . HEK 293 cells were maintained in MEM with Hanks’ salts ( Trace Biosciences ) supplemented with 10 % ( v / v ) FCS ( Commonwealth Serum Laboratories ) , 2 m M L - glutamine ( Life Technologies , Inc . ) , and 0 . 05 % ( w / v ) sodium bicarbonate ( Life Technologies , Inc . ) . This is referred to as HEK medium . Cells were transfected as described ( 32 ) with 20 m g of plasmid DNA ( either pRcCMV or pRcCMV - EMS1 ) , and selected using 500 m g / ml G418 . Single colonies were picked using a pipette , transferred to individual wells of 96 - well plates , and then briefly trypsinized the following day to disperse the cells . Following expansion , stably transfected cell lines were analyzed by Western blotting . Transient transfections were performed essentially as described ( 32 ) , using a total of 20 m g of plasmid DNA . Growth Factor Treatment of Cells . Cells were starved overnight in serum - free medium and then stimulated for the indicated time period with 100 ng / ml EGF ( Life Technologies , Inc . ) in serum - free medium . If no time period is indicated , the cells were stimulated for 30 min . The MEK inhibitor PD98059 ( New England Biolabs ) was dissolved in DMSO at a concentration of 50 m M . Unless indicated otherwise , cells were treated for 40 min with 50 m M PD98059 prior to stimulation . Antibodies . EMS1 was immunoprecipitated using 5 m g of a monoclonal antibody against chicken p80 / 85 ( cortactin ) exhibiting cross - species reactivity ( mAb 4F11 , UBI ; Ref . 1 ) , and was detected on Western blots with the same antibody diluted 1 : 2000 . Active Erks were detected using a polyclonal anti - body specific to the activated form ( New England Biolabs ) . All antibody solutions for Western blotting were made in 5 % ( w / v ) BSA ( RIA grade , Sigma ) / TBS ( 10 m M Tris - Cl , 150 m M NaCl , pH 7 . 4 ) . Immunoprecipitation and Western Blotting . Cell lysates were prepared using either lysis buffer as described previously ( 33 ) , or RIPA buffer ( 34 ) , each containing 10 m g / ml aprotinin , 10 m g / ml leupeptin , 1 m M sodium orthovana - date , and 1 m M phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride . Protein concentrations were determined using the Bio - Rad protein assay reagent , and samples were nor - malized by dilution with the appropriate lysis buffer . Immunoprecipitations were performed by incubation with the indicated amount of antibody for a minimum o f 2 h at 4°Cwith constant mixing . 20 m l of goat antimouse antibody - Sepharose conjugate ( Zymed ; prewashed twice in 20 m M HEPES , pH 7 . 5 ) was then added to the lysate - antibody mixture for 1 h . Immunoprecipitates were then washed five times in the lysis buffer and denatured in SDS - PAGE sample buffer by heating to 100°C for 3 min . Samples were analyzed by SDS - PAGE ( 10 % minigels ) , transferred to 0 . 2 - m m nitrocellulose ( Bio - Rad ) , and subjected to Western blot analysis . Equivalent loading of cell lysates was confirmed by Ponceau S staining of membranes after transfer . Detection of bound antibodies was by ECL ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech ) . P i Labeling of Cells . Cells were plated at 5 3 10 6 per 10 - cm plate and allowed to grow overnight in HEK medium containing 10 % FCS . The cells were then serum - starved overnight in serum - free HEK medium . Cells were then rinsed in phosphate - free MEM ( ICN ) and incubated in 5 ml of phosphate - free MEM for 2 h . This medium was subsequently replaced with 5 ml of phosphate - free MEM supplemented with 0 . 6 mCi / ml P i ( ICN , 500 mCi / ml ) and 50 m M PD98059 , as appropriate , for 3 h . Cells were then stimulated with EGF for 30 min prior to cell lysis in RIPA buffer . Cell Detachment Experiments . Cells were incubated in serum - free me - dium overnight and then either incubated with serum - free medium containing 50 m M PD98059 fo r 2 h orleft untreated . Following detachment with PBS - 0 . 02 % ( w / v ) EDTA , cells were maintained in suspension either in the presence or absence of PD98059 . Cells were then harvested and lysed at the indicated times . Phosphoamino Acid Analysis and Tryptic Phosphopeptide Mapping . EMS1 was immunoprecipitated from lysates prepared from P i - labeled cells and then subjected to SDS - PAGE . The gels were then either Coomassie - stained , dried and subjected to autoradiography prior to tryptic phosphopeptide mapping , or transferred to PVDF membranes for subsequent phosphoamino acid analysis . For the latter , following PVDF transfer , the samples were hydrolyzed in 6 M HCl and then subjected to two - dimensional thin - layer electrophoresis with phosphoamino acid standards as described previously ( 35 ) . For tryptic phosphopeptide mapping , samples were excised from the dried gel , rehydrated in water , and washed in 25 % ( v / v ) isopropanol followed by 10 % ( v / v ) methanol . The gel slices were then cut into small pieces and suspended in 50 m M ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 60 m g of N - tosyl - L - phenylalanine chloromethyl ketone - treated trypsin ( Sigma ) . The samples were incubated at 37°C overnight , and the supernatant was then removed and lyophilized . The pellet was then resuspended in water , lyophi - lized again , and then solubilized in electrophoresis buffer ( formic acid : acetic acid : water , 15 : 5 : 80 ) and applied to a silica gel 60 TLC plate ( Merck ) . Samples were electrophoresed in the first dimension at 1000 V for 45 min , and the plates were dried and then subjected to ascending chromatography in the second dimension ( chromatography buffer ; butanol : pyridine : acetic acid : formic acid : water , 127 . 5 : 22 . 5 : 45 : 15 : 90 ) for 5 h . The plates were dried then subjected to autoradiography . For phosphoamino acid analysis of individual tryptic phosphopeptides , the peptide spots were isolated from the TLC plate and 5377 REGULATION OF EMS1 PHOSPHORYLATION Research . on April 20 , 2017 . © 1999 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from extracted from the cellulose fragments using pH 1 . 9 buffer ( formic acid : acetic acid : water , 50 : 156 : 1794 ) . Peptide solutions were then lyophilized and sub - jected to phosphoamino acid analysis . In Vitro Protein Kinase Assays . GST fusion proteins were prepared from bacteria transformed with the appropriate expression constructs by standard methods ( 36 ) . Erks were kindly provided by Dr Boris Sarcevic . These were prepared from EGF - treated T - 47D cells by purification over DEAE cellulose ion - exchange and Superdex 75 gel filtration columns ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech ) , followed by hydrophobic chromatography over a phenyl - Superose HR15 / 5 column ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech ) . Activity and identity were monitored by phosphorylation of MBP and Western blot analysis , and purity was determined by SDS - PAGE and silver staining . In vitro kinase reactions were performed in 30 m l of kinase assay buffer ( 50 m M HEPES , pH 7 . 5 , 1 m M DTT , 10 m M MgCl 2 , 25 m M ATP ) containing 5 m Ci of [ g - 32 P ] ATP ( NEN , 10 mCi / ml ) per reaction for 30 min at 30°C . Reactions were terminated using 15 m l of 3 3 SDS - PAGE sample buffer . Equimolar amounts of fusion protein , GST , or MBP were used for the kinase assays . Thus 1 . 3 m g of MBP , 2 . 2 m g of GST , 3 . 3 m g of GST - SH3 , and 5 m g of GST - HP were used per reaction . Tryptic Phosphopeptide Mixing Experiments . GST - HP fusion protein was phosphorylated by Erks as described above . EMS1 was immunoprecipi - tated after in vivo P i labeling and EGF stimulation as described previously . Tryptic phosphopeptides of both these samples were derived , and following Cerenkov counting , the in vivo labeled sample was diluted in electrophoresis buffer to give equivalent cpm per unit volume to that obtained for the GST - HP sample . The proportion of in vivo and in vitro samples mixed were such that 3 - fold more radioactivity was derived from the in vitro reaction , enabling identification of co - migrating spots by comparison with the map obtained from the in vivo sample analyzed alone . RESULTS Regulation of the EGF - induced EMS1 Mobility Shift . A previ - ous report suggested that in squamous carcinoma cells , amplification of the 11q13 locus and consequent overexpression of the EMS1 gene were required for the EGF - induced mobility shift of the 80 - kDa form of EMS1 to the 85 - kDa form ( 29 ) . To investigate the effects of EMS1 overexpression in a simpler model system , we established cell lines overexpressing EMS1 . HEK 293 cells were transfected with the pRcCMV - EMS1 expression vector , and colonies isolated by G418 selection as described in Materials and Methods . The levels of EMS1 expression were determined by Western blotting . Fig . 1 A shows a Western blot characterizing EMS1 expression in two empty - vector ( RcCMV1 and RcCMV2 ) and four EMS1 - transfected ( EMS1 – 2 , - 6 , - 11 , and - 12 ) cell lines . To investigate the effect of EMS1 overex - pression on the EGF - induced modification of this protein , RcCMV2 and EMS1 – 6 cell lines were starved overnight in serum - free medium and then stimulated with EGF for varying times . EMS1 was immu - noprecipitated and Western blotted for EMS1 ( Fig . 1 B ) . Both cell lines expressed the p80 and p85 forms of EMS1 after overnight starvation at an abundance similar to that observed in cells maintained in 10 % serum ( Fig . 1 A ) , indicating that in these cells the p80 : p85 ratio was not affected by the absence of serum factors . For both EMS1 overexpressers and cells expressing endogenous levels of EMS1 , the p80 form started to disappear 5 min subsequent to EGF treatment ( presumably by conversion to p85 ) , and after 15 min , the majority of the p80 was converted to p85 . The p85 form was maintained for up to 3 h after EGF treatment . We did not detect any increase in EMS1 tyrosine phosphorylation under these conditions ( data not shown and Fig . 5 B ) . The time course of conversion of the p80 to p85 form is very similar to that described for 11q13 amplified squamous carcinoma cells ( 29 ) . However , these results demonstrate that in another cell type , 11q13 amplification or EMS1 overexpression is not required for the EGF - induced mobility shift , and this occurs to a similar extent and with comparable kinetics in cells with low or high EMS1 expression . Because the Ras - Erk pathway represented a candidate mechanism for EGF - induced modification of EMS1 , we investigated the kinetics of Erk activation by EGF in these cells ( Fig . 1 C ) . Both of these cell lines displayed undetectable levels of the activated form of Erks following serum starvation and exhibited a robust activation of Erks after EGF treatment that was evident at 2 min ( i . e . , prior to the onset of the EMS1 mobility shift ) and maintained for up to 3 h . The EGF - induced Mobility Shift Can Be Inhibited by PD98059 . To investigate the possible contribution of the Erks to the EGF - induced mobility shift , we used the inhibitor PD98059 , which pre - vents activation of MEK by Raf and hence blocks signaling through the Erks , without affecting other signaling pathways activated by the EGFR and Ras ( 37 , 38 ) . EMS1 – 6 and RcCMV2 control cells were used for this experiment with equivalent results . Cells were starved overnight and then either pretreated with the MEK inhibitor or with vehicle ( DMSO ) . The cells were then stimulated with EGF and lysates blotted for EMS1 or the activated form of Erks ( Fig . 2 A ) . Pretreatment with the MEK - inhibitor blocked the EGF - induced mobility shift of EMS1 and completely abolished EGF - induced Erk activation , whereas the vehicle was without effect . In squamous carcinoma cells overexpressing EMS1 , the p80 form is rapidly converted to p85 as a result of posttranslational modification , whereas squamous carcinoma cells that do not overexpress EMS1 show very little conversion of the p80 to the p85 form of the protein ( 29 ) . To determine whether long - term treatment with the MEK - inhibitor would prevent the ap - pearance of the 85 - kDa form of EMS1 , EMS1 – 2 cells were serum - Fig . 1 . Regulation of the EMS1 mobility shift in control or EMS1 - transfected HEK 293 cell lines . A , HEK 293 cells were stably transfected with the pRcCMV - EMS1 expression vector or with the pRcCMV vector alone , and stable colonies were isolated after G418 selection as described in “Materials and Methods . ” Cell lysates were prepared in lysis buffer as described in “Materials and Methods , ” and following normalization of protein concentration , they were subjected to SDS - PAGE . Proteins were then transferred to nitrocellulose membranes and Western blotted with the anti - EMS1 monoclonal antibody 4F11 . Bound antibodies were detected using ECL . The mobility of the 80 - and 85 - kDa species is shown . B , EMS1 – 6 or RcCMV2 cells were starved overnight in serum - free medium and then stimulated the following day with 100 ng / ml EGF for the indicated time periods . Following harvest in lysis buffer , EMS1 was immunoprecipitated from equivalent amounts of total protein and subjected to SDS - PAGE . Following transfer to nitrocellulose , the samples were Western blotted for EMS1 protein . C , The lysate samples prepared for B were normalized for protein content and subjected to SDS - PAGE and nitrocellulose transfer . The filters were then Western blotted for the activated forms of Erks 1 and 2 using a phosphorylation - specific polyclonal antibody . Bound antibodies were detected using ECL . 5378 REGULATION OF EMS1 PHOSPHORYLATION Research . on April 20 , 2017 . © 1999 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from starved overnight and then treated for 2 , 4 , 8 , or 24 h with the MEK inhibitor . Lysates were then prepared and Western blotted for EMS1 ( Fig . 2 B ) . The p80 : p85 ratio did not change after prolonged treatment with the MEK inhibitor , suggesting that there is also a MEK - inde - pendent pathway that gives rise to the p85 form of the protein in these cells under basal conditions . Active MEK Is Sufficient to Induce the EMS1 Mobility Shift , but Dominant Negative MEK Does Not Change the Basal p80 : p85 Ratio . To determine whether MEK alone could control the EMS1 mobility shift , HEK 293 cells were transiently transfected with the EMS1 expression vector and either MEK S217E / S221E ( an activated form ) or MEK S221A ( a dominant negative form ; Ref . 31 ) . Using short exposure times , only the transfected EMS1 was detected on a Western blot , and hence any EMS1 detected had been co - transfected with the MEK constructs ( see also Fig . 7 B ) . The transfected cells were starved overnight and then harvested , and the lysates were Western blotted for EMS1 or activated Erks ( Fig . 3 ) . Transfection of the EMS1 vector alone resulted in the appearance of both p80 and p85 forms ( Fig . 3 , cont ) , whereas co - transfection of the activated MEK and EMS1 constructs resulted in only the p85 form of the protein ( MEK EE ) . Co - transfection of the EMS1 and dominant negative MEK con - structs ( MEK A ) resulted in the appearance of both p80 and p85 forms of EMS1 at a ratio similar to that observed in the control transfection ( cont ) . EGF treatment of cells transiently transfected with the EMS1 construct gave rise to the p85 form of the protein and robust Erk activation ( Fig . 3 , 1 EGF ) . Transfection with the activated MEK construct also caused Erk activation in the transfected cells , whereas transfection with either the EMS1 vector alone or co - transfection with the dominant negative MEK construct did not result in any detectable activation of Erks . Although the levels of Erk activation detected after transfection with activated MEK were considerably lower than those obtained after EGF treatment , this was due to the small percentage of cells transfected . Thus , activated MEK is both required and sufficient to cause the EMS1 mobility shift , whereas expression of a dominant negative MEK is insufficient to prevent basal phosphorylation of EMS1 occurring in starved cells . Both these results are consistent with the results obtained using the MEK inhibitor PD98059 . Cell Detachment Induces the Mobility Shift . EMS1 has been implicated in regulation of cell - substratum attachment and cell mo - tility and invasion , and it also becomes tyrosine phosphorylated dur - ing cell spreading on extracellular matrix ( 2 , 21 , 27 , 28 ) . To investi - gate the role of cell - matrix adhesion on the p80 : p85 ratio , we first characterized the effect of cell detachment . EMS1 – 2 cells were starved overnight , either pretreated with PD98059 or left untreated for 2 h , and then detached using PBS - EDTA . Samples were taken from cells kept in suspension from 0 to 60 min . These lysates were then blotted for EMS1 and activated Erks ( Fig . 4 ) . Erks were activated immediately following detachment , and this was maintained for 60 min . Erk activation after cell detachment has also been observed in NIH 3T3 cells ( 39 ) . PD98059 pretreatment prevented the Erk activa - tion caused by cell detachment . The EMS1 mobility shift was appar - ent from approximately 15 min , and was largely complete by 30 min . Treatment with PD98059 prevented the EMS1 mobility shift after 60 min of suspension . Cell detachment therefore induces an EMS1 mo - bility shift that is slightly temporally delayed compared to that in - duced by EGF ( it is complete after 30 min rather than 15 min ) , but it also causes a much lower activation of the Erks ( data not shown ) . Although plating on fibronectin substantially increased Erk activation relative to that observed in detached cells , we were not able to investigate the effects of this on the EMS1 mobility shift , because the protein was already in the p85 form . Fig . 3 . Co - expression of EMS1 and activated MEK is sufficient to induce the EMS1 mobility shift . HEK 293 cells were transfected with plasmids encoding EMS1 ( all lanes ) and either MEK S221A ( MEK A ; dominant negative MEK ) , MEK S217E / S221E ( MEK EE ; activated MEK ) , or pRcCMV vector ( cont and 1 EGF ) as described in “Materials and Methods . ” The cells were starved overnight , and the following day either left untreated ( MEK A , MEK EE , and cont ) or stimulated with 100 ng / ml EGF for 30 min ( 1 EGF ) . Cont , control . Following lysate preparation , equivalent amounts of protein were Western blotted for either EMS1 or the activated form of Erks 1 and 2 as indicated . Fig . 4 . Cell detachment is sufficient to induce the EMS1 mobility shift in a MEK - dependent manner . EMS1 – 2 cells were starved overnight in serum - free medium and then either pretreated with 50 m M PD98059 or left untreated for 2 h . Cells were then detached using PBS - EDTA and placed in suspension in either the presence or absence of 50 m M PD98059 . Samples were taken at the indicated times , and the cells were lysed in RIPA buffer . Lysates were then Western blotted for EMS1 or the activated form of Erks 1 and 2 as indicated . Fig . 2 . Treatment with the MEK inhibitor PD98059 prevents the EGF - induced EMS1 mobility shift . A , EMS1 – 6 cells were starved overnight in serum - free medium . The following day , cells were incubated in medium containing 50 m g / ml PD98059 dissolved in DMSO vehicle or in vehicle alone for 40 min . Cells were then stimulated with 100 ng / ml EGF as indicated for 30 min and harvested in lysis buffer . Equivalent amounts of protein were analyzed by immunoblotting for either EMS1 or the activated form of Erks 1 and 2 as indicated . B , EMS1 – 2 cells were starved overnight in serum - free medium , incubated with 50 m g / ml PD98059 MEK inhibitor for the indicated time periods , and then harvested in lysis buffer . Equivalent amounts of protein were then analyzed by Western blotting for EMS1 . 5379 REGULATION OF EMS1 PHOSPHORYLATION Research . on April 20 , 2017 . © 1999 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from EGF Treatment Induces MEK - dependent Serine and Threo - nine Phosphorylation of EMS1 . To investigate in more detail the role of phosphorylation in regulation of EMS1 function , EMS1 – 2 or HEK 293 cells were subjected to in vivo labeling with P i . Equivalent results were obtained for both cell lines , and for convenience , only the results from the EMS1 – 2 cells are presented here . Following over - night starvation , cells were labeled with 32 P P i either in the presence or absence of the MEK inhibitor for 3 h and then stimulated with EGF for 30 min . EMS1 was immunoprecipitated and following SDS - PAGE was either subjected to autoradiography ( Fig . 5 A , top panel ) , Western blotted for EMS1 ( Fig . 5 A , bottom panel ) or subjected to phos - phoamino acid analysis ( Fig . 5 B ) . In all cases , phosphorylation was only detected for the p85 form of EMS1 , and no phosphorylation of the p80 form was observed . Basal phosphorylation of EMS1 was observed in the unstimulated samples , and this was increased approx - imately 2 - fold after EGF treatment , co - incident with the change in p80 : p85 ratio ( Fig . 5 A , lower panel ) . The EGF - induced increase in EMS1 phosphorylation was blocked by treatment with the MEK inhibitor , which blocked the p80 to p85 conversion . The 2 - fold increase in phosphorylation is consistent with p80 being converted into p85 . The labeling of EMS1 in the starved cells indicates that there is a MEK - independent kinase activity that phosphorylates EMS1 , as MEK activation ( as judged by active Erk blotting ) was extremely low in unstimulated cells ( Fig . 1 C ) . Consistent with this observation , treatment of unstimulated cells with PD98059 did not prevent phos - phate incorporation ( Fig . 5 A ) . EMS1 was phosphorylated on serine and threonine residues in starved and EGF - treated EMS1 – 2 cells in approximately equivalent amounts ( Fig . 5 B ) . Treatment with PD98059 or EGF did not appreciably alter the ratio of serine to threonine phosphorylation , nor did it result in detectable tyrosine phosphorylation . Thus EGF treatment causes serine and threonine phosphorylation of the p80 form of EMS1 in a MEK - dependent manner , correlating with a conversion to the p85 form . EGF Treatment Increases the Phosphorylation of the Same Tryptic Peptides That Are Phosphorylated Basally under Serum - starved Conditions . To investigate whether basal and EGF - induced phosphorylation occurs on the same or different sites , the EMS1 – 2 P i - labeled samples shown in Fig . 5 A were subjected to tryptic phos - phopeptide mapping ( Fig . 6 ) . EMS1 isolated from untreated cells displayed 4 prominent tryptic phosphopeptides ( labeled A – D in order of intensity ; Fig . 6 A ) . EMS1 isolated from EGF - treated cells showed exactly the same peptide map but with increased intensity of all of the peptides , and under these conditions we were unable to identify any novel peptides that were specifically induced after EGF treatment ( Fig . 6 B ) . Samples isolated from cells treated with either the MEK inhibitor alone ( Fig . 6 C ) or the MEK inhibitor and EGF ( Fig . 6 D ) again showed an identical peptide map , with the intensity of all of the peptides similar to that observed for the control sample . Tryptic peptide maps obtained from the HEK 293 cell line showed a pattern identical to those obtained from EMS1 – 2 cells ( data not shown ) , indicating that the sites of phosphorylation are not markedly altered by overexpression of the EMS1 protein . Phosphoamino acid analysis of the peptides shown in Fig . 6 B revealed that peptide A was phos - phorylated on both serine and threonine residues , peptide B was phosphorylated exclusively on serine , peptide C was phosphorylated on threonine , and peptide D was phosphorylated on serine ( data not shown ) . Thus , the EMS1 kinase activity in starved and EGF - treated cells is directed toward the same tryptic peptides , and the activity toward these peptides is induced by EGF in a MEK - dependent manner . The HP Region Is Required for the EGF - induced Mobility Shift . To determine which regions of EMS1 are required for basal and EGF - induced phosphorylation , truncation mutants were con - structed by inserting stop codons into the coding sequence of the EMS1 expression vector . Insertion of a stop codon between the SH3 and HP regions deleted the SH3 domain ( D SH3 ) , whereas insertion of a stop codon between the actin - binding region and the HP region deleted the HP and SH3 domains ( D HPSH3 ; Fig . 7 A ) . These con - structs were transiently transfected into HEK 293 cells and lysates Western blotted for EMS1 using the 4F11 monoclonal antibody , which recognizes an epitope in the actin - binding region ( 3 ) . Deletion of the SH3 domain gave rise to two forms of the EMS1 protein , suggesting that the SH3 domain was not required for the basal phosphorylation , whereas deletion of the HP and SH3 domains gave a single band ( Fig . 7 B ) . Thus , the HP region was required for the generation of two forms of EMS1 in exponentially growing cells , whereas the SH3 domain was not . To determine whether the HP or SH3 domain was required for the EGF - induced mobility shift , HEK 293 cells were transiently transfected with EMS1 constructs , starved overnight , and then stimulated with EGF for 30 min . The full - length and D SH3 constructs displayed EGF - induced shifts , whereas the D HPSH3 construct displayed no mobility shift upon EGF treatment ( Fig . 7 C ) . Consistent with these results , 32 P P i labeling of transient transfections indicated that removal of the SH3 domain did not affect basal or EGF - induced phosphorylation , whereas deletion of the HP and SH3 domains almost completely abolished basal and EGF - induced phosphorylation ( Fig . 7 D ) . To determine whether any of the phosphorylation sites were present in the SH3 domain and hence were not necessary for the mobility shift , tryptic phosphopeptide maps were prepared from cells transiently transfected with the D SH3 construct , labeled with 32 P P i , and then stimulated with EGF . Tryptic phos - phopeptides A , B , C , and D were all observed , indicating that the phosphorylation sites are all present within the HP or actin binding Fig . 5 . EGF treatment causes a MEK - dependent increase in EMS1 serine and threonine phosphorylation . EMS1 – 2 cells were starved overnight in serum - free medium and then incubated in phosphate - free medium for 2 h . Cells were then incubated in 5 ml of phosphate - free medium supplemented with 0 . 6 mCi / ml P i and 50 m M PD98059 as indicated for 3 h . Cells were then stimulated with 100 ng / ml EGF as indicated for 30 min and then harvested in RIPA buffer . EMS1 was immunoprecipitated from cell lysates , and following SDS - PAGE , two - fifths of the protein was used for tryptic phosphopeptide mapping , two - fifths was used for phosphoamino acid analysis , and the remaining one - fifth was used for Western blotting . A , following SDS - PAGE , Coomassie Blue staining , and drying , the gels were subjected to autoradiography ( top panel , 1 - h exposure ) . One - fifth of the samples were immunoblotted for EMS1 to determine EMS1 protein levels ( bottom panel ) . B , samples used for phosphoamino acid analysis were subjected to SDS - PAGE , transferred to PVDF membranes , and then analyzed for phosphoamino acid content as described in “Materials and Methods . ” Equivalent autoradiographic exposures ( 12 h ) are shown for each sample . The positions of phosphoamino acid standards are shown . P - Ser , phosphoserine ; P - Thr , phosphothreonine ; P - Tyr , phosphotyrosine . 5380 REGULATION OF EMS1 PHOSPHORYLATION Research . on April 20 , 2017 . © 1999 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from domains ( data not shown ) . Because the D HPSH3 construct was only very weakly phosphorylated under these conditions , this suggests that either the phosphorylation sites are not located in the actin binding region or that this construct cannot interact with EMS1 kinases . The HP Region Can Be Phosphorylated in Vitro by the Erks . To determine candidate EMS1 kinases that contribute to the EGF - induced mobility shift , a number of criteria were considered . First , the kinase should be activated after EGF treatment ; second , this EGF - induced activation should be MEK dependent ; and third , consensus sites for the kinase should be present in the actin - binding or HP regions of EMS1 . The Erks represent the only known MEK targets and are rapidly activated after EGF treatment in HEK 293 cells ( Fig . 1 C ) . The minimal consensus sequence for Erk phosphorylation is Ser / Thr - Pro , and the optimal sequence is Pro - X - Ser / Thr - Pro ( 40 ) . EMS1 contains two optimal ( Ser - 405 , PV S P ; Ser - 418 , PS S P ) and one minimal ( Thr - 401 , T P ) Erk consensus sites , which are all located in the HP region , consistent with the deletion analysis . These consensus phosphorylation sites are located on two predicted tryptic phos - phopeptides : Thr - 399 to Arg - 414 ( peptide 1 ) and Leu - 415 to Lys - 428 ( peptide 2 ; Fig . 8 A ) . DNA fragments encoding the HP and SH3 regions of EMS1 were cloned into the pGEX 2T vector and GST - HP and GST - SH3 fusion proteins purified from Escherichia coli . These fusion proteins were used as substrates for an in vitro kinase assay using purified Erk1 and Erk2 ( Fig . 8 B ) . The GST - HP fusion protein was phosphorylated by Erks , as was the MBP - positive control . Nei - ther the GST nor the GST - SH3 protein was phosphorylated in this assay , demonstrating that the phosphorylation by Erks was specific for the HP region . In contrast to the results obtained for in vivo labeling of EMS1 ( Fig . 5 B ) , Erks phosphorylated the HP region only on serine residues , eliminating Thr - 401 as an in vitro Erk target ( Fig . 8 C ) . To further characterize the in vitro phosphorylation of the HP region , the reaction product was subjected to tryptic phosphopeptide mapping ( Fig . 8 D ) . Two tryptic phosphopeptides of equivalent inten - sity were obtained after autoradiography , suggesting that both con - sensus sites corresponding to Ser - 405 and Ser - 418 were phosphoryl - ated , as these residues are present on different predicted tryptic phosphopeptides . To test whether the tryptic phosphopeptides gener - ated by in vitro phosphorylation of GST - HP fusion protein co - migrated with tryptic phosphopeptides obtained from in vivo labeled EMS1 , a mixing experiment was performed . Tryptic phosphopeptide samples obtained from in vivo labeled EMS1 were diluted to give an equivalent signal to that obtained for the in vitro samples . Two - thirds of the in vivo aliquot was subjected to tryptic phosphopeptide map - ping ( Fig . 9 A ) , and the other one - third was mixed with tryptic phos - phopeptides generated from in vitro labeled GST - HP fusion protein prior to analysis ( Fig . 9 B ) . Only peptide spots A , B , and C are clearly visible on the exposure shown in Fig . 9 A . Consistent with the results in Fig . 6 B , the signal from peptide B was considerably less than that Fig . 6 . EGF - treatment increases the phosphorylation of the same tryptic phosphopep - tides as are phosphorylated under serum - starved conditions . The samples depicted in Fig . 5 A were excised from the gels and subjected to tryptic phosphopeptide mapping as described in “Materials and Methods . ” Each image is from an equivalent exposure time ( 5 h ) . In each case , the origin is located at the bottom left corner of the image . Panel A , unstimulated cells . Panel B , cells treated with 100 ng / ml EGF . Panel C , cells treated with 50 m M PD98059 . Panel D , cells treated with 100 ng / ml EGF and 50 m M PD98059 . Fig . 7 . The HP region is required for both the EGF - induced mobility shift and EGF - induced phosphorylation of EMS1 . A , diagrammatic representation of the truncated proteins produced after insertion of stop codons into the pRcCMV - EMS1 expression vector . B , HEK 293 cells were transfected with the indicated vectors , and then lysates were prepared . EMS1 expression was determined by Western blotting . Note that at short exposure times , only the transfected EMS1 was detected ( compare left lane with right three lanes ) . Molecular mass markers are shown on the right side of the figure . C , HEK 293 cells were transiently transfected with either wild type , D SH3 , or D HPSH3 EMS1 expression vectors . The cells were starved overnight and then stimulated with 100 ng / ml EGF as indicated . Lysates were prepared and Western blotted for EMS1 . Note that the left and right panels used 8 and 10 % gels , respectively . D , HEK 293 cells were transfected with the D SH3 and D HPSH3 expression vectors . The cells were starved overnight in serum - free medium and then labeled with 32 P P i and stimulated with EGF as described in the legend to Fig . 5 . Lysates were prepared in RIPA buffer , EMS1 was immunoprecipi - tated , and the samples were subjected to SDS - PAGE . The gels were Coomassie Blue stained , dried , and then subjected to autoradiography ( top panels ) . A portion of the samples was analyzed for the EMS1 protein by Western blotting ( bottom panels ) . Note that in the top panels , the exposure time for the samples from the D SH3 transfections was 4 h , whereas the exposure time for the samples from the D HPSH3 samples was 24 h . 5381 REGULATION OF EMS1 PHOSPHORYLATION Research . on April 20 , 2017 . © 1999 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from of peptide A . After mixing in vivo and in vitro samples , four peptide spots were visible . Both spots B and D were increased in intensity relative to those obtained from the in vivo samples alone , indicating co - migration of peptides phosphorylated in vitro and in vivo . This result confirms that EMS1 is phosphorylated within the HP region and therefore complements the deletion analysis presented in Fig . 7 . Furthermore , co - migration of two HP - derived phosphopeptides phos - phorylated by Erks in vitro with two phosphopeptides phosphorylated in a MEK - dependent manner upon EGF treatment in vivo identifies Erks as candidate EMS1 kinases . Finally , assuming that in vitro phosphorylation by Erks occurs on the two consensus sites at Ser - 405 and Ser - 418 , these are also likely to represent in vivo phosphorylation sites . DISCUSSION The structure , function , and subcellular localization of EMS1 sug - gest that it is likely to play a major role in linking signaling events triggered by growth factor stimulation , cell - cell adhesion , and cell - substratum adhesion to organization of the actin cytoskeleton ( 1 , 3 , 6 , 11 , 21 , 28 ) . Furthermore , these properties , coupled with the common overexpression of this protein in a variety of human cancers ( 15 , 16 , 41 – 45 ) , indicate that it may modulate cancer cell invasion and me - tastasis . However , how the activity and subcellular localization of this protein are regulated in vivo is incompletely understood . Although others have identified tyrosine phosphorylation of EMS1 as one important regulatory mechanism and characterized the kinase and sites involved ( 1 , 6 , 28 ) , the signal transduction pathways leading to EMS1 serine and threonine phosphorylation have not been character - ized and hence were the subject of this study . Several lines of evidence suggest that serine / threonine phosphoryl - ation of EMS1 may play an independent role in regulation of EMS1 function to tyrosine phosphorylation . Firstly , a wide variety of cell types display both the 80 - and 85 - kDa forms of the EMS1 protein , and the presence of at least two forms of the protein is conserved between human , mouse , chicken , and Drosophila ( 1 , 11 , 29 ) . In addition , serine and threonine phosphorylation can occur independently of tyrosine phosphorylation , and only serine and threonine phosphoryl - ation correlates with the EMS1 mobility shift ( 29 ) . Similarly , in our studies , the mobility shift was independent of tyrosine phosphoryla - tion ( Fig . 5 B ) . One likely role for serine / threonine phosphorylation is in regulation of EMS1 subcellular localization , as vanadate - induced tyrosine phosphorylation of EMS1 in squamous carcinoma cells ex - pressing normal levels of EMS1 protein was insufficient to localize the protein to the cell - substratum contact region ; however , EGF - induced serine and threonine phosphorylation correlated with a change in subcellular localization for cells overexpressing the protein ( 29 ) . The specific role for serine / threonine versus tyrosine phospho - rylation is underscored by the observation that mutation of the tyro - sine residues necessary for c - Src - mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of EMS1 did not cause a change in subcellular localization of the protein when expressed in endothelial cells ( 28 ) . In cells that overexpressed the EMS1 protein and those that ex - pressed endogenous levels , EGF treatment resulted in a shift of p80 to p85 and a corresponding 2 - fold increase in serine / threonine phospho - rylation ( Figs . 1 B and 5 ) . We also observed an EGF - induced EMS1 mobility shift in SK - BR - 3 human breast cancer cells , another cell line that is not amplified for the 11q13 locus and expresses levels of EMS1 protein equivalent to normal breast epithelial cells ( data not shown ; Refs . 43 and 46 ) . Thus , neither 11q13 amplification nor EMS1 over - expression is required for the EGF - induced mobility shift , and the absence of CCND1 amplification in these cells argues against dereg - ulation of cyclin D1 / CDK4 as a possible mechanism for the increased Fig . 8 . Purified Erks can phosphorylate the HP region of EMS1 . A , representation of the two predicted tryptic phosphopeptides from the HP region of EMS1 that contain consensus Erk phosphorylation sites . The consensus sites are underlined , whereas the target residues are indicated in boldface . B , in vitro Erk kinase assays using MBP , GST protein , a fusion protein consisting of GST and the EMS1 HP region ( GST - HP ) , and a fusion protein consisting of GST and the EMS1 SH3 domain ( GST - SH3 ) were separated by SDS - PAGE and subjected to autoradiography . C , phosphoamino acid analysis of GST - HP fusion protein phosphorylated in vitro by Erks . The position of phosphoamino acid standards are indicated with dotted lines . P - Ser , phosphoserine ; P - Thr , phospho - threonine ; P - Tyr , phosphotyrosine . D , the GST - HP sample depicted in B was excised from the gel and subjected to tryptic phosphopeptide mapping as described in “Materials and Methods . ” Fig . 9 . Co - migration of tryptic phosphopeptides generated from GST - HP protein phosphorylated in vitro by Erks with tryptic phosphopeptides generated from in vivo labeled samples . The GST - HP fusion protein was phosphorylated by Erks as described in “Materials and Methods . ” EMS1 was immunoprecipitated after in vivo P i labeling and EGF stimulation as described in the legend to Fig . 5 . Tryptic phosphopeptides of both these samples were generated as described previously , and following Cerenkov counting , the in vivo - labeled sample was diluted in electrophoresis buffer to give equivalent cpm per unit of volume to that obtained for the GST - HP sample . Two - thirds of the in vivo aliquot was analyzed alone ( A ) , and the remaining one - third was analyzed in combination with the in vitro labeled aliquot at a ratio of 1 : 3 . Electrophoresis and ascending chromatography were performed as described in “Materials and Methods . ” Panel A , tryptic phosphopeptide map from EMS1 labeled in vivo . Panel B , combination of in vivo and in vitro labeled tryptic phosphopeptides . Note that the intensity of peptide A ( spot A ) is lower than that observed in panel A , as only one - half the amount of in vivo labeled sample was used . However , the intensity of spots B and D has increased relative to panel A , indicating co - migration of the two peptide spots generated from in vitro labeled GST - HP with peptides generated from in vivo labeled samples . 5382 REGULATION OF EMS1 PHOSPHORYLATION Research . on April 20 , 2017 . © 1999 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from EMS1 serine / threonine phosphorylation , as was suggested previously ( 29 ) . Inhibition of EGF - induced MEK activation using PD98059 was sufficient to prevent the mobility shift and the increase in serine / threonine phosphorylation ( Figs . 2 and 5 ) . Interestingly , a different cellular stimulus , cell detachment , also induced a MEK - dependent shift of EMS1 from p80 to p85 . Furthermore , co - transfection of EMS1 and a constitutively active MEK construct led to detection of only the p85 form of EMS1 , indicating that MEK activation not only is required for the p80 to p85 conversion but also is sufficient to induce it ( Fig . 3 ) . However , in unstimulated cells , the p85 form of EMS1 was present and incorporated radioactive phosphate , and this was unaf - fected by treatment with PD98059 or expression of a dominant negative MEK construct , indicating that this basal phosphorylation was independent of MEK activation ( Figs . 2 , 3 , and 5 ) . This was supported by the observation that the levels of activation of this pathway in starved cells , as determined by Western blotting for active Erks , was undetectable ( Fig . 1 C ) . This basal activity toward p80 could represent baseline activation of an enzyme susceptible to up - regula - tion by MEK and / or constitutive activation of a MEK - independent signaling pathway . In squamous carcinoma cells with an 11q13 am - plification , inhibition of protein synthesis via cycloheximide treatment results in loss of p80 due to conversion into p85 ( 29 ) . However , incubation of HEK 293 or EMS1 – 2 cells with cycloheximide for up to 6 h did not alter the p80 / 85 ratio . Consequently the stability of the p80 and p85 forms of EMS1 can vary according to cell type , presumably due to differences in the total amount of EMS1 protein and opposing kinase and phosphatase activities . To gain further insight into the potential regulatory role of EMS1 serine / threonine phosphorylation and the specific kinases involved , we mapped the EMS1 region required . EMS1 consists of three func - tional domains : the actin binding region , the HP region , and the COOH - terminal SH3 domain . Removal of the SH3 domain did not affect either the basal or EGF - induced phosphorylation of EMS1 , whereas removal of the HP region abolished both , as well as the EGF - induced mobility shift ( Fig . 7 ) . Furthermore , because two of the tryptic phosphopeptides derived from in vivo phosphorylated EMS1 co - migrated with phosphopeptides derived from in vitro phosphoryl - ation of the HP region by the Erks ( Fig . 9 ) , the latter domain must be phosphorylated in vivo . However , it remains possible that this region also serves to recruit a specific kinase that phosphorylates EMS1 within the actin binding region , because the origin of the other two phosphopeptides is currently unknown . Importantly , the observation that the two peptides phosphorylated in vitro on serine residues by the Erks co - migrated with equivalent peptides on the in vivo map , coupled with the MEK - dependency of the phosphorylation of these peptides , identified the Erks as candidate EMS1 kinases . EMS1 therefore joins the cytoplasmic subset of Erk targets that also includes cPLA 2 ( 47 ) , the Ras GDP - GTP exchange factor Sos - 1 ( 48 ) , and the EGFR ( 49 ) . It is interesting to note that a pool of Erk2 translocates to membrane ruffles , a site of EMS1 subcellular localization , upon serum stimula - tion of COS cells ( 50 ) . However , activation of MEK results in not only activation of the Erks , but also a number of other kinases that are in turn phosphoryl - ated and / or activated by these enzymes . These include p90 RSK1 – 3 ( 51 , 52 ) , MAP kinase - activated protein kinases 3 ( 53 , 54 ) and 5 ( 55 ) , the recently identified Mnk1 and Mnk2 ( 56 , 57 ) , and MSK1 ( 58 ) . The p90 RSK kinases are serine - directed kinases that display basal activity that is enhanced after activation by Erks but is not significantly altered by PD98059 treatment or expression of a dominant negative MEK ( 52 ) , and as such they are attractive candidate kinases for the basal and EGF - induced phosphorylation of EMS1 . Futhermore , there are two minimal ( Arg - XX - Ser ) RSK consensus phosphorylation sites ( Ser - 417 and Ser - 457 ) located in the HP region of EMS1 . It is noteworthy that RSK 2 and 3 interact with Erk1 and Erk2 , and both RSK and Erks have been implicated in phosphorylation of Sos - 1 ( 48 , 59 ) . This is of interest , as it must involve translocation to a site near the cell mem - brane , hence placing the complex in close proximity to cortical EMS1 . However , the selectivity of RSK kinases toward serine residues ( 60 ) indicates that a further MEK - dependent kinase must also be involved , as significant MEK - dependent phosphorylation on threonine residues was observed ( Fig . 5 ) . The contribution of these other MEK - regulated enzymes to EMS1 phosphorylation is currently under investigation . The finding that EMS1 phosphorylation is regulated by the MEK - Erk pathway may provide an underlying mechanism for our recent finding that EMS1 gene amplification is associated with poor prog - nosis in ER - negative , but not ER - positive , breast cancer ( 16 , 61 ) . Because EGFR and erbB2 are highly expressed in ER - negative breast cancer ( 17 , 18 ) , and because both receptors strongly activate this signaling pathway ( 33 , 62 ) , Erk mediated phosphorylation may alter the function of the overexpressed EMS1 protein . Because EMS1 also represents a target for Src family kinases ( 1 , 5 , 6 , 28 , 43 , 63 ) , and because these are also activated by these receptors ( 64 – 67 ) , enhanced tyrosine phosphorylation of EMS1 may also contribute to this effect . The HP region contains the tyrosine residues involved in regulation of the actin cross - linking activity by c - Src ( 6 , 28 ) . Importantly , mutation of these residues to Phe abolished the ability of transfected EMS1 to up - regulate the motility of endothelial cells , confirming the relevance of these phosphorylation events in vivo . These data , in combination with our results identifying the HP region as critical for serine / threonine phosphorylation , identify this region as an important regulatory domain . A possible model involves an intramolecular in - teraction between the SH3 domain and the proline - rich sequences N - terminal to this module , resulting in a “closed” conformation . Phosphorylation of serine and threonine residues in the HP region may then disrupt the intramolecular interaction , resulting in an “open” conformation , as has been suggested for regulation of the focal adhe - sion kinase - associated Rho - GAP protein Graf ( 68 ) . Alternatively , phosphorylation of the HP region may disrupt intermolecular interac - tions between EMS1 and SH3 domain - containing proteins , in a man - ner analogous to that proposed for the regulation of the Sos - 1 / Grb2 complex by Erk phosphorylation ( 69 , 70 ) . Circumstantial evidence for this model is that a proline - rich region of the EMS1 - related protein LckBP1 that is targetted by the Lck SH3 domain also contains a consensus Erk phosphorylation site ( 71 ) . Clearly , serine and threonine phosphorylation of EMS1 represents a conserved regulatory mecha - nism , and further definition of the sites involved will allow functional analysis of these events . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Dr . Boris Sarcevic for providing materials and constructive advice . REFERENCES 1 . Wu , H . , Reynolds , A . B . , Kanner , S . B . , Vines , R . R . , and Parsons , J . T . Identification and characterization of a novel cytoskeleton - associated pp60src substrate . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 11 : 5113 – 5124 , 1991 . 2 . Schuuring , E . , Verhoeven , E . , Litvinov , S . , and Michalides , R . J . A . M . The product of the EMS1 gene , amplified and overexpressed in human carcinomas , is homologous to a v - src substrate and is located in cell - substratum contact sites . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 13 : 2891 – 2898 , 1993 . 3 . Wu , H . , and Parsons , J . T . Cortactin , an 80 / 85 - kilodalton pp60src substrate , is a filamentous actin - binding protein enriched in the cell cortex . J . Cell Biol . , 120 : 1417 – 1426 , 1993 . 4 . Ozawa , K . , Kashiwada , K . , Takahashi , M . , and Sobue , K . Translocation of cortactin ( p80 / 85 ) to the actin - based cytoskeleton during thrombin receptor - mediated platelet activation . Exp . Cell Res . , 221 : 197 – 204 , 1995 . 5383 REGULATION OF EMS1 PHOSPHORYLATION Research . on April 20 , 2017 . © 1999 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from 5 . Okamura , H . , and Resh , M . D . p80 / 85 cortactin associates with the Src SH2 domain and colocalizes with v - Src in transformed cells . J . Biol . Chem . , 270 : 26613 – 26618 , 1995 . 6 . Huang , C . , Ni , Y . S . , Wang , T . , Gao , Y . M . , Haudenschild , C . C . , and Zhan , X . Down - regulation of the filamentous actin cross - linking activity of cortactin by Src - mediated tyrosine phosphorylation . J . Biol . Chem . , 272 : 13911 – 13915 , 1997 . 7 . Pawson , T . Protein modules and signalling networks . Nature ( Lond . ) , 373 : 573 – 580 , 1995 . 8 . Sparks , A . B . , Rider , J . E . , Hoffman , N . G . , Fowlkes , D . M . , Quillam , L . A . , and Kay , B . K . Distinct ligand preferences of Src homology 3 domains from Src , Yes , Abl , Cortactin , p53bp2 , PLCgamma , Crk , and Grb2 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 93 : 1540 – 1544 , 1996 . 9 . Du , Y . R . , Weed , S . A . , Xiong , W . C . , Marshall , T . D . , and Parsons , J . T . Identifi - cation of a novel cortactin SH3 domain - binding protein and its localization to growth cones of cultured neurons . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 18 : 5838 – 5851 , 1998 . 10 . Ohoka , Y . , and Takai , Y . Isolation and characterization of cortactin isoforms and a novel cortactin - binding protein , CBP90 . Genes Cells , 3 : 603 – 612 , 1998 . 11 . Katsube , T . , Takahisa , M . , Ueda , R . , Hashimoto , N . , and Kobayashi , M . S . T . Cortactin associates with the cell - cell junction protein ZO - 1 in both Drosophila and mouse . J . Biol . Chem . , 273 : 29672 – 29677 , 1998 . 12 . Fantl , V . , Smith , R . , Brookes , S . , Dickson , C . , and Peters , G . Chromosome 11q13 abnormalities in human breast cancer . Cancer Surv . , 18 : 77 – 94 , 1993 . 13 . Peters , G . , Fantl , V . , Smith , R . , Brookes , S . , and Dickson , C . Chromosome 11q13 markers and D - type cyclins in breast cancer . Breast Cancer Res . Treat . , 33 : 125 – 135 , 1995 . 14 . Williams , M . E . , Gaffey , M . J . , Weiss , L . M . , Wilczynski , S . P . , Schuuring , E . , and Levine , P . A . Chromosome 11q13 amplification in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma . Arch . Otolaryngol . Head Neck Surg . , 119 : 1238 – 1243 , 1993 . 15 . Schuuring , E . , Verhoeven , E . , van Tinteren , H . , Peterse , J . L . , Nunnink , B . , Thunnissen , F . B . , Devilee , P . , Cornelisse , C . J . , van de Vijver , M . J . , Mooi , W . J . , and Michalides , R . J . A . M . Amplification of genes within the chromosome 11q13 region is indicative of poor prognosis in patients with operable breast cancer . Cancer Res . , 52 : 5229 – 5234 , 1992 . 16 . Hui , R . , Campbell , D . H . , Lee , C . , McCaul , K . , Horsfall , D . J . , Musgrove , E . A . , Daly , R . J . , Seshadri , R . , and Sutherland , R . L . EMS1 amplification can occur independ - ently of CCND1 or INT - 2 amplification at 11q13 and may identify different pheno - types in primary breast cancer . Oncogene , 15 : 1617 – 1623 , 1997 . 17 . Sainsbury , J . R . , Farndon , J . R . , Needham , G . K . , Malcolm , A . J . , and Harris , A . L . Epidermal - growth - factor receptor status as predictor of early recurrence of and death from breast cancer . Lancet , 1 : 1398 – 1402 , 1987 . 18 . Seshadri , R . , Firgaira , F . A . , Horsfall , D . J . , McCaul , K . , Setlur , V . , and Kitchen , P . Clinical significance of HER - 2 / neu oncogene amplification in primary breast cancer . The South Australian Breast Cancer Study Group . J . Clin . Oncol . , 11 : 1936 – 1942 , 1993 . 19 . Maa , M . C . , Wilson , L . K . , Moyers , J . S . , Vines , R . R . , Parsons , J . T . , and Parsons , S . J . Identification and characterization of a cytoskeleton - associated , epidermal growth factor sensitive pp60c - src substrate . Oncogene , 7 : 2429 – 2438 , 1992 . 20 . Zhan , X . , Plourde , C . , Hu , X . , Friesel , R . , and Maciag , T . Association of fibroblast growth factor receptor - 1 with c - Src correlates with association between c - Src and cortactin . J . Biol . Chem . , 269 : 20221 – 20224 , 1994 . 21 . Vuori , K . , and Ruoslahti , E . Tyrosine phosphorylation of p130Cas and cortactin accompanies integrin - mediated cell adhesion to extracellular matrix . J . Biol . Chem . , 270 : 22259 – 22262 , 1995 . 22 . Kanner , S . B . , Reynolds , A . B . , Vines , R . R . , and Parsons , J . T . Monoclonal antibodies to individual tyrosine - phosphorylated protein substrates of oncogene - encoded tyrosine kinases . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 87 : 3328 – 3332 , 1990 . 23 . Wong , S . , Reynolds , A . B . , and Papkoff , J . Platelet activation leads to increased c - src kinase activity and association of c - src with an 85 - kDa tyrosine phosphoprotein . Oncogene , 7 : 2407 – 2415 , 1992 . 24 . Fox , J . E . , Lipfert , L . , Clark , E . A . , Reynolds , C . C . , Austin , C . D . , and Brugge , J . S . On the role of the platelet membrane skeleton in mediating signal transduction . Association of GP IIb - IIIa , pp60c - src , pp62c - yes , and the p21ras GTPase - activating protein with the membrane skeleton . J . Biol . Chem . , 268 : 25973 – 25984 , 1993 . 25 . He , H . , Watanabe , T . , Zhan , X . , Huang , C . , Schuuring , E . , Fukami , K . , Takenawa , T . , Kumar , C . C . , Simpson , R . J . , and Maruta , H . Role of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate in Ras / Rac - induced disruption of the cortactin - actomyosin II complex and malignant transformation . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 18 : 3829 – 3837 , 1998 . 26 . Weed , S . A . , Du , Y . R . , and Parsons , J . T . Translocation of cortactin to the cell periphery is mediated by the small GTPase Rac1 . J . Cell Sci . , 111 : 2433 – 2443 , 1998 . 27 . Patel , A . S . , Schechter , G . L . , Wasilenko , W . J . , and Somers , K . D . Overexpression of EMS1 / cortactin in NIH3T3 fibroblasts causes increased cell motility and invasion in vitro . Oncogene , 16 : 3227 – 3232 , 1998 . 28 . Huang , C . , Liu , J . L . , Haudenschild , C . C . , and Zhan , X . The role of tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin in the locomotion of endothelial cells . J . Biol . Chem . , 273 : 25770 – 25776 , 1998 . 29 . van Damme , H . , Brok , H . , Schuuring - Scholtes , E . , and Schuuring , E . The redistri - bution of cortactin into cell - matrix contact sites in human carcinoma cells with 11q13 amplification is associated with both overexpression and post - translational modifica - tion . J . Biol . Chem . , 272 : 7374 – 7380 , 1997 . 30 . Sambrook , J . , Fritsch , E . F . , and Maniatis , T . Molecular Cloning : A Laboratory Manual . Cold Spring Harbor , NY : Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory , 1989 . 31 . Alessi , D . R . , Saito , Y . , Campbell , D . G . , Cohen , P . , Sithanandam , G . , Rapp , U . , Ashworth , A . , Marshall , C . J . , and Cowley , S . Identification of the sites in MAP kinase kinase - 1 phosphorylated by p74raf - 1 . EMBO J . , 13 : 1610 – 1619 , 1994 . 32 . Janes , P . W . , Lackmann , M . , Church , W . B . , Sanderson , G . M . , Sutherland , R . L . , and Daly , R . J . Structural determinants of the interaction between the erbB2 receptor and the Src homology 2 domain of Grb7 . J . Biol . Chem . , 272 : 8490 – 8497 , 1997 . 33 . Janes , P . W . , Daly , R . J . , deFazio , A . , and Sutherland , R . L . Activation of the Ras signalling pathway in human breast cancer cells overexpressing erbB - 2 . Oncogene , 9 : 3601 – 3608 , 1994 . 34 . Lowenstein , E . J . , Daly , R . J . , Batzer , A . G . , Li , W . , Margolis , B . , Lammers , R . , Ullrich , A . , Skolnik , E . Y . , Bar - Sagi , D . , and Schlessinger , J . The SH2 and SH3 domain - containing protein GRB2 links receptor tyrosine kinases to ras signaling . Cell , 70 : 431 – 442 , 1992 . 35 . Fiddes , R . J . , Campbell , D . H . , Janes , P . W . , Sivertsen , S . P . , Sasaki , H . , Wallasch , C . , and Daly , R . J . Analysis of Grb7 recruitment by heregulin - activated erbB recep - tors reveals a novel target selectivity for erbB3 . J . Biol . Chem . , 273 : 7717 – 7724 , 1998 . 36 . Smith , D . B . , and Johnson , K . S . Single - step purification of polypeptides expressed in Escherichia coli as fusions with glutathione S - transferase . Gene , 67 : 31 – 40 , 1988 . 37 . Alessi , D . R . , Cuenda , A . , Cohen , P . , Dudley , D . T . , and Saltiel , A . R . PD 098059 is a specific inhibitor of the activation of mitogen - activated protein kinase kinase in vitro and in vivo . J . Biol . Chem . , 270 : 27489 – 27494 , 1995 . 38 . Dudley , D . T . , Pang , L . , Decker , S . J . , Bridges , A . J . , and Saltiel , A . R . A synthetic inhibitor of the mitogen - activated protein kinase cascade . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 92 : 7686 – 7689 , 1995 . 39 . Schlaepfer , D . D . , Hanks , S . K . , Hunter , T . , and van der Geer , P . Integrin - mediated signal transduction linked to Ras pathway by Grb2 binding to focal adhesion kinase . Nature ( Lond . ) , 372 : 786 – 791 , 1994 . 40 . Davis , R . J . The mitogen - activated protein kinase signal transduction pathway . J . Biol . Chem . , 268 : 14553 – 14556 , 1993 . 41 . Schuuring , E . , Verhoeven , E . , Mooi , W . J . , and Michalides , R . J . A . M . Identification and cloning of two overexpressed genes , U21B31 / PRAD1 and EMS1 , within the amplified chromosome 11q13 region in human carcinomas . Oncogene , 7 : 355 – 361 , 1992 . 42 . Patel , A . M . , Incognito , L . S . , Schechter , G . L . , Wasilenko , W . J . , and Somers , K . D . Amplification and expression of EMS - 1 ( cortactin ) in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell lines . Oncogene , 12 : 31 – 35 , 1996 . 43 . Campbell , D . H . , DeFazio , A . , Sutherland , R . L . , and Daly , R . J . Expression and tyrosine phosphorylation of EMS1 in human breast cancer cell lines . Int . J . Cancer , 68 : 485 – 492 , 1996 . 44 . Miglarese , M . R . , Mannion - Henderson , J . , Wu , H . , Parsons , J . T . , and Bender , T . P . The protein tyrosine kinase substrate cortactin is differentially expressed in murine B lymphoid tumors . Oncogene , 9 : 1989 – 1997 , 1994 . 45 . Bringuier , P . P . , Tamimi , Y . , Schuuring , E . , and Schalken , J . Expression of cyclin D1 and EMS1 in bladder tumours ; relationship with chromosome 11q13 amplification . Oncogene , 12 : 1747 – 1753 , 1996 . 46 . Buckley , M . F . , Sweeney , K . J . , Hamilton , J . A . , Sini , R . L . , Manning , D . L . , Nicholson , R . I . , deFazio , A . , Watts , C . K . , Musgrove , E . A . , and Sutherland , R . L . Expression and amplification of cyclin genes in human breast cancer . Oncogene , 8 : 2127 – 2133 , 1993 . 47 . Lin , L . L . , Wartmann , M . , Lin , A . Y . , Knopf , J . L . , Seth , A . , and Davis , R . J . cPLA2 is phosphorylated and activated by MAP kinase . Cell , 72 : 269 – 278 , 1993 . 48 . Rozakis - Adcock , M . , van der Geer , P . , Mbamalu , G . , and Pawson , T . MAP kinase phosphorylation of mSos1 promotes dissociation of mSos1 - Shc and mSos1 - EGF receptor complexes . Oncogene , 11 : 1417 – 1426 , 1995 . 49 . Takishima , K . , Griswold - Prenner , I . , Ingebritsen , T . , and Rosner , M . R . Epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) receptor T669 peptide kinase from 3T3 – L1 cells is an EGF - stimulated “MAP” kinase . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 88 : 2520 – 2524 , 1991 . 50 . Gonzalez , F . A . , Seth , A . , Raden , D . L . , Bowman , D . S . , Fay , F . S . , and Davis , R . J . Serum - induced translocation of mitogen - activated protein kinase to the cell surface ruffling membrane and the nucleus . J . Cell Biol . , 122 : 1089 – 1101 , 1993 . 51 . Zhao , Y . , Bjorbaek , C . , Weremowicz , S . , Morton , C . C . , and Moller , D . E . RSK3 encodes a novel pp90rsk isoform with a unique N - terminal sequence : growth factor - stimulated kinase function and nuclear translocation . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 15 : 4353 – 4363 , 1995 . 52 . Zhao , Y . , Bjorbaek , C . , and Moller , D . E . Regulation and interaction of pp90 ( rsk ) isoforms with mitogen - activated protein kinases . J . Biol . Chem . , 271 : 29773 – 29779 , 1996 . 53 . Sithanandam , G . , Latif , F . , Duh , F . M . , Bernal , R . , Smola , U . , Li , H . , Kuzmin , I . , Wixler , V . , Geil , L . , and Shrestha , S . 3pK , a new mitogen - activated protein kinase - activated protein kinase located in the small cell lung cancer tumor suppressor gene region . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 16 : 868 – 876 , 1996 . 54 . Ludwig , S . , Engel , K . , Hoffmeyer , A . , Sithanandam , G . , Neufeld , B . , Palm , D . , Gaestel , M . , and Rapp , U . R . 3pK , a novel mitogen - activated protein ( MAP ) kinase - activated protein kinase , is targeted by three MAP kinase pathways . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 16 : 6687 – 6697 , 1996 . 55 . Ni , H . , Wang , X . S . , Diener , K . , and Yao , Z . MAPKAPK5 , a novel mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) - activated protein kinase , is a substrate of the extracellular - regulated kinase ( ERK ) and p38 kinase . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . , 243 : 492 – 496 , 1998 . 56 . Fukunaga , R . , and Hunter , T . MNK1 , a new MAP kinase - activated protein kinase , isolated by a novel expression screening method for identifying protein kinase substrates . EMBO J . , 16 : 1921 – 1933 , 1997 . 57 . Waskiewicz , A . J . , Flynn , A . , Proud , C . G . , and Cooper , J . A . Mitogen - activated protein kinases activate the serine / threonine kinases Mnk1 and Mnk2 . EMBO J . , 16 : 1909 – 1920 , 1997 . 58 . Deak , M . , Clifton , A . D . , Lucocq , L . M . , and Alessi , D . R . Mitogen - and stress - activated protein kinase - 1 ( MSK1 ) is directly activated by MAPK and SAPK2 / p38 , and may mediate activation of CREB . EMBO J . , 17 : 4426 – 4441 , 1998 . 5384 REGULATION OF EMS1 PHOSPHORYLATION Research . on April 20 , 2017 . © 1999 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from 59 . Douville , E . , and Downward , J . EGF induced SOS phosphorylation in PC12 cells involves P90 RSK - 2 . Oncogene , 15 : 373 – 383 , 1997 . 60 . Leighton , I . A . , Dalby , K . N . , Caudwell , F . B . , Cohen , P . T . , and Cohen , P . Comparison of the specificities of p70 S6 kinase and MAPKAP kinase - 1 identifies a relatively specific substrate for p70 S6 kinase : the N - terminal kinase domain of MAPKAP kinase - 1 is essential for peptide phosphorylation . FEBS Lett . , 375 : 289 – 293 , 1995 . 61 . Hui , R . , Ball , J . R . , Macmillan , R . D . , Kenny , F . S . , Prall , O . W . J . , Campbell , D . H . , Cornish , A . L . , McClelland , R . A . , Daly , R . J . , Forbes , J . F . , Blamey , R . W . , Musgrove , E . A . , Robertson , J . F . R . , Nicholson , R . I . , and Sutherland , R . L . EMS1 gene expression in primary breast cancer : relationship to cyclin D1 and oestrogen receptor expression and patient survival . Oncogene , 17 : 1053 – 1059 , 1998 . 62 . Egan , S . E . , and Weinberg , R . A . The pathway to signal achievement . Nature ( Lond . ) , 365 : 781 – 783 , 1993 . 63 . Thomas , S . M . , Soriano , P . , and Imamoto , A . Specific and redundant roles of Src and Fyn in organizing the cytoskeleton . Nature ( Lond . ) , 376 : 267 – 271 , 1995 . 64 . Muthuswamy , S . K . , Siegel , P . M . , Dankort , D . L . , Webster , M . A . , and Muller , W . J . Mammary tumors expressing the neu proto - oncogene possess elevated c - Src tyrosine kinase activity . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 14 : 735 – 743 , 1994 . 65 . Oude Weernink , P . A . , Ottenhoff - Kalff , A . E . , Vendrig , M . P . , van Beurden , E . A . , Staal , G . E . , and Rijksen , G . Functional interaction between the epidermal growth factor receptor and c - Src kinase activity . FEBS Lett . , 352 : 296 – 300 , 1994 . 66 . Osherov , N . , and Levitzki , A . Epidermal - growth - factor - dependent activation of the src - family kinases . Eur . J . Biochem . , 225 : 1047 – 1053 , 1994 . 67 . Maa , M . C . , Leu , T . H . , Mccarley , D . J . , Schatzman , R . C . , Parsons , S . J . Potentiation of epidermal growth factor receptor - mediated oncogenesis by c - src : implications for the etiology of multiple human cancers . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA , 92 : 6981 – 6985 , 1995 . 68 . Taylor , J . M . , Hildebrand , J . D . , Mack , C . P . , Cox , M . E . , and Parsons , J . T . Characterization of graf , the GTPase - activating protein for rho associated with focal adhesion kinase . Phosphorylation and possible regulation by mitogen - activated pro - tein kinase . J . Biol . Chem . , 273 : 8063 – 8070 , 1998 . 69 . Corbalan - Garcia , S . , Yang , S . S . , Degenhardt , K . R . , and Bar - Sagi , D . Identification of the mitogen - activated protein kinase phosphorylation sites on human Sos1 that regulate interaction with Grb2 . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 16 : 5674 – 5682 , 1996 . 70 . Waters , S . B . , Holt , K . H . , Ross , S . E . , Syu , L . J . , Guan , K . L . , Saltiel , A . R . , Koretzky , G . A . , and Pessin , J . E . Desensitization of Ras activation by a feedback disassociation of the SOS - Grb2 complex . J . Biol . Chem . , 270 : 20883 – 20886 , 1995 . 71 . Takemoto , Y . , Furuta , M . , Li , X . K . , Strong - Sparks , W . J . , and Hashimoto , Y . LckBP1 , a proline - rich protein expressed in haematopoietic lineage cells , directly associates with the SH3 domain of protein tyrosine kinase p56lck . EMBO J . , 14 : 3403 – 3414 , 1995 . 5385 REGULATION OF EMS1 PHOSPHORYLATION Research . on April 20 , 2017 . © 1999 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from 1999 ; 59 : 5376 - 5385 . Cancer Res Douglas H . Campbell , Robert L . Sutherland and Roger J . Daly Phosphorylation of EMS1 / Cortactin Signaling Pathways and Structural Domains Required for Updated version http : / / cancerres . aacrjournals . org / content / 59 / 20 / 5376 Access the most recent version of this article at : Cited articles http : / / cancerres . aacrjournals . org / content / 59 / 20 / 5376 . full . html # ref - list - 1 This article cites 69 articles , 36 of which you can access for free at : Citing articles / content / 59 / 20 / 5376 . full . html # related - urls This article has been cited by 35 HighWire - hosted articles . Access the articles at : E - mail alerts related to this article or journal . Sign up to receive free email - alerts SubscriptionsReprints and . pubs @ aacr . org Department at To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal , contact the AACR Publications Permissions . permissions @ aacr . org Department at To request permission to re - use all or part of this article , contact the AACR Publications Research . on April 20 , 2017 . © 1999 American Association for Cancer cancerres . aacrjournals . org Downloaded from