Current Biology 17 , 825 – 833 , May 15 , 2007 ª 2007 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2007 . 04 . 037 Article Actin - Filament Stochastic Dynamics Mediated by ADF / Coﬁlin Alphe´e Michelot , 1 , 5 Julien Berro , 2 , 5 Christophe Gue´rin , 1 Rajaa Boujemaa - Paterski , 1 Christopher J . Staiger , 3 , 4 Jean - Louis Martiel , 2 , * and Laurent Blanchoin 1 , * 1 Institut de Recherches en Technologie et Sciences pour le Vivant Laboratoire de Physiologie Cellulaire Ve´ge´tale CEA Grenoble Commissariat a ` l’Energie Atomique Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique Universite´ Joseph Fourier 17 rue des Martyrs F38054 Grenoble France 2 Laboratoire Techniques de l’Inge´nierie Me´dicale et de la Complexite´ Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque 5525 Pavillon Taillefer Faculte´ de Me´decine F - 38706 La Tronche France 3 Department of Biological Sciences and 4 The Bindley Bioscience Center Purdue University West Lafayette , Indiana 47907 - 2064 Summary Background : The rapid dynamics of actin ﬁlaments is a fundamental process that powers a large number of cellular functions . However , the basic mechanisms that control and coordinate such dynamics remain a central question in cell biology . To reach beyond sim - ply deﬁning the inventory of molecules that control actin dynamics and to understand how these proteins act synergistically to modulate ﬁlament turnover , we com - bined evanescent - wave microscopy with a biomimetic system and followed the behavior of single actin ﬁla - ments in the presence of a physiologically relevant mix - ture of accessory proteins . This approach allows for the real - time visualization of actin polymerization and age - dependent ﬁlament severing . Results : In the presence of actin - depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) / coﬁlin and proﬁlin , actin ﬁlaments with a proces - sive formin attached at their barbed ends were observed to oscillate between stochastic growth and shrinkage phases . Fragmentation of continuously growing actin ﬁl - aments by ADF / coﬁlin is the key mechanism modulating the prominent and frequent shortening events . The net effect of continuous actin polymerization , driven by a processive formin that uses proﬁlin - actin , and of ADF / coﬁlin - mediating severing that trims the aged ends of the growing ﬁlaments is an up to 155 - fold in - crease in the rate of actin - ﬁlament turnover in vitro in comparison to that of actin alone . Lateral contact be - tween actin ﬁlaments dampens the dynamics and favors actin - cable formation . A kinetic simulation accurately validates these observations . Conclusions : Our proposed mechanism for the control of actin dynamics is dominated by ADF / coﬁlin - mediated ﬁlament severing that induces a stochastic behavior upon individual actin ﬁlaments . When combined with a selection process that stabilizes ﬁlaments in bundles , this mechanism could account for the emergence and extension of actin - based structures in cells . Introduction Force generation lies at the heart of a large and diverse array of cellular processes , including morphogenesis , the establishment of polarity , and motility [ 1 ] . The actin cytoskeleton can produce these large forces directly based on three main properties : ( 1 ) the abundance of the major protein constituent , actin ; ( 2 ) the potential to modulate polymerization and depolymerization with a battery of accessory proteins ; and ( 3 ) the ability to self - organize into higher - order structures [ 2 ] . The basic unit in this system is monomeric actin , a 42 kDa protein that binds a nucleotide ( ATP ) and a divalent cation ( Mg 2 + ) . In vivo , MgATP - actin monomers assemble rap - idly into polarized helical ﬁlaments that are a few mi - crons in length and that make contacts with the plasma membrane to drive cell movement at rates of up to 10 m m / min [ 1 ] . To sustain movement over time and to be able to rapidly change the direction of movement in re - sponse to stimuli , locomoting cells need to continuously polymerize actin ﬁlaments at the leading edge and dis - assemble actin ﬁlaments at the rear of the lamellipo - dium . This fast actin - ﬁlament turnover has been estab - lished for several different cells , including ﬁbroblasts [ 3 ] , ﬁsh keratocytes [ 4 ] , and neuronal growth cones [ 5 ] . Moreover , dynamic actin polymerization and depo - lymerization contribute to the formation of different actin - based structures , such as ﬁlopodia and micro - spikes [ 6 ] , as well as yeast actin cables and patches [ 7 ] . However , the basic mechanisms underlying fast actin - ﬁlament turnover in vivo remain a central unanswered question in cell biology . Indeed , actin ﬁlaments in vitro are stable structures that turn over at rather slow rates by a mechanism called ‘‘treadmilling . ’’ At steady state , treadmilling comprises the addition of actin monomers at ﬁlament barbed ends and the accompanying depoly - merization of actin subunits at ﬁlament pointed ends ( rate of 0 . 27 s 2 1 [ 8 ] ) . This is two orders of magnitude too slow for it to be compatible with cell locomotion [ 9 ] . Biomimetic systems that reconstitute actin - based motility in vitro are a valuable tool for identifying the min - imum set of actin - binding proteins required for generat - ing propulsion forces [ 10 ] . Here we use a combination of * Correspondence : jean - louis . martiel @ imag . fr ( J . - L . M . ) , laurent . blanchoin @ cea . fr ( L . B . ) 5 These authors contributed equally to this work . such a system and total - internal - reﬂection ﬂuorescence microscopy ( TIRFM ) , which allows for the direct visuali - zation of single actin ﬁlaments and the characterization of the molecular mechanism underlying physiological actin - ﬁlament turnover . In this system , individual actin ﬁlaments attached to a polystyrene bead with a proces - sive formin revealed a highly dynamic behavior in which continuous growth alternates with catastrophic reduc - tions in overall ﬁlament length . We ﬁnd that the severing activity of actin - depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) / coﬁlin plays a central role in this stochastic actin - ﬁlament - length oscillation by trimming the aged end of a ﬁlament thatcontinuestogrowatthebarbedend . Lateralinterac - tions between actin ﬁlaments modulate ﬁlament stability andareessential foractin - cableformationandbeadmo - tility . Basedonexperimental parameters , wehavedevel - oped a kinetic model that validates our observations . Results Actin Polymerization at the Surface of Formin - Coated Beads Generates Motility Polystyrene beads coated with the actin - promoting fac - tor of formin , mDia1 FH1 - FH2 , were added to a mixture of puriﬁed proteins , including actin ﬁlaments , proﬁlin , and ADF / coﬁlin . Actin polymerization was initiated from their surface , and ultimately bead movement could be observed at a velocity of 0 . 2 m m $ min 2 1 by phase - contrast microscopy ( Figure 1 and [ 11 ] ) . A ‘‘tail’’ of actin ﬁlaments attached to the bead comprises two large actin - ﬁlament bundles that are arrayed at 180 (cid:2) from each other ( Figure 1 ; Movie S1 in the Supplemental Data available online ) . We hypothesize that movement reﬂects the continuous insertional polymerization of ac - tin ﬁlaments due to a processive nucleation – elongation factor ( i . e . , the formin mDia1 ) at the surface of the bead and the actin - ﬁlament shortening induced by ADF / coﬁlin . When the bead stops moving , due to nonspeciﬁc interactions with other ﬁlament bundles in the mixture or with the cover glass , actin polymerization continues and is powerful enough to buckle actin - ﬁlament bundles ( Figure 1 , t = 80 min ; Movie S1 ) . Such buckling events have also been observed for individual actin ﬁlaments constrained in space by mDia1 attached to the growing barbed ends and by NEM - myosin II attached to the ﬁla - ment side [ 12 , 13 ] . Direct Visualization of Individual Actin - Filament Polymerization at the Surface of mDia1 - FH1 - FH2 - Coated Beads We used TIRFM to follow the nucleation and polymeriza - tion of single actin ﬁlaments at the surface of beads coated with mDia1 FH1 - FH2 ( Figure 2A ; Movies S2 – S6 ) . An advantage of our experimental design compared to those of previous TIRFM experiments with formins is that we know the exact location of mDia1 ( i . e . , at the bead surface ) . We introduced mDia1 - coated beads into a TIRFM ﬂow chamber and initiated polymerization by adding rhodamine - or Alexa - 532 - labeled actin mono - mers , initially in the presence of an excess of proﬁlin ( Figure 2A ; Movies S2 – S4 ) . A few seconds after the addi - tion of proﬁlin - actin , actin ﬁlaments nucleated from the surface of the bead by mDia1 grew continuously at a rate of up to k + = 38 m M 2 1 $ s 2 1 ( Figures 2A and 2C ; Movies S2 – S4 ) , in agreement with previous reports [ 13 , 14 ] . We were able to modulate the density of actin ﬁla - ments generated at the surface of the beads by varying the concentration of attached formins ( compare Movies S2 and S3 ) . We obtained a linear correlation between the concentration of attached mDia and the efﬁciency of ac - tin - ﬁlament nucleation from the beads ( data not shown ) . WerecentlyestablishedthatAlexa - 532actinisauseful tool for identifying and following polymerization at the growing barbed end of actin ﬁlaments [ 13 ] . The intensity ofAlexa - 532 - actin - ﬁlamentﬂuorescencedecreasesrap - idly as a result of photobleaching , with the result that subunits near the growing barbed ends are substantially brighter than older parts of the ﬁlament [ 13 ] . This de - crease is not related to the loss of ﬂuorescence when an actin ﬁlament moves out of the evanescent wave ; indeed , comparable bleaching is not observed with rho - damine - labeledactin . ByusingAlexa - 532actin , wedem - onstrated here that mDia1 attached to the beads is pro - cessive ( MovieS4 ) . The brightestpartofanactin ﬁlament , corresponding to the growing barbed end , was always in contact with the formin attached to the beads ( green arrows , Movie S4 ) , whereas ﬂuorescence of the actin ﬁl - ament near the pointed end decreased markedly over time ( blue arrows , Movie S4 ) . When actin ﬁlaments that initiated at the bead surface came into contact with the glass slide , we often observed buckling events , consis - tent with the processive behavior of mDia1 ( Figure 2A ; Movies S2 – S4 ) . Figure 1 . Motility of Polystyrene Beads Coated with the Formin mDia1 in a Biomimetic Reconstituted System Conditions : mDia1 - coatedbeads ( 1 m M ) wereaddedtoamotilitymediumcontaining8 m MF - actin , 4 m Mproﬁlin , and10 m Mhumancoﬁlin . Images were taken at the indicated times during polymerization . Time - lapse images of motile mDia1 beads were acquired by phase - contrast microscopy . After a few minutes , actin - ﬁlament cables appeared and managed to propel the bead , in this representative example . If any obstacle stopped the bead , the force from actin polymerization buckled the actin cables instead of pushing the bead ( t = 80 min ) . See also Movie S1 . The scale bar represents 5 m m . Current Biology 826 Whether proﬁlin is necessary for the processive be - havior of mDia1 remains controversial [ 11 , 14 ] . How - ever , we were able to induce growth of actin ﬁlaments , at a rate of k + = 7 . 8 m M 2 1 $ s 2 1 , from the surface of mDia1 - coated beads in the absence of proﬁlin ( Movies S5 and S6 ) . Moreover , the use of Alexa - 532 - actin al - lowed us to show that the growing barbed end was con - tinuously attached to a formin at the surface of a bead ( green arrow , Movie S6 ) . These observations , and the fact that actin ﬁlaments initiated from the bead surface often buckle ( Movie S6 ) , demonstrate that proﬁlin is not necessary for formin processivity and are in agreement with Kovar et al . [ 14 ] . To simulate the nucleation and growth of actin ﬁla - ments during evanescent - wave - microscopy experi - ments , we developed a 2D kinetic model ( see Experi - mental Procedures and Figures S1 and S2 ) that accounts for the full process of nucleation and proces - sive elongation at the surface of a bead ( Figures 2B and 2C ; Movie S7 ) . The model addresses only the kinetics of ﬁlament growth ; as a consequence , we neglected all ﬁlament - shape ﬂuctuations ( see Supplemental Data for a discussion of this hypothesis ) . The rate of elongation and the density of actin ﬁlaments generated at the sur - face of the beads agreed between experimental and simulated data ( Figure 2C ) . Figure 2 . TIRF Microscopy is a Powerful Tool for the Visualization of Individual Actin Filaments Polymerizing at the Surface of mDia1 - Coated Beads Conditions : mDia1 - coated beads ( 100 nM ) were attached to the cover glass before the addition of 1 . 2 m M rhodamine - labeled actin monomers in the presence of 3 . 6 m M proﬁlin . ( A ) Time - lapseevanescent - wavemicroscopyofrhodamine - labeled - actinpolymerizationaround100nMmDia1 - coatedbeads ( correspondingto 12moleculesofactivemDia1per m m 2 , onaverage ) . Almostallﬁlamentswerenucleatedfromthebeadsandremainedattachedwhileelongating . Actin ﬁlaments under these conditions grew at a rate of k + = 38 m M 2 1 $ s 2 1 . Moreover , ﬁlaments nucleated from the beads often buckled , as expected for a processive elongation factor . See also Movie S2 . ( B ) In silico modeling of the polymerization of 1 . 2 m M actin around 100 nM mDia1 - coated beads . Actin ﬁlaments are represented as red sticks centered on the central position where the bead remains . Actin ﬁlaments elongated progressively as long as polymerization occured . See also Movie S7 . ( C ) Thelengthofanactinﬁlamentover timeasmonitored byTIRFM , forarhodaminelabeled ( circles ) oranAlexa - 532labeled ( triangles ) ﬁlament , iscomparedwiththeinsilicogrowthofanactinﬁlament ( squares ) . Atthispointintheexperiment , ﬁlamentselongatedlinearlyovertimeandgrew at a fast rate ( i . e . , 38 m M 2 1 $ s 2 1 ) , consistent with the unique properties of mDia1 in the presence of proﬁlin . Dynamics of Individual Actin Filaments 827 Synergistic Effects of Formin , Proﬁlin , and ADF / Coﬁlin Induce Stochastic Growth and Shortening , Resulting in Rapid Turnover of Growing Actin Filaments We next reconstituted single - actin - ﬁlament dynamics by introducing mDia1 - coated beads into the ﬂow cham - ber and then added rhodamine - actin monomers , proﬁ - lin , and ADF / coﬁlin ( Figures 3A and 4A ; Movies S8 and S12 ) . A few seconds after the addition of the protein mixture , actin ﬁlaments were initiated at the surface of the bead ( Figure 3A ) . Initially , these ﬁlaments grew con - tinuously at a rate of up to 38 m M 2 1 $ s 2 1 . However , after the initial period , these actin ﬁlaments were observed to switch rapidly between phases of elongation ( Figure 3A , purple triangle ; Movie S8 ) and shortening ( Figure 3A , red triangle ; Movie S8 ) . This is remarkable because until Figure 3 . A Reconstituted System with Formin , Proﬁlin , and ADF / Coﬁlin Induces a Stochastic Behavior of Growing Actin Filaments and Accelerates Their Turnover Conditions : mDia1 - coated beads ( 100 nM ) were attached to the cover glass before the addition of 1 . 2 m M rhodamine - labeled actin monomers in the presence of 3 . 6 m M proﬁlin and 1 m M human coﬁlin . Purple arrows follow the actin - ﬁlament end during elongation , whereas the red arrows represent the last observed position of a ﬁlament end before shortening . ( A ) Time - lapse evanescent - wave microscopy of rhodamine - labeled - actin polymerization around mDia1 - coated beads inthe presence of human coﬁlin and proﬁlin . Human coﬁlin severed actin ﬁlaments while they elongated , thereby accelerating the turnover of actin subunits through the ﬁlament pool that remained attached to the beads . See also Movie S8 . ( B ) In silico modeling of actin polymerization around 100 nM mDia1 - coated beads in the presence of 1 m M human coﬁlin and 3 . 6 m M proﬁlin . Red sticks representing actin ﬁlaments around mDia1 - coated beads show a stochastic dynamic behavior due to the synergistic effects of formin , proﬁlin , and ADF / coﬁlin . See also Movie S10 . ( C ) Length ﬂuctuations of an actin ﬁlament over time for experimental data ( red curve ) and for a representative example of in silico data ( blue dotted curve ) . Blue dots represent the length of the in silico actin ﬁlament every 20 s ( corresponding to the sampling time of the camera during TIRFM experiments ) . The theoretical blue curve links the blue dots and predicts the length variation that might be observed experimentally . Straight lines represent the average length both experimentally ( red line ) and in silico ( blue line ) . ( D ) Distribution of subunit residence time obtained from in silico reconstitution of actin - ﬁlament turnover in the presence of formin , proﬁlin , and ADF / coﬁlin . The residence time peaks at approximately 43 s . ( average 6 SD w 43 6 9 . 7 s ) and is limited either by the time delay for the P i dis - sociation ( distributionlowerlimit , w 10s ) orbythebindingofADF / coﬁlintotheactinﬁlament ( distributionupperlimit , w 65s ) . Allactinsubunitsin a ﬁlament are replaced after a time interval of about 65 s , the maximal time residence obtained from simulations . See also Movie S11 . ( E ) Average residence time of subunits in actin ﬁlaments in the presence of ADF / coﬁlin . Error bars represent variability in measurements . Both experiments ( ﬁlled circles ) and simulations ( solid line ) show that the subunit residence time is extremely sensitive to the presence of ADF / coﬁlin at a low concentration ( below 1 m M ) . This residence time is bounded at high ADF / coﬁlin concentrations by a lower value , about 25 s . Simulations were carried out with the conditions of Figure 3D ( dotted lines and vertical bars indicate the variance for simulated and exper - imental data , respectively ) . Current Biology 828 now , only minor catastrophes have been reported for single actin ﬁlaments [ 15 ] . The addition of BeF 3 , which is a strong inhibitor of ADF / coﬁlin binding and mimics the ADP - P i state of actin ﬁlaments [ 16 ] , to the protein mixture prevents the stochastic behavior of actin ﬁla - ments ( Movie S9 ) . ADF / coﬁlin contributes to the short - ening of actin ﬁlaments by clipping off the aged ends of continuously growing actin ﬁlaments ( Figure 3A , Movie S8 ; and Figure 4A , Movie S12 , green arrows mark an example of severing ) . The apparent elongation rate of formin - bound actin ﬁlaments is then determined by the addition of actin monomers at the barbed end and massive subunit loss resulting from the severing of varying lengths of ﬁlament from the distal or pointed end . Speckles in the actin ﬁlament ( Figure 4B , blue triangle ) conﬁrm that , during a shortening phase ( Figure 4B , red triangle ) , the addition of actin monomers continues at the barbed end at a similar rate . This sug - gests that in the presence of formin , proﬁlin , and ADF / coﬁlin the net polymerization at the growing barbed ends attached to a processive formin of 41 . 8 subunits per second is balanced by the subunit loss that results from ADF / coﬁlin trimming the aged end of the growing actin ﬁlament ( Figures 3A and 4A ; Movies S8 and S12 ) . By incorporating into our kinetic model all reactions that contribute to the effects of ADF / coﬁlin on actin dy - namics ( these reactions include binding to actin mono - mers and ﬁlaments , fragmentation , depolymerization , and an increase in the rate of phosphate dissociation from actin ﬁlaments ) , we were able to reproduce the two phases ( i . e . , elongation and shortening ) of single actin ﬁlaments at the surface of formin - coated beads Figure 4 . TIRF Microscopy Allows for the Visualization of Actin - Filament - Cable Formation and Explains the Symmetry Breaking in a mDia1 - Based Motility Assay Conditions : mDia1 - coated beadswere attached to thecover glass before theaddition of 1 . 2 m Mrhodamine - labeled actin monomers inthepres - ence of 3 . 6 m M proﬁlin and variable amounts of human coﬁlin . ( A ) Time - lapseevanescent - wavemicroscopyofrhodamine - labeled - actinpolymerizationarounda100nMmDia1 - coatedbeadinthepresenceof 1 m M human coﬁlin and 3 . 6 m M proﬁlin . Human coﬁlin efﬁciently severed ( green triangle ) and reduced the length of single actin ﬁlaments while theyelongated ( red triangle ) , whereaszipperingof actinﬁlaments ( red arrow ) generatedthickeractin - ﬁlamentcablesthat weremoreresistantto ADF / coﬁlin ( purple triangle ) . See also Movie S12 . ( B ) Specklesinsidethegrowingﬁlaments ( bluetriangle ) allowedustodemonstratethatduringshorteningphases ( redtriangletracksthepointed end of an actin ﬁlament ) the addition of subunits at the barbed end continues at the same rate . See also Movie S12 . This ﬁgure represents an enlargement of the region deﬁned by the blue box in ( A ) . ( C ) Length variation of a single ﬁlament before and after a zippering event . A typical zippering event is marked with the red arrow in ( A ) . An actin ﬁlament after zippering is more resistant to ADF / coﬁlin fragmentation ( blue curves ) than an isolated actin ﬁlament ( green curves ) . This is illus - trated by the average length of isolated or zippered actin ﬁlaments . ( D ) Time - lapse evanescent - wave microscopy of rhodamine - labeled - actin polymerization around a 1 m M mDia1 - coated bead in the presence of 4 m Mhumancoﬁlinand3 . 6 m Mproﬁlin . HumanADF / coﬁlinprincipallyseveredsingleactinﬁlamentsratherthanactincables , leadingtothegradual symmetrybreaking andformation of largeactin cablesafter 1hr . After 3hr , continuous insertion of actin monomers between the barbed ends of actin ﬁlaments and formins attached to the bead produced enough force to buckle the cables . See also Movie S13 . Dynamics of Individual Actin Filaments 829 ( Figure 3B ; Movie S10 ) . Similar to our experimental con - clusions , the kinetic simulation suggests that fragmen - tation is the mechanism that counterbalances rapid actin - ﬁlament elongation in the presence of formin . Analysis of the variation in the length of actin ﬁlaments attached to the beads by a processive formin , both ex - perimentally ( Figures 3A and 3C , red curve ) and in silico ( Figures 3B and 3C , dashed blue curve ) , revealed that after a rapid phase of elongation ( about 100 s ) , a single actin ﬁlament ﬂuctuates rapidly between phases of elongation and shortening . To compare experimental and simulated data , we reduced the in silico number of time points for the acquisition of actin - ﬁlament length ( Figure 3C , solid blue curve ) . We obtained similar pro - ﬁles for the simulated and experimental dynamics of sin - gleactinﬁlamentswithcloseaverage lengths ( Figure3C , compare solid red and blue curves ) . These results sug - gest that the ﬂuctuations in the length of actin ﬁlaments in our TIRFM experiment were probably underestimated because of the limit of resolution of the microscope sys - tem ( i . e . , 0 . 5 m m ) and the time of acquisition between consecutive frames ; this acquisition time might have al - lowed actin ﬁlaments to be severed and disappear from the evanescent ﬁeld between frames . The kinetic simu - lation enabled us to predict that an actin subunit spends , in our experimental conditions ( Figure 3A ; Movie S8 ) , on average , about 43 s on a growing actin ﬁlament before dissociation by severing ( Figure 3D ; Movie S11 ) . In - creasing the concentration of ADF / coﬁlin reduces this average time to a lower limit of 25 s , both experimentally and in silico ( Figure 3E ) . Bundling Stabilizes Actin Filaments and Prevents ADF / Coﬁlin Severing Although ADF / coﬁlin severs single actin ﬁlaments quickly , we report here that higher - order structures such as actin bundles were more resistant to ADF / coﬁlin severing ( Figures 4A and C ; Movie S12 ) . This is also ob - served for actin - ﬁlament bundles generated by villin , a crosslinking protein [ 17 ] . As the density of actin ﬁla - ments increased around the polystyrene beads , individ - ual actin ﬁlaments started to interact with each other through a ‘‘zippering’’ mechanism and generated actin - ﬁlament bundles ( Figure 4A , red arrow , 6 min ; Movie S12 ; and [ 13 ] ) . A comparison of the ﬂuctuations in the length of a single actin ﬁlament alone before ( Figure 4C , green curves ) and after ( Figure 4C , blue curves ) a zipper - ingeventrevealedanobviousincreaseinthepersistence of the elongation because of bundle formation . This demonstrates that bundles were stabilized against frag - mentation by ADF / coﬁlin , whereas surrounding single actin ﬁlaments attached to the beads were still continu - ously fragmented by ADF / coﬁlin ( Figure 4A and Movie S12 , green arrows ) . Zippering of Actin Filaments Inhibits ADF / Coﬁlin Activity and Favors the Formation of Large Actin Cables Responsible for Actin - Based Motility The combination of TIRFM and a biomimetic system of formin - coated polystyrene beads allowed us to deter - mine the sequence of events leading from stationary to motile beads ( Figure 4D ) . Because actin , proﬁlin , and ADF / coﬁlin are the only proteins required in our mo - tility assay , experiments were conducted with densely coated beads ( i . e . , 1 m M mDia ) in the presence of rhoda - mine - actin , proﬁlin , and human coﬁlin ( Figure 4D ; Movie S13 ) . After the addition of the protein mixture into the ﬂow cell , actin - ﬁlament polymerization began rapidly around the beads ( Figure 4D , 0 to 15 min ; Movie S13 ) . Subsequently , it appeared that the dense mDia1 coat - ing of the beads induced a saturation of the bead by ac - tin ﬁlaments that contact each other because of thermal ﬂuctuations and then zipper to form large actin - ﬁlament cables ( Figure 4D , 15 to 60 min ; Movie S13 ) . Because actin - ﬁlament cables became progressively stiffer and brighter , we suggest that fragmentation by ADF / coﬁlin is less efﬁcient on these structures ( Figure 4D , 60 to 190 min ; Movie S13 ) . After 1 hr , large actin bundles were the predominant actin - based structures associ - ated with the bead ( Figure 4D ; Movie S13 ) . Two of these cables started to buckle at a rate of elongation of 0 . 2 m m $ min 2 1 ( Figure 4D , 190 min ; Movie S13 ) , similar to that of the large actin cables observed during the mo - tility of the mDia1 bead ( Figure 1 ) . No motility was observed in the TIRFM experiments , however , because the nonspeciﬁc interaction of the beads with the cover glass was required for maintaining the bead in the ﬁeld of the evanescent wave . In the absence of ADF / coﬁlin , actin - ﬁlament bundles were organized randomly around the beads ( Movie S14 ) . We propose that , in the case of mDia1 - coated beads , the symmetry breaking that allowed motility ( Figure 1 ) was essentially due to the modulation of ADF / coﬁlin severing efﬁciency by the actin - ﬁlament zippering that drives large actin - ﬁlament cable formation ( Figure 4D ; Movie S13 ) . To further test this hypothesis , we used a model ( Figure S3 ) where we included the possibility for actin ﬁlaments in close contact with each other to produce cables that are resistant to ADF / coﬁlin sever - ing ( Movie S15 ) . The interaction of ADF / coﬁlin with actin ﬁlaments within bundles is modulated by the ﬁlament accessibility and the change of the mechanical proper - ties of bundles . We assumed that the afﬁnity of ADF / coﬁlin for actin ﬁlaments , K ( N ) , depends on N , where N is the number of actin ﬁlaments in the bundle [ see Supplemental Data for a discussion of K ( N ) ] . This as - sumption leads to a simulation consistent with the ex - perimental data , in the sense that two large actin cables positioned 180 (cid:2) from each other emanate from the bead ( Movie S15 ) . Discussion Molecular Mechanism for Rapid Actin - Filament Turnover The use of TIRFM provided unique insights into the mechanism of actin polymerization initiated by the FH1 - FH2 domains of mDia1at the surface of polystyrene beads . We ﬁrst resolved the controversial role of proﬁlin during the processive mechanism of actin - ﬁlament as - sembly by formin [ 11 , 14 ] . Proﬁlin increased by 5 - fold the rate of addition of actin subunits at the barbed end of an actin ﬁlament attached to mDia1 ; however , proﬁlin was not required for the processive behavior of mDia1 , in agreement with Kovar et al . ( Movies S5 – S6 ; and [ 14 ] ) . The presence of ADF / coﬁlin in our reconstituted system caused dramatic changes in the dynamic Current Biology 830 behavior of individual actin ﬁlaments . We report here , for the ﬁrst time , that single actin ﬁlaments can grow and shorten stochastically because ADF / coﬁlin clips the aged ends of continuously growing actin ﬁlaments . In actin ﬁlaments attached to the beads by mDia1 , the apparent rate of subunit loss due to ADF / coﬁlin severing can increase to values more than 35 s 2 1 , in the case of actin - ﬁlament shortening . A simple kinetic model con - strained by experimental rate constants allowed us to reproduce qualitatively and quantitatively the type of stochastic dynamics that drives growing actin - ﬁlament turnover attached to a processive nucleator . Our kinetic model predicts that an actin subunit spends , in our ex - perimental conditions , on average about 43 s on these actin ﬁlaments before release . This value is similar to the actin - ﬁlament turnover observed in vivo in ﬁbro - blasts [ 3 ] , ﬁsh keratocytes [ 4 ] , and yeast actin cables [ 18 , 19 ] . The fragmentation or severing of growing actin ﬁlaments by ADF / coﬁlin is obviously the main property affecting actin - ﬁlament turnover . Severing has been reported previously but only on prepolymerized actin ﬁlaments ( most likely in the ADP state ) [ 20 – 23 ] . Here we observed for the ﬁrst time the severing of growing ﬁlaments in real time . We predict that severing is mod - ulated by the nucleotide status of subunits as they age along the length of a ﬁlament . To be efﬁcient , this highly dynamic system needs to spatially separate zones of polymerization and fragmentation . The nucleo - tide state of actin ﬁlaments—ATP , ADP - P i , or ADP—is then absolutely required as a timer controlling the efﬁ - ciency of ADF / coﬁlin [ 16 ] and limits the possible frag - mentation of actin ﬁlaments near the origin of nucleation where actin ﬁlaments are most likely ATP loaded [ 24 ] . Indeed , theaverage subunit residence timeon a growing actin ﬁlament in the presence of a large concentration of ADF / coﬁlin reaches a lower limit of 25 s , essentially be - cause of the presence of ATP - actin subunits in the ﬁla - ment ( Figure 3E ) . Moreover , stabilization of the ADP - P i state of actin ﬁlaments by addition of BeF 3 prevents the ADF / coﬁlin dynamizing effect ( Movie S9 ) . Model for Actin - Cable , or Bundle , Formation by the Synergistic Effects of Formin , Proﬁlin , and ADF / Coﬁlin Formin was initially reported to generate actin cables in yeast [ 25 , 26 ] . A careful observation of yeast actin ca - bles revealed that they are highly dynamic structures [ 18 ] . However , the actin - ﬁlament dynamics reported here raise the question of how such large actin - based structures can be generated and stabilized against the dynamizing activity of ADF / coﬁlin . We revealed that the dynamics of a single actin ﬁlament are related to whether it is laterally associated with another actin ﬁla - ment ( Figure 5 ) . Indeed , actin ﬁlaments comprising ca - bles are partially stabilized against ADF / coﬁlin - mediated severing . Whereas single actin ﬁlaments rapidly grow and shrink and maintain an almost constant length after the initial growth period ( Figure 5 , step 2 0 ) , actin ﬁlaments organized into longitudinal structures grow more rapidly than they shrink , on average , allowing ac - tin - cable formation ( Figure 5 , step 3 0 ) . This phenomenon can be easily explained if we consider the mechanism of action of ADF / coﬁlin . To have efﬁcient severing activity , this protein needs to bind the side of actin ﬁlaments . However , ADF / coﬁlin binding to actin ﬁlaments is ex - tremely slow and probably limited by ﬁlament breathing because of thermal ﬂuctuations [ 27 ] . We propose that the increased mechanical rigidity of actin - ﬁlament bun - dles in comparison to that of isolated actin ﬁlaments [ 28 ] partially suppresses the ﬁlament breathing that is necessary for ADF / coﬁlin to bind efﬁciently . In addition , actin ﬁlaments inside a large actin - based structure , such as a bundle , are potentially less accessible to ADF / coﬁlin . Moreover , the severing of a bundle would require the simultaneous fragmentation of all actin ﬁla - ments at the same location in the bundle , which must be an infrequent event . By growing rapidly , actin ﬁla - ments generated close together by formin can associ - ate laterally before destruction by ADF / coﬁlin ( Figure 5 , step 3 0 ) . This is a remarkable system because the actin - based structure controls its own stability . Figure 5 . Model for the Link between Rapid Actin - Filament Turnover , Actin - Cable Formation , and Symmetry Breaking Prior to Actin - Based Force Generation In the absence of ADF / coﬁlin , formin - coated beads are able to initiate actin ﬁlaments ( step 1 ) that grow continuously and randomly around the beads ( step 2 ) . This generates a cloud of actin ﬁlaments around the beads ( step 3 ) . In the presence of ADF / coﬁlin , actin ﬁlaments initi - ated at the surface of the beads grow and shrink rapidly ( step 2 0 ) . Lateral contact between actin ﬁlaments favors actin - bundle formation and enhances their stability against ADF / coﬁlin ( step 3 0 ) . This selection process is the basis for symmetry breaking and actin force generation ( step 4 0 ) . Dynamics of Individual Actin Filaments 831 Relationship between Actin - Cable Stability and Symmetry Breaking during Actin - Based Motility Actin bundles generated at the surface of mDia1 - coated beads are able to generate enough force to propel the bead ( Figure 5 , step 4 0 ) . However , mDia1 is most likely coated uniformly around a bead , and in the absence of ADF / coﬁlin , early polymerization events generate a sym - metrical actin ﬁlament ‘‘cloud’’ ( Figure 5 , steps 2 and 3 ) . We propose that the symmetry breaking necessary for bead motility is directly linked to the cooperative effect of the actin - ﬁlament zippering necessary for actin - cable formation and the related consequences to actin - ﬁla - ment stability against ADF / coﬁlin - mediated severing ( Figure 5 , steps 2 0 – 4 0 ) . The process of initiating these large actin cables is relatively slow because at the be - ginning , thin bundles do not have an appreciable sur - vival advantage with respect to ADF / coﬁlin severing and they frequently undergo catastrophic length reduc - tions similar to those of single actin ﬁlaments . The sym - metry - breaking phase begins when these bundles fuse together to form stiffer and larger structures . At this stage , both experimental data and simulations show that these bundles are strongly stabilized against ADF / coﬁlin , and the only noticeable change comes from the reduction of the population of bundles to two to four cables evenly distributed around the bead . Our experi - mental and in silico approaches do not include any crosslinking between ﬁlaments by speciﬁc proteins , such as fascin , villin , ﬁmbrin , and a - actinin . In the pres - ence of these actin - binding proteins , we predict that the resulting bundles would be stiffer and , as a conse - quence , would affect the process of cable formation by selection . The whole selection process is a simple and robust way to account for the emergence of the actin - based structures necessary for the production of forces of sufﬁcient magnitude to drive beads or any other subcellular structure or membrane . Experimental Procedures Protein Expression and Production Actin was isolated from rabbit - skeletal - muscle acetone powder [ 29 ] . MonomericCa - ATP - actin waspuriﬁed by gel - ﬁltration chroma - tography on Sephacryl S - 300 [ 30 ] at 4 (cid:2) C in G buffer ( 5 mM Tris - HCl [ pH 8 . 0 ] , 0 . 2 mM ATP , 0 . 1 mM CaCl 2 , and 0 . 5 mM DTT ) . Actin was labeled on Cys - 374 to a stoichiometry of 0 . 8 – 1 . 0 with pyrene iodoa - cetamide ( [ 31 ] ; as modiﬁed by Pollard [ 32 ] ) or on lysines with rhoda - mine or Alexa - 532 , according to Isambert et al . [ 33 ] . MgATP actin was prepared by incubation of Ca - ATP - actin on ice with 0 . 2 mM EGTA and an 11 - fold molar excess of MgCl 2 over actin and used within 1 hr . Actin was polymerized by addition of one - tenth volume of10 3 KMEI ( 500 mMKCl , 10mM MgCl 2 , 10mM EGTA , and100mM imidazole - HCl [ pH 7 . 0 ] ) . Proﬁlin [ 34 ] , Formin mDia1 , FH1 - FH2 domain [ 35 ] , and human ADF / coﬁlin [ 36 ] were puriﬁed as described . Coating of Beads Carboxylated polystyrene microspheres ( 2 m m , Polyscience , Eppel - heim , Germany ) were coated with the indicated concentration of mDia1 FH1 - FH2 according to Romero et al . [ 11 ] . Motility Assay Beads were mixed withamotility medium containing 8 m MF - actin , 4 m M proﬁlin , and 10 m M human coﬁlin in X buffer ( 10 mM HEPES [ pH 7 . 8 ] , 0 . 1 M KCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM ATP , and 0 . 1 mM CaCl 2 ) , supple - mented with 1 % BSA , 0 . 2 % methylcellulose , 3 mM DTT , 1 . 8 mM ATP , and 0 . 1 mM DABCO . Image acquisition was performed on a Zeiss Axioplan microscope ( Jena , Germany ) equipped with a 63 3 / 1 . 5 Plan - APOCHROMAT objective lens , and images were collected with a Hamamatsu ORCA CCD camera ( Hamamatsu Pho - tonics Deutschland GmbH ) with Metavue version 6 . 2r6 ( Universal Imaging , Media , PA ) . Total - Internal - Reﬂection - Fluorescence - Microscopy GlassﬂowcellswerecleanedandpreparedaccordingtoKovaretal . [ 12 ] . Rhodamine - actin and Alexa - 532 - labeled actin - ﬁlament poly - merization was observed and acquired as speciﬁed by Michelot et al . [ 13 ] . All data were analyzed with MetaMorph version 6 . 3r7 and plotted with Kaleidagraph v4 . 01 software ( Synergy Software , Reading , PA ) . Data Analysis Elongation rates were determined by the measurement of ﬁlament lengths with MetaMorph version 6 . 2r6 during actin - ﬁlament elonga - tion . Linear ﬁts were made to the plots of length over time ; the slopes represented elongation rates . Rates were converted from m m $ s 2 1 to m M 2 1 $ s 2 1 through the use of 333 actin monomers permicrometer [ 9 ] . Allplots andﬁtswere realized withKaleidagraph v3 . 6 software . Model of Actin - Filament Dynamics We adapted the Gillespie algorithm to simulate the polymerization of actin ﬁlaments in a reaction - diffusion system ( see Supplemental Data ) . The model for the zippering of ﬁlaments into bundles , as well as ﬁlament or bundle severing by ADF / coﬁlin , is discussed in the Supplemental Data section . Supplemental Data Experimental Procedures , three ﬁgures , one table , and ﬁfteen movies are available at http : / / www . current - biology . com / cgi / content / full / 17 / 10 / 825 / DC1 / . Acknowledgments We are grateful to Dr . Henry N . Higgs for providing mDia1 FH1 - FH2 and useful suggestions on the manuscript . This work was funded through grants from the Actions The´matiques et Initiatives sur Programmes et Equipes Plus ( ATIP + ) and Agence Nationale de la Recherche to L . B . and from the National Research Initiative of the United States Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) Cooperative State Research , Education , and Extension Service , grant number 2002 - 35304 - 12412 , to C . J . S . Received : January 19 , 2007 Revised : March 16 , 2007 Accepted : April 12 , 2007 Published online : May 10 , 2007 References 1 . Pollard , T . D . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Cellular motility driven by assemblyanddisassemblyofactin ﬁlaments . Cell 112 , 453 – 465 . 2 . Mogilner , A . ( 2006 ) . On the edge : Modeling protrusion . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 18 , 32 – 39 . 3 . Wang , Y . ( 1985 ) . Exchange of actin subunits at the leading edge of living ﬁbroblasts : Possible role of treadmilling . J . Cell Biol . 101 , 597 – 602 . 4 . Theriot , J . A . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1991 ) . Actin microﬁlament dynamics in locomoting cells . Nature 352 , 126 – 131 . 5 . Medeiros , N . A . , Burnette , D . T . , andForscher , P . ( 2006 ) . MyosinII functions in actin - bundle turnover in neuronal growth cones . Nat . Cell Biol . 8 , 215 – 226 . 6 . Schirenbeck , A . , Bretschneider , T . , Arasada , R . , Schleicher , M . , and Faix , J . ( 2005 ) . The Diaphanous - related formin dDia2 is re - quired for the formation and maintenance of ﬁlopodia . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 619 – 625 . 7 . Moseley , J . B . , and Goode , B . L . ( 2006 ) . The yeast actin cytoskel - eton : From cellular function to biochemical mechanism . Micro - biol . Mol . Biol . Rev . 70 , 605 – 645 . 8 . Pollard , T . D . ( 1986 ) . RateconstantsforthereactionsofATP - and ADP - actin with the ends of actin ﬁlaments . J . Cell Biol . 103 , 2747 – 2754 . Current Biology 832 9 . Pollard , T . D . , Blanchoin , L . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2000 ) . Molecular mechanisms controlling actin ﬁlament dynamics in nonmuscle cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 29 , 545 – 576 . 10 . Loisel , T . P . , Boujemaa , R . , Pantaloni , D . , andCarlier , M . F . ( 1999 ) . Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature 401 , 613 – 616 . 11 . Romero , S . , Le Clainche , C . , Didry , D . , Egile , C . , Pantaloni , D . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 2004 ) . Formin is a processive motor that requires proﬁlin to accelerate actin assembly and associated ATP hydrolysis . Cell 119 , 419 – 429 . 12 . Kovar , D . R . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2004 ) . Insertionalassembly of ac - tin ﬁlament barbed ends in association with formins produces piconewton forces . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 14725 – 14730 . 13 . Michelot , A . , Derivery , E . , Paterski - Boujemaa , R . , Guerin , C . , Huang , S . , Parcy , F . , Staiger , C . J . , and Blanchoin , L . ( 2006 ) . A novel mechanism for the formation of actin - ﬁlament bundles by a nonprocessive formin . Curr . Biol . 16 , 1924 – 1930 . 14 . Kovar , D . R . , Harris , E . S . , Mahaffy , R . , Higgs , H . N . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2006 ) . Control of the assembly of ATP - and ADP - actin by formins and proﬁlin . Cell 124 , 423 – 435 . 15 . Fujiwara , I . , Takahashi , S . , Tadakuma , H . , Funatsu , T . , and Ishi - wata , S . ( 2002 ) . Microscopic analysis of polymerization dynam - ics with individual actin ﬁlaments . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 666 – 673 . 16 . Blanchoin , L . , andPollard , T . D . ( 1999 ) . Mechanism ofinteraction of Acanthamoeba actophorin ( ADF / coﬁlin ) with actin ﬁlaments . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 15538 – 15546 . 17 . Huang , S . , Robinson , R . C . , Gao , L . Y . , Matsumoto , T . , Brunet , A . , Blanchoin , L . , andStaiger , C . J . ( 2005 ) . ArabidopsisVILLIN1gen - erates actin ﬁlament cables that are resistant to depolymeriza - tion . Plant Cell 17 , 486 – 501 . 18 . Yang , H . C . , and Pon , L . A . ( 2002 ) . Actin cable dynamics in bud - ding yeast . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 751 – 756 . 19 . Martin , S . G . , and Chang , F . ( 2006 ) . Dynamics of the formin for3p in actin cable assembly . Curr . Biol . 16 , 1161 – 1170 . 20 . Ichetovkin , I . , Han , J . , Pang , K . M . , Knecht , D . A . , and Condeelis , J . S . ( 2000 ) . Actin ﬁlaments are severed by both native and recombinant Dictyostelium coﬁlin but to different extents . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 45 , 293 – 306 . 21 . Andrianantoandro , E . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2006 ) . Mechanism of actin ﬁlament turnover by severing and nucleation at different concentrations of ADF / coﬁlin . Mol . Cell 24 , 13 – 23 . 22 . Maciver , S . K . , Zot , H . G . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1991 ) . Characteriza - tion of actin ﬁlament severing by actophorin from Acantha - moeba castellanii . J . Cell Biol . 115 , 1611 – 1620 . 23 . Pavlov , D . , Muhlrad , A . , Cooper , J . , Wear , M . , and Reisler , E . ( 2007 ) . Actin ﬁlament severing by coﬁlin . J . Mol . Biol . 365 , 1350 – 1358 . 24 . Svitkina , T . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 1999 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex and ac - tin depolymerizing factor / coﬁlin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin ﬁlament array in lamellipodia . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 1009 – 1026 . 25 . Evangelista , M . , Pruyne , D . , Amberg , D . C . , Boone , C . , and Bretscher , A . ( 2002 ) . Formins direct Arp2 / 3 - independent actin ﬁlament assembly to polarize cell growth in yeast . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 260 – 269 . 26 . Sagot , I . , Klee , S . K . , and Pellman , D . ( 2002 ) . Yeast formins regu - latecellpolaritybycontrolling theassembly ofactincables . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 42 – 50 . 27 . Cao , W . , Goodarzi , J . P . , and De La Cruz , E . M . ( 2006 ) . Energetics and kinetics of cooperative coﬁlin - actin ﬁlament interactions . J . Mol . Biol . 361 , 257 – 267 . 28 . Mogilner , A . , and Rubinstein , B . ( 2005 ) . The physics of ﬁlopodial protrusion . Biophys . J . 89 , 782 – 795 . 29 . Spudich , J . A . , and Watt , S . ( 1971 ) . The regulation of rabbit skel - etalmusclecontraction . I . Biochemicalstudiesoftheinteraction of the tropomyosin - troponin complex with actin and the proteo - lytic fragments of myosin . J . Biol . Chem . 246 , 4866 – 4871 . 30 . MacLean - Fletcher , S . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1980 ) . Mechanism of action of cytochalasin B on actin . Cell 20 , 329 – 341 . 31 . Kouyama , T . , and Mihashi , K . ( 1981 ) . Fluorimetry study of N - ( 1 - pyrenyl ) iodoacetamide labelled F - actin . Eur . J . Biochem . 114 , 33 – 38 . 32 . Pollard , T . D . ( 1984 ) . PolymerizationofADP - actin . J . CellBiol . 99 , 769 – 777 . 33 . Isambert , H . , Venier , P . , Maggs , A . C . , Fattoum , A . , Kassab , R . , Pantaloni , D . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 1995 ) . Flexibility of actin ﬁla - ments derived from thermal ﬂuctuations . Effect of bound nucle - otide , phalloidin , and muscle regulatory proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 11437 – 11444 . 34 . Fedorov , A . A . , Pollard , T . D . , and Almo , S . C . ( 1994 ) . Puriﬁcation , characterization and crystallization of human platelet proﬁlin expressed in Escherichia coli . J . Mol . Biol . 241 , 480 – 482 . 35 . Li , F . , and Higgs , H . N . ( 2003 ) . The mouse Formin mDia1 is a po - tent actin nucleation factor regulated by autoinhibition . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1335 – 1340 . 36 . Carlier , M . F . , Laurent , V . , Santolini , J . , Melki , R . , Didry , D . , Xia , G . X . , Hong , Y . , Chua , N . H . , and Pantaloni , D . ( 1997 ) . Actin depo - lymerizing factor ( ADF / coﬁlin ) enhances the rate of ﬁlament turnover : Implication in actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 1307 – 1322 . Dynamics of Individual Actin Filaments 833