85 Arguments in Hypertext : A Rhetorical Approach Locke M . Carter Department of English Texas Tech University Lubbock , TX 79409 - 3091 , USA Tel : 1 - 806 - 742 - 2507 # 247 E - mail : l . carter @ ttu . edu ABSTRACT The qualities of non - sequentiality that make hypertext so appealing to writers and readers of informative and literary texts are also those that problematize arguments in the same settings . For a hypertextual argument to succeed , it should clearly employ the fundamentals of giving good reasons and ample evidence . But such an essay should also deal with the loss of control over order by making use of recent developments in rhetoric and argument theory . Specifi - cally , the author presents concepts of informal logic , stasis theory , primacy / recency / repetition effects , spatial meta - phors , and textual coherence as a starting point for building a rhetorical understanding of argumentation strategies in hypertext . KEYWORDS : Hypertext , argumentation , discourse , rhetoric INTRODUCTION To echo what John Slatin observed several years ago , the point I would like to make in this paper is embarrassingly simple . People write arguments in hypertext differently than they do in a more traditional format . When faced with the task of constructing single - author , self - contained argu - ments in a hypertext environment , whether it be in Story - Space , a series of web pages , WinHelp , or something simi - lar , authors must overcome the expectation of order . After all , arguments do seem to rely very heavily on sequential structures like if - then sentences , first - came - this presenta - tion of evidence and reasons , and the building of a case in which each new piece of information builds upon previ - ously mentioned reasons . In contrast , the very spirit of a hypertextual essay is that it does not privilege a sequential structure . The apparent loss of sequence in hypertext gives rise to argumentative strategies that are more flexible , for concepts that are normally taken for granted in sequential discourse take on a new look in a hypertextual environ - ment . For example , it has always been assumed that the job of selecting arguments and putting them into the best se - quence is something the author does ; but in a hypertext program , this task ( or at least part of it ) belongs to the reader . Since the questions about the nature , order , and suc - cess of arguments belongs to the realm of rhetoric , we should apply these rhetorical concepts of structure , order , and sequence in order to build the basis for understanding and teaching hypertextual arguments . This essay highlights these applied rhetorical concepts . ARGUMENTATIVE HYPERTEXTS One might ask what is the point of studying and / or writing such essays . As Kinneavy [ 16 ] points out , all discourse serves one of four basic aims , corresponding to where its main emphasis lies . Discourse may focus on the objective world ( informative aim ) , on the speaker ( expressive aim ) , on the audience ( persuasive aim ) , or on the language itself ( literary aim ) . Most of the energy in hypertext studies has been generated about two broad categories of hypertext : informational and literary hypertext . Hypertext that serves the informative aim of discourse is seen as a way of making large amounts of information manageable . The majority of scholarship on hypertext deals with this aspect , for hyper - text promises its users instant and easy access to volumes of information , easy navigation , easy search capabilities , and easy retrieval of data . Theorists working on this aim have worked on the technology and the navigational challenges we face as we put more and more information online . The literary application of hypertext is radically different from its informative aim , often seeking to exploit the ambiguity and inherent non - linearity of a hyper - narrative . In contrast , literary hypertext emphasizes the inherent playfulness of the non - linear order and its natural reader - oriented poten - tial . Almost all discourse has a persuasive component . In - deed , with electronic commerce expanding , and with the Internet bursting at the seams with commercial sites , it is difficult not to find persuasion—advertising—in hypertext . In this paper , however , I am using the much narrower term “argumentation” for two simple reasons . Argumentation aims at a higher level of commitment from the audience : it not only seeks to persuade , but also to convince , or to bring about a change in the audience . Further , rhetoricians have always acknowledged that persuasion contains non - discursive elements , such as personal charisma and the character of the speaker . Theoretically , at least , argumenta - tion generally focuses on the intellect . Perelman sees argu - mentation as the discursive techniques that aim at winning the audience’s assent for one’s ideas [ 25 ] . In hypertext studies , the topic of argumentation has tended to focus on describing , capturing , and enabling argument structures in the work of Trigg [ 30 ] , Conklin [ 6 ] , and others . Kolb [ 18 ] Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and tha t copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Hypertext 2000 , San Antonio , TX . Copyright 2000 ACM 1 - 58113 - 227 - 1 / 00 / 0005… $ 5 . 00 86 has explored the sophisticated requirements of scholarly discourse and its use of argument , as well . ARGUMENTATION THEORY Argumentative hypertexts are ultimately worth writing and studying because argumentation has received a lot of atten - tion over the past ten years , with a new focus on argumen - tative writing in both the workforce and academia . Begin - ning in the 60’s , the old concepts of formal logic and debate came under fire , and argument theory acquired a new en - ergy , accompanied by a new set of grounds . The “New Rhetoric” of Burke and Perelman helped theorize the audi - ence back into the argumentation process . Philosophical inquiries into argument’s role in human activity , like Habermas’ Theory of Communicative Action , placed argu - mentation in the center of society [ 12 ] . And Informal Logic emerged in the 60’s , led by Toulmin [ 29 ] and Johnson and Blair [ 15 ] , as a focus on the structures and procedures that real - world language and actions engaged in . The still - emerging field of modern argumentation recognizes three aspects to argument . The products of argument—reasons , claims , premises—belong to the realm of logic ; the proce - dures for conducting arguments belong to the realm of dia - lectic ; and the processes of argumentation belong to the realm of rhetoric . For this essay , I emphasize products and processes , as I am primarily focused on single - author hypertexts that link to themselves , or what Roy Rada [ 26 ] calls “microtexts . ” There is much to be gained in understanding how the me - dium affects structure , even if we focus on argument - as - product . I believe that before we can address questions of hypertextual , collaborative arguments , however , we first must examine the dynamics of these microtext arguments . With such a grounding , we may then look at arguments as social events , as procedures such as we might see in a linked e - mail discussion list . Before the recent rise in argument theory standard presenta - tional order prescribed by Cicero was the norm ; it is still omnipresent , probably because it applies to most kinds of spoken and written argumentation . But alternative ap - proaches to order are available . Argument theory is today less obsessed with the “right” order of arguments and more focused on how arguments are constructed , chosen , and used . For example , instead of focusing on debate , with its goal of winning , argument theory follows Perelman’s more rhetorical goal of “gaining the adherence of the audience” [ 25 ] . And instead of studying logical structures of proofs , it listens to the way people actually argue . The field of in - formal logic certainly strives to observe language as it is used , and not to prescribe a correct use . Toulmin [ 29 ] , Perelman [ 25 ] , Hamblin [ 13 ] , and others who espouse in - formal logic do so because it describes the way reasons are given in real , everyday language . Syllogisms and analytic rules may be well - suited for certain sciences and pure math , but common sense will show even the most brazen skeptic that the vast majority of arguments are conducted success - fully day to day based on something else [ 29 ] . Everyday argument must be based not on the rules of formal logic , but on a kind of informal logic . This reasoning is always dependent on the audience to which one’s arguments are addressed [ 25 ] . ORDER In grasping arguments in hypertext , part of the difficulty lies in trying to map our existing expectations of argumen - tation and reason onto this new medium . Indeed , Bolter [ 3 ] suggests that argumentation without linearity is contradic - tion and that hypertext reveals what Sontag calls the “im - possibility or irrelevance of producing a continuous , sys - tematic argument . ” In this new age of hypertext , he says that “the new works do not have a single linear order , cor - responding to the pages of the book or the columns of the papyrus roll , and so there is no order to violate . It is pre - cisely the lack of a fixed order and commitment to a linear argument that will frustrate those used to working with and writing for the medium of dialog . For writers of the new dialog , the task will be to build , in place of a single argu - ment , a structure of possibilities . ” George Landow [ 21 ] also has problems with what hypertext does to argumentation : “Hypertextual linking , reader control , and variation not only mitigate against the modes of argumentation to which we have become accustomed but have other , far more gen - eral effects , ” such as randomness of the text , the writer’s loss of control , and the inevitable fragmentation and tight - ening of increasingly self - contained nodes . Unlike textual units—paragraphs and chapters—that depend on “neigh - bor” text units to create coherence , these self - contained nodes are like islands of meaning , no longer relying on other nodes for context . This fragmentation and self - contained tightening is what makes argumentation much more difficult . The speech - writer and paper - writer have the responsibility of arranging their points to achieve the best effect , and that order can be reasonably expected to be adhered to . But in a hypertextual setting , the writer’s job of carefully arranging arguments is shifted radically in a hypertext setting . For with the exception of the initial conditions ( i . e . the recom - mended starting point and the recommended path ( s ) through the argument ) , the author has no idea of how the reader will arrange the text . In other words , virtually all of the job of arrangement ( dispositio , in classical rhetoric ) now lies with the reader , NOT with the writer . The writer’s job is now something like the chess player who sets up the pieces in the proper order , then sits back and watches the participants move pieces around until there is a draw or a victory . So how does a hypertextual writer take responsibility for order ? Hypertext arguments resemble " natural arguments , " which Johnson and Blair describe as “digressive , rhetorical , repetitive , ill - organized , incomplete , and multi - functional , ” [ 15 ] . In these kinds of arguments , persuading does not de - pend on a particular formula or order [ 14 , 25 , 29 ] . Fur - thermore , in such arguments , it is reasonable to expect that the auditor ( or reader ) will allow inconsistencies to pass , rather than dispute them point - by - point . The good faith we hold in writing is that the reader will finish , or at least skim , 87 the argument . In hypertext , faith involves both parties . The readers assume the author will eventually reveal important parts of an argument and not waste our time , and the author expects that the readers will explore the entire hypertext , or at least those nodes that are easy to get to . But the speaker or writer must make choices , says Perelman , for “whatever be the benefit of an accumulation of arguments , there are psychological , social , and economic limits that prevent a thoughtless amplification of the discourse , ” including cost of printing , attention span of listeners , and time available in debates . “Since the number of arguments is a priori indefi - nite , a choice must inevitably be made , guided by the idea one has of the respective arguments” [ 25 ] . Arguments in hypertext raise these same issues of choice , for while a computer may be able to store massive numbers of reasons , rebuttals , and claims in a hypertextual argument , both the attention span of readers and the time they are willing to devote to reading an on - line argument are clearly limited . One choice that a writer might make would be to avoid using too much fragmentation of the main parts of the ar - gument , saving the large - scale chunking and linking for ancillary materials , such as context , warrants , and so on . Kolb [ 17 ] takes this approach , favoring a hybrid of tradi - tional argument structures and speech acts . This hybrid structure would be something relatively linear , at least at the gross level of the logic of the argument , meaning that an argument based on , say , a Toulmin model would not split up the claims , grounds , warrants , and data , but would keep these critical elements together . The all - inclusive nature of hypertext would come in at the level of what Kolb calls the “surrounding material” of arguments , namely all the discus - sion , facts , opinions , and dead - ends that accompany a real - world argument . The strength of such an approach would be that core arguments would be insulated from the inde - terminacy inherent in hypertext , but the argument essay would benefit from that same quality : “By not using hyper - text to model every move , we would assist perception rather than burdening it . ” After a writer has taken these steps , we can no longer speak of a “proper order” of reasons , but rather a visually - or tex - tually - suggested order to the reader . This suggested order might employ labels to guide the reader . More likely , the writer may make use of spatial metaphors like the western top - down , or left - to - right , flowchart , hub - and - spoke , in - side - and - out , and mandala . Bernstein [ 1 ] catalogs nine dif - ferent types of complex hypertext structures in an attempt to provide a common vocabulary for " large linked struc - tures . " PRIMACY , RECENCY , AND REPETITION EFFECTS Establishing a suggested order is one technique the writer may use to deal with the loss of control over a reader’s reading order . Even if we do not know the specifics of a given reading , we can describe specific visits to chunks of information in a hypertext with specialized terms . The Primacy Effects refers to the first thing the audience en - counters and the Recency Effect refers to the last thing they encounter . Studying the effects of the order of presentation upon the audience , Hovland [ 14 ] reports that , within certain constraints , Primacy and Recency are real and observable effects that should be taken into account . Rieke [ 27 ] also discovered that , up to a point , a larger number of arguments is more persuasive . This Repetition Effect “generally refers to the propensity of receivers to regard repeated statements as more true than new statements . ” But this effect seems only to be true up to a point , for “excessive repetition ( more than three times ) may be viewed as irritating or even offen - sive to an audience . ” If hypertext puts sequence into question , is it even possible to speak of primacy and recency ? In a word , yes . The reader does experience parts of electronic argumentation in a certain order , just not necessarily in the author’s intended order . Hovland’s and Rieke’s findings suggest that hyper - text authors must at least be aware of these effects , espe - cially if their aim is to argue convincingly . In most hyper - texts , the author establishes a starting point . Whether in a program like Storyspace or in a document destined for the world wide web , this known starting point will act as the user’s first contact with the hypertext . In these situations , then the Primacy Effect can be used to the author’s advan - tage . The author also chooses to link other parts of the hy - pertext together any way she pleases , perhaps encouraging a “suggested path , ” or building “ease” or “difficulty” of navigation into the inherent cross - linking of the hypertext . In other words , the author may make it relatively difficult to encounter a certain negative piece of information simply by linking it to the main body of the argument with a single link . More favorable arguments / points can be linked to the main corpus by redundant links , making it far more likely that the reader will encounter these favorable ideas . “Encountering” is an interesting term , and the author may have a degree of control over it . In a complicated hypertext , it is possible , even likely , that certain “places” or ideas will not be read or encountered by the reader . The larger and more richly linked the document is , the less likely it is that the reader will discover every single nook and cranny of that document . So there is a chance that the reader will NOT encounter certain parts . Through rich cross - linking , the author can skew the number of times a reader comes across a certain idea , so “encounter” takes on a frequency connotation , invoking the Repetition Effect . Another sense of “encounter” involves the primacy issue , so that while an author cannot guarantee that part of a hypertext will func - tion as a first encounter , or a later one , she can statistically aim for placing a node so that it will generally fall earlier or later in a reader’s path . Finally , the author also has control of the language within a node ; after all , nodes are not usu - ally single words , but coherent points or illustrations . The author has the ability to dampen Primacy or Recency ef - fects through internal wording ( transitions , summaries , and the like ) , so that no matter how a person gets to a node , the ideas contained in it are treated as a mini argument , with order and effect considered even within that node . Structuring arguments to try to take advantage of primacy , recency , and repetition effects is one answer to the question 88 of order in argumentation . Another involves taking advan - tage of stasis theory , a concept of argumentation that does not necessarily involve order , but relies more on required elements . Recent presentations of stasis theory revisit the classical legalistic notion of stasis , or a set of conditions that must be present in a well - formed argument . Each cate - gory involves a different set of conditions . These conditions do not necessarily have to be presented in any order , but they must be put forward in order to have a well - formed argument . If these conditions are not met , then no argument has been advanced for that stasis , but the arguer may look for another category that might work better . As Fahnestock and Secor [ 9 , 10 ] point out , this model of argumentation seems to work best with legal examples , such as Definition Arguments ( X is / is not Y ) , Causal Arguments ( X causes / does not cause Y ) , Resemblance Arguments ( X is / is not like Y ) , Evaluation Arguments ( X is / is not a good Y ) , and Proposal Arguments ( we should / should not do X ) . Fulkerson [ 11 ] presents the following extended example of the way a given stasis might be employed : [ Prima facie ] means that the case ( extended argu - ment ) made for a claim is structurally and substan - tively complete so that if no counter - case were pre - sented then the claim would stand . For each type of stasis being argued , certain elements must be present before the case can be regarded as complete and in need of evaluating . As an example , in a court of law , a prima facie case for the charge of battery must normally include four items : • There must have been a touching by the defen - dant , • The touching must have been either offensive or harmful , • The touching must have been unconsented , • And it must have been intentional rather than accidental . If anything is lacking , the prosecution has presented a “bad” argument , and the case will be dismissed without any defense being necessary . Handling all four , however , does not mean that the prosecution will win . It merely means that an argument of suffi - cient strength has been presented to necessitate some response . The prima facie case is thus a minimum but crucial criterion for a satisfactory argument . The more general view of stasis theory as a set of condi - tions that must be met in order to have a well - formed ar - gument also informs hypertextual writing . While order is still important to the reception of ideas by the audience , stasis theory holds that the order of an argument is not one of the requirements for a good argument . What this means for this inquiry is that a hypertext author may use a given stasis as an invention heuristic to insure that a user , by browsing the argument , and the author , in absentia , will be able to constitute the argument on these common grounds . The effectiveness of this argument will be subject to the actual order in which the nodes are traversed , but as I men - tioned above , the hypertext author may be able to mitigate primacy and recency effects through thoughtful linking , naming , and writing techniques . Since stasis theory views the entire “argument act” as one set of items with little regard to order , hypertext argumenta - tion may profit from adapting the classical stases and de - veloping new ones . A stasis - theory approach to hypertext would mean that writers may fairly present their reasons , chunked however they think they make the most sense , linked in simple or complex relationships , and as long as the reader encounters these reasons , the argument may be assumed to be adequate or well - formed . But this approach may imply that the author needs to make the approach visi - ble , concealing nothing from the reader . THE APPEAL TO SPACE A completely different approach to the problem of order involves the use spatial metaphors within a hypertext argu - ment to overlay onto the content , and hence , to suggest a path through the argument . As Lakoff and Johnson tell us , “Most of our fundamental concepts are organized in terms of one or more spatialization metaphors” [ 19 , 20 ] . These metaphors of space , of simply being embodied beings mov - ing through that space , are tools that we use to help organ - ize our minds . Unless we concentrate on them , they are probably largely invisible to us . But in places like hyper - texts and cyberspace , these unconscious mnemonics be - come more conscious . The field of cognitive psychology , with its broad brush of theory about learning , memory , metaphors , computing , and language , offers new perspec - tives on how we may study what hypertext does to our re - ception of concepts , and conversely , to our production of those concepts . Lakoff , Johnson , and Turner have explored the metaphors that buttress all of our conscious activities , shedding light on just how reliant our cognitive processes are on meta - phorical images , thoughts , utterances , and how those poetic devices help us organize our worlds . For them , metaphor is the fundamental cognitive block , like phonemes or mor - phemes are building blocks of meaning . It is important to realize that metaphor is not just supporting poetic language . Physical metaphors of space are used to make sense of ab - stract concepts . For instance , “I was stuck in this mindset and couldn’t get out” illustrates the root metaphor Mental states are rooms . “Where are you going in your life ? ” il - lustrates the metaphor Life is a journey . Mark Turner [ 31 ] points out how our concepts of argumentation depend greatly on metaphors of physical action of two forces and of landscape topology . On this view , physical force refers to arguers and the argument they conduct , and the land - scape topology refers to the grounds of that argument . Ori - entational metaphors are the norm in hypertext literature ; among the ubiquity of travel and orientation metaphors , perhaps the most useful is George Landow’s Clicking on a hot text is a departure and Displaying subsequent text is an arrival , as it seems to capture both the physical action of “abandoning” one bit of text on a computer screen to replace it with newer ones , as well as the psychology of leaving the known page and not knowing exactly what one 89 will find [ 22 ] . The view of argumentation as physical forces moving in space provides a useful perspective on hypertext , where metaphors of space abound . Hypertext theorists warn writers to “orient” the readers so they don’t get “lost” in “hyperspace . ” Nodes are often called places or spaces , and link terminology often consciously evokes physical action so that a reader “goes” from one node to another “through” a link , as if it were a tunnel or a highway . Readers of hyper - text are conceived as “explorers , ” “wanderers , ” “browsers , ” and so on . These navigational metaphors give real weight to many of the rhetorical techniques mentioned in the previous chapter , especially Landow’s arrival , departure , and orien - tation . In hypertext , such rhetorical “moves , ” are not just figurative , but literal , at least at a cognitive level . Marshall and Shipman [ 23 ] explore the nature of implicit structures that arise from spatial representations of complicated ideas within hypertexts . In my own dissertation study [ 4 ] , I found that the spatial layout of my writers’ arguments - - including node and link names , actual layout of graphical representations of spaces in StorySpace , and the overall arrangement of arguments - - was one of the most carefully wrought aspects of their work , far outweighing the logical force of their arguments . The overview space is one aspect of a larger issue , that of orientation and clarity in navigation and orientation . Dillon , McKnight , and Richardson [ 8 ] argue for geographic meta - phors of space in order to orient the reader : Schemata ( or the general and instantiated expectations of place ) , land - marks , routes , and surveys , which increase from egocentric to world - centric . Nielsen assumes the tourist metaphor works within larger hypertexts , and suggests the overview diagram : “In addition to showing users the layout of the information space , overview diagrams can also help users understand their current location and their own move - ments . ” Landow [ 22 ] , taking a slightly more general ap - proach to the problem , has introduced probably the best rhetorical terms to the discussion so far . Focusing on the reader , he draws on the analogy of travelling in order to explore the actions that take place in hypertext : “the first problem concerns navigation information necessary for making one’s way through the materials . The second con - cerns exit or departure information and the third arrival or entrance information” ( 82 ) . From this generalization , he offers nineteen rules for writing hypertext that fall under the categories of 1 ) the rhetoric of reader orientation , 2 ) the rhetoric of departure , and 3 ) the rhetoric of arrival . The foundation of these rules is a concern for the reader . The rhetorics of departure and arrival involve informing the reader about what movements are possible , staying consis - tent with links , choosing the length of chunks of informa - tion , providing users with maps to show where they have been . While hypertext happens to be enabled through computer programs , what the user sees is text that comes into being through writing . Bolter uses the term topographic writing : “Electronic writing is both a visual and a verbal description . It is not the writing of a place , but rather a writing with places , with spatially realized topics . ” In other words , once we break out texts into small units , arrange them into a meaningful structure , and think of them as both textual and visual , says Bolter , “we are writing topographically” [ 2 ] . Such a topographic view of arguing would involve using spaces themselves as a part of the argument , not just as a medium for that argument . This appeal to space , or what I call Argumentum ad Locum , would be employed properly if it functions as an invitation to the reader to explore the ar - gument’s claims on its own grounds , all facets of the argu - ment open to exploration for the reader / explorer . One should be able to retrace one’s steps , find out more infor - mation , test validity claims , explore contradictory claims in such an argument . Such an approach suggests not only appeals , but also fallacies . Just as any given appeal to the emotions is not necessarily fallacious ( the ad Hominem , for example ) , so too may an appeal based on spaces be either felicitous or fallacious . A writer would commit the ad Lo - cum fallacy by constructing unfair spaces , metaphorically resembling a house of cards , a house of mirrors , a labyrinth , uneven ground , etc . , where readers do not have a proper opportunity to check the grounds , retrace their steps , or make choices . In debate , as in deliberative arguments , the metaphor of the battlefield dominates , and as Turner points out , the winner is pictured as the king of the hill , winning by repelling challenges to his position . But it is possible to construct arguments that are based on convincing the other person to come and stand with you , and the metaphorical questions like “Are you following me ? ” and “Where do you stand on this one ? ” reveal such a topology . Successful hy - pertextual argumentation may employ this cooperative model because a ) hypertext does not lend itself to a brute force approach , b ) hypertext makes it much more possible to construct multiple arguments within one document so that read - ers may pick the argument that best suits them , and c ) the action within a hypertext is ultimately determined by the reader , who must be willing to be convinced , rather than conquered . It also suggests that the terrain that a hypertext argument builds should be equitable , balanced , employing no tricks , not unlike the expectations of charity from informal logic or the legally - neutral rules of stasis theory . It also suggests that if nodes are content and links are “moves” among that content that Landow’s advice is well - taken . If these links have to stand - in for our “leading” the other arguer through a cooperative space , then their function needs to be clear , their reasoning felicitous , and their meaning comprehensi - ble . To take advantage of this view , writers must create friendly , memorable spaces and paths for readers to trav - erse . The grounds upon which an argument takes place must be constructed so that its readers feel like wandering around , and wherever they go , they learn about the topic and are convinced . But it is also important not to allow readers to wander aimlessly . Because of the reader - oriented nature of hypertext , readers have to be allowed to convince themselves , which means that a writer’s argument mustn’t pretend that there are no counter - points , nor can it coerce 90 the reader to the “answer” through one - way doors or laby - rinths , which would be an ad Locum fallacy . An argument we can advance is that hypertext documents , particularly arguments , require us—readers and writers alike—to rely very heavily on metaphoric space , perhaps more heavily than a sequential document . In fact , the spa - tial metaphors inherent in hypertexts are central to conduct - ing business within those texts . But metaphoric space is also important in conducting the argument , as Turner illus - trates . A foregrounding of those metaphors actually enables hypertextual argumentation to advance , rather than mud - dling things up . The broad metaphor of the entire document is an important consideration . The author chooses a meta - phor that will , in Turner’s terms , provide good grounds on which to convince the reader , or bring him or her along with our line of thinking . It is difficult to generalize about which kinds of metaphors work best—just as it is hard to give specifics about the “proper” order of a speech— because the audience determines what works and what does not . One could construct a huge essay with all the reasons , and tailor a given reading to each reader . But even taking this approach , certain arguments and the kind of evidence needed will require different forms . For example , in the stasis of definition , a hypertextual metaphor of a tree dia - gram might suggest itself over , say , a mandala . COHERENCE Even if the gross metaphorical structure of the hypertextual argument is “reader - friendly , ” the actual text—the words and sentences and paragraphs—must still do its job for the reader . But in hypertext , coherence must be felt no matter in what sequence the text is encountered . Slatin calls our attention to the notion of “prediction” as a key to the user’s experience , prediction at the macroscopic ( document ) level , the microscopic ( sentence or paragraph ) level , and the metatextual ( the large context ) level [ 28 ] . While many words and phrases are unusable ( ordered lists , to name the largest casualty ) , there are many other strategies that help convey coherence , repetition being the most obvious . Nielsen [ 24 ] observes that just as there are large overviews , which are like maps , there are also small - scale overviews , which help users keep track of where they are within a small , bounded space . The small - scale overview is very much like narrative or argumentative coherence . Nielsen uses the term “context - in - the - large” to describe the global , graphic , or overview level , and “context - in - the - small” to describe the immediate vicinity , even the text within the node the user is currently reading . A loss of small context “could well damage overall usability more than the added context - in - the - large improves it . ” He warns that “we should remember that users need context not just in - the - large but also in - the - small when reading hypertexts , and that differ - ent mechanisms are usually required to provide the two kinds of context . ” At the level of the computer , mecha - nisms that help the small - context are as simple as a clear screen that is large enough to hold an entire node’s text , for if the screen prevents the user from recognizing the au - thor’s textual techniques , then small - context is more diffi - cult . At the level of the text itself , simple writing techniques may be used to strengthen a hypertext’s context or coher - ence . Conklin [ 6 ] warns that the loss of context is one of the great - unsolved issues in hypertext theory . When “natu - ral” sequence is disrupted , the reader will have to rejoin these pieces of the puzzle to make them whole again . The text has its own context , which it maintains in traditional ways , and the hypertext has its own context , maintained through graphic conventions , consistent names , and so on . Stated another way , the entire context for an original text document is split into two parts—text and hypertext—each carrying a portion of the burden of coherence . At the hypertextual level , coherence is also achieved through the repetition of words and phrases in the text , but as node names and link names rather than text in another node . Parallelism of node names and link names uses no - menclature to tie parts of the document to other parts . But one may also use non - textual means to create coherency , for if we take “cohere” to mean “stick together , ” then we may use linking conventions and visual juxtaposition of nodes as non - textual aspects of coherence . The visual ar - rangement of an overview place , suggests certain genres or stases , which come with their own internally - required co - herency rules , so that a Definition essay may receive some of its generic meaning from the appearance of definition in the map view . Even without suggesting stasis or genre , the visual relationship among nodes establishes a necessary coherence . If we find three nodes together , unlinked , we may assume a kind of parallelism among them . Perelman speaks of association of concepts , a technique in which the speaker or writer constructs connections for the lis - tener / reader among terms that may not have been linked previously . We may not be able to speak of order , but we can speak of simultaneity , and when several nodes are to - gether , they are associated , to use Perelman’s term . Clus - tered items are always associated because of this gestalt . If similar ideas are never seen together , conversely , then there is a disassociation of ideas . Links may also add coherence in a hypertext document , providing direct connections from one node to the next , somewhat like a footnote marker or a “see above . . . ” note in the text . The very common practice in web pages of mak - ing ways for a reader to return to the overview space is a good example . Navigation , then , is an aspect of coherence . Or another way of putting it is that hypertextual structure contributes to the overall coherence of the essay . It follows , then , that structure is a substitute for text , specifically text that is usually devoted to transition and orientation within a traditional essay . In other words , in the conversion from traditional text to hypertext , conventions of coherence are replaced by links , nodes , clusters of nodes , and so on . It is not possible , in hypertext , to draw a distinction between form and content because the form IS the content , or at least part of it . CONCLUSION When we look at how hypertext arguments are constructed by real writers who are grappling with the difficulty of or - 91 der , the field of rhetoric provides us with the best analytical tools for describing both the process and the products . We may employ concepts of textual and graphical coherence . We may use the broadened conceptions of spatial represen - tations and metaphors to help describe a writer’s techniques of orienting the reader and suggesting paths through the argument . We may utilize classical stasis theory as one strategy for getting around the issue of order . These tradi - tional strategies , along with new cognitive rhetorics and new approaches to argumentation , form the rhetorical foun - dation for describing and prescribing arguments written in a variety of hypertextual environments . WORKS CITED 1 . Bernstein , M . “Patterns of Hypertext . ” Proceedings of Hypertext ’98 . Pittsburgh : Association of Computing Machinery , 1998 . 21 - 29 . 2 . Bolter , J . D . “Topographic Writing : Hypertext and the Electronic Writing Space . ” Hypermedia and Literary Studies . Ed . Delany , P . & Landow , G . P . Cambridge , MA : MIT P , 1991 . 105 - 18 . 3 . Bolter , J . D . Writing Space : The Computer , Hypertext , and the History of Writing . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum , 1991 . 4 . Carter , L . Arguments in Hypertext : Order and Struc - ture in Non - Sequential Essays . Ph . D . Thesis , Univer - sity of Texas . Ann Arbor , UMI . # AAG 9824882 . 5 . Charney , D . “The Effect of Hypertext on Processes of Reading and Writing . ” Literacy and Computers : The Complications of Teaching and Learning with Tech - nology . Ed . Cynthia L . Selfe and Susan Hilligoss . New York : Modern Language Association , 1994 . 238 - 63 . 6 . Conklin , J . , and Begeman , M . L . “gIBIS : A Hypertext Tool for Team Design Deliberation . ” Proceedings of Hypertext ’87 . Chapel Hill , NC : Association of Com - puting Machinery , 1987 . 247 - 68 . 7 . Dee - Lucas , D . “Effects of Strategic Overview on Study Strategies and Text Representations for Instructional Hypertext . ” Hypertext and Cognition . Ed . Rouet , J . F . , et al . Mahwah : Erlbaum , 1996 . 73 - 107 . 8 . Dillon , A . , McKnight , C . & Richardson , J . “Space— the Final Chapter , or Why Physical Representations are not Semantic Intentions . ” Hypertext : A Psychological Perspective . Ed . Dillon , A . , McKnight , C . & Richard - son , J . New York : Horwood , 1993 . 169 - 91 . 9 . Fahnestock , J . R . , and Secor , M . J . “Teaching Argu - ment : A Theory of Types . ” College Composition and Communication 34 . 1 ( 1983 ) : 20 - 30 . 10 . Fahnestock , J . R . , and Secor , M . J . A Rhetoric of Ar - gument . 2nd ed . New York : McGraw - Hill , 1990 . 11 . Fulkerson , R . “Technical Logic , Comp - Logic , and the Teaching of Writing . ” College Communication and Composition 39 . 4 ( 1988 ) : 436 - 52 . 12 . Habermas , J . The Theory of Communicative Action . Trans . McCarthy , T . Vol . 1 . Boston : Beacon , 1984 . 13 . Hamblin , C . L . Fallacies . London : Metheun , 1970 . 14 . Hovland , C . I . The Order of Presentation in Persuasion . New Haven : Yale UP , 1957 . 15 . Johnson , R . H . , & Blair , A . J . Introduction . Informal Logic : First International Symposium . Ed . Johnson , R . H . , & Blair , A . J . Inverness , CA : Edge , 1978 . 1 - 25 . 16 . Kinneavy , J . A Theory of Discourse . New York : Nor - ton , 1980 . 17 . Kolb , D . Socrates in the Labyrinth : Hypertext , Argu - ment , Philosophy . Diskette . Watertown , MA : Eastgate Systems , 1994 . 18 . Kolb , D . “Scholarly Hypertext : Self - Represented Complexity . ” Proceedings of Hypertext ’97 . South - hampton : Association of Computing Machinery , 1997 . 247 - 68 . 19 . Lakoff , G . , & Johnson , M . Metaphors We Live By . Chicago UP , 1980 . 20 . Lakoff , G . , & Johnson , M . More Than Cool Reason : A Field Guide to Poetic Metaphor . Chicago UP , 1989 . 21 . Landow , G . P . Hypertext : The Convergence of Con - temporary Critical Theory and Technology . Baltimore : Johns Hopkins , 1992 . 22 . Landow , G . P . “The Rhetoric of Hypermedia : Some Rules for Authors . ” Hypermedia and Literary Studies . Ed . Delany , P . & Landow , G . P . Cambridge , MA : MIT , 1991 . 81 - 104 . 23 . Marshall , C . C . and Shipman , F . M . " Searching for the Missing Link : Discovering Implicit Structure in Spatial Hypertext . " Proceedings of Hypertext ’93 . Association of Computing Machinery , 1993 . 24 . Nielsen , J . Hypertext and Hypermedia . New York : Academic P , 1990 . 25 . Perelman , C . , & Olbrechts - Tyteca , L . The New Rheto - ric . Trans . William Kluback . Notre Dame , 1969 . 26 . Rada , R . Hypertext : From Text to Expertext . New York : McGraw - Hill , 1991 . 27 . Rieke , R . D . , & Stutman , R . K . Communication in Le - gal Advocacy . Columbia : U of South Carolina P , 1990 . 28 . Slatin , J . “Reading Hypertext : Order and Coherence in a New Medium . ” Hypermedia and Literary Studies . Ed . Delany , P . & Landow , G . P . Cambridge , MA : MIT P , 1991 . 153 - 70 . 29 . Toulmin , S . E . The Uses of Argument . Cambridge : Cambridge UP , 1958 . 30 . Trigg , R . " A Network - Based Approach to Text Han - dling for the Online Scientific Community . " Ph . D . thesis , U of Maryland . Ann Arbor : UMI , 1983 . # 8429934 . 31 . Turner , M . Reading Minds : The Study of English in the Age of Cognitive Science . Princeton UP , 1991 .