ARTICLE https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201802080 2661 J . Cell Biol . 2018 Vol . 217 No . 8 2661 – 2674 Rockefeller University Press Capture of each and every chromosome by spindle microtubules is essential to prevent chromosome loss and aneuploidy . In somatic cells , astral microtubules search and capture chromosomes forming lateral attachments to kinetochores . However , this mechanism alone is insufficient in large oocytes . We have previously shown that a contractile F - actin network is additionally required to collect chromosomes scattered in the 70 - µm starfish oocyte nucleus . How this F - actin – driven mechanism is coordinated with microtubule capture remained unknown . Here , we show that after nuclear envelope breakdown Arp2 / 3 - nucleated F - actin “patches” form around chromosomes in a Ran - GTP – dependent manner , and we propose that these structures sterically block kinetochore – microtubule attachments . Once F - actin – driven chromosome transport is complete , coordinated disassembly of F - actin patches allows synchronous capture by microtubules . Our observations indicate that this coordination is necessary because early capture of chromosomes by microtubules would interfere with F - actin – driven transport leading to chromosome loss and formation of aneuploid eggs . F - Actin nucleated on chromosomes coordinates their capture by microtubules in oocyte meiosis Mariia Burdyniuk , Andrea Callegari , Masashi Mori  , François Nédélec  , and Péter Lénárt  Rockefeller University Press Introduction Capture of chromosomes by spindle microtubules is an early step of cell division essential for subsequent alignment and segregation of chromosomes by the spindle apparatus . Failure to capture even a single chromosome will delay mitotic progres - sion and may result in aneuploidy in somatic cells , a source of carcinogenesis . Because in oocyte meiosis the spindle assembly checkpoint is weakened or absent , in egg cells failure to capture chromosomes ultimately leads to aneuploidy ( Kolano et al . , 2012 ; Shao et al . , 2013 ) . Aneuploid eggs develop to unviable or severely impaired embryos , which in humans is one of the most common causes of infertility and birth defects ( Webster and Schuh , 2017 ) . Mitchison and Kirschner ( Mitchison and Kirschner , 1984 ; Kirschner and Mitchison , 1986 ) recognized that “dynamic instability , ” the rapid growth and shrinkage of microtubules , is an effective means for centrosome - nucleated microtubules to explore the cellular space in their search for chromosomes . The proposed microtubule “search - and - capture” has since been validated in live cells ( Hayden et al . , 1990 ; Rieder and Alexander , 1990 ) , and the molecular details of the initial attachments have also been understood ( Tanaka , 2012 ) . These so - called lateral attachments form between the kinetochore and the microtu - bule lattice and involve molecular motors , dynein in particular , which transport captured chromosomes poleward ( Rieder and Alexander , 1990 ; Yang et al . , 2007 ) . Subsequently , these lat - eral attachments are replaced by end - on attachments to allow biorientation of chromosomes on the spindle ( Shrestha and Draviam , 2013 ) . Computer simulations recapitulated key fea - tures of search - and - capture , confirming that this mechanism is sufficient to reliably capture chromosomes in a typical , 30 - µm , rounded somatic cell ( Holy and Leibler , 1994 ; Wollman et al . , 2005 ; Heald and Khodjakov , 2015 ) . Oocytes are much larger than somatic cells because they store cytoplasmic as well as nuclear constituents to support early embryonic development ; hence , oocytes have not only a large cytoplasm but also a large nucleus , historically referred to as the germinal vesicle ( Lénárt and Ellenberg , 2003 ) . During meiosis , oocytes divide extremely asymmetrically to retain these stored components in the fertilizable egg . For this reason , across ani - mal species , the meiotic spindle is small and located very eccen - trically , anchored to the cell cortex to produce tiny polar bodies ( Crowder et al . , 2015 ) . The specific cellular geometry of oocytes challenges chro - mosome search - and - capture . Indeed , we have shown that in starfish oocytes the known microtubule - driven mechanisms are insufficient , and a contractile actin filament ( F - actin ) net - work is additionally required to transport chromosomes to the assembling microtubule spindle ( Lénárt et al . , 2005 ; Mori et al . , 2011 ; Bun et al . , 2018 ) . The F - actin network forms in the nuclear space at nuclear envelope breakdown ( NEBD ) and transports embedded chromosomes to the microtubule asters located at a cortical position called the animal pole ( AP ) . Thus , chromosome congression in starfish oocytes is a two - step process , whereby © 2018 Burdyniuk et al . This article is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution 4 . 0 International , as described at https : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / ) . Cell Biology and Biophysics Unit , European Molecular Biology Laboratory , Heidelberg , Germany . Correspondence to Péter Lénárt : lenart @ embl . de ; M . Mori’s present address is RIK EN Center for Developmental Biology , Minatojima - minamimachi , Hyogo , Japan . Burdyniuk et al . Actin coordinates chromosome capture in oocytes Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201802080 2662 F - actin – dependent transport delivers chromosomes for capture by spindle microtubules . Whether and how chromosome capture is coordinated with F - actin – driven transport remained unknown . Here , we tracked chromosomes in 3D at high spatiotempo - ral resolution in live oocytes to identify individual chromosome capture events . Our data indicate that capture of chromosomes by microtubules needs to be coordinated with F - actin – driven transport , because early capture events would interfere with F - actin – driven transport by causing a local collapse of the F - actin network . We show that this coordination is achieved by Arp2 / 3 - nucleated F - actin patches surrounding chromosomes . These patches form in a Ran - GTP – dependent manner at NEBD and sterically prevent microtubule – kinetochore attachments for ∼ 5 min after NEBD . We integrate these results in a computational model and find that two - step chromosome congression in star - fish oocytes is well explained by the classical search - and - capture model when we add the single feature of preventing chromosome capture during the initial F - actin – driven transport . Results Microtubule - capture events can be identified on high - resolution chromosome trajectories Upon entry into meiosis , after the onset of NEBD , a contractile F - actin network forms in the 70 - µm nucleus of starfish oocytes and transports chromosomes to the AP ( Mori et al . , 2011 ) . Star - fish oocytes do contain centrosomes , which form two microtu - bule asters at the AP ( Borrego - Pinto et al . , 2016a ) . We have shown earlier by tubulin immunofluorescence that these microtubules extend to 30 – 40 µm from the AP ( Lénárt et al . , 2005 ) . Once the F - actin network transports chromosomes within this “capture range , ” chromosomes are caught and are eventually incorpo - rated into the first meiotic spindle forming at the AP ( Lénárt et al . , 2005 ; Fig . 1 A ) . To visualize individual chromosome capture events in live oocytes , we imaged chromosomes and growing microtubule tips by acquiring single confocal sections at high spatiotemporal res - olution , starting from NEBD until chromosomes are collected at the AP ( Fig . 1 B and Video 1 ) . We then automatically tracked chro - mosome motion ( Mori et al . , 2011 ; Monnier et al . , 2012 ) . By com - parison of chromosome trajectories to microtubule dynamics , we could clearly identify individual events of capture : initially the F - actin network transported chromosomes at a lower speed and with the motion being less directed and more diffusive ( Fig . 1 , B and C , green trajectories ) . Then , shortly after ( 10 – 30 s ) a visible direct contact to a microtubule , the chromosomes switched to a faster and directed motion ( Fig . 1 , B and C , red trajectories ) . Similar to these 2D recordings with microtubule tips and chro - mosomes colabeled , we were also able to unambiguously identify such capture events in the entire 3D nuclear volume by imaging chromosomes alone . Because of the bright labeling provided by H2B - 3mEGFP , we were able to acquire volumes every 3 s , which was sufficient to resolve the transition point between the slow , F - actin – driven motion and fast transport along microtubules ( Fig . S1 , A – D ; and see Materials and methods for details ) . The speed of motion ( 9 . 22 ± 2 . 86 µm / min ) after the switch matched well the speed expected for dynein - driven transport after establishment of canonical lateral kinetochore – microtubule attachments ( Yang et al . , 2007 ; Barisic et al . , 2014 ) . Consistently , transport was abolished by the dynein small - molecule inhibitor , Ciliobrevin D ( Fig . 1 D and Fig . S1 , G and H ) . Together , these observations establish that chromosome capture events can be reliably identified by analysis of chromo - some trajectories as the transition point between the slow and more diffusive F - actin – driven and the fast and directed dynein - driven transport . Chromosome capture is coordinated by an F - actin – dependent mechanism Being able to identify capture events allowed us to next ask how F - actin – driven transport and microtubule capture are coordi - nated during chromosome congression . To this end , we com - pared chromosome capture in untreated control oocytes and oocytes in which F - actin – driven transport was abolished . To inhibit F - actin – driven transport , we developed a proto - col to acutely depolymerize F - actin after NEBD , because as we had shown earlier , NEBD in starfish oocytes requires F - actin ( Mori et al . , 2014 ; Fig . 2 A ) . Therefore , Latrunculin B ( or equal amount of DMSO for controls ) was added to the oocytes imme - diately after NEBD , allowing the formation of the “F - actin shell” required for the rupture of nuclear membranes ( Fig . 2 B , 00 : 30 ) . Latrunculin B then rapidly ( in 2 – 3 min ) disrupted all F - actin structures and abolished F - actin – driven chromosome transport , resulting in a massive loss of chromosomes distal to the AP ( Fig . 2 B and Video 2 ) . The affected F - actin structures included the cell cortex , the F - actin network in the nuclear region , as well as dense patches of F - actin , which were pre - viously observed surrounding chromosomes ( Fig . 2 B ; Lénárt et al . , 2005 ) . We next combined this protocol with high - resolution track - ing of chromosome motion as above . In control oocytes , trajec - tories showed the two clearly distinguishable phases of F - ac - tin – and microtubule - driven transport ( Fig . 2 C and Video 3 ) . The transition between the two phases , i . e . , the capture events , occurred rather synchronously ( 9 . 21 ± 2 . 36 min after NEBD ) showing a slight distance dependence ( Fig . 2 , C and D ) . Upon acute F - actin depolymerization , distal chromosomes outside of the microtubule - capture range were lost , as expected ( Fig . 2 , B and C ; Mori et al . , 2011 ) . However , to our surprise , chromosomes initially positioned within the microtubule - capture range were efficiently captured by microtubules , and capture of these chromosomes occurred earlier than in controls ( 6 . 16 ± 3 . 92 min after NEBD ; Fig . 2 , B – D ) . This difference is clearly visualized on scatter plots accumulating data from multiple oocytes and histograms of capture events : the majority of captures occur between 8 and 11 min after NEBD in DMSO controls , in contrast to the peak between 0 . 5 and 5 min for Latrunculin B – treated oocytes ( Fig . 2 , D and E ) . Thus , in control oocytes capture of chromosomes is pre - vented for the ∼ 5 min after NEBD . In contrast , when F - actin is depolymerized , capture starts immediately after NEBD ( Fig . 2 D ) . This implies that besides chromosome transport , F - actin plays an additional role in coordinating spindle assembly by delaying capture of chromosomes by microtubules . Burdyniuk et al . Actin coordinates chromosome capture in oocytes Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201802080 2663 The F - actin network is disrupted by chromosomes transported along microtubules To explore the potential function and mechanism underlying the F - actin – dependent delay of chromosome capture , we first char - acterized the F - actin network that forms in the nuclear region at NEBD and transports chromosomes ( Lénárt et al . , 2005 ; Mori et al . , 2014 ) . We hypothesized that the function of this delay may be that capture by microtubules interferes with transport by the F - actin network , and for this reason capture by microtubules needs to be delayed until F - actin – driven transport is complete . As for the underlying mechanisms , we considered two scenarios : ( 1 ) coordination may be achieved by the F - actin network hinder - ing access of microtubules to chromosomes and ( 2 ) alternatively , microtubule attachments could form in an uninhibited manner , but the F - actin network might physically entrap chromosomes to prevent their poleward transport . To test these possibilities , we first fixed and costained oocytes for F - actin and microtubules and imaged these at high resolution in 3D . We clearly visualized astral microtubules penetrating the F - actin network ( Fig . 3 A ) . Further , we could not detect inhomo - geneities in the microtubule density , suggesting that microtubules can grow just as freely into the F - actin network as in the cytoplasm ( Fig . 3 A ) . Additionally , we monitored microtubule dynamics in live oocytes treated with either Latrunculin B or DMSO using the protocol above ( Fig . 2 A ) . Quantification of microtubule lengths showed no significant difference between Latrunculin B – and DMSO - treated oocytes ( Figs . 3 B and S2 A ) . Based on these results , we conclude that the F - actin network does not present an obstacle to microtubule growth , and therefore the F - actin network , per se , does not restrict access of microtubules to chromosomes . We then tested whether the F - actin network retains chromo - somes by direct binding between chromatin and actin filaments , Figure 1 . After F - actin – driven congression , chromosomes form lateral attachments and are transported along microtubules to the spindle poles . ( A ) Left : Scheme of an immature starfish oocyte with the nucleus anchored at the AP and with centrosomes nucleating astral microtubules . Right : Schematics of the nuclear region after NEBD . The F - actin network fills the nuclear region and , as it contracts , transports embedded chromosomes toward the AP . Chro - mosomes delivered within the capture range of astral microtubules are captured and transported on microtubules to the centrosomes at the AP . ( B ) Selected frames from a time series of single confocal sections through the nuclear region of an oocyte expressing EB3 - 3mCherry to visualize microtubule plus - tips ( gray ) and H2B - 3mEGFP to label the chromosomes ( cyan ) . See also Video 1 . Chromosome trajectories are overlaid onto the images : green denotes actin - driven transport and red shows microtubule - driven transport . Lower panels : Zoom of the area marked with a dashed square , and the selected time points around microtubule capture are shown . Red arrowheads mark the contact between the microtubule and chromosome . Bars : ( main images ) 10 µm ; ( insets ) 5 µm . ( C ) Plot of distance of chromosomes to the AP over time , calculated from the trajectories shown in B . Black dots mark capture events identified as the transition point between slow , F - actin – driven , and fast microtubule - driven transport . ( D ) Plot of chromosome distance to the AP over time in an oocyte treated with Ciliobrevin D to inhibit dynein ( Fig . S1 , G and H , for details ) . Time is given as minutes : seconds relative to NEBD . Burdyniuk et al . Actin coordinates chromosome capture in oocytes Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201802080 2664 thereby preventing their transport along microtubules . There - fore , we generated chromatin fragments by treating oocytes with Zeocin ( Fig . S2 B ) . Small fragments of ∼ 0 . 5 µm were sieved through the F - actin network and diffused freely in the nucleo - plasm , whereas large fragments were trapped and transported by the network ( Fig . S2 B ) , remarkably similar to the behavior of inert beads of comparable sizes , as shown earlier ( Mori et al . , 2011 ) . This suggests that chromatin does not directly interact with filaments of the F - actin network . Even if chromatin did not directly bind F - actin , chromosomes are sufficiently large so that the F - actin network may hinder transport along microtubules by physically entrapping them . To Figure 2 . An F - actin – dependent mechanism delays chromosome capture . ( A ) Schematics of the experimental protocol for acute depolymerization of F - actin . ( B ) Selected maximum - intensity z - projections from a 3D confocal time series though the oocyte’s nuclear region during chromosome congression . Chromosomes ( H2B - 3mEGFP ) are in cyan and F - actin ( 3mCherry - UtrCH ) in gray . Bars , 10 µm . See also Video 2 . ( C ) Left : Pseudo - colored time projection of a 3D confocal time series of chromosome congression ( labeled with H2B - 3mEGFP ) in control or Latrunculin B – treated oocytes . See also Video 3 . Right : Plot of chromosome distance to the AP over time , for the control and Latrunculin B – treated oocytes shown on the left . ( D ) Chromosome capture events identified for 13 pairs of control and Latrunculin B – treated oocytes ( plotted in a different color for each oocyte ) . ( E ) Histograms of the data shown in D . Time is given relative to NEBD for all panels . Burdyniuk et al . Actin coordinates chromosome capture in oocytes Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201802080 2665 test this , we recorded videos with chromosomes and F - actin cola - beled . We could clearly visualize chromosomes being captured and pulled through the still - intact F - actin network , dragging F - actin bundles along ( Fig . 3 C and Video 4 ) . Capture and trans - port occurred efficiently even when filaments were strongly sta - bilized by phalloidin ( Fig . S2 C ) . These results indicate that the F - actin network is not able to resist chromosomes transported on microtubules . Importantly , the videos additionally revealed that such pulling through of chromosomes by microtubules causes a local collapse and disruption to the F - actin network , “clearing out” the network where chromosomes pass ( Fig . 3 D ) . Together , these data show that transport along microtubules leads to local disruption of the F - actin network by chromosomes being pulled through , confirming our hypothesis that capture by microtubules needs to be delayed for F - actin – driven transport to function effectively . However , we show that the F - actin network Figure 3 . The F - actin network does not prevent chromosome capture and transport by microtubules , but transport along microtubules interferes with F - actin network integrity . ( A ) A single selected slice from a deconvolved confocal stack of an oocyte fixed 5 min after NEBD and stained for tubulin ( red ) , F - actin ( green ) , and chromosomes by using Draq5 ( cyan ) . ( B ) Microtubule length distribution measured in control and Latrunculin B – treated oocytes and plotted against each other . ( C ) Selected single confocal sections acquired over time showing the nuclear area of an oocyte expressing 3mEGFP - UtrCH ( gray ) and H2B - mCherry ( cyan ) . See also Video 4 . Right : Zoom - in on the region marked by a dashed rectangle of a chromosome transported along a microtubule ( red arrowhead ) causing local collapse of the F - actin network . ( D ) Maximum - intensity z - projections of a 3D confocal time series through the nuclear region of an oocyte expressing H2B - mCherry ( cyan ) and injected with UtrCH – Alexa Fluor 568 ( gray ) . Single z - slice zooms of the regions marked by dashed rectangles are shown below visualizing the disruption of the F - actin network where chromosomes are pulled through . Bars : ( main images ) 10 µm ; ( C , inset ) 5 µm . Time is given as minutes : seconds relative to NEBD for all panels . Burdyniuk et al . Actin coordinates chromosome capture in oocytes Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201802080 2666 does not present an obstacle for microtubules to grow toward , to capture , or to transport chromosomes poleward ; thus the net - work itself is unlikely to be the F - actin structure responsible for mediating this delay in chromosome capture . Disassembly of F - actin patches coordinates capture by microtubules As the F - actin network is unlikely to be coordinating chromo - some capture , we next focused on the other prominent F - actin structure present in the nuclear region during this critical time period : F - actin patches that have been observed to form around chromosomes but otherwise remained poorly characterized ( Lénárt et al . , 2005 ) . We first characterized their morphology and the mecha - nisms of nucleation . F - actin patches appear to be composed of spots of dense F - actin , reminiscent of endocytic sites or other Arp2 / 3 - nucleated structures ( Kaksonen et al . , 2003 ) , clearly dis - tinct from the F - actin network composed of long filament bun - dles ( Fig . 4 A ) . We detected patches of variable size and intensity on chromosomes , with peripheral chromosomes in contact with nuclear envelope membranes being surrounded by much larger and brighter patches , as compared with those located deeper in the nuclear volume ( Fig . 4 A ) . Consistent with their morphology , F - actin patches were specifically labeled by mEGFP - ArpC1 , a subunit of the Arp2 / 3 nucleator complex ( Fig . 4 A ) . Indeed , the small - molecule Arp2 / 3 inhibitor , CK - 666 , blocked recruitment of Arp2 / 3 and effectively prevented the formation of F - actin patches , leaving the F - ac - tin network largely intact ( Fig . 4 B ; Mori et al . , 2014 ) . We thus conclude that the F - actin patches are nucleated by the Arp2 / 3 complex , whereas filaments of the F - actin network are polym - erized by other factors , likely formins ( Bun et al . , 2018 ) . We have shown previously that the F - actin patches are nucleated around DNA - coated beads ( Lénárt et al . , 2005 ) . This further suggested the involvement of the small GTPase , Ran , possibly related to Ran - and Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin nucleation reported in mouse oocytes ( Deng et al . , 2007 ) . To test this hypothesis , we injected a large amount of RanT24N , a mutated version of Ran locked predominantly in its inactive , GDP - bound form and RanQ69L , defective in GTP hydrolysis and thus locked in its active form ( Dasso et al . , 1994 ; Görlich et al . , 1996 ) . RanT24N injection abol - ished F - actin patches , preventing recruitment of ArpC1 as well as actin nucleation ( Fig . 4 C ) . RanQ69L also prevented F - actin patch formation locally on chromosomes and additionally caused a global recruitment of Arp2 / 3 and actin nucleation all along the nuclear region ( Fig . 4 C ) . These data indicate that Arp2 / 3 recruit - ment and F - actin patch nucleation require locally produced Ran - GTP on chromatin . Next , we quantified the assembly and disassembly kinetics of F - actin patches and correlated this with chromosome capture . To this end , we colabeled chromosomes and patches using mEG - FP - ArpC1 as a marker and imaged these in 3D at high resolution in live oocytes ( Fig . 5 A and Video 5 ) . We then tracked chromosomes as above and , using chromosome coordinates as reference points , quantified the total patch intensity in a 2 . 5 - µm - radius sphere around every chromosome for each time point ( Fig . 5 C ) . These measurements showed that F - actin patches assemble within 1 – 2 min after NEBD on all chromosomes ( with peripheral chromo - somes followed by those deeper in the nucleus ) . The intensity of the patches peaked at around 5 min , followed by disassembly , with mEGFP - ArpC1 intensities dropping to background levels ∼ 8 min after NEBD ( Fig . 5 C ) . The disassembly kinetics of F - actin patches was remarkably coordinated and largely independent of initial patch size and intensity ( Fig . 5 , A and D ) . Strikingly , the kinetics of F - actin patch disassembly matched well the time of chromosome capture by microtubules ( Fig . 5 B ) . The first capture events were detected 6 – 8 min after NEBD , when the first patches disassemble , and most chromosomes were captured very soon after F - actin patch disassembly , 8 – 11 min after NEBD . We obtained similar results by quantifying F - actin around chro - mosomes labeled by 3mCherry – Utrophin CH domain ( UtrCH ) , although the contrast was lower because 3mCherry - UtrCH also labels the F - actin network , unlike mEGFP - ArpC1 , which is specific to patches ( Fig . 5 E ) . However , this allowed us to simultaneously monitor F - actin network dynamics in these experiments . Com - parisons of temporal dynamics of patch and network intensities reveal that , similar to mEGFP - ArpC1 above , patch disassembly correlates with chromosome capture . To the contrary , the F - ac - tin network persists several minutes after chromosome capture is completed ( Fig . 5 , E and F ) . To test whether this correlation is maintained under perturbations , we treated oocytes with Latrun - culin B to acutely depolymerize F - actin as above . Quantifications confirmed the premature disassembly of F - actin patches at ∼ 4 min after NEBD that was followed by chromosome capture events correlated with the decline in patch intensities ( Fig . 5 , E and F ; and Fig . S3 ) . In contrast , the F - actin network disassembled 2 – 3 min before patches , much earlier than chromosome capture occurred . Thus , in both unperturbed and Latrunculin B – treated oocytes , chromosome capture events are correlated with patch disassem - bly but not with network assembly / disassembly dynamics . Collectively , patches are F - actin structures distinct from the network and nucleated by the Arp2 / 3 complex on chromosomes in a Ran - GTP – dependent manner . Quantitative analysis of their disassembly kinetics revealed a tight correlation with chromo - some capture events , strongly suggesting that F - actin patches are responsible for coordinating chromosome capture . To the con - trary , the disassembly kinetics of the network , the other prom - inent F - actin structure present in the nuclear region , is not cor - related with capture events , as it persists long after chromosome capture is completed , indicating that the network is not involved in coordinating capture events . Search - and - capture extended by an early block recapitulates chromosome capture dynamics Finally , we integrated our observations in a computational model using the Cytosim software ( Nedelec and Foethke , 2007 ) . Within the realistic 3D geometry of the starfish oocyte , microtubules were nucleated from centrosomes located at the AP with dynam - ics based on dynamic instability and parameters estimated experimentally ( Fig . 6 A ; Fig . S4 , A – E ; and Video 6 ; Mitchison and Kirschner , 1984 ; Wollman et al . , 2005 ; Magidson et al . , 2015 ) . We first simulated the classic search - and - capture , without F - actin driven transport . This model very closely recapitulated Burdyniuk et al . Actin coordinates chromosome capture in oocytes Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201802080 2667 the capture kinetics observed in Latrunculin B – treated oocytes : distal chromosomes outside of the capture range ( ∼ 30 µm ) were lost , whereas chromosomes within the capture range were cap - tured one after the other by random search ( Fig . 6 , B – D , model 1 ) . For chromosomes located close to the centrosomes , cap - ture started immediately after NEBD . In the second model , we included a force field simulating the F - actin network that trans - ports chromosomes toward the AP ( Fig . 6 , B – D , model 2 ; and Fig . S4 C ) . In this scenario , all 22 chromosomes were successfully cap - tured by microtubules within ∼ 15 min , with similar kinetics to experiments . However , unlike in experiments , the first capture events occurred immediately after NEBD . Therefore , in the third Figure 4 . F - actin patches are nucleated on chromosomes by the Arp2 / 3 complex in a Ran - dependent manner . ( A ) Maximum projection of selected z - sections from a confocal z - stack of an oocyte expressing mEGFP - ArpC1 fixed 5 min after NEBD and immunostained . Anti - GFP antibody was used to enhance mEGFP - ArpC1 , Phallodin - A568 to stain F - actin , and Draq5 for DNA . Below : Selected single z - slices zooming in on F - actin patches marked by dashed rect - angles on the overview . Bars : ( top images ) 10 µm ; ( bottom images ) 1 µm . ( B ) Single confocal slices selected from a time series of an oocyte injected with H1 – Alexa Fluor 568 ( cyan ) and expressing either 3mEGFP - UtrCH ( gray ) to label F - actin or injected with Arp2 / 3 – Alexa Fluor 488 protein ( gray ) to visualize the Arp2 / 3 complex . A region around a selected chromosome is shown . Oocytes were treated with CK - 666 or with equal amount of DMSO 1 h before maturation . ( C ) Single confocal slices selected from a time series of an oocyte injected with H1 – Alexa Fluor 568 ( cyan ) and either 3mEGFP - UtrCH mRNA to visualize F - actin or Arp2 / 3 – Alexa Fluor 488 protein to visualize the Arp2 / 3 complex . A region around a selected chromosome is shown . Oocytes were injected with RanT24N or RanQ69L protein or equal amount of buffer as control . Time is given as minutes : seconds relative to NEBD . Bars , 5 µm . Burdyniuk et al . Actin coordinates chromosome capture in oocytes Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201802080 2668 Burdyniuk et al . Actin coordinates chromosome capture in oocytes Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201802080 2669 model we introduced an additional feature to simulate F - actin patches . We set the binding rate of kinetochores to microtubules for the first 4 min after NEBD to 0 ( no binding ) and gradually increased it to 10 , then 30 , 70 , and finally 100 % , every min - ute , 4 – 8 min after NEBD , matching the disassembly kinetics of patches . Simulations with this feature added faithfully recapit - ulated chromosome capture dynamics observed experimentally ( Fig . 6 , B – D , model 3 ) . Thus , simulations show that the classical search - and - capture model is in principle able to explain chromosome capture in star - fish oocytes . There are only two additional , F - actin - dependent features to be added : ( 1 ) transport of distal chromosomes by the F - actin network and ( 2 ) F - actin patches that delay capture of chromosomes until the transport by the F - actin network is com - plete , thereby ensuring that early capture events do not interfere with transport by the F - actin network . Discussion Collectively , our results evidence a novel mechanism to coordi - nate chromosome capture that is mediated by F - actin patches nucleated on chromatin by the Arp2 / 3 complex in a Ran - GTP – dependent manner . We propose that these F - actin patches ste - rically block microtubule – kinetochore attachments until their synchronous disassembly . We show that in starfish oocytes , in which chromosomes are first transported by an F - actin net - work and then by microtubules , this coordination is necessary to ensure that F - actin – driven transport is complete before cap - ture by microtubules . Our observations suggest that without this coordination early captured chromosomes would locally collapse the F - actin meshwork and thereby interfere with F - ac - tin – driven transport of distally located chromosomes , leading to chromosome loss . In terms of the underlying molecular mechanism , it is interest - ing to note the similarity to mouse oocytes , in which Arp2 / 3 - nu - cleated and Arp2 / 3 - independent , formin - nucleated F - actin net - works coexist in the cytoplasm , each of them having separate , essential functions ( Almonacid et al . , 2014 ) . Similarly , in starfish oocytes the F - actin network assembles in the nuclear region at NEBD in an Arp2 / 3 - independent manner and functions to trans - port chromosomes . Simultaneously , Arp2 / 3 nucleates patches on chromosomes to delay capture by microtubules . In the future , it will be critical to develop assays in which one or the other F - actin structure can be selectively perturbed . Unfortunately , most regu - lators , such as disassembly or stabilizing factors , act on both , and inhibiting the specific nucleators is further complicated by the fact that these have multiple functions . In particular , Arp2 / 3 is essential for NEBD ( Mori et al . , 2014 ) just minutes before F - actin patches form . Therefore development of tools that allow acute perturbations , such as photoactivable small - molecule inhibitors or optogenetic reagents , will be necessary . Another intriguing similarity between mouse and starfish oocytes is that in the mouse chromatin also induces formation of the so called “actin cap , ” an Arp2 / 3 - nucleated thickening of the cell cortex in a Ran - GTP – dependent manner ( Deng et al . , 2007 ) . Ran - GTP has been proposed to act through Cdc42 and N - WASP in this case ( Dehapiot et al . , 2013 ) . If this pathway was conserved , it could explain nucleation of actin on chromosomes in starfish oocytes analogous to Ran - mediated activation of spindle assem - bly factors ( Hetzer et al . , 2002 ) . It will be very interesting in the future to explore the molecular details and conservation of the pathway leading to Ran - mediated Arp2 / 3 activation and subse - quent inactivation resulting in synchronous disassembly of the F - actin patches . How it is controlled in space and time , how is it coupled to the cell cycle , and how it may contribute to coor - dinating chromosome capture in other systems remain exciting open questions . An additional key question is how such dense F - actin struc - tures prevent chromosome capture by microtubules . One pos - sibility is a biochemical regulation mediated by molecules that interact with both cytoskeletal systems , many of which have been identified recently ( Chesarone et al . , 2010 ; Henty - Ridilla et al . , 2016 ) . However , we favor an alternative and not mutu - ally exclusive mechanism , whereby the dense , branched F - actin network nucleated by Arp2 / 3 constitutes a physical barrier to microtubule growth ( unlike formin - nucleated bundles that are expected to bend away and organize networks occupying a much smaller volume fraction ) . Indeed , in different contexts and cell types , particularly striking in axon growth cones , Arp2 / 3 - nucleated F - actin networks have been observed to strictly exclude microtubules , resulting in sharp separation between the two zones ( Lowery and Van Vactor , 2009 ) . It will be very exciting to explore the physiological functions exclusion of microtubules by branched F - actin networks may have . There are number of common features of oocyte meio - sis shared across animal species , strongly suggesting that Figure 5 . Disassembly kinetics of F - actin patches are tightly correlated with chromosome capture by microtubules . ( A ) Maximum - intensity z - projection of selected time points from a time series of the nuclear area of an oocyte expressing mEGFP - ArpC1 to label the Arp2 / 3 complex ( gray ) , and H2B - mCherry to label chromosomes ( cyan ) . Last frame : Chromosome tracks overlaid , color - coded as below . See also Video 5 . Below : Single confocal slices of selected chromo - somes marked by dashed rectangles on the overview . Bars : ( top ) 10 µm ; ( bottom ) 5 µm . Time is given as minutes : seconds relative to NEBD . ( B ) Plot of chro - mosome distance to the AP over time , calculated from the trajectories shown in A . Trajectories are color - coded for actin - ( green ) and microtubule ( red ) - driven transport phases and arrival at the spindle ( gray ) . Chromosome capture events are represented by black dots . ( C ) Normalized mEGFP - ArpC1 intensity profile for each chromosome tracked in B . Intensity is calculated in a 5 - µm diameter sphere around the chromosome’s center of mass and normalized to the background level before NEBD onset ( in gray ) . Plots are color - coded as in B . ( D ) Individual plots for chromosomes shown in A . ( E ) Oocytes expressing 3mCherry - UtrCH to label F - actin ( gray ) and H2B - 3mEGFP to label chromosomes ( cyan ) were then treated with DMSO or Latrunculin B , respectively ( left and right panels ) . Left side : Maximum z - projection of the first time point ( 00 : 30 ) . Right side : Single confocal slices of selected chromosomes and an area sampling the F - actin network as marked by dashed rectangles on the overview . Below : Individual plots of mean intensities for chromosome patches ( a and b ) or network ( c ) shown above . Red bars indicate the chromosome capture event . Bars : ( main images ) 20 µm ; ( smaller images ) 5 µm . Time is given as minutes : seconds relative to NEBD . ( F ) Plot of chromosome distance to the AP over time for the oocytes shown in E . Top right : Normalized 3mCherry - UtrCH intensity profiles for the 5 - µm - diameter sphere surrounding each chromosome . Bottom right : Normalized mean F - actin network intensity profile . Burdyniuk et al . Actin coordinates chromosome capture in oocytes Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201802080 2670 Figure 6 . Search - and - capture expanded by F - actin – driven transport and block of early capture explains chromosome capture dynamics . ( A ) Ren - derings of 3D Cytosim simulations of two - staged chromosome congression . Microtubules are in red , chromosomes are blue spheres with green kinetochores . Time starts at NEBD . See also Video 6 . ( B ) Schematics of the different models and corresponding plots of chromosome distance to the AP over time and capture events . Trajectories are color - coded for actin - ( green ) and microtubule ( red ) - driven transport phases and arrival at the spindle ( gray ) . Chromosome capture events are represented by gray dots . ( C ) Comparison of simulated and experimental chromosome capture dynamics ( observed in oocytes , treated with Latrunculin B or DMSO ; Fig . 2 ) . Data from 13 oocytes are shown for both simulations and experiments . ( D ) Plots of individual experimental and simulated capture events and histograms of the same data . S & C , search and capture ; trans . , transport . Burdyniuk et al . Actin coordinates chromosome capture in oocytes Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201802080 2671 coordination of chromosome capture , as described here , may be generally required . Animal oocytes store nutrients , hence the oocyte as well as its nucleus is exceptionally large ( Lénárt and Ellenberg , 2003 ) . To retain these stored nutrients for the fertil - izable egg , meiotic divisions are extremely asymmetric , and thus the meiotic spindle is small and located near the cell cortex across animal species ( Crowder et al . , 2015 ) . This specialized organiza - tion necessitates additional mechanisms to collect chromosomes scattered in the large nuclear volume , hence mechanisms to coor - dinate capture with these processes . Importantly , as the spindle assembly checkpoint is weak or inactive in oocytes , chromosome capture and its coordination is absolutely essential to produce euploid eggs , and thereby essential for sexual reproduction of the species . Intriguingly , actin structures around chromosomes have been reported at early steps of oocyte meiosis in jellyfish ( Amiel and Houliston , 2009 ) , tunicates ( Prodon et al . , 2006 ) , Xenopus laevis ( Weber et al . , 2004 ; Yamagishi and Abe , 2018 ) , as well as mouse ( Mogessie and Schuh , 2017 ) . It will be exciting to see in the future whether actin has similar , essential functions in coor - dinating chromosome capture in these species as well . Additionally , related mechanisms may play a role in mitosis of somatic cells as well . Although completing search and capture as quickly as possible may intuitively appear the optimal solution , delaying chromosome capture and coordinating it with other cel - lular events is likely to provide advantages and may contribute to preventing chromosome loss and aneuploidy also in mitosis . For example , it has been shown that in somatic cells chromosomes are prearranged in a specific spatial configuration in prometa - phase , before capture by microtubules to accelerate the spindle assembly ( Magidson et al . , 2011 ) . This suggests that mechanisms may indeed exist also in somatic cells to delay capture of chromo - somes until they are favorably positioned for rapid and efficient spindle assembly . Materials and methods Oocyte collection , maturation , and injection Starfish ( Patiria miniata ) were obtained from Southern Califor - nia ( South Coast Bio - Marine LLC , Monterey Abalone Company , or Marinus Scientific Inc ) . Animals were maintained in seawater aquariums at 16°C at European Molecular Biology Laboratory’s Marine Facility . Oocytes were isolated , and mRNAs and other fluorescent markers were injected into the oocytes by using mercury - filled microneedles , as described previously ( Jaffe and Terasaki , 2004 ; Borrego - Pinto et al . , 2016b ) . mRNA was injected 24 – 48 h before to allow protein expression , whereas fluores - cently labeled protein markers were injected a few hours before imaging . Oocytes were induced to enter meiosis by addition of 10 µM 1 - methyladenine ( 1 - MA ; Acros Organics ) . NEBD normally initiated 25 min after 1 - MA addition , and only those oocytes that started NEBD within 40 min were considered for analysis . Live - cell fluorescent markers H2B - 3mEGFP and H2B - mCherry , EB3 - 3mCherry , mEGFP - ArpC1 , 3mEGFP - UtrCH , and 3mCherry - UtrCH were subcloned to the pGEM - HE vector ( Borrego - Pinto et al . , 2016b ) . mRNA was syn - thesized in vitro from the linearized DNA template by using the AmpliCap - Max T7 High Yield Message Maker kit ( Cellscript ) , followed by polyA - tail elongation ( A - Plus Poly ( A ) Polymerase Tailing kit ; Cellscript ) . mRNAs were dissolved in water ( typical concentration , 3 – 5 µg / µl ) and injected into the oocytes up to 5 % of the oocyte volume . Histone H1 and UtrCH ( Burkel et al . , 2007 ) were labeled with Alexa fluorophores as described previously ( Bun et al . , 2018 ) . Phalloidin labeled with the indicated Alexa fluorophores ( Invitrogen ) was dissolved in methanol and was then air - dried before use and dissolved in PBS for microinjec - tion and immunostaining . For phalloidin , microinjection was performed 2 min after NEBD into the nuclear area . H1 – Alexa Fluor 568 , UtrCH – Alexa Fluor 568 , Arp2 / 3 – Alexa Fluor 488 ( gift from B . Bugyi , University of Pécs , Pécs , Hungary ) , and mEGFP - Ndc80 ( gift from S . Maffini and A . Musacchio , Max - Planck Institute , Dortmund , Germany ) proteins were injected into the oocytes before maturation . RanT24N and RanQ69L ( gift from R . Walczak and I . Mattaj , European Molecular Biology Laboratory , Heidelberg , Germany ; final concentration , ∼ 15 µM ) protein was injected right before NEBD . Drug treatments For all inhibitor treatments , oocytes were first transferred to an Ibidi dish ( catalog number 80131 ) . To acutely depolym - erize F - actin , Latrunculin B ( final concentration , 7 µM ) was added directly on the microscope stage in the form of a dou - ble - concentrated solution to the equal volume of seawater con - tained in the chamber . Nocodazole ( final concentration , 3 . 3 µM ) and Cytochalasin D ( final concentration , 40 µM ) were diluted from DMSO stocks in seawater and added simultaneously with 1 - MA . Ciliobrevin D ( final concentration , 150 µM ) was added 10 min before NEBD . Oocytes were incubated with CK - 666 ( final concentration , 0 . 5 mM ) for 1 h before maturation . Zeocin ( final concentration , 100 mg / ml ) was added 3 . 5 h before maturation . In all cases , control oocytes were treated at the same times with the corresponding amount of the DMSO solvent . Immunostaining Oocytes were fixed at desired times by the fixative composed of 100 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 0 , 50 mM EGTA , 10 mM MgSO 4 , 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 , 1 % formaldehyde , and 0 . 1 % glutaraldehyde , as described by ( Strickland et al . , 2004 ) . Samples were additionally treated with ImageIT ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) to reduce unspecific antibody binding and mounted with the antifade agent ProLong - Gold ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) between single layers of double - sided adhesive tape ( Scotch ) . Microtubules were visualized by an α - tubulin antibody ( 1 : 400 DM1α ; Sigma - Aldrich ) and goat anti – mouse Alexa Fluor 488 or 568 secondary antibodies ( 1 : 500 ) . mEGFP - ArpC1 signal was enhanced by an α - GFP antibody ( 1 : 400 ; ab6556 ; Abcam ) . Fixed oocytes were imaged according to Niquist criteria ( pixel size , 38 nm ; z - step , 130 nm ) . Image acquisition and processing Live cell movies were acquired on a Leica SP5 confocal micro - scope by using a 40× HCX PL AP 1 . 10 NA water - immersion objective lens ( Leica ) . Fixed samples were imaged on a Leica SP8 microscope equipped with the HC PL APO 1 . 40 NA 100× oil - immersion objective . Where indicated , images were deconvolved Burdyniuk et al . Actin coordinates chromosome capture in oocytes Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201802080 2672 by using the Huygens software ( Scientific Volume Imaging ) . Fast acquisition rate images were acquired on a Zeiss LSM 880 confocal microscope equipped with the AiryFast module and 40× C - Apochromat LD 1 . 1 NA water - immersion objective lens ( typical settings to image a volume of 70 × 70 × 60 µm volume , 306 × 306 pixels [ pixel size , 224 nm ] in xy , and Z step of 1 . 4 µm , allowing a time resolution of one stack every 3 s ) . AiryFast pixel reassignment and deconvolution was performed in the Zeiss Zen Black software . Imaging was performed at controlled tem - perature ( 19 – 21°C ) . Unless specified , images were loaded and adjusted for bright - ness and contrast , projected ( maximum - intensity projection and / or temporal color code for time projections ) , and filtered ( Gaussian blur , typically 0 . 5 – 1 pixels ) in Fiji / ImageJ ( Schindelin et al . , 2012 ) . Chromosome tracking was performed in 3D using either a custom Matlab ( MathWorks ) routine ( Mori et al . , 2011 ; Monnier et al . , 2012 ) or Imaris ( Bitplane ) . Chromosome capture events were identified manually by combining several quanti - tative measures and by examining the 3D trajectories , as well as plots of the chromosome – AP distance over time . Specifically , a chromosome - capture event was identified as a time point fol - lowed by at least four subsequent steps of unidirectional and fast motion ( Fig . S1 B , chromosome 2 ) , or at least two such steps if it coincided with a change in the overall direction ( Fig . S1 B , chro - mosome 1 ) . Every capture event was confirmed by examining the 3D trajectories ( Fig . S1 B ) , as well as plots of the chromosome – AP distance over time ( Fig . S1 C ) . These latter plots visualize the pole - ward / radial velocity component corresponding to the expected direction of transport on astral microtubules ( Fig . S1 C ) . By these stringent criteria , we were able to identify capture events in ∼ 50 % of chromosome trajectories in an unbiased manner ( Fig . S1 , E and F ) . To calculate the mEGFP - ArpC1 or 3mCherry - UtrCH intensity around chromosomes , we tracked chromosomes in Imaris and used a custom XTension script in Matlab to define a spherical volume around the chromosome and measured the intensity contained within . F - actin network intensity was quan - tified by measuring the mean fluorescent intensity in fixed size regions on individual confocal slices over time and normalized between minimum and maximum values . Analysis of tracks was performed , and plots were generated in Matlab . All figures were assembled in Adobe Illustrator CS6 . Simulations Chromosome congression was modeled in the Cytosim software ( Nedelec and Foethke , 2007 ) . The simulation was performed in a 3D spherical geometry 70 µm in diameter , corresponding to the mean size of the starfish oocyte nucleus and kinetochores matching in size and shape to experiments ( Fig . S4 E ) . Microtu - bules were modeled as dynamic , nonflexible polymers nucleated from the centrosomes with a distance - dependent catastrophe rate ( Fig . S4 D ) . Centrosomes were static and positioned 3 µm from the cell cortex and 6 µm apart from each other ( Fig . S4 A ) . Microtubules touching the cell cortex underwent catastrophe immediately . No chromatin - mediated microtubule nucleation was observed experimentally or included in simulations ( Fig . S4 F ) . The inactivation of kinetochores to prevent early capture events was modeled by setting the microtubule binding rate to 0 for the first 4 min after NEBD and then increasing it to 10 , then 30 , 70 , and finally 100 % , every minute , 4 – 8 min after NEBD . As we focused here on chromosome capture , we did not rep - resent the F - actin network by explicit filaments . Instead , we implemented a velocity field acting on the chromosomes to dis - place them as mediated by isotropic contraction of the F - actin network ( Mori et al . , 2011 ; Bun et al . , 2018 ) . The speed of any chromosome is constant in time , and it is proportional to its distance from the AP at NEBD onset ( t = 0 ) . Thus , at any time , the flow is directed toward a single point p at the AP . All chro - mosomes would converge to this point at the same time , t x = 15 min ; the transport , however , stops at a time t m = 12 . 5 min . The resulting speed of a chromosome located at position x at time t is v ( x , t ) = ( p − x ) / ( t x − t ) for t ∈ [ 0 , t m ] and v ( x , t ) = 0 for t > t m . Another independent term representing the Brownian motion of a sphere of radius 0 . 8 µm embedded in a fluid of viscosity 0 . 1 Pa s is added to realistically reproduce chromosome motion . In the simulation , chromosome capture or transport by microtubules is not affected by the F - actin network velocity field , which is acting only on the chromosomes . A comparison of the chromo - some - approach rate from the experimental data and in the model is shown on Fig . S4 C . To decrease computational costs , the simulation time - step was set to 0 . 05 s , and microtubule rotation was neglected . Param - eters of the model are tabulated in Fig . S4 B . The configuration file to run simulations is available on request . Cytosim is an Open Source project hosted on http : / / github . com / nedelec / cytosim . Online supplemental material The supplemental material contains four figures showing details of the high - resolution tracking and identification of chromo - some capture events ( Fig . S1 ) , details of the quantification of microtubule dynamics ( Fig . S2 A ) , generation of the chroma - tin fragments by Zeocin ( Fig . S2 B ) , as well as F - actin network stabilization ( Fig . S2 C ) . The complete dataset for DMSO - and Latrunculin B – treated oocytes in Fig . 5 ( E and F ) is shown in Fig . S3 . The details of the computer simulations are shown in Fig . S4 . The supplemental material also includes six videos showing sin - gle events of chromosome capture ( Video 1 ) , F - actin disassem - bly by acute Latrunculin B treatment ( Video 2 ) , high temporal resolution chromosome tracking ( Video 3 ) , local collapse in the F - actin network caused by captured chromosomes ( Video 4 ) , and the kinetics of Arp2 / 3 - nucleated patches on the chromosomes ( Video 5 ) . Video 6 shows the three simulations recapitulating chromosome capture kinetics . Acknowledgments We thank the members of the Lénárt laboratory for reagents and support , in particular Michal Fleszar for assistance and Joana Borrego - Pinto and Philippe Bun for sharing plasmid constructs and analysis tools . We thank Serge Dmitrieff ( Jacques - Monod Institute , Paris , France ) for help with implementing Cytosim scripts . We thank Johanna Bischof ( Tufts University , Medford , MA ) , Natalia Wesolowska , and Cristina Piñeiro Lopez ( European Molecular Biology Laboratory [ EMBL ] , Heidelberg , Germany ) , and Alexey Khodjakov ( Wadsworth Center , Albany , NY ) for Burdyniuk et al . Actin coordinates chromosome capture in oocytes Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201802080 2673 comments on the manuscript . We also thank EMBL’s Advanced Light Microscopy Facility for essential support , specifically Christian Tischer for the help with image analysis and informa - tion technology support . We thank EMBL’s Laboratory Animal Resources and Kresimir Crnokic in particular . We also thank the EMBL Centre for Statistical Data Analysis and Bernd Klaus for the help with statistics , Stefano Maffini and Andrea Musacchio ( Max - Planck Institute , Dortmund , Germany ) for mEGFP - Ndc80 protein , Beáta Bugyi ( University of Pécs , Pécs , Hungary ) for Arp2 / 3 – Alexa Fluor 488 protein , and Rudolf Walczak and Iain Mattaj ( EMBL ) for the RanT24N protein . This work was supported by the EMBL and specifically by the EMBL International PhD Program and the Darwin Trust of Edin - burgh to M . Burdyniuk . F . Nédélec is suported by the Centre for Modelling in the Biosciences . The authors declare no competing financial interests . Author contributions : M . Burdyniuk and P . Lénárt conceived the project and designed the experiments . M . Burdyniuk , A . Cal - legari , and M . Mori performed the experiments and analyzed the data . M . Burdyniuk and F . Nédélec implemented and ran simula - tions . M . Burdyniuk and P . Lénárt wrote the manuscript . Submitted : 13 February 2018 Revised : 4 May 2018 Accepted : 23 May 2018 References Almonacid , M . , M . - E . Terret , and M . - H . Verlhac . 2014 . Actin - based spindle positioning : New insights from female gametes . J . Cell Sci . 127 : 477 – 483 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 142711 Amiel , A . , and E . Houliston . 2009 . Three distinct RNA localization mecha - nisms contribute to oocyte polarity establishment in the cnidarian Cly - tia hemisphaerica . Dev . Biol . 327 : 191 – 203 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ydbio . 2008 . 12 . 007 Barisic , M . , P . Aguiar , S . Geley , and H . Maiato . 2014 . Kinetochore motors drive congression of peripheral polar chromosomes by overcoming random arm - ejection forces . Nat . Cell Biol . 16 : 1249 – 1256 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb3060 Borrego - Pinto , J . , K . Somogyi , M . A . Karreman , J . König , T . Müller - Reichert , M . Bettencourt - Dias , P . Gönczy , Y . Schwab , and P . Lénárt . 2016a . Dis - tinct mechanisms eliminate mother and daughter centrioles in meiosis of starfish oocytes . J . Cell Biol . 212 : 815 – 827 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201510083 Borrego - Pinto , J . , K . Somogyi , and P . Lénárt . 2016b . Live imaging of centriole dynamics by fluorescently tagged proteins in starfish oocyte meiosis . In Methods in Molecular Biology . John M . Walker , editor . Springer , Clifton , NJ . 145 – 166 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4939 - 3795 - 0 _ 11 Bun , P . , S . Dmitrieff , J . M . Belmonte , F . J . Nédélec , and P . Lénárt . 2018 . A dis - assembly - driven mechanism explains F - actin - mediated chromosome transport in starfish oocytes . eLife . 7 : e31469 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 31469 Burkel , B . M . , G . von Dassow , and W . M . Bement . 2007 . Versatile fluorescent probes for actin filaments based on the actin - binding domain of utro - phin . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 64 : 822 – 832 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / cm . 20226 Chesarone , M . A . , A . G . DuPage , and B . L . Goode . 2010 . Unleashing formins to remodel the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 : 62 – 74 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm2816 Crowder , M . E . , M . Strzelecka , J . D . Wilbur , M . C . Good , G . von Dassow , and R . Heald . 2015 . A comparative analysis of spindle morphometrics across metazoans . Curr . Biol . 25 : 1542 – 1550 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2015 . 04 . 036 Dasso , M . , T . Seki , Y . Azuma , T . Ohba , and T . Nishimoto . 1994 . A mutant form of the Ran / TC4 protein disrupts nuclear function in Xenopus laevis egg extracts by inhibiting the RCC1 protein , a regulator of chromosome con - densation . EMBO J . 13 : 5732 – 5744 . Dehapiot , B . , V . Carrière , J . Carroll , and G . Halet . 2013 . Polarized Cdc42 activa - tion promotes polar body protrusion and asymmetric division in mouse oocytes . Dev . Biol . 377 : 202 – 212 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ydbio . 2013 . 01 . 029 Deng , M . , P . Suraneni , R . M . Schultz , and R . Li . 2007 . The Ran GTPase medi - ates chromatin signaling to control cortical polarity during polar body extrusion in mouse oocytes . Dev . Cell . 12 : 301 – 308 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2006 . 11 . 008 Görlich , D . , N . Panté , U . Kutay , U . Aebi , and F . R . Bischoff . 1996 . Identification of different roles for RanGDP and RanGTP in nuclear protein import . EMBO J . 15 : 5584 – 5594 . Hayden , J . H . , S . S . Bowser , and C . L . Rieder . 1990 . Kinetochores capture astral microtubules during chromosome attachment to the mitotic spindle : direct visualization in live newt lung cells . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 1039 – 1045 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 111 . 3 . 1039 Heald , R . , and A . Khodjakov . 2015 . Thirty years of search and capture : The complex simplicity of mitotic spindle assembly . J . Cell Biol . 211 : 1103 – 1111 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201510015 Henty - Ridilla , J . L . , A . Rankova , J . A . Eskin , K . Kenny , and B . L . Goode . 2016 . Accelerated actin filament polymerization from microtubule plus ends . Science . 352 : 1004 – 1009 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . aaf1709 Hetzer , M . , O . J . Gruss , and I . W . Mattaj . 2002 . The Ran GTPase as a marker of chromosome position in spindle formation and nuclear envelope assem - bly . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 : E177 – E184 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb0702 - e177 Holy , T . E . , and S . Leibler . 1994 . Dynamic instability of microtubules as an effi - cient way to search in space . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 91 : 5682 – 5685 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 91 . 12 . 5682 Jaffe , L . A . , and M . Terasaki . 2004 . Quantitative microinjection of oocytes , eggs , and embryos . Methods Cell Biol . 74 : 219 – 242 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0091 - 679X ( 04 ) 74010 - 8 Kaksonen , M . , Y . Sun , and D . G . Drubin . 2003 . A pathway for association of receptors , adaptors , and actin during endocytic internalization . Cell . 115 : 475 – 487 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 03 ) 00883 - 3 Kirschner , M . , and T . Mitchison . 1986 . Beyond self - assembly : From microtu - bules to morphogenesis . Cell . 45 : 329 – 342 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 86 ) 90318 - 1 Kolano , A . , S . Brunet , A . D . Silk , D . W . Cleveland , and M . - H . Verlhac . 2012 . Error - prone mammalian female meiosis from silencing the spindle assembly checkpoint without normal interkinetochore tension . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 109 : E1858 – E1867 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1204686109 Lénárt , P . , and J . Ellenberg . 2003 . Nuclear envelope dynamics in oocytes : From germinal vesicle breakdown to mitosis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 : 88 – 95 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0955 - 0674 ( 02 ) 00011 - X Lénárt , P . , C . P . Bacher , N . Daigle , A . R . Hand , R . Eils , M . Terasaki , and J . Ellen - berg . 2005 . A contractile nuclear actin network drives chromosome congression in oocytes . Nature . 436 : 812 – 818 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature03810 Lowery , L . A . , and D . Van Vactor . 2009 . The trip of the tip : Understanding the growth cone machinery . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 : 332 – 343 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm2679 Magidson , V . , C . B . O’Connell , J . Lončarek , R . Paul , A . Mogilner , and A . Khod - jakov . 2011 . The spatial arrangement of chromosomes during prometa - phase facilitates spindle assembly . Cell . 146 : 555 – 567 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 07 . 012 Magidson , V . , R . Paul , N . Yang , J . G . Ault , C . B . O’Connell , I . Tikhonenko , B . F . McEwen , A . Mogilner , and A . Khodjakov . 2015 . Adaptive changes in the kinetochore architecture facilitate proper spindle assembly . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 : 1134 – 1144 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb3223 Mitchison , T . , and M . Kirschner . 1984 . Dynamic instability of microtubule growth . Nature . 312 : 237 – 242 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 312237a0 Mogessie , B . , and M . Schuh . 2017 . Actin protects mammalian eggs against chromosome segregation errors . Science . 357 : eaa11647 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . aal1647 Monnier , N . , S . - M . Guo , M . Mori , J . He , P . Lénárt , and M . Bathe . 2012 . Bayesian approach to MSD - based analysis of particle motion in live cells . Biophys . J . 103 : 616 – 626 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2012 . 06 . 029 Mori , M . , N . Monnier , N . Daigle , M . Bathe , J . Ellenberg , and P . Lénárt . 2011 . Intracellular transport by an anchored homogeneously contracting F - actin meshwork . Curr . Biol . 21 : 606 – 611 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2011 . 03 . 002 Mori , M . , K . Somogyi , H . Kondo , N . Monnier , H . J . Falk , P . Machado , M . Bathe , F . Nédélec , and P . Lénárt . 2014 . An Arp2 / 3 nucleated F - actin shell fragments nuclear membranes at nuclear envelope breakdown Burdyniuk et al . Actin coordinates chromosome capture in oocytes Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201802080 2674 in starfish oocytes . Curr . Biol . 24 : 1421 – 1428 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2014 . 05 . 019 Nedelec , F . , and D . Foethke . 2007 . Collective Langevin dynamics of flexible cytoskeletal fibers . New J . Phys . 9 : 427 – 454 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1088 / 1367 - 2630 / 9 / 11 / 427 Prodon , F . , J . Chenevert , and C . Sardet . 2006 . Establishment of animal - vegetal polarity during maturation in ascidian oocytes . Dev . Biol . 290 : 297 – 311 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ydbio . 2005 . 11 . 025 Rieder , C . L . , and S . P . Alexander . 1990 . Kinetochores are transported poleward along a single astral microtubule during chromosome attachment to the spindle in newt lung cells . J . Cell Biol . 110 : 81 – 95 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 110 . 1 . 81 Schindelin , J . , I . Arganda - Carreras , E . Frise , V . Kaynig , M . Longair , T . Pietzsch , S . Preibisch , C . Rueden , S . Saalfeld , B . Schmid , et al . 2012 . Fiji : An open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nat . Methods . 9 : 676 – 682 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2019 Shao , H . , R . Li , C . Ma , E . Chen , and X . J . Liu . 2013 . Xenopus oocyte meiosis lacks spindle assembly checkpoint control . J . Cell Biol . 201 : 191 – 200 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201211041 Shrestha , R . L . , and V . M . Draviam . 2013 . Lateral to end - on conversion of chro - mosome - microtubule attachment requires kinesins CENP - E and MCAK . Curr . Biol . 23 : 1514 – 1526 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2013 . 06 . 040 Strickland , L . , G . von Dassow , J . Ellenberg , V . Foe , P . Lenart , and D . Burgess . 2004 . Light microscopy of echinoderm embryos . Methods Cell Biol . 74 : 371 – 409 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0091 - 679X ( 04 ) 74016 - 9 Tanaka , K . 2012 . Dynamic regulation of kinetochore - microtubule interac - tion during mitosis . J . Biochem . 152 : 415 – 424 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / jb / mvs109 Weber , K . L . , A . M . Sokac , J . S . Berg , R . E . Cheney , and W . M . Bement . 2004 . A microtubule - binding myosin required for nuclear anchoring and spin - dle assembly . Nature . 431 : 325 – 329 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature02834 Webster , A . , and M . Schuh . 2017 . Mechanisms of aneuploidy in human eggs . Trends Cell Biol . 27 : 55 – 68 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2016 . 09 . 002 Wollman , R . , E . N . Cytrynbaum , J . T . Jones , T . Meyer , J . M . Scholey , and A . Mogilner . 2005 . Efficient chromosome capture requires a bias in the ‘search - and - capture’ process during mitotic - spindle assembly . Curr . Biol . 15 : 828 – 832 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2005 . 03 . 019 Yamagishi , Y . , and H . Abe . 2018 . Actin assembly mediated by a nucleation promoting factor WASH is involved in MTOC - TMA formation during Xenopus oocyte maturation . Cytoskeleton ( Hoboken ) . 75 : 131 – 143 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / cm . 21428 Yang , Z . , U . S . Tulu , P . Wadsworth , and C . L . Rieder . 2007 . Kinetochore dynein is required for chromosome motion and congression independent of the spindle checkpoint . Curr . Biol . 17 : 973 – 980 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2007 . 04 . 056