Computer Support for Clinical Practice : Embedding and Evolving Protocols of Care Barbara Katzenberg , Fred Pickard , and John McDermott Ellora Software , Inc P . O . Box 2002 Devens , MA 01433 + 1617 - 863 - 0348 katzen @ world . std . com ABSTRACT Protocols of care are representations of practice that specify how patients should be treated given specified conditions . We have been exploring ways that protocols of care can be encoded in computers so that they can actively structure work people do in clinics to accord with standards of care . We describe one such implementation called the Care Manager . Because a protocol’s power to suggest action lies in people’s alignment to it , and beeause organizational change can make such standards obsolete overnight , means for keeping protocols in sync with work practice are a necessary accompaniment to any implementation of protocol - based care . Keywords : Standardization , clinical information systems , care management , protcwol - based care , guidelines , coordination technologies , STANDARDIZING CARE PRACTICES Cooperative work differs from individual work in the degree to which one’s actions must be comprehensible and accountable to others . For the past year , we have been working with people in a few clinical organizations who have been trying to improve how they coordinate the care they deliver to patients . During that time , a central focus for many of these people has been on developing standards of care , i . e . , idealizations of practice that represent some consensus of how different patient situations should be handled . Permission to make digitallhard copies of all or pan of this material for personal or classroom uae is granted witiout fee provided that the copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advsntage , the copy - right notice , the title of the publication and its date appear , and notice is given that copyright is by permission of the ACM , Inc . To copy otherwise , to republish , to post on servers or to redktribute to lists , requires specific permission and / or fee . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ’96 , Cambridge MA USA @ 1996 ACM 0 - 89791 - 765 - 0 / 96 / 11 . . $ 3 . 50 The work we will describe has taken place at the National Naval Medical Center : primarily at a newly opened clinic for the care of breast cancer patients . Breast cancer is a poorly understood disease that is currently the fbeus of much public attention . While still a frequent cause of death in women , there is reason to hope . Combinations of surgery and other therapies have led to long survival rates for many patients who move from illness back to active life . But , the diagnosis and treatment path can be strenuous for the patient and complicated for medical organizations to provide . The patient - or parts of her— are subject to efforts by radiologists , surgeons , oncologists , pathologists , nurses , laboratory technicians , swial workers , physical therapists , clerks , and others across departments and institutions over long periods of time , many of whom will never know each other or talk face - to - face . The only clue they may have to the others’ efforts are via representational technologies . And yet , making sense of other care providers’ actions is crucial if one wants to appropriately coordinate one’s own actions among them , or if one wants to reconstruct a history of what has come before . Given the seriousness of mistakes , it is not surprising that people in clinics worry about ways to make sure care happens according to plan . In trying to understand what it means to support coordination work we are influenced by Suchman [ 8 ] who has called coordination the production of a coherent relationship between a “normal order of events” as it is 1 This is not to say that this dispersion is desirable or inevitable or that communication is necessarily technology - mediated . Some core ideas in starting the Breast Care Center were to provide patients with the continuity of a stable staff and location ; and to co - locate key providers to improve their ability to collaborate on cancer patients’ care . 364 encoded in representational technologies , and events as they are obsemed and reported by people at the worksite . In the clinical sites we work in , the “normal orders” takes the form of e . g . , clinic schedules , structured languages for documenting clinical events , and protocols of care . Protocol of care is the name we give any standardized action prescription that is intended to guide the work care providers do , and is the focus of this paper . As Suchman’s view implies , the protocols do not directly cause care to happen in a certain way , but rather create a framework that stall orient to in providing care ; and a framework they use in seeing and explaining events as they unfold . We have been exploring ways that protocols of care can be encoded in computers so that they can be used to structure more of the clinic’s work . While there are many implementation strategies , active reminding or structuring of work according to protocols brings us face to face with the ways prescriptions sometimes are orthogonal to the work people are trying to do . So , our discussion here will focus on how protocols can be defined and evolved at usefi , dlevels of representation and how areas of work that are amenable to standardization can be chosen . We will describe as well a particular implementation intended to make protocols available to some care providers at relevant times . THE CARE MANAGER The Care Manager @ is an application we have developed to help care providers organize their work in accordance with clinical standards of best practice2 . 3 A care provider can view the work that needs to be done for a given patient , for a given time frame , or by given providers ; and is reminded when the activities have not been completed according to schedule , In some ways the Care Manager is similar to business contact management programs4 that allow a workgroup to maintain a database of information about individuals and tie this to group members’ calendars of meetings , calls , and tasks . It differs in that it also allows for the encoding of protocoltialled procedures in this implementation—which are standard collections of activities that are prescribed for different patient situations . 2 The Care Manager is a Microsoft Visual Basic @ application which stores its own protocol and task status information in a small number of relational databases . It integrates with other information sources ( e . g . , supplemental patient information ) using Digital Equipment Corporation’s LinkWorks @ product . 3 Other designers on the project ( including contributors from the site ) are : Katerina Dobes , Joyce Durand , John Esielionis , Jaime Luke , Julie Maloney , Marilyn McIntyre , Sandra StoV , and Gregg Yost . 4 ( e . g . , Symantec’s ACT ! @ Osoftware ) For example a current protocol in use at BCC for lumpectomy ( a surgical procedure for breast cancer ) includes the following tasks as it is viewed by the nurse case manager . . Perform pre - op teaching . Verify Physical Therapy consult . Veri @ Social Work consult . Make follow - up visit to floor l Check for post - op biopsy results . Notifi physician of biopsy results These activities are proposed to happen at certain times in relation to the surgery date , and this is reflected in how the tasks are displayed on the nurse case manager’s schedule . So for example , it takes three to four days for the Pathology Department to complete surgical biopsy diagnoses , and the reminder to check for results shows up on the nurse case manager’s work list three days after the date that has been entered for surgery . For a given patient , a task or many tasks in the protocol may be judged by a care provider to be inappropriate . Before importing the collections of tasks in a protocol onto her work list , she can cross off those which she judges in that way . Tasks are added to a care provider’s work list in one of four ways 1 ) she assigns a protocol to a patient , thus importing that protocol’s collection of tasks ; 2 ) she creates an ad hoc task , which she may affdiate with an existing protocol or which may be free - standing ; 3 ) someone else assigns her a task , or 4 ) a task is suggested by the Care Manager based on evidence it has access to about the patient’s condition , and the care provider accepts the suggestion . Assigning a protocol to a patient is what current Care Manager users do most . They simply select a procedure name from the list and after reviewing the proposed tasks import the ones they want onto their task list . At BCC , they have defined about forty protocols ; some having as few as two tasks associated with them , the lengthiest right now having 15 . Ad hoc task creation is done either to add extra tasks not covered by the protocol , or to put items on the work list that are unrelated to patients . For instance , the case manager may put in an item about a conference she plans to attend in the following week . The idea of aftlliating ad hoc tasks with protocols is partly to organize documentation , but also provides grist for the mill when it comes time to update protocols . 365 Procedures h { + @ Bmm + , . . ~ Mastectomyw , / delayedrecon Figure 1 : Care providers use the Care Manager to refresh their memories about the current status of each of the clinic’s patients , to remind themselves of tasks that they need to do , to let each other know what tasks have been done , and to document the care provided to each patient . Work is primarily organized according to standardized collections of tasks called procedures which are interleaved on a care provider’s task list according to when the work needs to be completed . The category of assigning tasks to other care providers is currently being piloted at BCC . For instance , an ambulatory care nurse may initiate a protocol for a breast biopsy which includes tracking and notification tasks which are assigned to heL however if the biopsy is read as positive new tasks are enabled that are assigned to the nurse case managers that handle cancer patients . Because there is more than one nurse case manager at the clinic these tasks do not show up on an individual’s task list ; instead a message is sent to anyone identitled as a nurse case manager when the tasks becomes enabled . Then , using whatever means for dividing up patient responsibilities they decide upon , individual case managers will change the provider name on the tasks from “nurse case manager” to their own names thus making the work part of their own task lists The last catego ~ , task suggestion by the Care Manager , is not yet in use in the clinics . In this case , the Care Manager makes a task suggestion when it has evidence of a change in patient condition that has been tied to a specified action in a protocol . For instance , a demonstration we gave at NNMC’S Obstetrics clinic showed how an existing spreadsheet for recording the status of patients with gestational diabetes ( a common side effect of pregnancy ) could be combined with a protocol that suggested interventions based on blood levels . In the current work process , the nurse tracks the blood levels of the forty or f @ patients who have been diagnosed with gestational diabetes . At a certain level she may suggest that the patient use a home glucometer to monitor these levels more closely , and at a higher level still she may request intervention from one of the obstetricians . In this case , designing a protocol for the different cases was uncontroversial ; the obstetricians and nurses involved have found it easy to agree on what the cutoff points were for the two interventions . Because the data to assess the patient’s status on the relevant dimension is available on - line , task suggestion by the Care Manager is possible , and was experienced by the clinic staff viewing the demonstration as helpful . AN INCREMENTAL APPROACH TO PROTOCOL DEVELOPMENT AND SUPPORT Outsiders and insiders alike find remarkable regularity and standardization in clinical work . However those caring for 366 patients know that the calm can always be interrupted by occurrences that are baffling , terri ~ ing , or tragic . These two observations are not unrelateci - - + tandardization is an organizational method for bringing order and meaning to unruly turns of events . All clinic work does not submit to ( or require ) routinization , and that which does exist has taken time and negotiations to achieve . In other words , clinic work is highly heterogeneous along the dimension of degree of standardization . However , even in areas where standards have been developed and made available , they are not always paid attention to , and they vary in how well they support what people are trying to accomplish . At any given time there is significant variation in how seriously different standards are taken [ 6 ] The picture we are trying to paint is of an organization that is a patchwork of routines and standard operating procedures made concrete on a variety of devices ; but also interspersed with areas of work that proceed without ( and probably without the need for ) detailed specification and accounting . Defining standards of practice does not guarantee that people will pay attention to the standards . Their paying attention requires a mix of having the right standard available when it is relevant , people’s skill in interpreting the standards to fit the local circumstance , and substantial campaigning to get people to align with the standard as opposed to doing things their own way when their own way is different and not obviously better . Embedding standards of care—protocols—in computer applications is one way we think might get people to pay more attention to standards . A task on one’s list of things to do , particularly if it shows up at a relevant time can be a strong reminder . At NNMC there has been an enthusiasm for this kind of reminding for certain situations which may , however , be quite circumscribed . For instance , right now there is substantial agreement at the clinic about what semices a lumpectomy patient should get , but the decision about whether a patient should have a lumpectomy as opposed to other treatment is considered too complicated with too many dependencies ( e . g . , the patient’s preference ) to be so sharply encodable . Similarly , the details of what a nurse actually does when she makes a “follow - up visit to the floor” are left unspecified . The protocol is constraining at a level that brings the practice of diverse practitioners more closely in alignment , but not so constraining that it invades the space they call their own , e . g . , working through complicated treatment choices , or managing their interactions with patients . s Our point is at 5 In this respect , the protocol may be considered a boundary object [ 7 ] any given time there is a certain workable granularity for a protocol . The simple nature of the technology constrains the methodology for developing protocols . The Care Manager’s main capability is to display terse phrases that stand for pieces of work according to a predetermined schedule . This is helpful to the degree that those phrases evoke in their readers similar understandings and that the timing of their display coincides with the situations in which the readers find them relevant . To increase the likelihood of being successful our approach has been to : 1 ) start small and add protocol support in increments ; 2 ) base protocols on observation of practice ; 3 ) keep protocol definitions close to the surface where their assumptions are open to evaluation ; and 4 ) provide tools and methods for analyzing variation . We will talk about these in more detail below : Start small and work incrementally Our approach is to encourage the development of relatively simple protocols with few or no decision points for those situations in which there is agreement about what should be done , and where the Care Manager can be helpful in maintaining some desired order across providers . These areas of routinization are surrounded and interleaved by work that is substantially less structured . In our sites , the simple protocols that are in use have emerged from facilitated meetings in which care providers air their views about practice and in which a new iteration of the protocol definition is one of the meeting’s outcome . This is part of a larger effort to develop areas of consensus among a fairly diverse group of practitioners . In other organizations , such work might proceed less democratically ; However , unless the social work of bringing participants into alignment around the protocol is managed in some way , the protocols will have little power to organize activities [ 10 ] . ( See also [ 9 , 11 ] for a debate about the ways in which representation reified in information technologies promote different organizational agendas . ) Our intent is to have the embedding of protocols in the Care Manager follow closely on the heels of organizational agreements that have been achieved , and to help organizations create the conditions for agreement making . However , there is no attempt to create an overarching structure that all the protocols neatly fit within , Base protocol definitions on observation of practice The display of protocol tasks in the Care Manager is helpful only when they remind people to do something whose doing they value and that they might have forgotten , or when they directly contribute to getting the work done . This requirement means that the protocols currently in use are markedly unlike task decompositions . Parts of the work that are salient in descriptions of the activity ~ ecause they are perceived to be central to the 367 work or because they take the most time - are sometimes absent or left in large , unbroken chunks , while a seemingly uneven collection of minutiae are included . For example , the social work protocol includes the task “Perform initial social work assessment” which points to something the social worker describes as a lengthy and central aspect of the work she does , right next to “Check on patient housing” which is a responsibility which only occasionally becomes a focus of a attention . It is considered important enough to call out in the protocol but is stilciently off center stage that it can be forgotten We have found that the diilicult work of generating protocols can be made more fknitfid if observations and grounded scenarios of practice form a basis for the discussion . We use workplace analysis and scenario - based design methods to provide assistance on generating first pass protocols and reviewing existing ones [ 1 , 3 , 4 ] . Keep protocol definitions close to the surface The Care Manager makes recommendations , but it cannot support the recommendations it makes with the kinds of stories and explanations people might make if questioned . And , since the viability of protocols changes over time and across providers , there will necessarily be times when the recommendations it makes will not make sense to the reader . To counteract this effect the Care Manager makes available the protocol representation it is operating on . Some of what is intended by the authors maybe inferable from seeing the representation , but the task name may still be experienced as inappropriate by the provider who is seeing it . This mismatch can be seen to indicate a weakness in the protocol that the provider is well - positioned to criticize . The criticism can be direct ( bringing it up at the next meeting ) or indirect ( omitting the non - sensical task or adding a new one ) but the potential benefit is that there is a means to evolve the protocols that is close to the action they are intended to support . Of course , characteristics of the device only make such contributions easier , they do not create the social conditions that cause practitioners to want or need to make such contributions . The idea that standards development and maintenance is a professional responsibility is certainly foreign to many workplaces , but in our view a crucial element of protocol - based care . Make protocols easy to change Characteristics of device design can make a ditTerence in how easy or dMcult it is to evolve standards . For instance , the Care Manager , application is designed so that the protocols can be changed as needed without affecting any of the display , communication , and report capabilities of the application . A newly implemented protocol editing tool makes it possible for a clinic stti member to keep the protocols up - to - date with the latest agreements . Again , having it be easy to change in the device is not the same as having it be easy change in the organization , As the number of users of protocols grows , the work associated with getting agreement around changes increases those costs of change . Provide tools and methods for analyzing variation There will always be a gap between local practice and the idealization of a protocol , but when the differences are documented , these can later be mined for patterns that can improve the standard [ 2 ] . These may be tasks that are systematically omitted or they may be of the “other” variety . Many standardized forms have an “other” or “miscellaneous” category , which is the place where you put something when you can’t figure out where it belongs . Because of its design , there is no “other” in the Care Manager , but the ad hoc tasks can be said to fimction in a similar way . When the work to be done does not tit any of the existing task categories , and yet a care provider still wants to document it and remind herself to do it , she can simply write her own . Both the variances and the ad hoc tasks may provide good evidence of a gap between standard and practice that can then be used to evolve the standard . PROTOCOL DEVELOPMENT , USE , AND REFINEMENT : AN EXAMPLE A concern that was frequently voiced in early planning meetings at the Breast Care Center was that important details of cancer patient’s care might “fall through the cracks . ” The role of nurse case manager was created to provide clinical coordination for these patient’s care , following them from their initial diagnosis , through surgery and adjuvant therapy , and for years after treatment . Before the clinic opened how this work would proceed was envisioned in some detail in design meetings and these descriptions were later used in talking with prospective candidates for the nurse case manager position , Bit by bit , the goal of keeping details from falling through the cracks got fleshed out as idealized descriptions of what those details were . The Care Manager application was co - developed with nurses in the clinic , and in the early weeks we went through a few iterations getting usefid protocols in the system . For instance , the first versions we created were too exhaustive - the nurse case manager found she only wanted to see the tasks she was likely to forget , and she only wanted to see tasks she was involved in , not those filly handled by others . ( We are revisiting this , however , now that we have multiple users managing tasks related to the same patient . ) Now a few months later , the nurses have created some more regularity in their care of cancer patients that can become part of the protocols . For instance , calling in on 368 patients after surgery and periodically afterwards is considered helpful for the patients’ recovery . Now that the nurse case manager is following over fifty patients she would like to codifi the schedule of calls and to rely on the Care Manager to remind her when to make those calls . EVALUATING PRACTICE Consensus about practice is not the same as effectiveness . By effectiveness we mean doing well along dimensions of evaluation that matter to various stakeholders in a workplace . In clinical workplaces three dimensions of evaluation that get frequently articulated in various forms are 1 ) clinical assessment of patient progress , 2 ) patient satisfaction with care , and 3 ) the cost of providing care . Assessing status along these dimensions is difficult . The relationship between intervention and clinical results has historically been tracked in circumscribed research efforts , but the costs of this tracking efforts have been high , requiring a special record - keeping infrastructure that provided no direct value to clinical practice . The work we are doing starts to draw the tools of clinical practice closer to the tools of aggregation needed for evaluation . However , there are still daunting methodological problems in connecting documentation of practice with outcomes . We think having tools to compare practice patterns routinely could be valuable , although the authors disagree among themselves about the emphasis we place on explicit evaluation of protocols . We do agree that the effects of practice patterns in the aggregate can matter , and that giving insight into these patterns could help people reflect on the comparative value of different ways of working . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research was supported by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency and The National Naval Medical Center’s Breast Care Center . REFERENCES 1 ) Blomberg , J . , Giacomi , J . , Mosher , A . , & Swenton - Wall , P . Ethnographic field methods and their relation to design , pp . 123 - 156 . In D . Schuler and A Namioka , ( Eds . ) . Participato ~ Design : Principles and Practices . Hillsdale , N . J . : Erlbaum . 1993 . 2 ) Bowker , G . & Star , S . L . Knowledge and infrastructure in international information management : problems of classification and coding . In Lisa Bud - Frierman ( Ed . ) Information acumen : The understanding and use of knowledge in modern business . London and New York : Routledge . 1994 . 3 ) Brun - Cottan , F . & Wall , P . Using video to re - present the user . Communications of the ACM 38 : 5 , 61 - 71 . 1995 . 4 ) Carrel , J . M . Scenario - Based Design Envisioning Work and Technology in System Development . New York : John Wiley and Sons , Inc . 1995 . 5 ) Gregory , J . , Mattison , J . E . , Linde , C . Naming Notes : transitions from Free Text to Structured Entry . Methods of Information in Medicine 34 : 57 - 67 . 1995 . 6 ) Katzenberg , B . & McDermott , J . Meaning - making in the creation of useful summary reports . In R . Furuta and C Neuwirth ( Eds . ) Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , New York : ACM Press . 1994 . 7 ) Star , S . L . , & Griesemer , J . R . , Institutional ecolo ~ , ‘translations’ and boundary objects : Amateurs and professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology , 1907 - 39 . Social Studies of Science , 19 , 387 - 420 . 1989 . 8 ) Suchman , L . , , Technologies of accountability : of lizards and aeroplanes . In G . Button ( Ed , ) Technology in working order : studies of work , interaction , and technology , London and New York : Routledge . 1993 , 9 ) Suchman , L . Do categories have politics ? The language action perspective reconsidered . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ) 2 : 177 - 190 . 1994 . 10 ) Wenger , Etienne ( in preparation ) Communities of Practice . 11 ) Winograd , T . Categories , Disciplines , and Coordination . Computer Supported Cooperative Work ( Cscw ) 2 : 191 - 197 . 1994 . 369