Immunity Review Macrophages in Tissue Repair , Regeneration , and Fibrosis Thomas A . Wynn 1 , * and Kevin M . Vannella 1 1 Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases , National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases , NIH , Bethesda , MD 20892 , USA * Correspondence : twynn @ niaid . nih . gov http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . immuni . 2016 . 02 . 015 Inﬂammatory monocytes and tissue - resident macrophages are key regulators of tissue repair , regeneration , and ﬁbrosis . After tissue injury , monocytes and macrophages undergo marked phenotypic and functional changes to play critical roles during the initiation , maintenance , and resolution phases of tissue repair . Disturbances in macrophage function can lead to aberrant repair , such that uncontrolled production of in - ﬂammatory mediators and growth factors , deﬁcient generation of anti - inﬂammatory macrophages , or failed communication between macrophages and epithelial cells , endothelial cells , ﬁbroblasts , and stem or tissue progenitor cells all contribute to a state of persistent injury , and this could lead to the development of path - ological ﬁbrosis . In this review , we discuss the mechanisms that instruct macrophages to adopt pro - inﬂam - matory , pro - wound - healing , pro - ﬁbrotic , anti - inﬂammatory , anti - ﬁbrotic , pro - resolving , and tissue - regener - ating phenotypes after injury , and we highlight how some of these mechanisms and macrophage activation states could be exploited therapeutically . Introduction Tissue repair and regeneration are critical biological processes that are fundamental to the survival of all living organisms ( Das et al . , 2015 ) . When tissues are injured during infection or after toxic or mechanical injury , an inﬂammatory response is induced in response to damage - associated molecular patterns and path - ogen - associated molecular patterns released by dead and dying cells and invading organisms , respectively ( Zhang et al . , 2010 ) . These molecular triggers induce a complex inﬂammatory response that is characterized by the recruitment , proliferation , and activation of a variety of hematopoietic and non - hematopoi - etic cells , including neutrophils , macrophages , innate lymphoid cells , natural killer cells , B cells , T cells , ﬁbroblasts , epithelial cells , endothelial cells , and stem cells , which together make up the cellular response that orchestrates tissue repair ( Wynn , 2008 ) . When the wound - healing response is well organized and controlled , the inﬂammatory response resolves quickly , and normal tissue architecture is restored . However , if the wound - healing response is chronic or becomes dysregulated , it can lead to the development of pathological ﬁbrosis or scar - ring , impairing normal tissue function and ultimately leading to organ failure and death ( Wynn and Ramalingam , 2012 ) . Therefore , wound - healing responses must be tightly regulated . Although many cell types are involved in tissue repair , because of their highly ﬂexible programming ( Mosser and Edwards , 2008 ) , macrophages have been shown to exhibit critical regula - tory activity at all stages of repair and ﬁbrosis ( Wynn and Barron , 2010 ) . Consequently , because they represent potentially impor - tant therapeutic targets , there has been a great deal of interest over the past few years in deciphering the contributions of the different macrophage populations that control the initiation , maintenance , and resolution of wound - healing responses in different organ systems . The distinct macrophage populations that take up residence in many tissues of the body are mostly derived from the yolk sac during embryogenesis ; fetal liver and hematopoietic stem cells contribute macrophages to some but not all tissues at later time points ( Epelman et al . , 2014a ; Epelman et al . , 2014b ; Gomez Perdiguero et al . , 2015 ) . These tissue macrophages play critical roles during development and also provide important trophic signals that support neighboring parenchymal tissues ( Wynn et al . , 2013 ) . Thus , they are critically involved in normal tis - sue homeostasis . However , after tissue injury , large numbers of inﬂammatory monocytes ( macrophage precursors ) are recruited from the bone marrow via chemokine gradients and various adhesion molecules , and these recruited cells often greatly exceed the population of tissue - resident macrophages ( Davies et al . , 2013 ; Galli et al . , 2011 ) . The recruited and resident macro - phage populations proliferate and also undergo marked pheno - typic and functional changes in response to growth factors and cytokines released in the local tissue microenvironment ( Jenkins et al . , 2011 ; Jenkins et al . , 2013 ) ; many recent studies have iden - tiﬁed specialized and critically timed roles for different monocyte and macrophage activation states in tissue repair , regeneration , and ﬁbrosis ( Lech and Anders , 2013 ; Mun˜oz - Ca´noves and Serrano , 2015 ; Murray and Wynn , 2011 ; Novak et al . , 2014 ; Sica and Mantovani , 2012 ) . Although early research investigating the contribution of mac - rophages to wound repair focused on their role as scavenger cells that phagocytize cellular debris , invading organisms , neu - trophils , and other apoptotic cells after tissue injury ( Peiser et al . , 2002 ) , it is now clear that monocytes and macrophages exhibit much more complex roles not only in tissue repair but also in the mechanisms of ﬁbrosis and tissue regeneration ( Wynn et al . , 2013 ) . Macrophages are an important source of chemokines , matrix metalloproteinases ( MMPs ) , and other in - ﬂammatory mediators that drive the initial cellular response following injury ( Wynn and Barron , 2010 ) . Indeed , if macro - phages are depleted early after injury , the inﬂammatory response is often greatly diminished ( Dufﬁeld et al . , 2005 ) . How - ever , their removal can also result in decreased wound debride - ment and lead to less efﬁcient repair and regeneration ( Zhang 450 Immunity 44 , March 15 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . et al . , 2012 ) . After the early inﬂammatory phase subsides , the predominant macrophage population assumes a wound - healing phenotype that is characterized by the production of numerous growth factors , including platelet - derived growth factor ( PDGF ) , transforming growth factor b 1 ( TGF - b 1 ) , insulin - like growth factor 1 ( IGF - 1 ) , and vascular endothelial growth factor a ( VEGF - a ) , which promote cellular proliferation and blood - vessel development ( Berse et al . , 1992 ; Chujo et al . , 2009 ; Rap - polee et al . , 1988 ; Shimokado et al . , 1985 ) ( Willenborg et al . , 2012 ) . They also produce soluble mediators that stimulate local and recruited tissue ﬁbroblasts to differentiate into myoﬁbro - blasts that facilitate wound contraction and closure , as well as the synthesis of extracellular - matrix ( ECM ) components ( Murray and Wynn , 2011 ) . The proliferation and expansion of neighboring parenchymal and stromal cells are also regulated by macro - phages , and if the injury is severe , macrophages can activate additional stem cell and local progenitor cell populations that participate in repair . Thereafter , monocytes and / or macro - phages exhibiting a mostly anti - inﬂammatory phenotype become the dominant population ( Ramachandran et al . , 2015 ) . These macrophages respond to interleukin - 10 ( IL - 10 ) and other inhibitory mediators , secrete a variety of anti - inﬂammatory medi - ators ( such as IL - 10 and TGF - b 1 ) , and express cell - surface re - ceptors ( such as programmed cell death ligands 1 [ PD - L1 ] and 2 [ PD - L2 ] ) that play major roles in suppressing the immune sys - tem and quieting the inﬂammation that , if not controlled effec - tively , can lead to collateral cell death and ultimately delay the repair process ( Khalil et al . , 1989 ; Said et al . , 2010 ; Shouval et al . , 2014 ; Zigmond et al . , 2014 ) . Thus , the different stages of tissue repair must be carefully regulated such that monocytes and macrophages of different phenotypes play unique and crit - ical roles at each stage . Indeed , disturbances at any point in the process can lead to aberrant repair , such that uncontrolled production of inﬂammatory mediators and growth factors or de - ﬁciencies in the generation of inhibitory macrophages both contribute to the development of chronic wounds , which can ultimately contribute to the formation of pathological ﬁbrosis ( Figure 1 ) . Research over the past few years has focused on identifying and characterizing the various macrophage populations that regulate the different stages of tissue repair ( Dufﬁeld et al . , 2013 ) . Speciﬁcally , the differing roles of tissue - resident macro - phages and recruited monocytes have become an important area of research because there is accumulating evidence that different monocyte and macrophage populations play distinct and non - redundant roles in tissue repair , ﬁbrosis , and regenera - tion ( Gundra et al . , 2014 ; Vannella et al . , 2014 ) . The mechanisms that instruct macrophages to adopt pro - inﬂammatory , pro - wound - healing , pro - ﬁbrotic , anti - inﬂammatory , anti - ﬁbrotic , pro - resolving , and tissue - regenerating properties in various or - gan systems have also been the subject of intensive research ( Kluth , 2007 ; Mitchell et al . , 2002 ) . It also remains unclear whether an individual macrophage ( local or recruited ) is capable of adopting all of these attributes at different times in response to signals found in the local tissue microenvironment or whether truly distinct functional subsets of monocytes and macrophages are hard - wired to regulate these different and often opposing activities . This review focuses on recent ﬁndings that have advanced our understanding of the role of monocytes and tis - sue - resident macrophages in wound repair , tissue regeneration , and ﬁbrosis . Evidence that Distinct Macrophage Phenotypes Regulate Tissue Injury and Repair Using a transgenic CD11b - DTR mouse to selectively deplete CD11b hi macrophages at different stages in a reversible model of liver injury induced by CCl 4 , Dufﬁeld and colleagues showed that if macrophages are depleted after CCl 4 exposure is termi - nated , the liver is less capable of restoring normal tissue archi - tecture because matrix degradation is substantially impaired . In contrast , if CD11b hi macrophages are depleted during ongoing CCl 4 exposure , liver injury is reduced . These studies are important because they suggest that functionally distinct CD11b + macrophages regulate the injury and recovery phases of tissue repair ( Dufﬁeld et al . , 2005 ) . Recent studies have sug - gested that yolk - sac - derived tissue - resident macrophages and monocytes recruited from the bone marrow play distinct roles during the different stages of repair in some organs . For example , although genetic fate - mapping studies have conﬁrmed that the majority of macrophages in the adult heart are derived from yolk sac and fetal progenitors , CCR2 + monocyte - derived cells are the dominant macrophages driving the early inﬂamma - tory response in cardiac tissues after injury ( Epelman et al . , 2014a ) . In contrast , embryonically derived resident cardiac mac - rophages are the critical cells promoting recovery ( Lavine et al . , 2014 ) . The latter studies show that tissue - resident macrophages induce cardiomyocyte proliferation and blood - vessel develop - ment after injury . Consequently , when monocyte recruitment to the adult heart is suppressed after injury , the embryonic pop - ulation of macrophages is largely preserved , resulting in reduced inﬂammation and accelerated repair . Thus , recruited bone - marrow - derived monocytes exhibit tissue - destructive activity , whereas embryonically derived tissue - resident populations facilitate the resolution of inﬂammation and instruct tissue repair in the heart . Distinct pro - inﬂammatory and wound - healing macrophage phenotypes have also been observed in models of spinal - cord injury and repair , where the functionally distinct macrophage populations are recruited to the site of tissue injury by unique chemokine gradients . In the spinal cord , a pro - inﬂammatory Ly6c hi CX3CR1 lo monocyte population homes to sites of tissue injury in a CCR2 - and CCL2 - dependent manner , whereas the reparative Ly6c lo CX3CR1 hi population travels along a distinct path guided by VCAM - 1 , VLA - 4 , and CD73 , adhesion proteins and endothelial - cell - surface enzymes involved in leukocyte extravasation ( Shechter et al . , 2013 ) . These authors found that the route of monocyte and macrophage entry into the CNS also provides additional instructional signals to shape the unique functional activities of the recruited cells . Similar studies conducted in other tissues identiﬁed regener - ating islet - derived 3 b ( Reg3 b ) as an essential regulator of macro - phage trafﬁcking to cardiac tissues after injury ( Lo¨rchner et al . , 2015 ) . Using a mass spectrometry secretome approach , these authors found that damaged cardiomyocytes release large amounts of Reg3 b in response to the cytokine oncostatin M , pro - duced by inﬂammatory monocytes and neutrophils . Reg3 b re - cruits the reparative macrophage subset that facilitates the removal of neutrophils that would otherwise trigger extensive Immunity 44 , March 15 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . 451 Immunity Review matrix degradation , delayed collagen deposition , and cardiac rupture . Thus , a critical feed - forward loop among injured cardiomyocytes , inﬂammatory monocytes , and reparative mac - rophages facilitates tissue healing . Korf - Klingebiel et al . carried out a similar bioinformatics secretome analysis in humans and identiﬁed C19orf10 , a macrophage - derived growth factor that is encoded by an open reading frame on chromosome 19 and in - duces cardiac myocyte survival and angiogenesis after acute myocardial infarction ( MI ) ( Korf - Klingebiel et al . , 2015 ) . The study showed that this growth factor is also critical for tissue repair following acute MI and is most likely produced by the same reparative macrophage population described by Lo¨rchner et al . ( 2015 ) . In some tissues , there is also evidence that a single population of monocytes can be both pro - inﬂammatory and pro - repair , sug - gesting that in situ conversion rather than recruitment of the pro - reparative Ly6c (cid:1) subset is critical in some settings . For example , activin - A , a protein that instructs oligodendrocyte differentiation during CNS remyelination , has been recently identiﬁed as an important macrophage - derived reparative mediator . After CNS demyelination , microglia and peripherally derived inﬂammatory macrophages switch from a pro - inﬂammatory or classically acti - vated M ( interferon - g [ IFN - g ] ) phenotype to a pro - repair or alter - natively activated M ( IL - 4 ) - like phenotype as repair commences , and intra - lesional M ( IL - 4 ) cell depletion substantially delays oligodendrocyte differentiation ( Miron et al . , 2013 ) . In this case , both the microglia and recruited macrophages switch to the reparative activin - A - producing phenotype , suggesting that re - cruited and resident populations might both participate in repair in some tissues . Similar ﬁndings have also been reported in Pro - inflammatory DAMPs and PAMPs IFN - γ Necroptosis Cholesterol crystals Lipids and fatty acids IL - 4 and IL - 13 IL - 33 , IL - 25 IL - 21 CSF1R CX3CR1 CSF1R CCL1CCL22 IL - 4R IL - 10R IC PD - L1 IL - 10 TGF - β SOCS3microparticle SOCS1exosome CX3CR1 PD - L2 Wnt3a ? VEGF - α CCR2 Ly6c hi CSF1R AREGTGF - α PDGFIGF - 1 TGF - β FGF GAL - 3 Activin A CCR8 TNF - α IL - 1 β IL - 6 Yolk sac Stem cells , MSCs and tissue progenitor cells Fetalliver Anti - inflammatory ResolvinsPhagocytosisIL - 10 Immune complexesHDL Epithelial cells and other parenchymal tissues Endothelial cells Bone marrow Residentmacrophage Monocyte Residentmacrophage Treg cell Fibroblasts Inflammatorymacrophage Resolvingmacrophage Tissue repair macrophage pSTAT6IRF4PPARg LXRArg1 pSTAT1IRF5NOS2 pSTAT3ATF3GRArg1 Figure 1 . Mechanisms Driving Major Macrophage Activation Phenotypes in Tissue Repair , Regeneration , and Fibrosis In many tissues , thetissue - resident macrophage population is derivedfrom the yolk sacand fetal liverduring development but is complimentedby inﬂammatory monocytes recruited from the bone marrow after injury . The recruited and resident macrophages undergo marked phenotypic and functional changes in response to DAMPs , PAMPs , growth factors , cytokines , and other mediators released in the local tissue microenvironment . The dominant phenotypic variants depicted here regulate inﬂammation , tissue repair , regeneration , and resolution . Macrophages produce a variety of factors that stimulate the proliferation , dif - ferentiation , and activation of ﬁbroblasts , epithelial cells , endothelial cells , and stem and progenitor cells that facilitate tissue repair . During the later stages of the repairprocess , theyassumearegulatorypro - resolvingphenotypethatensuresthatthetissue - damaginginﬂammatoryresponseissuppressedandnormaltissue architecture is restored . If the process is not controlled effectively , persistent inﬂammation and / or maladaptive repair processes can lead to tissue - destructive ﬁbrosis . In some cases , the recruited monocytes seed the tissues and adopt a resident macrophage phenotype ; however , the mechanisms that restore tissue homeostasisarestill underdebate . Abbreviationsareasfollows : DAMP , damage - associatedmolecularpattern ; PAMP , pathogen - associatedmolecularpattern ; Treg cell , regulatory T cell ; IRF5 , interferon regulatory factor 5 ; NOS2 , nitric oxide synthase 2 ; LXR , liver X receptor ; AREG , amphiregulin ; Arg1 , arginase - 1 ; IRF4 , interferon regulatory factor 4 ; PPAR g , peroxisome proliferator - activated receptor g ; FGF , ﬁbroblast growth factor ; GAL - 3 , galectin - 3 ; TGF , transforming growth factor ; IC , immune complex ; GR , glucocorticoid receptor ; ATF3 , activating transcription factor 3 ; and SOCS , silencer of cytokine signaling . 452 Immunity 44 , March 15 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . Immunity Review models of liver injury , where IL - 4 , IL - 10 , and phagocytosis play critical roles in the conversion of inﬂammatory monocytes into cells exhibiting a reparative phenotype ( Dal - Secco et al . , 2015 ; Ramachandran et al . , 2012 ) . An M ( IL - 4 ) population of macrophages is also thought to play a critical role in wound repair following nematode invasion ( Chen et al . , 2012a ) . Using a helminth infection model in which parasitic nematode larvae cause signiﬁcant hemorrhaging and inﬂamma - tion , Chen and colleagues found that IL - 17 serves as a major pathogenic inﬂammatory mediator during parasite migration through the lung and that subsequent IL - 4R signaling in macro - phages drives IGF - 1 and IL - 10 production ; together , these contribute to the rapid resolution of the IL - 17 - induced damage . Here again , macrophage conversion from a pro - inﬂammatory to an anti - inﬂammatory phenotype has been hypothesized to promote lung healing after acute pathogen - induced injury , which is consistent with studies that identiﬁed critical but divergent roles for type 1 and type 2 cytokine responses in tissue repair ( Sandler et al . , 2003 ) . Subsequent studies by Vannella and colleagues identiﬁed distinct roles for resident and recruited alternatively activated macrophages ( M ( IL - 4 ) ) in the pathogenesis of schistosomiasis , a disease characterized by chronic granulomatous inﬂammation and the development of hepatic ﬁbrosis ( Vannella et al . , 2014 ) . In these studies , Il4ra ﬂox / delta mice were crossed with Lyz2 - cre mice for the generation of mice with a conditional deletion of the IL - 4 receptor ( IL - 4R ) in tissue macrophages . Because LysM is ex - pressed at high amounts in mature tissue macrophages but is expressed at much lower amounts in recruited monocytes , the conditional mutant provides a tool for distinguishing the contri - butions of resident M ( IL - 4 ) - like cells from those of recruited M ( IL - 4 ) - like cells . In these studies , Lyz2 hi F4 / 80 + CD11b + mature tissue macrophages were identiﬁed as the critical M ( IL - 4 ) popu - lation suppressing inﬂammation in the liver , whereas Lyz lo F4 / 80 + CD11b + monocytes expressing high amounts of arginase - 1 were largely responsible for the inhibition of ﬁbrosis during chronic infection . These studies are of interest because they suggest unique roles for different populations of IL - 4 - and / or IL - 13 - activated inﬂammatory monocytes and tissue - resident macrophages in the resolution of inﬂammation , tissue repair , and ﬁbrosis . Together , the preceding studies , which encompass various organ systems and experimental models , nicely illustrate the distinct and often opposing roles of inﬂammatory monocytes and tissue - resident macrophages in tissue repair . They also demonstrate how the timely conversion of monocytes and mac - rophages from a pro - inﬂammatory to a reparative phenotype plays a decisive role in wound - healing and tissue - regenerative responses . Pro - inﬂammatory Macrophages Exacerbate Tissue Injury Interest in elucidating the signaling pathways and distinct macrophage populations that sustain tissue - damaging inﬂam - matory responses has grown substantially over the past few years , given that a better understanding of these mechanisms will most likely guide the development of therapeutics for inﬂam - matory and ﬁbrotic diseases ( Han et al . , 2013 ; Xu et al . , 2012 ; Xu et al . , 2015 ) . For example , an exciting recent study by Jay and colleagues showed that macrophages expressing TREM2 ( triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 ) are required for the development of Alzheimer’s disease ( AD ) ( Jay et al . , 2015 ) . Inﬂammatory Ly6c + macrophages express TREM2 at high amounts , and when TREM2 activity is genetically deleted , the Ly6c + population is virtually eliminated , resulting in reduced inﬂammation and ameliorated amyloid and tau pathologies . Thus , TREM2 has been identiﬁed as an important instructional signal in inﬂammatory macrophage development , suggesting that it might represent a therapeutic target in neurodegenerative diseases such as AD . Therapeutic strategies that reduce the accumulation of tissue - destructive inﬁltrating blood monocytes might also hold promise for diseases associated with severe or persistent inﬂammation . For example , although axonal repair following traumatic spinal - cord injury is dependent upon the rapid development of repara - tive macrophages ( Shechter et al . , 2013 ) , sustained recruitment of inﬂammatory blood - derived macrophages can facilitate extensive secondary axonal dieback and delay the reparative process substantially . Using a radiation chimera model to distin - guish bone - marrow - derived cells from microglia , Evans and col - leagues determined that the vast majority of accumulated cells in spinal - cord injury are derived from the blood , and Cx3cr1 + mac - rophages but not CCR2 + monocytes are tightly associated with axonal dieback ( Evans et al . , 2014 ) . Thus , therapeutic targeting of the Cx3cr1 + subset might accelerate repair and reduce sec - ondary axonal injury following traumatic spinal - cord injury . Studies in the liver , however , identiﬁed a critical pro - injury role for CCR2 + monocytes , suggesting that blocking CCR2 might prove beneﬁcial in the treatment of pathological inﬂammation in the liver ( Mitchell et al . , 2009 ) . Factors that prevent accumu - lating tissue monocytes from converting from a pro - inﬂamma - tory to a reparative phenotype can also impair healing . Two such factors are TNF - a , which blocks phagocytosis - mediated conversion of inﬂammatory macrophages to the reparative M ( IL - 4 ) - like phenotype , and iron , which accumulates in local injury - associated macrophages and supports TNF - a production ( Kroner et al . , 2014 ) . Thus , iron accumulation and sustained TNF production by inﬂammatory macrophages can further delay tissue repair following injury . Repair of vascular tissues is also affected by mechanisms that maintain inﬂammatory macrophage numbers or prevent their conversion to a reparative anti - inﬂammatory phenotype . As observed for TNF - a in models of spinal - cord injury , secretion of the inﬂammatory cytokine IL - 1 b by macrophages has been shown to be a major driver in the pathogenesis of atheroscle - rosis . Investigating a murine model of atherosclerosis , War - natsch and colleagues found that cholesterol crystals act as both priming and danger signals for IL - 1 b production ( Warnatsch et al . , 2015 ) . Cholesterol crystals trigger neutrophils to release extracellular traps , which prime local macrophages to transcribe immature IL - 1 b , and serve a second role as a danger signal that activates inﬂammasomes , which process immature IL - 1 b for secretion . Thus , cholesterol and other sterile inﬂammatory sig - nals contribute to the sustained activation of inﬂammatory mac - rophages , which disrupt normal tissue homeostasis and impede vascular repair . Sustained IL - 1 b production through NLRP3 in - ﬂammasome activation in macrophages has also been shown to be a major driver of persistent inﬂammation and ﬁbrosis in Immunity 44 , March 15 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . 453 Immunity Review other tissues , including the liver during chronic hepatitis C virus infection ( Negash et al . , 2013 ) . Thus , therapeutic strategies that suppress NLRP3 , IL - 1 b , and TNF - a activity might contribute to tissue repair following infection , injury , or sterile inﬂammation by reducing the negative impacts of sustained pro - inﬂammatory cytokine production by macrophages . Macrophage necroptosis , a form of programmed necrosis characterized by the death of inﬂammatory cells , has been recently identiﬁed as a key signal maintaining microbial - induced type 1 inﬂammation . Here , programmed ‘‘suicide’’ of infected Kupffer cells triggers signiﬁcant monocyte recruitment and anti - microbial type 1 immunity ( Ble´riot et al . , 2015 ) . However , at the same time , Kupffer cell death promotes a type 2 response involving the hepatocyte - derived alarmin IL - 33 and basophil - derived IL - 4 , which quickly converts the monocyte - derived macrophages to an M ( IL - 4 ) - like phenotype that restores liver ho - meostasis and replenishes the depleted Kupffer cell population . Tissue - resident macrophages and Kupffer cells have also been shown to play a key role in the liver after acetaminophen - induced acute liver failure ( AALF ) in mice and humans . During AALF , a marked increase in inﬂammatory macrophages is observed in areas of hepatic necrosis , whereas circulating monocytes are generally reduced ( the lowest amounts are observed in patients who develop adverse outcomes ; Antoniades et al . , 2012 ) . The tissue - resident macrophages are thought to quickly convert to a pro - resolution tissue - repair phenotype during AALF , so ex - panding their numbers through local proliferation or recruitment from the monocyte pool has been hypothesized to be a critical determinant controlling survival following severe liver injury . In support of this conclusion , recent studies of AALF and partial hepatectomy in mice have shown that by expanding the number of tissue - resident macrophages and recruited monocytes exhib - iting a reparative anti - inﬂammatory phenotype , colony - stimu - lating factor 1 - Fc treatment holds promise as a therapeutic strat - egy after acute liver injury ( Stutchﬁeld et al . , 2015 ) . Regulation and Function of Pro - ﬁbrotic Macrophages Although approaches that either reduce the numbers of inﬂam - matory macrophages exhibiting an M ( IFN - g ) - skewed phenotype or increase the numbers of reparative anti - inﬂammatory M ( IL - 4 ) - like macrophages have been shown to accelerate the repair of many tissues , persistent activation or sustained recruitment of the M ( IL - 4 ) - like cells has also been hypothesized to contribute to the development of pathological ﬁbrosis ( Wynn and Ramalin - gam , 2012 ) . Nevertheless , to date , most mechanistic studies of ﬁbrosis have focused on the role of inﬂammatory macrophages ; far fewer studies have actually investigated the speciﬁc contribu - tions of M ( IL - 4 ) - like macrophages in repair and ﬁbrosis . Using several elegant in vivo strategies to globally deplete monocytes and macrophages , Gibbons and colleagues concluded that macrophages are critically required for the development of bleomycin - induced pulmonary ﬁbrosis ( Gibbons et al . , 2011 ) . Although the reduction in ﬁbrosis in macrophage - depleted mice was associated with decreases in the expression of several markers of alternative macrophage activation , including Ym1 and arginase - 1 , the depletion strategies used were not speciﬁc to the M ( IL - 4 ) subset , given that circulating Ly6c hi inﬂammatory monocytes were also depleted . Therefore , it is difﬁcult to conclude deﬁnitively whether ﬁbrosis is dependent on M ( IL - 4 ) cells , although adoptive - transfer studies suggest that this is most likely the case . In models of idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis , the pro - ﬁbrotic function of macrophages has also been attributed to their pro - duction and activation of the pro - ﬁbrotic cytokine TGF - b 1 ( Mur - ray et al . , 2011 ) . Fibrosis is typically associated with impaired angiogenesis and sustained development of local tissue hypox - ia , and hypoxia - inducible factor 1 a ( HIF - 1 a ) , a transcription fac - tor that functions as a master regulator of oxygen homeostasis , has been directly implicated in TGF - b 1 - driven ﬁbrogenesis ( Ueno et al . , 2011 ) . Indeed , silencing of HIF - 1 a expression mark - edly decreases TGF b 1 production in alveolar macrophages and attenuates the development of bleomycin - induced ﬁbrosis , con - ﬁrming a critical role for TGF - b 1 - producing macrophages in the development of ﬁbrosis in response to bleomycin . Nevertheless , some studies have suggested that ﬁbrosis can also develop in a TGF - b 1 - independent manner ( Kaviratne et al . , 2004 ) , whereby the type 2 cytokine IL - 13 plays a dominant role in many settings ( Wynn , 2007 ) . However , the contribution of macrophages to the development and maintenance of IL - 13 - dependent ﬁbrosis is less clear because macrophages are not thought to be a major source of IL - 13 ( Wynn , 2004 ) . To investi - gate the role of macrophages in a model of IL - 13 - driven ﬁbrosis , Borthwick and colleagues employed CD11b - DTR mice and depleted CD11b + monocytes and macrophages at different time points in three models of type - 2 - cytokine - driven disease ( Borthwick et al . , 2016 ) . Here , depletion of monocytes and mac - rophages , but not of dendritic cells , during the maintenance and resolution phases caused a profound decrease in inﬂammation , ﬁbrosis , and type 2 gene expression in tissues , but not in sec - ondary lymphoid organs , suggesting that macrophages are crit - ical to the maintenance of type 2 inﬂammation in the injured lung . In support of this conclusion , local tissue macrophages were identiﬁed as a critical source of the CD4 + T helper 2 ( Th2 ) - cell - recruiting chemokines CCL1 and CCL22 . Related studies have also identiﬁed the chemokine receptor CCR8 as a major medi - ator of macrophage recruitment to injured liver and have shown that CCL1 - directed migration controls the recruitment of clas - sical inﬂammatory monocytes that promote TGF - b 1 - dependent ﬁbrosis induced by CCl 4 or bile duct ligation ( Heymann et al . , 2012 ) . Thus , in addition to producing important pro - ﬁbrotic me - diators such as TGF - b 1 ( Figure 2 ) , monocytes and macrophages can also promote ﬁbrosis indirectly by orchestrating local inﬂam - matory reactions that maintain ﬁbrotic responses or by blocking the emergence of pro - resolution pathways ( Borthwick et al . , 2016 ; Ehling et al . , 2014 ; Mitchell et al . , 2009 ) . In addition to producing pro - ﬁbrotic mediators and facilitating the recruitment of inﬂammatory cells , macrophages have also been shown to directly enhance the survival and activation ofmyoﬁbroblasts , thekeyECM - producingcellsinallorgans . Pra - dere and colleagues showed that hepatic macrophages enhance myoﬁbroblast survival by stimulating nuclear factor kappa B ( NF - k B ) activity , which is critical for the development of liver ﬁbrosis ( Pradere et al . , 2013 ) . Studies of in vivo depletion have suggestedthatmononuclearphagocytesarecriticaltotheactiva - tion of myoﬁbroblasts , although further details on the source and phenotypeofthepro - ﬁbroticmacrophagepopulationareunclear . The studies determined that pro - ﬁbrotic macrophage function is highly dependent on TNF - a - and IL - 1 b - induced survival , but 454 Immunity 44 , March 15 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . Immunity Review not activation , of hepatic stellate cells in vitro and in vivo . In contrast , macrophage - derivedgalectin - 3 , a b - galactoside - biding lectin that is markedly upregulated in progressive renal ﬁbrosis , is critical for the activation of ﬁbroblasts to the pro - ﬁbrotic phenotype ( Henderson et al . , 2008 ) . Thus , macrophages ex - hibiting a pro - ﬁbrotic phenotype participate in the activation and expansion of ECM - producing myoﬁbroblasts via multiple mechanisms . Macrophages are also important producers of MMPs , en - zymes that degrade all kinds of ECM proteins and some of which serve as essential drivers of ﬁbrosis . For example , MMP12 is a macrophage - secreted elastase that is highly induced by IL - 13 in the lung and liver during the development of IL - 13 - dependent ﬁbrosis . Mmp12 (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice have been shown to develop reduced pulmonary and hepatic ﬁbrosis in response to S . mansoni eggs , and the decreased ﬁbrotic response is associated with increased expression of the ECM - degrading MMPs MMP2 , MMP9 , and MMP13 ( Madala et al . , 2010 ) . These ﬁndings sug - gest that IL - 13 promotes ﬁbrosis , at least in part , by increasing macrophage metalloelastase activity , which in turn reduces the activity of other MMPs . MMP12 activity is also increased in CCl 4 - and thioacetamide - induced liver ﬁbrosis , but in these models MMP12 activity either has no effect or leads to slightly decreased ﬁbrosis ( Pellicoro et al . , 2012 ) . Thus , macrophage - derived MMP12 exhibits contrasting roles in models of IL - 13 - and TGF - b 1 - driven ﬁbrosis . Finally , Knipper and colleagues investigated a model of skin repair and showed that collagen ﬁbril assembly following injury is also highly dependent on M ( IL - 4 ) macrophages ( Knipper et al . , 2015 ) . In the absence of IL - 4R a or the M ( IL - 4 ) - associated gene Retnla ( resistin - like alpha ) , induction of lysyl hydroxylase 2 ( LH2 ) , an enzyme that directs persistent pro - ﬁbrotic collagen cross - links , is greatly diminished in injured skin . Thus , in addition to producing several important wound - healing and pro - ﬁbrotic mediators , M ( IL - 4 ) macrophages also regulate the three - dimen - sional structure and size of collagen ﬁbrils during repair . Protective Roles for Anti - inﬂammatory and Anti - ﬁbrotic Macrophages Numerous studies have also focused on identifying and charac - terizing the mechanisms that drive macrophages to exhibit anti - inﬂammatory and anti - ﬁbrotic activity , because these pheno - types are thought to be critical to the resolution of most wound - healing responses . The immunoregulatory cytokine IL - 10 is produced by a variety of cell types , including Th2 cells , reg - ulatory T ( Treg ) cells , and macrophages , and is known to function as a critical anti - inﬂammatory mediator ( Saraiva and O’Garra , 2010 ) . However , the relative importance of IL - 10 secretion versus IL - 10 signaling in macrophages has been previously un - clear . Two recent papers have addressed this question in models of mucosal healing by performing adoptive - transfer studies and generating mice with genetic deletions of IL - 10 or IL - 10R a in macrophages . Shouval and colleagues showed that IL - 10R signaling in innate immune cells is critical for the mainte - nance of anti - inﬂammatory activity in the intestine , in that IL - 10R signaling in anti - inﬂammatory macrophages prevents the development of colitis ( Shouval et al . , 2014 ) . They showed that development of early - onset inﬂammatory bowel disease in IL - 10R - deﬁcient patients is also associated with major defects in the generation and function of anti - inﬂammatory macrophages . Using mice harboring IL - 10 or IL - 10R mutations in resident intes - tinal macrophages expressing chemokine receptor CX3CR1 , Zigmond et al . obtained complimentary ﬁndings showing that macrophage - derived IL - 10 is dispensable for gut homeostasis and maintenance of colonic Treg cells ( Zigmond et al . , 2014 ) . In contrast , loss of IL - 10R expression was shown to impair the conditioning of monocyte - derived macrophages and resulted in spontaneous development of colitis . Together , these studies identify IL - 10R signaling in CX3CR1 hi intestinal macrophages as the critical factor controlling intestinal inﬂammation . A similar role for IL - 10R signaling in macrophages has been recently generated in a model of corneal lymphangiogenesis . In these studies , development of lymphangiogenesis was exacerbated in both Il10 (cid:1) / (cid:1) and Stat3 ﬂ / ﬂ mice expressing lysozyme M cre , suggesting that IL - 10 - and STAT3 - mediated signaling in myeloid cells is critical to the prevention of disease ( Hos et al . , 2016 ) . Together , these studies suggest that an ongoing dialog between IL - 10 - responsive anti - inﬂammatory macrophages and other IL - 10 - producing cells , such as Treg cells and Th2 cells , is critical to the maintenance of immune homeostasis in mucosal tissues . Although the resolution of inﬂammation is often associ - ated with the expansion of IL - 10 - induced anti - inﬂammatory CCL1CCL22 IL - 13 IL - 13 IL - 4 IL - 13 IFN - γ TNF - α ECM synthesis TGF - β 1 Fibrosis Pro - inflammatorycytokines Anti - inflammatorycytokines Myofibroblasts Chemotaxis Th2 ILC2 Macrophage Macrophage Figure 2 . Cytokine - and Macrophage - Mediated Mechanisms of Fibrosis Inﬂammatory responses that develop after tissue injury are associated with the production of a va - riety of inﬂammatory mediators ( such as IFN - g and TNF - a ) that promote classical macrophage acti - vation . TGF - b 1 is then produced by macrophages as a regulatory feedback mechanism to facilitate the resolution of the pro - inﬂammatory response . TGF - b 1 also triggers ﬁbroblast activation and development of ECM - producing myoﬁbroblasts that facilitate repair and drive ﬁbrosis . The anti - in - ﬂammatory cytokine IL - 13 , produced by a variety ofcelltypes ( includingtype2innatelymphoidcells , eosinophils , basophils , and CD4 + Th2 cells ) , also servesasamajordriveroftissuerepairandﬁbrosisbyinducingTGF - b 1 , by directly targeting myoﬁ - broblast function , and by promoting the develop - ment of restorative M ( IL - 4 ) - like macrophages that facilitate the recruitment of IL - 13 - producing leu - kocytes to sites of tissue injury . Immunity 44 , March 15 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . 455 Immunity Review macrophages , other mechanisms have also been shown to trigger anti - inﬂammatory macrophage function . For example , De Nardo and colleagues investigated the mechanisms by which high - density lipoprotein ( HDL ) protects against atherosclerosis and identiﬁed the transcriptional regulator ATF3 as an HDL - inducible target that downregulates Toll - like receptor ( TLR ) - induced pro - inﬂammatory cytokine production in macrophages ( De Nardo et al . , 2014 ) . The transcription factor NR4A1 has also recently been shown to suppress autocrine norepinephrine production in macrophages , and this is known to regulate the severity of experimental autoimmune encephalitis ( EAE ) , a mouse model of multiple sclerosis ( Shaked et al . , 2015 ) . Lack of NR4A1 in myeloid cells leads to enhanced norepinephrine production , accelerated inﬁltration of leukocytes into the CNS , and disease exacerbation in vivo . The metabolic controller NR3B1 ( nuclear receptor subfamily 3 group B member 1 ) has also been identiﬁed as an important negative regulator of TLR - induced inﬂammation ( Yuk et al . , 2015 ) . NR3B1 regulates anti - inﬂammatory macrophage function by inducing Tnfaip3 transcription and controlling metabolic reprogramming in macrophages . IL - 4 and IL - 13 also induce miR - 142 - 5p and downregulate miR - 130a - 3p in macrophages , which sustains STAT6 activation and pro - ﬁbrotic gene expression ( Su et al . , 2015 ) . Finally , N - 3 polyunsaturated fatty acids , which exhibit substantial anti - inﬂammatory activity in vivo , confer important cardio - protective effects by inhibiting macrophage - mediated activation of cardiac ﬁbroblasts . Thus , a variety of mechanisms besides IL - 10 are involved in the development of macrophages with pro - wound healing and anti - inﬂammatory activity . The effector mechanisms by which anti - inﬂammatory macro - phages regulate tissue - damaging inﬂammation have also been a topic of intensive research . For example , a recent study by Westphalen and colleagues identiﬁed a specialized population of sessile alveolar macrophages ( AMs ) that protect the lung from tissue - damaging inﬂammation by directly communicating immunosuppressive signals to neighboring epithelium ( West - phalen et al . , 2014 ) . These AMs are attached to the alveolar wall and form connexin 43 ( Cx43 ) - containing gap - junction chan - nels with the epithelium . After lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) - induced inﬂammation , they directly transmit immunosuppressive signals through synchronized Ca2 + waves by using the epithelium as the conducting pathway . Bourdonnay and colleagues also identiﬁed trans - cellular delivery of SOCS ( vesicular suppressor of cytokine signaling ) proteins as another unique form of intercommunica - tion between AMs and epithelial cells ; this mechanism also plays important roles in the resolution of inﬂammation in the lung ( Bourdonnay et al . , 2015 ) . They showed that AMs secrete SOCS1 and SOCS3 exosomes and microparticles , respectively , which are taken up by alveolar epithelial cells , leading to the sup - pression of Stat activation ( Figure 3 ) . Delivery of SOCS proteins is actively inhibited in response to cigarette smoke , suggesting that it is a modiﬁable response during the initiation and resolution of inﬂammatory responses . In addition to communicating anti - in - ﬂammatory signals directly to epithelial cells , macrophages also regulate communication in the epidermis . Knuever and col - leagues showed that myeloid - cell - restricted deﬁciency of insulin and IGF - 1R protects mice from skin inﬂammation by decreasing epidermal cell production of pro - inﬂammatory cytokines ( Knu - ever et al . , 2015 ) . Monocyte - and macrophage - derived IGF - 1 has also been identiﬁed as a critical factor in skeletal - muscle repair ( Tonkin et al . , 2015 ) . Finally , anti - inﬂammatory macro - phages also regulate the development and maintenance of IL - 10 - and TGF - b 1 - producing Treg cells , which contribute to the resolution of tissue - damaging inﬂammatory responses in multiple tissues ( Soroosh et al . , 2013 ) . Although macrophages activated by type 2 cytokines are often linked with tissue repair because they can antagonize the func - tion of pro - inﬂammatory M ( IFN - g ) macrophages that exacerbate tissue damage ( Campbell et al . , 2013 ; Kratochvill et al . , 2015 ) , recent studies have suggested that they can also exhibit potent anti - ﬁbrotic activity , particularly when the tissue - repair response becomes chronic . Indeed , mechanistic studies investigating the Ca 2 + LPS Lymphocyte Lymphocyte Alveolar epithelial cells Neutrophil Diminishedinflammation ee trop CaCa 2 + AlveolarAlveolar epithelial cells Macrophage Ca 2 + edonn Diminishedinflammation SOCS1 or SOCS3 P Akt P Akt STAT A B Macrophage cropha SS LPLP Mac A cytcyt phocphoc eutNe LLympymp age d B c hoccyte Lymp SOCSO cro MMacMM Figure 3 . Anti - inﬂammatory Signaling by Macrophages Alveolar macrophages transmit key signals to neighboring cells to help facilitate the resolution of inﬂammation in the lung . ( A ) After LPS inhalation , a specialized population of sessile alveolar macrophages attached to the alveolar wall form gap - junction channels with the epithelium . These channels suppress inﬂammation by transmitting Ca 2 + waves to epithelial cells , resulting in the phosphorylation of the pro - survival kinase Akt . ( B ) AlveolarmacrophagescanalsodampeninﬂammationbysecretingSOCS1orSOCS3invesiclesthataretakenupbyalveolarepithelialcells . DeliveryofSOCS subsequently inhibits epithelial STAT activation , leading to the suppression of pro - inﬂammatory mediator production . 456 Immunity 44 , March 15 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . Immunity Review role of M ( IL - 4 ) - skewed macrophages in chronic models of ﬁbrosis and cancer have suggested that they slow the progres - sion of ﬁbrosis and augment cancer progression and metastasis by suppressing local CD4 + T cells responses and reducing ECM production by myoﬁbroblasts ( Ostuni et al . , 2015 ; Pesce et al . , 2009 ) . In tumors and granulomas , M ( IL - 4 ) - skewed macrophages are tightly associated with other inﬂammatory cells and actively compete with neighboring T cells and myoﬁbroblasts for the amino acids L - arginine and L - ornithine , which become depleted in areas of hypoxia , yet they are critically required for the mainte - nance of local T cell proliferation and myoﬁbroblast activation ( Hesse et al . , 2000 ; Pesce et al . , 2009 ) . Thus , nutrient competi - tion between local tissue macrophages and neighboring immune cells has been identiﬁed as an additional potent immunosup - pressive mechanism employed by regulatory macrophages ( Murray et al . , 2015 ) . Interestingly , the cytokines IL - 6 , IL - 10 , and IL - 21 have all been found to enhance IL - 4R expression on macrophages and contribute to the development of anti - inﬂam - matory and anti - ﬁbrotic macrophage function after stimulation with IL - 4 or IL - 13 ( Lang et al . , 2002 ; Mauer et al . , 2014 ; Pesce et al . , 2006 ) . Consequently , a variety of cytokines , signaling path - ways , and mechanisms collaborate to drive the recruitment , dif - ferentiation , and expansion of macrophages that control the res - olution of chronic inﬂammatory and ﬁbrotic responses . Therapeutic Manipulation of Macrophage Function in Repair and Fibrosis Because macrophages serve as both drivers and regulators of disease , therapeutic strategies that reduce the number or func - tion of pro - inﬂammatory or pro - ﬁbrotic macrophages or boost the activity of anti - inﬂammatory , anti - ﬁbrotic , pro - resolving , or pro - wound - healing macrophages are actively being investigated in several pre - clinical and clinical studies . One relatively straight - forward way to manipulate macrophage function is to regulate their numbers by targeting CSF - 1 and CSF - 1R signaling , given that CSF - 1 is critically required for the differentiation of myeloid progenitors into heterogeneous populations of monocytes and macrophages ( Hume and MacDonald , 2012 ) . It also regulates their migration , proliferation , function , and survival . Thus , over - expressing or inhibiting CSF - 1 signaling can substantially alter macrophage density and function . Consequently , CSF - 1 , anti - bodies against the ligand and receptor , and inhibitors of CSF - 1R kinase activity are all being tested in various disease models , and more recently clinical trials have also been initiated . MacDonald and colleagues found that anti - CSF - 1R antibody treatment primarily depletes the maturation and replacement of resident monocytes and tissue macrophages but does not affect the numbers of pro - inﬂammatory monocytes ( MacDonald et al . , 2010 ) . Consequently , they hypothesized that it might have little impact on the maintenance of inﬂammatory disease . Never - theless , anti - CSF - 1R therapy has been recently shown to reduce cutaneous and pulmonary chronic graft - versus - host disease ( Alexander et al . , 2014 ) . Stutchﬁeld and colleagues also showed that CSF - 1 - Fc therapy could be used to expand the numbers of protective tissue macrophages in models of acute liver injury and partial hepatectomy ( Stutchﬁeld et al . , 2015 ) . Therapeutic strate - gies that target important monocyte - and macrophage - recruit - ing chemokine or chemokine receptors have also emerged as possible therapeutic targets ( Baeck et al . , 2012 ; Baeck et al . , 2014 ; Chen et al . , 2015b ; Wehr et al . , 2014 ) . Serum amyloid P , a member of the pentraxin family , has been shown to inhibit the accumulation of pro - ﬁbrotic macrophages in the lungs of mice after bleomycin exposure , suggesting that it might be developed as a therapeutic strategy for idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis ( Murray et al . , 2011 ) . Alendronate inhalation into the lungs has also been shown to ameliorate emphysema in mice by inducing apoptosis of alveolar macrophages ( Ueno et al . , 2015 ) . Adoptive - transfer and transplantation techniques em - ploying bone - marrow - derived and pulmonary macrophages are also being investigated as strategies for increasing the number of restorative macrophages ( Suzuki et al . , 2014 ; Thomas et al . , 2011 ) . Thus , several distinct therapeutic approaches that lead to changes in the number of macrophages are being investigated . Another way to enhance the therapeutic potential of macro - phages is to speciﬁcally target or alter their function . For example , Cao and colleagues showed that macrophages modi - ﬁed ex vivo by IL - 10 and TGF - b stimulation could be used to ameliorate inﬂammation , pathological structural changes , and functional decline during kidney injury ( Cao et al . , 2010 ) . Zheng et al . generated a similar protective population by polarizing iso - lated macrophages with IL - 4 and IL - 13 and then adoptively transferring the stimulated cells into mice with pancreatic and renal injuries ( Zheng et al . , 2011 ) . Indeed , pancreatic beta cell renewal following bile duct injury is tightly regulated by M ( IL - 4 ) macrophages expressing TGF - b 1 ( Xiao et al . , 2014 ) . IL - 25 , which promotes type 2 cytokine production and M ( IL - 4 ) macrophage development , has also been shown to protect mice from kidney disease ( Cao et al . , 2011 ) . Lentiviral - mediated delivery of IL - 10 to macrophages also represents a promising strategy for inducing and sustaining macrophage polarization toward a restorative anti - inﬂammatory phenotype in vivo ( Boehler et al . , 2014 ) . Altering key macrophage transcription factors that stabilize or induce particular phenotypes , as Jay et al . did in a model of AD , also holds promise for inﬂammatory and ﬁbrotic diseases ( Jay et al . , 2015 ) . The transcription factor IRF5 has also been impli - cated in the polarization of macrophages toward an inﬂamma - tory phenotype that can impair wound repair and promote persistent inﬂammation . Thus , reducing IRF5 activity could be used to increase the number of anti - inﬂammatory and pro - wound - healing macrophages , as was demonstrated recently in models of obesity and insulin resistance ( Dalmas et al . , 2015 ) . Rapamycin , which blocks mTOR signaling in macrophages and myoﬁbroblasts , has also been shown to ameliorate kidney ﬁbrosis in mice ( Chen et al . , 2012b ) . MicroRNAs could also be used to target key transcription factors in macrophages to transform them from highly activated tissue - destructive mac - rophages into cells resembling a normal quiescent phenotype ( Ponomarev et al . , 2011 ) . Finally , by mimicking the anti - inﬂam - matory effects of apoptotic cells , phosphatidlyserine - presenting liposomes have also been used to induce reparative IL - 10 - and TGF b 1 - producing cardiac macrophages ( Harel - Adar et al . , 2011 ) . Macrophages in Tissue Regeneration Although macrophages play key regulatory roles during tissue injury and repair , the tissue - resident macrophage populations in nearly all tissues of the body also control normal tissue Immunity 44 , March 15 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . 457 Immunity Review homeostasis and organ regeneration ( Wynn et al . , 2013 ) . In fact , a recent cell - depletion study revealed that macrophages are crit - ically required for full limb regeneration in adult salamanders , but surprisingly , wound closure following limb amputation is much less dependent on macrophages ( Godwin et al . , 2013 ) . Macro - phages are , however , critical to the clearance of senescent cells ( Yun et al . , 2015 ) . Therefore , elucidating the mechanisms by which macrophages create a regeneration - permissive environ - ment could reveal strategies for the regeneration of injured or - gans in adult mammals . Aurora and colleagues recently employed a similar macro - phage - depletion strategy in mice and determined that macro - phages provide critical signals that drive angiogenesis and tis - sue regeneration after MI in neonatal hearts , which are capable of complete regeneration , but only during the earliest days of gestation ( Aurora et al . , 2014 ) . In the absence of macrophages , however , neonates lose the ability to regenerate myocardia and form ﬁbrotic scars similar to those seen in older animals after an infarct . Interestingly , the beneﬁcial effects of mesenchymal stem cells ( MSCs ) in adult MI also appear to be dependent on macrophages ( Ben - Mordechai et al . , 2013 ) , such that MSCs pri - marily serve a regulatory role by shifting local macrophages from a pro - inﬂammatory M ( IFN - g ) phenotype to a tissue - regenerative phenotype similar to that of M ( IL - 4 ) macrophages ( Cho et al . , 2014 ) . Multi - potent adult progenitor cells exhibit similar M ( IL - 4 ) polarizing activity , leading to a reduction in macrophage - medi - ated axonal dieback in spinal - cord injury ( Busch et al . , 2011 ) . M ( IL - 4 ) cells , in turn , establish an anti - inﬂammatory environment that is more accommodating to the survival and growth of both MSCs and progenitor populations in injured tissues , suggesting that a mutually beneﬁcial feedback loop exists between anti - in - ﬂammatory macrophages and stem cell populations that drive tissue regeneration ( Freytes et al . , 2013 ; Mounier et al . , 2013 ) . Therefore , differences in the number of MSCs and other progen - itor cells in neonates and adults and / or alterations in the dialog between stem cells and macrophages can have major impacts on tissue regeneration after injury and in aging . A complex dialog between macrophages and several other cell types is also required for the regeneration of peripheral nerves . Similar to neonatal hearts , the peripheral nervous system displays remarkable regenerative ability in that it can fully repair a completely severed nerve . An exciting study by Cattin and col - leagues showed that blood vessels play a critical role in nerve regeneration by serving as guides or tracks for the regenerative nerve cells to grow along ( Cattin et al . , 2015 ) . The multi - cellular process is initiated by injury - induced hypoxia , which is sensed by local tissue macrophages that then secrete VEGF - a to induce a polarized vasculature that relieves the hypoxia , but at the same time , it creates a path for proliferating Schwann cells to migrate across to reconnect the nerve . Thus , VEGF - a production by macrophages is an indispensable mechanism in nerve regeneration . In addition to stimulating blood - vessel development ( Ehling et al . , 2014 ) , monocytes and macrophages produce a variety of additional mediators that regulate the renewal and function of local tissue progenitor cells that are critical to tissue regener - ation . For example , London and colleagues identiﬁed a popula - tion of monocyte - derived , IL - 10 - producing macrophages that are required for progenitor cell renewal and neuroprotection in the injured adult murine retina ( London et al . , 2011 ) . IL - 10 also plays a central role in switching muscle macrophages from a pro - inﬂammatory to a reparative phenotype that promotes mus - cle regeneration ( Deng et al . , 2012 ) . Nevertheless , studies with Il4ra f / f Lyz2 cre mice have questioned the overall importance of anti - inﬂammatory M ( IL - 4 ) - like macrophages in muscle regenera - tion ( Goh et al . , 2013 ; Heredia et al . , 2013 ) . However , recent studies have also suggested that there are limitations in using the Lyz2 - cre mouse to dissect the contributions of M ( IL - 4 ) - like monocytes and macrophages in vivo ( Vannella et al . , 2014 ) . Wnt signaling in macrophages has also been identiﬁed as a crit - ical pathway driving parenchymal regeneration in models of liver injury . After hepatocyte cell death , macrophage engulfment of hepatocyte debris induces Wnt3a , which in nearby hepatic pro - genitor cells leads to canonical Wnt signaling that facilitates their speciﬁcation to hepatocytes ( Boulter et al . , 2012 ) . Regenerative macrophages also facilitate skeletal - muscle regeneration by directly targeting myogenic precursor cells ( MPCs ) . Saclier and colleagues demonstrated in vitro that through the differential secretion of cytokines and growth factors , anti - inﬂamma - tory macrophages strongly promote MPC differentiation by increasing their commitment into differentiated myocytes and mature myotubes ( Saclier et al . , 2013 ) . Pro - inﬂammatory macro - phages , in contrast , inhibit myogenic precursor fusion . Thus , pro - inﬂammatory and anti - inﬂammatory macrophages have direct effects on stem cell fate , leading to substantial impacts on tissue regeneration . Although effective wound repair and tissue regeneration are often associated with the preferential expansion of local tissue macrophages exhibiting an anti - inﬂammatory phenotype , when the injury is locally severe or chronic , restoring normal tissue ar - chitecture could also require additional inﬂammatory mono - cytes . For example , Chen and colleagues showed that CCL2 is released from neighboring hair follicles when hairs are plucked and that this leads to the rapid recruitment of TNF - a - secreting in - ﬂammatory macrophages , which accumulate near the plucked hair and provide key signals to local stem cells that facilitate the regeneration of new hair follicles ( Chen et al . , 2015a ) . In this case , recruitment of pro - inﬂammatory macrophages is crit - ical to the initiation of the stem cell response that facilitates new hair growth . Nevertheless , the rapid conversion of these pro - inﬂammatory TNF - a - producing macrophages to an anti - inﬂam - matory IL - 10 - and TGF - b 1 - producing phenotype appears to be critical to the long - term survival of stem and progenitor cell populations in most tissues ( Freytes et al . , 2013 ; Heredia et al . , 2013 ; Lemos et al . , 2015 ) . Thus , to facilitate effective organ regeneration and prevent ﬁbrosis , the monocyte and macro - phage response must be ﬁnely tuned . Future Directions As illustrated in this review , monocytes and macrophages are re - cruited and activated by several distinct mechanisms and as - sume many functional characteristics that are critical to tissue injury and repair . Although pro - inﬂammatory and anti - inﬂamma - tory macrophages are the two most frequently investigated phenotypes in studies of wound repair , ﬁbrosis , and tissue regeneration , macrophages exhibiting pro - wound - healing , pro - ﬁbrotic , anti - ﬁbrotic , pro - resolving , and tissue - regenerating characteristics are also commonly mentioned in the literature . 458 Immunity 44 , March 15 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . Immunity Review As highlighted here , there is evidence that these macrophage activation states are not always mutually exclusive . Neverthe - less , it remains unclear whether some functional subsets repre - sent distinct populations or whether they are simply subtle vari - ants of pro - inﬂammatory and anti - inﬂammatory macrophages . Thus , in future work , it will be important to include as many dis - tinguishing characteristics about the macrophages being stud - ied as possible ( Murray et al . , 2014 ) , including cell - surface markers and gene - expression analyses that reveal transcrip - tional and epigenetic proﬁles , because this will increase our abil - ity to compare ﬁndings between research groups and expand our understanding of the unique contributions of the different macrophage populations and activation states during tissue injury and repair in multiple organ systems . A more uniform macrophage nomenclature will also become increasingly impor - tant given that the number of clinical trials based on manipulating monocyte and macrophage function will most likely increase substantially over the next few years . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS T . A . W . and K . M . V . are supported by the intramural research program at the NIAID of the NIH . We would like to sincerely thank Ethan Tyler and Alan Hoofr - ingoftheNIHMedicalArtsforhelpwithﬁgures . Bothauthorswouldalsoliketo acknowledge the following colleagues at the NIH and abroad for many fruitful discussions on this topic : Peter Murray , John Pesce , Mark Wilson , Satish Madala , Rafael Prado , Trey Gieseck , David Cantu , Kayla Knilans , Robert Thompson , Lee Borthwick , Luke Barron , Kevin Hart , and Thiru Ramalingam . REFERENCES Alexander , K . A . , Flynn , R . , Lineburg , K . E . , Kuns , R . D . , Teal , B . E . , Olver , S . D . , Lor , M . , Raffelt , N . C . , Koyama , M . , Leveque , L . , etal . ( 2014 ) . CSF - 1 - dependant donor - derived macrophages mediate chronic graft - versus - host disease . J . Clin . Invest . 124 , 4266 – 4280 . Antoniades , C . G . , Quaglia , A . , Taams , L . S . , Mitry , R . R . , Hussain , M . , Abeles , R . , Possamai , L . A . , Bruce , M . , McPhail , M . , Starling , C . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Source and characterization of hepatic macrophages in acetaminophen - induced acute liver failure in humans . Hepatology 56 , 735 – 746 . Aurora , A . B . , Porrello , E . R . , Tan , W . , Mahmoud , A . I . , Hill , J . A . , Bassel - Duby , R . , Sadek , H . A . , and Olson , E . N . ( 2014 ) . Macrophages are required for neonatal heart regeneration . J . Clin . Invest . 124 , 1382 – 1392 . Baeck , C . , Wehr , A . , Karlmark , K . R . , Heymann , F . , Vucur , M . , Gassler , N . , Huss , S . , Klussmann , S . , Eulberg , D . , Luedde , T . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Pharmacolog - ical inhibition of the chemokine CCL2 ( MCP - 1 ) diminishes liver macrophage inﬁltration and steatohepatitis in chronic hepatic injury . Gut 61 , 416 – 426 . Baeck , C . , Wei , X . , Bartneck , M . , Fech , V . , Heymann , F . , Gassler , N . , Hittatiya , K . , Eulberg , D . , Luedde , T . , Trautwein , C . , and Tacke , F . ( 2014 ) . Pharmacolog - ical inhibition of the chemokine C - C motif chemokine ligand 2 ( monocyte chemoattractantprotein1 ) acceleratesliverﬁbrosisregressionbysuppressing Ly - 6C ( + ) macrophage inﬁltration in mice . Hepatology 59 , 1060 – 1072 . Ben - Mordechai , T . , Holbova , R . , Landa - Rouben , N . , Harel - Adar , T . , Feinberg , M . S . , Abd Elrahman , I . , Blum , G . , Epstein , F . H . , Silman , Z . , Cohen , S . , and Leor , J . ( 2013 ) . Macrophage subpopulations are essential for infarct repair with and without stem cell therapy . J . Am . Coll . Cardiol . 62 , 1890 – 1901 . Berse , B . , Brown , L . F . , Van de Water , L . , Dvorak , H . F . , and Senger , D . R . ( 1992 ) . Vascular permeability factor ( vascular endothelial growth factor ) gene is expressed differentially in normal tissues , macrophages , and tumors . Mol . Biol . Cell 3 , 211 – 220 . Ble´riot , C . , Dupuis , T . , Jouvion , G . , Eberl , G . , Disson , O . , andLecuit , M . ( 2015 ) . Liver - resident macrophage necroptosis orchestrates type 1 microbicidal inﬂammation and type - 2 - mediated tissue repair during bacterial infection . Immunity 42 , 145 – 158 . Boehler , R . M . , Kuo , R . , Shin , S . , Goodman , A . G . , Pilecki , M . A . , Gower , R . M . , Leonard , J . N . , and Shea , L . D . ( 2014 ) . Lentivirus delivery of IL - 10 to promote and sustain macrophage polarization towards an anti - inﬂammatory pheno - type . Biotechnol . Bioeng . 111 , 1210 – 1221 . Borthwick , L . A . , Barron , L . , Hart , K . M . , Vannella , K . M . , Thompson , R . W . , Oland , S . , Cheever , A . , Sciurba , J . , Ramalingam , T . R . , Fisher , A . J . , and Wynn , T . A . ( 2016 ) . Macrophages are critical to the maintenance of IL - 13 - dependent lung inﬂammation and ﬁbrosis . Mucosal Immunol . 9 , 38 – 55 . Boulter , L . , Govaere , O . , Bird , T . G . , Radulescu , S . , Ramachandran , P . , Pelli - coro , A . , Ridgway , R . A . , Seo , S . S . , Spee , B . , Van Rooijen , N . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Macrophage - derived WntopposesNotchsignaling tospecifyhepaticprogen - itor cell fate in chronic liver disease . Nat . Med . 18 , 572 – 579 . Bourdonnay , E . , Zas 1 ona , Z . , Penke , L . R . , Speth , J . M . , Schneider , D . J . , Przybranowski , S . , Swanson , J . A . , Mancuso , P . , Freeman , C . M . , Curtis , J . L . , and Peters - Golden , M . ( 2015 ) . Transcellular delivery of vesicular SOCS proteins from macrophages to epithelial cells blunts inﬂammatory signaling . J . Exp . Med . 212 , 729 – 742 . Busch , S . A . , Hamilton , J . A . , Horn , K . P . , Cuascut , F . X . , Cutrone , R . , Lehman , N . , Deans , R . J . , Ting , A . E . , Mays , R . W . , and Silver , J . ( 2011 ) . Multipotent adult progenitor cells prevent macrophage - mediated axonal dieback and promote regrowth after spinal cord injury . J . Neurosci . 31 , 944 – 953 . Campbell , L . , Saville , C . R . , Murray , P . J . , Cruickshank , S . M . , and Hardman , M . J . ( 2013 ) . Local arginase 1 activity is required for cutaneous wound healing . J . Invest . Dermatol . 133 , 2461 – 2470 . Cao , Q . , Wang , Y . , Zheng , D . , Sun , Y . , Wang , Y . , Lee , V . W . , Zheng , G . , Tan , T . K . , Ince , J . , Alexander , S . I . , and Harris , D . C . ( 2010 ) . IL - 10 / TGF - beta - modi - ﬁed macrophages induce regulatory T cells and protect against adriamycin nephrosis . J . Am . Soc . Nephrol . 21 , 933 – 942 . Cao , Q . , Wang , C . , Zheng , D . , Wang , Y . , Lee , V . W . , Wang , Y . M . , Zheng , G . , Tan , T . K . , Yu , D . , Alexander , S . I . , et al . ( 2011 ) . IL - 25 induces M2 macrophages andreducesrenalinjuryinproteinurickidneydisease . J . Am . Soc . Nephrol . 22 , 1229 – 1239 . Cattin , A . L . , Burden , J . J . , VanEmmenis , L . , Mackenzie , F . E . , Hoving , J . J . , Gar - cia Calavia , N . , Guo , Y . , McLaughlin , M . , Rosenberg , L . H . , Quereda , V . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Macrophage - Induced Blood Vessels Guide Schwann Cell - Mediated Regeneration of Peripheral Nerves . Cell 162 , 1127 – 1139 . Chen , F . , Liu , Z . , Wu , W . , Rozo , C . , Bowdridge , S . , Millman , A . , VanRooijen , N . , Urban , J . F . , Jr . , Wynn , T . A . , and Gause , W . C . ( 2012a ) . An essential role for TH2 - type responses in limiting acute tissue damage during experimental helminth infection . Nat . Med . 18 , 260 – 266 . Chen , G . , Chen , H . , Wang , C . , Peng , Y . , Sun , L . , Liu , H . , and Liu , F . ( 2012b ) . Rapamycin ameliorates kidney ﬁbrosis by inhibiting the activation of mTOR signaling in interstitial macrophages and myoﬁbroblasts . PLoS ONE 7 , e33626 . Chen , C . C . , Wang , L . , Plikus , M . V . , Jiang , T . X . , Murray , P . J . , Ramos , R . , Guer - rero - Juarez , C . F . , Hughes , M . W . , Lee , O . K . , Shi , S . , et al . ( 2015a ) . Organ - level quorum sensing directs regeneration in hair stem cell populations . Cell 161 , 277 – 290 . Chen , L . , Zhou , X . , Fan , L . X . , Yao , Y . , Swenson - Fields , K . I . , Gadjeva , M . , Wal - lace , D . P . , Peters , D . J . , Yu , A . , Grantham , J . J . , andLi , X . ( 2015b ) . Macrophage migration inhibitory factor promotes cyst growth in polycystic kidney disease . J . Clin . Invest . 125 , 2399 – 2412 . Cho , D . I . , Kim , M . R . , Jeong , H . Y . , Jeong , H . C . , Jeong , M . H . , Yoon , S . H . , Kim , Y . S . , and Ahn , Y . ( 2014 ) . Mesenchymal stem cells reciprocally regulate the M1 / M2 balance in mouse bone marrow - derived macrophages . Exp . Mol . Med . 46 , e70 . Chujo , S . , Shirasaki , F . , Kondo - Miyazaki , M . , Ikawa , Y . , and Takehara , K . ( 2009 ) . Role of connective tissue growth factor and its interaction with basic ﬁbroblast growth factor and macrophage chemoattractant protein - 1 in skin ﬁbrosis . J . Cell . Physiol . 220 , 189 – 195 . Dal - Secco , D . , Wang , J . , Zeng , Z . , Kolaczkowska , E . , Wong , C . H . , Petri , B . , Ransohoff , R . M . , Charo , I . F . , Jenne , C . N . , and Kubes , P . ( 2015 ) . A dynamic spectrum of monocytes arising from the in situ reprogramming of CCR2 + monocytes at a site of sterile injury . J . Exp . Med . 212 , 447 – 456 . Dalmas , E . , Toubal , A . , Alzaid , F . , Blazek , K . , Eames , H . L . , Lebozec , K . , Pini , M . , Hainault , I . , Montastier , E . , Denis , R . G . , etal . ( 2015 ) . Irf5deﬁciency inmac - rophages promotes beneﬁcial adipose tissue expansion and insulin sensitivity during obesity . Nat . Med . 21 , 610 – 618 . Immunity 44 , March 15 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . 459 Immunity Review Das , A . , Sinha , M . , Datta , S . , Abas , M . , Chaffee , S . , Sen , C . K . , and Roy , S . ( 2015 ) . Monocyte and macrophage plasticity in tissuerepair and regeneration . Am . J . Pathol . 185 , 2596 – 2606 . Davies , L . C . , Jenkins , S . J . , Allen , J . E . , and Taylor , P . R . ( 2013 ) . Tissue - resident macrophages . Nat . Immunol . 14 , 986 – 995 . De Nardo , D . , Labzin , L . I . , Kono , H . , Seki , R . , Schmidt , S . V . , Beyer , M . , Xu , D . , Zimmer , S . , Lahrmann , C . , Schildberg , F . A . , etal . ( 2014 ) . High - densitylipopro - tein mediates anti - inﬂammatory reprogramming of macrophages via the tran - scriptional regulator ATF3 . Nat . Immunol . 15 , 152 – 160 . Deng , B . , Wehling - Henricks , M . , Villalta , S . A . , Wang , Y . , and Tidball , J . G . ( 2012 ) . IL - 10triggerschanges inmacrophagephenotypethatpromotemuscle growth and regeneration . J . Immunol . 189 , 3669 – 3680 . Dufﬁeld , J . S . , Forbes , S . J . , Constandinou , C . M . , Clay , S . , Partolina , M . , Vuthoori , S . , Wu , S . , Lang , R . , and Iredale , J . P . ( 2005 ) . Selective depletion of macrophages reveals distinct , opposing roles during liver injury and repair . J . Clin . Invest . 115 , 56 – 65 . Dufﬁeld , J . S . , Lupher , M . , Thannickal , V . J . , and Wynn , T . A . ( 2013 ) . Host responses in tissue repair and ﬁbrosis . Annu . Rev . Pathol . 8 , 241 – 276 . Ehling , J . , Bartneck , M . , Wei , X . , Gremse , F . , Fech , V . , Mo¨ckel , D . , Baeck , C . , Hittatiya , K . , Eulberg , D . , Luedde , T . , et al . ( 2014 ) . CCL2 - dependent inﬁltrating macrophages promote angiogenesis in progressive liver ﬁbrosis . Gut 63 , 1960 – 1971 . Epelman , S . , Lavine , K . J . , Beaudin , A . E . , Sojka , D . K . , Carrero , J . A . , Calderon , B . , Brija , T . , Gautier , E . L . , Ivanov , S . , Satpathy , A . T . , et al . ( 2014a ) . Embryonic and adult - derived resident cardiac macrophages are maintained through distinct mechanisms at steady state and during inﬂammation . Immunity 40 , 91 – 104 . Epelman , S . , Lavine , K . J . , and Randolph , G . J . ( 2014b ) . Origin and functions of tissue macrophages . Immunity 41 , 21 – 35 . Evans , T . A . , Barkauskas , D . S . , Myers , J . T . , Hare , E . G . , You , J . Q . , Ransohoff , R . M . , Huang , A . Y . , and Silver , J . ( 2014 ) . High - resolution intravital imaging re - veals that blood - derived macrophages but not resident microglia facilitate secondary axonal dieback in traumatic spinal cord injury . Exp . Neurol . 254 , 109 – 120 . Freytes , D . O . , Kang , J . W . , Marcos - Campos , I . , and Vunjak - Novakovic , G . ( 2013 ) . Macrophages modulate the viability and growth of human mesen - chymal stem cells . J . Cell . Biochem . 114 , 220 – 229 . Galli , S . J . , Borregaard , N . , and Wynn , T . A . ( 2011 ) . Phenotypic and functional plasticityofcellsofinnateimmunity : macrophages , mastcellsandneutrophils . Nat . Immunol . 12 , 1035 – 1044 . Gibbons , M . A . , MacKinnon , A . C . , Ramachandran , P . , Dhaliwal , K . , Dufﬁn , R . , Phythian - Adams , A . T . , vanRooijen , N . , Haslett , C . , Howie , S . E . , Simpson , A . J . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Ly6Chi monocytes direct alternatively activated proﬁbrotic macrophage regulation of lung ﬁbrosis . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 184 , 569 – 581 . Godwin , J . W . , Pinto , A . R . , and Rosenthal , N . A . ( 2013 ) . Macrophages are required for adult salamander limb regeneration . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 9415 – 9420 . Goh , Y . P . , Henderson , N . C . , Heredia , J . E . , Red Eagle , A . , Odegaard , J . I . , Lehwald , N . , Nguyen , K . D . , Sheppard , D . , Mukundan , L . , Locksley , R . M . , and Chawla , A . ( 2013 ) . Eosinophils secrete IL - 4 to facilitate liver regeneration . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 110 , 9914 – 9919 . Gomez Perdiguero , E . , Klapproth , K . , Schulz , C . , Busch , K . , de Bruijn , M . , Rodewald , H . R . , and Geissmann , F . ( 2015 ) . The Origin of Tissue - Resident Macrophages : When an Erythro - myeloid Progenitor Is an Erythro - myeloid Progenitor . Immunity 43 , 1023 – 1024 . Gundra , U . M . , Girgis , N . M . , Ruckerl , D . , Jenkins , S . , Ward , L . N . , Kurtz , Z . D . , Wiens , K . E . , Tang , M . S . , Basu - Roy , U . , Mansukhani , A . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Alterna - tively activated macrophages derived from monocytes and tissue macro - phages are phenotypically and functionally distinct . Blood 123 , e110 – e122 . Han , M . S . , Jung , D . Y . , Morel , C . , Lakhani , S . A . , Kim , J . K . , Flavell , R . A . , andDa - vis , R . J . ( 2013 ) . JNK expression by macrophages promotes obesity - induced insulin resistance and inﬂammation . Science 339 , 218 – 222 . Harel - Adar , T . , Ben Mordechai , T . , Amsalem , Y . , Feinberg , M . S . , Leor , J . , and Cohen , S . ( 2011 ) . Modulation of cardiac macrophages by phosphatidylserine - presenting liposomes improves infarct repair . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 1827 – 1832 . Henderson , N . C . , Mackinnon , A . C . , Farnworth , S . L . , Kipari , T . , Haslett , C . , Ire - dale , J . P . , Liu , F . T . , Hughes , J . , andSethi , T . ( 2008 ) . Galectin - 3expressionand secretion links macrophages to the promotion of renal ﬁbrosis . Am . J . Pathol . 172 , 288 – 298 . Heredia , J . E . , Mukundan , L . , Chen , F . M . , Mueller , A . A . , Deo , R . C . , Locksley , R . M . , Rando , T . A . , and Chawla , A . ( 2013 ) . Type 2 innate signals stimulate ﬁbro / adipogenic progenitors to facilitate muscle regeneration . Cell 153 , 376 – 388 . Hesse , M . , Cheever , A . W . , Jankovic , D . , and Wynn , T . A . ( 2000 ) . NOS - 2 mediates the protective anti - inﬂammatory and antiﬁbrotic effects of the Th1 - inducing adjuvant , IL - 12 , in a Th2 model of granulomatous disease . Am . J . Pathol . 157 , 945 – 955 . Heymann , F . , Hammerich , L . , Storch , D . , Bartneck , M . , Huss , S . , Ru¨sseler , V . , Gassler , N . , Lira , S . A . , Luedde , T . , Trautwein , C . , andTacke , F . ( 2012 ) . Hepatic macrophage migration and differentiation critical for liver ﬁbrosis is mediated by the chemokine receptor C - C motif chemokine receptor 8 in mice . Hepatol - ogy 55 , 898 – 909 . Hos , D . , Bucher , F . , Regenfuss , B . , Dreisow , M . L . , Bock , F . , Heindl , L . M . , Eming , S . A . , and Cursiefen , C . ( 2016 ) . IL - 10 Indirectly Regulates Corneal Lymphangiogenesis and Resolution of Inﬂammation via Macrophages . Am . J . Pathol . 186 , 159 – 171 . Hume , D . A . , and MacDonald , K . P . ( 2012 ) . Therapeutic applications of macro - phage colony - stimulating factor - 1 ( CSF - 1 ) and antagonists of CSF - 1 receptor ( CSF - 1R ) signaling . Blood 119 , 1810 – 1820 . Jay , T . R . , Miller , C . M . , Cheng , P . J . , Graham , L . C . , Bemiller , S . , Broihier , M . L . , Xu , G . , Margevicius , D . , Karlo , J . C . , Sousa , G . L . , et al . ( 2015 ) . TREM2 deﬁ - ciency eliminates TREM2 + inﬂammatory macrophages and ameliorates pa - thology in Alzheimer’s disease mouse models . J . Exp . Med . 212 , 287 – 295 . Jenkins , S . J . , Ruckerl , D . , Cook , P . C . , Jones , L . H . , Finkelman , F . D . , van Rooi - jen , N . , MacDonald , A . S . , and Allen , J . E . ( 2011 ) . Local macrophage prolifera - tion , ratherthanrecruitmentfromtheblood , isasignatureofTH2inﬂammation . Science 332 , 1284 – 1288 . Jenkins , S . J . , Ruckerl , D . , Thomas , G . D . , Hewitson , J . P . , Duncan , S . , Brom - bacher , F . , Maizels , R . M . , Hume , D . A . , and Allen , J . E . ( 2013 ) . IL - 4 directly sig - nals tissue - resident macrophages to proliferate beyond homeostatic levels controlled by CSF - 1 . J . Exp . Med . 210 , 2477 – 2491 . Kaviratne , M . , Hesse , M . , Leusink , M . , Cheever , A . W . , Davies , S . J . , McKerrow , J . H . , Wakeﬁeld , L . M . , Letterio , J . J . , and Wynn , T . A . ( 2004 ) . IL - 13 activates a mechanism of tissue ﬁbrosis that is completely TGF - beta independent . J . Immunol . 173 , 4020 – 4029 . Khalil , N . , Bereznay , O . , Sporn , M . , and Greenberg , A . H . ( 1989 ) . Macrophage production of transforming growth factor beta and ﬁbroblast collagen synthe - sis in chronic pulmonary inﬂammation . J . Exp . Med . 170 , 727 – 737 . Kluth , D . C . ( 2007 ) . Pro - resolution properties of macrophages in renal injury . Kidney Int . 72 , 234 – 236 . Knipper , J . A . , Willenborg , S . , Brinckmann , J . , Bloch , W . , Maaß , T . , Wagener , R . , Krieg , T . , Sutherland , T . , Munitz , A . , Rothenberg , M . E . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Interleukin - 4 Receptor a Signaling in Myeloid Cells Controls Collagen Fibril Assembly in Skin Repair . Immunity 43 , 803 – 816 . Knuever , J . , Willenborg , S . , Ding , X . , Akyu¨z , M . D . , Partridge , L . , Niessen , C . M . , Bru¨ning , J . C . , and Eming , S . A . ( 2015 ) . Myeloid Cell - Restricted Insulin / IGF - 1 Receptor Deﬁciency Protects against Skin Inﬂammation . J . Immunol . 195 , 5296 – 5308 . Korf - Klingebiel , M . , Reboll , M . R . , Klede , S . , Brod , T . , Pich , A . , Polten , F . , Napp , L . C . , Bauersachs , J . , Ganser , A . , Brinkmann , E . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Myeloid - derived growth factor ( C19orf10 ) mediates cardiac repair following myocardial infarc - tion . Nat . Med . 21 , 140 – 149 . Kratochvill , F . , Neale , G . , Haverkamp , J . M . , Van de Velde , L . A . , Smith , A . M . , Kawauchi , D . , McEvoy , J . , Roussel , M . F . , Dyer , M . A . , Qualls , J . E . , andMurray , P . J . ( 2015 ) . TNFCounterbalances theEmergenceofM2 TumorMacrophages . Cell Rep . 12 , 1902 – 1914 . Kroner , A . , Greenhalgh , A . D . , Zarruk , J . G . , Passos Dos Santos , R . , Gaestel , M . , andDavid , S . ( 2014 ) . TNFandincreasedintracellularironaltermacrophage 460 Immunity 44 , March 15 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . Immunity Review polarization to a detrimental M1 phenotype in the injured spinal cord . Neuron 83 , 1098 – 1116 . Lang , R . , Patel , D . , Morris , J . J . , Rutschman , R . L . , and Murray , P . J . ( 2002 ) . Shaping gene expression in activated and resting primary macrophages by IL - 10 . J . Immunol . 169 , 2253 – 2263 . Lavine , K . J . , Epelman , S . , Uchida , K . , Weber , K . J . , Nichols , C . G . , Schilling , J . D . , Ornitz , D . M . , Randolph , G . J . , and Mann , D . L . ( 2014 ) . Distinct macro - phage lineages contribute to disparate patterns of cardiac recovery and re - modeling in the neonatal and adult heart . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 111 , 16029 – 16034 . Lech , M . , and Anders , H . J . ( 2013 ) . Macrophages and ﬁbrosis : How resident and inﬁltrating mononuclear phagocytes orchestrate all phases of tissue injury and repair . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1832 , 989 – 997 . Lemos , D . R . , Babaeijandaghi , F . , Low , M . , Chang , C . K . , Lee , S . T . , Fiore , D . , Zhang , R . H . , Natarajan , A . , Nedospasov , S . A . , andRossi , F . M . ( 2015 ) . Nilotinib reduces muscle ﬁbrosis in chronic muscle injury by promoting TNF - mediated apoptosis of ﬁbro / adipogenic progenitors . Nat . Med . 21 , 786 – 794 . London , A . , Itskovich , E . , Benhar , I . , Kalchenko , V . , Mack , M . , Jung , S . , and Schwartz , M . ( 2011 ) . Neuroprotectionandprogenitorcellrenewalintheinjured adult murine retina requires healing monocyte - derived macrophages . J . Exp . Med . 208 , 23 – 39 . Lo¨rchner , H . , Po¨ling , J . , Gajawada , P . , Hou , Y . , Polyakova , V . , Kostin , S . , Adrian - Segarra , J . M . , Boettger , T . , Wietelmann , A . , Warnecke , H . , et al . ( 2015 ) . MyocardialhealingrequiresReg3 b - dependentaccumulationofmacro - phages in the ischemic heart . Nat . Med . 21 , 353 – 362 . MacDonald , K . P . , Palmer , J . S . , Cronau , S . , Seppanen , E . , Olver , S . , Raffelt , N . C . , Kuns , R . , Pettit , A . R . , Clouston , A . , Wainwright , B . , et al . ( 2010 ) . An anti - body against the colony - stimulating factor 1 receptor depletes the resident subset of monocytes and tissue - and tumor - associated macrophages but does not inhibit inﬂammation . Blood 116 , 3955 – 3963 . Madala , S . K . , Pesce , J . T . , Ramalingam , T . R . , Wilson , M . S . , Minnicozzi , S . , Cheever , A . W . , Thompson , R . W . , Mentink - Kane , M . M . , and Wynn , T . A . ( 2010 ) . Matrix metalloproteinase 12 - deﬁciency augments extracellular matrix degrading metalloproteinases and attenuates IL - 13 - dependent ﬁbrosis . J . Immunol . 184 , 3955 – 3963 . Mauer , J . , Chaurasia , B . , Goldau , J . , Vogt , M . C . , Ruud , J . , Nguyen , K . D . , The - urich , S . , Hausen , A . C . , Schmitz , J . , Bro¨nneke , H . S . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Signaling by IL - 6 promotes alternative activation of macrophages to limit endotoxemia and obesity - associated resistance to insulin . Nat . Immunol . 15 , 423 – 430 . Miron , V . E . , Boyd , A . , Zhao , J . W . , Yuen , T . J . , Ruckh , J . M . , Shadrach , J . L . , van Wijngaarden , P . , Wagers , A . J . , Williams , A . , Franklin , R . J . , and ffrench - Con - stant , C . ( 2013 ) . M2 microglia and macrophages drive oligodendrocyte differ - entiation during CNS remyelination . Nat . Neurosci . 16 , 1211 – 1218 . Mitchell , S . , Thomas , G . , Harvey , K . , Cottell , D . , Reville , K . , Berlasconi , G . , Petasis , N . A . , Erwig , L . , Rees , A . J . , Savill , J . , et al . ( 2002 ) . Lipoxins , aspirin - triggered epi - lipoxins , lipoxin stable analogues , and the resolution of inﬂam - mation : stimulation of macrophage phagocytosis of apoptotic neutrophils in vivo . J . Am . Soc . Nephrol . 13 , 2497 – 2507 . Mitchell , C . , Couton , D . , Couty , J . P . , Anson , M . , Crain , A . M . , Bizet , V . , Re´nia , L . , Pol , S . , Mallet , V . , and Gilgenkrantz , H . ( 2009 ) . Dual role of CCR2 in the constitution and the resolution of liver ﬁbrosis in mice . Am . J . Pathol . 174 , 1766 – 1775 . Mosser , D . M . , and Edwards , J . P . ( 2008 ) . Exploringthe full spectrum ofmacro - phage activation . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 8 , 958 – 969 . Mounier , R . , The´ret , M . , Arnold , L . , Cuvellier , S . , Bultot , L . , Go¨ransson , O . , Sanz , N . , Ferry , A . , Sakamoto , K . , Foretz , M . , et al . ( 2013 ) . AMPK a 1 regulates macrophage skewing at the time of resolution of inﬂammation during skeletal muscle regeneration . Cell Metab . 18 , 251 – 264 . Mun˜oz - Ca´noves , P . , and Serrano , A . L . ( 2015 ) . Macrophages decide between regeneration and ﬁbrosis in muscle . Trends Endocrinol . Metab . 26 , 449 – 450 . Murray , P . J . , and Wynn , T . A . ( 2011 ) . Protective and pathogenic functions of macrophage subsets . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 11 , 723 – 737 . Murray , L . A . , Chen , Q . , Kramer , M . S . , Hesson , D . P . , Argentieri , R . L . , Peng , X . , Gulati , M . , Homer , R . J . , Russell , T . , van Rooijen , N . , et al . ( 2011 ) . TGF - beta driven lung ﬁbrosis is macrophage dependent and blocked by Serum amyloid P . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 43 , 154 – 162 . Murray , P . J . , Allen , J . E . , Biswas , S . K . , Fisher , E . A . , Gilroy , D . W . , Goerdt , S . , Gordon , S . , Hamilton , J . A . , Ivashkiv , L . B . , Lawrence , T . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Macro - phage activation and polarization : nomenclature and experimental guidelines . Immunity 41 , 14 – 20 . Murray , P . J . , Rathmell , J . , and Pearce , E . ( 2015 ) . SnapShot : Immunometabo - lism . Cell Metab . 22 , 190 – 190 . e1 . Negash , A . A . , Ramos , H . J . , Crochet , N . , Lau , D . T . , Doehle , B . , Papic , N . , Delker , D . A . , Jo , J . , Bertoletti , A . , Hagedorn , C . H . , and Gale , M . , Jr . ( 2013 ) . IL - 1 b production through the NLRP3 inﬂammasome by hepatic macrophages links hepatitis C virus infection with liver inﬂammation and disease . PLoS Pathog . 9 , e1003330 . Novak , M . L . , Weinheimer - Haus , E . M . , and Koh , T . J . ( 2014 ) . Macrophage acti - vation and skeletal muscle healing following traumatic injury . J . Pathol . 232 , 344 – 355 . Ostuni , R . , Kratochvill , F . , Murray , P . J . , and Natoli , G . ( 2015 ) . Macrophages and cancer : from mechanisms to therapeutic implications . Trends Immunol . 36 , 229 – 239 . Peiser , L . , Mukhopadhyay , S . , and Gordon , S . ( 2002 ) . Scavenger receptors in innate immunity . Curr . Opin . Immunol . 14 , 123 – 128 . Pellicoro , A . , Aucott , R . L . , Ramachandran , P . , Robson , A . J . , Fallowﬁeld , J . A . , Snowdon , V . K . , Hartland , S . N . , Vernon , M . , Dufﬁeld , J . S . , Benyon , R . C . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Elastin accumulation is regulated at the level of degradation by macro - phage metalloelastase ( MMP - 12 ) during experimental liver ﬁbrosis . Hepatol - ogy 55 , 1965 – 1975 . Pesce , J . , Kaviratne , M . , Ramalingam , T . R . , Thompson , R . W . , Urban , J . F . , Jr . , Cheever , A . W . , Young , D . A . , Collins , M . , Grusby , M . J . , and Wynn , T . A . ( 2006 ) . The IL - 21 receptor augments Th2 effector function and alternative macro - phage activation . J . Clin . Invest . 116 , 2044 – 2055 . Pesce , J . T . , Ramalingam , T . R . , Mentink - Kane , M . M . , Wilson , M . S . , El Kasmi , K . C . , Smith , A . M . , Thompson , R . W . , Cheever , A . W . , Murray , P . J . , and Wynn , T . A . ( 2009 ) . Arginase - 1 - expressing macrophages suppress Th2 cytokine - driven inﬂammation and ﬁbrosis . PLoS Pathog . 5 , e1000371 . Ponomarev , E . D . , Veremeyko , T . , Barteneva , N . , Krichevsky , A . M . , and Weiner , H . L . ( 2011 ) . MicroRNA - 124 promotes microglia quiescence and sup - presses EAE by deactivating macrophages via the C / EBP - a - PU . 1 pathway . Nat . Med . 17 , 64 – 70 . Pradere , J . P . , Kluwe , J . , De Minicis , S . , Jiao , J . J . , Gwak , G . Y . , Dapito , D . H . , Jang , M . K . , Guenther , N . D . , Mederacke , I . , Friedman , R . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Hepatic macrophages but not dendritic cells contribute to liver ﬁbrosis by promoting the survival of activated hepatic stellate cells in mice . Hepatology 58 , 1461 – 1473 . Ramachandran , P . , Pellicoro , A . , Vernon , M . A . , Boulter , L . , Aucott , R . L . , Ali , A . , Hartland , S . N . , Snowdon , V . K . , Cappon , A . , Gordon - Walker , T . T . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Differential Ly - 6C expression identiﬁes the recruited macrophage phenotype , which orchestrates the regression of murine liver ﬁbrosis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 109 , E3186 – E3195 . Ramachandran , P . , Iredale , J . P . , and Fallowﬁeld , J . A . ( 2015 ) . Resolution of liver ﬁbrosis : basic mechanisms and clinical relevance . Semin . Liver Dis . 35 , 119 – 131 . Rappolee , D . A . , Mark , D . , Banda , M . J . , and Werb , Z . ( 1988 ) . Wound macro - phages express TGF - alpha and other growth factors in vivo : analysis by mRNA phenotyping . Science 241 , 708 – 712 . Saclier , M . , Yacoub - Youssef , H . , Mackey , A . L . , Arnold , L . , Ardjoune , H . , Magnan , M . , Sailhan , F . , Chelly , J . , Pavlath , G . K . , Mounier , R . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Differentially activated macrophages orchestrate myogenic precursor cell fate during human skeletal muscle regeneration . Stem Cells 31 , 384 – 396 . Said , E . A . , Dupuy , F . P . , Trautmann , L . , Zhang , Y . , Shi , Y . , El - Far , M . , Hill , B . J . , Noto , A . , Ancuta , P . , Peretz , Y . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Programmed death - 1 - induced interleukin - 10 production by monocytes impairs CD4 + T cell activation during HIV infection . Nat . Med . 16 , 452 – 459 . Sandler , N . G . , Mentink - Kane , M . M . , Cheever , A . W . , and Wynn , T . A . ( 2003 ) . Global gene expression proﬁles during acute pathogen - induced pulmonary inﬂammation reveal divergent roles for Th1 and Th2 responses intissue repair . J . Immunol . 171 , 3655 – 3667 . Saraiva , M . , and O’Garra , A . ( 2010 ) . The regulation of IL - 10 production by immune cells . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 10 , 170 – 181 . Immunity 44 , March 15 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . 461 Immunity Review Shaked , I . , Hanna , R . N . , Shaked , H . , Chodaczek , G . , Nowyhed , H . N . , Tweet , G . , Tacke , R . , Basat , A . B . , Mikulski , Z . , Togher , S . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Transcription factor Nr4a1 couples sympathetic and inﬂammatory cues in CNS - recruited macrophages to limit neuroinﬂammation . Nat . Immunol . 16 , 1228 – 1234 . Shechter , R . , Miller , O . , Yovel , G . , Rosenzweig , N . , London , A . , Ruckh , J . , Kim , K . W . , Klein , E . , Kalchenko , V . , Bendel , P . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Recruitment of beneﬁ - cial M2 macrophages to injured spinal cord is orchestrated by remote brain choroid plexus . Immunity 38 , 555 – 569 . Shimokado , K . , Raines , E . W . , Madtes , D . K . , Barrett , T . B . , Benditt , E . P . , and Ross , R . ( 1985 ) . A signiﬁcant part of macrophage - derived growth factor con - sists of at least two forms of PDGF . Cell 43 , 277 – 286 . Shouval , D . S . , Biswas , A . , Goettel , J . A . , McCann , K . , Conaway , E . , Redhu , N . S . , Mascanfroni , I . D . , AlAdham , Z . , Lavoie , S . , Ibourk , M . , etal . ( 2014 ) . Inter - leukin - 10receptorsignalingininnateimmunecells regulatesmucosalimmune toleranceand anti - inﬂammatory macrophage function . Immunity 40 , 706 – 719 . Sica , A . , and Mantovani , A . ( 2012 ) . Macrophage plasticity and polarization : in vivo veritas . J . Clin . Invest . 122 , 787 – 795 . Soroosh , P . , Doherty , T . A . , Duan , W . , Mehta , A . K . , Choi , H . , Adams , Y . F . , Mikulski , Z . , Khorram , N . , Rosenthal , P . , Broide , D . H . , and Croft , M . ( 2013 ) . Lung - resident tissue macrophages generate Foxp3 + regulatory T cells and promote airway tolerance . J . Exp . Med . 210 , 775 – 788 . Stutchﬁeld , B . M . , Antoine , D . J . , Mackinnon , A . C . , Gow , D . J . , Bain , C . C . , Haw - ley , C . A . , Hughes , M . J . , Francis , B . , Wojtacha , D . , Man , T . Y . , et al . ( 2015 ) . CSF1 Restores Innate Immunity After Liver Injury in Mice and Serum Levels Indicate Outcomes of Patients With Acute Liver Failure . Gastroenterology 149 , 1896 – 1909 . e14 . Su , S . , Zhao , Q . , He , C . , Huang , D . , Liu , J . , Chen , F . , Chen , J . , Liao , J . Y . , Cui , X . , Zeng , Y . , et al . ( 2015 ) . miR - 142 - 5p and miR - 130a - 3p are regulated by IL - 4 and IL - 13 and control proﬁbrogenic macrophage program . Nat . Commun . 6 , 8523 . Suzuki , T . , Arumugam , P . , Sakagami , T . , Lachmann , N . , Chalk , C . , Sallese , A . , Abe , S . , Trapnell , C . , Carey , B . , Moritz , T . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Pulmonary macro - phage transplantation therapy . Nature 514 , 450 – 454 . Thomas , J . A . , Pope , C . , Wojtacha , D . , Robson , A . J . , Gordon - Walker , T . T . , Hartland , S . , Ramachandran , P . , Van Deemter , M . , Hume , D . A . , Iredale , J . P . , and Forbes , S . J . ( 2011 ) . Macrophage therapy for murine liver ﬁbrosis recruits host effector cells improving ﬁbrosis , regeneration , and function . Hepatology 53 , 2003 – 2015 . Tonkin , J . , Temmerman , L . , Sampson , R . D . , Gallego - Colon , E . , Barberi , L . , Bil - bao , D . , Schneider , M . D . , Musaro ` , A . , and Rosenthal , N . ( 2015 ) . Monocyte / Macrophage - derived IGF - 1 Orchestrates Murine Skeletal Muscle Regenera - tion and Modulates Autocrine Polarization . Mol . Ther . 23 , 1189 – 1200 . Ueno , M . , Maeno , T . , Nomura , M . , Aoyagi - Ikeda , K . , Matsui , H . , Hara , K . , Ta - naka , T . , Iso , T . , Suga , T . , and Kurabayashi , M . ( 2011 ) . Hypoxia - inducible fac - tor - 1 a mediates TGF - b - induced PAI - 1 production in alveolar macrophages in pulmonary ﬁbrosis . Am . J . Physiol . Lung Cell . Mol . Physiol . 300 , L740 – L752 . Ueno , M . , Maeno , T . , Nishimura , S . , Ogata , F . , Masubuchi , H . , Hara , K . , Yama - guchi , K . , Aoki , F . , Suga , T . , Nagai , R . , and Kurabayashi , M . ( 2015 ) . Alendro - nate inhalation ameliorates elastase - induced pulmonary emphysema in mice by induction of apoptosis of alveolar macrophages . Nat . Commun . 6 , 6332 . Vannella , K . M . , Barron , L . , Borthwick , L . A . , Kindrachuk , K . N . , Narasimhan , P . B . , Hart , K . M . , Thompson , R . W . , White , S . , Cheever , A . W . , Ramalingam , T . R . , and Wynn , T . A . ( 2014 ) . Incomplete deletion of IL - 4R a by LysM ( Cre ) reveals distinct subsets of M2 macrophages controlling inﬂammation and ﬁbrosis in chronic schistosomiasis . PLoS Pathog . 10 , e1004372 . Warnatsch , A . , Ioannou , M . , Wang , Q . , and Papayannopoulos , V . ( 2015 ) . Inﬂammation . Neutrophil extracellular traps license macrophages for cytokine production in atherosclerosis . Science 349 , 316 – 320 . Wehr , A . , Baeck , C . , Ulmer , F . , Gassler , N . , Hittatiya , K . , Luedde , T . , Neumann , U . P . , Trautwein , C . , and Tacke , F . ( 2014 ) . Pharmacological inhibition of the chemokine CXCL16 diminishes liver macrophage inﬁltration and steatohepa - titis in chronic hepatic injury . PLoS ONE 9 , e112327 . Westphalen , K . , Gusarova , G . A . , Islam , M . N . , Subramanian , M . , Cohen , T . S . , Prince , A . S . , and Bhattacharya , J . ( 2014 ) . Sessile alveolar macrophages communicate with alveolar epithelium to modulate immunity . Nature 506 , 503 – 506 . Willenborg , S . , Lucas , T . , vanLoo , G . , Knipper , J . A . , Krieg , T . , Haase , I . , Brach - vogel , B . , Hammerschmidt , M . , Nagy , A . , Ferrara , N . , et al . ( 2012 ) . CCR2 re - cruits an inﬂammatory macrophage subpopulation critical for angiogenesis in tissue repair . Blood 120 , 613 – 625 . Wynn , T . A . ( 2004 ) . Fibrotic disease and the T ( H ) 1 / T ( H ) 2 paradigm . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 4 , 583 – 594 . Wynn , T . A . ( 2007 ) . Common and unique mechanisms regulate ﬁbrosis in various ﬁbroproliferative diseases . J . Clin . Invest . 117 , 524 – 529 . Wynn , T . A . ( 2008 ) . Cellular and molecular mechanisms of ﬁbrosis . J . Pathol . 214 , 199 – 210 . Wynn , T . A . , and Barron , L . ( 2010 ) . Macrophages : master regulators of inﬂam - mation and ﬁbrosis . Semin . Liver Dis . 30 , 245 – 257 . Wynn , T . A . , andRamalingam , T . R . ( 2012 ) . Mechanismsofﬁbrosis : therapeutic translation for ﬁbrotic disease . Nat . Med . 18 , 1028 – 1040 . Wynn , T . A . , Chawla , A . , and Pollard , J . W . ( 2013 ) . Macrophage biology in development , homeostasis and disease . Nature 496 , 445 – 455 . Xiao , X . , Gaffar , I . , Guo , P . , Wiersch , J . , Fischbach , S . , Peirish , L . , Song , Z . , El - Gohary , Y . , Prasadan , K . , Shiota , C . , andGittes , G . K . ( 2014 ) . M2macrophages promote beta - cell proliferation by up - regulation of SMAD7 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 111 , E1211 – E1220 . Xu , H . , Zhu , J . , Smith , S . , Foldi , J . , Zhao , B . , Chung , A . Y . , Outtz , H . , Kitajewski , J . , Shi , C . , Weber , S . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Notch - RBP - J signaling regulates the tran - scription factor IRF8 to promote inﬂammatory macrophage polarization . Nat . Immunol . 13 , 642 – 650 . Xu , J . , Chi , F . , Guo , T . , Punj , V . , Lee , W . N . , French , S . W . , and Tsukamoto , H . ( 2015 ) . NOTCH reprograms mitochondrial metabolism for proinﬂammatory macrophage activation . J . Clin . Invest . 125 , 1579 – 1590 . Yuk , J . M . , Kim , T . S . , Kim , S . Y . , Lee , H . M . , Han , J . , Dufour , C . R . , Kim , J . K . , Jin , H . S . , Yang , C . S . , Park , K . S . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Orphan Nuclear Receptor ERR a Controls Macrophage Metabolic Signaling and A20 Expression to Negatively Regulate TLR - Induced Inﬂammation . Immunity 43 , 80 – 91 . Yun , M . H . , Davaapil , H . , and Brockes , J . P . ( 2015 ) . Recurrent turnover of senescent cells during regeneration of a complex structure . eLife 4 . Published online May 5 , 2015 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 05505 . Zhang , Q . , Raoof , M . , Chen , Y . , Sumi , Y . , Sursal , T . , Junger , W . , Brohi , K . , Itagaki , K . , and Hauser , C . J . ( 2010 ) . Circulating mitochondrial DAMPs cause inﬂammatory responses to injury . Nature 464 , 104 – 107 . Zhang , M . Z . , Yao , B . , Yang , S . , Jiang , L . , Wang , S . , Fan , X . , Yin , H . , Wong , K . , Miyazawa , T . , Chen , J . , et al . ( 2012 ) . CSF - 1 signaling mediates recovery from acute kidney injury . J . Clin . Invest . 122 , 4519 – 4532 . Zheng , D . , Wang , Y . , Cao , Q . , Lee , V . W . , Zheng , G . , Sun , Y . , Tan , T . K . , Wang , Y . , Alexander , S . I . , and Harris , D . C . ( 2011 ) . Transfused macrophages amelio - rate pancreatic and renal injury in murine diabetes mellitus . Nephron , Exp . Nephrol . 118 , e87 – e99 . Zigmond , E . , Bernshtein , B . , Friedlander , G . , Walker , C . R . , Yona , S . , Kim , K . W . , Brenner , O . , Krauthgamer , R . , Varol , C . , Mu¨ller , W . , and Jung , S . ( 2014 ) . Macrophage - restricted interleukin - 10 receptor deﬁciency , but not IL - 10 deﬁciency , causes severe spontaneous colitis . Immunity 40 , 720 – 733 . 462 Immunity 44 , March 15 , 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc . Immunity Review