1779 Research Article Introduction The dynamic reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton is a crucial component in nearly all aspects of cell motility ( Pollard and Borisy , 2003 ) . Actin polymerization itself is thought to provide the driving force during leading edge protrusion . Dynamic actin reorganization also plays an important role in other processes such as host - pathogen interactions and endocytosis ( Bear et al . , 2001 ; Engqvist - Goldstein and Drubin , 2003 ) . The molecular mechanisms of actin assembly and dynamics have been the target of intense study for decades . A host of cellular proteins control the nucleation , growth , organization and disassembly of actin filaments . Coronins are F - actin - binding proteins that are highly conserved across species and regulate a number of motility processes ( Uetrecht and Bear , 2006 ) . However , the mechanism by which coronins affect cell motility has not been fully elucidated . Functional studies from multiple species indicate that coronins play important roles in many processes involving actin dynamics . Coronin was originally identified in Dictyostelium as an F - actin - binding protein that is enriched at the leading edge and at phagocytic cup structures ( de Hostos et al . , 1991 ) . Dictyostelium mutants lacking coronin have defects in cell migration , cytokinesis and phagocytosis ( de Hostos et al . , 1993 ; Maniak et al . , 1995 ) . Yeast coronin crosslinks actin filaments and microtubules , and overexpression induces the formation of abnormal actin loop structures ( Goode et al . , 1999 ; Humphries et al . , 2002 ) . Mammals have six coronin genes that are divided into three subclasses ( Uetrecht and Bear , 2006 ) . Coronin 1B is an ubiquitously expressed isoform that localizes to the leading edge of migrating fibroblasts ( Cai et al . , 2005 ) . Depletion of coronin 1B influences lamellipodial protrusion and whole - cell motility by altering the actin dynamics and architecture at the leading edge ( Cai et al . , 2007 ) . Coronin 1B was also identified as an important factor for neurite outgrowth in a neuronal regeneration model ( Di Giovanni et al . , 2005 ) . Deletion of coronin 1A , a hematopoetic specific isoform , in mice leads to severe defects in lymphocyte homeostasis and T - cell chemotaxis ( Foger et al . , 2006 ) . One mechanism by which coronins exert an effect on motility is through the inhibition of the Arp2 / 3 complex . This observation was originally made in yeast where coronin interacts with the Arp2 / 3 complex in vivo and in vitro , and directly inhibits actin nucleation mediated by the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Humphries et al . , 2002 ) . Human coronin 1B also interacts with the Arp2 / 3 complex in vivo and specifically inhibits Arp2 / 3 - complex - induced actin nucleation in vitro ( Cai et al . , 2005 ; Cai et al . , 2007 ) . The interaction between coronin 1B and the Arp2 / 3 complex is regulated by phosphorylation of the serine residue 2 ( Ser2 ) via PKC ( Cai et al . , 2005 ) . Ser2 phosphorylation also controls the interaction of coronin 1A with the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Foger et al . , 2006 ) . Coronins are conserved F - actin binding proteins that have been implicated in a variety of processes including fibroblast migration , phagocytosis , and chemotaxis . Recent data from our lab indicate that coronin 1B coordinates Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin filament nucleation and cofilin - mediated filament turnover at the leading edge of migrating fibroblasts . Analysis of coronin function has been hampered by the lack of a clear understanding of how coronin interacts with F - actin . Here , we identify a surface - exposed conserved arginine residue at position 30 ( R30 ) , which is crucial for coronin 1B binding to F - actin both in vitro and in vivo . Using actin co - sedimentation , we demonstrate that coronin 1B binds with high affinity to ATP / ADP - P i – F - actin ( 170 nM ) and with 47 - fold lower affinity to ADP – F - actin ( 8 (cid:2) M ) . In contrast to a previous study , we find no evidence for enhanced cofilin binding to F - actin in the presence of either coronin 1B or coronin 1A . Instead , we find that coronin 1B protects actin filaments from cofilin - induced depolymerization . Consistent with an important role for interactions between coronin 1B and F - actin in vivo , an R30D coronin mutant that does not bind F - actin localizes inefficiently to the leading edge . Furthermore , our analysis indicates that F - actin binding is absolutely required for coronin 1B to exert its effects on whole - cell motility and lamellipodial dynamics . Supplementary material available online at http : / / jcs . biologists . org / cgi / content / full / 120 / 10 / 1779 / DC1 Key words : Coronin , Actin , Cofilin , Arp2 / 3 , FRAP Summary F - actin binding is essential for coronin 1B function in vivo Liang Cai 1 , Alexander M . Makhov 2 and James E . Bear 1 , * 1 Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center and Department of Cell & Developmental Biology , and 2 Department of Microbiology & Immunology , University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , Chapel Hill , North Carolina , 27599 - 7295 , USA * Author for correspondence ( e - mail : jbear @ email . unc . edu ) Accepted 2 April 2007 Journal of Cell Science 120 , 1779 - 1790 Published by The Company of Biologists 2007 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 007641 J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e JCS ePress online publication date 24 April 2007 1780 Another important mechanism by which coronins affect motility is through the regulation of ADF / cofilin proteins ( hereafter referred to as cofilin ) . Cofilin promotes the disassembly of actin filaments primarily through severing , although other evidence suggests that these proteins may also promote enhanced pointed end depolymerization ( Bamburg , 1999 ) . Coronin 1B targets the cofilin - activating phosphatase slingshot - 1L to the leading edge and , thus , indirectly regulates cofilin activity in vivo ( Cai et al . , 2007 ) . In addition to regulating slingshot - 1L targeting , coronin 1B can also be dephosphorylated on Ser2 by slingshot - 1L . Genetic studies in yeast have shown that the combination of coronin gene deletion with a mutation in the cofilin gene causes lethality , suggesting a functional link between coronin and cofilin in this organism ( Goode et al . , 1999 ) . Recent work using reconstituted Listeria actin comet tails as a model system for actin assembly / disassembly identified coronin 1A as a factor that enhances cofilin - dependent actin depolymerization ( Brieher et al . , 2006 ) . The authors of this study postulated that coronin 1A promotes cofilin severing activity by enhancing its binding to the sides of actin filaments . Although coronin was originally identified by its ability to bind actin filaments , the precise actin - binding site has yet to be unequivocally identified . In fact , actin - binding sites have been mapped to nearly every part of the protein ( Uetrecht and Bear , 2006 ) . The recent crystal structure of coronin 1A demonstrated that the majority of the protein participates in a seven - bladed (cid:3) - propeller ( Appleton et al . , 2006 ) . This structure includes two cryptic blades that flank the five known WD40 repeats and a C - terminal extension that folds tightly along the bottom of the (cid:3) - propeller . Many of the earlier attempts to map the F - actin - binding site of coronin used truncation mutants that contained fragments of this compact structure ( Gatfield et al . , 2005 ; Liu et al . , 2006 ; Mishima and Nishida , 1999 ; Oku et al . , 2003 ; Spoerl et al . , 2002 ) . These fragments may not adopt stable or physiological conformations and the results of these studies must be confirmed using mutations in the full - length protein ( Appleton et al . , 2006 ) . Since no clear consensus about the F - actin - binding site has been established , the requirement for the F - actin - binding activity of coronin in vivo has not yet been tested . The work presented here describes the identification of a conserved residue ( R30 ) that is crucial for binding to actin filaments , and establishes the importance of F - actin - binding activity for coronin 1B function in vivo . Journal of Cell Science 120 ( 10 ) Fig . 1 . Coronin 1B induces F - actin cables in Drosophila S2 cells independently of the Arp2 / 3 complex . ( A ) S2 cells were transfected with GFP - tagged coronin 1B or coronin 2A expression constructs , plated on ConA - treated coverslips , and stained for F - actin using phalloidin . ( B ) S2 cells transfected with GFP - tagged coronin 1B expression constructs were immunostained for Arp2 , a subunit of the Arp2 / 3 complex . ( C ) Endogenous Drosophila p20Arc was depleted by siRNA for 7 days . S2 cells were transfected with coronin 1B expression constructs and stained with phalloidin . Arrowheads show a colocalization of F - actin and coronin 1B in p20Arc depleted S2 cells . ( D ) Diagram of coronin - 1B – coronin - 2A chimeras showing cable - formation ability of each construct . Fragments from coronin 1B are in black , and fragments from coronin 2A are in white . Red numbers indicate the start position of each region according to amino acid sequence of coronin 1B . Corresponding coronin 2A regions were chosen by sequence alignment using ClustalX 1 . 83 . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 1781 F - actin binding to coronin 1B Results Ectopic expression of coronin 1B in Drosophila S2 cells induces F - actin cables While generating a stable Drosophila S2 cell line to produce recombinant human coronin 1B , we observed that ectopic expression of this protein induced the formation of F - actin - containing cable - like structures . These actin cables stain with phalloidin and contain most of the ectopic coronin 1B ( Fig . 1A ) . Previous studies of yeast coronin showed that overexpression of this protein induced the formation of Arp2 / 3 - containing aberrant F - actin loop structures ( Humphries et al . , 2002 ) . In the case of ectopic expression of coronin 1B in S2 cells , we cannot detect Arp2 / 3 complex in these coronin - 1B – actin cables ( Fig . 1B ) . To test whether the coronin - 1B - induced actin cables in S2 cells require the presence of functional Arp2 / 3 complex , we depleted the p20Arc subunit of the Arp2 / 3 complex in S2 cells using small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) of an established sequence ( Rogers et al . , 2003 ) . Depletion of p20Arc blocks the spreading of S2 cells on concanavalin A ( ConA ) - coated surfaces as reported previously , but does not appear to inhibit the formation of coronin - 1B - containing actin cables ( Fig . 1C , yellow arrowhead ) . Thus , ectopic coronin 1B expression in insect cells induces the formation of heavily bundled actin structures without a strict requirement for wild - type levels of Arp2 / 3 . We postulate that the ability to form these cables is a reflection of the F - actin binding and / or bundling activity of coronin 1B in vivo . Interestingly , ectopic expression of another mammalian coronin , coronin 2A , does not induce actin cables ( Fig . 1A ) . Consistent with this , coronin 2A appears to interact weakly with F - actin in vitro ( our unpublished observation ) . We exploited this difference between coronin 1B and coronin 2A to identify the part of coronin 1B that confers the ability to induce actin cable formation and thus F - actin binding and / or bundling . Based on the recently published coronin 1A structure ( Appleton et al . , 2006 ) and homology modeling ( supplementary material Fig . S1 ) , we designed a series of coronin - 1B – coronin - 2A chimeras to map the region on coronin 1B that is responsible for actin cable formation . We find that the (cid:3) - propeller region of coronin 1B is both necessary and sufficient to induce the formation of actin cables ( Fig . 1D ) . Using the chimera c5 - 1B567 , we further narrowed our search for the actin - cable - forming region to the first four blades of the (cid:3) - propeller of coronin 1B . Identification of a crucial F - actin - binding residue on the surface of the (cid:3) - propeller Using our structural model of coronin 1B , we systematically mutated charged , surface - exposed residues that differ between coronin 1B and 2A in the first four blades of the (cid:3) - propeller . We used both alanine substitutions and charge - reversal mutations , and tested the ability of these mutants to induce actin cables in S2 cells ( Fig . 2A , B ) . Mutation of arginine at position 30 to alanine ( R30A ) attenuated the ability of coronin 1B to induce cables , whereas the charge - reversal mutation of this residue ( R30D ) completely abolished cable formation . According to our homology model , R30 is a surface - exposed residue , has no predicted side - chain interactions with surrounding residues , and directly faces the lysine residue at position 73 ( K73 ) ( Fig . 2D and 2E ) . A charge - reversal mutation of K73 also greatly reduced the formation of actin cables , supporting the importance of a charged patch containing R30 in actin - cable formation . Based on multiple sequence alignments of coronin proteins from different species , we find that R30 is a highly conserved charged residue that is invariably flanked by two hydrophobic residues isoleucine / leucine and valine / leucine ( Fig . 2C ) . R30 is essential for coronin 1B binding to F - actin in vitro To directly test the role of R30 in the binding of coronin 1B to F - actin , we first characterized the F - actin - binding properties of wild - type coronin 1B by using high - speed actin co - sedimentation assays . We purified full - length recombinant coronin 1B to > 99 % purity using a mammalian protein expression system ( supplementary material Fig . S2 ) . Recombinant coronin 1B binds robustly to F - actin in vitro ( Fig . 3A ) . The stoichiometry of coronin 1B binding to F - actin ( ~ 2 . 6 : 1 ) exceeds a 1 : 1 ratio , an effect probably due to oligomerization of coronin 1B via its coiled - coil domain . We also examined the salt - sensitivity of the coronin - 1B – F - actin interaction ( Fig . 3B ) . This interaction occurs at physiological salt concentrations ( 100 mM KCl ) and lower , but is reduced under high - salt conditions ( 150 mM KCl ) . In order to test whether the nucleotide state of the actin filaments regulates coronin 1B binding , we polymerized filaments from ADP - G - actin or ATP - G - actin and repeated the co - sedimentation assays ( supplementary material Fig . S3 ) . After polymerization , bound ATP on individual actin subunits is hydrolyzed to ADP - P i at a rate of 0 . 3 second −1 , followed by the slow release of inorganic phosphate ( P i ) at a rate of 0 . 002 second −1 to form ADP - F - actin ( Pollard et al . , 2000 ) . As a result of this rate differential of 150 , newly polymerized filaments generated from ATP - G - actin are composed mainly of ATP - and ADP - P i – F - actin . Actin filaments assembled from ADP - G - actin are composed entirely of ADP - F - actin . Coronin 1B binds preferentially to filaments prepared from ATP - G - actin over filaments prepared from ADP - G - actin ( Fig . 3C - E ) . To calculate the affinity of coronin 1B binding to F - actin , we used an established supernatant - depletion method ( Bryce et al . , 2005 ) . Bound coronin 1B was calculated from the amount depleted from the supernatant as detected by immunoblotting and densitometry . To facilitate the affinity measurements and avoid the complicating factor of oligomerization , a sub - stoichiometric amount of coronin 1B ( 0 . 1 (cid:2) M ) was used in these reactions . Our results show that coronin 1B binds to ATP / ADP - P i – F - actin with an affinity of 170 nM , and to ADP F - actin with an affinity of 8 (cid:2) M . Thus , coronin 1B binds to actin filaments containing ATP / ADP - P i approximately 47 times stronger than actin filaments containing ADP . To test whether the R30D mutant binds to F - actin , we prepared a recombinant version of this protein and performed co - sedimentation assays . The R30D mutant displays extremely poor F - actin - binding capability in vitro ( Fig . 3F , G ) . The small amount of R30D mutant protein that pellets with actin filaments may reflect residual low - affinity F - actin binding or non - specific entrapment of the protein in the F - actin pellet . To exclude the possibility that the R30D mutation leads to protein misfolding , we compared wild - type coronin 1B with the R30D mutant using both limited J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 1782 proteolysis and circular dichroism analysis ( supplementary material Fig . S4 ) . Results show that the two proteins have indistinguishable protease K digestion patterns and similar molar ellipticity profiles , indicating the R30D mutation does not grossly affect protein structure . To further confirm this result , we tested the ability of the R30D mutant to oligomerize with wild - type coronin 1B to be phosphorylated and dephosphorylated , and to bind directly to purified Arp2 / 3 complex in vitro ( Fig . 4A - D , supplementary material Fig . S6 ) . In all cases , the R30D mutant behaves identically to the wild - type protein , indicating that this mutation selectively affects F - actin binding but not other molecular interactions . Interestingly , the co - immunoprecipitation between coronin 1B and the Arp2 / 3 complex from cell lysates is reduced by the R30D mutation , suggesting that F - actin binding increases the coronin 1B - Arp2 / 3 interaction in vivo ( Fig . 4E ) . Journal of Cell Science 120 ( 10 ) Fig . 2 . A conserved surface - exposed arginine residue , R30 , in coronin 1B is responsible for actin - cable formation . ( A ) Charged , surface - exposed residues within the first and fourth blades of the coronin 1B (cid:3) - propeller were mutated to alanine or an amino acid with an opposite charge ( i . e . R r D ) . Cable - formation capability was scored as follows : + + + , > 99 % of transfected cells contain GFP - positive actin cables ; + / – , < 50 % of transfected cells contain actin cables , the rest have phalloidin - positive , small GFP aggregates ; – , < 1 % of transfected cells contain phalloidin - positive GFP aggregates , the majority show high levels of cytoplasmic GFP . ( B ) S2 cells were transfected with the indicated GFP - tagged coronin 1B mutants and stained with phalloidin . ( C ) Multiple sequence alignment shows that R30 is a highly conserved charged residue in coronins , and locates between the first and second (cid:3) - sheet in the propeller structure . M - 1B , Mus musculus coronin 1B ( gi : 12229769 ) ; R - 1B , Rattus norvegicus coronin 1B ( gi : 12229732 ) ; H - 1B , Homo sapiens coronin 1B ( gi : 21263481 ) ; H - 1C , Homo sapiens coronin 1C ( gi : 7656991 ) ; Celegans , Caenorhabditis elegans coronin ( gi : 3121874 ) ; Spombe , Schizosaccharomyces pombe coronin ( gi : 3121869 ) ; Scerev , Saccharomyces cerevisiae coronin ( gi : 3121873 ) ; DICDI , Dictyostelium discoideum coronin ( gi : 116950 ) . The multiple alignment was generated using ClustalX 1 . 83 and illustrated using ESPRIPT . ( D ) Top view of coronin 1B homology model . N - terminus is blue , C terminus is red . The side chain of R30 is presented in stick form . The homology model was generated in InsightII - 2005 using HOMOLOGY model , and evaluated by Profile _ 3D function ( see supplementary material Fig . S1 ) . Illustration was generated using Pymol ( http : / / www . pymol . org ) . ( E ) Side view of coronin 1B structural model showing the postions of R30 and K73 . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 1783 F - actin binding to coronin 1B Full - length coronin 1B does not enhance cofilin binding to F - actin Recent evidence suggests that coronin 1A and cofilin synergize to promote actin depolymerization in an in vitro Listeria tail assay ( Brieher et al . , 2006 ) . To test this observation for coronin 1B , we used a dilution - induced pyrene actin depolymerization assay . We observed that coronin 1B alone cannot induce actin filament depolymerization ( Fig . 5A ) and coronin 1B protects actin filaments from depolymerization by cofilin ( Fig . 5B ) . Brieher and colleagues showed that coronin 1A enhanced the binding of cofilin to Listeria tails and purified actin filaments . To test this mechanism for coronin 1B , we used high - speed actin co - sedimentation assays . In contrast to the previous study , we find that coronin 1B binding to actin filaments is inhibited in the presence of cofilin , and we see no evidence for enhanced cofilin binding to filaments in the presence of coronin 1B ( Fig . 5C ) . The inhibition of coronin 1B binding by cofilin is reversible by the addition of phalloidin , which blocks the binding of cofilin to actin filaments ( Nishida et al . , 1987 ) . To test this potential competition more rigorously , we incubated filaments with a constant amount of coronin 1B ( 1 (cid:2) M ) and increasing concentrations of cofilin ( up to 10 (cid:2) M ) . Increasing cofilin decreased the amount of coronin 1B associated with filaments in a dose - dependent manner ( Fig . 5D ) . In a converse experiment , we incubated filaments with a constant amount of cofilin ( 1 (cid:2) M ) and increasing concentrations of coronin 1B ( up to 4 (cid:2) M ) . As with the cofilin dose - response experiment , increasing concentrations of coronin 1B decreased the binding of cofilin to actin filaments ( Fig . 5E ) . Similar results were Fig . 3 . Coronin 1B preferentially binds to ATP / ADP - P i – F - actin and mutation of R30 abolishes binding . ( A ) Representative Coomassie - Blue - stained gel showing the near - saturation binding of coronin 1B to ATP / ADP - P i – F - actin ( 1 (cid:2) M total actin ) . Upper band , coronin 1B ; lower band , actin . Numbers below bands indicate protein concentrations in (cid:2) M as determined by densitometry . ( B ) Representative Coomassie - Blue - stained gel showing F - actin binding of coronin 1B at indicated KCl concentrations ( 1 . 1 (cid:2) M total actin , 1 . 3 (cid:2) M coronin 1B ) . ( C , D ) Representative immunoblot showing F - actin bound coronin 1B in the pellets of high - speed co - sedimentation experiments ( top panel ) ; Coomassie - Blue - stained gel show the corresponding actin pellets ( bottom panel ) . Identical amounts of coronin 1B ( 0 . 1 (cid:2) M ) were used and concentrations of total ADP - and ATP - G - actin used in each lane are indicated above the blots . In this experiment , the ATP G - actin used was recharged from ADP – G - actin as described previously ( Pollard , 1986 ) . ( E ) Equilibrium binding of coronin 1B to ADP or ATP / ADP - P i – F - actin filaments . Bound coronin 1B was calculated from the depletion of coronin 1B from the supernatant fraction of experiments similar to those shown in C and D , and quantified by densitometry . Three different protein preparations were used to generate the data points , which are presented as means ± standard errors of the mean ( ±s . e . m . ) . ( F ) Representative Coomassie - Blue - stained gels comparing F - actin - binding capability of wild - type coronin 1B and R30D mutant . ( G ) Equilibrium binding of wild - type coronin 1B or R30D mutant to ATP / ADP - P i – F - actin ( 1 . 5 (cid:2) M F - actin in pellets ) . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 1784 obtained with recombinant coronin 1A ( supplementary material Fig . S7 ) , indicating this competitive binding is not an isoform - specific property . Thus , our results indicate that coronin 1B and cofilin do not synergize directly to promote actin depolymerization and that their binding to actin filaments is antagonistic . In an effort to reconcile our results with the published results for coronin 1A , we tested a number of coronin 1B mutants in the actin co - sedimentation assay described above . Interestingly , we found that the coronin 1B (cid:4) CC mutant that lacks the coil - coiled domain ( (cid:4) CC , 1 - 450 ) slightly enhanced the binding of cofilin to actin filaments ( Fig . 5F ) despite the fact that this mutant lacks high affinity F - actin binding ( supplementary material Fig . S9B ) . Coronin 1B can bundle F - actin in vitro Since ectopically expressed coronin 1B induces actin cables in S2 cells and yeast coronin is known to bundle actin filaments in vitro ( Goode et al . , 1999 ) , we tested whether coronin 1B can bundle F - actin in vitro using two assays . First , we used negative staining and electron microscopy on actin filaments incubated with various concentrations of coronin 1B . Whereas actin filaments alone occasionally have regions that lie in close apposition ( inset of Fig . 6A ) , 10 nM coronin 1B appeared to increase the bundling of actin filaments ( Fig . 6B ) . When coronin 1B ( 1 (cid:2) M ) was mixed with an equimolar concentration of F - actin , we observed large actin bundles ( Fig . 6C ) . By contrast , the R30D mutant that lacks F - actin binding does not induce any actin bundles under the same experimental conditions ( Fig . 6D ) . We confirmed this observation by low - speed actin co - sedimentation ( Fig . 6E ) . Since the coronin 1B (cid:4) CC mutant cannot form actin cables in S2 cells ( supplementary material Fig . S9A ) or actin bundles in vitro ( data to shown ) , both coiled - coil - mediated oligomerization and high - affinity F - actin binding are required for the actin - bundling activity of coronin 1B . High - affinity F - actin binding is required for stable leading edge localization of coronin 1B To study the importance of high - affinity F - actin binding for coronin 1B function in vivo , we used an established lentiviral knockdown / rescue system to generate cells that express only the R30D mutant , but not endogenous coronin 1B ( Cai et al . , 2007 ) . Briefly , we identified a short hairpin RNA ( shRNA ) that specifically depletes rat and mouse coronin 1B ( supplementary material Fig . S5A ) , and co - expressed it along with human coronin 1B tagged with GFP ( supplementary material Fig . S5B ) . Human coronin 1B is refractory to the shRNA because of multiple sequence mismatches . In cells infected with the lentivirus - expressing GFP - tagged coronin 1B , the endogenous protein was efficiently silenced and the GFP - tagged ‘rescue’ protein was expressed at physiological levels ( supplementary material Fig . S5C , D ) . To test whether high - affinity actin binding contributes to the localization of coronin 1B to the lamellipodia , we compared wild - type coronin 1B - GFP with the R30D mutant using the knockdown / rescue system in Rat2 fibroblasts . The localization pattern of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( visualized by p34Arc immunostaining ) , cortactin , F - actin ( visualized by phalloidin staining ) and VASP were not affected upon expression of either wild - type coronin 1B or the R30D mutant ( Fig . 7A , B ) . The leading edge localization of the R30D mutant was diminished relative to the wild - type protein ( Fig . 7B ) . To quantify the localization differences between these proteins , we performed lamellipodial colocalization analysis across multiple cells ( Fig . 7C ) . An index of leading edge enrichment relative to the cell body was calculated for cells expressing GFP alone , wild - type coronin 1B or the Journal of Cell Science 120 ( 10 ) Fig . 4 . The R30D mutation does not perturb other known coronin 1B molecular interactions . ( A ) HEK293 cells were co - transfected with Myc - tagged coronin 1B and various GFP - tagged coronin 1B mutants : wild type ( WT ) , R30D mutant , coil - coiled domain ( CC , 451 - 489 ) alone or a deletion mutant lacking the coil - coiled domain ( (cid:4) CC , 1 - 450 ) . We immunoprecipitated Myc - tagged coronin 1B with Myc antibodies and blotted with either anti - GFP or Myc antibodies . The results demonstrate that the coiled - coil domain of coronin 1B is both necessary and sufficient for oligomerization and that the R30D mutation does not affect oligomerization . ( B ) Rat2 fibroblasts were infected with the knockdown / rescue lentivirus expressing the coronin 1B shRNA and either wild - type coronin 1B or the R30D mutant . Cells were subjected to the in vivo phosphorylation and dephosphorylation assay described in Materials and Methods . ( C ) In vitro direct - binding assay using purified coronin 1B immobilized on Ni - NTA beads and purified bovine Arp2 / 3 complex in solution ( 5 nM ) . ( D ) Bound Arp2 / 3 complex on beads from experiments described in C was quantified by densitometry and normalized to the amount of coronin 1B . Results from three independent experiments are presented as the mean ± s . d . ( E ) Cells as described in B were lysed and GFP - tagged coronin 1B was immunoprecipitated using anti - GFP antibodies . To visualize the co - immunoprecipitated Arp2 / 3 complex , the R30D lane was intentionally overloaded . Arrowhead , GFP - tagged coronin 1B ; arrow , endogenous coronin 1B . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 1785 F - actin binding to coronin 1B R30D mutant . GFP - tagged wild - type coronin 1B has a similar distribution profile to the endogenous protein , whereas the R30D mutant has reduced leading edge enrichment . Similarly , the coronin 1B (cid:4) CC mutant ( which lacks high - affinity F - actin binding ) localizes poorly to the leading edge ( supplementary material Fig . S9C ) , despite the fact that this mutant is capable of interacting with the Arp2 / 3 complex in vivo ( supplementary material Fig . S9D ) . Together , these results indicate that , although other coronin 1B interactions may contribute to targeting , F - actin binding is required for normal leading edge localization of coronin 1B . To test the contribution of F - actin binding to the dynamics of coronin 1B protein , we used fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) analysis . In the case of wild - type protein , a spot at the leading edge ( Spot1 ) was compared with a spot in the cytoplasm ( Spot2 ) . The leading edge has a slower rate of fluorescence recovery and a larger immobile fraction than the cytoplasm , suggesting that coronin 1B stably interacts with a factor in the lamellipodium ( Fig . 7D - G and supplementary material Fig . S8 ) . By contrast , the recovery kinetics of the R30D mutant were identical between the leading edge and the cytoplasm ( Fig . 7F , G and supplementary material Fig . S8C ) , indicating that high - affinity F - actin binding is required for the stable leading edge localization of coronin 1B . F - actin binding mutants fail to rescue motility phenotypes induced by coronin 1B depletion To test the requirement of F - actin binding for the function of coronin 1B in vivo , we compared the motility of cells expressing either wild - type coronin 1B or the R30D mutant generated using our knockdown / rescue system . We analyzed the whole - cell motility of these cells by single - cell tracking . As observed previously , depletion of coronin 1B in fibroblasts leads to an ~ 33 % decrease in whole - cell speed relative to uninfected control cells , cells infected with a non - specific shRNA ( NS ) or cells rescued with shRNA - resistant human coronin - 1B - GFP fusion protein ( Fig . 8A ) ( Cai et al . , 2007 ) . The R30D mutant failed to rescue the defect in whole - cell motility observed in coronin - 1B - depleted cells ( Fig . 8A ) . Identical results were obtained with the coronin 1B (cid:4) CC mutant ( supplementary material Fig . S9E ) , indicating that F - actin binding is required for coronin 1B to exert an effect on whole - cell motility in vivo . We also employed kymography analysis to examine the Fig . 5 . Coronin 1B protects filaments from cofilin - induced depolymerization and binds antagonistically with cofilin to F - actin . ( A ) Time course of actin polymer concentration assembled from rabbit smooth muscle ATP G - actin , 30 % pyrene labelled , after dilution from 5 (cid:2) M to 0 . 1 (cid:2) M , either alone , with phalloidin or in the presence of coronin 1B and cofilin . ( B ) Same experimental conditions as in A with phalloidin , coronin 1B and cofilin , or in the presence cofilin alone . ( C ) Representative Coomassie - Blue - stained gels showing the F - actin binding ability of coronin 1B in the presence of 2 (cid:2) M cofilin , with or without pre - incubating actin filaments with 5 (cid:2) M phalloidin . ( D ) Equilibrium binding of cofilin to actin filaments ( assembled from 2 (cid:2) M ATP G - actin and stored at 4°C overnight ) in the presence of 1 (cid:2) M coronin 1B . ( E ) Equilibrium binding of coronin 1B to 2 (cid:2) M actin filaments in the presence of 1 (cid:2) M cofilin . ( F ) Representative Coomassie - Blue - stained gel showing the high - speed actin co - sedimentation assay using increasing concentrations of the coronin 1B (cid:4) CC mutant with 2 (cid:2) M actin and 1 (cid:2) M cofilin . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 1786 lamellipodial protrusion dynamics of cells expressing wild - type or R30D coronin 1B . Depletion of coronin 1B leads to increased protrusion rate , reduced protrusion persistence and decreased protrusion distance ( Fig . 8B - D ) . Whereas the wild - type coronin 1B can rescue these defects the R30D mutant cannot , indicating that high - affinity F - actin - binding activity is required for coronin 1B to regulate lamellipodial dynamics at the leading edge . Together , these results demonstrate that the interaction of coronin 1B with F - actin is important for its localization and is essential for in vivo function . Discussion Our results support a number of conclusions about the interaction of coronin 1B and F - actin . First , coronin 1B interacts with F - actin via a charged patch on the top surface of its (cid:3) - propeller domain that contains the highly conserved R30 residue . Second , coronin 1B binds selectively and with high affinity to actin filaments composed of ATP / ADP - P i subunits . Consistent with this nucleotide preference , coronin 1B and cofilin bind antagonistically to actin filaments . Third , the interaction of coronin 1B with F - actin is responsible for a significant fraction of the lamellipodial enrichment observed with this protein . Fourth , the interaction of coronin 1B with F - actin is absolutely required for its physiological function at the leading edge of motile cells . Interaction of coronin 1B with F - actin in vitro Coronins have been known as F - actin binding proteins since their discovery ( de Hostos et al . , 1991 ) and the work presented here addresses a number of significant gaps in our understanding of the interaction between coronins and F - actin . Our results indicate that coronin 1B binds preferentially to actin filaments composed of ATP / ADP - P i subunits with high affinity ( 170 nM ) . This preference for ATP / ADP - P i actin filaments is similar to that of cortactin , another actin - binding protein with an almost identical localization pattern in lamellipodia ( Bryce et al . , 2005 ) . The actin filaments in lamellipodia are highly dynamic and are thought to be composed mainly of ATP / ADP - P i subunits . Thus , the preference of coronin 1B to bind ATP / ADP - P i – F - actin filaments may help to selectively enrich this protein in the lamellipodia over other actin - filament - containing structures such as stress fibers . Not only does coronin 1B bind to actin filaments , it also bundles these filaments into parallel arrays – as has been observed for other coronins ( Goode et al . , 1999 ) . Although this effect is seen in vitro and with high - level ectopic expression in Drosophila S2 cells , it is unclear whether coronin 1B plays a significant role in bundling actin filaments in mammalian cells . In vitro , strong bundling is only observed when the ratio between coronin 1B and F - actin approaches 1 : 1 . In vivo , the intercellular concentration of coronin 1B is 0 . 73 (cid:2) M ( Cai et al . , 2007 ) while the concentration of polymerized actin is estimated to be near 100 (cid:2) M ( Pollard et al . , 2000 ) , suggesting that stoichiometry does not favor coronin 1B - driven bundling in the cytoplasm . Furthermore , unlike proteins such as fascin , coronin 1B is not strongly enriched in bundled F - actin structures , even within the lamellipodium ( data not shown ) . The coiled - coil domain of coronin 1B is required for both bundling and high - affinity F - actin binding in vitro . These results suggest that oligomerization affects bundling as previously shown ( Goode et al . , 1999 ) , but also increases the apparent affinity of coronin 1B’s interaction with filaments . This increased apparent affinity is probably due to effects on avidity , rather than a second F - actin - binding site because the coiled - coil domain displays no detectable F - actin - binding activity on its own ( data not shown ) . Journal of Cell Science 120 ( 10 ) Fig . 6 . Coronin 1B can bundle actin filaments in vitro . ( A ) Electron micrograph of actin filaments , inset showing 4 (cid:5) magnification . Actin filaments ( 1 (cid:2) M ) were negatively stained and examined by transmission electron microscopy . Arrowheads indicate areas where filaments lie with close apposition ; bar , 100 nm . ( B ) Electron micrograph of actin filaments ( 1 (cid:2) M ) with coronin 1B ( 10 nM ) ; bar , 100 nm . ( C , D ) Electron micrograph of actin filaments ( 1 (cid:2) M ) with either wild - type coronin 1B or the R30D mutant ( 1 (cid:2) M ) ; bar , 1 (cid:2) m . ( E ) Representative Coomassie - Blue - stained gel showing low - speed co - sedimentation of coronin 1B with F - actin . Samples were prepared as described in C and D , then subjected to centrifugation for 5 minutes at 13 , 000 g . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 1787 F - actin binding to coronin 1B Several lines of experimental evidence suggest that coronins and ADF / cofilin proteins cooperate to enhance actin depolymerization ( Brieher et al . , 2006 ; Cai et al . , 2007 ; Goode et al . , 1999 ) , but the precise mechanism of this effect is unclear . Unlike a previous study , we see no evidence for direct enhancement of cofilin binding to F - actin or cofilin - induced depolymerization of filaments by coronins ( Brieher et al . , 2006 ) . In fact , full - length coronin 1A and 1B bind antagonistically with cofilin to F - actin in co - sedimentation assays . At the moment , the reasons for the discrepancies between these results are unclear . Interestingly , we do observe a slight enhancement of cofilin binding to F - actin in the presence of the coronin 1B (cid:4) CC mutant . Although this result is intriguing , we know of no evidence for regulated oligomerization of coronins or the existence of truncated ( monomeric ) forms of this protein . Therefore , this result is unlikely to represent a physiologically relevant mechanism for coronin function . The antagonism between full - length coronin and cofilin for F - actin binding is unlikely to arise from competition for the same binding site on actin filaments , but rather reflects the binding preferences of coronin 1B for ATP / ADP - P i – F - actin and cofilin for ADP - F - actin ( Blanchoin and Pollard , 1999 ) . Since cofilin enhances the release of inorganic phosphate from actin , it will convert ADP - P i – F - actin to ADP - F - actin and indirectly inhibit coronin 1B binding ( Blanchoin et al . , 2000 ) . It will be interesting to test whether coronin 1B inhibits phosphate release from filaments and preserves ADP - P i – F - actin . Recent data from our lab indicate that coronin 1B targets the cofilin - activating phosphatase slingshot - 1L to the leading edge of migrating fibroblasts , suggesting a more indirect mechanism by which coronin and cofilin cooperate in vivo ( Cai et al . , 2007 ) . The precise location of the F - actin binding site of coronin is controversial and little consensus exists among the previous studies that addressed this point ( Uetrecht and Bear , 2006 ) . In this study , we have identified a single , highly conserved arginine residue ( R30 ) on the (cid:3) - propeller of coronin 1B that is crucial for F - actin binding both in vivo and in vitro . Mutation of this residue does not disrupt coronin 1B structure or interactions with other Fig . 7 . F - actin binding is required for efficient and stable leading edge localization of coronin 1B . ( A ) Rat2 fibroblasts expressing GFP - tagged R30D mutant and lacking endogenous coronin 1B were EGF - stimulated ( 2 minutes ) and stained for the Arp2 / 3 complex ( p34Arc subunit ) , cortactin , F - actin ( phalloidin ) and VASP . ( B ) Rat2 fibroblasts lacking endogenous coronin 1B and expressing GFP - tagged wild - type protein ( WT ) or R30D mutant protein were stained for the Arp2 / 3 complex ( p34Arc subunit ) and cortactin following recovery from ATP depletion . ( C ) The lamellipodial colocalization analysis was performed on the protruding areas of the Rat2 fibroblasts prepared as in B . Fluorescence intensity values were normalized , combined from multiple cells . N , number of cells analyzed per treatment ; data are given as the mean ± s . e . m . ( Top ) Endogenous coronin 1B , soluble GFP and Cortactin . ( Middle and bottom ) GFP - tagged coronin 1B ( WT or R30D ) , p34Arc ( Arp2 / 3 ) and cortactin . The indexes of relative leading edge enrichment of GFP signals from various cells were calculated and presented as the percentile mean ± s . d . in the center of the graphs . ( D ) Representative Rat2 fibroblast , whose endogenous coronin 1B was replaced with GFP - tagged wild - type protein , was subjected to fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) analysis . A differential interference contrast ( DIC ) image is presented on the left and individual frames from time - lapse imaging of GFP are presented on the right . Bleached regions are circled ; 1 , lamellipodia ; 2 , cytoplasm ) . ( E , F ) Representative fluorescent intensity profiles from the two - spot FRAP analysis of Rat2 fibroblasts whose endogenous coronin 1B was replaced with GFP - tagged wild - type protein or GFP - tagged R30D mutant . ( G ) Statistical analysis of the FRAP immobile fraction across multiple cells . Data are presented as the mean , error bars indicate 95 % confidence intervals . Dunnett multiple comparison test was performed as the post - test for one - way ANOVA using the first column as control . N , number of cells analyzed per treatment ; * * P < 0 . 01 , * * * P < 0 . 001 . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 1788 molecular partners , indicating that this mutation selectively affects F - actin binding . The fact that the R30 residue is on the top surface of the (cid:3) - propeller is not surprising because this is a common location for binding interfaces on proteins of this type and previous structural studies of coronin 1A postulated a potential binding surface containing this residue ( Appleton et al . , 2006 ) . Future studies will test whether F - actin interacts with other residues in this patch . The role of interactions between coronin 1B and F - actin in vivo One logical assumption about the coronin family of proteins is that they must interact with F - actin in order to localize properly and / or exert their biological effects . With the R30D mutant of coronin 1B in hand , we were able to formally test this notion . The R30D mutant shows reduced localization to the leading edge of fibroblasts relative to the wild - type protein , but does show some enrichment relative to soluble GFP . This suggests that other coronin 1B interactions such as Arp2 / 3 binding may drive some localization to the lamellipodium . Alternately , the residual F - actin - binding activity of the R30D mutant may be sufficient to provide some leading edge targeting . Regardless of the precise mechanism of the weak R30D localization , our FRAP analysis indicates that high - affinity F - actin binding is required for stable localization of coronin 1B to the leading edge . Coronin 1B coordinates Arp2 / 3 complex and cofilin activities ( via slingshot - 1L ) in the lamellipodium of migrating fibroblasts ( Cai et al . , 2007 ) . Upon coronin 1B depletion , whole - cell motility is reduced and lamellipodial dynamics are altered . These phenotypes arise from defects in the dynamics and organization of actin filaments at the leading edge . The results presented here indicate that F - actin binding is absolutely required for coronin 1B to exert its effects on motility . These data have important implications for the mechanism of coronin 1B function . For example , coronin function must include an obligate F - actin - binding step . The R30D mutant described in this work will be an invaluable tool for dissecting the mechanism of coronin function in future studies . Materials and Methods Materials Commercial antibodies were obtained from Cell Signaling Technologies ( pSer PKC ) , Upstate Biotechnology ( p34Arc , 4F11 / Cortactin ) , Roche ( 7 . 1 + 13 . 1 / GFP ) , Sigma ( 9E10 / myc ) , Santa Cruz ( yN16 / Arp2 ) and Jackson ImmunoResearch ( Rhodamine Red - X , Cy5 , and horseradish - peroxidase - conjugated secondary antibodies ) . Alexa Fluor dyes conjugated to phalloidin were from Molecular Probes . Inhibitors Ro32 - 0432 and okadaic acid were from Calbiochem . Protease and phosphatase inhibitors ( phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride , 1 , 10 - phenanthroline , aprotinin , leupeptin , sodium fluoride and sodium orthovanadate ) were from Sigma . All other materials were from Fisher Scientific unless otherwise indicated . Rabbit muscle G - actin and bovine Arp2 / 3 complex were generous gifts from Dorothy Schafer ( University of Virgina , Charlottesville , VA ) . Cell culture and viral transduction Mammalian cell culture , immunoprecipitation and immunoblotting were performed as previously described ( Bear et al . , 2000 ; Cai et al . , 2005 ) . Transient transfections were performed using FuGENE 6 ( Roche ) for HEK293 cells according to the manufacturer’s protocol . Lentivirus production and infection were performed as described previously ( Rubinson et al . , 2003 ) . Molecular cloning PCR and subcloning were performed using standard methods . Detailed methods and primer sequences are available upon request . Plasmids expressing wild - type coronin 1B were constructed as previously described ( Cai et al . , 2005 ) . Coronin - 1B – coronin - 2A chimeras and mutations on coronin 1B were generated by overlapping PCR and verified by sequencing . Drosophila S2 cell expression constructs were generated by sub - cloning coronin 1B - EGFP fragments into the pAc5 . 1 / V5 - HisA vector ( Invitrogen ) . For mammalian cell protein expression , the coronin 1B coding sequence was inserted into the multi - cloning sites of the pTT5SH8Q2 vector that contains the StrepTagII and 8xHis affinity tags ( Durocher et al . , 2002 ; Shi et al . , 2005 ) . The lentiviral knockdown constructs used have been described previously ( Cai et al . , 2007 ) . DrosophilaS2 cell actin - cable - formation assay Drosophila S2 cells were cultured as previously described with slight modifications ( Rogers et al . , 2003 ) . Briefly , S2 cells were maintained in Schneider’s Drosophila medium ( Gibco ) supplemented with 10 % heat - inactivated FBS ( HyClone ) , 100 units / ml penicillin , 100 (cid:2) g / ml streptomycin and 292 (cid:2) g / ml glutamine ( Gibco ) . S2 cells were transfected using CellFectin reagent ( Invitrogen ) according to the manufacturer’s protocol . For high - resolution imaging , S2 cells were plated on concanavalin A ( ConA ) - coated coverslips and stained according to standard protocols . Silencing of endogenous Drosophila p20Arc was performed as previously described ( Rogers et al . , 2003 ) . Briefly , depletion by RNA interference ( RNAi ) was performed on S2 cells for 7 days according to methods previously published ( Clemens et al . , 2000 ) , using PCR products flanked at their 5 (cid:6) and 3 (cid:6) ends by T7 sequences ( p20Arc primers : 5 (cid:6) - CAGACAACAACCCGACACC - 3 (cid:6) and 5 (cid:6) - CAGT - TTCATTTCGCTGATCTCC - 3 (cid:6) ) . On day 5 , p20Arc - depleted cells were transfected with the coronin 1B expression construct . Production of recombinant coronin 1B protein Recombinant coronin 1B protein was expressed and purified from a mammalian expression system as described previously ( Cai et al . , 2007 ) . Journal of Cell Science 120 ( 10 ) Fig . 8 . The R30D mutant cannot rescue depletion phenotypes of coronin 1B . ( A ) Rat2 fibroblasts were infected with lentivirus expressing coronin 1B shRNA ( KD - 1B ) without or with GFP - tagged wild - type or GFP - tagged R30D coronin 1B or with control shRNA ( NS ) . Cells were subjected to single - cell tracking . Data are presented as mean cell speed , error bars indicate 95 % confidence intervals . ( N , number of cells tracked per treatment ; * * P < 0 . 01 ) . ( B - D ) Cells described in A were subjected to kymography analysis . Protrusion parameters were determined from at least six randomly selected cells ; n , number of protrusion events analyzed per treatment . Data are presented as the mean , error bars indicate 95 % confidence intervals . Dunnett multiple comparison test was performed as a post - test for one - way ANOVA using the first column as control ; * P < 0 . 05 , * * P < 0 . 01 . J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 1789 F - actin binding to coronin 1B Actin co - sedimentation High - speed actin co - sedimentation was performed , with modifications , as previously described ( Bryce et al . , 2005 ) . Briefly , F - actin was prepared from actin monomers by polymerization in the presence of 50 mM KCl , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 5 mM Tris - Cl pH 8 . 0 and 1 mM ATP for 30 minutes at room temperature . Coronin 1B was incubated with F - actin at room temperature for 1 hour ( with 4 % glycerol ) , and sedimented using an Airfuge ( Beckman ) at 23 psi ( ~ 100 , 000 g ) for 30 minutes . Pellet and supernatant samples were prepared for SDS - PAGE using standard procedures . To calculate the binding affinity ( K d ) of coronin 1B to F - actin , we used an established supernatant - depletion method ( Bryce et al . , 2005 ) . Coronin 1B bound to F - actin ( [ 1B p ] ) was determined indirectly by immunoblotting the supernatant and quantified by densitometry : [ 1B t ] = 0 . 1 (cid:2) M . All blots were within the linear range of detection ( data not shown ) . F - actin concentrations [ Fa ] were calculated from total G - actin concentration and the known critical concentrations for ATP - G - actin ( 0 . 1 (cid:2) M ) and ADP - G - actin ( 5 (cid:2) M ) . ADP - G - actin was prepared as previously described and used within 4 hours ( Pollard , 1986 ) . In order to appropriately compare ADP - with ATP - F - actin , the ATP - G - actin used for affinity measurements ( Fig . 3C , D ) was regenerated from ADP - G - actin by diluting the stock of ADP - G - actin from 20 (cid:2) M to 5 (cid:2) M with 0 . 1 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 1 mM EGTA pH 8 . 0 and 1 mM ATP . To calculate the F - actin - binding affinity of coronin 1B , the following equation was used to fit the experimental data : Statistical analysis and graphing were performed with Prism ( GraphPad ) . Low - speed actin co - sedimentation was performed as previously described ( Goode et al . , 1999 ) . Briefly , 1 (cid:2) M coronin 1B was mixed with 1 (cid:2) M ATP F - actin and incubated for 2 hours at room temperature . The reactions were subjected to centrifugation at low speed ( 13 , 000 g ) for 5 minutes , and pellet and supernatant samples were analyzed as decribed above . Pyrene - actin depolymerization assay Pyrene - actin depolymerization assay was performed as previously described ( Moseley et al . , 2006 ) . Briefly , 5 (cid:2) l of 5 (cid:2) M ATP - G - actin ( 30 % pyrene labeled ) was polymerized at room temperature for 1 hour in F - buffer ( 10 mM Tris - HCl pH 7 . 5 , 0 . 2 mM DTT , 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 , 50 mM KCl , 2 mM MgCl 2 , and 0 . 7 mM ATP ) , with or without 5 (cid:2) M phalloidin ( final concentration ) . To initiate depolymerization , 245 (cid:2) l MKEI - 50 buffer ( 20 mM imidazole pH 7 . 0 , 50 mM KCl , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM EGTA , 0 . 5 mM DTT ) was added to the 5 (cid:2) l pre - assembled actin filaments ( final concentration 0 . 1 (cid:2) M actin in reaction ) with or without coronin 1B and / or cofilin . His - tagged cofilin was purified by standard methods . Care was taken to avoid filament shearing . Pyrene fluorescence was monitored at 25°C ( Fig . 5A , 1 - second interval ; Fig . 5B , 5 - second interval ; excitation 365 nm , emission 386 nm ) . Fluorescence was converted to the molar concentration of F - actin from the initial fluorescence of phalloidin - stabilized actin ( assuming to be all F - actin ) and the final fluorescence of 2 (cid:2) M cofilin treated sample ( assuming to be all G - actin ) . Partial proteolysis and circular dichroism analysis For partial proteolysis reactions , 6 (cid:2) g of wild - type coronin or R30D mutant protein was mixed with 20 ng protease K and incubated at 55°C . Reactions were stopped at fixed time points by mixing with 2 (cid:5) SDS sample buffer and by immediate boiling of the sample . Samples were separated by PAGE and visualized by silver staining . To perform circular - dichroism analysis , protein samples were dialyzed in 5 mM pH 7 . 4 Na 2 HPO 4 / NaH 2 PO 4 buffer overnight at 4°C . Circular - dichroism spectra were obtained using a Pistar - 180 Circular Dichroism / Fluorescence spectrometer ( Applied Photophysics ) , scanning from 260 - 185 nm at 0 . 2 - nm steps . In vivo coronin 1B dephosphorylation assay Coronin 1B phosphorylation / dephosphorylation assays were performed as described ( Cai et al . , 2007 ) . Light microscopy and image analysis Immunofluorescent staining and imaging were performed as previously described ( Cai et al . , 2005 ) . Except where indicated , cells were imaged using spinning disk confocal microscopy . To stimulate uniform lamellipodial protrusion , Rat2 cells were treated with sodium azide ( PBS supplemented with 0 . 1 g / l CaCl 2 , 0 . 1 g / l MgCl 2 , and 20 mM NaN 3 ) for 30 minutes , and recovered with fresh culture media for 5 minutes before fixation . Lamellipodial colocalization analysis was performed as described previously ( Cai et al . , 2007 ) . Pixel intensity information from – 3 (cid:2) m to 0 (cid:2) m was used to generate an index of relative leading edge enrichment . This index was calculated using the equation [ ( L – C ) ÷L ] where L is the lamellipodial peak intensity , and C is cell body minimum intensity and presented as percentile score . Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) movies were captured using a FluoView FV1000 scanning confocal microscope ( Olympus ) equipped with a 405 nm laser and a 60 (cid:5) objective ( N . A . 1 . 4 ) . Photobleaching was performed using K d + [ 1B t ] + [ Fa ] – (cid:2) (cid:2) ( K d + [ 1B t ] + [ Fa ] ) 2 – 4 [ 1B t ] [ Fa ] [ 1B p ] = . 2 ( 1 ) tornado mode for 100 milliseconds on a circlular area ( 28 - pixel diameter ) . Fluorescence intensities from the bleached area were measured using ImageJ , and analyzed and graphed in Prism . The fluorescence intensities before irradiation and 20 seconds after photobleaching were used to calculate the FRAP immobile fractions . Transmission electron microscopy An equal volume of either 20 nM or 2 (cid:2) M coronin 1B was mixed with F - actin ( 2 (cid:2) M Mg - ATP G - actin , pre - assembled for 30 minutes ) and incubated for 1 hour at room temperature . Aliquots of these samples were adsorbed directly onto glow - charged thin carbon foils on 400 - mesh copper grids without fixation and stained with 2 % ( w / v ) uranyl acetate . The grids were examined in a Philips CM12 microscope at 80 kV . The images were taken at magnification 10 , 000 (cid:5) or 45 , 000 (cid:5) on Kodak SO - 163 film , scanned using an Imacon FlexTight 848 scanner ( Hasselblad AB ) at resolution 2500 dpi and adjusted for publication using Photoshop ( Adobe ) . Single - cell tracking and kymography analysis Single - cell tracking and kymography assays and analysis were performed as described previously ( Cai et al . , 2007 ) . We gratefully acknowledge Eric Vitriol for help with FRAP microscopy ; Andrea Uetrecht and Steve Rogers for RNAi in Drosophila S2 cells ; Ken Jacobson for helpful discussions about FRAP analysis ; Hao Wu , Steve Rogers , David Roadcap for critical reading of the manuscript ; Dorothy Schafer for reagents and assistance with the pyrene actin depolymerization assay ; Yves Durocher and Keith Burridge for reagents . Circular dichroism measurement was performed at Macromolecular Interaction Facility in UNC , with the help from Ashutosh Tripathy . Electron microscopy work was supported by NIH grant CA - 16086 to Jack D . Griffith ( UNC ) . This work was supported by funds from Carolina Center for Cancer Nanotechnology Excellence ( NCI ; 1U54CA119343 ) and the Sontag Foundation . References Appleton , B . A . , Wu , P . and Wiesmann , C . ( 2006 ) . The crystal structure of murine coronin - 1 : a regulator of actin cytoskeletal dynamics in lymphocytes . Structure 14 , 87 - 96 . Bamburg , J . R . ( 1999 ) . Proteins of the ADF / cofilin family : essential regulators of actin dynamics . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 15 , 185 - 230 . Bear , J . E . , Loureiro , J . J . , Libova , I . , Fassler , R . , Wehland , J . and Gertler , F . B . ( 2000 ) . Negative regulation of fibroblast motility by Ena / VASP proteins . Cell 101 , 717 - 728 . Bear , J . E . , Krause , M . and Gertler , F . B . ( 2001 ) . Regulating cellular actin assembly . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 13 , 158 - 166 . Blanchoin , L . and Pollard , T . D . ( 1999 ) . Mechanism of interaction of Acanthamoeba actophorin ( ADF / cofilin ) with actin filaments . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 15538 - 15546 . Blanchoin , L . , Pollard , T . D . and Mullins , R . D . ( 2000 ) . Interactions of ADF / cofilin , Arp2 / 3 complex , capping protein and profilin in remodeling of branched actin filament networks . Curr . Biol . 10 , 1273 - 1282 . Brieher , W . M . , Kueh , H . Y . , Ballif , B . A . and Mitchison , T . J . ( 2006 ) . Rapid actin monomer - insensitive depolymerization of Listeria actin comet tails by cofilin , coronin , and Aip1 . J . Cell Biol . 175 , 315 - 324 . Bryce , N . S . , Clark , E . S . , Leysath , J . L . , Currie , J . D . , Webb , D . J . and Weaver , A . M . ( 2005 ) . Cortactin promotes cell motility by enhancing lamellipodial persistence . Curr . Biol . 15 , 1276 - 1285 . Cai , L . , Holoweckyj , N . , Schaller , M . D . and Bear , J . E . ( 2005 ) . Phosphorylation of coronin 1B by protein kinase C regulates interaction with Arp2 / 3 and cell motility . J Biol . Chem . 280 , 31913 - 31923 . Cai , L . , Marshall , T . W . , Uetrecht , A . C . , Schafer , D . A . and Bear , J . E . ( 2007 ) . Coronin 1B coordinates Arp2 / 3 complex and cofilin activities at the leading edge . Cell 128 , 915 - 929 . Clemens , J . C . , Worby , C . A . , Simonson - Leff , N . , Muda , M . , Maehama , T . , Hemmings , B . A . and Dixon , J . E . ( 2000 ) . Use of double - stranded RNA interference in Drosophila cell lines to dissect signal transduction pathways . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 97 , 6499 - 6503 . de Hostos , E . L . , Bradtke , B . , Lottspeich , F . , Guggenheim , R . and Gerisch , G . ( 1991 ) . Coronin , an actin binding protein of Dictyostelium discoideum localized to cell surface projections , has sequence similarities to G protein beta subunits . EMBO J . 10 , 4097 - 4104 . de Hostos , E . L . , Rehfuess , C . , Bradtke , B . , Waddell , D . R . , Albrecht , R . , Murphy , J . and Gerisch , G . ( 1993 ) . Dictyostelium mutants lacking the cytoskeletal protein coronin are defective in cytokinesis and cell motility . J . Cell Biol . 120 , 163 - 173 . Di Giovanni , S . , De Biase , A . , Yakovlev , A . , Finn , T . , Beers , J . , Hoffman , E . P . and Faden , A . I . ( 2005 ) . In vivo and in vitro characterization of novel neuronal plasticity factors identified following spinal cord injury . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 2084 - 2091 . Durocher , Y . , Perret , S . and Kamen , A . ( 2002 ) . High - level and high - throughput J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e 1790 recombinant protein production by transient transfection of suspension - growing human 293 - EBNA1 cells . Nucleic Acids Res . 30 , E9 . Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . and Drubin , D . G . ( 2003 ) . Actin assembly and endocytosis : from yeast to mammals . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 , 287 - 332 . Foger , N . , Rangell , L . , Danilenko , D . M . and Chan , A . C . ( 2006 ) . Requirement for coronin 1 in T lymphocyte trafficking and cellular homeostasis . Science 313 , 839 - 842 . Gatfield , J . , Albrecht , I . , Zanolari , B . , Steinmetz , M . O . and Pieters , J . ( 2005 ) . Association of the Leukocyte Plasma Membrane with the Actin Cytoskeleton through Coiled Coil - mediated Trimeric Coronin 1 Molecules . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 2786 - 2798 . Goode , B . L . , Wong , J . J . , Butty , A . C . , Peter , M . , McCormack , A . L . , Yates , J . R . , Drubin , D . G . and Barnes , G . ( 1999 ) . Coronin promotes the rapid assembly and cross - linking of actin filaments and may link the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons in yeast . J . Cell Biol . 144 , 83 - 98 . Humphries , C . L . , Balcer , H . I . , D’Agostino , J . L . , Winsor , B . , Drubin , D . G . , Barnes , G . , Andrews , B . J . and Goode , B . L . ( 2002 ) . Direct regulation of Arp2 / 3 complex activity and function by the actin binding protein coronin . J . Cell Biol . 159 , 993 - 1004 . Liu , C . Z . , Chen , Y . and Sui , S . F . ( 2006 ) . The identification of a new actin - binding region in p57 . Cell Res . 16 , 106 - 112 . Maniak , M . , Rauchenberger , R . , Albrecht , R . , Murphy , J . and Gerisch , G . ( 1995 ) . Coronin involved in phagocytosis : dynamics of particle - induced relocalization visualized by a green fluorescent protein Tag . Cell 83 , 915 - 924 . Mishima , M . and Nishida , E . ( 1999 ) . Coronin localizes to leading edges and is involved in cell spreading and lamellipodium extension in vertebrate cells . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 2833 - 2842 . Moseley , J . B . , Okada , K . , Balcer , H . I . , Kovar , D . R . , Pollard , T . D . and Goode , B . L . ( 2006 ) . Twinfilin is an actin - filament - severing protein and promotes rapid turnover of actin structures in vivo . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 1547 - 1557 . Nishida , E . , Iida , K . , Yonezawa , N . , Koyasu , S . , Yahara , I . and Sakai , H . ( 1987 ) . Cofilin is a component of intranuclear and cytoplasmic actin rods induced in cultured cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci USA 84 , 5262 - 5266 . Oku , T . , Itoh , S . , Okano , M . , Suzuki , A . , Suzuki , K . , Nakajin , S . , Tsuji , T . , Nauseef , W . M . and Toyoshima , S . ( 2003 ) . Two Regions Responsible for the Actin Binding of p57 , a Mammalian Coronin Family Actin - Binding Protein . Biol . Pharm . Bull . 26 , 409 - 416 . Pollard , T . D . ( 1986 ) . Rate constants for the reactions of ATP - and ADP - actin with the ends of actin filaments . J . Cell Biol . 103 , 2747 - 2754 . Pollard , T . D . and Borisy , G . G . ( 2003 ) . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin filaments . Cell 112 , 453 - 465 . Pollard , T . D . , Blanchoin , L . and Mullins , R . D . ( 2000 ) . Molecular mechanisms controlling actin filament dynamics in nonmuscle cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 29 , 545 - 576 . Rogers , S . L . , Wiedemann , U . , Stuurman , N . and Vale , R . D . ( 2003 ) . Molecular requirements for actin - based lamella formation in Drosophila S2 cells . J . Cell Biol . 162 , 1079 - 1088 . Rubinson , D . A . , Dillon , C . P . , Kwiatkowski , A . V . , Sievers , C . , Yang , L . , Kopinja , J . , Rooney , D . L . , Ihrig , M . M . , McManus , M . T . , Gertler , F . B . et al . ( 2003 ) . A lentivirus - based system to functionally silence genes in primary mammalian cells , stem cells and transgenic mice by RNA interference . Nat . Genet . 33 , 401 - 406 . Shi , C . , Shin , Y . O . , Hanson , J . , Cass , B . , Loewen , M . C . and Durocher , Y . ( 2005 ) . Purification and characterization of a recombinant G - protein - coupled receptor , Saccharomyces cerevisiae Ste2p , transiently expressed in HEK293 EBNA1 cells . Biochemistry 44 , 15705 - 15714 . Spoerl , Z . , Stumpf , M . , Noegel , A . A . and Hasse , A . ( 2002 ) . Oligomerization , F - actin interaction , and membrane association of the ubiquitous mammalian coronin 3 are mediated by its carboxyl terminus . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 48858 - 48867 . Uetrecht , A . C . and Bear , J . E . ( 2006 ) . Coronins : the return of the crown . Trends Cell . Biol . 16 , 421 - 426 . Journal of Cell Science 120 ( 10 ) J ou r na l o f C e ll S c i en c e