e 3 service : An ontological approach for deriving multi - supplier IT - service bundles from consumer needs Sybren de Kinderen VU University Amsterdam De Boelelaan 1081 1081 HV , Amsterdam , The Netherlands sdkinde @ few . vu . nl Jaap Gordijn VU University Amsterdam De Boelelaan 1081 1081 HV Amsterdam , The Netherlands gordijn @ cs . vu . nl Abstract IT - services should not only be considered from a tech - nical perspective , but should also be seen as commercial services that satisfy a consumer need . Examples include well - known services such as Internet access or content pro - visioning services . Typically , to satisfy a consumer need , a bundle of elementary services is required . In such a bun - dle , each elementary service can be offered by a different supplier . A key problem is then how to actually ﬁnd service - bundles that satify consumer needs as close as possible . Be - cause IT - service bundles can be automatically provisioned online immediately after ordering , ﬁnding a service bundle satisfying a need should preferably also happen automati - cally . To this end , we propose the e 3 service ontology , which offers constructs from service marketing , but in a computa - tional way , such that automated reasoning support can be developed to match consumer needs with IT - services . This paper presents the e 3 service ontology and explains it by a case from the telecom industry . 1 Introduction In recent years , the notion of customizable bundles of IT - services to satisfy complex needs from speciﬁc consumers has gained interest . Consider a daily - life example of obtain - ing internet services from Internet Service Providers ( ISPs ) . Often , the proposition of an ISP is actually a bundle consist - ing of more elementary services such as IP - based access , an email box , space to host a website , telephony , and access to newsgroups . However , the consumer may prefer a differ - ent , perhaps a smaller , bundle ; for instance only IP - based access plus email plus IP - telephony . Such a bundle then more closely matches the consumer need compared to the original - ﬁts for all - full - service bundle . Additionally , IT - services are increasingly offered by a networked value constellation , rather than just a single en - terprise [ 22 ] . By doing so , suppliers can utilize their core competencies , while still satisfying a consumer need . In the ISP - example , the offered bundle can be a multi - supplier bundle : IP - access is then provided by a telecom operator , an email box is offered by a commercial enterprise utilizing economies of scale , as can hold for website hosting , which may be offered by yet another enterprise . We perceive automatically composing and provisioning such a needs - driven , multi - supplier IT - service bundle as a key problem . In a future scenario we foresee , a consumer would ideally state to the web his IT - needs , and the web ( or some intermediate party ) responds with a list of candidate multi - supplier IT - service bundles . After selection of a spe - ciﬁc bundle by the consumer , the IT - services in the bundle should be provisioned automatically . Guidelines on creating customized service bundles have already been studied in business literature , most notably by [ 14 ] , [ 19 ] , [ 20 ] . However , these guidelines are fairly generic ( the focus is on services in general and not speciﬁcally on IT - services ) . More importantly , they lack conceptualiza - tion and formalization so it is difﬁcult to systematically and ( semi - ) automatically reason about service bundles . Such reasoning is important , because IT - services , as illustrated by the ISP example , are bought and provisioned online , en - abled by information technology . To adequately facilitate this buying and provisioning process , the elicitation of IT - needs , as well as the selection of commercial IT - services that can be provisioned to satisfy such needs , should be sup - ported by information technology as much as possible . The contribution of this paper to such a reasoning pro - cess is an ontology about consumer needs , called e 3 service . The ontology relates a need to available IT - services , which are in a service catalog . Moreover , we propose a gradual process from need elicitation and statement ( essentially the ‘problem statement’ ) to a bundle of IT - services ( the ‘solu - tion’ ) , recognizing that consumers often have already parts Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008 1530 - 1605 / 08 $ 25 . 00 © 2008 IEEE 1 of a service bundle in mind , if they articulate their needs . In other words : need ( and problem ) statement does usually not happen context - free , but already includes knowledge about the kind of available services ( solutions ) in the market . This phenonema is also known in design and problem solving theory ( see e . g . [ 11 ] ) . It is important to know that we understand IT - services really as commercial services : economic activities , deeds and performances of a mostly intangible nature [ 20 ] , with a focus on those services that can be ordered and provisioned ( nearly ) online . This is in contrast with web services and related standards such as WSDL [ 1 ] , BPSS [ 2 ] , BPEL4WS [ 4 ] , WSCI [ 5 ] , and WS - Coordination [ 9 ] , to name only a few : these services are mainly intended to arrive at a cross - organizational computing platform to facilitate interoper - ability on a more technical level . This paper is structured as follows . In section 2 , we present a comprehensive overview of the bundling reason - ing process . As this paper focuses only on a part of the reasoning process , namely consumer - oriented reasoning , we present in section 3 an ontology to represent consumer needs , wants , demand and beneﬁts . In section 4 we apply this ontology to a real - life case study , to reason about poten - tial service bundles . In section 5 , we discuss related work on IT - service bundling . Finally , in section 6 we present our conclusions . 2 Reasoning about IT - service bundles To develop a reasoning process that is capable of gener - ating bundles of IT - services based on a consumer need and doing so in a multi - supplier setting , we propose e 3 service . The idea of e 3 service is to generate these bundles ( semi - ) automatically , or in other words ; to formalize the reasoning process of needs - driven IT - service bundling as much as pos - sible . To achieve formalized reasoning on service bundling , we take notions from established services and marketing lit - erature and combine and conceptualize them by using com - puter science techniques . Most notably amongst the formal - ization techniques we employ is the notion of a formal on - tology , which in [ 8 ] is deﬁned as an ‘explicit formal speciﬁ - cation of a shared conceptualization’ . This deﬁnition high - lights two aspects of an ontology that are of interest to our research : ( 1 ) a formal speciﬁcation , since we want to reason about bundling services ( semi - ) automatically and ( 2 ) the shared conceptualization ; we want to reason about service bundling in a networked enterprise , meaning that it is im - perative that every organization in this network talks about the same concepts to avoid mismatches . In other words , a shared understanding must be present amongst the partic - ipating companies for a network of enterprises to succeed . This is important since without such a shared understand - ing , an organization in a networked enterprise could , for Figure 1 . Reasoning about needs - driven ser - vice bundling example , interpret the concept of a service as a purely tech - nical web - service , while others could interpret it as a purely commercial service . Finally , we want to ensure that this shared understanding has its ground in concepts that have proven themselves to exist in practice . That is why we base our ontology on established theory from service marketing literature . The high - level steps of e 3 service are presented in ﬁg - ure 1 . We make an explicit distinction between two pro - cesses needed for the bundling reasoning : the creation of service catalogs ( that should happen on beforehand ) , and reasoning with these catalogs about feasible bundles on a per consumer - need basis . 1 . Create a service catalog . This has to be done before we can actually reason about service bundles them - selves . The aim is to build per - supplier catalogs that describe the services and the needs which can be satisi - ﬁed by these services . Obviously , the catalogs will be used by the service bundling reasoning itself ( see step 2 ) . Building this catalog requires three steps : 1 . 1 Eliciting the suppliers , and for each supplier , eliciting the IT - services they offer . The outcome of this task is a - per supplier - list of commer - cial IT - services . These IT - services should as ﬁne - grained as possible , nevertheless it should still be commercially feasible to provision each service in its own right . 1 . 2 Formalizing each IT - service from a consumer perspective . As we will see later on , this com - prises an understanding of the consumer need that is satisﬁed by the IT - service , ultimately in terms of beneﬁts ( being features of an IT - service , such as a mail box size in case of an e - mail ser - vice ) . Also , this step explores consumer - side Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008 2 constraints : these constraints represent which supplementary beneﬁts can ( not ) be provided given a stated consumer need , by offering to the consumer additional services . 1 . 3 Formalizing each IT - service from a supplier per - spective . In this step we reason about bundles of services by reviewing supplier oriented mo - tivations and constraints for bundling . For in - stance , according to literature on mixed bundling [ 10 ] , suppliers want to offer a bundle of ser - vices for a lower price than for the sum of the prices of the individual services the bundle con - sists of , because the total revenue for all sold bundles is higher than the total revenue for all individual services . Also , we elicit supplier - driven constraints between services . For in - stance , a VoIP service puts certain constraints on the QoS - attributes of an internet access service ( a technical constraint but important for the al - lowed bundles ) . As an example of a commer - cial constraint , Apple only allows downloaded songs to be played within their own iTunes environment . The important reason to distin - guish supplier - driven constraints from consumer - driven constraints is that supplier - driven con - straints exist independently from the needs of an end - consumer . 2 . Generate bundles of services , using the service cata - logs . As can be seen in ﬁgure 1 , we create service - bundles in two steps : 2 . 1 Deriving an initial set of service bundles that cov - ers a consumer need . This step is enabled by step 1 . 2 . The e 3 service ontology we propose in section 3 has been designed such that reasoning about this set of bundles becomes possible . 2 . 2 Narrowing down the set of service bundles to those that are feasible and desirable from a sup - ply side perspective . This step is enabled by step 1 . 3 . In this paper , we will focus on the consumer - oriented steps . This means that we will elaborate upon steps 1 . 1 and 1 . 2 to illustrate the creation of a consumer - oriented ser - vice catalog , and that we walk through step 2 . 1 to illustrate how this catalog can be used to generate bundles of services covering a consumer need . Narrowing down the candidate bundles from a supply side perspective ( step 2 . 2 ) , as well as formalizing service catalogs for that purpose , has been extensively discussed in earlier research ( see e . g . [ 3 ] ) . Figure 2 . Needs ontology 3 e 3 service : An ontology for conﬁguring IT - services based on consumer needs In this section , we present our ontology ( see ﬁgure 2 ) that enables the reasoning process of matching consumer needs with available IT - services . We will discuss the concepts de - picted in this ontology individually , and also touch upon the relationships that exist between these concepts . To illustrate the discussed concepts , we will use the run - ning example of a basic e - mail hosting service . In brief , the example includes a person that has a need to communi - cate with family abroad ( the problem ) . To do so , he can use email or instant messaging ( parts of solutions ) . Examples of concrete email services are g - mail or hotmail ( being more speciﬁc solutions ) . Such services may have speciﬁc bene - ﬁts ( e . g . the allowed size of an email box ) . A consumer may derive economic value of these beneﬁts ( e . g . a certain retention item of their email ) . 3 . 1 Elementary service . An elementary service is the entity which is of economic value to the end - consumer , and which is provisioned by a supplier . It is the smallest unit that , from a commercial point of view , can be meaningfully obtained from a sup - plier . Typically , elementary services are listed in a service catalog of a supplier . The notion of ‘elementary service’ allows for connecting the consumer - oriented e 3 service on - tology to supplier - oriented ontologies ( see e . g . [ 3 ] ) . EXAMPLE : ‘e - mail hosting’ . Note that a speciﬁc prop - erty of e - mail hosting , ‘mailbox size’ , is not an elementary service , since it can not be provisioned in its own right , but is always connected to the e - mail service it belongs to . Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008 3 3 . 2 The need / want / demand - hierarchy The need / want / demand - hierarchy is a view on marketing as proposed by [ 6 ] and later by [ 18 ] , that emphasizes a grad - ual transition from a need - a high level problem statement - to a set of elementary services that together provide a so - lution for that need . In this section , we discuss the concepts from this hierarchy as used in our ontology . Additionally , we will touch upon the concept of a sacriﬁce , since this con - cept denotes the trade - off that is present between consumer demand and the cost for satisfying that demand . Functional need . A functional need represents a problem statement or goal , independently of considering a solution direction . We stress a separation of problem and solution here , since a need can usually be covered by multiple solu - tions [ 6 ] . Because of this we need to avoid a bias towards one of these solutions when deﬁning a need , so that promis - ing other solutions are not overlooked . EXAMPLE : ‘communicating with family abroad’ . This need statement does not include a notion of a solution yet ; in other words , nothing is said about how the communication will be done . Want . In the e 3 service ontology , a want is something that can be offered by a single supplier , with the constraint that this is commercially feasible . We emphasize this notion of a single supplier because ideally , we want to enable each or - ganization in the networked enterprise to focus on his / her core competencies . The bundling reason is then about meaningfully combining these single - supplier elementary services into one multi - supplier service bundle , to satisfy a consumer need . RELATIONS : Concretizes : a want concretizes a func - tional need by specifying an initial solution direction for a problem statement . A need can be concretized into multiple alternative wants since a certain problem can be resolved though multiple solutions . EXAMPLE : A want satisfying the functional need of ‘communicating with family abroad’ is ‘e - mail hosting’ . An alternative want is ‘instant messaging’ . Demand . A demand represents a want as provisioned by a speciﬁc supplier . As such , a demand differs from a want because a demand provides supplier - speciﬁc values to the properties of a want ( see example ) . We use a strict dis - tinction between wants and demands , because they actually refer to two different steps in the reasoning process about bundles . Since the notion of a want is deﬁned indepen - dently from a speciﬁc supplier , it enables to reason about the means we employ to satisfy the need , without having a speciﬁc supplier in mind already . In a second step , we rea - son about which supplier is satisfying a want by taking the demands into account . Without explicitly separating these steps , a consumer would be forced to choose directly be - tween suppliers , with the danger that the consumer loses sight of what the commonalities and differences between their offered solutions are . Now , the consumer ﬁrst focuses on choosing certain features ( e . g . web - based access in the case of an e - mailing service ) that he is interested in , inde - pendently of who actually provisions these features . RELATIONS : Concretizes : A demand concretizes a want if it speciﬁes the generic want , for instance e - mail hosting , for a speciﬁc supplier . A want has generally one or more demands , meaning that one or more suppliers can satisfy a want . EXAMPLE : ‘g - mail’ ( from Google ) is a demand that speciﬁes the want ‘e - mail hosting’ . For example , ‘g - mail’ may have a distinguishing property ‘mail - box size’ that would be different from the ‘mail - box size’ offered by ‘hot - mail’ . Sacriﬁce . A sacriﬁce represents something valuable to the consumer that has to be given up in order to acquire a service . When making buying decisions , consumers usu - ally trade off their demand for services with the sacriﬁce ( s ) needed for acquisition . Note that due to lack of space , the concept of a sacriﬁce is not discussed in the rest of this pa - per RELATIONS : Given by : A sacriﬁce is given by one con - sumer EXAMPLE : A consumer sacriﬁces a monthly fee for a paid e - mail service . Note that , even though money is the most common sacriﬁce , other types of sacriﬁces such as time are also possible . Discussion . The need / want / demand hierarchy provides us with a useful starting point in ﬁnding bundles of IT - services based upon consumer needs . The reasoning that can be performed with it is still rather limited however , since the need / want / demand concepts do not take into account the speciﬁc beneﬁts of a elementary service . This inclusion of beneﬁts in the reasoning process is however important , since they could discriminate two elementary services from one another that at ﬁrst seem similar - similarity of elemen - tary service offerings being something that is often the case when talking about a network of enterprises . For instance , hotmail and g - mail are similar in the sense that they are both e - mail hosting services , yet they differ with respect to the speciﬁc features they offer . In this example , g - mail differ - entiates itself on the property ”‘mailbox size”’ . How we intend to make the distinction on the level of beneﬁts , is discussed in the next section . Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008 4 3 . 3 Beneﬁts , consequences and value derivations Beneﬁt . Beneﬁts describe properties that are of economic value to the consumer in the sense of value in use [ 21 ] . In other words , beneﬁts provide an increase of economic util - ity to the consumer , through something functional , social ( e . g . status ) or otherwise . This is in contrast to the notion of value in exchange [ 21 ] , which indicates the amount of revenue generated by selling such a property . In sum , to un - derstand the value of a elementary service for a particular entity , the notion of value in exchange is convenient for the supplier , whereas value in use is more appropriate for the consumer . RELATIONS : A want ( and a demand also ) has one ore more beneﬁts . • A single want has one or more beneﬁts . Beneﬁts of a want do however not have speciﬁc values , as beneﬁts exist independently of a speciﬁc supplier . For instance , the speciﬁc size ( e . g . 1 GB ) of a mailbox is not speci - ﬁed , it is only speciﬁed that a mailbox has a size . • A single demand has one or more beneﬁts . Since a demand is speciﬁc for a supplier , beneﬁts of a demand do have speciﬁc values . For instance , in the case of the size of a mailbox , the size ( e . g . 1 GB ) would be speciﬁed for the speciﬁc supplier . EXAMPLE : In case of an e - mailing service , a speciﬁc beneﬁt could be ‘customized domain’ . A customized do - main allows for customizing an e - mail address , so instead of art . vandelay @ someunchangebledomain . com a customized e - mail address would be art @ vandelay . com . A customized domain is a beneﬁt because an e - mail service with a cus - tomized domain gives the consumer more status , height - ened stature being a measure of more value in use . Discussion . As mentioned , beneﬁts are important when discriminating between two apparently similar services . However , we also incorporated the notion of beneﬁts in our ontology to enable a closer match between consumer needs and the services providing a solution for these needs . Con - sumers namely , as is also stated in [ 12 ] , are also interested in the beneﬁts provided by a certain service , such as a large mail box size or web - based e - mail access . Suppliers on the other hand provide services with generic sets of beneﬁts , with the result that a consumer might acquire a service con - taining beneﬁts in which he / she is not interested . Or even worse : that a service insufﬁciently performs on a beneﬁt in which the consumer is interested ( such as web - based ac - cess with an interface that is not user - friendly ) or that the deisred beneﬁt is not contained in a service at all . The prob - lem then is to ﬁnd as close a match as possible between the beneﬁts the consumer is interested in and the beneﬁts contained within the services offered . The incorporation of the beneﬁt - concept in our ontology addresses this issue , ad - ditionally to making a distinction between two apparently similar services . Consequence . This concept represents the subjective added value for the end - consumer that is gained directly through obtaining a beneﬁt provided by a service . De - riving consequences from beneﬁts is based on means - end chaining , in which a technique called laddering [ 16 ] is em - ployed . Laddering shows how a speciﬁc beneﬁt ultimately contributes to satisfying a consumer need . Laddering shows this contribution of a beneﬁt to a need by using the interme - diary step of a consequence . Deriving a consequence from a beneﬁt is done by ask - ing the question ‘what happens when we consume a ele - mentary service in which beneﬁt X is contained ? ’ . In the next paragraph , we will discuss the concept of ‘value deriva - tion’ , which provides basic guidelines that aid in reasoning on how value is derived from beneﬁt . RELATIONS : A beneﬁt has one or more consequences . Multiple beneﬁts can point to the same consequence . A consequence contributes to a functional need . EXAMPLE : The beneﬁt ‘web - based e - mailing access’ allows for the consequence of ‘cost - effective communica - tion’ . Additionally , it also allows for the consequence of ‘accessing mail at any site with internet access’ . ’cost - effective communication’ ultimately contributes to satisfy - ing the need of ’communicating with family abroad’ . Value derivation . In our ontology , we reason about value derivation as a result of consuming a certain beneﬁt , by us - ing a consumer value framework presented by Holbrook et al [ 17 ] . This framework , which originates from the ﬁeld of axiology , is used to explain how end - consumers derive value while consuming a product / service . It consists of three main categories , each with two opposite dimensions . By means of choosing a combination of three dimensions - a single dimension from each category - one ultimately arrives at a singular value derivation ; this combination then also explains how the value derivation should be interpreted . As an example of the opposing dimensions , consider ac - tive vs reactive use : active use means that a consumer does something to a product / service as part of the consumption process ( eg . a nicely decorated cup used by a roman em - peror to drink wine ) while reactive use means that the prod - uct / service acts upon the consumer instead ( eg . the deco - rated cup on display in a museum ) . Examples of sigular value derivations that arise from a combination of the dime - nions are status and efﬁciency . For a more detailed discus - sion on these dimensions and value derivations , see [ 17 ] . Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008 5 EXAMPLE : The beneﬁt ‘customized domain’ from an e - mail service , can be annotated with the value derivation ‘status’ , resulting in the consequence of ’enhancing status through personalized e - mail address’ . 3 . 4 Incorporating dependencies between wants The notion of dependencies , as discussed in [ 7 ] , indi - cates that two services are related to one another . This re - lation can exist from a supplier perspective ; for instance a paid e - mail service cannot be delivered without some ba - sic administrative services such as billing . On the other hand , such a dependency can exist from a consumer per - spective ; for instance a spam ﬁlter adds value for the con - sumer when bundled with an e - mail hosting service . In ac - cordance with the scope of this paper , we will only discuss consumer - oriented dependencies . Adds value . As beneﬁts have consequences ( in terms of economic value for the consumer ) , the wants , that actually aggregate beneﬁts from several demands , implicitly also have consequences . We will illustrate this aggregation of beneﬁts on a want - level further when we discuss the case study in section 4 . For the discussion of this concept , it is sufﬁcient to know that wants have beneﬁts and as such , also consequences . In ﬁgure 2 , a relationship between a want and a consequence has been made explicit . This relationship indicates that when a consumer has a speciﬁc want , other wants and belonging consequences may also become relevant . The consequences inherent to these other wants then explain why this relation is present . In our ontology , we incorporated one such relationship ( adapted from [ 7 ] ) : Core / Enhancing ( C / E ) . This relationship indicates that a service B is able to provide added value when bundled with a certain core service A . A constraint in this dependency is that service B cannot be acquired inde - pendently from service A . Note that there are more types of relationships between wants that need to be reviewed from a consumer - perspective ; due to lack of space however , we cannot elaborate on them in this paper . RELATIONS : An Adds value relationship contains a single want and a single consequence . This pair represents a commercially feasible offering , plus part of the subjective value gained from consuming a beneﬁt contained within this offering . has Adds value has a relationship with one or more other adds value relationships . By this , we mean that a relation - ship exists between two or more pairs of wants and conse - quences . The basic idea behind this relationship is to show that a relationship exists between two services by using the concept of a want , and to show to the consumer why this relationship exists by using the concept of a consequence . EXAMPLE : The want ‘email’ can be supplemented with the want ‘spam ﬁlter’ . Since a spam - ﬁlter is only relevant in combination with an e - mailing service , a C / E relation - ship exists between these two wants . The relationship can then be explained by the consequence “increase number of relevant mails’ from the beneﬁt ‘spam reduction’ , the latter being contained in the ’spam ﬁlter’ want . 4 A real - life case study with e 3 service on telecommuncation services We now illustrate how the e 3 service ontology works in a real - life case study about telecommunication services , by following the earlier presented steps . 4 . 1 Step 1 . 1 - Elicit service suppliers and the oﬀered elementary services . The aim of this step is to get a list of IT - services of the service supplier ( s ) , in this case KPN . We do this by eliciting the IT - services that KPN offers to its end - consumers . From KPN , we found four IT - services : ( 1 ) VoIP , ( 2 ) IP - connectivity , ( 3 ) homepage capability , ( 4 ) e - mail , and ( 5 ) spam ﬁlter . In this case study , we performed this elicition by constructing an initial service catalog based upon documentation received from KPN . For validation of the initial service catalog , we then held a feedbacksession with an enterprise architect from KPN . However , the found services from KPN could have equally well been provided by separate enterprises . Each enterprise then focuses on his / her core competencies . In the case study , we also considered seperate organizations that provide services similar to KPN . We did this to illustrate how we make a distinction between two wants that at ﬁrst appear similar . Due to lack of space however , we chose not to show these alternative services in this step . Instead , we included the services and the beneﬁts we found , while considering a multi - enterprise setting , directly in the service catalog as discussed in step 1 . 2 . 4 . 2 Step 1 . 2 - Formalize each IT - service from a consumer perspective . We build up the service catalog in a bottom - up fashion ; we take the services found in step 1 . 1 as a starting point , and on the basis of them , elicit the needs , wants and demands they cover , as well as the beneﬁts . 4 . 2 . 1 Populate the service catalog with demands and ﬁnd the beneﬁts contained within them The ﬁrst step is to populate the service catalog with the ser - vices modeled in step 1 . 1 . These services are actually sim - Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008 6 ilar to demands , since they are the services as provisioned by the speciﬁc suppliers . Next , we add the beneﬁts as con - tained in the demands . Beneﬁts are elicited by reviewing the speciﬁc properties of a service that provide the end - consumer with more value in use . For instance , the property of web - based e - mail access is a beneﬁt because it allows a consumer to access mail at any site , without having to in - stall a seperate mail - client . However we did not yet model these beneﬁts in the ﬁrst step . So , we should now make the beneﬁts in the popu - lated catalog explicit for each of the demands modeled in step 1 . 1 . For example , ’call to ﬁxed lines , ’call to mobile’ , ’number recognition’ and ’voice mail’ are all beneﬁts from KPN’s VoIP service . These beneﬁts again illustrate that a demand is not the same as a beneﬁt , since ‘voice mail’ for instance cannot be viably delivered on its own . The resulting explication of beneﬁts and the demands that contain them , can be found in ﬁgure 3 . 4 . 2 . 2 Derive wants On the basis of the demands , we elicit wants . We ﬁrst ab - stract away from the speciﬁc values that the suppliers give to their beneﬁts . So , for instance , in the case of a customized domain we abstract away from the supplier - speciﬁc prop - erty of providing you with a personalized e - mail address that ends with ‘ . nl’ . After having made this abstraction , the services that contain these beneﬁts become the wants . If there are multiple similar services available from multiple suppliers , there will be a merge of these multiple services into a single want . For instance , a demand ‘VoIP’ as provi - sioned by the speciﬁc suppliers KPN and Abel becomes a want ‘VoIP’ , independently of these suppliers . This single want will then also inherit the beneﬁts from these different service objects . To illustrate this , consider the want ‘VoIP’ in ﬁgure 3 . This want contains not only the beneﬁts from KPN’s VoIP service , but also the beneﬁts from a different supplier , namely Abel . 4 . 2 . 3 Using consequences to show how beneﬁts con - tribute to satisfying a functional need Next , we derive the consequences from the beneﬁts by ask - ing the question : ‘What happens when we consume a ser - vice in which this beneﬁt is contained ? ’ . As mentioned in section 3 . 3 , we use the value derivation framework from Holbrook to aid us in this process . To illustrate , take two beneﬁts from our VoIP service modeled in ﬁgure 3 : ‘call to mobile’ and ‘call to ﬁxed lines’ . Now , by using the value derivation ‘efﬁciency’ from Holbrook , we can state that both of these calling options - to mobile and ﬁxed lines - are more cost - effective when employed through a VoIP calling - service than they would be from another calling - service ( eg . a POTS or mobile calling - service ) . However , when apply - ing the value derivation ‘status’ to these two beneﬁts we can ﬁnd yet another , at ﬁrst sight less obvious consequence namely that - when calling via VoIP - one can use it as a gadget , since it a relatively new phenomenon . By using the consequences we can now derive a set of needs . We do this by considering the goal that is achieved through a consequence . For example , in the case of the con - sequence of employing VoIP as a gadget , we can ultimately derive the need for more social stature . However , there can also be cases in which we are not able to deﬁne a new need on basis of a consequence . In the service catalog from this case study ( ﬁgure 3 ) , examples of such consequences are an ‘increase in relevant calls’ and an ‘increase in availability’ neither of which achieve new goals on their own terms . However , we can usually show that these consequences positively contribute to satisfying a need . For instance , an ‘increase in relevant calls’ aids in making the direct communication easier in case of a VoIP - service . Of course , this positively - contributes - to relation is only valid in case the want in which the beneﬁt is contained is actually acquired . 4 . 2 . 4 Deﬁne relationships between wants Now that we have deﬁned both the wants and the conse - quences , we can deﬁne the ‘adds value’ relationships that exist between wants . In the case study , this relationship can be illustrated by the C / E dependency that exists between the wants ‘e - mail hosting’ and ‘spam ﬁlter’ . This dependency has already been discussed in our ontology ; therefore , we sufﬁce with a short summary . A spam ﬁlter could , from a consumer perspective , add value to an e - mail hosting ser - vice , where the consequence of one of the beneﬁts in the spam ﬁlter service - ’increase in relevant e - mails’ - indicates why it could add value to the e - mail hosting service . 4 . 3 Step 2 . 1 : Generate needs - driven ser - vice bundles using the service catalog In this section , we will brieﬂy illustrate how to use the catalog ( see ﬁgure 3 ) for ﬁnding service bundles . For this purpose , we imagine that there are two different end - consumers that are both interested in increasing their com - munication possibilities : • A student , who is seeking an alternative for the rela - tively expensive mobile phone and wants a private e - mail address besides the one provided by his college . • A yup that , besides increasing his communication abil - ities , mainly wants to show that he is a front - runner when it comes to employing technology in everyday life . Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008 7 Now the student would start at ( 1 ) the need of communicat - ing directly to search for an alternative for the mobile phone and ( 2 ) at the need of communicating indirectly where he expects to ﬁnd an e - mailing service . The yup on the other hand , besides increasing his communication capabilities , mainly wants to employ technology to increase his social stature . In his case , we consider this to be his main concern . For the student and the yup , we have now deﬁned two different set of needs : ‘increasing ( in - ) direct communica - tion’ for the student and ‘increasing social stature’ for the yup . The next step is looking at the consequences belonging to these needs ; in case of the student , these would be ‘cost - effective communication’ and ‘cost - effective calling’ . For the yup , these would be ‘personalization of e - mailing’ and ‘possessing a gadget’ , either one of which ( indicated by the OR - annotation in ﬁgure 3 ) provides for a possible increase in stature . Based upon the services that contain these consequences , we are now able to derive an initial set of wants : ‘e - mail hosting’ and ‘call via VoIP’ for the student and customized domain’ and ‘call via VoIP’ for the yup . Next , we look whether there is a core / enhancing relation - ship present between the wants . According to our catalog , one such dependency is present between a ‘customized do - main’ and ‘e - mail hosting’ and since ‘customized domain’ is the enhancing service object , it can in this case only be acquired in combination with ‘e - mail hosting’ . Also , con - cerning this dependency we can see that an ‘e - mail service’ can be bought in combination with ‘a spam ﬁlter’ Thus , so far we have deﬁned already a fairly elaborate set of possible services that satisfy the functional needs . For the student , these are ‘call via VoIP’ and ‘e - mail hosting’ , with the optional service ‘spam ﬁlter’ For the yup , these are ‘e - mail hosting’ in combination with ‘customized do - main’ ( one cannot be provisioned without the other in this case ) with an optional ‘spam ﬁlter’ or ‘call via VoIP’ . Note that we did not include the ‘customized domain’ in a pos - sible bundle for the student , even though there is a C / E - relationship present between e - mail hosting and customized domain . This is because he was never interested in satisfy - ing the need of increasing social stature , which , as we have seen , is linked to the want of a customized domain . Next , we look at the speciﬁc beneﬁts present in the wants and whether these are of interest to the consumer . We need to do this because we have not yet reviewed all beneﬁts from the wants and as such , also not how these beneﬁts contribute to satisfying a need . In our example , we assume that the stu - dent is interested in a VoIP - service with the beneﬁt ‘number recognition’ since it increases the number of relevant calls and as such contributes to satisfying the need communicat - ing directly . We now have a list of services , and the beneﬁts contained within them that could be of interest to the consumer . These beneﬁts are those that directly satisfy a need - e . g . the ben - eﬁt of calling to ﬁxed lines enables direct communication - and those that beneﬁts that positively contribute to sat - isfying a need - e . g . number recognition . The last step is to review which actual service offerings from speciﬁc sup - pliers provision these beneﬁts . In case of the student , we can see that he is best off with the [ VoIP by KPN ] service when it concerns VoIP , since this provides him with number recognition whilst the other provider does not . Concern - ing e - mail , he can choose for both [ e - mail hosting by KPN , spam ﬁlter from KPN ] , [ e - mail hosting by sylconia , spam ﬁlter by K & K ] . In the case of the yup , [ VoIP by Abel ] and [ VoIP by KPN ] are valid bundles for VoIP , since he does not have a preference concerning a speciﬁc beneﬁt . Concern - ing a customized domain , [ e - mail - hosting by sylconia / KPN , customized domain by sylconia ] and [ e - mail - hosting by Sylconia / KPN , customized domain by sylconia , spam ﬁlter by K & K ] are valid bundles for the yup . 5 Related work The Business Motivation Model ( BMM ) [ 15 ] is a model representing ends ( goals , objectives ) that are to be achieved by means . It abstracts away from implementation issues such as the business processes necessary to provide for the means . In comparison to our work , BMM does not ex - plicitly assist in deriving consumer needs from a set of IT - services . Also , it does not take a multi - supplier perspective . Concerning the usage of an ontology , e 3 service is sim - ilar to the e 3 value - ontology from requirements engineer - ing [ 13 ] . As is the case with BMM however , e 3 value is not speciﬁcally aimed at IT - services . Additionally , the con - cepts from e 3 value are not speciﬁcally aimed at analyzing consumer needs . Serviguration [ 7 ] ( service conﬁguration ) provides com - puter supported reasoning about general service bundles . Case studies in the realm of electricity supply and health - care have shown that by using this methodology , meaning - ful bundles of services can generated semi - automatically [ 7 ] . Moreover , given the - per case study - supplier - oriented service catalogue started with , in principle a signiﬁcant amount of different bundles are possible ( millions ) , which serviguration reduced by its reasoning process to a few rel - evant bundles ( tenths ) , based on stated consumer needs , and supplier - oriented relationships ( and constraints ) between el - ementary services . So , serviguration is a good ﬁrst attempt to arrive at automated conﬁguration of a networked value constellation , in which a series of suppliers satisfy an need by bundling services . However , serviguration concentrates on conceptualizing services mainly from a supplier per - spective and while it does have a ontology for taking con - Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008 8 Figure 3 . The commercial services catalog in the VoIP case study Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008 9 sumer needs into account , this needs ontology is rudimen - tary . Most importantly , the needs ontology from servigu - ration does not include the concept of a beneﬁt , while this inclusion is important to differentiate between two appar - ently similar service offerings . Finally , [ 23 ] presents a methodology for evaluating how a business problem can be tackled by combining IT - services from multiple actors in a networked business setting . Yet this methodology differs from e 3 service because ( 1 ) it does not try to formalize the bundling process as much as possi - ble and ( 2 ) it is not speciﬁcally aimed at the end - consumer . 6 Conclusions and further research In this paper , we have shown how a catalog of IT - services can be created in a structured manner by applying a for - mal ontology . Also , we have presented how we can reason about creating IT - service bundles on the basis of such a cat - alog . Additionally , this paper clariﬁed that there is a dif - ference between what is offered to the consumer , being the the services , and the features the consumer is interested in , being the demands . Usually , there is a mismatch between the set of beneﬁts contained by a service , and the beneﬁts contained by a demand . We would like to point out that the e 3 service - ontology has a somewhat idealized vision of discovering needs . This is because it assumes that all consumers are able to artic - ulate their needs precisely and use the same phrasing for this articulation . In reality however , many consumers might not be that rational . For instance , consumers might phrase their needs differently from those presented to them in the consumer - oriented service catalog . However , we explicitly chose to exclude such irrational consumer behavior from e 3 service , even though it is sometimes inherent to the dis - covery of customer needs . We did this because in the end irrational behavior is hard to capture formally , which is in conﬂict with our research goal of automating the process of needs - driven IT - service bundling as much as possible . Currently , we are working on software support for the e 3 service ontology . Acknowledgements . The authors thank Leo Stout ( KPN ) and Peter Hermans for their input on the case study . This research has been partly funded by NWO / STW / Jacquard as the project VITAL . References [ 1 ] Web services description language ( wsdl ) version 2 . 0 , http : / / www . w3 . org / TR / 2007 / PR - wsdl20 - primer - 20070523 / . [ 2 ] ebXML business process speciﬁcation schema version 1 . 01 , http : / / www . ebxml . org / specs / ebBPSS . pdf , 2001 . [ 3 ] H . Akkermans , Z . Baida , and J . Gordijn . Value webs : Ontology - based bundling of real - world services . IEEE In - telligent Systems , 19 ( 44 ) : 2332 , July 2004 . [ 4 ] T . Andrews et al . Business process execu - tion language for web services version 1 . 1 , http : / / www . ebxml . org / specs / ebBPSS . pdf . Technical report , 2003 . [ 5 ] A . Arkin et al . Web service choreography interface ( WSCI ) 1 . 0 , http : / / www . w3 . org / TR / wsci / . Technical report , 2002 . [ 6 ] J . Arndt . How broad should the marketing concept be ? Jour - nal of Marketing , 42 ( 1 ) : 101 – 103 , January 1978 . [ 7 ] Z . Baida . Software - aided service bundling . PhD thesis , Free University Amsterdam , May 2006 . [ 8 ] P . Borst . Construction of Engineering Ontologies for Knowl - edge Sharing and Reuse . PhD thesis , Universiteit Twente , Sept . 1997 . [ 9 ] L . Cabrera et al . Web services coordination ( WS - Coordination ) , ftp : / / www6 . software . ibm . com / software / developer / library / ws - coordination . pdf . Technical report , 2003 . [ 10 ] S . - Y . Choi , D . O . Stahl , and A . B . Whinston . The Economics of Doing Business in the Electronic Marketplace . MACMil - lan Technical Publishing , Indianapolis , IN , 1997 . [ 11 ] N . Cross . Creative cognition in design : processes of excep - tional designers . In C & C ’02 : Proceedings of the 4th con - ference on Creativity & cognition , pages 14 – 19 , New York , NY , USA , 2002 . ACM Press . [ 12 ] M . Fishbein . Belief , attitude , intention and behavior : an introduction to theory and research . Addison - Wesley , 1978 . third print . [ 13 ] J . Gordijn and H . Akkermans . Value based requirements engineering : Exploring innovative e - commerce ideas . Re - quirements Engineering Journal , 8 ( 2 ) : 114 – 134 , 2003 . [ 14 ] C . Gr¨onroos . Service Management and Marketing . Lexing - ton Books , 1990 . [ 15 ] B . R . Group . The business motivation model - business gov - ernance in a volatile world . Technical report , 2005 . [ 16 ] J . Gutman and T . Reynolds . Laddering theory - analysis and interpretation . Journal of Advertising Research , 28 ( 1 ) : 11 , Febraury / March 1988 . [ 17 ] M . Holbrook”’ . Consumer value ; a framework for analysis and research . Routledge , 1999 . 1st edition . [ 18 ] P . Kotler . Marketing Management . Prentice Hall , 2000 . [ 19 ] C . Lovelock . Service Marketing - People , Technology , Strat - egy . Prentice Hall , 2001 . Fourth edition . [ 20 ] R . Normann . Service Management - strategy and leadership in service business . Wiley , 2000 . third edition . [ 21 ] J . Ramsay . The real maening of value in trading relation - ships . International Journal of Operations and Production Management , pages 549 – 565 , 2005 . [ 22 ] D . Tapscott , D . Ticoll , and A . Lowy . Digital Capital - Har - nessing the Power of Business Webs . Nicholas Brealy Pub - lishing , 2000 . [ 23 ] B . van der Raadt’ , J . Gordijn , and E . Yu . Exploring web ser - vices from a business value perspective . Proceedings of the 13th IEEE International Conference on Requirements Engi - neering , 25 ( 6 ) : 53 – 62 , 2005 . Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 2008 10