3 , 350 + OPEN ACCESS BOOKS 108 , 000 + INTERNATIONAL AUTHORS AND EDITORS 115 + MILLION DOWNLOADS BOOKS DELIVERED TO 151 COUNTRIES AUTHORS AMONG TOP 1 % MOST CITED SCIENTIST 12 . 2 % AUTHORS AND EDITORS FROM TOP 500 UNIVERSITIES Selection of our books indexed in the Book Citation Index in Web of Science™ Core Collection ( BKCI ) Chapter from the book Human Robot Interaction Downloaded from : http : / / www . intechopen . com / books / human _ robot _ interaction PUBLISHED BY World ' s largest Science , Technology & Medicine Open Access book publisher Interested in publishing with IntechOpen ? Contact us at book . department @ intechopen . com 19 Effect of Robot and Screen Agent Recommendations on Human Decision - Making Kazuhiko Shinozawa 1 and Junji Yamato 2 1 ATR Intelligent Robotics and Communication Laboratories , 2 NTT Communication Science Laboratories Japan 1 . Introduction Two - dimensional ( 2D ) character agents that have a human - like appearance are being developed . In the future , such agents will be able to interact with their users in a natural and friendly manner through speech recognition , synthesized speech , and(cid:1)action displays . In addition , robots or robotic companions that have a three - dimensional ( 3D ) physical body are attracting attention as communication partners . Such embodied social agents ( ESAs ) make interaction more meaningful than it is when interfaces do not appropriately display actions or speak ( Beskow and McGlashan , 1997 ) . It is known that people’s attitudes towards computerized media are similar to the attitudes they have towards other people ( Reeves and Nass , 1996 ) . Even if people only read text or hear a voice from computers , they tend to assign some social existence to them . More social richness , defined as more complete human - like presentations , promises to make computers more attractive , productive , and easy to use . Some research has provided fruitful results and suggestions for presentation , i . e . , graphical appearance ( Massaro , 1998 ) , non - verbal behavior ( Cassell and Thórisson , 1999 ) , and speech characteristics ( Nass and Gong , 1999 ) , and for personality ( Nass and Isbister , 1998 ) , emotion ( Ball and Breese , 1998 ; Becheiraz and Thalmann , 1998 ) , ethnicity ( Takeuchi et al . , 1998 ) , and interpersonal communication strategy ( Shinozawa et al . , 2001 ) as well . Much of such research suggests that an ESA should be an effective interface for interactions with media . The above research mainly focused on graphical on - screen agents and computers . On the other hand , robots having a physical body have attracted some attention as useful physical agents , and the above research results may apply to interaction with such robots . However , when we consider robots as ESAs , a new research topic , ` ` dimensionality ' ' , appears . A robot has a 3D physical body while an on - screen agent has a 2D one . This leads to several questions : Does increasing dimension make a big difference or not ? Does the physical 3D appearance affect us in a significant way during the interaction ? When both a 2D agent like an on - screen agent and a physical 3D agent like a robot have a similar shape and use the same voice , what is the significance of the difference in dimensionality ? Little research has focused on dimensionality , and we still have no solid answers . We live and work in 3D space . Everything has three dimensions and is located in 3D space . With a 3D body , pointing to some location makes it easy to understand what is being pointed at . When a Source : Human - Robot Interaction , Book edited by Nilanjan Sarkar , ISBN 978 - 3 - 902613 - 13 - 4 , pp . 522 , September 2007 , Itech Education and Publishing , Vienna , Austria O pen A cc e ss D a t aba s e www . i - t e c hon li ne . c o m Human - Robot Interaction 346 robot navigates a person , the combination of the robot ' s gestures and its body ' s direction has a strong relationship with high ratios of successful task completion ( Ono et al . , 2001 ) . This suggests that the dimensionality produces a difference in the effect of interaction and that a 3D body makes interaction more meaningful . How can we quantitatively measure the dimensionality or eye movement effects ? Almost all research exploring the behavioral factor’s effects of ESAs has been conducted by using questionnaire - based evaluations . For example , subjects are asked whether a robot is familiar or not . Getting a feeling of familiarity is important for a pet - like partner . However , it is not enough for a communication partner . Whenever we engage a communication partner , we listen to what the partner has to say , respond to it , and sometime change our thinking . If an ESA’s behavior can influence human decision - making , it leads that he / she treats it as a communication partner . This would be one of evaluations for a communication partner . So , we mainly investigate an ESA’s influence on human decision - making for evaluating above factors . In this chapter , in an attempt to answer some the above questions , we discuss dimensionality , investigated by directly comparing results between an on - screen agent and a physical robot , and the role of a robot’s eye movement in human - robot interaction . On both topics , the discussions are based on a quantitative evaluation of each factor’s effect on human decision - making with a selection task . Section 2 describes the selection task with the direct comparison topic and presents the experimental results . Section 3 describes the effect of a tracking function in the 3D world case and presents the results . Section 4 discusses the effect of the dimensionality and eye movement with the experimental results . Then , Section 5 concludes with a short summary . 2 . Difference in 3D and 2D agent’s recommendation Recommendation in an advertisement and assistance in a navigation task are two typical situations influencing human decision - making . An ESA acting as an assistant can easily influence users ' decisions because users want to know appropriate information . Generally speaking , however , changing a user ' s mind is difficult in the advertisement situation . Advertising is an important application of ESAs , and we can also say that the recommendation includes helpful interaction - like assistance , because the initial recommendation does not always depend on what the user wants . So , we focus on the advertisement situation and measure the influence of ESAs on human decision - making . 2 . 1 Color - name selection task The color - name selection task was introduced to quantitatively measure the influence of ESAs on human decision - making in an advertisement situation ( Shinozawa et al . , 2001 ) . In a color - name selection task , a subject looks at a colored region and selects the color name from two options . The matching ratio of the recommended color names is measured . The ratio is treated as showing the degree of a recommendation ' s influence on human decision - making . 2 . 2 Recommendation situation In the case of direct comparison between an on - screen agent and a physical robot , two situations are considered . In one , an ESA points to an object located in 3D space and in the other , it points to an object in 2D space during interaction . Accordingly , we prepared two scenes for interacting with an ESA . Effect of Robot and Screen Agent Recommendations on Human Decision - Making 347 One scene is equivalent to the original one in the color - name selection task ( Shinozawa et al . , 2001 ) . An ESA recommends a color name while it points to or looks at the color region and two color - name options on a CRT display when a subject should select one of them . In this case , objects used in the selection task are mainly located in 2D space . We therefore call this , the 2D world condition . The other scene is a new one that we call the 3D world condition . The color region that an ESA points to is in 3D space . Actually , we developed two new machines for displaying color regions in 3D space . One displays printed color plates according to external PC control . The other is a button box for displaying and selecting a color name . In the 3D world condition , a subject looks at printed color plates and selects color names using the button box ( Fig . 1 ) . Figure 1 . Display machines The ESA recommended one of the two options under these two conditions , and we investigated the dimensionality by comparing the ESA ' s effect on user decision - making . 2 . 3 Robot and On - screen agent Appearance is important for robots as well as for on - screen agents . Humans tend to recognize social roles , gender , or characters by analogy with appearance . Prior knowledge according to appearance has much influence on subjective evaluation ( Shibata and Tanie , 2001 ) . In dimensionality issue , to avoid such influence , we made the appearance of robots and on - screen agents as equivalent to each other as possible [ Fig . 2 ( a ) and ( b ) ] . The robot ' s height is 300 mm and on - screen agent ' s height is similar to the robot ' s one . ( a ) On - screen agent ( b ) Robot Figure 2 . Appearance of ESAs Similarly , voice plays an important role in molding the robot ' s or on - screen agent ' s character . Both the robot and on - screen agent use the same voice , which was made by Human - Robot Interaction 348 ` ` Fluet ' ' , a Japanese speech synthesizer developed by NTT ( Mizuno and Nakajima , 1998 ) . The robot was also developed by NTT . 2 . 4 Gestures We prepared 27 gestures for both the robot and on - screen agent , which included pointing to a color region , nodding , blinking , and so on . We made the robot ' s motions similar to the on - screen agent ' s motions . 2 . 5 Color names Before starting an experiment , subjects were told that this was a color - name selection task and that they should make a selection based on their own feeling and that there were no correct answers . Most of the color regions and options for color names in the experiment , such as vermilion or carmine , are unfamiliar to ordinary people . (cid:1) 2 . 6 Speaking words The robot and agent offered their personal opinions , for example , ` ` I think it’s vermilion ' ' , ` ` This shade is vermilion , isn ' t it ? ' ' , instead of making statements that would indicate it had definite knowledge about the displayed color . This was to avoid the effect of the subject ' s attributing any authority to the robot and agent . 2 . 7 Recommended color names We carried out pretests without an ESA ' s recommendation and determined what color names the ESA should recommend and the orders of color name options . In both the 2D and 3D world condition , the same order of color names and the same recommended color name options were used . 2 . 8 Face direction when ESAs speak Whenever we talk to someone , we look at that person’s face or eyes . ESAs should behave in the same way . With an on - screen 2D agent , a well - known illusion associated with full - faced portraits occurs : from any viewing angle , it appears that the agent’s gaze is always on the user ( Bruce & Young , 1998 ) . An on - screen agent’s full - face animation can give a feeling that the agent talks to subjects . However , humans can easily detect that the eyes of a 3D face’s are not looking at their face even if the difference from the correct direction is small . We therefore developed a subject’s head tracking function by which a robot adjusts its head direction so that its head faces subject’s head position . 2 . 9 Displayed Color region In both world cases , the size of the displayed color region was about 270 mm x 160 mm , and the average distance from subjects to the color regions was about 600 mm . In the 2D world case , the colors displayed on the CRT were measured with the CRT color analyzer three times a day . The changes in these values were small ( less than 10 % ) for the whole experiment . In the 3D world case , the colors displayed on printed plates were measured with a tristimulus colorimeter once a day . The changes in these values were also small ( less than 7 % ) for the entire experiment . Therefore , all of the subjects saw the same color in each world case . Effect of Robot and Screen Agent Recommendations on Human Decision - Making 349 2 . 10 Subjects Six experiments were conducted to manage all combinations described above . 1 . 2D world condition ( a ) No recommendation ( Group No2 ) ( b ) Agent recommendation ( Group Ag2 ) ( c ) Robot recommendation ( Group Ro2 ) 2 . 3D world condition ( a ) No recommendation ( Group No3 ) ( b ) Agent recommendation ( Group Ag3 ) ( c ) Robot recommendation ( Group Ro3 ) None of the subjects were experts on color names and all were recruited from the general public . Each subject participated in only one experiment ; never more than one . Table 1 shows information about the subjects in each group . Group No2 Ag2 Ro2 No3 Ag3 Ro3 Number 30 30 30 31 27 30 Mean age 23 . 87 27 . 60 23 . 30 25 . 40 25 . 00 26 . 29 Max . age 49 39 36 36 39 45 Min . age 19 19 18 18 20 18 Ratio of males 0 . 43 0 . 50 0 . 50 0 . 50 0 . 44 0 . 48 Table 1 . Subjects in each group 2 . 11 No recommendation case To investigate the influence of an ESA ' s recommendation on user decisions , we must know the mean of the matching ratios without recommendation . We therefore conducted no - recommendation experiments for the 2D and 3D world conditions . In these experiments , subjects did not see any on - screen agents or robots and chose a color name with no recommendation . In all recommendation conditions , the recommended color name options were fixed due to the pretest described above . The difference in matching ratios between the no - recommendation case and recommendation case shows the degree of the recommendation ' s influence on user decision - making . When matching ratios in the recommendation case are greater than in the no - recommendation case , the influence is considered to be positive . 2 . 12 Procedure Upon arriving at the lab , subjects were told that the purpose of this experiment was to mainly investigate the relationship between color regions and color names , and that they should make a selection based on their own feeling because there were no correct answers . After this explanation , they signed an informed consent statement . 2 . 12 . 1 No - recommendation In the no - recommendation condition , subjects did the task without the ESA ' s recommendation and there was no ESA near them . Human - Robot Interaction 350 2 . 12 . 2 Recommendation case They encountered the robots or on - screen agents for the first time when they entered the experimental room . The ESA behaved like it was asleep until the subject pushed a button . Once the button had been pushed , the ESA behaved like it had been awakened and introduced itself , and the experiment started . The experiment consisted of thirty questions , and each question had two possible responses . When presenting each question , the ESA made a statement endorsing one of the two possible responses . While the ESA was asking the question and presenting the two choices , these options appeared on the computer display in the 2D world condition and on the button box display in the 3D world condition . The subject in both conditions indicated his / her choice by clicking a radio button on the computer display and by pressing the corresponding button . The subject then pressed the ` ` OK ' ' button to send the selection to the computer . If the choice matched the ESA ' s suggestion , the ESA nodded with approval while expressing a positive statement . If it did not match the suggestion , the ESA bowed and shook its head slowly while responding with a negative statement . This continued until all questions were answered . When the interaction finished , the experimenter gave the subject a questionnaire . Figures 3 ( a ) and ( b ) show scenes of the on - screen agent and robot experiment in the 2D world condition , respectively . ( a ) Agent recommendation ( b ) Robot recommendation Figure 3 . Scene in 2D world case ( a ) Agent recommendation ( b ) Robot recommendation Figure 4 . Scene in 3D world case Almost all subjects finished one experiment in less than 20 minutes . The options that subjects selected were automatically recorded in a computer when subjects pushed the OK button . The scenes in one experiment were videotaped . Effect of Robot and Screen Agent Recommendations on Human Decision - Making 351 2 . 13 Results We calculated the mean matching ratios of the color names that the agent or robot successfully recommended to each subject . The mean ratios in the groups were also calculated . In the no - recommendation case , subjects did not get any recommendation , but the same color name options as in the recommendation case were presented . In the recommendation case , one of the color names was recommended . In estimating the mean matching ratios in the no - recommendation case , the mean matching ratios of the color names that were recommended in the recommendation case were calculated . 2 . 13 . 1 2D world case ( a ) 2D world case ( b ) 3D world case Figure 5 . Matching ratios Figure 5 ( a ) shows the mean matching ratios for each group in the 2D world case . Factorial analyses of variance ( ANOVA ) were conducted for each mean of matching ratios . We compared the mean between no - recommendation , on - screen agent ' s recommendation , and robot ' s recommendation . There was a significant difference only between Group No2 and Group Ag2 ( ANOVA , F = 3 . 457 , p = 0 . 036 , Scheffé , p = 0 . 043 ) . The difference between Group No2 and Group Ro2 was not statistically significant . 2 . 13 . 2 3D world case Figure 5 ( b ) shows the mean matching ratios for each group in the 3D world case . Again , factorial analyses of variance ( ANOVA ) were conducted for each mean of matching ratios . We again compared the mean between no - recommendation , on - screen agent ' s recommendation and robot ' s recommendation . There were significant differences between Group No3 and Group Ro3 and between Group Ag3 and Group Ro3 ( ANOVA , F = 6 . 725 , p = 0 . 002 , Scheffé , p = 0 . 003 , p = 0 . 042 ) . Table 2 summarizes the experiment results . The circles mean that the difference from the no - recommendation case is statistically significant . Table 2 . Effect of recommendation Human - Robot Interaction 352 3 . Gaze effect in 3D agent and 3D world case We used the robot with the subject’s head tracking function . In the actual experimental situation , subjects sat at fixed place and the relative position from a robot to the place was also fixed . Whenever the robot turned to the place with a fixed angle , its eyes could roughly catch the subject’s face or head . However , subjects’ sitting posture was not always same and their head sometime slightly moved during the experiment . Even in such a situation , does a robot need a tracking function ? Is precisely facing a human head important for a 3D agent ? We conducted additional experiments to confirm the importance of having the robot directly facing subjects and investigated whether the importance also holds in a robot with a different appearance . The experiments consisted of three groups with same color - name selection task as in the above experiments . One group used the same rabbit - like robot without a tracking function . The robot could not adjust its head direction to the subject’s head movement and always made a same motion . For the other groups , a head robot made a recommendation instead of a rabbit - like robot . Figure 7 shows the head robot’s appearance . The robot was developed by MIT AI Laboratory and modified by NTT Communication Science Laboratories . The robot has only a head and neck ( no arms or legs ) , both with 30 degrees of freedom . The robot can produce various facial expressions . In addition , each eyeball has a camera that can pan and tilt . Having cameras inside the eyeballs can makes the robot ' s gaze direction clear to subjects and ensures the center of the robot ' s eye can be directed toward subjects with an appropriate vision system . To enable the tracking function , a skin - color region was detected using a detector developed by MIT AI Lab , and the eye direction turned to the center of that region . Table 3 summarizes the three conditions . Subjects’ mean age was 24 . 2 years . Figure 7 . Head robot Group Ro3 - 2 Ro3 - 3 Ro3 - 4 Tracking / Non - tracking Non - Tracking Non - tracking Tracking Number 30 14 14 Mean age 20 . 97 25 . 07 23 . 21 Max . age 25 32 35 Min . age 19 19 19 Ratio of males 0 . 5 0 . 50 0 . 50 Table 3 . Groups Effect of Robot and Screen Agent Recommendations on Human Decision - Making 353 3 . 1 . Result in matching ratio The mean of the matching ratio to the robot’s recommended options for each subject is shown in Fig . 8 . Factorial ANOVA were conducted for each mean of matching ratios . We compared the mean between non - recommendation , without tracking , and with tracking for the same robot . There is a significant difference in the mean between non - recommendation and the robot with tracking for both robots . ( In the rabbit robot case , ANOVA , F = 6 . 292 , p = 0 . 003 , Scheffé , p = 0 . 003 and in the head robot case , ANOVA , F = 4 . 759 , p = 0 . 012 , Scheffé , p = 0 . 015 ) . The difference between the non - recommendation case and without tracking is not statistically significant ( p > 0 . 1 ) . Figure 8 . Matching ratios Figure 9 . Mutual gaze ratios 3 . 2 . Result in mutual gaze We determined a gaze - period according to the directions of both the robot’s gaze and subject’s gaze . Subjects’ gaze was classified into four categories : ”color plate” , ”button box” , ”robot’s face” , and “other” . The robot’s gaze was classified into three categories : ”color plate” , ”subject’s face” , and “other” . This is because the robot could make its eyes turn toward the button box . In the head robot condition , we recorded the experiment scenes using the cameras equipped in head robot’s eyes , which gave us an accurate recording from Human - Robot Interaction 354 the robot’s viewpoint . All assignments were made on the basis of an experimenter’s observations with those videos . We assumed that a combination of a robot’s gaze to a subject’s face and a subject’s gaze to a robot’s face achieved mutual gaze . We defined the mutual gaze period as the period for which the combination continues . Figure 9 shows the mean ratio of mutual gaze periods for the whole experiment . The ratio in the tracking condition is significantly larger than in non - tracking condition ( ANOVA , F = 6 . 468 , p = 0 . 018 ) . 4 . Discussion Figure 5 shows that the dimensionality of the ESA causes differences in the recommendation ' s effect on user decision - making . The 3D body was not always superior to the 2D body for recommendation , and on - screen agents seem to have weak points , too . Those differences cannot be explained only by the advantages or disadvantage of pointing . In the 2D world condition , the color region was presented on the computer display . The display was in 3D space , so the color region was presented in the 3D space . From this point of view , there should be no difference between the 2D and 3D world conditions and therefore no difference in the effect . There must therefore be some other reasons . The results changed according to the combination of the location pointed to and the ESA ' s dimensionality . This seems to be evidence supporting the importance of consistency in the dimensionality between communication partners and the environment consisting of the pointing location and manipulated objects . In the 2D world condition , the color region was displayed on the CRT and color name options that should be selected were also on the CRT . In the 2D world and on - screen agent case , all were contained in the frame of the computer display . The frame might have emphasized the appropriate consistency and the on - screen agent might have had a strong influence through its recommendation . In the 3D world condition , the communication environment was in the 3D physical space . In the 3D world and robot case , the color region and color name options were contained in the physical 3D space , although they were physically separated and there was no frame . In addition , the effect of robot ' s recommendation was much greater than that of the on - screen agent ' s . The robot ' s body might have had a strong influence for emphasizing appropriate consistency to 3D space without a visual frame . In addition , behavior in communication contains ambiguous meanings and depends on the situation and communication environment ( Sperber and Wilson , 1993 ) . So , humans tend to quickly recognize an environment where the communication partner exists for interpretation . The results of our experiment seem to provide evidence that humans tend to quickly recognize communication environments even in interaction with an ESA , and also suggest that we must not forget the communication environment in designing ESA behavior . 4 . 1 Tracking function effect in 3D world case . Figure 8 shows that the influence of a robot without a tracking function is still larger than both 2D agent’s and no - recommendation case , although the difference is not significant . The result suggests that the dimensionality still works even if a robot has no tracking function , although the effect is reduced . And , 3D shape with predetermined motions is not sufficient for significantly producing the robot’s dimensionality effect on human decision - making . In addition , those results also suggest that only a tracking function is not sufficient for Effect of Robot and Screen Agent Recommendations on Human Decision - Making 355 explaining all effects caused by the dimensionality , but that a tracking function must be important for robot’s influencing human decision - making . Much research has pointed out eye direction’s importance in conversation . For example , our gaze is one way of encouraging someone to talk ( Michael & Mark , 1976 ) . Gaze fixation exerts a special pressure to communication . In addition , research based on questionnaires has confirmed that a robot’s face direction makes a human notice its gaze ( Imai et al , 2002 ) and suggested that its face direction is effective for signaling to whom the robot will talk in a multi - user situation . As shown in Fig . 9 , a tracking function increases robot’s mutual gaze chances when subjects may have a feeling that the robot looks at them . In addition , robots with a tracking function influenced decision - making more significantly than robots without it . Thus , such a feeling of being looked at would be necessary for producing some changes on human decision . In other words , our results show that mutual gaze influences not only human feelings but also decision - making in cases of interaction between humans and robots . And , a feeling that a robot looks at us is fundamental and crucial to a robot’s becoming a communication partner . 5 . Conclusion We experimentally confirmed through quantitative evaluation that the degree of recommendation effect firmly depends on the interaction environment . The results show that a three - dimensional body has some advantage when the interaction environment is a three - dimensional space , but has less advantage in two - dimensional space than a two - dimensional body does . This suggests that geometrical consistency between an ESA and the interaction environment plays an important role in communication . In the 3D world case , we also experimentally confirmed that a tracking function for a robot can play the same important role that gaze has in humans ; that is , it can increase the robot’s influence on human decision - making through the interaction even if the tracking movement is small . For a robot as a physical advertisement agent , tracking is an important function . The tracking function successfully makes the mutual gaze ratio greater during interaction ; however , the ratio doesn’t always have a relationship with the influence on decision - making . Mutual gaze increases the chance when users may have feeling of being looked at , but it is not enough for insuring that a robot gives the feeling . To become a communication partner , a robot needs an effective method for emphasizing the feeling . 6 . References Ball , G . & Breese , J . , ( 1998 ) . Emotion and personality in a conversation character . In : Proceedings of the Workshop on Embodied Conversation Characters . Becheiraz , P . & Thalmann , D . , ( 1998 ) . A behavioral animation system for autonomous actors personified by emotions . In : Proceedings of the 1998 Workshop on Embodied Conversational Characters . Beskow , J . & McGlashan , S . ( 1997 ) . Olga - conversational agent with gestures . In : P roceedings of the IJCAI - 97 Workshop on Animated Interface Agents : Making them Intelligent . Bruce , V . & Young , A . ( 1998 ) . In the eye of the beholder : The science of face perception : Oxford University Press . Human - Robot Interaction 356 Cassell , J . & Thórisson , K . R . ( 1999 ) . The power of a nod and a glance : Envelope vs . emotional feedback in animated conversational agents . In : Applied Artificial Intelligence . Vol . 13 . pp . 519 – 538 . Imai , M . , Kanda , T . , Ono , T . , Ishiguro H . , & Mase , K . ( 2002 ) . Robot mediated round table : Analysis of the effect of robot’s gaze . In Proceedings of 11th IEEE International Workshop on Robot and Human Communication ( RO - MAN2002 ) , 2002 , pp . 411 – 416 . Michael , A . & Mark , C . ( 1976 ) Gaze and Mutual Gaze . Cambridge University Press , UK . Massaro , D . ( 1998 ) . Perceiving talking faces : From speech perception to a behavioral principle . MIT Press . Mizuno , O . & Nakajima , S . ( 1998 ) . Synthetic speech / sound control language : Mscl . In : 3rd ESCA / COCOSDA Proceedings of International Workshop on Speech Synthesis . pp . 21 – 26 . Nass , C . & Gong , L . ( 1999 ) . Maximized modality or constrained consistency ? In : Proceedings of the AVSP ’99 Conference . Nass , C . & Isbister , K . ( 1998 ) . Personality in conversational characters : Building better digital interaction partners using knowledge about human personality preferences and perceptions . In : Proceedings of the 1998 Workshop on Embodied Conversational Characters . Ono , T . , Imai , M . & Ishiguro , H . ( 2001 ) . A model of embodied communications with gestures between humans and robots . In : Proceedings of Twenty - third Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society . pp . 732 – 737 . Reeves , B . & Nass , C . ( 1996 ) . The Media Equation . Cambridge University Press . Shibata , T . & Tanie , K . ( 2001 ) . Physical and affective interaction between human and mental commit robot . In : Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation . pp . 2572 – 2577 . Shinozawa , K . , Yamato , J . , Naya , F . & Kogure , K . ( 2001 ) . Quantitative evaluation of effect of embodied conversational agents on user decision . In : Proceedings of HCI International 2001 . pp . 998 – 1002 . Shinozawa , K . , Naya , F . , & Kogure , K . & Yamato , J . , Effect of robot ' s tracking users on human decision making . Proceedings of 2004 IEEE / RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems , pp . 1908 - 1913 , 2004 , Sendai , Japan Shinozawa , K . , Naya , F . , Yamato , J . , & Kogure , K . , Differences in Effect of Robot and Screen Agent Recommendations on Human Decision - Making , IJHCS , Vol . 62 / 2 , pp 267 - 279 , 2005 . Sperber , D . & Wilson , D . ( 1993 ) . RELEVANCE : Communication and cognition . Oxford : blackwell . Takeuchi , Y . , Katagiri , Y . , Nass , C . & Fogg , B . ( 1998 ) . Social response and cultural dependency in human - computer interaction . In : Proceedings of PRICAI . pp . 114 – 123 . Yamato , J . , Shinozawa , K . , Naya , F . : Effect of Shared - attention on Human - Robot Communication , In Proceedings of ACM / CHI2004 Workshop Shaping Human - Robot Interaction - Understainding the Social Aspects of Intelligent Robotic Products Yamato , J . , Brooks , R . , Shinozawa , K . , and Naya , F . : Human - Robot Dynamic Social Interaction , NTT Technical Review , Vol . 1 , No . 6 , Sep . 2003 Human Robot Interaction Edited by Nilanjan Sarkar ISBN 978 - 3 - 902613 - 13 - 4 Hard cover , 522 pages Publisher I - Tech Education and Publishing Published online 01 , September , 2007 Published in print edition September , 2007 InTech Europe University Campus STeP Ri Slavka Krautzeka 83 / A 51000 Rijeka , Croatia Phone : + 385 ( 51 ) 770 447 Fax : + 385 ( 51 ) 686 166 www . intechopen . com InTech China Unit 405 , Office Block , Hotel Equatorial Shanghai No . 65 , Yan An Road ( West ) , Shanghai , 200040 , China Phone : + 86 - 21 - 62489820 Fax : + 86 - 21 - 62489821 Human - robot interaction research is diverse and covers a wide range of topics . All aspects of human factors and robotics are within the purview of HRI research so far as they provide insight into how to improve our understanding in developing effective tools , protocols , and systems to enhance HRI . For example , a significant research effort is being devoted to designing human - robot interface that makes it easier for the people to interact with robots . HRI is an extremely active research field where new and important work is being published at a fast pace . It is neither possible nor is it our intention to cover every important work in this important research field in one volume . However , we believe that HRI as a research field has matured enough to merit a compilation of the outstanding work in the field in the form of a book . This book , which presents outstanding work from the leading HRI researchers covering a wide spectrum of topics , is an effort to capture and present some of the important contributions in HRI in one volume . We hope that this book will benefit both experts and novice and provide a thorough understanding of the exciting field of HRI . How to reference In order to correctly reference this scholarly work , feel free to copy and paste the following : Kazuhiko Shinozawa and Junji Yamato ( 2007 ) . Effect of Robot and Screen Agent Recommendations on Human Decision - Making , Human Robot Interaction , Nilanjan Sarkar ( Ed . ) , ISBN : 978 - 3 - 902613 - 13 - 4 , InTech , Available from : http : / / www . intechopen . com / books / human _ robot _ interaction / effect _ of _ robot _ and _ screen _ agent _ recommendat ions _ on _ human _ decision - making