A bird’s eye view : biological categorization and reasoning within and across cultures Jeremy N . Bailenson a , * , Michael S . Shum b , Scott Atran c , d , Douglas L . Medin b , John D . Coley e a Research Center for Virtual Environments and Behavior , University of California , Santa Barbara , CA , USA b Northwestern University , Evanston , IL , USA c Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque , Lyon , France d University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , MI , USA e Northeastern University , Boston , MA , USA Received 7 November 2000 ; received in revised form 18 April 2001 ; accepted 1 February 2002 Abstract Many psychological studies of categorization and reasoning use undergraduates to make claims about human conceptualization . Generalizability ofﬁndings to other populations is often assumed but rarely tested . Even when comparative studies are conducted , it may be challenging to interpret differ - ences . As a partial remedy , in the present studies we adopt a ‘triangulation strategy’ to evaluate the ways expertise and culturally different belief systems can lead to different ways of conceptualizing the biological world . We use three groups ( US bird experts , US undergraduates , and ordinary Itza’ Maya ) andtwosetsofbirds ( NorthAmericanandCentralAmerican ) . Categorizationtasksshowconsiderable similarity among the three groups’ taxonomic sorts , but also systematic differences . Notably , US expert categorization is more similar to Itza’ than to US novice categorization . The differences are magniﬁed on inductive reasoning tasks where only undergraduates show patterns of judgment that are largely consistent with current models of category - based taxonomic inference . The Maya commonly employ causal and ecological reasoning rather than taxonomic reasoning . Experts use a mixture of strategies ( includingcausal andecological reasoning ) , onlysome ofwhichcurrentmodelsexplain . US and Itza’ informants differed markedly when reasoning about passerines ( songbirds ) , reﬂecting the somewhat different role that songbirds play in the two cultures . The results call into question the importance of similarity - based notions of typicality and central tendency in natural categorization and reasoning . These ﬁndings also show that relative expertise leads to a convergence of thought that transcends cultural boundaries and shared experiences . q 2002 Elsevier Science B . V . All rights reserved . Keywords : Biological categorization ; Reasoning ; Expertise ; Cross - cultural differences J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 1 Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 www . elsevier . com / locate / cognit 0010 - 0277 / 02 / $ - see front matter q 2002 Elsevier Science B . V . All rights reserved . PII : S0010 - 0277 ( 02 ) 00011 - 2 C O G N I T I O N * Corresponding author . Department of Psychology , University of California , Santa Barbara , CA , 93101 - 9660 , USA . E - mail address : bailenson @ psych . ucsb . edu ( J . N . Bailenson ) . 1 . Introduction Two bedrock cognitive processes are categorization ( how do we decide what objects are the same kind of thing ) and inductive reasoning ( given that one object or class exhibits a property , how do we decide whether other related objects or classes do ) . Although researchers have increasingly examined these issues in real world vs . artiﬁcially contrived domains , research participants are usually introductory psychology undergraduates . Atten - tion to real - world domains , however , raises important questions concerning the way knowledge and culture may affect these processes . In the present studies we focus on the domain of folkbiology for two reasons : there is a rich literature concerning how humans categorize and reason about plants and animals ; and there is signiﬁcant variability in folkbiological knowledge within and between cultures . If it should turn out that different knowledge systems , goals and activities differ - entially affect people’s ways of conceptualizing the natural world , then lopsided attention to a single participant pool risks biasing interpretation ( Atran , 1995 ) . In the worst case , undergraduate performance becomes something of a standard and when comparisons are made with different populations , any differences may be wrongly interpreted as either ‘failing’ a given experimental task or being under the inﬂuence of ‘extraneous’ factors when performing it . Although studies in social psychology and decision making have increasingly brought issues concerning populations and context to the forefront of the research agenda ( Giger - enzer , 1996 ; Hsee & Weber , 1999 ; Markus & Kitayama , 1991 ; Nisbett , Peng , Choi , & Norenzayan , 2001 ) , there is no comparable cautionary perspective in cognitive categor - ization and reasoning studies . This is perhaps even more surprising given that Rosch’s pioneering research on category structure was ﬁrmly rooted in cross - cultural comparisons ( Heider , 1971 , 1972 ; Rosch , 1975 , 1977 ) . In contrast to cognitive psychology , one of the most relevant subﬁelds of anthropology , ethnobiology , has by its very nature focused on cultural comparisons of classiﬁcation systems ( e . g . Atran , 1998 ; Berlin , 1992 ; Boster , 1988 ) . An endorsement of cross - group comparisons is not without its problems . Comparisons are a reasonable strategy when there is a clear theoretical rationale for expecting some difference ( e . g . Markus & Kitayama , 1991 ) . But consider two other cases . If one compares two groups and ﬁnds no difference , then the generality of the results is on ﬁrmer ground . Here the limitation is that the results may not be considered particularly newsworthy . If one compares two groups and ﬁnds clear differences , then interpretative problems quickly emerge . Which of the many ways in which the two groups differ are crucial ? For example , Lo´pez , Atran , Coley , Medin , and Smith , ( 1997 ) found that US undergraduates and Itza’ Maya of Guatemala showed a different pattern of responding on a category - based induc - tive reasoning task involving mammals . Although this undermines the universality of the particular reasoning phenomenon , the two groups differ in myriad ways ( e . g . age , educa - tion , literacy , livelihood , language , cosmology and so on ) . Furthermore , it is , practically speaking , very likely impossible to disentangle these various factors because ( cultural ) groups cannot be found that represent orthogonal combinations of these variables . In short , without a clear theory , one may be confronted by the dilemma of ﬁnding either weakly informative similarities or uninterpretable differences . J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 2 As a partial remedy our research group has followed what we informally refer to as a triangulation strategy . The general idea is to use observations from a third group to get at least modest leverage for understanding initial group differences . The third group should resemble one group in some potentially important ways and the second group in other ways . If the third group performs very much like one of the groups and different from the other group , then the variables shared by the third group and the group it mimics become candidates for critical variables . For example , two of the groups in the present studies , US undergraduates and Itza’ Maya adults , differ in all the ways faced by the Lo´pez et al . ( 1997 ) comparisons . The third group , US bird experts , is similar to US undergraduates in many ways but shares with the Itza’ extensive biological knowledge . If US bird experts and Itza’ show similar performance and differ from the third group , then one can have conﬁdence that one has identiﬁed a key variable ( knowledge ) and that it is robust over all the other differences between the two groups . If US bird experts perform comparably to undergraduates , one has at least ruled out domain knowledge as mediating the difference . This so - called triangulation strategy obviously is not a cure - all . For example , it may be difﬁcult to ﬁnd third groups that share variables with the ﬁrst two groups without introdu - cing further extraneous variables . Even if used successfully , it is like playing “twenty questions” but only being able to ask two ( “Are A and B different and if so , is C more like A or B ? ” ) . For the strategy to be effective one must either make good guesses about relevant variables or be able to collect data from additional groups to further clarify the pattern of similarities and differences . At ﬁrst glance , it might appear that our triangulation strategy is just a 2 £ 2 design with one cell missing . But a 2 £ 2 design presumes what the triangulation strategy is intended to discover , namely , which factors are crucial to group differences . In fact , the logic of triangulation implies compression of any number of possible 2 £ 2 designs that together entail a host of possible explanations for group differences . Instead of running 2 N th conventional controlled designs , each of which allows inference to a single factor , a carefully chosen third group , C , that resembles the ﬁrst group , A , in a number of ways and the second group , B , in a number of other ways deliberately confounds a number of variables . This is to enable discovery of the relative importance of the set of culturally - confounded variables by which C differs from A vs . those by which C differs from B . A 2 £ 2 design also implies more precise matching and control of variables than is feasible in cross - cultural comparisons . In the present studies the US birders and the Itza’ elders are both expert with respect to US undergraduates but it can hardly be said that the birders and the Itza’ are “matched” in expertise . As we will shortly point out , there is literature that demonstrates differences in categorization as a function of relative amounts ( Johnson & Mervis , 1997 , 1998 ) and type of expertise . We view the triangulation strategy as having the potential to be applied iteratively at different levels of resolution . For example , suppose we were to ﬁnd that US experts resembled Itza’ in some ways but differed from them in other ways . Rather than attributing any differences to culture , one might well attempt to develop another triangular comparison involving Itza’ , US experts with goals and activities resembling those of the Itza’ and US experts with goals and activities distinct from the Itza’ . Again , it would be unlikely that one could obtain a precise match on goals and activities but might well be able to produce greater cross - cultural than within culture similarity in goals and activities . To do this , one potentially might need to J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 3 “reverse the triangle” and compare types of Itza’ ( e . g . bird hunters and non - hunters ) with US experts . As we shall see , in the present studies the Itza’ often cluster with the US experts , ﬁndings which suggest that similarity with respect to knowledge is a more impor - tant factor than similarity with respect to culture . Before turning to the present experiments , we brieﬂy review some relevant literature on folkbiological categorization and reasoning . This prior work will be used to motivate several hypotheses concerning the role of expertise and culture in conceptual behavior . Our focus is on the assumptions that underlie general models of categorization and cate - gory - based reasoning , in particular typicality and diversity . 1 . 1 . Expertise effects in folkbiology Boster and Johnson ( 1989 ) examined knowledge and sorting patterns among expert and novice ﬁshermen . They note that morphological information ( the stimuli were pictures of ﬁsh ) is available to any observer , but cultural knowledge of functional and utilitarian properties of ﬁsh requires experience . Therefore , experts and non - experts should differ not only in the amount of information they possess , but also in the kinds of information . If this information is used in classiﬁcation , then experts should be more likely to classify along functional and utilitarian lines . As expected , Boster and Johnson found that non - experts relied more on morphological information than did experts . Although similarity judgments of all groups correlated with scientiﬁc taxonomy , non - experts correlated more highly than experts . Experts’ similarity judgments in turn were more highly correlated with functional similarity . Medin , Lynch , Coley , and Atran ( 1997 ) addressed the question of inter - expert differ - ences . Instead of comparing the conceptual structure of experts and non - experts , they examined similarities and differences among experts with different specialties within a single domain . They looked at how different types of tree experts ( maintenance workers , landscapers , and taxonomists ) categorized and reasoned about familiar tree species . Their analysis revealed some common conceptual organization between different types of experts , but also that expert groups differed with respect to the structure of their taxo - nomies and how they justiﬁed or explained the categories they formed . In sorting , main - tenance workers relied on morphological features , while the landscape workers structured their sorts around goal - derived categories based on practicable interests ( taxonomists sorted largely in accordance with scientiﬁc taxonomy ) . The reasoning of taxonomists and maintenance workers accorded well with the similarity relationships revealed on the sorting task . Landscapers’ reasoning could not be predicted from their ( goal - derived ) sorting ; instead , like the maintenance workers they relied on morphological similarity . Thus , the acquisition of expertise in a particular domain does not necessarily lead to a standardized conceptual organization of information in that domain , though reasoning tasks may reveal more agreement ( see Profﬁtt , Coley , & Medin , 2000 for further simila - rities and differences among tree experts as a function of type of expertise ) . The above studies of expertise clearly indicate an inﬂuence of experience in a domain with respect to reasoning and sorting about members of that domain . The way in which people structure their concepts about particular domains depends on both their level of knowledge and the kind of knowledge they possess by virtue of their characteristic goals J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 4 and activities . In the following section we discuss the ways in which an individual’s cultural experience may effect the way he or she reasons . 1 . 2 . Cross - cultural comparisons of folkbiology In addition to expertise , we are also principally interested in how cultural experience may affect folkbiology . Roughly , any given “culture” is a causally distributed assemblage of mental representations , their public expressions and resultant behaviors that become relatively pervasive , enduring and interconnecting among individual members . Represen - tations and behaviors become more or less “cultural” to the extent that they spread and stabilize within a population of minds over time ( Atran , 2001 ) . Because the current set of cross - cultural studies do not really explore the underlying causal processes of within - group variation and culture formation , for present purposes we restrict our use of the notion of culture to an imperfect community of evidentiary symptoms . We use the term in a commonsensical manner to refer to a host of confounded variables that include symbolic ( e . g . language and legends ) , ideational ( e . g . values and mores ) , social structural ( e . g . kinship and community organizations ) , technological ( e . g . arts and crafts ) , and envir - onmental ( e . g . landscape and local ecology ) factors . “Culture” as such cannot be reduced to an independent variable . For our purposes , however , it sufﬁces to say that populations that have radically different languages , legends , values , mores , community and kinship organizations , economic and ecological practices and so on belong to different “cultures” . Examples include the populations that ethnobiologists have traditionally studied ( e . g . Berlin , 1992 ) . In general , cross - cultural research in folkbiology has pointed to similarities between different cultural groups in their categorization and reasoning about natural kinds . Ethno - biologists studying systems of classiﬁcation in small - scale societies ( e . g . Atran , 1999 ; Berlin , 1978 , 1992 ; Berlin , Breedlove , & Raven , 1973 , 1974 ; Brown , 1984 ; Bulmer , 1974 ; Hays , 1983 ; Hunn , 1977 ) have argued that taxonomies of living kinds are organized into ranked systems . Not only are categories related to each other via class inclusion , but categories ( taxa ) at a given level in the system also share taxonomic , linguistic , biological , and psychological properties with other categories at that level . Moreover , these regula - rities in folkbiological classiﬁcation and nomenclature can be seen in disparate cultures throughout the world . Indeed , these common principles observed in culturally diverse populations are often taken as evidence for universal cognitive constraints on folkbiolo - gical thought ( Berlin , 1992 ) . These claims are supported by research that extends beyond the cataloging of folk taxonomies . For example , Boster , Berlin , and O’Neil ( 1986 ) examined disagreement between Aguaruna and Huambisa Jivaro natives by having the groups identify prepared bird specimens . Although the groups are both from the same region in northern Peru , their cultural milieux are distinct in the sense that members of the communities are not in direct contact and speak different but related languages . These authors demonstrate that the two groups exhibit similar disagreement patterns during identiﬁcation that can be predicted by taxonomic relatedness ; that is , both groups are more likely to confuse species that are more closely related scientiﬁcally . Boster ( 1987 ) extended the results of these experiments to include a condition where the J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 5 participants sorted unfamiliar birds . He chose a subset of the birds used in the Boster et al . ( 1986 ) study and presented them in a sorting task to US undergraduates . He then compared the data to previous results and found that specimens the college students found percep - tually similar corresponded with closely related birds according to scientiﬁc taxonomy , and also tended to be the ones confused by Peruvian natives . Although this ﬁnding is impressive in that it shows two completely distinct cultural groups performing quite similarly with the same biological kinds , the data would be more compelling had the same type of task been used for the subjects in both cultural settings . Boster’s ﬁndings support Berlin’s claim that diverse groups of informants discern the same sorts of biological kinds in the same ways because of the inter - correlated structure of the biological world ( see also Hunn , 1976 ) . Of course , if features are highly inter - corre - lated , then two individuals ( or groups ) may attend to different features but produce more or less the same sorts . That is , different people may attend to very different features of a given organism , but because the features themselves are covariant , the same structure is discerned . Alternatively , there may be universal classiﬁcatory principles that interact with the world’s correlational structure with the result that diverse groups of informants choose the same salient features of specimens to construct and distinguish biological kinds . Either alternative is also consistent with ﬁndings by Medin et al . ( 1997 ) that when different groups of tree experts produce similar sortings of species they may justify them differently ( see also Boster & D’Andrade , 1989 ) . 1 . 3 . Similarity - based models of categorization and reasoning in folkbiology The cross - cultural ﬁndings reported thus far are all interpretable in terms of ‘similarity - based models’ ( Smith & Medin , 1981 ) , which organize perceptually identiﬁable cate - gories on the basis of correlation or covariation of stimulus attributes . Category - based induction models of taxonomic reasoning in folkbiology also rely on computations over similarity judgments or their presumed underlying features ( Osherson , Smith , Wilkie , Lo´pez , & Shaﬁr , 1990 ; Sloman , 1993 ) . More recent studies , however , call into question the generality of similarity - based models of categorization and reasoning in folkbiology . Lo´pez et al . ( 1997 ) explored how University of Michigan students and Itza’ Maya sorted and reasoned about local mammal species . The Itza’ were shown mammals from Central America while the Michigan students were shown mammals native to the Great Lakes region . Lo´pez et al . found several consistent differences and similarities in reasoning and sorting . Both groups tended to justify their sorts by focusing on behavior and morphology , thereby creating groups consisting of predators and non - predators . Taxonomic sortings for both groups correlated to the same degree with one another and with scientiﬁc ( evolu - tionary ) taxonomies . However , Americans and Maya systematically diverged from science in relying on size and ferocity as salient sorting dimensions . The two groups also systematically diverged from one another , with Itza’ relying more on ecological considerations ( e . g . in grouping arboreal mammals ) and less on size than the Michigan students . Lo´pez et al . also tested for three category - based induction phenomena as deﬁned by Osherson et al . ( 1990 ) : similarity , typicality and diversity . Similarity predicts that the stronger inference should be the one in which the premise category is deemed more similar J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 6 to the conclusion category . For example , according to sorting data , Itza’ believe that fox and cat are more similar than fox and dog . US undergraduates believe that fox is more similar to dog than cat . Consistent with these beliefs , Itza’ were more likely to attribute a novel property of fox to cat , whereas US students were more likely to attribute it to dog . Both populations used similarity to guide induction . Lo´pez et al . also derived a metric for typicality from the sorting data . Items that were more “typical” by virtue of having higher central tendency ( i . e . high average similarity to other mammals ) supported inferences better than items that were less typical ( i . e . less similar on average to other mammals ) . Items that are more typical thus provide greater “coverage” of the category than items that are less typical . Both the Americans and Maya reliably performed inference tasks in conformity with this algebraic measure of typicality . The most notable differences between the two groups centered on diversity . According to the diversity principle , an argument with taxonomically dissimilar premises should be evaluated as stronger than an argument with taxonomically similar premises , all other things being equal . For example , people should be more willing to generalize a fact that is true of mice and bears to all mammals than a fact that is true of wolves and coyotes . US undergraduates showed high levels of diversity - based reasoning ; however , the Itza’ did not . In fact , in one condition , the Itza’ showed a reliable dis - preference for the more diverse arguments . The Itza’ justiﬁed their responses on the basis of speciﬁc ecological knowledge , often leading them to conclude that the more diverse premise was the weaker of the two choices . Subsequent work on direct typicality judgments among Itza’ ( Atran , 1999 ) shows that inductively useful notions of typicality may be driven more by notions of idealness than central tendency . In each case for which we have direct Itza’ ratings , the ‘truest’ or ‘most representative’ living kind categories are large , perceptually striking , culturally important , and ecologically prominent . The dimensions of perceptual , ecological and cultural salience all appear necessary to a determination of typicality , but none alone appears to be sufﬁcient . The three most representative birds are all large , morphologically striking and highly edible Galliformes ( wild fowl ) : the ocellated turkey , the crested guan , and the great curassow . In an earlier study , Barsalou ( 1985 ) argued that idealness rather than central tendency predicts typicality in goal - derived categories ( e . g . foods not to eat on a diet , things to take from one’s home during a ﬁre , camping equipment ) , although central tendency does predict typicality in ‘taxonomic’ categories ( e . g . furniture , vehicles ) , including folkbiolo - gical categories ( e . g . birds ) . The Atran ( 1999 ) results indicate that the story may be still more complicated . For mammals , direct Itza’ ratings of typicality and derived measures of central tendency largely coincide . Thus , what Lo´pez et al . ( 1997 ) interpreted as conﬁrma - tion of the role of central tendency in the Osherson et al . ( 1990 ) model may have as much or more to do with ideals than typicality in the model’s sense ( with the added complication that , for mammals , idealness may somehow be driving central tendency ) . For Itza’ birds , however , preliminary studies indicated a clear distinction between idealness ratings and central tendency , which facilitates an exploration of the respective contributions to induc - tion of these different conceptions of typicality . Given the bulk of cross - cultural research in folkbiology that stresses universals in conceptual organization , cultural differences with respect to typicality and diversity are J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 7 striking . However , the source of the differences is not clear . The groups differ in terms of cultural membership , and also in terms of relative expertise about the natural world . So , the question becomes , do the differences in categorization and reasoning about mammals between the Itza’ and US undergraduates owe to different information requirements that derive from cultural preference , relative expertise , or some combination of the two ? More generally , how do cultural experience and relative familiarity or knowledge interact to drive conceptual differences ? 1 . 4 . Sorting out knowledge and cultural effects : expertise effects Although there is not an extensive literature , the current evidence suggests that knowl - edge may be more important than culture in determining typicality ratings and category - based induction . Lynch , Coley , and Medin ( 2000 ) found that tree experts based their typicality judgments on ideals ( e . g . height , absence of undesirable characteristics ) and that central tendency was uncorrelated with judgments . They found no effects of type of expertise . The fact that US experts and Itza’ ( experts ) both show effects of ideals under - mines concerns about the wording of the typicality instructions in Itza’ Maya somehow conveying a different notion of typicality . Lynch et al . used instructions that followed verbatim those by Rosch and Mervis ( 1975 ) in their original studies showing central tendency - based typicality effects . Profﬁtt et al . ( 2000 ) examined typicality and diversity effects in reasoning among the three types of US tree experts studied by Medin et al . ( 1997 ) . They found that typicality and diversity effects were weak or absent . Only taxonomists showed above chance diver - sity responding and maintenance personnel were actually below chance on some diversity probes . Justiﬁcations point to the three types of experts using strategies based on ecolo - gical and causal factors , much like the Itza’ reasoning about mammals . Diversity was one justiﬁcation among many and never constituted a majority of the justiﬁcations for any of the groups . Direct appeals to typicality were rare in one experiment and totally absent in another . 1 . 5 . Integrating culture and expertise in typicality and reasoning : hypotheses This brief review helps motivate the current triangulation strategy . The studies of typicality and induction with experts suggest that type of expertise matters little and that causal / ecological reasoning may be far more common than abstract , similarity - based reasoning strategies . Combining the studies of expertise with work in ethnobiology suggests the following hypothesis : there is a natural or default categorization scheme sensitive to the structure of nature ( relative to the human perceptual system ) but experts may develop special - purpose classiﬁcation schemes as a function of characteristic activ - ities and the additional goal - related knowledge they acquire . Whether experts develop special - purpose categorization schemes may depend on the variety of goals they have with respect to some domain and the degree to which their goals are compatible with the correlational structure of that domain . Applying this hypothesis to the present studies suggests several predictions . First of all , we should note that we employed both birds found in Guatemala and those found in the US . The predictions hinge critically on whether or not US bird experts or Itza’ have J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 8 specialized goals . Given that the primary goal of birders is to identify birds , we see no reason for expecting that their goals violate the correlational structure of bird taxonomy . Both bird identiﬁcation and traditional taxonomic systems are based on morphological similarities and differences . If this analysis is correct then both US experts and US novices should base their categorization of both US and Mesoamerican birds on the natural or default taxonomy and show good agreement with scientiﬁc taxonomy . It is less clear what to predict for the Itza’ . On the one hand , they do have specialized goals with respect to some birds ( e . g . hunting them for their meat ) but , on the other , our prior work suggests that they have rich ecological knowledge concerning relationships between particular kinds of birds and both plants and other animals ( Atran et al . , 1999 ) . The latter observation suggests a general - purpose ( default ) representation . If the Itza’ have both special - purpose and general - purpose representations , then we would expect that the special - purpose representation would be much more evident in their sorting of familiar Mesoamerican birds than the unfamiliar US birds ( one cannot safely predict that a special - purpose representation would not be used at all for US birds because although the species in the two settings had essentially no overlap , at the higher levels of genera and families there was modest to extensive overlap ) . In sum , we offer the following hypotheses : ( 1 ) typicality judgments will be based on central tendency for US novices but not for US experts or Itza’ ; ( 2 ) typicality judgments will be based on ideals in the two groups of relative experts ; ( 3 ) US novices will be far more likely to rely on abstract , similarity - based reasoning strategies in category - based induction than either of the two groups of relative experts and consequently will be more likely to show typicality and diversity effects in reasoning . This prediction should be qualiﬁed by the possibility that US experts may have a greater focus on taxonomy than Itza’ ( by virtue of explicitly learning scientiﬁc taxonomy ) and may be somewhat more likely to show taxonomic diversity effects . One might also expect that the results for experts may vary as a function of whether the probes involve the familiar vs . unfamiliar set of birds . If experts are going to use abstract reasoning strategies at all , it should be with the unfamiliar set , because experts should be less likely to employ ecological reasoning with unfamiliar birds ( though , of course , they may do so by analogy from birds that they know ) . Overall , then , our hypotheses based on prior literature lead us to expect few , if any , differences on the sorting task . The two qualiﬁcations to this prediction are that we should be more likely to ﬁnd differences in justiﬁcations for sorts than in the sorts themselves and that Itza’ may use a goal - derived organization for Mesoamerican birds . ( Again , based on the Atran et al . ( 1999 ) ﬁndings we consider the latter possibility unlikely . ) In contrast , we expect large differences for both typicality ratings and category - based inductions . With respect to our triangulation strategy , we expect expertise effects to dominate cultural inﬂuences . To our knowledge , our study is the ﬁrst to simultaneously examine the effects of culture and relative expertise on category - based reasoning . The organization of the remainder of the paper is as follows . In Experiment 1 , we examine how the three groups sort two sets of bird species ( birds of Central America and birds of Illinois ) , and how they explain or justify their sorts . The sorting data provide a similarity metric used to guide the inter - pretation of typicality judgments ( Experiment 2 ) and inductive reasoning ( Experiment 3 ) . J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 9 2 . Experiment 1 : sorting Experiment 1 involved asking participants to sort pictures of local and exotic birds into groups that “go together by nature” . One purpose of this study was to use sorting distance as a similarity metric ( i . e . objective measures of central tendency and pair - wise distance ) for the second and third experiments . A second key goal was to compare within and across group patterns of sorting . In that regard there are two important questions to be addressed : ( 1 ) Do people within a group agree sufﬁciently in their sorting that it is sensible to claim that there is a consensual cultural or group model ? ( 2 ) Are the patterns of sorting reliably different across populations ? To address these questions we employ the cultural consensus model ( CCM ) of Romney , Batchelder , and Weller ( 1986 ) . The CCM is a factor - analytic method for computing levels of agreement and disagree - ment in the structure and distribution of information within and across populations . Of course , there are other possible ways of evaluating reliable patterns of inter - informant agreement . Nevertheless , the CCM has proven to be especially suited to comparisons with small - scale populations by providing formal criteria for assessing conformity among small numbers of informants who produce relatively large data sets of predetermined size ( Atran et al . , 1999 ; Boster & Johnson , 1989 ; Lo´pez et al . , 1997 ; Medin et al . , 1997 ; Romney et al . , 1986 ) . In our methods , we elicit complex information from a number of informants . Rather than assume an underlying model for all informants in a population , we test whether consensus exists . Finding consensus justiﬁes further study of group - wide patterns and establishes a somewhat higher threshold for reliability than mere statistical signiﬁ - cance ( e . g . P values ) , insofar as we do not consider cultural patterning to be established unless there is consensus in addition to signiﬁcance . The CCM is essentially principal components factor analysis . Using this analysis , a group consensus is indicated if ( 1 ) the ﬁrst eigenvalue is substantially larger than the second and accounts for much of the variance , and ( 2 ) the ﬁrst factor scores for each individual are positive . Each informant’s ﬁrst factor score represents the degree to which that person’s responses agree with the consensus . That is , the pattern of correlations among informants should owe entirely to the extent to which each knows the common ( culturally relative ) ‘truth’ . A ﬁt to the CCM provides a number of important indicators of within - group reliability in bird classiﬁcation . For example , it would indicate : ( 1 ) that there is sufﬁcient justiﬁcation for combining individual taxonomies into an aggregate group taxonomy ; ( 2 ) how each subject’s taxonomy compares to the aggregate taxonomy ( based on how each subject ranks on a given factor ) . The CCM also allows us to compare cultural taxonomies . To do this we look at patterns of residual agreement . If there is a single consensus across groups then the CCM should provide a good ﬁt to the aggregate data and the agreement of any two informants should be just the product of their ﬁrst factor scores . If the groups differ , however , then individuals within a group should be in agreement with each other to a greater extent than is predicted by the overall consensus analysis . In the present paper , we compare within vs . between group residual agreement and if the former is reliably greater than the latter , we conclude that there are group differences in consensual models . Note that use of the CCM allows us to treat cultural phenomena in terms of emergent patterns that are statistically derived and J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 10 aggregated from individual cognitions without a priori assumptions about degree of cultural homogeneity . Before describing the experimental procedure in detail , we ﬁrst provide a note on our general methodology . In the present study we asked informants to “sort together the things that go together by nature” rather than giving more abstract instructions to sort by simi - larity . One important lesson of the last decade of our cross - cultural experimental research with adults and children in widely different cultural settings is that experiments are not transparent windows onto reality . They are interactive communication settings wherein the experimenter contrives to get the participant to produce data that informs what the experimenter seeks to know . We have found that the production of data that are equiva - lently informative , or at least directly comparable , across cultural settings often requires incorporating differences in the experimental setup . Of course , the attempt is made to keep the differences to a minimum . In fact , our pilot studies almost always use instruction sets that are as close as possible to ﬂuent translations of one another . For example , in earlier sets of studies we explain why in biological sorting tasks we use the instruction to sort kinds that “go together by nature” rather than “are most similar” ( Lo´pez et al . , 1997 ) . Although sorting by “similarity” is by far the preferred instruction in psychology experiments in our society , there are often no ready translations in other societies . When we used the command “go together by nature” with the Itza’ ( as well as with the US subjects ) we elicited the sort of general - purpose taxonomy described for cultures across the world ( Atran , 1990 ; Berlin , 1992 ) . 2 . 1 . Method 2 . 1 . 1 . Subjects 2 . 1 . 1 . 1 . US experts The US experts were ten men and ten women ( mean age ¼ 50 : 8 years , range : 18 – 83 years ) having either occupations or extensive experience related to birds . The average number of years spent watching and studying birds ( termed ‘birding’ hereafter ) was 22 . 4 years . Three participants had completed high school , one had at least some college work , six had completed college , and ten had advanced degrees , four of those being PhDs . Fourteen had received at least some formal education regarding birds . On a seven - point continuous scale with 1 indicating ‘very little knowledge about birds’ and 7 indicating ‘total expertise’ , the mean self - reported rating for US experts was 5 . 1 ( SD ¼ 1 : 10 ) . The US experts were drawn predominantly from the four following organi - zations : the Evanston Birding Club , the North Shore Birding Club , the Morton Arboretum , and the Chicago Ornithological Society . Occupations of informants were extremely varied and included college professors , salesmen , engineers , retired workers , economists , high school teachers , botanists , and library clerks . Most of them viewed birding as an extremely involving hobby , often dedicating their vacation time to traveling to places where they could ﬁnd birds that they had never seen before . 2 . 1 . 1 . 2 . US non - experts The novices were eight men and eight women ( mean age ¼ 20 : 8 years , range : 18 – 40 years ) who were recruited through the university and paid for their participation . Out of the 16 , only two had any special experience with birds : one of the J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 11 novices had raised pet parrots , and another had taken an informal nature course . On the seven - point rating scale mentioned above , the mean self - reported rating for our non - experts was 2 . 33 ( SD ¼ 0 : 90 ) . 2 . 1 . 1 . 3 . Itza’ Maya Ten Itza’ Maya ( eight men and two women ) living in the village of San Jose´ , Pete´n , Guatemala participated in the study . The Itza’ are Maya Amerindians living in the Pete´n rain forest region of Guatemala . Men devote their time to shifting agriculture and hunting , and women concentrate on household maintenance . The Itza’ were the last independent native polity in Mesoamerica to be conquered by the Spaniards , and have preserved virtually all ethnobiological knowledge recorded for Lowland Maya since the time of the initial Spanish conquest . Informants ranged in age from 50 to 78 years ( mean age ¼ 66 : 14 years ) . All were bilingual in Itza’ and Spanish , although experimental instructions and responses were in the Itza’ language . Some Itza’ participated as part of a larger project on comparative folkbiology , while others were recruited especially for this study . There were no a priori grounds to distinguish experts among the Itza’ as nearly all informants in this and other studies had continuous and extensive experience with forest plants and animals . All Itza’ were well acquainted with the experimenters , and at relative ease in the session . The experimenters were part of an international , interdisciplinary team of researchers that has been studying the language , lore and natural history of Itza’ and other contemporary and Pre - Columbian Lowland Maya groups for the last decade ( Atran , 1993 ; Atran & Medin , 1997 ; Atran et al . , 1999 , in press ; Atran & Ucan Ek’ , 1999 ; Lois , 1988 ) . 2 . 1 . 2 . Design and materials Two separate groups of American participants ( ten experts and eight non - experts in each ) sorted the two sets ( US and Tikal ) of birds . These two groups were matched in terms of gender , and were comparable on other measures such as amount of formal education and knowledge concerning birds . Itza’ were tested in different sessions ( roughly one year apart ) on Tikal and US birds , but because of the more limited pool of participants , there was some overlap in participants ( ﬁve men , one woman ) who sorted both US and Tikal birds . 2 . 1 . 2 . 1 . Stimuli There were two sets of stimulus materials , each consisting of full - color illustrations of 104 bird species laminated onto index cards . One set ( hereafter called ‘US birds’ ) featured only species which were either resident to the Chicago area or breed there . For this set , illustrations were taken from the Golden and National Geographic ﬁeld guides , books designed to aid bird identiﬁcation . The other set ( ‘Tikal birds’ ) were species from the Tikal region of Guatemala , and were taken from the book The Birds of Tikal ( Smithe , 1966 ) . The speciﬁc selection of birds was based on the inventory list assembled by the University of San Carlos ( Guatemala ) for the UN - sponsored Maya Biosphere Reserve . The structure of the scientiﬁc taxonomy representing the US birds was designed to correspond maximally with that representing the Tikal bird set . Appendix A is a complete taxonomic listing of both stimulus sets . The scientiﬁc taxonomy was taken from a publi - cation by the US Audubon Society and is consistent with both national and international J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 12 ﬁeld guides to birds . The Tikal bird set consisted of 30 families and 17 orders , while the US bird set consisted of 33 families and 17 orders . One notable difference was in the number of passerines ( songbirds ) in the two sets . Although passerines are the numerically dominant group both in Chicagoland and Mayaland , they are a somewhat higher propor - tion of families in Chicagoland . Because passerines are so prevalent in the Chicago area , in order to structurally equate the two taxonomies , it became necessary to include more of them in the US set ( 32 ) than in the Tikal set ( 26 ) . For similar reasons , there were more Falconiformes ( birds of prey ) in the Tikal set ( 17 ) than in the US set ( 10 ) . Furthermore , there were some birds and taxonomic groups that were common to both sets . As Appendix A shows , there were 18 shared orders , 12 shared families , 12 shared genera , and ﬁve shared species in the two sets . The scientiﬁc taxonomies chosen can be roughly described as “classic evolutionary taxonomies” . Classic evolutionary taxonomies differ from so - called “numerical taxo - nomies” ( Sokal & Sneath , 1973 ) by weighting perceptual attributes according to their phylogenetic importance ( Mayr , 1965 ) . Classical evolutionary taxonomies also differ from strictly phylogenetic classiﬁcation schema , or “cladistic” taxonomies ( Hennig , 1966 ) . From a cladistic perspective , all taxonomic ranks are arbitrary ( although some cladists give special status to the species level ) and many classical taxa are wrongly related or delimited ( e . g . there is no phyletic justiﬁcation to placing birds on a par with mammals , or allowing reptiles to persist as a unitary category ) . Moreover , any scientiﬁc taxonomy will change over time , as new information is brought to bear ( e . g . molecular attributes , fossil evidence , etc . ) . All this suggests that there is presently no “true” scientiﬁc standard . Although cladistic analyses based on DNA - matching now appears to be steadily gaining credence over other strategies in biological systematics , one problem with comparative use of cladistics is that it does not furnish unique or clear - cut taxonomic resolutions of biodiversity and phylogenetic relationships . That is one reason why classical evolutionary taxonomy continues to provide a ( readily accessible if only approximate ) standard of reference commonly used by many scientists and most scientiﬁcally - minded amateurs ( e . g . birders ) . From the standpoint of comparison , it also has the convenience of main - taining the larger categories ( e . g . bird , mammal , ﬁsh ) that we wish to explore across various informant populations ( for further arguments in favor of comparative use of evolutionary taxonomy , see Lo´pez et al . , 1997 ) . 2 . 1 . 3 . Procedure All participants were tested individually by the experimenters . They were told that we were interested in how they organized their knowledge about birds . First , we showed them all 104 bird cards one at a time and asked them to name them ‘as speciﬁcally as possible’ . Responses were tape recorded and transcribed . After this initial naming phase , all 104 cards were placed in front of the participant , who was asked to ‘put together the birds that go together by nature into as many different groups as you’d like’ . The experimenters recorded these initial categories and asked the informant to describe or justify their basis for each category . Subjects were then asked to combine the initial categories by ‘putting together those groups of birds that go together by nature into as many larger groups as you’d like’ . The experimenters then recorded the new categories and their justiﬁcations . Participants were free to combine groups as many times as they so desired . Successive J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 13 compiling was repeated until the informant indicated no further grouping seemed to be natural . At this point the experimenters restored the initial categories created during the ﬁrst free sort and invited subjects to ‘split as many of the groups as you’d like into smaller groups of birds that go together by nature’ . The experimenters recorded the subgroupings and their justiﬁcations , and then the subpile sorting was repeated until participants indi - cated that no further subdivisions seemed sensible . 2 . 2 . Results 2 . 2 . 1 . Naming accuracy The naming data are useful in providing an independent index of expertise and relative familiarity with the two picture sets . We scored each naming response on athree - point scale , with a 3 representing an exact species match , a 2 representing a correct genus or family match , and a 1 representing a match at order or higher ( e . g . a ‘songbird’ response or a ‘bird’ response were both scored as 1 ) . The three groups named all the birds from both stimulus sets except the Itza’ , who named only birds that they sorted from the Tikal set ( e . g . an ‘ ix kusam ’ [ swallows and swifts ] response that generalized to all members of the Hirundinidae family of the order Passeriformes as well as to all members of the Apodidae family of the order Apodiformes and a ‘ ix wirisu ’ [ ﬂycatcher ] response that extended to various other Passeriformes were both scored as 1 ) . Consequently , we were unable to run a full factorial ANOVA . Instead , we ran a between - subjects ANOVA with stimulus set ( US and Tikal ) and subject group ( US experts and non - experts ) as factors and average naming score as the dependent variable . There were two main effects and a signiﬁcant interaction . First , both US experts and non - experts were better at naming US birds ( M ¼ 1 : 96 ) than Tikal birds ( M ¼ 1 : 43 ) ( F ð 1 ; 32 Þ ¼ 93 : 26 , P , 0 : 001 ) . Furthermore , US experts ( M ¼ 2 : 10 ) were more accurate overall than non - experts ( M ¼ 1 : 20 ) ( F ð 1 ; 32 Þ ¼ 304 : 38 , P , 0 : 001 ) . In addition , the interaction demonstrated that US experts were more accurate at naming US birds ( M ¼ 2 : 55 ) than Tikal birds ( M ¼ 1 : 66 ) , but that non - experts showed little difference between US birds ( M ¼ 1 : 25 ) and Tikal birds ( M ¼ 1 : 14 ) ( F ð 1 ; 32 Þ ¼ 56 : 55 , P , 0 : 001 ) . This interaction is essentially a ﬂoor effect based on the non - experts’ poor performance on both sets of birds . These results establish that the US experts were more familiar with the US birds than the Tikal birds and that their naming skills were superior to those of novices for both sets of birds . We also ran a one - way , between - subjects ANOVA using subject group ( US expert , US novice , or Itza’ ) as the factor and average naming score on Tikal birds . The effect of group was signiﬁcant ( F ð 2 ; 24 Þ ¼ 64 : 27 , P , 0 : 001 ) . The Itza’ were the most accurate ( M ¼ 1 : 92 ) , followed by US experts ( M ¼ 1 : 66 ) and then the non - experts ( M ¼ 1 : 14 ) . Tukey’s HSD test ( with alpha ¼ 0 : 05 ) showed that all three groups were signiﬁcantly different . Itza’ were less accurate at naming passerines ( M ¼ 1 : 39 ) than other birds ( M ¼ 2 : 11 ) ( t ð 8 Þ ¼ 20 : 49 , P , 0 : 01 ) . On the other hand , across US and Tikal birds , the American experts did not show any difference between trials on which they named passer - ines ( M ¼ 2 : 13 ) and trials on which they named non - passerines ( M ¼ 2 : 10 ) . This may be a function of Itza’ not having binoculars at their disposal , and not being able to see the small birds as clearly in the wild as US experts ; however , it may also be a function of cultural J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 14 interest ( see below ) . The non - experts did not show any difference in naming passerines and non - passerines on either bird set , but this is clearly a ﬂoor effect . 2 . 2 . 2 . Sorting First we discuss how performance on the sorting task was quantiﬁed . Then we consider , in turn , the degree to which performance within each group for each set of birds reﬂected a consensual taxonomy , the correspondence of these taxonomies with science , and ﬁnally , we compare the sorting justiﬁcations of the novice , expert and Itza’ folk taxonomies . 2 . 2 . 2 . 1 . Scoring We used each informant’s hierarchical sorting to derive a bird - by - bird similarity ( distance ) matrix . Each informant’s taxonomy was obtained by translating the groupings made during the free pile , successive pile and successive subpile sorts into a taxonomic tree . The bottom level nodes of this tree would correspond to individual bird species , and the top level node to all birds together . Intermediate levels correspond to the groupings the subject made during the sorts . Each level includes all groupings made during a given round of sorting , and the levels are rank - ordered from the last successive subpile sorting to the last successive pile sorting . Analogous taxonomic trees were constructed for each individual . From each taxonomy , we derived a pair - wise bird - by - bird distance matrix by calculating the distance between all possible pairs of birds in the taxonomy . The lowest level at which two given birds go together in a folk taxonomy represents the distance between them . For each participant , we derived a bird distance matrix where rows and columns correspond to the sorted birds , and the cells to the distances among them . 2 . 2 . 2 . 2 . Cultural consensus on bird taxonomies In each condition , the bird distance matrices produced by each informant were correlated with each other , yielding a single pair - wise subject - by - subject correlation matrix representing the degree to which each subject’s taxonomy agreed with each other subject’s taxonomy . Principal components analyses were then performed separately on each of the three subject groups’ intersubject correlation matrices for both sets of birds to determine whether or not there was a ‘cultural consensus’ in taxonomies . Each subject’s bird distance matrix was correlated with that of every other subject , yielding a 28 £ 28 matrix in which entries correspond to agreement among subjects on pair - wise bird distances derived from their individual taxonomies . Table 1 shows the factor solutions for the three groups combined on the two bird sets . For the analysis of US birds , the ﬁrst three eigenvalues were 14 . 25 , 1 . 71 , and 1 . 21 , accounting for 50 . 1 , 6 . 1 , and 4 . 3 % of the variance , respectively . All subjects’ scores on the ﬁrst factor were positive ( M ¼ 0 : 71 , range : 0 . 49 – 0 . 84 ) . A one - way ANOVA on ﬁrst factor scores revealed that US experts’ ﬁrst factor loadings ( M ¼ 0 : 77 , SD ¼ 0 : 05 ) were higher than those for non - experts and Itza’ ( M ¼ 0 : 64 , SD ¼ 0 : 09 , and M ¼ 0 : 69 , SD ¼ 0 : 07 , respectively ) ( F ð 2 ; 25 Þ ¼ 8 : 30 , P , 0 : 05 , Tukey’s HSD ) . Non - experts and Itza’ did not differ from each other . For the analysis of Tikal birds , the ﬁrst three eigen - values were 13 . 39 , 1 . 34 , and 1 . 04 , accounting for 53 . 5 , 5 . 4 , and 4 . 2 % of the variance , respectively . All subjects’ scores on the ﬁrst factor were positive ( M ¼ 0 : 71 , range : 0 . 30 – 0 . 90 ) . A one - way ANOVA on ﬁrst factor scores again revealed differences between J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 15 groups ( F ð 2 ; 22 Þ ¼ 37 : 95 , P , 0 : 05 ) . Non - experts’ consensus scores were lower ( M ¼ 0 : 48 , SD ¼ 0 : 15 ) than for experts and Itza’ ( M ¼ 0 : 84 , SD ¼ 0 : 05 , and M ¼ 0 : 79 , SD ¼ 0 : 04 , respectively ) , who did not differ from each other . In sum , there was a strong consensus for both US birds and for Tikal birds , with the ﬁrst factor account - ing for most of the variance in the sorts . 2 . 2 . 2 . 3 . Analysis of residual agreement Although we observed robust overall agreement , this was coupled with reliable group differences . To test for systematic group differences in categorization , we prepared a subject - by - subject residual agreement matrix ( Nakao & Romney , 1984 ) . First , the products of the ﬁrst - factor consensus scores were obtained for each pair of subjects , representing agreement predicted by each subject’s knowledge of the consensus . Next , this predicted agreement matrix was subtracted from the observed agreement matrix , yielding a residual matrix , which we then standardized . This standardized residual agreement matrix was compared to a model matrix corresponding to subject group membership ( i . e . a 26 £ 26 matrix with entries of ‘1’ if the corresponding subjects belong to the group in question , otherwise ‘0’ ) . These two matrices were then compared using Monte Carlo simulations to assess whether residual agreement is higher among subject groups than among randomly - chosen pairs of subjects . If patterns of agreement are completely described by the consensus component , there should be no appreciable residual agreement among subjects belonging to the same group ( see Boster , 1986 ; Coley , 1995 ; Johnson , Mervis , & Boster , 1992 ) . Systematic residual agreement within subject groups would lead to signiﬁcant association between model and residual matrices . The degree of association between the model matrix and the residual agreement matrix was assessed using the Quadratic Assignment Program ( Hubert & Schultz , 1976 ) . For the US birds all three groups showed signiﬁcant residual agreement ( non - experts : z ¼ 5 : 95 , P , 0 : 05 ; Itza’ : z ¼ 3 : 73 , P , 0 : 05 ; US experts : z ¼ 7 : 80 , P , 0 : 05 ) , indicat - ing that each group’s sorts show internal consistency beyond that captured by the consen - sus across groups . For Tikal birds , for non - experts and Itza’ , there was signiﬁcant residual agreement ( z ¼ 5 : 48 , P , 0 : 05 , and z ¼ 2 : 18 , P , 0 : 05 , respectively ) . US experts , however , showed no signiﬁcant residual agreement above and beyond the ﬁrst factor J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 16 Table 1 Mean factor loading scores by subject group by bird set in Experiment 1 Stimulus set Subject group US expert Non - expert Itza’ Tikal First factor 0 . 84 0 . 48 0 . 79 Second factor 2 0 . 04 0 . 35 2 0 . 16 Third factor 2 0 . 04 0 . 05 0 . 03 US First factor 0 . 77 0 . 64 0 . 69 Second factor 2 0 . 01 0 . 16 2 0 . 13 Third factor 2 0 . 21 0 . 12 0 . 16 ( z ¼ 0 : 13 ) . Apparently , the ﬁrst factor accounted for almost all consensus for US experts . These results point to differences in the taxonomies produced by each group , which we will take up in greater detail shortly . Results of the CCM analysis suggest a shared component to the taxonomies of the subjects that accounts for more than half of the variance . Residual analyses and analysis of within - group consensus also revealed systematic differences between groups . 2 . 2 . 2 . 4 . Correspondence to scientiﬁc taxonomy In this section we examine correlations with scientiﬁc distance . In order to compare performance from each group to science , we used the scientiﬁc taxonomy to derive a pair - wise bird - by - bird folk taxonomic distance matrix by calculating the distance between all possible pairs of birds in the taxonomy . We then compared the average matrix from each group to the science matrix . The by - subject mean correlations for each of the groups on the US birds were 0 . 38 , 0 . 60 , and 0 . 45 for non - experts , US experts , and Itza’ , respectively . The by - subject mean correlations for each of the groups on the Guatemalan birds were 0 . 34 , 0 . 70 , and 0 . 61 for non - experts , US experts , and Itza’ , respectively . Across bird sets , US experts’ taxonomies corresponded most closely with science ( 0 . 65 ) , followed by the Itza’ ( 0 . 53 ) , and then the non - experts ( 0 . 36 ) . To test the reliability of these group differences , we ran a 3 £ 2 ANOVA with each individual informant’s correlation with science as the dependent measure , and group ( either novice , expert , or Itza’ ) as one factor and bird set ( Tikal or US ) as the other . The effect of group was signiﬁcant ( F ð 2 ; 47 Þ ¼ 48 : 52 , P , 0 : 05 ) . Across groups , taxo - nomies corresponded with science to a greater degree for Tikal birds than for US birds ( 0 . 55 vs . 0 . 48 ) ( F ð 1 ; 47 Þ ¼ 9 : 08 , P , 0 : 05 ) . The interaction between subject group and bird set was also signiﬁcant ( F ð 2 ; 47 Þ ¼ 5 : 71 , P , 0 : 05 ) . Tukey’s HSD indicated that the interaction was due to the fact that US experts correspond highly to science when sorting foreign and local birds , while Itza’ correlate more highly with science when sorting local birds and non - experts do not correlate highly with science on either set . 2 . 2 . 2 . 5 . Cluster analysis In this section we present results from a cluster analysis to provide insights concerning the structure of our groups’ taxonomies . A matrix representing mean pair - wise distance between all birds was subjected to cluster analysis , using the average link method ( Sokal & Sneath , 1973 ) , yielding the tree diagrams shown in Figs . 1 – 6 . On both sets of birds , the three groups showed overall similarly coupled group differences . In all the taxonomies there were groups of predators , game birds , water birds , hummingbirds , and woodpeckers , to name a few . Some notable differences in the taxonomies are as follows . Whereas US non - experts and US experts generally kept all passerines ( small songbirds ) together in a large single group , the Itza’ had them spread out more across the taxonomy in a few different clusters . For example , American subjects grouped the swallows near the ﬂycatchers , while Itza’ placed ﬂycatchers in groups not adjacent to swallows . We also found a difference in subjects’ sorting of ‘water birds’ . On the US bird set , US experts had a large “water birds” cluster , featuring ducks , grebes , geese , “shore birds” and herons / egrets . This cluster was fairly isolated from the rest of the taxonomy . Although non - experts also had a water bird category , it was more spread out , was not as isolated from other birds , and was interrupted by non - water birds , such as game birds , nightjars J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 17 J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 18 Fig . 1 . Cluster analysis of non - experts sorting US birds . The numbers next to the bird names correspond to an alphabetic sort of the names . J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 19 Fig . 2 . Cluster analysis of experts sorting US birds . The numbers next to the bird names correspond to an alphabetic sort of the names . J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 20 Fig . 3 . Cluster analysis of Itza’ sorting US birds . The numbers next to the bird names correspond to an alphabetic sort of the names . J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 21 Fig . 4 . Cluster analysis of non - experts sorting Tikal birds . The numbers next to the bird names correspond to an alphabetic sort of the names . J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 22 Fig . 5 . Cluster analysis of experts sorting Tikal birds . The numbers next to the bird names correspond to an alphabetic sort of the names . J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 23 Fig . 6 . Cluster analysis of Itza’ sorting Tikal birds . The numbers next to the bird names correspond to an alphabetic sort of the names . ( birds that eat insects while they are ﬂying ) , the pigeon , and the turkey vulture . This also reduced the correspondence of novice sorts to scientiﬁc taxonomy . 2 . 2 . 2 . 6 . Justiﬁcations for sorts We grouped sorting justiﬁcations as taxonomic , morphological , ecological or behavioral . Because the groups did not differ substantially in their justiﬁcations we will not present them in detail . Justiﬁcations on initial sorts were mainly taxonomic , except in the cases of non - experts , who relied more on morphological justiﬁcations . The latter observation is not surprising given that the non - experts know few bird categories . Splits also tended to be justiﬁed in terms of taxonomy or morphology . Lumps were coupled with ecological and / or behavioral justiﬁcations , even for the non - experts ( though the ecological justiﬁcations for the non - experts tended to be fairly abstract ) . 2 . 3 . Discussion The naming data were as expected and conﬁrm the group differences in familiarity and expertise . Novices typically could not identify speciﬁc birds from either set . US experts were able to name US birds more accurately than Tikal birds . Itza’ were better than US experts in identifying Tikal birds . Nothing about these results is surprising . The sorting data , however , revealed some interesting and important group differences . Although the sorting results generally conﬁrm our hypotheses as well as previous claims that different cultural groups converge in the ways they assess similarity to classify birds ( and other vertebrates ) this convergence still leaves over half of the variance unexplained . In almost every case , residual within group agreement was reliably higher than across group residual agreement . Most striking are the observations concerning correlations with scientiﬁc taxonomy . We had expected that relative experts , especially Itza’ , might be more likely to have developed a special - purpose taxonomy and show a lower correlation with science than non - experts . To the contrary , both US expert and Itza’ expert correlation with science were much higher than the non - expert with science . The US expert data are not completely surprising in that guidebooks are often organized in a way that corresponds with scientiﬁc taxonomy . The Itza’ data are dramatic in that despite not being exposed to either western science in general or formal taxonomy in particular , their consensual sorting agrees more with ( western ) scientiﬁc taxonomy than does the consensual sort of US non - experts . This difference held for both US birds and Tikal birds . In short , not only did the Itza’ fail to show a clear inﬂuence of a special - purpose taxonomy but also they join US experts in reﬂecting greater sensitivity to taxonomic relations than non - experts . The results on expertise are not unprecedented . Johnson and Mervis ( 1998 ) tested bird experts , ﬁsh experts and novices on a triads task where participants were asked to pick out the two animals that were “most like the same kinds of thing” . Some triads pitted overall morphological similarity against taxonomic membership . Not only were bird experts more likely to make the taxonomic choice for birds and ﬁsh experts to make the taxonomic choice for ﬁsh but also these two types of expert were substantially more likely than novices to pick the taxonomic choice for the domain where they lacked expertise . Johnson and Mervis suggested that experts had learned to weight modiﬁed parts as much as features J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 24 more related to overall similarity in contrast with novices who apparently gave the latter type of feature more weight . In short , the Johnson and Mervis ﬁndings support the idea that some combination of perceptual learning and what they referred to as “intuitive theories” ( e . g . understandings of the functional signiﬁcance of different features ) leads experts to organize biological kinds in a manner closer to scientiﬁc taxonomy . Our results are consistent with this general interpretation in that the two groups of experts were clearly using information not reﬂected in the novice sorts . In short , expertise appears to involve more than a passive reception of real world structure – it includes learning to attend to the features and relationships that are most informative ( see also Boster & D’Andrade , 1989 ) which does not necessarily correspond with overall similarity . As noted earlier , work by Boster and Johnson ( 1989 ) indicates that expert ﬁshermen show less consensus than non - experts . This difference in ﬁndings from our results likely owes to different interests that underlie different kinds of expertise : Boster’s ﬁshermen tended to have particular , idiosyncratic ﬁsh - catching strategies and preferences , whereas US birders may simply aspire to understand all birds better . Similarly , the Itza’ appear not to employ a special - purpose taxonomy , perhaps because of their broad interest in ecolo - gical relationships and the health of the forest . Other work by Boster ( 1987 ) suggests that passerines are more easily confused than non - passerines . Itza’ were better at naming non - passerines but interestingly , experts were equally adept at naming passerines and non - passerines . US birders focus on identiﬁcation as their primary goal ; passerines may not be as psychologically or culturally salient for Itza’ . In the next experiment we report data from typicality or goodness of example ( GOE ) judgments which may also bear on this notion of salience . 3 . Experiment 2 : GOE ratings In Experiment 2 , we sought to determine the types of birds subjects believed to be ‘good examples’ or ‘ideal birds’ . We then compared the results from Experiment 2 to Experi - ment 1 in order to see if central tendency was a crucial factor in assessing GOE . In addition , we examine group differences in typicality ratings and their basis . As noted previously , we hypothesized that central tendency might play a critical role in assessing GOE for non - experts only . 3 . 1 . Method For the US subjects , we used the instructions from Rosch and Mervis ( 1975 ) , which featured a scale where 1 indicates high typicality ( or GOE ) and 7 indicates low typicality . Separate groups of 25 new US experts ( similar characteristics as in Experiment 1 , 12 on the Tikal birds , 13 on the US birds ) , 22 new US non - experts ( similar characteristics as in Experiment 1 , 12 on the Tikal birds , ten on the US birds ) , and nine of the same Itza’ subjects from Experiment 1 rated the GOE of the birds . Each Itza’ subject and US non - expert subject rated all 104 birds in the set , but each US expert rated a random sample of 26 birds from the respective set of 104 birds . Itza’ subjects were asked to rank the 104 Tikal birds in terms of ‘how true an example of a bird’ each one was . Pilot studies indicated that , in this context , the Itza’ word for “the true” ( jach ) exemplar would be J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 25 glossed with equal likelihood in Spanish as “the true / real / pure / ideal” ( el mero ) or “most typical” ( lo ma´s tI´pico ) exemplar . 3 . 2 . Results and discussion Ranked typicality ratings , ranked central tendency scores , and number of birds per family for all subject groups and all birds appear in Appendix B . We correlated central tendency and rated goodness of ﬁt for each subject group . Central tendency sorting ( i . e . the average pair - wise distance between a bird and every other bird in the set ) correlated with GOE ratings for the non - experts only ( Rxy ¼ 0 : 52 and 0 . 44 for US and Tikal birds ; the number for US experts was 0 . 00 and 0 . 12 ; for Itza’ it was 2 0 . 12 ) . This ﬁts with work reported by Lynch et al . ( 2000 ) ; typicality ratings do not seem to be based on central tendency for people relatively knowledgeable in a domain . We next examined the different patterns in the GOE ratings for the three subject groups , keeping in mind the possibility that the groups might differ in their ideals . After exploring the data , we found the most striking difference to be the passerine effect . The US experts rated passerines ( M ¼ 1 : 95 ) as more typical than other birds ( M ¼ 2 : 56 ) ( F ð 1 ; 24 Þ ¼ 15 : 71 , P , 0 : 01 ) . Furthermore , the average rank by US experts for US passerines ( M ¼ 23 : 50 ) was higher than Tikal passerines ( M ¼ 44 : 11 ) ( t ð 57 Þ ¼ 0 : 003 ) , indicating that US experts considered local passerines uniquely typical . US non - experts also rated passerines ( M ¼ 2 : 56 ) as more typical than other birds ( M ¼ 3 : 90 ) ( F ð 1 ; 21 Þ ¼ 21 : 83 , P , 0 : 01 ) . The opposite was true for Itza’ . The Itza’ ranked non - passerines ( M ¼ 29 : 86 ) as signiﬁ - cantly more ideal than passerines ( M ¼ 36 : 60 ) ( F ð 1 ; 8 Þ ¼ 6 : 45 , P , 0 : 05 ) . While passer - ines account for a slightly higher proportion of the total bird population in the US than they do in Tikal , songbirds still comprise the most numerous order in Mayaland . Nonetheless , Itza’ do not rate them as typical . Previous categorization research suggests that statistical similarities or central tenden - cies can be determinants of prototypes or best examples ( Boster , 1988 ; Mervis & Rosch , 1981 ; Rosch & Mervis , 1975 ; Rosch , Mervis , Gray , Johnson , & Boyes - Braem , 1976 ) ; however , there are many different possible measures of similarity and central tendency ( Medin , Goldstone , & Gentner , 1993 ) . We chose to use taxonomic distance as a measure of similarity in order to calculate central tendency , although we realize that alternative measures of similarity and central tendency could be used that might produce different results . Our measure has certain advantages : it makes use of natural taxonomies that are readily generated by sorting experiments in any cultural setting in which such experiments have been tried ( Boster , 1991 ; Lo´pez et al . , 1997 ; Medin et al . , 1997 ) , and it does not depend upon explicit elicitation that may involve culturally - speciﬁc instructions ( e . g . “similar to” has no ready or singular translation in Maya languages ) . Our results indicate that , at least in folkbiology , ideals can be made salient by factors other than similarity - based central tendency ( Atran , 1999 ; Barsalou , 1985 ; Lynch et al . , 2000 ) . As we shall see , these other factors may reﬂect the special interests of the populations concerned . 4 . Experiment 3 : category - based induction Experiment 3 builds on the results of Experiments 1 and 2 by asking how participants J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 26 use bird categories and salient examples of birds in reasoning . An important function of taxonomic classiﬁcation is enabling generalizations between categories . Osherson et al . ( 1990 ) identify a set of phenomena that characterize category - based inferences in adults , and formalize a model that predicts the strength of those inferences . Consider argument ( i ) below : ( i ) Hyenas have an ileal vein Cows have an ileal vein Wolves have an ileal vein . This argument is strong to the extent that belief in the premises leads to belief in the conclusion . There are two components to the Osherson et al . ( 1990 ) similarity - coverage model ( SCM ) . The ﬁrst component of the model , similarity , calculates the maximum similarity of the premise categories to the conclusion category ; the greater this similarity , the stronger the argument . In this example , hyenas are more similar to wolves than cows are , hence similarity is calculated for hyenas . The second component – coverage – calcu - lates the average maximum similarity of premise categories to members of the “inclusive category” – the lowest category that includes both premise and conclusion categories . For argument ( i ) , the inclusive category is presumably mammal . In our research , the inclusive category is simply the conclusion category . The greater the coverage of the inclusive category by the premise categories , the stronger the argument . Sloman ( 1993 ) presents an alternative model ; although Sloman’s feature - based model differs from the SCM in important ways , for our purposes the models make the same predictions . We focus on two phenomena : typicality and diversity . Both of these phenomena hinge on coverage . The typicality phenomenon predicts that a more typical instance promotes stronger inferences to a category than a less typical instance . Typicality in this case is computed in terms of central tendency ; the typicality of an item is the average taxonomic distance of that item to all other items in the inclusive category . The higher the average similarity of that item to other members of the category , the more typical it is . Thus , more typical items provide greater coverage than less typical ones . Like typicality , diversity is a measure of category coverage . The diversity phenomenon predicts that an argument will be inductively strong to the degree that categories mentioned in its premises are similar to different instances of the conclusion category . For example , consider arguments in ( ii ) : ( iia ) Jaguars have protein Y Leopards have protein Y All mammals have protein Y . ( iib ) Jaguars have protein Y Mice have protein Y All mammals have protein Y . The SCM predicts that the categories mentioned in the premise of ( iib ) provide greater coverage of the conclusion category mammal – i . e . are more similar to more mammals – J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 27 than the categories mentioned in the premises of ( iia ) , thus making ( iib ) the stronger argument . Indeed , most American college - aged subjects agree that ( iib ) is stronger than ( iia ) ( Osherson et al . , 1990 ) . In general , diversity predicts that an argument with more diverse premises will be evaluated as stronger than an argument with less diverse premises . Before focusing on the methodological details of Experiment 3 , we discuss the proper - ties we chose for induction . Based on previous work , we decided against using identical properties for the Itza’ and US induction probes . The rationale is much the same as noted in developing the sorting instructions for Experiment 1 . Half of the probes involved disease and this was constant across groups . For the other half we used “enzyme” for North American subjects and “little things inside” for Mesoamerican subjects . We piloted both terms with both groups . We found that North American adult subjects are confused by “little things inside” but not “enzyme” , “protein” or “disease X” ( different subjects projecting different types of contents ) , whereas Maya subjects were confused by “enzyme” and “protein” but not by “little things inside” or “disease X” . Earlier studies show that the patterns of results on different kinds of biological induction tasks for American under - graduates were statistically the same for “enzyme” and “disease” , whereas the Itza’ showed the same patterns of results for “little things inside” and “disease” ( Atran , Estin , Coley , & Medin , 1997 ; Coley , Medin , Profﬁtt , Lynch , & Atran , 1999 ) . Given the results from Lo´pez et al . ( 1997 ) and Profﬁtt et al . ( 2000 ) , we hypothesize that US non - experts should exhibit more diversity responding than either of the other two groups . It would not be surprising if the US bird experts showed some modest amount of diversity responding given that they are quite familiar with the scientiﬁc taxonomy . If so , we would expect this to be more predominant among US birders who have received formal training . Overall , however , our hypothesis is that domain knowledge makes it less likely that a person will employ abstract strategies . Instead we expect to observe more concrete justiﬁcations such as the ecological / causal reasoning . 4 . 1 . Method 4 . 1 . 1 . Typicality stimuli Eight typicality pairs ( each pair consisting of two birds ) were constructed for each of the stimulus sets ( US and Tikal ) . Within each of the eight pairs of birds in the US set , the two birds were matched in terms of frequency of sighting . Birds in the Tikal set were not matched for frequency because of a lack of a source from which to rank the birds on the dimension . The stimuli were created by crossing two variables : Typicality , or central tendency ( high vs . low ) gauged by mean distance from other birds in the sorting task , and Family Size ( high vs . low ) , a measure of how many members were in the same family as the bird in question . We decided to include family size as a factor because Profﬁtt et al . ( 2000 ) found that it was reliably used as the basis of choices on typicality probes . We had two pairs in each of these four cells for a total of eight pairs in each stimulus set . These typicality pairs appear in Appendix C . 4 . 1 . 2 . Diversity stimuli Four diversity pairs , each pair consisting of two pairs of birds ( i . e . four birds in total ) J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 28 were constructed for each of the stimulus sets ( US and Tikal ) . Within each diversity pair , one pair of birds was “close” in terms of mean distance between the birds in the pair across the three subject groups ; the other pair was “far” in terms of mean pair distance . To be eligible for selection for diversity stimuli , birds had to meet two requirements : ( 1 ) each bird had to be high ( top ﬁfty percentile ) in mean central tendency ( mean distance from all other birds in the set ) across the three groups ; and ( 2 ) each pair of birds had to be high ( top ﬁfty percentile ) in agreement on mean pair distance for each of the groups . Of course the critical variable was coverage , and to this end we ensured that birds in the far pair had a mean distance ( between each other ) of at least one level higher than birds in the close pair . In addition , we computed diversity as a function of simple minimal distance based on how similar each bird in the pair was to all of the other birds in the set . Both measures will be considered in Section 4 . 2 . Within each diversity pair , close and far pairs of birds were matched in terms of family size , central tendency , and frequency of sighting for US birds ( as determined by the Audubon Society ) , and family size and central tendency for Tikal birds ( there was no source for frequency of the Tikal birds ) . These diversity pairs appear in Appendix D . 4 . 1 . 3 . Design Stimulus set ( US vs . Tikal ) and question type ( disease vs . enzyme ) were crossed and blocked within subjects . Subjects saw two main blocks , one with US birds and the other with Tikal birds . Within each of these blocks , there were two question type blocks . One type of question involved induction about enzymes and the other about diseases . Each subject saw all four blocks ( US - Disease , US - Enzyme , Tikal - Disease , and Tikal - Enzyme ) . There were four possible orders of the four blocks . Within each of the four blocks , subjects saw two diversity trials and four typicality trials . The order of the trials within each block was randomized . In addition , after the four blocks described above , each participant received one additional block consisting of four diversity trials . These trials were comprised of only Tikal birds , and were included to match some previously acquired data from the Itza’ . The stimuli on these blocks were matched for Itza’ central tendency but not for agreement or frequency . 4 . 1 . 4 . Procedure Informants were run individually . American participants were told that they would be shown illustrations of birds and that they would be asked to answer questions about them . For the typicality trials , we displayed both birds in each pair and asked : Let’s assume that we discovered two new diseases ( or enzymes ) . All we know about these diseases is that Disease A is found in these types of birds and Disease B is found in these types of birds . Which disease is more likely to be found in all types of birds ? The instructions were the same for the Itza’ subjects , however instead of discussing ‘enzymes’ , we discussed ‘very small things inside of the birds’ . Subjects were required to select one of the birds in the pair , and to provide a justiﬁcation for their decision . Similarly , for the diversity trials , we placed one pair of birds on the left - hand side and J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 29 one pair of birds on the right - hand side , and asked the same question . The far pair appeared on the left - hand side for half the trials , and on the right - hand side for the other half . 4 . 1 . 5 . Subjects The US experts were ten men and two women ( mean age ¼ 51 : 8 years , range : 15 – 88 years ) having either occupations or extensive experience related to birds . The average experience in birding was 26 . 1 years ( range : 4 – 81 years ) . One subject had not yet completed high school , one had at least some college work , four had completed college , and ﬁve had advanced degrees , two of those being PhDs . On a seven - point continuous scale with 1 indicating ‘very little knowledge about birds’ and 7 indicating ‘total exper - tise’ , the mean self - reported rating for US experts was 5 . 00 ( SD ¼ 1 : 04 ) . The US experts were drawn predominantly from the same pool of subjects as the sorting task , and were paid for their participation . Occupations of subjects were extremely varied and included college professors , salesmen , insurance investigators , retired workers , lawyers , store owners , botanists , and homemakers . The non - experts were two men and 11 women ( mean age ¼ 25 : 08 , range : 18 – 41 years ) who were Northwestern University students . The average number of years birding was zero . Three of the subjects had completed at least a college degree ; the rest were still working towards their ﬁrst degree . On the self - reported bird knowledge scale the mean rating was 1 . 77 ( SD ¼ 1 : 09 ) . The non - experts were paid for their participation . The Itza’ were 12 men and women taken from the same population as in Experiment 1 , with similar ages , education experience , and knowledge concerning birds . Five of the Itza’ subjects also participated in the ﬁrst experiment . The time lag between the two studies was approximately 6 months . 4 . 2 . Results First we will describe the results from typicality probes and then turn to the diversity items . In every analysis reported below , we do not ﬁnd any differences due to question type . In other words , subjects responded in a similar manner regardless of whether the question dealt with diseases or enzymes ( or very small things ) . Consequently , we do not discuss this variable further . As we shall see the justiﬁcations for choices are as important as the choices themselves . To anticipate , in each case , we ﬁnd clear group differences . 4 . 2 . 1 . Typicality results 4 . 2 . 1 . 1 . Trial selections Table 2 shows the mean responses on the familiarity and typi - cality trials . On Family Size trials ( those in which typicality was controlled ) , the depen - dent variable is the percentage of trials in which the high family size bird was chosen ; on typicality trials ( those in which family size was controlled ) , the dependent variable is the percentage of trials in which the high typicality bird was chosen . As is apparent from Table 2 , only the undergraduates showed any clear indication of a typicality effect ( mean ¼ 0 : 78 vs . 0 . 57 for US experts and 0 . 50 for Itza’ ) . Across subject group and stimulus set , participants chose the more typical bird on 62 % of the trials , reliably greater than chance ( t ð 36 Þ ¼ 20 : 42 , P , 0 : 01 ) . We then ran an ANOVA with J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 30 subject group and stimulus set as factors , and typicality responses as the dependent vari - able . None of the main effects or interactions were signiﬁcant . Using data from the unique typicality pairs within each subject group and stimulus set ( 20 observations ) , we ran a regression with bird choice as the dependent variable and GOE ratings ( from Experiment 2 ) and central tendency as factors . For each of the two factors , we took a difference in average rank ( either central tendency or GOE ) of the two birds in the pair . The overall regression was not signiﬁcant ( F ð 2 ; 17 Þ ¼ 0 : 46 , R 2 ¼ 0 : 05 ) , and none of the individual factors were signiﬁcant . Next , we separated the analysis for the three subject groups . The only instance in which the model approached signiﬁcance was for the US non - experts ( F ð 2 ; 5 Þ ¼ 2 : 98 , P , 0 : 10 , R 2 ¼ 0 : 54 ) . In that analysis there was a marginal effect of GOE ratings ( t ð 7 Þ ¼ 2 : 09 , P , 0 : 09 ) . On the Family Size probes , subjects chose the bird with the larger family on 49 % of the trials , essentially chance responding . Next , we ran an ANOVA on choices with subject group , stimulus set , and family size ( high vs . low ) as the factors . There was a main effect of stimulus set ( F ð 1 ; 34 Þ ¼ 10 : 58 , P , 0 : 01 ) , indicating that the high family size bird was chosen more often on the Tikal bird set ( M ¼ 0 : 59 , SD ¼ 0 : 17 ) than on the US bird set ( M ¼ 0 : 39 , SD ¼ 0 : 14 ) . None of the other main effects were signiﬁcant . The interaction between stimulus set and subject group was signiﬁcant ( F ð 2 ; 34 Þ ¼ 3 : 76 , P , 0 : 05 ) : non - experts chose the high family size bird more on the Tikal bird set than on the US bird set , while the other two subject groups did not show as pronounced a differentiation . We looked at the items contributing to this interaction and found that it owed mainly to two trials . Interestingly , those trials that drove the interaction between stimulus set and subject group involved a choice between a passerine and a non - passerine . In both cases , non - experts were more apt to select the passerine over the non - passerine . In light of this trend , J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 31 Table 2 Mean percentages of high typicality responses on typicality trials and high family size responses on family size probes , by condition in Experiment 3 Subject group US expert Non - expert Itza’ Typicality trials Tikal birds Disease 0 . 50 0 . 69 0 . 54 Enzyme 0 . 71 0 . 85 0 . 67 US birds Disease 0 . 58 0 . 88 0 . 34 Enzyme 0 . 50 0 . 70 0 . 46 Family size trials Tikal birds Disease 0 . 58 0 . 77 0 . 34 Enzyme 0 . 67 0 . 77 0 . 45 US birds Disease 0 . 54 0 . 30 0 . 34 Enzyme 0 . 58 0 . 38 0 . 20 we then looked more closely at this passerine effect to see if it extended towards the rest of the trials . 4 . 2 . 1 . 2 . The passerine effect Of the 16 total family size and typicality trials , there were six trials where one bird in the pair was a passerine and the other was not . Using just these six trials we ran a by - item ANOVA with subject group as the independent variable and the percentage of trials that subjects chose the passerine as the dependent variable . Even with only six items , there was a signiﬁcant effect of subject group ( F ð 2 ; 10 Þ ¼ 23 : 47 , P , 0 : 01 ) . The US experts and non - experts chose the passerine over the non - passerine ( 66 and 86 % , respectively ) more than the Itza’ ( 40 % ) . To ensure that this difference was reliable , we compared the means of all three subject groups using Tukey’s HSD ( alpha ¼ 0 : 01 ) . The Itza’ differed from both the US experts and non - experts , while the difference between US experts and non - experts was not reliable . In short , the Itza’ avoided generalizing traits from passerines while the US subjects , especially the non - experts , preferred to generalize from them . 4 . 2 . 1 . 3 . Typicality trial justiﬁcations We realize that explicit post hoc justiﬁcations do not always correspond to implicit and actual bases for choice and decision ( Nisbett & Wilson , 1977 ) ; however , folk taxonomic justiﬁcations are often independently borne out ( e . g . birds that are grouped together because they eat other birds are generally predators ) . We used the following justiﬁcation categories for the typicality trials . ( 1 ) Typicality – any justiﬁcation that cited a bird as being a more typical or ideal example of a bird ( “These birds are more normal or more representative examples of birds” ) . ( 2 ) Behavioral – any justiﬁcation that described a category’s behavior , including locomotion ( “hops around” ) . ( 3 ) Ecological – any justiﬁcation that involved some sort of description of a category of birds and their relation to their environment , be it other birds or animals ( “predator” ) , their diet ( “eats bugs” ) , or their habitat ( “lives in marshy swamps” ) . ( 4 ) Geographical Range – any justiﬁcation that described a greater geographical range for the chosen bird ( “This bird travels extremely far” ) . ( 5 ) Number – any justiﬁcation that explicitly mentioned frequency of occurrence as a reason for selecting a bird ( “There are a lot of this kind of bird” ) . ( 6 ) Evolutionary Age – any justiﬁcation that cited an earlier emergence on the evolutionary time line as a reason for choosing a bird ( “This bird was around long before the other birds” ) . Table 3 shows the types of justiﬁcations used on the typicality trials by group . The most striking difference is that non - experts use typicality as a reason for the choice more than half of the time , while US experts and Itza’ never indicate typicality . Both Itza’ and US experts tended to use range or ecological factors as justiﬁcations but only the US experts commonly employed evolutionary age as a justiﬁcation . For each justiﬁcation category , we ran a by - subject ANOVA with subject type and stimulus set as independent factors and the percentage of trials on which that particular justiﬁcation was invoked as the dependent variable . Table 4 provides statistical justiﬁcation for the differences apparent in Table 3 . To sum up the typicality reasoning probes , none of the groups tended to pick the bird from the larger family and only the US non - experts sowed much evidence for central tendency - based typicality effects . Instead , other factors , such as presence of passerines , J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 32 were more responsible for choices . Furthermore , only non - experts used typicality as a justiﬁcation for their choices . 4 . 2 . 2 . Diversity 4 . 2 . 2 . 1 . Trial selection The mean percentage of diversity choices by condition appears in Table 5 . Across conditions , US experts chose the far pair on 58 % of the trials , the non - experts 58 % , and the Itza’ 45 % . None of these percentages differed reliably from each other or from chance ( 50 % ) . There was a trend for non - experts to show greater diversity J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 33 Table 4 Summary of reliable ( P , 0 : 05 ) main effects found for typicality and diversity trial justiﬁcations in Experiment 3 a Justiﬁcation category Typicality trials Diversity trials Subject type Stimulus set Subject type Stimulus set Typicality N . E , I US . TIK N . E , I NS Behavioral I . N , E NS I . N , E NS Ecological I . N , E NS I . N , E NS Geographical range E , I . N NS E , I . N NS Number N . E , I NS NS NS Evolutionary age NS NS NS NS Diversity – – N . I NS a Subject groups are represented by US non - experts ( N ) , US experts ( E ) and Itza’ ( I ) . Subject type effects are listed in the ﬁrst subcolumn . Stimulus set effects are listed in the second subcolumn , and indicate a difference between justiﬁcations based on whether the American ( US ) or Itza’ ( TIK ) stimulus set was used . All of these tests are not independent . Table 3 Expert , Itza’ , and non - expert justiﬁcations on typicality trials by stimuli set in Experiment 3 a Subject group Justiﬁcation type TYP BEH ECO GEO NUM EVO US expertTikal 0 0 18 39 2 21 US 0 0 12 37 4 23 Itza’ Tikal 0 12 60 18 1 0 US 0 7 58 26 9 0 Non - expert Tikal 47 2 7 4 18 2 US 56 4 3 5 18 0 a Categories include typicality ( TYP ) , behavior ( BEH ) , ecology ( ECO ) , geographical range ( GEO ) , number ( NUM ) , and evolutionary age ( EVO ) . responding for the US birds ( 67 % ) than the Tikal birds ( 49 % ) but it was not reliable . Collapsing across question - type , we ran an ANOVA on diversity choices . With our small N , none of the main effects or interactions was signiﬁcant . We then examined the data at a ﬁner level . 4 . 2 . 2 . 2 . Coverage models As a further test for diversity effects we ran a regression on choices using the two measures of coverage described in Section 4 . 1 ( minimal distance from other birds in the set and the distance between the two birds in the pair ) as independent variables . There were 24 diversity items in total ( 2 stimuli sets £ 3 subject groups £ 4 different pairs per stimuli set ) . The overall regression was not signiﬁcant ( F ð 2 ; 21 Þ ¼ 1 : 16 , R 2 ¼ 0 : 20 ) , and neither of the individual factors was signiﬁcant . Next , we ran three separate analyses for the individual subject groups . None of the individual models approached signiﬁcance . We then examined our now familiar passerine effect . 4 . 2 . 2 . 3 . The passerine effect Once again it appears that the US populations tended to choose probe pairs involving passerines while the Itza’ tended to avoid them . To verify these trends we performed a by - trial analysis including all 20 trials used for the diversity task ( 8 diversity pairs £ 2 question types ¼ 16 conditions , plus the 4 additional pairs run at the end of the reasoning tasks ¼ 20 total trials ) . We ran a regression that contained all 20 possible trials , and coded the independent variable “ 2 1” if there were more passerines in the far pair than the close pair ( four instances ) , “0” if there were an even number of passerines in both pairs ( seven instances ) , and “1” if there more passerines in the close pair than far pair ( nine instances ) . We entered as the dependent variable the percentage of times each subject group chose the far pair on that particular trial . Notice that we would expect for the US subject groups a negative relationship between our independent and dependent variables , because they should tend to prefer the far pair when it contains more passerines than the close pair ( instances of “ 2 1” ) . On the other hand , for the Itza’ we would expect a positive relationship between our independent and dependent variables , because they should tend to prefer the far pair when it contains fewer passerines than the close pair ( instances of “1” ) . In all three regressions , our suspicions were conﬁrmed . The US experts and non - experts showed a reliable ( P , 0 : 05 ) negative relationship ( t ð 19 Þ ¼ 2 : 19 , b ¼ 2 13 : 66 , and t ð 19 Þ ¼ 4 : 07 , b ¼ 2 26 : 45 , respectively ) . On J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 34 Table 5 Mean percentages of diversity responses by stimulus set and subject group in Experiment 3 Stimulus set Subject group US expert Non - expert Itza’ TikalDisease 65 56 43 Enzyme 54 42 46 US Disease 46 69 50 Enzyme 67 65 46 the other hand , the Itza’ showed a marginally reliable ( P , 0 : 10 , two - tailed test ) positive relationship ( t ð 19 Þ ¼ 1 : 79 , b ¼ 11 : 68 ) . It seems that our groups based their choices to a considerable degree on the presence of passerines or some factor correlated with it . This passerine effect suggests that the idealness of the birds may be driving our results more than coverage . To the Itza’ , passerines are not considered “true birds” to the same extent as other birds in the environment . 4 . 2 . 2 . 4 . Diversity trial justiﬁcations We coded diversity trial justiﬁcations into seven main categories : the six used for typicality trials and a seventh , diversity . Diversity involved any justiﬁcation that invoked greater taxonomic coverage as a reason for choosing a pair of birds ( “This pair is more varied and the birds come from different families” ) . Subjects’ justiﬁcations often included more than one of these six categories ( i . e . “typical birds of prey” ) . In these cases , justiﬁcations were broken up into their component cate - gories and each category was assigned a share of the justiﬁcation such that the total of the shares added up to 1 . Table 6 displays the mean justiﬁcation scores for these seven categories by group and stimulus set . Overall , US experts gave diversity justiﬁcations on 26 % of the trials . However , this proportion was driven almost entirely by two subjects who gave diversity justiﬁcations on virtually every trial . Interestingly , these two subjects had fewer years experience of bird - ing ( M ¼ 8 : 5 ) than the rest of the US experts ( M ¼ 29 ) . Consequently , they may have justiﬁed their choices in a manner similar to US novices . Six out of the 12 US experts did not give a single diversity justiﬁcation on any of their 12 diversity trials . Non - experts gave diversity justiﬁcations on 35 % of the trials . The Itza’ , in comparison , gave virtually no diversity justiﬁcations on any of the trials ( one response total ) . We ran an ANOVA on diversity justiﬁcations as the dependent variable and the only signiﬁcant effect was subject type ( F ð 2 ; 34 Þ ¼ 4 : 17 , P , 0 : 05 ) . Tukey tests indicated that overall , Itza’ used diversity J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 35 Table 6 Expert , Itza’ , and non - expert justiﬁcations on diversity trials by stimuli set in Experiment 3 a Subject group Justiﬁcation type DIV TYP BEH ECO GEO NUM EVO US expertTikal 25 0 0 5 42 14 11 US 25 0 0 7 36 14 18 Itza’ Tikal 1 2 6 56 28 0 0 US 0 2 10 44 37 1 0 Non - expert Tikal 33 37 0 12 3 13 2 US 33 23 0 19 2 23 0 a Categories include diversity ( DIV ) , typicality ( TYP ) , behavior ( BEH ) , ecology ( ECO ) , geographical range ( GEO ) , number ( NUM ) , and evolutionary age ( EVO ) . justiﬁcations less than US non - experts ( P , 0 : 05 ) . None of the other comparisons were signiﬁcant . There were also other notable differences in justiﬁcation patterns evident in Table 6 . US experts were the only group to rely on evolutionary justiﬁcations and the two expert groups were more likely to use range as a justiﬁcation . The Itza’ were also more likely to focus on ecology than the US groups . Table 4 provides statistical justiﬁcation for these differences . This effect of ecology sheds some light on the passerine effect described above . Compared to the larger and more perceptibly distinct game birds , the smaller songbirds play rela - tively minor or undifferentiated roles in deﬁning the ecological relationships that Itza’ consider important to their lives and to the life of the forest that hosts them ( cf . Atran & Medin , 1997 ) . This relative lack of ecological saliency may well cause the Itza’ to cate - gorize and reason differently about them . 4 . 2 . 2 . 5 . A “learning effect” An interesting trend in the justiﬁcation data can be seen when we break down diversity and typicality justiﬁcations by block and subject group . Because the Itza’ did not give either diversity or typicality justiﬁcations we did not include them in the following analysis . We partitioned the data into two blocks . The ﬁrst block included the ﬁrst four diversity trials ( i . e . those in trials 1 – 12 ) , and the second block included the four diversity trials in trials 13 – 24 . Non - experts used a diversity justiﬁcation on only 17 % of trials in block 1 ; this proportion jumps to 43 % for the trials in block 2 . It appears that non - experts learn to apply the diversity justiﬁcation as a strategy to respond to the diversity questions . Experts did not vary in their use of diversity justiﬁcations by block ( 21 % in block 1 , 25 % in block 2 ) . This trend also applies to non - experts’ diversity choices , in that they selected the diverse pair more often in the second block ( M ¼ 58 % ) than in the ﬁrst block ( M ¼ 54 % ) . Apparently , the use of other strategies led to non - diversity so that the overall effect was one of modest diversity effects . Finally , we tested to see if diversity justiﬁcations corresponded to diversity choices . On trials with diversity justiﬁcations , the diverse pair was chosen 98 . 89 % of the time . On trials without diversity justiﬁcations , the diverse pair was chosen 43 . 06 % of the time , not reliably different from chance . This trend was the same for both US experts and US non - experts ( the Itza’ never gave diversity justiﬁcations ) . To sum up the diversity results , unlike previous studies , we did not demonstrate a reliable diversity choice effect for non - experts . However , non - experts did show an increase in both diversity choices and diversity justiﬁcations as the experiment progressed . The best predictor of choices was presence of passerines – birds that tend to be ‘better’ examples for the US subjects and poor examples for the Itza’ subjects . Finally , as in the ﬁrst experiment , the justiﬁcations also illuminate differences between the two cultures : Itza’ , who monitor their local ecology more than the other groups , almost exclusively relied on behavioral and ecological explanations . 4 . 3 . Discussion Experiment 3 provides us with insight concerning the ways that cultural inﬂuence and relative expertise inﬂuence how people reason about natural kinds . Even though ‘passer - ine’ was rarely cited as a justiﬁcation , American subjects tended to pick small songbirds as J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 36 generalizing to the population of all birds , whereas Itza’ preferred larger , more percep - tually striking birds . Given the prominent role of the larger game birds in the behavioral ecology of Mayaland , and the more interactive goals of Itza’ in monitoring their ecology , then the information provided by their ideal birds would be more relevant to environ - mental understanding and management than information provided by songbirds . Itza’ preferentially monitor those species in their ecosystem ( e . g . game birds as opposed to passerines ) that provide the most relevant information about the interaction of human needs with the needs of the forest . For example , Itza’ tend to have the most detailed knowledge of , and to best protect , those species that are perceived to have the most interactions both with other species and with humans ( Atran et al . , 1999 , in press ) . For the Americans , whose interest in , and interaction with , the behavioral ecology is of a much reduced and altogether different order ( game birds are not considered palpably crucial to survival of the human habitat ) , correlated perceptual information may be more relevant by default . The net effect of the passerine and the anti - passerine strategies was very modest diversity responding . 5 . General discussion The purpose of running three distinct subject groups on natural categorization and reasoning tasks in the domain of folkbiology was twofold : ( 1 ) to better determine the extent that categorization and reasoning phenomena , such as typicality and diversity , actually do generalize from their manifestation in college students to the human species at large ; and ( 2 ) to disentangle effects of cultural inﬂuence from effects of relative exper - tise in order to better understand the scope and limits of universal cognitive principles in the speciﬁc domain of folkbiology . With respect to the above two issues , our triangulation strategy proved to be quite useful . For a number of important phenomena the US and Itza’ clustered together and contrasted with US non - experts . First of all , the expert groups sorted in closer correspon - dence with scientiﬁc taxonomy than did non - experts . This difference is particularly strik - ing for the Itza’ with respect to US birds because the birds , western science , and scientiﬁc taxonomy were all unfamiliar to them . US non - experts had prior exposure to the birds and to western science but their sorts corresponded less well with scientiﬁc taxonomy than did those of the Itza’ . This ﬁnding gives no comfort at all to relativists . For that matter it is also inconsistent with the opposite extreme view , namely , that everyone naturally perceives the structure of nature unless goals and activities foster a special - purpose categorization scheme . Instead our data suggest that expertise confers beneﬁts in abstracting important relationships in nature and , as a consequence , may lead to greater correspondence with scientiﬁc taxon - omy . In that regard our results are well - anticipated by the ﬁndings of Johnson and Mervis ( 1998 ) who showed that bird and ﬁsh experts were better able than novices to apprehend relational features tied to function and ecology . Our claim is not that all types of expertise will be associated with greater correspon - dence with science ( that ﬂies in the face of empirical evidence ) . At a minimum , one would need to add the proviso that expert characteristic goals and activities not lead to J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 37 special - purpose taxonomic systems . To avoid any implied circularity , one would need to analyze the daily goals and activities of the expert group under scrutiny . In the present case , the fact that neither expert birders nor Itza’ employed a special - purpose , goal - derived sorting strategy is consistent with our analysis of their characteristic activities . Differences between the two expert groups and novices in GOE ratings and in cate - gory - based induction are equally striking . First , consider GOE or typicality ratings . Since the original Rosch and Mervis ( 1975 ) paper on the basis of family resemblance , the consensus has been that typicality ratings are driven by central tendency ( similarity relations ) . One exception is the Barsalou ( 1985 ) evidence that ideals may play some independent role in GOE ratings for common taxonomic categories , though he also found that central tendency was a reliable predictor of GOE ratings . Our present results reinforce the speculation that central tendency may only play a signiﬁcant role in the typicality judgments of non - experts . Non - experts showed a robust correlation between central tendency and GOE ratings for both the US and Tikal birds . US experts and Itza’ showed no reliable correlation of ratings with central tendency for either set of birds . This lack of correlation also holds for tree experts’ typicality ratings for trees ( Lynch et al . , 2000 ) . If typicality is not a proxy for central tendency , then what drives it and what functions does it serve ? Berlin ( 1992 ) suggests that good examples tend to be perceptually salient and that less salient examples come to be organized around them ( see also Rosch , 1975 ) . Salient examples might be the ones ﬁrst learned and presumably their distinctive char - acteristics are paired with important shared properties with other category members . If so , then overall similarity is not the key organizing principle but rather some function of distinctive and shared characteristics . Other work ( e . g . Atran , 1999 ; Barsalou , 1985 ; Lynch et al . , 2000 ) points to idealness as an organizing principle . The category - based induction ﬁndings also reinforce the view that the non - experts were the ‘odd group out’ . Non - experts relied very heavily on familiarity or typicality as the basis of their choices on both the typicality and diversity trials . Neither the Itza’ nor the US experts ever gave typicality as a justiﬁcation for either type of probe . Instead , they used knowledge about birds that the non - experts did not possess . For example , both the Itza’ and US experts frequently mentioned the geographical range of birds , an explanation that the non - experts rarely produced . This is a truly striking qualitative difference . Both US experts and non - experts used ‘diversity’ as a justiﬁcation for a modest minority of probes . Itza’ did not . But even in this case the differences with expertise loom larger than the similarities . Two bird US experts produced virtually all the expert diversity justiﬁcations and this pattern did not change across the test session . Non - experts , in contrast , gave twice as many diversity justiﬁcations in the second half of the tests as in the ﬁrst . Apparently , once they thought of it , non - experts found the diversity justiﬁcation intuitively appealing . 5 . 1 . Itza’ vs . US bird experts There are impressive similarities between the Itza’ and the US birders . In Experiment 1 , on both the stimulus sets , the across - group consensus scores from the Itza’ were closer to J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 38 the scores from the US experts than they were from the non - experts’ scores . It is quite surprising that the Itza’ perform more like the US experts than the non - experts do , despite the fact that the Itza’ have never seen many of the birds in the US set before . Nonetheless , we did observe some differences between the two groups of experts . The differences we ﬁnd between the groups make sense when we consider the difference between interaction and observation . In Experiment 3 , the Itza’ gave predominantly ecological justiﬁcations that cited a bird’s relationship with other living things in their environment . The US birders tended to provide justiﬁcations about scientiﬁc taxonomy ( Experiment 1 ) and evolutionary history ( Experiment 3 ) , two factors emphasized in the ﬁeld guides on which they rely . In sum , although universal folkbiological principles are discernible across diverse human groups , different information requirements and back - ground assumptions also inﬂuence natural categorization and reasoning . Our triangulation strategy does not allow us to determine unequivocally whether these differences are mediated by cultural factors or by differences in amount and type of expertise . To follow up the differences between the two expert groups one would need to examine other groups such as less expert Itza’ or perhaps US birders for whom ecological goals are more salient . The ecological focus of the Itza’ is a robust ﬁnding ( Atran et al . , 1999 , in press ) , which distinguishes them from other groups living in the same area and engaged in more or less the same activities . 5 . 2 . Cultural effects Instances where US experts and non - experts cluster and contrast with the Itza’ suggest cultural differences . The clearest cultural difference we observed is what we called the ‘passerine effect’ . In Experiments 2 and 3 the two cultures’ perceptions regarding passer - ines ( small songbirds ) differed markedly from each other . In the GOE task , members of the two cultures clearly viewed the songbirds in a different light , with the US informants rating them high in typicality and the Itza’ rating them low . US subjects were more apt to generalize from passerines than from other birds ; the reverse trend is seen with the Itza’ , who were more likely to generalize from large , perceptually striking birds than from passerines . The justiﬁcations for choices serve to clarify the patterns of responding to passerines . Non - experts tend to select passerines on probes and justify their choices by saying that passerines are more typical and / or familiar birds . US experts also select passerines , but they never mention typicality . Their focus tends to be on geographical range as well as evolutionary history . Itza’ Maya do not so much avoid passerines as they approach non - passerines . Their justiﬁcations tend to be in terms of ecological relations and behavior . Itza’ have more difﬁculty distinguishing passerines , perhaps because Itza’ may not have as much ecological interest in passerines to bring to bear on the reasoning task . For the Itza’ , passerines are generally seen only as minor players in the causal processes that Itza’ monitor and manipulate to sustain the human ecology ( Atran , 1999 ) . US experts , surprisingly , do as well at naming passerines as non - passerines , perhaps because both bird groups are equally important to expert interests ( that is , to identify birds for their own sake , rather than as crucial factors in human – ecosystem interaction and survival ) . Given that passerines may be more perceptually similar than non - passerines J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 39 ( e . g . Boster , 1987 ) , it may be that the focus of US experts on bird identiﬁcation allows for compensatory perceptual learning . 5 . 3 . Implications for other models of reasoning and categorization In our reasoning studies , typicality strategies are reliably used only by US non - experts ( undergraduates ) . Consequently , models invoking these principles may apply solely to situations where non - experts are reasoning about stimuli with which they have limited knowledge . Most work on the role of typicality judgments in natural categorization and reasoning stems from studies with college students . Those studies tend to support the view that similarity - based structures ( e . g . central tendency , family resemblance ) are the primary predictors for typicality in taxonomic categories , in general , and folkbiological categories , in particular ( Barsalou , 1985 ; Rosch & Mervis , 1975 ) . In this view , the mind’s similarity judgments about typicality and the world’s correlational structure are closely linked : typical members of categories capture the correlational structure of identiﬁable features in the world better than do atypical members . This capacity to recognize correlated similarity structures in the world , such as other species types , seems to be a built in part of human as well as non - human species ( Cerella , 1979 ; Herrnstein , 1984 ; Lorenz , 1966 ; cf . Smith & Medin , 1981 ) . From these considera - tions Boster ( 1988 : 258 ) predicts a biological , cognitive and cultural universal : Passerines appear to be densely and continuously spread through the bird similarity space , whereas non - passerines are more sparsely and discontinuously distributed , leading to the choice of passerines as both more typical and more difﬁcult to cate - gorize than non - passerines . But for Itza’ Maya , passerines are not very typical at all . One way to follow up these ﬁndings would be to study US hunters who target game birds such as turkeys , grouse , partridges , ducks and geese . They might look more like the Itza’ with respect to the passerine effects than do other US groups . No doubt similarity structures and similarity - based typicality and diversity are impor - tant determinants in natural categorization and reasoning . Our ﬁndings suggest that , at least for American undergraduates , these may be dominant factors . But for our relative experts ( US experts and Itza’ ) , who have substantial knowledge , goals and activities about the items they classify and reason with , information other than that derived from percep - tual clustering and similarity judgment is relevant to understanding natural biodiversity . Behavior and ecology , for example , appear to be crucial to the deeper and broader under - standing of nature that scientists and birdwatchers seek . Such concerns also may be critical to the way the Maya and perhaps other peoples in small - scale manage to live and survive with nature . If so , then it is practically impossible to isolate folk ecological orientation from other aspects of cultural knowledge . Thus , previous studies indicate that Itza’ share with other cultural groups ( e . g . Spanish - speaking Ladino immigrants , Highland Q’eqchi’ Maya immigrants ) an identical habitat and a similar taxo - nomic understanding of its ﬂora and fauna ; nevertheless , these different cultural groups cognitively model species relationships ( including humans ) and socially interact with the same local ecology in fundamentally different ways ( Atran et al . , 1999 , in press ) . Such J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 40 ﬁndings strongly simply that culture - speciﬁc cognitions and practices – and not just biotic , demographic or other material features of the environment – reliably determine population differences in ecological orientation and folkbiological understanding . 5 . 4 . Conclusion Our results indicate that in the real - world cognitive domain of folkbiology , which provides our species with information for navigating its natural environment , universal , culturally speciﬁc and selective transcultural patterns of categorization and reasoning have emerged . Among three distinct subject populations – USA non - experts ( under - graduates ) , USA experts ( birdwatchers ) and Itza’ Maya of the Guatemalan rainforest – we found modest to strong similarities on categorization tasks despite large differences in the sorting justiﬁcations . These results provide some support for the operation of univer - sal principles of folkbiological taxonomy , as claimed by Berlin and his associates ( Berlin , 1992 ; Berlin et al . , 1973 ) . The primary qualiﬁcation on this summary is that undergraduate sorting showed fairly modest correlations with scientiﬁc taxonomy . It may be that claims about universality need to be qualiﬁed by the need for some minimal amount of exposure or experience with the domain in question . Only US non - experts show patterns of judgments that are consistent with similarity - based models of taxo - nomic inference and associated claims concerning notions of typicality and central tendency in categorization and reasoning . We also found systematic differences associated with interests and goals . For example , Itza’ Maya rely less on passerines than do USA informants to make inferences about the biological world in the face of uncertainty . The Maya , it appears , believe that passerines are causally less important than non - passerines in sustaining those human – ecosystem interactions deemed necessary to survival . Most surprisingly , we found content - speciﬁc knowledge with respect to categorization and reasoning that both approximates scientiﬁc evolutionary taxonomy and selectively transcends cultural boundaries . The novel empirical implication in this regard is that relative expertise and interaction , rather than mere exposure and observation , with respect to natural biodiversity may be the default condition for most human groups ( and for ancestral humanity ) . From a theoretical perspective , then , the chief interest in studying “standard groups” , such as psychology undergraduates at major North American and European research institutions , may not be to establish a baseline for generalizations about folkbiological knowledge , but to explore the cognitive consequences of limited input and devolutionary cultural processes ( Atran et al . , in press ; Wolff , Medin , & Pank - ratz , 1999 ) . Acknowledgements Portions of this work were supported by NSF grant SBR 9707761 , NSF / EPA grant SES - 9981762 and NIH grant MH55079 to Scott Atran and Douglas Medin . We thank Russell Burnett , Greg Hand , Lori Hanson and Elizabeth Lynch for assistance and Julia Beth Profﬁtt for helpful comments . J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 41 Appendix A . Taxonomic listing of the US and Tikal bird sets Order Family Genus Specie US bird Acadian Flycatcher Passeriformes Tyrannidae Empidonax Virescens Alder Flycatcher Passeriformes Tyrannidae Empidonax Alnorum American Bittern Ciconiiformes Ardeidae Botaurus Lentiginosus American Black Duck Anseriformes Anatidae Anas Rubripes American Coot Gruiformes Rallidae Fulica Americana American Crow Passeriformes Corvidae Corvus Brachyrhynchos American Kestrel Falconiformes Falconidae Falco Sparverius American Woodcock Charadriiformes Scolopalidae Scolopax Minor Bald Eagle Falconiformes Accipitridae Haliaeetus Leucocephalus Barn Owl Strigiformes Strigidae Tyto Alba Barn Swallow Passeriformes Hirundinidae Hirundo Rustica Belted Kingﬁsher Trogoniformes Trogonidae Ceryle Alcyon Black Tern Charadriiformes Laridae Chlidonias Niger Black - And - White Warbler Passeriformes Vireonidae Mniotilta Varia Black - Billed Cuckoo Cuculiformes Cuclidae Coccyzus Americanus Black - Crown Night - Heron Ciconiiformes Ardeidae Nycticorax Nycticorax Blue Jay Passeriformes Corvidae Cyanocitta Cristata Bobolink Passeriformes Emberizidae Dolychonyx Oryzivorus Broad - Winged Hawk Falconiformes Accipitridae Buteo Platypterus Brown Creeper Passeriformes Certhiidae Certhia Americana Canada Goose Anseriformes Anatidae Branta Canadensis Carolina Wren Passeriformes Troglodytidae Thryothorus Ludovicianus Caspian Tern Charadriiformes Laridae Sterna Caspia Cliff Swallow Passeriformes Hirundinidae Hirundo Pyrrhonota Common Goldeneye Anseriformes Anatidae Bucephala Clangula Common Grackle Passeriformes Emberizidae Quiscalus Quiscula Common Loon Gaviiformes Gaviidae Gavia Immer Common Merganser Anseriformes Anatidae Mergus Merganser Common Moorhen Gruiformes Rallidae Gallinula Chloropus Common Nighthawk Caprimulgiformes Caprimulgidae Chordeiles Minor Common Yellowthroat Passeriformes Vireonidae Geothlypis Trichas Cooper’s Hawk Falconiformes Accipitridae Accipiter Cooperii Double - Crested Cormorant Pelecaniformes Phalacrocoracidae Phalacrocorax Auritus Downy Woodpecker Piciformes Picidae Picoides Pubescens Eastern Bluebird Passeriformes Muscicapidae Sialia Sialis Eastern Kingbird Passeriformes Tyrannidae Tyrannus Tyrannus Eastern Phoebe Passeriformes Tyrannidae Sayornis Phoebe Eastern Screech - Owl Strigiformes Strigidae Otus Asio Evening Grosbeak Passeriformes Fringillidae Coccothraustes Vespertinus Gray Catbird Passeriformes Mimidae Dumetella Carolinensis Great Blue Heron Ciconiiformes Ardeidae Ardea Herodias Great Egret Ciconiiformes Ardeidae Casmerodius Albus Great Horned Owl Strigiformes Strigidae Bubo Virginianus Green Heron Ciconiiformes Ardeidae Butorides Virescens Green - Winged Teal Anseriformes Anatidae Anas Crecca Hairy Woodpecker Piciformes Picidae Picoides Villosus Herring Gull Charadriiformes Laridae Larus Argentatus Hooded Merganser Anseriformes Anatidae Lophodytes Cucullatus Horned Grebe Podicipediformes Podicipedidae Podiceps Auritus Horned Lark Passeriformes Alaudidae Eremophila Alpestris House Wren Passeriformes Troglodytidae Troglodytes Aedon Killdeer Charadriiformes Charadriidae Charadrius Vociferus Least Bittern Ciconiiformes Ardeidae Ixobrychus Exilis J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 42 ( continued ) Order Family Genus Specie Little Blue Heron Ciconiiformes Ardeidae Egretta Caerulea Long - Eared Owl Strigiformes Strigidae Asio Otus Louisiana Waterthrush Passeriformes Vireonidae Seiurus Motacilla Mallard Anseriformes Anatidae Anas Platyrhynchos Mourning Dove Columbiformes Columbidae Zenaida Macroura Northern Bobwhite Galliformes Phasianidae Colinus Virgianus Northern Flicker Piciformes Picidae Colaptes Auratus Northern Harrier Falconiformes Accipitridae Circus Cyaneus Northern Mockingbird Passeriformes Mimidae Mimus Polyglottus Northern Oriole Passeriformes Icteridae Icterus Galbula Rough - Winged Swallow Passeriformes Hirundinidae Stelgidopteryx Serripennis Northern Saw - Whet Owl Strigiformes Strigidae Aegolius Acadicus Orchard Oriole Passeriformes Icteridae Icterus Spurius Osprey Falconiformes Accipitridae Pandion Halieatus Pied - Billed Grebe Podicipediformes Podicipedidae Podilymbus Podiceps Purple Martin Passeriformes Hirundinidae Progne Subis Red - Bellied Woodpecker Piciformes Picidae Melanerpes Carolinus Red - Breasted Merganser Anseriformes Anatidae Mergus Serrator Red - Breasted Nuthatch Passeriformes Sittidae Sitta Canadensis Red - Headed Woodpecker Piciformes Picidae Melanerpes Erythrocephalus Red - Shouldered Hawk Falconiformes Accipitridae Buteo Lineatus Red - Tailed Hawk Falconiformes Accipitridae Buteo Jamaicensis Red - Winged Blackbird Passeriformes Emberizidae Agelaius Phoeniceus Redhead Anseriformes Anatidae Aythya Americana Ring - Billed Gull Charadriiformes Laridae Larus Delawarensis Ring - Necked Duck Anseriformes Anatidae Aythya Collaris Ring - Necked Pheasant Galliformes Phasianidae Phasianus Colchicus Rock Dove Columbiformes Columbidae Columbia Livia Ruby - Throated Hummingbird Trochiliformes Trochilidae Archilochus Colubris Ruddy Duck Anseriformes Anatidae Oxyura Jamaicensis Ruffed Grouse Galliformes Phasianidae Bonasa Umbellus Sandhill Crane Gruiformes Rallidae Grus Canadensis Sharp - Shinned Hawk Falconiformes Accipitridae Accipiter Striatus Sharp - Tailed Grouse Galliformes Phasianidae Tympanuchus Phasianellus Short - Eared Owl Strigiformes Strigidae Asio Flammeus Sora Gruiformes Rallidae Porzana Carolina Spotted Sandpiper Charadriiformes Scolopalidae Actitis Macularia Turkey Vulture Falconiformes Cathartidae Cathartes Aura Upland Sandpiper Charadriiformes Scolopalidae Bartramia Longicauda Veery Passeriformes Muscicapidae Catharus Fuscescens Virginia Rail Gruiformes Rallidae Rallus Limicola Whip - Poor - Will Caprimulgiformes Caprimulgidae Caprimulgus Vociferus White - Breasted Nuthatch Passeriformes Sittidae Sitta Carolinensis Willow Flycatcher Passeriformes Tyrannidae Empidonax Traillii Wilson’s Phalarope Charadriiformes Scolopalidae Phalaropus Tricolor Wood Duck Anseriformes Anatidae Aix Sponsa Wood Thrush Passeriformes Muscicapidae Hylocicla Mustelina Yellow Rail Gruiformes Rallidae Coturnicops Noveboracensis Yellow - Bellied Flycatcher Passeriformes Tyrannidae Empidonax Flaviventris Yellow - Bellied Sapsucker Piciformes Picidae Sphyrapicus Varius Yellow - Billed Cuckoo Cuculiformes Cuclidae Coccyzus Erythrophtalmus Tikal bird J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 43 ( continued ) Order Family Genus Specie Blue - Winged Teal Anseriformes Anatidae Anas discors Amazon Kingﬁsher Trogoniformes Alcedinidae chloroceryle amazona American Sparrow - Hawk Falconiformes Falconidae Falco sparverius Banded Tiger Heron Ardeiformes Ardeidae Tigrisoma Lineatum Barn Owl Strigiformes Tytonidae Tyto Alba Barn Swallow Passeriformes Hirundinidae Hirundo rustica Barred forest - Falcon Falconiformes Falconidae micrastur ruﬁcollis Bat Falcon Falconiformes Falconidae Falco ruﬁguralis Black & White Wood - Owl Strigiformes Strigidae Ciccaba nigrolieata Black Hawk - Eagle Falconiformes Accipitridae Spizae¨tus Tyrannus Black Vulture Falconiformes Cathartidae Coragyps atratus Black - cheeked Woodpecker Piciformes Picidae centurus pucherani Blue Grosbeak Passeriformes Fringillidae guiraca caerulea Blue Ground - Dove Columbiformes Columbidae Claravis pretiosa Blue - Crowned Motmot Coraciformes Momotidae Momotus momota Blue - Crowned Parrot Psittaciformes Psittacidae Amazona farinsoa Brown Jay Passeriformes Corvidae Psilorhinus Morio Brown - Crested Flycatcher Passeriformes Tyrannidae Myarchus tyrannulus Brown - Hooded Parrot Psittaciformes Psittacidae pionopsitta haematotis Buff - Throated foliage - gleaner Passeriformes Furnariidae automolus ochrolaemus Cayenne Kite Falconiformes Accipitridae Leptodon cayanensis Cayenne squirrel Cuckoo Culiciformes Cuculidae Piaya Cayana Chestnut - colored Woodpecker Piciformes Picidae celeus castaneus Collared Aracari Piciformes Ramphastidae Pteroglossus Torquatus Collared forest - Falcon Falconiformes Falconidae Micrastur semi - torquatus Common Black Hawk Falconiformes Accipitridae Buteogallus Anthracinus Common Egret Ardeiformes Ardeidae Casmerodius albus Crested Guan Galliformes Cracidae Penelope purpurascens Dusky - Capped Flycatcher Passeriformes Tyrannidae Myarchus tuberculifer Emerald Toucanet Piciformes Ramphastidae Aulacorhynchus prasinus Everglade Kite , Snail Kite Falconiformes Accipitridae Rostrhamus Sociabilis Ferruginous pygmy Owl Strigiformes Strigidae Glaucidium brasilianum Fork - Tailed Emerald Trochiliformes Trochilidae chlorostilblon canivetii Gaumer Swift Apodiformes Apodidae Chaetura gaumeri Giraud’s Flycatcher Passeriformes Tyrannidae Myiozetetes similis Golden - Fronted Woodpecker Piciformes Picidae centurus aurifrons Golden - olive Woodpecker Piciformes Picidae piculus rubiginosus Gray potoo Caprimulgaformes Nyctibiidae Nyctibius griseus Gray’s Robin Passeriformes Muscicapidae Turdus Grayi Gray - Breasted Martin Passeriformes Hirundinidae Progne Chalybea Gray - headed Dove Columbiformes Columbidae Leptotila plumbeiceps Great Black Hawk Falconiformes Accipitridae Buteogallus urubitinga Great Curassow Galliformes Cracidae Cra rubrea Great Horned Owl Strigiformes Strigidae Bubo virginianus Great Kiskadee Passeriformes Tyrannidae Pitangus Sulfuratus Great Tinamou Tinamiformes Tinimidae Tinamous Major Great - Crested Flycatcher Passeriformes Tyrannidae Myarchus crinitus Green Jay Passeriformes Corvidae Cyanocora yncas Green Parakeet Psittaciformes Psittacidae Aratinga nana Green - Breasted Mango Trochiliformes Trochilidae anthracolthora prevostii Groove - Billed ani Culiciformes Cuculidae Crotophaga sulcirostris Hook - Billed Kite Falconiformes Accipitridae Chondrohiera uncinatus J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 44 ( continued ) Order Family Genus Specie Keel - Billed Toucan Piciformes Ramphastidae Ramphastos Sulfuratus King Vulture Falconiformes Cathartidae Sarcoramphus Papa laughing Falcon Falconiformes Falconidae Herpetotheres cachinnans Lesser Swallow - Tailed Swift Apodiformes Apodidae Panyptila cayennensis Lesser Yellowhead Falconiformes Cathartidae Cathartes burrovianus Lineated Woodpecker Piciformes Picidae Dryocopus lineatus Little Blue Heron Ardeiformes Ardeidae Egretta caerula Little Tinamou Tinamiformes Tinimidae Cryturellus soui montezuma Oropendola Passeriformes Icteridae Gymnostinops montezuma Mottled Wood - Owl Strigiformes Strigidae Ciccaba virgata Northern jacana Charadriiformes Jacanidae Jacana spinosa Ocellated turkey Galliformes Phasianidae Agriocharis ocellata Olive - Throated Parrot Psittaciformes Psittacidae Aratinga aztec Ornate Hawk - Eagle Falconiformes Accipitridae Spizae¨tus Ornatus Pale - Billed Woodpecker Piciformes Picidae Phloeoceastes guatemalensis Purple Martin Passeriformes Hirundinidae Progne Subis Purple - Crowned fairy Trochiliformes Trochilidae heliothry barroti Red - Crowned Ant Tanager Passeriformes Thraupidae habia rubica Red - Crowned Parrot Psittaciformes Psittacidae Amazona viridigenalis Red - lored Parrot Psittaciformes Psittacidae Amazona autumnalis Resplendent Quetzal Trochiliformes Trogonidae Pharomachrus mocinno Ringed Kingﬁsher Trogoniformes Alcedinidae ceryle torquata Roadside Hawk Falconiformes Accipitridae Buteo magnirostris Rose - Throated Becard Passeriformes Tyrannidae Pachyramphus aglaiae Rough - Winged Swallow Passeriformes Hirundinidae Stelgideptery Ruﬁcollis Ruddy Ground - Dove Columbiformes Columbidae Columbina talpacoti Ruddy Quail - Dove Columbiformes Columbidae Geotrygon montana Rufescent Tinamou Tinamiformes Tinimidae Cryturellus cinnamoneus Scaled Pigeon Columbiformes Columbidae Columba speciosa Scaly - Breasted Hummingbird Trochiliformes Trochilidae phaeochroa cuvierii Scarlet Macaw Psittaciformes Psittacidae Ara macao Short - Billed Pigeon Columbiformes Columbidae Columba nigrirostris Singing Quail Galliformes Phasianidae Dactylorty thoracicus Slaty - Breasted Tinamou Tinamiformes Tinimidae Cryturellus boucardi Slaty - Tailed Trogon Trochiliformes Trogonidae trogon Massena Southern Boat - Billed Heron Ardeiformes Ardeidae Cochlearius cochlearius Spotted Wood Quail Galliformes Phasianidae Odontophorus guttatus Sumichrast’s Blackbird Passeriformes Icteridae Dives dives Turkey Vulture Falconiformes Cathartidae Cathartes aura Vaux’s Swift Apodiformes Apodidae Chaetura vaui Vermiculated Screech - Owl Strigiformes Strigidae Otus guatemalae Wagler’s Oropendola Passeriformes Icteridae Zarhynchus Wagleri Western chacalaca Galliformes Cracidae Ortalis poliocephala White - Crowned Parrot Psittaciformes Psittacidae Pionus senilis White - Fronted Parrot Psittaciformes Psittacidae Amazona albifrons White - Necked Jacobin Trochiliformes Trochilidae ﬂorisuga mellivora White - Throated Robin Passeriformes Muscicapidae Turdus Albicolis Yellow - backed oriole Passeriformes Icteridae icterus chrysater Yellow - Tailed oriole Passeriformes Icteridae Icterus mesomelas Yellow - Winged Tanager Passeriformes Thraupidae Thraupis Abbas Yucatan Flycatcher Passeriformes Tyrannidae Myarchus yucatanensis Yucatan Poorwill Caprimulgaformes Caprimulgadae Otophanes yucatanicus J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 45 Appendix B . List all 104 birds in each stimuli set For each bird , we list the approximate number of family members ( FAM ) , ranked mean central tendency ( CT ) and mean typicality / idealness ratings ( TYP ) for non - experts ( NOV ) , experts ( EXP ) and Itza’ ( ITZ ) . FAM NOV EXP ITZ CT TYP CT TYP CT TYP US bird set Acadian Flycatcher 10 13 5 13 1 23 – Alder Flycatcher 10 18 3 13 20 57 – American Bittern 10 75 92 42 80 28 – American Black Duck 26 46 79 8 91 10 – American Coot 6 74 60 25 75 71 – American Crow 2 101 5 93 42 98 – American Kestrel 3 71 53 58 42 57 – American Woodcock 19 62 66 90 42 66 – Bald Eagle 11 84 35 76 19 62 – Barn Owl 6 93 76 79 78 67 – Barn Swallow 6 30 35 84 25 94 – Belted Kingﬁsher 1 27 60 61 100 52 – Black Tern 10 53 31 86 86 90 – Black - And - White Warbler 35 6 29 56 1 26 – Black - Billed Cuckoo 2 16 41 35 68 74 – Black - Crowned Night - Heron 10 33 63 20 42 15 – Blue Jay 2 24 7 68 27 75 – Bobolink 9 23 10 32 59 18 – Broad - Winged Hawk 11 67 52 48 42 53 – Brown Creeper 1 45 10 97 75 41 – Canada Goose 26 61 84 28 68 11 – Carolina Wren 5 8 14 59 42 37 – Caspian Tern 10 81 49 85 61 79 – Cliff Swallow 6 10 18 67 35 63 – Common Goldeneye 26 44 84 6 42 4 – Common Grackle 9 63 26 39 1 72 – Common Loon 1 43 74 12 42 8 – Common Merganser 26 36 80 3 61 3 – Common Moorhen 6 77 84 38 104 54 – Common Nighthawk 2 95 45 103 1 81 – Common Yellowthroat 35 32 35 56 59 20 – Cooper’s Hawk 11 76 14 51 80 76 – Double - Crested Cormorant 1 87 98 47 1 78 – Downy Woodpecker 6 31 18 70 42 87 – Eastern Bluebird 10 15 1 37 23 50 – Eastern Kingbird 10 11 41 23 1 49 – Eastern Phoebe 10 2 18 19 41 43 – Eastern Screech - Owl 6 95 70 64 74 67 – Evening Grosbeak 8 28 49 91 42 39 – Gray Catbird 3 9 18 29 1 51 – Great Blue Heron 10 66 98 20 38 29 – J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 46 ( continued ) FAM NOV EXP ITZ CT TYP CT TYP CT TYP Great Egret 10 64 76 26 103 24 – Great Horned Owl 6 91 87 64 21 67 – Green or Green - Backed Heron 10 55 87 24 87 35 – Green - Winged Teal 26 39 66 6 34 9 – Hairy Woodpecker 6 54 31 70 1 89 – Herring Gull 10 90 63 74 100 34 – Hooded Merganser 26 49 104 3 78 12 – Horned Grebe 3 72 98 17 65 25 – Horned Lark 1 26 35 50 35 48 – House Wren 5 5 10 59 1 17 – Killdeer 4 69 31 69 35 82 – Least Bittern 10 60 66 43 97 35 – Little Blue Heron 10 83 103 22 42 22 – Long - Eared Owl 6 91 80 64 61 67 – Louisiana Waterthrush 35 20 9 40 1 32 – Mallard 26 40 89 8 65 7 – Mourning Dove 2 52 29 77 27 96 – Northern Bobwhite 5 99 70 98 97 91 – Northern Flicker 6 58 18 82 65 92 – Northern Harrier 11 82 48 54 61 73 – Northern Mockingbird 3 19 31 44 39 46 – Northern or Baltimore Oriole 2 12 4 31 27 45 – Northern Rough - Winged Swallow 6 14 35 87 23 86 – Northern Saw - Whet Owl 6 88 76 62 91 61 – Orchard Oriole 2 7 2 30 1 56 – Osprey 11 78 55 78 42 55 – Pied - Billed Grebe 3 48 101 18 42 5 – Purple Martin 6 21 18 89 27 80 – Red - Bellied Woodpecker 6 47 45 70 39 87 – Red - Breasted Merganser 26 50 92 11 42 14 – Red - Breasted Nuthatch 2 4 26 95 25 19 – Red - Headed Woodpecker 6 51 7 70 1 95 – Red - Shouldered Hawk 11 68 53 48 72 60 – Red - Tailed Hawk 11 73 57 51 42 59 – Red - Winged Blackbird 9 29 45 27 1 47 – Redhead 26 37 92 1 80 1 – Ring - Billed Gull 10 94 57 74 91 44 – Ring - Necked Duck 26 38 97 1 97 6 – Ring - Necked Pheasant 5 103 65 101 80 104 – Rock Dove 2 85 14 92 87 93 – Ruby - Throated Hummingbird 1 41 55 102 68 97 – Ruddy Duck 26 56 92 5 75 13 – Ruffed Grouse 5 102 80 98 80 103 – Sandhill Crane 6 86 92 83 1 21 – Sharp - Shinned Hawk 11 80 18 51 68 42 – Sharp - Tailed Grouse 5 100 74 98 42 102 – Short - Eared Owl 6 89 89 62 102 65 – Sora 6 70 70 88 87 101 – J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 47 ( continued ) FAM NOV EXP ITZ CT TYP CT TYP CT TYP Spotted Sandpiper 19 97 57 46 72 77 – Turkey Vulture 1 104 101 94 95 100 – Upland Sandpiper 19 79 70 45 42 64 – Veery 10 1 18 33 1 16 – Virginia Rail 6 65 62 41 96 33 – Whip - Poor - Will 2 98 49 103 1 99 – White - Breasted Nuthatch 2 22 26 95 27 38 – Willow Flycatcher 10 3 10 16 21 27 – Wilson’s Phalarope 19 57 80 55 1 31 – Wood Duck 26 42 89 10 91 2 – Wood Thrush 10 25 41 33 27 30 – Yellow Rail 6 35 41 81 90 84 – Yellow - Bellied Flycatcher 10 17 14 13 1 40 – Yellow - Bellied Sapsucker 6 34 35 80 27 85 – Yellow - Billed Cuckoo 2 59 69 35 80 83 – Tikal bird set Amazon Kingﬁsher 5 61 95 98 39 68 36 American Sparrow - Hawk / Kestrel 12 28 58 20 21 3 100 Banded Tiger Heron 17 41 95 101 48 97 75 Barn Owl 1 100 62 68 15 26 56 Barn Swallow 14 21 22 35 40 27 75 Barred forest - Falcon 12 45 62 9 1 5 79 Bat Falcon 12 62 27 13 46 6 79 Black & White Wood - Owl 30 96 90 61 85 24 56 Black Hawk - Eagle 40 69 77 14 6 11 79 Black Vulture 5 81 62 48 40 72 69 Black - cheeked Woodpecker 27 33 66 82 83 85 21 Blue Grosbeak 12 57 10 82 30 58 31 Blue Ground - Dove 24 30 52 95 51 37 36 Blue - Crowned Motmot 6 89 95 70 51 79 49 Blue - Crowned Parrot 22 66 36 2 45 38 2 Blue - Winged Teal 40 102 22 104 30 93 33 Brown Jay 24 2 14 22 91 65 90 Brown - Crested Flycatcher 75 19 3 24 30 13 62 Brown - Hooded Parrot 22 77 48 1 80 28 2 Buff - Throated foliage - gleaner 7 10 1 52 19 82 87 Cayenne Kite 40 56 36 23 21 4 100 Cayenne squirrel Cuckoo 12 39 90 69 66 101 68 Chestnut - colored Woodpecker 27 32 84 90 90 41 18 Collared Aracari 3 94 95 58 30 77 26 Collared forest - Falcon 12 72 62 18 66 2 95 Common Black Hawk 40 67 58 7 6 7 79 Common Egret 17 104 41 102 4 87 103 Crested Guan 8 42 102 88 91 69 10 Dusky - Capped Flycatcher 75 25 17 24 85 12 62 Emerald Toucanet 3 94 66 58 51 76 26 Everglade Kite , Snail Kite 40 63 48 32 83 14 79 J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 48 ( continued ) FAM NOV EXP ITZ CT TYP CT TYP CT TYP Ferruginous pygmy Owl 30 38 45 36 85 16 56 Fork - Tailed Emerald 61 59 41 74 4 46 45 Gaumer Swift 10 75 27 67 37 88 96 Giraud’s Flycatcher 75 26 17 21 6 19 52 Golden - Fronted Woodpecker 27 11 30 82 91 80 21 Golden - olive Woodpecker 27 9 36 82 30 83 21 Gray potoo 2 5 73 89 80 104 89 Gray’s Robin 37 3 21 43 6 45 66 Gray - Breasted Martin 14 8 3 29 37 55 91 Gray - headed Dove 24 50 77 47 62 64 40 Great Black Hawk 40 68 45 7 91 8 79 Great Curassow 8 46 104 91 101 69 11 Great Horned Owl 30 98 66 66 15 32 56 Great kiskadee , Derby Flycatcher 75 34 22 42 101 19 52 Great Tinamou 4 86 77 72 91 43 14 Great - Crested Flycatcher 75 22 14 24 6 17 62 Green Jay 24 15 7 28 85 44 74 Green Parakeet 22 51 17 15 6 36 2 Green - Breasted Mango 61 83 36 74 66 91 50 Groove - Billed ani 12 71 48 65 51 52 32 Hook - Billed Kite 40 53 77 12 74 10 79 Keel - Billed Toucan 3 92 77 60 1 86 24 King Vulture 5 87 102 50 73 78 69 laughing Falcon 12 13 54 11 74 1 100 Lesser Swallow - Tailed Swift 10 75 54 63 27 54 91 Lesser Yellowhead 0 78 90 51 74 75 69 Lineated Woodpecker 27 37 84 86 91 50 18 Little Blue Heron 17 103 77 100 6 99 103 Little Tinamou 4 82 66 93 51 84 28 montezuma Oropendola 33 90 84 37 50 95 51 Mottled Wood - Owl 30 96 90 62 74 23 56 Northern jacana 1 101 88 103 51 102 35 Ocellated turkey 19 91 77 94 91 81 1 Olive - Throated Parrot 22 54 30 15 6 35 2 Ornate Hawk - Eagle 40 43 84 19 48 18 30 Pale - Billed Woodpecker 27 27 95 86 27 50 20 Purple Martin 14 20 10 29 21 57 96 Purple - Crowned fairy 61 85 7 74 6 49 45 Red - Crowned Ant Tanager 30 40 10 39 51 60 67 Red - Crowned Parrot 22 74 41 2 62 34 2 Red - lored Parrot 22 54 36 2 17 30 2 Resplendent Quetzal 9 93 95 80 80 92 29 Ringed Kingﬁsher 5 47 95 98 25 71 36 Roadside Hawk 40 58 54 9 30 9 79 Rose - Throated Becard 75 4 14 34 74 61 96 Rough - Winged Swallow 14 6 3 29 66 59 96 Ruddy Ground - Dove 24 35 66 53 66 53 36 Ruddy Quail - Dove 24 1 35 40 46 63 43 J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 49 ( continued ) FAM NOV EXP ITZ CT TYP CT TYP CT TYP Rufescent Tinamou 4 52 88 72 74 39 14 Scaled Pigeon 24 16 66 41 51 66 40 Scaly - Breasted Hummingbird 61 64 48 74 25 48 45 Scarlet Macaw 22 60 17 17 62 67 12 Short - Billed Pigeon 24 49 52 54 62 62 40 Singing Quail , long - toed partridge 19 48 73 81 51 40 14 Slaty - Breasted Tinamou 4 65 58 79 61 74 17 Slaty - Tailed Trogon 9 88 22 33 17 98 13 Southern Boat - Billed Heron 17 44 90 97 91 96 75 Spotted Wood Quail 19 29 73 92 91 90 25 Sumichrast’s Blackbird 33 17 10 55 21 103 91 Turkey Vulture 5 79 54 48 51 72 69 Vaux’s Swift 10 7 3 71 51 56 75 Vermiculated Screech - Owl 30 98 58 64 91 33 56 Wagler’s Oropendola 33 83 73 37 66 89 44 Western chacalaca 8 80 41 45 85 94 33 White - Crowned Parrot 22 73 45 2 72 31 2 White - Fronted Parrot 22 70 27 2 44 29 2 White - Necked Jacobin 61 36 66 74 40 46 45 White - Throated Robin 37 12 30 43 30 42 88 Yellow - backed oriole 33 24 30 56 101 21 52 Yellow - Tailed oriole 33 18 30 56 1 21 52 Yellow - Winged Tanager 30 31 7 46 40 25 69 Yucatan Flycatcher 75 22 1 24 19 15 62 Yucatan Poorwill 14 14 22 96 27 100 91 Appendix C . The 16 pairs used as stimuli in the typicality task ( half are US birds and half are Tikal birds ) Typicality Familiality Pair US Tikal High Varied 1 Wilson’s Phalarope ( HI ) Yucatan Flycatcher ( HI ) Common Loon ( LO ) Laughing Falcon ( LO ) 2 Wilson’s Phalarope ( HI ) Yucatan Flycatcher ( HI ) N . Mockingbird ( LO ) Barn Swallow ( LO ) Low Varied 3 Caspian Tern ( HI ) Green - Breasted Mango ( HI ) N . Bobwhite ( LO ) N . Jacana ( LO ) 4 American Woodcock ( HI ) Blue - Winged Teal ( HI ) N . Flicker ( LO ) Keel - Billed Toucan ( LO ) Varied High 5 Wood Thrush ( HI ) Ornate Hawk - Eagle ( HI ) American Woodcock ( LO ) Blue - Winged Teal ( LO ) 6 Wood Thrush ( HI ) Ornate Hawk - Eagle ( HI ) Caspian Tern ( LO ) Green - Breasted Mango ( LO ) Varied Low 7 N . Mockingbird ( HI ) Barn Swallow ( HI ) N . Flicker ( LO ) Keel - Billed Toucan ( LO ) 8 Common Loon ( HI ) Laughing Falcon ( HI ) N . Bobwhite ( LO ) N . Jacana ( LO ) J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 50 Appendix D . The eight diversity pairs used as stimuli in the diversity task ( half are US birds and half are Tikal birds ) Diversity pair Distance US Tikal 1 Close Short - Eared Owl Emerald Toucanet Barn Owl Collared Aracari Far Ruffed Grouse Blue Grosbeak N . Flicker N . Jacana 2 Close Bald Eagle Gaumer Swift Osprey Lesser Yellow - Tailed Swift Far Sora Blue - Crowned Motmot American Woodcock Ocellated Turkey 3 Close Acadian Flycatcher Great - Crested Flycatcher Yellow - Bellied Flycatcher Brown - Crested Flycatcher Far Black - Crowned Night Heron Scaly - Breasted Hummingbird Bobolink Ornate Hawk - Eagle 4 Close Common Grackle Slaty - Breasted Tinamou American Crow Little Tinamou Far Killdeer Resplendent Quetzal American Kestrel Black Vulture References Atran , S . ( 1993 ) . Itza Maya tropical agro - forestry . Current Anthropology , 34 , 633 – 700 . Atran , S . ( 1995 ) . Classifying nature across cultures . In E . Smith & D . Osherson ( Eds . ) , Thinking . An invitation to cognitive science ( pp . 131 – 174 ) , Vol . 3 . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Atran , S . ( 1998 ) . Folk biology and the anthropology of science : cognitive universals and cultural particulars . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , Vol . 21 , 547 – 611 . Atran , S . ( 1999 ) . Itzaj Maya folkbiologicaltaxonomy . In D . Medin & S . Atran ( Eds . ) , Folk biology ( pp . 119 – 203 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Atran , S . ( 2001 ) . The trouble with memes : inference versus imitation in cultural creation . Human Nature , 12 , 351 – 381 . Atran , S . , Estin , P . , Coley , J . , & Medin , D . ( 1997 ) . Generic species and basic levels : essence and appearance in folk biology . Journal of Ethnobiology , 17 , 22 – 45 . Atran , S . , & Medin , D . ( 1997 ) . Knowledge and actions : cultural models of nature and resource management in Mesoamerica . In M . H . Bazerman , D . M . Messick , A . E . Tenbrunsel & K . A . Wade - Benzoni ( Eds . ) , Envir - onment , ethics , and behavior : the psychology of environmental valuation and degradation ( pp . 171 – 208 ) . San Francisco , CA : The New Lexington Press . Atran , S . , Medin , D . , Ross , E . , Lynch , E . , Coley , J . , Ucan Ek’ , E . , & Vapnarsky , V . ( 1999 ) . Folkecology and commons management in the Maya Lowlands . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA , 96 , 7598 – 7603 . Atran , S . , Medin , D . , Ross , N . , Lynch , E . , Vapnarsky , V . , Ucan Ek’ , E . , Coley , J . , Timura , C . , & Baran , M . ( in press ) . Folkecology , cultural epidemiology , and the spirit of the commons : a garden experiment in the Maya Lowlands , 1991 – 2001 . Current Anthropology , 43 ( 3 ) . Atran , S . , & Ucan Ek’ , E . ( 1999 ) . Classiﬁcation of useful plants among the Northern Pete´n Maya . In C . White ( Ed . ) , Reconstructing ancient Maya diet . Salt Lake City , UT : The University of Utah Press . Barsalou , L . W . ( 1985 ) . Ideals , central tendency , and frequency of instantiation as determinants of graded structure of categories . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 11 , 629 – 654 . J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 51 Berlin , B . ( 1978 ) . Ethnobiological classiﬁcation . In E . Rosch & B . Lloyd ( Eds . ) , Cognition and categorization ( pp . 9 – 26 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Berlin , B . ( 1992 ) . Ethnobiological classiﬁcation : principles of categorization of plants and animals in traditional societies . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Berlin , B . , Breedlove , D . , & Raven , P . ( 1973 ) . General principles of classiﬁcation and nomenclature in folk biology . American Anthropologist , 74 , 214 – 242 . Berlin , B . , Breedlove , D . , & Raven , P . ( 1974 ) . Principles of Tzeltal plant classiﬁcation . New York : Academic Press . Boster , J . S . ( 1986 ) . Exchange of varieties and information between Aguaruna Manioc Cultivators . American Anthropologist , 88 , 429 – 436 . Boster , J . ( 1987 ) . Agreement between biological classiﬁcation systems is not dependent on cultural transmission . American Anthropologist , 89 , 914 – 920 . Boster , J . ( 1988 ) . Natural sources of internal category structure : typicality , familiarity , and similarity of birds . Memory & Cognition , 16 , 258 – 270 . Boster , J . ( 1991 ) . The information economy model applied to biological similarity judgment . In J . Levine , L . Resnick & S . Teasley ( Eds . ) , Perspectives on socially shared cognition ( pp . 203 – 235 ) . Washington , DC : American Psychological Association . Boster , J . , Berlin , B . , & O’Neill , J . ( 1986 ) . The correspondence of Jivoroan to scientiﬁc ornithology . American Anthropologist , 88 , 569 – 583 . Boster , J . , & D’Andrade , R . ( 1989 ) . Natural and human sources of cross - cultural agreement in ornithological classiﬁcation . American Anthropologist , 91 , 132 – 142 . Boster , J . , & Johnson , J . ( 1989 ) . Form or function : a comparison of expert and novice judgments of similarity among ﬁsh . American Anthropologist , 91 , 866 – 889 . Brown , C . ( 1984 ) . Language and living things : uniformities in folk classiﬁcation and naming . New Brunswick , NJ : Rutgers University Press . Bulmer , R . ( 1974 ) . Folk biology in the New Guinea Highlands . Social Science Information , 13 , 9 – 28 . Cerella , J . ( 1979 ) . Visual classes and natural categories in the pigeon . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Perception and Performance , 5 , 68 – 77 . Coley , J . D . ( 1995 ) . Emerging differentiation of folkbiology and folkpsychology : attributions of biological and psychological properties to living things . Child Development , 66 , 1856 – 1874 . Coley , J . , Medin , D . , Profﬁtt , J . , Lynch , E . , & Atran , S . ( 1999 ) . Inductive reasoning in folkbiological thought . In D . L . Medin & S . Atran ( Eds . ) , Folkbiology ( pp . 205 – 232 ) . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Gigerenzer , G . ( 1996 ) . The modularity of social intelligence . In A . Whiten & R . Byrne ( Eds . ) , Machiavellian intelligence ( pp . 264 – 288 ) , Vol . II . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Hays , T . ( 1983 ) . Ndumba folk biology and the general principles of ethnobotanical classiﬁcation and nomen - clature . American Anthropologist , 85 , 489 – 507 . Heider , E . R . ( 1971 ) . “Focal” color areas and the development of color names . Developmental Psychology , 4 , 447 – 455 . Heider , E . R . ( 1972 ) . Universals in color naming and memory . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 93 , 10 – 20 . Hennig , W . ( 1966 ) . Phylogenetic systematics . Urbana , IL : University of Illinois Press . Herrnstein , R . ( 1984 ) . Objects , categories , and discriminative stimuli . In H . Roitblat ( Ed . ) , Animal cognition ( pp . 233 – 261 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Hsee , C . K . , & Weber , E . U . ( 1999 ) . Cross - national differences in risk preference and lay predictions . Journal of Behavioral Decision Making , 12 , 165 – 179 . Hubert , L . , & Schultz , J . ( 1976 ) . Quadratic assignment as a general data analysis strategy . British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology , 29 , 190 – 241 . Hunn , E . ( 1976 ) . Toward a perceptual model of folk biological classiﬁcation . American Ethnologist , 3 , 508 – 524 . Hunn , E . ( 1977 ) . Tzeltal folk zoology . New York : Academic Press . Johnson , K . , & Mervis , C . ( 1997 ) . Effects of varying levels of expertise on the basic level of categorization . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 126 , 248 – 277 . Johnson , K . , & Mervis , C . ( 1998 ) . Impact of intuitive theories on feature recruitment throughout the continuum of expertise . Memory & Cognition , 26 , 382 – 401 . Johnson , K . , Mervis , C . , & Boster , J . S . ( 1992 ) . Developmental changes in the structure of the mammal domain . Developmental Psychology , 28 , 74 – 83 . J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 52 Lois , X . ( 1988 ) . Gender markers as “rigid determiners” of the Itzaj Maya world . International Journal of American Linguistics , 64 , 224 – 282 . Lo´pez , A . , Atran , S . , Coley , J . , & Medin , D . ( 1997 ) . The tree of life : universal and cultural features of folkbio - logical taxonomies and inductions . Cognitive Psychology , 32 , 251 – 295 . Lo´pez , A . , Gelman , S . , Gutheil , G . , & Smith , E . ( 1992 ) . The development of category - based induction . Child Development , 63 , 1070 – 1090 . Lorenz , K . ( 1966 ) . The role of gestalt perception in animal and human behavior . In L . White ( Ed . ) , Aspects of form ( pp . 157 – 178 ) . Bloomington , IN : Indiana University Press . Lynch , E . , Coley , J . , & Medin , D . ( 2000 ) . Tall is typical : central tendency , ideal dimensions and graded category structure among tree experts and novices . Memory & Cognition , 28 , 41 – 50 . Markus , H . R . , & Kitayama , S . ( 1991 ) . Culture and the self : implications for cognition , emotion , and motivation . Psychological Review , 98 , 224 – 253 . Mayr , E . ( 1965 ) . Numerical phenetics and taxonomic theory . Systematic Zoology , 14 , 73 – 97 . Medin , D . , Goldstone , R . , & Gentner , D . ( 1993 ) . Respects for similarity . Psychological Review , 100 , 254 – 278 . Medin , D . L . , Lynch , E . B . , Coley , J . D . , & Atran , S . ( 1997 ) . Categorization and reasoning among tree experts : do all roads lead to Rome ? Cognitive Psychology , 32 , 49 – 96 . Mervis , C . , & Rosch , E . ( 1981 ) . Categorization of natural objects . Annual Review of Psychology , 32 , 89 – 115 . Nakao , K . , & Romney , A . ( 1984 ) . A method for testing alternative theories : an example from English kinship . American Anthropologist , 86 , 668 – 673 . Nisbett , R . , Peng , K . , Choi , I . , & Norenzayan , A . ( 2001 ) . Culture and systems of thought : holistic vs . analytic cognition . Psychological Review , 108 , 291 – 310 . Nisbett , R . , & Wilson , T . ( 1977 ) . Telling more than we know : verbal reports on mental processes . Psychological Review , 84 , 231 – 259 . Osherson , D . , Smith , E . , Wilkie , O . , Lo´pez , A . , & Shaﬁr , E . ( 1990 ) . Category - based induction . Psychological Review , 97 , 85 – 200 . Profﬁtt , J . , Coley , J . , & Medin , D . ( 2000 ) . Expertise and category - based induction . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 26 , 811 – 828 . Romney , A . K . , Weller , S . , & Batchelder , W . ( 1986 ) . Culture as consensus : a theory of culture and informant accuracy . American Anthropologist , 88 , 313 – 338 . Rosch , E . ( 1975 ) . Universals and cultural speciﬁcs in categorization . In R . Brislin , S . Bochner & W . Lonner ( Eds . ) , Cross - cultural perspectives on learning ( pp . 177 – 206 ) . New York : Sage . Rosch , E . ( 1977 ) . Human categorization . In N . Warren , Studies in cross - cultural psychology ( pp . 1 – 49 ) . London : Academic Press . Rosch , E . , & Mervis , C . B . ( 1975 ) . Family resemblances : studies in the internal structure of categories . Cognitive Psychology , 7 , 573 – 605 . Rosch , E . , Mervis , C . B . , Gray , W . D . , Johnson , D . M . , & Boyes - Braem , P . ( 1976 ) . Basic objects in natural categories . Cognitive Psychology , 8 , 382 – 439 . Sloman , S . A . ( 1993 ) . Feature - based induction . Cognitive Psychology , 25 , 231 – 280 . Smith , E . , & Medin , D . ( 1981 ) . Categories and concepts . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Smithe , F . ( 1966 ) . The birds of Tikal . Garden City , NY : The Natural History Press . Sokal , P . , & Sneath , R . ( 1973 ) . Numerical taxonomy . San Francisco , CA : Freeman . Wolff , P . , Medin , D . , & Pankratz , C . ( 1999 ) . Evolution and devolution of folkbiological knowledge . Cognition , 73 , 177 – 204 . J . N . Bailenson et al . / Cognition 84 ( 2002 ) 1 – 53 53