a r X i v : 2201 . 04271v2 [ c s . S I ] 10 F e b 2022 No Community Can Do Everything : Why People Participate in Similar Online Communities NATHAN TEBLUNTHUIS , University of Washington , USA CHARLES KIENE , University of Washington , USA ISABELLA BROWN , University of Washington , USA LAURA ( ALIA ) LEVI , University of Washington , USA NICOLE MCGINNIS , University of Washington , USA BENJAMIN MAKO HILL , University of Washington , USA Large - scale quantitative analyses have shown that individuals frequently talk to each other about similar things in diﬀerent online spaces . Why dothese overlapping communities exist ? We provide an answer grounded in the analysis of 20 interviews with active participants in clusters of highly related subreddits . Within a broad topical area , there are a diversity of beneﬁts an online community can confer . These include ( a ) speciﬁc in - formation and discussion , ( b ) socialization with similar others , and ( c ) attention from the largest possible audience . A single community cannot meet all three needs . Our ﬁndings suggest that topical areas within an online community platform tend to become populated by groups of specialized communities with diverse sizes , topical boundaries , and rules . Compared with any single community , such systems of overlapping com - munities are able to provide a greater range of beneﬁts . CCS Concepts : • Human - centered computing → Collaborative and social computing theory , con - cepts and paradigms ; Social content sharing ; Computer supported cooperative work . Additional Key Words and Phrases : ecology , interviews , multiple communities , online communities , Reddit ACM Reference Format : Nathan TeBlunthuis , Charles Kiene , Isabella Brown , Laura ( Alia ) Levi , Nicole McGinnis , and Benjamin Mako Hill . 2018 . No Community Can Do Everything : Why People Participate in Similar Online Communities . In Woodstock ’18 : ACM Symposium on Neural Gaze Detection , June 03 – 05 , 2018 , Woodstock , NY . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 25 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1122445 . 1122456 1 INTRODUCTION Early work in social computing treated online communities as isolated units that could be under - stood without considering their members’ participation in other online communities . As commu - nity hosting platforms such as Reddit and Facebook have grown in prominence , social comput - ing scholars have sought to document and explore the connections between online communities [ 20 , 37 , 75 , 87 ] . This research has shown that online communities overlap with each other in terms of their memberships and topics in ways that have important consequences for a range of outcomes [ 16 , 76 , 80 ] . User and topic overlap is widespread—both within platforms and across them . For example , a range of studies have highlighted the fact that members frequently participate in multiple online groups . This occurs both serially as users migrate between communities over time [ 55 , 74 , 75 ] Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . Woodstock ’18 , June 03 – 05 , 2018 , Woodstock , NY © 2018 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - XXXX - X / 18 / 06 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1122445 . 1122456 1 Woodstock ’18 , June 03 – 05 , 2018 , Woodstock , NY TeBlunthuis , et al . and concurrently as individuals belong to multiple groups at once [ 40 , 80 , 88 ] . Many large plat - forms host distinct communities with similar topics and content [ 21 , 87 ] . In at least one study , researchers have documented that overlaps in users and topics often coincide [ 21 ] . In other words , members of online communities often simultaneously participate in overlapping conversations with overlapping groups of people in diﬀerent online spaces . Why are the same individuals talking to each other about similar things in diﬀerent online commu - nities ? Although social computing oﬀers many theories of why individuals might want to partici - pate in a community , almost all empirical work in social computing on user and topic overlap has used computational or quantitative analysis . As a result , we know very little about what overlaps mean to users . Critically , we also have very little in the way of empirical evidence that is able to speak to why communities overlap in the ﬁrst place . Our work seeks to complement existing quantitative research with a better qualitative under - standing of intercommunity overlap and contribute to several streams of social computing schol - arship . In particular , our work complements a series of social computing studies that have taken inspiration from ecological theory and shown that online groups’ growth and survival are closely tied to activity in adjacent online spaces [ 76 , 80 , 87 , 88 ] . We seek to answer our research question ( in italics above ) through an interview - based study of Reddit users with experience in overlapping communities . Using a dataset of posts and comments on Reddit , we identify clusters of communities on Reddit with highly overlapping users and topics and recruit a set of 20 participants from nine clusters . Drawing from a grounded theory analysis of interview transcripts , we develop an explanation of why many users participate simultaneously in communities with overlapping memberships and topics . Our ﬁndings suggest that users seek three beneﬁts from online groups : users want to ( a ) ﬁnd speciﬁc types of content , discussions , and information ; ( b ) connect with similar types of people ; and ( c ) share content with the largest possible audience . Our work also suggests that these three beneﬁts are frequently in conﬂict such that the more a community provides one of these beneﬁts , the less able it will be to provide the other two . Because it is diﬃcult for a single community to fully provide all three beneﬁts , clusters of multiple overlapping communities are constructed to do so in aggregate . 2 RELATED WORK Although most research in online communities analyzes the internal factors driving online com - munity success [ 44 ] , a growing literature studies communities related by overlaps in topic or mem - bership [ 21 , 75 , 76 , 88 ] . This work has found that concurrent engagement in multiple communities is common on large platforms that host online communities such as Reddit where individuals smoothly jump from community to community [ 75 ] . With several exceptions [ e . g . , 25 , 40 , 42 , 86 ] , this work typically takes the fact that communities overlap for granted and focuses on the conse - quences of overlap on outcomes such as the emergence and growth of communities [ 11 , 88 ] and the diﬀusion of types of language such as hate speech [ 16 ] . None of this work provides insight into how communities come to overlap and why these overlaps persist . Researchers have investigated intercommunity conﬂict and found that conﬂict is initiated by a very small proportion of online communities [ 45 ] . Other work has shown that content cross - posted to diﬀerent communities contributes to the ongoing renegotiation of topical boundaries [ 11 ] . Zhang et al . [ 84 ] have shown that topical boundaries can also shift as similar communities attract users with diﬀerent interests . In a related sense , Massanari [ 58 ] has argued that toxic com - munities can inﬂuence the broader culture of a platform . As a result , banning problematic com - munities from a platform such as Reddit can reduce toxicity in adjacent communities that are not directly aﬀected [ 15 , 67 ] . 2 No Community Can Do Everything Woodstock ’18 , June 03 – 05 , 2018 , Woodstock , NY A number of studies on overlapping communities draw upon ecological theory [ 76 , 80 , 87 , 88 ] . Ecological approaches in social computing theorize that overlaps between users and topics relate to competitive or mutualistic forces and drive outcomes such as growth and survival . For example , Wang et al . [ 80 ] found that membership overlap reduced the growth rate of Usenet groups . Zhu et al . [ 87 ] found that participation rates often suﬀered if there was too little or too much overlap with other communities . Zhu et al . [ 88 ] found that communities’ survival was positively associated with membership overlap , especially with overlap with older communities . Recently , TeBlunthuis and Hill [ 76 ] found that mutualism is common in clusters of overlapping subreddits . Although these studies use statistical analysis to tell us about how communities relate to each other , they do not to speak to how participants understand the relationships between similar online communities or why they participate in overlapping communities . The exclusively quantitative nature of these accounts means that a range of potential explanations are possible . Although we know of no qualitative examination focused directly on understanding why over - lapping communities exist , there are a series of qualitative papers that point to potential answers . Fiesler and Dym [ 25 ] describe the history of online fanﬁction writing communities migrating across platforms in pursuit of hospitable infrastructure . Similarly , Zhao et al . [ 86 ] describe how individuals use multiple social media platforms to meet varied and nuanced communication needs . Although their study is primarily quantitative , Zhu et al . [ 87 ] include quotes from interviews to support the emic validity of notions of competition and mutualism between groups in an enterprise social media system . Finally , Hwang and Foote’s [ 40 ] recent paper seeks to explain why individ - uals participate in persistently small online communities on Reddit and ends with a reﬂection that many small communities are sustainable only because they are “nested” within larger niches . All told , these ﬁndings suggest a rich social process by which participants in online communities purposefully construct and move between overlapping spaces . However , the small amount of qualitative evidence from participants in overlapping communi - ties means that we lack a strong sense of why members choose to participate in multiple communi - ties simultaneously . Although ecological studies attempt to quantify competition and mutualism , we know little about how members understand the relationships between their communities or if these key ecological concepts have any emic resonance . Our work seeks to place ecological studies of online communities on ﬁrmer qualitative ground . 2 . 1 Reasons for Joining Online Communities Decades of social computing research has sought to understand why people belong to particular online communities [ 44 ] . It has long been recognized that diﬀerent people have diﬀerent moti - vations and that a single individual may have multiple motivations that include the social , infor - mational , and material beneﬁts users receive through their participation [ 10 , 78 , 82 ] . In terms of uses and gratiﬁcations theory , “users actively seek particular media with the goal of gratifying an existing need” [ 48 ] . Past research has shown that people seek online communities to collaborate on projects [ 66 ] , to receive social support [ 51 ] , to cooperate with friends [ 78 ] , and , especially , to exchange information [ 50 , 52 , 63 , 68 ] . Other research focuses on the growth and decline of mem - bership in online communities and surfaces motivations for why people choose not to participate [ 19 ] . Brandtzæg and Heim [ 8 ] found that a lack of trust or low quality content can lead to de - clines in membership . Online communities may decline because leaders are resistant to change and unwelcoming to newcomers [ 35 , 71 , 77 ] . Although our ﬁndings are the result of an inductive process of bottom - up grounded theory analysis , the presentation of our ﬁndings relies on three existing concepts : ﬁnding speciﬁc content , homophily , and ﬁnding the largest possible audience . 3 Woodstock ’18 , June 03 – 05 , 2018 , Woodstock , NY TeBlunthuis , et al . 2 . 1 . 1 Finding specific content . One of the most important features of online communities is their ability to enable the spread of useful knowledge and information [ 24 ] . By connecting individuals with speciﬁc information and skills that they desire , online communities match knowledge seekers with experts and foster collaboration on information goods [ 6 , 27 , 31 , 46 ] . Research has often focused on the ways that individuals utilize diverse types of social computing systems to meet their speciﬁc information needs through systems such as Q & A sites [ 3 ] , synchronous chat systems [ 81 ] , search engines [ 61 ] , social network sites [ 62 , 72 ] , fanworks [ 27 ] , and knowledge bases [ 2 , 64 ] . 2 . 1 . 2 Homophily . A second need that online communities serve is to foster connections with sim - ilar others . The term homophily , “a tendency for friendships to form between those who are alike in a designated respect” [ 49 ] , describes the set of beneﬁts people can only receive from others who share their identities , beliefs , interests , or culture [ 60 ] . In oﬄine settings , homophily helps explain why tastes in cuisine , music , and other cultural preferences are often correlated [ 22 ] , why similar people tend to congregate , and what happens when they do [ 60 ] . Homophily on social networks may drive the emergence of online “echo chambers” as individuals seek online communities whose members share their beliefs [ 23 , 34 , 39 , 41 ] . Research has shown that people have greater degrees of trust in homophilous groups and are more likely to share content posted by homophilous others [ 17 , 56 ] . Homophily has been described as an important feature of online fan communities [ 27 , 38 ] . 2 . 1 . 3 Finding the largest possible audience . Research on online communities producing public in - formation goods has found evidence that audience size motivates contributors [ 85 ] . Additionally , numerous studies have shown that users of social networking sites frequently consider the audi - ence that their posts and messages may reach [ 57 , 83 ] . As individuals on social media typically have little information about who sees their posts , they conceive of “imagined audiences” based on cues from visible activity [ 7 ] and target imagined audiences using deliberate strategies , such as using multiple platforms to reach distinct audiences , in order to control who sees or does not see their posts [ 54 , 57 , 86 ] . 3 STUDY DESIGN To study overlapping membership in online communities , we conduct interviews with members of online communities hosted on Reddit , a social media platform for sharing , discussing , and rating news , media , and other content in user - created subcommunities called “subreddits . ” Individual users can participate in any of Reddit’s millions of subreddit communities by posting “submissions” that might include a link to a news article , a question for discussion , an image , or text written by the submitter . Each submission has a corresponding threaded comments section . Users can also vote submissions and comments up or down as a form of distributed moderation and can give awards to comments and posts [ 9 , 47 ] . Subreddit communities are managed by teams of volunteer content moderators tasked with curtailing abusive behavior and keeping conversation on topic [ 59 , 70 ] . Subreddits exist covering an enormous range of topics [ 26 ] , and Reddit has been the site of much research on overlapping online communities [ 21 , 36 , 74 – 76 ] . Because the cost of creating and joining new communities on Reddit is very low , subreddits often overlap in both topic and membership . Users frequently create spinoﬀ subreddit communities from larger and more established groups [ 74 ] . 3 . 1 Participant Selection To understand why people participate in overlapping communities , we set out to interview people who are active in highly related subreddits . Additional inclusion criteria were that users were 4 No Community Can Do Everything Woodstock ’18 , June 03 – 05 , 2018 , Woodstock , NY adults ( i . e . , above the age of majority in their country ) and able to participate in an interview in English . Our participant selection process began by ﬁrst choosing clusters of highly related groups . To do so , we built a web - based data visualization of a clustering algorithm derived from user overlap to identify groups of interest - based subreddits having similar users . To generate the visualization , we conducted a computational analysis of the Pushshift Reddit dump containing a nearly complete collection of Reddit comments made before April 2020 [ 5 ] . We selected the top 10 , 000 subreddits based on the number of comments in this data and excluded subreddits where a majority of sub - missions were ﬂagged as not safe for work . Next , following an approach described in prior work [ 21 ] , we constructed the measure of user similarity by taking the cosine similarities of TF - IDF vectors . Using this similarity measure , we ran aﬃnity propagation clustering [ 29 ] to group sub - reddits having overlapping users . We then built an HTML visualization of these clusters based on t - distributed stochastic neighbor embedding ( t - SNE ) . We have included the visualization in our online supplement . Although some aspects of our manual cluster selection process using this visualization were necessarily arbitrary , we tried to select clusters that were interest driven , involved primarily Eng - lish language discussion , and were focused on content about which all members of the research team would be comfortable speaking . As a result , we did not select any clusters that were focused on sex or pornography , fringe or extreme politics , content speciﬁc to geographic regions , or topics that our group could not understand . We sought out clusters that we hoped would result in individuals from a diverse range of ages , genders , and life experiences . Although we did not collect demographic information from our in - terviewees , our interviewees’ presentation and descriptions of themselves suggested that these eﬀorts were not entirely successful . Our pool of interviewees included young and middle - aged people ; people of color ; people from the United States , Canada , and Europe ; people who did not speak English as a ﬁrst language ; and people who were not men . That said , men were very likely overrepresented in our pool of interviewees , perhaps even in relation to the disproportionate par - ticipation of men on Reddit [ 4 ] . The clusters we selected each include 3 – 10 subreddits on the following topics : rock climbing , streetwear fashion , roller coasters , vintage audio , podcasting , painting , drag culture and perfor - mance , indie music , and dating for middle - aged adults . Information about each subreddit and clus - ter can be found in Table 1 . Using the Pushshift Reddit dataset , we identiﬁed candidate participants who were among the top 80 % most frequent commenters within each cluster , who participated in multiple subreddits in the cluster , and who were active in the cluster during a period of at least 1 calendar year . We began recruiting a random sample of 50 candidates matching these criteria within each cluster by sending direct messages through Reddit . Interested potential recruits ﬁlled out a short online survey conﬁrming that they were adults and able to participate in English language interviews . The survey also asked participants about their participation and familiarity with each of the subreddits in each cluster to verify that they were knowledgeable . At the beginning of each interview , we asked if there were any other subreddits related to those identiﬁed by the clustering algorithm . As a result , our conversations were not limited to the subreddits listed in Table 1 . We began by recruiting participants from the ﬁrst three clusters listed in Table 1 . We found ourselves reaching saturation within these clusters quickly . We also found that diﬀerent clusters were surfacing quite diﬀerent data . In response , we added additional clusters and recruited at least two participants from each until we reached global saturation . In some clusters , we did not reach saturation in two interviews . In these cases , we sent additional invitations and conducted additional interviews . In total , 20 participants were successfully recruited and interviewed by ﬁve 5 Woodstock ’18 , June 03 – 05 , 2018 , Woodstock , NY TeBlunthuis , et al . Subreddit Cluster Subscribers Created r / bouldering Climbing 194 , 814 2009 - 10 - 28 r / climbharder Climbing 117 , 288 2010 - 10 - 19 r / climbing Climbing 935 , 621 2008 - 07 - 17 r / climbingcirclejerk Climbing 45 , 032 2011 - 08 - 18 r / Drag Drag 44 , 724 2011 - 01 - 15 r / Dragula Drag 27 , 510 2016 - 11 - 03 r / rupaulsdragrace Drag 440 , 329 2011 - 11 - 15 r / RPDR _ UK Drag 31 , 867 2019 - 02 - 07 r / SpoiledDragRace Drag 69 , 027 2018 - 02 - 16 r / MsPaintsArtRace Drag 61 , 292 2017 - 04 - 17 r / MGMT Indie Music 17 , 744 2010 - 02 - 25 r / tameimpala Indie Music 94 , 248 2011 - 10 - 30 r / kgatlw Indie Music 59 , 191 2015 - 07 - 01 r / Indieheads Indie Music 1 , 932 , 698 2013 - 12 - 24 r / datingoverthirty Middle Age Dating 436 , 480 2014 - 11 - 04 r / DatingAfterThirty Middle Age Dating 11 , 550 2018 - 03 - 09 r / datingoverforty Middle Age Dating 52 , 522 2018 - 12 - 15 r / relationshipsover35 Middle Age Dating 14 , 916 2018 - 02 - 06 r / OilPainting Painting 186 , 716 2011 - 09 - 22 r / Painting Painting 280 , 865 2008 - 06 - 13 r / PourPainting Painting 178 , 800 2017 - 07 - 28 r / Watercolor Painting 269 , 882 2012 - 01 - 15 r / HappyTrees Painting 53 , 362 2011 - 02 - 07 r / podcasts Podcasting 1 , 995 , 693 2008 - 01 - 25 r / podcast Podcasting 60 , 497 2009 - 01 - 02 r / podcasting Podcasting 73 , 010 2010 - 09 - 17 r / audiodrama Podcasting 129 , 102 2010 - 11 - 30 r / ska Podcasting 34 , 397 2008 - 03 - 12 r / guessthecoaster Rollercoasters 5 , 094 2017 - 06 - 30 r / rollercoasterjerk Rollercoasters 12 , 378 2016 - 07 - 14 r / rollercoasters Rollercoasters 66 , 652 2010 - 07 - 31 r / rct Rollercoasters 55 , 275 2010 - 08 - 04 r / themeparkitect Rollercoasters 13 , 536 2014 - 06 - 16 r / streetwear Streetwear 2 , 678 , 745 2011 - 04 - 30 r / supremeclothing Streetwear 154 , 797 2012 - 04 - 04 r / womensstreetwear Streetwear 421 , 279 2016 - 04 - 25 r / bapeheads Streetwear 19 , 672 2013 - 08 - 12 r / malefashion Streetwear 207 , 843 2011 - 04 - 02 r / sadboys Streetwear 74 , 932 2013 - 06 - 30 r / techwearclothing Streetwear 94 , 675 2017 - 03 - 01 r / Vans Streetwear 51 , 997 2011 - 07 - 01 r / cassetteculture Vintage Audio 45 , 615 2011 - 05 - 25 r / typewriters Vintage Audio 20 , 037 2010 - 10 - 25 r / vintageaudio Vintage Audio 59 , 202 2011 - 09 - 18 Table 1 . Clusters of subreddits from which we recruited participants , subscriber counts at the time of the study , and the creation date of each subreddit . members of the research team before we reached global saturation and ceased data collection . The characteristics of our interviewees are presented in Table 2 . 6 No Community Can Do Everything Woodstock ’18 , June 03 – 05 , 2018 , Woodstock , NY All of our interviews were semistructured . Although we drew from a long series of open - ended questions about participation in diﬀerent subreddits and the relationships between communities , we chose our questions based on what our subjects wanted to talk about . A copy of our interview protocol is included in our supplementary material . Interviews were 49 min long on average but varied substantially in length . We suggested conducting interviews over Zoom but oﬀered the participants their choice of communication channel . As a result , we conducted two interviews over the phone , one using Discord chat , and the rest over Zoom . Interviews were transcribed automatically using Zoom’s built - in transcription and the otter . ai service and were then manually corrected by the authors . After each interview , participants were compensated with a digital gift card for $ 20 USD through the Tango Card reward service . 1 3 . 2 Qualitative Data Analysis Our analysis followed Charmaz’s [ 18 ] approach to grounded theory as closely as possible . We con - ducted coding and data collection in parallel . We generated over 950 codes , which we then grouped in an iterative axial coding process that generated 18 thematic memos . As we completed collecting data , we reﬁned our codes and combined themes to identify answers to our following orienting research questions : Why are there so many similar online communities ? And why not more ? Al - though primarily inductive , our analysis was inﬂuenced by sensitizing concepts from prior work including our knowledge of scholarship on overlapping online communities described in § 2 and the reasons that people participate in online communities summarized in § 2 . 1 . In analyzing our data , we noted that interviewees described their participation in multiple diﬀerent subreddits and their preference for particular subreddits in terms of the inability of one community ( often the “main” or “largest” community ) to provide the desired beneﬁts . This observation forms the basis of the grounded theory around which we organize our ﬁndings . All parts of this process were completed by the full team . 3 . 3 Ethical Considerations Our study design was reviewed by the Institutional Review Board ( IRB ) at the University of Wash - ington and was determined to be exempt . As part of the design of this study , we took several steps to protect the privacy of our research participants . Participants were fully briefed about the design of the study before being interviewed and were given documents concerning the study and contact information for our IRB . Explicit consent was obtained from every participant . Because this project involved collaboration with a relatively large team , we used the Keybase end - to - end encryption service for all discussion and data sharing . Finally , participants were anonymized so that no direct identiﬁers were recorded in the process of data collection , and only anonymized pseudonyms ( e . g . , C1 , P2 , and V2 , as show in Table 2 ) are published in this paper . We made several minor edits to quotes to obscure potentially identifying details . 4 FINDINGS Why do people participate in multiple online communities around the same topic ? The answer that emerged from our grounded theory is that no one community can provide all the beneﬁts that users want . At a high level , we ﬁnd that people have multiple and diverse motivations for participation in online communities . In § 4 . 1 , we describe the types of beneﬁts they seek organized into three categories : ( a ) engaging with speciﬁc types of content , ( b ) homophilous socialization , and ( c ) sharing content contributions with as large an audience as possible . In § 4 . 2 , we use data from our interviews to describe the tensions between these beneﬁts . We also investigate how 1 https : / / www . tangocard . com / 7 Woodstock ’18 , June 03 – 05 , 2018 , Woodstock , NY TeBlunthuis , et al . Participant ID Cluster Interview Length ( min ) C1 Climbing 56 C2 Climbing 51 C3 Climbing 41 D1 Drag 51 D2 Drag 67 I1 Indie Music 71 I2 Indie Music 43 O1 Podcasting 30 O2 Podcasting 44 P1 Painting 58 P2 Painting 35 P3 Painting 40 P4 Painting 35 R1 Rollercoasters 24 R2 Rollercoasters 43 S1 Streetwear 79 S2 Streetwear 55 T1 Dating in Middle Age 63 T2 Dating in Middle Age 53 V1 Vintage Audio 34 V2 Vintage Audio 56 Table 2 . List of anonymized participant IDs , the cluster from which we recruited them , and the length of their interview . our interviewees understood competition and mutualism—key concepts from ecological studies in social computing—between overlapping communities . Our interviewees overwhelmingly found mutualism to be more consistent with their understandings of overlapping online communities than competition . Our contribution comes in the form of a theoretical framework , grounded in our data , that describes how the full beneﬁts of participating in communities can only be satisﬁed by portfolios of communities . 4 . 1 Benefits Users Seek from Communities 4 . 1 . 1 Specific kinds of content . Content on Reddit is organized into subreddits that deﬁne their own topical boundaries . These boundaries may be broad ( e . g . , news ) or narrow ( e . g . , types of paint - ing media ) . Moreover , subreddits that prohibit types of content or behavior generate niches for subreddits with diﬀerent rules . Despite such forms of specialization , multiple communities often welcome the same content and encourage users to “cross - post” material . A subreddit’s topic—what it is about and what content should be posted—is often signiﬁed by its name . A climbing enthusiastic explains : I think the name itself [ r / climbharder ] , kind of speciﬁcally points out that : this is not for people who climb hard . It’s for people who climb and want to climb hard er . ( C1 ) C1 describes how the purpose of a subreddit is tied to its name by emphasizing the adjectival suﬃx “ - er” as indicative of the fact that the subreddit is not about achieving elite performance but about improving . Similarly , a participant in subreddits about drag performance invokes Marshall McLuhan to describe how they know what content to post and where to post them : 8 No Community Can Do Everything Woodstock ’18 , June 03 – 05 , 2018 , Woodstock , NY Let’s say you were a drag artist and you wanted to show oﬀ something that you just created . You would have to go select which community you wanted to show it oﬀ in . And I guess among those , [ r / Drag ] would be the one to do that in . But if you’re— if you’re wanting to show oﬀ a piece of artwork or something that you made of a queen from Rupaul’s drag race—and the best place to show that oﬀ would be to go to [ r / rupaulsdragrace ] and post it there . So it’s [ a ] ‘the medium is the message’ kind of thing . . . . You know where would get the most views [ and ] where would be the best place to post your content . ( D1 ) Like D1 , our informants had deep knowledge of what kinds of speciﬁc content would be appropri - ate for each subreddit in their cluster . Specialization also occurred as a form of regulatory arbitrage when one community had formal or informal rules about the kind of content that was allowed . In these cases , we would often hear about an adjacent community where breaking the rules is accepted , perhaps even the raison d’être . For example , r / rupaulsdragrace prohibits spoilers and information about the outcomes of a reality TV show . r / spoileddragrace is a community about the same show that allows spoilers . This pattern is so widespread on Reddit that it is often signaled in subreddit naming conventions [ 36 ] . The “meta” preﬁx signals meta - discussions , often drama - centered , about another subreddit . The “jerk” suﬃx signals a space for memes , mockery , silliness , or other content unaccepted in the “main” subreddit . Both are commonlyunderstood and were discussed at length by our interviewees . For example , among the Rollercoasters subreddits , R1 described the “jerk” subreddit as a “joke subreddit” where members of the main rollercoasters subreddit could make fun of themselves : I would deﬁnitely say r / rollercoasters and r / rollercoasterjerk are really deeply intertwined . It’s usually all the same members and stuﬀ because of the fact that the coaster ‘jerk’ is just meant to make fun of the main subreddit . It’s just a joke subreddit . ( R1 ) “Jerk” subreddits were a common source of discussion among our participants . Among the Climbing subreddits , the “main” subreddit about rock climbing ( r / climbing ) is wel - coming to newcomers . C1 explained that members upvote posts by newcomers“to encourage more entrance into the sport . ” However , newcomer posts are often repetitive pictures of people climb - ing in gyms or videos of famous climbers . This annoys some experienced climbers . The “jerk” subreddit provides a backstage space where making fun of newcomers is permitted . In addition to being divided by rules , interrelated subreddits can be structured as a ladder of “conceptual rungs” where one ﬁnds larger communities as one ascends the ladder . A participant in the subreddits on art and painting described this phenomenon as You go up through these conceptual rungs . . . . When you go up from , say , r / OilPainting — like r / HappyTrees to r / OilPainting —it’s a much bigger community . And then from r / OilPainting to Painting , which is even bigger . ( P2 ) P2 explained that smaller subreddits such as / r / HappyTrees support learners and are generally more welcoming places . Although the quotation above suggests that the size of communities in - creases as one moves up conceptual rungs , the relationship between topical scope and size was more complicated . In some topical areas , subreddits with relatively speciﬁc topics have the largest and most active communities . For example , / r / rupaulsdragrace is the most active drag subred - dit by a large margin , even though it focuses on a reality TV series that is part of the broader drag community covered by r / drag . Although many specialized subreddits exist , people who want to share their work , ask a ques - tion , or have a speciﬁc discussion may not know the best place to post . Cross - posting—i . e . , when someone posts the same content , questions , or messages in multiple communities—is widespread 9 Woodstock ’18 , June 03 – 05 , 2018 , Woodstock , NY TeBlunthuis , et al . on Reddit . Cross - posting has sometimes been viewed negatively as a form of attention grabbing ( i . e . , “karma whoring” ) [ 65 ] . More often , however , we heard that cross - posting was acceptable and even encouraged to establish complementary conversations or ﬁnd diﬀerent audiences . Multiple interviewees from the Climbing cluster , including C1 , described how , when people ask for training advice in r / climbing , the largest subreddit about rock climbing , they will be advised to cross - post to r / climbharder : Somebody will post asking for advice in r / climbing and oftentimes , somebody will comment and be like , ‘Hey , you know ? You’re welcome to ask this here , but you might get more and better responses at r / climbharder . ’ ( C1 ) C1 explained that even though conversations about training often start in the main subreddit , they are not likely to gain traction because not everybody in the main community is interested in the more intensive aspects of climbing . In sum , the ecosystem of subreddits about similar topics provides more opportunities for people to ﬁnd speciﬁc desired discussions . People receive positive feedback and engagement when they post content that ﬁts a subreddit’s speciﬁc topic . That said , the subreddit where a particular piece of content will be best received is often not clear to the person posting it . Cross - posting provides multiple chances to start a desired discussion . 4 . 1 . 2 Homophily . Online communities have long been recognized as a way to “ﬁnd my people” by bringing together users who share things as diverse as a psychiatric diagnosis , enthusiasm for a hobby , or membership in a subculture or identity group . A member of the Middle Age Dating cluster of subreddits explains : [ When I joined the ADHD Reddit sites ] , I feel like I found my people after all these years . . . . If you don’t have ADHD , and don’t wonder what’s going on other people’s brains all the time , I think you just think that everybody thinks like you . And they don’t . They don’t . So if you’re 30 and you’re having a problem , you really just want to talk to other 30 somethings . ( T2 ) T2’s description of having “found my people” and talking to other people like themselves invokes the idea of homophily : the desire to connect to others similar to oneself . Analytically distinct from ﬁnding personalized information in narrowly focused subreddits , homophily was frequently cited as an end in itself by our interviewees . Our interviewees sought to connect with “like - minded” people having similar interests , demographics , identities , tastes , and status . Even though the identities of others in subreddit communities are largely invisible , participants can easily imagine the demography of the subreddit . A participant in the Drag cluster of subreddits described r / Dragula , a community of fans of a TV show featuring horror - infused drag styles , as follows : I think it would be a mostly LGBTQ audience . And not many straights . But if there are straights , they would be really open minded or edgy . Or , I don’t know . . . associated with that ‘dark’ aesthetic . ( D2 ) D2’s thoughts on r / Dragula convey a clear sense of the audience of the subreddit . Of course , the pseudonymous nature of Reddit obscures age , race , gender , and ethnicity . That said , Reddit users draw on stereotypes about fanbases and cues such as mentions of schools , selﬁe posts , linguistic markers , and cultural references to build clear models of the types of people in a subreddit . In fur - ther unpacking these dimensions , D2 contrasts r / Dragula with the more mainstream subreddits about the show Rupaul’s Drag Race : [ As for subreddits about ] the drag race ( r / rupaulsdragrace ) , Drag Race UK ( r / RPDR _ - UK ) , and the spoiled drag race ( r / SpoiledDragRace ) . . . . Most of [ the participants in 10 No Community Can Do Everything Woodstock ’18 , June 03 – 05 , 2018 , Woodstock , NY these other groups ] don’t do drag . Most of them are , I think , white gay men , or straight women who see drag with a very narrow view of what drag is . Hegemonic ? I don’t know if that’s the word , but they apply the same standards of beauty that are applied to women and men and artists and performers to this art form . ( D2 ) D2 conveyed both a strong sense of the demographics of diﬀerent drag subreddits and a strong sense of identiﬁcation with r / Dragula , which they described as less toxic , more inclusive , and more creative , in part because its membership has a greater concentration of LGBTQ and non - White people who are less interested in conforming to hegemonic beauty standards . Subreddits divide broad topical areas such as drag , art , and fashion into subgroups of people occupying strata of status hierarchies associated with identity , expertise , and class . For example , in the Climbing cluster of subreddits , rock climbing ability confers status and separates beginners from advanced athletes . We found that these two groups concentrate their participation in diﬀerent subreddits . Across the clusters , we found that experts sought out fellow experts with whom to share knowledge , oﬀer reﬂections , and give advice grounded in shared extensive experience . Our Streetware interviewees reported that subreddits about fashion are split along lines that are associated with the price and status of the clothes being discussed : The kind of person , the Platonic ideal poster or user of something like r / streetwear , is probably more open - minded , maybe , in terms of what they think is cool , what they think is worth wearing . Whereas , you know , . . . the r / malefashion snob is a snob . ( S1 ) Even though users of r / streetwear share and discuss men’s fashion , r / malefashion , which focuses on higher - status and more expensive styles , looks down on their casual and youthful styles . S1 is a member of the r / streetwear subreddit . Although their groups are “chill” and “supportive , ” higher - status groups are “snobby . ” It is clear that S1 feels unwelcome and out of place in the higher - status group . Similarly , our interviewees described status hierarchies in Painting subreddits related to skill level and medium . P4 described how they were invited to cross - post their work from r / Watercolor to r / Artoilpainting , a smaller subreddit that seems to have a complicated relationship with wa - tercolor . Although watercolor submissions are allowed , and , in this instance , encouraged , both the subreddit’s name and the similarity between its visual tag for watercolor submissions with the downvote button suggest that oil is the preferred medium in this community . In this way , the di - vision of topical spaces into spheres of similar status and identity allows members to ﬁnd groups that exclude both those who look down on them and those who they look down upon . Although “ﬁnding your people” is satisfying in itself , it can also be a foundation for a wide range of other kinds of beneﬁts . For example , a homophilous community leads to conversations that can promote trust . Trust has many beneﬁts such as building conﬁdence in the advice and information shared within a community . In some communities we studied , this trust enabled buying , selling , and trading of material goods . V2 , one of our interviewees from the Vintage Audio cluster , described a community of record collectors on Reddit that acted as a market for buying , selling , and trading records . They preferred this subreddit to other online markets such as Ebay because the community holds members ac - countable for honest transacting and because of the intrinsic reward that comes from sharing records with a fellow community member : Because it’s a group of people that are like - minded , . . . your feet are kind of held to the ﬁre a little bit more about actually being realistic with the condition [ of the material you are selling ] . Whereas , [ when you buy ] vinyl at the used record shop , sometimes you feel like someone’s trying to pull one over on you . . . I feel like because it is a 11 Woodstock ’18 , June 03 – 05 , 2018 , Woodstock , NY TeBlunthuis , et al . community , sometimes you can get some kind of better deal . . . I found other people that share the hobby that I like . So I almost , deﬁnitely , feel like they’re friends in a little way . And so I want to , if I’m ever selling , I’m going out of my way to make sure that whatever I’m doing , everything I’m doing , is above board . ( V2 ) V2 was very enthusiastic about the “marketplace wrapped in a community” for vinyl records . According to V2 , both buyers and sellers of records beneﬁt from transacting within a commu - nity of like - minded hobbyists . Because the community holds sellers accountable , the community promotes honest representation of merchandise . Being part of a like - minded community where members feel friendship with each other gives sellers a reason to be honest , and even to discount their wares , because they get “some kind of better deal . ” In sum , our interviewees turned to speciﬁc subreddits to ﬁnd people who share their interests , tastes , problems , and identities . Our participants described subreddits in terms of demographics and identity groups as well as styles , subgenres , or categories related to social status such as wealth , expertise , and beauty standards . They used these categories to place themselves within the con - stellation of related subreddits they participated in . Members of subreddits who are “ﬁnding their people” beneﬁt each other by acting as communities as well as building trust and feelings of friend - ship . Over time , these feelings can provide further beneﬁts such as the ability to more safely engage in buying and selling . 4 . 1 . 3 Finding the largest possible audience . A third type of beneﬁt derives from the number of members in a subreddit . All our interviewees were keenly aware of the fact that a post reach - ing one of the top positions on a larger subreddit would receive the attention of a vast audience . They described this attention as emotionally thrilling and otherwise beneﬁcial . For artists and inﬂuencers , large audiences brought material rewards . For learners , a large audience’s collective knowledge could bring hard - to - ﬁnd answers and advice . That said , our interviewees explained that larger subreddits do not necessarily provide a larger audience because posts in larger subreddits are more likely to be ignored or missed in the torrent of other content . Although posting in a smaller subreddit might increase the chances of ﬁnding an audience at all , subreddits that were too small were described as unattractive because they would not attract many posts or replies . Interviewees responded by choosing where to post strategically . Although the competition for the top spots on the front page of large subreddits can be ﬁerce , this competition can make recognition from a large subreddit extremely gratifying : Likes are just kind of fake : fake social currency . But yeah , when you get a charge out of it , yeah , I love it . Most of the time , painting is a really busy sub . I mean , like , in any given hour , the new page is already replaced . . . . If you can get something that gets a hold there and stays on the front page for a little while , [ if ] it gets up in even the top ﬁve , I’ve had a handful do that . That’s kind of cool . ( P2 ) P2 describes the thrill of reaching top positions in r / painting with posts of their paintings . Even though they are dismissive of likes on Reddit , they desire the attention their work gets from the subreddit . It sends traﬃc to their websites , raises their artistic proﬁle , and helps them sell their art . Although these material incentives are important , part of the thrill comes from knowing that a given subreddit is competitive . Smaller subreddits are simply unable to provide these beneﬁts . However , posting in a large subreddit also means the risk of being ignored : I think there’s this weird bell curve where the community needs to be big enough where people want to post content . But it can’t get too big where people are drowning each other out for attention . ( S2 ) 12 No Community Can Do Everything Woodstock ’18 , June 03 – 05 , 2018 , Woodstock , NY S2 was among several of our interviewees who described an ideal “middle ground” for subreddit size . In general , we heard that people were less interested in posting content in very small subred - dits that do not provide an audience . Thus , competition over the largest audiences drives people to smaller subreddits where they can reliably ﬁnd an audience . I2 from our Indie Music cluster explained : Usually r / Indieheads is the way to reach more people if you want to . Just like if you wanted to do even more , you’d probably do it on r / music . . . . Say a small indie band decided to do an AMA they would probably want to do it on r / Indieheads . Because if they did it on r / music , it would get drowned out and nobody would see it because there’s so many posts . In r / Indieheads it would get a decent bit of attention , I think . In the band subreddit , it would probably get a lot of attention too . But r / Indieheads seems like the best middle ground for that kind of thing . ( I2 ) I2 explained that when the psych - rock band King Gizzard and the Wizard Lizard wanted to engage with an audience on Reddit , they had a choice whether to post in the smaller “band subreddit” dedicated to them , the very large r / music , or the medium - sized r / Indieheads . Although posting in the band subreddit would have surely provided an audience , they chose r / Indieheads , which was large but where there was still little risk that their post would be drowned out . Our interviewees repeatedly described how ﬁnding an audience for one’s content is a clear motivation for posting in larger subreddits . However , we also heard that competition for attention in the largest subreddits leads people to try to ﬁnd an audience in smaller subreddits . In the smallest subreddits , posting may not seem worthwhile at all . This trade - oﬀ between ﬁnding a large audience and being ignored suggests that posting in subreddits of intermediate size can be the most reliable way to reach a sizable audience . 4 . 2 Tensions Between the Benefits The ﬁndings in the previous sections imply a clear reason that so many overlapping subreddits exist . When one subreddit prohibits a certain type of content or conversation , an adjacent group can form that allows it . When an identity group is marginalized in one subreddit , members of that group may form a subreddit of their own . When getting attention in a large subreddit is too diﬃcult , a smaller subreddit becomes attractive . Using data from our interviewees , we describe each of the three possible tensions that exist between the three beneﬁts : ( 1 ) subreddits where one ﬁnds a large audience are less able to provide speciﬁc types of content ; ( 2 ) communities with large audiences are rarely able to provide a community of similar others ; ( 3 ) some valuable types of discussion and information are found only in diverse groups of people . As we discuss in § 5 , taken together , these tensions form a “trilemma”—i . e . , a choice with three mutually incompatible options—between our interviewees’ desires for speciﬁc content , homophily , and ﬁnding audiences . A single community might provide two of these beneﬁts , but almost never all three . 4 . 2 . 1 Larger audiences create background noise . In § 4 . 1 . 1 , we described how subreddits are struc - tured according to distinctions between diﬀerent types of content . Breaking topical areas into subreddits of varying levels of granularity makes ﬁnding speciﬁc content easier because doing so reduces the need to sift through unrelated material in a large and broad subreddit . Our intervie - wees often expressed that larger subreddits are simply not the best places for enthusiasts to have discussions : I see this background noise problem building [ in ] r / climbing , the main climbing com - munity , [ which ] has just become less and less and less interesting and less relevant as it’s gotten bigger . That’s not really a problem . Right ? That’s probably has more to do 13 Woodstock ’18 , June 03 – 05 , 2018 , Woodstock , NY TeBlunthuis , et al . with my interest level and how long I’ve been on it . And my experience level with climbing . I’m just a little bit more crusty about it , you know ? ( C2 ) C2 describes losing interest in the primary subreddit about climbing as it grew because of the interviewee’s speciﬁc interest in particular types of climbing content ( i . e . , material associated with being “crusty” or experienced ) . C2 recognizes that when r / climbing experienced growth , the larger volume of posts by newcomers to the sport created a “background noise problem” that made it diﬃcult for established climbers to ﬁnd discussions of interest . Similarly , smaller subreddits can be incredibly valuable to those looking for highly specialized information . Even though they may have very low levels of activity , they can provide a way to learn about rare forms of expertise . A participant in our Vintage Audio cluster explained how they might seek out advice on building a reel - to - reel audio setup : If you’re at [ r / ReelToReel ] . Everybody is hyper into them . Whereas there’s proba - bly overlap with somebody in r / vintageaudio . . . If I’m like trying to rebuild my reel - to - reel player , I want to talk to . . . the most knowledgeable person particularly about building reel - to - reel . . . So I know that who I’m talking to is hyper speciﬁc to the knowledge I want . ( V2 ) Invoking r / ReelToReel , V2 describes a highly niche subreddit about archaic audio tape equipment with only 3 , 200 subscribers and a handful of posts each day . V2 is simply not looking to ﬁnd a large audience . Instead , they want access to the “most knowledgeable person” with speciﬁc expertise because access to this expertise makes it possible for them to consider doing their own reel - to - reel projects . Although the r / ReelToReel community overlaps with the larger and more general r / vintage - audio , the latter does not provide the ability to connect with a small group of enthusiasts who are expert in an old - fashioned technology . Similarly , when someone wants a podcast recommendation tailored to their personal tastes , asking in a larger subreddit is not likely to prove as fruitful as it is within a smaller one . O2 , a participant in the Podcasting cluster explained : So I think for like r / audiodrama , I would probably write a longer post , and probably get a bit more into like , my personal tastes . Like I would comment about , ‘oh , I really love the acting in this one , is there anything similar ? ’ Open up a bit more about what I do and don’t like . Whereas I think in podcasts , it probably would be more direct . I’d ask a speciﬁc question . . . more to the point , more factual , probably just more almost transactional . ( O2 ) Although the larger r / podcasts subreddit is a popular place to promote podcasts on Reddit , O2 explains that they prefer asking for recommendations in the smaller r / audiodrama where they ﬁnd others willing to take their personal tastes into account . Our interviewees did not advance a “smaller is better” argument . O2 explains that they still engage in larger subreddits but use a more direct and transactional approach to information exchange when they do . Similarly , large art communities provide opportunities to ﬁnd a large audience , but someone can ﬁnd more substantive feedback to improve their skills , by posting in a smaller subreddit organized speciﬁcally for this purpose . Interviewees described the most general interest - based subreddits such as r / podcasts , r / painting , and r / climbing as more accessible and welcoming to newcomers and as reaching a larger audi - ence : all things they valued . They also described these larger groups as having a high volume of low - eﬀort posts or comments . Our interviewees explained that although they play a useful role in an information ecosystem , the largest subreddits in a topical area are rarely the best places to 14 No Community Can Do Everything Woodstock ’18 , June 03 – 05 , 2018 , Woodstock , NY look for information or advice . They explained that small subreddits can eﬀectively play host to content , information , and discussion that larger subreddits cannot . 4 . 2 . 2 Homophily is more diﬀicult in larger groups . Because they have less background noise , smaller subreddits are more likely to provide better opportunities to connect with people who share one’s distinctive interests , tastes , and identity . Smaller subreddits are also better places to ﬁnd a com - munity because they provide opportunities to have repeated encounters with recognizable others , oﬀ - topic discussions , and personal interactions . P4 explained : Obviously , I want as many people to see my stuﬀ as possible , especially [ since I am ] trying to establish myself . But at the same time , I do want to build a relationship with any sort of community that I can . ( P4 ) P4 explained that they participated in multiple communities because they have two goals as an artist . First , they want to ﬁnd an audience for their artwork to establish their career . Second , they want to build a community with others who share their craft . They felt that they needed to turn to multiple subreddits to satisfy both needs . Although larger subreddits provide a large potential audience , smaller subreddits were described as being friendlier . Another interviewee from our Painting cluster explains that this is because of how people act diﬀerently in large and small subreddits : I live in the middle of nowhere . And every so often , before the pandemic , I would visit [ the large city several hours away ] . Now I found there were very polite people , both in [ the city ] and in [ my rural area ] . But the tone by which people carried themselves changes in their environment . That’s kind of one of the big changing factors . So , in the city , people are in a rush . They’re about their business . We don’t really have time to chat . . . . The big subreddits might seem unfriendly [ but ] it’s not that so much . In - dividual members are impolite or unfriendly . But it’s almost as though people carry themselves diﬀerently when we’re in diﬀerent subreddits . ( P3 ) In their extended metaphor , P3 explained that large subreddits are like big cities full of busy people who do not “have time to chat . ” Evocatively , they described people as behaving diﬀerently in large and small subreddits . The very same people who are rude in large subreddits might be friendly in smaller subreddits where people have repeated encounters with one another and have a stronger sense of knowing each other . In another quote from the same cluster , P2 described how the small subreddit for Bob Ross - inspired painters , r / HappyTrees , stands out from the larger art subreddits because people know one another and it does not feel anonymous . The tight - knit nature of this community contributes to its utility as a source for feedback . 4 . 2 . 3 Tension between finding specific content and homophily . A third tension described by our interviewees is between the desire to connect with similar others and the desire for forms of dis - cussion , content , and feedback that can only be found in diverse groups inclusive of dissimilar others . Our interviewees described a range of situations when they sought out dissimilar others . For example , they described beginners seeking to learn from experts and outsiders seeking to learn about other cultures . They also described how subreddits instituted rules to limit or organize con - tent that also interfered with unstructured and oﬀ - topic discussions that helped with community building . For example , although multiple subreddits with overlapping users discuss the same episodes of the TV series Rupaul’s Drag Race , they have diﬀerent understandings of events in the show depending on their national identities . D1 explained : The discussions played out diﬀerently on diﬀerent subreddits . In the Drag Race UK sub there’s a lot more understanding about [ a British drag queen ] in particular , about 15 Woodstock ’18 , June 03 – 05 , 2018 , Woodstock , NY TeBlunthuis , et al . where they come from . . . In America we don’t understand how that person is from Worcestershire . ( D1 ) D1 explained that the cultural background of one of the drag queens was a subject of discussion in r / RPDR _ UK , the UK drag race subreddit , while the main subreddit , r / rupaulsdragrace , was “dominated by the American viewpoint . ” Our interviewees described a number of subreddits focused on discussing broad topics from a speciﬁc national or regional culture context . These cultural communities within a topical area pro - vide a homophilous space for sharing distinctive cultural knowledge and sensibilities . The wrinkle is that even for our American interviewee D1 , the r / RPDR _ UK subreddit provided an opportunity to enhance their own experience and appreciation of the show by observing and learning from members of another culture . In examples such as these , our interviewees explained that commu - nities where like - minded people can share their distinctive appreciation could provide a source of knowledge for outsiders . Similarly , Painting participant P2 explained that a group that has a mixture of experts and be - ginners provides a better learning environment than does a group of beginners alone : If you can ﬁnd a small group , with a small core of people who are particularly skilled , they sort of energize the group as a whole . r / HappyTrees , even though it’s kind of a beginner subreddit , there’s some people that posts there that are like , you know , Bob Ross instructors , or they’ve been doing this for years . And they’ve mastered that sort of . . . “happy trees” thing . ( P2 ) P2 explains that part of what makes r / HappyTrees great is that it connects learners to experts . A homogenous subreddit of only beginners or experts would not provide the same opportunities . To stay focused on speciﬁc types of content , subreddit moderators will frequently employ strict rules and heavy - handed moderation . Our respondents explained that smaller subreddits can get by with fewer rules and lighter moderation because they have fewer behavior problems and are less attractive to toxic outsiders . They are also more able to self - police using Reddit’s voting system and through direct interpersonal sanctions such as admonition . In the words of one of the Vintage Audio participants , In Reddit , the more users you get , the more strict the rules , and the more strict the moderation . Just to prevent problems . ( V2 ) V2 continued and explained that when a subreddit is small enough that you can “wrap your hands around” it and is built around a “like - minded” group , it can develop and enforce shared behavioral norms that substitute for formal rules and rigid enforcement regimes . V2 explained that the pro - cesses of creating spaces for speciﬁc types of information got in the way of building community . Similarly , one of our interviewees described r / Indieheads ’s rules limiting how often one can post , requiring speciﬁc titles and tags , and prohibiting types of user - generated content . Although these rules help maintain a high - quality feed , they also prevent the sharing of more personal and relatable forms of content such as amateur performances and chit - chat . As a result , subreddits that make rules to ensure that posts are on - topic frequently have adjacent “ - jerk” subreddits that provide an outlet for jokes and memes and act as places where oﬀ - topic discussions can thrive . 4 . 3 Interviewee’s Understandings of Competition and Mutualism Except for a small qualitative subpart of a single paper [ 87 ] , prior ecological studies in social com - puting have relied on concepts such as competition and mutualism but have provided limited evidence that such concepts are salient to participants . As part of our interviews , we asked our interviewees if they perceived relationships between the communities they participated in to be competitive or mutualistic . In some cases , interviewees imagined hypothetical scenarios where 16 No Community Can Do Everything Woodstock ’18 , June 03 – 05 , 2018 , Woodstock , NY Speciﬁc Content LargestPossible Audience HomophilousCommunity A B D C Fig . 1 . Venn diagram illustrating the specificity - homophily - audience “trilemma . ” competition might emerge from the perspective of subreddit moderators . For example , a partici - pant in Climbing said : I guess if you put your Reddit [ moderator status ] on your resume or something , and you want to be a moderator of a larger community , you could try to get users from other communities . But I haven’t seen or experienced competition . ( C1 ) Although we asked nearly every interviewee about competition , only one interviewee ( S2 ) de - scribed an actual instance of conﬂict or direct competition . In nearly every other interview , our subjects found our suggestion that subreddits might be in competition to be surprising and strange . However , the idea that communities are complementary and mutualistic was much more intu - itive . One Vintage Audio participant explained the relationship between subreddits : Yeah , the overlapping . . . . They each have their own niche . . . . They get big enough to have super critical mass of people . Then they’ll have a reason to exist . And then they’ll sort of ﬁt into the ecosystem of diﬀerent communities . ( V2 ) Consonant with this description of subreddits in unproblematic coexistence , our interviewees re - peatedly suggested that there were not meaningful structural or technical limitations on the num - ber of subreddits a user can join and this reduced the possibility of competition , if it did not elimi - nate it altogether . 5 DISCUSSION The tensions between the beneﬁts that our interviewees sought can be thought of as forming a “trilemma” between ﬁnding speciﬁc content , homophily , and ﬁnding as large an audience as possi - ble . This three - way dilemma captures the fact that the more a subreddit succeeds in providing any one of these beneﬁts , the less able it will be able to provide the others . A portfolio of overlapping communities solves this problem by providing all three types of beneﬁts . Figure 1 visualizes the theorized trilemma . Each of the beneﬁts described in § 4 . 1 is reﬂected in large circles . Each of the tensions described in § 4 . 2 is reﬂected in the overlapping areas in the ﬁgure . Area A contains communities that provide the largest possible audience and speciﬁc con - tent but are unlikely to provide homophily to community members . Subreddits that provide large audiences face “the background noise problem” as a large volume of submissions makes it diﬃcult for people to ﬁnd the speciﬁc content they care about . Area B contains communities that oﬀer 17 Woodstock ’18 , June 03 – 05 , 2018 , Woodstock , NY TeBlunthuis , et al . both large audiences and homophily but that will struggle to provide speciﬁc content . For exam - ple , an American interested in learning about international drag culture ﬁnds the need to search beyond r / rupaulsdragrace . Area C contains communities that provide specialized content and a homophilous community but that may not attract large audiences . Although not everyone who desires a speciﬁc type of content may be similar to those who produce the content , smaller sub - reddits can often provide both desired content and opportunities to socialize with similar others . However , as the size of the audience increases , subreddits encounter the background noise problem and acquire a “big city” air of unfriendliness . 5 . 1 Connections to Prior Research 5 . 1 . 1 Finding specific content . Our ﬁndings are consonant with prior work that the primary ben - eﬁts provided by online communities stem from their power to connect people to novel and hard - to - ﬁnd sources of information [ 6 , 12 , 27 , 79 ] . Our study adds to this work and complements recent ﬁndings of Hwang and Foote [ 40 ] by describing how nested and overlapping online communities are useful for information seeking and managing one’s information exposure . Individuals often desire multiple types of content within a general subject area , such as spoiled and spoiler - free discussions . Even when a relatively obscure community such as r / vintageaudio exists , an even more specialized community such as r / ReelToReel may provide access to an even more special - ized set of experts . 5 . 1 . 2 Finding homophilous community . Prior work has recognized the importance of homophily in motivating and structuring participation in online communities [ 17 , 19 , 34 ] . Contributing to this line of research , we identiﬁed a number of types of homophily that drive individuals’ deci - sions to participate . These included hobbies , expertise , age , national culture , identity , and status . Homophily was in tension with the need for speciﬁc content in that diﬀerences among many of these dimensions were valuable for ﬁnding information . Our results suggest that participants in online communities face trade - oﬀs between homophily and information novelty . These may be similar in structure to the trade - oﬀs between short and long ties observed in contexts such as work groups [ 69 ] and social networks [ 33 , 34 ] . One advantage of joining a group of overlapping online communities is that it can help ﬁnd information that would be unavailable in homophilous groups . 5 . 1 . 3 Finding the largest possible audience . Much social computing research points to the beneﬁts of large audiences and large communities [ 44 ] . Our work adds more evidence to back up those claims . More important , perhaps , are recent counterclaims about the beneﬁts of smallness . Hwang and Foote [ 40 ] presents an interview study with members of small Reddit communities . Although our results about the tensions between large audience size and other beneﬁts are fully in line with Hwang and Foote’s ﬁndings , our starting assumptions and ultimate takeaways are quite diﬀerent . Hwang and Foote seek to understand why people participate in persistently small communities and conclude that smallness oﬀers a range of beneﬁts . Our results suggest that individuals seek out beneﬁts that happen to be incompatible with largeness and participate in portfolios of communities that , because of the trilemma we described , will almost certainly include small ones . Although we believe that Hwang and Foote’s [ 40 ] emphasis on smallness might draw focus to a side eﬀect instead of the cause , we believe that the ﬁndings in our two papers are largely complementary . Although users may desire large audiences , large online communities often require additional structure to maintain order [ 32 , 42 , 43 ] . Kiene et al . [ 43 ] describes how a massive inﬂux of new - comers presents diﬃculties that can be managed by appointing additional moderators , increasing norm enforcement , and limiting the frequency of posts . Lin et al . [ 53 ] ﬁnd that such interventions help subreddits maintain comment quality and stay on topic during massive inﬂuxes of growth . 18 No Community Can Do Everything Woodstock ’18 , June 03 – 05 , 2018 , Woodstock , NY Our sense is that these changes ensure the availability of speciﬁc content , in part , because of the growth - limiting eﬀects of rules and enforcement [ 35 , 77 ] . We see this as yet more evidence in favor of our theory . 5 . 2 Implications for Ecological Studies in Social Computing The quote by V2 in § 4 . 3 can be read as a kind of summary of resource partitioning theory ( RPT ) , a strand of ecological research in organizational science that focuses on explaining specialization [ 13 ] . Although RPT has not been deeply examined in prior social computing work , our ﬁndings suggest that it may be able to explain the widespread occurrence of overlapping communities . RPT proposes that the reason that small specialized organizations coexist with large generalist organizations is that generalists are constrained in their ability to meet distinctive needs in niche markets [ 14 , 73 ] . In V2’s terms , the “ecosystem of diﬀerent communities” is constructed by a pro - cess in which those that “have a reason to exist” and are specialized to “have their own niche” will achieve “critical mass . ” Our grounded theory suggests that the trade - oﬀs in the capacity of an online community to provide diﬀerent types of beneﬁts that people seek from online communities give rise to new niches . On the basis of our ﬁndings and our understanding of RPT , we hypothesize the following process to describe how systems of overlapping communities develop : When a new topical area grows , the bulk of activity will happen in a generalist community . New members joining that community may seek and ﬁnd the perceived beneﬁts described in § 4 . 1 ( i . e . , speciﬁc kinds of content , homophily , and the largest possible audience ) . If a topic area , such as art , is suﬃciently general , initial membership growth occurs as the community attracts new and existing users interested in both general and more speciﬁc types of content . As growth continues , membership in the generalist community becomes heterogeneous with lower levels of homophily ( e . g . , amateur and professional artists ) and more speciﬁc interests ( e . g . , painters and photographers ) and types of engagement desired ( e . g . , attention from an audience or critique ) . At this point , the trade - oﬀs we discuss in § 4 . 2 related to size become relevant . Finding information related to a specialized subtopic and homophilous socializing grows diﬃcult . If , as with Reddit , creating new communities is low cost , a community specialized in a subtopic can emerge . This specialized community will likely not attract as large an audience as the generalist community . However , those most interested in the speciﬁc subtopic will join it to escape what our interviewees describe as “background noise” in the larger generalist community . Similarly , those seeking personal interaction or social bonding with other community members will be more likely to ﬁnd them in the specialized community . A similar process occurs in the formation of spaces having diﬀerent rules or purposes ( such as “jerk” spaces ) . The cycle will then begin anew as subreddits repartition a subtopic such as r / painting into subspecialists such as r / oilpainting and r / watercolor . Although some of our interviewees described parts of this process , the model we have narrated is an untested theory . We leave it to future work to establish its empirical validity . 5 . 3 Implications for Design By allowing users to create multiple communities with similar or identical topics , platforms can host ecosystems of online communities capable of providing a larger range of beneﬁts to a larger range of users . Some platforms , such as Stack Exchange , prohibit new communities from over - lapping with existing communities [ 30 ] . Our ﬁndings suggest that such rules limit the range of beneﬁts the platform’s communities can confer . Existing designs for online community platforms such as Reddit are at best “ﬁrst - order approx - imations” of an ideal solution in that a “sociotechnical gap” remains between these designs and the goal of a platform that meets every person’s every need [ 1 ] . Our interviewees partly ﬁlled this 19 Woodstock ’18 , June 03 – 05 , 2018 , Woodstock , NY TeBlunthuis , et al . gap with personalized bespoke solutions in the form of their handpicked portfolios of communi - ties . Improved designs for multicommunity discovery and engagement can better support users in knitting together these portfolios . Many Reddit users make heavy use of the aggregated streaming feeds r / all and r / popular , which surface highly upvoted posts from across Reddit . Our interviewees described these feeds as most often featuring content from subreddits that are already extremely popular . Furthermore , Reddit’s system for recommending subreddits often returned irrelevant suggestions . Suggesting communities in as many cells in Figure 1 as possible could help users build their portfolios of com - munities . Because increased visibility may create stress and labor for communities and moderators [ 43 ] , recommendations should target those potential members likely to be positive contributors . Although some of our interviewees used the “multireddit” feature for making a custom feed of subreddits , they described this feature as cumbersome and overwhelming . A design alterna - tive is to formalize or even automate the types of informal social practices our interviewees de - scribed such as cross - community linking and cross - posting . For example , a subreddit such as r / vintageaudio might conﬁgure an auto - moderator to detect posts about reel - to - reel equipment and recommend cross - posting to r / reeltoreel . A discussion - focused subreddit might routinely invite productive contributors to discussions in the related “main” subreddit . Because intercom - munity interactions can give rise to conﬂict , individual communities should have control of how such practices are implemented . New tools for collaboration between moderation teams may en - able the institution of policies encouraging productive concurrent participation in overlapping communities . 5 . 4 Limitations Our study has limitations common to all interview - based studies . Our ﬁndings derive from in - depth conversations with relatively few of the people who were highly active participants in the handful of clusters of communities in our sample . Although our study was designed to achieve analytic saturation within each cluster and to cover a wide range of types of topics discussed on Reddit , additional interviews across a wider range of communities might uncover new types of specialization . Additionally , our interviewees were among the most active members of the clusters , and their experiences may diﬀer from those of peripheral members . Similarly , we cannot speak to the experiences of those who participated in only one community within a cluster . Our interview data were collected at one point in time and cannot speak to how the dynamics we describe played out over time or how new communities were created and emerged . Relatedly , although we ﬁnd that overlapping communities tend to provide diﬀerent beneﬁts to members , we did not set out to interview community founders and thus cannot speak to the reasons that communities were created [ 28 ] . Furthermore , our study focuses only on the Reddit platform . Reddit has distinctive aﬀordances for voting , moderation , and multicommunity engagement that might shape the construction and use of overlapping communities . Although Reddit is among the most popular online community platforms . Our ﬁndings may not describe relationships between overlapping communities on other platforms , or between one platform and another . Diﬀerent platforms likely have diﬀerent strengths or weaknesses for building communities that provide some types of beneﬁts but not others . At the same time , cross - platform engagement may involve friction related to the use of multiple identities and sociotechnical systems . Future research should investigate how people use portfolios that include communities on multiple platforms . 20 No Community Can Do Everything Woodstock ’18 , June 03 – 05 , 2018 , Woodstock , NY 6 CONCLUSION Why are the same people talking to each other about similar things in diﬀerent online communi - ties ? We answer this question by developing a theory grounded in the analysis of 20 interviews with members of highly related communities on Reddit . Our answer suggests that people turn to online communities in search of multiple beneﬁts—speciﬁc kinds of content and discussion , social - ization in a homophilous community , and attention from the largest possible audience . We argue that although structures such as the topic , rules , and size of a community might improve the de - gree to which it provides one of these beneﬁts , they will necessarily detract from its ability to provide others . Multiple communities having a range of structures exist to provide the full range of beneﬁts . No community can do everything . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Text from a draft of this article was included as part in the ﬁrst authors PhD dissertation and he thanks his committee—Professors Aaron Shaw , Emma Spiro , David McDonald and Kirsten Foot—for their generous support , wise advice and insightful comments . This work was supported by NSF grants IIS - 1908850 , IIS - 1910202 , and GRFP # 2016220885 . Versions of this paper received very helpful feedback from the Community Data Science Collective and Aaron Shaw , Sohyeon Hwang , Jeremy Foote , Carl Colglazier , Floor Fiers , Sejal Khatri , Sefania Druga , Nicholas Vincent , and Kaylea Champion in particular . We also thank the HCI seminar at the University of Wash - ington for their thoughtful discussion and comments . We are grateful to the anonymous CSCW reveiwers for their keen insights and feedback which considerably improved the paper . Thanks to Jason Baumgartner and pushshift . io for the Reddit data archive . This work was facilitated through the use of the advanced computational infrastructure provided by the Hyak supercomputer sys - tem at the University of Washington . Most of all , we owe special gratitude to our 20 interview participants for their time and knowledge . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Mark S . Ackerman . 2000 . The Intellectual Challenge of CSCW : The Gap Between Social Requirements and Technical Feasibility . Human – Computer Interaction 15 , 2 - 3 ( Sept . 2000 ) , 179 – 203 . [ 2 ] M . S . Ackerman and T . W . Malone . 1990 . Answer Garden : A Tool for Growing Organizational Memory . In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOIS and IEEE CS TC - OA Conference on Oﬃce Information Systems ( COCS ’90 ) . ACM , New York , NY , 31 – 39 . [ 3 ] Lada A . Adamic , Jun Zhang , Eytan Bakshy , and Mark S . Ackerman . 2008 . Knowledge Sharing and Yahoo Answers : Everyone Knows Something . In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on World Wide Web ( WWW ’08 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , Beijing , China , 665 – 674 . [ 4 ] Ashley Amaya , Ruben Bach , Florian Keusch , and Frauke Kreuter . 2021 . New Data Sources in Social Science Research : Things to Know Before Working With Reddit Data . Social Science Computer Review 39 , 5 ( Oct . 2021 ) , 943 – 960 . [ 5 ] Jason Baumgartner , Savvas Zannettou , Brian Keegan , Megan Squire , and Jeremy Blackburn . 2020 . The Pushshift Reddit Dataset . Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media 14 ( May 2020 ) , 830 – 839 . [ 6 ] Yochai Benkler . 2006 . The Wealth of Networks : How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom . Yale University Press , New Haven , CT . [ 7 ] Michael S . Bernstein , Eytan Bakshy , Moira Burke , and Brian Karrer . 2013 . Quantifying the Invisible Audience in Social Networks . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 21 – 30 . [ 8 ] Petter Bae Brandtzæg and Jan Heim . 2008 . User Loyalty and Online Communities : Why Members of Online Com - munities Are Not Faithful . In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on INtelligent TEchnologies for Interactive enterTAINment . ICST , Cancun , Mexico . [ 9 ] Gordon Burtch , Qinglai He , Yili Hong , and Dokyun Lee . 2021 . How Do Peer Awards Motivate Creative Content ? Experimental Evidence from Reddit . Management Science ( June 2021 ) . [ 10 ] Brian S . Butler . 2001 . Membership Size , Communication Activity , and Sustainability : A Resource - Based Model of Online Social Structures . Information Systems Research 12 , 4 ( 2001 ) , 346 – 362 . 21 Woodstock ’18 , June 03 – 05 , 2018 , Woodstock , NY TeBlunthuis , et al . [ 11 ] Brian S . Butler and Xiaoqing Wang . 2011 . The Cross - Purposes of Cross - Posting : Boundary Reshaping Behavior in Online Discussion Communities . Information Systems Research 23 , 3 - part - 2 ( Sept . 2011 ) , 993 – 1010 . [ 12 ] Julie Campbell , Cecilia Aragon , Katie Davis , Sarah Evans , Abigail Evans , and David Randall . 2016 . Thousands of Positive Reviews : Distributed Mentoring in Online Fan Communities . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 691 – 704 . [ 13 ] Glenn R . Carroll . 1985 . Concentration and Specialization : Dynamics of Niche Width in Populations of Organizations . Amer . J . Sociology 90 , 6 ( May 1985 ) , 1262 – 1283 . [ 14 ] Glenn R . Carroll and Anand Swaminathan . 2000 . Why the Microbrewery Movement ? Organizational Dynamics of Resource Partitioning in the U . S . Brewing Industry . Amer . J . Sociology 106 , 3 ( 2000 ) , 715 – 762 . [ 15 ] Eshwar Chandrasekharan , Umashanthi Pavalanathan , Anirudh Srinivasan , Adam Glynn , Jacob Eisenstein , and Eric Gilbert . 2017 . You Can’t Stay Here : The Eﬃcacy of Reddit’s 2015 Ban Examined through Hate Speech . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 1 , CSCW ( Dec . 2017 ) , 31 : 1 – 31 : 22 . [ 16 ] Eshwar Chandrasekharan , Mattia Samory , Shagun Jhaver , Hunter Charvat , Amy Bruckman , Cliﬀ Lampe , Jacob Eisen - stein , and Eric Gilbert . 2018 . The Internet’s Hidden Rules : An Empirical Study of Reddit Norm Violations at Micro , Meso , and Macro Scales . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact . 2 , CSCW ( 2018 ) , 32 : 1 – 32 : 25 . [ 17 ] Shuo Chang , Vikas Kumar , EricGilbert , andLorenG . Terveen . 2014 . Specialization , Homophily , and Genderina Social Curation Site : Findings from Pinterest . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’14 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 674 – 686 . [ 18 ] Kathy Charmaz . 2015 . Constructing Grounded Theory : A Practical Guide through Qualitative Analysis ( second ed . ) . SAGE , Thousand Oaks , California . [ 19 ] Tiago Cunha , David Jurgens , Chenhao Tan , and Daniel Romero . 2019 . Are All Successful Communities Alike ? Char - acterizing and Predicting the Success of Online Communities . In The World Wide Web Conference ( WWW ’19 ) . Asso - ciation for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 318 – 328 . [ 20 ] Srayan Datta and Eytan Adar . 2019 . Extracting Inter - Community Conﬂicts in Reddit . Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media 13 ( July 2019 ) , 146 – 157 . [ 21 ] Srayan Datta , Chanda Phelan , and Eytan Adar . 2017 . Identifying Misaligned Inter - Group Links and Communities . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 1 , CSCW ( Dec . 2017 ) , 37 : 1 – 37 : 23 . [ 22 ] Daniel DellaPosta , Yongren Shi , and Michael Macy . 2015 . Why Do Liberals Drink Lattes ? Amer . J . Sociology 120 , 5 ( March 2015 ) , 1473 – 1511 . [ 23 ] Shira Dvir - Gvirsman . 2017 . Media Audience Homophily : Partisan Websites , Audience Identity and Polarization Pro - cesses . New Media & Society 19 , 7 ( July 2017 ) , 1072 – 1091 . [ 24 ] SamerFaraj , Georg vonKrogh , EricMonteiro , andKarimR . Lakhani . 2016 . OnlineCommunity asSpace forKnowledge Flows . Information Systems Research 27 , 4 ( Dec . 2016 ) , 668 – 684 . [ 25 ] Casey Fiesler and Brianna Dym . 2020 . Moving Across Lands : Online Platform Migration in Fandom Communities . Proc . ACM Hum . - Comput . Interact 4 , CSCW1 ( May 2020 ) , 042 : 1 – 042 : 25 . [ 26 ] CaseyFiesler , Jialun " Aaron " Jiang , Joshua McCann , Kyle Frye , and Jed R . Brubaker . 2018 . RedditRules ! Characterizing an Ecosystem of Governance . . In Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media . AAAI , Stanford , CA , 72 – 81 . [ 27 ] Casey Fiesler , Shannon Morrison , R . Benjamin Shapiro , and Amy S . Bruckman . 2017 . Growing Their Own : Legitimate PeripheralParticipation forComputational LearninginanOnlineFandomCommunity . In Proceedings ofthe2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( CSCW ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1375 – 1386 . [ 28 ] Jeremy Foote , Darren Gergle , and Aaron Shaw . 2017 . Starting Online Communities : Motivations and Goals of Wiki Founders . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’17 ) . ACM , New York , NY , 6376 – 6380 . [ 29 ] Brendan J . Frey and Delbert Dueck . 2007 . Clustering by Passing Messages Between Data Points . Science 315 , 5814 ( Feb . 2007 ) , 972 – 976 . [ 30 ] Hengyi Fu and Besiki Stvilia . 2016 . Knowledge Curation Discussions and Activity Dynamics in a Short Lived Social Q Amp ; A Community . In 2016 IEEE / ACM Joint Conference on Digital Libraries ( JCDL ) . 203 – 204 . [ 31 ] Janet Fulk , Andrew J . Flanagin , Michael E . Kalman , Peter R . Monge , and Timothy Ryan . 1996 . Connective and Com - munal Public Goods in Interactive Communication Systems . Communication Theory 6 , 1 ( 1996 ) , 60 – 87 . [ 32 ] TarletonGillespie . 2018 . Custodians of the Internet : Platforms , Content Moderation , and the Hidden Decisions That Shape Social Media . Yale University Press , New Haven . [ 33 ] Mark S . Granovetter . 1973 . The Strength of Weak Ties . Amer . J . Sociology 78 , 6 ( May 1973 ) , 1360 – 1380 . [ 34 ] CatherineGrevet , Loren G . Terveen , and Eric Gilbert . 2014 . Managing Political Diﬀerencesin Social Media . In Proceed - ings ofthe 17th ACM ConferenceonComputer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’14 ) . Association 22 No Community Can Do Everything Woodstock ’18 , June 03 – 05 , 2018 , Woodstock , NY for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1400 – 1408 . [ 35 ] Aaron Halfaker , R . Stuart Geiger , Jonathan T . Morgan , and John Riedl . 2013 . The Rise and Decline of an Open Collab - oration System : How Wikipedia’s Reaction to Popularity Is Causing Its Decline . American Behavioral Scientist 57 , 5 ( May 2013 ) , 664 – 688 . [ 36 ] Jack Hessel , Chenhao Tan , and Lillian Lee . 2016 . Science , Askscience , and Badscience : On the Coexistence of Highly Related Communities . In Tenth International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media . 11 . arXiv : 1612 . 07487 [ 37 ] Benjamin Mako Hill and Aaron Shaw . 2019 . Studying Populations of Online Communities . In The Oxford Handbook of Networked Communication , Brooke Foucault Welles and Sandra González - Bailón ( Eds . ) . Oxford University Press , Oxford , UK , 173 – 193 . [ 38 ] Serena Hillman , Jason Procyk , and Carman Neustaedter . 2014 . ’alksjdf ; Lksfd’ : Tumblr and the Fandom User Expe - rience . In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ’14 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 775 – 784 . [ 39 ] Itai Himelboim , Kaye D Sweetser , Spencer F Tinkham , Kristen Cameron , Matthew Danelo , and Kate West . 2016 . Valence - Based Homophily on Twitter : Network Analysis of Emotions and Political Talk in the 2012 Presidential Elec - tion . New Media & Society 18 , 7 ( Aug . 2016 ) , 1382 – 1400 . [ 40 ] Sohyeon Hwang and Jeremy D . Foote . 2021 . Why Do People Participate in Small OnlineCommunities ? . In Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction . [ 41 ] Thomas J . Johnson , Shannon L . Bichard , and Weiwu Zhang . 2009 . Communication Communities or “CyberGhettos ? ” : A Path Analysis Model Examining Factors That Explain Selective Exposure to Blogs . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication 15 , 1 ( Oct . 2009 ) , 60 – 82 . [ 42 ] Charles Kiene , Jialun " Aaron " Jiang , and Benjamin Mako Hill . 2019 . Technological Frames and User Innovation : Exploring Technological Change in Community Moderation Teams . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( Nov . 2019 ) , 44 : 1 – 44 : 23 . [ 43 ] Charles Kiene , Andrés Monroy - Hernández , and Benjamin Mako Hill . 2016 . Surviving an “Eternal September” : How an Online Community Managed a Surge of Newcomers . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , 1152 – 1156 . [ 44 ] Robert E . Kraut , Paul Resnick , and Sara Kiesler . 2012 . Building Successful Online Communities : Evidence - based Social Design . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . [ 45 ] SrijanKumar , WilliamL . Hamilton , JureLeskovec , andDanJurafsky . 2018 . Community InteractionandConﬂicton the Web . In Proceedings of the 2018 World Wide Web Conference ( WWW ’18 ) . International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee , Lyon , France , 933 – 943 . [ 46 ] Karim R . Lakhani and Eric von Hippel . 2003 . How Open Source Software Works : " Free " User - to - User Assistance . Research Policy 32 , 6 ( 2003 ) , 923 – 943 . [ 47 ] Cliﬀ Lampe and Paul Resnick . 2004 . Slash ( Dot ) and Burn : Distributed Moderation in a Large Online Conversation Space . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’04 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 543 – 550 . [ 48 ] Cliﬀ Lampe , Rick Wash , Alcides Velasquez , and Elif Ozkaya . 2010 . Motivations to Participate in Online Communities . In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , Atlanta , Georgia , USA , 1927 – 1936 . [ 49 ] Paul F . Lazarsfeld and Robert K . Merton . 1954 . Friendship as a Social Process : A Substantive and Methodological Analysis . In Freedom and Control in Modern Society , Morroe Berger , Theodore Abel , and Charles H . Page ( Eds . ) . Van Nostrand , New York , 18 – 66 . [ 50 ] Alex Leavitt and John J . Robinson . 2017 . The Role of Information Visibility in Network Gatekeeping : Information Aggregation on Reddit during Crisis Events . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Co - operative Work and Social Computing ( CSCW ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , Portland , Oregon , USA , 1246 – 1261 . [ 51 ] Jan Marco Leimeister and Helmut Krcmar . 2005 . Evaluation of a Systematic Design for a Virtual Patient Community . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication 10 , JCMC1041 ( July 2005 ) . [ 52 ] Yuyang Liang . 2017 . Knowledge Sharing in Online Discussion Threads : What Predicts the Ratings ? . In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing ( CSCW ’17 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 146 – 154 . [ 53 ] Zhiyuan Lin , Niloufar Salehi , Bowen Yao , Yiqi Chen , and Michael S . Bernstein . 2017 . Better When It Was Smaller ? Community Content and Behavior after Massive Growth . . In Eleventh International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media . AAAI , Montreal , Canada , 132 – 141 . [ 54 ] Eden Litt and Eszter Hargittai . 2016 . " Just Cast the Net , and Hopefully the Right Fish Swim into It " : Audience Manage - ment on Social Network Sites . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing ( CSCW ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1488 – 1500 . 23 Woodstock ’18 , June 03 – 05 , 2018 , Woodstock , NY TeBlunthuis , et al . [ 55 ] John Lu , Sumati Sridhar , Ritika Pandey , Mohammad Al Hasan , and Georege Mohler . 2019 . Investigate Transitions into Drug Addiction through Text Mining of Reddit Data . In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining ( KDD ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 2367 – 2375 . [ 56 ] Xiao Ma , Justin Cheng , Shankar Iyer , and Mor Naaman . 2019 . When Do People Trust Their Social Groups ? . In Pro - ceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , Glasgow Scotland Uk , 1 – 12 . [ 57 ] A . E . Marwick and danah boyd . 2011 . I Tweet Honestly , I Tweet Passionately : Twitter Users , Context Collapse , and the Imagined Audience . New Media & Society 13 , 1 ( Feb . 2011 ) , 114 – 133 . [ 58 ] Adrienne Massanari . 2017 . # Gamergate and The Fappening : How Reddit’s Algorithm , Governance , and Culture Sup - port Toxic Technocultures . New Media & Society 19 , 3 ( March 2017 ) , 329 – 346 . [ 59 ] J . Nathan Matias . 2019 . The Civic Labor of Volunteer Moderators Online . Social Media + Society 5 , 2 ( April 2019 ) , 1 – 12 . [ 60 ] Miller McPherson , Lynn Smith - Lovin , and James M Cook . 2001 . Birds of a Feather : Homophily in Social Networks . Annual Review of Sociology 27 , 1 ( Aug . 2001 ) , 415 – 444 . [ 61 ] Meredith Ringel Morris , Jaime Teevan , and Katrina Panovich . 2010 . A Comparison of Information Seeking Using Search Engines and Social Networks . In Fourth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media . [ 62 ] Meredith Ringel Morris , Jaime Teevan , and Katrina Panovich . 2010 . What Do People Ask Their Social Networks , and Why ? A Survey Study of Status Message Q & amp ; a Behavior . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1739 – 1748 . [ 63 ] Ahlam Muhtaseb and Lawrence R . Frey . 2008 . Arab Americans’ Motives for Using the Internet as a Functional Media Alternative and Their Perceptions of U . S . Public Opinion . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication 13 , 3 ( April 2008 ) , 618 – 657 . [ 64 ] Wanda J . Orlikowski . 1992 . Learning from Notes : Organizational Issues in Groupware Implementation . In Proceedings ofthe 1992 ACM ConferenceonComputer - supported Cooperative Work ( CSCW ’92 ) . ACM , NewYork , NY , USA , 362 – 369 . [ 65 ] Nathaniel Poor . 2005 . Mechanisms of an Online Public Sphere : The Website Slashdot . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication 10 , JCMC1028 ( Jan . 2005 ) . [ 66 ] Nathaniel Poor . 2014 . Computer Game Modders’ Motivations and Sense of Community : A Mixed - Methods Approach . New Media & Society 16 , 8 ( Dec . 2014 ) , 1249 – 1267 . [ 67 ] Manoel Horta Ribeiro , Shagun Jhaver , Savvas Zannettou , Jeremy Blackburn , Gianluca Stringhini , Emiliano De Cristo - faro , and RobertWest . 2021 . Do PlatformMigrations Compromise Content Moderation ? Evidence from r / The _ Donald and r / Incels . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 5 , CSCW2 ( Oct . 2021 ) , 1 – 24 . [ 68 ] Catherine M . Ridings and David Gefen . 2004 . Virtual Community Attraction : Why People Hang out Online . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication 10 , 1 ( Nov . 2004 ) . [ 69 ] Martin Ruef , Howard E . Aldrich , and Nancy M . Carter . 2003 . The Structure of Founding Teams : Homophily , Strong Ties , and Isolation among U . S . Entrepreneurs . American Sociological Review 68 , 2 ( 2003 ) , 195 – 222 . [ 70 ] Joseph Seering , Tony Wang , Jina Yoon , and Geoﬀ Kaufman . 2019 . Moderator Engagement and Community Develop - ment in the Age of Algorithms . New Media & Society ( Jan . 2019 ) , 1461444818821316 . [ 71 ] Aaron Shaw and Benjamin Mako Hill . 2014 . Laboratories of Oligarchy ? How theIron Law Extendsto Peer Production . Journal of Communication 64 , 2 ( 2014 ) , 215 – 238 . [ 72 ] Kate Starbird . 2012 . Crowd Computation : Organizing Information during Mass Disruption Events . In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work Companion ( CSCW ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 339 – 342 . [ 73 ] Anand Swaminathan . 2001 . Resource Partitioning and the Evolution of Specialist Organizations : TheRole of Location and Identity in the U . S . Wine Industry . Academy of Management Journal 44 , 6 ( Dec . 2001 ) , 1169 – 1185 . [ 74 ] Chenhao Tan . 2018 . Tracing Community Genealogy : How New Communities Emerge from the Old . In Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference on Web and Social Media ( ICWSM ’18 ) . AAAI , Palo Alto , California , 395 – 404 . [ 75 ] Chenhao Tan and Lillian Lee . 2015 . All Who Wander : On the Prevalence and Characteristics of Multi - Community Engagement . In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on World Wide Web ( WWW ’15 ) . International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee , Republic and Canton of Geneva , Switzerland , 1056 – 1066 . [ 76 ] Nathan TeBlunthuis and Benjamin Mako Hill . 2021 . Identifying Competition and Mutualism Between Online Groups . arXiv : 2107 . 06970 [ cs ] ( July 2021 ) . arXiv : 2107 . 06970 [ cs ] [ 77 ] Nathan TeBlunthuis , Aaron Shaw , and Benjamin Mako Hill . 2018 . Revisiting " The Rise and Decline " in a Population of Peer Production Projects . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , New York , NY , 355 : 1 – 355 : 7 . [ 78 ] Fred Turner . 2005 . Where the Counterculture Met the New Economy : The WELL and the Origins of Virtual Commu - nity . Technology and Culture 46 , 3 ( 2005 ) , 485 – 512 . [ 79 ] Eric von Hippel . 2016 . Free Innovation ( 1 edition ed . ) . The MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . 24 No Community Can Do Everything Woodstock ’18 , June 03 – 05 , 2018 , Woodstock , NY [ 80 ] Xiaoqing Wang , Brian S . Butler , and Yuqing Ren . 2012 . The Impact of Membership Overlap on Growth : An Ecological Competition View of Online Groups . Organization Science 24 , 2 ( June 2012 ) , 414 – 431 . [ 81 ] Ryen W . White , MatthewRichardson , andYandong Liu . 2011 . Eﬀectsof Community Size andContact Rate in Synchro - nous Social Q & amp ; a . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 2837 – 2846 . [ 82 ] Xigen Li . 2011 . Factors Inﬂuencing the Willingness to Contribute Information to Online Communities . New Media & Society 13 , 2 ( March 2011 ) , 279 – 296 . [ 83 ] Justine Zhang , James Pennebaker , Susan Dumais , and Eric Horvitz . 2020 . Conﬁguring Audiences : A Case Study of Email Communication . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 4 , CSCW1 ( May 2020 ) , 062 : 1 – 062 : 26 . [ 84 ] Jason Shuo Zhang , Brian Keegan , Qin Lv , and Chenhao Tan . 2021 . Understanding the Diverging User Trajectories in Highly - Related OnlineCommunities During theCovid - 19 Pandemic . Proceedings ofthe International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media 5 ( 2021 ) , 12 . arXiv : 2006 . 04816 [ 85 ] Xiaoquan Michael Zhang and Feng Zhu . 2011 . Group Size and Incentives to Contribute : A Natural Experiment at Chinese Wikipedia . American Economic Review 101 , 4 ( June 2011 ) , 1601 – 1615 . [ 86 ] Xuan Zhao , Cliﬀ Lampe , and Nicole B . Ellison . 2016 . The Social Media Ecology : User Perceptions , Strategies and Chal - lenges . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 89 – 100 . [ 87 ] Haiyi Zhu , Jilin Chen , Tara Matthews , Aditya Pal , Hernan Badenes , and Robert E . Kraut . 2014 . Selecting an Eﬀective Niche : An Ecological View of the Success of Online Communities . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 301 – 310 . [ 88 ] Haiyi Zhu , Robert E . Kraut , and Aniket Kittur . 2014 . The Impact of Membership Overlap on the Survival of Online Communities . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 281 – 290 . 25 This figure " by . png " is available in " png " (cid:10) format from : http : / / arxiv . org / ps / 2201 . 04271v2