© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd REVIEWS Over the past 30 years , much work has been devoted to the description of organelles , and consequently the pathways that are followed by cargo proteins during secretion or endocytosis . Many key processes have been analysed at the molecular and atomic levels , with the current challenges being to understand how molecular machines regulate each transport step and then how these different mechanisms are integrated . However , the principles that guide the movement of proteins and lipids , and the specific organization of each compart - ment , are still poorly understood ; in particular , how is the linear organization of the genome translated into a three - dimensional cellular architecture ? In the endocytic pathway , some compartments can be easily identified because of their characteristic multi - vesicular or multilamellar appearance . Similarly , the Golgi ribbon or the endoplasmic reticulum network can usually be easily identified by their typical organiza - tion and topology . And yet , the boundaries between two easily distinguishable compartments in the same path - way are blurred at the molecular level , in part because key proteins that regulate membrane transport are often found in more than one compartment . Different membrane domains , which might show defined bio - physical properties , probably coexist in each endocytic compartment . The dynamic interplay between these domains might provide a driving force that is responsi - ble both for the specific organization of each compart - ment and for the movement of cargo molecules . So , one of the questions we now face is : do endocytic organelles with a homogeneous membrane composition exist in the strict sense of the word ? A mosaic of structural and functional domains In higher eukaryotic cells , internalization of proteins and lipids is mediated by CLATHRIN - coated vesicles , and other less characterized pathways . Typically , endocy - tosed molecules , including recycling receptors with their bound ligands and downregulated receptors , are delivered to early endosomes , where efficient sorting occurs ( FIG . 1 ) . After receptor – ligand uncoupling at the mildly acidic lumenal pH , recycling receptors are rapid - ly ( t 1 / 2 ~ 2 . 5 min ) segregated away from their ligand and transported along the recycling route , whereas ligands follow the degradation pathway together with downreg - ulated receptors . Hence , it is generally accepted that early endosomes represent both the single entry point for internalized molecules , and the first sorting station in the pathway . The early endosome is a dynamic compartment with a high homotypic fusion capacity 1 . But its ele - ments display a highly complex and pleiomorphic orga - nization that consists of cisternal regions from which thin tubules ( ~ 60 nm diameter ) and large vesicles ( ~ 300 – 400 nm diameter ) seem to emanate ( FIG . 2 ) . The vesicles contain membrane invaginations , and are therefore described as multivesicular — although it is not clear to what extent these invaginations detach from the limiting membrane and form free vesicles in the lumen . Tubular elements closely resemble the tubules of THE ENDOCYTIC PATHWAY : A MOSAIC OF DOMAINS Jean Gruenberg Organelles in the endocytic pathway are composed of a mosaic of structural and functional regions . These regions consist , at least in part , of specialized protein – lipid domains within the plane of the membrane , or of protein complexes associated with specific membrane lipids . Whereas some of these molecular assemblies can be found in more than one compartment , a given combination seems to be unique to each compartment , indicating that membrane organization might be modular . NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 2 | OCTOBER 2001 | 721 Department of Biochemistry , University of Geneva , 1211 - Geneva - 4 , Switzerland . e - mail : jean . gruenberg @ biochem . unige . ch CLATHRIN Large protein , which polymerizes into a triskelion , comprising three heavy chains and three light chains . Triskelions assemble into polyhedral lattices to form clathrin coats . © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd 722 | OCTOBER 2001 | VOLUME 2 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S surface occurs by default . This view is difficult to recon - cile with the situation in epithelial cells , in which transcy - tosed and recycling receptors transit through a common recycling endosome before being transported to oppo - site plasma membrane domains 3 . Lysosomal targeting signals have been identified , but it is not always clear at which transport step these operate . Sorting motifs have been found in the cytoplasmic domains of P - selectin 4 , the interleukin - 2 ( IL - 2 ) receptor β chain 5 , in the viral protein Nef during CD4 downregulation 6 , and in the epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) 7 , but these motifs bear little resemblance to each other . Recent stud - ies indicate that ubiquitylation of the cytoplasmic domain might contribute to lysosomal sorting 8 , 9 . Transient protein monoubiquitylation is also believed to act at the cell surface as an internalization signal , and it is possible that a similar mechanism operates in sorting elsewhere in the cell 10 . This apparent lack of recycling signals and diversity in degradation signals indicates that different sorting principles might operate in early endosomes . Lipids are not distributed randomly within endosomal mem - branes , and different lipid domains might coexist at each step of the pathway . Protein and lipid sorting — for example , during biogenesis of tubules and ECV / MVBs — could be coupled to selective incorporation into spe - cialized protein – lipid environments . Attractive candidates for early endosomal sorting functions include LIPID RAFTS , as these are believed to show sorting functions in the trans - Golgi network and at the plasma membrane 11 . Although the fate of rafts in endo - cytosis is not clear , it has been suggested that cell - surface rafts can act as internalization platforms 12 , 13 , a route pre - sumably followed by downregulated IL - 2 receptors on their way to endosomes and then lysosomes 14 . In addi - tion , SV40 was recently found to enter cells through CAVE - OLAE and then to reside within CAVEOSOMES , which do not recycling endosomes , and multivesicular elements resemble the endosomal carrier vesicles / multivesicular bodies ( ECV / MVBs ) of the degradation pathway ( FIG . 3 ) . These tubular and multivesicular regions can there - fore be considered as the trans face of the organelle . It could be that the central cisternal region functions as the entry or cis region , receiving incoming vesicles from the plasma membrane or trans - Golgi network . It is not easy to imagine how early endosomal membranes can be shaped into such different struc - tures . Selective changes must occur in the curvature and organization of the bilayer , for example , during membrane invagination in nascent ECV / MVBs or tubule biogenesis 2 . Morphogenesis in the endocytic pathway must involve the action of molecular machines and the segregation of proteins and lipids in the plane of the membrane . Sorting in early endosomes Recycled and downregulated receptors are efficiently sorted from one another in early endosomes . But it has been particularly difficult to identify sorting signals in the cytoplasmic domains of cargo proteins . This seems surprising as such signals have been found for most , if not all , other transport steps of the biosynthetic and endocytic pathways . No recycling motif has been identi - fied , leading to the proposal that recycling to the cell Figure 1 | Outline of the endocytic pathway . The main routes of endocytic membrane transport are indicated , with the recycling pathway in green and the degradation pathway in red . Microtubules and the microtubule - organizing centre ( MTOC ) are in blue . In higher eukaryotic cells , internalization of receptors and other cell - surface components occurs through clathrin - mediated endocytosis , although other less characterized pathways are also involved . Internalized molecules are then delivered to early endosomes , where efficient sorting occurs . Some receptors are recycled back to the plasma membrane to be reused , at least in part through recycling endosomes , whereas downregulated receptors are transported to late endosomes and lysosomes for degradation . Late endosomes provide the last sorting station in the pathway , whereas lysosomes are generally believed to represent the end station . Transport routes also connect the biosynthetic and endocytic pathways , and are in particular responsible for the delivery of lysosomal enzymes and membrane proteins . ECV , endosomal carrier vesicle ; MVB , multivesicular body . Plasma membrane Recyclingendosome Early endosome ECV / MVB Late endosome Lysosome MTOC Figure 2 | The early endosome . The figure shows an early endosome containing low - density lipoprotein ( LDL ) – gold particles endocytosed for 5 minutes ( gold particles are visualized as white spots , as contrast was reversed ) . After internalization , cells were homogenized , crude fractions prepared and deposited on mica plates . Samples were analysed by freeze - etch electron microscopy . ( Courtesy of J . Heuser , Washington University , Missouri , USA ) . LIPID RAFTS Dynamic assemblies of cholesterol and sphingolipids in the plasma membrane , probably involved in cell signalling . CAVEOLA Specialized raft that contains the protein caveolin , and forms a flask - shaped , cholesterol - rich invagination of the plasma membrane that might mediate the uptake of some extracellular materials , and is probably involved in cell signalling . CAVEOSOME A recently discovered organelle that is involved in the intracellular transport of SV40 from caveolae to the endoplasmic reticulum . © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 2 | OCTOBER 2001 | 723 R E V I E W S pathways 20 . Although a given SNARE will be most abundant in a certain compartment , SNAREs inevitably spread through several compartments dur - ing vesicular transport . So , docking / fusion specificity cannot be solely determined by the distribution of endosomal SNAREs . Much effort has been devoted to the study of small GTPases of the Rab family , which are considered as organelle markers due to their restricted distribution . When in the active GTP - bound state , Rab5 , which is involved in early endocytic transport , can interact with several effectors , such as other Rab proteins 21 . Through these interactions , Rab5 probably builds a specific effec - tor platform on the membrane , which could integrate different mechanisms that regulate transport , including membrane fusion , membrane budding and interaction with cytoskeletal components 21 . Rab5 might also con - tribute to the spatial organization of docking / fusion sites for vesicles arriving from different pathways , as its effector EEA1 can interact with syntaxin 6 ( REF . 22 ) , which has been implicated in the trans - Golgi network to early endosome transport , and syntaxin - 13 , which is required for endosome fusion 23 and recycling 24 . However , like other key regulators , Rab5 is not only found in a single compartment , but is also associated with the plasma membrane , where its activity , perhaps related to clathrin - coated vesicle formation 25 , seems to be regulated by the EGFR signalling pathway 26 . The findings that the Rab5 effector rabaptin 5 also interacts with Rab4 ( REF . 27 ) — which is involved in recycling — and that the Rab4 effector RABIP4 contains a FYVE motif and localizes to early endosomes 28 , raise the possi - bility that these Rab proteins are functionally coupled , perhaps reflecting the existence of a physical link between different platforms . It will be interesting to determine whether crosstalk between Rab effectors also exists along other pathways . Several proteins interact specifically with phos - phatidylinositol - 3 - phosphate ( PtdIns ( 3 ) P ) through a conserved FYVE motif 29 , including the Rab5 effectors EEA1 and rabenosyn - 5 , which are both required for early endosome fusion 30 , 31 . EEA1 ( REFS 16 , 32 , 33 ) — and perhaps other FYVE proteins 28 , 34 , 35 — is , in fact , restrict - ed to early endosomes . The presence of both phos - phatidylinositol 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) and PtdIns ( 3 ) P - bind - ing proteins among Rab5 effectors would facilitate the formation of microdomains or platforms that contain Rab5 and PtdIns ( 3 ) P on early endosomal membranes 21 . Although PtdIns ( 3 ) P – FYVE interactions are sufficient for early endosomal targeting 36 , the distribution of FYVE proteins also depends on other components . The FYVE protein , hepatocyte growth factor - regulated tyro - sine kinase substrate ( Hrs ) — a homologue of the YEAST CLASS E protein Vps27 — is found on early endosomes 35 , even when the FYVE motif is defective 37 . In addition , the yeast FYVE protein , Fab1 , which is a PtdIns ( 3 ) P - 5´ - OH kinase that generates PtdIns ( 3 , 5 ) P 2 , is essential for maintenance of normal vacuolar morphology and was proposed to regulate cargo - selective sorting into the vacuole lumen 38 . In addition to its function in early endosomal dynamics , PtdIns ( 3 ) P might also function contain endocytosed tracers 15 . Whether a functional relationship exists between caveosomes and endosomes remains to be shown . Raft components , such as choles - terol and sphingomyelin , are abundant in recycling endosomes , at least in Chinese - hamster ovary ( CHO ) and Madin – Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) cells 16 – 18 , indicating that lipid rafts might contribute to endosomal sorting . Indeed , GPI - ANCHORED proteins , which preferen - tially partition into rafts at the cell surface , follow the same route as the rafts themselves in CHO cells 18 . Whether raft components show the same distribution in all cell types is not known . More importantly , it remains to be shown whether these components actually assem - ble into rafts within endosomes — endocytosed lipid analogues with a preference for ordered membrane domains are targeted to late endosomes / lysosomes , rather than recycling endosomes , in the same CHO cells 19 . Whatever the mechanism and molecular compo - nents involved , protein – lipid sorting and membrane organization seem to be intimately coupled in early endosomal membranes . Molecular architecture of early endosomes In addition to the morphologically visible mosaic of early endosomal domains , it is becoming apparent that key components that regulate membrane organi - zation and protein transport are distributed in a non - random manner on membranes , defining functional domains ( FIG . 4 ) . Whether vesicles arriving from the plasma membrane or the trans - Golgi network can dock and fuse anywhere on these membranes is not known , but if early endosomes display the cis – trans polarity discussed above , docking / fusion sites might not be randomly distributed . Docking / fusion proteins of the SNARE family have been identified along both recycling and degradation Figure 3 | Endosomal carrier vesicles / multivesicular bodies . ECV / MVBs containing endocytosed glycoprotein - G of vesicular stomatitis virus ( VSV ) were purified and the distribution of G - protein was analysed by immunogold labelling of cryosections 1 . ( Reproduced from The Journal of Cell Biology , 1989 , 108 , 1301 – 1316 by copyright permission of The Rockerfeller University Press . ) GPI ANCHOR The function of this post - translational modification is to attach proteins to the exoplasmic leaflet of membranes , possibly to specific domains therein . The anchor is made of one molecule of phosphatidylinositol to which a carbohydrate chain is linked through the C - 6 hydroxyl of the inositol , and is linked to the protein through an ethanolamine phosphate moiety . SNARES ( Soluble N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive factor attachment protein receptor ) . A family of membrane - tethered coiled - coil proteins that regulate fusion reactions and target specificity in the vacuolar system . They can be divided into vesicle - SNAREs and target - SNAREs on the basis of their localization , or into Q - SNAREs and R - SNAREs on the basis of a highly conserved amino acid . YEAST CLASS E MUTANTS One class of vacuolar protein sorting ( VPS ) mutants in yeast . Class E genes are involved in the delivery of both newly synthesized vacuolar enzyme carboxypeptidase Y ( CPY ) and endocytosed proteins to the vacuole from the prevacuolar compartment . Mutations in any of the class E VPS gene products causes an accumulation of cargo in an aberrant endosome - like structure termed the class E compartment . © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd 724 | OCTOBER 2001 | VOLUME 2 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S ins , using a variety of membrane - association mecha - nisms , might form platforms on the membrane of dif - ferent sub - cellular compartments , which would specifi - cally interact with cytosolic components , including the cytoskeleton . Annexin II localizes to the plasma membrane and on early endosomes , and it was shown to be involved in the dynamics of early and / or recycling endosomes 49 , 50 . Annexin II binding to endosomes 51 , but perhaps not plasma membrane 52 , seems to use an unconventional , cholesterol - dependent — but calcium - independent — mechanism . Annexin II also interacts with proteins of the cortical actin cytoskeleton , and it seems to be non - randomly distributed on early endosomal membranes , and concentrated in areas from which actin - like fila - ments seem to emanate 51 . It is therefore possible that cholesterol - rich regions of early endosomal membranes that interact with annexin II are important in the gener - al organization and dynamics of this compartment . The COPI coat complex regulates retrograde transport from the Golgi to the endoplasmic reticulum , but sever - al lines of evidence indicate that an endosomal COPI complex , lacking β - and γ - subunits , functions in endo - somal transport 53 — in particular in ECV / MVB biogen - esis 54 and Nef - mediated CD4 downregulation 6 . COPI has also been implicated in transport from the phagoso - mal membrane 55 . Like biosynthetic COPI , endosomal COPI interacts with membranes through the small GTPase , ADP - ribosylation factor 1 ( ARF1 ) ( REF . 56 ) . However , recruitment of ARF1 and COPI onto endo - somes , but not biosynthetic membranes , depends on the acidic lumenal pH , possibly through a pH sensor 54 , 56 , as does binding of ARF6 and the ARF 57 exchange factor , ARNO . As is the case for other coat components , includ - ing COPII , as well as clathrin and some of its partners 58 , COPI can also interact with membrane lipids 59 . Such weak interactions could facilitate membrane targeting and association , and concentrate coat components locally . The close relationship between early endosome func - tions in transport and morphogenesis is also apparent in COPI functions . COPI inactivation in LDLF CELLS with a temperature sensitive - defect in ε - COP 60 inhibits trans - port to late endosomes and interferes with transferrin receptor recycling 61 , but not with bulk 62 recycling , and also disrupts early endosomes 62 . These then become tubular or cisternal clusters without multivesicular domains — a phenotype reminiscent of class E VPS mutants in yeast 63 . Identical perturbations are caused by neutralization of the endosomal pH 54 , 64 , 65 , which inhibits ARF1 and COPI binding . Tubules of the recycling endosome The two main circuits of recycling and degradation are well separated , both topologically and functionally , to ensure that proteins that need to be reused at the cell surface remain separate from those that are destined to be degraded ( FIG . 1 ) . However , compartment boundaries along the recycling or degradation pathways seem blurred at the molecular level , in particular when fol - lowing a single component . It is probably the interplay in the biogenesis of multivesicular endosomes 29 , under - scoring the close connection between early endosome function and morphogenesis . Recent studies have also uncovered the existence of another phosphoinositide - binding domain shared by several proteins , called the PX - or PHOX - homology domain . This was first found in p40 phox and p47 phox — two subunits of the neutrophil oxidase 39 , 40 . The PX domain of p40 phox binds PtdIns ( 3 ) P selectively , and the presence of this domain is required for the endocytic function and / or localization of the t - SNARE VAM7 ( REF . 41 ) and the sorting nexin SNX3 ( REF . 42 ) . Interestingly , the PX protein , SNX1 , interacts with the FYVE protein Hrs 43 , and is involved in EGFR degrada - tion 44 , whereas the SNX1 yeast homologue , Vps5 , is a component of the RETROMER COMPLEX that is necessary for endosome – trans - Golgi network recycling 45 . In addition , SNX3 and SNX15 are involved in endosomal transport , and their overexpression disrupts endosome morpholo - gy 42 , 46 . The relationships between PtdIns ( 3 ) P and PX proteins or FYVE proteins are still unclear , but should be of high interest in understanding the organization of endosomal membranes . Other proteins that might function in organizing functional regions in the membrane are annexins 47 . These proteins seem to have the intrinsic ability to self - organize at the membrane surface into bidimensional ordered arrays 48 . It is attractive to speculate that annex - Figure 4 | Lipid – protein microdomains and molecular machines . A schematic early endosome is represented . A cisternal region is represented with a thick black line , recycling tubules are in yellow , whereas a forming MVB / ECV is shown with a black limiting membrane and purple invaginations . PtdIns ( 3 ) P is represented as yellow dots . Regions of membrane constriction or invagination , which presumably involve specialized lipids , are circled . Lipid – protein domains and complexes that might function as modular elements of early endosomal membranes are represented . The precise function of PtdIns ( 3 ) P signalling and class E VPS proteins in MVB / ECV formation is not clear in mammalian cells ( BOX 1 ) . MVB / ECV , multivesicular body / endosomal carrier vesicle . PtdIns ( 3 ) P signalling pathway , FYVE and PHOX proteins Rab5 and effectors Annexin II – cholesterol Recycling Degradation Endosomal COPs RETROMER COMPLEX Protein complex consisting of Vps35 , Vps26 , Vps29 , Vps17 and Vps5 , which was discovered through genetic screens in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . It functions in the retrieval of proteins from the prevacuolar compartment and transport to the Golgi . COPI COAT Complex consisting of α - , β - , β ’ - , γ - , δ - , ε - and ζ - COP , also called coatomer . This coat complex functions in anterograde transport within the Golgi and in retrograde transport from the Golgi to the endoplasmic reticulum . COPII COAT Complex consisting of Sec13 , Sec31 , Sec23 and Sec24 . This coat complex functions in anterograde transport from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi . LDLF CELLS A mutant Chinese - hamster ovary cell line that was identified on the basis of its defect in low - density lipoprotein ( LDL ) transport . The mutation causing the phenotype was later identified as a deletion of ε - COP . © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 2 | OCTOBER 2001 | 725 R E V I E W S Transport in the degradation pathway Although tubules mediate recycling to the cell surface , transport intermediates along the degradation pathway — from early to late endosomes — involve large ( ~ 300 – 400 nm diameter ) ECV / MVBs . In mammalian cells , ECV / MVBs are clearly distinct from both early and late endosomes . In particular , ECV / MVBs do not contain early endosome - specific proteins or recycling receptors , nor do they contain the main lipid and pro - tein constituents of late endosomal membranes . Once formed , ECV / MVBs move towards late endosomes in a microtubule - and motor - dependent fashion , and acquire the capacity to dock onto and fuse selectively with late endosomes , a step which depends on the con - ventional docking / fusion machinery 20 , 21 , 88 . In axons , ECV / MVBs also function as intermediates from early endosomes at the presynaptic membrane to late endo - somes in the cell body 67 . Whether ECV / MVBs change in composition as they undergo a maturation process , or whether they mediate transport between two stable compartments , has been the subject of much debate , and so far , it has not been possible to solve this issue by following single components at the boundary between early and late endosomes . ECV / MVBs , like late endosomes , contain two mor - phologically visible membrane domains , internal invaginations and a limiting membrane . The composi - tion of the ECV / MVB limiting membrane is not known , except that it seems to lack early endosomal proteins , and is different from the late endosomal mem - brane , which contains high amounts of LAMP1 . Similarly , little is known about the composition of ECV / MVB invaginations . They accumulate downregu - lated receptors , in particular the EGFR 89 , which has led to the idea that internal membranes are destined to be degraded in lysosomes — a view partially challenged in mammalian cells by recent observations ( see the next section ) . Electron - microscopy studies showed that PtdIns ( 3 ) P is abundant within ECV / MVB internal membranes , in addition to early endosomes , and that it is not detected within late endosomes that contain LYSOBISPHOSPHATIDIC ACID ( LBPA ) 36 . However , it is not clear whether the presence of PtdIns ( 3 ) P on these inter - nal membranes reflects a role for this lipid in the bio - genesis of invaginations , or simply the metabolism of the lipid . Wortmannin , a drug that inhibits PI ( 3 ) K was reported to inhibit multivesicular body formation in mammalian cells 90 . At the same time , evidence is accu - mulating in yeast that signalling through the PI ( 3 ) K Vps34 and PtdIns ( 3 ) P is crucial in vacuole transport of the trans - Golgi network 29 . Considering the close rela - tionship that exists between ECV / MVB biogenesis and early endosome organization , we might expect some of the components that regulate early endosomal func - tions to also be important in the invagination process . In addition , yeast class E VPS mutants are all defective in MVB biogenesis , as they form stacks of tubules or curved cisternae 63 , perhaps in a ‘frustrated invagination’ process . Several class E mutants have a mammalian homologue that has been implicated in transport , between key components that defines the functional boundaries in each pathway . After leaving early endosomes , recycling molecules are found in distinct tubular structures that corre - spond to recycling endosomes . These do not contain ligands and receptors that are destined to be degraded , are less acidic than early endosomes , and are found close to the centrioles in some , but not all , cell types 16 , 66 , 67 . These tubules form dynamic networks 68 and are collectively referred to as recycling endosomes . But the distinction between transport intermediates and compartments is not clear . Early endosomal Rab5 and two small GTPases involved in recycling , Rab4 and Rab11 , show a distinct , but partially overlapping , distribution in vivo , which presumably corresponds to different effector platforms 69 . However , the precise functions of Rab4 and Rab11 are not clear . SNARE family members have been found in recycling endosomes and were reported to function in the pathway , including the v - SNAREs cellu - brevin 70 and endobrevin / VAMP8 in the apical pathway of polarized cells 71 , and the t - SNARE syntaxin 13 ( REF . 24 ) , which is also involved in endosome fusion 23 . Again , the precise function of these molecules is not clear . Recycling can occur by a fast and a slow route 72 – 75 . These could correspond to at least two separate trans - port steps to the plasma membrane , each with a distinct molecular machinery ; for example , from early endo - somes or from recycling endosomes ( FIG . 1 ) . Alternatively , fast and slow transport could reflect the existence of a gradient of molecules on their way to the cell surface within early and recycling endosomes . This issue is not easily addressed . Drugs or expression of mutant proteins might unbalance transport along either route , perhaps explaining why recycling kinetics are hardly affected by microtubule depolymerization , although the pericentriolar distribution of the recycling endosome depends on microtubules . Transport along the recycling pathway depends on the actin cytoskeleton and unconventional myosin motors 76 – 78 , which might have a mechanical role in tubule biogenesis and dynamics . Crosstalk between transport , actin remodelling and Rac - mediated sig - nalling could depend on the small GTPase ARF6 and its possible partners 79 – 82 . Clathrin - coated buds have been observed on recycling endosomes 83 , but whether they mediate transport back to the cell surface 83 or to the trans - Golgi network remains to be fully established 84 . As clathrin coats usually have sorting functions , their pres - ence on recycling endosomes strengthens the view that protein sorting occurs within recycling endosomes . A genetic screen for endocytosis mutants in Caenorhabditis elegans recently identified RME - 1 ( REFS 85 , 86 ) — a new member of the conserved family of Eps15 - homology ( EH ) - domain proteins 87 , which show characteristics of an endocytic accessory protein . RME - 1 is associated with recycling endosomes and might be involved in the exit of membrane proteins from this compartment . Beyond these observations , little is known about the molecular mechanisms that drive the dynamics of tubular recycling endosomes . LBPA Lysobisphosphatidic acid ( LBPA ) is a phospholipid , structurally analogous with phosphatidylglycerol . LBPA is poorly degradable , presumably because of its unusual stereoconfiguration , and is abundant within internal membranes of late endosomes . © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd 726 | OCTOBER 2001 | VOLUME 2 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S the idea that the fate of internal membranes is degrada - tion in lysosomes . Sandhoff and collaborators 104 have demonstrated , using an in vitro liposome assay , that neg - atively charged phospholipids , in particular LBPA , great - ly facilitate the degradation of several glycolipids . As LBPA itself is poorly degradable , one function of LBPA membranes could be to present lipids and proteins that need to be degraded to the hydrolytic machinery . However , internal membranes of late endosomes do not only contain proteins that are destined to be degraded . Members of the TETRASPANIN FAMILY , including CD63 / LAMP3 , have been shown to accumulate within internal membranes 105 , in addition to their presence on the cell surface . In ANTIGEN - PRESENTING CELLS , major histo - compatibility complex ( MHC ) class II compartments ( MIIC ) share most characteristics of late endosomes and lysosomes , including a complex system of internal membranes 106 , although they are specialized compart - ments that contain specific components , such as the cathepsin S protease required for antigen processing 107 and the human leukocyte antigen DM ( HLA – DM ) complex 108 . MHC class II molecules are abundant in MIIC internal membranes , both in B lymphocytes and in immature DENDRITIC CELLS . MHC class II molecules colocalize with LBPA in B lymphocytes , and they are also found in LBPA - containing microvesicles , presum - ably secreted by antigen - presenting cells 109 . Finally , MANNOSE 6 - PHOSPHATE RECEPTOR ( M6PR ) molecules are transported between the trans - Golgi network and late endosomes to deliver lysosomal enzymes to endo - somes and lysosomes . While in transit through late endosomes , M6PR is found predominantly within internal membranes 97 , 99 . LBPA membranes probably have an important function in transport through late endosomes . When endocytosed in vivo , antibodies against LBPA accumu - late in late endosomes , and specifically inhibit M6PR transport 99 . Conversely , loss of M6PR expression pro - motes LBPA accumulation in multilamellar bodies 110 . Endocytosed anti - LBPA antibodies also cause choles - terol accumulation in late endosomes , mimicking the cholesterol - storage disorder Niemann – Pick type C ( NPC ) , leading to the idea that LBPA membranes serve as a collecting and distribution device for low - density lipoprotein ( LDL ) - derived cholesterol 111 . In turn , cho - lesterol accumulation in late endosomes interferes with the M6PR cycle in several cell types 111 , 112 , and also with CD63 and p - selectin cycling to WEIBEL – PALADE bodies in endothelial cells 113 . Sphingolipids accumulate in multi - vesicular compartments in tissue from NPC patients , and , conversely , cholesterol accumulates in late endo - cytic compartments in several sphingolipid storage disorders 114 , 115 . The function of LBPA membranes in protein and lipid transport indicates that some membrane proteins and lipids do not only enter internal membranes , but could subsequently exit and return to other cellular destinations . Incorporation within internal mem - branes can be explained easily by the selective parti - tioning of some molecules within LBPA invaginations , or the selective exclusion from the limiting membrane . including the Vps27 ( REF . 91 ) , Vps23 ( REF . 92 ) and the Vps4 homologues ( REF . 93 ) , indicating that the function of these proteins might be conserved in mammalian cells ( BOX 1 ) . Whereas there is compelling evidence in yeast that class E proteins have an essential role in the endocytic pathway , their precise functions remain to be established . It has been proposed that the yeast class E compartment — or prevacuolar compartment — cor - responds to a late endosome 94 , but its mammalian counterpart remains mysterious ( BOX 1 ) . In mammalian cells , a phenotype that is morphologically similar to the class E phenotype has not been well characterized , with the possible exception of early endosome after COP inactivation in LDLF cells 62 , or Hrs disruption in mice 91 . The pomegranate and the onion Much like early endosomes , late endosomal elements are very dynamic 95 , 96 , with a highly complex and pleiomorphic organization , containing cisternal , tubu - lar and vesicular regions with numerous membrane invaginations 97 . Their limiting membrane , similar to that of lysosomes , contains high amounts of LAMP1 , which is believed to be protected from the degradative milieu of the compartment because of its high glycosy - lation state 97 . The limiting membrane of late endosomes also contains MLN64 , a homologue of the mitochondrial steroidogenic acute regulatory protein ( StAR ) 98 . Internal membranes in higher eukaryotic cells undergo much remodelling and accumulate large amounts ( ~ 15 % of total phospholipids ) of LBPA 99 , which is a poor substrate for phospholipase and therefore resistant to degradation 100 . LBPA has not been detected on the outer face of the limiting bilayer 101 , 102 . To what extent the bio - genesis and dynamics of late endosome inner mem - branes are regulated by the same mechanisms as those operating during budding of ECV / MVBs is not clear . LBPA is presumably synthesized in situ 103 , and has an inverted cone shape . This structure could facilitate the formation of the invaginations that form the multi - vesicular elements of late endosomes 101 . Proteins that are destined to be degraded accumu - late within ECV / MVB internal membranes , leading to Box 1 | The endocytic pathways in yeast and mammals A degree of caution is needed when extrapolating from mammalian to yeast endocytic pathways and vice versa , with respect to the specific structure and organization of endosomal membranes . One of the most striking features of mammalian endocytosis , without discussing features of polarized or other differentiated cells , is the capacity to reuse cell - surface components efficiently and rapidly through recycling routes ; whereas equivalent recycling routes , if they exist , do not seem to be as efficient in yeast cells . Although extensive sorting already occurs in early endosomes of mammalian cells , it has been proposed that a prevacuolar compartment equivalent to late endosomes functions as the main sorting station in the yeast pathway 94 , 128 . In addition , yeast cells do not seem to share the striking appearance of mammalian endosomes within the degradation pathway , with a complex network of membrane invaginations . In yeast cells , small and regularly shaped vesicles can be observed in the vacuole of strains with impaired vacuolar hydrolase activity 129 . In addition to the basic machinery of yeast cells , mammalian cells are likely to have evolved a more elaborate endosomal membrane system to ensure optimal regulation and reutilization of proteins and lipids . TETRASPANIN FAMILY The tetraspanin family contains proteins that span the membrane four times with two exoplasmic loops , and that can be found at the cell surface . Although some are highly restricted to specific tissues , others are widely distributed . Members of this family have been implicated in cell activation and proliferation , adhesion , motility , differentiation and cancer . ANTIGEN - PRESENTING CELLS A cell , most often a B lymphocyte , macrophage or dendritic cell , that is specialized in the generation of epitopes that are presented through major histocompatibility complex ( MHC ) class I or II to T lymphocytes . DENDRITIC CELLS ‘Professional’antigen - presenting cells found in T - cell areas of lymphoid tissues , but also as a minor cellular component in most tissues . They have a branched or dendritic morphology and are the most potent stimulators of T - cell responses . MANNOSE 6 - PHOSPHATE RECEPTOR These receptors transport soluble lysosomal hydrolases to late endosomes by cycling between the trans - Golgi network and late endosomes . They bind in the trans - Golgi network to mannose 6 - phosphate moieties on N - linked glycans of the hydrolases . They release the hydrolases in late endosomes and return to the trans - Golgi network for another round of transport . © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 2 | OCTOBER 2001 | 727 R E V I E W S stable or extreme version of this network , which is con - sistent with the fact that they share some late endosomal characteristics 122 , 123 . LBPA membranes could have turn - pike functions in the network , as they seem to be involved both in protein and lipid transport 99 , 111 , and lipid degradation 104 . Other specialized regions might exist . These could account for the idea that different late endosome populations sort and package cargo mole - cules through Rab9 – TIP47 or through the retromer complex 124 , and also for the presence of specialized late endosomes or lysosomes in highly differentiated cells , including MIIC in antigen - presenting cells 106 . Cholesterol export might occur in specialized ele - ments , as the NPC1 protein — which is involved in intracellular cholesterol transport — seems to distribute to a subset of lysosomes 125 . Transport defects in NPC 101 , 111 , and perhaps other lipid - storage disorders 115 , could result from a collapse of the mosaic architecture of endosomes , leading to mixing of lipid – protein domains and eventually transport inhibition 114 . Conclusions Although individual machines and regulatory compo - nents in the endocytic pathway might be loosely If so , export from late endosomes should be slow , as internal membranes are abundant , and only molecules that are present on the limiting membranes would be available for transport ( FIG . 5 ) — this could account for the slow cycle of CD63 in endothelial cells 113 . Other mechanisms , however , must be evoked to account for efficient export — for example , M6PR transport or MHC class II export to the plasma membrane in acti - vated dendritic cells . One possibility is that transport between the internal and the limiting membranes is regulated by several mechanisms , including post - translational modifications and , in particular , ubiqui - tylation 9 . It is also possible that late endosomes in higher eukaryotic cells might contain more than one type of internal membrane , such as those specialized in protein degradation or recycling . This is consistent with the finding that ECV / MVBs and late endosomes differ in their LBPA content , although both have abundant internal membranes . Moreover , late endo - cytic compartments in mammalian cells can appear like a pomegranate ( multivesicular ) or like an onion ( multilamellar ) . Essentially nothing is known about the functional significance of these different types of inner membranes , or about the differences in their biophysical state , organization and composition . It is tempting to speculate that , in addition to the basic machinery that is responsible for the formation of intralumenal vesicles in yeast — which could depend on class E VPS proteins and PtdIns ( 3 ) P signalling 38 — mammalian cells have evolved more efficient recycling mechanisms , perhaps LBPA dependent , for proteins that need to be exported from internal membranes of late endocytic compartments . The end point or a dynamic network ? If it has been difficult to draw the line between early and late endosomes , the boundary between late endosomes and lysosomes is even more elusive , despite much work from many groups . Both compartments contain lysoso - mal enzymes , their pH is similarly acidic ( ~ 5 . 5 ) , and their limiting membrane is primarily composed of the same glycoproteins . Lysosomes can only be identified by their physical properties on gradients and their elec - tron - dense appearance , and by the fact that they lack proteins found in late endosomes , including M6PR in transit , Rab7 and Rab9 , or phosphorylated hydrolase precursors 116 . So far , neither proteins nor lipids have been found that would only be present in lysosomes , but not in endosomes , and the basic docking / fusion machinery seems to be shared by both compart - ments 20 , 117 , 118 . Moreover , late endosomes and lysosomes can exchange content and membrane proteins rapidly and efficiently , and they probably interact dynamically to form a hybrid intermediate 119 , 120 . It is tempting to speculate that late endosomes and lysosomes correspond to separate elements of a com - mon , but dynamic , network . Such a sub - compartmen - talization into regions and membrane domains that dif - fer both structurally and functionally is reminiscent of the early endosome organization . Highly motile tubular lysosomes in macrophages 121 might represent a more Figure 5 | Degradation or recycling ? The different mechanisms that could account for protein recycling from late endosome internal membranes are represented . A canonical vesicle ( A ) delivers proteins , which will be incorporated into the limiting membrane of late endosomes ( yellow ) , or into internal membrane invaginations ( green and blue ) . The latter proteins are destined to be degraded ( green ) or recycled ( blue ) . Proteins destined to be degraded could simply partition preferentially into membrane invaginations containing LBPA ( red ) , or might be excluded from the limiting membrane . The same mechanism might apply to some proteins that need to be recycled ( 1 ) . However , other mechanisms must be evoked to account for efficient incorporation of some proteins into vesicles budding from late endosomes ( B ) , including regulation by post - translational modifications ( 2 ) or by the existence of more than one type of internal membrane ( 3 ) . ? 1 2 3 A B WEIBEL – PALADE BODIES Morphologically unique secretory structures of endothelial cells , which store von Willebrand factor — a protein involved in blood clotting — for eventual release . © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd 728 | OCTOBER 2001 | VOLUME 2 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S domains are integrated to support protein and lipid transport , as well as organelle structure and functions . Some clues are being provided from recent studies that show the existence of a close interplay between sig - nalling and transport pathways through protein net - works 126 . Moreover , several components discussed in this article are linked to human diseases and involved in development 127 . We might expect that beyond protein complexes and molecular machines with well defined roles , organellar functions also require specific sets of effectors that mediate cross - interactions and thereby articulate a modular combination . These could control the formation and maintenance of different membrane domains , more or less transient in nature , providing the architectural framework for a given compartment . distributed throughout several compartments , a certain combination is unique to each compartment . Early endo - somes , for example , contain Rab5 and its effectors , PtdIns ( 3 ) P and partners , endosomal COPs , raft compo - nents and annexin II , which all function in transport through this compartment . Each of these molecules is also found on other membranes , but this particular combina - tion is present only on early endosomes . It is attractive to speculate that endosomal membranes , and probably the membranes of other organelles , are built from modular elements . This could explain the difficulties encountered in defining organelle boundaries at the molecular level , particularly when tracking a single component . An important challenge will be to understand how these different membrane machines and dynamic 1 . Gruenberg , J . , Griffiths , G . & Howell , K . E . Characterisation of the early endosome and putative endocytic carrier vesicles in vivo and with an assay of vesicle fusion in vitro . J . Cell Biol . 108 , 1301 – 1316 ( 1989 ) . 2 . Mukherjee , S . & Maxfield , F . R . Role of membrane organization and membrane domains in endocytic lipid trafficking . Traffic 1 , 203 – 211 ( 2000 ) . 3 . Apodaca , G . , Katz , L . A . & Mostov , K . E . Receptor - mediated transcytosis of IgA in MDCK cells is via apical recycling endosomes . J . Cell Biol . 125 , 67 – 86 ( 1994 ) . Together with reference 95 and studies from the Kai Simons group , this paper shows the organization of the apical and basolateral endocytic pathways in epithelial cells along the degradation , recycling and transcytotic routes . 4 . Blagoveshchenskaya , A . D . , Norcott , J . P . & Cutler , D . F . Lysosomal targeting of P - selectin is mediated by a novel sequence within its cytoplasmic tail . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 2729 – 2737 ( 1998 ) . 5 . Subtil , A . , Rocca , A . & Dautry - Varsat , A . Molecular characterization of the signal responsible for the targeting of the interleukin 2 receptor β chain toward intracellular degradation . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 29424 – 29429 ( 1998 ) . 6 . Piguet , V . et al . Nef - induced CD4 degradation : a diacidic - based motif in Nef functions as a lysosomal targeting signal through the binding of β - COP in endosomes . Cell 97 , 63 – 73 ( 1999 ) . 7 . Kil , S . J . & Carlin , C . EGF receptor residues Leu 679 , Leu 680 mediate selective sorting of ligand - receptor complexes in early endosomal compartments . J . Cell Physiol . 185 , 47 – 60 ( 2000 ) . 8 . Rocca , A . , Lamaze , C . , Subtil , A . & Dautry - Varsat , A . Involvement of the ubiquitin / proteasome system in sorting of the interleukin 2 receptor β chain to late endocytic compartments . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 1293 – 1301 ( 2001 ) . 9 . Lemmon , S . K . & Traub , L . M . Sorting in the endosomal system in yeast and animal cells . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 457 – 466 ( 2000 ) . 10 . Hicke , L . Protein regulation by monoubiquitin . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 195 – 201 ( 2001 ) . 11 . Ikonen , E . Roles of lipid rafts in membrane transport . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 13 , 470 – 477 ( 2001 ) . 12 . Parton , R . G . , Joggerst , B . & Simons , K . Regulated internalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 1199 – 1215 ( 1994 ) . Provides the first evidence that caveolae can be endocytosed in non - endothelial cells . 13 . Verkade , P . , Harder , T . , Lafont , F . & Simons , K . Induction of caveolae in the apical plasma membrane of Madin – Darby canine kidney cells . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 727 – 739 ( 2000 ) . 14 . Lamaze , C . et al . Interleukin 2 receptors and detergent - resistant membrane domains define a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway . Mol . Cell 7 , 661 – 671 ( 2001 ) . A receptor known to follow the classical endocytic pathway is shown to be internalized by a mechanism — perhaps raft - dependent — that does not depend on the clathrin machinery . 15 . Pelkmans , L . , Kartenbeck , J . & Helenius , A . Caveolar endocytosis of simian virus 40 reveals a new two - step vesicular - transport pathway to the ER . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 473 – 483 ( 2001 ) . 16 . Gagescu , R . et al . The recycling endosome of MDCK cells is a mildly acidic compartment rich in raft components . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 2775 – 2791 ( 2000 ) . 17 . Mukherjee , S . , Zha , X . , Tabas , I . & Maxfield , F . R . Cholesterol distribution in living cells : fluorescence imaging using dehydroergosterol as a fluorescent cholesterol analog . Biophys . J . 75 , 1915 – 1925 ( 1998 ) . 18 . Mayor , S . , Sabharanjak , S . & Maxfield , F . R . Cholesterol - dependent retention of GPI - anchored proteins in endosomes . EMBO J . 17 , 4626 – 4638 ( 1998 ) . 19 . Mukherjee , S . , Soe , T . T . & Maxfield , F . R . Endocytic sorting of lipid analogues differing solely in the chemistry of their hydrophobic tails . J . Cell Biol . 144 , 1271 – 1284 ( 1999 ) . Shows that hydrophobic tails are important for lipid sorting in early endosomes . 20 . Chen , Y . A . & Scheller , R . H . SNARE - mediated membrane fusion . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 98 – 106 ( 2001 ) . 21 . Zerial , M . & McBride , H . Rab proteins as membrane organizers . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 107 – 117 ( 2001 ) . Following the work of Zerial and his group with Rab5 and its effectors , this review presents and discusses the concept of Rab platforms . 22 . Simonsen , A . , Gaullier , J . M . , D’Arrigo , A . & Stenmark , H . The RAB5 effector EEA1 interacts directly with syntaxin - 6 . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 28857 – 28860 ( 1999 ) . 23 . McBride , H . M . et al . Oligomeric complexes link RAB5 effectors with NSF and drive membrane fusion via interactions between EEA1 and syntaxin 13 . Cell 98 , 377 – 386 ( 1999 ) . 24 . Prekeris , R . , Klumperman , J . , Chen , Y . A . & Scheller , R . H . Syntaxin 13 mediates cycling of plasma membrane proteins via tubulovesicular recycling endosomes . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 957 – 971 ( 1998 ) . 25 . McLauchlan , H . et al . A novel role for RAB5 - GDI in ligand sequestration into clathrin - coated pits . Curr . Biol . 8 , 34 – 45 ( 1998 ) . 26 . Lanzetti , L . et al . The EPS8 protein coordinates EGF receptor signalling through Rac and trafficking through RAB5 . Nature 408 , 374 – 377 ( 2000 ) . 27 . Stenmark , H . , Vitale , G . , Ullrich , O . & Zerial , M . Rabaptin - 5 is a direct effector of the small GTPase RAB5 in endocytic membrane fusion . Cell 83 , 423 – 432 ( 1995 ) . 28 . Cormont , M . , Mari , M . , Galmiche , A . , Hofman , P . & Le Marchand - Brustel , Y . A FYVE - finger - containing protein , RABIP4 , is a RAB4 effector involved in early endosomal traffic . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 1637 – 1642 ( 2001 ) . 29 . Simonsen , A . , Wurmser , A . E . , Emr , S . D . & Stenmark , H . The role of phosphoinositides in membrane transport . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 13 , 485 – 492 ( 2001 ) . 30 . Simonsen , A . et al . EEA1 links PI ( 3 ) K function to RAB5 regulation of endosome fusion . Nature 394 , 494 – 498 ( 1998 ) . 31 . Nielsen , E . et al . Rabenosyn - 5 , a novel RAB5 effector , is complexed with hVPS45 and recruited to endosomes through a FYVE finger domain . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 602 – 612 ( 2000 ) . 32 . Mu , F . - T . et al . EEA1 , an early endosome - associated protein . EEA1 is a conserved α - helical peripheral membrane protein flanked by cysteine ‘fingers’ and contains a calmodulin - binding IQ motif . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 13503 – 13511 ( 1994 ) . 33 . Verges , M . , Havel , R . J . & Mostov , K . E . A tubular endosomal fraction from rat liver : biochemical evidence of receptor sorting by default . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 10146 – 10151 ( 1999 ) . 34 . Ito , K . et al . Molecular cloning of a novel 130 - kDa cytoplasmic protein , Ankhzn , containing Ankyrin repeats hooked to a zinc finger motif . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 257 , 206 – 213 ( 1999 ) . 35 . Komada , M . , Masaki , R . , Yamamoto , A . & Kitamura , N . Hrs , a tyrosine kinase substrate with a conserved double zinc finger domain , is localized to the cytoplasmic surface of early endosomes . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 20538 – 20544 ( 1997 ) . 36 . Gillooly , D . J . et al . Localization of phosphatidylinositol 3 - phosphate in yeast and mammalian cells . EMBO J . 19 , 4577 – 4588 ( 2000 ) . 37 . Hayakawa , A . & Kitamura , N . Early endosomal localization of hrs requires a sequence within the proline - and glutamine - rich region but not the FYVE finger . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 29636 – 29642 ( 2000 ) . 38 . Odorizzi , G . , Babst , M . & Emr , S . D . FAB1p PtdIns ( 3 ) P 5 - kinase function essential for protein sorting in the multivesicular body . Cell 95 , 847 – 858 ( 1998 ) . This paper describes the mechanisms that control incorporation of proteins within the yeast endosome / vacuole lumen , and the role of PtdIns ( 3 ) P signalling at this step . 39 . Kanai , F . et al . The PX domains of p47phox and p40phox bind to lipid products of PI ( 3 ) K . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 675 – 678 ( 2001 ) . 40 . Ellson , C . D . et al . PtdIns ( 3 ) P regulates the neutrophil oxidase complex by binding to the PX domain of p40phox . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 679 – 682 ( 2001 ) . 41 . Cheever , M . L . et al . Phox domain interaction with PtdIns ( 3 ) P targets the Vam7 t - SNARE to vacuole membranes . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 613 – 618 ( 2001 ) . 42 . Xu , Y . , Hortsman , H . , Seet , L . , Wong , S . H . & Hong , W . SNX3 regulates endosomal function through its PX - domain - mediated interaction with PtdIns ( 3 ) P . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 658 – 666 ( 2001 ) . 43 . Chin , L . S . , Raynor , M . C . , Wei , X . , Chen , H . Q . & Li , L . Hrs interacts with sorting nexin 1 and regulates degradation of epidermal growth factor receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 7069 – 7078 ( 2001 ) . 44 . Kurten , R . C . , Cadena , D . L . & Gill , G . N . Enhanced degradation of EGF receptors by a sorting nexin , SNX1 . Science 272 , 1008 – 1010 ( 1996 ) . 45 . Seaman , M . N . , McCaffery , J . M . & Emr , S . D . A membrane coat complex essential for endosome - to - Golgi retrograde transport in yeast . J . Cell Biol . 142 , 665 – 681 ( 1998 ) . 46 . Barr , V . A . , Phillips , S . A . , Taylor , S . I . & Haft , C . R . Overexpression of a novel sorting nexin , SNX15 , affects endosome morphology and protein trafficking . Traffic 1 , 904 – 916 ( 2000 ) . 47 . Gerke , V . & Moss , S . E . Annexins and membrane dynamics . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1357 , 129 – 154 ( 1997 ) . 48 . Oling , F . , Bergsma - Schutter , W . & Brisson , A . Trimers , dimers of trimers , and trimers of trimers are common building blocks of Annexin a5 two - dimensional crystals . J . Struct . Biol . 133 , 55 – 63 ( 2001 ) . Shows that annexins tend to self - organize into bidimensional ordered arrays . 49 . Harder , T . & Gerke , V . The subcellular distribution of early endosomes is affected by the Annexin II ( 2 ) p11 ( 2 ) complex . J . Cell Biol . 123 , 1119 – 1132 ( 1993 ) . 50 . Emans , N . et al . Annexin II is a major component of fusogenic endosomal vesicles . J . Cell Biol . 120 , 1357 – 1370 ( 1993 ) . © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 2 | OCTOBER 2001 | 729 R E V I E W S 51 . Harder , T . , Kellner , R . , Parton , R . & Gruenberg , J . Specific release of membrane bound Annexin II and cortical cytoskeletal elements by sequestration of membrane cholesterol . Mol . Biol . Cell 8 , 533 – 545 ( 1997 ) . 52 . Babiychuk , E . B . & Draeger , A . Annexins in cell membrane dynamics . Ca 2 + - regulated association of lipid microdomains . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 1113 – 1124 ( 2000 ) . 53 . Whitney , J . A . , Gomez , M . , Sheff , D . , Kreis , T . E . & Mellman , I . Cytoplasmic coat proteins involved in endosome function . Cell 83 , 703 – 713 ( 1995 ) . 54 . Aniento , F . , Gu , F . , Parton , R . & Gruenberg , J . An endosomal bcop is involved in the pH - dependent formation of transport vesicles destined for late endosomes . J . Cell Biol . 133 , 29 – 41 ( 1996 ) . References 53 and 54 show that an endosomal version of the COPI coat — which regulates retrograde transport in the early biosynthetic pathway — functions in the early endocytic pathway . 55 . Botelho , R . J . , Hackam , D . J . , Schreiber , A . D . & Grinstein , S . Role of COP1 in phagosome maturation . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 15717 – 15727 ( 2000 ) . 56 . Gu , F . & Gruenberg , J . ARF1 regulates pH - dependent COP functions in the early endocytic pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 8154 – 8160 ( 2000 ) . 57 . Maranda , B . et al . Intra - endosomal pH - sensitive recruitment of the ARF - nucleotide exchange factor ARNO and ARF6 from cytoplasm to proximal tubule endosomes . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 18540 – 18550 ( 2001 ) . 58 . Kirchhausen , T . Three ways to make a vesicle . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 1 , 187 – 198 ( 2000 ) . 59 . Spang , A . , Matsuoka , K . , Hamamoto , S . , Schekman , R . & Orci , L . Coatomer , ARF1p , and nucleotide are required to bud coat protein complex I - coated vesicles from large synthetic liposomes . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 11199 – 11204 ( 1998 ) . 60 . Hobbie , L . , Fisher , A . S . , Lee , S . , Flint , A . & Krieger , M . Isolation of three classes of conditional lethal Chinese hamster ovary cell mutants with temperature - sensitive defects in low density lipoprotein receptor . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 20958 – 20970 ( 1994 ) . 61 . Daro , E . , Sheff , D . , Gomez , M . , Kreis , T . & Mellman , I . Inhibition of endosome function in CHO cells bearing a temperature - sensitive defect in the coatomer ( COP1 ) component epsilon - COP . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 1747 – 1759 ( 1997 ) . 62 . Gu , F . , Aniento , F . , Parton , R . & Gruenberg , J . Functionnal dissection of COP1 subunits in the biogenesis of multivesicular endosomes . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 1183 – 1195 ( 1997 ) . 63 . Rieder , S . E . , Banta , L . M . , Kohrer , K . , McCaffery , J . M . & Emr , S . D . Multilamellar endosome - like compartment accumulates in the yeast Vps28 vacuolar protein sorting mutant . Mol . Biol . Cell 7 , 985 – 999 ( 1996 ) . 64 . Clague , M . , Urbé , S . , Aniento , F . & Gruenberg , J . Vacuolar ATPase activity is required for endosomal carrier vesicle formation . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 21 – 24 ( 1994 ) . 65 . Presley , J . F . , Mayor , S . , McGraw , T . E . , Dunn , K . W . & Maxfield , F . R . Bafilomycin A1 treatment retards transferrin receptor recycling more than bulk membrane recycling . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 13929 – 13936 ( 1997 ) . 66 . Yamashiro , D . J . , Tycko , B . , Fluss , S . R . & Maxfield , F . R . Segregation of transferrin to a mildly acidic ( pH 6 . 4 ) para - Golgi compartment in the recycling pathway . Cell 37 , 789 – 800 ( 1984 ) . Provides the initial characterization of recycling endosomes . 67 . Parton , R . G . , Simons , K . & Dotti , C . G . Axonal and dentritic endocytic pathways in cultured neurons . J . Cell Biol . 119 , 123 – 137 ( 1992 ) . 68 . Hopkins , C . R . , Gibson , A . , Shipman , M . & Miller , K . Movement of internalized ligand - receptor complexes along a continuous endosomal reticulum . Nature 346 , 335 – 339 ( 1990 ) . 69 . Sonnichsen , B . , De Renzis , S . , Nielsen , E . , Rietdorf , J . & Zerial , M . Distinct membrane domains on endosomes in the recycling pathway visualized by multicolor imaging of RAB4 , RAB5 , and RAB11 . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 901 – 914 ( 2000 ) . 70 . Galli , T . et al . Tetanus toxin - mediated cleavage of cellubrevin impairs exocytosis of transferrin receptor - containing vesicles in CHO cells . J . Cell Biol . 125 , 1015 – 1024 ( 1994 ) . 71 . Steegmaier , M . , Lee , K . C . , Prekeris , R . & Scheller , R . H . SNARE protein trafficking in polarized MDCK cells . Traffic 1 , 553 – 560 ( 2000 ) . 72 . Besterman , J . M . , Airhart , J . A . , Woodworth , R . C . & Low , R . B . Exocytosis of pinocytosed fluid in cultured cells : kinetic evidence for rapid turnover and compartmentation . J . Cell Biol . 91 , 716 – 727 ( 1981 ) . 73 . Dunn , K . W . , McGraw , T . E . & Maxfield , F . R . Iterative fractionation of recycling receptors from lysosomally destined ligands in an early sorting endosome . J . Cell Biol . 109 , 3303 – 3314 ( 1989 ) . 74 . Sheff , D . R . , Daro , E . A . , Hull , M . & Mellman , I . The receptor recycling pathway contains two distinct populations of early endosomes with different sorting functions . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 123 – 139 ( 1999 ) . 75 . Hao , M . & Maxfield , F . R . Characterization of rapid membrane internalization and recycling . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 15279 – 15286 ( 2000 ) . 76 . Apodaca , G . Endocytic traffic in polarized epithelial cells : role of the actin and microtubule cytoskeleton . Traffic 2 , 149 – 159 ( 2001 ) . 77 . Durrbach , A . , Raposo , G . , Tenza , D . , Louvard , D . & Coudrier , E . Truncated brush border Myosin I affects membrane traffic in polarized epithelial cells . Traffic 1 , 411 – 424 ( 2000 ) . 78 . Huber , L . et al . Both calmodulin and the unconventional myosin MYR4 regulate membrane trafficking along the recycling pathway of MDCK cells . Traffic 1 , 494 – 503 ( 2000 ) . 79 . Al - Awar , O . , Radhakrishna , H . , Powell , N . N . & Donaldson , J . G . Separation of membrane trafficking and actin remodeling functions of ARF6 with an effector domain mutant . Mol . Cell Biol . 20 , 5998 – 6007 ( 2000 ) . 80 . D’Souza - Schorey , C . , Boshans , R . L . , McDonough , M . , Stahl , P . D . & Van Aelst , L . A role for POR1 , a Rac1 - interacting protein , in ARF6 - mediated cytoskeletal rearrangements . EMBO J . 16 , 5445 – 5454 ( 1997 ) . 81 . Tarricone , C . et al . The structural basis of Arfaptin - mediated cross - talk between Rac and Arf signalling pathways . Nature 411 , 215 – 219 ( 2001 ) . 82 . Di Cesare , A . et al . p95 - APP1 links membrane transport to Rac - mediated reorganization of actin . Nature Cell Biol . 2 , 521 – 530 ( 2000 ) . 83 . Stoorvogel , W . , Oorschot , V . & Geuze , H . J . A novel class of clathrin - coated vesicles budding from endosomes . J . Cell Biol . 132 , 21 – 33 ( 1996 ) . 84 . Meyer , C . et al . µ 1A - adaptin - deficient mice : lethality , loss of AP - 1 binding and rerouting of mannose 6 - phosphate receptors . EMBO J . 19 , 2193 – 2203 ( 2000 ) . 85 . Lin , S . X . , Grant , B . , Hirsh , D . & Maxfield , F . R . Rme - 1 regulates the distribution and function of the endocytic recycling compartment in mammalian cells . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 567 – 572 ( 2001 ) . 86 . Grant , B . et al . Evidence that RME - 1 , a conserved C . elegans EH - domain protein , functions in endocytic recycling . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 573 – 579 ( 2001 ) . 87 . Santolini , E . , Salcini , A . E . , Kay , B . K . , Yamabhai , M . & Di Fiore , P . P . The EH network . Exp . Cell Res . 253 , 186 – 209 ( 1999 ) . 88 . Gu , F . & Gruenberg , J . Biogenesis of transport intermediates in the endocytic pathway . FEBS Lett . 452 , 61 – 66 ( 1999 ) . 89 . Futter , C . E . , Pearse , A . , Hewlett , L . J . & Hopkins , C . R . Multivesicular endosomes containing internalized EGF – EGF receptor complexes mature and then fuse directly with lysosomes . J . Cell Biol . 132 , 1011 – 1023 ( 1996 ) . 90 . Fernandez - Borja , M . et al . Multivesicular body morphogenesis requires phosphatidyl - inositol 3 - kinase activity . Curr Biol . 9 , 55 – 58 ( 1999 ) . 91 . Komada , M . & Soriano , P . Hrs , a FYVE finger protein localized to early endosomes , is implicated in vesicular traffic and required for ventral folding morphogenesis . Genes Dev . 13 , 1475 – 1485 ( 1999 ) . 92 . Babst , M . , Odorizzi , G . , Estepa , E . J . & Emr , S . D . Mammalian tumor susceptibility gene 101 ( TSG101 ) and the yeast homolog , Vps23p , both function in late endosomal trafficking . Traffic 1 , 248 – 258 ( 2000 ) . 93 . Scheuring , S . et al . Cloning , characterisation , and functional expression of the Mus musculus SKD1 gene in yeast demonstrates that the mouse SKD1 and the yeast VPS4 genes are orthologues and involved in intracellular protein trafficking . Gene 234 , 149 – 159 ( 1999 ) . 94 . Mulholland , J . , Konopka , J . , Singer - Kruger , B . , Zerial , M . & Botstein , D . Visualization of receptor - mediated endocytosis in yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 799 – 817 ( 1999 ) . 95 . Bomsel , M . , Parton , R . , Kuznetsov , S . A . , Schroer , T . A . & Gruenberg , J . Microtubule and motor dependent fusion in vitro between apical and basolateral endocytic vesicles from MDCK cells . Cell 62 , 719 – 731 ( 1990 ) . 96 . Aniento , F . , Emans , N . , Griffiths , G . & Gruenberg , J . Cytoplasmic dynein - dependent vesicular transport from early to late endosomes . J . Cell Biol . 123 , 1373 – 1388 ( 1993 ) . 97 . Griffiths , G . , Hoflack , B . , Simons , K . , Mellman , I . & Kornfeld , S . The mannose - 6 - phosphate receptor and the biogenesis of lysosomes . Cell 52 , 329 – 341 ( 1988 ) . The pre - lysosomal compartment ( or late endosome ) is characterized as the compartment that contains M6PR in transit within membrane invaginations , in contrast to lysosomes . 98 . Alpy , F . et al . The StAR homolog MLN64 a late endosomal cholesterol binding protein . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 4261 – 4269 ( 2000 ) . 99 . Kobayashi , T . et al . A lipid associated with the antiphospholipid syndrome regulates endosome structure / function . Nature 392 , 193 – 197 ( 1998 ) . References 99 and 111 show that late endosome internal membranes form specialized domains that contain high amounts of LBPA and that LBPA membranes are involved in protein and lipid traffic . 100 . Brotherus , J . , Renkonen , O . , Herrmann , J . & Fisher , W . Novel stereochemical configuration in lysobisphosphatidic acid of cultured BHK cells . Chem . Phys . Lipids 13 , 178 – 182 ( 1974 ) . 101 . Kobayashi , T . , Gu , F . & Gruenberg , J . Lipids and lipid domains in endocytic membrane traffic . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 9 , 517 – 526 ( 1998 ) . 102 . Kobayashi , T . , Startchev , K . , Whitney , A . J . & Gruenberg , J . Localization of lysobisphosphatidic acid - rich membrane domains in late endosomes . Biol . Chem . 382 , 483 – 485 ( 2001 ) . 103 . Amidon , B . , Brown , A . & Waite , M . Transacylase and phospholipases in the synthesis of bis ( monoacylglycero ) phosphate . Biochemistry 35 , 13995 – 14002 ( 1996 ) . 104 . Wilkening , G . , Linke , T . & Sandhoff , K . Lysosomal degradation on vesicular membrane surfaces . Enhanced glucosylceramide degradation by lysosomal anionic lipids and activators . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 30271 – 30278 ( 1998 ) . 105 . Escola , J . M . et al . Selective enrichment of tetraspan proteins on the internal vesicles of multivesicular endosomes and on exosomes secreted by human B lymphocytes . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 20121 – 20127 ( 1998 ) . 106 . Geuze , H . J . The role of endosomes and lysosomes in MHC class II functioning . Immunol . Today 19 , 282 – 287 ( 1998 ) . 107 . Pierre , P . & Mellman , I . Developmental regulation of invariant chain proteolysis controls MHC class II trafficking in mouse dendritic cells . Cell 93 , 1135 – 1145 ( 1998 ) . Shows that a specific protease – protease inhibitor system regulates the fate of MHC class II in dendritic cells . 108 . Sanderson , F . et al . Accumulation of HLA - DM , a regulator of antigen presentation , in MHC class II compartments . Science 266 , 1566 – 1569 ( 1994 ) . 109 . Denzer , K . et al . Follicular dendritic cells carry MHC class II - expressing microvesicles at their surface . J . Immunol . 165 , 1259 – 1265 ( 2000 ) . Together with previous studies from Hans Geuze’s group , this paper shows that exosomes are microvesicles derived from late endocytic membrane invaginations , which are secreted through a novel pathway . 110 . Reaves , B . J . , Row , P . E . , Bright , N . A . , Luzio , J . P . & Davidson , H . W . Loss of cation - independent mannose 6 - phosphate receptor expression promotes the accumulation of lysobisphosphatidic acid in multilamellar bodies . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 4099 – 4108 ( 2000 ) . 111 . Kobayashi , T . et al . Late endosomal membranes rich in lysobisphosphatidic acid regulate cholesterol transport . Nature Cell Biol . 1 , 113 – 118 ( 1999 ) . 112 . Galve de Rochemonteix , B . et al . Interaction of anti - phospholipid antibodies with late endosomes of human endothelial cells . Arterioscler . Thromb . Vasc . Biol . 20 , 563 – 574 ( 2000 ) . 113 . Kobayashi , K . et al . The tetraspanin CD63 / LAMP3 cycles between endocytic and secretory compartments in human endothelial cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 1829 – 1843 ( 2000 ) . 114 . Simons , K . & Gruenberg , J . Jamming the endosomal system : lipid rafts and lysosomal storage diseases . Trends Cell Biol . 10 , 459 – 462 ( 2000 ) . 115 . Pagano , R . E . , Puri , V . , Dominguez , M . & Marks , D . L . Membrane traffic in sphingolipid storage diseases . Traffic 1 , 807 – 815 ( 2000 ) . 116 . Gruenberg , J . & Maxfield , F . Membrane transport in the endocytic pathway . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 7 , 552 – 563 ( 1995 ) . 117 . Martinez , O . & Goud , B . Rab proteins . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1404 , 101 – 112 ( 1998 ) . 118 . Caplan , S . , Hartnell , L . M . , Aguilar , R . C . , Naslavsky , N . & Bonifacino , J . S . Human Vam6p promotes lysosome clustering and fusion in vivo . J . Cell Biol . 154 , 109 – 122 ( 2001 ) . 119 . Mullock , B . M . , Bright , N . A . , Fearon , C . W . , Gray , S . R . & Luzio , J . P . Fusion of lysosomes with late endosomes produces a hybrid organelle of intermediate density and is NSF dependent . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 591 – 601 ( 1998 ) . 120 . Jahraus , A . , Storrie , B . , Griffiths , G . & Desjardins , M . Evidence for retrograde traffic between terminal lysosomes and the prelysosomal / late endosome compartment . J . Cell © 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd 730 | OCTOBER 2001 | VOLUME 2 www . nature . com / reviews / molcellbio R E V I E W S Sci . 107 , 145 – 157 ( 1994 ) . 121 . Hollenbeck , P . J . & Swanson , J . A . Radial extension of macrophage tubular lysosomes supported by kinesin . Nature 346 , 864 – 866 ( 1990 ) . 122 . Rabinowitz , S . , Horstmann , H . , Gordon , S . & Griffiths , G . Immunocytochemical characterization of the endocytic and phagolysosomal compartments in peritoneal macrophages . J . Cell Biol . 116 , 95 – 112 ( 1992 ) . 123 . Parton , R . G . , Dotti , C . G . , Bacallao , R . , Simons , K . & Prydz , K . pH - induced microtubule - dependent redistribution of late endosomes in neuronal and epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 113 , 261 – 274 ( 1991 ) . 124 . Pfeffer , S . R . Membrane transport : retromer to the rescue . Curr . Biol . 11 , R109 – R111 ( 2001 ) . 125 . Neufeld , E . B . et al . The niemann - pick C1 protein resides in a vesicular compartment linked to retrograde transport of multiple lysosomal cargo . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 9627 – 9635 ( 1999 ) . 126 . Cavalli , V . , Corti , M . & Gruenberg , J . Endocytosis and signaling cascades : a close encounter . FEBS Lett . 498 , 190 – 196 ( 2001 ) . 127 . Aridor , M . & Hannan , L . A . Traffic jam : a compendium of human diseases that affect intracellular transport processes . Traffic 1 , 836 – 851 ( 2000 ) . Offers a complete list — at the time of publication — of human diseases that are linked to transport defects . 128 . Gerrard , S . R . , Bryant , N . J . & Stevens , T . H . VPS21 controls entry of endocytosed and biosynthetic proteins into the yeast prevacuolar compartment . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 613 – 626 ( 2000 ) . 129 . Wurmser , A . E . & Emr , S . D . Phosphoinositide signaling and turnover : PtdIns ( 3 ) P , a regulator of membrane traffic , is transported to the vacuole and degraded by a process that requires lumenal vacuolar hydrolase activities . EMBO J . 17 , 4930 – 4942 ( 1998 ) . Acknowledgements I am very grateful to G . van der Goot and R . G . Parton for com - ments and suggestions . Support was by grants from the Swiss National Science Foundation and the International Human Frontier Science Program . Online links DATABASES The following terms in this article are linked online to : Flybase : http : / / flybase . bio . indiana . edu / Rab11 | Hrs Locuslink : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / LocusLink / Annexin II | ARF1 | ARF6 | ARNO | β - COP | CD63 | cellubrevin | EEA1 | endobrevin | endosomal COPI complex | γ - COP | interleukin - 2 receptor β chain | LAMP1 | M6PR | MLN64 | NPC - 1 | P - selectin | RAB4 | RAB5 | RAB7 | RAB9 | Rabaptin - 5 | Rabenosyn - 5 | StAR | syntaxin - 6 | SNX1 | SNX3 | SNX15 | TIP47 Mouse Genome Informatics : http : / / www . informatics . jax . org / ε COP | RME - 1 OMIM : http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / entrez / query . fcgi ? db = OMIM Niemann – Pick type C SGD : http : / / genome - www . stanford . edu / Saccharomyces / Fab1 | VAM7 | Vps4 | Vps5 | Vps27 | Vps34 Swiss - Prot : http : / / www . expasy . ch / CD4 | EGFR | FYVE domain | syntaxin - 13