Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 A field experiment on GSS anonymity and group member status Dr . John Wilson Wausau Insurance Companies Abstract A field experiment was conducted within Wausau lnsurance Companies ( Wausau ) to determine the efects of GSS anonymity and status on group productivity and satisfaction . Professionals and managers within Wausau participated in GSS sessions to discuss ways to solve the problem of insurancefraud within their industry . Groups of four and five members interacted either with or without anonymity and either under equal status or unequal status . Anonymous groups generated more total comments , more unique ideas , and more ideas of higher rarity than did identified groups . Equal status group members were more satisfied than were unequal status group members . Introduction The study of Group Support Systems ( GSS ) as an aid to group decision - making in organizations is important to organizational researchers , for practical and scientific reasons ( DeSanctis & Gallupe , 1987 ; Huber , Valacich , & Jessup , 1993 ) . GSS are a promising vehicle for better managing groups . When meeting as a group , group members bring with them extemal status characteristics , which are derived from their formal position within an organization ' s hierarchy , personal reputation , community or social status ( age , sex , or race ) ( Berger , Cohen , Zelditch , 1972 ) . Some common problems experienced by decision - making groups include the extreme influence exerted by high - status members , the lack of acknowledgment of low - status members ' ideas , and a low tolerance exhibited toward minority or controversial opinions ( DeSanctis & Gallupe , 1987 ) . Group members with low external status characteristics have difficulty achieving influence over group decisions ( Ridgeway , 1982 ) . Some group members are often reluctant to contribute , because of their shyness , low status , and / or the controversial ideas being discussed ( DeSanctis & Gallupe , 1987 ) . Dr . Leonard M . Jessup University of Idaho In a GSS environment , anonymity has been shown to play an important role in enabling group members to better participate , making group meetings more productive ( see for a review , Valacich , Jessup , Dennis , and Nunamaker , 1992 ) . In their conceptual framework of GSS anonymity , Valacich et a1 ( 1992 ) define anonymity as the extent to which group members ' contributions to the group are identifiable to the other group members or to others outside the group . The theoretical model of GSS proposed by Dennis , George , Jessup , Nunamaker & Vogel ( 1988 ) describes several variables that affect group process and outcome , among them are GSS anonymity and group member status . The purpose of this research was to study how the anonymity component of a GSS and group member status interact and influence group productivity and group member satisfaction . Research on GSS Anonymity GSS anonymity has been the subject of a great deal of research , and much of this research suggests that the effects of GSS anonymity are positive ( see , for example , Beauclair , 1987 ; Connolly , Jessup , & Valacich , 1991 ; DeSanctis & Gallupe , 1987 ; Jessup , 1989 ; Nunamaker et al . , 1987 ; Nunamaker et al . , 1988 ; Valacich , Jessup , Dennis , & Nunamaker , 1992 ) . Anonymity is believed to create an environment in which group members participate equally , vote their conscience , and participate more often than they might in a non - computerized environment where their contributions are more easily identified . With the anonymity component of a GSS , the fear of embarrassment , social disapproval , and the sanction of an ill - received remark may be greatly reduced . Anonymity thus enables group members to speak freely and contribute ideas openly and honestly without fear of direct reprisals , especially when participants feel concerned about their personal or professional security . In addition , anonymity promotes the honest , objective evaluation of contributions based solely on the merit of the idea and not the 212 1060 - 3425 / 95 $ 4 . 00 0 1995 IEEE Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii lntemational Conference on System Sciences - 1995 author . Consequently , participants should generate , and better evaluate , more ideas and make better decisions . Conversely , a fair amount of research on GSS anonymity suggests that the effects of anonymity may be negative ( see , for example , DeSanctis & Gallupe , 1987 ; Jessup , 1989 ; Jessup , Connolly , & Tansik , 1990 ; Nunamaker et al . , 1988 ) . Anonymity may enable participants to be overly caustic in their evaluations of others and more blunt and assertive in their comments , which may heighten conflict within the group . Anonymity may afford group members an opportunity to hide , masking the individual’s effort or lack of effort . As a result , participants may loaf and let others do the work . In addition , anonymity may filter out some communication and cause some political information often obtained in meetings to be lost . An explanation for these differing arguments can be seen when one compares the results of laboratory experiments of GSS anonymity with those of field studies . The results from laboratory experiments of GSS anonymity are mixed . In some laboratory experiments , effects from GSS anonymity have been found . For example , Connolly , Jessup and Valacich , ( 1990 ) , Jessup , Connolly , & Galegher , ( 1990 ) , and Jessup & Tansik , ( 1991 ) , found that anonymous group members generated more solution clarifications , critical and total comments , and questions about solutions than did groups working under identified conditions . Anonymous group members using a GSS were more critical , probing and more likely to embellish an idea than identified group members using a GSS . In one of the three studies groups interacting anonymously also generated more unique , goal - directed ideas than did groups interacting without anonymity . In other laboratory experiments the researchers found no effects for GSS anonymity ( see , for example , Beauclair , 1989 ; Dennis , 1991 ; George et al . , 1990 ; Valacich , Dennis , and Nunamaker , 1992 ) . In one study ( Beauclair , 1989 ) , although the subjects felt anonymity allowed them to effectively interact and reveal their true feelings , their actual performance did not match this perceived satisfaction . The lack of results suggested that a GSS does not appear useful for groups that do not have a vested interest in the task , an established history , or an inequitable hierarchy that might create a situation in which the anonymity component of a GSS would be needed . The mixed findings from these laboratory experiments of GSS anonymity are in contrast with field studies of GSS anonymity ( see , for example , Nunamaker et al . , 1987 ; Nunamaker et al . , 1988 ; Dennis , 1991 ) . These researchers studied users of GSS in a variety of organizations , at various levels within these organizations , involving a variety of tasks and group sizes . The methods used in these studies included participant observations , structured observations , and pre - and post - session questionnaires . In these field studies of GSS , researchers found stronger , more positive effects from GSS anonymity than did researchers using laboratory studies . Field study researchers reported that because of GSS anonymity , group members appeared to express their true feelings without fear of social disapproval ( Nunamaker et al . , 1987 ) . The participants’ reports supported this . Group members using GSS reported that anonymity was an important , if not the most important , GSS contribution ( Dennis , 1991 ) . Group members also reported that anonymity encouraged open and honest discussions , and they perceived that anonymity reduced organizational politics ( Dennis , 1991 ) . Group members also perceived that anonymity encouraged more participation , particularly from those with lower status ( Dennis , 1991 ) . The researchers concluded that GSS anonymity appeared to neutralize the effects of an authority hierarchy in the group ( Nunamaker et al , 1987 ) and that anonymity was a positive factor in encouraging broad based participation ( Nunamaker et al , 1988 ) . In one study ( Nunamaker et al . , 1988 ) the researchers also suggested that anonymity might heighten group conflict , because members became more blunt , assertive , and not as polite as in personal interactions . Understanding Anonymity’s Effects It appears that , depending on the setting , the effects of GSS anonymity can be positive , negative or negligible . This fits with the results from laboratory experiments which suggest that a GSS does not appear useful for groups that do not have a vested interest in the task ( Jessup , 1989 ) , an established history , or an inequitable hierarchy that might create a situation in which the anonymity component of a GSS would be needed ( Beauclair , 1989 ) . This 213 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 also fits with results from the Dennis ( 1991 ) field study , where members of peer groups reported that anonymity was less important than did members of groups of superiors and subordinates with formal power and status differences . The richness and reality of the field setting appear to provide the environment in which GSS anonymity is more useful . These field environments tend to be places where individuals have a more vested interest in the task at hand , either because of some personal or professional stake in the task . Consequently , they feel more compelled to contribute . In addition , the threat of repercussions for ill - received contributions to the group is greater and the potential disadvantages as a result of these ill - received contributions are stronger and more salient . Further , it appears that within the group the status of group members is important in determining whether GSS anonymity is more necessary and important . In the laboratory experiments group members were either friends , acquaintances , or strangers ; whereas , in the field studies groups normally had a distinct , natural hierarchy of power and authority . Some researchers have studied the status construct in GSS experiments ( see , for example , Lim , Raman and Wei , 1990 ; Tan , Wei and Watson , 1993 ) , but in these laboratory experiments status was defined as " influence , " was operationalized as an artifact of group process , and was treated as a dependent variable . Hypotheses In groups with unequal status , low - status members will have fewer opportunities to interact , will be less likely to have their suggestions evaluated by the group , and will have less influence on group decision - making . Status generalization is the process where external status characteristics order the internal status of a group and create an interaction disability for low - status members ( Ridgeway , 1982 ) . This process occurs whether or not the external status characteristics are related to the group task ( Berger et al . , 1972 ) . To reduce this disability requires techniques for overcoming the status generalization process ( Ridgeway , 1982 ) . We predict that GSS anonymity will overcome the status generalization process in groups with unequal members . As has been argued in laboratory experiments and field studies on GSS anonymity , anonymity should allow more ideas to be generated during a meeting , because group members with low - status would contribute ideas more freely and openly . Anonymity should also promote the honest and objective evaluation of an idea based on the merit of the idea and not the contributor , because group members would more freely evaluate and criticize other members ' ideas ( Connolly , Jessup , and Valacich , 1990 ; Jessup , Connolly , & Galegher , 1990 ; Jessup & Tansik , 1991 ; Valaach et al . , 1991 ) . In short , GSS anonymity should be most helpful under the conditions of unequal status described above ( Beauclair , 1989 ; Dennis , 1991 ; Jessup , 1989 ; Nunamaker et al . , 1987 ; Nunamaker et at . , 1988 ) . Further evidence for this is provided by the results of two laboratory experiments ( Lim , Raman and Wei , 1990 ; Tan , Wei and Watson , 1993 ) , which showed that use of a GSS dampened status influence within groups . In groups where the members are of equal status , when group members make contributions or criticize ideas of other members , they do not have to feel strongly restrained , nor do they have to severely fear disapprovals . With or without anonymity , group members should be able to contribute and criticize ideas more freely and more honestly . Anonymity should have minimal or negligible affect on group interaction or output ( Beauclair , 1989 ; Dennis , 1991 ) . We thus hypothesize : HI : Groups whose members are unequal in status and anonymous will generate more total comments and unique ideas , more ideas of higher rarity , and more critical comments than will groups whose members are unequal in status and identified . H2 : Groups whose members are equal in status will generate more total comments and unique ideas , more ideas of higher rarity , and more critical comments than will groups whose members are unequal in status . H3 : Groups interacting under anonymity will generate more total comments and unique ideas , more ideas of higher rarity , and more critical comments than will groups interacting without anonymity . In field studies and laboratory experiments of GSS , participants are generally satisfied with the anonymity component . We believe that in our field experiment group members unequal in status and anonymous 214 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 should be more satisfied than group members unequal in status and identified . Anonymity should reduce the fear of embarrassment , disapproval , or sanction of an ill - received remark in groups with unequal status . Group members equal in status should be more satisfied than those that are unequal in status , because group members with equal status will not feel strongly restrained or severely fear disapprovals . Anonymous group members should be more satisfied than identified group members , because anonymous group members would be able to contribute ideas more freely and openly than would identified group members . Therefore , we hypothesize : H4 : Group members unequal in status and anonymous will be more satisfied than will group members unequal in status and identified . Group members equal in status will be more satisfied than will group members unequal in status . Hg : Group members interacting under anonymity will be more satisfied than will group members interacting without anonymity . Research Design An empirical , quantitative laboratory experiment or a more qualitative field study design would each provide its unique disadvantages . There is a need for a controlled field experiment on GSS anonymity and status for which the precision and control of the laboratory are used with real participants , with real status differences , performing a task of importance and relevance to them . We can then see how the experimental findings from the field match with the mixed findings from the laboratory , whether positive or negative . We thus chose to conduct a field experiment using a 2 X 2 factorial design ( crossing anonymity with group member status ) with random assignment and equivalent groups . Status - Group members were either equal in status or unequal in status . For this study , the most easily measured external status characteristic was the position of the subject in organization’s hierarchy of reporting and responsibility . We thus operationalized group member status such that members of equal status had positions at the same level of reporting and responsibility within the organization . Members of unequal status had positions at different levels of reporting and responsibility within the organization . H5 : Before the experiment began , subjects completed a questionnaire in which they answered questions related to their position within the organization . The author used the questionnaires to assign subjects to groups in which all members were equal in status , or to groups in which one or more of the members had a higher level of status within the organization . For groups having a higher level of status , forty percent had one manager present , forty percent had two , and the remaining twenty percent had three managers present . Forty percent of the groups having a higher level of status included two levels of managers . As suggested by pilot testing , to make the status manipulation stronger we had the participants stand up at the beginning of the sessions and state their name , department and job title . Nearly all the group members knew each other from having worked together prior to the study . In addition , fifty percent of the groups contained all members currently from the same department , twenty - two percent had three out of four , and twenty - eight percent contained two out of four members from the same department . With the above manipulations , we feel we created a structure where status mattered . Anonymity - We used the definition of GSS anonymity provided by Valacich , Jessup , Dennis , and Nunamaker , ( 1992 ) - the extent to which group members’ contributions to the group are identifiable to the other group members or to others outside the group . While using the GSS , group members were either anonymous or identified . The GSS software was set such that the group members in the anonymous condition submitted their ideas and comments without identifying themselves . In the identified condition , group members added their first name , and the first initial of their last name , to the beginning of all ideas and comments submitted during the GSS session . Following the methodology used by Connolly , Jessup and Valacich ( 1990 ) , Jessup , Connolly , & Galegher , ( 1990 ) , and Jessup & Tansik ( 1991 ) , there were five dependent variables used in this experiment : total number of comments generated , number of unique ideas generated , rarity of ideas generated , number of critical comments , and satisfaction with using a GSS . To operationalize the first four dependent variables , we used a content 215 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 coding scheme presented by Connolly et al . ( 1990 ) , which has consistently produced high rates of reliability . Given the consistency and high reliability of this process we did not compute additional reliability measures for our use of the process . Two raters analyzed comments each group produced during the GSS session and then independently classified each comment into one of several categories , such as proposed a solution , made a critical remark , and so on . The raters then compare ratings and came to consensus on any differences . Unique ideas consisted of proposed solutions , minus redundancies and frivolous ideas ( Jessup , 1989 ) . To measure rarity of ideas generated we first counted the number of times each idea appeared among all groups . To compute rarity , we then used the reciprocal of the count for each idea . For example , an idea proposed only once had a rarity score of 1 . 0 , while the more common ideas had scores approaching zero ( Jessup , 1989 ) . A critical comment was an expression of opposition to a proposal with , or without , evidence or argument . We also followed Connolly , Jessup and Valacich ( 1990 ) , Jessup , Connolly , & Galegher , ( 1990 ) , and Jessup & Tansik ( 1991 ) , to measure the fifth dependent variable , satisfaction with using a GSS , by using the same post - experimental questionnaire . Each member answered fifteen questions on a five - point Likert scale . One question measured overall satisfaction . Other questions measured a group member ' s perception of the meeting process . To determine the average satisfaction rating , the author summed the values of the fifteen satisfaction - related questions for each group member ( Easton , 1988 ) . The post - experimental questionnaire contained questions used to check the anonymity and status manipulations . Two questions used to check the anonymity manipulation were , " Was it possible to trace comments to people who proposed them ? " and " Were other participants in your group able to trace comments to people who proposed them ? " . Participants answered each question with either " Yes = 3 , Don ' t Know = 2 , or No = 1 " ( Connolly et al . , 1990 , p . 695 ) . Three questions used to check the status manipulation were , " Were members of your group equal in status , as related to their job descriptions at work ? " , " Did you feel pressured by another group member ( s ) with higher status ? " , and " Were you afraid to express your ideas , because of a higher status member ( s ) in you group ? " . Participants answered each question with either " Yes = 3 , Don ' t Know = 2 , or No = 1 " . We held constant two variables for all groups during the experiment : the task and group size . The author selected the insurance fraud task , which was an idea generating task . McGrath ( 1984 ) defined an idea generating task as a creativity task ( task type two ) , which involves generating ideas or altematives . Best ' s Review and the Insurance Information Institute described insurance fraud as one of the most important issues now confronting the insurance industry . Subjects in this study were managers and professional employees of an insurance company . These insurance company employees deal with this issue on a daily basis and all have thoughts and ideas on this major issue confronting their industry . Group size varied between four and five members . Following a common practice for GSS experiments , we invited five potential participants per session in order to guarantee that at least four showed up . Experimental Setting and Procedures All sessions took place in the personal computer ( PC ) laboratory at Wausau Insurance Companies ( Wausau ) in Wausau , WI . As part of Wausau ' s meeting room facility , the PC laboratory is a normal setting for groups to perform tasks , such as groups meeting to receive training on PC software . This setting satisfies Kerlinger ' s ( 1986 , p . 372 ) definition for a field experiment . The PC laboratory consisted of six personal computers arranged classroom style on two rows of tables . The author inserted privacy panels between the six PC ' s and between the two rows of tables . A participant was not able to see other participants ' personal computer screens or keyboards . Whenever possible , participants sat at alternating PC ' s to minimize distracting one another during a session . The PC laboratory contained no windows , which further prevented distractions . A total of seventy - five ( 75 ) subjects in 18 groups participated in this experiment . All subjects were employees of Wausau Insurance Companies and were either managers or professionals . The author invited potential participants from departments of Wausau related to selling , underwriting , claim , credit , 216 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 audit , policy processing , internal audit , and education . copies of a pre - experimental questionnaire . The author used the questionnaires to determine participants ' levels of computer literacy , willingness to participate , and times available to participate , as well as other personal attributes ( Beauclair , 1987 ) . The author used the questionnaires to assign subjects randomly to groups in which all members were equal in status , or to groups in which one or more of the members had a higher level of status within the organization . The author assigned equal and unequal status groups randomly to groups in which all members were anonymous or identified . To ensure uniformity during the sessions , the author conducted all sessions using a standard script . Each subject had a copy of the standard script and followed along as the author read aloud the set of instructions . At the beginning of the session , the subjects received training on how to use the hardware and GSS software . They practiced using the hardware and software by performing an idea generating warm - up task . We then introduced the insurance fraud task , encouraged the subjects to generate as many ideas as possible to solve the problem of fraud in the insurance industry , and we emphasized that the case should not be discussed out loud . The instructions stated that ideas and comments would be reviewed by a panel of two raters , who would separate the ideas from other comments and assign a quality rating to the ideas . A thirty minute brainstorming session followed , during which time the subjects used the GSS to generate as many solutions to the task as possible . Subjects completed a post - experimental questionnaire , which the author used to assess subjects ' reactions to the session , were debriefed and released . The GSS software used was the Brainwriting tool from VisionQuestTM , version 2 . 1 , by Collaborative Technologies Corporation . The hardware used consisted of two IBM PS / 2 Model 50 and three Compaq 486 / SX personal computers connected to an IBM PC server via a token - ring local area network ( LAN ) . Results A total of 75 subjects in 18 groups participated in the experiment . The average age of the subjects was 38 years . 61 percent of the subjects were female , and 39 percent of the Subjects completed subjects were male . The subjects were managers or professional employees of Wausau Insurance Companies . 24 percent of the subjects were managers , and 76 percent were professional employees . Table 1 shows the relationship between the number of groups and subjects and the independent variables anonymity and status . The author used subjects ' responses to questions in the post - experimental questionnaire to determine how important the subjects thought the insurance fraud task was . Table 2 contains means and standard deviations for each of the three task importance questions . Means for each of the three task importance questions were all well above the mid - point on the five - point measurement scale . The results show that the insurance fraud task was important to subjects in all conditions . To test the subjects understanding of manipulations of anonymity and status , the author used subjects ' responses to questions in the post - experimental questionnaire . Responses to the anonymity manipulation questions showed that all identified subjects understood the manipulation . 100 percent of identified subjects stated it was possible to trace comments to people who proposed them , and 95 percent stated others within their group were able to trace comments to people who proposed them . The majority of anonymous subjects understood the anonymity manipulation . 76 percent of anonymous subjects stated it was not possible to trace comments to people who proposed them . However , anonymous subjects were unsure if others within their group were able to trace comments to people who proposed them , because 82 percent answered " don ' t know " to this question . Responses to the status manipulation question showed that almost all of the equal status subjects understood the manipulation . 97 percent of the equal status subjects answered " yes " to the question , " Were members of your group equal in status , as related to their job description at work ? " The majority of unequal status subjects , 55 percent , answered " no " to the same question , indicating a weaker manipulation among unequal status subjects . Table 3 contains a summary of results for the independent and dependent variables . Anonymous groups generated more total comments ( F = 4 . 289 , P = 0 . 057 ) , more unique 217 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 ideas ( F = 4 . 248 , P = 0 . 058 ) , and more ideas of of laboratory experiments where there were no higher rarity ( F = 5 . 560 , P = 0 . 033 ) than did effects of GSS anonymity ( see , for example , identified groups . The pattern supports Beauclair , 1989 ; Jessup , 1989 ) , given that the hypothesis H3 . Equal status group members researchers in these other studies explained that were more satisfied than were unequal status there were no findings because there was little group members ( F = 5 . 560 , P = 0 . 033 , 1 , 71 d . f . ) , or no reason for anonymity to be important in which supports hypothesis H5 . mere was no these environments . evidence to support the following research Replicating the results of the laboratory hypotheses : HI , H2 , . I % , and Hg . experiments on GSS anonymity by Jessup and Discussion his colleagues is important given that this was a In this field experiment , anonymous true field experiment in a business organization , groups generated more total comments , more using managers and professionals as subjects unique ideas and more ideas of higher rarity and having them complete a non - contrived than did identified groups , which is consistent task . In comparing early experimental and field with earlier GSS laboratory experiments studies involving GSS ' s , Dennis , Nunamaker ( Jessup , Connolly and Galegher , 1990 ; Connolly , and Vogel ( l990 ) stated that findings from field Jessup and Valacich , 1990 ; and Jessup and studies should not be generalized to use of Tansik , 1991 ) . These results also fit with those Table 1 . Grouus and Subjects bv Indeuendent Variables Status Equal Unequal Anonymous Number of Groups 4 5 Number of Subjects 17 21 Number of Groups 4 5 Number of Subjects 16 21 Identified Table 2 . Means and Standard Deviations for Task Importance Ouestions M SD Important Problem ? 4 . 733 0 . 577 Important to Generate Solutions ? 4 . 520 0 . 665 Useful Ideas to Solve Problem ? 3 . 967 0 . 832 Table 3 . Results for the Independent and Dependent Variables Measure Total Number of Comments Number of Unique Ideas Number of Higher Rarity Ideas Critical Comments Satisfaction Equal Status Anonymous Identified M SD M SD 52 . 75 25 . 42 36 . 25 6 . 24 35 . 50 18 . 45 24 . 75 1 . 26 21 . 59 15 . 30 12 . 28 2 . 98 1 . 50 1 . 29 0 . 75 0 . 96 57 . 77 9 . 61 59 . 38 7 . 73 Unequal Status Anonymous Identified Sign Level M SD M SD S A X 64 . 80 22 . 62 42 . 40 20 . 27 - - - * - - - 44 . 60 15 . 50 29 . 00 13 . 17 - - - * - - - 25 . 27 9 . 89 13 . 69 6 . 05 - - - * * - - - 3 . 60 5 . 32 0 . 40 0 . 89 - - - - - - - - - 53 . 90 9 . 64 53 . 48 9 . 09 * * - - - - - - For significance , the S column indicates significant main effects for status , the A column indicates significant main effects for anonymity , and the X column indicates a significant interaction effect . * * p < . 05 ; * p < . lo . 218 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 GSS ' s in experimental settings , and vice versa . The parallel results from this field experiment of anonymity are a step in the direction of overcoming shortcomings of early field and experimental studies and drawing together field and laboratory studies , as noted by Dennis , Nunamaker and Vogel ( l990 ) . There were no statistically significant effects for status on number of total comments , number of unique ideas , number of higher rarity ideas or critical comments . It may be that status is important , but it was not operationalized well enough in this experiment . Perhaps we did not manipulate status strongly enough or provide a task for which status is important . Alternatively , perhaps the instructions for manipulating status were not perceived by subjects as the author intended . As the results of the manipulation checks show , a very high percentage of subjects in the equal status condition reported " yes , " that members in their group were of equal status . Conversely , only 55 percent of the group members in the unequal status condition answered " no " to the same question , indicating a weaker manipulation among unequal status subjects . We believe that the manipulation worked adequately . The procedure we used to manipulate status was quite straightforward , and subjects were paying attention when we had them introduce themselves to each other out loud . One other explanation for the nonsignificant output results for status is that status isn ' t the key construct . Perhaps there are other factors operating within a group that would more strongly cause certain members to be afraid to contribute . It may be as simple as an overpowering group member who would ridicule others for their ideas , regardless of that person ' s status within the organization . Alternatively , it may be that , at the individual level , self confidence or personal security are more likely to cause a person to be afraid to contribute , regardless of status . Given the compelling arguments for status as an important variable in this setting , and given that status is likely to correlate with these other variables , this explanation is not as likely . A more plausible explanation for the nonsignificant output results is that while subjects could clearly see that there were members of their group that were from a different level in the organization , employees from this organization do not believe that this constitutes a difference in " status . " Further , it may be that the professionals and managers in this study were too democratic for status differences to mean much , and / or group members may have been too comfortable working with first level managers , with whom they may have developed a rapport . Our prior experience with the employees of this organization , which is substantial , suggests that this is the case . Further evidence that these groups were fairly civil is provided by the analysis of critical comments . Contrary to our hypothesis , anonymous groups were not more critical than identified groups , which is not consistent with prior empirical studies where anonymous groups were more critical than identified groups ( Jessup , Connolly and Galegher , 1990 ; Jessup and Tansik , 1991 ; & Valacich , Dennis and Nunamaker , 1992 ) . In addition , the number of critical comments was generally low for all groups . The business professionals and managers participating in this field experiment were less critical than were subjects from our prior laboratory experiments with student subjects . Student subjects are generally younger , meet as a group one time for the research experiment , and then see little or nothing of each other after the session . The business professionals and managers in this experiment may have been less critical because of their organizational culture , professional maturity , and because they knew they had to work with each other after the session . Some final evidence of the civility of these participants is provided by the results for the satisfaction measures . Contrary to our hypothesis , anonymous group members were not more satisfied than were identified group members . Generally , all participants were relatively satisfied with the experience . Apparently , the interaction was not of a type where the group members would be more satisfied under anonymity . Interestingly , there was a statistically significant effect for status on group member satisfaction . Group members equal in status were more satisfied than group members unequal in status . To better understand why , we analyzed responses to each question on the post - experimental questionnaire and found that the responses of group members equal in status were significantly higher ( significant at the . 05 level ) than were the responses of the group members unequal in status on the following 219 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 items : the participation in the discussion was evenly distributed , the behavior of the group was goal directed , the interpersonal relationships among the participants were healthy , participants dealt systematically with the issues , participants initiated discussion on relevant issues , and members were satisfied with the quality of the group ' s solutions . This suggests that , while the members of this organization may in fact not be influenced to a great degree by organizational status in terms of their actual output in the GSS sessions , the status manipulation worked and there were significant differences , at least in terms of perceptions , between equal and unequal status groups . Implications The results of this field experiment confirm the quantitative finding from laboratory experiments , and the qualitative finding from field studies , that GSS anonymity is useful . In this field experiment , while performing an idea generating task in a laboratory setting , anonymous groups of business professionals and managers generated more total comments , unique ideas and ideas of higher rarity than did identified groups . This experiment suggests that we may need to either think differently about the status construct and / or work toward a better operationalization of status in experimental settings . While there was no significant effect for status on real output , groups that were equal in status were more satisfied than were groups that were unequal in status . One explanation is that we chose the right construct and manipulated it correctly . There is compelling evidence in the literature to suggest that an organizationally - based status variable is important . In addition , our manipulation of status was straightforward and the results of the manipulation check suggest that it was understood by most subjects . In this case , the implication is that , for tasks like this , organizationally - based status is not important in terms of its effects on real group output , though being in equal status groups made participants feel better about their session . Further , status differences do not seem to be important , in terms of real output , for group like ours , that are mature , professional business people with real , lasting relationships with each other that transcend the experiment . Another avenue for exploration is that we chose the right construct , but we did not operationalize it well . Our manipulation of status , while straightforward to subjects , may not have been strong enough . Perhaps we needed to include individuals with a higher level of responsibility than managers in an organization . For example , including senior and executive vice presidents , or selectively choosing managers based on their leadership styles , may strengthen the status manipulation . Alternatively , we may have chosen a more sensitive task which would have made status differences more important . A task which would evoke different preferences between status levels with direct implications for members ( e . g . , bonus allocations , promotion policies , etc . ) may be more likely to surface status effects . In future field experiments of this type researchers might also increase the number of groups to determine if a larger sample size would produce a statistically significant result for status . It is possible that organizationally - based status is not as important as is other phenomena . Perhaps status based on seniority or expertise is more important . Alternatively , anonymity may be more important for individuals who are afraid to contribute , regardless of the setting . In such a case , we should study individual level phenomena , such as self - confidence or dominance versus submissiveness . Researchers need to isolate these other factors and manipulate them along with anonymity to determine if they , rather than organizationally based status , are the real factors keeping some group membexs from contributing . While this study suffered the small sample size inherent in field experimentation , one thing is clear . It was useful to draw from the results of quantitative laboratory experiments and qualitative field studies on GSS , and then build theory to be tested in a field experiment . Field experiments such as this are difficult and costly , but they help to integrate and validate other types of research . REFERENCES Beauclair , R . A . ( 1987 ) . & experimental studv of the effects of Group Decision Support Svstem process support applications on small ~ O U D decision - making ( Doctoral dissertation , Indiana University ) . ( University Microfilms No . 8717842 ) 220 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 Beauclair , R . A . ( 1989 ) . An experimental study of GDSS support application effectiveness . Joumal of Information Science , 15 , 321 - 332 . Berger , J . , Cohen , B . P . , & Zelditch , M . , Jr . ( 1972 ) . Status characteristics and social interaction . American Sociological Review , Connolly , T . , Jessup , L . M . , & Valacich , J . S . ( 1990 ) . Effects of anonymity and in computer - mediated groups . Management Science , 36 ( 6 ) , 689 - 703 . Dennis , A . R . ( 1991 ) . Parallelism , anonvmitv , structure , and aouu size in electronic meetings ( Doctoral dissertation , University of Arizona ) . ( University Microfilms Dennis , A . R . , George , J . F . , Jessup , L . M . , Nunamaker , J . F . , & Vogel , D . R . ( 1988 ) . Information technology to support electronic meetings . MISQ , 12 : 4 : 591 - 624 . Dennis , A . R . , Nunamaker , J . F . , Jr . , & Vogel , D . R . ( 1990 - 1991 ) . A comparison of laboratory and field research in the study of electronic meeting systems . Journal of MIS , DeSanctis , G . , & Gallupe , R . B . ( 1987 ) . A foundation for the study of group decision support systems . Manavement Science , 33 ( 5 ) , Easton , A . C . , Vogel , D . R . , & Nunamaker , J . F . , Jr . ( 1989 ) Stakeholder identification and assumption surfacing in small groups : An experimental study . Proceedings of the Twenty - Third Annual HICSS , 111 , 344 - 352 . George , J . F . , Easton , G . K . , Nunamaker , J . F . , Jr . , & Northcraft , G . B . ( 1990 , December ) . A study of collaborative group work with and without computer - based support . Information Systems Research , pp . 394 - 415 deindividuating effects of anonymity on automated grouu idea genera - ( Doctoral dissertation , University of Arizona ) . ( University Microfilms No . 9003487 ) Jessup , L . M . , Connolly , T . , & Galegher , J . ( 1990 ) . The effects of anonymity on GDSS group process with an idea - generating task . Jessup , L . M . , Connolly , T . , & Tansik , D . A . ( 1990 ) . Toward a theory of automated group work . The deindividuating effects of 373 : 241 - 255 . evaluative tone on idea generation NO . AAD91 - 27710 ) 7 : 2107 - 135 . 589 - 609 . Jessup , L . M . ( 1989 ) . m MISQ , l4 ( 3 ) , 312 - 321 . anonymity . Small Grouu Research , 2l ( 3 ) , Jessup , L . M . , & Tansik , D . A . ( 1991 ) . Decision making in an automated environment : The effects of anonymity and proximity with a group decision support system . Decision Sciences , 22 , 266 - 279 . Kerlinger , F . N . ( 1986 ) . Foundations of behavioral research ( 3rd ed . ) . Fort Worth : Holt , Rinehart , and Winston . Lim , L . H . , Raman , K . S . , & Wei , K . K . 1990 . Does GDSS promote more democratic decision - making ? - - The Singapore experiment . Proceedings of the Twentv - Third HICSS , N . McGrath , J . E . ( 1984 ) . Groups : Interaction and performance . Englewood Cliffs : Prentice Hall . Nunamaker , J . F . , Jr . , Applegate , L . M . , & Konsynski , B . R . ( 1987 ) . Facilitating group creativity : Experience with a group decision support system . Joumal of MIS , 3 ( 4 ) , 5 - 19 . Nunamaker , J . F . , Jr . , Applegate , L . M . , & Konsynski , B . R . ( 1988 ) . Computer - aided deliberation : Model management and group decision support . Operations Research , 36 ( 6 ) , Ridgeway , C . L . ( 1982 ) Status in groups : The important of motivation . American Sociolopical Review , 46 : 76 - 88 . Tan , B . C . Y . , Wei , K . K . , & Watson , R . T . ( 1993 ) . Dampening status influence using a Group Support System : An empirical study . Proceedings of the Twentv - sixth HICSS , IV . Valacich , J . S . , Dennis , A . R . , Jessup , L . M . , & Nunamaker , J . F . , Jr . ( 1992 ) . A conceptual framework of anonymity in GSS . Grouu Decision and Negotiation , 1 : 219 - 241 . Valacich , J . S . , Dennis , A . R . , & Nunamaker , J . F . , Jr . ( 1991 ) . Electronic meeting support : The Groupsystems concept . International lournal on Man - Machine Studies , Valacich , J . S . , Dennis , A . R . , & Nunamaker , J . F . , Jr . ( 1992 ) . Group size and anonymity effects on computer - mediated idea generation . Small Grouu Research , 23 ( 1 ) , 49 - 73 . 333 - 348 . 826 - 848 . 34 , 261 - 282 . Please address all correspondence to : Dr . John Wilson Wausau Insurance Companies P . 0 . Box 8017 Wausau , WI 54402 - 8017 Office 715 - 842 - 6670 221