Damage and disease in the CNS trigger coordinated multicellular responses that involve glia , neurons and non - neural cells . Immune and inflammatory cells have crucial roles in these responses , particularly in terms of neutralizing microbial pathogens and clear - ing debris . Fine - tuned regulation of inflammation is essential to equilibrate between debris accumulation and excessive phagocytosis , either of which can be harmful . Accordingly , there are diverse cellular and molecular regulatory mechanisms in and around CNS tissue lesions that balance inflammatory cell - mediated debris clearance with maximizing the preservation of healthy tissue and restricting the spread of cytotoxic inflammation 1 . Inflammation plays a part in most , if not all , CNS insults , and there is intense interest in understanding the cellular and molecular mechanisms that regulate the onset and resolution of CNS inflammation . There is an equally intense search for causal mechanisms underlying the initiation and progression of CNS autoimmune inflammatory disorders 2 , 3 . Although the principal effectors of CNS inflammation are circulat - ing bone marrow - derived leukocytes , there is increas - ing recognition that CNS - intrinsic cells have essential roles in recruiting , instructing and retaining leuko - cytes at sites of CNS insults . Among CNS - intrinsic cells , myeloid lineage - derived microglia are well established as early sensors of damage and recruiters of multicellular inflammation 4 . In addition , astrocytes are now emerging as cells that can exert either potent pro - inflammatory functions or crucially protective anti - inflammatory functions , as regulated by specific signalling inputs . This Review discusses and examines astrocyte contributions to the recruitment , instruction and restriction of immune and inflammatory cells at sites of CNS injury and disease . Astrocyte responses to CNS damage In addition to their many essential functions in a healthy CNS , astrocytes respond to CNS insults through a pro - cess called astrogliosis 5 – 7 . Although astrogliosis is often referred to as though it were a single uniform entity , this is emphatically not the case . Evidence accumulated over the past 20 years provides compelling support that astrogliosis is a spectrum of heterogeneous potential changes , and that these changes are determined in a context - specific man - ner by diverse signalling events that vary with the nature and severity of different CNS insults 7 – 11 . The functions and effects of astrogliosis are being elucidated . Reactive astrocytes have the potential to release diverse molecules that affect nearby cells of all types in many ways 7 – 10 . Astrogliosis and scar formation have sometimes been regarded as responses that are predominantly harmful and should therefore be broadly inhibited . This notion is refuted by a large volume of in vivo experimental stud - ies from many laboratories , which show that normally occurring astrogliosis and scar formation exert numer - ous essential beneficial functions that improve outcome , including wound closure , neuronal protection , blood – brain barrier ( BBB ) repair and restriction of CNS inflam - mation 6 – 8 , 10 , 12 . Nevertheless , under specific circumstances , astrogliosis has the potential to lead to harmful effects , such as exacerbating inflammation or interfering with synapse sprouting or axon growth 6 , 7 , 13 . Both the benefi - cial functions of astrogliosis and its potentially harmful effects are regulated by specific signalling mechanisms Astrocyte barriers to neurotoxic inflammation Michael V . Sofroniew Abstract | Astrocytes form borders ( glia limitans ) that separate neural from non - neural tissue along perivascular spaces , meninges and tissue lesions in the CNS . Transgenic loss - of - function studies reveal that astrocyte borders and scars serve as functional barriers that restrict the entry of inflammatory cells into CNS parenchyma in health and disease . Astrocytes also have powerful pro - inflammatory potential . Thus , astrocytes are emerging as pivotal regulators of CNS inflammatory responses . This Review discusses evidence that astrocytes have crucial roles in attracting and restricting CNS inflammation , with important implications for diverse CNS disorders . Department of Neurobiology , David Geffen School of Medicine , University of California , Los Angeles , California 90095 , USA . e‑mail : sofroniew @ mednet . ucla . edu doi : 10 . 1038 / nrn3898 Corrected online 8 May 2015 REVIEWS NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 16 | MAY 2015 | 249 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Innate immune responses Inherent and automatic immune and inflammatory responses to specific molecular cues that do not require previous exposure . Adaptive immune responses Acquired immune responses ( for example , antibody formation ) resulting from prior exposure to molecular cues ( antigens ) recognized by the host immune system as foreign . Diapedesis The passage of blood cells through the intact walls of blood vessels . Perivascular spaces Spaces immediately adjacent to the external surface of blood vessels . that occur in specific contexts and thus represent targets for potential therapeutic manipulation 7 , 14 . In addition , there is accumulating clinical and experimental evidence that dysfunctions of astrocytes and astrogliosis , either through loss of beneficial functions or inappropriate gain of detrimental effects , have the potential to contribute to or be primary causes of CNS disorders , leading to the notion of astrocytopathies 7 , 15 , as discussed below . Restricted leukocyte trafficking in the CNS Regulation of leukocyte trafficking in the CNS has simi - larities and differences with other tissues . As in other tissues , leukocyte responses to CNS damage , infection and disease involve two arms of the immune system : the innate immune responses and adaptive immune responses . Innate inflammatory responses are coordinated by receptors for conserved pathogen - associated molecu - lar patterns ( PAMPs ) or damage ( or danger ) - associated molecular patterns ( DAMPs ) 16 , 17 . Adaptive immune responses are coordinated by antigen receptors generated de novo and rearranged to achieve specificity 18 , 19 . In contrast with most other tissues , CNS tissues exhibit some degree of ‘immune privilege’ ; this privi - lege is not absolute , but it does restrict and regulate the access of blood - borne antibodies and leukocytes to CNS parenchyma 20 . This relative immune privilege is implemented by CNS - intrinsic cells that create a par - tial but not absolute BBB to circulating antibodies and other immune effector molecules and that regulate the entry and trafficking of leukocytes in CNS tissue from the circulation , meninges and choroid plexus 3 , 20 – 22 . The restricted access of leukocytes to CNS parenchyma from the circulation involves several levels of control that regulate the diapedesis and entry of leukocytes past endothelial barriers into perivascular spaces ( also known as Virchow – Robin spaces ) , as well as their passage beyond perivascular spaces into CNS parenchyma 21 , 23 . Diverse CNS cells take part in these activities , includ - ing CNS endothelial cells , pericytes , other perivascular cells , microglia and astrocytes 21 , 23 . Astrocyte restriction of CNS inflammation Astrocytes form structurally prominent borders ( glia limi - tans ) that line all interfaces between CNS neural paren - chyma and non - neural cells ( such as meningeal cells , endothelial cells , pericytes and fibroblast lineage cells ) along all blood vessels ( FIG . 1a ) and meningeal surfaces ( FIG . 1b ) . In healthy CNS tissue , these astrocyte borders form functional barriers that present molecular cues that help to restrict leukocyte access into CNS parenchyma Figure 1 | Astrocytes form borders ( glia limitans ) that serve as functional barriers at interfaces between non - neural tissue and CNS neural parenchyma along blood vessels , meninges and tissue lesions . a | Along blood vessels , astrocyte endfeet and the parenchymal basement membrane ( PBM ) present diverse molecular cues that constitute some of the multiple functional barriers , which include endothelial cells with tight junctions and the endothelial basement membrane ( EBM ) , across which leukocytes must be actively recruited to pass from the bloodstream into CNS neural parenchyma 21 , 23 , 24 . b | Abutting the meninges , astrocyte endfeet and the PBM present multiple molecular cues that restrict leukocytes in the subarachnoid space ( SAS ) from passing freely into CNS parenchyma . c | Around tissue lesion cores ( which are comprised of non - neural cells , including leukocytes ) , astrocyte scars and PBM are similar in appearance , organization and function to astrocyte borders lining non - neural cells along meninges and blood vessels , and similarly restrict the entry of leukocytes into adjacent CNS parenchyma . Nature Reviews | Neuroscience Macrophage Neural parenchyma PBM Astrocyte functional barrier Non - neural tissue T cell a Perivascular b Perimeningeal c Perilesional Bloodstream EBM Tight junction Neuron Endothelial cell Blood vessel Meninges Lesion core Pericyte Astrocyte endfoot Astrocyte scar Pial ﬁbroblast Cerebrospinal ﬂuid Arachnoid ﬁbroblast Collagen Astrocyte Lesion core ﬁbroblast SAS Myeloid cell R E V I E W S 250 | MAY 2015 | VOLUME 16 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved from adjacent non - neural tissues that exhibit high levels of leukocyte trafficking for immune surveillance 21 , 23 , 24 . At sites of CNS tissue damage , astrocytes form scars that share structural similarities with perivascular and menin - geal astrocyte glia limitans borders 25 ( FIG . 1c ) . CNS lesions exhibit high levels of immune and inflammatory cell trafficking after traumatic injury , stroke , infection , neu - rodegenerative disease and autoimmune attack . Astrocyte scars are formed by newly proliferated astrocytes that line all interfaces between viable CNS neural parenchyma and non - neural cells at sites of tissue damage 1 , 6 , 26 – 28 ( FIG . 1c ) . There is now compelling evidence that astrocyte scar borders serve as functional barriers that use contact - and diffusion - mediated molecular mechanisms to restrict and regulate the entry of inflammatory cells into CNS paren - chyma from non - neural lesion cores , as demonstrated in particular by transgenically targeted loss - of - function experiments ( TABLE 1 ) . Astrocyte restriction of cytotoxic CNS inflammation is a recent discovery 28 . Astrocyte scar formation around CNS lesions has been recognized for more than 125 years but , for much of this time , scar functions have been enig - matic and astrocyte scars have been studied primarily as potential inhibitors of axon regrowth after injury 13 . Over the past 20 years , transgenic technology revolutionized the ability to study CNS cellular and molecular mechanisms in vivo , including mechanisms of neural injury and repair . Early transgenic loss - of - function studies of astrogliosis unexpectedly revealed an essential function for pro - liferating reactive astroglia in restricting cytotoxic inflam - mation in the gut and brain 28 , 29 . These observations have been reinforced by numerous related findings ( TABLES 1 , 2 ) , and there is now compelling evidence that scar - forming astrocytes exert crucial functions that not only recruit ( TABLE 3 ) but also restrict the spread of inflammation into CNS parenchyma from inflamed non - neural tissue at perivascular spaces ( FIG . 2Aa , Ab ) , meninges ( FIG . 2Ba , Bb ) and tissue lesions ( FIG . 2Ca , Cb ) after diverse CNS insults such as trauma , ischaemia , autoimmune attack and neuro degeneration 28 , 30 – 34 . Nevertheless , in addition to the considerable evidence for astrocyte anti - inflammatory barrier functions , there is equally substantial evidence that astrocytes exert pro - inflammatory functions . Thus , astrocytes are emerging as cells that have complex roles in both recruiting and restricting inflammatory cells . Astrocyte control of leukocytes Entry of leukocytes into CNS parenchyma involves inter - actions among multiple cell types and requires active recruitment across several cellular and molecular func - tional barriers 3 , 21 , 24 ( FIG . 3 ) . As in other tissues , initial events involve rolling and adhesion of leukocytes to CNS endothelia . In contrast with other tissues , diapedesis in CNS requires passing through an endothelial BBB , the permeability of which is regulated by numerous mol - ecules that can be produced by diverse cell types , includ - ing astrocytes 1 , 3 , 21 , 24 ( FIG . 3 , part 1 ) . After leukocytes have extravasated , they do not pass directly into CNS parenchyma but collect in perivascular spaces formed by the retraction of astrocyte endfeet and the parenchy - mal basement membrane that surrounds blood vessels 35 Table 1 | Anti - inflammatory astrocyte functions and molecular mechanisms Disease model Deleted or downregulated astrocyte type or astrocyte molecule Functions revealed by transgenic loss - of - function studies in mice Refs Stab brain injury Newly proliferated scar astrocyte • Repairs BBB • Restricts inflammation • Protects neurons 28 Spinal cord injury Newly proliferated scar astrocyte • Repairs BBB • Restricts inflammation • Protects neurons • Preserves motor function 30 STAT3 • Required for scar formation • Restricts inflammation • Protects neurons • Preserves motor function 26 , 41 , 54 BMPR1A • Promotes scar formation • Restricts inflammation 128 Focal brain injury Newly proliferated scar astrocyte • Restricts inflammation • Protects neurons 127 Stroke GFAP and vimentin • Required for scar structure • Restricts inflammation 31 , 34 Notch1 • Promotes proliferation and scar formation • Restricts inflammation 129 , 130 TGF β Restricts inflammation 62 Experimental autoimmune encephalo myelitis GFAP • Critical for border structure • Restricts inflammation 58 CRYAB Restricts inflammation 70 Newly proliferated scar astrocyte Restricts inflammation 32 , 33 GP130 • Critical for barrier function • Restricts inflammation 56 ER α Restricts inflammation 74 , 75 A20 • Blocks NF - κ B signalling • Restricts inflammation 68 SHH Maintains BBB 51 Infection GP130 • Critical for barrier formation • Inflammatory cell infiltration 55 TGF β • Inflammatory cell infiltration • Protects neurons 63 Liposomal storage disease GFAP and vimentin • Critical for border structure • Protects neurons 59 Alzheimer disease GFAP and vimentin • Critical for border structure • Reduces amyloid - β load • Restricts inflammation 60 APOE • Maintains BBB • Restricts inflammation 53 Parkinson disease DRD2 Restricts inflammation 69 CRYAB Restricts inflammation 69 APOE , apolipoprotein E ; BBB , blood – brain barrier ; BMPR1A , bone morphogenetic protein receptor type 1A ; CRYAB , α - crystallin B chain ; DRD2 , dopamine D2 receptor ; ER α , oestrogen receptor - α ; GFAP , glial fibrillary acidic protein ; NF - κ B , nuclear factor - κ B ; SHH , Sonic hedgehog ; STAT3 , signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 ; TGF β , transforming growth factor - β . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 16 | MAY 2015 | 251 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Extravasation The passage of blood or any of its components , such as cells , molecules or fluids , from blood vessels ( intact or damaged ) into surrounding tissues . ( FIG . 2Aa ; FIG . 3 , part 2 ) . In these perivascular spaces , they may receive molecular instructions from various cell types , including astrocytes ( FIG . 3 , part 3 ) . Passage beyond this barrier of basement membrane and astrocyte endfeet into CNS parenchyma normally requires active recruitment , which is regulated by various potential molecules that can be produced by different cell types 21 , 23 , 24 , including astro - cytes ( FIG . 3 , part 4 ) . In this manner , astrocytes take part in both recruiting and restricting the migration of leukocytes in the CNS , and these functions are purposefully regu - lated in a context - specific manner by specific signalling events ( FIG . 3 ) . Thus , in response to different signalling mechanisms , astrocytes can , on the one hand , exert pro - inflammatory effects by releasing molecules that disrupt the BBB , promote leukocyte extravasation and help to recruit leukocytes into CNS parenchyma ( FIG . 3 , parts 1 – 4 ; TABLES 3 , 4 ) ; on the other hand , astrocytes can also exert anti - inflammatory effects by releasing molecules that pro - mote BBB repair , restrict or confine leukocyte migration , and promote the resolution of inflammation over time ( FIG . 3 , parts 5 – 8 ; TABLES 1 , 2 ) . Astrocyte pro - inflammatory mechanisms Several decades of investigation 36 has shown that astro - cytes can produce numerous pro - inflammatory mol - ecules , including diverse cytokines , chemokines , growth factors and small molecules such as prostaglandin E ( PGE ) and nitric oxide ( NO ) ( TABLE 3 ) . Recent technolo - gies that allow cell type - specific transcriptome analysis have begun to define specific contexts in which astrocytes produce a broad repertoire of pro - inflammatory mole - cules in vivo and to identify combinations of molecular triggers that regulate their production in vitro 37 – 39 . For example , analysis of astrocyte transcriptome profiles indicates that astrocyte exposure either in vivo or in vitro to PAMPs such as lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) and associated cytokines markedly skews astrocyte transcrip - tome changes towards pro - inflammatory and potentially cytotoxic profiles 37 – 39 . By contrast , the ischaemia caused by experimental stroke in vivo shifts the astrocyte transcriptome towards neuroprotective mechanisms 37 . Transgenic approaches such as Cre – loxP - mediated cell type - specific loss - of - function models are being used to dissect intracellular signalling cascades and to iden - tify intercellular effector molecules that mediate astro - cyte pro - inflammatory functions ( TABLE 4 ) . For example , nuclear factor - κB ( NF - κB ) and suppressor of cytokine sig - nalling 3 ( SOCS3 ) are pro - inflammatory transcriptional regulators in astrocytes during CNS traumatic injury and CNS autoimmune inflammation 40 – 42 ( FIG . 3 ; TABLE 4 ) . As intercellular effectors , CC - chemokine ligand 2 ( CCL2 ) and CXC - chemokine ligand 10 ( CXCL10 ) released specifically by astrocytes are important recruiters of perivascular leukocytes in CNS autoimmune inflamma - tion 43 – 45 ( FIG . 3 , parts 2 , 3 ) . CCL2 and CCL7 production by astrocytes is hetero geneous 38 , which may contribute to the selective direction of leukocyte migration in CNS parenchyma . Multimolecular signalling cascades are also being defined . For example , in response to stimulation by the pro - inflammatory cytokine interleukin - 1β ( IL - 1β ) , astrocytes generate and release vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) , which increases BBB perme - ability and promotes leukocyte extravasation 46 , 47 ( FIG . 3 , part 1 ) . ACT1 ( also known as TRAF3IP2 ) signalling in astrocytes is critical for mediating IL - 17 inflammatory gene induction in CNS autoimmune inflammation 48 ( FIG . 3 , parts 2 , 3 ) . Certain types of increased neuronal activity can trigger inflammation in epilepsy , stress and neuropathic pain , and astrocytes contribute to mediating these effects 49 . Astrocyte anti - inflammatory mechanisms Essential anti - inflammatory roles of astrocytes have now been demonstrated by numerous trans - genic loss - of - function experiments in diverse mod - els of CNS injury and disease ( TABLE 1 ) , and specific molecular mechanisms are gradually being identified ( FIG . 3 , parts 5 – 8 ; TABLE 2 ) . An early observation using transgenic models indicated that BBB repair after trau - matic injury is critically dependent on the presence of newly proliferated scar - forming astrocytes 28 , 30 . The Table 2 | Astrocyte - produced molecules that exert or regulate anti - inflammatory functions Categories Astrocyte molecules Anti - inflammatory functions Refs Cytokines and growth factors TGF β , IL - 6 , IL - 10 , IL - 11 , IL - 19 and IL - 27 Activate diverse anti - inflammatory signalling mechanisms 37 – 39 , 131 – 133 SHH • Maintains BBB by acting on endothelial SMO receptors • Induces proliferation of scar - forming astrocytes 51 , 134 Intracellular signalling factors STAT3 , A20 , GAL9 and CRYAB Suppress pro - inflammatory signalling mechanisms 26 , 41 , 54 , 68 , 69 , 71 , 135 Receptors ER α , GP130 and DRD2 Suppress pro - inflammatory signalling mechanisms 55 , 69 , 74 , 75 Small intercellular effector molecules Retinoic acid • Reduces oxidative stress • Protects BBB function • Reduces inflammation 66 MicroRNAs miR - 181 , Dicer 1 and miR - 17 - 5p • Suppress pro - inflammatory signalling mechanisms • Required for scar - forming astrocyte proliferation through JAK – STAT signalling 72 , 136 BBB , blood – brain barrier ; CRYAB , α - crystallin B chain ; DRD2 , dopamine D2 receptor ; ER α , oestrogen receptor - α ; GAL9 , galectin 9 ; IL , interleukin ; JAK , Janus kinase ; miR , microRNA ; SHH , Sonic hedgehog ; SMO , Smoothened homologue ; STAT3 , signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 ; TGF β , transforming growth factor - β . R E V I E W S 252 | MAY 2015 | VOLUME 16 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved impact of astrocytes on BBB function has a long history of investigation 50 , and recent findings are beginning to define specific molecular mechanisms through which astrocytes can influence BBB integrity in different ways . For example , as discussed above , IL - 1β - stimulated astro - cytes release VEGF , which disrupts the endothelial BBB and increases leukocyte extravasation 46 , 47 ( FIG . 3 , part 1 ) . Under different circumstances , astrocytes release mol - ecules , such as Sonic hedgehog ( SHH ) , that promote endothelial BBB repair 51 , 52 ( FIG . 3 , part 8 ) . In addition , apolipoprotein E ( APOE ) secretion by astrocytes sup - presses a cyclo philin A ( CYA ) – NF - κB – matrix metallo - proteinase 9 ( MMP9 ) pathway in pericytes that increases BBB permeability 53 ( FIG . 3 , part 6 ) . Thus , astrocytes are emerging as pivotal regulators of endothelial BBB properties that can , through specific molecular mecha - nisms , either open or maintain barrier functions in a context - dependent manner that is regulated by specific signalling events . As discussed above , astrocyte borders and scars form functional barriers that restrict leukocyte migration after diverse CNS insults , including trauma , ischaemia , auto - immune attack and neurodegeneration 28 , 30 – 34 ( FIG . 2C ) . Transgenic loss - of - function approaches are beginning to define intracellular signalling cascades that mediate astrocyte anti - inflammatory functions ( TABLE 1 ) . Studies from multiple laboratories indicate that the GP130 ( also known as IL - 6Rβ ) – Janus kinase 2 ( JAK2 ) – signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 ( STAT3 ) signalling pathway is a crucial regulator of astrocyte anti - inflammatory functions after various CNS insults , by mediating scar formation and barrier functions that restrict the spread of leukocytes and microbial patho - gens after traumatic injury 26 , 41 , 54 , infection 55 and auto - immune attack 56 . In this regard , it is interesting that the astrocyte structural proteins — glial fibrillary acidic pro - tein ( GFAP ) and vimentin 57 — are required for astrocyte scar formation 8 , and their absence markedly exacerbates the inflammation and tissue pathologies associated with autoimmune attack 58 , stroke 31 , 34 and neurodegen - eration owing to lipid storage defects 59 or amyloid - β accumulation 60 . Intercellular effector molecules that mediate astro - cyte anti - inflammatory functions are also being iden - tified . For example , in response to IL - 10 , astrocytes release molecules such as transforming growth factor - β ( TGFβ ) that promote resolution of inflammation 61 – 63 ( FIG . 3 , part 7 ) . Certain molecules released by astro - cytes have anti - inflammatory effects on microglia and monocytes 64 , 65 . Retinoic acid released from astrocytes is implicated in protecting BBB function and attenuating inflammation 66 ( FIG . 3 ) . An indirect form of anti - inflammatory regulation also seems to be operational in the form of intra - cellular signalling mechanisms that suppress pro - inflammatory activators ( FIG . 3 ) . For example , tumour necrosis factor - α ( TNFα ) signalling not only induces production of the pro - inflammatory transcriptional regulator NF - κB but also promotes production of the ubiquitin - modifying protein A20 , which acts to sup - press NF - κB signalling 67 . A20 production by astrocytes is a crucial anti - inflammatory regulator in autoimmune inflammation that suppresses astrocyte production of leukocyte - recruiting chemokines 68 . In an analogous manner , dopamine signalling through the astrocytic dopamine D2 receptor ( DRD2 ) that acts via α - crystallin B chain ( CRYAB ) attenuates inflammation - associated 1 - methyl - 4 - phenyl - 1 , 2 , 3 , 6 - tetrahydropyridine ( MPTP ) toxicity 69 . CRYAB produced by astrocytes is a potent negative regulator that acts as a ‘brake’ on various inflammatory pathways in autoimmune inflammation 70 . Similarly , galectin 9 ( GAL9 ) expression by astrocytes is induced by pro - inflammatory cytokines such as IL - 1β , interferon - γ ( IFNγ ) and TNFα , but GAL9 released by astrocytes induces the apoptosis and downregulation of encephalitogenic T cells in autoimmune inflammation 71 . Table 3 | Astrocyte - produced molecules that exert or regulate pro - inflammatory functions Categories Astrocyte molecules Pro - inflammatory functions Refs Chemokines CCL2 , CCL5 , CCL7 , CCL8 and CCL12 Recruit diverse leukocytes , including monocytes , macrophages , T cells , eosinophils , basophils , mast cells and dendritic cells 37 – 39 , 43 , 44 , 132 CXCL1 , CXCL9 , CXCL10 , CXCL12 and CXCL16 Recruit diverse leukocytes , including monocytes , macrophages , neutrophils , T cells , natural killer T cells , B cells and dendritic cells 37 – 39 , 45 , 132 Cytokines and growth factors IL - 1 β , IL - 6 , IL - 11 , IL - 15 , IL - 17 , TNF α and BAFF Activate diverse pro - inflammatory signalling mechanisms 37 – 39 , 131 , 132 , 137 VEGF • Opens endothelial blood – brain barrier • Promotes leukocyte extravasation 46 , 47 Intracellular signalling factors NF - κ B and SOCS3 Activate diverse pro - inflammatory signalling mechanisms 40 – 42 ACT1 Activates IL - 17 - mediated pro - inflammatory signalling mechanisms 48 Small intercellular effector molecules PGE and NO Diverse pro - inflammatory effects 135 BAFF , B cell - activating factor ; CCL , CC - chemokine ligand ; CXCL , CXC - chemokine ligand ; IL , interleukin ; NF - κ B , nuclear factor - κ B ; NO , nitric oxide ; PGE , prostaglandin E ; SOCS3 , suppressor of cytokine signalling 3 ; TNF α , tumour necrosis factor - α ; VEGF , vascular endothelial growth factor . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 16 | MAY 2015 | 253 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved It is interesting to speculate that within astrocytes , tem - poral regulation of production of molecules such as CRYAB , A20 and GAL9 may contribute to mechanisms that bring about the resolution of CNS inflammation over time ( FIG . 3 , part 7 ) . Small RNAs such as micro - RNA - 181 ( miR - 181 ) are also implicated in attenuat - ing astrocyte expression of certain pro - inflammatory molecules 72 ( TABLE 2 ) . Attenuation of astrocyte pro - inflammatory effects also seems to be an important mechanism under - lying the anti - inflammatory effects of sex steroids ( FIG . 3 , part 7 ) . Both oestrogen and testosterone have potent anti - inflammatory and neuroprotective effects in experimental and clinical CNS autoimmune inflam - mation 73 . Transgenic loss - of - function studies show that activation of oestrogen receptor - α ( ERα ) , but not Nature Reviews | Neuroscience Aa Neural parenchyma PBM Astrocyte functionalbarrier Non - neural tissue A Perivascular B Perimeningeal C Perilesional Blood vessel Meninges Lesion core Neural parenchyma PBM disruption Dysfunction of astrocyte barrier Non - neural tissue Ab Ba Ca Bb Cb Collagen Pericyte EBM Neuron Astrocyte Macrophage T cell SAS Lesion core ﬁbroblast Arachnoid ﬁbroblast Pial ﬁbroblast Tight junction Endothelial cell PVS Myeloid cell R E V I E W S 254 | MAY 2015 | VOLUME 16 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved ERβ , specifically on astrocytes potently attenuates auto immune inflammation and reduces astrocyte pro - duction of the pro - inflammatory cytokines CCL2 and CCL7 ( REFS 74 , 75 ) . Astrocytes and leukocyte aggregation The immune system consists of billions of motile leu - kocytes that circulate throughout the body 76 . Their navigation , interactions and functions are orchestrated by chemokines and cytokines 76 , which are produced by leukocytes themselves and by resident cells in organs and systems such as the CNS . Various aspects of leukocyte instruction are dependent on stochastic interactions , which are facilitated by the formation of leukocyte aggre - gates in lymph nodes or in specialized structures in certain organs 77 , 78 . Organized aggregates of leukocytes within the CNS are of interest in terms of their roles in infections and autoimmune inflammation 3 , 78 – 82 , as well as their potential roles after CNS injury or during degenerative disease . As discussed above , astrocytes form borders and functional barriers to non - neural tissues that exhibit increased immune cell trafficking . Because astro - cytes have the combined capacity for recruitment and restriction of leukocytes ( FIG . 3 ) , they are well placed to facilitate both the formation and the instruction of leukocyte aggregates in perivascular spaces , peri - meningeal locations and areas of tissue damage after trauma , ischaemia , infection , degenerative disease or autoimmune inflammation ( FIG . 2Aa – Ca ) . Perivascular lymphocyte aggregates are characteristic of CNS viral infections . Recent studies show that during recovery from viral encephalomyelitis , multiple changes in the brain microenvironment not only facilitate B cell entry but also support the proliferation , differentiation and long - term survival of antiviral antibody - secreting cells in perivascular spaces that are inside the BBB 82 . Perivascular lymphocyte aggregates are surrounded by barrier - forming reactive astrocytes , which can produce many of the chemokines and cytokines implicated in B cell recruitment and retention in the CNS , includ - ing CCL2 , CCL5 , CXCL9 , CXCL10 , IL - 10 and B cell - activating factor ( BAFF ; also known as TNFSF13B ) ( FIG . 2Aa ; TABLES 2 , 3 ) . Meningeal and perivascular aggregates of inflam - matory leukocytes are characteristic of autoimmune inflammation 3 , 78 – 81 . Meningeal leukocyte aggregates are also separated from adjacent neural parenchyma by barrier - forming reactive astrocytes , and these astrocytes are similarly well positioned to contribute to the forma - tion and persistence of meningeal leukocyte aggregates through their ability to produce numerous chemokines and cytokines involved in the recruitment and instruction of diverse leukocytes ( TABLES 2 , 3 ) , as well as through their ability to restrict leukocyte migration during autoimmune inflammation ( FIG . 2Ba ; TABLE 1 ) . Although less well studied , aggregates of inflamma - tory leukocytes are also found in the non - neural lesion cores that form after CNS damage caused by trauma , ischaemia , chronic epilepsy and chronic neurodegenera - tive insults 1 ( FIG . 2Ca ) . These leukocyte aggregates are also surrounded by scar - forming reactive astrocytes that sep - arate them from adjacent neural parenchyma ( FIG . 2Ca ) , and these border - forming astrocytes not only contribute to the formation of leukocyte aggregates through their ability to produce numerous molecules that recruit and restrict leukocyte migration ( FIG . 3 , parts 1 , 2 , 5 ) but also have the potential to instruct leukocytes via the mol - ecules they produce ( FIG . 3 , part 3 ; TABLES 2 , 3 ) . The formation of leukocyte aggregates during CNS inflammation could have various roles , such as facilitat - ing the transfer of molecular instructions among leuko - cytes , from locally resident CNS cells to leukocytes , and from leukocytes to local CNS cells , including astrocytes . In addition , the release of antibodies and other mol - ecules produced by leukocyte aggregates within the BBB could be important in clearing CNS infections or clear - ing debris and achieving repair after CNS damage . The formation and ongoing instruction of leukocyte aggre - gates could also have maladaptive roles that exacerbate and perpetuate CNS autoimmune inflammation . In this regard , certain evidence suggests that T cell activation may occur in leukocyte aggregates within CNS lesions in neuromyelitis optica 83 , and astrocytes have causal roles in this disorder , as discussed below . Thus , multiple lines of evidence implicate important but underappreciated roles for astrocytes in the forma - tion , retention and instruction of leukocyte aggregates in specific CNS tissue compartments in different contexts . In microbial infections and after CNS damage due to trauma or ischaemia , astrocytes are likely to have adaptive roles in clearing debris , clearing pathogens and repairing tissue . In light of these important , potent and widely exercised roles , it is perhaps not surprising that certain astrocyte effects , dysfunctions or losses of function may contribute to diverse disease mechanisms . Astrocyte impact on CNS disorders Given the many ways in which astrocytes can interact with immune and inflammatory cells , there is increasing interest in the impact of astrocytes on inflammation in Figure 2 | Dysfunction of astrocyte functional barriers lining inflamed non - neural tissue leads to increased spread of neurotoxic inflammation into adjacent neural parenchyma . Aa | Along blood vessels , during autoimmune inflammation or certain infections , leukocytes are recruited across the barriers formed by endothelial cells and the endothelial basement membrane ( EBM ) and collect in the perivascular space ( PVS ) . However , they are restricted from passing freely into CNS neural parenchyma by molecular functional barriers presented by the parenchymal basement membrane ( PBM ) and astrocyte endfeet . Ab | When astrocyte endfeet and the PBM are disrupted or rendered dysfunctional by experimental transgenic manipulations or by certain disease mechanisms , cytotoxic inflammation spreads into and damages CNS parenchyma ( as indicated by the dashed outlines ) . Ba | Along meninges , during infections and autoimmune inflammation , leukocytes freely traffic and collect in the subarachnoid space ( SAS ) but are restricted from passing freely into CNS parenchyma by molecular functional barriers presented by the PBM and astrocyte endfeet . Bb | When astrocyte endfeet and the PBM are disrupted or rendered dysfunctional by experimental transgenic manipulations , cytotoxic inflammation spreads from the SAS into CNS parenchyma . Ca | At tissue lesions , leukocytes freely traffic and collect in non - neural lesion cores , but they are largely excluded from adjacent viable CNS parenchyma when astrocyte scars and the PBM are intact and functional . Cb | When astrocyte scars and the PBM are disrupted or rendered dysfunctional by experimental transgenic manipulations , cytotoxic inflammation spreads from lesion cores into adjacent CNS parenchyma , resulting in neural degeneration and increased lesion size . ◀ R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 16 | MAY 2015 | 255 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved diverse CNS disorders . It is important to emphasize that astrocyte roles in CNS inflammation are not uniform or stereotypical , but instead are heterogeneous and context dependent , as determined by a multitude of specific sig - nalling events . Thus , astrocyte effects on inflammation may vary not only among different CNS disorders but also within the same disorder , as determined by specific circumstances such as the time course of the pathogenic mechanisms , location within the CNS or concomitant exposure to PAMPs and cytokines that are derived from local or peripheral pathogens . In this regard , it is also interesting to consider that astrocyte dysfunctions , and perhaps astrocyte genetic polymorphisms , have the potential to contribute to CNS disorders 7 , 15 . Figure 3 | Pro - inflammatory and anti - inflammatory molecular mechanisms of astrocyte borders and functional barriers . Entry of leukocytes into CNS parenchyma requires active recruitment across multiple cellular barriers , including the endothelial blood – brain barrier ( BBB ) , the endothelial basement membrane ( EBM ) , the parenchymal basement membrane ( PBM ) and astrocytic functional barriers . Different molecules produced by astrocytes can take part in recruiting , restricting and instructing leukocytes in the CNS , as well as in promoting the resolution of inflammation over time . Thus , in response to different signalling mechanisms that are generated in different settings and at different times in relation to insult progression , astrocytes can , in different contexts , release molecules that : disrupt the BBB by signalling to endothelia ( part 1 ) ; promote leukocyte extravasation into the perivascular space ( PVS ) , subarachnoid space ( SAS ) or lesion cores ( part 2 ) ; instruct leukocytes ( part 3 ) ; recruit leukocytes into CNS parenchyma ( part 4 ) ; restrict leukocyte entry into CNS parenchyma ( part 5 ) ; repair the BBB by signalling to pericytes ( part 6 ) ; promote resolution of inflammation ( part 7 ) ; or repair the BBB by signalling to endothelia ( part 8 ) . APOE , apolipoprotein E ; CCL , CC - chemokine ligand ; CRYAB , α - crystallin B chain ; CXCL , CXC - chemokine ligand ; CYA , cyclophilin A ; DA , dopamine ; DAMP , damage ( or danger ) - associated molecular pattern ; DRD2 , dopamine D2 receptor ; eNOS , endothelial nitric oxide synthase ; ER α , oestrogen receptor - α ; ES , oestrogen ; IFN γ , interferon - γ ; IL , interleukin ; miR , microRNA ; MMP9 , matrix metalloproteinase 9 ; NF - κ B , nuclear factor - κ B ; NO , nitric oxide ; PAMP , pathogen - associated molecular pattern ; PGE , prostaglandin E ; RA , retinoic acid ; SHH , Sonic hedgehog ; SMO , Smoothened homologue ; SOCS3 , suppressor of cytokine signalling 3 ; STAT3 , signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 ; TGF β , transforming growth factor - β ; TLR , Toll - like receptor ; TNF α , tumour necrosis factor - α ; VEGFA , vascular endothelial growth factor A ; VEGFR2 , VEGF receptor 2 . Nature Reviews | Neuroscience Neural parenchyma PBM Astrocytefunctional barrier Non - neural tissue EBM Pericyte CCL2 , CCL5 , CCL7 , CCL8 and CCL12 CXCL1 , CXCL9 , CXCL10 , CXCL12 and CXCL16 IL - 1 β , IL - 6 , IL - 7 , IL - 11 , IL - 15 etc . • • • Astrocyte endfoot Pro - inﬂammatory Anti - inﬂammatory SAS Lesion core Bloodstream eNOS VEGFR2 VEGFA VEGFA 1 DAMPs PAMPs TLR IFN γ IL - 1 β IL - 1R SOCS3 Recruitment PGE NO T cell Astrocyte NF - κ B ? ↑ NF - κ B IL - 17 TNF α ACT1 ↓ CCL2 RA ES ER α TNF α A20 ↓ NF - κ B Restriction 5 SHH SHH 8 CYA – NF - κ B – MMP9 APOE APOE 6 TGF β TGF β IL - 10 IL - 6 GP130 STAT3 miR - 181 CRYAB DA DRD2 SMO Recruitment 2 Instruction 3 Resolution 7 PGENO RA 4 PVS Tight junction Endothelial cell Myeloid cell R E V I E W S 256 | MAY 2015 | VOLUME 16 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved Trauma and stroke CNS tissue damage caused by focal traumatic injury or ischaemia gives rise to focal inflammation surrounded by astrocyte scars 1 . Under normal circumstances in otherwise healthy subjects , astrocytes contribute to regulating this inflammation in different ways , first by mounting pro - inflammatory responses that help to recruit leukocytes , and second by forming essential barriers that limit the spread of inflammatory cells , as discussed above ( FIGS 1 – 3 ) . These astrocyte roles serve adaptive functions by helping to attract a robust inflam - matory response to sites of tissue damage , where it is needed to clear debris , neutralize pathogens and pro - mote tissue repair , while at the same time protecting immediately adjacent viable neural tissue . Experimental disruption of astrocyte scar formation after focal trauma or stroke is associated with the spread of neurotoxic inflammation , increased lesion size , loss of neurons and decreased function ( FIG . 2 ; TABLE 1 ) . Such findings suggest that astrocyte dysfunctions could contribute to patho - genic mechanisms in various ways . Astrocyte dysfunc - tions could be caused by genetic polymorphisms or by exposure to molecular signals deriving from infections , which might alter astrocyte inflammatory regulation during the response to trauma or stroke in ways that lead to detrimental effects . There is evidence for such possibilities . For example , astrocytes are major sources of APOE , and astrocyte - derived APOE signalling to peri - cytes is important in maintaining a functioning BBB 53 ( FIG . 3 , part 6 ) . In humans , polymorphisms of APOE are associated with various disease mechanisms , and APOE4 is a risk factor associated with worse progno - sis not only in Alzheimer disease but also in stroke and traumatic injuries 84 , 85 . In transgenic mouse experiments , astrocyte - derived APOE4 was associated with poor BBB maintenance 53 . Astrocyte signalling mechanisms may also be altered by infections . There is compelling evi - dence that inflammatory mediators produced by local and peripheral infections can markedly skew astrocytes towards pro - inflammatory and cytotoxic responses 37 , 38 , which could have detrimental effects in trauma or stroke , as discussed below . Finally , it is noteworthy that CNS lesions after trauma and stroke are surrounded by large areas of perimeter tissue in which hypertrophic reactive astrocytes are intermingled with functioning neurons , and these astrocytes also respond to inflam - matory stimuli emanating from the lesions 1 . Increasing evidence suggests that astrocytes have important roles in maintaining and modulating neuronal synaptic func - tions 86 , 87 . The extent to which inflammation acting on reactive astrocytes located among functioning neu - rons affects local circuit function is an important but under - studied area 88 . Astrocytes and autoimmune disorders Compelling experimental and clinical evidence indi - cates that astrocytes have crucial and complex roles in CNS autoimmune inflammation . Numerous loss - of - function studies using the experimental auto - immune encephalo myelitis model demonstrate that astrocytes contribute to both attracting autoimmune inflammation and restricting its spread in vivo ( FIG . 3 ; TABLES 1 , 4 ) . These experimental observations are likely to help to illuminate important pathophysiological mechanisms in clinical CNS auto immune diseases . An illustrative example is neuromyelitis optica ( NMO ) , a CNS inflammatory demyelinating and degenerative disease with pronounced tissue destruction and severe symptoms that can include vision loss and paralysis . NMO has been causally linked to autoantibodies that bind specifically to aquaporin 4 ( AQP4 ) on astrocytes and are implicated in complement - mediated astrocyte lysis 89 , 90 . There is now persuasive experimental and clin - ical evidence that AQP4 is not simply a passive autoim - mune CNS antigen ; rather , binding of AQP4 - specific antibodies ( also known as NMO - immunoglobulin G ( IgG ) ) to astrocytes leads to disruption of astrocyte pro - inflammatory and anti - inflammatory functions that have causal and disease - defining roles in NMO pathophysiology and disease progression . Experimental evidence for this notion includes observations that : combined exposure of astrocytes to AQP4 - specific anti - bodies and complement in vivo leads to lytic astrocyte destruction in experimental animals 91 ; experimentally induced astrocyte destruction or dysfunction by diverse transgenically targeted mechanisms markedly exacer - bates the spread and severity of inflammation dur - ing experimental CNS autoimmune inflammation 32 , 56 ( TABLE 1 ) ; and binding of NMO - causing AQP4 - specific antibodies to astrocytes in vitro triggers the release Table 4 | Pro - inflammatory astrocyte functions and molecular mechanisms Disease model Deleted or downregulated astrocyte molecule Functions revealed by transgenic loss - of - function studies in mice Refs Spinal cord injury SOCS3 Promotes inflammation 41 NF - κ B Promotes inflammation 40 Experimental autoimmune encephalo myelitis NF - κ B Promotes inflammation 42 ACT1 Promotes IL - 17 - induced inflammation 48 CCL2 Promotes inflammation 43 , 44 CXCL10 Promotes inflammation 45 VEGF • Opens blood – brain barrier • Promotes inflammation 46 , 47 CCL2 , CC - chemokine ligand 2 ; CXCL10 , CXC - chemokine ligand 10 ; NF - κ B , nuclear factor - κ B ; SOCS3 , suppressor of cytokine signalling 3 ; VEGF , vascular endothelial growth factor . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 16 | MAY 2015 | 257 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved from astrocytes of a broad range of pro - inflammatory molecules 92 . These experimental findings illuminate clinical evidence that both clinical progression and tis - sue lesions are markedly more severe in patients with NMO who have an autoimmune - mediated CNS pathol - ogy associated with AQP4 - specific autoantibodies than in patients who have myelin - specific autoantibodies but not AQP4 - specific antibodies ; the latter is referred to by some as an NMO spectrum disorder 93 – 95 , but it is likely to be a different mechanistic clinical entity 96 . Thus , both experimental and clinical evidence sup - port the notion of NMO as an astrocytopathy in which autoimmune pathophysiology is complicated by auto - immune disruption of astrocyte immune regulatory functions . Taken together , available evidence supports a working model of cellular and molecular pathophysio - logical mechanisms in which astrocytes have active and causal roles in different phases of NMO progression ( FIG . 4 ) . According to this model , focal pathology begins with binding of AQP4 - specific antibodies to astrocyte membranes ( FIG . 4a ) . CNS entry of AQP4 - specific anti - bodies could occur through sporadic or disease - specific breaches of the BBB . Low - level breaches of BBB are well recognized to occur sporadically in an otherwise healthy CNS through various mechanisms that can allow CNS entry of small but functional amounts of circulating IgG 22 , 97 . Disease - specific breaches could include B cell pro - duction of AQP4 - specific antibodies inside the CNS 98 . As AQP4 - specific antibodies bound to astrocyte membranes accumulates , it either directly or indirectly provokes astrocyte production of multiple molecules that help to recruit and activate inflammatory infiltrates ( FIG . 4b ) . In this context , it is noteworthy that there is evidence for activation and instruction of T cells within the CNS in NMO lesions 83 . With time , AQP4 - specific antibodies lead to complement - mediated lytic astrocyte destruction 89 , 90 , which in turn results in loss of barrier function and the spread of neurotoxic inflammation ( FIG . 4c ) . This spread of inflammation is associated with the spread of additional BBB breakdown , entry of more AQP4 - specific antibodies Figure 4 | Model of neuromyelitis optica as an astrocytopathy with causal contributions of astrocyte gains and losses of functions at different stages of disease progression . a | Stage 1 : sporadic or disease - specific breaches of the blood – brain barrier lead to binding of aquaporin 4 ( AQP4 ) - specific antibodies to astrocyte membranes , which results in astrocyte functional changes . b | Stage 2 : AQP4 - specific antibody binding leads to astrocyte production of pro - inflammatory molecules 92 and recruitment of leukocytes , initially into the perivascular space ( PVS ) . This process may be exacerbated by concomitant exposure to inflammatory mediators derived from local or peripheral infections , such as damage ( or danger ) - associated molecular patterns ( DAMPs ) , pathogen - associated molecular patterns ( PAMPs ) or interferon - γ ( IFN γ ) . This process may be attenuated by oestrogen - related signalling mechanisms . c | Stage 3 : complement - mediated astrocyte destruction 89 , 90 ( indicated by the dashed outlines ) leads to loss of astrocyte barrier functions and subsequent spread of neurotoxic inflammation into adjacent neural parenchyma . CCL , CC - chemokine ligand ; CXCL , CXC - chemokine ligand ; EBM , endothelial basement membrane ; ER α , oestrogen receptor - α ; NF - κ B , nuclear factor - κ B ; PBM , parenchymal basement membrane . Nature Reviews | Neuroscience Neural parenchyma PBM Astrocytefunctional barrier Non - neural tissue a b c Pericyte EBM Neuron Astrocyte T cell Tight junction Endothelial cell AQP4 - speciﬁc antibody Macrophage Bloodstream Restriction Astrocyte endfoot CCL2 , CCL5 , CCL7 and CXCL1 PVS Recruitment ER α IFN γ DAMPsPAMPs NF - κ B Time Myeloid cell Stage 1 AQP4 - speciﬁc antibody entry Stage 2 Gain of leukocyte recruitment Stage 3 Loss of barrier functions ER α Complement R E V I E W S 258 | MAY 2015 | VOLUME 16 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved and the subsequent cascade of astrocyte gain and loss of function with its associated inflammatory pathology . This drives the local disease process in a positive feedback manner , leading to contiguous spread through adjacent CNS tissue and generation of the large , contiguous lesions that are characteristic of AQP4 - associated NMO . It is also noteworthy that early binding of AQP4 - specific antibod - ies to astrocyte membranes ( FIG . 4a ) may alter astrocyte homeostatic functions , such as regulation of extracellular fluid and ion balance . Disruption of astrocyte mainte - nance of extracellular ion homeostasis can affect neu - ronal excitability and neural circuit function 99 . Such disruptions could explain early neurological symptoms associated with NMO before the onset of overt tissue degeneration . Recognition of NMO as an astrocyto - pathy with different stages and mechanisms of disease progression as they relate to different perturbations of astrocyte immune regulatory functions ( FIG . 4 ) may also reveal new opportunities for treatment strategies in addition to those already under consideration 100 . From a broader perspective , recognition of the central role of astrocyte functions in CNS immune and inflammatory responses has fundamental implications for other CNS autoimmune disorders in which astrocyte roles are only beginning to emerge . Multiple sclerosis is a major CNS autoimmune disor - der . For much of the long history of investigating multiple sclerosis , astrocytes were regarded as non - participatory bystanders that responded to , but had little or no role in , disease mechanisms 35 . This view is now changing , and there is abundant and steadily growing evidence indicating that astrocytes actively participate in both lesion development and repair , as reviewed recently 35 . Neuropathological specimens of active multiple sclerosis lesions exhibit unambiguous early damage to peri vascular astrocyte endfeet 35 . Although causation cannot be inferred in such specimens , the astrocyte appearance and con - comitant local inflammation in such clinical specimens is comparable with the experimentally induced loss of astro - cyte barrier functions described above ( FIG . 2 ; TABLE 1 ) . There is also compelling evidence that astrocytes take part in both pro - inflammatory and anti - inflammatory mecha - nisms in multiple sclerosis and its experimental models 35 . These findings fit well with the experimental findings and models discussed here ( FIGS 1 – 3 ; TABLES 1 – 4 ) . Given the many ways in which astrocytes can participate in pro - inflammatory and anti - inflammatory mechanisms asso - ciated with multiple sclerosis and its experimental models , it is interesting to consider that astrocyte dysfunctions , or differences in astrocyte functions that are secondary to genetic polymorphisms or induced by concomitant local or peripheral infections , may influence the susceptibility of different individuals to multiple sclerosis or may con - tribute to the waxing and waning of symptoms . From a therapeutic perspective , a strategy involving reduction of astrocyte pro - inflammatory effects might prove fruitful . The roles of autoantibodies are less well defined in multiple sclerosis than in NMO . The most conspicu - ous autoantibodies in multiple sclerosis specifically recognize myelin peptides , which could be regarded as passive antigens . Recently , autoantibodies against the astrocyte membrane potassium channel K ir 4 . 1 ( inwardly rectifying potassium channel 4 . 1 ) have been reported in nearly half of a cohort of patients with multiple scle - rosis 101 , although another report did not find this in a different cohort of patients 102 . The functional conse - quences of K ir 4 . 1 - specific antibodies with respect to astrocyte homeostatic or immune regulatory functions are not yet known . Work is needed to identify potential effects of these and other autoantibodies on astrocytes in multiple sclerosis and other auto immune disorders with CNS involvement , such as lupus . Identification of diverse antibodies among different patient subsets and recognition that certain antibodies may alter immune regulatory functions of CNS - intrinsic cells such as astrocytes may shed light on the diversity of clinical syndromes associated with CNS autoimmunity . Astrocytes and sex differences A striking feature of CNS autoimmune diseases is their markedly increased prevalence among women 103 , 104 . Conservative estimates are that for every male affected by NMO or multiple sclerosis , there are 7 and 2 females affected , respectively . The cellular and molecular mecha - nisms that underlie these differences are incompletely understood and are likely to be multifactorial . Intriguing evidence suggests that astrocytes may contribute to these differences . As discussed throughout this Review , astro - cytes are well positioned to exert powerful effects on CNS inflammation . Signalling through ERα on astro - cytes mediates potent anti - inflammatory and neuro - protective effects during autoimmune inflammation 74 , 75 . As discussed above , in NMO , which exhibits a remark - able prevalence among females , there is strong evidence that astrocytes have active , causal roles in the spread of neuro toxic inflammation through both gains and losses of their function ( FIG . 4 ) . These findings strongly suggest that further investigation of potential astrocyte contributions to sex differences in mechanisms of CNS inflammation is warranted . Neurodegenerative diseases Astrogliosis is a feature of all neurodegenerative pathologies , but astrocyte roles in most neurodegen - erative disorders are only beginning to be investigated . Inflammation occurs during the course of most neuro - degenerative pathologies , and its impact is of increas - ing interest . Various lines of evidence are emerging and potentially converging as molecular dissection of vari - ous processes illuminates cellular and molecular mech - anisms . For example , APOE secretion by astrocytes suppresses a CYA – NF - κB – MMP9 pathway in pericytes that increases BBB permeability and is pro - inflamma - tory 53 ( FIG . 3 , part 6 ) . The APOE4 allele is associated with increased risk of Alzheimer disease , and astro - cytes that have been modified to express APOE4 cause BBB disruption , predisposing to inflammation 53 . Synapse loss is a key feature of Alzheimer disease , and astrocytes take part in the induction and pruning of synapses using molecular cues that partly overlap with immune system cues 105 , 106 . Astrocyte expression of some of these cues is modified by inflammatory R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 16 | MAY 2015 | 259 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved stimuli . Attenuation of reactive astrogliosis exacerbates amyloid - β accumulation and inflammation in mouse models of Alzheimer disease 60 . In a mouse model of a neuro degenerative lipid storage defect , experimental attenuation of reactive astrogliosis markedly exacer - bates inflammation and degeneration 59 . In Huntington disease and its models , both astrocytes and as neurons accumulate nuclear inclusions of mutant huntingtin protein ( mHTT ) . In transgenic mouse models , astro - cytes with mHTT downregulate the K ir 4 . 1 potassium channel , leading to increased extracellular potas - sium concentrations and increased neuronal excit - ability , which are likely to contribute to and exacerbate direct effects of mHTT on neurons 87 , 99 . It is interesting that these changes occur before the onset of detectable astrogliosis , leading to the important recognition that astrogliosis and astrocyte dysfunction are independ - ent and separable events 99 . In Parkinson disease and its models , astrocytes are also implicated as regulating inflammation and having both neuroprotective and neuro degenerative potential 107 . It is beyond the scope of this Review to examine the many ways in which astrocytes may affect the broad spectrum of neurodegenerative diseases . Nevertheless , a rapidly growing literature points towards crucial roles for astrocytes in modulating inflammation and disease progression in diverse neurodegenerative disorders , and indicates that both losses and gains of astrocyte functions have the potential to attenuate or exacerbate these conditions in context - specific manners . The over - simplified assumption that astrogliosis is uniformly harmful and should be broadly attenuated in neuro - degenerative conditions is incorrect and no longer ten - able . Specific mechanisms need to be identified and addressed . Astrocytes and infections CNS - intrinsic infections . Astrocytes contribute to the control and clearance of CNS - intrinsic infections in multiple ways . Astrocyte barrier functions along blood vessels and meninges are crucial for limiting the spread of infections through CNS parenchyma 55 ( FIG . 2 ; TABLE 1 ) . As discussed above , in addition to barrier functions , astrocytes take part in the recruitment and instruc - tion of CNS - intrinsic leukocyte aggregates ( FIG . 3 , parts 2 , 3 ) , and such aggregates are thought to contrib - ute to immune responses that control and clear micro - bial infections , particularly the production inside the CNS endothelial BBB of antibodies that are crucial for viral clearance 82 . Astrocyte functions that help to con - trol and clear infections and related inflammation are particularly important along meningeal borders , where leukocyte trafficking for immune surveillance and inflammatory activity are high to enable rapid detec - tion and response to pathogens that gain entry into the CNS protective meningeal shield 3 , 23 . Restricting these processes to the meninges is crucial to protect the immediately adjacent CNS parenchyma — for exam - ple , the cerebral cortex . The transition from meningitis to cerebritis is a well - known devastating progression in CNS clinical infections . Impact of peripheral infections on astrocytes and CNS inflammation . The goal of limiting microbial infections is likely to have powerfully shaped the evolution of CNS injury responses . As a consequence , cells responding to CNS insults are highly sensitive to PAMPs and molecular cues associated with infections 1 . There is growing aware - ness that such molecular cues released by local as well as distant peripheral infections can markedly alter the characteristics of inflammation associated with diverse CNS insults in both experimental and clinical settings 1 . Astrocytes are exquisitely sensitive to infection - associ - ated PAMPs and cytokines , which can drive astrocyte transcriptome profiles towards highly pro - inflam - matory and cytotoxic phenotypes 37 – 39 . Although such responses may be essential and beneficial if triggered by local microbial infections , they could be detrimental if triggered by circulating PAMPs generated by periph - eral infections . Thus , astrocytes exposed to circulating PAMPs could inappropriately contribute to recruiting cytotoxic leukocytes ( neutrophils , eosinophils and mac - rophages ) to CNS insults that would otherwise be sterile ( uninfected ) tissue responses . Notably , there is clinical epidemiological evidence that peripheral infections have a negative impact on neurological outcome after spinal cord injury 108 . It is also interesting to consider that astrocytes stim - ulated by PAMPs and inflammatory cytokines might contribute to autoimmune potential by producing local levels of molecular cues that recruit and instruct leu - kocytes in the CNS . The signalling events that initiate CNS autoimmune disorders or trigger their relapses are not well understood . It is noteworthy that induction of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis with myelin antigens is markedly accelerated by , and in some cases dependent on , concomitant inoculation of PAMP - related immune stimulatory molecules 109 . Although these immune stimulatory molecules are generally thought to act entirely through the peripheral immune system , they will also push astrocyte transcription towards a markedly pro - inflammatory profile , which may contribute to the induction or persistence of auto - immune pathology . In support of this notion , exposure to LPS , the prototypical PAMP , drives astrocytes towards highly pro - inflammatory molecular phenotypes 37 , 38 , and deletion of CCL2 production selectively from astrocytes attenuates autoimmune clinical symptoms and inflam - mation 43 , 44 . Such astrocyte - related mechanisms are only beginning to be explored but hold much potential for adding to the understanding of CNS autoimmune pathophysiology . In general , an important emerging topic that warrants further investigation is the impact of concomitant local or peripheral microbial infections and inflammation on astrocyte and other glial cell responses to diverse CNS insults and their potential contribution to neurodegenerative and autoimmune events . Cytokines and behavioural disturbances It deserves brief mention that astrocytes may contrib - ute to behavioural effects associated with inflammatory stimuli . Astrocytes can modulate neuronal function and affect complex behaviours such as sleep 86 , pain 110 , R E V I E W S 260 | MAY 2015 | VOLUME 16 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 1 . Burda , J . E . & Sofroniew , M . V . Reactive gliosis and the multicellular response to CNS damage and disease . Neuron 81 , 229 – 248 ( 2014 ) . 2 . Goverman , J . Autoimmune T cell responses in the central nervous system . Nature Rev . Immunol . 9 , 393 – 407 ( 2009 ) . 3 . Ransohoff , R . M . & Engelhardt , B . The anatomical and cellular basis of immune surveillance in the central nervous system . Nature Rev . Immunol . 12 , 623 – 635 ( 2012 ) . 4 . Prinz , M . & Priller , J . Microglia and brain macrophages in the molecular age : from origin to neuropsychiatric disease . Nature Rev . Neurosci . 15 , 300 – 312 ( 2014 ) . 5 . Barres , B . A . The mystery and magic of glia : a perspective on their roles in health and disease . Neuron 60 , 430 – 440 ( 2008 ) . 6 . Sofroniew , M . V . & Vinters , H . V . Astrocytes : biology and pathology . Acta Neuropathol . 119 , 7 – 35 ( 2010 ) . 7 . Sofroniew , M . V . Astrogliosis . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 7 , a020420 ( 2014 ) . 8 . Pekny , M . & Nilsson , M . Astrocyte activation and reactive gliosis . Glia 50 , 427 – 434 ( 2005 ) . 9 . Sofroniew , M . V . Molecular dissection of reactive astrogliosis and glial scar formation . Trends Neurosci . 32 , 638 – 647 ( 2009 ) . 10 . Kang , W . & Hebert , J . M . Signaling pathways in reactive astrocytes , a genetic perspective . Mol . Neurobiol . 43 , 147 – 154 ( 2011 ) . 11 . Anderson , M . A . , Ao , Y . & Sofroniew , M . V . Heterogeneity of reactive astrocytes . Neurosci . Lett . 565 , 23 – 29 ( 2014 ) . 12 . Sofroniew , M . V . Reactive astrocytes in neural repair and protection . Neuroscientist 5 , 400 – 407 ( 2005 ) . 13 . Silver , J . & Miller , J . H . Regeneration beyond the glial scar . Nature Rev . Neurosci . 5 , 146 – 156 ( 2004 ) . 14 . Hamby , M . E . & Sofroniew , M . V . Reactive astrocytes as therapeutic targets for CNS disorders . Neurotherapeutics 7 , 494 – 506 ( 2010 ) . 15 . Verkhratsky , A . et al . Neurological diseases as primary gliopathies : a reassessment of neurocentrism . ASN Neuro 4 , e00082 ( 2012 ) . 16 . Bianchi , M . G . , Bardelli , D . , Chiu , M . & Bussolati , O . Changes in the expression of the glutamate transporter EAAT3 / EAAC1 in health and disease . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 71 , 2001 – 2015 ( 2014 ) . 17 . Kono , H . & Rock , K . L . How dying cells alert the immune system to danger . Nature Rev . Immunol . 8 , 279 – 289 ( 2008 ) . 18 . Janeway , C . A . Jr & Medzhitov , R . Innate immune recognition . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 20 , 197 – 216 ( 2002 ) . 19 . Iwasaki , A . & Medzhitov , R . Regulation of adaptive immunity by the innate immune system . Science 327 , 291 – 295 ( 2010 ) . 20 . Galea , I . , Bechmann , I . & Perry , V . H . What is immune privilege ( not ) ? Trends Immunol . 28 , 12 – 18 ( 2007 ) . 21 . Owens , T . , Bechmann , I . & Engelhardt , B . Perivascular spaces and the two steps to neuroinflammation . J . Neuropathol . Exp . Neurol . 67 , 1113 – 1121 ( 2008 ) . 22 . Broadwell , R . D . & Sofroniew , M . V . Serum proteins by‑pass the blood brain barrier for extracellular entry to the CNS . Exp . Neurol . 120 , 246 – 263 ( 1993 ) . 23 . Engelhardt , B . & Coisne , C . Fluids and barriers of the CNS establish immune privilege by confining immune surveillance to a two‑walled castle moat surrounding the CNS castle . Fluids Barriers CNS 8 , 4 ( 2011 ) . 24 . Wilson , E . H . , Weninger , W . & Hunter , C . A . Trafficking of immune cells in the central nervous system . J . Clin . Invest . 120 , 1368 – 1379 ( 2010 ) . 25 . Kawano , H . et al . Role of the lesion scar in the response to damage and repair of the central nervous system . Cell Tissue Res . 349 , 169 – 180 ( 2012 ) . 26 . Wanner , I . B . et al . Glial scar borders are formed by newly proliferated , elongated astrocytes that interact to corral inflammatory and fibrotic cells via STAT3‑dependent mechanisms after spinal cord injury . J . Neurosci . 33 , 12870 – 12886 ( 2013 ) . mood and depression 86 , 111 – 113 , as well as certain child - hood behavioural syndromes that involve disorders of synapse development 105 , 106 , 114 . Cytokines and inflamma - tory stimuli are increasingly being implicated in sickness behaviours , pain , sleep disturbances , mood disorders and certain behavioural developmental disorders 115 – 121 . Cytokines and inflammatory stimuli exert powerful effects on astrocyte gene expression and physiology in ways that can markedly affect synaptic and neuronal functions 38 , 88 . The broad mixture of astrocyte signalling capabilities provides astrocytes with the potential to mediate crosstalk between immune or inflammatory and neural systems 88 . Although much work is still needed , these types of interactions represent an exciting emerg - ing area of research that has the potential to deepen our understanding of how signalling events associated with inflammation can affect behaviour and its disturbances . Astrocyte dysfunctions and astrocytopathies There is steadily accumulating evidence that astro - cyte dysfunction can provoke or contribute to diverse clinical neurological disorders 6 , 7 , 15 . Potential causes of astrocyte dysfunction include genetic mutations , genetic polymorphisms , metabolic disturbances , co - morbid infections or autoimmune attack . For example , in Alexander disease , a dominant mutation of the GFAP gene is associated with inflammatory degenerative changes , particularly of white matter , and severe neuro - logical dysfunction 122 , 123 . In familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis , a dominant mutation of the SOD1 ( superoxide dismutase 1 , soluble ) gene leads to production of neuro - toxic molecules . Targeting mutant SOD1 selectively to astrocytes in transgenic mice is sufficient to cause neu - ronal dysfunction and degeneration 124 – 126 , but in the full disease , mutant SOD1 in neurons also contributes to neuronal degeneration . In Huntington disease , as dis - cussed above , astrocytes accumulate mHTT nuclear inclusions , leading to K ir 4 . 1 downregulation in genetic mouse models and thus increased levels of extra cellular potassium and neuronal excitability 87 , 99 , which are likely to contribute to and exacerbate direct effects of mHTT on neurons . In addition , genetic poly morphisms of APOE in the form of allele 4 are associated with BBB disruption and increased risk and severity in Alzheimer disease and traumatic brain injury 53 . Finally , in NMO , auto immune targeting of astrocytes leads to both gain and loss of astrocyte immune regulatory functions , leading to the spread of neurotoxic inflammation ( FIG . 4 ) . Observations such as these provide compelling support for the emerging concept of astrocytopathies , in which gain or loss of astrocyte functions is either the primary cause of or an important contributor to the pathophysiology and neurological symptoms of certain CNS disorders . Concluding remarks Inflammation is an essential response to CNS insults that is crucial for the clearance of potentially toxic cel - lular debris and pathogens . CNS parenchyma is partic - ularly vulnerable to the rapid spread of inflammatory destruction . Astrocytes form borders and functional barriers that help to restrict the trafficking of immune and inflammatory cells to non - neural cellular compart - ments both in healthy CNS and during the response to CNS insults , thereby limiting the spread of potentially neurotoxic inflammation . Astrocytes can also con - tribute to the recruitment , retention and instruction of leukocytes in CNS tissue . Although astrogliosis and astrocyte scars are sometimes thought of as detrimen - tal to CNS recovery , both experimental and clinical observations now indicate that loss or dysfunction of scar - forming astrocytes can severely exacerbate CNS inflammation and tissue damage . Compelling evidence implicates astrocytes as critical regulators of multiple aspects of CNS inflammation in ways that have the potential to affect outcome after traumatic or ischae - mic damage , infection , neurodegenerative disease and autoimmune disorders . There is growing awareness that a better understanding of astrocyte immune regu - latory mechanisms and their dysfunctions will lead to a greater understanding and safer modulation of CNS inflammation in diverse CNS disorders . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 16 | MAY 2015 | 261 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 27 . Norton , W . T . , Aquino , D . A . , Hozumi , I . , Chiu , F . C . & Brosnan , C . F . Quantitative aspects of reactive gliosis : a review . Neurochem . Res . 17 , 877 – 885 ( 1992 ) . 28 . Bush , T . G . et al . Leukocyte infiltration , neuronal degeneration and neurite outgrowth after ablation of scar‑forming , reactive astrocytes in adult transgenic mice . Neuron 23 , 297 – 308 ( 1999 ) . This early transgenic loss‑of‑function study unexpectedly reveals that newly proliferated , scar‑forming astrocytes restrict the spread of inflammatory cells after CNS damage . 29 . Bush , T . G . et al . Fulminant jejuno‑ileitis following ablation of enteric glia in adult transgenic mice . Cell 93 , 189 – 201 ( 1998 ) . 30 . Faulkner , J . R . et al . Reactive astrocytes protect tissue and preserve function after spinal cord injury . J . Neurosci . 24 , 2143 – 2155 ( 2004 ) . This transgenic loss‑of‑function study shows that newly proliferated , scar‑forming astrocytes have important functions in protecting adjacent neural tissue and thereby help to improve outcome after CNS injury . 31 . Li , L . et al . Protective role of reactive astrocytes in brain ischemia . J . Cereb . Blood Flow Metab . 28 , 468 – 481 ( 2008 ) . 32 . Voskuhl , R . R . et al . Reactive astrocytes form scar‑like perivascular barriers to leukocytes during adaptive immune inflammation of the CNS . J . Neurosci . 29 , 11511 – 11522 ( 2009 ) . 33 . Toft‑Hansen , H . , Fuchtbauer , L . & Owens , T . Inhibition of reactive astrocytosis in established experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis favors infiltration by myeloid cells over T cells and enhances severity of disease . Glia 59 , 166 – 176 ( 2011 ) . 34 . Liu , Z . et al . Beneficial effects of gfap / vimentin reactive astrocytes for axonal remodeling and motor behavioral recovery in mice after stroke . Glia 62 , 2022 – 2033 ( 2014 ) . 35 . Brosnan , C . F . & Raine , C . S . The astrocyte in multiple sclerosis revisited . Glia 61 , 453 – 465 ( 2013 ) . 36 . Eddleston , M . & Mucke , L . Molecular profile of reactive astrocytes — implications for their role in neurological disease . Neuroscience 54 , 15 – 36 ( 1993 ) . 37 . Zamanian , J . L . et al . Genomic analysis of reactive astrogliosis . J . Neurosci . 32 , 6391 – 6410 ( 2012 ) . This study provides evidence for large‑scale differences in transcriptome profiles of reactive astrocytes responding to different stimuli such as stroke or the bacterial protein LPS . 38 . Hamby , M . E . et al . Inflammatory mediators alter the astrocyte transcriptome and calcium signaling elicited by multiple G‑protein‑coupled receptors . J . Neurosci . 32 , 14489 – 14510 ( 2012 ) . 39 . John , G . R . , Lee , S . C . , Song , X . , Rivieccio , M . & Brosnan , C . F . IL‑1‑regulated responses in astrocytes : relevance to injury and recovery . Glia 49 , 161 – 176 ( 2005 ) . 40 . Brambilla , R . et al . Inhibition of astroglial nuclear factor κ B reduces inflammation and improves functional recovery after spinal cord injury . J . Exp . Med . 202 , 145 – 156 ( 2005 ) . 41 . Okada , S . et al . Conditional ablation of Stat3 or Socs3 discloses a dual role for reactive astrocytes after spinal cord injury . Nature Med . 12 , 829 – 834 ( 2006 ) . 42 . Brambilla , R . et al . Transgenic inhibition of astroglial NF‑ κ B improves functional outcome in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis by suppressing chronic central nervous system inflammation . J . Immunol . 182 , 2628 – 2640 ( 2009 ) . 43 . Kim , R . Y . et al . Astrocyte CCL2 sustains immune cell infiltration in chronic experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis . J . Neuroimmunol . 274 , 53 – 61 ( 2014 ) . 44 . Moreno , M . et al . Conditional ablation of astroglial CCL2 suppresses CNS accumulation of M1 macrophages and preserves axons in mice with MOG peptide EAE . J . Neurosci . 34 , 8175 – 8185 ( 2014 ) . 45 . Ko , E . M . et al . Deletion of astroglial CXCL10 delays clinical onset but does not affect progressive axon loss in a murine autoimmune multiple sclerosis model . J . Neuroinflammation 11 , 105 ( 2014 ) . 46 . Argaw , A . T . , Gurfein , B . T . , Zhang , Y . , Zameer , A . & John , G . R . VEGF‑mediated disruption of endothelial CLN‑5 promotes blood – brain barrier breakdown . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 1977 – 1982 ( 2009 ) . 47 . Argaw , A . T . et al . Astrocyte‑derived VEGF‑A drives blood – brain barrier disruption in CNS inflammatory disease . J . Clin . Invest . 122 , 2454 – 2468 ( 2012 ) . This study shows that an astrocyte‑derived molecule , VEGFA , could increase permeability of the BBB and facilitate CNS entry of inflammatory cells . 48 . Kang , Z . et al . Astrocyte‑restricted ablation of interleukin‑17‑induced Act1‑mediated signaling ameliorates autoimmune encephalomyelitis . Immunity 32 , 414 – 425 ( 2010 ) . 49 . Xanthos , D . N . & Sandkuhler , J . Neurogenic neuroinflammation : inflammatory CNS reactions in response to neuronal activity . Nature Rev . Neurosci . 15 , 43 – 53 ( 2014 ) . 50 . Abbott , N . J . , Ronnback , L . & Hansson , E . Astrocyte – endothelial interactions at the blood – brain barrier . Nature Rev . Neurosci . 7 , 41 – 53 ( 2006 ) . 51 . Alvarez , J . I . et al . The Hedgehog pathway promotes blood – brain barrier integrity and CNS immune quiescence . Science 334 , 1727 – 1731 ( 2011 ) . 52 . Alvarez , J . I . , Katayama , T . & Prat , A . Glial influence on the blood brain barrier . Glia 61 , 1939 – 1958 ( 2013 ) . 53 . Bell , R . D . et al . Apolipoprotein E controls cerebrovascular integrity via cyclophilin A . Nature 485 , 512 – 516 ( 2012 ) . This study shows that an astrocyte‑derived molecule , APOE , could facilitate maintenance BBB integrity and thereby protect against CNS inflammation . 54 . Herrmann , J . E . et al . STAT3 is a critical regulator of astrogliosis and scar formation after spinal cord injury . J . Neurosci . 28 , 7231 – 7243 ( 2008 ) . 55 . Drogemuller , K . et al . Astrocyte gp130 expression is critical for the control of Toxoplasma encephalitis . J . Immunol . 181 , 2683 – 2693 ( 2008 ) . This transgenic loss‑of‑function study shows that astrocytes have important functions in restricting the spread of CNS infections . 56 . Haroon , F . et al . GP130‑dependent astrocytic survival is critical for the control of autoimmune central nervous system inflammation . J . Immunol . 186 , 6521 – 6531 ( 2011 ) . 57 . Middeldorp , J . & Hol , E . M . GFAP in health and disease . Prog . Neurobiol . 93 , 421 – 443 ( 2011 ) . 58 . Liedtke , W . , Edelmann , W . , Chiu , F . C . , Kucherlapati , R . & Raine , C . S . Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis in mice lacking glial fibrillary acidic protein is characterized by a more severe clinical course and an infiltrative central nervous system lesion . Am . J . Pathol . 152 , 251 – 259 ( 1998 ) . 59 . Macauley , S . L . , Pekny , M . & Sands , M . S . The role of attenuated astrocyte activation in infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis . J . Neurosci . 31 , 15575 – 15585 ( 2011 ) . 60 . Kraft , A . W . et al . Attenuating astrocyte activation accelerates plaque pathogenesis in APP / PS1 mice . FASEB J . 27 , 187 – 198 ( 2013 ) . This transgenic loss‑of‑function study shows that reactive astrogliosis helps to restrict amyloid plaque pathology . 61 . Norden , D . M . , Fenn , A . M . , Dugan , A . & Godbout , J . P . TGF β produced by IL‑10 redirected astrocytes attenuates microglial activation . Glia 62 , 881 – 895 ( 2014 ) . 62 . Cekanaviciute , E . et al . Astrocytic transforming growth factor‑beta signaling reduces subacute neuroinflammation after stroke in mice . Glia 62 , 1227 – 1240 ( 2014 ) . This transgenic loss‑of‑function study shows that TGF β signalling in reactive astrocytes reduces CNS inflammation after stroke . 63 . Cekanaviciute , E . et al . Astrocytic TGF‑ β signaling limits inflammation and reduces neuronal damage during central nervous system Toxoplasma infection . J . Immunol . 193 , 139 – 149 ( 2014 ) . 64 . Min , K . J . , Yang , M . S . , Kim , S . U . , Jou , I . & Joe , E . H . Astrocytes induce hemeoxygenase‑1 expression in microglia : a feasible mechanism for preventing excessive brain inflammation . J . Neurosci . 26 , 1880 – 1887 ( 2006 ) . 65 . Kostianovsky , A . M . , Maier , L . M . , Anderson , R . C . , Bruce , J . N . & Anderson , D . E . Astrocytic regulation of human monocytic / microglial activation . J . Immunol . 181 , 5425 – 5432 ( 2008 ) . 66 . Mizee , M . R . et al . Astrocyte‑derived retinoic acid : a novel regulator of blood – brain barrier function in multiple sclerosis . Acta Neuropathol . 128 , 691 – 703 ( 2014 ) . 67 . Catrysse , L . , Vereecke , L . , Beyaert , R . & van Loo , G . A20 in inflammation and autoimmunity . Trends Immunol . 35 , 22 – 31 ( 2014 ) . 68 . Wang , X . et al . Astrocytic A20 ameliorates experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis by inhibiting NF‑ κ B‑ and STAT1‑dependent chemokine production in astrocytes . Acta Neuropathol . 126 , 711 – 724 ( 2013 ) . 69 . Shao , W . et al . Suppression of neuroinflammation by astrocytic dopamine D2 receptors via α B‑crystallin . Nature 494 , 90 – 94 ( 2013 ) . 70 . Ousman , S . S . et al . Protective and therapeutic role for α B‑crystallin in autoimmune demyelination . Nature 448 , 474 – 479 ( 2007 ) . This study shows that reactive astrocytes reduce CNS inflammation through a CRYAB‑dependent mechanism in autoimmune encephalomyelitis . 71 . Steelman , A . J . , Smith , R . 3rd , Welsh , C . J . & Li , J . Galectin‑9 protein is up‑regulated in astrocytes by tumor necrosis factor and promotes encephalitogenic T‑cell apoptosis . J . Biol . Chem . 288 , 23776 – 23787 ( 2013 ) . 72 . Hutchison , E . R . et al . Evidence for miR‑181 involvement in neuroinflammatory responses of astrocytes . Glia 61 , 1018 – 1028 ( 2013 ) . 73 . Spence , R . D . & Voskuhl , R . R . Neuroprotective effects of estrogens and androgens in CNS inflammation and neurodegeneration . Front . Neuroendocrinol . 33 , 105 – 115 ( 2012 ) . 74 . Spence , R . D . et al . Neuroprotection mediated through estrogen receptor‑ α in astrocytes . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 8867 – 8872 ( 2011 ) . This transgenic loss‑of‑function study shows that reactive astrocytes can reduce CNS inflammation in autoimmune encephalomyelitis via an ER α ‑dependent mechanism . 75 . Spence , R . D . et al . Estrogen mediates neuroprotection and anti‑inflammatory effects during EAE through ER α signaling on astrocytes but not through ER β signaling on astrocytes or neurons . J . Neurosci . 33 , 10924 – 10933 ( 2013 ) . 76 . Rot , A . & von Andrian , U . H . Chemokines in innate and adaptive host defense : basic chemokinese grammar for immune cells . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 22 , 891 – 928 ( 2004 ) . 77 . Allen , C . D . , Okada , T . & Cyster , J . G . Germinal‑center organization and cellular dynamics . Immunity 27 , 190 – 202 ( 2007 ) . 78 . Aloisi , F . & Pujol‑Borrell , R . Lymphoid neogenesis in chronic inflammatory diseases . Nature Rev . Immunol . 6 , 205 – 217 ( 2006 ) . 79 . Franciotta , D . , Salvetti , M . , Lolli , F . , Serafini , B . & Aloisi , F . B cells and multiple sclerosis . Lancet Neurol . 7 , 852 – 858 ( 2008 ) . 80 . Peters , A . et al . T H 17 cells induce ectopic lymphoid follicles in central nervous system tissue inflammation . Immunity 35 , 986 – 996 ( 2011 ) . 81 . Lucchinetti , C . F . et al . Inflammatory cortical demyelination in early multiple sclerosis . N . Engl . J . Med . 365 , 2188 – 2197 ( 2011 ) . 82 . Metcalf , T . U . , Baxter , V . K . , Nilaratanakul , V . & Griffin , D . E . Recruitment and retention of B cells in the central nervous system in response to alphavirus encephalomyelitis . J . Virol . 87 , 2420 – 2429 ( 2013 ) . 83 . Pohl , M . et al . T cell‑activation in neuromyelitis optica lesions plays a role in their formation . Acta Neuropathol . Commun . 1 , 85 ( 2013 ) . 84 . Yamagata , K . , Nakayama , C . & Suzuki , K . Dietary β ‑carotene regulates interleukin‑1 β ‑induced expression of apolipoprotein E in astrocytes isolated from stroke‑prone spontaneously hypertensive rats . Neurochem . Int . 62 , 43 – 49 ( 2013 ) . 85 . Mahley , R . W . & Huang , Y . Apolipoprotein E sets the stage : response to injury triggers neuropathology . Neuron 76 , 871 – 885 ( 2012 ) . 86 . Halassa , M . M . & Haydon , P . G . Integrated brain circuits : astrocytic networks modulate neuronal activity and behavior . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 72 , 335 – 355 ( 2010 ) . 87 . Tong , X . et al . Astrocyte Kir4 . 1 ion channel deficits contribute to neuronal dysfunction in Huntington’s disease model mice . Nature Neurosci . 17 , 694 – 703 ( 2014 ) . 88 . Sofroniew , M . V . Multiple roles for astrocytes as effectors of cytokines and inflammatory mediators . Neuroscientist 20 , 160 – 172 ( 2014 ) . 89 . Lennon , V . A . , Kryzer , T . J . , Pittock , S . J . , Verkman , A . S . & Hinson , S . R . IgG marker of optic – spinal multiple sclerosis binds to the aquaporin‑4 water channel . J . Exp . Med . 202 , 473 – 477 ( 2005 ) . This study identifies the astrocyte protein AQP4 as the target of autoimmune antibodies in NMO , thereby providing both a diagnostic tool and a mechanistic target that have revolutionized understanding of this disorder . 90 . Roemer , S . F . et al . Pattern‑specific loss of aquaporin‑4 immunoreactivity distinguishes neuromyelitis optica from multiple sclerosis . Brain 130 , 1194 – 1205 ( 2007 ) . R E V I E W S 262 | MAY 2015 | VOLUME 16 www . nature . com / reviews / neuro © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 91 . Saadoun , S . et al . Intra‑cerebral injection of neuromyelitis optica immunoglobulin G and human complement produces neuromyelitis optica lesions in mice . Brain 133 , 349 – 361 ( 2010 ) . 92 . Howe , C . L . et al . Neuromyelitis optica IgG stimulates an immunological response in rat astrocyte cultures . Glia 62 , 692 – 708 ( 2014 ) . 93 . Kitley , J . et al . Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders with aquaporin‑4 and myelin‑ oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibodies : a comparative study . JAMA Neurol . 71 , 276 – 283 ( 2014 ) . 94 . Sato , D . K . et al . Distinction between MOG antibody‑ positive and AQP4 antibody‑positive NMO spectrum disorders . Neurology 82 , 474 – 481 ( 2014 ) . 95 . Hoftberger , R . et al . Antibodies to MOG and AQP4 in adults with neuromyelitis optica and suspected limited forms of the disease . Mult . Scler . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1352458514555785 ( 2014 ) . 96 . Zamvil , S . S . & Slavin , A . J . Does MOG Ig‑positive AQP4‑seronegative opticospinal inflammatory disease justify a diagnosis of NMO spectrum disorder ? Neurol . Neuroimmunol . Neuroinflamm . 2 , e62 ( 2015 ) . 97 . Diamond , B . , Huerta , P . T . , Mina‑Osorio , P . , Kowal , C . & Volpe , B . T . Losing your nerves ? Maybe it’s the antibodies . Nature Rev . Immunol . 9 , 449 – 456 ( 2009 ) . 98 . Kowarik , M . C . et al . The cerebrospinal fluid immunoglobulin transcriptome and proteome in neuromyelitis optica reveals central nervous system‑ specific B cell populations . J . Neuroinflammation 12 , 19 ( 2015 ) . 99 . Khakh , B . S . & Sofroniew , M . V . Astrocytes and Huntington’s disease . ACS Chem . Neurosci . 5 , 494 – 496 ( 2014 ) . 100 . Papadopoulos , M . C . , Bennett , J . L . & Verkman , A . S . Treatment of neuromyelitis optica : state‑of‑the‑art and emerging therapies . Nature Rev . Neurol . 10 , 493 – 506 ( 2014 ) . 101 . Srivastava , R . et al . Potassium channel KIR4 . 1 as an immune target in multiple sclerosis . N . Engl . J . Med . 367 , 115 – 123 ( 2012 ) . 102 . Brickshawana , A . et al . Investigation of the KIR4 . 1 potassium channel as a putative antigen in patients with multiple sclerosis : a comparative study . Lancet Neurol . 13 , 795 – 806 ( 2014 ) . 103 . Ngo , S . T . , Steyn , F . J . & McCombe , P . A . Gender differences in autoimmune disease . Front . Neuroendocrinol . 35 , 347 – 369 ( 2014 ) . 104 . Voskuhl , R . Sex differences in autoimmune diseases . Biol . Sex Differ . 2 , 1 ( 2011 ) . 105 . Stephan , A . H . , Barres , B . A . & Stevens , B . The complement system : an unexpected role in synaptic pruning during development and disease . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 35 , 369 – 389 ( 2012 ) . 106 . Clarke , L . E . & Barres , B . A . Emerging roles of astrocytes in neural circuit development . Nature Rev . Neurosci . 14 , 311 – 321 ( 2013 ) . 107 . Rappold , P . M . & Tieu , K . Astrocytes and therapeutics for Parkinson’s disease . Neurotherapeutics 7 , 413 – 423 ( 2010 ) . 108 . Failli , V . et al . Functional neurological recovery after spinal cord injury is impaired in patients with infections . Brain 135 , 3238 – 3250 ( 2012 ) . 109 . Gold , R . , Linington , C . & Lassmann , H . Understanding pathogenesis and therapy of multiple sclerosis via animal models : 70 years of merits and culprits in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis research . Brain 129 , 1953 – 1971 ( 2006 ) . 110 . Hansen , R . R . & Malcangio , M . Astrocytes — multitaskers in chronic pain . Eur . J . Pharmacol . 716 , 120 – 128 ( 2013 ) . 111 . Paradise , M . B . , Naismith , S . L . , Norrie , L . M . , Graeber , M . B . & Hickie , I . B . The role of glia in late‑life depression . Int . Psychogeriatr . 24 , 1878 – 1890 ( 2012 ) . 112 . Martin , J . L . , Magistretti , P . J . & Allaman , I . Regulation of neurotrophic factors and energy metabolism by antidepressants in astrocytes . Curr . Drug Targets 14 , 1308 – 1321 ( 2013 ) . 113 . Czeh , B . & Di Benedetto , B . Antidepressants act directly on astrocytes : evidences and functional consequences . Eur . Neuropsychopharmacol 23 , 171 – 185 ( 2013 ) . 114 . Chung , W . S . et al . Astrocytes mediate synapse elimination through MEGF10 and MERTK pathways . Nature 504 , 394 – 400 ( 2013 ) . 115 . Miller , D . B . & O’Callaghan , J . P . Depression , cytokines , and glial function . Metabolism 54 , 33 – 38 ( 2005 ) . 116 . Dantzer , R . , O’Connor , J . C . , Freund , G . G . , Johnson , R . W . & Kelley , K . W . From inflammation to sickness and depression : when the immune system subjugates the brain . Nature Rev . Neurosci . 9 , 46 – 56 ( 2008 ) . 117 . Dowlati , Y . et al . A meta‑analysis of cytokines in major depression . Biol . Psychiatry 67 , 446 – 457 ( 2010 ) . 118 . Irwin , M . R . & Cole , S . W . Reciprocal regulation of the neural and innate immune systems . Nature Rev . Immunol . 11 , 625 – 632 ( 2011 ) . 119 . Bauer , S . , Kerr , B . J . & Patterson , P . H . The neuropoietic cytokine family in development , plasticity , disease and injury . Nature Rev . Neurosci . 8 , 221 – 232 ( 2007 ) . 120 . Deverman , B . E . & Patterson , P . H . Cytokines and CNS development . Neuron 64 , 61 – 78 ( 2009 ) . 121 . Patterson , P . H . Maternal infection and autism . Brain Behav . Immun . 26 , 393 ( 2012 ) . 122 . Brenner , M . et al . Mutations in GFAP , encoding glial fibrillary acidic protein , are associated with Alexander disease . Nature Genet . 27 , 117 – 120 ( 2001 ) . 123 . Messing , A . , Brenner , M . , Feany , M . B . , Nedergaard , M . & Goldman , J . E . Alexander disease . J . Neurosci . 32 , 5017 – 5023 ( 2012 ) . 124 . Lobsiger , C . S . & Cleveland , D . W . Glial cells as intrinsic components of non‑cell‑autonomous neurodegenerative disease . Nature Neurosci . 10 , 1355 – 1360 ( 2007 ) . 125 . Nagai , M . et al . Astrocytes expressing ALS‑linked mutated SOD1 release factors selectively toxic to motor neurons . Nature Neurosci . 10 , 615 – 622 ( 2007 ) . 126 . Yamanaka , K . et al . Astrocytes as determinants of disease progression in inherited amyotrophic lateral sclerosis . Nature Neurosci . 11 , 251 – 253 ( 2008 ) . 127 . Myer , D . J . , Gurkoff , G . G . , Lee , S . M . , Hovda , D . A . & Sofroniew , M . V . Essential protective roles of reactive astrocytes in traumatic brain injury . Brain 129 , 2761 – 2772 ( 2006 ) . 128 . Sahni , V . et al . BMPR1a and BMPR1b signaling exert opposing effects on gliosis after spinal cord injury . J . Neurosci . 30 , 1839 – 1855 ( 2010 ) . 129 . Shimada , I . S . , Borders , A . , Aronshtam , A . & Spees , J . L . Proliferating reactive astrocytes are regulated by Notch‑1 in the peri‑infarct area after stroke . Stroke 42 , 3231 – 3237 ( 2011 ) . 130 . Shimada , I . S . , Lecomte , M . D . , Granger , J . C . , Quinlan , N . J . & Spees , J . L . Self‑renewal and differentiation of reactive astrocyte‑derived neural stem / progenitor cells isolated from the cortical peri‑ infarct area after stroke . J . Neurosci . 32 , 7926 – 7940 ( 2012 ) . 131 . Meeuwsen , S . , Persoon‑Deen , C . , Bsibsi , M . , Ravid , R . & van Noort , J . M . Cytokine , chemokine and growth factor gene profiling of cultured human astrocytes after exposure to proinflammatory stimuli . Glia 43 , 243 – 253 ( 2003 ) . 132 . Jensen , C . J . , Massie , A . & De Keyser , J . Immune players in the CNS : the astrocyte . J . Neuroimmune Pharmacol . 8 , 824 – 839 ( 2013 ) . 133 . Cooley , I . D . , Chauhan , V . S . , Donneyz , M . A . & Marriott , I . Astrocytes produce IL‑19 in response to bacterial challenge and are sensitive to the immunosuppressive effects of this IL‑10 family member . Glia 62 , 818 – 828 ( 2014 ) . 134 . Pitter , K . L . et al . The SHH / Gli pathway is reactivated in reactive glia and drives proliferation in response to neurodegeneration‑induced lesions . Glia 62 , 1595 – 1607 ( 2014 ) . 135 . Sarafian , T . A . et al . Disruption of astrocyte STAT3 signaling decreases mitochondrial function and increases oxidative stress in vitro . PLoS ONE 5 , e9532 ( 2010 ) . 136 . Hong , P . , Jiang , M . & Li , H . Functional requirement of dicer1 and miR‑17‑5p in reactive astrocyte proliferation after spinal cord injury in the mouse . Glia 62 , 2044 – 2060 ( 2014 ) . 137 . Krumbholz , M . et al . BAFF is produced by astrocytes and up‑regulated in multiple sclerosis lesions and primary central nervous system lymphoma . J . Exp . Med . 201 , 195 – 200 ( 2005 ) . Acknowledgements Work in the author’s laboratory is supported by the US National Institutes of Health ( grants NS057624 and NS084030 ) , the Dr . Miriam and Sheldon G . Adelson Medical Research Foundation , the Hilton Foundation and Wings for Life . Competing interests statement The author declares no competing interests . R E V I E W S NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE VOLUME 16 | MAY 2015 | 263 © 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved