fnins - 13 - 01436 January 11 , 2020 Time : 11 : 37 # 1 REVIEW published : 21 January 2020 doi : 10 . 3389 / fnins . 2019 . 01436 Edited by : Jong - Min Kim , Seoul National University Bundang Hospital , South Korea Reviewed by : Takashi Kanda , Yamaguchi University , Japan Torben Moos , Aalborg University , Denmark * Correspondence : Yeqi Wang wangyeqi _ cn @ 126 . com Guixue Wang wanggx @ cqu . edu . cn Specialty section : This article was submitted to Neuroenergetics , Nutrition and Brain Health , a section of the journal Frontiers in Neuroscience Received : 07 September 2019 Accepted : 19 December 2019 Published : 21 January 2020 Citation : Tjakra M , Wang Y , Vania V , Hou Z , Durkan C , Wang N and Wang G ( 2020 ) Overview of Crosstalk Between Multiple Factor of Transcytosis in Blood Brain Barrier . Front . Neurosci . 13 : 1436 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fnins . 2019 . 01436 Overview of Crosstalk Between Multiple Factor of Transcytosis in Blood Brain Barrier Marco Tjakra 1 , Yeqi Wang 1 * , Vicki Vania 1 , Zhengjun Hou 1 , Colm Durkan 2 , Nan Wang 2 and Guixue Wang 1 * 1 Key Laboratory for Biorheological Science and Technology , Ministry of Education , State and Local Joint Engineering Laboratory for Vascular Implants , Bioengineering College of Chongqing University , Chongqing , China , 2 The Nanoscience Centre , University of Cambridge , Cambridge , United Kingdom Blood brain barrier ( BBB ) conserves unique regulatory system to maintain barrier tightness while allowing adequate transport between neurovascular units . This mechanism possess a challenge for drug delivery , while abnormality may result in pathogenesis . Communication between vascular and neural system is mediated through paracellular and transcellular ( transcytosis ) pathway . Transcytosis itself showed dependency with various components , focusing on caveolae - mediated . Among several factors , intense communication between endothelial cells , pericytes , and astrocytes is the key for a normal development . Regulatory signaling pathway such as VEGF , Notch , S1P , PDGF β , Ang / Tie , and TGF - β showed interaction with the transcytosis steps . Recent discoveries showed exploration of various factors which has been proven to interact with one of the process of transcytosis , either endocytosis , endosomal rearrangement , or exocytosis . As well as providing a hypothetical regulatory pathway between each factors , speciﬁcally miRNA , mechanical stress , various cytokines , physicochemical , basement membrane and junctions remodeling , and crosstalk between developmental regulatory pathways . Finally , various hypotheses and probable crosstalk between each factors will be expressed , to point out relevant research application ( Drug therapy design and BBB - on - a - chip ) and unexplored terrain . Keywords : blood brain barrier , transcytosis , developmental , mechanical stress , cytokines , miRNA , physicochemical , tight junctions INTRODUCTION Blood Brain Barrier Concept and Constituents The neurovascular unit is a complex system of blood vessels and nerves , together with neighboring cells and the extracellular matrix . There are numerous similarities , functions , interactions , and remodeling process interconnected between these two systems ( vascular and nervous ) in the body . A prominent example is the formation of the blood brain barrier ( commonly abbreviated as BBB ) . Frontiers in Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 1 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 1436 fnins - 13 - 01436 January 11 , 2020 Time : 11 : 37 # 2 Tjakra et al . Transcytosis Factors Crosstalk in BBB The BBB is a complex mixture of various transport systems located between blood vessels and the brain . It is predominantly composed of endothelial cells , neurons , oligodendrocytes , pericytes , astrocytes , microglia , and surrounded by the extracellular matrix which is mainly composed of collagen and laminin . The primary function of the BBB is to provide a safety mechanism to prevent potentially harmful material from entering the brain , while still enabling the transcytosis of nutrients and signaling factors . Failure to maintain the BBB integrity results in abnormalities , mainly infectious diseases such as meningitis , multiple sclerosis , neurodegenerative diseases , and a plethora of brain disorders . Understanding the exact mechanisms of transcytosis in the BBB will provide useful insights for diseases and their possible treatments . Among this complex mixture of cells , endothelial cells ( ECs ) are squamous cells that form the lining wall of the vascular system . The diﬀerentiation of endothelial cells is organ and tissue speciﬁc , modiﬁed via responses of the appropriate gene expression toward hemodynamic forces , extracellular stress , interaction with adjunct cells , and matrix secretions ( Marcu et al . , 2018 ) . Brain microvasculature endothelial cells ( BMECs ) have an adaptation to form tight barriers and also active transport protein , such as P - glycoprotein ( Stebbins et al . , 2015 ) . Expression of p - glycoprotein at BMECs , which is one of the eﬄux transporters , shows dependency to β - catenin upregulation ( Lim et al . , 2008 ) . This clearance process showed that transcytosis in the BBB can be accomplished from abluminal to luminal sides . The response and behavior of BMECs also shows dependence on cytokine stimuli ( Carroll et al . , 2015 ) . The primary formation of BBB tight junction is also regulated by ECs , together with other cells . Pericyte is interconnected with ECs in microvasculature , and act as the co - regulator of ECs . In the BBB , this type of cell plays an important role as one of the supporting cell types for BBB integrity and permeability via cell to cell communication and ECM to cell communication . Pericytes have been shown to regulate the diﬀerentiation of ECs into HBMECs . These cells also interact with astrocytes to induce polarization of astrocytes surrounding the blood vessel . A lack of pericytes in the mouse model and cell culture experiment causes increased BBB permeability . Treatment of imatinib , which depletes pericytes , inhibits the release of tracers from ECs to the brain via transcytosis . Thus it can be inferred that pericytes have a role in regulating transcytosis in the BBB ( Armulik et al . , 2010 ) . Astrocytes are part of the modiﬁed glial cells . The primary role of these cells is to support neurons . In the BBB complex , the foot of astrocytes encircles ECs and blood vessels . Astrocytes also enable nutrients transport and delivery to neurons . A recent study showed astrocytes may promote blood ﬂow and microvasculature remodeling ( Figley and Stroman , 2011 ) . One of the prominent mechanisms for tight junction regulation by astrocytes is by regulating the accumulation of agrin , a heparin sulfate proteoglycan which is important for BBB integrity in the basal lamina ( Abbott et al . , 2006 ) . However , the exact mechanism whereby transcytosis may be aﬀected by co - regulation between ECs , pericytes , and astrocytes is still unclear ( Figure 1 ) . Various relevant factors also still need further elucidation . This review will focus on revealing and summarizing current ﬁndings of interaction between ECs , pericytes , and astrocytes as well as the crosstalk of factors which may aﬀect transcytosis in the BBB . Paracellular and Transcellular BBB Permeability Molecular transport across the BBB is highly dependent on its permeability , which is deﬁned by the paracellular pathway ( molecules cross through ECs junctions ) and the transcellular pathway ( endocytosis followed by endosomal rearrangement and exocytosis from the cell ) . These mechanism contributes to the brain’s nutrition supply , as comprehensively reviewed by Lalatsa and Butt ( 2018 ) . BMECs have a specialized tight junction in order to prevent undesirable paracellular transport and consequently direct the necessary molecules by a speciﬁc transcellular pathway ( Zhou et al . , 2019 ) . The importance of transcytosis is emphasized under certain conditions including hypertension and strokes ( Knowland et al . , 2014 ) . When pathogenesis occurs , the primary response is upregulation of caveolin , which facilitates caveolae assembly ( Knowland et al . , 2014 ) . A similar ﬁnding in the case of multiple sclerosis also stresses the signiﬁcant upregulation of caveolae - mediated transcytosis ( Lengfeld et al . , 2017 ) . This response may be a reaction to facilitate the recovery process , which requires a higher supply of nutrients , as well as clearance of toxic materials . Transcellular pathways in cells are categorized into clathrin mediated and non - clathrin mediated . Detail mechanism in several types of transcytosis can be studied extensively in the comprehensive review by Pulgar ( 2019 ) and Villaseñor et al . ( 2019 ) . Non - clathrin mediated transport makes use of dynamin , coat proteins , small GTPases , and RhoGAP proteins . Caveolae - mediated transcytosis is one of the non - clathrin mediated pathway . Transportation between cells using extracellular vesicles ( EVs ) is very important during development and maintenance of the BBB . A recent study showed atheroprotective intercellular communication via EVs between ECs and smooth muscle cells through miRNAs regulation ( Hergenreider et al . , 2012 ) . Based on these interactions , the transport pathway plays an essential role in intercellular communication . Which brings us to question , is there any interaction between paracellular and transcellular pathways ? In the case of water transport , lack of protein transporter in the paracellular path may signiﬁcantly impair the transcellular path ( Kawedia et al . , 2007 ) . It has been elucidated that Cav - 1 also plays a part in the regulation of TJ protein expression in HBMECs ( Song et al . , 2007 ) , indicating a central role for the transcellular pathway in the BBB maintenance ( Figure 2 ) . Caveolae Biosynthesis There are two main proteins which play a major role in caveolae biosynthesis . The ﬁrst is caveolin , along with multiple isomers ( Cav - 1 , Cav - 2 , and Cav - 3 ) . The second one is cavin , which currently has four known isomers . These two components are an essential part of caveolae , and the absence of either one Frontiers in Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 2 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 1436 fnins - 13 - 01436 January 11 , 2020 Time : 11 : 37 # 3 Tjakra et al . Transcytosis Factors Crosstalk in BBB will signiﬁcantly suppress the amount and function of caveolae . Lipodystrophic phenotype has been observed both in mice and humans lacking caveolae , suggesting its importance for lipid transcytosis . A recent discovery has showed that binding of these components with phosphatidylserine plays a crucial role in caveolae formation ( Hirama et al . , 2017 ) . Cav - 1 and Cav - 2 will form 8S oligomer on endoplasmic reticulum , followed by transport via COP II ( coat protein complex II ) to the Golgi . In this place , 8S Cav - 1 / Cav - 2 will undergo oligomerization with cholesterol forming the 70S subunit , followed by transport to plasma membrane ( Hayer et al . , 2010 ) . In the context of the BBB , HBMECs have been modiﬁed to limit the number of caveolae , thus limiting leakiness and transcytosis . One reason for this regulation is the role of Mfsd2a , which is a facilitator at the cell membrane to transport the LPC - DHA supply to the brain . In contrast with the increasing lipid content , the cell will undergo suppression of caveolae amounts ( Andreone et al . , 2017 ) . Meanwhile , elevated caveolae occurrence is a sign of pathogenesis ( Table 1 ) , indicating BBB leakiness with interaction of several other factors of transcytosis ( Gu et al . , 2012 ) . However , attenuation of caveolae expression inhibits the expression of TJ proteins ( Song et al . , 2007 ) and also accelerates neurodegeneration and aging ( Head et al . , 2010 ) . Keeping the balance of caveolae number for appropriate amount of transcytosis has been a challenging aspect for maintaining BBB stability . TABLE 1 | Several diseases with abnormality concerning transcytosis , as well as abnormality of the Cav - 1 as the component of endocytosis . Pathological condition with implication for abnormality of transcytosis in BBB (cid:2) Focal cerebral ischemia • Upregulation of Cav - 1 and Cav - 2 ( Xie and Lu , 2018 ) (cid:2) Moyamoya disease • Downregulation of Cav - 1 ( Chung et al . , 2018 ) (cid:2) Dengue hemorrhagic fever • Upregulation of Cav - 1 ( Chanthick et al . , 2016 ) (cid:2) Traumatic brain injury • Upregulation of Cav - 1 phosphorylation ( Nag et al . , 2009 ) (cid:2) Alzheimer disease • Upregulation of Cav - 1 ( Gaudreault et al . , 2004 ) • Downregulaton of PICALM ( Ando et al . , 2016 ) (cid:2) Inﬂuenza associated encelopathy • downregulation of Cav - 1 ( Imakita et al . , 2019 ) (cid:2) Cortical spreading depolarization • Upregulation of Cav - 1 ( Sadeghian et al . , 2018 ) • Independent of paracellular ( Sadeghian et al . , 2018 ) (cid:2) Parkinson disease • Upregulation of Cav - 1 ( Cha et al . , 2015 ) • Downregulation of TJ protein ( Kuan et al . , 2016 ) (cid:2) Multiple sclerosis • Upregulation of Cav - 1 ( Lutz et al . , 2017 ) (cid:2) Amytrophic lateral sclerosis • Endosomal rearrangement ( Rabs ) instability ( Farg et al . , 2014 ) • Exocytosis ( SNARE ) abnormality ( Kawamata et al . , 2014 ) SHARED DEVELOPMENTAL PATHWAY Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor ( VEGF ) Vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) has cytoprotective eﬀects on ECs by preventing apoptosis , mediated through phosphatidyl inositol 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) / Akt pathway ( Ferrara et al . , 2003 ) . Action of VEGF in angiogenesis is prominent , but for maintenance at the latter stages of development , pericytes will take over this function . Instead of maintaining , VEGF reduces barrier robustness through the nitric oxide synthase ( NOS ) / cGMP - dependent pathway ( Mayhan , 1999 ) . The activation of eNOS in Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cells ( HUVECs ) is also crucial for caveolae formation ( Bai et al . , 2017 ) . Endocytosis of VEGF receptors are also caveolae dependent , inferred from a study of leukemia cell line ( Caliceti et al . , 2014 ) . In vivo retina study using Macaca fascicularis shows administration of VEGF will induce angiogenic phenotype both in ECs and pericytes , thus it might be resulting in BBB instability in adults ( Witmer et al . , 2004 ) . This side eﬀect can be neutralized by administration of Ang1 , which attenuates the activity of MMP - 2 and MMP - 9 , without disturbing the angiogenesis in mice cerebrovascular ( Valable et al . , 2005 ) . Activation of VEGF / PI3K / Akt pathway may induce actin reorganization in human angioma cells ( Wang et al . , 2011 ) , a process known to be crucial for endocytosis and endosomal rearrangement ( Podar and Anderson , 2008 ; Römer et al . , 2010 ; Coelho - Santos et al . , 2016 ) . This might be one of the ways for VEGF controlling caveolae and transcytosis in the ECs . In the early symptoms of stroke and cerebral ischemia , regions of the brain can end up in hypoxic conditions . During hypoxia , VEGF will be secreted from the pericytes which aﬀects claudin - 5 and BBB integrity via paracellular pathway ( Bai et al . , 2015 ) . Other secreted cytokines such as IL - 6 and G - CSF attenuates BBB transcellular robustness via an unknown mechanism . Another study also highlights astrocytes role in BBB integrity attenuation for VEGF - A secretion during pathological condition ( Argaw et al . , 2012 ) . Balance between VEGF activities to properly upregulate transcytosis while maintaining BBB stability still needs further investigation . Platelet - Derived Growth Factor ( PDGF ) - B / PDGF Receptor Beta ( PDGFR β ) At early stages of vessel formation , tip ECs will secrete PDGF - B to promote the recruitment of pericyte progenitor cells . This mitogen growth factor will be detected by PDGFR β on the pericytes , leading the migration to tip ECs in the process of angiogenesis ( Hellström et al . , 1999 ) . The expression will gradually decrease following vessel maturation , but irregularities will arise in the pathological conditions of several diseases as indicated by the increasing PDGF - B expression in mature vasculature ( Gallini et al . , 2016 ) . This pathway still persists in the postnatal angiogenesis , indicating an important communication between pericytes and endothelial progenitor cells ( EPCs ) ( Baumgartner et al . , 2010 ) . Lack of pericytes caused by diminished signaling of PDGF - B / PDGFR β also showed fatality in mice phenotypes ( Lindahl et al . , 1997 ) . Frontiers in Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 3 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 1436 fnins - 13 - 01436 January 11 , 2020 Time : 11 : 37 # 4 Tjakra et al . Transcytosis Factors Crosstalk in BBB FIGURE 1 | Close interaction between ECs , astrocytes , and pericytes as the backbone of BBB . Together they share some common developmental pathways , which involves each cell to support one another . In the neurovascular unit within adult mice , the expression of PDGFR β exclusively persists only at pericytes ( Winkler et al . , 2010 ) , diﬀering from humans which also retain it in general ECs ( Muhl et al . , 2017 ) . Transcription factor Foxf2 maintains PDGFR β expression speciﬁcally in brain pericytes to support BBB integrity ( Reyahi et al . , 2015 ) , indicating the role of the FOX family for maintaining the BBB . Endocytosis receptor Ephrin - B2 supports the internalization and also signaling of PDGFR β in mice vascular smooth muscle cells ( Nakayama et al . , 2013 ) , leaving room for further study in brain pericytes . Reactivation of PDGF - B / PDGFR β signaling through administration of TGF - β can restore the function of the BBB after focal cerebral ischemia ( Shen et al . , 2018 ) , indicating a crosstalk shared by these two pathway . In vitro experiment also showed protective eﬀects of PDGF - BB on astrocytes through activation of antioxidant mechanism ( Cabezas et al . , 2018 ) . Mice model also support this ﬁndings , emphasizing astrocytes roles to recover neuronal damage after hemorrhage ( Zhou et al . , 2019 ) . Another complementary communication is the PDGF - D / PDGFR β signaling which is supported by the co - receptor Neuropilin1 ( NRP1 ) in ECs ( Muhl et al . , 2017 ) . This communication involves NRP1 translocation , indicating a regulation for other pathways involving NRP1 . NRP1 is also a co - receptor for the VEGF signaling pathway , indicating a crosstalk between these two pathways . NRP1 also regulates HMGB1 , which induces caveolae formation in general ECs ( Ma et al . , 2019 ) . Possibly PDGF signaling is able to manage transcytosis via this pathway , additionally activating a regular PI3K / AKT pathway for actin dynamic regulation . Transforming Growth Factor - β ( TGF - β ) Transforming growth factor ( TGF - β ) plays an important role in angiogenesis together with VEGF . These cytokines have a range of diﬀerent eﬀects on ECs depending on the conditions : TGF - β may induce apoptosis via MAPK pathway on general ECs , while VEGF will protect general ECs from apoptosis ( Ferrari et al . , 2009 ) . The process of apoptosis may induce vascular remodeling , which includes vessel pruning and maturation . Thus the role of TGF - β is indispensable within normal vessels . TGF - β 1 dimer starts by binding with TGF - β receptor II , followed by TGF - β receptor I . This heterotetramer complex undergoes phosphorylation , subsequently activating Smad transcription factors : Smad2 / 3 will be activated ﬁrst , forming a heterocomplex with Co - Smad Smad4 . Subsequent transport of this complex to the cell nucleus may regulate expression of target genes ( Daly et al . , 2008 ) . Transport of TGF - β receptor in HeLa cells model is known to be dependent on clathrin and caveolae , including the novel endosomal fusion between two vesicles which are regulated by Rab5 ( He et al . , 2015 ) . Expression of TGF - β maintains cerebrovascular integrity Frontiers in Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 4 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 1436 fnins - 13 - 01436 January 11 , 2020 Time : 11 : 37 # 5 Tjakra et al . Transcytosis Factors Crosstalk in BBB FIGURE 2 | ( A ) Caveolae formation in endothelial cells . Nu , nucleus . ( B ) Caveolae is the main endocytosis pathway of ECs compared to clathrin . Uptake of spherical nucleic acids ( SNAs ) as the nanocarrier showed 60 % reduction in the Cav - 1 deﬁcient cells , also showed 10 % reduction in clathrin heavy chain ( CLTC ) deﬁcient cells . Reproduced with permission and courtesy of Chad Mirkin ( Choi et al . , 2013 ) . by regulating N - cadherin expression in cooperation with Notch signaling ( Li et al . , 2011 ) . However , activation of TGF - β also upregulates α - SMA ( Smooth Muscle Actin ) and actin in the brain pericytes , as well as the VEGF , MMP - 3 , and MMP - 9 which promotes barrier instability ( Thanabalasundaram et al . , 2011 ) . This is an issue requiring further investigation . TGF - β expression in brain pericytes has showed upregulation via Foxf2 expression ( Reyahi et al . , 2015 ) . Treatment of brain pericytes with bFGF ( basic Fibroblast Growth Factor ) may promote expression of desmin , vimentin , and nestin which suppress barrier leakiness ( Thanabalasundaram et al . , 2011 ) . Both TGF - β and bFGF are secreted from astrocytes ( Abbott et al . , 2006 ) , further proving their role in regulating BBB functions , as well as interaction with ECs and pericytes . ECs speciﬁc TGF - β receptor III ( Endoglin ) the co - receptor of TGF - β RI , activates ALK1 - Smad1 / 5 / 8 , which can leads to vessel destabilization . In myoﬁbroblast model , TGF - β RI activation may suppress Cav - 1 expression via p38 / MAPK pathway , and it’s shown to be independent to Smad activation ( Sanders et al . , 2015 ) . This dual activity of TGF - β signaling should be investigated even further in BBB . Sphingosine - 1 - Phosphate ( S1P ) Sphingosine - 1 - phosphate ( S1P ) is synthesized by two types of sphingosine kinase ( Sphk 1 and 2 ) . The HBMECs only expressed four out of ﬁve known S1P G - protein coupled receptors . S1P exposure to ECs might induce proangiogenic gene expression , cell migration , maintenance of cell proliferation , and inhibition of apoptosis ( Kimura et al . , 2001 ; Kuwabara et al . , 2003 ) . Secretion of S1P from pericytes and astrocytes to retinal microvasculature ECs will promote barrier stability through upregulation of various junctional proteins , as well as the expression of N - cadherin which promotes cell - to - cell interaction ( Paik et al . , 2004 ; McGuire et al . , 2011 ) . Expression of S1P will induce activation of the PI3K / protein kinase B ( Akt / PKB ) pathway and also upregulate antiapoptotic Bcl - 2 and downregulate proapoptotic Bim ( Limaye et al . , 2005 ) . Upregulation and dephosphorylation of the junctional molecule PECAM - 1 was also observed in HUVECs ( Limaye et al . , 2005 ) . S1P and LRP1 showed synergistic eﬀects on chemotactic migration of HBMECs ( Vézina et al . , 2018 ) . Vessel carrier eﬀects showed by the chaperone HDL - associated ApoM may deliver S1P to the S1P1 and S1P3 receptors , promoting ECs proliferation , preventing apoptosis , and also improve barrier stability at the BBB ( Galvani et al . , 2015 ; Ruiz et al . , 2017 ) . However , S1P3 receptor activation in astrocytes isolated from mice shows that it might activates RhoA which induces inﬂammatory cytokines and S1P expression , indicating an autocrine loop which participates in BBB breakdown ( Dusaban et al . , 2017 ) . In HUVECs and mice model , S1P / S1P1R activity possibly have a vasoprotective eﬀects by regulating the amount of proinﬂammatory adhesion proteins ( in this case ICAM - 1 ) ( Galvani et al . , 2015 ) . Activation of S1P1R signaling was reported to induce translocation of N - cadherin ( making the bond between general ECs and pericytes stronger ) , and it has also been proposed that it alters the adhesive property of N - cadherin . This activity in general ECs gives rise to complex cellular communication via various ligands interacting with a single receptor , but activated through diﬀerent pathways ( Paik et al . , 2004 ) . Loss of the S1P1R will induce BBB leakiness ( Yanagida et al . , 2017 ) . Meanwhile , activation of this receptor will also contribute to the synthesis and also recovery of rat fat - pad ECs glycocalyx , which mediates vascular robustness and adsorptive - mediated transcytosis ( Zeng et al . , 2015 ) . Conversely , S1P2 receptor plays a role in suppressing the PI3K pathway which is activated via S1P1R . This inhibition is achieved through the coupling mechanism of Rho - dependent activation of PTEN phosphatase . Activation of these pathways will induce vascular permeability , promoting disruption of adherens junctions and stimulates stress ﬁbers resulting in the leaky barrier ( Sanchez et al . , 2007 ) . Interestingly , activation of the PI3K / Akt pathway by VEGF has been discovered to induce transcytosis via actin dynamics and Cav - 1 activation ( Wang et al . , 2011 ; Jin et al . , 2015 ; Chen et al . , 2018 ) . Multiple responses from PI3K / Akt pathway activation or suppression is indicating another regulatory pathway is necessary for a balanced transcytosis in ECs , and the outcome of this pathway may diﬀer depending on the cell’s dynamics . A previous study using HeLa cells showed that S1P regulates transport proteins tetraspanins ( CD63 , CD81 ) and ﬂotillin into exosomes in the process of MVEs ( Multi Vesicular Endosomes ) maturation ( Kajimoto et al . , 2013 ) . S1P also has a protective eﬀect on general ECs and adheren junctions , as well as actin and cytoskeleton arrangement ( Kajimoto et al . , 2013 ; Shepherd et al . , 2017 ) . In regulation of the synaptic system , sphingosine was shown to regulate the assembly of Frontiers in Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 5 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 1436 fnins - 13 - 01436 January 11 , 2020 Time : 11 : 37 # 6 Tjakra et al . Transcytosis Factors Crosstalk in BBB FIGURE 3 | Complex shared developmental pathway between ECs , pericytes , and astrocytes to regulate transcytosis in BBB . Notice the central role of PI3K , updated model of TIE2 expressed in pericytes , as well as glycocalyx role for negative membrane charge . Dashed arrows indicates downregulation , straight line arrows indicates upregulation . SNARE complex via synaptobrevin ( Darios et al . , 2009 ) . In neurons , S1P also regulates localization of synapsin I , showing supporting activity of exocytosis process ( Riganti et al . , 2016 ) . It is currently unknown whether S1P also plays similar role in the HBMECs or BBB complex . Angiopoietin / Tyrosine Kinase With Immunoglobulin - Like and EGF - Like Domains ( Ang / TIE ) The mechanism of Ang / TIE pathway involves several angiopoietin ligands ( Ang 1 , 2 , and 4 in humans ) and TIE1 / TIE2 . Ang1 which is expressed from pericytes induces occludin expression in brain capillary ECs through TIE2 activation , thus promoting barrier tightness ( Hori et al . , 2004 ) . Ang1 also inhibits FOXO1 activity via Akt activation in HUVECs , possibly interacting with various downstream target genes which involved in transcytosis ( Daly et al . , 2004 ) . In vitro HUVECs study shows that after activation by Ang1 , TIE2 will undergo internalization mediated by clathrin vesicles ( Bogdanovic et al . , 2009 ) . Normally , Ang2 is not expressed in adult brain ECs , as Ang2 promotes barrier permeability via upregulation of Caveolin - 1 ( Cav - 1 ) ( Gurnik et al . , 2016 ) . Release of Ang2 showed dependency on VAMP3 in human brain ECs ( Zhou et al . , 2016 ) . The expression of Ang1 and Ang2 will undergo changes during the normal aging process , whereby the former will be more expressed and meanwhile the latter will be suppressed . Expression of both receptors ( TIE1 and TIE2 ) has been shown to be stable both in young ECs or adult ECs ( Hohensinner et al . , 2016 ) . This regulation leads to vessel stability and ECs settlement in HUVECs ( Hohensinner et al . , 2016 ) . Along with the senescence of HUVECs , some expression of junction proteins will be downregulated ( Occludin and claudin - 5 ) , while ZO - 1 will be upregulated compared to the younger ECs in vitro ( Krouwer et al . , 2012 ) . A recent discovery has clariﬁed that TIE2 receptors in human brain pericytes also play a vital role in the angiogenesis process ( Teichert et al . , 2017 ) . Silencing of TIE2 expression in pericytes will induce pro - migratory phenotypes of ECs , indicating a close reciprocal Frontiers in Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 6 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 1436 fnins - 13 - 01436 January 11 , 2020 Time : 11 : 37 # 7 Tjakra et al . Transcytosis Factors Crosstalk in BBB FIGURE 4 | Crosstalk of various factors involved in the regulation of transcytosis . Biomechanics ﬂow sensing by multiple mechanosensor gives several types of regulatory signal , together with miRNA , ECM , physicochemical factors , and various cytokines . Dashed arrows indicates downregulation , straight line arrows indicates upregulation . relationship ( Figure 3 ) between pericytes and ECs ( Teichert et al . , 2017 ) . This discovery also provides a hypothetical connection between astrocytes and pericytes , since astrocytes also express Ang1 ( Lee et al . , 2003 ) which could regulate TIE2 in pericyte membranes . Notch There are four types of Notch receptor in mammals , which showed interaction with ﬁve membrane - bound ligands , Jagged1 , Jagged2 , and also delta - like ligand ( Dll ) type 1 , type 3 , and type 4 . Both brain pericytes and HUVECs showed expression of Jagged1 during co - culture ( Koﬂer et al . , 2015 ) , indicating their importance in communication . Among several types of Notch receptors and ligands , only Dll4 and Notch4 speciﬁcally expressed on mammalian ECs ( Shutter et al . , 2000 ) . In mice model , stimulation of Dll4 ligand will induce EphrinB2 expression in ECs . Furthermore , pericytes lacking in EphrinB2 expression will have a defects on vessel recruitment with ECs and impaired interaction with ECM ( Foo et al . , 2006 ) . In a study using HUVECs , upregulation of Dll4 shows inhibition to the expression of VEGFR2 and NRP1 , which regulates VEGF type A pathway ( Williams et al . , 2006 ) , suggesting a mechanism to limit the number of caveolae and transcytosis across BBB . Inhibition of Notch signaling by GSI ( γ - secretase inhibitor ) showed its’ eﬀects to increase blood vessel diameter , but not the vessel length , indicating a local shear stress regulation ( Lee et al . , 2017 ; Davis et al . , 2018 ) . Brain ECs showed activity to regulate astrocytes’ GLT - 1 via Notch signaling pathway , which requires close contact between cells conﬁrmed by in vitro experiment ( Lee et al . , 2017 ) . This brings us to question - how does Notch signaling between ECs and astrocytes occur in the BBB when ECs are enveloped by pericytes and basal lamina ? It has been discovered that Dll - 4 and Jagged1 can be transported for intercellular communication , by passing through the extracellular matrix Frontiers in Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 7 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 1436 fnins - 13 - 01436 January 11 , 2020 Time : 11 : 37 # 8 Tjakra et al . Transcytosis Factors Crosstalk in BBB FIGURE 5 | Illustration of BBBoC for drug or toxic compound testing . Interaction between various components of the BBB will regulate transcytosis resembling in vivo conditions . Reproduced with permission and courtesy of Yeoheung Yun ( Koo et al . , 2018 ) . ( A ) Diagram of BBBoC design with inlet and outlet for medium ﬂow . ( B ) Steps of cell seeding and gel - cell matrix formation . ( C ) Established model of BBBoC in this study . ( Sheldon et al . , 2010 ; Sharghi - Namini et al . , 2014 ; Gonzalez - King et al . , 2017 ) . These discoveries bring our attention to the role of exosomes in signal traﬃcking , and that they possibly also regulate transcytosis . FACTORS AFFECTING REGULATION OF TRANSCYTOSIS Numerous factors might have a connection , either regulating directly or indirectly the transcytosis mechanism ( Figure 4 ) . In this review we would like to highlight some factors which have been indicated to regulate either endocytosis , endosomal rearrangement , exocytosis , or components of transcytosis . Physicochemical ( pH , Temperature , O 2 , CO 2 , ROS ) of the Molecules and Environment Through several discoveries , physicochemical factors have been shown to play an indispensable role in balanced transcytosis in the BBB . Transcytosis via transferrin receptor showed a dependence on pH and the polarity of proteins ( Sade et al . , 2014 ) . The release of iron also utilizes pH changes in endosomes to change the aﬃnity between iron and transferrin ( Qian et al . , 2002 ) . It is undetermined whether changes in pH might alter the expression of transcytosis’ components or not . A temperature shift induces membrane reorganization and actin dynamics which is cholesterol - dependent ( Römer et al . , 2010 ) , indicating the role of temperature in governing transcytosis . Similar ﬁndings in neuron behavior highlights temperature - sensitive clathrin - independent endocytosis , which is mediated by dynamin and actin ( Delvendahl et al . , 2016 ) . Further investigation is required to elucidate the mechanisms behind the eﬀects of these factors . Oxygenation upregulates SSeCKS , a cytoskeleton protein which is expressed by astrocytes to invoke BBB tightness via VEGF suppression and Ang1 stimulation ( Lee et al . , 2003 ) . Exposure to normobaric hyperoxia also can slow BBB damage ( Liang et al . , 2015 ) . On the other hand , hyperoxia / ROS might induce the Fas - BID apoptosis signaling cascade , which is mediated by Cav - 1 ( Zhang et al . , 2011 ) . Signifying balanced regulation is necessary to maintain an appropriate amount of oxygen in the BBB . Hypoxic conditions might alter the content of exosomes for intercellular signaling . It has been shown that Notch ligands transport will be upregulated during hypoxia ( Gonzalez - King et al . , 2017 ) . Hypoxia may induce oxidative stress , mainly caused by reperfusion ( Thornton et al . , 2017 ) , triggering BBB breakdown via NOX4 activation ( Casas et al . , 2017 ) . ROS which is produced by NOX is disruptive to the BBB , and has showed a dependence on cytokines , which actively downregulate junctional proteins in BBB ( Rochfort et al . , 2014 ) . ROS disrupts brain ECs’ tight junctions arrangement via RhoA / PI3K / PKB pathway ( Schreibelt et al . , 2007 ) . ROS also enhance the transcellular migration of monocytes across BBB ( Van der Goes et al . , 2002 ) , possibly due to stimulation of caveolae production via c - Src ( Coelho - Santos et al . , 2016 ) . H 2 O 2 from ecSOD in caveolae might also promoting VEGF activity , which causing leakiness ( Oshikawa et al . , 2010 ) . These data indicate that ROS will increase BBB permeability through transcytosis regulation . Supplementation of alpha lipoic acid ( ALA ) and melatonin helps to alleviate ECs oxidative stress brain ( Patiño et al . , 2016 ; Badran et al . , 2018 ) , possibly explored as the treatment . Mechanical Stress The importance of normal blood ﬂow for healthy brain microvasculature development since infancy has been proved ( Farzam et al . , 2017 ) . Maintenance of regular blood ﬂow by neurovascular control as well as cardiac function is prominent especially in childhood , and failure may lead to sleep - disordered breathing ( Kontos et al . , 2017 ) . The maintenance of a healthy brain in adults is also closely related to normal hemodynamics , where individuals with cardiac problems will also suﬀer from brain aging ( Sabayan et al . , 2015 ) . Hemodynamics aﬀect neural activity and both systems are coupled and synchronized spatiotemporally , especially in excitatory neuron activity ( Ma et al . , 2016 ) . One of the regulators between neural activity and HBMECs is pericytes , which control the capillary diameter within the central nervous system , depending on the neurotransmitter ( Peppiatt et al . , 2006 ) . Pericyte activity as the regulator of blood ﬂow in the neurovascular unit is also detected in the adult brain and during brain aging . Phenotypes such as BBB breakdown , neurodegeneration , and neuroinﬂammation were observed in pericyte - deﬁcient model mice ( Bell et al . , 2010 ) . Frontiers in Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 8 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 1436 fnins - 13 - 01436 January 11 , 2020 Time : 11 : 37 # 9 Tjakra et al . Transcytosis Factors Crosstalk in BBB In vitro experiments on bovine BMECs showed some proteins related to tight junction of BBB , Occludin and ZO - 1 are regulated by blood ﬂow ( Berardi and Tarbell , 2009 ) . When there is a higher shear stress , the expression will also be upregulated , and this process is dependent on cyclic strain ( Collins et al . , 2005 ) . Mechanical stress has been shown to regulate cell behavior and other factors involving transcytosis . Shear stress aﬀects the production of NO , independent of intracellular calcium ( Chen et al . , 2018 ) . A recent discovery is that there is a close reciprocal connection between Hippo pathway ( mechanosensory pathway ) and caveolae . It has been elucidated that caveolae are regulating the mechanosensory action of cells , and they aﬀect the expression of YAP / TAZ which is the transcription factor of Cav - 1 and Cavin1 ( Rausch et al . , 2019 ) . Shear stress also aﬀects vessel growth by regulating miRNA expression ( Guan et al . , 2017 ) . Reduced blood ﬂow will alter ion homeostasis and receptor - mediated transcytosis of insulin at the BBB , but not signiﬁcantly altered the paracellular transports ( Hom et al . , 2001 ) . Pericyte ability to express α - SMA indicates the cell have a contractile ability for regulating blood vessel diameter and blood ﬂow ( Alarcon - martinez et al . , 2018 ) . In some study , eﬀects of mechanical stress to the cell permeability has been well - elucidated . One example is in the renal epithelial cells , where ﬂuid shear stress modulated the endocytosis via mTOR pathway ( Long et al . , 2017 ) . In the HUVECs , shear stress aﬀects the endocytosis through PECAM - 1 via various pathways depending on the binding of distinct epitopes ( Han et al . , 2015 ) . It is indeed a result from specialization that HBMECs behave diﬀerently under exposure to shear stress compared to HUVECs as the representative of other ECs . HBMECs can maintain a cobblestone - like appearance under high shear stress , and most likely this mechanism is to minimize the paracellular transport by minimizing the length of tight junctions ( Ye et al . , 2014 ; Reinitz et al . , 2015 ) . The detailed explanation needs to be studied even further . In HBMECs , Mfsd2a ( Major Facilitator Superfamily Domain Containing 2A ) has been known to facilitate the uptake of DHA into brain ( Nguyen et al . , 2014 ) as well as maintaining low rates of transcytosis in the cerebrovascular units ( Zhao and Zlokovic , 2014 ) . By transporting DHA inside the cells , the caveolae vesicles formation can be inhibited by intracellular lipid concentration , thus promoting BBB integrity ( Andreone et al . , 2017 ) . Mfsd2a expression is shown to be downregulated by the metastatic brain tumor to disrupt BBB integrity and lipid metabolism ( Tiwary et al . , 2018 ) . Another study also showed a lethal microcephaly phenotype was shown in the absence of Mfsd2a ( Guemez - gamboa et al . , 2015 ) . The expression of Mfsd2a showed partial dependency to LXR / Srebp1 and Srebp2 ( Chan et al . , 2018 ) . Interestingly , shear stress was shown to activate Srebp1 splicing mediated by integrins in EC ( Liu et al . , 2002 ) . SREBP splicing is also showed dependency to shear stress through S1P and S2P activation , allowing SREBP ( N ) to translocates into nucleus and activating SRE - mediated genes ( Lin et al . , 2003 ) . Inferred from this pathway , this hypothesis opens up a possibility for explaining how mechanotransduction may aﬀecting transcytosis . In astrocytes , mechanical stress is positively regulating the expression of GFAP . P2Y2 and P2Y4 are the mediators of calcium signaling in astrocytes , which also colocalize with GFAP ( Paniagua - Herranz et al . , 2017 ) . These calcium receptors are dependent to caveolae regulation ( Pani and Singh , 2009 ) , suggesting a crosstalk between these factors to transcytosis process in astrocytes , as well as feedback regulation for promoting caveolae formation . Basement Membrane and Junctions Remodeling Close contacts between neurovascular units are maintained through several ways . One of them is the peg - socket junctional complex , where the pericytes act like a peg and are inserted into EC’s sockets through facilitation of proteins , such as N - cadherin and connexin 43 ( CX43 ) hemichannels . Hemichannels are membrane protein structures which are coupled to each other in adjacent cells , providing a channel for signaling molecules and exchange of metabolites ( Orellana et al . , 2011 ) . The roles of CX43 as hemichannel between pericytes and ECs has been clearly elucidated . It has a crucial part in the maintenance of intercellular communication between pericytes and ECs , consequently promoting stability of barrier properties ( Li and Roy , 2009 ; Bobbie et al . , 2010 ) . Inactivity of CX43 expression may leads to pericytes detachment and activation of ECs apoptosis ( Tien et al . , 2014 ) . Gap junction alteration as part of tissue remodeling also contributes to alteration of transcytosis . During inﬂammation , expression of Cx43 and Cav - 3 in astrocytes will be downregulated via iNOS activity . Cx43 as the regulator of gap junctions has also showed interaction with Cav - 1 / Cav - 2 during transcytosis , however its relation with Cav - 3 still has not been elucidated ( Liao et al . , 2010 ) , leaving room for further study . N - cadherin is one of the transmembrane glycoproteins that is expressed by ECs , together with VE - cadherin . While VE - cadherin is indispensable for vascular morphogenesis , N - cadherin is essential to the process of vascular maturation through pericytes recruitment ( Tillet et al . , 2005 ) . The regulation of N - cadherin is closely connected to the S1P pathway , where the activation of S1P1R will promote N - cadherin - dependent of the pericyte - EC connection ( Paik et al . , 2004 ) . Albumin also plays a crucial role in the transcytosis of myeloperoxidase ( MPO ) via caveolae - albumin binding proteins ( ABPs ) ( Tiruppathi et al . , 2004 ) . MPO itself will be localized at ﬁbronectin and induce nitration of ECM , thus promoting the tissue remodeling by binding with adhesion plaques ( Baldus et al . , 2001 ) . The expression of Cav - 1 was upregulated after the induction of juvenile traumatic brain injury ( jTBI ) , demonstrating signs of BBB repair attempts ( Badaut et al . , 2015 ) . Upregulation of MMP - 2 and MMP - 9 expression was the result of the decreased amount of Cav - 1 , together with downregulation of TJ protein ZO - 1 . Rescue experiment using NOS inhibitor showed reserved expression of Cav - 1 , inhibition of MMPs activity , and restored BBB integrity ( Gu et al . , 2012 ; Sadeghian et al . , 2018 ) . Pericytes may induce rapid localized MMP - 9 activity during ischemia ( Underly et al . , 2017 ) . MMP - 2 is the major contributor to occludin degeneration , meanwhile Cav - 1 actively redistributes claudin - 5 ( Liu et al . , 2012 ) . BBB stabilization through astrocytic laminin ( laminins - 111 and - 211 ) secretion occurs through pericytes’ integrin α 2 ( ITGA2 ) Frontiers in Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 9 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 1436 fnins - 13 - 01436 January 11 , 2020 Time : 11 : 37 # 10 Tjakra et al . Transcytosis Factors Crosstalk in BBB binding . Lack of astrocytic laminins may induce pericytes into contractile form , which compromise BBB integrity ( Yao et al . , 2014 ) . Consequently , all these data represent exemplary cases of how basal lamina might regulate BBB transcytosis . Various Cytokines The cytokine family contains the key molecules for cellular signaling . The exchange of cytokines between ECs , pericytes , and astrocytes are necessary to maintain BBB integrity , especially in the process of transcytosis ( Dohgu and Banks , 2013 ) . Discovery of the cytokines related to transcytosis is continuously studied , for example the CTRP5 , which promotes LDL transcytosis ( Li et al . , 2018 ) . It is indeed interesting that several pro - inﬂammatory cytokines are shown to be promoting transcytosis , one example is the HMGB1 which promotes albumin transcytosis through activation of Src and Cav - 1 phosphorylation ( Shang et al . , 2016 ) . Which bring us to question : what about dual - functioning cytokines ? And also the anti - inﬂammatory cytokines ? Cytokine signaling has also showed a dependence on the transcytosis process . One case of this phenomenon is the traﬃcking of IL - 11 , which is known to maintain barrier function at the intestinal epithelium . Traﬃcking of IL - 11 through IL - 11R1 showed a unidirectional transcytosis process , and IL - 11R1 / 2 also controls redirection of gp130 to the apical part of the cells ( Monhasery et al . , 2016 ) . Following gp130 , one of the inhibitors of the JAK / STAT pathway , the SOCS3 was showed to have another function in the stabilization of cavin - 1 . In return , cavin - 1 also modulate SOCS3 ability to inhibit IL - 6 signaling via cAMP ( Williams et al . , 2018 ) . In this case we can see clearly how cytokines might alter cell - signaling processes , regulating transcytosis and at the same time was also showed dependency on the transcytosis process . Further investigation should be conducted regarding the way cytokines might alter endosomal rearrangement , including whether the quantity of cytokines exposure plays a part in transcytosis , and vice versa . miRNA Intercellular Transport ( EC , Pericytes , Astrocytes ) miRNA is another factor which is both regulating and regulated by transcytosis . It has been proven to actively contribute in cell - to - cell communication , a process heavily relying on transcytosis , mainly through EVs . During diabetic complication located on the limb , miR - 503 through the shedding of microparticles ( MPs ) is transferred from ECs to pericytes , resulting in pericyte detachment and increased vessel permeability ( Caporali et al . , 2015 ) . Cav - 1 downregulation by miR - 192 is also observed in synovial tissue ﬁbroblast - like cells ( Li et al . , 2017 ) , as well as another miR - 199a - 5p targeting clathrin in cancer cells ( Huang et al . , 2017 ) . It is plausible to see whether miRNA also regulates BBB permeability and transcytosis , given the specialization of HBMECs and the neurovascular unit . An attempt has been made to characterize miR - 155 eﬀects on HBMECs ( Chen et al . , 2015 ) , further research should be arranged to see the combined interaction when co - cultured with astrocytes and pericytes , or in vivo study . Previous study showed pericytes capability to regulate vasculogenesis by secreting miRNA targeting Fli1 ( Larsson et al . , 2009 ) . Astrocytes through EVs of cytokines ( TNF - α and IL - 1 β ) also regulates miR - 501 - 3p which disrupts tight junction ( Chaudhuri et al . , 2018 ; Toyama et al . , 2018 ) . Another study showed miR - 107 , which endogenously expressed in ECs but also present in the cerebrospinal ﬂuid , may protect BBB robustness from amyloid - beta ( Liu et al . , 2016 ) , eﬀects of miRNA also supports recovery after intracerebral hemorrhage ( Xi et al . , 2017 ) . In contrast , there are also miRNA with BBB disrupting activities , for example miR - 155 disrupting tight junction protein expression ( Zheng et al . , 2017 ) , and miR - 181c which secreted by cancer cells ( Tominaga et al . , 2015 ) . There have been several ﬁndings where miRNA was alternating the course of signaling pathway related to BBB transcytosis , mainly VEGF ( Chamorro - Jorganes et al . , 2016 ) , Ang / Tie ( Fang et al . , 2016 ) , PDGFR β ( Tanaka et al . , 2013 ) , and TGF - beta ( Zhou et al . , 2016 ) . miRNA was also showed to interact with other factors concerning transcytosis , especially mechanotransduction pathway ( Demolli et al . , 2015 ) and cytokines expression ( Guo et al . , 2017 ) . Altogether , miRNA functions and transport system might be one of the factors aﬀecting and also aﬀected by transcytosis . Further research is needed to elucidate the detail mechanism and interaction in order to design an eﬀective treatment strategy . CONCLUSION : FUTURE APPLICATIONS AND PERSPECTIVES By exploring factors of transcytosis which have been described above , we can apply the knowledge to the development of drug design and also BBB - on - a - chip . Drug Therapy Design One of the obstacles for brain disease treatment is the special design and low permeability of the BBB which requires customized drug design . This design will enable drugs to be taken for transport , which mainly involves caveolae - dependent transcytosis ( Choi et al . , 2013 ; Piazzini et al . , 2018 ) . Several candidates have been tested as potential protagonists of Cav - 1 , which upregulates caveolae formation ( Table 2 ) . Nevertheless , speciﬁc protagonists of Cav - 1 still have not been found , requiring future study . Targeting the growth factor receptor also seems promising for inducing caveolae formation , even though speciﬁcity and delivery should be considered . There are also agents targeting other receptors which may have an indirect eﬀects to caveolae formation ( Table 2 ) . Targeting S1P1R might induce small molecule selective of BBB opening , indicating a possibility for drug administration ( Yanagida et al . , 2017 ) . Recent study successfully create a temperature sensitive liposome ( Bredlau et al . , 2018 ) utilizing hyperthermia , and conjugated cation transporter which utilize ECs’ glycocalyx negative charge ( Kou et al . , 2018 ) . Inactivating P - gp remains a challenge to prevent drug eﬄux , and a recent study showed it can be internalized due to ROS activation dependent on Cav - 1 ( Hoshi et al . , 2019 ) , consequently emphasizing the control of transcytosis upregulating factors to drug therapy strategies . Frontiers in Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 10 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 1436 f n i n s - 13 - 01436 J a n u a r y 11 , 2020 T i m e : 11 : 37 # 11 T j a k r a e t a l . T r a n s c y t o s i s F ac t o r s C r o ss t a l k i n BBB TABLE 2 | Some signaling receptors , along with the characteristics of endocytosis , exocytosis ( if available ) , protagonist , and antagonist molecules . Signaling pathway membrane receptors Endocytosis characteristics Exocytosis characteristics Protagonist Antagonist Relation to phenotype observed TGF - β R I Novel clathrin / caveolae dependent ( He et al . , 2015 ) CTGF , SDC2 ( Chang , 2016 ) TGF - β SB431542 ( Paonessa et al . , 2019 ) , A 83 - 01 ( Yakoub and Sadek , 2018 ) In homozygous KO mice , lethality was observed . Severe hemorrhage and abnormal vessel development was also present ( Larsson et al . , 2001 ) VEGFR 1 Caveolae dependent ( Celus et al . , 2017 ) VEGF - A ; B Sunitinib , Pazopanib , Axitinib ( Musumeci et al . , 2012 ) Lack of this receptor induced by tamoxifen may cause increased angiogenesis , upregulation of VEGFR2 expression , but non - signiﬁcant BBB Permeability . It also cause lethality in germline mice ( Ho et al . , 2012 ) . VEGFR 2 Caveolae dependent ( Caliceti et al . , 2014 ) VEGF - A ; C ; D ; E , Gremlin , Monomeric Gremlin C 141 A , Sorafenib , Sunitinib , Pazopanib , Vandetanib , Axitinib ( Musumeci et al . , 2012 ) Deﬁcient of blood - island formation and vasculogenesis was observed in the KO mice ( Shalaby et al . , 1995 ) , in heterozygous KO mice , angiogenesis was perturbed ( Oladipupo et al . , 2018 ) S1P1R Clathrin dependent ( Reeves et al . , 2016 ) , Caveolae dependent ( Ephstein et al . , 2013 ) Fingolimod ( Quancard et al . , 2012 ) , Ponesimod ( Bell et al . , 2018 ) CYM5442 ( Kim et al . , 2018 ) , NIBR - 0213 ( Quancard et al . , 2012 ) , AD2900 ( Song et al . , 2017 ) Knockout mice showed lethality and severe hemorrhage since infancy ( Liu et al . , 2000 ) TIE2 Clathrin dependent ( Bogdanovic et al . , 2009 ) Caveolae dependent ( Hossain et al . , 2017 ) ANG1 , ANG4 ANG2 , ANG3 Global deletion will cause lethality to mice embryo , pericytes speciﬁc deletion may cause developmental delay and abnormal vessel maturation ( Teichert et al . , 2017 ) Dll4 Clathrin dependent ( Sheldon et al . , 2010 ) Exosomal markers : LAMP1 TSG101 Rab5 ( Sheldon et al . , 2010 ) Dll4 - Fc ( Sheldon et al . , 2010 ) , MEDI0639 ( Jenkins et al . , 2012 ) Heterozygous deletion will induce arteriovenous malformation and haploinsufﬁcient lethality in mice ( Krebs et al . , 2004 ) Notch Clathrin dependent ( Meloty - Kapella et al . , 2012 ) Egﬂ7 ( Nichol et al . , 2010 ) Lack of Notch1 in KO mice cause lethality ( Conlon et al . , 1995 ) , meanwhile artery enlargement and vein underdevelopment was observed in heterozygous KO ( Kim et al . , 2008 ) G Protein - Coupled Receptor ( GPCR ) Clathrin dependent Caveolae dependent ( Zhang and Kim , 2017 ) GRI977143 , kynurenic acid , 3 - methoxycatechol GDP - β - S In GPR124 KO mice , embryonic lethality , with abnormality in CNS vascular and BBB was observed ( Cullen et al . , 2011 ) EphrinB2 Clathrin dependent ( Gaitanos et al . , 2016 ) EphA4 Dasatinib ( Barquilla and Pasquale , 2014 ) Blocking of EphrinB2 may inhibit angiogenesis in brain via VEGFR2 regulation ( Sawamiphak et al . , 2010 ) , global deletion causes defective angiogenesis especially in the head region , and also lethality in embryonic mice ( Wang et al . , 1998 ) . PDGFR - β EphB2 - Caveolae dependent ( Nakayama et al . , 2013 ) EphB2 - null - Clathrin dependent Sorafenib , Sunitinib ( Musumeci et al . , 2012 ) Knockout mice showed excessive bleeding , hypoplasia of vascular smooth muscle cells in larger vessel , and lack of pericytes in microvasculature ( Hellström et al . , 1999 ) Cav - 1 - PPAR γ , Pioglitazone ( Werion et al . , 2016 ) Chlorogenic acid derivatives ( Lee et al . , 2017 ) Lovastatin and / or Celecoxib ( Shimato et al . , 2013 ) GGTI - 286 Incadronate ( Iguchi et al . , 2006 ) Knockout mice showed loss of Cav - 2 expression , endocytosis defect , hyper - proliferation and abnormal vascular development ( Razani et al . , 2001 ) Caveolae - mediated endocytosis - M β CD ( Moriyama et al . , 2017 ; Wu et al . , 2019 ) Nystatin ( Burger et al . , 2011 ) - Clathrin - mediated endocytosis - Dynasore ( Wu et al . , 2019 ) - F r o n t i e r s i n N e u r o s c i e n ce | www . f r o n t i e r s i n . o r g 11 J a n u a r y 2020 | V o l u m e 13 | A r t i c l e 1436 fnins - 13 - 01436 January 11 , 2020 Time : 11 : 37 # 12 Tjakra et al . Transcytosis Factors Crosstalk in BBB BBB - on - a - Chip The organ - on - a - chip oﬀers a possibility to create a model closer to the human body than animal models and conventional cell culture models . One of the primary applications for BBBoC is the drug - testing ﬁeld , to observe cytotoxicity and pharmacodynamics . It is also useful to study physiological interactions and responses from multiple organs ( Ahadian et al . , 2017 ) . With relatively simple steps , and also time - and money - saving aspects , the organ - on - a - chip is the future model for experimentation and study models in the ﬁeld of life science ( Streets and Huang , 2013 ) . Elucidation regarding transcytosis factors on the BBB will support establishment of BBBoC . For instance , a fruitful approach was taken by Koo et al . ( 2018 ) , where a three - dimensional ( 3D ) tetra - culture was made using combined construct of gel - cell matrix , phase guide , and perfusion of medium . The usage of phase guide which composed of capillary pressure barriers enable the separation of gel and ﬂuid phases . Thus , the construction of membrane - free substrate for endothelial cell attachment was made possible , initiated by gel - cell polymerization which contained mix culture of microglia , astrocytes , and neuroblastoma combined to extracellular matrix that comprised of collagen . Cell seeding of ECs with perfused medium was done to mimics the shear stress and blood ﬂow , which resulted in the development of neurovascular unit by ECs and gel - cell matrix ( Figure 5 ) . The permeability and integrity of BBBoC was tested by using AChE activity , viability , and residual organo phosphates ( OPs ) assay , which were known to be toxic and came across the brain through the BBB in vivo . Positive points of this model are the utilization of four types of cell which present in vivo , relatively normal permeability , and closely mimics the neurovascular unit ( Koo et al . , 2018 ) . Some consideration that should be made is regarding the inability to measure TEER because of the diﬃculty to insert the electrodes , and another thing is the extracellular matrix which only comprised of collagen , whereas the in vivo extracellular matrix also comprised of ﬁbronectin and gelatin . In conclusion , the ﬁeld of BBBoC still has many possibilities for future development and integration to the body - on - a - chip system . BBBoC is a promising construct that may answer and serves as the future study model in many ﬁelds of life science . Taken together , the whole study regarding factors of transcytosis in BBB still needs further exploration , especially regarding crosstalk between factors , context of environment and nutrition , as well as pathogenesis stimulation . With these factors in mind , application development will be more eﬀective and eﬃcient . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS MT , YW , CD , and GW contributed conception and design of the study . NW and ZH organized the literature . VV performed the design of ﬁgures . MT wrote the ﬁrst draft of the manuscript . All authors contributed to manuscript revision , read and approved the submitted version . FUNDING The author ( s ) disclosed receipt of the following ﬁnancial support for the research , authorship , and / or publication of this article . The work was supported by grants from the National Natural Science Foundation of China ( 11572064 , 31971242 , and 31771599 ) , the National Key Technology R & D Program of China ( 2016YFC1102305 ) , and Chongqing Science and Technology Bureau ( cstc2019kjrc ) . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors wish to acknowledge and appreciate the courtesy of Chad Mirkin at Northwestern University , United States and Yeoheung Yun at North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University , United States for generously giving permission to use the relevant data . The authors also wish to thank all other member of GW’s Laboratory for constructive discussion and feedback . They are also thankful for the support from the Chongqing Engineering Laboratory in Vascular Implants and the Public Experiment Centre of State Bioindustrial Base ( Chongqing ) and the National “111 plan” ( B06023 ) . REFERENCES Abbott , N . J . , Rönnbäck , L . , and Hansson , E . ( 2006 ) . Astrocyte - endothelial interactions at the blood - brain barrier . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 7 , 41 – 53 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrn1824 Ahadian , S . , Civitarese , R . , Bannerman , D . , Mohammadi , M . H . , Lu , R . , Wang , E . , etal . ( 2017 ) . Organ - on - a - chipplatforms ? : aconvergenceofadvancedmaterials . cells , and microscale technologies . 7 : 1700506 . doi : 10 . 1002 / adhm . 20170 0506 Alarcon - martinez , L . , Yilmaz - ozcan , S . , Yemisci , M . , Schallek , J . , Kılç , K . , Can , A . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Capillary pericytes express α - smooth muscle actin , which requires prevention of ﬁlamentous - actin depolymerization for detection . eLife 7 : e34861 . doi : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 34861 Ando , K . , Tomimura , K . , Sazdovitch , V . , Suain , V . , Yilmaz , Z . , Authelet , M . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Level of PICALM , a key component of clathrin - mediated endocytosis , is correlated with levels of phosphotau and autophagy - related proteins and is associated with tau inclusions in AD . PSP and Pick disease . Neurobiol . Dis . 94 , 32 – 43 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . nbd . 2016 . 05 . 017 Andreone , B . J . , Chow , B . W . , Tata , A . , Lacoste , B . , Ben - Zvi , A . , Bullock , K . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Blood - brain barrier permeability is regulated by lipid transport - dependent suppression of caveolae - mediated transcytosis . Neuron 94 : 581 - 594 . e5 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2017 . 03 . 043 Argaw , A . T . , Asp , L . , Zhang , J . , Navrazhina , K . , Pham , T . , Mariani , J . N . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Astrocyte - derived VEGF - A drives blood - brain barrier disruption in CNS inﬂammatory disease . J . Clin . Invest . 122 , 2454 – 2468 . doi : 10 . 1172 / JCI60842 Armulik , A . , Genové , G . , Mäe , M . , Nisancioglu , M . H . , Wallgard , E . , Niaudet , C . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Pericytes regulate the blood - brain barrier . Nature 468 , 557 – 561 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature09522 Badaut , J . , Ajao , D . O . , and Sorensen , D . W . ( 2015 ) . Caveolin expression changes in the neurovascular unit after juvenile traumatic brain injury ? : signs of blood – brain barrier healing ? ? Neuroscience 285 , 215 – 226 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuroscience . 2014 . 10 . 035 Frontiers in Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 12 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 1436 fnins - 13 - 01436 January 11 , 2020 Time : 11 : 37 # 13 Tjakra et al . Transcytosis Factors Crosstalk in BBB Badran , M . , Abuyassin , B . H . , Golbidi , S . , Ayas , N . , and Laher , I . ( 2018 ) . Alpha lipoic acid improves endothelial function in mice subjected to chronic intermittent hypoxia . Am . J . Respirat . Crit . Care Med . 197 : A3761 . Bai , X . - L . , Yang , X . - Y . , Li , J . - Y . , Li , Y . , Jia , X . , Xiong , Z . - F . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Cavin - 1 regulates caveolae - mediated LDL transcytosis : crosstalk in an AMPK / eNOS / NF - kB / Sp1 loop . Oncotarget 8 , 103985 – 103995 . doi : 10 . 18632 / oncotarget . 21944 Bai , Y . , Zhu , X . , Chao , J . , Zhang , Y . , Qian , C . , and Li , P . ( 2015 ) . Pericytes contribute to the disruption of the cerebral endothelial barrier via increasing VEGF expression ? : implications for stroke . PLoS One 10 : e0124362 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0124362 Baldus , S . , Eiserich , J . P . , Mani , A . , Castro , L . , Figueroa , M . , Chumley , P . , et al . ( 2001 ) . Endothelial transcytosis of myeloperoxidase confers speciﬁcity to vascular ECM proteins as targets of tyrosine nitration . Clin . Chem . 108 , 1759 – 1770 . doi : 10 . 1172 / JCI200112617 . Introduction Barquilla , A . , and Pasquale , E . B . ( 2014 ) . Eph receptors and ephrins : therapeutic opportunities . Ann . Rev . Pharmacol . Toxicol . 55 , 465 – 487 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev - pharmtox - 011112 - 140226 Baumgartner , I . , Kalka , C . , Von Ballmoos , M . W . , Yang , Z . , Vo , J . , and Santo , S . D . ( 2010 ) . Endothelial progenitor cells induce a phenotype shift in diﬀerentiated endothelial cells towards PDGF / PDGFR b axis - mediated angiogenesis . PLoS One 5 : e0014107 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0014107 Bell , M . , Foley , D . , Naylor , C . , Robinson , C . , Riley , J . , Epemolu , O . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Discovery of super soft - drug modulators of sphingosine - 1 - phosphate receptor 1 . Bioorg . Med . Chem . Lett . 28 , 3255 – 3259 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bmcl . 2018 . 07 . 044 Bell , R . D . , Winkler , E . A . , Sagare , A . P . , Singh , I . , Larue , B . , and Deane , R . ( 2010 ) . Article pericytes control key neurovascular functions and neuronal phenotype in the adult brain and during brain aging . Neuron 68 , 409 – 427 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2010 . 09 . 043 Berardi , D . E . , and Tarbell , J . M . ( 2009 ) . Stretch and shear interactions aﬀect intercellular junction protein expression and turnover in endothelial cells . Cell Mol . Bioeng . 2 , 320 – 331 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s12195 - 009 - 0073 - 7 Bobbie , M . W . , Roy , S . , Trudeau , K . , Munger , S . J . , Simon , A . M . , andRoy , S . ( 2010 ) . Reduced connexin 43 expression and its eﬀect on the development of vascular lesions in retinas of diabetic mice . Invest . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 51 , 3758 – 3763 . doi : 10 . 1167 / iovs . 09 - 4489 Bogdanovic , E . , Coombs , N . , andDumont , D . J . ( 2009 ) . OligomerizedTie2localizes to clathrin - coated pits in response to angiopoietin - 1 . Histochem . Cell Biol . 132 , 225 – 237 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00418 - 009 - 0603 - 3 Bredlau , A . L . , Motamarry , A . , Chen , C . , McCrackin , M . A . , Helke , K . , Armeson , K . E . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Localized delivery of therapeutic doxorubicin dose across the canine blood - brain barrier with hyperthermia and temperature sensitive liposomes . Drug Deliv . 25 , 973 – 984 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 10717544 . 2018 . 1461280 Burger , D . , Montezano , A . C . , Nishigaki , N . , He , Y . , Carter , A . , and Touyz , R . M . ( 2011 ) . Endothelial microparticle formation by angiotensin II is mediated via ang II receptor type I / NADPH Oxidase / rho kinase pathways targeted to lipid rafts . Arteriosc . Thrombosis Vasc . Biol . 31 , 1898 – 1907 . doi : 10 . 1161 / ATVBAHA . 110 . 222703 Cabezas , R . , Vega - Vela , N . E . , González - Sanmiguel , J . , González , J . , Esquinas , P . , Echeverria , V . , et al . ( 2018 ) . PDGF - BB preserves mitochondrial morphology , attenuates ros production , and upregulates neuroglobin in an astrocytic model under rotenone insult . Mol . Neurobiol . 55 , 3085 – 3095 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s12035 - 017 - 0567 - 6 Caliceti , C . , Zambonin , L . , Rizzo , B . , Fiorentini , D . , VieceliDallaSega , F . , Hrelia , S . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Role of plasma membrane caveolae / Lipid rafts in VEGF - induced redox signaling in human leukemia cells . BioMed . Res . Int . 2014 , 1 – 13 . doi : 10 . 1155 / 2014 / 857504 Caporali , A . , Meloni , M . , Nailor , A . , Mitiæ , T . , Shantikumar , S . , Riu , F . , etal . ( 2015 ) . P75 NTR - dependent activation of NF - κ B regulates microRNA - 503 transcription and pericyte - endothelial crosstalk in diabetes after limb ischaemia . Nat . Commun . 6 : 9024 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms9024 Carroll , S . J . O . , Kho , D . T . , Wiltshire , R . , Nelson , V . , Rotimi , O . , Johnson , R . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Pro - inﬂammatory TNF α and IL - 1 β diﬀerentially regulate the inﬂammatory phenotype of brain microvascular endothelial cells . J . Neuroinﬂam . 12 : 131 . doi : 10 . 1186 / s12974 - 015 - 0346 - 0 Casas , A . I . , Geuss , E . , Kleikers , P . W . M . , Mencl , S . , Herrmann , A . M . , Buendia , I . , et al . ( 2017 ) . NOX4 - dependent neuronal autotoxicity and BBB breakdown explain the superior sensitivity of the brain to ischemic damage . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 114 , 12315 – 12320 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1705034114 Celus , W . , Di Conza , G . , Oliveira , A . I . , Ehling , M . , Costa , B . M . , Wenes , M . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Loss of Caveolin - 1 in metastasis - associated macrophages drives lung metastatic growth through increased angiogenesis . Cell Rep . 21 , 2842 – 2854 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2017 . 11 . 034 Cha , S . H . , Choi , Y . R . , Heo , C . H . , Kang , S . J . , Joe , E . H . , Jou , I . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Loss of parkin promotes lipid rafts - dependent endocytosis through accumulating caveolin - 1 : Implications for Parkinson’s disease . Mol . Neurodegen . 10 , 1 – 13 . doi : 10 . 1186 / s13024 - 015 - 0060 - 5 Chamorro - Jorganes , A . , Lee , M . Y . , Araldi , E . , Landskroner - Eiger , S . , Fernández - Fuertes , M . , Sahraei , M . , et al . ( 2016 ) . VEGF - induced expression of miR - 17 - 92 cluster in endothelial cells is mediated by ERK / ELK1 activation and regulates angiogenesis . Circ . Res . 118 , 38 – 47 . doi : 10 . 1161 / CIRCRESAHA . 115 . 307408 Chan , J . P . , Wong , B . H . , Chin , C . F . , Galam , D . L . A . , Foo , J . C . , Wong , L . C . , et al . ( 2018 ) . ThelysolipidtransporterMfsd2aregulateslipogenesisinthedeveloping brain . PLoS Biol . 16 : e2006443 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 2006443 Chang , C . ( 2016 ) . Agonists and antagonists of the TGF - β family . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 8 , 203 – 258 . Chanthick , C . , Kanlaya , R . , Kiatbumrung , R . , Pattanakitsakul , S . N . , and Thongboonkerd , V . ( 2016 ) . Caveolae - mediated albumin transcytosis is enhanced in dengue - infected human endothelial cells : a model of vascular leakage in dengue hemorrhagic fever . Sci . Rep . 6 : 31855 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep31855 Chaudhuri , A . D . , Dastgheyb , R . M . , Yoo , S . W . , Trout , A . , Talbot , C . C . , Hao , H . , et al . ( 2018 ) . TNF α and IL - 1 β modify the miRNA cargo of astrocyte shed extracellular vesicles to regulate neurotrophic signaling in neurons article . Cell Death Dis . 9 : 363 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41419 - 018 - 0369 - 4 Chen , Y . , Liu , Y . , Pan , Q . , Zhao , Y . , He , C . , Bi , K . , et al . ( 2015 ) . MicroRNA - 155 regulates ROS production , NO generation , apoptosis and multiple functions of humanbrainmicrovesselendothelialcellsunderphysiologicalandpathologicalconditions . J . Cell . Biochem . 116 , 2870 – 2881 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jcb . 25234 Chen , Z . , D’Arc Oliveira , S . , Zimnicka , A . M . , Jiang , Y . , Sharma , T . , Chen , S . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Reciprocal regulation of eNOS and Caveolin - 1 functions in endothelial cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 29 , 1190 – 1202 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . e17 - 01 - 0049 Choi , C . H . J . , Hao , L . , Narayan , S . P . , Auyeung , E . , and Mirkin , C . A . ( 2013 ) . Mechanism for the endocytosis of spherical nucleic acid nanoparticle conjugates . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 110 , 7625 – 7630 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1305804110 Chung , J . W . , Kim , D . H . , Oh , M . J . , Cho , Y . H . , Kim , E . H . , Moon , G . J . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Cav - 1 ( Caveolin - 1 ) and arterial remodeling in adult moyamoya disease . Stroke 49 , 2597 – 2604 . doi : 10 . 1161 / STROKEAHA . 118 . 021888 Coelho - Santos , V . , Socodato , R . , Portugal , C . , Leitão , R . A . , Rito , M . , Barbosa , M . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Methylphenidate - triggered ROS generation promotes caveolae - mediated transcytosis via Rac1 signaling and c - Src - dependent caveolin - 1 phosphorylation in human brain endothelial cells . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 73 , 4701 – 4716 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00018 - 016 - 2301 - 3 Collins , N . T . , Cummins , P . M . , Colgan , O . C . , Ferguson , G . , Birney , Y . A . , Murphy , R . P . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Cyclic strain – mediated regulation of vascular endothelial occludin and ZO - 1 inﬂuence on intercellular tight junction assembly and function . Arterioscler . Thromb . Vasc . Biol . 26 , 62 – 68 . doi : 10 . 1161 / 01 . ATV . 0000194097 . 92824 . b3 Conlon , R . A . , Reaume , A . G . , and Rossant , J . ( 1995 ) . Notch1 is required for the coordinate segmentation of somites . Development 121 , 1533 – 1545 . Cullen , M . , Elzarrad , M . K . , Seaman , S . , Zudaire , E . , Stevens , J . , Yang , M . Y . , et al . ( 2011 ) . GPR124 , an orphan G protein - coupled receptor , is required for CNS - speciﬁcvascularizationandestablishmentoftheblood - brainbarrier . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 , 5759 – 5764 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1017192108 Daly , A . C . , Randall , R . A . , and Hill , C . S . ( 2008 ) . Transforming growth factor ? - induced Smad1 / 5 phosphorylation in epithelial cells is mediated by novel receptor complexes and is essential for anchorage - independent growth . Mol . Cell Biol . 28 , 6889 – 6902 . doi : 10 . 1128 / MCB . 01192 - 08 Daly , C . , Wong , V . , Burova , E . , Wei , Y . , Zabski , S . , Griﬃths , J . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Angiopoietin - 1 modulates endothelial cell function and gene expression via the transcription factor FKHR ( FOXO1 ) . Genes Dev . 18 , 1060 – 1071 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 1189704 Darios , F . , Wasser , C . , Shakirzyanova , A . , Giniatullin , A . , Goodman , K . , Munoz - Bravo , J . L . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Sphingosine facilitates SNARE complex assembly and Frontiers in Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 13 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 1436 fnins - 13 - 01436 January 11 , 2020 Time : 11 : 37 # 14 Tjakra et al . Transcytosis Factors Crosstalk in BBB activatessynapticvesicleexocytosis . Neuron 62 , 683 – 694 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2009 . 04 . 024 Davis , R . B . , Pahl , K . , Datto , N . C . , Smith , S . V . , Shawber , C . , Caron , K . M . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Notchsignalingpathwayisapotentialtherapeutictargetforextracranial vascular malformations . Sci . Rep . 8 , 1 – 10 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 018 - 36628 - 1 Delvendahl , I . , Vyleta , N . P . , von Gersdorﬀ , H . , and Hallermann , S . ( 2016 ) . Fast , temperature - sensitive and clathrin - independent endocytosis at central synapses . Neuron 90 , 492 – 498 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2016 . 03 . 013 Demolli , S . , Doebele , C . , Doddaballapur , A . , Lang , V . , Fisslthaler , B . , Chavakis , E . , et al . ( 2015 ) . MicroRNA - 30 mediates anti - inﬂammatory eﬀects of shear stress and KLF2 via repression of angiopoietin 2 . J . Mol . Cell . Cardiol . 88 , 111 – 119 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . yjmcc . 2015 . 10 . 009 Dohgu , S . , and Banks , W . A . ( 2013 ) . Brain pericytes increase the lipopolysaccharide - enhancedtranscytosisofHIV - 1freevirusacrosstheinvitro blood – brain barrier ? : evidence for cytokine - mediated pericyte - endothelial cell crosstalk . Fluids Barr . CNS 10 : 23 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 2045 - 8118 - 10 - 23 Dusaban , S . S . , Chun , J . , Rosen , H . , Purcell , N . H . , and Brown , J . H . ( 2017 ) . Sphingosine 1 - phosphate receptor 3 and RhoA signaling mediate inﬂammatory gene expression in astrocytes . J . Neuroinﬂam . 14 , 1 – 10 . doi : 10 . 1186 / s12974 - 017 - 0882 - x Ephstein , Y . , Singleton , P . A . , Chen , W . , Wang , L . , Salgia , R . , Kanteti , P . , et al . ( 2013 ) . CriticalroleofS1PR1andintegrin β 4inHGF / c - Met - mediatedincreases in vascular integrity . J . Biol . Chem . 288 , 2191 – 2200 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M112 . 404780 Fang , Z . , He , Q . W . , Li , Q . , Chen , X . L . , Baral , S . , Jin , H . J . , et al . ( 2016 ) . MicroRNA - 150regulatesblood - brainbarrierpermeabilityviaTie - 2afterpermanentmiddle cerebral artery occlusion in rats . FASEB J . 30 , 2097 – 2107 . doi : 10 . 1096 / fj . 201500126 Farg , M . A . , Sundaramoorthy , V . , Sultana , J . M . , Yang , S . , Atkinson , R . A . K . , Levina , V . , et al . ( 2014 ) . C9ORF72 , implicated in amytrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia , regulates endosomal traﬃcking . Hum . Mol . Genet . 23 , 3579 – 3595 . doi : 10 . 1093 / hmg / ddu068 Farzam , P . , Buckley , E . M . , Lin , P . , Hagan , K . , Grant , P . E . , Inder , T . E . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Shedding light on the neonatal brain ? : probing cerebral hemodynamics by diﬀuse optical spectroscopic methods . Sci . Rep . 8 : 6007 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 15995 - 1 Ferrara , N . , Gerber , H . , and Lecouter , J . ( 2003 ) . The biology of VEGF and its receptors . Nat . Med . 9 , 669 – 676 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nm0603 - 669 Ferrari , G . , Cook , B . D . , Terushkin , V . , Pintucci , G . , and Mignatti , P . ( 2009 ) . Transforming growth angiogenesis through vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) - mediated apoptosis . J . Cell Physiol . 219 , 449 – 458 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jcp . 21706 Figley , C . R . , and Stroman , P . W . ( 2011 ) . The role ( s ) of astrocytes and astrocyte activity in neurometabolism , neurovascular coupling , and the production of functional neuroimaging signals . Eur . J . Neurosci . 33 , 577 – 588 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1460 - 9568 . 2010 . 07584 . x Foo , S . S . , Turner , C . J . , Adams , S . , Compagni , A . , Aubyn , D . , Kogata , N . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Ephrin - B2 controls cell motility and adhesion during blood - vessel - wall assembly . Cell 124 , 161 – 173 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2005 . 10 . 034 Gaitanos , T . N . , Koerner , J . , and Klein , R . ( 2016 ) . Tiam - Rac signaling mediates trans - endocytosis of ephrin receptor EphB2 and is important for cell repulsion . J . Cell Biol . 214 , 1 – 18 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201512010 Gallini , R . , Lindblom , P . , Bondjers , C . , Betsholtz , C . , and Andrae , J . ( 2016 ) . PDGF - A and PDGF - B induces cardiac ﬁ brosis in transgenic mice . Exp . Cell Res . 349 , 282 – 290 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . yexcr . 2016 . 10 . 022 Galvani , S . , Sanson , M . , Blaho , V . A . , Swendeman , S . L . , Conger , H . , Dahlbäck , B . , et al . ( 2015 ) . HDL - bound sphingosine 1 - phosphate acts as a biased agonist for the endothelial cell receptor S1P 1 to limit vascular inﬂammation . Sci . Signal . 8 , 1 – 11 . doi : 10 . 1126 / scisignal . aaa2581 Gaudreault , S . B . , Dea , D . , and Poirier , J . ( 2004 ) . Increased caveolin - 1 expression in Alzheimer’s disease brain . Neurobiol . Aging 25 , 753 – 759 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neurobiolaging . 2003 . 07 . 004 Gonzalez - King , H . , García , N . A . , Ontoria - Oviedo , I . , Ciria , M . , Montero , J . A . , and Sepúlveda , P . ( 2017 ) . Hypoxia inducible factor - 1 α potentiates jagged 1 - mediated angiogenesis by mesenchymal stem cell - derived exosomes . Stem Cells 35 , 1747 – 1759 . doi : 10 . 1002 / stem . 2618 Gu , Y . , Zheng , G . , Xu , M . , Li , Y . , Chen , X . , Zhu , W . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Caveolin - 1 regulates nitric oxide - mediated matrix metalloproteinases activity and blood – brain barrier permeability in focal cerebral ischemia and reperfusion injury . J . Neurochem . 120 , 147 – 156 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1471 - 4159 . 2011 . 07542 . x Guan , Y . , Cai , B . , Wu , X . , Peng , S . , Gan , L . , Huang , D . , etal . ( 2017 ) . MicroRNA - 352 regulatescollateralvesselgrowthinducedbyelevatedﬂuidshearstressintherathindlimb . Sci . Rep . 7 , 1 – 13 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 06910 - 9 Guemez - gamboa , A . , Nguyen , L . N . , Yang , H . , Zaki , M . S . , Kara , M . , Ben - omran , T . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Inactivating mutations in MFSD2A , required for omega - 3 fatty acid transport in brain , cause a lethal microcephaly syndrome . Nat . Genet . 47 , 809 – 813 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ng . 3311 Guo , J . , Li , J . , Zhao , J . , Yang , S . , Wang , L . , Cheng , G . , et al . ( 2017 ) . MiRNA - 29c regulates the expression of inﬂammatory cytokines in diabetic nephropathy by targeting tristetraprolin . Sci . Rep . 7 , 1 – 13 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 01027 - 5 Gurnik , S . , Devraj , K . , Macas , J . , Yamaji , M . , Starke , J . , Scholz , A . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Angiopoietin - 2 - induced blood – brain barrier compromise and increased stroke size are rescued by VE - PTP - dependent restoration of Tie2 signaling . Acta Neuropathol . 131 , 753 – 773 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00401 - 016 - 1551 - 3 Han , J . , Shuvaev , V . V . , Davies , P . F . , Eckmann , D . M . , Muro , S . , and Muzykantov , V . R . ( 2015 ) . Flow shear stress diﬀerentially regulates endothelial uptake of nanocarriers targeted to distinct epitopes of PECAM - 1 . J . Control . Release 210 , 39 – 47 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jconrel . 2015 . 05 . 006 Hayer , A . , Stoeber , M . , Bissig , C . , and Helenius , A . ( 2010 ) . Biogenesis of caveolae : Stepwise assembly of large caveolin and cavin complexes . Traﬃc 11 , 361 – 382 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1600 - 0854 . 2009 . 01023 . x He , K . , Yan , X . , Li , N . , Dang , S . , Xu , L . , Zhao , B . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Internalization of the TGF - β type i receptor into caveolin - 1 and EEA1 double - positive early endosomes . Cell Res . 25 , 738 – 752 . doi : 10 . 1038 / cr . 2015 . 60 Head , B . P . , Peart , J . N . , Panneerselvam , M . , Yokoyama , T . , Pearn , M . L . , Niesman , I . R . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Loss of caveolin - 1 accelerates neurodegeneration and aging . PLoS One 5 : e0015697 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0015697 Hellström , M . , Kalén , M . , Lindahl , P . , Abramsson , A . , andBetsholtz , C . ( 1999 ) . Role of PDGF - B and PDGFR - β in recruitment of vascular smooth muscle cells and pericytes during embryonic blood vessel formation in the mouse . Development 126 , 3047 – 3055 . Hergenreider , E . , Heydt , S . , Tréguer , K . , Boettger , T . , Horrevoets , A . J . G . , Zeiher , A . M . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Atheroprotective communication between endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells through miRNAs . Nat . Publish . Group 14 , 249 – 256 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncb2441 Hirama , T . , Das , R . , Yang , Y . , Ferguson , C . , Won , A . , Yip , C . M . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Phosphatidylserine dictates the assembly and dynamics of caveolae in the plasma membrane . J . Biol . Chem . 292 , 14292 – 14307 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M117 . 791400 Ho , V . C . , Duan , L . J . , Cronin , C . , Liang , B . T . , and Fong , G . H . ( 2012 ) . Elevated vascular endothelial growth factor receptor - 2 abundance contributes to increased angiogenesis in vascular endothelial growth factor receptor - 1 - deﬁcient mice . Circulation 126 , 741 – 752 . doi : 10 . 1161 / CIRCULATIONAHA . 112 . 091603 Hohensinner , P . J . , Ebenbauer , B . , Kaun , C . , Maurer , G . , Huber , K . , and Wojta , J . ( 2016 ) . Reduced Ang2 expression in aging endothelial cells . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 474 , 447 – 451 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbrc . 2016 . 04 . 143 Hom , S . , Egleton , R . D . , Huber , J . D . , and Davis , T . P . ( 2001 ) . Eﬀect of reduced ﬂow on blood – brain barrier transport systems . Brain Res . 890 , 38 – 48 . doi : 10 . 1016 / s0006 - 8993 ( 00 ) 03027 - 4 Hori , S . , Ohtsuki , S . , Hosoya , K . , and Nakashima , E . ( 2004 ) . A pericyte - derived angiopoietin - 1 multimeric complex induces occludin gene expression in brain capillary endothelial cells through Tie - 2 activation in vitro . J . Neurochem . 89 , 503 – 513 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1471 - 4159 . 2004 . 02343 . x Hoshi , Y . , Uchida , Y . , Tachikawa , M . , Ohtsuki , S . , Couraud , P . O . , Suzuki , T . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Oxidative stress - induced activation of Abl and Src kinases rapidly induces P - glycoprotein internalization via phosphorylation of caveolin - 1 on tyrosine - 14 , decreasing cortisol eﬄux at the blood – brain barrier . J . Cereb . Blood Flow Metab . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0271678X18822801 [ Epub ahead of print ] . Hossain , M . B . , Shifat , R . , Li , J . , Luo , X . , Hess , K . R . , Rivera - Molina , Y . , etal . ( 2017 ) . TIE2 associates with caveolae and regulates caveolin - 1 to promote their nuclear translocation . Mol . Cell . Biol . 37 : e142 - 17 . doi : 10 . 1128 / mcb . 00142 - 17 Frontiers in Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 14 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 1436 fnins - 13 - 01436 January 11 , 2020 Time : 11 : 37 # 15 Tjakra et al . Transcytosis Factors Crosstalk in BBB Huang , G . H . , Shan , H . , Li , D . , Zhou , B . , and Pang , P . F . ( 2017 ) . MiR - 199a - 5p suppresses tumorigenesis by targeting clathrin heavy chain in hepatocellular carcinoma . Cell Biochem . Funct . 35 , 98 – 104 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cbf . 3252 Iguchi , K . , Matsunaga , S . , Nakano , T . , Usui , S . , and Hirano , K . ( 2006 ) . Inhibition of caveolin - 1 expression by incadronate in PC - 3 prostate cells . Anticancer Res . 26 , 2977 – 2981 . Imakita , N . , Kitabatake , M . , Ouji - Sageshima , N . , Hara , A . , Morita - Takemura , S . , Kasahara , K . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Abrogated Caveolin - 1 expression via histone modiﬁcation enzyme Setdb2 regulates brain edema in a mouse model of inﬂuenza - associated encephalopathy . Sci . Rep . 9 , 1 – 12 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 018 - 36489 - 8 Jenkins , D . W . , Ross , S . , Veldman - Jones , M . , Foltz , I . N . , Clavette , B . C . , Manchulenko , K . , et al . ( 2012 ) . MEDI0639 : a novel therapeutic antibody targeting Dll4 modulates endothelial cell function and angiogenesis in vivo . Mol . Cancer Therapeut . 11 , 1650 – 1660 . doi : 10 . 1158 / 1535 - 7163 . mct - 11 - 1027 Jin , J . , Peng , C . , Wu , S . Z . , Chen , H . M . , and Zhang , B . F . ( 2015 ) . Blocking VEGF / Caveolin - 1 signaling contributes to renal protection of fasudil in streptozotocin - induced diabetic rats . Acta Pharmacol . Sinica 36 , 831 – 840 . doi : 10 . 1038 / aps . 2015 . 23 Kajimoto , T . , Okada , T . , Miya , S . , Zhang , L . , and Nakamura , S . I . ( 2013 ) . Ongoing activation of sphingosine 1 - phosphate receptors mediates maturation of exosomal multivesicular endosomes . Nat . Commun . 4 , 1 – 13 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms3712 Kawamata , H . , Ng , S . K . , Diaz , N . , Burstein , S . , Morel , L . , Osgood , A . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Abnormal intracellular calcium signaling and SNARE - dependent exocytosis contributes to SOD1G93A astrocyte - mediated toxicity in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis . J . Neurosci . 34 , 2331 – 2348 . doi : 10 . 1523 / jneurosci . 2689 - 13 . 2014 Kawedia , J . D . , Nieman , M . L . , Boivin , G . P . , Melvin , J . E . , Kikuchi , K . - I . , Hand , A . R . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Interaction between transcellular and paracellular water transport pathways through Aquaporin 5 and the tight junction complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 104 , 3621 – 3626 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0608384104 Kim , S . J . , Bielawski , J . , Yang , H . , Kong , Y . , Zhou , B . , and Li , J . ( 2018 ) . Functional antagonism of sphingosine - 1 - phosphate receptor 1 prevents cuprizone - induced demyelination . Glia 66 , 654 – 669 . doi : 10 . 1002 / glia . 23272 Kim , Y . H . , Hu , H . , Guevara - Gallardo , S . , Lam , M . T . Y . , Fong , S . Y . , and Wang , R . A . ( 2008 ) . Artery and vein size is balanced by Notch and ephrin B2 / EphB4 during angiogenesis . Development 135 , 3755 – 3764 . doi : 10 . 1242 / dev . 022475 Kimura , T . , Sato , K . , Kuwabara , A . , Tomura , H . , Ishiwara , M . , Kobayashi , I . , et al . ( 2001 ) . Sphingosine 1 - phosphate may be a major component of plasma lipoproteins responsible for the cytoprotective actions in human umbilical vein endothelial cells . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 31780 – 31785 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M104353200 Knowland , D . , Arac , A . , Sekiguchi , K . J . , Hsu , M . , Lutz , S . E . , Perrino , J . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Stepwise recruitment of transcellular and paracellular pathways underlies blood - brain barrier breakdown in stroke . Neuron 82 , 603 – 617 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2014 . 03 . 003 Koﬂer , N . M . , Cuervo , H . , Uh , M . K . , Murtomäki , A . , and Kitajewski , J . ( 2015 ) . Combined Deﬁciency of Notch1 and Notch3 Causes Pericyte Dysfunction , Models CADASIL , and Results in Arteriovenous Malformations . Berlin : Nature Publishing Group , 1 – 13 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep16449 Kontos , A . , Lushington , K . , Martin , J . , Schwarz , Q . , Green , R . , Wabnitz , D . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Relationship between vascular resistance and sympathetic nerve ﬁber density in arterial vessels in children with sleep disordered breathing . J . Am . Heart Assoc . 6 , 1 – 11 . doi : 10 . 1161 / JAHA . 117 . 006137 Koo , Y . , Hawkins , B . T . , and Yun , Y . ( 2018 ) . Three - dimensional ( 3D ) tetra - culture brain on chip platform for organophosphate toxicity screening . Sci . Rep . 8 , 1 – 7 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 018 - 20876 - 2 Kou , L . , Hou , Y . , Yao , Q . , Guo , W . , Wang , G . , Wang , M . , et al . ( 2018 ) . L - Carnitine - conjugated nanoparticles to promote permeation across blood – brain barrier andtotargetgliomacellsfordrugdeliveryviathenovelorganiccation / carnitine transporter OCTN2 . Artif . Cells Nanomed . Biotechnol . 46 , 1605 – 1616 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 21691401 . 2017 . 1384385 Krebs , L . T . , Shutter , J . R . , Tanigaki , K . , Honjo , T . , Stark , K . L . , and Gridley , T . ( 2004 ) . Haploinsuﬃcient lethality and formation of arteriovenous malformations in Notch pathway mutants . Genes Dev . 18 , 2469 – 2473 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 1239204 Krouwer , V . J . D . , Hekking , L . H . P . , Langelaar - Makkinje , M . , Regan - Klapisz , E . , and Post , J . A . ( 2012 ) . Endothelial cell senescence is associated with disrupted cell - cell junctions and increased monolayer permeability . Vasc . Cell 4 , 1 – 10 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 2045 - 824X - 4 - 12 Kuan , W . L . , Bennett , N . , He , X . , Skepper , J . N . , Martynyuk , N . , Wijeyekoon , R . , et al . ( 2016 ) . α - Synuclein pre - formed ﬁbrils impair tight junction protein expressionwithoutaﬀectingcerebralendothelialcellfunction . Exp . Neurol . 285 , 72 – 81 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . expneurol . 2016 . 09 . 003 Kuwabara , A . , Murakami , M . , and Okajima , F . ( 2003 ) . High - density lipoprotein stimulates endothelial cell migration and survival through sphingosine 1 - phosphate and its receptors . Arterioscler . Thromb . Vasc . Biol . 23 , 1283 – 1288 . doi : 10 . 1161 / 01 . ATV . 0000079011 . 67194 . 5A Lalatsa , A . , and Butt , A . M . ( 2018 ) . “Physiology of the blood – brain barrier and mechanisms of transport across the BBB , ” in Nanotechnology - Based Targeted Drug Delivery Systems for Brain Tumors , eds P . Kesharwani , and U . Gupta , ( Cambridge , MA : Academic Press ) , doi : 10 . 1016 / b978 - 0 - 12 - 812218 - 1 . 00003 - 8 Larsson , E . , Fuchs , P . F . , Heldin , J . , Barkefors , I . , Bondjers , C . , Genové , G . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Discovery of microvascular miRNAs using public gene expression data : MiR - 145 is expressed in pericytes and is a regulator of Fli1 . Genome Med . 1 , 1 – 12 . doi : 10 . 1186 / gm108 Larsson , J . , Goumans , M . J . , Sjöstrand , L . J . , Van Rooijen , M . A . , Ward , D . , Levéen , P . , et al . ( 2001 ) . Abnormal angiogenesis but intact hematopoietic potential in TGF - β type I receptor - deﬁcient mice . EMBO J . 20 , 1663 – 1673 . doi : 10 . 1093 / emboj / 20 . 7 . 1663 Lee , M . L . , Martinez - Lozada , Z . , Krizman , E . N . , and Robinson , M . B . ( 2017 ) . BrainendothelialcellsinduceastrocyticexpressionoftheglutamatetransporterGLT - 1 by a Notch - dependent mechanism . J . Neurochem . 143 , 489 – 506 . doi : 10 . 1111 / jnc . 14135 Lee , S . W . , Kim , W . J . , Choi , Y . K . , Song , H . S . , Son , M . J . , Gelman , I . H . , etal . ( 2003 ) . SSeCKS regulates angiogenesis and tight junction formation in blood - brain barrier . Nat . Med . 9 , 900 – 906 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nm889 Lee , Y . J . , Hsu , J . D . , Lin , W . L . , Kao , S . H . , and Wang , C . J . ( 2017 ) . Upregulation of caveolin - 1 by mulberry leaf extract and its major components , chlorogenic acid derivatives , attenuates alcoholic steatohepatitis : via inhibition of oxidative stress . Food Funct . 8 , 497 – 405 . doi : 10 . 1039 / c6fo01539e Lengfeld , J . E . , Lutz , S . E . , Smith , J . R . , Diaconu , C . , Scott , C . , Kofman , S . B . , et al . ( 2017 ) . EndothelialWnt / β - cateninsignalingreducesimmunecellinﬁltrationin multiple sclerosis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 114 , E1168 – E1177 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1609905114 Li , A . F . , and Roy , S . ( 2009 ) . High glucose - induced downregulation of connexin 43 expression promotes apoptosis in microvascular endothelial cells . Invest . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 50 , 1400 – 1407 . doi : 10 . 1167 / iovs . 07 - 1519 Li , C . , Chen , J . W . , Liu , Z . H . , Shen , Y . , Ding , F . H . , Gu , G . , et al . ( 2018 ) . CTRP5 promotes transcytosis and oxidative modiﬁcation of low - density lipoprotein and the development of atherosclerosis . Atherosclerosis 278 , 197 – 209 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . atherosclerosis . 2018 . 09 . 037 Li , F . , Lan , Y . , Wang , Y . , Wang , J . , Yang , G . , Meng , F . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Endothelial Smad4 maintains cerebrovascular integrity by activating N - Cadherin through cooperation with Notch . Dev . Cell 20 , 291 – 302 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2011 . 01 . 011 Li , S . , Jin , Z . , and Lu , X . ( 2017 ) . MicroRNA - 192 suppresses cell proliferation and induces apoptosis in human rheumatoid arthritis ﬁbroblast - like synoviocytes by downregulating caveolin 1 . Mol . Cell . Biochem . 432 , 123 – 130 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s11010 - 017 - 3003 - 3 Liang , J . , Qi , Z . , Liu , W . , Wang , P . , Shi , W . , Dong , W . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Normobaric hyperoxia slows blood - brain barrier damage and expands the therapeutic time window for tissue - type plasminogen activator treatment in cerebral ischemia . Stroke 46 , 1344 – 1351 . doi : 10 . 1161 / strokeaha . 114 . 008599 Liao , C . K . , Wang , S . M . , Chen , Y . L . , Wang , H . S . , and Wu , J . C . ( 2010 ) . Lipopolysaccharide - induced inhibition of connexin43 gap junction communication in astrocytes is mediated by downregulation of caveolin - 3 . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 42 , 762 – 770 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . biocel . 2010 . 01 . 016 Lim , J . C . , Kania , K . D . , Wijesuriya , H . , Chawla , S . , Sethi , J . K . , Pulaski , L . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Activation of β - catenin signalling by GSK - 3 inhibition increases p - glycoprotein expression in brain endothelial cells . J . Neurochem . 106 , 1855 – 1865 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1471 - 4159 . 2008 . 05537 . x Frontiers in Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 15 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 1436 fnins - 13 - 01436 January 11 , 2020 Time : 11 : 37 # 16 Tjakra et al . Transcytosis Factors Crosstalk in BBB Limaye , V . , Li , X . , Hahn , C . , Xia , P . , Berndt , M . C . , Vadas , M . A . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Sphingosine kinase - 1 enhances endothelial cell survival through a PECAM - 1 - dependent activation of PI - 3K / Akt and regulation of Bcl - 2 family members . Blood 105 , 3169 – 3177 . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2004 - 02 - 0452 Lin , T . , Zeng , L . , Liu , Y . , DeFea , K . , Schwartz , M . A . , Chien , S . , et al . ( 2003 ) . Rho - ROCK - LIMK - coﬁlin pathway regulates shear stress activation of sterol regulatory element binding proteins . Circ . Res . 92 , 1296 – 1304 . doi : 10 . 1161 / 01 . RES . 0000078780 . 65824 . 8B Lindahl , P . , Johansson , B . R . , Levéen , P . , and Betsholtz , C . ( 1997 ) . Pericyte loss and microaneurysm formation in PDGF - B - deﬁcient mice . Science 277 , 242 – 245 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 277 . 5323 . 242 Liu , J . , Jin , X . , Liu , K . J . , and Liu , W . ( 2012 ) . Matrix metalloproteinase - 2 - mediated occludin degradation and caveolin - 1 - mediated claudin - 5 redistribution contribute to blood - brain barrier damage in early ischemic stroke stage . J . Neurosci . 32 , 3044 – 3057 . doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 6409 - 11 . 2012 Liu , W . , Cai , H . , Lin , M . , Zhu , L . , Gao , L . , Zhong , R . , et al . ( 2016 ) . MicroRNA - 107 prevents amyloid - beta induced blood - brain barrier disruption and endothelial cell dysfunction by targeting Endophilin - 1 . Exp . Cell Res . 343 , 248 – 257 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . yexcr . 2016 . 03 . 026 Liu , Y . , Chen , B . P . C . , Lu , M . , Zhu , Y . , Stemerman , M . B . , Chien , S . , et al . ( 2002 ) . Shear stress activation of SREBP1 in endothelial cells is mediated by integrins . Arterioscler . Thromb . Vasc . Biol . 22 , 76 – 81 . doi : 10 . 1161 / hq0102 . 101822 Liu , Y . , Wada , R . , Yamashita , T . , Mi , Y . , Deng , C . X . , Hobson , J . P . , et al . ( 2000 ) . Edg - 1 , theGprotein - coupledreceptorforsphingosine - 1 - phosphate , isessential for vascular maturation . J . Clin . Invest . 106 , 951 – 961 . doi : 10 . 1172 / JCI10905 Long , K . R . , Shipman , K . E . , Rbaibi , Y . , Menshikova , E . V . , Ritov , V . B . , Eshbach , M . L . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Proximal tubule apical endocytosis is modulated by ﬂuid shear stress via an mTOR - dependent pathway . Mol . Biol . Cell 28 , 2508 – 2517 . doi : 10 . 1091 / mbc . e17 - 04 - 0211 Lutz , S . E . , Smith , J . R . , Kim , D . H . , Olson , C . V . L . , Ellefsen , K . , Bates , J . M . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Caveolin1 is required for Th1 cell inﬁltration , but not tight junction remodeling , attheblood - brainbarrierinautoimmuneneuroinﬂammation . Cell Rep . 21 , 2104 – 2117 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2017 . 10 . 094 Ma , Y . , Shaik , M . A . , Kozberg , M . G . , Kim , S . H . , Portes , J . P . , Timerman , D . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Resting - state hemodynamics are spatiotemporally coupled to synchronized and symmetric neural activity in excitatory neurons . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 113 , E8463 – E8471 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1525369113 Ma , Y . , Zhang , Z . , Chen , R . , Shi , R . , Zeng , P . , Chen , R . , etal . ( 2019 ) . NRP1regulates HMGB1 in vascular endothelial cells under high homocysteine condition . Am . J . Physiol . Heart Circ . Physiol . 316 , H1039 – H1046 . doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpheart . 00746 . 2018 Marcu , R . , Choi , Y . J . , Xue , J . , Stephen , M . , Marcu , R . , Choi , Y . J . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Human organ - speciﬁc endothelial cell heterogeneity human organ - speciﬁc endothelial cell heterogeneity . IScience 4 , 20 – 35 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . isci . 2018 . 05 . 003 Mayhan , W . ( 1999 ) . VEGF increases permeability of the blood - brain barrier via a nitric oxide synthase / cGMP - dependent pathway . Am . J . Physiol . Cell 276 , C1148 – C1153 . doi : 10 . 1152 / ajpcell . 1999 . 276 . 5 . C1148 McGuire , P . G . , Rangasamy , S . , Maestas , J . , and Das , A . ( 2011 ) . Pericyte - derived sphinogosine 1 - phosphate induces the expression of adhesion proteins and modulates the retinal endothelial cell barrier . Arterioscler . Thromb . Vasc . Biol . 31 , 107 – 115 . doi : 10 . 1161 / ATVBAHA . 111 . 235408 Meloty - Kapella , L . , Shergill , B . , Kuon , J . , Botvinick , E . , and Weinmaster , G . ( 2012 ) . Notch ligand endocytosis generates mechanical pulling force dependent on dynamin . epsins , and actin . Dev . Cell 22 , 1299 – 1312 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2012 . 04 . 005 Monhasery , N . , Moll , J . , Cuman , C . , Franke , M . , Lamertz , L . , Nitz , R . , et al . ( 2016 ) . transcytosis of IL - 11 and apical redirection of gp130 is mediated by IL - 11 α receptor . Cell Rep . 16 , 1067 – 1081 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2016 . 06 . 062 Moriyama , T . , Sasaki , K . , Karasawa , K . , Uchida , K . , and Nitta , K . ( 2017 ) . Intracellular transcytosis of albumin in glomerular endothelial cells after endocytosis through caveolae . J . Cell . Physiol . 232 , 3565 – 3573 . doi : 10 . 1002 / jcp . 25817 Muhl , L . , Folestad , E . B . , Gladh , H . , Wang , Y . , Moessinger , C . , Jakobsson , L . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Neuropilin 1 binds PDGF - D and is a co - receptor in PDGF - D - PDGFR β signaling . J . Cell Sci . 130 , 1365 – 1378 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 200493 Musumeci , F . , Radi , M . , Brullo , C . , and Schenone , S . ( 2012 ) . Vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) receptors : drugs and new inhibitors . J . Med . Chem . 55 , 10797 – 10822 . doi : 10 . 1021 / jm301085w Nag , S . , Manias , J . L . , and Stewart , D . J . ( 2009 ) . Expression of endothelial phosphorylated caveolin - 1 is increased in brain injury . Neuropathol . Appl . Neurobiol . 35 , 417 – 426 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2990 . 2008 . 01009 . x Nakayama , A . , Nakayama , M . , Turner , C . J . , Höing , S . , Lepore , J . J . , and Adams , R . H . ( 2013 ) . Ephrin - B2 controls PDGFR β internalization and signaling . Genes Dev . 27 , 2576 – 2589 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 224089 . 113 Nguyen , L . N . , Ma , D . , Shui , G . , Wong , P . , Cazenave - Gassiot , A . , Zhang , X . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Mfsd2a is a transporter for the essential omega - 3 fatty acid docosahexaenoic acid . Nature 509 , 503 – 506 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature13241 Nichol , D . , Shawber , C . , Fitch , M . J . , Bambino , K . , Sharma , A . , Kitajewski , J . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Impaired angiogenesis and altered Notch signaling in mice overexpressing endothelial Egﬂ7 . Blood 116 , 6133 – 6143 . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2010 - 03 - 274860 Oladipupo , S . S . , Kabir , A . U . , Smith , C . , Choi , K . , and Ornitz , D . M . ( 2018 ) . Impaired tumor growth and angiogenesis in mice heterozygous for Vegfr2 ( Flk1 ) . Sci . Rep . 8 , 1 – 10 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 018 - 33037 - 2 Orellana , J . A . , Figueroa , X . F . , Sánchez , H . A . , Contreras - Duarte , S . , Velarde , V . , andSáez , J . C . ( 2011 ) . Hemichannelsintheneurovascularunitandwhitematter under normal and inﬂamed conditions . CNS Neurol . Disord . Drug Targets 10 , 404 – 414 . doi : 10 . 2174 / 187152711794653869 Oshikawa , J . , Urao , N . , Kim , H . W . , Kaplan , N . , Razvi , M . , McKinney , R . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Extracellular SOD - derived H2O2 promotes VEGF signaling in caveolae / lipid rafts and post - ischemic angiogenesis in mice . PLoS One 5 : e0010189 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0010189 Paik , J . , Skoura , A . , Chae , S . , Cowan , A . E . , Han , D . K . , Proia , R . L . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Sphingosine 1 - phosphate receptor regulation of N - cadherin mediates vascular stabilization . Genes Dev . 114 , 2392 – 2403 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 1227804 Pani , B . , and Singh , B . B . ( 2009 ) . Lipid rafts / caveolae as microdomains of calcium signaling . Cell Calcium 45 , 625 – 633 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceca . 2009 . 02 . 009 Paniagua - Herranz , L . , Gil - Redondo , J . C . , Queipo , M . J . , González - Ramos , S . , Boscá , L . , Pérez - Sen , R . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Prostaglandin E2 Impairs P2Y2 / P2Y4 receptor signaling in cerebellar astrocytes via EP3 receptors . Front . Pharmacol . 8 : 937 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fphar . 2017 . 00937 Paonessa , F . , Evans , L . D . , Solanki , R . , Larrieu , D . , Wray , S . , Hardy , J . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Microtubules deform the nuclear membrane and disrupt nucleocytoplasmic transport in Tau - mediated frontotemporal dementia . Cell Rep . 26 , 582 . e – 593 . e . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2018 . 12 . 085 Patiño , P . , Parada , E . , Farré - Alins , V . , Molz , S . , Cacabelos , R . , Marco - Contelles , J . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Melatonin protects against oxygen and glucose deprivation by decreasing extracellular glutamate and Nox - derived ROS in rat hippocampal slices . Neuro Toxicol . 57 , 61 – 68 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuro . 2016 . 09 . 002 Peppiatt , C . M . , Howarth , C . , Mobbs , P . , and Attwell , D . ( 2006 ) . Bidirectional control of CNS capillary diameter by pericytes . Nature 443 , 1 – 5 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature05193 Piazzini , V . , Landucci , E . , Graverini , G . , Pellegrini - Giampietro , D . E . , Bilia , A . R . , andBergonzi , M . C . ( 2018 ) . Stealthandcationicnanoliposomesasdrugdelivery systemstoincreaseandrographolideBBBpermeability . Pharmaceutics 10 , 1 – 19 . doi : 10 . 3390 / pharmaceutics10030128 Podar , K . , and Anderson , K . C . ( 2008 ) . The pathophysiologic role of VEGF in hematologic malignancies ? : therapeutic implications review in translational hematology the pathophysiologic role of VEGF in hematologic malignancies ? : therapeutic implications . Clin . Res . 105 , 1383 – 1395 . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2004 - 07 - 2909 Pulgar , V . M . ( 2019 ) . Transcytosis to cross the blood brain barrier , new advancements and challenges . Front . Neurosci . 13 : 1019 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fnins . 2018 . 01019 Qian , Z . M . , Li , H . , Sun , H . , and Ho , K . ( 2002 ) . Targeted drug delivery via the transferrin receptor - mediated endocytosis pathway . Pharmacol . Rev . 54 , 561 – 587 . doi : 10 . 1124 / pr . 54 . 4 . 561 Quancard , J . , Bollbuck , B . , Janser , P . , Angst , D . , Berst , F . , Buehlmayer , P . , et al . ( 2012 ) . A potent and selective S1P1 antagonist with eﬃcacy in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis . Chem . Biol . 19 , 1142 – 1151 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . chembiol . 2012 . 07 . 016 Frontiers in Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 16 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 1436 fnins - 13 - 01436 January 11 , 2020 Time : 11 : 37 # 17 Tjakra et al . Transcytosis Factors Crosstalk in BBB Rausch , V . , Bostrom , J . R . , Park , J . , Bravo , I . R . , Feng , Y . , Hay , D . C . , et al . ( 2019 ) . The hippo pathway regulates caveolae expression and mediates ﬂow response via caveolae . Curr . Biol . 29 : 242 - 255 . e6 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2018 . 11 . 066 Razani , B . , Engelman , J . A . , Wang , X . B . , Schubert , W . , Zhang , X . L . , Marks , C . B . , et al . ( 2001 ) . Caveolin - 1 null mice are viable but show evidence of hyperproliferative and vascular abnormalities . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 38121 – 38138 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M105408200 Reeves , P . M . , Kang , Y . L . , and Kirchhausen , T . ( 2016 ) . Endocytosis of ligand - activated Sphingosine 1 - Phosphate receptor 1 mediated by the Clathrin - pathway . Traﬃc 17 , 40 – 52 . doi : 10 . 1111 / tra . 12343 Reinitz , A . , DeStefano , J . , Ye , M . , Wong , A . D . , and Searson , P . C . ( 2015 ) . Human brain microvascular endothelial cells resist elongation due to shear stress . Microvasc . Res . 99 , 8 – 18 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . mvr . 2015 . 02 . 008 Reyahi , A . , Nik , A . M . , Ghiami , M . , Gritli - Linde , A . , Pontén , F . , Johansson , B . R . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Foxf2 is required for brain pericyte diﬀerentiation and development and maintenance of the blood - brain barrier . Dev . Cell 34 , 19 – 32 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2015 . 05 . 008 Riganti , L . , Antonucci , F . , Gabrielli , M . , Prada , I . , Giussani , P . , Viani , P . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Sphingosine - 1 - Phosphate ( S1P ) impacts presynaptic functions by regulating Synapsin I localization in the presynaptic compartment . J . Neurosci . 36 , 4624 – 4634 . doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 3588 - 15 . 2016 Rochfort , K . D . , Collins , L . E . , Murphy , R . P . , and Cummins , P . M . ( 2014 ) . Downregulation of blood - brain barrier phenotype by proinﬂammatory cytokines involves NADPH oxidase - dependent ROS generation : consequences for interendothelial adherens and tight junctions . PLoS One 9 : e0101815 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0101815 Römer , W . , Pontani , L . L . , Sorre , B . , Rentero , C . , Berland , L . , Chambon , V . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Actin dynamics drive membrane reorganization and Scission in Clathrin - independent endocytosis . Cell 140 , 540 – 553 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2010 . 01 . 010 Ruiz , M . , Okada , H . , and Dahlbäck , B . ( 2017 ) . HDL - associated ApoM is anti - apoptotic by delivering sphingosine 1 - phosphate to S1P1 & S1P3 receptors on vascular endothelium . Lipids Health Dis . 16 : 36 . doi : 10 . 1186 / s12944 - 017 - 0 429 - 2 Sabayan , B . , Buchem , M . A . , Van Sigurdsson , S . , Zhang , Q . , Harris , T . B . , Gudnason , V . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Cardiac hemodynamics are linked with structural and functional . J . Am . Heart Assoc . 4 : e001294 . doi : 10 . 1161 / JAHA . 114 . 001294 Sade , H . , Baumgartner , C . , Hugenmatter , A . , Moessner , E . , Freskga , P . , and Niewoehner , J . ( 2014 ) . A human blood - brain barrier transcytosis assay reveals antibody transcytosis inﬂuenced by ph - dependent receptor binding . PLoS One 9 : e0096340 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0096340 Sadeghian , H . , Lacoste , B . , Qin , T . , Toussay , X . , Rosa , R . , Oka , F . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Spreading depolarizations trigger caveolin - 1 – dependent endothelial transcytosis . Ann . Neurol . 84 , 409 – 423 . doi : 10 . 1002 / ana . 25298 Sanchez , T . , Skoura , A . , Wu , M . T . , Casserly , B . , Harrington , E . O . , and Hla , T . ( 2007 ) . Induction of vascular permeability by the sphingosine - 1 - phosphate receptor - 2 ( S1P2R ) and its downstream eﬀectors ROCK and PTEN . Arterioscler . Thromb . Vasc . Biol . 27 , 1312 – 1318 . doi : 10 . 1161 / ATVBAHA . 107 . 143735 Sanders , Y . Y . , Cui , Z . , Le Saux , C . J . , Horowitz , J . C . , Rangarajan , S . , Kurundkar , A . , et al . ( 2015 ) . SMAD - independent down - regulation of caveolin - 1 by TGF - β : Eﬀects on proliferation and survival of myoﬁbroblasts . PLoS One 10 : e0116995 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0116995 Sawamiphak , S . , Seidel , S . , Essmann , C . L . , Wilkinson , G . A . , Pitulescu , M . E . , Acker , T . , etal . ( 2010 ) . Ephrin - B2regulatesVEGFR2functionindevelopmental and tumour angiogenesis . Nature 465 , 487 – 491 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature0 8995 Schreibelt , G . , Kooij , G . , Reijerkerk , A . , van Doorn , R . , Gringhuis , S . I . , van der Pol , S . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Reactive oxygen species alter brain endothelial tight junction dynamics via RhoA . PI3 kinase , and PKB signaling . FASEB J . 21 , 3666 – 3676 . doi : 10 . 1096 / fj . 07 - 8329com Shalaby , F . , Janet , R . , Yamaguchi , T . P . , Gertsenstein , M . , Wu , X . F . , Breitman , M . L . , et al . ( 1995 ) . Failure of blood - island formation and vasculogenesis in Flk - 1 - deﬁcient mice . Nature 376 , 62 – 66 . doi : 10 . 1038 / 3760 62a0 Shang , D . , Peng , T . , Gou , S . , Li , Y . , Wu , H . , Wang , C . , et al . ( 2016 ) . High mobility group box protein 1 boosts endothelial albumin transcytosis through the RAGE / Src / Caveolin - 1 pathway . Sci . Rep . 6 , 1 – 12 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep32180 Sharghi - Namini , S . , Tan , E . , Ong , L . L . S . , Ge , R . , and Asada , H . H . ( 2014 ) . Dll4 - containing exosomes induce capillary sprout retraction in a 3D microenvironment . Sci . Rep . 4 , 1 – 8 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep04031 Sheldon , H . , Sainson , R . C . A . , Sargent , I . , Li , J . - L . , Harris , A . L . , Heikamp , E . , et al . ( 2010 ) . New mechanism for Notch signaling to endothelium at a distance by Delta - like 4 incorporation into exosomes . Blood 116 , 2385 – 2394 . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2009 - 08 - 239228 Shen , J . , Xu , G . , Zhu , R . , Yuan , J . , Ishii , Y . , Hamashima , T . , et al . ( 2018 ) . PDGFR - β restores blood - brain barrier functions in a mouse model of focal cerebral ischemia . J . Cereb . Blood Flow Metab . 39 , 1501 – 1515 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0271678X18769515 Shepherd , J . , Fisher , M . , Welford , A . , McDonald , D . M . , Kanthou , C . , and Tozer , G . M . ( 2017 ) . Theprotectiveroleofsphingosine - 1 - phosphateagainsttheaction of the vascular disrupting agent combretastatin A - 4 3 - O - phosphate . Oncotarget 8 , 95648 – 95661 . doi : 10 . 18632 / oncotarget . 21172 Shimato , S . , Anderson , L . M . , Asslaber , M . , Bruce , J . N . , Canoll , P . , Anderson , D . E . , etal . ( 2013 ) . InhibitionofCaveolin - 1RestoresMyeloidCellFunctioninHuman Glioblastoma . PLoS One 8 : e0077397 . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0077397 Shutter , J . R . , Scully , S . , Fan , W . , Richards , W . G . , Kitajewski , J . , Deblandre , G . A . , et al . ( 2000 ) . D114 , a novel Notch ligand expressed in arterial endothelium . Genes Dev . 14 , 1313 – 1318 . doi : 10 . 1101 / gad . 14 . 11 . 1313 Song , J . , Dagan , A . , Yakhtin , Z . , Gatt , S . , Riley , S . , Rosen , H . , et al . ( 2017 ) . The novel sphingosine - 1 - phosphate receptors antagonist AD2900 aﬀects lymphocyte activation and inhibits T - cell entry into the lymph nodes . Oncotarget 8 , 53563 – 53580 . doi : 10 . 18632 / oncotarget . 18626 Song , L . , Ge , S . , and Pachter , J . S . ( 2007 ) . Caveolin - 1 regulates expression of junction - associatedproteinsinbrainmicrovascularendothelialcells . Blood 109 , 1515 – 1523 . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2006 - 07 - 034009 Stebbins , M . J . , Wilson , H . K . , Canﬁeld , S . G . , Qian , T . , Palecek , S . P . , and Shusta , E . V . ( 2015 ) . Diﬀerentiation and characterization of human pluripotent stem cell - derived brain microvascular endothelial cells . Methods 101 , 93 – 102 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ymeth . 2015 . 10 . 016 Streets , A . M . , and Huang , Y . ( 2013 ) . Chip in a lab : Microﬂuidics for next generation life science research . Biomicroﬂuidics 7 , 1 – 23 . doi : 10 . 1063 / 1 . 4789751 Tanaka , S . , Suto , A . , Ikeda , K . , Sanayama , Y . , Nakagomi , D . , Iwamoto , T . , et al . ( 2013 ) . Alteration of circulating miRNAs in SSc : MiR - 30b regulates the expression of PDGF receptor β . Rheumatology 52 , 1963 – 1972 . doi : 10 . 1093 / rheumatology / ket254 Teichert , M . , Milde , L . , Holm , A . , Stanicek , L . , Gengenbacher , N . , Savant , S . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Pericyte - expressed Tie2 controls angiogenesis and vessel maturation . Nat . Commun . 8 , 1 – 12 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms16106 Thanabalasundaram , G . , Schneidewind , J . , Pieper , C . , and Galla , H . J . ( 2011 ) . The impact of pericytes on the blood - brain barrier integrity depends critically on the pericyte diﬀerentiation stage . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 43 , 1284 – 1293 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . biocel . 2011 . 05 . 002 Thornton , C . , Baburamani , A . A . , Kichev , A . , and Hagberg , H . ( 2017 ) . Oxidative stress and endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) stress in the development of neonatal hypoxic – ischaemic brain injury . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 45 , 1067 – 1076 . doi : 10 . 1042 / bst20170017 Tien , T . , Muto , T . , Barrette , K . , Challyandra , L . , and Roy , S . ( 2014 ) . Downregulation of Connexin 43 promotes vascular cell loss and excess permeability associated with the development of vascular lesions in the diabetic retina . Mol . Vis . 20 , 732 – 741 . Tillet , E . , Vittet , D . , Féraud , O . , Moore , R . , Kemler , R . , and Huber , P . ( 2005 ) . N - cadherin deﬁciency impairs pericyte recruitment , and not endothelial diﬀerentiation or sprouting , in embryonic stem cell - derived angiogenesis . Exp . Cell Res . 310 , 392 – 400 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . yexcr . 2005 . 08 . 021 Tiruppathi , C . , Naqvi , T . , Wu , Y . , Vogel , S . M . , Minshall , R . D . , and Malik , A . B . ( 2004 ) . Albumin mediates the transcytosis of myeloperoxidase by means of caveolae in endothelial cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 101 , 7699 – 7704 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0401712101 Tiwary , S . , Morales , J . E . , Kwiatkowski , S . C . , Lang , F . F . , Rao , G . , andMccarty , J . H . ( 2018 ) . Metastatic brain tumors disrupt the blood - brain barrier and alter lipid metabolismbyinhibitingexpressionoftheendothelialcellfattyacidtransporterMfsd2a . Sci . Rep . 8 : 8267 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 018 - 26636 - 6 Tominaga , N . , Kosaka , N . , Ono , M . , Katsuda , T . , Yoshioka , Y . , Tamura , K . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Brain metastatic cancer cells release microRNA - 181c - containing Frontiers in Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 17 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 1436 fnins - 13 - 01436 January 11 , 2020 Time : 11 : 37 # 18 Tjakra et al . Transcytosis Factors Crosstalk in BBB extracellular vesicles capable of destructing blood - brain barrier . Nat . Commun . 6 : 7716 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms7716 Toyama , K . , Spin , J . M . , Deng , A . C . , Huang , T . T . , Wei , K . , Wagenhäuser , M . U . , et al . ( 2018 ) . MicroRNA - mediated therapy modulating blood - brain barrier disruptionimprovesvascularcognitiveimpairment . Arterioscler . Thromb . Vasc . Biol . 38 , 1392 – 1406 . doi : 10 . 1161 / ATVBAHA . 118 . 310822 Underly , R . G . , Levy , M . , Hartmann , D . A . , Grant , R . I . , Watson , A . N . , and Shih , A . Y . ( 2017 ) . Pericytes as inducers of rapid , matrix metalloproteinase - 9 - dependent capillary damage during ischemia . J . Neurosci . 37 , 129 – 140 . doi : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 2891 - 16 . 2016 Valable , S . , Montaner , J . , Bellail , A . , Berezowski , V . , Brillault , J . , Cecchelli , R . , et al . ( 2005 ) . VEGF - induced BBB permeability is associated with an MMP - 9 activity increase in cerebral ischemia : Both eﬀects decreased by Ang - 1 . J . Cereb . Blood Flow Metab . 25 , 1491 – 1504 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . jcbfm . 9600148 Van der Goes , A . , Wouters , D . , Susanne , M . , Van der Pol , S . , Huizinga , R . , Ronken , E . , et al . ( 2002 ) . Reactive oxygen species enhance the migration of monocytes across the blood - brain barrier in vitro . FASEB J . 15 , 1852 – 1854 . doi : 10 . 1096 / fj . 00 - 0881fje Vézina , A . , Charﬁ , C . , Zgheib , A . , and Annabi , B . ( 2018 ) . Cerebrovascular Angiogenic reprogramming upon LRP1 repression : impact on Sphingosine - 1 - Phosphate - mediated signaling in brain endothelial cell chemotactism . Mol . Neurobiol . 55 , 3551 – 3563 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s12035 - 017 - 0614 - 3 Villaseñor , R . , Lampe , J . , Schwaninger , M . , and Collin , L . ( 2019 ) . Intracellular transport and regulation of transcytosis across the blood – brain barrier . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 76 , 1081 – 1092 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00018 - 018 - 2982 - x Wang , F . , Yamauchi , M . , Muramatsu , M . , Osawa , T . , Tsuchida , R . , and Shibuya , M . ( 2011 ) . RACK1 regulates VEGF / Flt1 - mediated cell migration via activation of a PI3K / Akt pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 286 , 9097 – 9106 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M110 . 165605 Wang , H . U . , Chen , Z . F . , and Anderson , D . J . ( 1998 ) . Molecular distinction and angiogenic interaction between embryonic arteries and veins revealed by ephrin - B2 and its receptor Eph - B4 . Cell 93 , 741 – 753 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 00 ) 81436 - 1 Werion , A . , Joris , V . , Hepp , M . , Papasokrati , L . , Marique , L . , De Ville De Goyet , C . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Pioglitazone , a PPAR γ agonist , upregulates the expression of Caveolin - 1 and Catalase , essential for thyroid cell homeostasis : a clue to the pathogenesis of Hashimoto’s Thyroiditis . Thyroid 26 , 1320 – 1331 . doi : 10 . 1089 / thy . 2015 . 0625 Williams , C . K . , Li , J . L . , Murga , M . , Harris , A . L . , and Tosato , G . ( 2006 ) . Up - regulation of the Notch ligand Delta - like 4 inhibits VEGF - induced endothelial cell function . Blood 107 , 931 – 939 . doi : 10 . 1182 / blood - 2005 - 03 - 1000 Williams , J . J . L . , Alotaiq , N . , Mullen , W . , Burchmore , R . , Liu , L . , Baillie , G . S . , et al . ( 2018 ) . Interaction of suppressor of cytokine signalling 3 with cavin - 1 links SOCS3 function and cavin - 1 stability . Nat . Commun . 9 : 168 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 017 - 02585 - y Winkler , E . A . , Bell , R . D . , and Zlokovic , B . V . ( 2010 ) . Pericyte - speciﬁc expression of PDGF beta receptor in mouse models with normal and deﬁcient PDGF beta receptor signaling . Mol . Neurodegen . 5 , 1 – 11 . doi : 10 . 1186 / 1750 - 1326 - 5 - 32 Witmer , A . N . , Blijswijk , B . C . , Van Noorden , C . J . F . , Van , and Vrensen , G . F . J . M . ( 2004 ) . In vivo angiogenic phenotype of endothelial cells and pericytes induced by vascular endothelial growth factor - A . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 52 , 39 – 52 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 002215540405200105 Wu , C . , Wu , Y . , Jin , Y . , Zhu , P . , Shi , W . , Li , J . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Endosomal / lysosomal location of organically modiﬁed silica nanoparticles following caveolae - mediated endocytosis . RSC Adv . 9 , 13855 – 13862 . doi : 10 . 1039 / c9ra00404a Xi , T . , Jin , F . , Zhu , Y . , Wang , J . , Tang , L . , Wang , Y . , etal . ( 2017 ) . MicroRNA - 126 - 3p attenuates blood - brain barrier disruption , cerebral edema and neuronal injury following intracerebral hemorrhage by regulating PIK3R2 and Akt . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 494 , 144 – 151 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bbrc . 2017 . 10 . 064 Xie , H . , and Lu , W . C . ( 2018 ) . Inhibition of transient receptor potential vanilloid 4 decreases the expressions of caveolin - 1 and caveolin - 2 after focal cerebral ischemia and reperfusion in rats . Neuropathology 38 , 337 – 346 . doi : 10 . 1111 / neup . 12469 Yakoub , A . M . , and Sadek , M . ( 2018 ) . Development and characterization of human cerebral organoids : an optimized protocol . Cell Transplant . 27 , 393 – 406 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0963689717752946 Yanagida , K . , Liu , C . H . , Faraco , G . , Galvani , S . , Smith , H . K . , Burg , N . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Size - selective opening of the blood - brain barrier by targeting endothelial sphingosine 1 - phosphate receptor 1 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 114 , 4531 – 4536 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1618659114 Yao , Y . , Chen , Z . L . , Norris , E . H . , and Strickland , S . ( 2014 ) . Astrocytic laminin regulates pericyte diﬀerentiation and maintains blood brain barrier integrity . Nat . Commun . 5 : 4413 . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms4413 Ye , M . , Sanchez , H . M . , Hultz , M . , Yang , Z . , Bogorad , M . , Wong , A . D . , etal . ( 2014 ) . Brain microvascular endothelial cells resist elongation due to curvature and shear stress . Sci . Rep . 4 , 1 – 6 . doi : 10 . 1038 / srep04681 Zeng , Y . , Liu , X . , Tarbell , J . , and Fu , B . ( 2015 ) . Sphingosine 1 - phosphate induced synthesis of glycocalyx on endothelial cells . Exp . Cell Res . 339 , 90 – 95 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . yexcr . 2015 . 08 . 013 Zhang , M . , Lee , S . J . , An , C . , Xu , J . F . , Joshi , B . , Nabi , I . R . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Caveolin - 1 mediates Fas - BID signaling in hyperoxia - induced apoptosis . Free Radical Biol . Med . 50 , 1252 – 1262 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . freeradbiomed . 2011 . 02 . 031 Zhang , X . , and Kim , K . M . ( 2017 ) . Multifactorial regulation of g protein - coupled receptor endocytosis . Biomol . Ther . 25 , 26 – 43 . doi : 10 . 4062 / biomolther . 2016 . 186 Zhao , Z . , andZlokovic , B . V . ( 2014 ) . Blood - BrainBarrier : ADualLifeofMFSD2A ? Neuron 82 , 728 – 730 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2014 . 05 . 012 Zheng , B . , Yin , W . N . , Suzuki , T . , Zhang , X . H . , Zhang , Y . , Song , L . L . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Exosome - MediatedmiR - 155TransferfromSmoothMuscleCellstoEndothelial Cells Induces Endothelial Injury and Promotes Atherosclerosis . Mol . Ther . 25 , 1279 – 1294 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ymthe . 2017 . 03 . 031 Zhou , H . J . , Qin , L . , Zhang , H . , Tang , W . , Ji , W . , He , Y . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Endothelial exocytosis of angiopoietin - 2 resulting from CCM3 deﬁciency contributes to cerebral cavernous malformation . Nat . Med . 22 , 1033 – 1042 . doi : 10 . 1038 / nm . 4169 Zhou , Q . , Zheng , X . , Chen , L . , Xu , B . , Yang , X . , Jiang , J . , et al . ( 2016 ) . Smad2 / 3 / 4 pathway contributes to TGF - β - induced MiRNA - 181b expression to promote gastric cancer metastasis by targeting Timp3 . Cell . Physiol . Biochem . 39 , 453 – 466 . doi : 10 . 1159 / 000445638 Zhou , T . , Zheng , Y . , Sun , L . , Badea , S . R . , Jin , Y . , Liu , Y . , etal . ( 2019 ) . Microvascular endothelial cells engulf myelin debris and promote macrophage recruitment andﬁbrosisafterneuralinjury . Nat . Neurosci 22 , 421 – 435 . doi : 10 . 1038 / s41593 - 018 - 0324 - 9 Zhou , X . , Wu , Q . , Lu , Y . , Zhang , X . , Lv , S . , Shao , J . , et al . ( 2019 ) . Crosstalk between soluble PDGF - BB and PDGFR β promotes astrocytic activation and synaptic recovery in the hippocampus after subarachnoid hemorrhage . FASEB J . 33 , 9588 – 9601 . doi : 10 . 1096 / fj . 201900195r Conﬂict of Interest : The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest . Copyright © 2020 Tjakra , Wang , Vania , Hou , Durkan , Wang and Wang . This is an open - access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( CC BY ) . The use , distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted , provided the original author ( s ) and the copyright owner ( s ) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited , in accordance with accepted academic practice . No use , distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms . Frontiers in Neuroscience | www . frontiersin . org 18 January 2020 | Volume 13 | Article 1436