Voyagers and Voyeurs Supporting Social Data Analysis Jeffrey Heer Computer Science Department Stanford University CIDR 2009 – Monterey , CA 5 January 2009 A Tale of Two Visualizations vizster Observations Groups spent more time in front of the visualization than individuals . Friends encouraged each other to unearth relationships , probe community boundaries , and challenge reported information . Social play resulted in informal analysis , often driven by story - telling of group histories . NameVoyager The Baby Name Voyager Social Data Analysis Visual sensemaking can be social as well as cognitive . Analysis of data coupled with social interpretation and deliberation . How can user interfaces catalyze and support collaborative visual analysis ? sense . us A Web Application for Collaborative Visualization of Demographic Data Voyagers and Voyeurs Complementary faces of analysis Voyager – focus on visualized data Active engagement with the data Serendipitous comment discovery Voyeur – focus on comment listings Investigate others’ explorations Find people and topics of interest Catalyze new explorations Out of the Lab , Into the Wild Wikimapia . org DecisionSite posters Spotfire Decision Site Posters Tableau Server Many - Eyes Social Data Analysis In Action 1 . Discussion and Debate 2 . Text is Data , Too 3 . Data Integrity and Cleaning 4 . Integrating Data in Context 5 . Pointing and Naming For each , some thoughts on future directions . I asked my colleagues : if you could give database researchers a wish list , what would it be ? Discussion and Debate Tableau X - Box / Quest Diag ? “Valley of Death” Content Analysis of Comments Feature prevalence from content analysis ( min Cohen’s = . 74 ) High co - occurrence of Observations , Questions , and Hypotheses Service Sense . us Many - Eyes 0 20 40 60 80 Percentage 0 20 40 60 80 Percentage Observation Question Hypothesis Data Integrity Linking Socializing System Design TestingTips To - Do Affirmation Reduce the cost of synthesizing contributions WANTED : Structured Conversation Wikipedia : Shared Revisions NASA ClickWorkers : Statistics Reduce the cost of synthesizing contributions Can we represent data , visualizations , and social activity in a unified data model ? WANTED : Structured Conversation Text is Data , Too Visualization Popularity Over 1 / 3 of Many - Eyes visualizations use free text Service Many - Eyes Swivel 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 Percentage 0 . 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 Percentage Tag Cloud Bubble Graph Word Tree Bar Chart Maps Network DiagramTreemap Matrix Chart Line Graph Scatterplot Stacked Graph Pie Chart Histogram Alberto Gonzales WANTED : Better Tools for Text Statistical Analysis of text ( with ties to source ! ) Entity Extraction Aggregation and Comparison of texts Get a “global” view of documents We can do better than Tag Clouds ( ! ? ) Use text analysis tools to enable analysis of structured conversation by the community . Data Integrity and Cleaning No cooks in 1910 ? … There may have been cooks then . But maybe not . The great postmaster scourge of 1910 ? Or just a bug in the data ? Content Analysis of Comments 16 % of sense . us comments and 10 % of Many - Eyes comments reference data quality or integrity . Service Sense . us Many - Eyes 0 20 40 60 80 Percentage 0 20 40 60 80 Percentage Observation Question Hypothesis Data Integrity Linking Socializing System Design TestingTips To - Do Affirmation WANTED : Data Cleaning Tools Reshape data , reformat rows & columns Handle missing data : label , repair , interpolate Entity resolution and de - duplication Group related values into aggregates Assist table lookups & data transforms Provide tools in situ to leverage collective Transparency requires provenance Integrating Data in Context College Drug Use College Drug Use Harry Potter is Freaking Popular WANTED : In - Situ Data Integration Search for and suggest related data or views User input for types , schema matching , or data Apply in context of the current task But record mappings for future use Record provenance : chain of data sources Examples : Google Web Tables , Pay - As - You - Go , Stanford Vispedia , Utah VisTrails Pointing and Naming “Look at that spike . ” “Look at the spike for Turkey . ” “Look at the spike in the middle . ” Free - form Data - aware Visual Queries Model selections as declarative queries over interface elements or underlying data ( - 118 . 371 ≤ lon AND lon ≤ - 118 . 164 ) AND ( 33 . 915 ≤ lat AND lat ≤ 34 . 089 ) Visual Queries Model selections as declarative queries over interface elements or underlying data Applicable to dynamic , time - varying data Retarget selection across visual encodings Support social navigation and data mining WANTED : Data - Aware Annotation Meta - queries linking annotations to views Visually specifying notification triggers Annotating data aggregates ( use lineage ? ) Unified model ( again ! ) to facilitate reference How to make it work at scale ? How else to use machine - readable annotations ? Can annotations be used to steer data mining ? Conclusion Social Data Analysis Collective analysis of data supported by social interaction . 1 . Discussion and Debate 2 . Text is Data , Too 3 . Data Integrity and Cleaning 4 . Integrating Data in Context 5 . Pointing and Naming Summary As visualization becomes common on the web , opportunities for collaborative analysis abound . Weave visualizations into the web : data access , visualization creation , view sharing and pointing . Support discovery , discussion , and integration of contributions to leverage the collective . Improve both processes and technologies for communication and dissemination . Parting Thoughts Visualizations may have a catalytic effect on social interaction around data . Encourage participation by minimizing or offsetting interaction costs . Provide incentives by fostering the personal relevance of the data . Acknowledgements @ Berkeley : Maneesh Agrawala , Wes Willett , danah boyd , Marti Hearst , Joe Hellerstein @ IBM : Martin Wattenberg , Fernanda Viégas @ PARC : Stu Card @ Tableau : Jock Mackinlay , Chris Stolte , Christian Chabot Jeffrey Heer Stanford University jheer @ stanford . edu http : / / jheer . org Voyagers and Voyeurs Supporting Social Data Analysis With a collaborative spirit , with a collaborative platform where people can upload data , explore data , compare solutions , discuss the results , build consensus , we can engage passionate people , local communities , media and this will raise - incredibly - the amount of people who can understand what is going on . And this would have fantastic outcomes : the engagement of people , especially new generations ; it would increase knowledge , unlock statistics , improve transparency and accountability of public policies , change culture , increase numeracy , and in the end , improve democracy and welfare . Enrico Giovannini , Chief Statistician , OECD . June 2007 .