UvA - DARE is a service provided by the library of the University of Amsterdam ( http : / / dare . uva . nl ) UvA - DARE ( Digital Academic Repository ) Shedding light on endocytosis with optimized super - resolution microscopy Leyton Puig , D . M . Link to publication Citation for published version ( APA ) : Leyton Puig , D . M . ( 2017 ) . Shedding light on endocytosis with optimized super - resolution microscopy General rights It is not permitted to download or to forward / distribute the text or part of it without the consent of the author ( s ) and / or copyright holder ( s ) , other than for strictly personal , individual use , unless the work is under an open content license ( like Creative Commons ) . Disclaimer / Complaints regulations If you believe that digital publication of certain material infringes any of your rights or ( privacy ) interests , please let the Library know , stating your reasons . In case of a legitimate complaint , the Library will make the material inaccessible and / or remove it from the website . Please Ask the Library : http : / / uba . uva . nl / en / contact , or a letter to : Library of the University of Amsterdam , Secretariat , Singel 425 , 1012 WP Amsterdam , The Netherlands . You will be contacted as soon as possible . Download date : 11 Dec 2018 S h e dd i n g li g h t o n e nd o c y t o s i s w i t h o p ti m i z e d s up e r - r e s o l u ti o n m i c r o s c o p y D a n i e l a M o n i c a L e y t o n P u i g 2017 Shedding light on endocytosis with optimized super - resolution microscopy Daniela Monica Leyton Puig Uitnodiging voor het bijwonen van de openbare verdediging van het proefschrift van Daniela Leyton Puig op donderdag 6 april 2017 om 12 : 00 uur in de Agnietenkapel van de Universiteit van Amsterdam Oudezijds Voorburgwal 229 - 231 Amsterdam Receptie ter plaatse na afloop van de promotie Paranimfen : Jonne Raaijmakers Judith Haarhuis Daniela Leyton Puig danielaleytonpuig @ gmail . com Shedding light on endocytosis with optimized super - resolution microscopy Daniela Monica Leyton Puig ISBN : 978 - 94 - 6233 - 569 - 1 The studies described in this thesis were performed at the division of Cell Biology at the Netherlands Cancer Institute ( NKI ) in Amsterdam , and financially supported by the Dutch Technology Foundation STW . Printed by : Gildeprint Cover : single molecule localization super - resolution microscopy is a dotty techni - que . If we would make a super - resolution image of a corner of Amsterdam , this is what it would look like . Copyright © 2017 D . M . Leyton Puig Shedding light on endocytosis with optimized super - resolution microscopy ACADEMISCH PROEFSCHRIFT ter verkrijging van de graad van doctor aan de Universiteit van Amsterdam op gezag van de Rector Magnificus prof . dr . ir . K . I . J . Maex ten overstaan van een door het College voor Promoties ingestelde commissie , in het openbaar te verdedigen in de Agnietenkapel op donderdag 6 april 2017 , te 12 : 00 uur door Daniela Monica Leyton Puig geboren te Cochabamba , Bolivia Promotiecommissie Promotor : prof . dr . K . Jalink Universiteit van Amsterdam Copromotor : dr . M . Innocenti NKI - AVL Overige leden : prof . dr . T . W . J . Gadella Universiteit van Amsterdam prof . dr . W . J . Wadman Universiteit van Amsterdam prof . dr . J . Borst Universiteit van Amsterdam dr . E . A . J . Reits Universiteit van Amsterdam prof . dr . W . H . Moolenaar NKI prof . dr . A . Sonnenberg RUL Leiden en NKI dr . M . Postma Universiteit van Amsterdam Faculteit der Natuurwetenschappen , Wiskunde en Informatica Introduction The fidelity of stochastic single - molecule super - reso - lution reconstructions critically depends upon robust background estimation PFA fixation enables artifact - free super - resolution imaging of the actin cytoskeleton and associated pro - teins Flat clathrin lattices are dynamic actin - controlled hubs for clathrin - mediated endocytosis and signalling of specific receptors . Perifosine inhibits EGFR signaling by inducing its in - ternalization Summarizing discussion References English Summary Nederlandse Samenvatting Curriculum Vitae List of Publications Dankwoord Table of Contents Chapter 1 Chapter 2 Chapter 3 Chapter 4 Chapter 5 Chapter 6 Addendum 7 23 53 71 93 109 119