NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL . 1 NO . 1 | 2006 | 297 PROTOCOL INTRODUCTION The DCCS 1 – 3 is an easily administered and widely used ( see refs . 4 – 10 ) measure of executive function that is suitable for use across the lifespan . In the standard version of this task ( Fig . 1 ) , which is usually used with healthy children between the ages of 3 and 5 years , children are shown two target cards ( e . g . , a blue rab - bit and a red boat ) and asked to sort a series of bivalent test cards ( e . g . , red rabbits and blue boats ) according to one dimension ( e . g . , color ) . During a post - switch phase , they are told to sort the same types of test cards according to the other dimension ( e . g . , shape ) . Regardless of which dimension is presented first , the majority of normal 3 - year - olds perseverate during the post - switch phase of the standard version by continuing to sort test cards by the first dimension . Moreover , they do this despite being told the new rules on every trial , despite having sorted cards by the new dimension on other occasions , and despite correctly answering questions about the post - switch rules ( e . g . , “Where do the rabbits go in the shape game ? ” ) . In other words , most 3 - year - olds show a pattern of inflexibility on this task that resembles that exhibited on the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test ( WCST ) by adult patients with damage to dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 11 . By 5 years of age , most children switch immediately when instructed to do so . The standard version of the DCCS provides an index of the devel - opment of executive function during the preschool years , and it has been useful in the assessment of individual differences in executive function in this age range ; children’s performance on the DCCS is correlated with their performance on other measures of execu - tive function as well as measures that have been linked theoreti - cally to executive function , such as self - and social - understanding ( i . e . , theory of mind ) 1 , 12 , 13 . Versions of the DCCS have proven sen - sitive to disorders that involve impairments in executive function ( e . g . , ADHD 14 and autism 15 , 16 ) . Research reveals that performance on the DCCS improves with training and that these improvements generalize to performance on a measure of theory of mind 9 . The The Dimensional Change Card Sort ( DCCS ) : a method of assessing executive function in children Philip David Zelazo Department of Psychology , University of Toronto , 100 St . George Street , Toronto , Ontario M5S 3G3 , Canada . Correspondence should be addressed to P . D . Z . ( zelazo @ psych . utoronto . ca ) . Published online 27 June ; corrected after print 31 August 2006 ; doi : 10 . 1038 / nprot . 2006 . 46 The dimensional change card sort ( DCCS ) is an easily administered and widely used measure of executive function that is suitable for use with participants across a wide range of ages . In the standard version , children are required to sort a series of bivalent test cards , first according to one dimension ( e . g . , color ) , and then according to the other ( e . g . , shape ) . Most 3 - year - olds perseverate during the post - switch phase , exhibiting a pattern of inflexibility similar to that seen in patients with prefrontal cortical damage . By 5 years of age , most children switch when instructed to do so . Performance on the DCCS provides an index of the development of executive function , and it is impaired in children with disorders such as attention - deficit / hyperactivity disorder ( ADHD ) and autism . We describe the protocol for the standard version ( duration = 5 min ) and the more challenging border version ( duration = 5 min ) , which may be used with children as old as 7 years . “Play the color game : If it’s red , it goes here ; but if it’s blue , it goes there . Here’s a red one . Where does it go ? ” Target cards “Okay , now we’re not going to play the color game anymore . Now we’re going to play a new game—the shape game . If it’s a rabbit , it goes here ; but if it’s a boat , it goes there . Here’s a rabbit . Where does it go ? ” Target cards Test cards ( i . e . , 3 red rabbits and 3 blue boats presented in a quasi - random order ) Test cards ( i . e . , 3 red rabbits and 3 blue boats presented in a quasi - random order ) Figure 1 | Sample target cards and test cards used during the pre - and post - switch phases of the standard version of the DCCS . © 2006 N a t u r e P u b li s h i n g G r o u p h tt p : / / www . n a t u r e . c o m / n a t u r e p r o t o c o l s 298 | VOL . 1 NO . 1 | 2006 | NATURE PROTOCOLS PROTOCOL implications of this finding for therapeutic intervention remain to be explored . One advantage of the DCCS as a mea - sure of executive function—particularly for use with children—is its relative sim - plicity . Unlike in the WCST , for example , children are told exactly what to do on every trial . This feature of the DCCS makes it suitable for use with young chil - dren , and it also constrains interpretation of the subject’s difficulties with the task . Difficulty cannot be attributed to prob - lems with hypothesis testing or memory for the relevant rules . Instead , the DCCS provides a more direct measure of flexible rule use—the selection and use of a pair of rules to sort bivalent stimuli despite inter - ference from previous trials . More precise assessments are also pos - sible . The task is easily adapted to assess specific aspects of flexible rule use in rela - tive isolation . For example , by changing the target and test cards between the pre - and post - switch phases as shown in Fig . 2 ( negative priming version ) , it is possible to obtain a relatively pure measure of a child’s ability to sort by stim - ulus values that were not selected during the pre - switch phase—to select rules that were previously inhibited 17 . Moreover , by chang - ing the motivational significance of the stimulus values , it is pos - sible to assess not only more ‘cool’ cognitive aspects of executive function usually associated with dorsolateral prefrontal cortex , but also more ‘hot’ affective aspects that are usually associated with the orbitofrontal cortex 13 . Finally , more challenging versions of the DCCS , such as the border version , have been used successfully with older children 6 , 13 and adults across the lifespan 18 , 19 . In these versions , switches are presented randomly ( e . g . , on 20 % of trials ) and cued via visual symbols , and participants may be instructed to respond as quickly as possible . Dependent measures may include not only accuracy but also reaction time . The following procedure includes only the standard version of the DCCS and the border version . For an overview of the entire sequence , see Fig . 3 . Standard Total change Partial change Negative priming Stimuli during the pre - switch phase ( “color game” ) Stimuli during the post - switch phase ( “shape game” ) Target cards Test cards Figure 2 | Sample target cards and test cards used during the pre - switch phase of the DCCS ( top panel ) . The bottom panel shows the target cards and test cards used during the post - switch phase for several versions of the DCCS ( based on the assumption that color is the initial , pre - switch dimension ) . MATERIALS • For the standard version of the DCCS , suitable participants include children with mental ages between about 2 . 5 and 5 . 0 years . For the border version , participants include children with higher mental ages ( between 5 . 0 and 7 . 0 years ) who pass the standard version ( see Step 5 , below ) . When used together , these two versions provide an index of executive function across the mental age range of 2 . 5 to 7 . 0 years . Parents provide informed consent allowing their children to participate , and confirm that their children have normal or corrected - to - normal vision and are not color blind . • Two sorting trays : each tray is 11 . 5 cm long , 9 . 5 cm wide and 2 cm deep , and there is a display panel behind each tray that supports the target cards and allows them to be displayed throughout the task . Trays may be made out of wood . Target cards may be affixed to the display panel by Velcro or tape . • Two target cards : each card is 10 . 75 cm × 7 cm and laminated . These cards display color drawings on a white background . One target card shows a blue rabbit and the other shows a red boat . • Fourteen standard test cards for use in the standard version . These are identical in style to the target cards , but half of them ( n = 7 ) depict a red rabbit and half ( n = 7 ) depict a blue boat . Two of these standard test cards are used in the demonstration phase . • In addition to the above materials , seven border test cards are needed for the border version . These are identical in style to the standard test cards except that they have a 5 mm black border around them ( see Fig . 4 ) . Four of these cards depict a red rabbit and three depict a blue boat . For the border version , these cards are used together with seven standard test cards ( 4 red rabbits and 3 blue boats ) . • Alternative shapes and colors may be used , as long as the cross - mapped relation between test and target cards is maintained ( i . e . , each test card matches one target card on one dimension and the other target card on the other dimension ) . Use shapes and colors that are easily distinguishable and that will be familiar and engaging to the youngest children tested . PROCEDURE1 | Decide which dimension will be relevant during the pre - switch phase of the standard version . In the examples that follow , it is assumed that color has been chosen as the pre - switch dimension . 2 | During the demonstration phase , place the two sorting trays side by side in front of the subject , ensuring that they are within reaching distance . Sit beside the child so that you are able to view the display panels . Affix target cards to the display panels behind the sorting trays ( e . g . , a blue rabbit behind the tray on the child’s left and a red boat behind the tray on the child’s right ) . Label the target cards by both dimensions . Say , “Here’s a blue rabbit and here’s a red boat . ” Then say , “Now , we’re © 2006 N a t u r e P u b li s h i n g G r o u p h tt p : / / www . n a t u r e . c o m / n a t u r e p r o t o c o l s NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL . 1 NO . 1 | 2006 | 299 PROTOCOL going to play a card game . This is the color game . In the color game , all the blue ones go here [ pointing to the tray on the left ] , and all the red ones go there [ pointing to the tray on the right ] . ” Sort one type of test card ( e . g . , a blue boat ) by color , saying , “See , here’s a blue one . So it goes here [ place it face down in the tray on the left ] . ” Repeat the pre - switch rules , “If it’s blue it goes here , but if it’s red it goes there . ” Show children the other type of test card ( e . g . , a red rabbit ) , and say , “Now here’s a red one . Where does this one go ? ” If the child takes the card and sorts it correctly , or simply indicates the correct tray by pointing , say , “Very good . You know how to play the color game . ” If they point , say , “Can you help me put this red one down ? ” Ensure that the card is placed face down in the appropriate tray , turning the card over if necessary . If the child sorts incorrectly , say , “No , this one’s red , so it has to go over here in the color game . Can you help me put this red one down ? ” Ensure that the card is placed face - down in the appropriate tray . 3 | Proceed immediately to the pre - switch phase . On the first pre - switch trial , say , “Now it’s your turn . So remember , if it’s blue it goes here , but if it’s red it goes there . ” Randomly select a test card ( e . g . , a red rabbit ) , show it to the child , and label it by the relevant dimension only . Say , “Here’s a red one . Where does it go ? ” The child may take the card and place it in a tray or simply point to one of the trays , in which case you may sort the card for them . In either case , ensure that the card is placed face down in the appropriate tray . Whether or not children sort correctly , simply say , “Let’s do another one” ( or , for variety , “Let’s do it again , ” or “How about another one ? ” ) , and proceed to the next pre - switch trial ; that is , respond to children in a neutral , non - evaluative , non - corrective fashion ( e . g . , do not say , “Okay” ) . On each pre - switch trial , repeat the pre - switch rules , select a test card ( ensuring that the same type of test card , e . g . , a red rabbit , is not selected on more than two consecutive trials ) , show the card to the child , label it by the relevant dimension only , and ask the child where it goes : “Here’s a red one , where does it go ? ” or “Here’s a red one , where does this one go ? ” 4 | After six pre - switch trials , say , “Now we’re going to play a new game . We’re not going to play the color game anymore . We’re going to play the shape game . In the shape game , all the rabbits go here [ pointing to the tray on the left ] , and all the boats go there [ pointing to the tray on the right ] . Remember , if it’s a rabbit , put it here , but if it’s a boat put it there . Okay ? ” Do not remove the target cards or the cards that were sorted during the pre - switch phase , and do not pause between pre - and post - switch phases . Select a test card ( still ensuring that the same type of test card is not selected on more than two consecutive trials ) , show the card to the child , label it by the relevant dimension only , and ask , “Where does this one go ? ” Whether or not the child sorts correctly , simply say , “Let’s do another one” ( or , for variety , “Let’s do it again , ” or “How about another one ? ” ) , and proceed to the next post - switch trial . Standard version : Demonstrationphase ( 2 trials ) Standard Version : Pre - switch phase ( 6 trials ) Standard version : Post - switch phase ( 6 trials ) Border version ( 12 trials ) Figure 3 | Summary of the phases involved in the standard and border versions of the DCCS ( see text for detail ) . Children who pass the post - switch phase may proceed to the border version . “If there’s a black border , you have to play the color game . But if there’s no black border , you have to play the shape game . Here’s one with a black border . Where does it go ? ” Target cards Test cards ( i . e . , 3 red rabbits without borders , 3 blue boats without borders , 3 red rabbits with borders , and 3 blue boats with borders , presented in a quasi - random order ) Figure 4 | Sample target cards and test cards used during the border version of the DCCS . © 2006 N a t u r e P u b li s h i n g G r o u p h tt p : / / www . n a t u r e . c o m / n a t u r e p r o t o c o l s 300 | VOL . 1 NO . 1 | 2006 | NATURE PROTOCOLS PROTOCOL 5 | Children who are 36 months of age and older usually sort correctly on all six pre - switch trials . Scores on the post - switch phase of the DCCS are usually bimodally distributed ( i . e . , either correct or incorrect on all post - switch trials ) , so children are usually classified as passing or failing the DCCS . A child needs to sort at least five out of six post - switch trials correctly in order to pass . Analyses of post - switch performance are usually based only on children who sort five or more out of six pre - switch trials correctly ( but see ANTICIPATED RESULTS below ) . 6 | Children who pass the post - switch phase of the standard version of the DCCS may proceed immediately to the border version , which uses the same target cards as the standard version . Remove the already - sorted cards from the sorting trays , reserving four red rabbits and three blue boats . Set the remaining cards aside . Combine the four red rabbits and three blue boats with the additional Border test cards . Say , “Okay , you played really well . Now I have a more difficult game for you to play . In this game , you sometimes get cards that have a black border around it like this one [ showing a red rabbit with a border ] . If you see cards with a black border , you have to play the color game . In the color game , red ones go here and blue ones go there [ pointing to the appropriate trays ] . This card’s red , so I’m going to put it right there [ placing it face down in the appropriate tray ] . But if the cards have no black border , like this one [ show them a red rabbit without a border ] , you have to play the shape game . In the shape game , if it’s a rabbit , we put it here , but if it’s a boat , we put it there [ pointing to the appropriate trays ] . This one’s a rabbit , so I’m going to put it right here [ placing it face down in the appropriate tray ] . Okay ? Now it’s your turn . ” 7 | The border version consists of 12 trials . On each trial , repeat the rules ( “If there’s a border , play the color game . If there’s no border , play the shape game” ) , select a test card ( ensuring that the same type of test card—with or without a border—is not selected on more than 2 consecutive trials ) , label the card as having a border or not , and ask the child where it goes . After the child sorts it , simply say , “Let’s do another . ” For example , “Remember , if there’s a black border , you have to play the color game . But if there’s no black border , you have to play the shape game . Here’s one with a black border . Where does it go ? [ Children sort ] Let’s do another . ” As in the standard version , respond to children in a neutral , non - evaluative , non - corrective fashion . 8 | Performance on the border version is scored as the number correct out of 12 . Children are considered to pass this task if they sort nine or more cards correctly out of 12 test trials . ● TIMING Steps 2 – 4 , 5 min ; Steps 6 + 7 , 5 min . ? TROUBLESHOOTING See Table 1 . TABLE 1 | Troubleshooting table . PROBLEM SOLUTION Steps 2 – 4 , 6 + 7 Children hesitate Label the card by the relevant dimension and ask where it goes ( e . g . , “Here’s a rabbit , where does it go ? ” ) . If the child still hesitates , say , “Let’s do another one , ” return the skipped card to the pile of to - be - sorted cards , select a new card , label it by the relevant dimension , and ask where it goes . Children refuse to complete the task If a child refuses to continue sorting , suggest that he or she may point to the correct box and show you where each card goes . If the child refuses to do this , then terminate the task , as their data will be unusable unless all trials are completed . Children change response Allow children to change their responses , scoring only their final response . Do not provide evaluative feedback . Simply say , “Are you sure ? ” and then proceed to the next trial , saying , “Let’s do another one . ” Children ask for feedback Do not provide evaluative or corrective feedback . Simply encourage them to keep playing , saying , “Sort the card , ” or “Let’s do another one , ” as appropriate . Children pick up previously sorted cards Prevent children from picking up previously sorted cards . Tell them , “Those cards have to stay there , but let’s do another one . ” Children take a break during the task Discourage children from taking a break until the procedure has been completed , saying , “We’re almost done . ” If children need to take a break during Steps 2 , 3 , 6 or 7 , repeat the interrupted step when they return and then complete the procedure . Only use data from the completed ( re - administered ) step , not the interrupted one . Children should not take a break during Step 4 ; this would render the data unusable . © 2006 N a t u r e P u b li s h i n g G r o u p h tt p : / / www . n a t u r e . c o m / n a t u r e p r o t o c o l s NATURE PROTOCOLS | VOL . 1 NO . 1 | 2006 | 301 PROTOCOL ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Preparation of this article was supported , in part , by a grant from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada and by a Canada Research Chair . Many individuals have been involved the creation and refinement of the DCCS and its many versions , but the author would like to acknowledge in particular the valuable contributions of D . Frye and T . Palfai , co - authors of the article in which the protocol was first described . COMPETING INTERESTS STATEMENT The author declares that he has no competing financial interests . Published online at http : / / www . natureprotocols . com / Reprints and permissions information is available online at http : / / npg . nature . com / reprintsandpermissions / 1 . Frye , D . , Zelazo , P . D . & Palfai , T . Theory of mind and rule - based reasoning . Cog . Dev . 10 , 483 – 527 ( 1995 ) . 2 . Zelazo , P . D . , Frye , D . & Rapus , T . An age - related dissociation between knowing rules and using them . Cog . Dev . 11 , 37 – 63 ( 1996 ) . 3 . Zelazo , P . D . , Müller , U . , Frye , D . & Marcovitch , S . The development of executive function in early childhood . Mono . Soc . Res . Child Dev . 68 , Serial No . 274 ( 2003 ) . 4 . Bialystok , E . Cognitive complexity and attentional control in the bilingual mind . Child Dev . 70 , 636 – 644 ( 1999 ) . 5 . Bohlmann , N . L . & Fenson , L . The effects of feedback on perseverative errors in preschool aged children . J . Cog . Dev . 6 , 119 – 131 ( 2005 ) . 6 . Carlson , S . M . Developmentally sensitive measures of executive function in preschool children . Dev . Neuropsychol . 28 , 595 – 616 ( 2005 ) . 7 . Dick , A . S . , Overton , W . F . & Kovacs , S . L . The development of symbolic coordination : representation of imagined objects , executive function , and theory of mind . J . Cog . Dev . 6 , 133 – 161 ( 2005 ) . 8 . Kirkham , N . Z . , Cruess , L . & Diamond , A . Helping children apply their knowledge to their behavior on a dimension - switching task . Dev . Sci . 6 , 449 – 476 ( 2003 ) . 9 . Kloo , D . & Perner , J . Training transfer between card sorting and false belief understanding : Helping children apply conflicting descriptions . Child Dev . 74 , 1823 – 1839 ( 2003 ) . 10 . Munakata , Y . & Yerys , B . E . All together now : when dissociations between knowledge and action disappear . Psychol . Sci . 12 , 335 - 337 ( 2001 ) . 11 . Milner , B . Effects of different brain lesions on card sorting . Arch . Neurol . 9 , 100 – 111 ( 1963 ) . 12 . Carlson , S . M . & Moses , L . J . Individual differences in inhibitory control and theory of mind . Child Dev . 72 , 1032 – 1053 ( 2001 ) . 13 . Hongwanishkul , D . , Happaney , K . R . , Lee , W . & Zelazo , P . D . Hot and cool executive function : Age - related changes and individual differences . Dev . Neuropsychol . 28 , 617 – 644 ( 2005 ) . 14 . Mulas , F . et al . Shifting - related brain magnetic activity in attention - deficit / hyperactivity disorder . Biol . Psychiat . 59 , 373 – 379 ( 2006 ) . 15 . Zelazo , P . D . , Jacques , S . , Burack , J . & Frye , D . The relation between theory of mind and rule use : evidence from persons with autism - spectrum disorders . Inf . Child Dev . ( Special Issue : Executive functions and development ) , 11 , 171 – 195 ( 2002 ) . 16 . Colvert , E . , Custance , D . & Swettenham , J . Rule - based reasoning and theory of mind in autism : a commentary on the work of Zelazo , Jacques , Burack and Frye . Inf . Child Dev . 11 , 197 – 200 ( 2002 ) . 17 . Müller , U . , Dick , A . S . , Gela , K . , Overton , W . F . & Zelazo , P . D . The role of negative priming in preschoolers’ flexible rule use on the dimensional change card sort task . Child Dev . 77 , 395 – 412 ( 2006 ) . 18 . Zelazo , P . D . , Craik , F . I . M . & Booth , L . Executive function across the life span . Acta Psychol . 115 , 167 – 184 ( 2004 ) . 19 . Diamond , A . & Kirkham , N . Not quite as grown - up as we like to think : parallels between cognition in childhood and adulthood . Psychol . Sci . 16 , 291 – 297 ( 2005 ) . 20 . Zelazo , P . D . The development of conscious control in childhood . Trends Cog . Sci . 8 , 12 – 17 ( 2004 ) . 21 . Bunge , S . & Zelazo , P . D . A brain - based account of the development of rule use in childhood . Curr . Dir . Psychol . Sci . 15 , 118 – 121 ( 2006 ) . ANTICIPATED RESULTS The majority of healthy 3 - year - old children ( i . e . , children between 36 and 47 months ) fail the post - switch phase of the standard version of the DCCS ; the majority of 4 - and 5 - year - olds pass this phase . Most 4 - year - olds fail the border version of the DCCS , as do approximately half of all 5 - year - olds . The precise percentages of children passing in any particular sample will vary . Data from the standard version are usually scored categorically , as passing or failing . Data from the border version may be treated continuously or categorically . When both versions are used in a single study , it is possible to score performance as follows : assign a score of 0 if children fail the pre - switch phase of the standard version ; assign a score of 1 if they pass the pre - switch phase of the standard version but fail the post - switch phase ; assign a score of 2 if they pass both the pre - and post - switch phases of the standard version but fail the border version ; assign a score of 3 if they pass both phases of the standard version and pass the border version . Both versions of the DCCS assess the flexible use of rules to govern behavior—a key aspect of executive function . According to the Cognitive Complexity and Control theory - Revised 3 , switching on the DCCS ( both versions ) requires the formulation and use of a higher - order rule for selecting which pair of rules ( i . e . , the color rules or the shape rules ) to use on any particular trial . That is , both the post - switch phase of the standard version and the border version require children to formulate and use a rule that says , in effect , “If shape game , then if rabbit here and if boat there ; if color game , then if red here and if blue there . ” The ability to use higher - order rules may be tied to the development of self - reflection 20 , and it is hypothesized to rely on the function of specific regions within the prefrontal cortex 21 . © 2006 N a t u r e P u b li s h i n g G r o u p h tt p : / / www . n a t u r e . c o m / n a t u r e p r o t o c o l s ERRATUM Erratum : The Dimensional Change Card Sort ( DCCS ) : a method of assessing executive function in children Philip David Zelazo Nat . Protocols 1 , 297 – 301 ( 2006 ) ; published online 27 June 2006 ; corrected after print 31 August 2006 . In the version of the article originally published , the boat in the upper right of the figure was blue . It should be red . The error has been corrected in the HTML and PDF versions of the article . © 2006 N a t u r e P u b li s h i n g G r o u p h tt p : / / www . n a t u r e . c o m / n a t u r e p r o t o c o l s