Robust Pore Size Analysis of Filamentous Networks from Three - Dimensional Confocal Microscopy Walter Mickel , * Stefan Mu¨nster , y Louise M . Jawerth , z David A . Vader , z David A . Weitz , z Adrian P . Sheppard , § Klaus Mecke , * Ben Fabry , y and Gerd E . Schro¨der - Turk * * Institut fu¨r Theoretische Physik , and y Center for Medical Physics and Technology , Biophysics Group , Friedrich - Alexander Universita¨t Erlangen - Nu¨rnberg , Erlangen , Germany ; z Experimental Soft Condensed Matter Group , Harvard University , Cambridge , Massachusetts ; and § Department of Applied Mathematics , Research School of Physical Science and Engineering , The Australian National University , Canberra , Australia ABSTRACT We describe a robust method for determining morphological properties of ﬁlamentous biopolymer networks , such as collagen or other connective tissue matrices , from confocal microscopy image stacks . Morphological properties including pore size distributions and percolation thresholds are important for transport processes , e . g . , particle diffusion or cell migration through the extracellular matrix . The method is applied to ﬂuorescently labeled ﬁber networks prepared from rat - tail tendon and calf - skin collagen , at concentrations of 1 . 2 , 1 . 6 , and 2 . 4 mg / ml . The collagen ﬁbers form an entangled and branched network . The medial axes , or skeletons , representing the collagen ﬁbers are extracted from the image stack by threshold intensity segmentation and distance - ordered homotopic thinning . The size of the ﬂuid pores as deﬁned by the radii of largest spheres that ﬁt into the cavities between the collagen ﬁbers is derived from Euclidean distance maps and maximal covering radius transforms of the ﬂuid phase . The size of the largest sphere that can traverse the ﬂuid phase between the collagen ﬁbers across the entire probe , called the percolation threshold , was computed for both horizontal and vertical directions . We demonstrate that by representing the ﬁbers as the medial axis the derived morphological network properties are both robust against changes of the value of the segmentation threshold intensity and robust to problems associated with the point - spread function of the imaging system . We also provide empirical support for a recent claim that the percolation threshold of a ﬁber network is close to the ﬁber diameter for which the Euler index of the networks becomes zero . INTRODUCTION Most adherent cells within living organisms are surrounded by a three - dimensional connective tissue matrix . Some fun - damental cell functions such as the formation of adhesion contacts , cell shape , migration , contraction , and differentia - tion sensitively depend on the morphology , composition , and mechanical properties of the surroundings ( 1 – 3 ) . Yet for convenience and reproducibility of the observations , cells are traditionally cultured on two - dimensional hard plastic or glass culture dishes . This often limits the physiological rel - evance of the data . To study cell behavior in a physiologically more relevant three - dimensional environment , reconstituted connective tissue gels are gaining widespread usage ( 3 – 5 ) . To produce them , animal tissue is harvested and dissolved , the proteins are then puriﬁed and later repolymerized in a cell culture dish . Recipes differ widely for each of these steps , as do the re - sulting properties of the reconstituted gels . Structural and morphological characteristics of these net - works are important for their mechanical properties and bi - ological functionality . The size of the pores of the ﬂuid phase between the ﬁbers is an important factor for determining the migration behavior of cells ( such as cancer cells , neutrophils , smooth muscle cells , or ﬁbroblasts ) through the gel ( 3 , 4 , 6 , 7 ) . The pore size of collagen foams has also been linked to he - patocyte function ( 8 ) . The relationship between ﬁber orien - tation on the one hand and elastic properties on the other hand is the subject of ongoing research ( 2 , 9 ) . In this work , we discuss a conceptually robust deﬁnition for a pore or mesh size measure of the ﬂuid phase in bio - polymer networks and discuss algorithms to compute it for experimental data sets . Despite the relevance of this quantity , a generic deﬁnition and a robust method to extract pore sizes from experimental three - dimensional microscopy data sets have been lacking . Here we discuss the deﬁnition of two generic pore size measures based on the so - called ( maximal ) covering radius transform and on percolation analysis . Both approaches have been successfully applied to the analysis of pore sizes of porous materials , such as sandstones ( 10 – 12 ) . Previous pore - size estimates of biological ﬁber networks were derived , for example , from observations of collagen volume fraction and ﬁber radius under the assumption that the network geometry is described by a speciﬁc model for random ﬁbers ( 7 , 13 ) . Other approaches include Fourier spectra analyses of three - dimensional confocal microscopy images , e . g . , of ﬁbrin ( 14 ) , or from statistical analysis of nearest points on collagen ﬁbers in sections of confocal mi - croscopy image stacks ( 15 ) , and the analysis of spheres dif - fusing through the network ( 16 ) . In contrast to those approaches , our method is based on the analysis of the entire doi : 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 108 . 135939 Submitted April 24 , 2008 , and accepted for publication September 5 , 2008 . Walter Mickel and Stefan Mu¨nster contributed equally to this work . Address reprint requests to Gerd E . Schroeder - Turk , E - mail : gerd . schroeder - turk @ physik . uni - erlangen . de . Editor : Gaudenz Danuser . (cid:2) 2008 by the Biophysical Society 0006 - 3495 / 08 / 12 / 6072 / 09 $ 2 . 00 6072 Biophysical Journal Volume 95 December 2008 6072 – 6080 three - dimensional real - space network geometry and does not rely on speciﬁc assumptions or network models . We apply our method to confocal microscopy data sets of collagen networks obtained after ﬂuorescently labeling the connective tissue proteins before polymerization . The colla - gen ﬁbers are represented as thinned skeletal center lines , so - called medial axes , of the high - intensity phase of the bi - narized data sets . Medial representations are well known in analysis of porous media ( 17 ) and medical images ( 18 ) and have also been used as representations of collagen networks ( 19 ) . Here we show that the covering radius transform and the percolation analysis yield intuitive and fundamental mea - sures of pore sizes that are robust if analyzed on the medial axis representation of the collagen ﬁbers . Moreover , these measures are generic in the sense that they apply to networks of arbitrary geometry and topology ( en - tangled , branched , cross - linked , straight , or curved edges , connected or disconnected , isotropic or anisotropic , homo - geneous or heterogeneous ) . The method is robust against variations of the image analysis parameters , in particular the segmentation threshold . METHODS Reconstituted collagen networks from calf - skin collagen and rat - tail tendon were ﬂuorescently labeled and imaged by confocal microscopy with x and y pixel dimension of 0 . 1 m m and distance of 0 . 1 m m between consecutive images . The resulting three - dimensional grayscale data sets were trans - formed into binary data sets using standard threshold - segmentation after smoothing by anisotropic diffusion ( 20 ) . A line representing the collagen ﬁbers was extracted from the binary data sets as the medial axis of the col - lagen phase . The pore size distributions and percolation thresholds of the ﬂuid phase were computed from the medial axis of the ﬂuid phase , described in detail in Morphological Image Analysis . Importantly , for these compu - tationsthe ﬂuidphasewas notrepresentedbythecomplementofthecollagen phase in the segmented data set but by the complement of the single - voxel thick medial axis representing the collagen ﬁbers . This approach takes into account that the width of the collagen ﬁbers is ; 0 . 15 m m ( 7 ) ; a wider ap - pearance of the ﬁbers in the segmented data set is mostly due to the point - spread function of the confocal microscopy imaging system . Synthesis of labeled collagen networks Acid - soluble calf - skin collagen at 4 mg / mL ( Biochrom , Berlin , Germany ) and acid - dissolved rat - tail tendon collagen at 2 mg / mL ( Biochrom ) were each ﬂuorescently labeled with 5 - ( and 6 ) - carboxytetramethylrhodamine succini - midyl ester ( TAMRA SE , Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) . We followed the pro - tocol by Baici etal . ( 21 ) but used TAMRASEinstead ofFITCand omitted the ﬁnal separation step . To reduce structural alterations due to changes in the dynamics of the network self - assembly , the labeled collagen solutions were each diluted with their unlabeled stock solutions at a volume ratio of 1 : 4 . Next , the components were mixed in the following order by pipetting : 350 - m L labeled calf - skin collagen , 350 - m L labeled rat - tail tendon collagen , 80 - m L 10 3 Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium ( DMEM , Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) , 80 - m L 0 . 25 M sodium bicarbonate , and 13 - m L 1 M sodium hydroxide . Care was taken to avoid bubblesand all componentswere kepton ice before mixing . The resulting mixture had a collagen concentration of 2 . 4 mg / mL at a pH of 10 . For gels with lower collagen concentration ( 1 . 6 mg / mL and 1 . 2 mg / mL ) , this mixture was diluted with 1 3 DMEM adjusted to pH 10 . A quantity of 200 m L of the mixture were immediately pipetted into 35 - mm glass - bottom culture dishes ( MatTek , Ashland , MA ) and incubated for 2 h at 37 (cid:3) C . Before confocal imaging , the gels were thoroughly washed with warmed 1 3 phosphate buffered saline ( PBS , Sigma , St . Louis , MO ) to eliminate unbound dye or nonpolymerized labeled collagen from the ﬂuid phase . Confocal microscopy Optical sections of the three gel samples were obtained using a Leica SP5 confocal microscope ( Leica , Wetzlar , Germany ) with a HCX PL APO CS 63 3 , NA1 . 2waterimmersionobjective ( Leica ) inﬂuorescence mode . A543 nm HeNe Laser ( 1 mW ) was used to excite the specimen , and the emitted light of wavelengths between 557 nm and 625 nm was collected . A stack of consecutiveimageplaneswithverticaldistance d z wastakenforeachsample . The vertical spacing was adjusted to d z (cid:2) d xy . The remaining differences between d z and d x , d y were dealt with by linear interpolation to ensure exact cubic voxel size in the three - dimensional data set . The8 - bit grayscale images had512 2 pixels , with408 , 333 , and 458 stackedimagesfor Gel1 ( 1 . 2 mg / mL ) , 2 ( 1 . 6 mg / mL ) , and 3 ( 2 . 4 mg / mL ) , respectively . The pixel width of the confocal microscopy images , and consequently the voxel width , of the three - dimensional data sets was 0 . 1 m m for Gel 3 ( 2 . 4 mg / mL ) and 0 . 15 m m for the others . Examples of confocal sections for each gel are shown in Fig . 1 . Most digital imaging systems use pixel sizes of ; 100 nm for objectives witha numericalaperture between1 . 2and1 . 4 ( 22 ) . Thischoiceis considered to be a good compromise between a maximum utilization of the optical resolution ( (cid:2) 0 . 25 m m in the lateral direction ) and a minimum image ﬁle size . For the lateral direction a pixel sizes of 100 nm is close to the Nyquist limit but it can be shown that excessive oversampling , also called empty magni - ﬁcation , would only give a marginal gain in resolution but would lead to larger ﬁle sizes and longer computation times ( 22 ) . Because of the reduced optical resolution in the z direction ( (cid:2) 0 . 5 m m ) , a vertical voxel size of 0 . 25 m m would be sufﬁcient to fulﬁll the Nyquist criterion ; however , our image processing algorithms were optimized for cubic voxels . Morphological image analysis The confocal microscopy data sets were converted into binary data sets of the same size by simple threshold segmentation . All voxels with intensity greater than a chosen threshold value I c were set to 1 ( collagen ) and all others to 0 ( ﬂuid ) . Before segmentation , a sequence of Gaussian ( isotropic ) smoothing followed by anisotropic diffusion smoothing ( 20 ) was applied to the grayscale data for noise removal . Fig . 2 a shows an example of the segmented data set . FIGURE 1 Two - dimensional confocal microscopy images of the recon - stituted collagen gels analyzed in this study . Pore Sizes of Filamentous Networks 6073 Biophysical Journal 95 ( 12 ) 6072 – 6080 The segmented data set contains in general some noise defects , notably isolated ﬂuid voxels or small ﬂuid clusters surrounded by collagen voxels and narrow gaps between collagen ﬁbers that appear to form part ofthe same ﬁber . While the classiﬁcation of these features as defects implies some inter - pretation , we removed such defects by so - called morphological closing or dilation - erosion ( 12 ) . This involves dilation of the 1 - phase ( collagen ) by a width R DE ( here R DE ¼ 1 ) ; all voxels of the ﬂuid phase with Euclidean distancelessthan R DE to thenearest collagenvoxelare convertedto1 . Thisis followed by an erosion step in which all voxels of the dilated collagen phase with Euclidean distance less than R DE to the ﬂuid phase are converted to 0 . This implies that collagen domains with distance less than or equal to two voxels are merged . The minimum resolved ﬁber spacingis hence two voxels . In addition , we removed all clusters of the ﬂuid phase that are fully sur - rounded by the collagen phase . The collagen phase of the data set obtained by this process overestimates thetruediameterofthecollagenﬁbersof ; 0 . 15 m m ( 7 ) duetothepoint - spread function of confocal microscopy systems ( 23 ) . This broadening is particularly pronounced in the vertical z direction . Therefore , the collagen ﬁbers are better representedas thinnedand centered subsets of the 1 - phase , called medial axes . The medial axis can be computed by distance - ordered homotopic thinning ( 24 – 26 ) . It tracesthe paths through the center of the collagen ﬁbers and is one - voxel thick . We note that the same algorithm is also well suited for the com - putation of the medial axis of the ﬂuid phase ( see below ) . An alternative skeletonization algorithm for biopolymer ﬁbers based on tracing maximally wide paths intheEuclideandistance maphas been describedbyWuetal . ( 19 ) . The medial axis is derived from the Euclidean distance map , EDM ( 27 – 29 ) , of the 1 - phase . The EDM speciﬁes for every voxel of the 1 - phase the distance from its center to the center of the nearest voxel of the ﬂuid 0 - phase . The EDM is used to thin the collagen phase to its one - voxel - thick medial axis . To do this , voxels of the 1 - phase are incrementally converted to 0 in order of their distance values , provided that this conversion does not change the topology and connectivity of the 1 - phase . ( Note that the resulting medial axis is a 26 - connected set of voxels , i . e . , the 3 3 - neighborhood of each me - dial axis voxel contains at least one other medial axis voxel , unless the medial axis reduces to a single voxel . ) The medial axis is guaranteed to be homotopy - equivalent to the body represented by the collagen phase and correctly represents its topology . It is also as geometrically centered in the ﬁbers as possible . There are in general many caveats to skeletonization of arbitrary three - dimensional bodies . The geometry of an arbitrary three - dimensional object , including labyrinthine networklike structures ( 30 ) , cannot in general be represented by a one - di - mensional line skeleton ( 31 ) . However , the geometry of a network structure consisting of connected tubes of convex cross section , possibly with varying but small diameters , is well represented by a one - dimensional medial axis . This includes the collagen networks studied here . For such structures , the medial axis computation is also not sensitive to details of the deﬁnition of the skeletonization algorithm or to noise . All following data are computed from a representation of the collagen ﬁbers as the medial axis of the 1 - phase . We apply two different measures to characterize the width of the pores of the ﬂuid phase between the collagen ﬁbers , namely a pore size distribution and a percolation threshold . Both are computed from the Euclidean distance map of the ﬂuid phase . The pore size distribution is given by the distribution of values of the cov - ering radius transform ( 10 , 11 ) ; see Fig . 3 . The covering radius transform as - signsavalue D f toeachvoxelofthedataset ( withsubscript f sinceweapplyitto theﬂuidphase ) . Foravoxel p thepositivevalue D f ( p ) istheradiusofthelargest FIGURE 2 Illustration of the three - dimensional image data analysis on a small ( 5 m m ) 3 subsetofGel3 ( 2 . 4mg / ml ) . ( a ) Binarydataset ; all voxelswith I ( p ) . I c represent the collagen phase . The ﬁber thickness overestimates the width of collagen ﬁbers ( 0 . 15 m m ) , in particular in the vertical z direction . ( b ) The medial axis of the collagen domain as a one - dimensional curve repre - sentation of the ﬁbers . ( c ) Medial axis of the ﬂuid phase , i . e . , the complement of the collagen ﬁbers , as a network of widest paths through the collagen matrix . The color indicates the distance to the nearest collagen ﬁber , with distance increasing from red to blue . ( d ) A single percolating path of the ﬂuid medial axis together with the bottleneck sphere at its point with minimal distance . FIGURE 3 Illustration for the maximal covering radius transform of the ﬂuidphaseofthecollagennetwork . ( Top ) Theimageshowsatwo - dimensional schematic representation of a collagen gel ( black ) . The gray - level of each ﬂuid phase pixel corresponds to the maximal covering radius transform value D f . It representstheradiusofthe largest spherefully contained in the ﬂuid phase that covers that pixel . For clarity , the outlines of a few of the maximal disks have been highlighted . The colors in the histogram below provide a bar chart mapping D f to color . ( Bottom ) The distribution of maximal covering radii ( in arbitraryunitson the y axis ) . See Fig . 4 for the distributionsof the realcollagen network data sets . 6074 Mickel et al . Biophysical Journal 95 ( 12 ) 6072 – 6080 EDM sphere centered anywhere in the ﬂuid phase that covers the voxel p . An EDMsphereisaspherewitharadiusthatcorrespondstotheEuclideandistance mapvalueatitscenterpoint . Thedistribution p ( D f ) D D f givesthevolumethatis coveredbyallEDMspheresofradius R . D f minusthevolumethatiscovered byall EDM sphereswith radius R . D f 1 D D f ; seeFig . 4 . D D f is thebinwidth of the distribution . The deﬁnition of pore size as the average of the covering radius transform corresponds to an incremental ﬁlling of the ﬂuid phase by overlapping EDM spheres of decreasing size , starting with the global EDM maximum . ( Note that for reasons ofdigital topology relatingto the medial axis computation—speciﬁcally to turnthecollagenmedial axisinto a 6 - ratherthan 26 - connectedobject—itisnecessarytocomputetheEDMoftheﬂuidphasefor adilatedversionofthecollagenmedialaxis , i . e . , adilationofthemedialaxisby onevoxelasdescribedabove . ThisimpliesareductionoftheEDMvaluesofthe ﬂuid phase byone linearvoxelsize . The results for thepore sizedistribution of the ﬂuid phase ( see Figs . 6 and 7 and the data in Tables 1 and 2 ) take this additional thickness of the ﬁbers into account and are reduced by one voxel . ) The covering radius pore - size distribution is normalized to the total vol - ume V f oftheﬂuidphase , i . e . , R N r ¼ 0 p ð r Þ dr ¼ V f . IndeedtheEDMspheresthat contribute to the distribution , i . e . , exactly those that are not fully covered by larger EDM spheres , are so - called maximal balls , in a computational geo - metricsense . Theircentersformtheso - calledmedialsurface ( 30 , 32 – 34 ) . The medial surface deﬁnes a backbone or skeleton representation of the ﬂuid phase that consists of surface patches rather than one - dimensional lines ( 30 ) . The medial surface—as opposed to the one - dimensional medial axes con - sidered in this article—allows for the exact reconstruction of the original ﬂuid phase as a union of maximal spheres ( 34 ) . The medial surface degen - erates to a line if the cross section is circular . A secondary pore size distribution is obtained by the analogous con - struction but restricted to EDM spheres that are located on the medial axis of the ﬂuid phase , i . e . , on the network of maximally wide paths between the ﬁbers ( see Fig . 2 , b and c ) . This distribution is not normalized to the total volume of the ﬂuid phase but instead to the volume of the union of medial axis maximal spheres . We refer to the average of this distribution as Æ D f , MA æ . This is a relevant measure because the union of maximal spheres centered on the medial axis of the ﬂuid phase represents to a ﬁrst approximation the possible ﬂow pathways of an intruder particle through the network . This distribution yields larger pore sizes than the full radius covering transform distribution . A third measure for the pore size of the ﬂuid phase that is directly relevant to the problem of a spherical intruder particle of given radius D is the medial axis percolation threshold D c evaluated with respect to a given reference direction x , y , or z . The percolation threshold is deﬁned as the radius of the largest sphere that can traverse the ﬂuid phase between the collagen ﬁbers from one side of the data set to the other in the given direction . For example , the percolation threshold D zc is the radius of the largest sphere that can tra - verse the data set from top to bottom . Modern Euclidean distance map algorithms have linear computational complexity in the number of voxels of the image ( 29 ) but with prefactors that are morphology - dependent . The thinning operation for the computation of the medial axis requires a number k of iterations , each proportional to the number of interface voxels between phases 0 and 1 . In the worst case , k is the maximal value of the Euclidean distance map . The percolation thresholds are computed by log ( m ) fast linear sweeps through the Euclidean distance transform image where m is the maximal Euclidean distance map value divided by the desired precision of the threshold . In a simple implementation , the maximal covering radius transform is determined by l sweeps where l is the maximal Euclidean distance value divided by the increment D D f in sphere sizes . RESULTS We analyze the average pore sizes , the percolation threshold , and the speciﬁc length of collagen networks for three colla - gen concentrations . In all cases , these data are found to be approximately constant over a certain range of values of the segmentation parameter and have modest spatial variations throughout the samples . FIGURE 4 Distribution p ( D f ) of three - dimensional covering radius trans - form D f values of the ﬂuid phase of the three investigated gels for a ﬁxed segmentation parameter of L ¼ 70 % . The lines are normal distributions ð s f ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 2 p p Þ (cid:3) 1 exp ð(cid:3)ð D f (cid:3) Æ D f æ Þ 2 = ð 2 s 2f Þ with variables s f and Æ D f æ from Table 2 . The error bars represent the standard deviation of each data point when evaluated on eight subsets arranged on a 2 3 2 3 2 array . TABLE 1 Morphological characteristics of collagen gels with different concentrations c , together with estimates for the systematic error due to changes of the segmentation parameter Gel 1 Gel 2 Gel 3 ( 1 . 2 mg / ml ) ( 1 . 6 mg / ml ) ( 2 . 4 mg / ml ) L S 0 . 12 6 0 . 02 0 . 22 6 0 . 04 0 . 50 6 0 . 06 Æ D f , MA æ 3 . 2 6 0 . 2 2 . 3 6 0 . 1 1 . 5 6 0 . 1 Æ D f æ 3 . 0 6 0 . 1 1 . 9 6 0 . 1 1 . 3 6 0 . 1 D c 2 . 8 6 0 . 3 1 . 8 6 0 . 2 1 . 2 6 0 . 1 Values for the speciﬁc ﬁber length L S , average pore sizes Æ D f æ and Æ D f , MA æ , and percolation threshold D c are averaged over all data points with seg - mentation parameter L in the interval I ¼ [ 0 . 55 , 0 . 8 ] . These averages cor - respond to the horizontal lines in Figs . 6 – 9 . The percolation threshold D c is the average D c ¼ ð D xc 1 D yc 1 D zc Þ = 3 : The error estimates D g ¼ max fj g i (cid:3) g jg for each of these quantities g are the maximal deviation of any of the m data points g i in I from the average g ¼ + g i = m : See the text for speciﬁc details for L S . All values are given in m m . TABLE 2 Morphological characteristics of collagen gels with different concentrations c together with estimates for the statistical error due to the random nature of the media Gel 1 Gel 2 Gel 3 ( 1 . 2 mg / ml ) ( 1 . 6 mg / ml ) ( 2 . 4 mg / ml ) L S 0 . 12 6 0 . 02 0 . 22 6 0 . 02 0 . 48 6 0 . 02 Æ D f æ 3 . 0 6 0 . 2 1 . 90 6 0 . 08 1 . 28 6 0 . 05 s f 0 . 8 6 0 . 1 0 . 54 6 0 . 05 0 . 34 6 0 . 02 D xc 2 . 7 6 0 . 3 1 . 7 6 0 . 1 1 . 2 6 0 . 1 D yc 2 . 6 6 0 . 4 1 . 7 6 0 . 1 1 . 1 6 0 . 1 D zc 2 . 5 6 0 . 3 1 . 7 6 0 . 1 1 . 1 6 0 . 1 D x 2 . 3 6 0 . 3 1 . 6 6 0 . 1 1 . 2 6 0 . 1 These values for the speciﬁc ﬁber length L S , average pore sizes Æ D f æ , and percolation threshold D c are evaluated for a single segmentation parameter L ¼ 0 . 7 for data sets of size 300 3 voxels , i . e . , ( 30 m m ) 3 for Gel 3 and ( 45 m m ) 3 for Gels 1 and 2 . For the error estimates the sample was subdivided into an array of 2 3 cubic subsets of size 150 3 voxels and g i was computed for each subset i . The errors are ð + 8i ¼ 1 ð g i (cid:3) g Þ 2 = 7 Þ 1 = 2 Þ with g ¼ + 8i ¼ 1 g i = 8 : All values are given in m m . Pore Sizes of Filamentous Networks 6075 Biophysical Journal 95 ( 12 ) 6072 – 6080 We use the integrated intensity L of the ﬂuid phase as the segmentation parameter instead of the segmentation threshold I c ( see Fig . 5 ) . For a given segmentation threshold I c , the in - tegrated intensity of all voxels of the ﬂuid phase is L ¼ ð + I ð p ÞÞ (cid:3) 1 + (cid:4) I ð p Þ ; where I ( p ) is the intensity of voxel p in the originalintensitydataset , + isthesumoverallvoxelsofthedata set , and + (cid:4) is the sum over all voxels of the ﬂuid phase . Hence L ¼ 0 corresponds to the limit where all voxels are identiﬁed as ﬂuid voxels and L ¼ 1 to the case where all voxels are identiﬁed as collagen . For a given segmentation threshold I c and the cor - responding 0 - phase ( ﬂuid ) and 1 - phase ( collagen ) , L ( I c ) is the integrated intensity of the ﬂuid phase . Since L increases monotonically with I c , L can be used as the relevant parameter ofthesegmentationprocess . Asanadditional advantage , theuse of L conceals the irrelevant absolute range of the intensity values , for example , 8 - or 16 - bit intensity resolution or different use of the dynamic range . In practice , one performs the analysis as function of I c and presents the data as function of L . The key idea—supported by the data presented below—is that the essential large - scale features of the medial axis skeleton of the segmented collagen phase , but not those of the segmented collagen phase itself , are independent of the segmentation parameter L over a certain range of L . In this range , a change of L predominantly affects the apparent width or thickness of the collagen ﬁbers in the segmented data set but not their location or existence . It is instructive to consider the limits of large and small L where this threshold independence breaks down : The average pore size , shown in Figs . 6 and 7 as a function of L , increases sharply for small and large values of L . The increase for large L is due to loss of ﬁbers with small ﬂuorescence signal . The increase for small values of L is due to merging of distinct ﬁbers as the ﬂuid phase between them is erroneously iden - tiﬁed as collagen . Nevertheless , there is an intermediate re - gime where a change in the segmentation parameter affects predominantly the thickness of the ﬁbers but only marginally their position or existence . This intermediate range was 0 . 55 # L , 0 . 8 for the collagen data sets but needs to be assessed individually for each material . The percolation threshold was also found to be approxi - mately constant over the same range of L ( Fig . 8 ) . In addi - tion , there was no statistically signiﬁcant difference between the horizontal ( x , y ) and the vertical direction ( z ) through the sample . The same data presented in Fig . 8 with the collagen ﬁbers represented by the 1 - phase of the segmented data set instead of its medial axis show large L - dependent differences between D xc and D zc ( data not shown ) that are certainly partly due to anisotropic point - spread function of the imaging system . The medial axis representation reduces the anisot - ropy artiﬁcially introduced by the imaging system . FIGURE 5 Intensity distribution f ( I ) of the confocal image stacks ( bot - tom ) and cumulative sum L ð I Þ ¼ R I0 f ð I 9 Þ dI 9 ( top ) . The gray bar corresponds to values of L , and according values for the segmentation threshold I c , for which the pore size characteristics are almost constant . FIGURE 6 Average Æ D f , MA æ of the covering radius pore size distributions of the ﬂuid phase as function of the segmentation parameter L , restricted to EDM spheres on the medial axis . For an intermediate range of L ( shaded region ) , Æ D f , MA æ is nearly constant . These data were evaluated on a subset of approximate size ( 17 m m ) 3 for Gel 3 and ( 25 m m ) 3 for Gels 1 and 2 . FIGURE 7 Average Æ D f æ of the covering radius pore size distributions of the ﬂuid phase as function of the segmentation parameter L incorporating the whole ﬂuid phase as described in Fig . 3 . These data are evaluated on a subset of size 280 3 voxels . 6076 Mickel et al . Biophysical Journal 95 ( 12 ) 6072 – 6080 Note that the average pore size Æ D f æ of the ﬂuid phase and the percolation threshold D c are similar . This ﬁnding points toward a spatial homogeneity of the collagen networks . The width of the bottleneck along the single , maximally widest path through the network is approximately equal to the in - tegral quantity Æ D f æ . Fig . 9 shows the speciﬁc length L S , i . e . , total ﬁber length of the network divided by the total volume of the data set as function of L . In contrast to the pore size or percolation thresholds , the length is sensitive to small - scale details of the medial axis and its discretization and to additional image processing steps , such as pruning of dangling dead - ends of the medial axis . The error estimates for L S in Table 1 correspond to variations of L S with L and to differences depending on the level of smoothing applied to the piecewise linear represen - tation of the medial axis before measuring its length . We unexpectedly found L S to increase disproportionally with in - creasing collagen concentration . It suggests that at higher collagen concentrations the ﬁber diameter is smaller ( a rather unlikely scenario ) or that the polymerization efﬁciency ( the fraction of polymerized to unpolymerized collagen ) was higher . The computational effort necessary to compute all quan - tities as function of the threshold parameter L is not pro - hibitive . Nevertheless , for additional analyses , such as error or homogeneity estimates or the analysis of sequences of similar data sets , it may be useful to extract a value for an optimal segmentation threshold . While there is no universal system - independent value for an optimal threshold L c , a value approximately centered in the range of L where the morphological measures only vary mildly is a sensible choice . Speciﬁcally for the collagen data we choose L c ¼ 0 . 7 . The errors of the intrinsic morphological measures that stem from the irregular or disordered nature of the media can be determined by analyzing subsets of the data . These pro - vide an indication of whether the sample size was sufﬁciently large . The value g a of a morphological measure g is computed for a cubic subset of the data chosen maximally large but suf - ﬁciently smaller than the whole data set to exclude boundary effects , ( 30 m m ) 3 for Gel 3 and ( 45 m m ) 3 for Gels 1 and 2 . This subset is then subdivided into a grid of n 3 cubic subsets ( here n ¼ 2 ) , for each of which the value g i with i ¼ 1 ; . . . ; n 3 of g is computed . For an intensive measure , g a equals g 9 a ¼ 1 = n 3 + n 3 i g i by deﬁnition and D g ¼ (cid:3) + n 3 i ¼ 1 ð g i (cid:3) g a Þ 2 = ð n 3 (cid:3) 1 ÞÞ is an appropriate estimate for the error due to the statistical nature of the system . Table 2 shows the results of this analysis demonstrating that the sizes of the collagen data sets were sufﬁcient relative to the inhomogeneity of the collagen network . This analysis was carried out for a ﬁxed segmentation parameter L ¼ 0 . 7 . The importance to quantify both this statistical error ( Table 2 ) and the systematic error due to changes of the segmentation parameters ( Table 1 ) is demonstrated by the speciﬁc length ; for L S the statistical error evaluated for a single L is small but the systematic error associated with variations of L and other process parameters is large . In addition , Fig . 4 shows the distributions of Æ D f æ for L ¼ 0 . 7 . These data suggest that these distributions are approxi - mately given by normal distributions ð s f ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 2 p p Þ (cid:3) 1 exp ð(cid:3) D f (cid:3) Æ D f æ Þ 2 = ð 2 s 2f Þ with values of s f and Æ D f æ tabulated in Table 2 . We have also validated the robustness of our method against noise for simple synthetic data sets . To this end we have generated a synthetic confocal microscopy data set by convoluting the medial axis representation of Gel 2 with an approximation of a typical point - spread function and appli - cation of Gaussian smoothing . Furthermore we have added additive uncorrelated noise with a given amplitude r / D I to the grayscale data set before computing the average pore size Æ D f æ by the same process as described above . D I is the stan - dard deviation of the distribution of intensities in the gray - scale data set . The values for the average pore size Æ D f æ obtained from the original network model and from the grayscale data set by application of the methods described are the same , as expected . Fig . 10 shows that Æ D f æ as a function of FIGURE 8 The percolation threshold of the ﬂuid phase as function of the segmentation parameter L , for the vertical ( Z ) and for one of the horizontal ( x ) directions . The straight lines are linear ﬁts to the data points in the interval 0 . 55 # L # 0 . 8 for the horizontal direction . The percolation threshold for the y direction is up to statistical deviations the same as x ( data not shown ) . FIGURE 9 Speciﬁc length , i . e . , length / volume , of the collagen ﬁber network as function of segmentation parameter L . Pore Sizes of Filamentous Networks 6077 Biophysical Journal 95 ( 12 ) 6072 – 6080 L is indeed almost constant in the absence of noise and that our method is robust against strong levels of uncorrelated noise ( e . g . , r / D I ¼ 4 ) . Relation of the percolation threshold to the Euler index The percolation threshold , deﬁned above , has thus far been used as a collagen pore size measure . However , percolation thresholds are of broader importance including applications to transport in random media ( 35 – 37 ) . We show that our data are commensurate with a hypothesis linking the percolation threshold D c to the Euler index , a fundamental topological quantity ( 38 ) . For the collagen networks the percolation threshold D c marks a critical size of a spherical intruder particle , in the sense that smaller particles can migrate globally through the whole ﬂuid phase whereas larger particles are conﬁned to local domains of the medium . More generally , percolation thresholds always mark the parameter value for a random system where isolated clusters merge to form percolating domains that extend through the whole available space . ( 35 , 36 ) . This implies the relevance of percolation thresholds to global physical properties of heterogeneous media . The Euler index x is a fundamental morphological de - scriptor of the topology and connectivity of spatial structure . The Euler index is deﬁned by integral geometry ( 39 , 40 ) . For a three - dimensional solid body K 2 E 3 it is given by x ¼ N – R 1 C where N is the number of connected components of K , R the number of handles , and C the number of hollow cavities ( holes ) in K ( 39 ) . It is hence a topological quantity ( i . e . , re - mains constant if the body is deformed unless the deforma - tion includes cutting or gluing ) . The computation of the Euler index of the 1 - phase of a voxelized data set is a fast local linear - time procedure ( 40 ) . Note that the Gauss - Bonnet theorem ( 41 ) states that x is also given by the integral of the Gaussian curvature G over bounding surface S ¼ @ K , that is x ¼ ð 4 p Þ (cid:3) 1 R S G ð p Þ dp : It is important to accurately state if one computes the Euler characteristic x of the body K or the Euler characteristic x S of its bounding surface S : ¼ @ K . For a three - dimensional solid body K the relation x ¼ x S / 2 holds . This is derived by con - sidering that x ( K c ) ¼ – ( (cid:3) 1 ) d x ( K ) for any d - dimensional body K and its compactiﬁed complement K c ¼ ( E 3 \ K ) [ @ ( E 3 \ K ) . Applying the additivity relation x ( K 1 [ K 2 ) ¼ x ( K 1 ) 1 x ( K 2 ) – x ( K 1 \ K 2 ) ( that is valid for any K 1 and K 2 ) to K 1 ¼ K and K 2 ¼ K c yields with @ K ¼ K 1 \ K 2 and x ( K 1 [ K 2 ¼ E 3 ) ¼ 0 that the Euler characteristic of the bounding surface is x ( @ K ) ¼ x ( K ) / 2 ( 39 ) . The Euler index has been shown to be a relevant descriptor of global properties of spatial patterns for a variety of phys - ical problems and relevant for percolation transitions ( 42 ) . Indeed it was conjectured that for a wide class of random structure models the percolation thresholds are bounded tightly from above by the zero of the mean Euler index ( 38 ) . Although not proven rigorously , numerical studies of various different types of percolation models suggest that the analysis of the Euler index provides an estimate of the percolation threshold ( 43 , 44 ) . The random homogeneous nature of the materialis essential for this conjecture as itistrivial to construct counter - examples , for example by superposing a smaller - scale porous structure on the solid phase , which greatly changes x but does not affect the percolation threshold . A dilation K c ( r p ) of the collagen network with dilation radius r p is the set of voxels that are closer to the medial axis representing the collagen ﬁbers than r p . The value of the dilation radius for which the Euler index of the dilated col - lagen network vanishes , x ( D x ) ¼ 0 , is denoted D x . The complement K f ( r p ) of the dilated collagen network is the space in which the centers of spheres of radius r p can move . If K f is ( not ) percolating for a given radius r p , then a sphere of radius r p can ( cannot ) traverse the collagen network . Note that the Euler characteristics of K c and of its complement K f are the same except for effects due to the sample boundary . Fig . 11 shows the Euler index x ( r p ) of dilations of the collagen network as function of the dilation radius r p . These data support the hypothesis that the zero of the Euler index at D x is close to the percolation threshold D c , considering the statistical errors . The values of D x are smaller than D c ( see Tables 1 and 2 ) , consistent with the statement that D x is an upper bound for the percolation threshold of the ﬂuid phase . This ﬁnding lends additional experimental support to the hypothesis that the percolation threshold of sufﬁciently ho - mogeneous disordered materials is related to the topology of the material . CONCLUSION We have presented a method for extracting morphological measures of reconstituted collagen networks—in particular , pore - size distributions and percolation thresholds—from confocal microscopy image stacks . This method is robust FIGURE 10 The Euler index of dilated versions of the collagen network as a function of the dilation radius . The vertical lines mark the dilation radius D x for which x vanishes . 6078 Mickel et al . Biophysical Journal 95 ( 12 ) 6072 – 6080 against variations of the segmentation parameter L that is used to segment the grayscale intensity images . The key idea is to derive morphological measures from the medial axes of the collagen phase or the ﬂuid phase and to use the robust average of the maximal covering radius transform as pore size estimate . The measurements described here exploit the three - dimensional nature of the confocal microscopy data set . Our analysis of the concentration - dependence of the average pore size is consistent with previously published data ( 13 ) . We also provide empirical support for the recent conjec - ture that the percolation critical lengths D c are well approx - imated by the zeros as function of r p of the Euler index x of the dilated collagen network body with dilation radius r p . The presented method of pore size characterization is not limited to collagen networks but can be applied to any ﬁbrous polymer network such as bundled F - actin , ﬁbrin , cytoskeletal ﬁlament networks , etc . , as long as the individual ﬁbers can be resolved by the confocal imaging system . Fast confocal scanning microscopy has become a widely used tool in cell biology for live - cell imaging of cytoskeletal ﬁlaments in three dimensions . Moreover , using video - rate confocal super resolution ( stimulated emission depletion ) microscopy , the three - dimensional live - cell imaging of cortical actin struc - tures with their typical mesh size of , 200 nm should become possible in the near future ( 45 , 46 ) . The average pore size and the percolation threshold of less than 3 m m for all three collagen concentrations investigated indicate that these collagen networks form a steric barrier against the invasion of cells ( 3 ) . The fact that many tumor cells can easily migrate through these collagen networks ( 5 ) suggest that they must employ mechanisms to overcome the steric hindrance of the matrix , such as proteolytic collagen degradation or the generation of protrusive forces that deform and widen the network pores ( 3 ) . For a quantitative under - standing of cell migration through such three - dimensional networks , a characterization of their morphological proper - ties is therefore essential . The ﬁber width of the analyzed collagen samples corre - sponds approximately to the voxel size and is known to be almost constant . This is the simplest situation for the methods presented but not a requirement . The average Æ D f æ of the maximal covering radius transform is a robust pore size measure for any reliable voxelized representation of the ﬂuid phase . The representation of the ﬁber network as the medial axis is immediately applicable to a network of circular ﬁbers with arbitrary constant ﬁber thickness ; the medial axis is simply dilated to the known radius of the ﬁbers . If the ﬁber cross section varies , a medial axis representation is still possible—with dilation by spatially varying radii—but the dependence of Æ D f æ of the segmentation parameter L is more complex ; thinner ﬁbers have lower intensities and a change in L does not only affect the ﬁber width but also the network composition ( relevant , for example , for biopolymer networks in the presence of bundling proteins ) . For thick ﬁber net - works , the medial axis representation is unnecessary as the solid phase can be obtained by deconvolution with the point - spread function . In summary , the medial axis approach , combined with the maximal covering radius transform as a pore - size measure , facilitates the robust and quantitative analysis of the mor - phology of three - dimensional ﬁlamentous networks from diffraction - limited noisy confocal images . The approach applies similarly to other robustly deﬁned morphological descriptors ( such as integral measures of ﬁber orientation ) and can , in principle , be extended to noise - sensitive measures such as branching ratios or branching angles . We thank Christoph Arns ( University of New South Wales , Sydney , Australia ) for useful discussions regarding the maximal covering radius transform . We are grateful to the Australian Partnership for Advanced Computing for generous allocation of CPU time . We acknowledge support by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through grant Nos . SCHR 1148 / 2 - 1 and FA 336 / 2 - 1 , by the National Institutes of Health through grant No . HL65960 , and by the German Academic Exchange Service ( DAAD ) for travel to Boston , MA , and Canberra , Australia . L . M . J . , D . A . V . , and D . A . W . were supported by the National Science Foundation ( grant Nos . DMR - 0602684 and CTS - 0505929 ) and the Harvard Materials Research Science and Engineering Center ( grant No . DMR - 0820484 ) . REFERENCES 1 . Cukierman , E . , R . Pankov , D . Stephens , and K . Yamada . 2001 . Taking cell - matrix adhesion to the third dimension . Science . 294 : 1708 – 1712 . 2 . Pedersen , J . , and M . Swartz . 2005 . Mechanobiology in the third dimension . Ann . Biomed . Eng . 33 : 1469 – 1490 . 3 . Zaman , M . , L . Trapani , A . Siemeski , D . Mackellar , H . Gong , R . Kamm , A . Wells , D . Lauffenburger , and P . Matsudaira . 2006 . Migration of tumor FIGURE 11 Analysis of the noise sensitivity of Æ D f æ for a simulated collagen data . The grayscale data set is obtained from a binary data set representing the medial axis of Gel 2 with L ¼ 70 % by convolution with a representation of the point - spread function and application of Gaussian smoothing . The inset shows Æ D f æ as a function of the integrated intensity L , demonstrating that for such an idealized situation Æ D f æ is almost constant over a much larger range of L than for the experimental data sets . For comparison , the data for the real data set of Gel 2 from Fig . 7 are also shown . The main plot shows Æ D f æ for thesimulated data set with L ¼ 0 . 7 asa function ofthe strength of white noise , i . e . , random numbers between [ – r / D I , r / D I ] are added to the intensity values of each pixel where D I is the standard deviation of the dis - tribution of intensities of the unperturbed data set . Pore Sizes of Filamentous Networks 6079 Biophysical Journal 95 ( 12 ) 6072 – 6080 cells in 3D matrices is governed bymatrix stiffness along with cell - matrix adhesion and proteolysis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 103 : 10889 – 10894 . 4 . Wolf , K . , I . Mazo , H . Leung , K . Engelke , U . von Andrian , E . Deryugina , A . Strongin , E . Brocker , andP . Friedl . 2003 . Compensation mechanism in tumor cell migration : mesenchymal - amoeboid transition after blocking of pericellular proteolysis . J . Cell Biol . 160 : 267 – 277 . 5 . Mierke , C . , D . Paranhos - Zitterbart , P . Kollmannsberger , C . Raupach , U . Schlo¨tzer - Schrehardt , T . Goecke , J . Behrens , and B . Fabry . 2008 . Breakdown of the endothelial barrier function in tumor cell transmi - gration . Biophys . J . 94 : 2832 – 2846 . 6 . Parkhurst , M . , and W . Saltzman . 1992 . Quantiﬁcation of human neu - trophil motility in three - dimensional collagen gels . Effect of collagen concentration . Biophys . J . 61 : 306 – 315 . 7 . Kuntz , R . , and W . Saltzman . 1997 . Neutrophil motility in extracellular matrix gels : mesh size and adhesion affect speed of migration . Biophys . J . 72 : 1472 – 1480 . 8 . Ranucci , C . , A . Kumar , S . Batra , and P . Moghe . 2000 . Control of hepa - tocyte function on collagen foams : sizing matrix pores toward selective in - duction of 2D and 3D cellular morphogenesis . Biomaterials . 21 : 783 – 793 . 9 . Gardel , M . , J . Shin , F . MacKintosh , L . Mahadevan , P . Matsudaira , and D . Weitz . 2004 . Elastic behavior of cross - linked and bundled actin networks . Science . 304 : 1301 – 1305 . 10 . Hazlett , R . 1995 . Simulation of capillary - dominated displacements in microtomographic images of reservoir rocks . Transp . Porous Media . 20 : 21 – 35 . 11 . Thovert , J . - F . , F . Youseﬁan , P . Spanne , C . G . Jacquin , and P . M . Adler . 2001 . Grain reconstruction of porous media : application to a low - porosity Fontainebleau sandstone . Phys . Rev . E Stat . Nonlin . Soft Matter Phys . 63 : 061307 . 12 . Soille , P . 1999 . Morphological Image Analysis—Principles and Ap - plications . Springer - Verlag , Berlin , Germany . 13 . Saltzman , W . , M . Radomsky , K . Whaley , and R . Cone . 1994 . Anti - body diffusion in human cervical mucus . Biophys . J . 66 : 508 – 515 . 14 . Takahashi , A . , R . Kita , T . Shinozaki , K . Kubota , and M . Kaibara . 2003 . Real space observation of three - dimensional network structure of hydrated ﬁbrin gel . Colloid Polym . Sci . 281 : 832 – 838 . 15 . Kaufman , L . , C . Brangwynne , K . Kasza , E . Filippidi , V . Gordon , T . Deisboeck , and D . Weitz . 2005 . Glioma expansion in collagen i matrices : analyzing collagen concentration - dependent growth and mo - tility patterns . Biophys . J . 89 : 635 – 650 . 16 . Schmidt , C . , M . Baermann , G . Isenberg , and E . Sackmann . 1989 . Chain dynamics , mesh size , and diffusive transport in networks of polymerized actin : a quasielastic light scattering and microﬂuorescence study . Macromolecules . 22 : 3638 – 3649 . 17 . Lindquist , W . , A . Venkatarangan , J . Dunsmuir , and T . Wong . 2000 . Pore andthroatsizedistributionsmeasuredfromsynchrotronx - raytomographic images of Fontainebleau sandstones . J . Geophys . Res . 105 : 21509 – 21527 . 18 . Zhou , Y . , A . Kaufman , and A . Toga . 1998 . Three - dimensional skeleton and centerline generation based on an approximate minimum distance ﬁeld . Vis . Comput . 14 : 303 – 314 . 19 . Wu , J . , B . Rajwa , D . Filmer , C . Hoffmann , B . Yuan , C . Chiang , J . Sturgis , and J . Robinson . 2003 . Automated quantiﬁcation and reconstruction of collagen matrix from 3D confocal datasets . J . Microsc . 210 : 158 – 165 . 20 . Frangakis , A . , and R . Hegerl . 2001 . Noise reduction in electron tomographic reconstructions using nonlinear anisotropic diffusion . J . Struct . Biol . 135 : 41 – 44 . 21 . Baici , A . , G . Cohen , K . Fehr , and A . Bo¨ni . 1980 . A handy assay for collagenase using reconstituted ﬂuorescein - labeled collagen ﬁbrils . Anal . Biochem . 108 : 230 – 232 . 22 . Inoue´ , S . , and K . Spring . 1997 . Video Microscopy : The Fundamentals , 2nd Ed . Springer , New York . 23 . Semwogerere , D . , and E . Weeks . 2005 . Confocal microscopy . In Encyclopedia of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering . G . Wnek , and G . Bowlin , editors . Taylor and Francis , New York . 24 . Pudney , C . 1998 . Distance - ordered homotopic thinning : a skeletoniza - tion algorithm for 3D digital images . Comput . Vis . Image Underst . 72 : 404 – 413 . 25 . Ma , C . , and M . Sonka . 1996 . A fully parallel 3D thinning algorithm and its applications . Comput . Vis . Image Underst . 64 : 420 – 433 . 26 . Lee , T . , R . Kashyap , and C . Chu . 1994 . Building skeleton models via 3D medial surface / axis thinning algorithms . CVGIP : Graph . Models Image Proc . 56 : 462 – 478 . 27 . Danielsson , P . 1980 . Euclidean distance mapping . Comput . Graph . Image Proc . 14 : 227 – 248 . 28 . Saito , T . , and J . Toriwaki . 1994 . New algorithms for Euclidean distance transformation of an n - dimensional digitized picture with applications . Pattern Recognit . 27 : 1551 – 1565 . 29 . Cuisenaire , O . , and B . Macq . 1999 . Fast Euclidean distance transfor - mation by propagation using multiple neighborhoods . Comput . Vis . Image Underst . 76 : 163 – 172 . 30 . Schro¨der , G . , S . Ramsden , A . Christy , and S . Hyde . 2003 . Medial surfaces of hyperbolic structures . Eur . Phys . J . B . 35 : 551 – 564 . 31 . Siddiqi , K . , and S . Pizer , editors . 2007 . Medial Representations : Mathematics , Algorithms and Applications . Springer , New York . 32 . Blum , H . 1964 . A transformation for extracting new descriptors of shape . In Models for the Perception of Speech and Visual Form . W . Wathen - Dunn , editor . The M . I . T . Press , Cambridge , MA . 33 . Nackman , L . R . 1982 . Curvature relations in three - dimensional sym - metric axes . Comput . Graph . Image Proc . 20 : 43 – 57 . 34 . Wolter , F . - E . 1992 . Cut locus and medial axis in global shape interrogation and representation . MIT Design Laboratory Memoran - dum 92 – 2 , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Cambridge , MA . 35 . Isichenko , M . B . 1992 . Percolation , statistical topography , and trans - port in random media . Rev . Mod . Phys . 64 : 961 – 1043 . 36 . Stauffer , D . , and A . Aharony . 1994 . Introduction to Percolation Theory , 2nd Ed . Taylor and Francis , New York . 37 . Arns , C . 2002 . The inﬂuence of morphology on physical properties of reservoir rocks . PhD thesis , University of New South Wales , Australia . 38 . Mecke , K . , and H . Wagner . 1991 . Euler characteristic and related measures for random geometric sets . J . Stat . Phys . 64 : 843 – 850 . 39 . Santalo´ , L . 1976 . Integral Geometry and Geometric Probability . Addison - Wesley , Reading , MA . 40 . Arns , C . H . , M . A . Knackstedt , W . V . Pinczewski , and K . R . Mecke . 2001 . Euler - Poincare´ characteristics of classes of disordered media . Phys . Rev . E Stat . Nonlin . Soft Matter Phys . 63 : 031112 . 41 . Do Carmo , M . 1976 . Differential Geometry of Curves and Surfaces . Prentice Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ . 42 . Mecke , K . 1998 . Integral geometry and statistical physics . Int . J . Mod . Phys . B . 12 : 861 – 899 . 43 . Mecke , K . , and S . Seyfried . 2002 . Strong dependence of percolation thresholds on polydispersity . Europhys . Lett . 58 : 28 – 34 . 44 . Neher , R . , K . Mecke , and H . Wagner . 2008 . Topological estimation of percolation thresholds . J . Stat . Mech . Theory Exp . 2008 : P01011 . http : / / stacks . iop . org / 1742 – 5468 / 2008 / P01011 . 45 . Hartwig , J . , and P . Shevlin . 1986 . The architecture of actin ﬁlaments and the ultrastructural location of actin - binding protein in the periphery of lung macrophages . J . Cell Biol . 103 : 1007 – 1020 . 46 . Westphal , V . , S . Rizzoli , M . Lauterbach , D . Kamin , R . Jahn , and S . Hell . 2008 . Video - rate far - ﬁeld optical nanoscopy dissects synaptic vesicle movement . Science . 320 : 246 – 249 . 6080 Mickel et al . Biophysical Journal 95 ( 12 ) 6072 – 6080