GENERATIVE TRANSFORMERS FOR DESIGN CONCEPT GENERATION A P REPRINT Qihao Zhu Data - Driven Innovation Lab Singapore University of Technology and Design qihao _ zhu @ mymail . sutd . edu . sg Jianxi Luo Data - Driven Innovation Lab Singapore University of Technology and Design jianxi _ luo @ sutd . edu . sg November 7 , 2022 A BSTRACT Generating novel and useful concepts is essential during the early design stage to explore a large variety of design opportunities , which usually requires advanced design thinking ability and a wide range of knowledge from designers . Growing works on computer - aided tools have explored the retrieval of knowledge and heuristics from design data . However , they only provide stimuli to inspire designers from limited aspects . This study explores the recent advance of the natural language generation ( NLG ) technique in the artificial intelligence ( AI ) field to automate the early - stage design concept generation . Specifically , a novel approach utilizing the generative pre - trained transformer ( GPT ) is proposed to leverage the knowledge and reasoning from textual data and transform them into new concepts in understandable language . Three concept generation tasks are defined to leverage different knowledge and reasoning : domain knowledge synthesis , problem - driven synthesis , and analogy - driven synthesis . The experiments with both human and data - driven evaluation show good performance in generating novel and useful concepts . 1 Introduction At the early stage of design , the quantity and diversity of design concepts are essential for designers to explore new design opportunities departing away from existing designs [ 1 ] . However , the well - recognized features in existing designs can fixate designers’ thinking and limit their capability of generating novel design concepts [ 2 - 4 ] . Traditional approaches to overcome design fixation include brainstorming , mind mapping , and design heuristics [ 5 - 8 ] which aim to improve creative thinking and help designers to think out - of - the - box . Meanwhile , the limitation of designers’ knowledge base is also an important source of design fixation [ 9 - 10 ] . Figure 1 illustrates a highly summarized view of the human cognitive process of design concept generation , in which prior knowledge is transformed into novel concepts through creative reasoning . Therefore , methods and tools that could augment the knowledge and creative reasoning aspects of the process may enhance design concept generation . Figure 1 : Design concept generation process Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 2 In the era of data - driven innovation [ 11 ] , researchers have explored various data - driven approaches and data sources to augment design for innovation . For instance , technical or conceptual data have been mined to uncover designers’ creative thinking heuristics during the ideation stage [ 7 - 8 , 12 - 14 ] . Various approaches have been proposed to retrieve knowledge from data that provoke designers for creative and cross - domain design concept generation [ 9 - 10 , 15 - 16 ] . Other works explored generative approaches of function synthesis based on design repositories [ 17 - 24 ] or deep generative models based on product images or geometry data [ 25 - 31 ] . To date , few studies have leveraged the creative reasoning and prior knowledge from data simultaneously and transformed them into understandable design concepts . Thus , the inspiration that designers can draw using these methods is limited . Herein , we present a data - driven design concept generation method . Our method utilizes the pre - trained language model ( PLM ) , a cutting - edge technology in artificial intelligence ( AI ) . We show that PLM can learn the knowledge and creative reasoning from the textual data in design repositories and automatically generate novel concepts in natural language . Three sets of design concept generation experiments will be presented to showcase the performance of the method on that basis . These experiments also demonstrate the AI - based generative conceptual design process , i . e . , how designers can collaborate with AI to explore potential solutions and develop design concepts . This paper is organized as follow . In Section 2 , we review the existing design concept generation research . Section 3 will introduce the natural language generation technology that we use in the paper . Section 4 presents our method in detail , followed by the experiment settings and results in Section 5 . Finally , Section 6 gives a summary discussion and Section 7 discusses the limitation and the potential future improvement to the method . 2 Literature Review The computer aids for design concept generation can be categorized into three types according to their potential roles in the human - computer collaborative relationship . The roles of methods or tools are a ) to guide , b ) to stimulate , and c ) to generate . Figure 2 shows different modes of computer - aided conceptual design in terms of human - computer collaboration . Figure 2 ( a ) is the most common scenario where human designers gather to generate ideas , and record , analyze and improve them with the aid or guide of computers . In scenario ( b ) , computers provide stimuli to inspire human designers to generate ideas . Existing knowledge - or heuristics - based computer tools can facilitate such a process . In scenario ( c ) , a computer agent ( i . e . , a virtual creative designer ) generates concepts for human designers to evaluate , select and improve . The output could also provoke designers to be more creative with the extended knowledge and thinking modes . Scenario ( c ) is an expected application of the method in this paper , in which the virtual designer works as a brainstorming collaborator generating new design concepts at a quality and quantity far beyond human capacity . Figure 2 : Human - computer collaboration in different ideation approaches : ( a ) Brainstorming ( b ) Stimuli - based approach ( c ) Generative approach Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 3 2 . 1 Guiding Design Concept Generation The methods to guide are instructively involved in the generation of design concepts , providing design rules or guidelines to the activities of the designers . The common group - based innovation approaches of brainstorming , C - sketch , and mind mapping fall into this category [ 5 - 6 , 32 ] . Although these methods are considered less efficient in the data - driven era , their variants and computer - aided improvements have been proposed , e . g . , data - driven brainstorming [ 33 ] . Bonnardel and Didier [ 34 ] proposed two variants of brainstorming , encouraging designers to focus on the evocation of both the design ideas and the constraints related to the design problem . Wang et al [ 35 ] introduced a creative agent that generates feedback and recommendations for designers during brainstorming . Lee et al . [ 36 ] developed Speech2Mindmap that automatically transforms speech data collected from brainstorming sessions into mind maps . Empirical studies have shown great potential of AI tools to guide a more explorative design strategy [ 37 - 38 ] and manage team - based design process efficiently [ 39 ] . However , these tools can only guide human to be more creative without providing any creative reasoning themselves . The creative thinking capability and knowledge input of the human designer group are still essential in the early - stage design process . 2 . 2 Stimulating Design Concept Generation The methods to stimulate the concept generation process provide inspirational stimuli to provoke designers to conceive new concepts . These include design heuristics that provide critical creative thinking and knowledge pieces that extend the knowledge scope of designers . For design heuristics , Altshuller [ 8 ] proposed the 40 TRIZ principles based on patent innovations that focus on solving the technical contradictions in engineering design . Yilmaz et al . [ 13 ] derived 77 design heuristics from a dataset of 3 , 457 award - winning products and concepts designed by experts . Such heuristics aim to discover the patterns of how experienced designers design conceptual products . Jin and Dong [ 14 ] extracted 10 design heuristics as stimuli from RedDot award - winning design concepts to help digital designers overcome design fixation . Moreover , [ 40 ] used the heuristic procedure of morphological matrix to guide designers to generate a variety of design options . The heuristic includes identifying and combining alternative solutions to multiple functions of a product . Stone et al . [ 41 ] also propose heuristic methods using functional modelling derived from functional basis and function chains . Knowledge - based stimulation approaches have been focusing on the retrieval and mapping of source knowledge into the target design domain [ 42 ] . He et al . [ 43 ] tested the use of word clouds as stimulators to inspire ideation . Luo et al . [ 9 - 10 ] introduced a computer - aided ideation tool InnoGPS to guide the provision of design stimuli . InnoGPS enables designers to search for inspiration in the patent database by the knowledge distance to the design problem or interest . Sarica et al . [ 15 - 16 ] developed a technology semantic network for identifying technical white space according to the semantic distance between the design target and stimulus . Recently , several large semantic networks and engineering knowledge graphs have been created as knowledge infrastructures to aid design representation , reasoning , and stimulation [ 44 - 46 ] . Most stimuli - based research focuses on either knowledge retrieval as the source of inspiration or creative thinking heuristics in concept generation . However , there are contexts where both sides should be considered together to perform successful conceptual design . Especially , in biologically inspired design research , to bridge the gap between the domains of biology and engineering will require both the knowledge of biological systems and the methods to transfer them [ 47 - 48 ] . For example , Vattam et al . [ 49 ] introduced DANE , which represents the knowledge of natural biological systems in text descriptions and images . In addition , to capture the functions of the biological system , structure and behavior models are added . AskNature is a web - based tool that offers not only a wide variety of scientific knowledge , but also biomimicry strategies to help designers work on bio - inspired design [ 50 ] . Other works also suggest that visual stimuli like images and sketches can affect design performance from the initial problem - solving idea generation to the visual embodiment design of the product [ 51 - 54 ] . Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 4 2 . 3 Automatically Generating Design Concept As a result of limited digital knowledge and computing algorithms for utilizing in this process , fully automated approaches are considered challenging during the conceptual design phase [ 17 , 55 ] . This could result in a stimuli - based approach that is still dependent on humans to infer from the initial information provided by computers . Existing attempts exploring generative computing approaches mainly include the creation of function structure and the optimization of well - established concepts [ 17 ] . For example , computer - aided functional analysis utilizes a design repository including component connections and functionality of the recorded products [ 17 - 19 ] . Function structures can be generated based on the knowledge and relations stored in the repository . The resulted function structure can either be represented in a function model [ 20 - 22 ] or a function - means tree [ 23 - 24 ] . This approach has a significant advantage of leveraging the functional knowledge and structural relations from the design data . It enables designers to quickly come up with new concepts . However , the reported design repository utilized in this kind of research usually contains no more than a few hundred domain - focused products [ 20 , 21 , 22 ] . This is probably due to the amount of work involved in constructing such a function - based design repository . Thus , the approach of function - based synthesis for automatic concept generation can face two major drawbacks : First , the output function structure is commonly represented in abstract diagram of functions and components and well - trained engineers are needed to make sense of the concepts . Today , collaborative design scenarios involve members of diverse expertise working together through negotiation and evaluation [ 56 ] . Thus , the concepts need to be presented in a more understandable way for different expertise to understand . Secondly , the size and scope of the limited human - curated design repository data can prevent designers from exploring the full range of cross - domain design options . Automatic concept generation may also take the form of optimizing well - established concepts to achieve predetermined objectives . This includes topology optimization and generative shape synthesis [ 31 , 57 ] . Topology optimization aims to optimize the distribution of the material in a given design space according to a certain objective of product performance , e . g . , reduce weight , reduce stress , and improve stiffness [ 58 ] . This also requires designers to set up the design space with constraints for optimization . Shape synthesis is traditionally implemented through shape grammar [ 59 - 60 ] or parametric approaches [ 61 - 62 ] . Both approaches are based on computational algorithms to transform human input of objects , rules , or parameters into the desired 2D or 3D geometry . The recent advance in artificial intelligence ( AI ) has led to deep generative models like Generative Adversarial Network ( GAN ) [ 63 ] and Variational Autoencoder ( VAE ) [ 64 ] , which have received increasing interest from the engineering design community . Research efforts utilizing these novel techniques have been seen in topology optimization and generative shape synthesis [ 31 ] . Oh et al . [ 25 ] and Nie et al . [ 26 ] integrate GAN into topology optimization and result in a significantly decreasing computational cost compared to traditional approaches . Burnap et al . [ 27 ] introduced VAE to the generation of new concepts of 2D vehicle profile design . Yilmaz and German [ 28 ] used GAN to conditionally generate the design of the airfoil section . Li et al . [ 29 ] developed a recursive autoencoder that encodes and synthesizes 3D shapes . Using an iterative training approach , Shu et al . [ 30 ] optimize the 3D shape of aircraft designs with GANs and Computational Fluid Dynamics , which take the generated results with high performance to update the dataset for the next loop of training . These methods utilizing deep generative models can learn from the geometric training data and synthesize visual representations of design concepts . They can be potentially applicable to the optimization and customization of many design domains [ 31 ] . Readers are referred to [ 31 ] for a detailed review of deep generative models in engineering design . However , a major limitation of these models is that they are currently only capable of learning and generating spatially visualized representations of design concepts , e . g . , images , point clouds , and meshes . These representations are mainly useful for embodiment and detail design and may cause design fixation if applied in earlier stages [ 4 ] . Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 5 Figure 3 summarizes the concept generation methods and tools according to their roles in human - computer collaboration , the source of knowledge and reasoning input , and the form of the computational output if applicable . In Figure 3 , ‘knowledge’ refers to both the internal and external knowledge space that is potentially applicable to the target design space , while ‘reasoning’ refers to any kind of mindset , guideline , heuristic thinking , or computational algorithm that transforms the knowledge into novel design concepts . Our method is located at the top right of Figure 3 and focused on the verbal generation approach using the cutting - edge language models . Figure 3 : Taxonomy of concept generation methods and tools Our work aims to contribute to natural language processing ( NLP ) in design research [ 65 ] , with a focus on generative transformers and natural language generation ( NLG ) for design concept generation . Particularly , we experiment with generative pre - trained transformers ( GPT ) to learn the design knowledge and reasoning from task - oriented datasets , and then generate high fidelity design concept descriptions in natural language . 3 Natural Language Generation In this section , we briefly review the natural language generation ( NLG ) technology we use in this research as well as its evaluation metrics . Especially , the popular series of generative pre - trained transformers from OpenAI , including GPT - 2 and GPT - 3 , are introduced , as they will be applied in the experiments in this paper . 3 . 1 Text - to - Text and Data - to - Text NLG NLG is considered as a computer program that generates natural language as output [ 66 ] . According to [ 66 ] , depending on the input , there are two major instances of NLG : text - to - text and data - to - text generation . Text - to - text is what takes in the existing text as input and then outputs new pieces of text . Examples of text - to - text generation include machine translation ( e . g . , [ 67 ] ) , text summarization or simplification ( e . g . , [ 68 ] ) , paraphrasing ( e . g . , [ 69 ] ) , and so on . On the other hand , data - to - text Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 6 generation takes in non - linguistic data as input . Applications of data - to - text have been seen in varied fields , e . g . , generating news based on election data [ 70 ] , and generating personalized suggestions based on user input and web data [ 71 ] . Considering real - world applications , data - to - text generation has been a more popularly recognized type of NLG . Accordingly , some researchers define NLG as only the generation of data from non - textual input [ 72 ] . 3 . 2 Pre - Trained Language Model Pre - Trained Language models ( PLMs ) are language models that have been trained with a large textual dataset collected from varied sources . The training data could include but not limited to Wiki , books , and web data . The pre - trained model can be applied to specific language - related tasks [ 73 ] . In recent years , transformer - based language models have been achieving state - of - the - art performance on many tasks . Originally proposed by [ 74 ] , transformer is the most advanced neural network architecture for natural language processing ( NLP ) and has quickly become the dominant for NLG [ 75 ] . By contrast to the recurrent neural network ( RNN ) and the long short - term memory ( LSTM ) , two of the most popular neural network architectures until recently , transformer accounts for vanishing gradients [ 76 ] . Vanishing gradients were perceived as causing context loss when processing longer texts in RNN and LSTM . Moreover , the transformer enables parallel training . With the training data and model architecture becoming larger in size , it can capture longer sequence features and therefore result in much more comprehensive language understanding and generation [ 77 ] . The state - of - the - art network architecture of transformers , as well as the huge pre - training datasets , offer PLMs with not only the capability of learning human language , but also the knowledge and logic that come with it . By applying PLMs , NLG systems could leverage and transform a wide range of knowledge without the need for manual formulation and inference . Another significant feature of transformer for NLG is that it blurs the boundary between data - to - text and text - to - text NLG models . For instance , Radford et al . [ 78 ] shows outstanding performance of the GPT - 2 transformer model from OpenAI for text - to - text generation tasks such as translation and summarization . Peng et al . [ 79 ] shows the model after fine - tuning is also capable of performing data - to - text dialogue generation tasks . Although transformer - based PLM is a rather new technique in NLG , some applications have already been seen in different fields . Amin - Nejad et al . [ 80 ] use transformer models to create structured patient information to augment medical datasets . Lee and Hsiang [ 81 ] use GPT - 2 with fine - tuning to generate patent claims . Fang [ 82 ] also uses GPT to generate ideas for content creators . However , according to [ 31 ] , the application of transformers is still a wide - open space for engineering design tasks . Our work fills this gap . 3 . 3 Generative Pre - trained Transformer Now we introduce the most popular series of transformers in NLG tasks : the generative pre - trained transformer [ 77 - 78 , 83 ] , or GPT for short . Later in this paper , we apply and compare the 2nd and 3rd generations of GPT , i . e . , GPT - 2 and GPT - 3 , in design concept generation tasks . GPT - 2 uses the two - step training strategy of pre - training and fine - tuning , following [ 84 ] . The workflow is shown in Figure 4 ( a ) . During the pre - training step , the model is trained on a massive text dataset called WebText , which is collected from millions of web pages [ 78 ] . This results in a comprehensive language model that can perform general language completion tasks . According to OpenAI , the largest GPT - 2 pre - trained model has 1 . 5 billion parameters . For downstream NLP tasks , the pre - trained model then needs to be fine - tuned given a customized and task - oriented dataset . The fine - tuned model is trained through repeated gradient updates using a large dataset of a corpus of the example task . This process updates the weights of the pre - trained model and stores them for the use Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 7 of the target task . However , the large dataset customized for the target NLP task may be unavailable or difficult to collect . GPT - 3 is trained on a mixture of datasets containing 400 billion tokens and has a maximum of 175 billion parameters , over a hundred times larger than GPT - 2 . Compared to its precursor , GPT - 3 can perform a wide range of NLP tasks without the need for fine - tuning . GPT - 3 is capable of zero - shot learning , one - shot learning , and few - show learning [ 77 ] . In zero - shot learning , the model is given only the description of the task and generates the answer in natural language . In one - shot learning , the model is given a single example of the task in addition to the description . In few - shot learning , the model learns from multiple examples before performing the task . In all three modes , no gradient updates are performed [ 77 ] . The training and generation process of GPT - 3 is shown in Figure 4 ( b ) , where the prompts are the task descriptions and examples given to the model for zero - shot , one - shot , or few - shot learning . Figure 4 : Training process of GPT - 2 ( a ) and GPT - 3 ( b ) For text generation , the implementation of GPT requires several control parameters ( Table 1 ) and can be categorized into three types by the aimed property of the generated text . The ‘max _ tokens’ ( also called ‘length’ ) , ‘prompt’ ( also called ‘profix’ ) , and ’ stop’ ( also called ‘truncate’ ) control the content and format of the text . These are essential parameters when customizing the task and defining the input of the NLG model . When conditionally sampling with a pre - determined prompt , the model will learn to set up the context and output results based on it . The ‘temperature’ , ‘top - k’ , and ‘top - p’ parameters control the randomness of the generated text . Higher randomness will result in more varied outputs . Finally , the ‘presence _ penalty’ and ‘frequency _ penalty ’ parameters are only applicable for GPT - 3 and control generation repetitiveness . By encouraging original topics and discouraging existing ones , the generated texts are more likely to deviate from the example and represent novel concepts . Table 1 : Main parameters of text generation with GPT Parameter Explanation GPT - 2 GPT - 3 max _ tokens The maximum number of tokens to generate in the completion √ √ prompt The prompt ( s ) to generate completions for √ √ stop Up to 4 sequences where the API will stop generating further tokens . √ √ temperature Higher values mean the model will take more risks √ √ Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 8 top _ k Random sampling the next token from the k most likely candidates [ 85 ] √ top _ p The model considers the results of the tokens with top _ p probability mass √ √ presence _ penalty Positive values penalize new tokens based on whether they appear in the text so far , increasing the model ' s likelihood to talk about new topics √ frequency _ penalty Positive values penalize new tokens based on their existing frequency in the text so far , decreasing the model ' s likelihood to repeat the same line verbatim √ * Explanations of parameters except top - k are from OpenAI 1 Another well - known transformer - based PLM is the Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers ( BERT ) [ 86 ] , which was trained with Wiki and books data that contains over 3 . 3 billion tokens . BERT is commonly used in natural language understanding ( NLU ) tasks such as text classification and keyword extraction . However , as a masked language model , BERT is generally weak at NLG , because it can only learn the contextual representation of words [ 73 ] . 3 . 4 NLG Evaluation To facilitate NLG experiments and development , researchers have developed automatic evaluation metrics for rapid iteration of NLG techniques . A common approach is to measure the n - gram matching to represent the similarity between the machine - generated text and the human - written ground truth text . BLEU is a weighted geometric mean of n - gram precision scores [ 87 ] . ROUGE measure n - gram recall instead of precision [ 88 ] . METEOR is another n - gram based metric that calculates the harmonic mean of precision and recall [ 89 ] . Although the n - gram overlap approach is one of the most utilized metrics in NLG research , it only considers the surface level similarity between the reference and the generated text , i . e . , are the words in the two paragraphs match or not ? More recent methods consider semantic level similarity by measuring text embeddings . Word Mover’s Distance ( WMD ) is a measurement of the distance between the probability distribution of two vector spaces extracted from the word embeddings of documents [ 90 ] . Sentence Mover’s Distance ( SMD ) , similar to WMD , also measures the embeddings of two documents , but it is based on the embedding of sentences instead of words [ 91 ] . The embedding - based approaches go beyond surface - level measurement and provide a more intuitive scale of how two documents are related to each other . However , these methods still require ground truth references to compare the generated results . Ground truth is not always available in real - world applications because there is no preferred answer for many text generation tasks ( e . g . , open - ended question answering ) . Other works explored machine - learned metrics ( e . g . , [ 92 - 93 ] ) to evaluate open - ended text generation without the need for baseline references , but they require human - annotated samples to train or fine - tune such evaluation models . 4 Method 4 . 1 Concept Generation In this paper , we experiment with the applications of different GPT models in different design concept generation tasks . GPTs are trained to pick up patterns in human language and such patterns will also be reflected in the generated text [ 94 ] . Through properly preparing the fine - tuning data or prompts , 1 https : / / beta . openai . com / docs / api - reference / Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 9 we can force the models to connect remote concepts that rarely appear together in existing knowledge and synthesize them into novel new design concepts . In psychology and creative cognition literatures , there have been many contributions on creative thinking that involves connecting concepts that are weakly related , both theoretically ( e . g . , [ 95 ] ) and empirically ( e . g . , [ 96 ] ) . This pattern has also been discovered in the research of novel design . Simonton [ 97 ] suggests that the unconventional combinations of prior technologies could results in novel innovations . He & Luo [ 98 ] statistically found the most valuable inventions tend to embed extremely novel combinations of prior knowledge . Luo & Wood [ 99 ] also revealed a trend that patented inventions have been combining the knowledge of broader domains over the past three decades . Thus , by teaching GPTs to connect remote knowledge and generate solutions diverse from existing ones , creative reasoning for novel concept generation can be supported . In fact , a recent study empirically suggests that GPT - 3 is capable of divergent thinking to perform creative tasks [ 100 ] . Therefore , by customizing the dataset for fine - tuning or few - shot learning and the prompts , we control the learning and reasoning of GPT to generate novel concepts in varied design tasks . Figure 5 depicts the general framework of our experiments . Figure 5 : Experimental Framework Three essential components determine the way that GPTs could learn to generate design concepts . First , knowledge and reasoning for the task is the key component of our framework . It is provided through the dataset used for fine - tuning the GPT - 2 model , or in the examples of design concepts for few - shot learning of GPT - 3 . Secondly , we take in varied input for conditional learning . The input should be customized and consistent with the specific reasoning we want the model to learn , and the output will be the generated design concept description . For instance , for analogy reasoning , the input will be the source and target domains for analogy mapping . Finally , the transformer in the framework can be either a fine - tuned GPT - 2 or the pre - trained GPT - 3 for few - shot learning . 4 . 2 Concept Evaluation As discussed in Section 3 . 4 , most NLG evaluation metrics require ground truth references and measure the similarity between the reference and the generated result given the same condition . However , for design concept generation , the aim of the NLG task is not to generate texts that are as close to the reference as possible ( as in common NLG tasks like machine translation ) . On the other hand , we aim to produce novel concepts diverging from existing ones to expand design alternatives . Thus , evaluation metrics will focus on assessing the novelty of the generated concepts . Traditional approaches toward novelty evaluation require the judgement from human experts ( e . g . , [ 101 ] , [ 102 ] ) . However , novelty is subjective to the opinion , intuition , and experience of the evaluators [ 103 , 104 ] . Human experts can hardly be knowledgeable enough about every existed innovation to give a fully objective novelty assessment . Therefore , data - driven novelty evaluation metrics have been explored in recent years [ 98 , 105 , 106 ] . Especially , the semantic distance or relevancy between terms have been measured based on word embeddings to represent novelty [ 107 , 108 ] . The word embeddings are vector representations learned from a large corpus of textual data to encode the meaning of the words [ 109 ] . This allows the metrics to comprehend the extensive knowledge in the corpus when Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 10 evaluating novelty . The applicability of semantic distance is also supported empirically by creative cognition research [ 110 ] . In this paper , we apply two informative metrics based on semantic distance . One is to use WMD in reverse to measure the diversity between new concepts and existing ones . Prior approaches often aim for minimizing WMD as they want the generated results to be as close to the ground truth as possible . However , we want to do the opposite in our design concept generation task , i . e . , assess which model gives the higher WMD score . Higher WMD means the embedding spaces of the generated text and the reference are more distant , thus showing the model can deliver more diverse results . In design tasks , the diversity of concepts could lead to novel solutions , and therefore we use the metrics to represent the model’s capability of generating potentially novel concepts . This approach is only applicable when the concepts of the target domain of interest are obtainable so that the generated new concepts can be compared with the reference . The word embedding extraction method for WMD that we use in this paper is the pre - trained Word2Vec model provided by Gensim 2 . Secondly , we propose a within - text evaluation metrics utilizing TechNet [ 15 - 16 ] to measure concept novelty without the need for ground truth references . TechNet can retrieve an adjacency matrix of term - term relevancy from a given text based on the word embeddings . The lower relevancy score means the given terms are more semantically distant in the design context . In the metrics , all term pairs in a generated idea are extracted and the pairs’ semantic distances are calculated . Then , the minimum value among them can be used to estimate the degree of novelty regarding the knowledge distance within the idea . The lower minimum score indicates a more novel idea . However , one drawback of this method is that it assumes the generated result being evaluated is concise and only contains critical information about the innovation of the concept . Any extra information ( e . g . , minor features , style of the product ) may interfere with the evaluation by improperly assigning a reduced minimum term - term relevancy score to the concept . Both evaluation metrics used in this paper are embedding - based because we want to semantically measure the novelty and diversity of the generated concepts . Moreover , both metrics use the bag - of - words representation of the concepts , which means they only measure the content and topic semantically while ignoring the grammar and logic in the texts during evaluation . This allows the evaluation of concepts in different syntaxes or formats . 5 Experiments and Results In this section , we explore the capability of GPT to leverage and transform knowledge and reasoning from design data to new design concepts through three experiments . The settings of experiments are reported in Table 2 . Table 2 : Experiment settings Experimental Task Data Source Input Condition Transformer Model Evaluation Method Domain Knowledge Synthesis USPTO patent data ( domain - focused ) Target domain Fine - tuned GPT - 2 TechNet Target domain GPT - 3 few - shot learning TechNet Problem - driven reasoning RedDot award - winning design data Concept category , problem statement Fine - tuned GPT - 2 WMD Analogy - driven reasoning Target and source domains GPT - 3 few - shot learning WMD 2 https : / / radimrehurek . com / gensim / Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 11 5 . 1 Domain Knowledge Synthesis Luo et al . [ 9 ] conducted the study of design concept generation via domain knowledge synthesis with the help of a stimuli - based tool InnoGPS . Following their work , this experiment focuses on the concept generation of rolling toys synthesizing near - domain and far - domain knowledge . InnoGPS 3 is a knowledge - based design expert system based on all USTPO patents from 1974 to 2020 . The system guides the retrieval of near - domain and far - domain stimuli by knowledge distance to aid creative design ideation . The system uses a network of all international patent classes to store , organize and retrieve the world’s cumulative technical design knowledge according to statistically estimated knowledge distance between patent classes . In InnoGPS 2 . 0 [ 10 ] , the design stimuli are provided at the semantic , document , and field levels simultaneously . While providing data - driven ideation aids , InnoGPS itself does not have generative capability . In this experiment , we employ InnoGPS to gather patent data and assess knowledge distance . Six domains are picked as references according to their rank order by knowledge proximity to rolling toys : 1 ) Weapons , 2 ) Agriculture , 3 ) Lighting , 4 ) Drilling & Mining , 5 ) Grinding & Polishing , and 6 ) Fuels & Lubricants . Regarding knowledge distance calculation , please refer to [ 9 - 10 ] . The first three domains are relatively near - field ( 13th , 17th , 28th nearest , respectively ) while the other ones are considered far - field ( 64th , 68th , 100th nearest , respectively ) . These domains vary a lot regarding the number of patents they hold . To control variables and test for performance , we picked the latest 20 , 000 patents from each domain to form a dataset . Moreover , the titles of the chosen patents all have more than three words because we want the model to learn to generate ideas that contain rich information . For each domain , we gather the patent titles from InnoGPS and extract a keyword for each title using automatic keyword extraction techniques . Here , we utilize KeyBERT 4 which leverages BERT embeddings to extract keywords and key phrases that best represent a document . Figure 6 shows an example of patent title data prepared for GPTs . The extracted keyword is put in front of the title as the generation condition , together with fixed prompts that indicate the contents . Once the GPT model is prepared after either fine - tuning or few - shot learning , the target domain can be input as the condition to generate new concepts . In this experiment , “rolling toy” is used as the target domain . Figure 6 : Data preparation example for the domain knowledge synthesis This study experiments with GPTs for concept generation via domain knowledge synthesis , which was done by human designers in [ 10 ] . Both GPT - 2 fine - tuning and GPT - 3 few - shot learning are tested to compare their performance in learning and leveraging the domain knowledge . For fine - tuning GPT - 2 , we use the 355M base model , and the model for each domain is fine - tuned for 20 , 000 steps with a batch size of 1 . It takes dozens of minutes to fine - tune each GPT - 2 domain experts with a T4 or G100 GPU provided by Google’s Colaboratory 5 . Figure 7 shows the fine - tuning loss of each model during the first 10 , 000 steps . The loss is stabilized afterward . The fine - tuning loss is plotted every 100 steps . The parameters of ‘temperature = 0 . 9 ; top - k = 50’ are used in the generation to enable a more random generation for more creative ideas . 500 rolling toy design concepts are generated by the virtual domain expert ( i . e . , the fine - tuned GPT - 2 based on each domain’s knowledge ) and the unique ones are selected for further analysis . 3 http : / / www . innogps . com / 4 https : / / github . com / MaartenGr / KeyBERT 5 https : / / research . google . com / colaboratory / Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 12 Figure 7 : Training loss during fine - tuning the domain - specific GPT - 2 models For GPT - 3 , 10 samples are randomly selected from the domain data to form the prompts for few - shot learning . Even though 10 sentences contain hardly any knowledge themselves , they can evoke the domain - related knowledge of GPT - 3 that was learned during pre - training . Using the GPT - 3 base model of ‘Curie’ with the temperature of 0 . 9 and top - p of 1 , 500 concepts are generated for each domain and the unique ones are selected . Table 3 reports the percentage of unique rolling toy concepts generated by each virtual domain expert based on GPT - 2 or GPT - 3 . Some examples of the generated design concepts are also listed in table 3 to provide an intuition of the what the results are like . Table 3 : Results of rolling toy concept generation Domain GPT - 2 GPT - 3 % Unique Ideas Examples % Unique Ideas Examples Weapons ( 13 th nearest ) 35 . 8 % ( 179 / 500 ) • Rolling toy wheeled target . • Rolling toy dart board capable of making turns . • Rolling toy air gun . • Rolling toy dart game . • Rolling toy targeted at delivering a selection of magnetic objects . 71 . 8 % ( 359 / 500 ) • Rolling toy having a safety lock . • Rolling toy as firearms accessory . • Rolling toy pistol . • Rolling toy projectile . • Rolling toy with propeller and internal storage . Agriculture ( 17 th nearest ) 40 . 8 % ( 204 / 500 ) • Rolling toy bale wrapper apparatus . • Rolling toy saddle with pressure adjustment . • Rolling toy with liquid container . • Rolling toy splitting system . • Rolling toy harness with attached fabric head . 67 . 4 % ( 337 / 500 ) • Rolling toy and a treadmill powered by the rolling toy . • Rolling toy that caters to animal and pet owners . • Rolling toy with multi - directional steering . • Rolling toy having a revolving cylinder comprising interlocking , rotating bands . Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 13 • Rolling toy with engaging and disengaging feature . Lighting ( 28 th nearest ) 69 . 6 % ( 348 / 500 ) • Color changing LED roll toy . • Rolling toy and cart with a plurality of removable LED - units . • Lighting device for rolling and adjusting a light source . • Color changing , multi - sided rolling toy . • Programmable multi - color rolling toy . 84 . 2 % ( 421 / 500 ) • Rolling toy with illuminated stickers . • Rolling toy for lighting visual display and gaming . • Rolling toy with a lighted pointer feature . • Rolling toys with artificial light sources . • Rolling toy for exhibition model . Drilling & Mining ( 64 th nearest ) 69 . 8 % ( 349 / 500 ) • Rolling toy spindle drive system . • Rolling toy anti - locking system and method . • Rolling toy spinner reel . • Rolling toy deflector and method of use . • Rolling toy milling block and cylinder . 73 . 6 % ( 368 / 500 ) • Rolling toy and reel assembly . • Collapsible rolling toy . • Rollover rescue device utilizing a rolling toy . • Rolling toy with three - axis control . • Rolling ball with laser apertures . Grinding & Polishing ( 68 th nearest ) 76 . 4 % ( 382 / 500 ) • Fixture for rolling toy sleeves . • Deep rolling toy arm with interchangeable rolling force . • Nozzle device for the rolling of a rolling toy . • Rubber rolled toy machine with assembly clamping mechanism . • Deep rolling toy arm for a grinding machine . 77 . 2 % ( 386 / 500 ) • Toy for rolling on non - slip surfaces • Rolling toy with hidden wheels . • Rolling toy with wheels and axle used for manipulating surfaces . • Rolling toy with a track . • Motorized rolling industrial toy with cam engine . Fuels & Lubricants ( 100 th nearest ) 68 . 6 % ( 343 / 500 ) • Toy diesel fuel production system and rolling toy vehicle . • Toy with rolling bearing and friction mechanism . • Electrical tool and planer for use in a rolling toy . • Lubricant for rolling toy . • Toy diesel fuel and lubricant for use in a rolling toy vehicle . 84 . 4 % ( 422 / 500 ) • Apparatus for the rolling of steel sheet to make rolled steel sheet for railway track . • Rolling toy having a pneumatic cylinder . • Flow reactor with a porous rolling toy . • Rolling toy comprising a coating composition . • Method for producing a plastic rolling toy comprising elastomer . Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 14 In general , both GPT - 2 and GPT - 3 can generate understandable and concise design concepts in natural language . The concepts do take advantage of external knowledge in the design data provided . The results also show that the concepts from the GPT - 3 based virtual experts are less repetitive . This can be potentially valuable for the ideation process with both near - field and far - field knowledge sources . For example , given near - field stimuli of weapons , rolling toy designers may quickly come to the idea of “adding a gun or other shooting mechanism to the rolling toy” and then fixate on it . The AI - generated concepts , in addition to that , suggest that the rolling toy can also be designed into a moving shooting target or utilize the idea of a safety lock from the domain of weapons . For far - field stimuli , the virtual experts can also generate ideas as inspiration stimuli when human designers find it challenging to synthesize such distant knowledge . However , as the titles are too simple in syntax , they hardly carry any interesting logical reasoning . Nevertheless , two basic forms of reasoning can be observed from the generated concepts : • Use - case - oriented : Utilize the target in a domain - specific context or application ( e . g . , " Rolling toy dart board capable of making turns " , " Rolling toy that caters to animal and pet owners " ) . • Feature - oriented : Add a domain - specific function or structure to the target ( e . g . , " Rolling toy with liquid container " , " Rolling toy having a safety lock " ) . However , from the examples shown in Table 3 , it is not clear how the different knowledge distances and different GPTs may affect concept generation . According to Luo et al . [ 9 - 10 , 111 ] and Srinivasan et al . [ 112 ] , when ideating with external knowledge , the resulting concepts that synthesize far - field source knowledge could be more novel compared to those utilizing near - field stimuli . It is expected that the concepts generated by GPT - based virtual domain experts will follow a similar pattern , i . e . , far - domain virtual experts may generate ideas with higher novelty than near - domain virtual experts . TechNet is used for the evaluation of the generated concepts because similarity - based metrics are not applicable in this experiment . In addition , the AI - generated concept descriptions are concise and typically contain no more than 15 words . This property of concision makes the minimum term - term relevancy score a good indicator of novelty based on the knowledge contained within a text . Figure 8 reports the evaluation results based on TechNet . In TechNet , as reported in [ 15 ] , the estimated mean value of the term relevancy score is 0 . 133 ( shown as the horizontal line in Figure 8 ) . Therefore , either near - field or far - field models achieve overall good novelty . Note that this mean value of relevancy was calculated using 108 different pairs of terms . In real contexts , the more relevant pairs will appear more frequently , thus making the mean value even higher . Moreover , for either GPT - 2 or GPT - 3 , concepts generated by the far - field domain expert models achieve generally lower relevancy scores ( indicating higher novelty ) than those generated by near - field models , thus verifying our expected pattern . However , comparing Figure 8 ( a ) and ( b ) , this pattern is far less obvious in GPT - 3 few - shot learning , probably because it leverages knowledge mostly from its pre - training common sense dataset . In addition , Figure 9 shows that both GPT - 2 and GPT - 3 based virtual experts tend to generate longer concept descriptions for far - field domains . Longer texts are likely to contain richer details which could also be the source of the lower minimum relevancy because it could increase the probability of the co - occurrence of terms with low relevancy . Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 15 Figure 8 : Distribution of the minimum term - term semantic relevancy of concepts generated by GPT - 2 ( a ) and GPT - 3 ( b ) Figure 9 : Distribution of the number of tokens of the concepts generated by GPT - 2 ( a ) and GPT - 3 ( b ) Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 16 Overall , comparing the two GPT models , GPT - 2 has the advantage of leveraging a large amount of domain - specific knowledge by fine - tuning . This advantage results in more novel concept generation , especially when synthesizing far - domain knowledge . On the other hand , GPT - 3 only requires a few examples to achieve reasonably good performance , and the process does not need further training to update the hyperparameters of the model . Thus , GPT - 3 based concept generation can be very easy to use but also not so controllable . 5 . 2 Problem - Driven Synthesis Given GPT ' s capability to generate text based on the understanding of the context , we experiment with its application in generating the text of solution ideas for a given problem . Problem - solving in design could be supported by different methods such as analogy and first principle . In this experiment , we test GPT - 2 ' s problem - solving performance without constraining its approach , i . e . , it is free to use any methods based on what it learned from the data to solve a given design problem . The dataset for model fine - tuning is collected from RedDot ' s official website 6 , including 14 , 502 product designs from 2011 to 2020 and 1 , 486 design concepts from 2016 to 2020 . We organize the dataset by the categories of designs or concepts . Data preparation includes picking out the text description of each design and adding its category name in front of the description . Figure 10 shows an example of the training data prepared for GPT - 2 . Part of the concept description is omitted in the figure for space - saving . Figure 10 : Data preparation example for the problem - driven reasoning experiment The concept category is used as a condition to control for the general domain of concept generation . In addition , the problem statement is introduced as a loose condition , which could express the design problem in varied forms . As shown in the example in Figure 10 , the first sentence of the concept description states the phenomenon of an existing use case context . This is followed by the second sentence which proposes potentially problematic or even harmful experiences . The solution idea description follows . This structure is common in the descriptions of problem - driven design and thus ideal for GPT to generate solution idea text as the output in response to a problem text as the input . However , some problem statements come in different forms and do not necessarily contain both the phenomenon and the effect . Moreover , not all award - winning designs are problem - driven and often the description does not begin with a problem description . Our hypothesis is that the model can learn from those varied problem - driven design descriptions ( as the example above ) in the total dataset to execute problem - solving tasks , while also learning from design descriptions of other structures during training . Therefore , we consider the problem statement as a loose condition in this concept generation experiment and test with different problems . This includes 1 ) a known problem to a known solution , 2 ) a new unsolved problem , and 3 ) an open problem that includes only the target product . Among them , 3 ) is not a complete problem statement and relies on the model to determine novel needs based on its knowledge . Using the entire RedDot dataset , a pre - trained GPT - 2 of 355M parameters is fine - tuned for 28 , 000 steps with a batch size of 1 . It takes couple of hours to fine - tune the GPT - 2 model with a T4 or G100 6 https : / / www . red - dot . org / Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 17 GPU provided by Google’s Colaboratory . Figure 11 reports loss over the fine - tuning steps , added with a simple moving average ( SMA ) plot over 2000 steps . Figure 11 : Training loss during fine - tuning GPT - 2 using RedDot award - winning data The problem used for the experiment is based on an IF award - winning design concept in 2021 which proposed a wireless ECG device to improve the medical testing experience for children 7 . After minor simplification , the problem statement of “current electrocardiograph testing involves a large number of wires , making the process time - consuming for doctors and stressful for children” is used as the input of a known problem . This concept is not included in the fine - tuning dataset and the pre - training dataset of GPT - 2 does not include any data after 2019 . Thus , even if we do not know the pre - training dataset composition , it is certain that the fine - tuned model has no knowledge of the solution to the problem . Based on the same target product , the new problem is defined as : “Current electrocardiograph testing may cause tissue breakdown or skin irritation if the electrode patches are left on too long” which is from a health advice from a medical organization 8 . In addition , the open problem input is simply as “Current electrocardiograph testing” which only define the target and leaves the problem space open for the transformer to complete . Certain starting tokens such as “current” or “existing” could evoke the fine - tuned model to complete the problem statement with its own knowledge before generating any solutions . This could allow novel needs of the target product to be explored . To test performances , 500 concepts are generated for each problem prompt using the parameter of ‘temperature = 0 . 9 ; top - k = 50’ . The input condition of the concept category in this experiment is fixed as “Life Science” . Table 4 reports three examples of the generated concepts for each problem statement . Table 4 : Examples of problem - driven ECG device concept generation Input Problem Examples of Generated Concepts Original Problem 1 # Current electrocardiograph testing involves a large number of wires , making the process time - consuming for doctors and stressful for children . The Patchboard electrocardiograph features an innovative retractable electrode cardiopulae that retracts into the paper cartridge during testing . With the help of an adaptable patch board , the doctor can now safely excorlate and patch the data up onto the child’s bed . The cartridge is retractable and fixed in place at the base of the electrocardiograph , making it convenient to leave the cartridge lying around . The design of the electrocardiograph patchboard is adaptable to every child . It is sized to fit every child’s height and is made from a variety of materials to be used in craft and manufacturing industries . 2 # Current electrocardiograph testing involves a large number of wires , making the process time - consuming for doctors and stressful for children . Therefore , the EM 20 – package is designed to replace traditional testing by a wireless device that affords an optimal fit for children’s clothing . To wear , adjust 7 https : / / ifdesign . com / en / winner - ranking / project / ema / 324944 8 https : / / www . hopkinsmedicine . org / health / treatment - tests - and - therapies / electrocardiogram Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 18 the button to the age of the child and attach the other device to the chest . Then , insert the child’s birthday cake into the wireless device . The birthday cake will remain attached to the device throughout the entire testing process , allowing doctors to continue the testing procedure even after the cake has been removed from the device . This device is also designed to fit children’s clothing in their regular bra size . 3 # Current electrocardiograph testing involves a large number of wires , making the process time - consuming for doctors and stressful for children . Future Trig Therapy device could be used to help reduce the frequency of testing and thereby increase the doctor’s comfort level with patients . This future device could be worn like a fashion accessory or a ‘glimmer’ – a magnetic coil . Instead of testing electrical impulses in a baby’s arm , it stimulates the body through electromagnetic waves . In its younger stages , the electromagnetic waves are transmitted to the muscle tissue and the signals are converted to electrical impulses . As the doctor continues to work in the arm , the electrocardiogram can be better monitored . New Problem 4 # Current electrocardiograph testing may cause tissue breakdown or skin irritation if the electrode patches are left on too long . Long - term use of the device can result in cognitive impairment , resulting in discontinuation of the generator therapy . ARTISTICIZE patches are designed to address these issues . ARTISTICIZE is a new cartridge type of electrocardiograph that includes an embedded patch board in which long - term use of the device can continue without cognitive or learning impairment . This allows the body to continue producing clotting factor , thereby meeting the demands for its primary organ . The ARTISTICIZE cartridge board is engineered to provide an optimal electrode distribution for the long - term use of electrocardiogram . The long - term use of the device results in high levels of treatment , which are well - thought - out in terms of both symptom severity and dosimeter compliance . The ARTISTICIZE cartridge is well - thought - out because it incorporates high - quality materials that provide fine - motorable soft tissue augmentation . 5 # Current electrocardiograph testing may cause tissue breakdown or skin irritation if the electrode patches are left on too long . To address this problem , the Five Eyes Patch devices use a unique algorithm to monitor the electrical activity in the muscle layers and automatically adjust patch length and electrodes applied . This not only makes for more precise patch placement , but it also reduces the risk of scarring and infection . The product can be applied topically , or it can be attached to the wrist via a strap . 6 # Current electrocardiograph testing may cause tissue breakdown or skin irritation if the electrode patches are left on too long . To address this problem , Patch T130 shows a duration of 510 micros ( micros ) that can be applied along the along electrode patch length . The thickness of the patch can be adjusted to the size of muscle sheaths to protect both the hypertrophied patient and the accessory device . The adhesive patches are made of medical - grade , skin - friendly tissue that stays on the patient patch and is removed when the device is attached to the skin . Open Problem 7 # Current electrocardiograph testing equipment is bulky , not aesthetically pleasing and generally not ergonomically optimised . The new NEXT generation of electrocardiograph without electrodes will improve the user experience in a range of areas of daily use , and is also significantly less bulky than current electrocardiograph test systems . New features include a 5G wireless biorhythm sensor and a colour design that allows the biorhythm sensor to be inserted into a variety of fabrics . This makes it easier to insert , and thus more convenient for patients who are transgender or genderfluid . Additionally , a biochip on the back can be added , which signifies that the device is in good working condition . 8 # Current electrocardiograph testing devices do not allow for long - time recording electrocardiograms without taking multiple body measurements . This time - consuming approach is detrimental to the fitness of recovering athletes who require daily monitoring to be able to play a full part in their rehab and recovery . Testing at Home Is an Option That Can Recorder Next Cycle Fitness will allow you to play a recording session during which you can recharge your device . The product also sends feedback on the exercise completed and calorie consumption is calculated . In addition , it can be connected to a wearable coaching platform on Wear OS so that a personalised coaching tool is available for consumers . 9 # Current electrocardiograph testing devices do not allow for long - term monitoring of the heart function . This device can send data via Bluetooth link to the owner’s smartphone . The testing device is lightweight , small , comfortable to wear and also reduces the agony of wasted testing days . To start using , the owner simply inserts his or her phone into the device andottoads for the appropriate heart function test . Depending on the test result , the owner may be awarded points for a successful or unsuccessful test . Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 19 Intuitively , the model is capable of generating novel and useful concepts for all three problem settings . For the original problem , solutions are proposed to innovate the interaction or materials of the ECG device to be more children friendly . Some of them ( e . g . , 2 # ) even mention using wireless technology just like the original award - winning concept even though the model has no previous knowledge about such a solution . For the newly defined problem , the model can either add a negative effect to the given phenomenon before generating new concepts ( e . g . , 4 # ) or directly give a solution ( e . g . , 5 # ) . This variation of details in the problem statement is also observed in the generation based on an open - ended problem . Another noteworthy observation is that it may automatically search for use cases for a solution , e . g . , concept 8 # mentions that recovering athletes who require daily monitoring could use such an ECG device . However , one potential drawback is that the machine - generated or completed problem statement is not guaranteed to be objectively correct , and the designers need to check if the problem is valid before moving forward . For example , the problem in 8 # mentioned “multiple body measurements” , which makes little sense for ECG testing . Nevertheless , the partially correct problem in 8 # is still valid and the generated solution could still be useful . Furthermore , as the text lengthens , they are likely to cover other features that are unrelated to the given problem . This is not surprising as the design descriptions in the fine - tuning dataset often provide comprehensive elaboration of multiple aspects and the model learned this well . This is also the major reason that the evaluation metric using TechNet is not applicable for this experiment . In this experiment , WMD is used for evaluating the diversity of the generated results . We set two ground - truth references for the evaluation , one is the original IF concept as an existing novel design , and the other is an introduction of ECG by Wiki as a common - sense reference . Figure 12 reports the evaluation result of all the 1 , 500 generated concepts . The results show the concepts derived from all problem settings achieve equally good novelty compared to our common - sense cognition of ECG testing . However , when compared to the original IF concept , the AI - generated design concepts using the original problem setting achieve much lower novelty . This is because the same problem is more likely to lead to similar solutions even for GPT - 2 . In addition , the concepts with open - ended problems also have relatively lower WMD scores compared to either reference . Figure 12 : Distribution of the WMD scores of the generated problem - driven concepts comparing to different references Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 20 5 . 3 Analogy - Driven Synthesis Design - by - analogy is the projection of existing reference in a source domain to address a comparable challenge in the target domain [ 16 , 42 , 113 ] . It is usually considered a problem - solving approach . However , when a problem is not specified , analogy reasoning can also lead to open - ended design concept generation . This experiment is to test the analogy - driven reasoning of the model for concept generation . The experiment is guided by TechNet to explore near - domain and far - domain analogy by the semantic distance between the source and target term . This is not only applicable for the context when a designer aims to establish clear analogy mapping across given domains , but also for exploring unfamiliar or unexpected domains as analogies . As there are insufficient design - by - analogy examples to fine - tune a GPT - 2 , this experiment selects from RedDot five analogy - driven reasoning examples for GPT - 3’s few - shot learning . Table 5 shows the source and target domains in each of the five examples for learning . Before the text description of each sample , a structured sentence specifying the source and target domains ( e . g . , “Applying accordion to computer mouse” ) is inserted so that GPT - 3 may learn to develop ideas based on the input domains . An example of the prepared sample for few - shot learning is shown in Figure 13 . When generating new concepts , we simply need to update the tokens that specify the source and target domains in the condition . Table 5 : Analogy - driven reasoning examples used as prompts for GPT - 3 Example Source Domain Target Domain AMBI - 9 Accordion Computer Mouse Build Fender 10 Cells Building Sole 11 Standing desk Automobile FOLD ( Light wheelchair ) 12 Folding chair Wheelchair CableTread 13 Circuit board Desk Figure 13 : Data preparation example for the analogy - driven reasoning experiment In this experiment , we fix the target domain as " drone " , and select source domains according to their semantic relevancy to the target as well as their own categories . First , one of the most near - field terms 9 https : / / www . red - dot . org / project / ambi - 48504 10 https : / / www . red - dot . org / project / build - fender - 27044 11 https : / / www . red - dot . org / project / sole - 26525 12 https : / / www . red - dot . org / project / fold - light - wheelchair - 26521 13 https : / / www . red - dot . org / project / cabletread - 46563 Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 21 “airplane” ( relevancy score : 0 . 421 ) is selected as the comparison set of the experiment . Next , “bird” and “insect” are picked to test for bio - inspired design ( BID ) . These biological terms have surprisingly high relevancy scores to " drone " , which are 0 . 313 and 0 . 234 respectively , showing that the BID of drones using birds or insects has already been implemented in engineering design . The last group contains the culture - related terms “lantern” and “poetry” which only have the relevancy score of 0 . 142 and 0 . 106 . Using the GPT - 3 base model of ‘Davinci’ with the temperature of 0 . 9 and top - p of 1 , we generated 100 concepts based on the analogy of each source domain , three of which are reported in Table 6 . Table 6 : Examples of analogy - driven drone concept generation Source Domain Examples of Generated Concepts Airplane ( 0 . 421 ) 1 # The UAV is a drone inspired by modern day aircraft . It is made entirely out of carbon fibres reinforced with glass fibres . This design makes the drone lighter and more aerodynamic in flight . The drone is battery powered and is equipped with a camera that transmits back images to its remote controller . 2 # Inspired by the interior design of modern airplanes , PLANE is a drone that aims to eliminate the social stigma that drones are ‘murder machines’ . The green colour and minimalistic style shows a humanised touch , bringing a user - friendly experience to the flying drones . To teach drones the value of an individual ' s safety and privacy , PLANE is promoted as a drone with ' eyes ' – sensors that protect its surroundings . In addition , the heart - shaped , exposed camera on its belly shows the drone ' s ability to document and deliver information to users . 3 # Inspired by the efficiency of airplane cargo carriers , the Rotary UAV was designed to transport heavier loads through urban areas while being unobtrusive to citizens . The cylindrical structure of the Rotary UAV provides greater stability and transportation capacity . Funded by the Singapore - MIT Alliance for Research and Technology , the Rotary UAV ' s rotary engine also provides its ability to drive in any direction , thus eliminating the need for a runway . It is propelled by a motor spinning the rotor of the plane ( vertically oriented ) . This technology would make it possible to transport heavier items or cargo around a neighbourhood without a helipad or runway . Bird ( 0 . 313 ) 4 # The body structure of aircraft must be redesigned to accommodate a greater number of passengers and cargo . SPEA is modelled after a bird , specifically the blue - footed booby to achieve speed and stability in flight . The reconfiguration of the wings and tail has helped achieve this goal . APASI was chosen as it allows more space under the wings in comparison to other designs which helps reduce drag force . 5 # DSDK is inspired by the way birds flap their wings in loop patterns before taking off . The ' Bird - like drone ' is able to maintain stability and direction during flight whilst allowing quick movement , fluidity , and coordination . Using this model , the drone is able to travel long distances and still be able to maintain or adjust its position . Self - deploying drones that incorporate functionalities like this are useful for many applications , for example delivery . The self - deploying nature of the drone allows it to be dropped from a safe distance and travel at a steady pace without much piloting needed . 6 # DUCOPTER is inspired by birds . It integrates two vertical takeoff and landing capabilities . The launch and landing process are similar to how birds take off and land during flight . The first is the familiar takeoff – propellers are turned on , and the wings provide lift . After reaching a certain height , the wings fold down , allowing the aircraft to move forward like a bird gliding in the air . This innovation will allow the aircraft to land safely when the battery dies . Insect ( 0 . 234 ) 7 # Inspired by the efficiency of the ant colony , a multi - user drone was conceived . The drone can be controlled by a single user for one task and also by several users for another , to perform tasks together . Additionally , the drone contains an “ant defense mechanism” , which is inspired by ants ' capacity to self - heal . The mechanism enables other drones that are functional to return home while delivering spare parts to repair the broken down drones . 8 # Inspired by the hard and heavy exoskeletons of beetles and wasps , PROTECTOR is a drone designed for military surveillance operations . The thick outer casing is made of either ceramic or polycarbonate and armour plate protection , an essential extra protection which will help protect the drone and increase its chance of survival in hostile environments . The drone is powered by two Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 22 batteries with a capacity of 200Wh , which can fly for 12 hours and run the surveillance equipment for up to 20 hours . 9 # Insects have the ability to communicate and navigate through vibration . Inspired by this , Bugs² is a drone that produces on - board vibration to communicate with other Bugs² units and effects . Lower frequency vibration will be used to communicate with other Bugs² , while higher frequency vibration will be used to communicate with other aircraft nearby . The system will also produce a unique vibration frequency when the drone has detected obstacles nearby , sending this signal to other drones nearby . This will create a swarm that flies together , avoiding any collision . Lantern ( 0 . 142 ) 10 # Inspired by traditional Chinese paper lantern , which is made of just three steps and a hexagonal wire frame . Drone is a drone which can be assembled simply with a hexagonal wire frame using extremely flexible , heat - resistant , and dual - ended tape . The frame is then filled with a flexible , heat - resistant material . The filling can be varied to make different shapes of lanterns , such as one candle - like and another resembling a sun . 11 # Night flying using drones is highly restricted due to the lack of visibility of the surroundings and its low altitude . LampTread is a drone concept that can transform into a lantern . It is designed with a hook that attaches to a drone to be flown at night . By tapping a button , the hook allows the drone to be hung from lamp posts that are on both ends of a road intersection . This makes it easy for users to identify locations at night by just looking up . 12 # The lantern for drone is inspired by vernacular fishing trap lanterns designed to attract fish to shallow water to be easily harvested . The concept transforms the conventional UFO - looking drone into a translucent and glow - in - the - dark lantern . The lantern not only attracts fish , but it also attracts people in the area for them to be aware of the existence of the drone , hence the drone does not need extra lights to create an illuminated light environment . It also means that unwanted attention brought by the drone is mitigated . Poetry ( 0 . 106 ) 13 # Why would we use rigid laws and encyclopedias to define the world ? Epic # is a multi - functional swarming drone inspired by the idea of poetry . To create a unified atmosphere or shared experiences , the team behind this concept hopes to develop an AI system for drones . The AI will generate different types of poetic stories based on real - time data collected from sensors and cameras – such as weather conditions and citizens ' emotions . On a conceptual level , Epic # can be used to explore new forms of language while communicating despite different cultural contexts . 14 # Inspired by the Japanese art of Haikai , a light drone is imagined to use during outdoor gatherings . When people feel that their conversations have been exhausted , a set of light drones will rise from the ground and emit cute words with lights that quickly disappear – giving new life to the conversation . The drones are designed to have a simplistic structure and use a single circuit board and propellers . Its polycarbonate shell is soft and tough enough to survive even after hitting a target . 15 # Inspired by poetry , the project is set to redesign the popular Chinese consumer drone , HeChat , by introducing a poetry element with the aim of broadening the user’s range of expression . Poetry is a form of art that revolves around the expression of thoughts and feelings through words . In this concept , a poetic expression module is introduced . Instead of programming the robot to follow a set sequence of motions , this module creates a state - machines based movement that relies on an improvisation mechanism . This improves the user experience by providing an infinite number of movement sequences the user can manipulate . In the end , this makes the drone a fun companion that can improvise by the user’s movements . As expected , the domain of airplanes does not provide many novel insights for drones because the mapping between the two domains already exists to a great extent . For biological analogies , GPT - 3 can not only retrieve a specific creature from the given domain for inspiration but also learn behavioral or structural features from the creatures . For example , 7 # proposes to innovate the control system of the swarm of drones based on the group behavior of ants , 8 # takes inspiration from the exoskeleton of beetles to design tough military drones . For the culture - related terms as analogies , the model is also capable of generating interestingly and surprisingly novel concepts from varied angles . When using the term lantern as the analogy , 10 # retrieves the hexagonal wire frame structure of the Chinese traditional lantern to design an easy - to - assemble drone . 11 # proposes a lighting drone that can either fly or hang at fixed positions to light the surrounding . Interestingly , the idea of 11 # is very similar to Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 23 an IF award - winning drone concept 14 . Finally , poetry could be a hard - to - imagine analogy for human designers because of its intangible and artistic nature . 13 # suggests using swarm drones to collect real - time sensor and camera data to generate poetic stories , 14 # also proposes an interesting design of drones for social activity . Overall , the results show promising performance of GPT - 3 to implement analogy - driven reasoning . However , the generated concepts face a similar issue as the ones from the previous experiment , which is that they are not concise enough and contain trivial information . Thus , for the quantitative evaluation of the method , WMD is utilized . In this experiment , we form a common - sense reference from Wiki’s introduction to the unmanned aerial vehicle ( UAV ) , and an existing novel concept reference consisting of four RedDot award - winning drone concepts in recent years . The evaluation results are shown in Figure 14 . The four award - winning concepts to form the reference are : Bladeless Drone 15 , Xenon Adventure Drone 16 , Racer 17 , and Rotate and Fly 18 . Figure 14 : Distribution of the WMD scores of the generated analogy - driven concepts comparing to different references Evaluation results show that the generated concepts are generally more novel compared to the Wiki knowledge than comparing to RedDot concepts , which is not surprising because concepts on RedDot already represent a high - level novelty of design ( calculating the WMD score of the two references gets the result of 3 . 159 ) . Our generated concepts are shown to achieve better novelty than existing novel concepts . In addition , with the source and target domains getting semantically distant , the generated results also show increasing novelty . However , this trend is observable but not obvious , similar to the results of our GPT - 3 experiment in Section 5 . 1 . This is most likely due to the fact that GPT - 3 mainly leverages common - sense knowledge during few - shot learning and little technical knowledge is introduced to enhance diversity further . 14 https : / / ifdesign . com / en / winner - ranking / project / illuminated - drone / 333309 15 https : / / www . red - dot . org / project / bladeless - drone - 26825 16 https : / / www . red - dot . org / project / xenon - adventure - drone - 27016 17 https : / / www . red - dot . org / project / racer - 40463 18 https : / / www . red - dot . org / project / rotate - and - fly - 54390 Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 24 6 Discussion To the best of our knowledge , this paper is the first to explore and experiment with the uses of generative transformers ( i . e . , fine - tuned GPT - 2 or GPT - 3 few - shot learning with design data ) for generating novel and useful design concepts in the early design stage . Our first experiment ( focusing on domain knowledge synthesis for concept generation ) shows that the generative transformers based on GPT - 2 have greater capability to leverage domain - specific expert knowledge learned during fine - tuning , especially when synthesizing far - domain knowledge , than GPT - 3 . This indicates that GPT - 2 can be an ideal option when the design task is highly domain - specific , and at the same time , a large amount of domain knowledge is available . In the second experiment ( focusing on problem - driven synthesis for concept generation ) , GPT - 2 can also learn specific design reasoning even if not all samples in the fine - tuning dataset contain such type of reasoning . In addition , novel needs that were previously unknown to the designers can be generated when the problem statement is not strictly defined . This makes the interaction with computer more flexible when exploring design opportunities using generative transformers . On the other hand , the experiment ( focusing on analogy - driven synthesis for concept generation ) reveals the performance of transformers based on GPT - 3 to leverage a much larger variety of common - sense knowledge and reasoning than those of GPT - 2 . GPT - 3 only requires a few examples of the expected reasoning . The exploration of initial design opportunities often starts with a wide - open design space and technical expert knowledge is seldomly required until later process . GPT - 3 can be a valuable and easy - to - use tool in this context . In sum , the readily available pre - trained language model , the collection and customization of the dataset for fine - tuning or few - shot learning , and the development and selection of evaluation metrics are all task - specific . This makes task definition and training data customization essential steps when it comes to utilizing the PLM for design concept generation . Based on the experiments conducted in this paper , we propose three guidelines for defining the concept generation task and preparing the training dataset : 1 ) Define the conceptual design task as a combination of conditions and completion . The conditions can be any constraints or requirements defined during the task clarification stage of design process . However , do note that GPTs can hardly comprehend every detailed constraint and requirement , so the conditions should be selective and explorative . 2 ) Collect and curate a dataset that contains the defined conditions and completion . Extract the conditions manually or with automatic NLP techniques like keyword extraction or named - entity recognition . If a condition is not available in every sample , try to utilize it as a loose condition . 3 ) When customizing the dataset , always put the conditions at the beginning of the text . Because GPTs are auto - regressive models that predict the next token based on all tokens before . Despite the observable outstanding performance in concept generation with fine - tuning and few - shot learning , exploiting generative transformers from scratch can be very challenging for engineering design applications . This is because training a generative transformer from scratch requires both a massive amount of data and the super computing power . The lack of openly available engineering design data [ 31 ] and powerful but affordable GPU servers can be a major limitation for design researchers to exploiting transformers for meaningful engineering applications . Furthermore , transformer is a rapid developing technology in the AI community . Although it was originally proposed for NLP tasks [ 74 ] , experimental works have developed transformers with and for computer vision ( CV ) in varied ways . For examples , OpenAI published CLIP for zero - shot downstream CV tasks [ 114 ] and DALL - E for zero - shot text - to - image generation [ 115 ] . Vision transformer ( ViT ) is also shown to outperform the convolutional neural networks ( CNN ) architecture in many tasks [ 116 ] . A more recent work even achieved high performance image completion on Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 25 random patches [ 117 ] . Generative transformers for CV could open great opportunities for engineering design by not only improving existing deep generative approaches , but also exploring novel human - AI collaborative design methods . Imagine the generated concepts in this paper can be directly transformed into design images through text - to - image generation . 7 Limitation and Future Work Although our work has shown the great performance of generative transformers in design concept generation , there are limitations that need further attentions . We organize four major limitations in this section , namely : interpretability , generalizability , extendibility , and lack of baselines . Interpretability . One major limitation is that the generated concepts in each experiment are not guaranteed to be valid or of good quality . Developing automatic metrics to evaluate and filter the concepts can be very challenging because the quantitative scale of the validity of verbally expressed concepts has yet to be defined . A concept that makes perfect sense is often not insightful , meanwhile ambiguous concepts could carry critical inspirations for designers . Simply filtering out the concepts that could contain key insights just because they are not completely interpretable is not supposed to be the way . Future work will focus on developing an interpretability scale that measures “to what extent the generated concept makes sense” . Then we can explore the correlation between interpretability and the actual novelty and usefulness of the generated concepts . Generalizability . To facilitate the design concept generation in real - world design practices , different tasks and the associated knowledge are needed to be generalized . A practical design concept generation process could begin with either a problem from the user’s perspective ( as in section 5 . 2 ) , or a technology to be explored with extended opportunities ( as in section 5 . 1 and 5 . 3 ) . It is necessary for a fully automated AI assistant to comprehend different strategies and learn to pick up the applicable ones for customized input . Given a dataset with adequate size and variety of design knowledge and reasoning , it could be possible to train a model that generalize many tasks . This limitation will be explored in future works . Extendibility . Although the proposed framework in Figure 5 is not limited to the three case studies in this paper , it could be challenging to extend the method to different tasks . This is because the lack of open and high - quality engineering design dataset [ 31 ] could limit the method to learn and leverage extended data . However , by customizing the available data , further design reasonings ( e . g . , reverse thinking ) could be learned from the introduced data sources ( i . e . , patents , award - winning design ) and thus extend the applicability of the proposed framework . Lack of baselines . This work is an explorative study and the first to apply AI to comprehend design knowledge and reasoning and generate concepts in natural language . Thus , the presented research lacks existing methods as the comparison set to evaluate performance . Specifically , the metrics to quantitively and automatically evaluate concept novelty and diversity in this paper are specifically tailored to our concept generation tasks . The purpose of these metrics is to compare the performance between different experiment attempts ( e . g . , could far - field domains lead to more novel concepts compare to near - field ones ) . Therefore , baseline verification is absent , i . e . , how high the WMD score or how low the TechNet relevancy score represents good novelty ? There also exist other metrics to automatically evaluate novelty and additional dimensions of new design concepts ( e . g . , [ 107 ] ) . More extensive experiments on varied subjects and alternative evaluation metrics with human evaluation are needed to discover more insightful patterns or guidelines for using generative transformers in design concept generation . This work addresses the recent call for advancing NLP and NLG for - and - in design research [ 65 ] and especially utilizing the generative transformers in generative design [ 11 ] . In the time that transformer - based foundation models [ 118 ] start to reshape both academia and industry , we believe it is timely and crucial to explore the opportunities that it offers to creative design . By showing evidence of great Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 26 potentials , the authors hope this paper to be path - breaking and able to inspire more studies into this area . Transformer technologies and the new pre - trained transformers ( including the vision transformers ) are rapidly evolving . We need to continually explore , experiment , and adapt the new ones for applications in the creative design process toward the future . Another important avenue for future research is the design of the process of interactions between human designers and generative transformers . In sum , we hope readers view this paper as an invitation for more research and development of generative transformers in design research and practice . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Tschimmel , K . , 2012 , “Design Thinking as an effective Toolkit for Innovation , ” ISPIM Conference Proceedings ( p . 1 ) , The International Society for Professional Innovation Management ( ISPIM ) . [ 2 ] Purcell , A . T . , & Gero , J . S . , 1996 , “Design and other types of fixation , ” Design studies , 17 ( 4 ) , 363 - 383 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / S0142 - 694X ( 96 ) 00023 - 3 [ 3 ] Linsey , J . S . , Tseng , I . , Fu , K . , Cagan , J . , Wood , K . L . and Schunn , C . , 2010 , “A Study of Design Fixation , Its Mitigation and Perception in Engineering Design Faculty , ” Journal of Mechanical Design , 132 ( 4 ) . DOI : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4001110 [ 4 ] Viswanathan , V . , Tomko , M . , & Linsey , J . , 2016 , “A study on the effects of example familiarity and modality on design fixation , ” AI EDAM , 30 ( 2 ) , pp . 171 - 184 . DOI : 10 . 1017 / S0890060416000056 [ 5 ] Nishimoto , K . , Sumi , Y . , & Mase , K . , 1996 , “Toward an outsider agent for supporting a brainstorming session—an information retrieval method from a different viewpoint , ” Knowledge - Based Systems , 9 ( 6 ) , pp . 377 - 384 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / S0950 - 7051 ( 96 ) 01050 - 7 [ 6 ] Buzan , T . , 1996 , The mind map book : How to use radiant thinking to maximize your brain ' s untapped potential , New York , NY : Penguin Books [ 7 ] Altshuller , G . , 1999 , “TRIZ , Systematic Innovation and Technical Creativity , ” Technical Innovation Center , Publisher , 312 . [ 8 ] Altshuller , G . , Shulyak , L . , Rodman , S . , and Fedoseev , U . , 1998 , 40 Principles : TRIZ Keys to Innovation , Vol . 1 , Technical Innovation Center Inc . , Worcester , MA . [ 9 ] Luo , J . , Sarica , S . and Wood , K . L . , 2019 , " Computer - aided design ideation using InnoGPS , " IDETC - CIE , ASME , V02AT03A011 . DOI : 10 . 1115 / DETC2019 - 97587 [ 10 ] Luo , J . , Sarica , S . , & Wood , K . L . , 2021 , “Guiding data - driven design ideation by knowledge distance , ” Knowledge - Based Systems , 218 , 106873 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . knosys . 2021 . 106873 [ 11 ] Luo , J . , 2022 , “Data - Driven Innovation : What Is It” , IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management . DOI : 10 . 1109 / TEM . 2022 . 3145231 [ 12 ] Ilevbare , I . M . , Probert , D . and Phaal , R . , 2013 , “A review of TRIZ , and its benefits and challenges in practice , ” Technovation , Vol . 33 No . 2 - 3 , pp . 30 - 37 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . technovation . 2012 . 11 . 003 [ 13 ] Yilmaz , S . , Daly , S . R . , Seifert , C . M . and Gonzalez , R . , 2016 , " Evidence - based design heuristics for idea generation , " Design studies , Vol . 46 , pp . 95 - 124 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2016 . 05 . 001 [ 14 ] Jin , X . and Dong , H . , 2020 , " New design heuristics in the digital era , " Proceedings of the Design Society : DESIGN Conference , pp . 607 - 616 . DOI : 10 . 1017 / dsd . 2020 . 321 [ 15 ] Sarica , S . , Luo , J . , & Wood , K . L . , 2020 , “TechNet : Technology semantic network based on patent data , ” Expert Systems with Applications , 142 , 112995 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . eswa . 2019 . 112995 Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 27 [ 16 ] Sarica , S . , Song , B . , Luo , J . , & Wood , K . L . , 2021 , “Idea generation with technology semantic network , ” AI EDAM , 35 ( 3 ) , pp . 265 - 283 . DOI : 10 . 1017 / S0890060421000020 [ 17 ] Chakrabarti , A . , Shea , K . , Stone , R . , Cagan , J . , Campbell , M . , et al . , 2011 , " Computer - based design synthesis research : an overview , " Journal of Computing and Information Science in Engineering , 11 ( 2 ) . DOI : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 3593409 [ 18 ] Wood , K . L . , & Greer , J . L . , 2001 , “Function - based synthesis methods in engineering design : State - of - the - art , methods analysis , and visions for the future , ” Formal engineering design synthesis , 170 - 227 . [ 19 ] Bohm , M . R . , Vucovich , J . P . , & Stone , R . B . , 2008 , “Using a design repository to drive concept generation , ” Journal of Computing and Information Science in Engineering , 8 ( 1 ) . DOI : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 2830844 [ 20 ] Sridharan , P . , & Campbell , M . I . , 2005 , “A study on the grammatical construction of function structures , ” Ai Edam , 19 ( 3 ) , 139 - 160 . DOI : 10 . 1017 / S0890060405050110 [ 21 ] Kurtoglu , T . , & Campbell , M . I . , 2009 , “Automated synthesis of electromechanical design configurations from empirical analysis of function to form mapping , ” Journal of Engineering Design , 20 ( 1 ) , pp . 83 - 104 . DOI : 10 . 1080 / 09544820701546165 [ 22 ] Sangelkar , S . , & McAdams , D . A . , 2017 , “Automated graph grammar generation for engineering design with frequent pattern mining , ” IDETC - CIE , ASME , V02AT03A006 . DOI : 10 . 1115 / DETC2017 - 67520 [ 23 ] Liu , Y . C . , Chakrabarti , A . , & Bligh , T . , 2000 , “A computational framework for concept generation and exploration in mechanical design , ” Artificial intelligence in design’00 , pp . 499 - 519 , Springer , Dordrecht . [ 24 ] Chakrabarti , A . , & Bligh , T . P . , 2001 , “A scheme for functional reasoning in conceptual design , ” Design Studies , 22 ( 6 ) , pp . 493 - 517 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / S0142 - 694X ( 01 ) 00008 - 4 [ 25 ] Oh , S . , Jung , Y . , Kim , S . , Lee , I . and Kang , N . , 2019 , " Deep generative design : Integration of topology optimization and generative models , " Journal of Mechanical Design , 141 ( 11 ) . DOI : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4044229 [ 26 ] Nie , Z . , Lin , T . , Jiang , H . and Kara , L . B . , 2021 , " Topologygan : Topology optimization using generative adversarial networks based on physical fields over the initial domain , " Journal of Mechanical Design , 143 ( 3 ) , 031715 . DOI : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4049533 [ 27 ] Burnap , A . , Liu , Y . , Pan , Y . , Lee , H . , Gonzalez , R . et al , P . Y . , 2016 , " Estimating and exploring the product form design space using deep generative models , " IDETC - CIE , ASME , V02AT03A013 . DOI : 10 . 1115 / DETC2016 - 60091 [ 28 ] Yilmaz , E . , & German , B . , 2020 , “Conditional generative adversarial network framework for airfoil inverse design , ” AIAA aviation 2020 forum ( p . 3185 ) . DOI : 10 . 2514 / 6 . 2020 - 3185 [ 29 ] Li , J . , Xu , K . , Chaudhuri , S . , Yumer , E . , Zhang , H . , & Guibas , L . , 2017 , “Grass : Generative recursive autoencoders for shape structures , ” ACM Transactions on Graphics ( TOG ) , 36 ( 4 ) , pp . 1 - 14 . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 3072959 . 3073637 [ 30 ] Shu , D . , Cunningham , J . , Stump , G . , Miller , S . W . , Yukish , M . A . , Simpson , T . W . , & Tucker , C . S . , 2020 , “3D design using generative adversarial networks and physics - based validation , ” Journal of Mechanical Design , 142 ( 7 ) , 071701 . DOI : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4045419 [ 31 ] Regenwetter , L . , Nobari , A . H . , & Ahmed , F . , 2022 , “Deep generative models in engineering design : A review , ” Journal of Mechanical Design , 144 ( 7 ) , 071704 . DOI : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4053859 Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 28 [ 32 ] Shah , J . J . , Vargas - Hernandez , N . O . E . , Summers , J . D . , & Kulkarni , S . , 2001 , “Collaborative Sketching ( C - Sketch ) —An idea generation technique for engineering design , ” The Journal of Creative Behavior , 35 ( 3 ) , pp . 168 - 198 . DOI : 10 . 1002 / j . 2162 - 6057 . 2001 . tb01045 . x [ 33 ] Krasadakis , G . , 2020 , “Brainstorming , ” In The Innovation Mode ( pp . 141 - 146 ) , Springer , Cham . ISBN : 978 - 3 - 030 - 45138 - 7 . DOI : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 45139 - 4 _ 8 [ 34 ] Bonnardel , N . , & Didier , J . , 2020 , " Brainstorming variants to favor creative design , " Applied Ergo . , 83 , 102987 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . apergo . 2019 . 102987 [ 35 ] Wang , H . C . , Li , T . Y . , Rosé , C . P . , Huang , C . C . , & Chang , C . Y . , 2006 , “VIBRANT : A brainstorming agent for computer supported creative problem solving , ” International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems , pp . 787 - 789 , Springer , Berlin , Heidelberg . DOI : 10 . 1007 / 11774303 _ 101 [ 36 ] Lee , B . , Feldman , B . , & Fu , K . , 2022 , “Speech2Mindmap : Testing the Accuracy of Unsupervised Automatic Mindmapping Technology With Speech Recognition , ” Journal of Mechanical Design , 144 ( 2 ) . DOI : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4052282 [ 37 ] Song , B . , Zurita , N . F . S . , Gyory , J . T . , Zhang , G . , McComb , C . , Cagan , J . , . . . & Yukish , M . , 2022 , “Decoding the agility of artificial intelligence - assisted human design teams , ” Design Studies , 79 , 101094 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2022 . 101094 [ 38 ] Song , B . , Soria Zurita , N . F . , Nolte , H . , Singh , H . , Cagan , J . , & McComb , C . , 2022 , “When Faced With Increasing Complexity : The Effectiveness of Artificial Intelligence Assistance for Drone Design , ” Journal of Mechanical Design , 144 ( 2 ) . DOI : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4051871 [ 39 ] Gyory , J . T . , Soria Zurita , N . F . , Martin , J . , Balon , C . , McComb , C . , Kotovsky , K . , & Cagan , J . , 2022 , “Human Versus Artificial Intelligence : A Data - Driven Approach to Real - Time Process Management During Complex Engineering Design , ” Journal of Mechanical Design , 144 ( 2 ) . DOI : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4052488 [ 40 ] Fargnoli , M . , Rovida , E . and Troisi , R . , 2006 , " The morphological matrix : Tool for the development of innovative design solutions , " 4th ICAD , pp . 1 - 7 . [ 41 ] Stone , R . B . , Wood , K . L . and Crawford , R . H . , 2000 , " A heuristic method for identifying modules for product architectures , " Design studies , 21 ( 1 ) , pp . 5 - 31 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / S0142 - 694X ( 99 ) 00003 - 4 [ 42 ] Jiang , S . , Hu , J . , Wood , K . L . , & Luo , J . , 2022 , “Data - Driven Design - By - Analogy : State - of - the - Art and Future Directions , ” Journal of Mechanical Design , 144 ( 2 ) . DOI : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4051681 [ 43 ] He , Y . , Camburn , B . , Liu , H . , Luo , J . , Yang , M . , et al . , 2019 , " Mining and representing the concept space of existing ideas for directed ideation , " Journal of Mechanical Design , 141 ( 12 ) . DOI : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4044399 [ 44 ] Siddharth , L . , Blessing , L . , Wood , K . L . , & Luo , J . , 2022 , “Engineering knowledge graph from patent database , ” Journal of Computing and Information Science in Engineering , 22 ( 2 ) . DOI : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4052293 [ 45 ] Han , J . , Sarica , S . , Shi , F . , & Luo , J . , 2022 , “Semantic Networks for Engineering Design : State of the Art and Future Directions , ” Journal of Mechanical Design , 144 ( 2 ) . DOI : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4052148 [ 46 ] Sarica , S . , Han , J . , & Luo , J . , 2023 , “Design representation as semantic networks , ” Computers in Industry , 144 , 103791 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . compind . 2022 . 103791 [ 47 ] Vattam , S . , & Goel , A . , 2013 , “An information foraging model of interactive analogical retrieval , ” Proc . of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society , Vol . 35 , No . 35 . Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 29 [ 48 ] Kruiper , R . , Vincent , J . F . , Abraham , E . , Soar , R . C . , Konstas , I . , Chen - Burger , J . , & Desmulliez , M . P . , 2018 , “Towards a design process for computer - aided biomimetics , ” Biomimetics , 3 ( 3 ) , 14 . DOI : 10 . 3390 / biomimetics3030014 [ 49 ] Vattam , S . , Wiltgen , B . , Helms , M . , Goel , A . K . , & Yen , J . , 2011 , “DANE : fostering creativity in and through biologically inspired design , ” Design creativity 2010 , pp . 115 - 122 , Springer , London . DOI : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 0 - 85729 - 224 - 7 _ 16 [ 50 ] Deldin , J . M . , & Schuknecht , M . , 2014 , “The AskNature database : enabling solutions in biomimetic design , ” In Biologically inspired design , pp . 17 - 27 , Springer , London . DOI : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4471 - 5248 - 4 _ 2 [ 51 ] Goldschmidt , G . , & Smolkov , M . , 2006 , “Variances in the impact of visual stimuli on design problem solving performance , ” Design Studies , 27 ( 5 ) , pp . 549 - 569 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2006 . 01 . 002 [ 52 ] Ahmed , S . , & Boelskifte , P . , 2006 , “Investigations of product design engineering students intentions and a users perception of product character , ” Proceedings of NordDesign 2006 Conference , Reykjavik , Iceland . [ 53 ] Han , J . , Forbes , H . , Shi , F . , Hao , J . , & Schaefer , D . , 2020 , “A data - driven approach for creative concept generation and evaluation , ” Proceedings of the Design Society : DESIGN Conference , Vol . 1 , pp . 167 - 176 , Cambridge University Press . DOI : 10 . 1017 / dsd . 2020 . 5 [ 54 ] Jiang , S . , Luo , J . , Ruiz - Pava , G . , Hu , J . , & Magee , C . L . , 2021 , “Deriving design feature vectors for patent images using convolutional neural networks , ” Journal of Mechanical Design , 143 ( 6 ) . DOI : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4049214 [ 55 ] Wang , L . , Shen , W . , Xie , H . , Neelamkavil , J . , & Pardasani , A . , 2002 , “Collaborative conceptual design—state of the art and future trends , ” Computer - aided design , 34 ( 13 ) , pp . 981 - 996 . [ 56 ] Kvan , T . , 2000 , “Collaborative design : what is it ? , ” Automation in construction , 9 ( 4 ) , pp . 409 - 415 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / S0010 - 4485 ( 01 ) 00157 - 9 [ 57 ] Vlah , D . , Žavbi , R . and Vukašinović , N . , 2020 , " Evaluation of topology optimization and generative design tools as support for conceptual design , " Proceedings of the Design Society : DESIGN Conference , pp . 451 - 460 . DOI : 10 . 1017 / dsd . 2020 . 165 [ 58 ] Querin , O . M . , Victoria , M . , Alonso , C . , Loyola , R . A . , & Montrull , P . M . , 2017 , Topology design methods for structural optimization . Elsevier , London . [ 59 ] Chau , H . H . , Chen , X . , McKay , A . , & Pennington , A . D . , 2004 , “Evaluation of a 3D shape grammar implementation , ” Design computing and cognition’04 , pp . 357 - 376 , Springer , Dordrecht . DOI : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4020 - 2393 - 4 _ 19 [ 60 ] Hoisl , F . , & Shea , K . , 2011 , “An interactive , visual approach to developing and applying parametric three - dimensional spatial grammars , ” AI EDAM , 25 ( 4 ) , pp . 333 - 356 . DOI : 10 . 1017 / S0890060411000205 [ 61 ] Reid , T . N . , Gonzalez , R . D . , & Papalambros , P . Y . , 2010 , “Quantification of Perceived Environmental Friendliness for Vehicle Silhouette Design , ” Journal of mechanical design , 132 ( 10 ) . DOI : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4002290 [ 62 ] Ren , Y . , Burnap , A . , & Papalambros , P . , 2013 , “Quantification of perceptual design attributes using a crowd , ” DS 75 - 6 : Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Engineering Design ( ICED13 ) , Design for Harmonies , Vol . 6 : Design Information and Knowledge , Seoul , Korea , 19 - 22 . 08 . 2013 . [ 63 ] Goodfellow , I . , Pouget - Abadie , J . , Mirza , M . , Xu , B . , Warde - Farley , D . , Ozair , S . , . . . & Bengio , Y . , 2014 , “Generative adversarial nets , ” Advances in neural information processing systems , 27 . Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 30 [ 64 ] Kingma , D . P . , & Welling , M . , 2013 , “Auto - encoding variational bayes , ” arXiv preprint arXiv : 1312 . 6114 . DOI : 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 1312 . 6114 [ 65 ] Siddharth , L . , Blessing , L . , & Luo , J . , 2022 , “Natural language processing in - and - for design research , ” Design Science , 8 , E21 . Doi : 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2022 . 16 [ 66 ] Gatt , A . , & Krahmer , E . , 2018 , “Survey of the state of the art in natural language generation : Core tasks , applications and evaluation , ” Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 61 , pp . 65 - 170 . DOI : 10 . 1613 / jair . 5477 [ 67 ] Lopez , A . , 2008 , “Statistical machine translation , ” ACM Computing Surveys ( CSUR ) , 40 ( 3 ) , pp . 1 - 49 . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 1380584 . 1380586 [ 68 ] Ozsoy , M . G . , Alpaslan , F . N . , & Cicekli , I . , 2011 , “Text summarization using latent semantic analysis , ” Journal of Information Science , 37 ( 4 ) , pp . 405 - 417 . DOI : 10 . 1177 % 2F0165551511408848 [ 69 ] Li , Z . , Jiang , X . , Shang , L . and Li , H . , 2018 , " Paraphrase Generation with Deep Reinforcement Learning , " Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp . 3865 - 3878 . DOI : 10 . 18653 / v1 / D18 - 1421 [ 70 ] Leppänen , L . , Munezero , M . , Granroth - Wilding , M . , & Toivonen , H . , 2017 , “Data - driven news generation for automated journalism , ” Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Natural Language Generation , pp . 188 - 197 . DOI : 10 . 18653 / v1 / W17 - 3528 [ 71 ] Wanner , L . , Bosch , H . , Bouayad ‐ Agha , N . , Casamayor , G . , Ertl , T . , Hilbring , D . , . . . & Vrochidis , S . , 2015 , “ Getting the environmental information across : from the Web to the user , ” Expert Systems , 32 ( 3 ) , pp . 405 - 432 . DOI : 10 . 1111 / exsy . 12100 [ 72 ] Perera , R . , & Nand , P . , 2017 , “Recent advances in natural language generation : A survey and classification of the empirical literature , ” Computing and Informatics , 36 ( 1 ) , 1 - 32 . [ 73 ] Duan , J . , Zhao , H . , Zhou , Q . , Qiu , M . , & Liu , M . , 2020 , “A Study of Pre - trained Language Models in Natural Language Processing , ” 2020 IEEE International Conference on Smart Cloud ( Smart - Cloud ) , pp . 116 - 121 . DOI : 10 . 1109 / SmartCloud49737 . 2020 . 00030 [ 74 ] Vaswani , A . , Shazeer , N . , Parmar , N . , Uszkoreit , J . , Jones , L . , Gomez , A . N . , . . . & Polosukhin , I . , 2017 , “Attention is all you need , “ Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30 ( NeurIPS 2017 ) . [ 75 ] Topal , M . O . , Bas , A . , & van Heerden , I . , 2021 , " Exploring transformers in natural language generation : GPT , BERT , and XLNET , " International Conference on Interdisciplinary Applications of AI ( ICIDAAI ) [ 76 ] Pascanu , R . , Mikolov , T . , & Bengio , Y . , 2013 , “On the difficulty of training recurrent neural networks , “ International conference on machine learning , pp . 1310 - 1318 , PMLR . [ 77 ] Brown , T . B . , Mann , B . , Ryder , N . , Subbiah , M . , Kaplan , J . , et al . , 2020 , " Language models are few - shot learners , " Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33 ( NeurIPS 2020 ) . [ 78 ] Radford , A . , Wu , J . , Child , R . , Luan , D . , Amodei , D . , & Sutskever , I . , 2019 , " Language models are unsupervised multitask learners , " OpenAI blog , 1 ( 8 ) , 9 . [ 79 ] Peng , B . , Zhu , C . , Li , C . , Li , X . , Li , J . , Zeng , M . , & Gao , J . , 2020 , “Few - shot Natural Language Generation for Task - Oriented Dialog , “ Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics : EMNLP 2020 , pp . 172 - 182 . DOI : 10 . 18653 / v1 / 2020 . findings - emnlp . 17 [ 80 ] Amin - Nejad , A . , Ive , J . , & Velupillai , S . , 2020 , " Exploring transformer text generation for medical dataset augmentation , " Proceedings of the 12th Language Resources and Evaluation Conference , pp . 4699 - 4708 . Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 31 [ 81 ] Lee , J . S . , & Hsiang , J . , 2020 , “Patent claim generation by fine - tuning OpenAI GPT - 2 , “ World Patent Information , 62 , 101983 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . wpi . 2020 . 101983 [ 82 ] Fang , J . , 2021 , “An Application of Customized GPT - 2 Text Generator for Modern Content Creators , ” Master thesis , https : / / escholarship . org / uc / item / 3rd9v7xm [ 83 ] Radford , A . , Narasimhan , K . , Salimans , T . , & Sutskever , I . , 2018 , “Improving language understanding by generative pre - training” [ 84 ] Hinton , G . E . and Salakhutdinov , R . R . , 2006 , " Reducing the dimensionality of data with neural networks , " Science , 313 ( 5786 ) , pp . 504 - 507 . DOI : 10 . 1126 / science . 1127647 [ 85 ] Huang , Q . , Gan , Z . , Celikyilmaz , A . , Wu , D . , Wang , J . , & He , X . , 2019 , “Hierarchically structured reinforcement learning for topically coherent visual story generation , ” Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , Vol . 33 , No . 01 , pp . 8465 - 8472 . DOI : 10 . 1609 / aaai . v33i01 . 33018465 [ 86 ] Devlin , J . , Chang , M . W . , Lee , K . , & Toutanova , K . , 2019 , “BERT : Pre - training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding , ” Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics : Human Language Technologies , Volume 1 ( Long and Short Papers ) , pp . 4171 - 4186 . DOI : 10 . 18653 / v1 / N19 - 1423 [ 87 ] Papineni , K . , Roukos , S . , Ward , T . , & Zhu , W . J . , 2002 , “Bleu : a method for automatic evaluation of machine translation , ” Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pp . 311 - 318 . DOI : 10 . 3115 / 1073083 . 1073135 [ 88 ] Lin , C . Y . , 2004 , “Rouge : A package for automatic evaluation of summaries , ” Text summarization branches out , pp . 74 - 81 . [ 89 ] Banerjee , S . , & Lavie , A . , 2005 , “METEOR : An automatic metric for MT evaluation with improved correlation with human judgments , ” Proceedings of the acl workshop on intrinsic and extrinsic evaluation measures for machine translation and / or summarization , pp . 65 - 72 . [ 90 ] Kusner , M . , Sun , Y . , Kolkin , N . , & Weinberger , K . , 2015 , “From word embeddings to document distances , ” International conference on machine learning , pp . 957 - 966 . PMLR . [ 91 ] Zhao , W . , Peyrard , M . , Liu , F . , Gao , Y . , Meyer , C . M . , & Eger , S . , 2019 , “MoverScore : Text Generation Evaluating with Contextualized Embeddings and Earth Mover Distance , ” Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing ( EMNLP - IJCNLP ) , pp . 563 - 578 . DOI : 10 . 18653 / v1 / D19 - 1053 [ 92 ] Lowe , R . , Noseworthy , M . , Serban , I . V . , Angelard - Gontier , N . , Bengio , Y . , & Pineau , J . , 2017 , “Towards an Automatic Turing Test : Learning to Evaluate Dialogue Responses , ” Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , Volume 1 : Long Papers , pp . 1116 - 1126 . DOI : 10 . 18653 / v1 / P17 - 1103 [ 93 ] Zhou , W . , & Xu , K . , 2020 , “Learning to compare for better training and evaluation of open domain natural language generation models , ” Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , Vol . 34 , No . 05 , pp . 9717 - 9724 . DOI : 10 . 1609 / aaai . v34i05 . 6521 [ 94 ] Bender , E . M . , Gebru , T . , McMillan - Major , A . , & Shmitchell , S . , 2021 , “On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots : Can Language Models Be Too Big , ” Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness , Accountability , and Transparency , pp . 610 - 623 . DOI : 10 . 1145 / 3442188 . 3445922 [ 95 ] Mednick , S . , 1962 , “The associative basis of the creative process , ” Psychological review , 69 ( 3 ) , 220 . DOI : 10 . 1037 / h0048850 Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 32 [ 96 ] Beaty , R . E . , Kenett , Y . N . , Hass , R . W . , & Schacter , D . L . , 2022 , “Semantic memory and creativity : the costs and benefits of semantic memory structure in generating original ideas , ” Thinking & Reasoning , 1 - 35 . DOI : 10 . 1080 / 13546783 . 2022 . 2076742 [ 97 ] Simonton , D . K . , 2000 , “Creativity : Cognitive , personal , developmental , and social aspects , ” American psychologist , 55 ( 1 ) , 151 . DOI : 10 . 1037 / 0003 - 066X . 55 . 1 . 151 [ 98 ] He , Y . , & Luo , J . , 2017 , “The novelty ‘sweet spot’ of invention , ” Design Science , 3 . DOI : 10 . 1017 / dsj . 2017 . 23 [ 99 ] Luo , J . , & Wood , K . L . , 2017 , “The growing complexity in invention process , ” Research in Engineering Design , 28 ( 4 ) , 421 - 435 . DOI : 10 . 1007 / s00163 - 017 - 0266 - 3 [ 100 ] Stevenson , C . , Smal , I . , Baas , M . , Grasman , R . , & van der Maas , H . , 2022 , “Putting GPT - 3 ' s Creativity to the ( Alternative Uses ) Test , ” arXiv preprint arXiv : 2206 . 08932 . DOI : 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2206 . 08932 [ 101 ] Amabile , T . M . , 1982 , “Social psychology of creativity : A consensual assessment technique , ” Journal of personality and social psychology , 43 ( 5 ) , 997 . DOI : 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 43 . 5 . 997 [ 102 ] Weisberg , R . W . , 2006 , Creativity : Understanding innovation in problem solving , science , invention , and the arts , John Wiley & Sons , Inc . , Hoboken , NJ , US [ 103 ] Amabile , T . M . , 1996 , Creativity in context : Update to The Social Psychology of Creativity , Westview Press , Boulder , CO . DOI : 10 . 4324 / 9780429501234 [ 104 ] Shah , J . J . , Smith , S . M . , & Vargas - Hernandez , N . , 2003 , “Metrics for measuring ideation effectiveness , ” Design studies , 24 ( 2 ) , pp . 111 - 134 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / S0142 - 694X ( 02 ) 00034 - 0 [ 105 ] Brown , D . C . , 2015 , “Computational design creativity evaluation , ” Design Computing and Cognition ' 14 , pp . 207 - 224 , Springer , Cham . DOI : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 14956 - 1 _ 12 [ 106 ] He , Y . , & Luo , J . , 2017 , “Novelty , conventionality , and value of invention , ” Design Computing and Cognition ' 16 , pp . 23 - 38 , Springer , Cham . DOI : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 44989 - 0 _ 2 [ 107 ] Camburn , B . , He , Y . , Raviselvam , S . , Luo , J . , & Wood , K . , 2020 , “Machine learning - based design concept evaluation , ” Journal of Mechanical Design , 142 ( 3 ) , 031113 . DOI : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4045126 [ 108 ] Shibayama , S . , Yin , D . , & Matsumoto , K . , 2021 , “Measuring novelty in science with word embedding , ” PloS one , 16 ( 7 ) , e0254034 . DOI : 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0254034 [ 109 ] Teller , V . , 2000 , Speech and language processing : an introduction to natural language processing , computational linguistics , and speech recognition , Upper Saddle River , N . J . : Prentice Hall . DOI : 10 . 1162 / 089120100750105975 [ 110 ] Beaty , R . E . , & Johnson , D . R . , 2021 , “Automating creativity assessment with SemDis : An open platform for computing semantic distance , ” Behavior research methods , 53 ( 2 ) , 757 - 780 . DOI : 10 . 3758 / s13428 - 020 - 01453 - w [ 111 ] Luo , J . , Song , B . , Blessing , L . , & Wood , K . , 2018 , “Design opportunity conception using the total technology space map , ” Ai Edam , 32 ( 4 ) , 449 - 461 . DOI : 10 . 1017 / S0890060418000094 [ 112 ] Srinivasan , V . , Song , B . , Luo , J . , Subburaj , K . , Elara , M . R . , Blessing , L . , & Wood , K . , 2018 , “Does analogical distance affect performance of ideation ? , ” Journal of Mechanical Design , 140 ( 7 ) . DOI : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4040165 [ 113 ] Gentner , D . , 1983 , " Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for analogy , " Cognitive science , 7 ( 2 ) , 155 - 170 . Generative Transformers for Design Concept Generation ( A P REPRINT ) 33 [ 114 ] Radford , A . , Kim , J . W . , Hallacy , C . , Ramesh , A . , Goh , G . , Agarwal , S . , . . . & Sutskever , I . , 2021 , “Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision , ” International Conference on Machine Learning , pp . 8748 - 8763 . PMLR . [ 115 ] Ramesh , A . , Pavlov , M . , Goh , G . , Gray , S . , Voss , C . , Radford , A . , . . . & Sutskever , I . , 2021 , “Zero - shot text - to - image generation , ” International Conference on Machine Learning , pp . 8821 - 8831 . PMLR . [ 116 ] Dosovitskiy , A . , Beyer , L . , Kolesnikov , A . , Weissenborn , D . , Zhai , X . , Unterthiner , T . , . . . & Houlsby , N . , 2020 , “An Image is Worth 16x16 Words : Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale , ” International Conference on Learning Representations . [ 117 ] He , K . , Chen , X . , Xie , S . , Li , Y . , Dollár , P . , & Girshick , R . , 2021 , “Masked autoencoders are scalable vision learners , ” arXiv preprint arXiv : 2111 . 06377 . DOI : 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2111 . 06377 [ 118 ] Bommasani , R . , Hudson , D . A . , Adeli , E . , Altman , R . , Arora , S . , von Arx , S . , . . . & Liang , P . , 2021 , “On the opportunities and risks of foundation models , ” arXiv preprint arXiv : 2108 . 07258 . DOI : 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2108 . 07258