© Blackwell Publishing Ltd , 2004 . 9600 Garsington Road , Oxford OX4 2DQ and 350 Main St , Malden , MA 02148 , USA . Volume 13 Number 3 September 2004 176 CREATIVITY AND INNOVATION MANAGEMENT Blackwell Publishing Ltd . Oxford , UK and Malden , USACAIMCreativity and Innovation Management0963 - 1690Blackwell Publishing Ltd , 2004 . September 2004133ARTICLES EVOCATION PROCESSES IN DESIGNCREATIVITY AND INNOVATION MANAGEMENT Evocation Processes by Novice and Expert Designers : Towards Stimulating Analogical Thinking Nathalie Bonnardel and Evelyne Marmèche Design activity occurs in many professions , ranging from technical to more artistic domains . Whatever the domain , it is a constant challenge for designers to introduce creativity in each design project they work on and minimize the tendency to repeat familiar design features . The goal of this paper is to present a cognitive approach to design problem solving as well as an experimental study . This study aims at determining whether creative ideas can be enhanced by the presentation of external sources of inspiration . In particular , we analyse the effect of the presentation of different kinds of sources ( intra - versus interdomain sources , which are presented as graphical representations or as verbal labels ) according to the designers’ level of expertise ( lay - designers versus professionals ) . Results show that it is possible to enhance evocation processes in design , but that it is dependent on both the nature of sources of inspiration and the designers’ level of expertise . Based on these results , we suggest ways for enhancing creative ideas in design tasks . Introduction esign activities are performed in a very large range of professional areas , such as the design of everyday life products ( e . g . Norman , 1993 ) , website design ( e . g . Bonnardel , Lanzone & Sumner , 2003 ) , software design ( Détienne , 2001 ) or even the design of aero - space products ( Bonnardel , 1999 ) . Whatever the design area , the ﬁnal products have both to be useful , usable and attractive for customers or users . The usefulness depends on the func - tionality planned for the products at hand , which should be in accordance with users’ needs . In order to create usable ( or easy to use ) products , designers can refer to guidelines and ergonomic principles or criteria ( see , for instance , Norman , 1993 ; Nielsen , 1993 , 2000 ; Scapin & Bastien , 1997 ) . Though applying guidelines or ergonomic criteria appears not to be easy ( Bonnardel & Chevalier , 2001 ; Chevalier & Ivory , 2003 ) , designers can attend human - computer classes and training in order to reach more usable products . Developing attractive products is also a major challenge , since the decision of purchase frequently depends on the users’ ﬁrst feelings about the considered product . D So the ﬁrst main question is : how to stimu - late the design of such useful , usable and attractive products ? Our objective in this paper is to better understand how creative ideas occur in design activities , and whether it is possible to enhance the emergence of such ideas by stimulating analogical thinking . The role of analogy - making in creativity has been stressed by several authors ; for instance , Koestler ( 1975 ) , Kolodner ( 1993 ) and Boden ( 1990 ) . Analogical thinking is also considered as having a positive role in creative design activities or in ‘cognitive generative tasks’ ( see Bonnardel , 2000 ; Ward , Smith & Vaid , 1997 ) . Koestler ( 1975 , p . 121 ) explained creativity as ‘the sudden interlocking of two previously unrelated skills , or matrices of thought’ . According to Ward , Smith and Vaid ( 1997 ) , people engaged in generative cognitive activ - ities have to extend the boundaries of a con - ceptual domain by mentally crafting novel instances of the concept . This paper ﬁrst presents a cognitive approach that characterizes design problem - solving and describes cognitive mechanisms involved in creative design activities . Next , an experimental study is described . It aims both at determining whether it is possible to deﬁne caim _ 306 . fm Page 176 Wednesday , July 7 , 2004 2 : 54 PM EVOCATION PROCESSES IN DESIGN 177 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd , 2004 Volume 13 Number 3 September 2004 experimental conditions that enhance evoca - tion processes in design and whether such conditions are dependent on the designers’ level of expertise . Lastly , based on the obtained results , we suggest ways for enhanc - ing evocation processes in designers’ thinking . Creativity in design : A cognitive psychology view Design problem solving In cognitive psychology , design activities are described as problem - solving situations : design - ers have to produce an artefact , which should ﬁt a speciﬁc function and satisfy different requirements ( Malhotra et al . , 1980 ) . These requirements deﬁne to some extent the goal to reach , but designers have to com - plement their mental representation of the design problem , since these problems are ill - structured or ill - deﬁned ( Eastman , 1969 ; Reitman , 1964 ; Simon , 1973 ) . Indeed , at the beginning of the problem , the designers have only an incomplete and imprecise mental representation of the design goal . It is only through the problem - solving process itself that designers can complete their mental rep - resentations by choosing design options ( see Falzon et al . 1990 ) . Thus , the design problem solving results from a co - evolution of problem and solution spaces ( Cross & Dorst , 1999 ; Dorst & Cross , 2001 ) . This speciﬁcity of design prob - lems has also been described as based on an iterative dialectic between problem framing and problem solving ( Rittel & Webber , 1984 ; Simon , 1995 ) . During problem framing , designers reﬁne design goals and speciﬁcations and , thus , reﬁne their mental representation of the problem . During problem solving , designers elaborate solutions and evaluate these solutions with respect to various criteria and constraints , which guide the designers in per - forming subsequent stages of design problem solving ( see , for instance , Bonnardel , 1993 , 1999 ) . Continuous interactions between the problem space and the solution space allows a reﬂective conversation between the designer and his / her external representation of the artefact ( see Schön , 1983 ) . Each designer constructs his or her own mental representation of the design problem and deals in fact with a problem which has become speciﬁc to him or her . Different designers dealing with a same problem , develop different ideas and reach different solutions , materialized , for instance , by draw - ings or plans ( Bisseret , Figeac - Létang & Falzon , 1988 ) . Design problems are also considered to be open - ended since there is usually no single cor - rect solution for a given problem , but instead a variety of potential solutions ( Fustier , 1989 ) , which satisfy different criteria or constraints to varying degrees . Opportunistic process The dialectic process between problem fram - ing and problem solving contributes to another characteristic of design problem solv - ing : it is viewed as an opportunistic process . Several years ago , much debate centred on whether design activities were hierarchically organized ( see , for instance , Adelson & Soloway , 1985 ; Jeffries et al . , 1981 ) or opportu - nistically organized ( for a review , see Visser , 1994 ) . The seminal study of Hayes - Roth and Hayes - Roth ( 1979 ) and later research ( see , for instance , Bisseret , Figeac - Létang & Falzon , 1988 ; Guindon , 1990 ; Visser , 1990 ) provided arguments on behalf of an opportunistic orga - nization of design activities , though they possibly include hierarchical episodes . The design process was thus described as multi - directional : decisions included both top - down and bottom - up instances and they could be made at different levels of abstraction etc . Such an activity was characterized by the authors as opportunistic because ‘each deci - sion [ was ] motivated by one or two immedi - ately preceding decisions , rather than by some high - level executive program’ ( Hayes - Roth & Hayes - Roth , 1979 , p . 381 ) . Such decisions could lead to reconsidering previous decisions or postponing certain decisions ( Bonnardel , Lanzone & Sumner , 2003 ; Hayes - Roth & Hayes - Roth , 1979 ; Visser , 1990 ) . Emergence of new ideas Understanding how designers opportunis - cally develop new ideas and reach innovative products remains a major issue . Models of creativity have been proposed in order to highlight the sociocultural context in which individual creativity occurs ( see Boden , 1990 ; Csikszentmihalyi , 1996 ; Fischer , 2000 ; Liu , 2000 ) . Other approaches describe characteris - tics of creative individuals ( e . g . motivation , attitude , knowledge , skills ) in relationship with positive or negative effects of the envi - ronment ( Amabile , 1996 ) . In particular , the ‘investment approach’ ( Sternberg & Lubart , 1991 , 1995 ) points out necessary resources for creative persons ( e . g . intelligence , knowledge , motivation and so on ) as well as the necessity 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 caim _ 306 . fm Page 177 Wednesday , July 7 , 2004 2 : 54 PM 178 CREATIVITY AND INNOVATION MANAGEMENT Volume 13 Number 3 September 2004 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd , 2004 of presenting the new production at the right moment for the production to be appreciated . Since our objective is to understand more precisely how the designers’ mental represen - tations evolve in order to reach an innovative production , we are going to focus on cognitive processes developed by designers , in line with cognitive - components approaches of creativ - ity ( see Finke , Ward , & Smith , 1992 ; Mumford et al . , 1991 ; Runco & Chand , 1995 ) . Based both on observations in professional design situations ( Bonnardel , 1992 ; Dorst , 1997 ; Valkenburg & Dorst , 1998 ) and previous experiments involving real design problem - solving activities ( Bonnardel , 2000 ) , we argue that evocation process in design is based on two main cognitive mechanisms which contin - uously interact : • The construction of a ‘constrained cognitive environment’ , which delimits the space of research , on the basis of different kinds of constraints , in order quickly to reach in - depth levels of understanding . These con - straints can consist of prescribed constraints derived from a schedule of conditions , ‘constructed’ constraints which depend on the designers’ expertise , or ‘deduced’ con - straints , which depend on the current state of problem solving as well as on previously deﬁned constraints ( see Bonnardel , 1993 ) . Constraints are propagated during design problem solving ( Darses , 1994 ) and they dynamically orient the designer’s reason - ing towards the most appropriate decision - making and choices of design options ( Bonnardel , 1999 ) . • Analogy - making , which can open up or restrict the ‘space of research’ of new ideas , depending on the nature of the sources that are evoked for solving the problem at hand . Design activities would be more or less cre - ative according to the conceptual domains evoked sources belong to , and to the fea - tures of sources taken into account , such as functional , aesthetic or structural features ( see Bonnardel & Marmèche , 2003 ) . Analogy making and expertise A lot of results showed that the cognitive treat - ment of data is performed differently depend - ing on the participants’ level of expertise ( see , for instance , Bonnardel & Marmèche , 2003 ; Chi , Feltovitch & Glaser , 1981 ; Besnard & Bastien - Toniazzo , 1999 ; Didierjean & Marmèche , 2003 ; ) . Case - based reasoning is a usual cognitive process for experts , since they have a large library of cases at their disposal . Experts can refer to such cases in order to engage in analogy - making for solving 8 design problems . Analogy - making is , how - ever , double - edged : • on one hand , it allows experts to consider promising ways for designing a new object ; • on another hand , it can restrict the bound - aries of the space of research , the extent of design ideas , the range of procedures to be used and thus , reduce creativity . In contrast , novice designers have only a few reference cases to deal with new design problems , which may restrict their space of research of innovative ideas . Analogy - making is usually described as allowing two kinds of analogies : • intradomain analogies , when the target ( e . g . the situation or problem at hand ) and the source ( a previous similar situation ) belong to the same conceptual domain ; • interdomain analogies , when the target and the source belong to different conceptual domains . In addition , relationships are established between the target and the source . Intra - domain analogies would be based on both sur - face similarities and structural similarities between the target and the cible , whereas interdomain analogies would be based only on structural similarities ( or underlying prin - ciples ) between the target and the sources . A way to inﬂuence people in developing ideas is to provide them with suggestions or examples . Thus , several experiments were conducted , in the case of ‘cognitive generative tasks’ , in order to determine the impact of the presentation of examples on participants’ pro - ductions . Experimental tasks were deﬁned in various areas : to design technical artefacts , such as spill - proof mugs or bicycle racks ( Jansson & Smith , 1989 , 1991 ; Purcell & Gero , 1992 ) , to design novel space creatures to inhabit a distant planet , to provide novel ideas for reducing trafﬁc accidents ( Marsh , Landau & Hicks , 1996 ; Smith , Ward , & Schumacher , 1993 ; Ward , 1994 ; Ward & Sifonis , 1997 ) . What - ever the ﬁnal objective , mainly similar results were observed : when they are provided with examples , participants’ productions conform to experimenter - provided examples . Such an effect has been called ‘design ﬁxation effect’ in the case of design activities ( Jansson & Smith , 1989 , 1991 ) . This type of effect appears , to a certain extent , similar to phenomena described for years , in psychology , under the terms of ‘functional ﬁxedness’ and ‘mechani - sation of thought’ ( see Duncker , 1945 ; Luchins , 1942 ; Maier , 1931 , Weisberg , 1988 ) . In contrast to these results , we argue that it is possible to enhance the evocation of new ideas and , especially , to lead designers to caim _ 306 . fm Page 178 Wednesday , July 7 , 2004 2 : 54 PM EVOCATION PROCESSES IN DESIGN 179 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd , 2004 Volume 13 Number 3 September 2004 extend their space of research , by providing them with different kinds of sources of inspi - ration . The objectives of our study are to determine : • What is the nature of the sources of inspira - tion spontaneously evoked by lay designers and professionals . • Whether it is possible to support designers in extending the boundaries of the concep - tual domain related to the object to be designed , by providing them with different kinds of sources . • Whether designers’ evocation processes are different according to their level of expertise . Experimental study Hypotheses • Throughout the design activity , profes - sional designers should globally evoke more intra - and interdomain sources than lay designers , since they are used to make analogies in their professional activities . • In line with previous research about the design ﬁxation effect , we expected that designers , whatever their level of expertise , would evoke mainly intra - domain sources directly related to the object to be designed . • However , we hypothesized that profes - sional designers may extend their space of research of ideas , when they are provided with interdomain sources . The suggestion of interdomain sources could lead profes - sionals to develop a reﬂection based on principles underlying these interdomain sources , and to adopt various points of view , which lead them to evoke new cre - ative ideas . In contrast , we hypothesized that lay designers will be more focused on surface features of the object to be designed . Therefore , they would not realize the poten - tial interest of interdomain sources , which are apparently far from the object to be designed . In addition , we compared two formats of pre - sentation of the suggested sources : graphical representations versus verbal labels . In previ - ous research , examples were always presented as graphical representations , which could limit the space of research more than verbal labels . Participants 75 designers participated in this study : • 25 professionals , who have been working in design ofﬁces for at least three years . They were between 26 and 66 years old and they had superior degrees in industrial design , graphical or applied arts , architecture . With regard to these characteristics , participants were assigned to each of the ﬁve experi - mental groups , in order to have matched groups . • 50 ‘lay designers’ , who were students in their ﬁrst or second year of Psychology , and who had no experience at all in industrial design . Experimental task All the participants had to perform the same task : to design a new seat ( see Figure 1 ) . This task was deﬁned in collaboration with a pro - fessor of industrial design and presented to participants as a scenario describing the object to design and its use , as well as the main requirements to satisfy . The object they had to design belongs to a category of objects well - known by everyone , novice or expert , since it is a speciﬁc seat . Participants had to express ideas and evoke sources , and though they real - ized drawings , our analysis is not focused on the quality of the drawings ( which would require more technical skills ) , nor on their role Figure 1 . Brief Description of the Object to Design . The object to be designed was intended to be used in a Parisian ‘cyber - café’ . It should be a particular seat with a contemporary design in order to be attractive for young customers . Such seats should allow the user to have a good sitting position , holding the back upright . Towards this end , the users should put their knees on a support intended to this function . In addition , these seats should allow the users the opportunity to relax , by offering them the possibility of rocking . caim _ 306 . fm Page 179 Wednesday , July 7 , 2004 2 : 54 PM 180 CREATIVITY AND INNOVATION MANAGEMENT Volume 13 Number 3 September 2004 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd , 2004 in the design task . Data analyses are only focused on the evoked sources , either without any suggested source of inspiration , or after the presentation of some sources , intra - or interdomain . Experimental conditions and procedure The participants had to solve the design prob - lem in their own ofﬁce . They were assigned to groups corresponding to the following exper - imental conditions : • a ‘free’ condition , in which the participants were only provided with the description of the design problem . • Four ‘guided’ conditions in which the par - ticipants were ﬁrst provided with the description of the design problem and , immediately after , with two potential sources of inspiration . These sources were either intra - domain or inter domain sources , and presented in a verbal or in a graphical format ( see Figure 2 ) . The suggested intra - domain sources pertain to the ‘seat’ category , which is the category the object to be designed belongs to . They consist of a rocking chair and an ofﬁce chair . The sug - gested interdomain sources do not belong to the category of the object to be designed . They consist of a climbing position and a logo . Each participant had about 50 minutes to begin to solve the design problem at hand . The designers’ drawings were video - recorded in order to allow us to analyse their evolution . In addition , in order to allow us to identify the sources of inspiration they referred to , the par - ticipants were invited to think aloud ( see Dorst & Cross , 2001 ; Ericsson & Simon , 1993 ; Gero & Mc Neil , 1998 ; Piolat & Pélissier , 1998 ) . The designers’ verbalizations were transcribed in order to perform an analysis of new evoked sources . Data analysis Since we focused on the designers’ evocation processes , two indicators related to these pro - cesses were taken into account : • the number of new sources evoked by the designers all along the design activity ; • the nature of new evoked sources , by dis - tinguishing intra - domain sources and inter - domain sources . By ‘new’ sources of inspiration , we mean that , for the four guided conditions , the account was performed on sources of inspiration that were not the suggested ones , but really newly evoked sources ( for instance , a camping seat , a sledge , a wave or a nest ) . Three judges independently categorized these sources as being intra - or interdomain sources . A high degree of agreement was obtained ( 0 . 95 ) . In case of hesitation , a short discussion allowed us to reach a complete agreement . Results Number and nature of sources evoked by laydesigners and professionals in the free and guided conditions A ﬁrst ANOVA was conducted on the number of evoked sources , with the ‘expertise level’ ( lay designers versus professionals ) and the ‘kind of condition’ ( free condition versus guided conditions ) as between - subject factors . The results yielded a signiﬁcant effect of the expertise level F ( 1 , 71 ) = 10 , 33 ; MSe = 14 , 32 ; p < 0 . 01 . The effect of the conditions was non - signiﬁcant . The results indicated no signiﬁcant interaction between expertise level and kind of conditions . A second ANOVA was conducted on the ‘nature of the evoked sources’ ( intra - versus interdomain sources ) , with the ‘expertise level’ ( lay designers versus professionals ) and the ‘kind of condition’ ( free condition versus guided conditions ) as between - subject factors . The results indicated three signiﬁcant interac - tions : the interaction between expertise level and the nature of the evoked sources , F ( 1 , 71 ) = 5 , 96 ; MSe = 5 , 71 ; p < 0 . 05 , the interaction between the kind of conditions and the nature of the evoked sources , F ( 1 , 71 ) = 4 , 22 ; MSe = 5 , 71 ; p < 0 . 05 , and the triple interaction between expertise level , kind of conditions and nature of the evoked sources , F ( 1 , 71 ) = 4 , 63 ; MSe = 5 , 71 ; p < 0 . 05 . In accordance with our ﬁrst hypothesis , lay designers evoked less sources than profession - als : in mean , respectively , 2 . 9 versus 6 . 4 ( see Table 1 ) . Thus , with the acquisition of exper - tise , the space of research is extended . In line with our second hypothesis , what - ever their level of expertise , designers sponta - neously evoked ( i . e . in the free condition ) more intra - domain sources than interdomain sources ( see Table 1 ) . The effect of the ‘condition’ factor ( i . e . free versus guided conditions ) is not globally sig - niﬁcant : there is no signiﬁcant difference in the number of sources evoked in the ‘free’ condi - tion versus in the different ‘guided’ conditions taken together . However , planned compari - sons show that though there is no signiﬁcant effect for lay designers , for professionals , a sig - niﬁcant interaction between conditions and the number of evoked sources does exist ( intra - and interdomain sources ) . In the free caim _ 306 . fm Page 180 Wednesday , July 7 , 2004 2 : 54 PM EVOCATION PROCESSES IN DESIGN 181 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd , 2004 Volume 13 Number 3 September 2004 Figure 2 . Suggested Sources of Inspiration Nature of sources Format of presentation Intradomain Interdomain Graphical representations Verbal labels ROCKING - CHAIR OFFICE CHAIR CLIMBING POSITION LOGO caim _ 306 . fm Page 181 Wednesday , July 7 , 2004 2 : 54 PM 182 CREATIVITY AND INNOVATION MANAGEMENT Volume 13 Number 3 September 2004 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd , 2004 condition , professionals mainly evoked intra - domain sources , whereas it is the reverse in the guided conditions , in which interdomain sources are predominant . Number and nature of sources evoked by lay designers and professionals according to the kinds of suggested sources and their format of presentation A ﬁrst ANOVA was conducted on the number of evoked sources , with the ‘expertise level’ ( lay designers versus professionals ) , the kind of ‘suggested sources’ ( intra - versus interdo - main sources ) and the ‘presentation format’ ( graphical representations versus labels ) as between - subject factors . The results yielded a signiﬁcant effect of the expertise level , F ( 1 , 52 ) = 15 , 52 ; MSe = 13 , 40 ; p < 0 . 001 , a signiﬁcant effect of the factor ‘suggested sources’ F ( 1 , 52 ) = 9 , 56 ; MSe = 13 , 40 ; p < 0 . 01 and a signiﬁcant interaction between the factors ‘expertise level’ and ‘suggested sources’ F ( 1 , 52 ) = 12 , 89 ; MSe = 13 , 40 ; p < 0 . 001 . The effect of the pre - sentation format was non - signiﬁcant , nor any interaction involving this factor . A second ANOVA was conducted on the nature of the evoked sources ( intra versus inter ) , with the ‘expertise level’ ( lay designers versus professionals ) and the kind of ‘sug - gested sources’ ( intra - versus interdomain sources ) as between - subject factors . The results indicated a signiﬁcant effect of the expertise level , F ( 1 , 56 ) = 16 , 05 ; MSe = 6 , 48 ; p < 0 . 001 , of the suggested sources , F ( 1 , 56 ) = 9 , 88 ; MSe = 6 , 48 ; p < 0 . 01 ] and of the number of intra versus interdomain sources that are evoked , F ( 1 , 56 ) = 11 , 75 ; MSe = 5 , 63 ; p < 0 . 01 ] . The inter - action between expertise level and the kind of the suggested sources is signiﬁcant , F ( 1 , 56 ) = 13 , 33 ; MSe = 6 , 48 ; p < 0 . 001 . The interaction between expertise level and the nature of the evoked sources is signiﬁcant , F ( 1 , 56 ) = 26 , 71 ; MSe = 5 , 63 ; p < 0 . 001 . The interaction between the suggested sources and the evoked sources is also signiﬁcant , F ( 1 , 56 ) = 12 , 12 ; MSe = 5 , 63 ; p < 0 . 001 . The triple interaction between exper - tise level , suggested sources and nature of the evoked sources is not signiﬁcant . To summarize , for lay designers , the sugges - tion of sources , whatever they are intra - or interdomain , did not appear to enhance the production of new creative ideas . In contrast , for professionals , the interdo - main condition signiﬁcantly facilitated the evocation of sources ( in mean , 10 . 5 evoked sources ) , whereas the intra - domain condition appeared to limit the evocation of sources ( in mean , 3 . 8 evoked sources ) with regard to the result obtained in the free condition ( 6 . 4 evoked sources ) . In the guided conditions , whatever the nature of suggested sources , pro - fessionals evoked more interdomain sources than intra - domain ones ( see Table 2 ) . How - ever , the space of research of interdomain sources appears to be even larger for profes - sionals when they are provided with interdo - main sources ( in mean , 8 . 3 ) than with intra - domain sources ( in mean , 2 . 8 ) . Thus , expertise seems to be related to the possibility of accessing interdomain sources , a priori far from the object to design . No signiﬁcant difference due to the format of presentation ( graphical representations or verbal labels ) of the initially suggested sources was observed , whatever the designers’ level of expertise . Discussion This study highlights interesting ﬁndings : • The evocation of creative sources of inspi - ration mainly results from analogy - making with interdomain sources . Table 1 . Number and Nature of Sources Evoked by Lay Designers and Professionals in the Free and Guided Conditions Experimental conditions Free condition Guided conditions Level of expertise Lay designers Intra 1 . 8 2 . 0 Inter 1 . 1 1 . 2 Total 2 . 9 3 . 2 Professionals Intra 3 . 4 1 . 6 Inter 3 . 0 5 . 6 Total 6 . 4 7 . 2 caim _ 306 . fm Page 182 Wednesday , July 7 , 2004 2 : 54 PM EVOCATION PROCESSES IN DESIGN 183 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd , 2004 Volume 13 Number 3 September 2004 • It is possible to exert an inﬂuence on the designers’ evocation processes , but this inﬂuence depends on the designers’ level of expertise . Our results appear very different from previ - ous ﬁndings ( such as the ones of Jansson & Smith , 1989 , 1991 ) : • For lay - designers , the presentation of sources of inspiration – playing the role of examples – did not limit the number of new evoked sources , though it did not expand it . • In contrast , for professionals , we observed a limitation of the evocation of sources when they were provided with intra - domain sources . This result is in line with the one obtained by Jansson & Smith ( 1989 , 1991 ) . These authors analysed the effect of intra - domain sources presented as exam - ples to professionals in order to design a bicycle - rack . However , our study showed that an opposite effect is obtained when professionals ( but not lay designers ) are provided with interdomain sources . In this case , these sources highly facilitated the evocation of new sources . Thus , with regard to the number of evoked sources , the evocation processes of profession - als can be more easily facilitated than the ones of lay designers . In addition , professionals appear to be very sensitive to the type of sources they are provided with . Concerning the nature of evoked sources , we found that , in the free condition , both pro - fessionals and lay designers spontaneously evoked mainly intra - domain sources . How - ever , we observed that , in contrast to lay designers , professionals can avoid such spon - taneous behaviour , when they are provided with external sources , whatever the nature of these sources . Indeed , professionals who were provided with sources mainly evoked interdo - main sources , whatever the nature ( intra - or interdomain ) of the suggested sources . The cognitive treatment of the suggested sources seems to be performed differently according to the designers’ level of expertise . Some research showed that experienced designers are able to take into account a mul - tiplicity of aspects of suggested sources ( func - tional , structural , aesthetic and so on ) , which could allow them to activate in long - term memory very heterogeneous new sources , or conﬂicting aspects from different domains ( see Bonnardel & Marmèche , 2003 ; Dorst , 1997 ) . Towards enhancing creative ideas in design Various techniques and divergent thinking guidelines – such as the classical brainstorm - ing technique ( Osborn , 1963 ) – have been pro - posed in order to foster creativity ( see Dewulf & Baillie , 1999 ; Nickerson , 1999 ) . In the case of professional situations , such as design , the challenge is to provide designers with a spe - ciﬁc support in accordance with their level of expertise . Moreover , it is also necessary to pro - vide designers with a ‘contextualized’ support and to present it ‘at the right moment’ , i . e . when designers look for new ideas and pro - gressively deﬁne their space of research . Though there is a co - evolution of problem and solution ( Cross & Dorst , 1999 ; Dorst & Cross , 2001 ) as well as an iterative dialectic between problem framing and problem solving ( Rittel & Webber , 1984 ; Simon , 1995 ) , if suggestions occur too late in the design process , designers may not consider these suggestions , since they will be more focused on graphically represent - ing their own design ideas . Table 2 . Number and nature of sources evoked by lay - designers and professionals in the guided conditions , according to the nature and format of presentation of suggested sources Suggested sources Intra - domain sources Interdomain sources Level of expertise Graphical Verbal Graphical Verbal Lay - designers Intra 3 . 3 2 . 0 1 . 3 1 . 4 Inter 0 . 2 1 . 4 1 . 4 1 . 8 Total 3 . 5 3 . 4 2 . 7 3 . 2 Professionals Intra 0 . 8 1 . 2 2 . 2 2 . 2 Inter 1 . 6 4 . 0 9 . 2 7 . 4 Total 2 . 4 5 . 2 11 . 4 9 . 6 caim _ 306 . fm Page 183 Wednesday , July 7 , 2004 2 : 54 PM 184 CREATIVITY AND INNOVATION MANAGEMENT Volume 13 Number 3 September 2004 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd , 2004 Towards the end of adapting support to the designers’ level of expertise , our ﬁndings show that only experts beneﬁt from the pre - sentation of external sources of inspiration , and especially of interdomain sources . Such sources allow experts to explore new concep - tual domains . In contrast , for novices , the fact of being provided with sources , either intra - or interdomain , does not signiﬁcantly modify the evocation of new sources . Our interpretation is that the suggested intra - domain sources are in fact very similar to the sources they would spontaneously evoke . Concerning interdo - main sources , the main problem for novices would be that they cannot envision the poten - tial utility of such sources , these sources look - ing for us too far from the object to design . Such results can lead to useful beneﬁts in two areas : enhancing novices’ analogical thinking and supporting expert designers in producing creative ideas . • For novices , in order to enhance analogical thinking , it appears necessary to go further than simply suggesting intra - or interdo - main sources . Pedagogical actions during design education could be particularly use - ful for novices in order to show them how and why to use analogies for successful design problem solving ( see Casakin & Goldschmidt , 1999 ) . In particular , a speciﬁc guidance should lead them to adopt vari - ous points of view on the suggested sources , as well as to connect these sources with the object to design . For instance , nov - ices could get speciﬁc questions related to aspects that they do not spontaneously con - sider ( see Bonnardel & Marmèche , 2003 ) , such as ‘affective’ , or ‘aesthetic’ ones in order to beneﬁt more from the presentation of interdomain sources . • For experts , in order to enhance the produc - tion of new creative ideas , our results allow us to point out the interest of the use of computational systems for providing designers with large databases consisting of a lot of pictures or words potentially useful for creative design tasks ( see Nakakoji , Yamamoto & Ohira , 2000 ) . In particular , based on our ﬁndings , it seems interesting to provide designers with sources of inspi - ration a priori very far conceptually from the object to design . Thus , it would lead experts to extend the boundaries of the conceptual domain they spontaneously consider . Lastly , at a more general level , it could be interesting to lead both novices and experts to become aware of the usefulness of reasoning by analogy from diverse sources , in order to become more and more creative and original . Acknowledgements We wish to thank the professionals and lay designers who participated in this study . Many thanks also to André Didierjean , Anthony Hutton , Malory Sénéquier , Caroline Tékéressine and anonymous reviewers for their precious contributions . References Amabile , T . M . ( 1996 ) Creativity in Context . Westview Press , Boulder , CO . Bisseret , A . , Figeac - Létang , C . and Falzon P . ( 1988 ) Modeling opportunistic reasonings : the cognitive activity of trafﬁc signal setting technicians . INRIA Research report no . 893 . INRIA , Rocquencourt . Besnard , D . and Bastien - Toniazzo , M . ( 1999 ) Expert error in trouble shooting : An exploration study in electronics . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , 50 , 391 – 405 . Boden , M . ( 1990 ) The Creative Mind : Myths & Mech - anisms . Weidenfeld & Nicolson , London . Bonnardel , N . ( 1992 ) Le rôle de l’évaluation dans les activités de conception . PhD thesis , University of Provence . INRIA , Rocquencourt . Bonnardel , N . ( 1993 ) Comparison of evaluation pro - cesses in design activities and critiquing systems : a way to improve design support systems , Technical Report CU - CS - 681 - 93 . University of Colorad - ojournal , Boulder . Bonnardel , N . ( 1999 ) L’évaluation réﬂexive dans la dynamique de l’activité du concepteur . In Perrin , J . ( ed . ) , Pilotage et évaluation des activités de concep - tion . L’Harmattan , Paris pp . 87 – 105 . Bonnardel , N . ( 2000 ) Towards understanding and supporting creativity in design : Analogies in a constrained cognitive environment . Knowledge - Based Systems , 13 , 505 – 513 . Bonnardel , N . and Chevalier , A . ( 2001 ) How do designers of web sites take into account con - straints and ergonomic criteria . In Smith , M . J . , Salvendy , G . , Harris , D . and Koubek , R . J . ( eds ) , Usability Evaluation and Interface Design . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Mahwah , NJ pp . 1066 – 70 . Bonnardel , N . , Lanzone , L . and Sumner , S . ( 2003 ) Designing web sites : opportunistic actions and cognitive effort of lay - designers . Cognitive Science Quarterly , 3 , 25 – 56 . Bonnardel , N . and Marmèche , E . ( 2003 ) Supporting the evocation process in creative design . In Stephanidis , C . and Jacko , J . ( eds ) , Human - Computer Interaction : Theory and Practice , part II . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Mahwah NJ pp . 1158 – 62 . Casakin , H . and Goldschmidt , G . ( 1999 ) Expertise and the use of visual analogy : implications for design education . Design Studies , 20 , 153 – 75 . Chevalier , A . and Ivory , M . Y . ( 2003 ) Can novice designers apply usability criteria and recommen - dations to make web sites easier to use ? In Jacko , J . and Stephanidis , C . ( eds ) , Human - Computer Interaction , Theory and Practice , part 1 . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Mahwah NJ pp . 58 – 62 . caim _ 306 . fm Page 184 Wednesday , July 7 , 2004 2 : 54 PM EVOCATION PROCESSES IN DESIGN 185 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd , 2004 Volume 13 Number 3 September 2004 Cross , N . and Dorst , K . ( 1999 ) Co - evolution of prob - lem and solution spaces in creative design . In Gero , J . S . and Maher , M . L . ( eds ) , Computational Models of Creative Design IV . Key Centre of Design Computing and Cognition , University of Sydney pp . 243 – 62 . Csikzentmihalyi , M . ( 1996 ) Creativity : Flow and the psychology of discovery and invention . Harpper Colins , New York . Darses , F . ( 1994 ) Gestion de contraintes dans la résolu - tion de problèmes de conception . PhD thesis , Univer - sity of Paris 8 . INRIA , Rocquencourt . Détienne , F . ( 2001 ) Psychology of Software Design . Springer , Heidelberg . Dewulf , S . and Baillie , C . ( 1999 ) CASE – Creativity in Art , Science and Engineering : How to foster cre - ativity . Imperial College of Science , Technology and Medicine , London . Didierjean , A . and Marmèche , E . ( 2003 ) Generaliza - tion and Transfer : The role of speciﬁc cases . In Colombus , F . ( ed . ) , Advances in Psychology Research . Nova Science Publishers , New York pp . 35 – 56 . Dorst , K . ( 1997 ) Describing Design – A comparison of paradigms , PhD Thesis Technische Universiteit Delft , Delft . Dorst , K . and Cross , N . ( 2001 ) Creativity in the design process : co - evolution of problem - solution . Design Studies , 22 , 425 – 37 . Duncker , K . ( 1945 ) On problem solving , Psychologi - cal Monographs , 270 ( whole issue ) . Eatsman , C . M . ( 1969 ) Cognitive processes and ill - deﬁned problems : a case study from design . In Proceedings of the First Joint International Conference on I . A . Washington , DC pp . 669 – 90 . Ericsson , K . A . and Simon , H . ( 1993 ) Protocol analy - sis : Verbal reports as data ( Revised version ) . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Falzon , P . , Bisseret , A . , Bonnardel , N . , Darses , F . , Détienne , F . and Visser , W . ( 1990 ) Les activités de conception : l’approche de l’ergonomie cognitive . Actes du colloque ‘Recherches sur le design ’ . UTC , Compiègne . Finke , R . A . , Ward , T . B . and Smith , S . S . ( 1992 ) Cre - ative cognition : Theory , research , and applications . MIT Press , Cambridge , MA . Fischer , G . ( 2000 ) Social creativity , symmetry of ignorance and meta - design . Knowledge - based sys - tems , 13 , 527 – 37 . Fustier , M . ( 1989 ) La résolution de problème : méthod - ologie de l’action . Editions ESF & Librairies Tech - niques , Paris . Gero , J . S . and Mc Neill , T . ( 1998 ) An approach to the analysis of design protocols . Design Studies , 19 , 21 – 61 . Jansson , D . G . and Smith , S . M . ( 1989 ) Design ﬁxa - tion , Proceedings of the Engineering Design Research Conference . University of Massachussetts , National Science Foundation , Amherst pp . 53 – 76 . Jansson , D . G . and Smith , S . M . ( 1991 ) Design ﬁxa - tion . Design Studies , 12 , 3 – 11 . Koestler , A . ( 1975 ) The Act of Creation . Publisher ? London . Kolodner , J . L . ( 1993 ) Understanding creativity : A case - based approach . In Wess , S . , Althoff K - D . and Richter , M . M . ( eds ) , Topics in Case - Base Rea - 9 soning , Lectures Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence , n ∞ 837 . Springer - Verlag , Berlin pp . 3 – 20 . Liu , Y . T . ( 2000 ) Creativity or novelty ? Design Studies , 21 , 261 – 76 . Luchins , A . S . ( 1942 ) Mechanization in problem - solving , Psychological Monographs , 248 ( whole issue ) . Maier , N . R . F . ( 1931 ) Resoning in humans : II . The solution of a problem and its appearance in con - sciousness . Journal of Comparative Psychology , 12 , 181 – 94 . Malhotra , A . , Thomas , J . C . , Carroll , J . M . and Miller , L . A . ( 1980 ) Cognitive processes in design . Inter - national Journal of Man - Machine Studies , 12 , 119 – 40 . Marsh , R . L . , Landau , J . D . and Hicks , J . L . ( 1996 ) How examples may ( and may not ) constrain cre - ativity . Memory & Cognition , 24 , 669 – 80 . Mumford , M . D . , Mobley , M . I . , Uhlman , C . E . , Reiter - Palmon , R . and Doares , L . M . ( 1991 ) Pro - cess analytic models of creative capacities . Cre - ativity Research Journal , 4 , 91 – 122 . Nakakoji , K . , Yamamoto , Y . and Ohira , M . ( 2000 ) Computational support for collective creativity . Knowledge - Based Systems , 13 , 451 – 58 . Nickerson , R . S . ( 1999 ) Enhancing creativity . In Sternberg , R . J . ( ed . ) , Handbook of Creativity Cam - bridge University Press , Cambridge , MA pp . 392 – 430 . Nielsen , J . ( 1993 ) Usability Engineering . A . P . Profes - sional , New Jersey . Nielsen , J . ( 2000 ) Designing Web Usability . New Riders Publishing , Indianapolis . Norman , D . A . ( 1993 ) The things that make us smart . Addison - Wesley , Reading MA . Osborn , A . ( 1963 ) Applied imagination : Principles and procedures of creative thinking . Scribner’s , New York . Piolat , A . and Pélissier , A . ( 1998 ) Etude de la rédaction de textes : contraintes théoriques et méthodes de recherche . In Piolat , A . and Pélissier , A . ( eds ) , La rédaction de textes : Approche cognitive . Delachaux & Niestlé , Neuchâtel , pp . 225 – 69 . Purcell , A . T . and Gero , J . S . ( 1992 ) The effects of examples on the results of a design activity . Knowledge - Based Systems Journal , 5 , 82 – 91 . Reitman , W . ( 1964 ) Heuristic decision procedures , open constraints , and the structure of ill - deﬁned problems . In Shelley , M . W . and Bryan G . L . ( eds ) , Human Judgements and Optimality . John Wiley & Sons , New York . Rittel , H . and Webber , M . M . ( 1984 ) Planning prob - lems are wicked Problems . In N . Cross ( Ed . ) , Developments in Design Methodology . John Wiley & Sons , New York pp . 135 – 44 . Runco , M . A . and Chand , I . ( 1995 ) Cognition and creativity . Educational Psychology Review , 7 , 243 – 67 . Scapin , D . L . and Bastien , J . M . C . ( 1997 ) Ergonomic criteria for evaluating the ergonomic quality of interactive systems . Behaviour & Information Tech - nology , 16 , 220 – 31 . Schön , D . A . ( 1983 ) The reﬂective practitioner . Basic Books , New York . Simon , H . A . ( 1973 ) The structure of ill structured problems . Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 4 , 181 – 201 . caim _ 306 . fm Page 185 Wednesday , July 7 , 2004 2 : 54 PM 186 CREATIVITY AND INNOVATION MANAGEMENT Volume 13 Number 3 September 2004 © Blackwell Publishing Ltd , 2004 Simon , H . A . ( 1995 ) Problem forming , problem ﬁnd - ing and problem solving in design . In Collen , A . and Gasparski , W . ( eds ) , Design & Systems . Trans - action Publishers , New Brunswick pp . 245 – 57 . Smith , S . M . , Ward , T . B . and Shumacher , J . S . ( 1993 ) Constraining effects of examples in a creative generation task , Memory & Cognition , 21 , 837 – 45 . Sternberg , R . J . and Lubart , T . I . ( 1991 ) An investment theory of creativity and its development . Human Development , 34 , 1 – 31 . Sternberg , R . J . and Lubart , T . I . ( 1995 ) Defying the crowd : Cultivating creativity in a culture of confor - mity . Free Press , New York . Valkenburg , R . and Dorst , K . ( 1998 ) The reﬂective practice of design teams . Design Studies , 19 , 249 – 71 . Ward , T . B . ( 1994 ) Structured imagination : The role of category structure in exemplar generation . Cognitive Psychology , 27 , 1 – 40 . Ward , T . B . and Sifonis , C . ( 1997 ) Task demands and generative thinking : What changes and what remains the same ? Journal of Creative Behavior , 31 , 245 – 59 . Ward , T . B . , Smith , S . M . and Vaid , J . ( 1997 ) Concep - tual structures and processes in creative thought . In Ward , T . B . , Smith S . M . and Vaid , J . ( eds ) , Cre - ative Thought : An investigation of conceptual struc - tures and processes . American Psychological Association , Washington , DC pp . 1 – 27 . Weisberg , R . W . ( 1988 ) Problem solving and creativ - ity . In Sternberg , R . J . ( ed . ) , The Nature of Creativity : Contemporary Psychological Perspectives . Cam - bridge University Press , Cambridge . Nathalie Bonnardel is an Assistant Profes - sor in the department of Cognitive and Experimental Psychology of the University of Provence . She has studied for years designers’ cognitive processes , such as eval - uation processes and analogy - making , in order to develop knowledge - based design systems adapted to the designers’ level of expertise . She conducts her studies in the research centre in Psychology of Cognition , Language and Emotion ( E . A . 3273 ) , where she is the head of the team ‘Design and use of multimedia and symbolic systems’ . She is also in charge of a Master degree in ‘Cog - nitive Ergonomics’ proposed at the Univer - sity of Provence . She previously conducted her research at INRIA ( National Institute of Research in Computer Science and Automatique , Rocquencourt , France ) as well as post - doctoral research at the Univer - sity of Colorado and the Institute of Cogni - tive Science ( Boulder , Colorado ) . Evelyne Marmèche is a Research Scientist at the CNRS ( National Center for Scientiﬁc Research ) . She has studied analogical rea - soning in various areas ( e . g . mathematics problems , chess games , basket games and so on ) . She is also interested in studying expertise in professional activities . She con - ducts her research at the Laboratory of Cog - nitive Psychology ( LPC ) – UMR 6146 : CNRS and at the University of Provence , where she is the head of the team working on expert memory . She previously con - ducted her studies at the LAPSYDEE ( Lab - oratory of Psychology , Development and Education of Children ) at the University of Paris V . caim _ 306 . fm Page 186 Wednesday , July 7 , 2004 2 : 54 PM AUTHOR QUERY FORM Dear Author During the preparation of your manuscript , the questions listed below have arisen . Please answer all the queries ( marking any other corrections on the proof enclosed ) and return this form with your proofs . Query Query Reply no . 1 please supply full reference details 2 please supply full reference details 3 please supply full reference details 4 please supply full reference details 5 please supply full reference details 6 please supply full reference details 7 please supply full reference details 8 please supply full reference details 9 Pls provide publisher name ? CAIM Volume 13 , 2004 BSA article no : 306 Proofreader : Elsie AUTHOR QUERY FORM ( CAIM306 ) Page 1 Wednesday , July 7 , 2004 2 : 54 PM