Sculpture Inspired Musical Composition Francisco Manuel Alves Pereira Braga francisco . braga @ tecnico . ulisboa . pt Instituto Superior T´ecnico , Lisboa , Portugal November 2019 Abstract Creativity is one of the most beautiful wonders of humanity . It is an essential factor for areas from the arts to science . Another concept , intrinsic to creativity , is inspiration . Inspiration is something that arises in us and motivates us to do all kinds of tasks . It can come from within us , or from the world around us . In this thesis , we have tried to make an inspirational system that takes as its source of inspiration a sculpture to compose music . What we present is only a possible approach to the problem of mapping diﬀerent domains . Our approach does not consider the semantics of the sculpture but instead looks at it more abstractly . The result of our system is three diﬀerent compositions : Primal , the direct result of the application of our approach ; Toniﬁed , a version of the ﬁrst in which out - of - scale notes are altered so as to have only in - scale notes ; Genetic , the result of an evolutionary process that uses a Genetic Algorithm . The Genetic composition was evaluated through questionnaires . In these questionnaires , the musical quality of the composition and the association with the sculpture were evaluated . The results were promising , with the majority of the participants having given a high classiﬁcation ( 4 out of 5 ) to the preferred interpretations of the compositions and relating them to the respective sculpture . Much work can still be done on this topic , nevertheless , we consider that what has been done in this thesis is a valid , interesting , and successful approach to this topic . Keywords : Computational Creativity , Inspiration , Genetic Algorithm , Sculpture , Musical Composi - tion 1 . Introduction Creativity is one of the pillars of several areas , such as arts or science and engineering , where it is mostly used when trying to solve a particular problem [ 6 ] . Many would consider trying to repro - duce this unique skill an impossible task , or even immoral . Nevertheless , machines capable of mim - icking creative behavior could have countless ben - eﬁts , either helping in problem - solving or in being responsible for the creation or co - creation of works of art . From an artistic point of view , this would be very controversial since art is mainly considered a human activity . Still , systems able to apply cre - ative processes are interesting both as a scientiﬁc project and in the world of art . Computational Creativity is the ﬁeld of Artiﬁcial Intelligence that deals with this type of research . In this ﬁeld , not only computational aspects are in - vestigated , but also other areas such as cognitive psychology and philosophy . As such , it deals both with practical and theoretical issues concerning cre - ativity . One can easily state that something is creative , either it being a thought , product , or something else than to deﬁne creativity itself . Still , there is some consensus regarding what creativity involves : a person , process , press , and product , i . e . , ”four P’s of creativity” [ 8 ] . Although the four ”P’s” play an essential role in creativity , since we are working in the Computation Creativity ﬁeld , we aimed at partially taking the person out of the equation . One element to consider in our case is that our goal was to create an inspirational system . As such , much importance is given , in our case , to the press aspect of creativity . Inspiration is a fascinating topic by itself . We search for inspiration when attempting to create a certain product , regardless of the ﬁeld . Inspira - tion can come from inside of us or from the world around . Focusing on creativity inspired by other creative artifacts , existing ideas inspire new ones in all sort of areas , such engineering , where new so - lutions to problems can be signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by already existing solutions , or in product design , where inspiration may come from shapes in nature [ 2 ] , or art , where already existing artworks greatly 1 help one to create original works or styles [ 7 ] . Even though in these three cases inspiration comes from the same domain as the initial problem , it can also come from diﬀerent domains . Here , there is a much more signiﬁcant challenge because there is no direct connection . This forces the person to reconsider his / her framework since the inspirational artifact does not directly ﬁt in it , leading to the construc - tion of new frameworks and perspectives [ 7 ] . In the computational realm , inspiration can be seen as the mapping between two diﬀerent artifacts . This mapping is made so that the new artifact gets the essence of the already existing one . Several au - thors were successful in this matter , by making sys - tems capable of doing this mapping , but still , not many examples of inspirational systems are found in this ﬁeld [ 10 ] . The big problem here is how to relate two diﬀerent domains . In our work , we aimed at making an inspirational system that composes music inspired by sculptures . We decided to draw the inspiration from existing human - made artworks since , this way , we were able to maintain the human hand in the equation . Three goals have driven our research : • First we aim at building a system that both acts creatively , and generates a product that is considered creative . • Second , we want to compose a piece of music that is inspired by a sculpture . As such , the music should , in a certain way , be associated with it . • Third and last , we aim at building a system that composes music and not just sound . Al - though the exact diﬀerence between sound and music has not yet been deﬁned , it is essential that the music can be considered aesthetically pleasing . Our work has been divided into several stages . The ﬁrst stage was to explore the two domains involved in our work , sculpture and music . In the next sec - tion we describe the background on these domains necessary to fully understand our system . 2 . Background 2 . 1 . Sculpture When ﬁrst looking at a sculpture , several charac - teristics come to our attention . These can be di - vided into two groups : shape features , regarding the shape of the sculpture , and texture features , re - garding the color or texture of the sculpture . More - over , we decided not to address the semantic mean - ing from sculptures , since this would be a complex task both computationally and in terms of inter - pretation , since each individual may have its own perception of a sculpture . So , a general approach that does not address semantics was chosen , leading to a more abstract interpretation . When dealing with sculptures computationally ( or any form of data ) , the ﬁrst problem is the repre - sentation . There are many possibilities to obtain a sculpture in a computer , such as retrieving it from images , but the one we followed was using 3D ob - jects since all the information regarding both shape and texture can be more easily obtained . Considering the 3D objects domain , there are sev - eral diﬀerent possible representations . In our work , we decided to use Polygonal Meshes , since it is a simple representation , yet it has all the informa - tion we needed . In this representation , the object is represented by its boundary surface , composed of several planar shapes ( or facets ) , which are deﬁned by a series of vertices connected by edges . The pre - cision of this representation depends on the number of facets and vertices . It is more eﬃcient computa - tionally , since manipulating planar shapes is rela - tively simple ( linear algebra ) , but in high precision requirements it may need a large amount of data [ 1 ] . The most commonly used shapes are triangles ( triangular meshes ) . Having speciﬁed our choice of representation , we can move to the extracted fea - ture . First considering shape , diﬀerent features can be identiﬁed , some more intuitive than others . From all the features that could be extracted , three main ones were chosen as the most relevant for our work : curvature , angles , and segments . Starting with the curvature , there are many pos - sibilities to measure this feature . From all the possi - bilities , such as the two classical measures Gaussian and mean curvature [ 5 ] , we used the mean curva - ture . Each vertex in the mesh has its own mean curvature . Regarding the angles , these are measured using the normal vector of the faces . To obtain each ver - tex angle , the angles between all its faces are mea - sured , and only the maximum is considered . One important aspect to note is that , since the angle is obtained from the normal vector , if the faces form a plane surface , the angle is 0 ◦ , while two overlap - ping faces have an angle of 180 ◦ . Using the angles , we also obtained another measure , which we called zero angle predominance . This measure veriﬁes if the vertices with 0 ◦ angles in an object are inserted in a plane surface , or if they occur separately . If they are inserted in a plane surface , than our focus goes towards what arises from it , or to limits of that surface . Finally , the segmentation is performed using the spectral clustering algorithm . This algorithm ﬁts our purpose since its roots are on graph theory , and a mesh can be seen as a graph . It receives the adja - cency matrix of the object’s vertices and the num - 2 ber of clusters . It returns a label for each vertex . Using this , we divide the mesh into segments . In Figure 1 , an example of segmentation of a 3D Mesh using Spectral Clustering can be seen . ( a ) Original ( b ) Segmented Figure 1 : 3D Mesh Segmentation example using Spectral Clustering Moving to the texture , although we are extract - ing features from a 3D object , when it comes to this it is referring to a 2D surface . A simple analogy is one of a gift wrap . The gift itself is a 3D object , but the wrapping alone is a 2D surface . In order to do the mapping of the texture in the 3D object to 2D , there are several processes that can be can be applied , being the most common the UV mapping , that simply takes the coordinates of a 3D object , ( x , y , z ) , and converts it to 2D coordinates , ( U , V ) . Since we are dealing with a 2D image , the feature extraction process will be done using the same fea - ture extraction algorithms as in a 2D image . As such , it is required to look further into color , start - ing by its possible representations . Of the diﬀerent available options , the ones more relevant are RGB and HSV . On the one hand , in RGB , any color is described as a combination of values of the three principal additive colors : Red , Green , and Blue . This model can be represented as a cube , as seen in Figure 2 ( a ) . On the other hand , HSV refers to a combination of Hue , Satu - ration , and Value . Hue refers to the color itself , saturation to the intensity ( purity ) of a particular hue , and value to the lightness or darkness of that color . This model can be represented as a cone , as seen in Figure 2 ( b ) . ( a ) RGB Cube ( b ) HSV Cone Figure 2 : RGB and HSV representations There are several diﬀerent color features , being the two main categories histogram - based methods and color statistics [ 11 ] : • Color histogram - based methods - These meth - ods mainly represent the distribution of colors in the image . Although there are several ways to do this , the most common and useful way is the histogram of the distribution over the color model ( 3D in the case of RGB and HSV ) or each channel of the color model . • Color Statistics - These are statistical mea - sures , such as the value , standard deviation , median , percentiles , among others . Aside from these two categories , several features can be obtained by processing the image . From those , the two more relevant to our work are : • Most Common Colors - To obtain these colors , a simple counting approach was used . First , nine equally spaced values were deﬁned for each channel of the RGB model ( thus a total of 729 distinct colors ) . Having the image’s pixels rep - resented in the same model , for each pixel , the closest value for each channel is chosen , and that color’s count is incremented . • Perceived Brightness - This can be seen as a conversion from the original colors to a greyscale , based on the brightness of each color . This feature can be obtained in several ways , for instance , a simple average of the three chan - nels in the RGB model . In our work , to obtain a better brightness descriptor , a more complex formula was used . In this formula , diﬀerent brightness weights are attributed to each of the RGB channels [ 3 ] : PB = (cid:112) 0 . 299 ∗ R 2 + 0 . 587 ∗ G 2 + 0 . 114 ∗ B 2 2 . 2 . Musical Elements and Concepts Music is a form of art which consists of organized sound throughout time . The source of that sound can be vocal , instrumental , among others , and it is usually divided into three parts : melody , rhythm , and harmony . These parts and their existence vary from culture to culture , being these three the most commonly used in Western music . Several exist - ing elements in music govern each of the already mentioned parts , such as notes , chords , scales , and modes . Starting with the most basic element , a note rep - resents a sound . The two main characteristics of a note are its pitch and duration . The interval be - tween pitches is measured by tones , being the small - est interval in western music the semitone . There are twelve pitch classes in western music that are represented with a letter from A to G . They may also have a symbol called accidental . For our pur - pose , the accidental may be either ﬂat ( (cid:91) ) or sharp ( (cid:93) ) . The ﬂat accidental translates into a semitone bellow , while the sharp translates into a semitone above . For instance , having a G , if we introduce a ﬂat symbol , it becomes G (cid:91) , i . e . , a semitone bellow G , and if we introduce a sharp , it becomes G (cid:93) , i . e . , 3 a semitone above G . It is important to note that in standard pitch , the pitch class repeats when we double a certain frequency . For example , the pitch class A right above the middle C in the piano equals to 440 Hz . If we double that ( 880 Hz ) , we get an - other A one octave above . The duration of a note is the time the note lasts . This duration is repre - sented as a fraction of what is called a whole note . For our purposes , not all possible durations were used A scale is a repeating cycle of organized notes that usually repeats every octave . The notes of a scale can be organized in ascending or descending order , and , commonly , the step between neighbor notes is either a tone or a semitone . Scales may have a tonal center , which is usually the ﬁrst de - gree of a scale , that is called the tonic . Considering the major scale , the steps separating each of the notes are T - T - S - T - T - T - S ( T - tone , S - semitone ) . The natural minor scale is simply the major scale starting on the sixth note , thus creating the pat - tern : T - S - T - T - S - T - T . The chromatic scale is a scale with twelve pitches , and the step between pitches is always a semitone . Considering that this scale in - cludes all twelve pitches used in western music , it has no tonal center , meaning it has no tonic . Before moving to modes , it is most relevant to look into the common names given to intervals . These names are given according to the number of semitones that separate two pitches , and can be seen in Table 1 . What is called the modern modes N . of semitones Name Abbreviation 0 Perfect Unison P1 ( 1 ) 1 Minor Second m2 ( (cid:91) 2 ) 2 Major Second M2 ( 2 ) 3 Minor Third m3 ( (cid:91) 3 ) 4 Major Third M3 ( 3 ) 5 Perfect Fourth P4 ( 4 ) 6 Augmented Fourth A4 ( (cid:93) 4 ) Tritone TT Diminished Fifth d5 ( (cid:91) 5 ) 7 Perfect Fifth P5 ( 5 ) 8 Minor Sixth m6 ( (cid:91) 6 ) 9 Major Sixth M6 ( 6 ) 10 Minor Seventh m7 ( (cid:91) 7 ) 11 Major Seventh M7 ( 7 ) 12 Perfect Octave P8 ( 8 ) Table 1 : Common interval names and abbreviations are seven scales that derive from the major scale , i . e . , that use the same set of notes . The diﬀer - ence between the major scale and the modes is that modes start in one of the seven notes of the scale , making it the tonic , thus having diﬀerent intervals . It is also important to mark that each mode has one or more characteristic notes , which are notes that better describe the mode ( concerning the other modes ) . In Table 2 , all the seven modes , and their characteristics can be seen . ModeName Tonic relative to major scale Intervals Name Ionian I P1 M2 M3 P4 P5 M6 M7 Dorian II P1 M2 m3 P4 P5 M6 m7 Phrygian III P1 m2 m3 P4 P5 m6 m7 Lydian IV P1 M2 M3 A4 P5 M6 M7 Mixolydian V P1 M2 M3 P4 P5 M6 m7 Aeolian VI P1 M2 m3 P4 P5 m6 m7 Locrian VII P1 m2 m3 P4 d5 m6 m7 Table 2 : Modes ( characteristics notes are in bold according to interval ) A common concept when talking about modes is their brightness [ 9 ] . This notion is quite sim - ple : a mode with raised degrees , i . e . , more sharps , is brighter than a mode with lowered degrees , i . e . , more ﬂats . The order of modes from brighter to darker is the following : Lydian ( Brightest ) , Io - nian , Mixolydian , Dorian , Aeolian , Phrygian , and Locrain ( Darkest ) . A chord is a set of multiple notes played simulta - neously . The number of notes in a chord may vary , but the most common in western music are chords with three notes , called triads , and chords with four notes , called tetrads . Triads are chords that commonly contain three speciﬁc notes : the root note , and the intervals ( above the root ) third , which can be major or mi - nor , and ﬁfth , which , for our purpose , can be per - fect or diminished . A tetrad usually contains the same notes as the respective triad plus the seventh , which may be major or minor . By positioning the root note at each degree of the major scale , the ex - isting chords of the major scale are obtained . Each chord can also be associated with the mode formed from the respective scale degree . In Table 3 , we can see the chord associated with each mode , its char - acteristics , and its representation as a triad and a tetrad . Degree of major scale Mode Notes Triad Tetrad I Ionian M3 P5 M7 I I∆ II Dorian m3 P5 m7 IIm IIm7 III Phrygian m3 P5 m7 IIIm IIIm7 IV Lydian M3 P5 M7 IV IV∆ V Mixolydian M3 P5 m7 V V7 VI Aeolian m3 P5 m7 VIm VIm7 VII Locrain m3 b5 m7 VII ◦ VIIm7 (cid:91) Table 3 : Chords from the major scale and corre - sponding mode The concept of consonance and dissonance is a way to characterize notes played simultaneously or successively . Consonance can be associated with pleasant , satisfying , and stable , while dissonance with unpleasant , troubling , and unstable . For our 4 purpose , it is relevant to further look into this con - cept applied to notes played above a particular chord . There are many diﬀerent ways to put these concepts in pratice , from which we chose the fol - lowing . If the chord already includes that note , it can be considered as consonant , while if the chord does not include the note , a simple rule can be fol - lowed : if the note creates the interval m2 with any note from the chord , it is considered dissonant . The importance given to a dissonant note also depends on several other factors , being the two most impor - tant the note’s duration and where it occurs in the bar . For the most common time signature in west - ern music , 44 , we have fours bars . The ﬁrst beat is the strongest , followed by the third beat , and ﬁ - nally the second and fourth beat . A dissonant note played in a weak beat is less critical than one played in a strong beat . Another important musical element is a motif . It can be described as a short musical idea that often occurs in a piece of music . The motif does not need to be always equal , and may be subject to changes while maintaining its general idea . We considered four possible changes , called variations : Melodic , when the melody is altered in some way , but the rhythmic value is maintained , Rhythmic , when the rhythm is modiﬁed , i . e . , the rhythmic value of notes is altered , maintaining the pitch , Retrograde , when the motif is reversed , i . e . , the ﬁrst note becomes the last , and vice - versa , and Inversion , when the motif is mirrored , i . e . , all the intervals are maintained , but their direction is the opposite , usually considering the ﬁrst note as the reference . Finally , we consider the already mentioned parts of a music piece : melody , harmony , and rhythm . A melody consists of a linear sequence of notes . The harmony may consist of several elements , such as multiples distinct melodic lines . For our purpose , harmony consists of multiple sequenced chords that will deﬁne a chord progression . From the diﬀerent types , we used modal harmony . The rhythm is as - sociated with the tempo and the time signature of the piece . Having already explained the time sig - nature , the concept of tempo in music is simply the pace of the given piece , and it is measured in beats per minute ( BPM ) . 3 . Approach and Implementation Since we aim at composing sculpture inspired mu - sic , we started by creating an analogy from one do - main to the other . However , before doing so , we needed to restrict our approach regarding the musi - cal domain . Music is such a vast ﬁeld with so many diﬀerent styles and types that it becomes quite im - possible not to restrict . As such , we decided to base our approach on modal music . This decision was made considering that with modal harmony , one can more easily pass on a speciﬁc sensation , associ - ated with the respective mode . This decision also inﬂuences the type of chords used , which shall be later explained . Besides this , we also only used the most common time signature in western music , 44 . The ﬁrst step towards creating the analogy was to map the sculpture’s features into musical elements and concepts . From the start , we did not want a too precise approach , for example , where each point would be converted into a note . We intended to ob - tain the musical elements through the analysis of sculpture’s features in a more general manner , by considering either the sculpture or each the sculp - ture’s segments as a whole . With this in thought , let us start with a high - level association between the two groups of sculpture’s features , shape and texture , and the parts of a musical piece , melody , harmony , and rhythm . If we listen to a melody without any harmony ( chords ) , we may perceive a particular sensation or emotion . Once we listen to it with harmony , this sensation or emotion may vary drastically from the ﬁrst . Moving to the sculpture domain , if we think about a sculpture’s shape , we will obtain mainly sensation associated with its characteristics , such as smooth or rough . However , once we add the texture / color , we get , once again , a much better - deﬁned sensation , or even emotion . One can say that the same way the texture / color gives context to the shape , the harmony gives context to the melody . As such , our approach’s foundations arise from the association of the sculpture’s shape with melody , and the texture / color with harmony . It is important to note that this is not imperative , and some associations were made from texture to melody . There is still one part of the music piece left to map , the rhythm . As already stated , the rhythm is associated with the time signature and the tempo . Concerning time signature , as already stated , we decided to only use the most common time signa - ture in western music , 44 . About the tempo , al - though initially we wanted both shape and texture to be considered , we ended up using only the tex - ture . This decision was only made when confronted with the ﬁnal results since one can only evaluate the tempo having the music piece . As such , it shall be later on explained . Starting with the melody , this element consists of a linear sequence of notes , while each note consists of pitch and duration . Accordingly , we tried to asso - ciate these two characteristics with shape features . We used the sculpture’s lines or curve to obtain the pitch of the notes . If the lines of the sculpture are smooth , the pitches of the melody would have to give this same sensation , as well as the contrary . To obtain the line’s description , we used the an - gles . We started by obtaining a general representa - 5 Angles ( degrees ) 0 ◦ - 15 ◦ 15 ◦ - 30 ◦ 30 ◦ - 45 ◦ 45 ◦ - 60 ◦ 60 ◦ - 75 ◦ 75 ◦ - 90 ◦ 90 ◦ - 105 ◦ 105 ◦ - 120 ◦ 120 ◦ - 135 ◦ 135 ◦ - 150 ◦ 150 ◦ - 165 ◦ 165 ◦ - 180 ◦ Interval M2 M3 m3 P1 M6 m6 P5 P4 m7 m2 M7 TT Table 4 : Mapping from angles to musical intervals . tion of the angles , the histogram . The histogram is a representation of the distribution of data , where we can obtain the frequency of intervals of values . These intervals are called bins , which may or may not have the same width . Having this , we decided to relate the musical interval for the next note con - cerning the current note with each bin . Since in one octave there are twelve possible intervals , the his - togram was calculated using twelve bins . With the histogram , we created a probability distribution to obtain a musical interval , thus having the proba - bility for the next note’s interval in relation to the current note . The mapping made from angles to musical intervals can be seen in Table 4 One issue with this approach is the fact that if one particular bin does not contain any occur - rences , that interval will never be used . We ac - knowledged that an interval of angles could not only be mapped to the respective musical interval , but also the neighbors’ musical intervals . With this in mind , after using the probability distribution to ob - tain the musical interval , we also apply a normal distribution to give the neighboring musical inter - vals a chance to be chosen . We used what is know as the standard normal distribution ( µ = 0 and σ = 1 ) . Using a value obtain from the normal dis - tribution , there are three possible cases : if the value is between - 1 and 1 ( probability of 68 . 3 % ) , the orig - inal musical interval is chosen ; If the value is below - 1 ( probability of 15 . 85 % ) , the left neighbor musi - cal interval is chosen , unless the original value is the ﬁrst position , in this case , the original musical interval is chosen ; If the value is above 1 ( probabil - ity of 15 . 85 % ) , the right neighbor musical interval is chosen , unless the original value is the last position , in this case , the original musical interval is chosen . The only aspect left to decide is the direction of the interval , being the only musical element in the melody that we decided to map from the tex - ture . Here , we decided to make use of the perceived brightness . Colors with a higher perceived bright - ness value would be related to upwards intervals , and colors with lower values with downwards inter - vals . From the histogram of perceived brightness values , we took the value that occurred more often . This value ranges from 0 to 1 , and set the probabil - ity of the interval direction being upwards between 20 % and 80 % . The duration of a note ( or rhythmic value ) will signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the way we perceive a music piece . If we think of a sculpture with much variation concerning the curvature , one can easily associate that with a dense music piece , where the notes keep changing in a small fragment of time . The opposite can also be related . As such , we aimed at relat - ing the variation of the sculpture’s curvature with the note’s duration . To obtain the curvature’s vari - ation , we used the autocorrelation . We gathered the curvature value of each point , grouped them by neighbors , and used autocorrelation in these groups . We decided to use the mean of all results , and map this value with what would become the most prob - able rhythmic value . The mapping can be seen in Table 5 . Mean of the Autocorrelation Results 0 - 0 . 05 0 . 05 - 0 . 1 0 . 1 - 0 . 4 0 . 4 - 0 . 7 0 . 7 - 1 Most Probable Rhythmic Value Table 5 : Mapping the mean of the autocorrelation results to the most probable rhythmic value . We did not want only one type of rhythmic value . We were looking for a general way to relate the au - tocorrelation results with the rhythmic value with - out making a direct relation . To achieve this , the Standard Normal Distribution was used once again . Using this tool , we can set the most probable rhyth - mic value while maintaining the possibility of using other rhythmic values . For each note , a rhythmic value is chosen based on the most probable one and a value obtained using the normal distribution . Instead of composing all the melody at once , we decided to compose motifs that would later be joined , composing the whole melody . As seen be - fore , a sculpture can be segmented . As such , we decided to compose each motif using features ob - tained from each segment . To obtain the size of the motif , we used each segment’s size in relation to the whole sculpture . Having the various motifs that will form the melody , we can now move to the harmony . It was decided to relate the harmony with the sculpture’s texture / color . As such , we want to harmonize each motif according to the respective segment’s color . For each segment , we obtained the most common colors , as explained before . Having the HSV color model in mind , for the same Hue , and the highest Saturation ( 100 % ) , the Value channel will give us how dark or how pure that Hue is , ranging from black ( Value close to 0 % ) to the pure Hue ( Value close to 100 % ) . Similarly , the musical modes can also be ordered from darker ( Locrian ) to brighter ( Lydian ) . As such , having the most common colors , we re - 6 lated the Value channel from the HSV color model to musical modes . A color with a lower value in the Value channel would be associated with a darker mode , while one with a higher value with a brighter mode . However , not all Hues should be matched with all modes , since , for the same Value , some col - ors are perceived as darker than others . As such , the Hues were divided in three groups , and for each group the Value channel maps to a range of modes . The division in groups can be seen in Figure 3 . Figure 3 : Hue value based groups Besides these three groups , two special cases are not accounted for by the Hue values : If the color is black , or very close to black ( Value channel below 20 % ) , the mode is set to Locrian ( the darkest ) ; if the color is white , or very close to white ( Saturation channel below 10 % ) , the mode is set to Lydian ( the brightest ) . It is important to note that even if the Saturation is near 0 % if the Value channel is close to 0 % , the color will be close to black . As such , the ﬁrst veriﬁcation to be made must be if the color is close to black ( Value ¡ 20 % ) . The range of modes per color group association and the special cases can be seen in Figure 4 . Figure 4 : Range of Modes per Color Group and Special Cases To obtain the chord , the closest tone of each motif is found , and then obtain the mode’s chord in that tonality , as seen in Table 3 . For each segment , we get the two most common colors , from there the two respective modes , and ﬁnally , the two chords . The chord obtained from the most common color is placed ﬁrst in the motif and the one from the second most common chord second . The number of bars for the ﬁrst chord is obtained by dividing the motif’s number of bars by two and rounding up , while the remaining bars are left for the second chord . To join the motifs in a logical order , we decided to get the probability distribution of intervals from the histogram of angles , although this time from the whole sculpture . From there , we calculate which of all possible permutations of the motifs’ order best corresponds to the probability distribution of the intervals , being this the chosen order . The only aspect considered left to map is the tempo . For this element , we used the variation of color among segments . To get this variation , ﬁrst , we obtained the most common colors of the whole sculpture . Then , for each segment , we veriﬁed how many of the most common colors of that segment matched the ones from the whole sculpture . In the end , we obtained a ratio of the colors that matched the total colors veriﬁed that ranges from 0 to 1 . The higher the ratio , the lower the tempo should be , as well as the contrary . For our purposes , we considered a tempo range of 80 BPM to 160 BPM . Having the melody and the harmony from the ordered motifs , and the respective tempo , we obtain the ﬁrst version of the music piece , we can call it the raw composition . The second version was obtained by correcting notes in the motifs that did not belong to the respective scale , changing them to the closest note found on the scale . This way , we obtain a version that respects each of the motif’s scale . One might call it a ”toniﬁed” composition . Besides these two versions , we decided to use a Genetic Algorithm . This algorithm provides a way to search for better results while maintaining a cer - tain randomness that leads to exciting results . This algorithm may vary from application to ap - plication , where the representation is can be seen as the basis . we deﬁned each individual ( candidate solution ) as a music piece . As already stated , we considered a music piece to be the gathering of sev - eral motifs ( melody and harmony ) , their ordering , and the music’s tempo . Therefore , each individual being a music piece , its genes are motifs . There is a crucial property in each individual that is the order - ing of the motifs ( genes ) . The algorithm is divided in the following phases : 1 . Initialization - This phase is the initial stage of the algorithm . We decided to have a popula - tion of 100 individuals . The number of motifs generated per segment is the chosen number of individuals . Each individual is created by randomly choosing a motif from each segment . The initial order of the motifs is randomly cho - sen . 2 . Elitism - In this each generation , 10 % of the individuals with the highest ﬁtness are directly passed to the new generation . This is done to guarantee some level of quality . 3 . Selection - A pair of individuals is selected . The probability of each individual to be cho - sen is based on the individual’s ﬁtness . The higher the ﬁtness , the higher the probability of being chosen . As such , one individual may be selected several times or no times at all . 4 . Crossover - Having a pair of selected indi - viduals , there is a probability of 80 % of suf - 7 weight < = 1 weight > 1 NotebelongstotheMode Characteristic Consonant 2 ∗ weight Dissonant 2 ∗ weight − weight Not characteristic Consonant weight Dissonant weight − weight Note does not belong to the Mode weight − weight Table 6 : Mode deﬁnition Fitness measure for diﬀerent types of notes fering crossover . We deﬁned two types of crossover , both equally probable : motif and note crossover . In the ﬁrst case , half of the individual’s motifs are randomly selected and crossed over . This crossover occurs between motifs generated from the same segment . Con - sidering the second , the pitch of the individuals is swapped . Since one may be bigger than the other , among the proper starting points , one is randomly chosen . 5 . Mutation - The individuals obtained have a probability of being mutated . This involves altering the individual’s genes . Four types of mutation were used , each with an independent probability . The ﬁrst is order mutation , with a probability of 10 % . In this case , the order of the motifs is randomly altered . The second is the ”tonify” mutation , with a probability of 10 % for each motif . In this case , notes that do not belong to the motif’s scale are corrected to the closest note found on the scale . The third and fourth are the Inversion and Retrograde mutations , each with a probability of 5 % per motif . In these cases , the respective variation is applied . 6 . Fitness - The ﬁtness for all individuals is cal - culated at the end of each generation . This is obtained from a ﬁtness function . In our case , there are three measure to obtain the global ﬁtness : order , mode deﬁnition and range ﬁt - ness . The order deﬁnition ﬁtness evaluates how well the order matches the probability distribu - tion of intervals obtained from the histogram of angles from the whole sculpture . This mea - sure ranges from 10 ( perfect ﬁt ) to - 10 ( no ﬁt ) . The mode deﬁnition ﬁtness evaluates how well the motif describes the respective mode . For this , each note has a weight according to its beat and its duration . Only the beat with the highest value is considered if the note includes more than on beat . If it is in the ﬁrst beat , the weight is 4 ∗ duration , the third 3 ∗ duration , the second 2 ∗ duration , and the fourth 1 ∗ duration . The value for this measure is than calculated according to the type of note regarding the mode , as described in Table 6 . The range mea - sure penalizes − 4 for pitches that are not in an acceptable range . We deﬁned that acceptable range between 55 and 90 in MIDI . 7 . Termination - To terminate the algorithm , we decided to have a ﬁxed number of generations . Regarding the ﬁnal music piece , we could ob - tain it from the ﬁttest individual in the ﬁnal generation . However , our interest has moved towards an approach that considers the evolu - tionary process as artwork [ 4 ] . In order to do this , we decided to obtain the ﬁttest individ - ual in each ﬁxed number of generations . In the end , the individuals are joined and form the ﬁ - nal music piece . We decided to terminate the algorithm once it reached 300 generations . To obtain the ﬁnal results , we obtain the ﬁttest individual every 100 generations . 4 . System Architecture The approach above explained was implemented through the architecture seen in Figure 5 . At ﬁrst , our system receives a sculpture . The ﬁrst module encountered is the Sculpture Module . In this module , the sculpture ( 3D object ) is processed and analyzed to obtain the necessary features . The results of this module are the sculpture’s shape fea - tures ( segments , angles , and mean curvature ) and texture features ( perceived brightness and colors ) . Having the necessary features , we pass them on to the Mapping Module . This module is respon - sible for the mapping of the sculpture’s features to elements of the musical domain , or mechanisms to obtain them . One can see it as the middleware be - tween the sculpture part and the musical part . The result of this model is a set of properties or values to be used in the musical domain . These include the interval probability distribution and the inter - val direction probability for the pitch generation , the rhythmic value to be used as the most com - mon , and the mode to be used . One important as - pect to note is that diﬀerent values are obtained for each of the sculpture’s segments . The Tempo and the general interval probability distribution ( from whole sculpture ) are also outputs of this module . The values and properties obtained in the map - ping module , except for the Tempo that shall be directly applied in the music piece , are passed on to the Composer Module . Here , with all the necessary information , motifs are composed . The melody is obtained using the interval probability distribution , the interval direction probability , and the rhythmic value for the common case . The har - mony is composed using the modes obtained , and 8 Sculpture SculptureModule ( 3D Object Analysis ) ShapeAnalysis TextureAnalysis Mapping Module Composer Module Sculpture Inspired Musical Composition Motif Composer HarmonyComposition OrderMotifs Motifs Tonify Primal Composition Toniﬁed Composition GeneticAlgorithmModule Genetic Composition Melody Composition Figure 5 : System Architecture considering the melody . Following this module , there are two possible scenarios : • The motifs are ordered using the general in - terval probability distribution - In this case , we obtain two compositions after adding the Tempo : the Primal Composition , and , after being ”toniﬁed” , the Toniﬁed Composition . • The motifs are passed on to the Genetic Al - gorithm Module - In this case , the composer module generates a ﬁxed number of motifs from each segment , instead of only one . These mo - tifs are used in the genetic algorithm , and , after adding the Tempo , the Genetic Composition is obtained . 5 . Evaluation Six 3D Models of sculptures were used as the dataset . These had two sources : models found on - line , and models captured and processed by the au - thor . One example can be seen in Figure 6 . For the Figure 6 : Galo de Barcelos 1 six sculptures , the genetic composition was gener - ated . This was the only composition considered for the evaluation . Having the six compositions , three possible interpretations of each were generated us - ing virtual instruments . One closer to Jazz , one to Rock , and one to Electronic / Space Rock . To evaluate our system , the most important as - pects to consider are our objectives . Having this in mind , we wanted to verify if the music pieces composed are associated with the sculpture and if the music is considered aesthetically pleasing . Al - though one of our goals was to make a system that acts creatively and generates creative products , this aspect was not evaluated directly . Instead , we con - sidered that the evaluation of the other two goals would lead to this goal’s evaluation . We decided to use online surveys to perform the evaluation . Two surveys were made , each contain - ing three compositions . Having three interpreta - tions for each composition , the main part of the survey was done concerning the preferred interpre - tation . For each , we evaluated the quality of of the music piece and the association with the sculpture . The least preferred is also evaluated , to establish a ground ﬂoor for interpretation . The results are explained in more detail in the full version of the thesis . In here , we them very brieﬂy . Regarding the quality of the music , the statis - tics for all compositions can be seen in Table 7 . In this particular question , the participants rated the music for the preferred and the least preferred interpretations . The responses obtained were very good for the preferred version . On a scale of 1 to 5 , considering the median of 4 , we can state that at least 50 % of the responses rated the pieces as 4 or higher . These results are the veriﬁcation for the musical quality of the composed music pieces . The least preferred interpretation had lower results , as expected . However , the rating lowered about one step . These results were expected , and we consid - ered them to be good since this was the least pre - ferred interpretation of the three , and still got a median and mode of 3 . How would you rate this music ? Preferred Least Preferred Mean 3 . 55 2 . 79 Median 4 3 Mode 4 3 Std . Deviation 0 . 92 1 . 03 Table 7 : How would you rate this music ? Statistics Considering the sculpture - music association , the results vary more from case to case . Two special cases were encountered . The ﬁrst case , where the semantics of the sculpture led to a perspective dras - tically diﬀerent from the one obtained through our approach . In this case , the results were obviously bad . In this case , the description given by the par - 9 ticipants for the sculpture was very distant from the composition . The composition was not considered related to the sculpture since , for both the preferred and the least preferred interpretations , about 70 % of the participants rated the relation as either 1 or 2 on a scale of 1 to 5 . The second special case is encountered in compositions inspired by very sub - jective sculptures . In this case , there is much vari - ation on what is perceived from the sculpture . De - spite this variation , for the preferred composition , at least 50 % of the participants rated the relation as 3 or higher . For the least preferred interpreta - tion , 51 . 6 % of the participants rated the relation either as 1 or 2 . For the typical case , the results were good , since most people related the music to the sculpture . Regarding the description , there was a clear connection between the sculpture and the music . Considering this case , for three out of the four sculptures , more than 50 % of the participants rated the relation for the preferred interpretation as 4 or higher . For the least preferred , the values were about one step lower than for the preferred , which is expected . 6 . Conclusions The main objective of our thesis was create a system that composes music inspired in sculptures . Our approach involved relating the shape of the sculp - ture with the music’s harmony , and the texture with melody . This association was not a strict associa - tion , yet it was our basis . We believe that we created an inspirational sys - tem with an interesting approach that balances the freedom associated with inspiration with a logical mapping from the sculpture domain to the musical one . During the process , we imposed many limita - tions and restrictions that are both associated with any approach , but special to ours due to the vast musical knowledge used to build the system . It is imperative to reinforce that what we have done is one possible approach . As such , for future work , there are other possible approaches that could be explored . Starting with the musical realm , more elements and concepts could be used . For example , instead of using a modal approach , use a tonal or atonal approach or maybe even consider the three , limiting the system much less . The use of diﬀerent time signatures could also be implemented since we only used one . As for the association approach , others should be tested . The shape - harmony and texture - melody association was made at the begin - ning , and exploring other possibilities could be in - teresting . Other approaches to the genetic algo - rithm could also be investigated . One possibility would be to give more freedom to the algorithm by not limiting the crossover between motifs gener - ated from the same segment of the sculpture . This could be compensated by adding a ﬁtness measure that would favor individuals where all the segments are represented . A more concrete aspect to could be worked on is the evaluation since only one of the three output compositions was evaluated . The three could be assessed to verify , for example , which one is preferred and which one is considered to be more related to the sculpture . Besides this , hav - ing human interpretations of the composition could signiﬁcantly improve the evaluation . The quality of music played by real musicians may be much better than interpretations generated using a computer . References [ 1 ] J . - L . Dugelay , A . Baskurt , and M . Daoudi . 3D Object Processing : Compression , Indexing and Watermarking . John Wiley & Sons , 2008 . [ 2 ] C . Eckert and M . Stacey . Fortune favours only the prepared mind : Why sources of inspira - tion are essential for continuing creativity . Cre - ativity and Innovation Management , 7 ( 1 ) : 9 – 16 , 1998 . [ 3 ] D . R . Finley . HSP Color Model - Alter - native to HSV ( HSB ) and HSL . http : / / alienryderflex . com / hsp . html . [ 4 ] C . G . Johnson . Fitness in evolutionary art and music : what has been used and what could be used ? In International Conference on Evo - lutionary and Biologically Inspired Music and Art , pages 129 – 140 . Springer , 2012 . [ 5 ] J . J . Koenderink and A . J . Van Doorn . Surface shape and curvature scales . Image and vision computing , 10 ( 8 ) : 557 – 564 , 1992 . [ 6 ] A . Koestler . The Act of Creation . Hutchinson , 1964 . [ 7 ] T . Okada and K . Ishibashi . Imitation , in - spiration , and creation : Cognitive process of creative drawing by copying others’ artworks . Cognitive science , 41 ( 7 ) : 1804 – 1837 , 2017 . [ 8 ] M . Rhodes . An analysis of creativity . The Phi Delta Kappan , 42 ( 7 ) : 305 – 310 , 1961 . [ 9 ] M . Ron . Modal jazz composition & harmony . Advance Music , Rottenburg , 1996 . [ 10 ] J . Teixeira . Cross - Domain Analogy : From Im - age to Music . Master’s thesis , Instituto Supe - rior T´ecnico , Lisbon , Portugal , 2017 . [ 11 ] M . J . ´Alvarez , E . Gonz´alez , F . Bianconi , J . Armesto , and A . Fern´andez . Colour and texture features for image retrieval in granite industry . Dyna , 77 : 121 – 130 , 2010 . 10