Learning Effects of Asynchronous Learning Networks : A Comparison of Groups and Individuals Solving Ethical Case Scenarios Raquel Benbunan - Fich Department of Information Systems Stern School of Business , NYU raquel @ stern . nyu . edu Starr Roxanne Hiltz Computer and Information Science New Jersey Institute of Technology hiltz @ vc . njit . edu Abstract The field experiment described in this paper explores self - reported learning and actual learning outcomes when Asynchronous Learning Networks ( ALN ) vs . manual methods are used in the individual and group solution of ethical scenarios . A 2x2 factorial design crosses two modes of communication ( manual vs . asynchronous computer conference ) and two types of teamwork ( individuals working alone vs . individuals working in groups ) . The results of this field experiment suggest that the use of ALN’s can be as effective as a traditional or face - to - face medium for conducting collaborative activities , such as the discussion and solution of cases in groups . Teamwork combined with asynchronous support can enhance the perception of learning . However , individual work in interaction with online materials negatively affects the perception of learning and subsequent exam performance . 1 . Introduction Recently , a number of empirical studies comparing learning outcomes in computer - supported versus unsupported groups have been carried out ( [ 1 ] , [ 3 ] , [ 8 ] , [ 10 ] , [ 14 ] ) . Most of these studies measured two types of learning : objective and subjective . Objective learning refers to the actual learning , traditionally measured through an exam in which participants are asked to recall as well as apply the concepts learned in the process of completing an experimental task . Subjective learning is concerned with self - reported or perceived learning . It is usually measured by a post - test questionnaire , in which participants report their own perceptions about the learning experience and many other aspects of the experiment . Prior field studies of Asynchronous Learning Networks ( ALN ) , such as the Virtual Classroom (cid:212) or VC ( a long term research project on the use of asynchronous communication systems in entire courses ) , found no consistent significant differences between traditional and VC supported classes in mastery of the material ( actual learning ) as measured by grades . Subjectively , by contrast , most students reported that VC is overall a better way of learning than traditional classes [ 8 ] . For this particular study , conducted in the context of the VC research program , a field experiment was conducted to compare individuals and groups using a computer conference or a manual mode to solve ethical case scenarios . This experiment measured objective and subjective learning . The analysis of these outcomes can advance our understanding of the benefits of asynchronous learning networks . Whereas prior field studies of ALN’s tend to confound the effects of online learning with those of individuals and group ( or collaborative ) learning , the factorial design used in this experiment allows us to determine their separate and joint effects . 2 . Theoretical Background Different learning models can be placed on a continuum ranging from objectivism to constructivism . The objectivist approach assumes that there is an objective reality and the goal of learning is to understand it and modify the behavior accordingly . On the contrary , the constructivist perspective ( based on the work of [ 13 ] ) assumes that knowledge is created or constructed by each learner . For a recent review of learning models see [ 9 ] . One of the derivations of the constructivist approach is the cognitive information processing model . According to this model , learning involves processing inputs to develop , test , and refine mental models in long - term memory [ 16 ] . At the cognitive level , learning is a process of constructing , extending and refining mental models , and using them in problem - solving situations [ 1 ] . Collaborative learning is one approach towards facilitating constructivism . In this approach , learning emerges from the interaction of individuals with other individuals [ 17 ] . Learning occurs as individuals 1060 - 3425 / 98 $ 10 . 00 ( C ) 1998 IEEE exercise , verify , solidify , and improve their mental models through discussion and information sharing during the problem solving process ( [ 1 ] , [ 9 ] ) , and as team members engage in reciprocal teaching [ 12 ] . Case studies are effective ways to engage students in problem - solving activities that challenge mental models and allow their refinement . “The goal of the cases is to enable students to process instructional inputs and assimilate the course material . Such cases can be analyzed individually or in the context of a group” [ 10 : 294 ] . When case discussions take place in a group setting , higher order cognitive skills are developed [ 8 ] . Moreover , the contribution of different understandings or the exposure to alternative points of view can enhance learning . Thus , the discussion and solution of case scenarios in groups may accelerate the creation or refinement of improved mental models and augment learning . Collaboration and teamwork can support the development of advanced mental models for a number of reasons . First , there is an opportunity for evaluation and feedback in which group members can monitor individual thinking and provide feedback for clarification and change . Second , the exposure to alternative points of view can challenge understanding and motivate learning [ 6 ] . Third , a group structure provides social support and encouragement for individual efforts [ 1 ] . Groupware technology can support collaborative learning activities by providing an environment in which group interaction is more effective and efficient . A computer - mediated communication system to support group processes can increase group process gains , such as synergy , pooling of more information , objective evaluation , cognitive stimulation and learning ; and decrease group process losses , such as fragmentation , blocking , domination , evaluation apprehension and information overload [ 11 ] . Asynchronous Group Support Systems ( GSS ) , in particular , can facilitate self - pacing and self - directed learning and increase the time available to read or reread a message and formulate a comment . This can improve in - depth reflection and development of a topic [ 7 ] . Increased opportunity for member input may enhance the quality of decision making [ 15 ] . The downside of ALN’s includes procrastination because students do not have to participate at any specific time , they may not participate regularly at all . The anxiety produced by delays and different participation rates ( or “login - lags” [ 4 ] ) may reduce the quality of decision making , because members may go along with an initial suggestion , even if they do not agree with it , in order to accelerate the process and meet a deadline [ 7 ] . In addition , students may feel that the medium is not as warm or personal as face - to - face classes , and this may also decrease motivation . 3 . Review of Empirical Studies Various studies in the area of technology supported collaborative learning using synchronous GSS have reported mixed results in objective and subjective learning . Table 1 compares the findings in self - reported and actual learning for each study . Leidner and Fuller [ 10 ] observed that students working collaboratively in groups ( discussing cases ) perceived themselves to learn more than students who worked alone . However , students who worked individually outperformed students who discussed the cases in groups before preparing their individual response to the case , as measured by the quality of the final reports they submitted . In this study , the individual solutions can be considered as a measure of actual learning . Therefore , those who participated in the group discussion , prior to solving the case on their own , learned less than those students who worked individually all the time . Yet , the self - reported learning measure reflects exactly the opposite . Students who discussed in groups perceived that they had learned more than students who worked alone . Another study [ 14 ] compared two sections of an introductory MIS course held in two consecutive semesters . One section used GSS support for the discussion of eight ethical scenarios in groups , while the other section carried out the discussions face - to - face with no GSS support . This study found that students in the GSS - supported class learned more ( measured by the scores obtained in the last question of the final exam ) than students in the traditional class , but no significant differences in self - reported learning were observed . Alavi [ 1 ] is one of the few studies reporting that GSS - supported collaborative learning leads to higher levels of both subjective ( self - reported ) learning and objective learning ( measured by the grades in the final exam ) . She also compared the use of GSS support versus a traditional face - to - face approach to case discussions in an MIS introductory course . There are interesting similarities among these studies . They all ran for at least one semester and were focused on MIS introductory courses , using synchronous GSS to discuss several case scenarios . Although the findings across studies seem to be favorable to the use of GSS tools to support case discussions , only Alavi found consistent results between objective and subjective measures of learning . 1060 - 3425 / 98 $ 10 . 00 ( C ) 1998 IEEE Table 1 : Comparison between objective and subjective learning in different studies Learning Perception Actual ( Observed ) Learning Alavi [ 1 ] GSS > non - GSS GSS > non - GSS Leidner and Fuller [ 10 ] GSS > non - GSS ( Individual ) GSS < non - GSS ( Individual ) Reinig [ 14 ] No significant differences GSS > non - GSS 4 . Hypotheses There is a need to separate the role that working in groups ( teamwork ) and using an asynchronous computer - supported communication medium play in learning . Therefore , three main research questions motivated the field experiment on which this paper is focused : ( 1 ) How does teamwork , virtual or face - to - face , affect learning outcomes ? ( 2 ) How does the use of a GSS as an Asynchronous Learning Network affect objective and subjective learning in groups and individuals ? ( 3 ) How do teamwork and GSS interact ? ( i . e . is online learning dependent on teamwork for good results ? ) Based on the literature review , the following hypotheses were formulated . 4 . 1 . Self - Reported Learning Hypotheses Based on Leidner and Fuller’s [ 10 ] findings , it is expected that participants working in groups will perceive that they have learned more than participants working alone . Thus , H1a : Group participants will perceive higher levels of self - reported learning than individuals working alone Moreover , the combination of asynchronous work , i . e . more time to process a comment and think about personal contributions , linked to the availability of a written transcript of the interaction , can augment learning . Hence , H1b : Computer - supported participants will perceive higher levels of learning than non - supported participants Due to the advantages of working in groups ( exposure to different understandings ) and the availability of an asynchronous system to support group communication , a positive interaction effect between teamwork and computer - support is expected . On the other hand , working alone online is likely to lack stimulation and motivation for participants , and they may not work as long or as hard as individuals pooling their efforts in a collaborative endeavor . Therefore , H1c : Computer - supported groups will perceive the highest levels of self - reported learning 4 . 2 . Actual Learning Hypotheses Collaborative or group learning involves three attributes of effective learning : active construction of knowledge , cooperation or teamwork , and learning by problem solving [ 1 ] . Therefore , it is expected that , as measured by exam scores : H2a : Group participants will learn more than individual participants The online exposure to alternative points of view and different responses will enhance learning [ 6 ] in computer - supported individuals when compared to individuals working without computer support . Therefore , H2b : Participants working online will learn more than participants working manually . As in the case of self - reported learning , the availability of a written transcript of the interaction , linked to the flexibility to participate by choosing the most convenient time and place , can augment learning ( [ 7 ] , [ 8 ] ) . Hence , H2c : Participants in computer - supported groups will learn more than will participants in any other condition . 1060 - 3425 / 98 $ 10 . 00 ( C ) 1998 IEEE 5 . Research Design and Methodology The experimental design was a 2x2 factorial , crossing two modes of communication ( offline - manual vs . asynchronous computer conference on EIES2 ) and two types of teamwork ( individuals working alone vs . individuals working in groups ) . In the individual manual condition , students solved the case individually , in an in - class exercise like an open - book quiz . In the individual online condition , students submitted their individual responses in the computer conference by using the Question / Response activity software on the Electronic Information Exchange System ( EIES2 ) . The Question / Response Activity allows students to submit their individual responses without seeing what anybody else has written , but after their solutions are posted , they can read the answers of others . In the group manual condition , team members discuss and solve the case by interacting face - to - face . In the allotted time ( two hours ) , they discuss the scenario and write the report . In the group online condition , team members interact asynchronously using the computer conference as the only means of communication , in order to solve the case . The participants are 136 NJIT undergraduate students in a core course for computer science majors ( “Computers and Society” ) . Since this course is traditionally offered in two modes - - face - to - face and distance - - , students in face - to - face sections could be assigned to any condition , while those in distance sections could be assigned to online conditions only . Subjects were distributed across conditions as follows : 44 in Individual / Manual , 42 in Individual / Online , 28 in Groups / Manual and 22 in Groups / Online . Due to scheduling constraints and the loss of groups because of “no - shows” , fewer participants completed the experiment in group conditions , but each of these conditions ended up with five teams of 4 to 6 students . The task was the solution of an ethical case scenario ( “Jane’s Case” in [ 2 ] ) . This kind of task accomplishes two objectives at the same time : it encourages group discussion and allows the practice of ethical analysis . A case worksheet was added to the case scenario to standardize the solution reports and to introduce questions which have correct answers , whose responses could be objectively graded . The task was implemented as one of the assignments in the course . This allowed us to obtain a measure of long - term learning ( recall and application of concepts ) by including two similar ethical scenarios in the final exam for the course . Upon completing the experiment and the post - test questionnaire , students were debriefed about experimental methods , research design , and hypotheses . Since this experiment was implemented in the context of an actual college course , in the debriefing the students were presented with a model solution to the case . 5 . 1 . Learning Measures Learning perception was measured immediately after the experiment concluded in the post - test questionnaire through a seven item scale adapted from [ 8 ] ( see Table 2 ) . The students responded on a five - point Likert scale ranging from 1 = Strongly Disagree to 5 = Strongly Agree . A Cronbach’s Alpha of . 92 was obtained , indicating a very high reliability of the self - reported learning scale . Actual learning was measured in the final exam with two similar ethical scenarios , two weeks after the experiment ended . Table 2 : Learning Perception Scale Items 1 . My skill in ethical thinking was increased by solving this case 2 . My ability to integrate facts and develop recommendations improved with this case 3 . My ability to critically analyze ethical issues improved4 . I learned to interrelate topics and ideas 5 . I learned a great deal from this case 6 . The case aided my learning 7 . I learned to identify central issues in this field 8 . Solving this case was a good learning experience 6 . Results 6 . 1 . Learning Perception Results The scores of the items in the self - reported learning scale were added up to create a composite variable , which was used to test the hypotheses in this category . Means and Analysis of Variance results are shown in Table 3 . Because this was a field experiment , the minimum level of significance for assessing the results as worthy of note was . 10 . However , a minimum of . 05 is required to refer to the results as “statistically significant” . 1060 - 3425 / 98 $ 10 . 00 ( C ) 1998 IEEE Table 3 : Means and ANOVA Results for Self - Reported Learning 1 Condition Mean Individual / Manual 30 . 47 Individual / Online 26 . 81 Groups / Manual 30 . 15 Groups / Online 31 . 38 Individual 28 . 64 Group 30 . 77 Manual 30 . 31 Online 29 . 10 F val . p Model 2 . 07 0 . 08 * SourceTeamwork Effect 3 . 22 0 . 07 * Online Effect 1 . 04 0 . 31 Interaction Effect 4 . 23 0 . 04 * * 1 Self - Reported Learning : min = 5 ; max = 40 ; * = p < . 1 ; * * = p < . 05 Groups reported marginally higher perception of learning than participants in individual conditions , but not significantly so ( Teamwork effect : F = 3 . 22 ; p = . 07 ) . Therefore , H1a ( “ Group participants will perceive higher levels of self - reported learning than individuals working alone ” ) was not supported . Manual conditions reported higher perception of learning than computer - supported conditions , but not significantly so ( Online effect : F = 1 . 04 ; p > . 1 ) . Hence , H1b ( “ Computer - supported participants will perceive higher levels of learning than non - supported participants ” ) was not supported . However , there was a significant interaction effect between teamwork and technology ( Interaction effect : F = 4 . 23 ; p < . 05 ) . Groups / Online reported better perceptions of learning than the rest of the conditions ( mean 31 . 38 ) . Thus , H1c ( “Computer - supported groups will perceive the highest levels of self - reported learning” ) was supported . Note that Individuals / Online reported the worst perception of learning ( mean 26 . 81 ) . 6 . 2 . Observed Learning Results The actual grades that participants obtained in the ethics section of the final exam ( normalized to 100 points ) were analyzed to determine significant differences . The case scenarios presented in the final exam were similar for all conditions , but each instructor graded the exams for her own section . There was no significant instructor effect ( F = 1 . 14 ; p = . 32 ) . The ANOVA test of exam scores is shown in Table 4 . There are no significant factor effects ( Teamwork : F = . 91 ; p = . 34 and Online : F = . 32 ; p = . 57 ) ; and no significant interaction effect either ( Teamwork * Online : F = . 27 ; p = . 61 ) . It is worthy of note that Individuals / Online are once again the lowest scoring condition . Table 4 : Means and ANOVA Results for Actual Learning Condition Mean Individual / Manual 69 . 43 Individual / Online 66 . 27 Groups / Manual 73 . 33 Groups / Online 70 . 57 Individual 67 . 85 Group 71 . 38 Manual 71 . 95 Online 68 . 42 F val . p Model . 57 . 64 SourceTeamwork Effect . 91 . 34 Online Effect . 32 . 57 Interaction Effect . 27 . 61 Participants in group conditions scored higher in the final exam than subjects in individual conditions , but not significantly so ( Teamwork effect : F = . 91 , p > . 1 ) . Hence , H2a ( “ Group participants will learn more than individual participants ” ) was not supported . Students in computer - supported conditions scored lower than their manual counterparts , but not significantly so ( Online effect : F = . 32 , p > . 1 ) . Thus , H2b ( “ Participants working online will learn more than participants working manually ” ) was not supported . An interaction effect was expected . The theory suggested than online groups would reflect higher levels of actual learning than the rest of the conditions , but this was not the case . It is worthy of note , however , that Individuals / Online are once again the lowest scoring condition . Therefore , H2c ( “Participants in computer - supported groups will learn more than will participants in any other condition” ) was not supported . Since hypotheses 2a , 2b and 2c were not supported by the data , further statistical analysis was conducted with exam scores using the Grade Point Average ( GPA ) as a covariate . This variable was chosen 1060 - 3425 / 98 $ 10 . 00 ( C ) 1998 IEEE because it measures the students’ academic ability , which is usually a good predictor of exam performance . Results are shown in Table 5 . Table 5 : Means and ANOVA Results for Actual Learning using GPA as covariate Condition Mean Individual / Manual 69 . 43 Individual / Online 66 . 27 Groups / Manual 73 . 33 Groups / Online 70 . 57 Individual 67 . 85 Group 71 . 38 Manual 71 . 95 Online 68 . 42 F val . p Model 6 . 53 . 0001 * * * SourceTeamwork Effect 2 . 20 . 14 Online Effect 4 . 23 . 04 * * Interaction Effect 0 . 43 . 51 GPA 21 . 95 . 0001 * * * * * = sig . at p < . 05 ; * * * = sig at p < . 01 Comparing experimental conditions in terms of actual learning and controlling for academic ability shows that GPA seems to be the best explanation for differences in exam scores . In this enhanced analysis of exam performance , the online effect is significant at p < . 05 . In other words , online conditions tended to perform lower than their manual counterparts . Further statistical analyses revealed that the online effect is only significant in individual conditions . 7 . Discussion of Results In terms of self - reported learning , Groups / Online reported better perceptions than the rest of the conditions , and Individuals / Online reported the worst perception of learning . Computer - supported groups benefited not only from the exchange of ideas among team members , but also from the availability of a written transcript of their interaction . These elements may have improved their learning perception . Individuals / Online were allowed to see their classmates’ responses only after entering their own report . This could have negatively affected their perception of learning . When confronted with other people’s responses , some individuals may have felt that their work was inadequate or incomplete , and this feeling may have diminished their perception of learning . Regarding actual learning , the only significant effect was that Individuals / Online performed significantly worse than the rest of the conditions when controlling for GPA . Here again , individuals who worked alone interacting with the technology were the lowest scoring condition . Apparently , their lower perception of learning affected their performance in the final exam . The lack of significant findings for some of the hypothesis of this study leads us to reevaluate the relationship between objective and subjective learning measures and the particular problems associated with each type of learning measure . Learning perception is usually measured immediately after finishing the task . At this point participants may not yet appreciate the impacts of the activity on their own learning process ; or they may not be totally honest in their responses because they know they are being evaluated . Accuracy and honesty are two of the main problems with the use of perceptual measures . However , perceptions are critical because of their ability to moderate or influence other outcomes . In addition , the students’ perception of their own learning is a very relative measure . One person may feel that s / he has learned a lot in being able to create or refine his / her mental model , due to the experimental task . Another person may report lower levels of learning because his / her mental model did not change much after solving the case , and yet the initial model was adequate enough . There has been some controversy about whether exams are accurate instruments to measure actual learning . In this particular study , the ethics section of the final exam consisted of two case scenarios very similar to the one presented in the experimental task . When actual learning is measured in a final exam at the end of the semester , several weeks after the experiment concluded ( as in this study ) , there are a number of factors other than the ones manipulated in this study that can account for differences in exam grades . These include , for example , number of hours of preparation for the final exam , study groups , motivation , study habits and academic ability in general . Therefore , when actual learning is measured through exam grades , there are several intervening factors that can affect the results . In this field experiment , there was a period of two weeks between the conclusion of the experiment , when the post - test questionnaire was administered , and the final exam , when actual learning was measured . The students’ awareness of their learning perception may 1060 - 3425 / 98 $ 10 . 00 ( C ) 1998 IEEE have influenced their behavior regarding exam preparation . In other words , if the students honestly felt that they had learned a lot because of their participation in the experiment , they may have changed their intentions to study for the final exam . Using expectancy theory [ 5 ] , it can be argued that if the student perceives that s / he has learned , the motivation and subsequent effort to study for the exam may be low . This tendency may be moderated by other factors such as kind of student ( high performers vs . low performers ) , need for a passing grade in the exam and available time to study for the exam . Therefore , if the actual and self - reported measures had been taken at the same time ( i . e . right after the experiment concluded ) there would be no chance that the perception of learning could change attitudes towards studying for the exam . The lack of difference in exam scores using very similar scenarios may also have been a methodological artifact of the procedures used in this study . In particular , the fact that the model answer was given to all participants after the experimental phase , could have helped to level out exam scores . Therefore , the actual learning results of this field experiment should be viewed as a consequence not only of the experiment itself , but also of the debriefing materials . Another possible reason for lack of support for hypotheses related to actual learning is that doing one case analysis did not provide enough practice to have significant long term effects . 8 . Limitations of this study There was a limitation preventing a totally random assignment of subjects to conditions . Students in distance learning sections of the course could only be assigned to online conditions , while students in traditional sections could be assigned to any condition . Since this research was conducted with actual course materials and students , there was a clear reciprocal obligation , instructors should teach and students should learn . On the one hand , the duty to learn was very helpful for the purpose of this research because participants would have a real stake in learning the computer ethics material . Sometimes , they would make an extra effort to study the topic , regardless of the condition in which they solved the case , because a large portion of the final exam was based on computer ethics . This additional effort could have helped to level out learning effectiveness measures among conditions . On the other hand , the responsibility to teach computer ethics could have also affected the outcomes of this field experiment . In the debriefing , a model solution to the case was presented to the students . Therefore , all participants could see one example of a very good solution to the case scenario . This could have also helped to equalize long - term learning measures . 9 . Implications for Researchers The analysis of learning outcomes in asynchronous environments allows us to draw important implications for researchers . First , researchers should be aware of the problems associated with self - reported and actual learning . In self - reported measures taken from students , honesty , accuracy and relativity are the main concerns ; and in observed learning , the key questions are : how accurate is the exam to measure actual learning ? and how may other uncontrollable factors affect exam performance ? . Second , when self - reported and actual learning are not measured at the same time , one may affect the other . For example , the perception of learning may change the subsequent attitude towards exam preparation and therefore affect the results of the actual learning as measured by the grade in a section of the exam . To avoid the effects of learning perception or learning awareness on exam preparation , it is advisable to administer an exam immediately after the experiment finishes . At this point , exam performance will be more a function of the experimental condition , than of any other intervening factors . Another important implication for researchers is drawn from the statistical results of this experiment . Groups / Online reported better perceptions of learning than the rest of the conditions , and Individuals / Online reported the worst perception of learning . In addition , when controlling by GPA , Individuals / Online were the lowest scoring condition in the final exam . It seems that putting individuals online to interact with course materials is not as effective as the traditional classroom . By contrast , if an asynchronous GSS is used , collaborative learning approaches , such as case solution in Groups / Online , are as effective as manual ( unsupported ) group discussion of cases . 10 . Conclusions This experiment has shown that the use of Asynchronous Learning Networks can be as effective as a traditional or face - to - face medium for conducting collaborative activities , such as the discussion and solution of cases in groups . Teamwork combined with 1060 - 3425 / 98 $ 10 . 00 ( C ) 1998 IEEE asynchronous support can enhance the perception of learning . However , individual work in interaction with online materials negatively affects the perception of learning and subsequent exam performance . Acknowledgments Partial funding for this research was provided by a National Science Foundation Grant NSF - IRI - 9408805 and the Alfred P . Sloan Foundation . Virtual Classroom (cid:212) is a registered trademark of NJIT . The opinions of this paper are solely those of the authors , and not necessarily those of the sponsors of this research . We are grateful to Ronald Rice for his suggestions on this project . References [ 1 ] Alavi , M . 1994 . " Computer - Mediated Collaborative Learning : An Empirical Evaluation " . MIS Quarterly . June , pp . 150 - 174 . [ 2 ] Anderson , R . ; Johnson , D . ; Gotterbarn , D . and Perolle , J . 1993 . Using the New ACM Code of Ethics in Decision Making . Communications of the ACM . Vol . 36 , No . 2 , 98 - 108 . [ 3 ] Benbunan - Fich , R . 1997 . Effects of Computer - Mediated Communication Systems on Learning , Performance and Satisfaction : A Comparison of Groups and Individuals Solving Ethical Case Scenarios . Doctoral Dissertation ( in progress ) . Rutgers University , Newark , NJ . [ 4 ] Dufner , D . 1995 . The Effects of Group Support ( Listing and Voting Tools ) and Sequential procedures on Group Decision Making , Using Asynchronous Computer Conferences . Doctoral Dissertation . Ph . D . in Management Program , Graduate School of Management , Rutgers University , Newark . [ 5 ] Fishbein , M . and Ajzen , I . 1975 . Belief , Attitude , Intention and Behavior . Addison - Wesley , Reading MA . [ 6 ] Glasser , R . and Bassok , M . 1989 . " Learning theory and the study of instruction " . Annual Review of Psychology . Vol . 40 , pp . 631 - 666 . [ 7 ] Harasim , L . Ed . 1990 . On - Line Education : Perspectives on a new medium , New York : Praeger / Greenwood . [ 8 ] Hiltz , S . R . 1994 . The Virtual Classroom : Learning without limits via computer networks . Norwood , New Jersey : Ablex Publishing Corporation . [ 9 ] Leidner , D . and Jarvenpaa , S . “The Use of Information Technology to Enhance Management School Education : A Theoretical View” . MIS Quarterly . September , pp . 265 - 291 . [ 10 ] Leidner , D . and Fuller , M . 1996 . “Improving Student Processing and Assimilation of Conceptual Information : GSS - Supported Collaborative Learning vs . Individual Constructive Learning” . Proceedings of HICSS 29th . January , pp . 293 - 302 [ 11 ] Nunamaker , J . , Dennis , A . , Valacich , J . , Vogel , D . and George , J . " Electronic Meeting Systems to support group work " . Communications of the ACM , 34 , 7 , 1991 , pp . 41 - 61 . [ 12 ] Palincsar , A . and Brown , A . 1984 . “Reciprocal Teaching of Comprehension - Fostering and Comprehension - Monitoring Activities” . Cognition and Instruction , 1 , 2 , pp . 117 - 175 . [ 13 ] Piaget , J . 1926 . The Language and Thought of the Child . London : Routledge and Kegan Paul . [ 14 ] Reinig , B . 1996 . “An Empirical Examination of the use of Group Support Systems in the Classroom” . Doctoral Dissertation , University of Arizona , Tucson . [ 15 ] Rice , R . 1984 . The new media : Communication , Research and Technology . Beverly Hills : Sage . [ 16 ] Shuell , T . 1986 . " Cognitive Conceptions of Learning " . Review of Educational Research , Winter , Vol . 56 , N . 4 , pp . 411 - 436 . [ 17 ] Slavin , R . E . 1987 . Cooperative Learning : Student Teams , 2nd Edition , Washington : National Educational Association . 1060 - 3425 / 98 $ 10 . 00 ( C ) 1998 IEEE