VISCOMETRIC ANALYSIS OF THE GELATION OF ACANTHAMOEBA EXTRACTS AND PURIFICATION OF TWO GELATION FACTORS 414 SUSAN D . MAcLEAN - FLETCHER and THOMAS D . POLLARD From the Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy , The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine , Baltimore , Maryland 21205 ABSTRACT We have studied the kinetics of the gelation process that occurs upon warming cold extracts of Acanthamoeba using a low - shear falling ball assay . We find that the reaction has at least two steps , requires 0 . 5 mM ATP and 1 . 5 MM MgC12 , and is inhibited by micromolar Ca " . The optimum pH is 7 . 0 and temperature , 25 ' - 30 ' C . The rate ofthe reaction is increased by cold preincubation with both MgC12 and ATP . Nonhydrolyzable analogues of ATP will not substitute for ATP either in this " potentiation reaction " or in the gelation process . Either oftwo purified or any one of four partially purified Acanthamoeba proteins will cross - link purified actin to form a gel , but none can account for the dependence of the reaction in the crude extract on Mg - ATP or its regulation by Ca " . This suggests that the extract contains , in addition to actin - cross - linking proteins , factors dependent on Mg - ATP and Ca " that regulate the gelation process . The soluble proteins extracted from a variety of cells in the cold form a solid gel when warmed to room temperature under physiological conditions ( 5 , 12 , 13 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 25 , 27 , 28 , 31 ) . This so - called gelation reaction has attracted considerable atten - tion , because analysis of it promises to reveal how cells regulate the consistency of their cytoplasm . It is already clear that gelation requires polymeriza - tion of actin ( 12 , 20 ) and the cross - linking of the actin filaments by accessory proteins ( 2 , 3 , 15 , 25 , 30 ) . These cross - linking proteins seem to differ from cell to cell . One goal of research in this area is to explain the gelation phenomenon at the molecular level . This will require the purification of all of the essential components of the gelation system and characterization of their interactions . To prove that all of the essential structural and regulatory components of the gel have been identified , one must show that the purified components account quantitatively for the gelation properties of the crude extract . To make this comparison , it is nec - essary to define in some detail the properties of the gelation reaction in the crude extract . In the present study we use a low - shear falling ball viscometer to describe in detail how environ - mental conditions influence the rate and extent of the gelation reaction in crude Acanthamoeba ex - tracts . We confirm previous qualitative evidence ( 18 , 19 ) that gelation of Acanthamoeba extract requires Mg ` and ATP , is reversed by cold , and is inhibited by cytochalasin B . New findings in - clude evidence for an Mg " - and ATP - requiring " potentiation reaction " that precedes gelation and for inhibition of gelation by micromolar Ca " . Furthermore , we confirm the finding of Maruta and Korn ( 15 ) that the extract can be fractionated into a number of low molecular weight compo - J . CELL BIOLOGY © The Rockefeller University Press - 0021 - 9525 / 80 / 05 / 0414 / 15 $ 1 . 00 Volume 85 (cid:9) May 1980 (cid:9) 414 - 428 on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m nents each of which will cause purified actin to gel . Neither of two purified gelation factors alone nor any of four partially purified gelation factors can account for the Ca " sensitivity and potentia - tion reaction characteristic of the unfractionated extract . Our interpretation of these results is that the extract contains , in addition to actin and sev - eral cross - linking proteins , some additional factors that regulate the gelation reaction . These charac - teristics of the Acanthamoeba gelation reaction were originally described in brief at the annual meeting of the Biophysical Society in 1978 ( 14 ) . MATERIALS AND METHODS Reagent grade chemicals were purchased from the following sources : sucrose ( Mallinckrodt Ltd . , St . Louis , Mo . ) ; imidazole chloride ( imidazole ) ( grade III ) , dithiothreitol ( DTT ) , EGTA , ATP , ADP , AMP , adenosine , GTP , CTP , UTP , cytochalasin B ( Sigma Chemical Co . , St . Louis , Mo . ) ; ITP ( P - L Biochemicals , Inc . , Milwaukee , Wisc . ) ; adenylyl - imidodiphosphate ( AMP - PNP ) , adenylyl ( R - y - methylene ) - diphosphate ( AMP - PCP ) ( Boeh - ringer Mannheim Biochemicals , Indianapolis , Ind . ) ; 32 P - y - ATP ( New England Nuclear Corp . , Boston , Mass . ) ; MgC12 , glycerol ( J . T . Baker Chemical Co . , Phillipsburg , N . J . ) ; anhydrousCaC12 ( Merck & Co . , Rahway , N . J . ) . Chromatography materials were purchased from the following sources : Sephadex G - 25 medium and G - 150 ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) ; cellulose PEI / F thin - layer chromatography sheets ( J . T . Baker Chemical Co . ) ; DEAE - cel - lulose DE 52 , Phosphocellulose P - I I ( Whatman , Ltd . , Springfield Mill , Maidstone , England ) ; Bio - Gel HTPhydroxylapatite ( Bio - RadLaboratories , Richmond , Calif . ) . Viscosity and Yield Strength We used a simple falling ball device , described in detail in the Appendix , to measure the yield strength and apparent viscosity of Acanthamoeba extracts . Although this viscometer cannot be used to measure absolute viscosities of non - Newtonian fluids such as the gelling extract , it is very useful for documenting the rapid changes in the apparent viscosity that occur during the gelation process . At 0°C extract was mixed with test solutions , drawn into capillary tubes , andthen warmed to 25°C to initiate gelation . The apparent viscosity was measured at several inter - vals . Rapid changesin apparent viscosity in asingle sample were measured by recording the time for the ball to fall past each centimeter level . Data from the occasional sample through which the ball did not fallsmoothly were discarded . To avoid disturbing the progress of the gelation reaction , only one ball wasused per capillary . We defined agelled extract as one through which the ball would not fall at an angle of 80 ' . This represents a yield strength ofgreater than 140 dyn / cm 2 . Preparation ofAcanthamoeba Extracts An extract of Acanthamoeba castellanii ( Nefl strain ) was prepared as described previously ( 18 ) with the following modi - fications : ( a ) the cells were homogenized with 10 strokes of a Dounce homogenizer ( Kontes Co . , Vineland N . J . ) with aloose - fitting pestle ; ( b ) the homogenate was centrifuged at 4°C for 1 h at 40 , 000 rpmin aBeckman Instruments , Inc . ( Spinco Div . , Palo Alto , Calif ) Ti50 rotor ( g avg . , 106 , 000 ) ; and ( c ) care wastaken to avoid the floating lipid , the incompletely sedimented micro - somal fraction , and the pellet in pipetting off clear supernatant extract . Samplesofextract ( 25 - 30 ml ) were desalted by gel permeation chromatography at 4 ' C on a 2 . 5 x 36 . 5 - cm column of Sephadex G - 25 equilibrated with 0 . 34 Msucrose , 10 mM imidazole ( pH7 ) , 1 mM EGTA , and 0 . 5 mM DTT . Forexperiments with 4 . 5 mM EGTA - Ca buffers , the desalting buffer contained 5 mM EGTA and 30 mM imidazole with DTTand sucrose . Fractionation of Gelation Factors Gelation factors were isolated from the extract by a modifi - cation of a method described briefly by Maruta and Korn ( 15 ) . The crude extract was first fractionated by ion exchange chro - matography on DEAE - cellulose as described for myosin - II pu - rification ( 21 ) . To assay for gelation factors , samples weregently vortexed with depolymerized skeletal muscle actin in 30 mM imidazole ( pH 7 ) , 5 mM EGTA , 2 mM MgCl , and l mM ATP and immediately drawn into capillary tubes . After warming the samples at 25°C for 10 min , we measured the viscosity as described above . Fractions containing gelation factors were iden - tified by theirability to increase the viscosity ofpure actin . Active fractions were pooled andpurified further by ammonium sulfate precipitation . using 1 . 5 - 2 . 0 M ammonium sulfate with 10 mM EDTA in the saturated stock solution . This was followed by gel permeation chromatography on Sephadex G - 150 in 20 mM imidazole ( pH7 . 5 ) , 1 mM EGTA , and0 . 5 mM DTT . The active fractions were applied to Bio - Rad Laboratories HT hydroxylap - atite columns in 10 mM imidazole and 1 mM DTT ( pH7 . 5 ) , and eluted with phosphate gradients . Biochemical Methods Rabbit skeletal muscle actin was prepared by amodification of the method of Spudich andWatt ( 24 ) with a single cycle of polymerization and sedimentation from 0 . 8 M KCl . Protein concentrations were estimated using the method ofHartree ( l0 ) , with bovine serum albumin as astandard . Theamount of pelletable actin in extracts wasdetermined by centrifugation of 1 - ml samples for 60 min in a Ti - 50 rotor at 40 , 000 rpm ( g max , 150 , 000 ) followed by SDS - polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of pellets and supernates . Actin was deter - mined by densitometry of stained gels ( 18 ) . It had been shown previously that virtually all of the protein of 43 , 000 molecular weight wasactin ( 9 , 18 ) . Free calcium ion concentrations in CaC12 - EGTA - MgC12 - ATP - imidazole buffers were calculated using the following Ca - EGTA dissociation constants : 1 . 9 x 10 - 6 M for pH 6 . 5 , 1 . 9 x 10 - ' MforpH7 . 0 , 8 . 0x10 - 8 MforpH7 . 2 , 3 . 4x10 ' MforpH 7 . 4 , and 2 . 2 x 10 - fl M for pH 7 . 5 ( 22 ) . RESULTS We measured the viscosity change during gelation ofboth crude and desalted extracts . The two prep - arations are similar in many respects , but only the desalted extract is suitable for quantitative analy - sis , for two reasons . First , the properties of the crude extract change during storage at 0°C , whereas the desalted extract is stable . Second , it is possible to work under defined ionic conditions with the desalted extract , but not with the crude extract . In the following paragraphs we present a SUSAN D . MACLEAN - FLETCHER AND THOMAS D . POLLARD (cid:9) GelatiOn Of Acanthamoeba Extracts 415 on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m brief description of the properties of the crude extract , followed by a detailed analysis of gelation in the desalted extract . Crude Extract PROTEIN COMPOSITION : The polypeptide composition in the crude extract was identical to that described previously ( 18 ) . The average protein concentration was 10 . 8 mg / ml . Thus actin , which constituted 14 % ofthe extract protein , was present at 1 . 5 mg / ml . PHYSICAL CHANGES DURING GELATION : When the cold extract was warmed to 25°C , the initial apparent viscosity was 1 - 2 cp , but after a brief lag it increased rapidly to > 12 , 000 cp as it gelled ( Fig . 1 ) . At 1 g , this represents a minimum yield strength of 146 dyn / cm2 . As judged by the centrifugation assay , the yield strength of the gelled extract varied among preparations from 0 . 6 to 2 . 9 x 10 3 dyn / cm2 . For comparison , a 1 . 5 - mg / ml solution of pure muscle actin filaments in 10 mM imidazole ( pH 7 ) and 2 mM MgC12 , at 25°C , has an apparent viscosity of - 150 cp in our vis - cometer and a yield strength of < 20 dyn / cm2 . This is an approximate maximum value for the yield strength of pure actin , because this yield strength is below the accurate range of our apparatus . 0 . 04 0 . 02 0 . 01 0 2 4 6 8 10 Extract , mg / ml FIGURE 1 Dependence of the time for gelation of Acanthamoeba extract upon the concentration of extract and the time after preparation . At 1 . 5 h ( O ) and 3 h ( " ) after preparation of the extract , samples were diluted to various protein concentrations in 0 . 34 M sucrose , 10 mM imidazole ( pH 7 ) , 2 mM MgC12 , 1 . 5 mM ATP , 1 . 5 mM EGTA , and 1 mM DTT , and the time to gel at 25°C was measured . 0 416 (cid:9) THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 85 , 1980 Using another method , Brotschi ( 2 ) found the yield strength of 1 . 5 mg / ml of muscle actin in 0 . 1 M KCl is 0 . 05 dyn / cm2 . This difference may be in part a result of the buffer composition and the purity of the actin . ' REQUIREMENTS FOR GELATION : The gela - tion kinetics of crude extract depend on protein concentration , temperature , and pH . Below a crit - ical concentration of 5 - 6 mg / ml protein ( actin concentration , 0 . 7 - 0 . 8 mg / ml ) the extract would not gel ( Fig . 1 ) . Gelation occurred at 15°C and the rate was faster at higher temperatures up to at least 30°C . Gelation occurred over a wide pH range , from 6 . 5 to 9 . 0 , with the optimum rate at pH 7 . 0 . REVERSIBILITY : Using the low - shear viscom - eter , we confirmed the earlier qualitative obser - vation ( 18 ) that the gelation of crude extract is reversible by low temperature . Fresh extract gelled when warmed to 25° , liquefied when incubated at 0° , and gelled again if rewarmed to 25°C . Both liquefaction and gelation occurred rapidly ( < 2 min ) ; however , after several cycles of gelation and liquefaction , the crude extract no longer liquefied at 0°C . AGING OF CRUDE EXTRACT : Although the polypeptide composition of the crude extract was stable for > 6 h , even at 25°C ( 18 ) , its properties changed during the first few hours after prepara - tion while stored at 0°C . Crude extract gelled more rapidly and at lower protein concentrations after storage on ice for 3 h ( Fig . 1 ) . Fresh extract did not gel at temperatures below 15°C , whereas 3 - h - old extract gelled readily at 12°C . Moreover , gels of aged extract were not liquefied at 0°C . Because this instability of the crude extract complicates detailed analysis , we concentrated our efforts on experiments with the more stable desalted extract . Desalted Extract COMPOSITION AND STABILITY : (cid:9) As judged by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis , the poly - peptide composition of desalted extract was quan - titatively identical to the crude extract . The aver - age protein concentration of the desalted extract was 9 . 4 mg / ml , slightly lower than the crude ex - tract , and the actin concentration was about 1 . 3 mg / ml . The gelation properties of the desalted extract were stable during storage on ice for at least 6 h . KINETICS OF GELATION : Desalted extract ' MacLean - Fletcher , S . and T . Pollard . Manuscript sub - mitted for publication . on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m gelled when supplied with optimal concentrations of Mg " and ATP and warmed to 25 ' ( 18 ) . The gelation kinetics of the desalted extracts ( Fig . 2 ) were similar to those of the crude extract . In both cases , there was an initial lag phase during which the apparent viscosity changed little , followed by an explosive increase in viscosity to > 12 , 000 cp . The duration ofthe lag depended upon the protein concentration , and below 5 mg / mldesalted extract did not gel ( Fig . 2 ) . REQUIREMENTS FOR GELATION : Gelation of desalted extract was optimal at pH 7 . 0 and 25 - 30°C , but it would occur , though less rapidly , over a wide range of pH ( 6 . 5 - 9 . 0 ) and temperature ( from 12° to at least 35°C ) . Desalted extract that gelled at 25° liquefied at 0°C through several cycles . In the presence of 1 mM ATP , gelation of desalted extract required M9C12 at aconcentration > _ 1 . 5 mM . At lower concentrations Of MgC12 , the viscosity increased slightly after prolonged incu - bation at 25°C , but a gel did not form . None of several other cations tested substituted for MgC12 ( Table I ) . au T 0 u c d aaa 150 100 50 0 4 Min at 25 ° c FIGURE 2 (cid:9) Dependence of the time - course of gelation ofdesalted Acanthamoeba extract upon the concentration of extract . We diluted samples to various concentrations in 0 . 34 M sucrose , 10 mM imidazole ( pH 7 ) , 2 mM MgC12 , 1 mM ATP , 1 mM EGTA , and 0 . 5 mM DTT , and preincubated them for 5 min at 0°C before meas - uring the time - course of their viscosity changes at 25°C . Protein concentrations in milligrams per milliliter are indicated next to each curve . u a aaa 20 TABLE I Ion Requirementsfor Gelation Conditions : Desalted extract in 0 . 34 M sucrose , imidazole ( pH 7 ) , 2 mM EGTA , 1 mM ATP , mM DTT . Incubation , 15 min at 20°C . 2 3 0 . 06 8 0 . 04 s 0 . 02 SUSAN D . MACLEAN - FLETCHER AND THOMAS D . POLLARD (cid:9) Gelation ofAcanthamoeba Extracts 20 mM and 0 . 5 Min at 25°c FIGURE 3 (cid:9) Dependence of the time - course of gelation of desalted Acanthamoeba extract upon the free calcium ion concentration . We preincubated samples containing 9 . 2 mg / ml protein in 0 . 34 M sucrose , 10 mM imidazole ( pH 7 ) , 2 mM MgC12 , 1 mM ATP , 1 mM EGTA , 0 . 5 mM DTT , and various amounts of CaC12 , for 5 min at 0°C before warming them to 25 ' C and measuring the time - courses of viscosity changes . Free calcium ion con - centrations : 10 ' M ( O ) , 10 - d M ( " ) , 10 ' M ( 0 ) , 10 - 5 M ( " ) . Inset , a plot of the reciprocal of the time to gel vs . pCa from another experiment . Gelation of desalted extract with 1 mM ATP and 2 mM MgC12 was optimal in 0 - 20 mM KCI . In 40 - 60 mM KCI , gelation occurred somewhat more slowly , whereas at KCI concentrations > 80 mM there was an increase in viscosity , but no gelation . Similar results were obtained with NaCl . In the presence of Mg - ATP , the optimal free calcium ion concentration for gelation was 10 - 8 M ( Fig . 3 ) . Free calcium ion concentrations > 10 - 7 M completely inhibited gelation . The results were identical with either 1 mM or 4 . 5 mM EDTA - 417 Ion MM Viscosity CP MgC12 , 1 . 5 Gel CaC12 ( without EGTA ) , 2 1 . 4 BaC12 , 1 . 5 1 . 4 MnC12 , 1 . 5 1 . 6 NaCl , 50 1 . 6 KCI , 50 1 . 6 on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m CaC12 buffers , indicating that traces of Ca " con - taminating the solutions were not an important factor in determining the free Ca " concentration . The inhibition of gelation by micromolar Ca " occurred over a pH range from at least 6 . 6 to 7 . 2 . Inhibition ofgelation by Ca " was not reversible at 25°C . An extract in 10 - 6 M Ca " did not gel within 4 h of dialysis at 25°C against an EGTA buffer containing 10 - 9 M Ca " . However , an ex - tract that gelled in - - 10 - 9 M Ca " could be lique - fied at 25°C within - 30 min by dialysis against a buffer containing 10 - 6 M Ca " . In the presence of 2 mM MgC12 , gelation of desalted extract required ATP at a concentration ? 0 . 5 mM . At lower concentrations of ATP , the viscosity increased slightly after prolonged incu - bation at 25°C , but a gel did not form . ITP sub - stituted for ATP to give quantitatively identical gelation kinetics . A small increase in viscosity occurred with 1 mM AMP , but there was no viscosity change with 1 mM ADP , AMP - PCP , or AMP - PNP . Thin - layer chromatography on PEI cellulose showed that the ITP and AMP contained < 3 % ATP . The effects of 1 mM CTP , GTP , or UTP on gelation varied . Typically , the viscosity of the extract increased for a short time before falling back to buffer levels if CTP , GTP , or UTP was substituted for ATP . POTENTIATION REACTION : When desalted extract was incubated at 0°C with MgC12 and ATP , it did not gel , but underwent changes poten - tiating the gelation that occurred upon subsequent warming to 25°C . This potentiation reaction caused the desalted extract to gel more rapidly , at lower protein concentration , at lower tempera - tures , and more permanently . These changes in the desalted extract were similar to those observed upon aging of the crude extract , but there is no direct evidence that the two processes involved the same reactions . The time required for gelation at 25°C de - creased by a factor of six ( Fig . 4 ) after 15 - 20 min preincubation at 0°C with MgC12 . and ATP ( Fig . 5 ) , Both M9C12 and ATP were required for this potentiation reaction ( Fig . 4 ) . Neither AMP - PCP nor AMP - PNP substituted for ATP in this reac - tion . The potentiation effect was maintained even if the MgC12 and ATP were removed by a second desalting on Sephadex G - 25 . If MgC12 and ATP were re - added to such a potentiated , MgC12 - and ATP - free sample , it gelled at 25°C in about one - sixth the time required for gelation of unpoten - au T 418 (cid:9) THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 85 , 1980 30 ~ FIGURE 4 (cid:9) Dependence of the time - course of gelation of desalted Acanthamoeba extract upon preincubation with MgC12 and ATPat 0°C . We preincubated samples containing 7 . 6 mg / mlprotein in 0 . 34 M sucrose , 20 mM imidazole ( pH 7 ) , 2 mM EGTA , and 0 . 5 mM DTT for 17 min at 0°C under various conditions before warming them to 25 ' C and measuring the time - course ofgelation . Experimental conditions indicated next to each curve : present during 17 - min preincubation / added immedi - ately before warming . Conditions : cold preincubation with both 1 mM ATP and 2 MM MgCl2 ( O ) ; cold preincubation with ATP followed by addition of MgC12 immediately before warming ( / ) ; cold preincubation with MgC12 followed by addition of ATP immediately before warming ( Q ) ; cold preincubation followed by addition of MgC12 and ATP immediately before warm - ing ( A ) ; no addition of MgC12or ATP ( " ) . 0u0 ï umáa 40 20 0 ATP / Mg lMg - ATP 1 4 6 Minat 25°c 0 / 0 FIGURE 5 (cid:9) Potentiation of gelation of desalted extract at 25°C by preincubation with Mg - ATP at 0°C . We incubated desalted extract containing 7 . 6 mg / ml protein in 20 mM imidazole ( pH 7 ) , 2 mM EGTA , 2 mM MgC12 , and l mM ATPat 0°C for various lengths oftime before warming it to 25°C for 1 min , when we measured the viscosity . on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m tiated desalted extract . Thus , extracts that were potentiated and then desalted retained the effects of the potentiation reaction , even though MgC12 and ATP were required for gelation . Over aperiod of 2 h after the second gel filtration , the original potentiation effects were lost and rapid gelation occurred only if extracts were preincubated a sec - ond time with MgC12 and ATP for 15 - 20 min before warming . During the time required for the potentiation reaction , gamma phosphate from ATP was incor - porated into many of the proteins of the desalted extract . The rate of phosphorylation at 0°C was about 0 . 07 nmol 32p / mg protein per min for - 7 min and about 0 . 02 nmo1 32P / mg protein per min thereafter . This protein phosphorylation required M9C12 , but was not affected by the presence or absence of micromolar concentrations of Ca " . Autoradiographs ofextract polypeptides separated by gel electrophoresis in SDS showed that many polypeptides ( excluding actin ) were phosphoryl - ated during the potentiation reaction ( Fig . 6 ) . The first and most prominent phosphorylated poly - peptide had the same electrophoretic mobility as the myosin - II heavy chain . In the low molecular weight region of the gel , the most highly phospho - rylated polypeptides had molecular weights of 37 , 000 , 33 , 000 , 27 , 000 , and 23 , 000 . FIGURE 6 (cid:9) Phosphorylation of Acanthamoeba proteins during incubation of desalted extract with MgC12 and 32P - ATPat 0°C . Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis was used to separate the proteins . From the left : standards with molecular weights given in thousands ; two stained gels with light and heavy loadings ; and autoradiograms of pairs of gels with samples incubated with 32P - ATP for 3 min , 5 min , and 7 min . 0 gel 0 . 1 , ' M 02pM 60 40 20 2 4 6 8 10 Minet 25°c FIGURE 7 (cid:9) Inhibition ofgelation by cytochalasin B . We preincubated desalted Acanthamoeba extract containing 9 . 2 mg / ml protein in 0 . 34 M sucrose , 10 mM imidazole ( pH 7 ) , 2 MM MgC12 , l mM ATP , 1 mM EGTA , 0 . 5 mM DTT , and various concentrations of cytochalasin B ( with < _ O . I % DMSO ) for 3 min at 0°C before warming it to 25°C and measuring the time - course of viscosity changes . Concentrations of cytochalasin B : 0 ± 0 . 1 % DMSO ( O ) , 0 . 1 pM ( " ) , 0 . 2 ttM ( " ) , 0 . 4 gM ( A ) , 1 pM ( O ) . CYTOCHALASIN B INHIBITION : MICromo - lar concentrations of cytochalasin B ( < I cytocha - lasin B / 30 actins ) completely inhibited gelation , whereas submicromolar cytochalasin B reduced both the rate and extent of the reaction in a concentration - dependent fashion ( Fig . 7 ) . At low shear in the falling ball viscometer , the viscosity of 10 p , M polymerized muscle actin was also de - creased - 90 % by 1 p , M cytochalasin B . A compa - rable decrease in viscosity of muscle actin by cytochalasin B was not detectable by Ostwald viscometry . On the basis of these observations , we believe that cytochalasin B influences actin fila - ment - filament interactions but not the extent of actin polymerization . ' ACTIN POLYMERIZATION : We used a pel - leting assay to estimate the amount ofactin polym - erized during various treatments of the extract ( Table II ) . Both above and below the critical ex - tract concentration for gelation ( Fig . 2 ) , - 30 % ( range in four experiments , 25 - 45 % ) of the extract actin pelleted ( Table II ) . At the critical concentra - tion for gelation , there was about 0 . 2 mg / ml po - lymerized and 0 . 5 mg / ml unpolymerized actin . When depolymerized muscle actin was added to cold extract , the amount ofactin that pelleted after warming to 25°C equaled the sum of the exoge - nous muscle actin and the expected endogenous actin polymer . Thus , all added pure actin seemed capable of polymerization in the extract . When gelation was reversed by cooling , the amount of SUSAN D . MACLEAN - FLETCHER AND THOMAS D . POLLARD (cid:9) Gelatlon ofAcanthamoeba Extracts 419 on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m 420 TABLE 11 Actin Polymerization in the Extract Pelleting assay described under Materials andMethods . Conditions : ( A1 ) 1 - ml Samples with various concentra - tions ofextract were warmed at 25 ' C for 15 min in 0 . 34 M sucrose , 30 mM imidazole ( pH 7 . 0 ) , 2 MM MgC12 , 1 mM ATP , 1 mM EGTA , and 0 . 5 mM DTT , and then centrifuged at 25°C . ( A2 ) 0 . 2 mg / ml depolymerized chicken skeletal muscle actin wasadded to two different concentrations ofextract in 1 ml total volume and treated as in A1 . ( B ) Gel reversed by cold . A sample of 8 . 5 mg / ml was warmed to 25°C to gel as in A1 , liquefied by incubation at 0°C for 30 min , and then centrifuged at 3 ' C . ( C ) Mgconcentration . 8 . 5 mg / mlsamples ofextract were treated as in A1 , except that the MgC12 concentra - tion was varied from 0 - 2 mM . ( D ) ATP concentration . 8 . 5 mg / ml samples of extract were treated as in A1 , except that the ATP concentration was varied from 0 - 1 mM . ( E ) Free calcium ion concentration . 8 . 5 mg / ml samples of extract were treated as in A1 , except that CaC12 was added to yield a free Ca " concentration ranging from 10 - 9 to 10 - s M . pelletable actin did not change ( Table II ) . Actin polymerization does not seem to be the limiting factor in the Mg " and ATP requirement for gelation , because actin pelleting was normal even THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 85 , 1980 at concentrations of Mg " ( 0 . 2 mM ) or ATP ( 0 . 1 mM ) that failed to support gelation ( Table II ) . Compared with 10 - 9 M Ca " , only half as much actin pelleted at 10 - s M Ca " ( Table II ) . GELATION OF PURIFIED MUSCLE ACTIN BY EXTRACT : Smallamounts of crude extract from Acanthamoeba caused pure actin to form a gel ( 15 ) . We confirmed this observation , using the viscometric assay : a mixture of actin monomers ( > 0 . 4 mg / ml ) and extract ( > _ 0 . 1 mg / ml ) in 0 . 34 M sucrose , 10 mM imidazole ( pH 7 ) , 2 MM MgC12 , 1 mM ATP , 1 mM EGTA , and 0 . 5 mM DTT formed a gel upon warming . Under these condi - tions , the actin polymerized in the presence of the extract . When actin filaments were used in place of actin monomers , gelation occurred , but only if mixing were gentle . For example , upon warming , a gel formed at the interface of a solution of actin filaments in 1 mM ATP and 2 mM MgC12 layered over low concentrations of desalted extract . Most of the conditions that influenced the time - course of gelation in the crude and desalted ex - tracts also influenced gelation in the mixtures of muscle actin and small amounts of desalted ex - tract . Gelation was completely inhibited in the absence of MgC12 or in the presence ofmicromolar concentrations of free calcium ion or cytochalasin B . Gelation occurred slowly or not at all without added ATP . Two properties of the extract were not reconsti - tuted when small amounts of desalted extract were mixed with muscle actin . First , the rate of gelation of the reconstituted system was notpotentiated by preincubation with 1 mM ATP and 2 mM MgC12 . Second , the gel formed in the reconstituted system at 25° was not liquefied at 0°C . FRACTIONATION OF GELATION ACTIVITY : As demonstrated by Maruta and Korn ( 15 ) , the gelation activity of Acanthamoeba extracts can be separated into a number of fractions , each of which causes solutions of pure skeletal muscle actin to form a gel . They purified four different proteins that accounted for the bulk of the gelation activity in their extracts . Using aprocedure similar to that described briefly by Maruta and Kom ( 15 ) , we separated the gelation activity of the extract into a number of distinct fractions , including two of high purity . Thecold extract was first fractionated on alarge DEAE - cellulose ( DEAE ) column ( Fig . 8 ) , which separated three peaks of gelation factor activity ( designated A , B , and C ) from the two classes of A . Extract , mg / ml 1 . 8 . 5 Totalactin mg l . 2 Actinpelleted mg 0 . 37 Total actin pelleted 31 Gel + 6 . 6 0 . 9 0 . 25 28 + 4 . 7 0 . 7 0 . 22 32 - 2 . 8 0 . 4 0 . 13 33 - 2 . 8 . 5 + 0 . 2 mg 1 . 4 0 . 53 38 + muscle actin 2 . 8 + 0 . 2 mg 0 . 6 0 . 35 58 - muscle actin B . Gel reversed by 1 . 2 0 . 38 32 - cold C . MgC12 , MM 0 1 . 2 0 . 24 20 - 0 . 2 1 . 2 0 . 34 28 - 2 . 0 1 . 2 0 . 37 31 + D . ATP , mM 0 1 . 2 0 . 38 32 - 0 . l 1 . 2 0 . 34 28 - 1 . 0 l . 2 0 . 37 31 + E . Ca " , mM 0 1 . 2 0 . 37 31 + 10 - 9 l . 2 0 . 34 28 + l0 - 1 l . 2 0 . 35 29 + 10 - 7 1 . 2 0 . 28 23 + 10 - 6 1 . 2 0 . 18 15 - on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m FIGURE 8 (cid:9) Fractionation of Acanthamoeba extract on DEAE as previously described ( 21 ) . 500 ml of extract was applied to a 4 x 24 - cm column and eluted with a 1 , 500 ml 0 - 0 . 5 M KC1 gradient ( solid line ) . Fraction volume , 17 ml . Thegelation factor activity wasmeasured as the low - shear viscosity of 0 . 5 mg / ml muscle actin mixed with 0 . 01 part ofcolumn fraction . Arrows indicate the elution positions of myosin - 1 ( AM - 1 ) , myosin - 11 ( AM - 11 ) , and actin . O , A2so ; " , gelation activity in cen - tipoise measured with 0 . 5 mg / mlactin and 0 . 01 part of column fraction . myosin and from actin . ' Although each of these three fractions can gelactin , none ofthese partially purified fractions had the millimolar Mg - ATP requirement or the Ca " and cold sensitivity of the crude extract . Each of the three peaks of gelation activity was fractionated by ammonium sulfate precipitation and gel permeation chroma - tography , revealing that there were at least six distinct fractions of gelation activity . We purified two of these gelation factors from DEAE peak A by use of gel permeation chroma - tography ( Fig . 9 ) and hydroxylapatite chromatog - raphy ( Fig . 10 ) . During the purification , we as - sessed the specific activity by determining the dependence of the viscosity of actin upon the concentration of gelation factor ( Fig . 11 ) . The viscosity was not directly proportional to gelation factor concentration ; rather , the curves were hy - perbolic . Low concentrations of gelation factor had little effect on theviscosity , butover anarrow concentration rangethere wasan abrupt transition 2 Assays of the DEAE column for gelation activity also revealed that fractions 105 - 115 decrease the low - shear viscosity of actin filaments . Similar activity is found in muscle actinpreparations . See footnote 1 . in theviscosity , as noted previously forother actin - cross - linking proteins ( 2 ) . Consequently , the spe - cific activity of a fraction must be estimated by the concentration required to yield a viscosity , e . g . , 1 , 000 cp , just above the transition point . By this criterion , the specific activity of DEAE peak A was about four times higher than that of the crude extract , but this activity declined by - 50 % during the concentration of thegelation factor activity by 0 . 4 0 . 3 a 0 . 2 0 FIGURE 9 Fractionation of ammonium sulfate - con - centrated DEAE peak A on a 2 . 5 x 52 - cm column of Sephadex G - 150 . Fraction volume , 4 . 0 ml . " , Also . Ge - lation factor activity ( O ) measured with 0 . 5 mg / ml actin and 0 . 1 part of column fraction . gel - 1 1 , 500 FIGURE 10 (cid:9) Fraction of Sephadex G - 150 peak A - 2 on a 1 . 5 x 9 - cm hydroxylapatite column as described in Materials and Methods . Fraction volume , 4 . 7 ml . " , A2w . Gelation factor activity ( O ) measured with 0 . 5 mg / ml actin and 0 . 1 part ofcolumn fraction . SUSAN D . MACLEAN - FLETCHER AND THOMAS D . POLLARD (cid:9) Gelation ofAcanthamoeba Extracts 421 on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m ammoniumsulfate precipitation . Chromatography on Sephadex G - 150 ( Fig . 9 ) separated the activity into two peaks ( A - 1 and A - 2 ) . Peak A - 2 had a much higher specific activity than the column sample or peakA - 1 and was composed ofonly two major polypeptides ( Fig . 11 ) . Both of these poly - peptides had gelation activity after separation on hydroxylapatite ( Fig . 10 ) into purified fractions A - 2Q and A - 2b . The two purified gelation factors had molecular weights of 33 , 000 and 37 , 000 , respec - tively , so they may be the gelation factors III and IV isolated by Maruta and Korn ( 15 ) . However , their gelation factor IV bound to DEAE , whereas A - 2b did not . It is important to note that although our procedure resulted in substantial purification of these two polypeptides , the increase in specific activity was only - 12 - fold compared with the crude extract and 3 - fold compared with the DEAE fraction A . Moreover , < I0 % of the total activity in the DEAE - A fraction was recovered in the A - 2a and A - 2b fractions . Neither of these purified gelation factors can account for the behavior of the extract . Although each can cross - link actin to form a gel , in neither case was gelation dependent on ATP or inhibited 422 FIGURE I l (cid:9) Dependence of actin low - shear viscosity on the concentration of gelation factor fractions . Actin concentration : 0 . 5 mg / ml in 2 MM MgC12 , 1 mM ATP , 1 mM EGTA , and 10 mM imidazole ( pH 7 ) . Hydroxylapatite fraction A - 2a ( O ) , hydroxylapatite fraction A - 2n ( " ) , Sephadex G - 150 fraction A - 2 ( " ) , DEAE fraction A ( A ) , ammonium sulfate fraction A ( " ) , Sephadex G - 150 fraction A - 1 ( O ) . THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 85 , 1980 by micromolar Ca " , as was the crude extrct or the mixture of pure actin with a small amount of crude extract . CONTRACTION : Under our standard condi - tions , extract remained gelled for - 45 min , and thereafter the gel pulled away from the sides of the container to form a contractile thread . The ability of the thread to do work was demonstrated by its movement of the steel ball a distance of several centimeters overnight . DISCUSSION We divide the following discussion into two parts . Because we have introduced a new method for measuring gelation , we first evaluate the falling ball method and compare it with other assays . Second , we comment on the new features of the gelation reaction revealed by our experiments . Gelation Assays The actin - containing gels from Acanthamoeba and other cells are complex materials , possessing the properties of both liquids ( above their yield points ) and solids ( below their yield points ) . More - over , microscopic observations ( 5 , 26 ) suggest that on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m they are elastic as well . It is also likely that their physical properties change with time under stress . Eventually it will be desirable to make a thorough analysis of the physical properties of these gels , including a complete stress / strain curve vs . time for the viscous component and a restoring force vs . displacement curve for the elastic component . No simple assay can yield all of this information , but of the approaches one might take in a kinetic study , the falling ball method has distinct advan - tages . The falling ball assay is simple , inexpensive , and highly reproducible . The sample size is small . The sample is stationary before interaction with the ball . The viscosity range is wide . Kinetic data are obtained with ease . It is possible to keep the maximum shear rate for Newtonian fluids below 10 s - ' for samples with viscosities > 6 cp by choos - ing an appropriate angle of inclination . For com - parison , Ostwald viscometers typically have shear rates > 100 s - ' . Although the falling ball method , has many advantages , it has three main limitations in studies of gelation . First , only two structural parameters ( apparent viscosity and yield strength ) can be measured . Second , for a given sample the shear rate can only be varied by a factor of - 12 when using gravitational acceleration and angles of in - clination between 10° and 80° . Finally , even at the relatively low shear rates in the falling ball device , the stress applied to these delicate samples by the falling ball is destructive . The ball centrifugation assay is a simple ap - proach to measuring yield strength . Its major limi - tations at the present time are some uncertainty about the value of the geometrical constant in Eq . 3 ( see Appendix ) and the crude , stepwise applica - tion of force by centrifugation . A better method would be to observe the ball continuously as the centrifugal force is gradually increased . A number of other assays have been used to study gelation of cytoplasmic extracts and systems reconstituted from purified actin and various cross - linking proteins . In most cases , the assay has been the inversion of test tubes to demonstrate sample consistency ( 3 , 5 , 12 , 15 , 18 , 19 , 25 , 30 ) . This assay is both subjective and impossible to quantitate . Other inadequate assays include cap - illary viscometry , strain birefringence , pelleting , and turbidity . Capillary viscometry has been used to show that the viscosity increases during gelation , but the apparent viscosities obtained are unreliable because the gel is fragmented during flow through the capillary ( 20 ) . Moreover , stationary samples allowed to gel in such viscometers will not flow because their viscosity exceeds the range of the viscometer , an observation no more quantitative than test - tube inversion . Strain birefringence measurements ( 5 ) could be made quantitative if the stress were applied quantitatively , but this has not been done . Because cross - linked actin fila - ments will sediment at low centrifugal forces , it has been possible to use a pelleting assay for gelation ( 2 , 13 ) . This assay may be misleading under some conditions because aggregated pro - teins also pellet . Turbidity changes have been used to follow the progress of the gelation reaction ( 5 , 18 , 19 , 25 ) . Although the method is ideal for kinetic analysis , turbidity changes resulting from other reactions , including precipitation , compli - cate this approach . Perhaps the only satisfactory assay for gelation previously described is a measurement of yield point ( 2 ) . This assay is , however , cumbersome for kinetic analysis . Physical Properties of the Gelled Extract The most important physical properties of the gelled extract are its rigidity , reflected in its high yield strength of - 103 dyn / cm2 , and its sensitivity to mechanical shearing . Both rigidity and thixo - tropy are also properties of cytoplasm . These fea - tures of the gelled extract can be accounted for by a continuously cross - linked network of actin fila - ments . Such a model has been inferred previously from the gooey nature of the gels , from electron micrographs of fixed gels ( 5 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 27 ) , and from the requirement for both actin and actin - binding gelation factors to form a gel ( 2 , 3 , 12 , 15 , 20 , 25 , 30 ) . The high yield strength of the gel , as compared to that of the same concentration of actin filaments , proves that the filaments are phys - ically cross - linked to one another . The measured rigidity and high viscosity of these samples are properties of the bulk material . For particles as small as organelles , the viscosity must also be very high , judging from the absence of Brownian movement ( 18 ) . On the other hand , it seems highly likely that the microscopic viscos - ity , on the level ofsolute molecules , is much lower , because small molecules should be free to diffuse throughout the interstices of the actin filament network . As in other cross - linked fibrous gels and in cytoplasm , mechanical shearing disrupts the struc - ture of the gelled extract . At the high shear rates SUSAN D . MACLEAN - FLETCHER AND THOMAS D . POLLARD (cid:9) Gelation ofAcanthamoeba Extracts 423 on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m found in Ostwald viscometry or mechanical mix - ing , the gel is fragmented into a precipitate that never recovers the original viscosity . The level of shearing in our falling ball viscometer also disrupts the gel , but given time , the latter recovers , . dem - onstrating its thixotropic nature . Brotschi et al . ( 2 ) used a " gelmeter " to measure the yield strength of gels composed of actin and macrophage actin - binding protein and found val - ues of < 10 dyn / cm2 . We cannot account for why our measurements of the yield strength of the Acanthamoeba extract gel are 100 x higher , but we believe the difference must be related to meth - ods used to measure rigidity rather than to major differences in the properties of the gels . The Gelation Process KINETICS : The gelation reaction occurs in two steps : a lag period of duration approximately proportional to concentration ' , followed by a rapid rise in viscosity . Maximum rates of change exceed 100 cp / s . The rate of this rapid phase of the gelation reaction seems to be sufficiently fast to account for the rapid changes in consistency that occur in the cytoplasm of living cells ( 1 , 27 ) . SOLUTION CONDITIONS : (cid:9) The optimal con - ditions for gelation are likely to be close to those found inside the Acanthamoeba : millimolar Mg - ATP , low ionic strength , neutral pH , and submi - cromolar free Ca " . Similar conditions favor ge - lation in extracts of other cells such as Dictyoste - lium ( 5 ) , alveolar macrophages ( 25 , 32 ) and Ehr - lich ascites tumor cells ( l3 , 17 ) . Micromolar concentrations of calcium ion com - pletely inhibit the gelation reaction and partially inhibit the polymerization of actin in the extract . Micromolar Ca " also inhibits the gelation of mixtures of muscle actin and small amounts of extract . In contrast , micromolar calcium does not inhibit the gelation of exogenous actin mixed with any of the four gelation factors purified by Maruta and Korn ( 15 ) or any of the gelation factors we have identified . Our interpretation of these obser - vations is that the extract contains one or more calcium - regulatory factors that are separated from the gelation factors by DEAE chromatography . The identification and characterization ofthe fac - tors mediating Ca ` control will be most interest - ing , because they may regulate the consistency of the cytoplasm within the cell . Such factors could regulate gelation either by controlling actin polym - erization ( as suggested by the experiment in Table 424 (cid:9) THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 85 , 1980 II ) or by affecting the cross - linking of actin fila - ments by gelation factors . There is evidence for such a calcium - sensitive regulatory factor in mac - rophages ( 32 ) . Several observations indicate that Mg - ATP par - ticipates in the gelation reaction , above and be - yond its role in actin polymerization . The Mg - ATP concentration required for gelation is consid - erably higher than that needed for actin polym - erization . Both Mg ` and ATP are required for the cold potentiation of gelation . The inability of nonhydrolyzable analogues of ATP to substitute for ATP suggests that ATP hydrolysis is necessary for gelation . One possibility is phosphorylation of one or more proteins involved in gelation , because many Acanthamoeba proteins , including four with approximately the same molecular weights as the Maruta and Kom gelation factors , are phospho - rylated during the potentiation reaction . Whatever the mechanism of this potentiation reaction , it is likely to occur both during the gelation reaction at 25 ' and before gelation at 0°C . If potentiation is necessary to activate one or more of the components of the gelation system , these gelation factors may be missed during frac - tionation of the extract , if they become separated from their activators . Actin Polymerization in the Extract Actin filaments are required for gelation , as we expected from the cross - linked filament model for the gel . Thus , actin filaments must form from depolymerized actin in the extract before gelation . This step may account for the lag in the kinetic curves ( Fig . 2 ) . The actin filament concentration is probably the factor limiting gelation when the extract is diluted , because the extract contains a vast excess of gelation activity ( 15 ) . In both recon - stitution experiments with pure actin plus 0 . 2 mg / ml of extract protein and in extract - dilution ex - periments , 0 . 2 - 0 . 3 mg / ml of actin filaments is necessary for gelation . Consequently cellular reg - ulation ofactin polymerization may be an essential factor in determining the cytoplasmic consistency . The observation that the fraction ofextract actin sedimentable at 25°C is constant and independent of the total protein concentration suggests that some factor in the extract limits the polymerization of a fixed fraction of the actin . The experiment suggests that actin is present in - 1 . 5 x the concen - tration of this presumed inhibitor , because within the limits ofour assay , one - third ofthe endogenous on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m actin , and any additional exogenous actin , pellet . This inhibitor is separated from the actin by chro - matography on DEAF , because thereafter vir - tually all of the actin can polymerize ( 9 ) . A low molecular weight Acanthamoeba protein ( 23 ) sim - ilar to mammalian profilin ( 4 ) may be responsible for the inhibition of actin polymerization that was observed in the extract . Reconstitution Maruta and Korn ( 15 ) isolated four low molec - ular weight proteins from Acanthamoeba , each of which caused pure actin to form a gel . Together they seemed to account for most of the gelation factor activity of the extract . In our efforts to fractionate the gelation factor activity , we have separated at least six different low molecular weight components , none of which can account for the activity of the extract . Further efforts to reconstitute the gelation re - action from purified components will require the final purification of all the actin - cross - linking pro - teins as well as any associated regulatory proteins . This study suggests that both a calcium - binding regulator of cross - linking and a Mg " - and ATP - requiring activating enzyme should be sought . APPENDIX In this appendix we describe the theory , design , and testing of a small falling ball device that can be used to measure both yield strength and viscos - ity . From the force balance in the system , we derive an expression relating the yield strength of any sample to the maximum force per unit mass that can be applied to the system without the ball moving through the sample . The same force bal - ance and the Stokes ' equation yield the well - known ( 29 ) expression relating the velocity of a ball falling through a Newtonian sample to the viscosity of the sample . We use the velocity of the ball in standard Newtonian fluids to determine the empirical calibration constants for the viscometer , which we then use to measure the apparent vis - cosities of non - Newtonian fluids . Finally , we dis - cuss the caution necessary in using this viscometer to estimate the apparent viscosity of non - Newton - ian fluids such as the cross - linked actin gels studied in this paper . Theory The force balance for a ball immersed in a medium is : Fb = F , - + Fm + Ff , ( 1 ) where the force acting on the medium ( the ball force , Fb ) is balanced by the forces acting on the ball ( the static yield force , F , - , the buoyant force , F and the dynamic frictional force , Ff ) . Eq . 1 is valid when there is no acceleration in the system , i . e . , when the ball is either stationary or moving at a constant velocity . Fb = 4 / 3 . II " R3 - Pb * a , (cid:9) ( 2 ) where R is the radius of the ball , pb is the density ofthe ball , and a is the force per unit mass applied to the ball . F , = T° " II - R2 . C , (cid:9) ( 3 ) where the static yield strength , T° , is the maximum force per unit area that the medium will support without displacement and C is a geometrical con - stant to correct for the nonhomogeneous distribu - tion of shear stress around the ball . For a sphere , C has been determined empirically to be about 1 . 75 ( 11 ) . Fm = 4 / 3 . II " R ' . Pm - a , (cid:9) ( 4 ) where pin is the density of the medium and a is the force per unit mass applied to the medium . wheref is the dynamic frictional coefficient and u is the velocity of the ball . YIELD STRENGTH : (cid:9) In the case where the me - dium is strong enough to support the ball , Ff = 0 and Fb = F , , + Fm . Under these conditions , it is possible to estimate the static yield strength , T° , of the medium by determining a , the maximum force per unit mass that can be applied to the system without movement ofthe ball . As described in a latter section , this is accomplished by centri - fuging a capillary containing a ball immersed in the test medium . This applies to the system a force per unit mass of wzr , where w is angular velocity in radians per second and r is the radius . Solving for T° , 4 / 3 . II . Rs . a° ( Pb - Pm ) T° 1 . 75 - II " R2 = 0 . 76 " R - a° ( Pb - Pm ) . (cid:9) ( 6 ) VISCOSITY : If the medium is not strong enough to support the ball , the ball will accelerate SUSAN D . MACLEAN - FLETCHER AND THOMAS D . POLLARD (cid:9) Gelation ofAcanthamoeba Extracts 425 on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m until it reaches a constant " terminal " velocity . At this point the forces are balanced and the absolute viscosity of a Newtonian fluid can be determined from the terminal velocity using Stokes ' equation , f ( 7 ) 77 = 6 II - R * If F , is negligible compared with the other forces in the system ( i . e . , Fb - Fm - Ff is small ) , then Ff = Fb - Fm , and f = m - 4 / 3 - n - R ' . a ( Pb - Pm ) . (cid:9) ( 8 ) u The term m is a calibration constant required when the ball and medium are confined to a narrow tube and inclined at angle 9 . It corrects for drag on the ball resulting from wall effects ( 29 ) and friction at the point of contact between the ball and the wall ( 8 ) . Thevalue ofmis determined empirically below and is a function of the radius of the ball , the radius ofthe tube , and the angle of inclination . The force per unit mass ( a ) along the axis of a tube inclined at angle 9from the horizon - tal is g - sin 6 . Solving Eq . 7 and Eq . 8 for rl , 0 . 22 " m - R2 " g * sin B ( Pb - Pm ) 77 - (cid:9) , (cid:9) ( 9 ) u Design of the Falling Ball Apparatus A capillary tube , 1 . 3 mm i . d . , 12 . 6 - cm long ( 100 - p1 micropipet from VWR Scientific Inc . , Univar Corp . , San Francisco , Calif . ) , is filled with about 170 t l of sample using a Clay Adams Pipet Filler and sealed at oneend with Seal Ease ( Clay Adams , Div . Becton , Dickinson & Co . , Parsippany , N . J . ) . A Plexiglas stand is used to hold the micropipet at 10° , 50° , or 80° of inclination from the horizontal plane in a temperature - controlled water bath . A stainless - steel ball ( 0 . 64 - mm diam . , density 7 . 2 g / cm . 3 , grade 10 , gauge deviation ± 0 . 000064 mm , material 440C from the Microball Company , Pe - terborough , N . H . ) is placed on the meniscus of the sample by hand and pushed through the me - niscus with a thin metal wire to initiate its fall . The velocity of the ball is measured by recording with aprinting timer ( Chronomix All Sport Timer , Chronomix Corp . , Sunnyvale , Calif . ) the time re - quired for the ball to pass 2 - cm intervals beginning about 1 cm below the meniscus . If the sample has a yield strength > 146 dyn / cm2 , the ball will fail to move at an angle of 80° 426 (cid:9) THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 85 . 1980 under the influence of gravity alone . A measure - ment of yield strength can be made by increasing the ball force . This is accomplished by placing the ball about 0 . 5 cm below the meniscus and centri - fuging in a stepwise fashion for 30 s at progres - sively higher speeds . For samples with To < 146 dyn / cm2 , a rough estimate of yield strength can be made by placing the ball in a horizontal tube and slowly increasing the angle ofinclination until the ball moves . In this case , a = g - sin 0 . Testing the Falling Ball Apparatus The viscometer was tested with glycerol / water mixtures , which are Newtonian solutions ofknown viscosity . The ball has a constant velocity through - out the measuring section of the capillary for any given sample over the entire viscosity range tested ( 1 - 12 , 000 cp ) . At any angle between 10° and 90° , u - ` is proportional to viscosity up to the point where the ball will not move ( Fig . 12 ) . The meas - urements are highly reproducible with a standard deviation from the mean velocity of < 2 % over the entire range . The variation is larger at high viscos - ity than at low viscosity . Tilting the capillary at various angles 0 allows one to vary the useful range of the apparatus . Most of our measurements are made at 50° or 80° because the samples have high viscosities . An angle of 10° is more conven - ient for low - viscosity samples . We determined the calibration constant m for the 0 . 32 - mm radius stainless - steel ball in tubes of 2 , 000 (cid:9) 4 , 000 VISCOSITY , cp FIGURE 12 (cid:9) Calibration of the inclined falling ball vis - cometer with glycerol solutions of known viscosity . Angle of inclination 50° ( O ) , 80° ( " ) . Vertical bars represent ± one standard deviation . on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m various radii held at several angles . In tubes with radii R . > 16 mm , m = 1 . For R , between 2 . 7 and 16 mm , m can be calculated from the empirical equation of Fax6n ( 6 ) quoted in reference 29 . For R , < 2 . 7 mm , m must be determined empirically and is a function of both R , and 0 . For the capillaries we usewith R , of 0 . 65 mm , m is 0 . 13 at 80° , 0 . 09 at 50° , and 0 . 06 at 10° . These values do not vary with the viscosity ofthe sample ( Fig . 12 ) . The linearity of this relationship justifies , for these Newtonian fluids , our omission of the F , , term from the viscosity equation . ( This result is ex - pected from the magnitude of the forces in the system . At 80° , Fb - Fm = 0 . 82 dyn . For F , , = 1 % of this force , To = 1 . 46 dyn / cm2 . The standards used for calibration have yield forces even less than this . ) These tests establish that the viscometer can be used to measure the absolute viscosity of Newtonian solutions in the range of 1 - 12 , 000 cp with an error of < 2 % . The use of the apparatus for yield strength measurement was tested with solidified gelatin . The precision of this measurement is limited by the crude method of applying centrifuged force in graded steps , butwe obtained values close to those in the literature : 2 x 10 " dyn / cm2 for 4 % gelatin and 1 x 10 " dyn / cm2 for 3 % gelatin ( 7 ) . This confirms that the empirical geometrical factor ( 1 . 75 in Eq . 3 ) is approximately correct for our apparatus . Using gelatin , we measured the same value for the yield strength in tubes with radii from 0 . 65 to 14 mm , demonstrating that there was no detectable wall effect on yield strength meas - urement . Application of the Falling Ball Viscometer to Non - Newtonian Fluids In a falling ball viscometer with acceleration provided by gravity , the velocity of the ball , and hence the maximum shear rate of a Newtonian fluid , d = 1 . 5 R / u ( 29 ) , varies inversely with viscosity . This is of no consequence with a New - tonian fluid in which viscosity is independent of shear rate . In contrast , the absolute viscosity ofa non - New - tonian fluid varies with the shear rate , so that the observed ball velocity is used to calculate an " ap - parent viscosity " from Eq . 5 . These apparent vis - cosities are expressed in centipoise for comparison with the absolute viscosities of Newtonian fluids through which the ball falls at the same velocity , with the full understanding that these apparent viscosities are not absolute , but depend on the shear rate around the ball . Absolute viscosities could be calculated directly from these apparent viscosities if the shear rate around the ball could be determined exactly and the dependence of the absolute viscosity upon the shear rate were estab - lished . However , to our knowledge , there is no theoretical treatment of shear rates around balls falling through non - Newtonian fluids , nor have we or others established the dependence of the absolute viscosity of our samples on the shear rate . A second note of caution is that the shear de - pendence of the viscosity of non - Newtonian sam - ples such as actin filaments ( 16 ) will amplify dif - ferences in the apparent viscosity . Take , for ex - ample , the case of actin filaments and other ma - terials in which viscosity is inversely proportional to shear rate . If sample A has a higher viscosity than sample B when the two are measured at the same shear rate , the velocity of the ball falling under the influence of gravity will be less in A than in B . Thus the shear rate in A will be less than in B . As a result of the lower shear rate in A , the observed difference in the viscosity of A and B is greater than the difference measured at con - stant shear rates . In contrast , with rheopexic ma - terials the apparent difference will be less than the actual difference . A final point is that the static yield strength of a sample will contribute to the apparent viscosity , ifthe magnitude of the yield force approaches that of the other forces in the system . In our device at 80° inclination , F , , wouldhave to be > 0 . 02 dyn to have a detectable ( > 2 % ) effect on the observed viscosity . F , , of 0 . 02 dyn corresponds to Ta of 3 dyn / cm2 , which is greater than the To of low concentrations ofactin filaments ( 2 ) , so we expect that F , . has little or no effect on the apparent viscosity of actin filament solutions . Even if the yield strength of a sample were 70 dyn / cm2 ( F , , = 0 . 41 dyn ) , it would increase the viscosity by only a factor of2 . On the other hand , when F , , = Fb - Fm , u = 0 and the observed viscosity is , of course , infinite . These are maximum effects of yield strength on observed viscosity , because it is possi - ble that the dynamic yield strength is much less than the static yield strength , in which case the F , term is less consequential than stated here . We thank Mr . Harvey Kaufman for making the initial measurements of gelation with the falling ball viscome - ter , Drs . D . Pollard and A . Johnson for advice on the yield strength measurements , Dr . Thomas Stossel for SUSAN D . MACLEAN - FLETCHER AND THOMAS D . POLLARD (cid:9) Gelation ofAcanthamoeba Extracts 427 on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m referring us to earlywork on protein gels , and Dr . D . L . Taylor for suggestions on the manuscript . This work was initiated in the Department of Anat - omy , Harvard Medical School , where it was supported by National Institutes of Health research grant GM - 19654 . The work is currently supported by National Institutes of Health research grant GM - 26338 . Receivedforpublication 7June 1979 , andin revisedform 30 November 1979 . REFERENCES 1 . ALLEN , R . D . 1961 . In The Cell . J . Brachet and E . Mirsky , editors . Academic Press , Inc . , NewYork . 2 : 135 - 216 . 2 . BROTSCHI , E . A . , J . H . HARTWIG , andT . P . STOSSEL . 1978 . Gelationof actinby actin - binding protein . J . Biol . Chem . 253 - 8988 - 8993 . 3 . BRYAN , J . , and R . E . KANE . 1978 . Separationandinteractionofmajor components ofsea - urchin actingel . J . Mol . Biol . 125 : 207 - 224 . 4 . CARLSSON , L . , L . E . NYSTROM , I . SUNDKVIs , F . MARKEY , and U . LINDBERG . 1977 . Actin polymerizability is influenced by profilin , alow molecularweight protein in non - muscle cells . J . Mol . Biol . 115 : 465 - 483 . 5 . CONDEELIS , J . S . , andD . L . TAYLOR . 1977 . Contractilebasisofameboid movement . V . Control ofgelation , solation , andcontraction in extracts from Dicryostelium discoideum . J . Cell Biol . 74 ; 901 - 927 . 6 . FAXtN , H . 1922 . Ark . Mat . Astron . Fys . 17 : 1 . 7 . FERRY , J . D . 1948 . Protein gels . Adv . Protein Chem . 4 : 1 - 78 . 8 . GEILS , R . H . , and R . C . KEEZER . 1977 . Smallvolume , inclined , falling ball viscometer . Rev . Sci . Insirum . 48 : 783 - 785 . 9 . GORDON , D . J . , E . EISENBERG , andE . D . KORN . 1976 . Characterization ofcytoplasmic actin isolated from Acanthamoeba castellanii by a new method . J . Biol . Chem . 251 : 4778 - 4786 . 10 . HARTREE , E . F . 1972 . Determination of protein : amodification of the Lowry methodthat givesalinearresponse . Anal . Biochem . 48 : 422 - 435 . 11 . JOHNSON , A . M . 1970 . Physical Processes inGeology . Freeman , Cooper and Co . , San Francisco , Calif 481 - 491 . 12 . KANE , R . E . 1975 . Preparation and purification of polymerized actin from sea - urchin eggextracts . J . Cell Biol . 66 : 305 - 15 . 13 . ISHIURA , M . , andY . OKADA , 1979 . Therole of actin in temperature - dependent gel - sot transformation of extracts of Ehrlich asciles tumor cells . J . Cell Biol . 80 : 465 - 480 . 14 , MAULEAN , S . D . , H . KAUFMAN , andT . D . POLLARD . 1978 . Gelahon of Acanthamoeba extracts . Biophys . J . 21 : 24a . ( Abslr . ) . 15 . MARUTA , H . , andE . D . KORN . 1977 . Purificationfrom Acanthamoeba 428 THE JOURNAL - OF CELL BIOLOGY " VOLUME 85 , 1980 castellanii of proteins that induce gelation and syneresisof F - actin . J . Blot Chem . 252 : 399 - 402 . 16 . MARUYAMA , K . , M . KAIBARA , and E . FUKADA . 1974 . Rheology of F - actin I . NetworkofF - actin in solution . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 371 : 20 - 29 . 17 . MIMURA , N . , and A . ASANO . 1978 . Actin - related gelation of Ehrlich tumor - cell extracts is reversibly inhibited by low concentrations of Ca " . Nature ( Loud . ) . 272 ( 5650 ) : 273 - 276 . 18 . POLLARD , T . D . 1976 . The role of actinin thetemperature - dependent gelation andcontraction ofextracts of Acanthamoeba . J . Cell Biol . 68 : 579 - 601 . 19 . Pollard , T . D . 1976 . Cytoskeletal functions of cytoplasmic contractile proteins . J . Supramol . Struct . 5 : 317 - 334 . 20 . POLLARD , T . D . , andS . ITO . 1970 . Cytoplasmic filaments of Amoeba proteus . I . Therole of filaments inconsistency changes andmovement . J . Cell Biol . 46 : 267 - 289 . 21 . POLLARD , T . D . , W . F . STAFFORD , andM . E . PORTER . 1978 . Character - ization of a second myosin from Acanthamoeba castellanii . J . Biol . Chem . 253 : 4798 - 4808 . 22 . REGENSTEIN , J . M . , and A . G . SZENT - GYÓRGYL 1975 . Regulatory proteins oflobsterstriated muscle . Biochemistry . 14 : 917 - 25 . 23 . REICHSTEIN , E . 1979 . Acanthamoeba profilin . Fed . Proc . 38 : 338 . ( Abstr . ) . 24 . SPUDICH , J . A . , and S . WATT . 1971 . The regulation of rabbit skeletal muscle contraction . I . Biochemical studies of the interaction of the tropomyosin - troponincomplexwith actinandtheproteolyticfragments ofmyosin . J . Biol . Chem . 246 ; 4866 - - 0871 . 25 . STOSSEL , T . P . , andJ . H . HARTWIG . 1976 . Interactionsof actin , myosin andanewactin - binding proteinofrabbit pulmonarymacrophages . II . Role in cytoplasmicmovement and phagocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 68 : 602 - 619 . 26 . TAYLOR , D . L . 1977 . Contractile basis of amoeboid movement . 4 . Viscoelasticity andcontractility ofamoeba cytoplasm in vivo . Exp . Cell Res . 105 : 413 - 426 . 27 . TAYLOR , D . L . , and 1 . CONDEELIS . 1979 . Cytoplasmic structure and contractility in amoeboid cells . Int . Rev . Cytol . 56 : 57 - 144 . 28 . TAYLOR , D . L . , J . S . CONDEELIS , P . L . MOORE , andR . D . ALLEN . 1973 . Thecontractilebasis of amoeboid movement . I . Thechemical control ofmotility in isolated cytoplasm . J . Cell Biol . 59 - 378 - 394 . 29 . VANWAZER , J . R . , J . W . LYONS , K . Y . KIM , andR . E . COLWELL . 1963 . Viscosityand Flow Measurement : ALaboratory Handbook of Rheol - ogy . Interscience Publishers , NewYork . 30 . WANG , K . , andS . J . SINGER . 1977 . Interactionof filamin with F - actin in solution . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 74 : 2021 - 2025 . 31 . WOLPERT , L . , C . M . THOMPSON , and C . H . O ' NEILL . 1964 . Studies on theisolated membrane andcytoplasmofAmoebaproteus in relation to ameboidmovement . In Primitive Motile Systems in Cell Biology . R . D . Allen , and N . Kamiya , editors . Academic Press , Inc . , New York . 143 . 32 . YIN , H . L . , andT . P . STOSSEL . 1978 . Ca - - dependentregulatorofactin - binding protein . J . Cell Biol . 79 ( 2 , Pt . 2 ) : 271 a ( Abstr . ) . on J anua r y 22 , 2018 j c b . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m