Editorial InternatIonal research In GeoGraphIcal and envIronmental educatIon 2022 , vol . 31 , no . 3 , 169 – 171 Assessment and evaluation in geographical and environmental education Finding out what has worked and what has not worked is essential for the advancement of human performance . Without assessment and evaluation , we cannot choose which performance intervention to discontinue , alter , maintain , or enhance ( Kaufman , Keller and Watkins , 1996 ) . We have a constant need to measure , analyse , and make decisions , yet we need to ask if we are assessing or evaluating . Both assessment and evaluation are important aspects of education—they are central to learning and teaching . However , the terms assessment and evaluation are often used interchangeably . This is erroneous . Assessment is concerned with measuring effectiveness . It is the process of making judgements and or measurements of the worth of a person or a process . Evaluation , on the other hand , involves gathering information related to learning activities or subjects . Evaluation involves adding a value aspect to the process . The value relates to the impor - tance we assign to the information in determining success or failure . In geographical and environmental education , we often see research relating to the assessment of student learning as well as programme evaluation in the domains of formal and informal learning . An IRGEE editorial ( Reid , 2018 ) called for further investment in research and evaluation to improve practice in environmental education . Before this , IRGEE published several studies on the evaluation of geographical or environmental education programmes . Later , IRGEE published a systematic review ( Lane & Bourke , 2019 ) of assessment in geography education . The study concluded that greater clarity is needed regarding : 1 . the essential geographical knowledge and skills that students should learn and develop ; 2 . the characteristics of the learning progressions in the respective knowledge and skills ; and 3 . the types and formats of measurement instruments that will provide valid and reliable indicators of this progression . Lane and Bourke’s ( 2019 ) systematic review provided an evaluation of the assessment practices in geographical education . There was also an evaluation of research published in 2012 where a content analysis of 18 years’ worth of academic publishing was carried out for IRGEE ( Kidman & Papadimitriou , 2012 ) . These two examples provide insights into the types of evaluation valued by IRGEE—at the programme level , a domain level—e . g . , Evaluation of assessment , and a systematic evaluation of the body of work itself . Evaluation is used to measure how well students are learning , improve education systems , and hold people accountable for the results . Administrators and teachers are both doing their own evaluations to improve school performance and make classrooms more creative places to learn . As the number of evaluation purposes grows , people become more aware of how important it is to fully understand the evaluation needs of stakeholders , acknowledge the advantages of contextual factors , and to choose a method © 2022 Informa uK limited , trading as taylor & Francis Group https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10382046 . 2022 . 2105499 170 Editorial that is responsive to specific audiences and actually gives them useful information . The most significant aspect of educational evaluation and assessment is that it helps calibrate the efficacy of schooling when done correctly . The secondary advantage of educational evaluation and assessment is that it assists schools and teachers in correctly managing their teaching based on student learning . The International Charter on Geographical Education ( International Geography Union and Commission on Geographical Education [ IGU - CGE ] , 2016 , p . 6 ) poses a number of research questions that can all be viewed from an assessment and evaluation perspective : 1 . What geography do students need to know ? What are their misperceptions and preconceptions ? How can we enhance their geographical knowledge , understand - ing , and skills ? 2 . How do we understand students’ learning progressions in geography ? How are these best calibrated and assessed ? 3 . Which are the characteristics of effective teaching and learning materials and resources in improving the quality of geographical education ? 4 . What teaching methods are efficient and effective in improving the quality of geographical education ? 5 . How can the education of geography teachers be improved to raise the quality of teaching and the levels of achievement in geography in schools ? Each of the articles included in this issue of IRGEE can be aligned to these research questions : • The paper by Salazara et al . ( 2022 ) entitled The Challenge of Measuring Children’s Attitudes Toward Wildlife in Rural India is an evaluation of an environmental education program and assesses student attitudes . This article is addressing the 3rd research question above . • Suárez - López and Eugenio’s ( 2022 ) paper entitled How is sustainability addressed in primary and secondary education curricula ? Assessing the cases of Spain and Portugal also addresses the 3rd research question above . This Ecuadorian paper is a frequency analysis of topics that provides the evaluation of the curriculum . • Cho , Kim , and Stoltman’s ( 2022 ) paper entitled Design , Implementation , and Outcomes of an In - service Program with Photovoice as a Pedagogical Tool for Geography Teachers uses South Korean data to relate to research questions 4 and 5 above . • Larsen , Solem , Zadrozny , and Boehm ( 2022 ) paper entitled Applying aspirations and workforce data to contextualize geographic knowledge for diverse learners is a methodological article from the USA and responds to research question 4 above . • Dizon’s ( 2022 ) paper entitled Content Analysis of the K to 12 Junior High School Geography Curriculum in the Philippines responds to research question 3 above . As Editors of IRGEE , we are delighted to publish this selection of articles that are readily aligned with our 2016 Charter . The alignment of each article indicates that assessment and evaluation are of importance as evidenced by researchers from across the globe refining curriculum and pedagogical practices . We notice that the research community is promoting a “research orientation” ( IGU - CGE , 2016 , p . 6 ) among teachers , intErnational rEsEarch in GEoGraphical and EnvironmEntal Education 171 and we also notice that the purposes and goals of geographical and environmental education are being evaluated through consideration of the curriculum . Disclosure statement No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author . References Cho , C . K . , Kim , B . Y . , & Stoltman , J . P . ( 2022 ) . Design , implementation , and outcomes of an in - service program with photovoice as a pedagogical tool for geography teachers . International Research in Geographical and Environmental Education , 31 ( 2 ) , 123 – 138 . Dizon , A . G . ( 2022 ) . Content analysis of the K to 12 Junior High School geography curric - ulum in the Philippines . International Research in Geographical and Environmental Education , 31 ( 2 ) , 152 – 168 . International Geographical Union and Commission on Geographical Education . ( 2016 ) . International Charter on Geographical Education . Retrieved from http : / / www . igu - cge . org / Charters - pdf / 2016 / IGU _ 2016 _ def . pdf . Kaufman , R . , Keller , J . , & Watkins , R . ( 1996 ) . What works and what doesn ' t : Evaluation beyond Kirkpatrick . Performance + Instruction , 35 ( 2 ) , 8 – 12 . Kidman , G . , & Papadimitriou , F . ( 2012 ) . Content analysis of international research in geo - graphical and environmental education : 18 years of academic publishing . International Research in Geographical and Environmental Education , 21 ( 1 ) , 3 – 10 . Lane , R . , & Bourke , T . ( 2019 ) . Assessment in geography education : A systematic review . International Research in Geographical and Environmental Education , 28 ( 1 ) , 22 – 36 . Larsen , T . B . , Solem , M . , Zadrozny , J . , & Boehm , R . G . ( 2022 ) . Applying aspirations and workforce data to contextualize geographic knowledge for diverse learners . International Research in Geographical and Environmental Education , 31 ( 2 ) , 139 – 151 . Reid , A . ( 2018 ) . Investing in research and evaluation to improve practice is a direct way of showing we can act now for environmental education . International Research in Geographical and Environmental Education , 27 ( 2 ) , 99 – 102 . Salazar , G . , Ramakrishna , I . , Satheesh , N . , Mills , M . , Monroe , M . C . , & Karanth , K . K . ( 2022 ) . The challenge of measuring children’s attitudes toward wildlife in rural India . International Research in Geographical and Environmental Education , 31 ( 2 ) , 89 – 105 . Suárez - López , R . , & Eugenio , M . ( 2022 ) . How is sustainability addressed in primary and secondary education curricula ? Assessing the cases of Spain and Portugal . International Research in Geographical and Environmental Education , 31 ( 2 ) , 106 – 122 . Gillian Kidman Faculty of Education , Monash University , Australia gillian . kidman @ monash . edu Chew - Hung Chang National Institute of Education , Nanyang Technological University , Singapore http : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0002 - 1301 - 2735