A Spatial Hypertext Wiki for Knowledge Management Carlos Solis and Nour Ali Lero , the Irish Software Engineering Research Centre University of Limerick Limerick , Ireland { Carlos . Solis , Nour . Ali } @ lero . ie ABSTRACT Collaboration is a key factor in successful knowledge management . Recently , wikis have become a popular solution for distributed and collaborative knowledge management . However , most wikis do not appropriately support the facilities needed for group idea creation and can only represent unstructured knowledge ( text , images , and hyperlinks ) which cannot be reused or systematized . This paper proposes the use of a Spatial Hypertext Wiki ( ShyWiki ) as a knowledge management wiki which allows users to interact in a distributed and collaborative way in order to generate ideas , and organize and structure knowledge . This type of wiki can help in the externalization of tacit knowledge , and is able to represent explicit knowledge at different levels of formality . Furthermore , the visual and spatial characteristics of this wiki can be used for representing implicit relations among concepts as well as for organizing and visualizing knowledge . KEYWORDS : Knowledge management , spatial hypertext , wiki , ShyWiki . 1 . INTRODUCTION Knowledge Management is composed of the activities , methods , processes , and software that validate , evaluate , integrate , and disseminate information for learning and decision making [ 26 ] . A Knowledge Management System ( KMS ) is an information system that improves the organizational process of creating , storing , retrieving , transferring , and applying knowledge [ 2 ] . Wikis have emerged as a popular solution for knowledge management [ 15 , 36 , 37 ] . Wikis are collaborative hypertext systems where users are authors and organizers of the content [ 17 ] . Wikis provide simple editing mechanisms which permit the fast evolution of the content . The content in a wiki page is defined using a mark - up language , which allows users to format the content and create links . The entry level for users using a wiki is low , because they do not have to be technical experts in the edition and design of hypertext [ 8 ] . The advantage of using wikis as a tool for knowledge management is that the knowledge management tasks such as capturing , searching , and sharing knowledge can be performed in an open , collaborative and distributed way [ 12 ] . One of the most accepted models for knowledge management is the knowledge creation spiral [ 23 ] which describes how organizational knowledge is converted into different types of knowledge . The diversity of existing types of knowledge such as tacit , explicit , unstructured and structured force organizations to use several knowledge management approaches in order to deal in an effective way with the conversion between the types of knowledge [ 2 ] . Wikis lack support for representing different types of knowledge [ 14 ] . Therefore , they do not have an effective support to the knowledge creation spiral . Most wikis are able to represent only explicit unstructured knowledge by means of hypermedia : text , images , video , and hyperlinks . Wikis do not provide support for capturing tacit knowledge . Structured knowledge is currently supported by semantic wikis [ 27 ] . These types of wikis do not allow users to represent relations among concepts in a visual and spatial way . This paper proposes the use of a spatial hypertext wiki ( ShyWiki ) as a wiki for knowledge management . ShyWiki provides a flexible hypertext model that can represent different types of knowledge . Users are able to capture tacit knowledge , and represent explicit knowledge which can be structured or unstructured . ShyWiki is also able to visually and spatially represent implicit relations among 225 978 - 1 - 4244 - 6622 - 1 / 10 / $ 26 . 00 ©2010 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to : University of Limerick . Downloaded on July 19 , 2010 at 15 : 32 : 42 UTC from IEEE Xplore . Restrictions apply . the concepts in the wiki . The wiki characteristics allow users to build the different types of knowledge in a collaborative way . This paper is organized as follows : Section 2 explains the knowledge types used in the knowledge spiral . Section 3 explains what spatial hypertext is . Section 4 presents the ShyWiki Hypertext Model . Section 5 explains the knowledge conversions in ShyWiki . Section 6 presents the related work . Finally , section 7 gives the conclusions and the future work . 2 . KNOWLEDGE TYPES AND THE KNOWLEDGE SPIRAL In this work , the taxonomy of knowledge types proposed by Nonaka [ 23 ] is followed . Knowledge is classified into two dimensions which are tacit and explicit . Tacit knowledge is composed of intuitions , unarticulated mental models , or technical skills [ 25 , 23 ] . Tacit knowledge is personal , context specific and hard to communicate to others . Tacit knowledge has individual cognitive elements such as mental maps , beliefs , paradigms and viewpoints , concrete technical elements ( know - how ) , and context specific skills [ 2 ] . Explicit knowledge is articulated , codified , and can be communicated in natural or symbolic languages [ 23 ] . Explicit knowledge can be processed by computers . Explicit unstructured knowledge does not have a structure which explicitly indicates the correspondences to the concepts and relations in a domain , e . g . , plain text and images are unstructured . On the other hand , structured knowledge can be represented using logic or models . The most common way for representing structured knowledge is through a graph where nodes correspond to facts or concepts , and arcs correspond to the relations between concepts , both nodes and links are usually typed [ 31 ] . Nonaka also divides knowledge in collective and individual [ 23 ] . Individual knowledge is created and exists in an individual . Collective knowledge is created as a result of the actions of a group of individuals . Organizational knowledge is created by a dynamic process called the knowledge creation spiral [ 23 ] ( see Figure 1 ) . The spiral has four types of knowledge conversion : socialization , externalization , combination and internalization . The process can start from any of the four knowledge conversion . In socialization , tacit knowledge of an individual is shared with a group , it is a conversion from individual tacit to collective tacit knowledge . In externalization , tacit knowledge is transformed into explicit knowledge by capturing ideas and experiences of experts in order to solve particular problems . In combination , explicit unstructured knowledge can be transformed into a different level of systemic explicit knowledge . Internalization is the conversion from explicit to tacit knowledge . Figure 1 . Knowledge Creation Spiral ( Adapted from [ 23 ] ) The knowledge spiral conversions are supported by collaborative systems . Externalization is supported by groupware systems that allow users to brainstorm or create arguments [ 22 ] . Externalization is a collaborative interpretation task [ 7 ] which is performed by a group when they transform pieces of information into meaningful descriptions . One of the main characteristics of collaborative interpretation is the emergence of ideas . The requirements , defined by Cox and Greenberg [ 7 ] , for systems that support the emergence of ideas are : (cid:2) Provide a spatial visual workspace . (cid:2) Let people express relationships between the data using spatial proximity . (cid:2) Allow free - form annotation of the underlying space . (cid:2) Allow the free creation and movement of data in the space . A technique commonly used for externalization is the Kawakita Jiro ( KJ ) method [ 16 ] which is used by Japanese companies to brainstorm , evaluate and organize information [ 22 ] . The KJ method is a three phases brainstorming session . In the first phase , ideas are generated and written on adhesive cards or post - it notes without any evaluation or critique . In the second phase , ideas are grouped . For example , when an idea on a post - it note describes a better solution than the others , it is put over the other notes in order to prioritize it . If the ideas are related , they can be placed near each other . In this way , spatial location can represent a group of notes , e . g . the notes on the right of a board are the notes that contain 226 Authorized licensed use limited to : University of Limerick . Downloaded on July 19 , 2010 at 15 : 32 : 42 UTC from IEEE Xplore . Restrictions apply . requirements about performance . The goal of the third phase is to create a consensus about the solution to be adopted . In this phase , the groups of ideas are evaluated , i . e . , ideas of a group are considered to be the best solution , then the second , and so on . Combination is a process of improving explicit knowledge by organizing it in more logical ways . For example , documents with unstructured text and images can be organized or classified into more detailed themes or topics using collaborative document editors [ 22 , 28 ] , or can be annotated and mapped to concepts and relations in a domain [ 34 ] . The objective is to enable the processing of knowledge . Internalization is supported by means of e - learning and knowledge repositories . A wiki system in order to support the knowledge management spiral , it must provide ways to facilitate externalization , and must be able to represent explicit knowledge with diverse degrees of formality to support combination . 3 . SPATIAL HYPERTEXT The initial hypertext approaches [ 9 ] defined document centred navigation where users navigate through documents using hyperlinks . However , using this type of navigation in large networks make users get lost in the hyperspace [ 4 ] . A way to solve this problem is by using map based navigation , which explicitly shows the relations among hypertext documents [ 32 ] . Spatial hypertext [ 20 ] is based on using visual and spatial characteristics of hypertext elements for defining the relationships among them . When these characteristics are used to relate elements , the hyperlinks become implicit [ 19 ] . The relations that are explicit in the map are represented using visual and spatial characteristics . For example , the relations of elements in spatial hypertext can be represented in the following ways : The elements in the document can be positioned to form lists , stacks or only being near each other . Also , elements of the same type can be represented by sharing the same visual and spatial characteristics : colour , borders , font types , adornments , layout , position , proximity , geometric relations , etc . The objects can be contained inside other objects , creating collections . Spatial hypertext systems have special facilities in their user interface . These facilities have been concluded and observed through practice [ 20 ] . For example , users can handle and move elements from one place to another in a hypertext document or change the colour , or size of an element . The spatial hypertext doc ument’s elements are seen as post - it notes or bibliographic cards that are classified through visual clues , or spatial position . When information is organized like this , it allows users to describe complex relations among the elements . 4 . SHYWIKI HYPERTEXT MODEL ShyWiki [ 29 , 30 ] is a wiki which uses spatial hypertext for representing its content . It is designed to support users in creating , storing , editing , and browsing knowledge structures , understood as interconnected networks of information . ShyWiki manages a network of wiki pages ( the nodes of the network ) . Each page is a hypermedia document that is identified by its name and is made up of an unordered set of named attributes called notes . The main function of notes is to define the attributes that characterize the concept represented by a wiki page . The content of wiki pages is spatially organized . Notes may be placed in different regions of the page , and can be moved around . Notes can have different sizes or colors . The notes can contain a mix of text , hyperlinks , or images . Composite notes can be created from simpler ones , helping in organizing knowledge hierarchically . Figure 2 shows a ShyWiki page . It is composed of notes that are organized spatially , and that are of different sizes and colours . Also , it can be observed that in Figure 2 there are two composite notes . The components of the ShyWiki Hypertext Model are summarized in Figure 3 . The root of a ShyWiki document is the ShyWikiWeb , which is composed of information and knowledge stored in WikiPages , connected by hyperlinks . The WikiPages are composed of notes . The AbstractNote class includes the properties which are common to other types of notes : ContentNotes , TranscludedNotes , and MapNotes . ContentNotes can contain text , images , video and hyperlinks , and can be composed of other ContentNotes . Transclusion is the inclusion of notes already defined in other wiki pages by reference , i . e . , without duplicating them in the including note . A TranscludedNote is a note whose content is defined by another note . MapNotes are used to draw graphs . A MapNote represents a concept , and it is a node in the graph . The arrows in the graph represent the typed hyperlinks that connect two wiki pages . A template is a wiki page abstract type , and it is also a wiki page . One of the purposes of templates is the classification of other wiki pages . A wiki page can be an instance of one or many templates . If a wiki page instantiates a template , the notes in the template are created in the wiki page . 227 Authorized licensed use limited to : University of Limerick . Downloaded on July 19 , 2010 at 15 : 32 : 42 UTC from IEEE Xplore . Restrictions apply . In the edit mode , a user can perform the following actions to create or modify wiki pages : (cid:2) Create wiki pages . When a wiki link is navigated for the first time , a new wiki page in the ShyWiki web is created . (cid:2) Create Notes . The user can add new notes to the wiki page . The note types that can be added are content , transcluded or map notes . (cid:2) Edit Notes . The content of notes can be changed anytime . The content of the notes is described using the ShyWiki mark - up language . (cid:2) Move notes . Notes can be moved freely in the interface by dragging and dropping them . In this way , the user can organize the information as she or he desires . (cid:2) Group notes . The user can group the notes to create aggregations . In this way , a note can be dragged and dropped inside another note , and the note becomes a part of another one . Once notes are grouped , a user can manipulate a set of notes together . (cid:2) Transclude notes . Users can transclude a note inside another wiki page by indicating the source document and the note identifier . The position of the transcluded note can be changed , but the other properties can only be modified if the original note is edited . (cid:2) Label hyperlinks . Hyperlinks in ShyWiki can be typed . A label indicates the meaning or type of the association represented by a hyperlink . (cid:2) Create a template . This action allows the user to define a new template . A template defines a set of notes which are inherited by wiki page instances , and associations between a template and others . (cid:2) Instantiate a Template . This operation is used to indicate that a wiki page is an instance of a template . As a result , the notes defined in a template are added to the current wiki page . Figure 3 . ShyWiki Hypertext Model Figure 2 . A Wiki Page In ShyWiki 228 Authorized licensed use limited to : University of Limerick . Downloaded on July 19 , 2010 at 15 : 32 : 42 UTC from IEEE Xplore . Restrictions apply . There are three facilities provided by ShyWiki : the versioning facility allows users to look at previous versions of the wiki pages . The search facility that is used to find wiki pages that contain a word or a phrase , and the SPARQL Protocol and RDF Query Language ( SPARQL ) search interface . 5 . KNOWLEDGE CONVERSION IN SHYWIKI This section explains how ShyWiki supports the externalization and combination knowledge conversions described by the knowledge spiral . ShyWiki features allow users to asynchronously collaborate in the creation of different knowledge types . Distributed Partners working in a global environment need such support . 5 . 1 . Externalization ShyWiki supports converting tacit knowledge of the individuals into explicit knowledge in a collaborative way . It is a type of idea processing system due to the fact that elements of ShyWiki are similar to adhesive notes . In this way , a brainstorming session is easily supported . In addition , ShyWiki has many advantages over traditional brainstorming systems without loosing their simplicity . In ShyWiki , there is no need for using a room with a blackboard or to use paper based notes . A ShyWiki page is a workspace where individuals can write notes . The workspace participants can be geographically distributed providing distributed team work support and write their notes asynchronously . ShyWiki can support different brainstorming sessions in parallel , one for each team working on a particular problem . The three phases of the KJ method can be developed inside a ShyWiki . The participants can easily enrich other notes : by adding new content to the original ones , or by adding annotations to them . The drag and drop facilities aid in grouping ideas by using relations of proximity ( spatial properties ) between notes , or covering one note with another to make stacks . The grouping of ideas can also be done by creating big container notes . In addition , the ideas can be classified using background or border colours . As a result , the relations that can be expressed among ShyWiki notes are richer and easier to manipulate than the blackboard or paper based techniques . Figure 4 shows an example of a brainstorming session about security requirements of a web application performed in ShyWiki . ShyWiki can automatically preserve a brainstorming session , which can be reconstructed if required later on . Furthermore , the use of the versioning facility of a ShyWiki page can enable a user to track the path followed by a team for making a certain design decision . The decision making process can be reconstructed along with the rationale for the different steps taken during the process . Figure 4 . Example Of Brainstorming In ShyWiki 5 . 2 . Combination Using Implicit Relations Wikis capture explicit unstructured knowledge in the content of their wiki pages as hypermedia . Users are not able to interact with the wiki in order to structure and reorganize knowledge . In ShyWiki , knowledge can be captured in the content of notes . Another type of knowledge captured in ShyWiki , are the relationships among notes that are represented implicitly using visual and spatial properties . They are implicit graphic knowledge structures that can express some logic and set relations [ 11 ] . The following logic relations can be expressed graphically : disjoint , intersection , part of , and connection . The disjoint relation ( see Figure 5 ( a ) ) indicates that two concepts do not have elements in common . The intersection ( see Figure 5 ( b ) ) indicates that two concepts have elements in common . The part of relation ( see Figure 5 ( c ) ) points that a concept is part of another . The connection relation ( see Figure 5 ( d ) ) indicates that two concepts are disjoint , but they are very close to each other . The set relation is expressed by means of proximity , visual properties , and alignment . A visual colour shared by diverse elements indicates that they belong to the same set or type . For example , assuming that all the grid notes in Figure 6 are in the same wiki page , we can implicitly relate them . A group of elements which are near each other form a set . A group of elements that are aligned form a list . The alignment may indicate an order or priority of the elements . The elements in a set can also 229 Authorized licensed use limited to : University of Limerick . Downloaded on July 19 , 2010 at 15 : 32 : 42 UTC from IEEE Xplore . Restrictions apply . form structures as stacks . Figure 6 shows the different ways of representing a set relation , Figure 6 ( a ) represents a set , Figure 6 ( b ) a list , and Figure 6 ( c ) a stack . Figure 5 . Logic Relations In ShyWiki , it is possible to represent implicit relations with different cardinalities : one to one ( Figure 6 ( d ) ) , one to n ( Figure 6 ( e ) ) , and m to n ( Figure 6 ( f ) ) . The different ways of expressing graphic relations can be combined to form complex graphic relations . Figure 6 . Set And Cardinality Relations 5 . 3 Combination Using Structured Knowledge In ShyWiki , structured knowledge is captured by means of named notes , typed hyperlinks , and templates . ShyWiki hypertext can have arbitrary node and hyperlink types , and there is no structural or relational constraint . ShyWiki templates define entity types , their properties and relationships . Typed hyperlinks represent relationships with an explicit meaning between wiki pages . In the following , we explain named notes , typed hyperlinks and templates in detail . 5 . 3 . 1 . Named Notes Any note in a wiki page can be optionally named . A named note is a property of the concept represented by a wiki page . A named note is a type of annotation to the content , and serves to describe it . These types of annotations are easier to be used than annotations done in RDF , because these annotations are embedded in the wiki mark - up notation of semantic wikis . A named note can have any type of content . Therefore , it can annotate texts , links , images or a combination of them . The graphic knowledge relations can be used in combination with named notes . In this way , a wiki page can represent relations among notes that represent specific properties of a concept . 5 . 3 . 2 . Typed Hyperlinks A typed hyperlink is a relation which has a meaning or type that is indicated by a label . Any hyperlink can be labelled by users . The semantic net representation in ShyWiki is straightforward : the name of a wiki page indicates the concept represented , and the labelled hyperlinks give the semantics to the relations . In ShyWiki , the syntax for labeling a link is the following : [ [ wiki page name | label ] ] . The first part indicates the name of the target wiki page of the hyperlink , and the second part is the label of the hyperlink . The interpretation given is that the wiki page where the link appears is related to the target wiki page through a named relation , and the name of the relation is the hyperlink label . Figure 7 . ShyWiki Map There is a special type of note called MapNote . A MapNote represents a wiki page or concept , and it is used to draw graphs . For example , in Figure 2 there is a note which indicates that ShyWiki is a Spatial Hypertext Wiki . The hyperlink under the word wiki is labelled as ‘is a’ , 230 Authorized licensed use limited to : University of Limerick . Downloaded on July 19 , 2010 at 15 : 32 : 42 UTC from IEEE Xplore . Restrictions apply . and the hyperlink under Spatial Hypertext is labelled as ‘uses’ . Figure 7 shows another wiki page where three MapNotes were added : ShyWiki , Spatial Hypertext , and Wiki . The ShyWiki tool automatically draws the arrows and labels between the MapNotes . 5 . 3 . 3 . Templates A ShyWiki template is an abstraction which represents a set of concepts that share common properties and relationships . A template has an identifier , which is a unique template name . A template defines the properties and relationships shared by its instances . In ShyWiki , properties and relationships are defined by using named notes . A note’s name can define the name of a property , and its content is the default value in the instances . The template permits the definition of 1 to 1 and 1 to N relationships . The user has to define a named note , the note’s name defines the name of the relation . Then , the associated concept is selected from the template list . The content of the note shows the definition of the relation : a typed hyperlink to a concept instance , which is labeled with the name of the note , followed by an N if the cardinality is 1 to N . Figure 8 . Requirement Template Figure 8 shows that the user has defined a template called Requirement . Each note is defined by giving it a name , a colour and optionally indicating if it represents an association ( relationship ) of type 1 to N ( by default it is a 1 to 1 ) . When a note represents a property , only the name and colour have to be defined . In Figure 8 , the notes Name , Number , Comments are properties . Notes Status , Priority , and Difficulty are 1 to 1 relationships . Notes Person ( stakeholder ) , Option , and Agreements are 1 to N relations . Figure 8 also shows that the Stakeholder relation is defined . The note’s name Stakeholder defines the name of the relation , and the associated concept Person is selected from the template list . The content of the note shows the definition of the relation : [ [ Person | Stakeholder ] ] N . The instantiation of a template is performed in the following way : when a new wiki page is created , the user has the option to make it an instance of a set of templates . If the user chooses a wiki page to be an instance of a template , the instance includes the properties and relations defined in the template . If the user edits a note which corresponds to a one to one relation , a select box of the instances of the associated template is presented , and the user can select one of these instances . The user can also type a name that is not included in the select box . As a result , the wiki page indicated is declared an instance of the associated template . The definition of 1 to N relationships is similar to the definition of 1 to 1 relationships . When a note corresponding to a 1 to N association is edited then a select box of the possible associated instances and a text box to define a new one are presented . Also , an operation for removing the instanceof relation is provided . The result of this operation is the removal of the instanceof relation between the template and the instance , but it does not remove any note in the wiki page . Figure 9 . Data Validation Instance Of Requirement Figure 9 shows the wiki page called Data Validation which is an instance of the Requirement template . The property name has the value of data validation , and the property number has the value of Security - DV . The relations 1 to 1 or 1 to N are defined with the help of the note editor that allows the user to choose the associated instances ( see drop down menu in Figure 9 ) . The edited note Cristobal is a relation to one of the stakeholders of this requirement , as well as John . 231 Authorized licensed use limited to : University of Limerick . Downloaded on July 19 , 2010 at 15 : 32 : 42 UTC from IEEE Xplore . Restrictions apply . 5 . 4 . Collaboration With Agents The software agents that need to read the content of ShyWiki can access the RDF wiki page by means of the link relation included in the html : < link rel = ‘alternate‘ type = ‘application / rdf + xml‘ref = ‘ / data / wiki page / 30 ? output = rdfxml‘ title = ‘This page in RDF‘ > . The RDF projection of the wiki page contains the description of the content of the wiki page . Figure 10 shows the HTML view of the RDF resource of the wiki page Security Requirements . It indicates the name of the wiki page ( Security Requirements ) , version ( 15 ) , and a list of the notes that it contains . Each note is described in another RDF resource . The RDF projections are done using the D2R server [ 5 ] . ShyWiki is a service - oriented wiki . ShyWiki web client interacts with the server using Asynchronous JavaScript and XML ( AJAX ) web services . These services can be used by agents to write or read the content of the wiki . Figure 10 . HTML View Of The RDF Resource Security Requirements 5 . 5 . Example Scenario A possible scenario where ShyWiki can be used is in the requirements specification of a software system . In this process , many stakeholders ( e . g . clients , developers ) need to interact in order to come up with the final requirements specification . The stakeholders can be distributed in different places . The first step performed is the elicitation of the requirements , which usually are externalized using brainstorming sessions . In this step , the stakeholders express the initial requirements they want the system to implement . Later , these initial requirements are classified in groups , and some of them are eliminated if they are duplicated . The last step of the elicitation is the prioritization of the requirements . For example , Figure 4 shows a brainstorming session about security requirements of a web application . In the next step , the accepted requirements should be specified with more detail . This is the combination of knowledge . For example , accepted requirements can be specified using the requirement template of Figure 8 . The wiki page will present the different attributes that a requirement has . For example , each requirement has a name , description , stakeholders , priority , status , etc . Figure 9 shows an instance of the requirement template . In addition , if the software development project is managed using a method such as Scrum , the assignation of tasks related with a requirement ( user stories in Scrum ) can be managed using the spatial hypertext properties of the wiki pages . For example , a Scrum board can be represented in a wiki page , where note containers represent tasks states , and the colour of a task represents a developer . 6 . RELATED WORK There are several spatial hypertext systems such as : VIKI [ 21 ] is one of the first spatial hypertext systems that has focused on the emergent structure of the documents . WARP [ 10 ] is a Web - based dynamic spatial hypertext system that is based on applets , and it has an interactive interface . TinderBox [ 3 ] is a personal content assistant for visualizing , analyzing , and sharing notes . However , neither of them have wiki behaviour , and they cannot be used for collaboration in the web . The first WikiWikiWeb was proposed in 1995 [ 17 ] . Wikipedia [ 1 ] is the biggest collaborative wiki , and it represents the success of the wiki concept . Wikis are a way to provide a usable solution for knowledge management in the organizations [ 15 , 36 , 37 ] , in addition , it has be found that wikis in the corporations are sustainable [ 18 ] . According to Wagner [ 35 ] , Wikipedia follows the Bazaar - Style knowledge management , which is characterized by incremental development , multi - person effort , and quality improvement . Oren et al . [ 24 ] propose the use of semantic wikis for knowledge management . Semantic wikis support the combination of explicit knowledge . Semantic wikis permit the application of semantic web knowledge description languages to annotate explicit knowledge and create structured knowledge [ 27 ] . Users can create annotations and wiki page types in order to provide richer semantic 232 Authorized licensed use limited to : University of Limerick . Downloaded on July 19 , 2010 at 15 : 32 : 42 UTC from IEEE Xplore . Restrictions apply . descriptions of the content . The first semantic wikis such as Platypus [ 33 ] and Semper Wiki [ 24 ] allow users to edit the wiki pages and add Resource Description Framework annotations to the wiki pages . Some semantic wikis focus on ontology building such as OntoWiki [ 13 ] , and SweetWiki [ 6 ] . Semantic wikis can represent structured knowledge , but they cannot represent implicit visual and spatial relations among the concepts in the semantic wiki , and neither have good support for externalization . Wen and Jiao developed the Knowledge Fusion Creation Model Wiki [ 38 ] , which is based on the knowledge management framework of Nonaka , their wiki is another semantic wiki . In most wikis and semantic wikis the acquisition of knowledge is done using the wiki page editor . Wikis do not satisfy the requirements needed to perform collaborative interpretation . Therefore , they do not have enough support for the externalization of tacit knowledge . ShyWiki gives a more complete support to Nonaka ’s knowledge creation model than other wikis , because ShyWiki permit the collaborative creation of the different types of knowledge involved in the knowledge creation spiral . In this way , ShyWiki can be considered an improved solution for knowledge management . 7 . CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK The knowledge spiral for the creation of organizational knowledge involves different types of knowledge conversion . Therefore , managing different types of knowledge is essential in a knowledge management system . This paper has proposed the use of a spatial hypertext wiki ( ShyWiki ) for knowledge management . ShyWiki is an implementation of the ShyWiki Hypertext Model . The visual and spatial characteristics make this model suitable for representing three different types of explicit knowledge : unstructured ( text , images , and hyperlinks ) , implicit graphic relations among concept types , and structured knowledge by means of typed concepts and hyperlinks . The visual and spatial characteristics of ShyWiki make it suitable for the externalization of tacit knowledge . ShyWiki fulfills the requirements for systems that support collaborative interpretation , and can be used to perform the KJ method . ShyWiki is a tool for facilitating the transit from tacit to formal knowledge . Users can incrementally formalize the knowledge in the wiki . They can start with an externalization process , make the knowledge explicit and gradually incorporate annotations , and concept and hyperlink types . In this way , ShyWiki gives support to the knowledge creation spiral The on - going work is research about the use of ShyWiki for capturing user requirements and for documenting software architectural knowledge . In the future work , we plan to improve the wiki editor , and perform usability evaluations . In addition , we are working on enriching the ShyWiki tool in order to allow the user to define structured knowledge in a more intuitive way . Our plan is to allow the ShyWiki tool use the implicit spatial and visual properties to infer the structure of knowledge . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This work was funded by Science Foundation Ireland grant 03 / CE2 / I303 1 to Lero - the Irish Software Engineering Research Centre ( http : / / www . lero . ie ) . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia . http : / / www . wikipedia . org . Accessed on February 2010 . [ 2 ] D . E . Leidner , M . Alavi . “Review : Knowledge management and knowledge management systems : Conceptual foundations and research issues . ” MIS Quarterly : Management Information Systems , Vol . 25 , No . 1 , pp . 107 – 136 , 2001 . [ 3 ] M . Bernstein . “Collage , composites , construction . ” In Proc . of conference on Hypertext and hypermedia , 2003 . [ 4 ] M . Bernstein , P . J . Brown , M . Frisse , R . Glushko , P . Zellweger , and G . Landow . “Structure , navigation , and hypertext : the status of the navigation problem . ” In Proc . of the ACM conference on Hypertext , pp . 363 – 366 , 1991 . [ 5 ] C . Bizer . “D2R map - a database to RDF mapping language . ” In International WWW Conference , 2003 . [ 6 ] M . Buffa and F . Gandon . “Sweetwiki : semantic web enabled technologies in wiki . ” In Proc . of the international symposium on Wikis , pp . 69 – 78 , 2006 . [ 7 ] D . Cox and S . Greenberg . “Supporting collaborative interpretation in distributed groupware . ” In Proc . of Computer supported cooperative work , pp . 289 – 298 , 2000 . [ 8 ] W . Cunningham . “Design principles of wiki : how can so little do so much ? ” In Proc . of the international symposium on Wikis , pp . 13 – 14 , 2006 . [ 9 ] D . C . Engelbart . Authorship provisions in augment ( reprint ) . pp . 107 – 126 , 1988 . 233 Authorized licensed use limited to : University of Limerick . Downloaded on July 19 , 2010 at 15 : 32 : 42 UTC from IEEE Xplore . Restrictions apply . [ 10 ] L . Francisco - Revilla and F . M . Shipman . “Warp : a web - based dynamic spatial hypertext . ” In Proc . of Hypertext and hypermedia , pp . 235 – 236 , 2004 . [ 11 ] L . Francisco - Revilla and F . M . Shipman . “Parsing and interpreting ambiguous structures in spatial hypermedia . ” In Proc . of Hypertext and hypermedia , pp . 107 – 116 , 2005 . [ 12 ] H . Hasan and C . C . Pfaff . “The wiki : an environment to revolutionize employees ’ interaction with corporate knowledge . ” In Proc . of Australia conference on Computer - Human Interaction , pp . 377 – 380 , 2006 . [ 13 ] M . Hepp , D . Bachlechner , and K . Siorpaes . “Ontowiki : community - driven ontology engineering and ontology usage based on wikis . ” In Proc . of the international symposium on Wikis , pp . 143 – 144 , 2006 . [ 14 ] S . Huang and C . Yang . “Designing a semantic bliki system to support different types of knowledge and adaptive learning . ” Comput . Educ , Vol . 53 , No . 3 , pp . 701 – 712 , 2009 . [ 15 ] H . Jing and Y . Fan . “Usability of wiki for knowledge management of knowledge - based enterprises . ” In International Symposium on Knowledge Acquisition and Modeling , pp . 201 – 205 , 2008 . [ 16 ] J . Kawakita . THE ORIGINAL KJ - METHOD . Kawakita Research Institute , 1982 . [ 17 ] B . Leuf and W . Cunningham . THE WIKI WAY : QUICK COLLABORATION ON THE WEB . Addison - Wesley Longman , Boston , USA , 2001 . [ 18 ] A . Majchrzak , C . Wagner , and D . Yates . Corporate wiki users : results of a survey . In Proc . of the international symposium on Wikis , pp . 99 – 104 , 2006 . [ 19 ] C . C . Marshall and F . M . Shipman . “Searching for the missing link : Discovering implicit structure in spatial hypertext . ” In Hypertext’93 Proceedings , p p . 217 – 230 , 1993 . [ 20 ] C . C . Marshall and F . M . Shipman . “Spatial hypertext : designing for change . ” Communications of A CM , Vol . 38 , No . 8 , pp . 88 – 97 , 1995 . [ 21 ] C . C . Marshall , F . M . Shipman , and J . H . Coombs . “Viki : spatial hypertext supporting emergent structure . ” In Proc . of Hypermedia technology , pp . 13 – 23 , 1994 . [ 22 ] I . Nonaka , K . Umemoto , and D . Senoo . “From information processing to knowledge creation : A paradigm shift in business management . ” Technology in Society , Vol . 18 , No . 2 , pp . 203 – 218 , 1996 . [ 23 ] I . Nonaka and H . Takeuchi . THE KNOWLEDGE CREATING COMPANY : HOW JAPANESE COMPANIES CREATE THE DYNAMICS OF INNOVATION . Oxford University Press , USA , May 1995 . [ 24 ] E . Oren , M . Volkel , J . G . Breslin , and S . Decker . “Semantic wikis for personal knowledge management . ” In Database and Expert Systems Applications , vol . 4080 , pp . 509 – 518 , 2006 . [ 25 ] M . Polanyi . THE TACIT DIMENSION . Anchor Books , 1967 . [ 26 ] A . Rhem . UML FOR DEVELOPING KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS . Auerbach Publications , Boston , MA , USA , 2005 . [ 27 ] S . Schaffert , F . Bry , J . Baumeister , and M . Kiesel . “Semantic wikis . ” IEEE Software , Vol . 25 , No . 4 , pp . 8 – 11 , 2008 . [ 28 ] A . Schmidt . “Knowledge maturin g and the continuity of context as a unifying concept for knowledge management and e - learning . ” In Proceedings of I - KNOW , 2005 . [ 29 ] C . Solis and N . Ali . “Shywiki - A Spatial Hypertext Wiki . ” In Proc . of the international symposium on Wikis . 2008 . [ 30 ] C . Solis and N . Ali . “Shywiki : A Spatial Hypertext Wiki Prototype ( demo ) . ” In Proc . of the international symposium on Wikis . 2008 . [ 31 ] J . F . Sowa . PRINCIPLES OF SEMANTIC NETWORKS . Morgan Kaufmann , 1991 . [ 32 ] H . J . Strauss . “Hypermaps : telling your users where to go . ” In Proc . of the conference on User services , 1990 . [ 33 ] Roberto Tazzoli , Paolo Castagna , and Stefano Emilio Campanini . “Towards a Semantic WikiWikiWeb” . In 3rd International Semantic Web Conference , 2004 . [ 34 ] V . S . Uren , P . Cimiano , J . Iria , S . Handschuh , M . Vargas - Vera , E . Motta , and F . Ciravegna . “Semantic annotation for knowledge management : Requirements and a survey of the state of the art . ” J . Web Sem . , Vol . 4 , No . 1 , pp . 14 – 28 , 2006 . [ 35 ] C . Wagner . “ Breaking the Knowledge Acquisition Bottleneck through Conversational Knowledge Management ” . Information Resources Management , Vol . 1 , 2006 . [ 36 ] C . Wagner and N . Bolloju . “Supporting knowledge management in organizations with conversational technologies : Discussion forums , weblogs , and wikis . ” Database Management , Vol . 16 . No . 2 , pp . 1 – 8 , 2005 . [ 37 ] A . Weiss . “The power of collective intelligence . ” net - Worker , Vol . 9 , No . 3 , pp . 16 – 23 , 2005 . [ 38 ] Y . Wen and Y . Jiao . “Knowledge fusion creation model and its implementation based on wiki platform . ” In International Symposium on Information Engineering and Electronic Commerce , pp . 495 – 499 , 2009 . 234 Authorized licensed use limited to : University of Limerick . Downloaded on July 19 , 2010 at 15 : 32 : 42 UTC from IEEE Xplore . Restrictions apply .