REVIEW SRChing for the substrates of Src AB Reynolds 1 , SB Kanner 2 , AH Bouton 3 , MD Schaller 4 , SA Weed 5 , DC Flynn 6 and JT Parsons 7 By the mid 1980’s , it was clear that the transforming activity of oncogenic Src was linked to the activity of its tyrosine kinase domain and attention turned to identifying substrates , the putative next level of control in the pathway to transformation . Among the ﬁrst to recognize the potential of phosphotyrosine - speciﬁc antibodies , Parsons and colleagues launched a risky shotgun - based approach that led ultimately to the cDNA cloning and functional characterization of many of today’s best - known Src substrates ( for example , p85 - Cortactin , p110 - AFAP1 , p130Cas , p125FAK and p120 - catenin ) . Two decades and over 6000 citations later , the original goals of the project may be seen as secondary to the enormous impact of these protein substrates in many areas of biology . At the request of the editors , this review is not restricted to the current status of the substrates , but reﬂects also on the anatomy of the project itself and some of the challenges and decisions encountered along the way . Oncogene advance online publication , 14 October 2013 ; doi : 10 . 1038 / onc . 2013 . 416 Keywords : Src ; cortactin ; p130Cas ; FAK ; p120 - catenin ; AFAP1 INTRODUCTION The decade of the 1980’s witnessed an immense leap in the understanding of oncogenic signaling , including that mediated by v - Src , the ﬁrst identiﬁed oncoprotein 1 and the ﬁrst described protein tyrosine kinase ( PTK ) . 2 The discovery of Src as a PTK was quickly followed by identiﬁcation of other oncogenic PTKs 3 , 4 including members of the receptor tyrosine kinase family , and attention turned to the possibility of downstream effectors . The search for receptor tyrosine kinase substrates was facilitated by the ligand - induced formation of stable receptor – substrate complexes that could be immunoprecipitated for analysis . In contrast , the substrates of Src were slow to emerge owing primarily to technical constraints . Nonetheless , by mid - decade it was clear that the kinase activity of Src was essential for its transforming activity and the possibility of a substrate - depen - dent pathway to transformation was increasingly difﬁcult to ignore . Lacking the handle provided by today’s phosphotyrosine - speciﬁc antibodies , identifying putative Src substrates was a slow and labor - intensive process , requiring high - level 32 P - labeling of Src - transformed cells , separation of the radiolabelled phospho - proteins by 2 - D polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and an in - gel alkaline treatment protocol designed to leave phosphotyrosine residues intact , while cleaving phospho - serine and - threonine . It was largely ineffective and by 1988 , only a handful of putative substrates had been identiﬁed ( for example , b 1 - integrin , talin , vinculin , phosphatidylinositol - 3 kinase , p36 ( calpactin ) and p42 ( later , identiﬁed as MAP kinase ) ) . 5 The technical problems were ultimately resolved by the discovery of phosphotyrosine ( pTyr ) - speciﬁc antibodies , 6 which provided a convenient and highly speciﬁc molecular handle on pTyr - containing proteins . For the ﬁrst time , tyrosine - phosphorylated proteins could be selectively immunoprecipitated and / or visualized by western blotting . The technology was rapidly adopted by Parsons and colleagues in the form of a risky endeavor that led ultimately to the cDNA cloning and functional characterization of several of today’s best - known Src substrates . Contrary to expectations , most shared an ability to regulate the actin cytoskeleton , as exempliﬁed by the roles of FAK and p120 in cell – ECM and cell – cell adhesion , respectively . They were , in fact , among the ﬁrst representatives of a larger network of substrates that now deﬁne one of the better - recognized roles of c - Src . At the request of the editors , this review is not entirely about the substrates , but reﬂects also on the anatomy of the project itself and some of the challenges and decisions encountered along the way . Indeed , despite the enormous long - term impact of the work described below , it was not at all obvious at the time that the spectrum of apparent Src targets , as indicated by pTyr - antibodies , would turn out to be anything more than a collection of physiologically irrelevant proteins , phosphorylated unproduc - tively by an overexpressed and promiscuous kinase . Arguing against that notion was the apparent speciﬁcity implied by the recognition of just 15 – 20 well - deﬁned pTyr substrates from a proteome of some 30 000 candidates . The search for Src substrates In 1987 , postdoctoral fellows Kanner and Reynolds , together with Parsons , initiated a high - risk project ( never subjected to NIH peer review ) to identify the Src substrates indicated by pTyr - Abs . The two - pronged strategy was to ﬁrst use pTyr - antibodies to purify the tyrosine - phosphorylated proteins from Src - transformed cell lysates , with the aim to shotgun immunize mice for generation of monoclonal antibodies ( mAbs ) to individual substrates . The substrates were then to be identiﬁed directly by cDNA cloning , using the mAbs to screen l GT11 expression libraries . 1 Department of Cancer Biology , Vanderbilt University , Nashville , TN , USA ; 2 Arrowhead Research Corporation , Madison , WI , USA ; 3 Departments of Microbiology , Immunology and Cancer Biology , University of Virginia School of Medicine , Charlottesville , VA , USA ; 4 Department of Biochemistry , 3124 HSN , Robert C . Byrd Health Sciences Center , West Virginia University School of Medicine , Morgantown , WV , USA ; 5 Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy , 1833 Mary Babb Randolph Cancer Center , Robert C . Byrd Health Sciences Center , West Virginia University School of Medicine , Morgantown , WV , USA ; 6 Department of Medical Lab Sciences , College of Health Sciences , University of Delaware , Newark , DE , USA and 7 Departments of Microbiology , Immunology and Cancer Biology , University of Virginia Cancer Center , Charlottesville , VA , USA . Correspondence : Dr DC Flynn , College of Health Sciences , University of Delaware , Newark , DE 19716 , USA . E - mail : dﬂynn @ udel . edu Received 31 May 2013 ; revised 16 August 2013 ; accepted 17 August 2013 Oncogene ( 2013 ) , 1 – 11 & 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited All rights reserved 0950 - 9232 / 13 www . nature . com / onc Accordingly , tyrosine - phosphorylated proteins were puriﬁed from cell lysates of Src - transformed chicken embryo ﬁbroblasts , essentially in one step , using anti - pTyr immunoafﬁnity chromato - graphy . 7 Given the small amount of puriﬁed protein available , only four mice were immunized , two of which responded robustly to the chicken - derived antigens . As there was almost no information on substrate abundance , direct and indirect ELISAs were developed , the former for robustness , the latter providing increased sensitivity . 8 Both mice were fused , generating 786 hybridomas , of which 251 were positive in one or both of the ELISA assays . After subcloning and biochemical validation , the ﬁnal tally came to 32 individual mAbs recognizing seven distinct tyrosine - phosphorylated substrates , and in a few cases , pTyr itself . 8 To isolate the corresponding cDNAs efﬁciently , l GT11 libraries were initially screened with an antibody pool comprised of the best mAbs to each substrate . The positive clones were then rescreened with each individual antibody , resulting in partial cDNA clones for most substrates , the lone exception being p120 ( as described elsewhere ) . Because of the rapid expansion in the scope of the project , it was broken up according to substrate ( along with corresponding mAbs and partial cDNAs ) , and redistributed to lab members to be completed as independent projects . Interestingly , sequencing of the open reading frames revealed that all but tensin encoded entirely novel genes . Moreover , with the possible exception of p185 , which was not pursued , all of the proteins were ultimately validated as physiologically relevant Src substrates . Notably , an unexpected ﬁnding at the time of original sequencing was the almost ubiquitous presence of one or more Src homology domains ( for example , SH1 , SH2 and SH3 ) . For example , FAK itself emerged as an unconventional PTK ( that is , SH1 domain ) , tensin was the ﬁrst reported example of an SH2 domain in a cytoskeletal protein , and both Cortactin and p130CAS contained SH3 domains . P120 , on the other hand , was similar to b - catenin , as both proteins contained central Armadillo Repeat Domains . P120 was initially viewed as an outlier based on the lack of PTK - associated domains . However , both p120 and b - catenin are prominent Src substrates that together control the dynamic interface between classical cadherin complexes and the actin cytoskeleton . Importantly , they bind and regulate all 26 members of the human classical cadherin family , thereby accounting for substantial control over cell – cell adhesion systems in essentially all solid tissues . Thus , despite distinctly different roles , all of the substrates share close functional connections to the actin cytoskeleton . The substrates are now well known and ﬁrmly established in the literature . The following sections contain brief accounts of progress to date for each of the ﬁve novel substrates ( Table 1 ) . As they were discovered as part of a larger effort to understand the mechanism ( s ) underlying transformation by Src , each section at least brieﬂy reﬂects on the nature of that relationship . However , a much better measure of the importance of the substrates stems from their enormous impact over the past two decades in areas of biology that extend well beyond the early focus on Src . P85 / CORTACTIN Early work with p85 revealed striking localization to the cortical actin cytoskeleton , giving rise to the name ‘cortactin’ . 9 On western blots , cortactin appeared as two to three bands ranging from 80 – 85kDa , all of which were phosphorylated on tyrosine by Src . Early work in several cell types revealed that cortactin is also tyrosine - phosphorylated by other Src - family members and following ligand activation of the FGF receptor . 10 Structure Cortactin was described well ahead of the other substrates due largely to the rapid isolation of a full - length cDNA clone . 11 Sequence analysis revealed a novel amino - terminal domain consisting of six - and - one - half 37 amino - acid tandem repeats , later identiﬁed as the actin - binding region , and a carboxy - terminal SH3 domain . The human ortholog ( EMS1 ) was cloned shortly thereafter as a component of the 11q13 amplicon in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma ( HNSCC ) . 12 Cellular function and effects of phosphorylation Consistent with a role in cortical actin regulation , cortactin promotes actin polymerization through direct binding to the actin related protein ( Arp ) 2 / 3 complex 13 – 15 and interactions with the Arp2 / 3 nucleation activator protein , neuronal Wiskott – Aldrich Syndrome protein ( N - WASp ) . 16 , 17 Cortactin also stabilizes binding of Arp2 / 3 to F - actin networks , consistent with its function in lamellipodia dynamics . 18 – 20 Studies conducted with the N - WASp activating proteins WIP and Nck1 demonstrate that tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin enhances Arp2 / 3 activation through binding of the adaptor protein Nck1 , which in turn activates N - WASp directly or through the association of the cortactin – Nck1 complex with WIP . 21 Further work on invadopodia formation conﬁrmed that Nck1 binding to cortactin is critical for promoting cytoplasmic N - WASp - mediated Arp2 / 3 actin nucleation . 22 , 23 These observations indicate a positive role for Src - mediated cortactin phosphorylation in regulating Arp2 / 3 - based actin ﬁlament formation . Changes in cellular actin ﬁlament polymerization are hallmarks of Src - transformation and cortactin is well positioned to regulate these changes . Invadosomes ( aka , podosomes and invadopo - dia ) , 14 comprise another hallmark of cancer found in most carcinoma cell types , where they direct proteolytic degradation of the underlying basement membrane , thereby facilitating local tumor cell spread . 24 , 25 Cortactin expression and Src - based phosphorylation are essential for invadosome formation and Table 1 . Tyrosine - phosphorylated substrates Substrateidentiﬁed Cellular function Possible role in transformation p85 - Cortactin Dynamic regulation in actin ﬁlaments Promotes invadosomes formation , stabilizes lamellipodia p110 - AFAP1 Actin ﬁlament cross - linking Regulation of Src activity , cell contractility and invadosomes stability p130Cas Protein interactions in focal adhesion complexes and at membrane protrusions Regulation of cell adhesion and cell survival p125FAK Regulation of signaling in focal adhesion complexes Regulation of cell adhesion , survival , and cell – cell contacts p120CTN Regulation of cell – cell adhesion by classical cadherins Regulation of cell – cell contacts The ﬁve substrates identiﬁed during the course of this study , their cellular function and potential role in Src - directed transformation . Substrates of Src AB Reynolds et al 2 Oncogene ( 2013 ) 1 – 11 & 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited function , 22 , 26 , 27 suggesting that tyrosine phosphorylation of cortactin is a critical regulator of the early metastatic cascade . Indeed , cortactin is now a widely accepted marker for invadosomes and may have a role in regulating the dynamic changes in actin polymerization required for invadopodia function in transformed cells . Mouse models and human disease Interestingly , embryo formation was blocked by constitutive cortactin knockout ( using gene trap technology ) due to mis - localization of the Arp2 / 3 - F - actin network and inability of the oocyte to undergo proper asymmetric cell division . 28 In adult mice , however , the effect of global disruption of the gene ( induced by Cre - lox activation ) was relatively mild , the main phenotype being increased vascular permeability . A possible explanation for the discrepancy is that expression of the amino - terminal end of cortactin by the gene trap vector may have a dominant - negative affect , as apposed to the null phenotype associated with the conditional knockout . 29 EMS1 ampliﬁcation occurs in multiple carcinoma types , suggest - ing a role for cortactin in human malignancy . 30 In HNSCC , increased copy number correlates with poor patient survival , increased recurrence and lymph node involvement . 31 , 32 In premalignant HNSCC lesions , EMS1 overexpression associates with progression to malignancy . 33 Other effects of ems1 gene ampliﬁcation in HNSCC include increased invasive disease , Arp2 / 3 activation , invadopodia - associated matrix degradation , metalloproteinase secretion and resistance to targeted therapeutics and radiation . 34 – 37 These observations suggest a prominent role for cortactin ampliﬁcation and / or overexpression in HNSCC . P110 / AFAP1 p110 / AFAP1 ( formerly AFAP - 110 ) was initially identiﬁed as a 110 - kDa tyrosine - phosphorylated protein that bound to activated forms of Src in an SH3 - and SH2 - dependent fashion . 7 , 8 , 38 Immuno - ﬂuorescence analysis of normal cells revealed an association with stress ﬁlaments and the cortical actin matrix , giving rise to the name ‘AFAP - 110’ ( actin ﬁlament - associated protein 110 kDa ) . 8 , 38 It was later re - named ‘AFAP1’ ( actin ﬁlament - associated protein - 1 ) by the Human Genome Project to distinguish it from newly discovered family members AFAP1L1 ( AFAP1 - like 1 ) and AFAP1L2 ( AFAP1 - like 2 ) . 39 , 40 Structure cDNA library screening initially led to the discovery of the neuronal form of AFAP1 , a 120 - kDa protein called AFAP - 120 expressed exclusively in neurons . 41 Further screening turned up the ﬁbroblast form of AFAP1 , which lacks just one codon relative to the neuronal form . 42 Structure – function analyses revealed an actin ﬁlament binding motif in the AFAP1 carboxy - terminus , 43 , 44 preceded by a series of protein - binding modules , including 2 pleckstrin homology domains , one of which binds to the protein kinase C ( PKC ) isoforms a , b , g and l . AFAP1 also contained SH2 - binding motifs ( generated by Src phosphorylation ) and an SH3 - binding motif that facilitates stable interactions with Src , as well as the Src - family members Fyn and Lyn . 41 , 45 These data indicate that AFAP1 may function by bridging interactions between Src - family kinases and the actin cytoskeleton . Cellular function and effects of phosphorylation In addition to direct interactions with actin ﬁlaments , AFAP1 can multimerize via a carboxy - terminal leucine motif 43 , 44 to function as an actin ﬁlament cross - linking protein . Deletion of this motif reduces multimer size , and induces a transition from cortical ﬁbers to tighter actin ﬁlament bundles . The ability of AFAP1 to affect dynamic changes in actin ﬁlament cross - linking is regulated by PKC a - mediated phosphorylation , which modulates the con - formation and multimer size of AFAP1 in a fashion analogous to deletion of the Lzip motif . 44 Thus , AFAP1 mediates dynamic changes in actin ﬁlament cross - linking in response to PKC a phosphorylation . Interestingly , several lines of evidence suggest that AFAP1 can function as an upstream activator of Src . For example , deletion of the AFAP1 Lzip motif enables autonomous activation of c - Src in cells . 46 In a potentially analogous scenario , PKC a can promote Src activation by an AFAP1 - dependent mechanism . Overall , the data suggest that AFAP1 phosphorylation by PKC a induces structural changes ( for example , destabilization of AFAP1 multimers ) that potentiate both its actin - ﬁlament cross - linking activity and its positive effects on c - Src . 47 – 50 A working model based on these data proposes that the Lzip motif functions as an auto inhibitor of AFAP1 activity by stabilizing the multimeric conﬁguration , a condition relieved by upstream activation of PKC a . Notably , AFAP1 knockdown has little effect on the Src - transformation phenotype . Thus , AFAP1 is apparently an upstream effector of c - Src , but its role downstream of activated Src , does not modulate transformation . Mouse models and human cancer To date , AFAP1 has not been extensively investigated with regard to potential roles in human cancer . Its expression , however , is signiﬁcantly elevated in at least two cancers , namely cancer of the prostate and neuroblastoma . 51 , 52 Together , these data indicate that AFAP1 may be positioned to promote cancer progression , possibly through its function as a signaling protein or as a regulator of cytoskeletal integrity and cell contractility . Its role as a c - Src activating protein and regulator of stress ﬁlament cross - linking in tumor formation in mouse models has not been determined . The establishment of mouse models will be important to determine a role for AFAP1 in cancer progression . Early results indicate that AFAP1 knockout mice appear to have deﬁcits in lactation , indicating AFAP1’s normal function could have an important role in breast physiology ( Cho , Flynn and Cunnick , manuscript in preparation ) . This mouse model may also be a useful tool to determine a role for AFAP1 in tumor formation or tumor progression . P130CAS ( CAS ) Of the 15 – 20 Src substrates evident on the original pTyr western blots , p110 ( AFAP1 ) and p130Cas ( Cas ) were singled out because it strongly coimmunoprecipitated with Src , a potential indicator of physiological relevance . 8 , 38 , 53 The p130 interaction turned out to be dependent on the Src SH2 domain , suggesting an SH2 - mediated interaction with a phosphotyrosine epitope on p130 . This same p130 protein also associated with the v - Crk oncoprotein ( p47v - Crk ) . The p130 cDNA was later cloned by Hirai et al . , 54 who proposed the name p130Cas for ‘Crk - associated substrate’ . Structure Analysis of the amino - acid sequence of p130Cas ( Cas ) predicted a unique domain structure consisting of an amino - terminal SH3 domain and a centrally located ‘substrate - binding domain’ containing 15 Tyr - X - X - Pro motifs hypothesized to serve as binding sites for the Crk SH2 domains when phosphorylated . The carboxy - terminus contained an additional predicted Src SH2 domain - binding site and an adjacent poly - proline motif likely to function as an SH3 domain - binding site for Src . 55 Analysis of the dynamic interaction between Src and Cas led to a novel paradigm of processive binding between Src and its substrates , whereby the kinase forms an initial , lower afﬁnity interaction with the substrate Substrates of Src AB Reynolds et al 3 & 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited Oncogene ( 2013 ) 1 – 11 ( in this case via the Cas SH3 domain ) before enzymatic modiﬁcation of the substrate . 56 , 57 Ensuing phosphorylation of the adjacent tyrosine residue on Cas then provides a binding site for the Src SH2 domain , signiﬁcantly strengthening the interaction between the two proteins . 55 A similar model was predicted for AFAP1 , whereby SH3 - directed interactions were required for tyrosine phosphorylation of AFAP1 and high - afﬁnity binding with Src . 58 , 59 Binding of Cas to the c - Src SH3 domain also results in release of c - Src’s autoinhibitory conformation resulting in activation of the kinase . 39 , 56 , 60 – 62 Thus , as with AFAP1 , p130Cas can function as an upstream activator of c - Src . Cas is now recognized as the prototype of a four - member family of adaptor / scaffolding proteins that share common structural and functional features . 63 – 66 In addition , to Cas ( also known as BCAR1 for breast cancer anti - estrogen resistance - 1 ) , this family includes NEDD9 ( also known as HEF1 and Cas - L ) , EFS ( also known as Sin ) and CASS4 ( also known as HEPL ) . Cellular function and effects of phosphorylation As with several of the other Src substrates discussed in this review , Cas becomes phosphorylated in response to integrin engagement , localizes to focal adhesions and has a critical role in adhesion - dependent cytoskeletal remodeling and cell migration . 67 – 72 These activities are mediated by the processive phosphorylation of tyrosine residues located in the Cas substrate - binding domain and subsequent association with Crk , leading to activation of Rac1 and Rap1 . 73 – 75 Cas - Crk coupling may also contribute to its function as a mechanotransducer , as Cas phosphorylation is signi - ﬁcantly enhanced under conditions in which the Cas substrate - binding domain is physically stretched in response to integrin engagement . 76 Cas signaling is involved in the regulation of cell death once apoptosis has been triggered , which is mediated by a 31 - kDa carboxy - terminal Cas fragment produced by the action of apoptosis - induced proteases . 77 , 78 Independent expression of the 31kDa fragment causes diverse pro - apoptotic cellular activities . In addition to adhesion signaling , Cas has been implicated in the control of cell proliferation and survival . Cas tyrosine phosphorylation is induced in response to a number of mitogenic stimuli . 79 , 80 However , the mechanisms by which Cas phosphorylation regulates cell proliferation are complex and not yet clear . Cas becomes dephosphorylated on tyrosine and phosphorylated on serine / threonine residues during mitosis , which leads to disruption of Cas / FAK / c - Src interactions and dissolution of focal adhesions . 81 These changes in phosphorylation may enable Cas to affect dynamic changes in focal adhesions in response to phosphorylation by Src and subsequent dephosphorylation . Mouse models and human disease Mouse models of breast tumorigenesis further support a role for Cas in cell proliferation and survival , as mammary gland - speciﬁc overexpression of Cas results in tissue hyperplasia coincident with Src and Akt activation . 82 Furthermore , when crossed with a HER2 - neu mammary tumor model , Cas overexpression results in shortened tumor latency , while knockdown of Cas in cells isolated from HER2 - neu tumors results in increased apoptosis . 82 As an integral component of signaling pathways that control cyto - skeletal dynamics , adhesion , migration , proliferation , survival and apoptosis , Cas expression positively correlated with poor prognoses in a number of human cancers , including breast , prostate , ovarian and lung . 65 , 83 – 88 It remains undetermined whether these pathological states are a direct consequence of Cas function and , if so , whether speciﬁc Cas signaling nodes can be targeted as a means of disease management . Nonetheless , Cas has clearly shown an ability to enhance cell proliferation and survival . For example , overexpression of Cas in breast cancer cells can result in a failure to undergo cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in response to antiestrogens and cytotoxic agents . 84 , 89 , 90 The ability of Cas to bind to , and activate , c - Src 62 , 91 , 92 has an important role in this resistance pathway 89 , 90 demonstrating a clear link between Cas , Src and cell survival . FOCAL ADHESION KINASE , P125FAK ( FAK ) Early studies demonstrated that in normal chick embryo ﬁbroblast cells , the only major substrate phosphorylated on tyrosine was a single 125 kDa phosphoprotein . 93 A hint regarding the function of p125 came from observations that levels of phosphotyrosine increased in integrin - dependent adhesion structures upon attachment of cells to ﬁbronectin , 94 cross - linking cell surface integrins 95 or platelet activation and adhesion to ﬁbrinogen . 96 Structure Identiﬁcation of the p125 protein elicited excitement during the early phases of this project . At that time , BLAST databases came into use and early identiﬁcation of coding sequences revealed that p125 was a tyrosine kinase . Further , studies by other colleagues in the ﬁeld demonstrated that integrin engagement was associated with increased tyrosine phosphor - ylation in focal adhesion complexes . With p125 thought to have a role in regulating integrin engagement and signaling , the lab gave much thought into naming the protein , ultimately deciding on focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) , due to its colocalization with focal adhesion complexes and intrinsic kinase activity . The observation that FAK localized to regions of the cell that closely adhere to the extracellular matrix indicated that it might function in the transduction of biochemical signals both in response to and in the control of cell adhesion . 97 The domain organization of FAK consists of a FERM ( Band Four . one / Ezrin / Radixin / Moesin ) domain , catalytic domain , a domain of unknown structure containing several proline - rich regions and a C - terminal domain that mediates localization ( the focal adhesion targeting domain ) . 98 Cellular function and effects of phosphorylation Tyrosine 397 is a major site of phosphorylation in FAK and has a critical role in signaling as a docking site for SH2 domain - containing proteins , including Src . 97 , 99 The relationship between FAK and cell adhesion is complex . Integrin - dependent cell adhesion to extracellular matrix proteins stimulates FAK activity resulting in tyrosine phosphorylation on multiple residues . 98 FAK controls a number of biological responses regulated by cell adhesion , including anoikis , proliferation and cell migration . One role of FAK in the control of cell migration is the regulation of the assembly and disassembly of focal adhesions , adhesive structures that tether cells to the underlying extracellular matrix . 100 – 102 FAK mutants that cannot be phosphorylated at tyrosine 397 are defective for disassembly of cell / matrix adhesions . In this regard , Src is likely an important signaling partner for FAK , as Src null cells exhibit a similar phenotype . 102 FAK regulates cell adhesion through multiple mechanisms . The FAK / Src complex controls phosphorylation and the activity of PIP5KCI , an isoform of phosphatidylinositol 5 0 kinase that discretely localizes to cell / extracellular matrix adhesions , regulates the generation of PI ( 4 , 5 ) P2 at these sites , and the subsequent assembly of these structures . 103 FAK can also regulate cell adhesion through Rho family GTPases . 104 – 108 The focal adhesion targeting domain of FAK mediates binding to two focal adhesion - associated proteins , paxillin and talin , and each has been implicated in directing FAK localization to focal adhesions and in the regulation of cell adhesion . 109 , 110 Paxillin had been identiﬁed as a Src substrate by Glenney et al . 111 FAK can directly and indirectly ( via Src ) promote paxillin phosphorylation on tyrosine . Substrates of Src AB Reynolds et al 4 Oncogene ( 2013 ) 1 – 11 & 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited Like FAK , paxillin is required for proper turnover of cell / matrix adhesions and mutants of paxillin that are defective for tyrosine phosphorylation are defective for regulation of adhesion turnover . 102 The interaction of FAK and talin is also important . FAK is required for the recruitment of talin to nascent focal adhesions but not to mature focal adhesions ; 112 Talin has a role in recruiting or stabilizing FAK in mature adhesions . The interaction between FAK and talin 113 could offer another mechanism for regulating adhesion . Further , FAK may regulate the cleavage of talin by calpain , which is an important mechanism for regulation of adhesion . 112 , 114 p85 - Cortactin also binds via its SH3 domain to two proline - rich sequences in the C - terminal domain of FAK . Mutation of these sites in FAK impairs its ability to regulate cell / matrix adhesion turnover . 115 Although these sequences mediate interaction with multiple proteins , cortactin may be the critical binding partner for controlling adhesion remodeling . 115 FAK also regulates recruitment of dynamin to adhesive structures , via a direct interaction with the FAK FERM domain or an indirect interaction via a phosphorylated tyrosine residue in the C - terminus of FAK ( tyrosine 925 ) , and dynamin has been implicated in the disassembly of adhesions . 116 , 117 Thus , FAK may regulate cell adhesion through changes in phosphorylation that affect interactions with different binding partners , including Src . FAK has an important role in the organization of the extracellular matrix in tissue culture and the basement membrane in vivo . 118 , 119 By regulating expression and secretion of matrix metalloproteinases , FAK also controls remodeling of the matrix after its initial organization , which enables FAK to control cell invasion . 120 , 121 FAK functions in regulating the assembly of adhesive structures that mediate matrix degradation . FAK interactions with Cas are required to regulate invadosome formation in several cell types , and the subsequent degradation of the underlying extracellular matrix . 122 FAK also functions in controlling extracellular matrix degradation at focal adhesions and Cas is an important FAK - binding partner in controlling matrix degradation at these sites as well . 123 FAK is implicated in controlling cell proliferation and degradation of the extracellular matrix in response to mechanical signals generated by stiff matrices . 124 – 126 Although FAK’s role in controlling cell / extracellular matrix adhesion was not surprising , the ﬁnding that FAK has a role in controlling cell – cell adhesions was unexpected . FAK is required for efﬁcient assembly of N - cadherin - and E - cadherin - mediated cell / cell adhesions and FAK - dependent control of the activity of Rho family proteins appears responsible for modulating the assembly of cell / cell junctions . 127 , 128 Impairment of FAK activity also retards the disassembly of cell / cell junctions in response to stimuli that promote epithelial to mesenchymal transition . 129 Thus , FAK is implicated in controlling both the assembly and disassembly of different classes of cell adhesions . Mouse models and human disease FAK is essential for mouse development , as demonstrated by the embryonic lethal phenotype of FAK - null mice . 130 These embryos exhibit defects in mesoderm development , neural tube closure and heart tube formation . 131 The analysis of conditional knockout mice has provided additional insight into FAK’s role in development . These include essential roles in embryonic angiogenesis , 132 , 133 development of the heart / aorta 134 and differentiation of neural crest cells . 135 Further , in mouse models FAK has also been implicated in the regulation of axonal branching , 136 myelination 137 and mammary gland development during pregnancy . 138 As outlined below , FAK is implicated in a number of human diseases . Thus , FAK appears to have an important role in regulating cell adhesion , cell – cell interactions and cell survival , all of which are altered in Src - transformed cells and in human cancer . P120 - CATENIN , P120CTN , P120 Interest in p120 was initially based on the proﬁling of tyrosine - phosphorylated proteins in cells expressing activated forms of Src that were either transformation - competent or transformation - defective . Remarkably , p120 was unique among the substrates in that its phosphorylation correlated with cell transformation , suggesting a possible role in the mechanism of transformation . 53 Structure Most of the substrates emerged as unique regulators of the actin cytoskeleton , each possessing one or more domains typically associated with PTK signaling . In contrast , p120 contained tandem armadillo repeats with weak homology to the Armadillo repeats in b - catenin / Armadillo . 139 , 140 Further analysis revealed sets of tandem repeats in p120 and several other proteins , leading to the recognition and naming of the Armadillo Repeat Domain , a structure that has emerged over the last decade as an important protein – protein interaction scaffold . Notably , the similarity to b - catenin led to testing for an analogous interaction with classical cadherins . It turned out that p120 and b - catenin interact simultaneously with adjacent motifs in the cadherin cytoplasmic tail . 141 Because of these molecular interactions , p120 was originally called ‘Cas’ for cadherin - associated ( Src ) substrate . 142 That name was soon rescinded in favor of p120 - catenin ( p120 ) 143 to avoid being confused with the previously described Src substrate p130Cas . 54 Cellular function and effects of phosphorylation The catenin identiﬁer turned out to be a highly accurate descriptor , as p120 and b - catenin are direct stoichiometric binding partners for each of the 26 classical cadherins , important mediators of cell – cell adhesion in solid tissues . b - catenin interacts further with a - catenin , a vinculin - like actin - binding protein at the dynamic functional interface between the cadherin cytoplasmic tail and the underlying actin cytoskeleton . The term catenin ( that is , chain or to link ) , coined well before the discovery of p120 , was aimed originally at the a - catenin / b - catenin partnership . However , p120 also modulates the actin interface , albeit via direct and / or indirect regulation of Rho GTPases . For example , cytoplasmic p120 functions as a guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitor , binding RhoA and blocking its activity by preventing GTP / GDP exchange . 144 , 145 Cadherin - bound p120 , on the other hand , does not bind RhoA directly , 144 but instead recruits factors such as p190RhoGAP 146 – 148 and ROCK 149 that in turn localize RhoA activity to adherens junctions . Hence , p120 and b - catenin are important regulators of the actin cytoskeleton and participate actively in the global integration of cytoskeletal activity . More recently , p120 has emerged as a master regulator of classical cadherin stability and cell surface retention . p120 modulates the strength of cell – cell adhesion , in part , by controlling cadherin levels . Nascent cadherin complexes arrive at the cell surface independent of p120 . Thereafter , direct interaction with p120 is essential as the complex is otherwise rapidly internalized and degraded . Thus , loss of p120 in most adhesive cell types results in reduced or complete loss of cell – cell adhesion . Mechanistically , p120 prevents cadherin endocytosis by physically masking crucial endocytic signals in the cadherin juxtamembrane domain . 150 Recent evidence suggests a second role , however , as the cell fate and endocytic adaptor protein Numb can regulate endocytosis of the entire cadherin complex ( p120 included ) through direct interaction with p120 . 151 Transformation by Src in many cell types is associated with disruption of adherens junctions , actin - based cell – cell adhesion complexes organized by classical cadherins . p120 is also tyrosine - phosphorylated by various growth factor receptors , including the EGF , PDGF and CSF - 1 receptors , 152 , 153 which are functionally Substrates of Src AB Reynolds et al 5 & 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited Oncogene ( 2013 ) 1 – 11 coupled to cadherins by poorly understood mechanisms . 154 The role of p120 phosphorylation in these processes is not yet known . p120 itself , on the other hand , is clearly essential for transformation by Src and Rac1 , but not H - Ras , it remains an open question , therefore , as to whether tyrosine phosphorylation of p120 in fact has an essential role in transformation . Mouse models and human disease The in vitro effects of p120 loss are also observed in vivo in mouse models , although the complexity of the phenotypes varies depending on the epithelial organ targeted . Global p120 knockout is early embryonic lethal ( B day 9 . 5 ) . Targeted deletion in the intestinal epithelium causes cell – cell adhesion defects and serious intestinal bleeding , leading to inﬂammation and death in the ﬁrst three weeks of life . 155 Curiously , p120 ablation on a very limited basis ( that is , B 10 % of the intestinal epithelial surface ) by itself induces intestinal tumors in about half of the mice , but tumors invariably retain at least one p120 allele . 156 In the squamous epithelia of skin and esophagus , p120 induces an apparently cell autonomous inﬂammatory response ( that is , it cannot be attributed to a barrier defect ) . 157 , 158 These clues suggest an as yet poorly understood role for p120 in the innate immune system . The esophageal phenotype involves progression to esophageal cancer that closely resembles the human condition . In contrast , the mammary gland does not form at all in the absence of p120 , 159 and the salivary gland displays misshapen ducts that lack acini . 160 Remarkably , the epithelium of the prostate is not noticeably affected , 159 and is the only system to date lacking an obvious phenotype . Despite signiﬁcant tissue - speciﬁc variation , the mouse models in general illustrate multiple connections to cancer and will ultimately be essential for understanding the roles of p120 misexpression in human cancer . Indeed , the human pathology literature reveals frequent mislocalization and / or downregulation of p120 in most epithelial cancers . 161 The mechanism ( s ) of p120 dysregulation in human cancer are not yet clear but the involvement of receptor - and Src - family tyrosine kinases remain a strong possibility . PHARMACEUTICAL TARGETING OF SRC AND ITS SUBSTRATES Among the substrates identiﬁed in this study , FAK , as well as Src , appear to have the greatest promise as druggable targets for the treatment of cancer . The approach to identify new signaling pathway components remains an important element in the discovery of targets for pharmaceutical development . However , the lengthy path from target identiﬁcation to drug registration shifted the effort toward later stages of preclinical development . Companies save time and money if their starting point involves a preclinically , well - validated target before initiating a drug hunting campaign . 162 – 164 For these reasons , drug targeting of Src and its substrates proves a critical opportunity for the discovery and development of new therapies for cancer and other diseases . There have been signiﬁcant strides in developing novel therapies inhibiting Src . 165 , 166 However , the pharmaceutical industry should explore new avenues of target discovery to ensure future development of highly effective treatments . Targeting Src substrates represents a rational next step toward the deliberate intervention of this key signaling cascade in multiple disease states . To date , four small - molecule inhibitors of Src have been developed for treatment of various malignancies , including chronic myelogenous leukemia ( CML ) . 165 , 166 Among these , dasatinib ( Sprycel ) and bosutinib ( Bosulif ) exhibit low nanomolar activity against Src - family kinases . 167 , 168 However , they both equally inhibit Bcr - Abl kinase , the pivotal target in CML , and other tyrosine - and serine / threonine - speciﬁc kinases , thereby promoting their anti - CML activity . 167 – 169 Three of the inhibitors are ATP - competitive , including dasatinib , bosutinib and saracatinib , while KX - 01 is peptidomimetic . 169 Additional non - selective kinase inhibitors have been developed , including nilotinib ( Tasigna ) , that inhibit Src - family kinases amongst their off - target activities . 170 Although anti - Bcr - Abl activity has enabled dasatinib , bosutinib and nilotinib to be marketed for CML , the activity of the four Src inhibitors in clinical trials of solid tumors has been less robust . 165 , 166 Src regulates tumor cell migration , invasion and adhesion in a variety of model systems , suggesting a role in tumor cell metastasis . 171 , 172 In addition , Src exhibits downstream activity in both angiogenesis and bone resorption pathways , indicating functions in tumor cell maintenance and survival . 166 . Src also has roles in tumor cell proliferation and cell cycle control in both in vitro and in vivo pre - clinical models of many major solid tumor types , including prostate , breast , colon , lung , pancreatic and glioblastoma , among others . 173 , 174 The pre - clinical antitumor activities of Src inhibitors provided the rationale , which prompted investigators to evaluate Src inhibitors in multiple solid tumor clinical trials . 166 Early trials show promise , leading to advanced studies evaluating combinations with chemotherapy or other targeted agents . One possibility for the limited success of Src inhibitors as single agents is their inability to induce apoptosis , potentially required for clinical antitumor activity , despite their inhibitory effects on tumor cell proliferation and xenograft growth . 173 The signiﬁcant effects of Src inhibitors in tumor cell motility in vitro may impart a critical activity on patient metastases . Previous and ongoing clinical trials evaluating the effects of Src inhibitors in metastatic cancer are critical for shaping our understanding of their antitumor capacity . Evaluating early stages of malignancy such as in adjuvant settings and studying rational combinations of Src inhibitors with chemotherapy or other targeted agents is warranted . Another limitation for the success of Src inhibitors in solid tumors may be a lack of standard biomarkers . Such data could identify responsive patients , and clinical trials could focus on those patients that demonstrate a molecular response to treatment . The potential for establishing novel Src biomarkers may exist within the rich panel of Src substrates . 8 The discovery of Src substrates provided an important cornerstone in the development of agents targeting downstream effectors of Src function . 5 One key target is FAK , implicated in multiple cancer types . 175 – 178 Similar to its upstream activator Src , FAK promotes tumor cell motility , survival and angiogenesis , thereby validating its potential utility in the clinical setting . 175 – 180 Five small - molecule FAK inhibitors have been described , several having advanced into clinical trials . 181 – 183 Although early in development , these agents show promise for use in the armamentarium against different tumor types . Similarly as observed for Src inhibitors , perhaps the pre - clinical validation of FAK in survival and cell motility points to the potential activity of inhibitors as potent anti - metastatic agents rather than impacting primary tumors . 179 – 183 Combination therapies that address tumor de - bulking ( for example , chemotherapy ) with an anti - metastatic drug ( for example , potentially FAK inhibitors ) may have the best patient response rate and progression - free survival . Future and ongoing clinical evaluation of existing and new inhibitors should help to answer these fundamental questions . Other substrates of Src have been studied exten - sively . 5 , 46 , 65 , 68 , 184 – 187 The substrate proteins p130Cas , p120Ctn , p110 - AFAP1 , p85 - cortactin and p210 tensin exhibit functional interactions with important partner proteins . 5 , 46 , 65 , 68 , 184 – 187 Such interactions are crucial for their functions in tumor cell biology . Pharmaceutical intervention of protein – protein interactions emerged as a potential area for further exploration . 188 , 189 Although many biological therapies are marketed based on disruption or stabilization of protein – protein interactions , the approach remains challenging for small - molecule development targeting intracellular proteins . The large surface area between Substrates of Src AB Reynolds et al 6 Oncogene ( 2013 ) 1 – 11 & 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited protein domains and few binding pockets amenable to small - molecule docking limits this approach . Peptide scaffolds provided the basis for generating some protein – protein interface inhibi - tors . 188 , 189 Recently , protein – complex stabilizers that enhance the retention time of key complexes have been generated and may have therapeutic utility . 188 , 189 Allosteric site modulators offer an alternative approach when targeting outside of enzymatic domains , such as those that inhibit myristate binding in the autoinhibitory pocket of the Bcr - Abl kinase . 190 A variety of potential therapeutic agents have been generated for protein interfaces that possess high afﬁnity , but are larger than typical pharmaceuticals . 188 , 189 Overall , the approach has signiﬁcant merit , and the industry is poised to harvest novel medicines from the large breadth of protein - complexes involved in tumor cell biology . The Src substrates and their cognate interactions may serve as targets for pharmaceutical development , possibly by RNA interference , and as clinical biomarkers for drugs that interfere with Src - associated pathways . Targeting Src , FAK or other substrates may provide critical new drugs for cancer treatment , but may best be served in combinations with other drugs in parallel or convergent path - ways . The development of resistance is common among targeted agents , particularly with kinase inhibitors . Some muta - tions in kinases remain sensitive to drugs , while others are resistant , such as the T315I mutation of Bcr - Abl not inhibited by either dasatinib or bosutinib . 169 Drug combinations that include multiple Src pathway inhibitors may provide a rational approach for reducing relapse for malignancies where Src exhibits a direct role . The discovery of the Src substrates exempliﬁes a ‘shotgun’ approach to identify multiple proteins involved in Src biology . 8 Today , microarrays , protein arrays , yeast two - hybrid systems , synthetic lethality screens and other technologies enable researchers to identify putative targets in multiple settings , including signal transduction pathways , protein networks and patient responses in clinical trials to experimental agents . Broad approaches to the discovery of critical connections between cellular proteins require exploration to enhance our understanding of the cell system beyond an individual molecular pathway . 191 Deﬁning the system biology and understanding tumor microenvironments may hasten the clinical application of appropriate combinations of new medicines customized for each patient . SUMMARY Twenty years of study has provided much information about the structure and function of Src substrates . The work highlighted herein was among the ﬁrst to describe an important group of Src substrates involved in the regulation of cell adhesion and actin dynamics ( Figure 1 ) . Notably , the main roadblock from outset had little to do with the technical challenges . Indeed , by 1989 , just 2 years into the project , both mAbs and partial cDNAs for most of the substrates were already in hand , but it was not a project for the risk averse . Although the jury is perhaps still out on p120 , the substrates identiﬁed did not turn out to be essential for transformation . They were , however , among the ﬁrst bona ﬁde Src substrates identiﬁed , and taught us a great deal about Src and its substrates . Two decades later , the original goals of the project seem rather unimportant compared to the enormous impact of many of the substrates in areas that could not have been anticipated a priori . Driven by a compelling question , application of novel technologies , and the willingness to invest time and energy in a ‘risky’ venture , we began the search for the Src substrates . In today’s difﬁcult funding environment , we must consider whether this type of scientiﬁc effort will garner support . The substantial effort to identify and characterize Src substrates involved not only the authors of this review , but a number of post - doctoral fellows , graduate students and technicians . Importantly , the rewards have been notable . A survey of PubMed citations lists over 6000 papers on these substrates discussed above . Understanding the function of these proteins far exceeded the original goal of understanding how Src functions to transform cells and has in addition provided novel insights as to how these proteins contribute to the complex regulation of cellular dynamics . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Many thanks to Steven Bernhardt for critical review and suggestions for organization of this review . Also , we are grateful for the help of Jenny Michelle Reed in the preparation of this review . Figure 1 . The ﬁve substrates identiﬁed during the course of this study largely regulated cytoskeletal processes that are affected by Src - transformation . P120CTN regulates E - cadherin interactions between cells , p85 - cortactin regulates invadopodia formation and actin polymerization , p110 - AFAP1 regulates actin ﬁlament cross - linking , p125FAK and p130Cas regulate cell adhesion complexes . Substrates of Src AB Reynolds et al 7 & 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited Oncogene ( 2013 ) 1 – 11 REFERENCES 1 Vogt PK . Retroviral oncogenes : a historical primer . Nat Rev Cancer . 2012 ; 12 : 639 – 648 . 2 Hunter T , Sefton BM . Transforming gene product of Rous sarcoma virus phos - phorylates tyrosine . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 1980 ; 77 : 1311 – 1315 . 3 Pawson T , Kung TH , Martin GS . Structure and phosphorylation of the Fujinami sarcoma virus gene product . J Virol 1981 ; 40 : 665 – 672 . 4 Witte ON , Dasgupta A , Baltimore D . Abelson murine leukaemia virus protein is phosphorylated in vitro to form phosphotyrosine . Nature 1980 ; 283 : 826 – 831 . 5 Schaller MD , Bouton AH , Flynn DC , Parsons JT . Identiﬁcation and characterization of novel substrates for protein tyrosine kinases . Prog Nucleic Acid Res Mol Biol 1993 ; 44 : 205 – 227 . 6 Kamps MP , Sefton BM . Identiﬁcation of multiple novel polypeptide substrates of the v - src , v - yes , v - fps , v - ros , and v - erb - B oncogenic tyrosine protein kinases utilizing antisera against phosphotyrosine . Oncogene 1988 ; 2 : 305 – 315 . 7 Kanner SB , Reynolds AB , Parsons JT . Immunoafﬁnity puriﬁcation of tyrosine - phosphorylated cellular proteins . J Immunol Methods 1989 ; 120 : 115 – 124 . 8 Kanner SB , Reynolds AB , Vines RR , Parsons JT . Monoclonal antibodies to indivi - dual tyrosine - phosphorylated protein substrates of oncogene - encoded tyrosine kinases . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 1990 ; 87 : 3328 – 3332 . 9 Wu H , Parsons JT . Cortactin , an 80 / 85 - kilodalton pp60src substrate , is a ﬁla - mentous actin - binding protein enriched in the cell cortex . J Cell Biol 1993 ; 120 : 1417 – 1426 . 10 Zhan X , Hu X , Friesel R , Maciag T . Long term growth factor exposure and dif - ferential tyrosine phosphorylation are required for DNA synthesis in BALB / c 3T3 cells . J Biol Chem 1993 ; 268 : 9611 – 9620 . 11 Wu H , Reynolds AB , Kanner SB , Vines RR , Parsons JT . Identiﬁcation and char - acterization of a novel cytoskeleton - associated pp60src substrate . Mol Cell Biol 1991 ; 11 : 5113 – 5124 . 12 Schuuring E , Verhoeven E , Mooi WJ , Michalides RJ . Identiﬁcation and cloning of two overexpressed genes , U21B31 / PRAD1 and EMS1 , within the ampliﬁed chromosome 11q13 region in human carcinomas . Oncogene 1992 ; 7 : 355 – 361 . 13 Uruno T , Liu J , Zhang P , Fan Y , Egile C , Li R et al . Activation of Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin polymerization by cortactin . Nat Cell Biol 2001 ; 3 : 259 – 266 . 14 Weaver AM , Heuser JE , Karginov AV , Lee WL , Parsons JT , Cooper JA . Interaction of cortactin and N - WASp with Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr Biol 2002 ; 12 : 1270 – 1278 . 15 Weed SA , Karginov AV , Schafer DA , Weaver AM , Kinley AW , Cooper JA et al . Cortactin localization to sites of actin assembly in lamellipodia requires inter - actions with F - actin and the Arp2 / 3 complex . J Cell Biol 2000 ; 151 : 29 – 40 . 16 Kowalski JR , Egile C , Gil S , Snapper SB , Li R , Thomas SM . Cortactin regulates cell migration through activation of N - WASP . J Cell Sci 2005 ; 118 ( Pt 1 ) : 79 – 87 . 17 Martinez - Quiles N , Ho HY , Kirschner MW , Ramesh N , Geha RS . Erk / Src phos - phorylation of cortactin acts as a switch on - switch off mechanism that controls its ability to activate N - WASP . Mol Cell Biol 2004 ; 24 : 5269 – 5280 . 18 Weaver AM , Karginov AV , Kinley AW , Weed SA , Li Y , Parsons JT et al . Cortactin promotes and stabilizes Arp2 / 3 - induced actin ﬁlament network formation . Curr Biol 2001 ; 11 : 370 – 374 . 19 Bryce NS , Clark ES , Leysath JL , Currie JD , Webb DJ , Weaver AM . Cortactin pro - motes cell motility by enhancing lamellipodial persistence . Curr Biol 2005 ; 15 : 1276 – 1285 . 20 Boguslavsky S , Grosheva I , Landau E , Shtutman M , Cohen M , Arnold K et al . p120 catenin regulates lamellipodial dynamics and cell adhesion in cooperation with cortactin . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 2007 ; 104 : 10882 – 10887 . 21 Tehrani S , Tomasevic N , Weed S , Sakowicz R , Cooper JA . Src phosphorylation of cortactin enhances actin assembly . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 2007 ; 104 : 11933 – 11938 . 22 Oser M , Yamaguchi H , Mader CC , Bravo - Cordero JJ , Arias M , Chen X et al . Cortactin regulates coﬁlin and N - WASp activities to control the stages of invadopodium assembly and maturation . J Cell Biol 2009 ; 186 : 571 – 587 . 23 Oser M , Mader CC , Gil - Henn H , Magalhaes M , Bravo - Cordero JJ , Koleske AJ et al . Speciﬁc tyrosine phosphorylation sites on cortactin regulate Nck1 - dependent actin polymerization in invadopodia . J Cell Sci 2010 ; 123 ( Pt 21 ) : 3662 – 3673 . 24 Murphy DA , Courtneidge SA . The ‘ins’ and ‘outs’ of podosomes and invadopodia : characteristics , formation and function . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2011 ; 12 : 413 – 426 . 25 Linder S , Wiesner C , Himmel M . Degrading devices : invadosomes in proteolytic cell invasion . Ann Rev Cell Dev Biol 2011 ; 27 : 185 – 211 . 26 Artym VV , Zhang Y , Seillier - Moiseiwitsch F , Yamada KM , Mueller SC . Dynamic interactions of cortactin and membrane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase at invadopodia : deﬁning the stages of invadopodia formation and function . Cancer Res 2006 ; 66 : 3034 – 3043 . 27 Magalhaes MA , Larson DR , Mader CC , Bravo - Cordero JJ , Gil - Henn H , Oser M et al . Cortactin phosphorylation regulates cell invasion through a pH - dependent pathway . J Cell Biol 2011 ; 195 : 903 – 920 . 28 Yu D , Zhang H , Blanpied TA , Smith E , Zhan X . Cortactin is implicated in murine zygotic development . Exp Cell Res 2010 ; 316 : 848 – 858 . 29 Schnoor M , Lai FP , Zarbock A , Klaver R , Polaschegg C , Schulte D et al . Cortactin deﬁciency is associated with reduced neutrophil recruitment but increased vascular permeability in vivo . J Exp Med 2011 ; 208 : 1721 – 1735 . 30 Wilkerson PM , Reis - Filho JS . The 11q13 - q14 amplicon : clinicopathological cor - relations and potential drivers . Genes Chromosomes Cancer 2013 ; 52 : 333 – 355 . 31 Rodrigo JP , Garcia LA , Ramos S , Lazo PS , Suarez C . EMS1 gene ampliﬁcation correlates with poor prognosis in squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck . Clin Cancer Res 2000 ; 6 : 3177 – 3182 . 32 Rodrigo JP , Garcia - Carracedo D , Garcia LA , Menendez S , Allonca E , Gonzalez MV et al . Distinctive clinicopathological associations of ampliﬁcation of the cortactin gene at 11q13 in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas . J Pathol 2009 ; 217 : 516 – 523 . 33 Rodrigo JP , Alvarez - Alija G , Menendez ST , Mancebo G , Allonca E , Garcia - Carra - cedo D et al . Cortactin and focal adhesion kinase as predictors of cancer risk in patients with laryngeal premalignancy . Cancer Prevention Res 2011 ; 4 : 1333 – 1341 . 34 Rothschild BL , Shim AH , Ammer AG , Kelley LC , Irby KB , Head JA et al . Cortactin overexpression regulates actin - related protein 2 / 3 complex activity , motility , and invasion in carcinomas with chromosome 11q13 ampliﬁcation . Cancer Res 2006 ; 66 : 8017 – 8025 . 35 Clark ES , Whigham AS , Yarbrough WG , Weaver AM . Cortactin is an essential regulator of matrix metalloproteinase secretion and extracellular matrix degra - dation in invadopodia . Cancer Res 2007 ; 67 : 4227 – 4235 . 36 Timpson P , Wilson AS , Lehrbach GM , Sutherland RL , Musgrove EA , Daly RJ . Aberrant expression of cortactin in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cells is associated with enhanced cell proliferation and resistance to the epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor geﬁtinib . Cancer Res 2007 ; 67 : 9304 – 9314 . 37 Eke I , Deuse Y , Hehlgans S , Gurtner K , Krause M , Baumann M et al . beta ( 1 ) In - tegrin / FAK / cortactin signaling is essential for human head and neck cancer resistance to radiotherapy . J Clin Invest 2012 ; 122 : 1529 – 1540 . 38 Kanner SB , Reynolds AB , Wang HC , Vines RR , Parsons JT . The SH2 and SH3 domains of pp60src direct stable association with tyrosine phosphorylated proteins p130 and p110 . EMBO J . 1991 ; 10 : 1689 – 1698 . 39 Xu W , Harrison SC , Eck MJ . Three - dimensional structure of the tyrosine kinase c - Src . Nature 1997 ; 385 : 595 – 602 . 40 Snyder BN , Cho Y , Qian Y , Coad JE , Flynn DC , Cunnick JM . AFAP1L1 is a novel adaptor protein of the AFAP family that interacts with cortactin and localizes to invadosomes . Eur J Cell Biol 2011 ; 90 : 376 – 389 . 41 Flynn DC , Koay TC , Humphries CG , Guappone AC . AFAP - 120 . A variant form of the Src SH2 / SH3 - binding partner AFAP - 110 is detected in brain and contains a novel internal sequence which binds to a 67 - kDa protein . J Biol Chem 1995 ; 270 : 3894 – 3899 . 42 Flynn DC , Leu TH , Reynolds AB , Parsons JT . Identiﬁcation and sequence analysis of cDNAs encoding a 110 - kilodalton actin ﬁlament - associated pp60src substrate . Mol Cell Biol 1993 ; 13 : 7892 – 7900 . 43 Qian Y , Baisden JM , Zot HG , Van Winkle WB , Flynn DC . The carboxy terminus of AFAP - 110 modulates direct interactions with actin ﬁlaments and regulates its ability to alter actin ﬁlament integrity and induce lamellipodia formation . Exp Cell Res 2000 ; 255 : 102 – 113 . 44 Qian Y , Gatesman AS , Baisden JM , Zot HG , Cherezova L , Qazi I et al . Analysis of the role of the leucine zipper motif in regulating the ability of AFAP - 110 to alter actin ﬁlament integrity . J Cell Biochem 2004 ; 91 : 602 – 620 . 45 Summy JM , Guappone AC , Sudol M , Flynn DC . The SH3 and SH2 domains are capable of directing speciﬁcity in protein interactions between the non - receptor tyrosine kinases cSrc and cYes . Oncogene 2000 ; 19 : 155 – 160 . 46 Baisden JM , Qian Y , Zot HM , Flynn DC . The actin ﬁlament - associated protein AFAP - 110 is an adaptor protein that modulates changes in actin ﬁlament integrity . Oncogene 2001 ; 20 : 6435 – 6447 . 47 Bruce - Staskal PJ , Bouton AH . PKC - dependent activation of FAK and src induces tyrosine phosphorylation of Cas and formation of Cas - Crk complexes . Exp Cell Res 2001 ; 264 : 296 – 306 . 48 Brandt D , Gimona M , Hillmann M , Haller H , Mischak H . Protein kinase C induces actin reorganization via a Src - and Rho - dependent pathway . J Biol Chem 2002 ; 277 : 20903 – 20910 . 49 Gatesman A , Walker VG , Baisden JM , Weed SA , Flynn DC . Protein kinase Calpha activates c - Src and induces podosome formation via AFAP - 110 . Mol Cell Biol 2004 ; 24 : 7578 – 7597 . 50 Walker VG , Ammer A , Cao Z , Clump AC , Jiang B - H , Kelley LC et al . PI3K activation is required for PMA - directed activation of cSrc by AFAP - 110 . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2007 ; 293 : 119 – 132 . 51 Zhang J , Park SI , Artime MC , Summy JM , Shah AN , Bomser JA et al . AFAP - 110 is overexpressed in prostate cancer and contributes to tumorigenic growth by regulating focal contacts . J Clin Invest 2007 ; 117 : 2962 – 2973 . Substrates of Src AB Reynolds et al 8 Oncogene ( 2013 ) 1 – 11 & 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited 52 Berwanger B , Hartmann O , Bergmann E , Bernard S , Nielsen D , Krause M et al . Loss of a FYN - regulated differentiation and growth arrest pathway in advanced stage neuroblastoma . Cancer Cell 2002 ; 2 : 377 – 386 . 53 Reynolds AB , Roesel DJ , Kanner SB , Parsons JT . Transformation - speciﬁc tyrosine phosphorylation of a novel cellular protein in chicken cells expressing oncogenic variants of the avian cellular src gene . Mol Cell Biol 1989 ; 9 : 629 – 638 . 54 Sakai R , Iwamatsu A , Hirano N , Ogawa S , Tanaka T , Mano H et al . A novel signaling molecule , p130 , forms stable complexes in vivo with v - Crk and v - Src in a tyrosine phosphorylation - dependent manner . EMBO J . 1994 ; 13 : 3748 – 3756 . 55 Nakamoto T , Sakai R , Ozawa K , Yazaki Y , Hirai H . Direct binding of C - terminal region of p130Cas to SH2 and SH3 domains of Src kinase . J Biol Chem 1996 ; 271 : 8959 – 8965 . 56 Pellicena P , Stowell KR , Miller WT . Enhanced phosphorylation of Src family kinase substrates containing SH2 domain binding sites . J Biol Chem 1998 ; 273 : 15325 – 15328 . 57 Pellicena P , Miller WT . Processive phosphorylation of p130Cas by Src depends on SH3 - polyproline interactions . J Biol Chem 2001 ; 276 : 28190 – 28196 . 58 Guappone AC , Flynn DC . The integrity of the SH3 binding motif of AFAP - 110 is required to facilitate tyrosine phosphorylation by , and stable complex formation with , Src . Mol Cell Biochem 1997 ; 175 : 243 – 252 . 59 Guappone AC , Weimer T , Flynn DC . Formation of a stable src - AFAP - 110 complex through either an amino - terminal or a carboxy - terminal SH2 - binding motif . Mol Carcinogen 1998 ; 22 : 110 – 119 . 60 Sicheri F , Moareﬁ I , Kuriyan J . Crystal structure of the Src family tyrosine kinase Hck . Nature 1997 ; 385 : 602 – 609 . 61 Williams JC , Weijland A , Gonﬂoni S , Thompson A , Courtneidge SA , Superti - Furga G et al . The 2 . 35 a crystal structure of the inactivated form of chicken Src : a dynamic molecule with multiple regulatory interactions . J Mol Biol 1997 ; 274 : 757 – 775 . 62 Burnham MR , Bruce - Staskal PJ , Harte MT , Weidow CL , Ma A , Weed SA et al . Regulation of c - SRC activity and function by the adapter protein CAS . Mol Cell Biol 2000 ; 20 : 5865 – 5878 . 63 Bouton AH , Riggins RB , Bruce - Staskal PJ . Functions of the adapter protein Cas : signal convergence and the determination of cellular responses . Oncogene 2001 ; 20 : 6448 – 6458 . 64 Cabodi S , del Pilar Camacho - Leal M , Di Stefano P , Deﬁlippi P . Integrin signalling adaptors : not only ﬁgurants in the cancer story . Nat Rev Cancer 2010 ; 10 : 858 – 870 . 65 Tikhmyanova N , Little JL , Golemis EA . CAS proteins in normal and pathological cell growth control . Cell Mol Life Sci 2010 ; 67 : 1025 – 1048 . 66 Guerrero MS , Parsons JT , Bouton AH . Cas and NEDD9 contribute to tumor pro - gression through dynamic regulation of the cytoskeleton . Genes Cancer 2012 ; 3 : 371 – 381 . 67 Nojima Y , Morino N , Mimura T , Hamasaki K , Furuya H , Sakai R et al . Integrin - mediated cell adhesion promotes tyrosine phosphorylation of p130Cas , a Src homology 3 - containing molecule having multiple Src homology 2 - binding motifs . J Biol Chem 1995 ; 270 : 15398 – 15402 . 68 Harte MT , Hildebrand JD , Burnham MR , Bouton AH , Parsons JT . p130Cas , a substrate associated with v - Src and v - Crk , localizes to focal adhesions and binds to focal adhesion kinase . J Biol Chem 1996 ; 271 : 13649 – 13655 . 69 Honda H , Nakamoto T , Sakai R , Hirai H . p130 ( Cas ) , an assembling molecule of actin ﬁlaments , promotes cell movement , cell migration , and cell spreading in ﬁbroblasts . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1999 ; 262 : 25 – 30 . 70 Harte MT , Macklem M , Weidow CL , Parsons JT , Bouton AH . Identiﬁcation of two focal adhesion targeting sequences in the adapter molecule p130 ( Cas ) . Biochim Biophys Acta 2000 ; 1499 : 34 – 48 . 71 Meenderink LM , Ryzhova LM , Donato DM , Gochberg DF , Kaverina I , Hanks SK . P130Cas Src - binding and substrate domains have distinct roles in sustaining focal adhesion disassembly and promoting cell migration . PLoS One 2010 ; 5 : e13412 . 72 Nakamoto T , Sakai R , Honda H , Ogawa S , Ueno H , Suzuki T et al . Requirements for localization of p130cas to focal adhesions . Mol Cell Biol 1997 ; 17 : 3884 – 3897 . 73 Klemke RL , Leng J , Molander R , Brooks PC , Vuori K , Cheresh DA . CAS / Crk cou - pling serves as a ‘molecular switch’ for induction of cell migration . J Cell Biol 1998 ; 140 : 961 – 972 . 74 Cho SY , Klemke RL . Extracellular - regulated kinase activation and CAS / Crk cou - pling regulate cell migration and suppress apoptosis during invasion of the extracellular matrix . J Cell Biol 2000 ; 149 : 223 – 236 . 75 Cho SY , Klemke RL . Puriﬁcation of pseudopodia from polarized cells reveals redistribution and activation of Rac through assembly of a CAS / Crk scaffold . J Cell Biol 2002 ; 156 : 725 – 736 . 76 Sawada Y , Tamada M , Dubin - Thaler BJ , Cherniavskaya O , Sakai R , Tanaka S et al . Force sensing by mechanical extension of the Src family kinase substrate p130Cas . Cell 2006 ; 127 : 1015 – 1026 . 77 Kim W , Kook S , Kim DJ , Teodorof C , Song WK . The 31 - kDa caspase - generated cleavage product of p130cas functions as a transcriptional repressor of E2A in apoptotic cells . J Biol Chem 2004 ; 279 : 8333 – 8342 . 78 Wei L , Yang Y , Zhang X , Yu Q . Cleavage of p130Cas in anoikis . J Cell Biochem 2004 ; 91 : 325 – 335 . 79 Casamassima A , Rozengurt E . Tyrosine phosphorylation of p130 ( cas ) by bom - besin , lysophosphatidic acid , phorbol esters , and platelet - derived growth factor . Signaling pathways and formation of a p130 ( cas ) - Crk complex . J Biol Chem 1997 ; 272 : 9363 – 9370 . 80 Casamassima A , Rozengurt E . Insulin - like growth factor I stimulates tyrosine phosphorylation of p130 ( Cas ) , focal adhesion kinase , and paxillin . Role of phosphatidylinositol 3’ - kinase and formation of a p130 ( Cas ) . Crk complex . J Biol Chem 1998 ; 273 : 26149 – 26156 . 81 Yamakita Y , Totsukawa G , Yamashiro S , Fry D , Zhang X , Hanks SK et al . Dis - sociation of FAK / p130 ( CAS ) / c - Src complex during mitosis : role of mitosis - speciﬁc serine phosphorylation of FAK . J Cell Biol 1999 ; 144 : 315 – 324 . 82 Cabodi S , Tinnirello A , Di Stefano P , Bisaro B , Ambrosino E , Castellano I et al . p130Cas as a new regulator of mammary epithelial cell proliferation , survival , and HER2 - neu oncogene - dependent breast tumorigenesis . Cancer Res 2006 ; 66 : 4672 – 4680 . 83 van der Flier S , Brinkman A , Look MP , Kok EM , Meijer - van Gelder ME , Klijn JG et al . Bcar1 / p130Cas protein and primary breast cancer : prognosis and response to tamoxifen treatment . J Natl Cancer Inst 2000 ; 92 : 120 – 127 . 84 Brinkman A , van der Flier S , Kok EM , Dorssers LC . BCAR1 , a human homologue of the adapter protein p130Cas , and antiestrogen resistance in breast cancer cells . J Natl Cancer Inst 2000 ; 92 : 112 – 120 . 85 Dorssers LC , Grebenchtchikov N , Brinkman A , Look MP , van Broekhoven SP , de Jong D et al . The prognostic value of BCAR1 in patients with primary breast cancer . Clin Cancer Res 2004 ; 10 ( 18 Pt 1 ) : 6194 – 6202 . 86 Fromont G , Vallancien G , Validire P , Levillain P , Cussenot O . BCAR1 expression in prostate cancer : association with 16q23 LOH status , tumor progression and EGFR / KAI1 staining . Prostate 2007 ; 67 : 268 – 273 . 87 Nick AM , Stone RL , Armaiz - Pena G , Ozpolat B , Tekedereli I , Graybill WS et al . Silencing of p130cas in ovarian carcinoma : a novel mechanism for tumor cell death . J Natl Cancer Inst 2011 ; 103 : 1596 – 1612 . 88 Huang W , Deng B , Wang RW , Tan QY , He Y , Jiang YG et al . BCAR1 protein plays important roles in carcinogenesis and predicts poor prognosis in non - small - cell lung cancer . PLoS One 2012 ; 7 : e36124 . 89 Riggins RB , Thomas KS , Ta HQ , Wen J , Davis RJ , Schuh NR et al . Physical and functional interactions between Cas and c - Src induce tamoxifen resistance of breast cancer cells through pathways involving epidermal growth factor receptor and signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b . Cancer Res 2006 ; 66 : 7007 – 7015 . 90 Ta HQ , Thomas KS , Schrecengost RS , Bouton AH . A novel association between p130Cas and resistance to the chemotherapeutic drug adriamycin in human breast cancer cells . Cancer Res 2008 ; 68 : 8796 – 8804 . 91 Riggins RB , Quilliam LA , Bouton AH . Synergistic promotion of c - Src activation and cell migration by Cas and AND - 34 / BCAR3 . J Biol Chem 2003 ; 278 : 28264 – 28273 . 92 Schuh NR , Guerrero MS , Schrecengost RS , Bouton AH . BCAR3 regulates Src / p130 Cas association , Src kinase activity , and breast cancer adhesion signaling . J Biol Chem 2010 ; 285 : 2309 – 2317 . 93 Reynolds AB , Vila J , Lansing TJ , Potts WM , Weber MJ , Parsons JT . Activation of the oncogenic potential of the avian cellular src protein by speciﬁc structural alteration of the carboxy terminus . EMBO J 1987 ; 6 : 2359 – 2364 . 94 Guan JL , Trevithick JE , Hynes RO . Fibronectin / integrin interaction induces tyrosine phosphorylation of a 120 - kDa protein . Cell Reg 1991 ; 2 : 951 – 964 . 95 Kornberg LJ , Earp HS , Turner CE , Prockop C , Juliano RL . Signal transduction by integrins : increased protein tyrosine phosphorylation caused by clustering of beta 1 integrins . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1991 ; 88 : 8392 – 8396 . 96 Golden A , Brugge JS , Shattil SJ . Role of platelet membrane glycoprotein IIb - IIIa in agonist - induced tyrosine phosphorylation of platelet proteins . J Cell Biol 1990 ; 111 ( 6 Pt 2 ) : 3117 – 3127 . 97 Schaller MD , Borgman CA , Cobb BS , Vines RR , Reynolds AB , Parsons JT . pp125FAK a structurally distinctive protein - tyrosine kinase associated with focal adhesions . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992 ; 89 : 5192 – 5196 . 98 Parsons JT . Focal adhesion kinase : the ﬁrst ten years . J Cell Sci 2003 ; 116 ( Pt 8 ) : 1409 – 1416 . 99 Schaller MD , Hildebrand JD , Shannon JD , Fox JW , Vines RR , Parsons JT . Autop - hosphorylation of the focal adhesion kinase , pp125FAK , directs SH2 - dependent binding of pp60src . Mol Cell Biol 1994 ; 14 : 1680 – 1688 . 100 Ren XD , Kiosses WB , Sieg DJ , Otey CA , Schlaepfer DD , Schwartz MA . Focal adhesion kinase suppresses Rho activity to promote focal adhesion turnover . J Cell Sci 2000 ; 113 ( Pt 20 ) : 3673 – 3678 . Substrates of Src AB Reynolds et al 9 & 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited Oncogene ( 2013 ) 1 – 11 101 Owen KA , Pixley FJ , Thomas KS , Vicente - Manzanares M , Ray BJ , Horwitz AF et al . Regulation of lamellipodial persistence , adhesion turnover , and motility in macrophages by focal adhesion kinase . J Cell Biol 2007 ; 179 : 1275 – 1287 . 102 Webb DJ , Donais K , Whitmore LA , Thomas SM , Turner CE , Parsons JT et al . FAK - Src signalling through paxillin , ERK and MLCK regulates adhesion disassembly . Nat Cell Biol 2004 ; 6 : 154 – 161 . 103 Ling K , Doughman RL , Firestone AJ , Bunce MW , Anderson RA . Type I gamma phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase targets and regulates focal adhesions . Nature 2002 ; 420 : 89 – 93 . 104 Hildebrand JD , Taylor JM , Parsons JT . An SH3 domain - containing GTPase - acti - vating protein for Rho and Cdc42 associates with focal adhesion kinase . Mol Cell Biol 1996 ; 16 : 3169 – 3178 . 105 Iwanicki MP , Vomastek T , Tilghman RW , Martin KH , Banerjee J , Wedegaertner PB et al . FAK , PDZ - RhoGEF and ROCKII cooperate to regulate adhesion movement and trailing - edge retraction in ﬁbroblasts . J Cell Sci 2008 ; 121 ( Pt 6 ) : 895 – 905 . 106 Lim Y , Lim S - T , Tomar A , Gardel M , Bernard - Triﬁlo JA , Chen XL et al . PyK2 and FAK connections to p190Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor regulate RhoA activity , focal adhesion formation , and cell motility . J Cell Biol 2008 ; 180 : 187 – 203 . 107 Ren XR , Du QS , Huang YZ , Ao SZ , Mei L , Xiong WC . Regulation of CDC42 GTPase by proline - rich tyrosine kinase 2 interacting with PSGAP , a novel pleckstrin homology and Src homology 3 domain containing rhoGAP protein . J Cell Biol 2001 ; 152 : 971 – 984 . 108 Tomar A , Lim S - T , Lim Y , Schlaepfer DD . A FAK - p120RasGAP - p190RhoGAP complex regulates polarity in migrating cells . J Cell Sci 2009 ; 122 ( Pt 11 ) : 1852 – 1862 . 109 Chen HC , Appeddu PA , Parsons JT , Hildebrand JD , Schaller MD , Guan JL . Inter - action of focal adhesion kinase with cytoskeletal protein talin . J Biol Chem 1995 ; 270 : 16995 – 16999 . 110 Hildebrand JD , Schaller MD , Parsons JT . Paxillin , a tyrosine phosphorylated focal adhesion - associated protein binds to the carboxyl terminal domain of focal adhesion kinase . Mol Biol Cell 1995 ; 6 : 637 – 647 . 111 Glenney Jr JR , Zokas L . Novel tyrosine kinase substrates from Rous sarcoma virus - transformed cells are present in the membrane skeleton . J Cell Biol 1989 ; 108 : 2401 – 2408 . 112 Lawson C , Lim S - T , Uryu S , Chen XL , Calderwood DA , Schlaepfer DD . FAK pro - motes recruitment of talin to nascent adhesions to control cell motility . J Cell Biol 2012 ; 196 : 223 – 232 . 113 Nayal A , Webb DJ , Horwitz AF . Talin : an emerging focal point of adhesion dynamics . Curr Opin Cell Biol 2004 ; 16 : 94 – 98 . 114 Franco SJ , Rodgers MA , Perrin BJ , Han J , Bennin DA , Critchley DR et al . Calpain - mediated proteolysis of talin regulates adhesion dynamics . Nat Cell Biol 2004 ; 6 : 977 – 983 . 115 Tomar A , Lawson C , Ghassemian M , Schlaepfer DD . Cortactin as a target for FAK in the regulation of focal adhesion dynamics . PLoS One 2012 ; 7 : 8 e44041 . 116 Ezratty EJ , Partridge MA , Gundersen GG . Microtubule - induced focal adhesion disassembly is mediated by dynamin and focal adhesion kinase . Nat Cell Biol 2005 ; 7 : 581 – 590 . 117 Wang Y , Cao H , Chen J , McNiven MA . A direct interaction between the large GTPase dynamin - 2 and FAK regulates focal adhesion dynamics in response to active Src . Mol Biol Cell 2011 ; 22 : 1529 – 1538 . 118 Beggs HE , Schahin - Reed D , Zang K , Goebbels S , Nave KA , Gorski J et al . FAK deﬁciency in cells contributing to the basal lamina results in cortical abnormalities resembling congenital muscular dystrophies . Neuron 2003 ; 40 : 501 – 514 . 119 Midwood KS , Schwarzbauer JE . Tenascin - C modulates matrix contraction via focal adhesion kinase - and Rho - mediated signaling pathways . Mol Biol Cell 2002 ; 13 : 3601 – 3613 . 120 Hauck CR , Sieg DJ , Hsia DA , Loftus JC , Gaarde WA , Monia BP et al . Inhibition of focal adhesion kinase expression or activity disrupts epidermal growth factor - stimulated signaling promoting the migration of invasive human carcinoma cells . Cancer Res 2001 ; 61 : 7079 – 7090 . 121 Wu X , Gan B , Yoo Y , Guan J - L . FAK - mediated src phosphorylation of endophilin A2 inhibits endocytosis of MT1 - MMP and promotes ECM degradation . Dev Cell 2005 ; 9 : 185 – 196 . 122 Pan Y - R , Chen C - L , Chen H - C . FAK is required for the assembly of podosome rosettes . J Cell Biol 2011 ; 195 : 113 – 129 . 123 Wang Y , McNiven MA . Invasive matrix degradation at focal adhesions occurs via protease recruitment by a FAK - p130Cas complex . J Cell Biol 2012 ; 196 : 375 – 385 . 124 Klein EA , Yin L , Kothapalli D , Castagnino P , Byﬁeld FJ , Xu T et al . Cell - cycle control by physiological matrix elasticity and in vivo tissue stiffening . Curr Biol 2009 ; 19 : 1511 – 1518 . 125 Parekh A , Weaver AM . Regulation of cancer invasiveness by the physical extra - cellular matrix environment . Cell Adh Migr 2009 ; 3 : 288 – 292 . 126 Provenzano PP , Inman DR , Eliceiri KW , Keely PJ . Matrix density - induced mechanoregulation of breast cell phenotype , signaling and gene expression through a FAK - ERK linkage . Oncogene 2009 ; 28 : 4326 – 4343 . 127 Playford MP , Vadali K , Cai X , Burridge K , Schaller MD . Focal adhesion kinase regulates cell - cell contact formation in epithelial cells via modulation of Rho . Exp Cell Res 2008 ; 314 : 3187 – 3197 . 128 Yano H , Mazaki Y , Kurokawa K , Hanks SK , Matsuda M , Sabe H . Roles played by a subset of integrin signaling molecules in cadherin - based cell - cell adhesion . J Cell Biol 2004 ; 166 : 283 – 295 . 129 Avizienyte E , Wyke AW , Jones RJ , McLean GW , Westhoff MA , Brunton VG et al . Src - induced de - regulation of E - cadherin in colon cancer cells requires integrin signalling . Nat Cell Biol 2002 ; 4 : 632 – 638 . 130 Ilic D , Furuta Y , Kanazawa S , Takeda N , Sobue K , Nakatsuji N et al . Reduced cell motility and enhanced focal adhesion contact formation in cells from FAK - deﬁcient mice . Nature 1995 ; 377 : 539 – 544 . 131 Furuta Y , Ilic D , Kanazawa S , Takeda N , Yamamoto T , Aizawa S . Mesodermal defect in late phase of gastrulation by a targeted mutation of focal adhesion kinase , FAK . Oncogene 1995 ; 11 : 1989 – 1995 . 132 Braren R , Hu H , Kim YH , Beggs HE , Reichardt LF , Wang R . Endothelial FAK is essential for vascular network stability , cell survival , and lamellipodial formation . J Cell Biol 2006 ; 172 : 151 – 162 . 133 Shen TL , Park AY , Alcaraz A , Peng X , Jang I , Koni P et al . Conditional knockout of focal adhesion kinase in endothelial cells reveals its role in angiogenesis and vascular development in late embryogenesis . J Cell Biol 2005 ; 169 : 941 – 952 . 134 Hakim ZS , DiMichele LA , Doherty JT , Homeister JW , Beggs HE , Reichardt LF et al . Conditional deletion of focal adhesion kinase leads to defects in ventricular septation and outﬂow tract alignment . Mol Cell Biol 2007 ; 27 : 5352 – 5364 . 135 Vallejo - Illarramendi A , Zang K , Reichardt LF . Focal adhesion kinase is required for neural crest cell morphogenesis during mouse cardiovascular development . J Clin Invest 2009 ; 119 : 2218 – 2230 . 136 Rico B , Beggs HE , Schahin - Reed D , Kimes N , Schmidt A , Reichardt LF . Control of axonal branching and synapse formation by focal adhesion kinase . Nat Neurosci 2004 ; 7 : 1059 – 1069 . 137 Forrest AD , Beggs HE , Reichardt LF , Dupree JL , Colello RJ , Fuss B . Focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) : a regulator of CNS myelination . J Neurosci Res 2009 ; 87 : 3456 – 3464 . 138 Nagy T , Wei H , Shen TL , Peng X , Liang CC , Gan B et al . Mammary epithelial - speciﬁc deletion of the focal adhesion kinase gene leads to severe lobulo - alveolar hypoplasia and secretory immaturity of the murine mammary gland . J Biol Chem 2007 ; 282 : 31766 – 31776 . 139 Peifer M , Berg S , Reynolds AB . A repeating amino acid motif shared by proteins with diverse cellular roles . Cell 1994 ; 76 : 789 – 791 . 140 Reynolds AB , Herbert L , Cleveland JL , Berg ST , Gaut JR . p120 , a novel substrate of protein tyrosine kinase receptors and of p60v - src , is related to cadherin - binding factors beta - catenin , plakoglobin and armadillo . Oncogene 1992 ; 7 : 2439 – 2445 . 141 Thoreson MA , Anastasiadis PZ , Daniel JM , Ireton RC , Wheelock MJ , Johnson KR et al . Selective uncoupling of p120 ( ctn ) from E - cadherin disrupts strong adhe - sion . J Cell Biol 2000 ; 148 : 189 – 202 . 142 Reynolds AB , Daniel J , McCrea PD , Wheelock MJ , Wu J , Zhang Z . Identiﬁcation of a new catenin : the tyrosine kinase substrate p120cas associates with E - cadherin complexes . Mol Cell Biol 1994 ; 14 : 8333 – 8342 . 143 Dillon DA , D’Aquila T , Reynolds AB , Fearon ER , Rimm DL . The expression of p120ctn protein in breast cancer is independent of alpha - and beta - catenin and E - cadherin . Am J Pathol 1998 ; 152 : 75 – 82 . 144 Anastasiadis PZ , Moon SY , Thoreson MA , Mariner DJ , Crawford HC , Zheng Y et al . Inhibition of RhoA by p120 catenin . Nat Cell Biol 2000 ; 2 : 637 – 644 . 145 Anastasiadis PZ , Reynolds AB . Regulation of Rho GTPases by p120 - catenin . Curr Opin Cell Biol 2001 ; 13 : 604 – 610 . 146 Birukova AA , Zebda N , Cokic I , Fu P , Wu T , Dubrovskyi O et al . p190RhoGAP mediates protective effects of oxidized phospholipids in the models of venti - lator - induced lung injury . Exp Cell Res 2011 ; 317 : 859 – 872 . 147 Ponik SM , Trier SM , Wozniak MA , Eliceiri KW , Keely PJ . RhoA is down - regulated at cell - cell contacts via p190RhoGAP - B in response to tensional homeostasis . Mol Biol Cell 2013 ; 24 : 1688 – 1699 . 148 Wildenberg GA , Dohn MR , Carnahan RH , Davis MA , Lobdell NA , Settleman J et al . p120 - catenin and p190RhoGAP regulate cell - cell adhesion by coordinating antagonism between Rac and Rho . Cell 2006 ; 127 : 1027 – 1039 . 149 Smith AL , Dohn MR , Brown MV , Reynolds AB . Association of Rho - associated protein kinase 1 with E - cadherin complexes is mediated by p120 - catenin . Mol Biol Cell 2012 ; 23 : 99 – 9110 . 150 Miyashita Y , Ozawa M . Increased internalization of p120 - uncoupled E - cadherin and a requirement for a dileucine motif in the cytoplasmic domain for endo - cytosis of the protein . J Biol Chem 2007 ; 282 : 11540 – 11548 . Substrates of Src AB Reynolds et al 10 Oncogene ( 2013 ) 1 – 11 & 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited 151 Sato K , Watanabe T , Wang S , Kakeno M , Matsuzawa K , Matsui T et al . Numb controls E - cadherin endocytosis through p120 catenin with aPKC . Mol Biol Cell 2011 ; 22 : 3103 – 3119 . 152 Kanner SB , Reynolds AB , Parsons JT . Tyrosine phosphorylation of a 120 - kilo - dalton pp60src substrate upon epidermal growth factor and platelet - derived growth factor receptor stimulation and in polyomavirus middle - T - antigen - transformed cells . Mol Cell Biol 1991 ; 11 : 713 – 720 . 153 Downing JR , Reynolds AB . PDGF , CSF - 1 , and EGF induce tyrosine phosphoryla - tion of p120 , a pp60src transformation - associated substrate . Oncogene 1991 ; 6 : 607 – 613 . 154 Rodriguez FJ , Lewis - Tufﬁn LJ , Anastasiadis PZ . E - cadherin’s dark side : possible role in tumor progression . Biochim Biophys Acta 2012 ; 1826 : 23 – 31 . 155 Smalley - Freed WG , Eﬁmov A , Burnett PE , Short SP , Davis MA , Gumucio DL et al . p120 - catenin is essential for maintenance of barrier function and intestinal homeostasis in mice . J Clin Invest 2010 ; 120 : 1824 – 1835 . 156 Smalley - Freed WG , Eﬁmov A , Short SP , Jia P , Zhao Z , Washington MK et al . Adenoma formation following limited ablation of p120 - catenin in the mouse intestine . PLoS One 2011 ; 6 : e19880 . 157 Perez - Moreno M , Davis MA , Wong E , Pasolli HA , Reynolds AB , Fuchs E . p120 - catenin mediates inﬂammatory responses in the skin . Cell 2006 ; 124 : 631 – 644 . 158 Stairs DB , Bayne LJ , Rhoades B , Vega ME , Waldron TJ , Kalabis J et al . Deletion of p120 - catenin results in a tumor microenvironment with inﬂammation and cancer that establishes it as a tumor suppressor gene . Cancer Cell 2011 ; 19 : 470 – 483 . 159 Kurley SJ , Bierie B , Carnahan RH , Lobdell NA , Davis MA , Hofmann I et al . p120 - catenin is essential for terminal end bud function and mammary morphogen - esis . Development 2012 ; 139 : 1754 – 1764 . 160 Davis MA , Reynolds AB . Blocked acinar development , E - cadherin reduction , and intraepithelial neoplasia upon ablation of p120 - catenin in the mouse salivary gland . Dev Cell 2006 ; 10 : 21 – 31 . 161 Thoreson MA , Reynolds AB . Altered expression of the catenin p120 in human cancer : implications for tumor progression . Differentiation 2002 ; 70 : 583 – 589 . 162 David E , Tramontin T , Zemmel R . Pharmaceutical R & D : the road to positive returns . Nat Rev Drug Discov 2009 ; 8 : 609 – 610 . 163 Paul SM , Mytelka DS , Dunwiddie CT , Persinger CC , Munos BH , Lindborg SR et al . How to improve R & D productivity : the pharmaceutical industry’s grand chal - lenge . Nat Rev Drug Discov 2010 ; 9 : 203 – 214 . 164 Berggren R , Moller M , Moss R , Poda P , Smietana K . Outlook for the next 5 years in drug innovation . Nat Rev Drug Discov 2012 ; 11 : 435 – 436 . 165 Brunton VG , Frame MC . Src and focal adhesion kinase as therapeutic targets in cancer . Curr Opin Pharmacol 2008 ; 8 : 427 – 432 . 166 Creedon H , Brunton VG . Src kinase inhibitors : promising cancer therapeutics ? Crit Rev Oncog 2012 ; 17 : 145 – 159 . 167 Abbott BL . Dasatinib : from treatment of imatinib - resistant or - intolerant patients with chronic myeloid leukemia to treatment of patients with newly diagnosed chronic phase chronic myeloid leukemia . Clin Ther 2012 ; 34 : 272 – 281 . 168 Quintas - Cardama A , Kantarjian H , Cortes J . Bosutinib for the treatment of chronic myeloid leukemia in chronic phase . Drugs Today 2012 ; 48 : 177 – 188 . 169 Hantschel O , Grebien F , Superti - Furga G . The growing arsenal of ATP - competi - tive and allosteric inhibitors of BCR - ABL . Cancer Res 2012 ; 72 : 4890 – 4895 . 170 Manley PW , Drueckes P , Fendrich G , Furet P , Liebetanz J , Martiny - Baron G et al . Extended kinase proﬁle and properties of the protein kinase inhibitor nilotinib . Biochim Biophys Acta 2010 ; 1804 : 445 – 453 . 171 Parsons SJ , Parsons JT . Src family kinases , key regulators of signal transduction . Oncogene 2004 ; 23 : 7906 – 7909 . 172 Frame MC . Newest ﬁndings on the oldest oncogene ; how activated src does it . J Cell Sci 2004 ; 117 ( Pt 7 ) : 989 – 998 . 173 Gallick GE , Corn PG , Zurita AJ , Lin SH . Small - molecule protein tyrosine kinase inhibitors for the treatment of metastatic prostate cancer . Future Med Chem 2012 ; 4 : 107 – 119 . 174 Kopetz S , Shah AN , Gallick GE . Src continues aging : current and future clinical directions . Clin Cancer Res 2007 ; 13 : 7232 – 7236 . 175 Tilghman RW , Parsons JT . Focal adhesion kinase as a regulator of cell tension in the progression of cancer . Semin Cancer Biol 2008 ; 18 : 45 – 52 . 176 Tomar A , Schlaepfer DD . Focal adhesion kinase : switching between GAPs and GEFs in the regulation of cell motility . Curr Opin Cell Biol 2009 ; 21 : 676 – 683 . 177 Schaller MD . Cellular functions of FAK kinases : insight into molecular mechan - isms and novel functions . J Cell Sci 2010 ; 123 ( Pt 7 ) : 1007 – 1013 . 178 Zhao X , Guan J - L . Focal adhesion kinase and its signaling pathways in cell migration and angiogenesis . Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2011 ; 63 : 610 – 615 . 179 Han EK - H , McGonigal T . Role of focal adhesion kinase in human cancer : a potential target for drug discovery . Anticancer Agents Med Chem 2007 ; 7 : 681 – 684 . 180 Schwock J , Dhani N , Hedley DW . Targeting focal adhesion kinase signaling in tumor growth and metastasis . Expert Opin Ther Targets 2010 ; 14 : 77 – 94 . 181 Ma WW . Development of focal adhesion kinase inhibitors in cancer therapy . Anticancer Agents Med Chem 2011 ; 11 : 638 – 642 . 182 Schultze A , Fiedler W . Clinical importance and potential use of small molecule inhibitors of focal adhesion kinase . Anticancer Agents Med Chem 2011 ; 11 : 593 – 599 . 183 Dunn KB , Hefﬂer M , Golubovskaya VM . Evolving therapies and FAK inhibitors for the treatment of cancer . Anticancer Agents Med Chem 2010 ; 10 : 722 – 734 . 184 Reynolds AB , Roczniak - Ferguson A . Emerging roles for p120 - catenin in cell adhesion and cancer . Oncogene 2004 ; 23 : 7947 – 7956 . 185 Reynolds AB . p120 - catenin : past and present . Biochim Biophys Acta . 2007 ; 1773 : 2 – 7 . 186 Ammer AG , Weed SA . Cortactin branches out : roles in regulating protrusive actin dynamics . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 2008 ; 65 : 687 – 707 . 187 Kirkbride KC , Sung BH , Sinha S , Weaver AM . Cortactin : a multifunctional regulator of cellular invasiveness . Cell Adh Migr 2011 ; 5 : 187 – 198 . 188 Wells JA , McClendon CL . Reaching for high - hanging fruit in drug discovery at protein - protein interfaces . Nature 2007 ; 450 : 1001 – 1009 . 189 Khan SH , Ahmad F , Ahmad N , Flynn DC , Kumar R . Protein - protein interactions : principles , techniques , and their potential role in new drug development . J Biomol Struct Dyn 2011 ; 28 : 929 – 938 . 190 Radi M , Schenone S , Botta M . Allosteric inhibitors of Bcr - Abl : towards novel myristate - pocket binders . Curr Pharm Biotechnol . ( e - pub ahead of print 20 March 2012 ) . 191 Hopkins AL . Network pharmacology : the next paradigm in drug discovery . Nat Chem Biol 2008 ; 4 : 682 – 690 . Substrates of Src AB Reynolds et al 11 & 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited Oncogene ( 2013 ) 1 – 11