Capabilities as Real Options Author ( s ) : Bruce Kogut and Nalin Kulatilaka Reviewed work ( s ) : Source : Organization Science , Vol . 12 , No . 6 ( Nov . - Dec . , 2001 ) , pp . 744 - 758 Published by : INFORMS Stable URL : http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 3086045 . Accessed : 26 / 08 / 2012 13 : 44 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use , available at . http : / / www . jstor . org / page / info / about / policies / terms . jsp . JSTOR is a not - for - profit service that helps scholars , researchers , and students discover , use , and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive . We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship . For more information about JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . . INFORMS is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize , preserve and extend access to Organization Science . http : / / www . jstor . org Capabilities as Real Options Bruce Kogut * Nalin Kulatilaka Wharton School , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania 19104 School of Management , 595 Commonwealth Avenue , Boston University , Boston , Massachusetts 02215 kogut @ wharton . upenn . edu * nalink @ bu . edu Abstract Strategy research consists of a balance between positive and normative theory . Normative theories suggest particular heuris - tics , or cognitive representations , to find appropriate solutions . Heuristics permit faster solutions to real - time problems ; they also suffer from the potential of negative transfer to inappro - priate applications . The theory of real options provides the appropriate heuristic framing of competencies and exploratory search . A real options approach marries the theory of financial options to foundational ideas in strategy , organizational theory , and complex systems . We join these approaches to identify three pairs of concepts : scarce factor and the underlying asset in option theory , inertia and irreversibility , and the ruggedness of landscape and option values . Strategic theories of resources largely define a core competence as unique and nonimmutable . In doing so , this def - inition has wrongly forgotten Barney ' s initial insight into scarce factor markets as determining the valuation of a competitive asset . Financial theory of real options derives its heuristics of investing in exploratory search by inferring future value of to - day ' s investments from market prices . We apply the three conceptual pairs to the evaluation of ca - pabilities as real options through a formal descriptive model . The valuation of core capabilities is derived from observing the price dynamics of correlated strategic factors in the market . Be - cause of inertia , managers cannot easily adjust the wrong set of organizational capabilities to the emergence of market oppor - tunities . However , firms that have made investments in capa - bilities appropriate to these opportunities are able to respond . From this description , we define core competence as the choice of capabilities that permits the firm to make the best response to market opportunities . The heuristic framing of capabilities as real options guides the normative evaluation of the balance be - tween exploitation and exploration . ( Strategy ; Options ; Capabilities ; Heuristics ; Irreversibility ; Landscapes ) Strategizing is the application of heuristic frames to an - alyze the world and to generate normative evaluations of potential avenues of implementation . Strategy research reflects competing ideas about how the world looks , or what the world needs . However , like their counterparts in engineering or architecture , strategy researchers distin - guish themselves from practitioners by their attention to an articulation of theory and evidence . It is this serious concern for the design of practice by an investigation of the appropriate theoretical framing that is the mark of applied sciences in professional schools ( Simon 1969 ) . There is currently debate in strategy research between the importance for a firm to " position " itself in the market or to own unique resources . Ned Bowman ( 1995 ) made the distinction between strategies that look in the mirror and those that look through the looking glass . In the par - lance of contemporary strategy research , resource and knowledge theories of the firm are inward looking , whereas market positioning and industry analysis are out - ward looking . It is not surprising that during a time of restructuring and reengineering , strategy researchers should shift the emphasis from industry analysis to the internal sources of competitive advantage . The current emphasis on looking in the mirror begs the question of how to choose among alternatives . The resource - based and knowledge theories view the unique capabilities of the firm as the cornerstone of sustainable rents . These approaches share the common insight that a chosen strategy presumes the capability of implementing the vision . A heuristic appropriate to iden - tifying capabilities required to support a strategy is pro - vided by the notion of core competence , as proposed by Hamel and Prahalad ( 1994 ) . And yet , it is often over - looked that Hamel and Prahalad ( 1994 ) essentially invert the framing of a resource - based view of strategy by ar - guing for the analysis of white spaces in the market to - pography of existing businesses to identify valuable av - enues of exploration . The ideas of core competence and white spaces share strong parallels with the heuristic application of real op - tion theory to strategy , whereby investments in explora - tion create capabilities to address future opportunities ( Bowman and Hurry 1993 ) . In this regard , a real option is strongly reminiscent of the distinction between exploi - tation and exploration ( Hedlund and Rolander 1990 , ORGANIZATION SCIENCE , ? 2001 INFORMS Vol . 12 , No . 6 , November - December 2001 , pp . 744 - 758 1047 - 7039 / 0 1 / 1 206 / 0744 / $ 05 . 00 1526 - 5455 electronic ISSN BRUCE KOGUT AND NALIN KULATILAKA Capabilities as Real Options March 1991 ) . A real option is the investment in physical and human assets that provides the opportunity to respond to future contingent events . A good example of a real option is the investment in a sales operation in a devel - oping country that loses money but provides learning of the environment that will provide the future capability to expand if the country should grow . Firms as adaptive sys - tems strike a balance between refinements of existing pro - cesses and explorations of variations on new techniques and new markets . The static analysis of deciding to al - locate effort to each of these activities is especially com - plicated , because current efforts result in short - term effi - ciencies that can overwhelm long - term efforts of exploration ( March 1991 ) . Thus , the dynamics by which capabilities interact and are learned pose a complex com - binatorial problem . Organizational theory has been slow to embrace the idea that organizations can proactively exploit risk rather than just absorb it . Yet if firms and their environment are engaged in a coevolutionary dynamic Lewin et al . ( 1998 ) , then it is useful for a firm to ponder the match between its future capabilities and future environments . We pro - pose that the theory of real options provides an appropri - ate theoretical foundation for the heuristic frames to iden - tify and value capabilities and exploratory activities . Because capabilities are platforms that create a generic set of resources , they represent investments in future op - portunities ( Kogut and Kulatilaka 1994a ) . In effect , real option valuation marries the resource - based view with in - dustry positioning by disciplining the analysis of the value of capabilities by a market test . We proceed by first characterizing the value and limi - tations of heuristics . We then develop the use of real op - tions as a heuristic and show how it is grounded in , and throws light on , three lines of thought of strategy : resource - based view of the firm , traditional organizational theory , and complex adaptive systems . A central concept in or - ganizational theory is inertia . Its allied notion in financial economics of " irreversibility " is critical to the definition of a real option . The argument that we develop is that capabilities reflect irreversible investments because of the costliness of rapidly transforming the organizational knowledge in a firm . This knowledge is composed of the set of technological and organizational complements , very much in the spirit of the sociotechnical tradition . The difficulty facing a firm is that improvements in comple - ments provide a competitive advantage , while also gen - erating a high level of inertia that inhibits the firm from radical change . We examine these ideas through a stylized mathemat - ical description of the problem of adopting radical change . Our formalization clarifies that the benefit of a real options heuristic is the imposition of a market test to derive the valuation of capabilities . It also allows for a precise definition of a core competence as derived from the valuation of inert resources given the environment . Strategy as Heuristic Following distinctions made in cognitive science , we separate a heuristic into its cognitive frame and the rules of search . A cognitive ( or heuristic ) frame refers to the " representation " of the problem and solution space . The heuristic rules of search are the algorithms by which so - lutions are found in the represented solution space . ' Simon ( 1969 ) introduced both of these elements by de - fining heuristics as procedural search in distinction to the substantive rationality of economics and operations re - search . Simon noted that the solutions to many problems are not computable ; that is , the search algorithm cannot in finite time determine the optimal answer . The problem of computation is classically illustrated by the traveling salesman problem in which the objective is to minimize the travel costs of a salesperson who has to visit 50 cities . The 50 ! calculation is computable , but not within any reasonable horizon . For this reason , many heuristic al - gorithms have been proposed to provide " satisfactory , " but not clearly optimal , solutions to this problem . Strategy often has this level of complexity and also often lacks a method of determining the optimal choice . In order to know whether a firm should enter into a par - ticular business , it is important to understand the costs and quality of the product or service that can be delivered . It is also important , consequently , to understand the re - sponse of competitors to the competitive entry of an in - novation and its embedded bundle of attributes ( e . g . , price , quality ) . There are , then , two embedded deci - sions - one determining the capabilities , the other the market strategy . The dimensional problem of identifying all these elements and understanding their interactions quickly defies a declarative analysis ( i . e . , net present value ) or an exhaustive procedural search across all com - binations . Heuristics have the advantage of countering some cog - nitive biases , but at a cost . In some cases , the heuristic will lead to nonoptimal decisions . In a study on plant scheduling , Bowman ( 1963 ) found that managers would do better if they used linear estimates from their experi - ence rather than tried to optimize in response to each sit - uation . The implication is that managers would do better to rely upon experiential heuristics than seek to optimize each situation . In real time , the search for optimal strat - egies can be too costly or liable to be influenced by recency ORGANIZATION SCIENCENol . 12 , No . 6 , November - December 2001 745 BRUCE KOGUT AND NALIN KULATILAKA Capabilities as Real Options effects ( e . g . , the arrival of new information ) . Kunreuther ( 1969 ) modified these findings that rules cued to selective environmental information improve actual decisionmak - ing . This finding implies that there may be certain me - taheuristics that identify the environment and thereby in - dicate the application of less robust , but more appropriate , decision rules . The merit of a heuristic is its real - time utility . One of the cornerstones of evolutionary organizational theory is March and Simon ' s ( 1958 ) notion of routines , which is an organizational enactment of heuristic problem solving . ( See Nelson and Winter 1982 . ) Studies on innovation show remarkable trade - offs between costs and time for innovations ( Scherer 1967 , Mansfield 1988 ; see Midler ' s 1993 discussion ) . Consequently , because the develop - ment and use of heuristics are situated in particular con - texts that are only partially understood , they can be mis - applied . The Cohen and Bacdayan ( 1994 ) experiments illustrate these trade - offs between routines as heuristics and misapplications . Their study of the emergent rules in a simple card game showed that simple heuristics routines guided the behavior of play . Better routines , of course , were associated with better outcomes . When the game changed , the players tended to engage in " negative trans - fer , " that is , they transferred the acquired heuristics to the new game even though inappropriate . Strategizing is , then , the application of imperfect heu - ristics to problem solving and implementation . Unlike the implicit heuristics that represent what Argyris and Schon ( 1978 ) call " theories in use , " formal strategizing applies explicit schemas to search for appropriate decisions . Nev - ertheless , the underlying theories to these heuristics are often only implicit . Even explicit heuristics are liable to be applied to the inappropriate setting if hidden assump - tions prove to be wrong . Because complex interactions mark organizational choice , the potential for the cognitive misrepresentation of the problem is large . Thus , an im - portant feature of any framework is a process of discovery and experimentation . It is this process that the heuristic of real options at - tempts to impose and evaluate . If strategy is seen as the choice of capabilities that provide the appropriate flexi - bility for a stochastically changing landscape , then it is critical to try to infer the value of design and investment that provides the flexibility to respond to opportunities . An organization cannot , however , expend all of its re - sources on search , nor can it simply ignore the importance of change and evolution . A real option heuristic is a way to discern the value of particular paths of exploration in evolving environments . Moreover , as we develop below , it is a heuristic that is grounded in theories of strategy , organizational ecology , and complex systems . Strategy and Real Options The core competence concept arose in the late 1980s dur - ing the height of reengineering , propelled by acquisitions and new information technologies . It is a direct response to the reputed financial pressures from financial markets dominated for the first time by institutional investors . The formulation by Hamel and Prahalad ( 1994 ) suggests that the initial data are in the spirit of understanding the in - tended strategy of the firm , which should be grounded in a distinctive competence , an idea that dates back to Selznick ( 1957 ) . The theoretical foundations to this view are several , from the reasoning about why knowledge is hard to im - itate to the evolutionary theories of firm growth . From a decision - theoretic perspective , the core competence fram - ing readily lends itself to a real option interpretation . A real option is technically defined by an investment deci - sion that is characterized by uncertainty , the provision of future managerial discretion to exercise at the appropriate time , and irreversibility . These three elements are jointly required for the appli - cation of a real options heuristic . An option has value only if there is uncertainty , though defining the relevant source of the uncertainty is not trivial . An operationally impor - tant element of design is the provision of discretion , such as the staging of an R & D project to correspond to discrete points of go - no go decisions . Irreversibility is an easily overlooked feature and sig - nifies the inability to costlessly revisit an investment or decision . Irreversibility is a subtle idea that carries the notion of the arrow of time . 2 For example , the decision to make an investment today bears the risk that the in - vested assets can only be sold later at a discount . In this context , irreversibility is the inability to recover the in - vestment costs already expended for the product division . Irreversibility is accentuated if the divesting of an in - vestment also engages costs attached to the unbundling of integrated and coupled assets . The concept of irreversibility is critical to why inertia of organizational capabilities is the source of the value of real options . Irreversibility does not mean that firms can - not change , or that transformation is not possible . Clearly , if a firm had no competitive pressure , it could gradually implement the transformation process . It is because the benefits of transformation decline as competitors them - selves adopt new capabilities that a firm faces a problem of irreversibility in this case . A delay may lower the costs , but transformation comes too late . Because time has an arrow , the decision to delay mak - ing investments in knowledge needed to enter a new mar - ket has a time subscript . The value of this decision will be different if it is considered next year ; other firms may 746 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / Vol . 12 , No . 6 , November - December 2001 BRUCE KOGUT AND NALIN KULATILAKA Capabilities as Real Options have entered and the early rents are now dissipated . Be - cause strategy entails a decision to invest in capabilities to sustain a market strategy , foregoing this investment means that the firm does not have the option to launch the strategy if the market becomes favorable . However , not all capabilities are irreversible . The failure of a firm to invest in information technologies at one point of time does not preclude contracting out for such services in the future . More likely , the opportunity to invest diminishes over time as others come to acquire the necessary capa - bilities . There is , therefore , a time dimension between making a decision to invest and its actual implementation during which the value of the investment will change . Irreversibility implies that the asset should be " scarce " and difficult to replicate in a timely way in order to sup - port a strategy at a particular time . If , through imitation and substitution , this factor will be more abundant in the future and its value will be less , the option value is only realized through the current investment to exploit tran - sient opportunities . 3 To Barney ( 1986 ) , the creation of entrepreneurial rents is fortuitous . If managers understood the value creation process , the knowledge through imi - tation would lead to the erosion of these rents . Consequently , a core competence is a scarce factor as Barney ( 1986 ) defines it , that embeds complex options on future opportunities . The important difference be - tween this early statement of the resource - based view of the firm and core competence is the latter ' s insistence on the value of a resource as derived from its future but un - certain use . In the sense that Barney relies on market val - uations to back into his identification of unique assets , he is consistent with the view that the market values the use of these assets in reference to their potential use by firms bidding for their ownership . Dierickx and Cool ( 1989 ) note that Barney makes the incomplete inference by ig - noring irreversibility . Firms must have differential infor - mation by factor of the arrow of time ( or what they call " time compression " ) . Because it takes time to build and absorb capabilities , a firm cannot spontaneously replicate scarce assets . Consequently , some firms will discover profitable projects where the " excess rents " are earned through their organizational complementarities , not through superior information . This conclusion emphasizes that the scarcity of a core competence should be reflected in equilibrium financial prices , even if a firm cannot earn excess rents by buying this competence in the market . This point is exactly Barney ' s contention that a market for scarce factors forces external prices to reflect the present and future value of the internal assets . The market attempts to value the scarcity of these assets for generating current and future cash flows given a firm ' s position in the market . In other words , scarcity itself does not determine the value of a competence . It is a necessary but not sufficient condition . Rather , scarcity is interesting if the competence permits a firm to achieve a competitive position in the market place . Some writers fail to make this observation altogether . For example , Teece et al . ( 1997 , p . 516 ) write that " core competences must accordingly be derived by looking across the range of a firm ' s ( and its competitors ) products and services . " This statement is , however , seriously in - complete . The missing element in this analysis is , of course , the scarce factor market . A firm may be well en - dowed with patents making it difficult for competitors to imitate . However , the important question is whether these endowments , which we might also call more generically the knowledge of the firm , is useful not only to current , but also to future applications . This question is not an - swered by a notion of dynamic capabilities , or of com - binative capabilities , unless the normative criterion is the identification and investment in core competence in ref - erence to potential uses . This criterion , by definition , must consider the market and the position of the firm . This objection is not petty , for it is easy to imagine that without market discipline on the analysis , the potential candidates for core competence quickly multiply . There is another way to think about this problem , sug - gested by Winter ( 1987 ) , as a broader formulation along the lines of optimal control . Winter ( 1987 , p . 180 - 181 ) states , " From evolutionary theory comes the idea that a state description may include organizational behavioral patterns or routines that are not amenable to rapid change , as well as . . . more conventionally defined assets . It is by this route that a variety of considerations that fall under the rubrics knowledge and competence may enter the stra - tegic state description . " 4 Conventionally , optimal control describes the state characteristics of the environment and allows the decision maker discretion over a few control variables , e . g . , technologies or output . Winter ' s sugges - tion is to capture the constraints and opportunities of ca - pabilities through a richer description of the state vari - ables . It is this insight that we use below in our formal treatment . The Organizational Ecology of Irreversible Investments The concept of core capabilities as embodying explora - tory investments to hedge the future runs counter to some streams of thought on organizational design . Organiza - tional theory historically has viewed uncertainty as threat - ening the stability of the technical core of an organization . By proposing the idea of " uncertainty avoidance , " March ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / Vol . 12 , No . 6 , November - December 2001 747 BRUCE KOGUT AND NALIN KULATILAKA Capabilities as Real Options and Simon ( 1958 ) suggested that an organization ' s design serves the function of eliminating variance . This idea also appears in Thompson ' s ( 1967 ) landmark book that ana - lyzes the many ways that firms buffer themselves from uncertainty . Similarly , Pfeffer and Salancik ( 1978 ) mo - tivate the theory of resource dependency as the creation of organizational mechanisms to reduce uncertainty . The contribution of organizational ecology is to for - mulate more explicitly the relationship between environ - mental uncertainty and organizational strategies in a dy - namic setting . In particular , Hannan and Freeman ( 1977 ) distinguish between environments that change smoothly from those whose change is granular , i . e . , more abrupt . This distinction between two kinds of uncertainty - a dis - tinction that we exploit mathematically below - implies that in granular and uncertain environments , generalists will do better than specialists . This notion of generalists is defined operationally in their empirical work as orga - nizations whose competence corresponds to a broad array of possible environmental outcomes . Given its stress on inertia , it is no doubt surprising that organizational ecology implies option thinking . In the framing of options , generalists are organizations whose competencies are robust across many future states of the world . The formulation by Tuma and Hannan ( 1984 ) makes the analogy between options and survival strate - gies more explicit . They note that a hazard model is the probability of hitting a lower boundary in a stochastic diffusion process which governs the growth of the orga - nization . Indeed , the conditional probability of exercising the option is also the hazard of hitting the boundary of a diffusion process . The difference between the two ap - proaches , of course , is that a real option model typically considers the upper boundary , that is , the probability of increasing growth by exercise rather than the implied strategy in organizational ecology of minimizing the haz - ard of death . 5 The inertial qualities of an organization are consequently central to understanding the value of a firm ' s assets for future deployment given the uncertainty and graininess of the environment . Indeed , it is exactly because of McKelvey ' s ( 1999 ) contention that the envi - ronment changes more rapidly than organizations that there is value in investing assets to respond to future changes . The boundary problem in organizational ecology is based on the same presumption as for real options , namely , that an organization consists of a reservoir of inert and irreversible resources . Organization ecology , like organizational theory in general , has sought to sepa - rate out features of the organization that can be easily changed and hence peripheral from those that are inert and hence core . Following Thompson , the core has fre - quently been regarded as technical , a point of view also adopted by Scott ( 1995 ) . Core and periphery imply a dimension of distance . This notion of distance in core and periphery is one of the hardest concepts in organizational science , and yet it is also found in the fundamental organizational concepts of local versus exploratory learning and radical or incre - mental innovation . These concepts share the idea that firms can be mapped onto a multidimensional space rep - resenting different combinations of technological and or - ganizational practices . ( In the next section , we turn to understanding this space as rugged . ) To simplify these dimensions , consider a two - dimensional space with the coordinates representing a combination of a technology and organizational practices . The notion of inertia poses the question of whether it is easier to move along the technological or organizational dimensions if one wants to change . The organizational literature on innovation has implied that the technological dimension is especially problematic by emphasizing the difference between incremental and radical innovation . The dimension of organization ap - pears as independent from this consideration . Tushman and Anderson ( 1986 ) have offered the insight that inno - vations can be characterized as radical or incremental , depending upon whether they destroy or enhance a firm ' s competence . ( See also Henderson 1993 . ) This reasoning ultimately leads to the consideration that the radicalness of an innovation has less to do with the novelty of the technology than its conformity with existing knowledge of the firm , i . e . , the ways by which work is organized and power is distributed . Because the way work is organized will vary by firms , then the radicalness of a technological innovation cannot be determined independent of a partic - ular organizational context . Switching , or adoption , costs are strongly contingent on the current organization of work . One of the most perplexing questions in organizational behavior is the failure to identify clear matches between technologies and organizational structures . ( See the re - view given in Dosi and Kogut 1993 , and the summary of the work comparing U . S . and Japanese organizations in Lincoln 1993 . ) Dosi and Kogut ( 1993 ) proposed that the failure to find robust relationships has been due to the tendency to theorize element - to - element correspondence , such as high volume production with vertical hierarchy . 6 The empirical results do not show that these are comple - ments when other factors are controlled . Alternatively , Dosi and Kogut suggest that the correspondence might be set to set , where a set of organizational practices maps onto a set of technologies . The data might not reveal that 748 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VOl . 12 , No . 6 , November - December 2001 BRUCE KOGUT AND NALIN KULATILAKA Capabilities as Real Options A and B exist as complements ; all we observe is A and C and D and B . Complementarities need not be unique between any given technology or organization , but they still should be relationally bounded . The recent findings by MacDuffie ( 1996 ) on " bundles " of human resource practices in auto plants indicate that there is a logic which relates organizing practices to each other and to technol - ogies . The experience of General Motors and other car manufacturers is that adopting the new capabilities of flexibility and speed requires changes in automation and organization . Between these two sets , there are many functionally equivalent complements , but there are no unique element - to - element correspondences . This description also captures Dosi and Kogut ' s idea of coevolution of technology and organization through two key features . First , technology and organization do not represent random assignments , nor is their coupling simply at the discretion of managers . Rather , the matches of a technology and organizing principle are constrained to reasonable set - to - set correspondence . However , within these " developmental " constraints , improvements in tech - nology and organization are correlated through experi - ential learning . For example , the introduction of mechan - ical equipment to move the chassis from one line to the next required the organizational innovation to increase the " tightness " of the coupling of serial work processes in the factory . In other words , technology and organiza - tion are dynamically coupled in their evolution . The costs of altering tightly coupled components of technology and organization imply that firms will persist in their old ways beyond the recommendation of the net present value . This persistence defines a range of inertia , or what is called a hysteresis band . Because organiza - tional change is disruptive and hence discontinuous , man - agers hesitate to radically change their organizations , hoping perhaps that future states of the world would pro - vide more appealing environments . Thus , contrary to the normative value in responding flexibly , inertia is ration - ally encouraged in highly volatile environments if change is costly and the environment is granular . Figure 1 provides a simple illustration of this point . A firm can choose between two complementary systems , called low and high variety . The important issue is whether the relative value of gaining the capability of variety is enough to offset the costs of discontinuous change . The choice of capabilities is , as we depict it , de - rived from the market price placed on variety . Because of uncertainty over the evolution of the value of variety and the costs of adoption , managers rationally might choose to persist with inferior techniques before they are confident of future developments . Inertia , then , is not sim - ply a property of stickiness , but reflects expectations re - garding the value and costs of change . Inertia increases with uncertainty , because managers are rationally hesitant to incur the cost of change to capabilities that may be - come easily worthless if the environment reverts to its previous state . ( Clearly , inertia can also stem from con - siderations of loss aversion or status quo bias of manag - ers . ) In a normative vein , it stands to reason from the point of view of an organizational ecology that a firm should experiment in activities that promote its future survival ( Lewin and Volderba 1999 ) . In this sense , organizational ecology offers an escape from the inward - looking bias of the resource - based view of strategy . For enhancing future survival , a firm should invest in platforms that correspond to expectations regarding the evolution of the external environment . Platforms are technological and organiza - tional investments that permit a firm to enter into a wide menu of future markets . Firms that build general plat - forms are more likely to survive and grow ( Kim and Kogut 1996 ) . It is exactly the evaluation of this corre - spondence between exploration of new capabilities and the evolution of the market environment that is provided by the application of a real options heuristic . Complex Adaptive Systems and Option Theory7 A hallmark feature of complex systems is the recognition that environmental change is marked by sharp nonline - arity ( Lewin and Volderba 1999 ) . An option is defined , of course , by returns that are nonlinear and contingent on the stochastic state of the world . Hence , it is not surprising that option valuation is appropriate in complex and non - linear environments . To avoid confusion , we distinguish between experi - mentation and market exploration . Search is the appli - cation of products and services to new markets and land - scapes . Experimentation is the learning of new techniques and combinations of technical and organizational ele - ments . In practice , the market search and experimentation are likely to be linked , and , consequently , it is confusing to insist too strongly on their separation . It is nevertheless useful to remember that new ways of doing things and addressing new markets are not the same . To understand what innovation stream to choose and what kinds of flex - ibility to develop requires an evaluation of the implica - tions of experiments and market exploration for the con - tours of the innovative landscape . For this , we need to match more closely the stochasticity of the environment to experiments of new combinations of organizational and technological elements . A landscape is the performance contour generated by ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / Vol . 12 , No . 6 , November - December 2001 749 BRUCE KOGUT AND NALIN KULATILAKA Capabilities as Real Options Figure 1 The Implications of Hysteresis on the Choice of New Techniques Variety . . . . . . . - . . . i . Hysteresis Band B A Method Time of Organizing A : Mass Production B : Toyotaism the aggregation of each firm ' s position in a multidimen - sional space given by its configuration of resources . With - out imposing a core and periphery , it represents distance among organizational and technical features in a multi - dimensional space . ( If features are identified as " there " or " not there , " then the measure of proximity is the Euclid - ean hamming distance in a multidimensional space . ) The ruggedness of the landscape implies , much like the theory of strategic groups , that firms compete around discrete combinations of resources which correspond to different market niches , or which provide functionally equivalent methods of production . Moving from one to the other is problematic because competencies are scarce ( that is , dif - ficult to imitate ) and also because a landscape coevolves through competitive interactions . A useful heuristic in this kind of representation is to know the value of directional change in the landscape . The value of changing resources and hence changing po - sition in this landscape requires an evaluation of the cost of change against the future unknown reward . This is what option theory does ; it puts a value on the investment in the capability to change position in the landscape con - tingent on the environmental outcome . It does this by inferring from today ' s market valuations the expected value of changing position in the future . Unlike the fitness landscapes found in organizational ecology and biology , real options looks at the value of a position , where con - tours correspond to different valuations placed on the as - sets of an organization . Complex adaptive system thinking has found it difficult to give heuristic advice other than the importance of cre - ating a process by which to respond to uncertainty . In his thoughtful conclusion to a special issue on complexity , Cohen ( 1999 , p . 375 ) concludes that aim of recent " efforts is not so much a theory that predicts what a given com - plex system will do , but rather a framework . " However , ultimately , a framework needs to provide decision heu - ristics to evaluate choices . The normative literature in organizational theory ( e . g . , Tushman and O ' Reilly 1997 , Brown and Eisenhardt 1998 ) has in recent years recognized the value of flexible responses to radical uncertainty as an organizational ca - pability in complex environments . Brown and Eisenhardt ( 1998 , p . 151 ) explicitly connect probes with options thinking . If the future evolution of opportunities was ob - vious , then a firm could focus the efforts of change in one direction . However , because the direction of change is unknown , it pays to invest in probing . But clearly , a heu - ristic to choose the probes is required . It is useful to marry the perspective of probes as options with the idea of a rugged landscape , an idea that origi - nates in biology but that has useful applications to un - derstanding the performance implications of complex in - teractions among complements . ( See Kauffman 1993 , Levinthal 1997 , McKelvey 1999 . ) Consider a firm that is located near a local peak . Holding its environment con - stant , probing consists of learning about superior ways to combine its technological and organizational elements . By learning , we imply a notion of knowledge that is in - complete and not entirely explicitly understood . It is in - complete , as suggested by the observation that firms in - novate incrementally to improve existing practices . It is partly tacit ; or else firms would easily converge to best practice . To return to the set - to - set discussion in Dosi and Kogut ( 1993 ) , local learning is the discovery of the cor - respondence between new elements in the existing set of techniques . The case of local learning is different than moving from one peak to another . Moving to a new peak implies an architectural change in the language of Henderson and Clark ( 1990 ) . Such change is no longer experimentation around individual modules , but requires a complex re - design around new sets of technical and organizational elements . Normally , radical architectural change is viewed as incurring catastrophic risks because of , for ex - ample , a competitor ' s introduction of a product that re - quires a major change in a firm ' s capabilities . But in fact , such change can be orchestrated through exploration and experimentation that effectively builds ridges between peaks . Baldwin and Clark ( 2000 ) propose a real options ap - proach for understanding the choice of modules when performance outcomes are unknown . The explicit valu - ation of the activity of experimentation raises an impor - tant issue of the design of the firm . It would seem , ar - guably , that the best design for exploration is based on modularity , whereby a firm can pick and choose the best components . Since modules might be viewed as indepen - dent experiments , a reasonable inference is that the firm , 750 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / Vol . 12 , No . 6 , November - December 2001 BRUCE KOGUT AND NALIN KULATILAKA Capabilities as Real Options like a market , should be designed around independent teams . This argument is , in fact , congruous with Simon ' s ( 1969 ) argument of the social decomposition of organi - zations into relatively independent units . The heuristic framework of Baldwin and Clark ( 2000 ) cannot , however , be applied to the case of radical archi - tectural change . This is no longer a mix - and - match problem of modules , but represents the switch from one conjoint set of technological and organizational correspondences to a new set . In this environment , a firm cannot exploit its path dependence . It rather must evaluate the distant contours of the value landscape and decide the optimal timing to switch new capabilities . As we will show , this problem is , in fact , less severe than commonly portrayed because exploration permits the building of ridges be - tween value peaks . A Formal Description To ground a heuristic of real options in positive theory , we have indicated the commonalities in strategy , orga - nizational ecology , and complex systems by pairing three concepts of scarce factors and the underlying asset , irre - versibility and inertia , and the landscape ruggedness and option values . To make these pairings explicit , we present below a formal description that grounds the heuristics of real options in organizational theory . We make use of the following three principal ideas . First , the stickiness of or - ganizational and technological combinations requires a notion of time , that is , of irreversibility as indicated by the dynamic market valuation of organizational assets . ( There are , of course , start - up and transaction costs , which we incorporate into switching costs . ) Second , that distance in discrete combinations results in a radical dif - ference between learning and recombination of modules within a family of organization and technical elements , as opposed to between families . Last , uncertainty can be decomposed into continuous and granular measures of change . We seek below to offer the theoretical underpinnings to understanding capabilities as an option , not to value explicitly a real option . ( Dixit and Pindyck 1994 and Amram and Kulatilaka 1999 provide a thorough collection of such applications . ) For many applications , there exist rea - sonable avenues of valuation . The formal description has the important advantage of clearly defining a core com - petence in reference to a market valuation , as well as providing a clear statement of the trade - offs between learning and exploitation , on the one hand , and experi - mentation and exploration on the other . The graphs , which are drawn based on linear profit functions and par - ticular parameter values , illustrates these trade - offs and switching points . Looking Outside the Firm : Market Pricing How should we value an investment in new capabilities ? Clearly , the value of a capability depends not only on the internal assets , but also on how those assets are deployed , and on the external market conditions . Thus , the price of a correlated asset in the relevant " scarce factor " market represents the initial point of departure . The value of a capability is then inferred from the observed price dy - namics which replicate the payoff to the real option . This replication is the device through which market discipline is imposed on the identification and selection of core ca - pabilities . It is not the static comparison of the capability and strategic factor that matters , but rather the informa - tion that is gleaned in the changes in prices over time . To elucidate the intuition , consider again the framing of a real options problem . The organizational assets of a firm provide an option to spend a fixed amount to procure a new capability by purchasing a physical asset at the end of one year . If the option is exercised , then the resulting project value has the risk characteristics of an existing traded firm . For example , a pharmaceutical firm is con - sidering an entry into biotechnology . It currently has a strong capability in conventional drug development that provides an option to enter into biotechnology at an es - timated cost . This cost is idiosyncratic to this firm . How - ever , once it enters into the market , its new business car - ries a market risk similar to other biotechnology firms . This example illustrates why the price of other firms does not give the value of the core capability , because the cost of entry is idiosyncratic to each firm . However , the price dynamics of other firms provide information on the fac - tors ( e . g . , risk ) that drive the value of the option to enter in this market . The value of a financial option depends on the current share price . Because the source of this exogenous uncer - tainty is the market price of a frequently traded market financial security ( the share of stock ) , financial options can be dynamically replicated with a portfolio of stocks and risk - free investments . As a result , derivatives can be valued without knowledge of the expected return earned by the underlying financial asset . For a special but important case , Black and Scholes ( 1973 ) derived this value through an option pricing for - mula . The simple but critical innovation was their even - tual recognition that by composing a replicating portfolio , the value of the option could be perfectly tracked by a levered position in the traded stock . It is , however , un - likely that real options can be perfectly replicated with traded assets . The replication may require the use of prod - uct or factor prices . Even when widely traded , the prices of such real assets need not appreciate at a rate equal to ORGANIZATION SCIENCENVol . 12 , No . 6 , November - December 2001 751 BRUCE KOGUT AND NALIN KULATILAKA Capabilities as Real Options its equilibrium risk - adjusted return . Instead , owners of real assets will reap various convenience benefits and in - cur carrying costs that affect the total returns . In such cases , valuation requires knowledge of the actual price dynamics of the factor price and the equilibrium risk - adjusted return . As an initial proposal , we suggest that the theoretically most interesting way to identify the appropriate correlated asset is to decompose the market price into a bundle of attributes that pierces the revenue veil of the firm to see the underlying assets . Whereas this analysis is unques - tionably hard , it should be recalled that it is consistent both with the financial market pressure to understand ( i . e . , strip ) assets and the growth of derivatives to hedge spe - cific components of a firm ' s risk . From this angle , the value of the capability depends on its contribution to the price of product or factor prices whose risk is spanned by traded assets in the economy . The value of the capability is thus obtained by explicitly specifying the profit func - tion using these prices as an argument . To identify and value a core competence , we must specify the evolution of the quality - adjusted price that we call 0 . A simple example is a microprocessor , whereby a quality - adjusted price can be expressed as the ratio of price to the processing speed ( or " mips " for millions of instructions per second ) . Since we cannot directly observe this price , we can choose the stock price of a firm spe - cializing in microprocessors to give the estimates for the volatility . However , because 0 is not a pure security but is the observed price of a scarce factor , its price charac - teristics need not necessarily evolve according to its equi - librium risk characteristics . Local supply - and - demand conditions and technological innovation determine the evolution of 0 . We want to sort out smoothly evolving uncertainty from discrete granular shocks . We assume 0 to be exogenously determined and characterize its evo - lution by stochastic process Ato = ~ ( O t ) At + Deterministic Growth G3 ( Ot , t ) AZt + Kdq Smoothly evolving uncertainty Discrete innovations where , u is the expected growth rate of 0 , 6 is its instan - taneous volatility , AZ , is standard Normal distributed , dq is a Poisson process with intensity parameter X , and K iS the random percentage jump amplitude conditional on the Poisson event occurring ( Merton 1976 ) . Changes in the quality - adjusted price may reflect un - predictable shifts in consumer preferences or incremental technical change . For example , an increase in oil prices would lead consumers to prefer cars which save in fuel consumption . As long as these changes are fairly smooth , it seems reasonable to capture this uncertainty in volatil - ity . This term represents the uncertainty in the environ - ment around the local peak . Other changes may be more radical and appear as dis - continuous Poisson jumps , such as the arrival of new or - ganizational innovations , and is a measure of the granu - larity of the environment . These changes would appear as a sudden jump in price to a firm . The quality adjusted price approach to building a valu - ation model faces potential problems . The argument hinges on the premise that the risk profile of the value of the innovation is spanned by quality - adjusted prices . However , the quality - adjusted price is derived from a model of the industry pricing behavior and can suffer from " modeling error . " Furthermore , the quality - adjusted price may not perfectly track the value of the innovation and may introduce a " tracking error . " This error is akin to basis risk in commodity markets where the price of a commodity is specific to its location . Finally , not being a security price , the quality - adjusted price can embed a convenience value that is not easily observed or esti - mated . For the arbitrage - based valuation approach to work , the error components must be independent of each other and have no systematic risk . Hence , expert opinion may provide a superior method to form probability dis - tributions of possible future market conditions for the new business in radically new landscapes . Looking Inside the Firm : Capability Sets Even if two firms are competing in the same industry and market , movement in prices of the strategic asset influ - ences differently their value because of the relationship between the capabilities of the firm and the profit oppor - tunities . To describe this formally , we make use of the notion of distance - which we showed to be a common assumption in strategy , organizational ecology , and com - plex systems - between discrete combinations of tech - nology and organizational elements that define a capa - bility . We first develop the notion of a capability set and then define the profit function of a firm in relation to its set of organizational and technological practices . For convenience , we consider the case of an automo - bile producer choosing to stay within the current set of mass production or switching to new high - performance combinations called lean production ( See MacDuffie 1996 ) . A firm has the set of capabilities c , where c E C is the set of all feasible capabilities . In our case , C con - tains " mass " and " lean " production families with their 752 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / Vol . 12 , No . 6 , November - December 2001 BRUCE KOGUT AND NALIN KULATILAKA Capabilities as Real Options associated organizational structures . Each family of pro - duction techniques can contain many distinct technolo - gies . They are , however , coupled with the same organi - zational structure . Hence , a technology family refers to all technologies that can be operated within a single or - ganization . Suppose the firm is currently employing technology in the " mass " production family , i . e . , cm E Cm E C . The firm ' s problem is to decide what capabilities it should use in the current period . Specifically , its choices are ( a ) con - tinue using ci , ( b ) continue in the same family but make incremental technological improvements by employing a better mass production technique , c4 , j or ( c ) make a dis - continuous organizational switch and employ lean pro - duction technique , c 1 . Choices a and b reflect " as is " eval - uations ; only c involves a " could be " alternative . We capture the idea of inertia through the reorganizing costs incurred by switching from one capability to another , be it from mass into lean , or conventional pharmaceutics to biotechnology . We denote these large organizational costs of switching as Aiy . For example , the cost of switch - ing from cn ( mass production ) to cl ( lean production ) can be denoted as Aml . In practice , switching between capa - bilities will consume time , as Dierickx and Cool ( 1989 ) note . Our model assumes that there is an inverse mono - tonic relationshp between cost of switching and the time taken to switch . Hence , a switch that takes more time will be represented by a higher switching costs . Within an organizational capability , switching costs between modules are small , but not insignificant . At the same time , continuing within the same family enables the firm to capitalize on local learning effects . If the firm continues in cm or moves to a better mass technique ci , then it will subsequently learn by doing . However , switching from the ith to the jth technology may still incur technological costs . We define the local learning benefits in mass production as - 6 mm and technological switching costs 6ii . To summarize the magnitude of switching costs be - tween all combinations of capabilities and technologies , we denote the cost of switching from cm capability to c4 as : 6m1i iml = Tij Technological change + Qml Organizational learning where technological cost Ti - bij if i 0 j - 6ii if i = j technological learning organizational cost Oml if m = I Omm if m = 1 . organizational learning We can now write down the firm ' s objective . Each set of capabilities cm has an accompanying profit function which is obtained by solving the usual profit - maximiza - tion problem : H ( O , c ' ) = max O . y YECM where 0 is a vector of quality - adjusted input and output prices and y is the vector of input and output levels that are determined by the capability set . This simple expres - sion indicates that the firm ' s ability to choose the best strategy is contingent on its organizational resources . Dynamic Valuation of the Critical Capability Set When future values of 0 evolve stochastically , the current decision influences all future decisions as well . The de - cision by a mass producer of cars to invest in flexible manufacturing using lean production runs the risk that the American market suddenly decides to buy large recrea - tional vehicles made best by standard mass production techniques . But now they face the problem that they are invested in lean manufacturing and cannot easily switch back . The tight coupling of organization and technology is essential to understanding why capabilities radically change the understanding of strategy as not only the choice of entering markets , but also as the selection of competence . The way to fully analyze the implications of inertia is to write out explicitly the problem over time . To do this , we no longer work directly with profit functions , but in - stead with a value function . While technically this prob - lem is often hard to solve , its formulation is both intuitive and insightful . At a point in time t , this formulation treats the present value of all future benefits given optimal fu - ture behavior , as represented by the value function ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / Vol . 12 , No . 6 , November - December 2001 753 BRUCE KOGUT AND NALIN KULATILAKA Capabilities as Real Options V ( Ot , cl ) . The value function is the solution of the well - known Bellman equation : V ( Ot , Cl ) = max r ( H ( Ot , ci ) - 6alJ ) + pEt [ V ( Qt + , , c1 ' ) I , where cl is the current capability cA chosen from the set of feasible technologies and organizations at time t + 1 . This formulation is Winter ' s optimal control suggestion which includes organizational knowledge , or capabilities , as a state variable . The Bellman equation has an intuitively appealing for - mulation , for it directly evaluates the exploitation of the choice of current capabilities ( the first term in brackets ) with the value of persisting or switching in the future ( the second term ) . This equation indicates that in each period the producer contemplates switching into a new capabil - ity . If it chooses capability c4 , it realizes benefits of HI ( Ot , c4 ) , but pays switching costs of 6 ml , and then arrives at the following period with value function V ( Ot + 1 , cJ ) . This value depends on the capability chosen , ci , as well as on the value of the state variable next period , Ot + 1 . Because Ot + ? was still unknown at time t , we take ex - pectations ; we also discount at rate p . ( See Pindyck 1991 and Kulatilaka and Marcus 1994 for a more explicit treat - ment of systematic risk . ) In each period the producer chooses the capability cl , that maximizes the value of the project . This choice can be interpreted as defining the dynamic capability as c * * = argmax L ( H ( Ot , cl ) - 65ij ) + pEt [ V ( Ot + 1 , cl ) ] . c4 In the absence of switching costs , the solution to this optimization problem is simple : Choose in each period the capability cl that maximizes Hl ( Ot , cl ) in that period . This is the static critical capability discussed earlier . However , the presence of switching costs makes a forward - looking analysis necessary . In the case of costly reorganization , the probability distribution of future prices affects the current choice of technology and or - ganization . This definition of a dynamic capability defines our re - interpretation of a " core competence . " Core competence is the capability set ( i . e . , combination of organization and technology elements ) that permits the firm to dynamically choose the optimal strategy for a given price realization of the strategic factor . Hysteresis and Inertia With the above concepts , we can now analyze more fully the hysteresis band first given in Figure 1 . Hysteresis is Figure 2 Static and Dynamic Hysteresis Profits 0 . 80 - . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Dynamic Hysteresis Band - - - r " capability . 0 . 70 0 . 60 06 ' capability 2 - 0 . 50 , r . capability 2 given I ' 0 . 40 - 0 . 30 . 0 . 20 - ' - + " capability 1 given 2 " Breaceven point : 0 . 10 iBreaceven point . " swtch from 2 to 1n 0 . 00 - " witcllfrom I to2 " 0 . 00 0 . 20 0 . 40 0 . 60 0 . 80 1 . 00 Quality Adjusted Price ( 0 ) a critical concept because it shows that inertia need not be the consequence of myopia but is itself sensitive to environmental turbulence and to a firm ' s competence . A more competent firm is , ironically , more subject to iner - tia . The band between the switching costs is underesti - mated by comparing single - period breakeven profits , net of switching costs , under the two capabilities . Because of the possibility that 0 may revert back to previous values ( e . g . , because of a sudden drop in oil prices favoring gas - guzzling cars ) , the firm persists in its current mode and waits to see how prices evolve in the future . At some point , however , 0 takes on values that justify not only the one - time switching costs but also the probability - weighted costs attached to switching back . If a firm is unable to choose the optimal response , these conditions lead to a competency trap that is expressed by a hysteresis band . In Figure 2 , the profit functions for two capability sets and the resulting hysteresis band is graphed . Competency Traps and Learning to Learn Because of the benefits of learning by doing , simply ex - ploiting current capabilities leads to cumulative and in - cremental improvement . In effect , the profit function can be described as shifting outward over time . By staying in its current activities , the firm becomes increasingly more competent . Techniques of mass production are expressed in well - understood routines that couple technology and people through known organizing principles of work . The danger remains , of course , that 0 will suddenly jump to a range or cross a critical threshold in which the firm ' s competence is no longer profitable . In a sense , its accumulated learning in the old techniques is a " compe - tency trap . " ( See the discussion in March 1991 . ) Yet , as a consequence , by improving in mass production , it is less attractive to change organizational capabilities . Hence , a firm might rationally preserve its way of doing things 754 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / VOl . 12 , No . 6 , November - December 2001 BRUCE KOGUT AND NALIN KULATILAKA Capabilities as Real Options because it has become so good at doing the ( now ) wrong thing . Dougherty ( 1995 ) has labeled this " core incom - petence . " Exploitation of current knowledge drives learn - ing by doing ; the pitfall is that this learning increases the rigidity of the firm . To speed its transition to new techniques , the firm may decide proactively to allocate funding to exploration by experimenting with new techniques . This diversion of re - sources slows down its accumulation of learning with the current technology . At the same time , it increases the value of the option to switch to new capabilities by low - ering the costs of switching . To characterize this wider menu of choices , Figure 3 depicts the decision of a firm that has accumulated a particular breadth of knowledge in the current production techniques , as well as in learn - ing derived from experiments with new methods . ( We can think of these experiments as ' joint ventures , " such as the Nummi venture between General Motors and Toyota . ) The net effects of learning are ambiguous and depend upon the rate by which new knowledge is gained through learning by doing relative to experimentation . In Figure 4 , this comparison is graphed by showing the upward change in profit functions over time due to these two learning effects . By construction , we show the gains to experimentation dominating learning by doing . Thus , while it is a truism that firms need to balance exploitation and exploration , the possibility for local learning may drive out distant search ( Levinthal and March 1993 ) . There is a more important insight provided by the in - vestments in exploration , namely , that the literature on innovation overemphasizes the difficulty posed by dis - continuous change . In more contemporary parlance , the prospects of successful radical change are viewed as poor because the chance of jumping from one performance peak to a distant peak is considered improbable . But ex - ploratory investments permit the building of ridges be - tween peaks . By exploring the current assets that can be Figure 3 Expanded Capability Sets Family i Family i + 1 Family i + 2 Time t - - - _ Producton Experimental knowledge leaming Continue in Family ; Time t + 1 Experimental Producton leaming knowledge Switch to Family i + 1 Production Experimental knowledge leaming Figure 4 Effects of Learning Profits " Lean Production Family " t + 2 5 . - . . ' - . - , 2 , - t . . Quality Adjusted ice ( 0 ) . " Mass Production amly : Crsitcal wsitching price increases . - . f . wsith increased learning recombined and coupled with new ones , a firm is able to reduce the risks of falsely choosing new capabilities . Through recombination , exploration reduces the organi - zational costs to successfully adopt radical change in its capabilities . Discussion : How Good a Heuristic ? Real option theory provides complex heuristics to apply , though there are reasonable ways to simplify the appli - cation ( Bowman and Moskowitz 1997 ) . Equally impor - tant is that the real options heuristic carries the danger of negative transfer to inappropriate situations . A particu - larly troubling complication for real options analysis is the explicit consideration of competitive interactions and positioning . Competitive interactions endogenize the dy - namics of the external market price . The valuation of a strategic option requires an identification of a market price by which to derive the replicate of the underlying asset . In financial markets , this price is easily given by stock or future prices . An important and reasonable as - sumption is that exercising the option does not influence the value of the replicating portfolio . This assumption does not always hold for real options for two reasons . First , by exercising an option to enter a market , a firm often influences prices through increasing supply . Second , by entering ( or exiting ) a market , com - petitors will alter their behavior . As a result , the market price is endogenous to the decision whether to exercise the option . This problem is partly resolved by recognizing that the value of theta reflects the assessment on entry . But this assumption hardly provides insight into the identity of possible entrants and their strategic behavior . A structural approach is explicit regarding the nature of future com - petition . Kulatilaka and Perotti ( 1998 ) follow this ap - proach by evaluating the decision to launch a new tech - nology in the context of different conjectures about market structure . This solution marries the industry struc - ture analysis to core competence , but through the stipu - lation that the analysis is forwardlooking rather than fo - cused on current market structure . ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / Vol . 12 , No . 6 , November - December 2001 755 BRUCE KOGUT AND NALIN KULATILAKA Capabilities as Real Options Conclusions Real option analysis provides the theoretical foundations to the use of heuristics for deriving capabilities . Through conditioning an understanding of competence in relation to a market test ( e . g . , Barney ' s notion of a strategic factor market ) , it identifies the coupling of organization and technology as the leading explanation for the iffeversi - bility of investments in capabilities . In a naffow sense , it faults discounted cash flow analysis as the principal tool of understanding the value of a firm . But more pro - foundly , the recognition that the coupling of people and technology is a source of option value challenges sim - plistic notions of firms as " pure asset plays . " In this re - spect , it strengthens the argument that a firm ' s most en - during advantage lies in its human resources ( Pfeffer 1994 ) . Ironically , then , the derivation of the option value from the embedded knowledge in organizational assets deflects a purely financial evaluation of the firm . Because orga - nizations consist of coupled systems , the value of the firm is not reflected in the present value of its constituent parts , but in the combinative potential of deploying these ca - pabilities for innovation in existing markets or for ad - dressing new markets . It suggests that firms are dynamic systems consisting of the complex coupling of technology and people through organizational design . The paradox - ical conclusion to the sustained application of financial modeling to firms is that , in the end , the fundamental basis of the value of the firm is its organizational capa - bility to exploit current assets and explore future oppor - tunities . The recent efforts in organizational theory to embrace complex systems analysis underscores the importance of understanding distance in capabilities in conjunction with the volatility of the environment . An appropriate heuristic arising out of complex systems is to understand landscape contours as representing market expectations of the value of discrete organizational capabilities . An options ap - proach indicates that firms construct exploratory ridges between peaks to hedge against adverse changes in the landscape . But to understand the direction of exploration , it is necessary not only to know distances and locations of peaks , but also to know their heights . It is logical that the positive theory of organizational inertia should imply that the most valuable heuristic is one that identifies the best options attached to the direction and timing of or - ganizational changes . Acknowledgment The authors would like to thank Ned Bowman , Carliss Baldwin , Howard Kunreuther , and Arie Lewin for many helpful discussions , the anonymous referees for their comments , and the managers of Lucent for a reality check on some ideas . Endnotes ' See Minsky ( 1985 , pp . 243 - 253 ) for an example . 2Georgescu - Roegen ( 1971 , p . 196 ) provides an explicit and early dis - cussion of irreversibility , hysteresis ( as discussed later ) , and the arrow of time . The arrow of time and evolution are central themes in Prigogine and Stengers ( 1984 ) . A volume of essays on irreversibility ( with little closure on definition ) is edited by Boyer et al . ( 1991 ) . 3For a discussion , see Kogut and Zander ( 1992 ) on knowledge and combinative capabilities as options , and Zander and Kogut ( 1995 ) and Szulanski ( 1995 ) for empirical studies that measure inimitable as tac - itness . 4Winter ( 1987 ) suggests net present value as a measure which is ap - propriate for the case without uncertainty . Most surveys on the use of capital budgeting techniques show that almost all large corporate firms use net present value calculations for investment decisions . See Kogut and Kulatilaka ( 1992 ) and Baldwin and Clark ( 1992 , 1994 ) for a dis - cussion of why investment in capabilities is not a net present value of cash flows , but a real option valuati . 5Howard Kunreuther points out to us that a strategy of minimizing death results in suboptimal behavior , as shown in an extant literature in the decision sciences . Still , there is a technical correspondence be - tween evaluating the value of the firm at either boundary . As Black and Scholes ( 1973 ) noted early in the development of option pricing , the boundary defined by bankruptcy can be used to value the stock . Note also Tuma and Hannan ' s ( 1984 ) acknowledgement of the nonlin - ear and stochastic process that governs firm growth in their Chapters 12 and 15 discussion of stochastic calculus . 6This point is implicit in the lattice formulation of Milgrom and Roberts ( 1990 ) , where a firm ' s choice is constrained by technical complemen - tarities . See Levinthal ( 1997 ) for complementarities as a combinatorial problem in organizational space . 7We thank Arie Lewin for encouraging the development of the ideas below . References Amram , Martha , Nalin Kulatilaka . 1999 . Real Options : Managing Strategic Investments in an Uncertain World . Harvard Business School Press , Harvard , Cambridge , MA . Argyris , Chris , Donald Schoen . 1978 . Organizational Learning . Addison - Wesley , Reading , MA . Baldwin , Carliss , Kim Clark . 1992 . Capabilities and capital investment : New perspectives on capital budgeting . J . Applied Corporate Fi - nance 5 67 - 82 . . Capital budgeting systems and capabilities investments in U . S . companies after World War II . Bus . History Rev . 68 ( 1 ) 73 - 109 . . 2001 . Design Rules : The Power of Modularity . MIT Press , Forthcoming . Barney , Jay . 1986 . Strategic factor markets : Expectations , luck , and business strategy . Management Sci . 32 ( 10 ) 1231 - 1241 . Black , F . , M . Scholes . 1973 . The pricing of options and corporate li - abilities . J . Political Economy 81 637 - 659 . Bowman , Edward . 1963 . Consistency and optimality in managerial de - cision making . Management Sci . 9 310 - 321 . . 1995 . Strategy history : Through different mirrors . Adv . in Stra - tegic Management 11 25 - 45 . 756 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / Vol . 12 , No . 6 , November - December 2001 BRUCE KOGUT AND NALIN KULATILAKA Capabilities as Real Options , D . Hurry . 1993 . Strategy through the option lens : An integrated view of resource investments and the incremental choice process . Acad . Management Rev . 18 ( 4 ) 760 - 782 . , Gary Moskowitz . 1997 . The use of options analysis in strategic decision making . Working Paper , Reginald H . Jones Center , Wharton School , University of Pennsylvania . Boyer , Robert , Bernard Chavance , Olivier Godard , eds . 1991 . Les Fig - ures de l ' irreversibilite en Economie . Paris : EHESS . Brown , Shona , Kathleen Eisenhardt . 1998 . Competing on the Edge : Strategies as Structured Chaos . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA . Cohen , Michael . 1999 . Commentary on the Organization Science spe - cial issue on complexity . Organ . Sci . 10 373 - 376 . , Paul Bacdayan . 1994 . Organizational routines are stored as pro - cedural memory : Evidence from laboratory study . Organ . Sci . 5 554 - 568 . Dierickx , Ingemar , Karel Cool . 1989 . Asset stock accumulation and the sustainability of competitive advantage . Management Sci . 35 1504 - 1511 . Dixit , Avinash , Robert Pindyck . 1994 . Investment Under Uncertainty . Princeton University Press , Princeton , NJ . Dosi , Giovanni , Bruce Kogut . 1993 . National specificities and the con - text of change : The coevolution of organization and technology . B . Kogut , ed . Country Competitiveness : Technology and the Or - ganizing of Work . Oxford University Press , New York . Dougherty , Deborah . 1995 . Managing your core incompetencies for innovation . Entrepreneurship , Theory , Practice 19 113 - 135 . Georgescu - Roegen , Nicholas . 1971 . The Entropy Laws and Economic Progress . Harvard University , Cambridge , MA . Hamel , Gary , C . K . Prahalad . 1994 . Competing for the Future : Break - through Strategies . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA . Hannan , Michael , John Freeman . 1977 . The population ecology of or - ganizations . Amer . J . Soc . 82 929 - 964 . 1984 . Structural inertia and organizational change . Amer . Soc . Rev . 49 149 - 164 . Hedlund , Gunnar , Dag Rolander . 1990 . Action in hierarchies : New approaches to managing the MNC . Christopher A . Bartlett , Yves Doz , Gunnar Hedlund , eds . Managing the Global Firm . Rout - ledge , London and New York . Henderson , Rebecca . 1993 . Underinvestment and incompetence as re - sponses to radical innovation : Evidence from the photolitho - graphic alignment equipment industry . Rand J . 24 248 - 270 . , Kim Clark . 1990 . Architectural innovation : The reconfiguration of existing product technologies and the failure of established firms . Admin . Sci . Quart . 35 9 - 30 . Hull , John C . 1997 . Options , Futures , and Other Derivatives , 3rd Edi - tion . Prentice - Hall , Englewood Cliffs , New Jersey . Kauffman , Stuart . 1993 . The Origins of Order : Self Organization and Selection in Evolution . Oxford University Press , New York . Kim , Dong Jae , Bruce Kogut . 1996 . Technological platforms and di - versification . Organ . Sci . 7 283 - 301 . Kogut , Bruce , Nalin Kulatilaka . 1992 . What is a critical capability ? Working paper , Reginald H . Jones Center , Wharton School , Uni - versity of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA . 1994a . Options thinking and platform investments : In - vesting in opportunity . California Management Rev . 36 52 - 71 . 1994b . Operating flexibility , global manufacturing , and the option value of multinationality . Management Sci . 40 123 - 139 . Kulatilaka , Nalin , Alan J . Marcus . 1994 . Hedging foreign project risk . J . Internat . Financial Management Accounting 5 ( 2 ) 142 - 156 . Enrico Perotti . 1998 . Strategic growth options . Management Sci . 1021 - 1031 . Kunreuther , Howard . 1969 . Extensions of Bowman ' s theory on man - agerial decision - making . Management Sci . 16 B415 - B439 . Levinthal , Daniel . 1997 . Adaptation on rugged landscapes . Manage - ment Sci . 43 934 - 950 . , James March . 1993 . The myopia of learning . Strategic Manage - ment J . 14 95 - 112 . Lewin , Arie , T . Carroll , C . Long . 1998 . The co - evolution of new or - ganizational forms . Organ . Sci . 10 535 - 550 . , Henk Volderba . 1999 . Prolegomena on co - evolution : A frame - work for on research on strategy and new organizational forms . Organ . Sci . 10 519 - 534 . Lincoln , James . 1993 . Comparison of Japanese and US organizational structures . B . Kogut , ed . Country Competitiveness : Technology and the Organizing of Work . Oxford University Press , New York . MacDuffie , John Paul . 1996 . Human resource bundles and manufac - turing performance : Flexible production systems in the world auto industry . Indust . Labor Relations Rev . 97 - 221 . Mansfield , Edward . 1988 . Speed and cost of industrial innovation in Japan and United States . Management Sci . 34 1157 - 1168 . March , James . 1991 . Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning . Organ . Sci . 2 71 - 87 . , Herbert Simon . 1958 . Organizations . Wiley , New York . McDonald , Robert , Daniel Siegel . 1984 . Option pricing when the un - derlying asset earns a below - equilibrium rate of return : A note . J . Finance . 39 261 - 265 . McKelvey , Bill . 1999 . Avoiding complexity catastrophe in coevolu - tionary pockets : Strategies for rugged landscapes . Organ . Sci . 10 294 - 321 . Merton , Robert C . 1976 . Option pricing when underlying stock returns are discontinuous . J . Financial Econom . 3 125 - 144 . Midler , Christopher . 1993 . L ' auto qui n ' existe pas . Management des projets et transformation de 1 ' enterprise . InterEditions , Paris , France . Milgrom , Paul , John Roberts . 1990 . The economics of modem manu - facturing : Technology , strategy , and organization . Amer . Econom . Rev . 80 511 - 528 . Minsky , Marvin . 1985 . The Society of Mind . Simon and Schuster , New York . Nelson , Richard R . , Sidney G . Winter . 1982 . An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA . Pfeffer , Jeffrey . 1994 . Competitive Advantage through People . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA . Gerald Salancik . 1978 . The External Control of Organizations : A Resource Dependence Perspective . Harper and Row , New York . Pindyck , Robert S . 1991 . Irreversibility , uncertainty , and investment . J . Econom . Literature . 29 ( 3 ) 1110 - 1148 . Prigogine , Ilya , Isabelle Stengers . 1984 . Order Out of Chaos . Man ' s New Dialogue with Nature . Bantam Book , New York . ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / Vol . 12 , No . 6 , November - December 2001 757 BRUCE KOGUT AND NALIN KULATILAKA Capabilities as Real Options Scherer , F . M . 1967 . Research and development resource allocation under rivalry . Quart . J . Econom . 81 359 - 394 . Scott , W . Richard . 1995 . Institutions and Organizations . Sage , Thou - sand Oaks , CA . Selznick , Philip . 1957 . Leadership in Administration , A Sociological Interpretation . Row , Peterson , Evanston , IL . Simon , Herbert . 1969 . The Sciences of the Artificial . MIT Press , Cam - bridge , MA . Szulanski , Gabriel . 1995 . Unpacking stickiness : An empirical investi - gation of the barriers to transfer best practice inside the firm . Acad . Management Best Paper Proceedings 437 - 441 . Teece , David , Gary Pisano , Amy Shuen . 1997 . Dynamic capabilities and strategic management . Strategic Management J . 18 509 - 534 . Thompson , James D . 1967 . Organizations in Action : Social Science Bases of Administrative Theory . McGraw Hill , New York . Accepted by Arie Lewin . Tuma , Nancy Brandon , Michael T . Hannan . 1984 . Social Dynamics : Models and Methods . Academic Press , New York . Tushman , Michael , Philip Anderson . 1986 . Technological discontinu - ities and organizational environments . Admin . Sci . Quart . 31439 - 465 . , Charles O ' Reilly . 1997 . Winning Through Innovation : A Prac - tical Guide to Leading Organizational Change and Renewal . Har - vard Business School Press , Boston , MA . Winter , Sidney . 1987 . Knowledge and competence as strategic assets . D . Teece , ed . The Competitive Challenge - Strategies for Indus - trial Innovation and Renewal . Ballinger , Cambridge , MA . 159 - 184 . Zander , Udo , Bruce Kogut . 1995 . Knowledge and the speed of the transfer and imitation of organizational capabilities : An empirical test . Organ . Sci . 6 76 - 92 . 758 ORGANIZATION SCIENCE / Vol . 12 , No . 6 , November - December 2001