Community Engagement Buﬀalo & Erie County Public Library , in coordination with Catholic Health’s Women Care division , convened 44 community organizations in a Women’s Health Fair . The fair was held at the Central Library location in March 2015 and more than 300 community members attended . Everyone was welcome to learn about local health and wellness resources , and participate in interactive activities such as free bone density screening , a keynote address on healthy relationships , and Tai Chi and Zumba demonstrations , among others . Organizing the Event The Buﬀalo & Erie County Public Library system includes 37 libraries throughout Erie County . The Central Library is close to a growing medical corridor in downtown Buﬀalo , along with other community resources common in an urban core . In her role as an Information / Outreach Specialist , Renee Masters has experience partnering with local nonproﬁt organizations to raise awareness about community health issues . While collaborating with Catholic Health for the Women’s Health Fair , Renee did so with the intent to make her process and learning something that could be shared and customized for other branches in the system . The Central Library has built on the relationships and procedures established during the Women’s Health Fair to support similar events at local branch libraries , with a focus on tailoring those events to unique branch communities . With Renee’s support , the East Delavan branch manager coordinated a health fair in June 2015 , with 12 exhibitors focused on family health . The foundation has been built for similar engagements at additional branches . Factors that Contributed to Success Embracing an expanded deﬁnition of health : Referencing local health assessments and data , the library embraced an internal understanding that health needs and barriers go beyond diseases , conditions and healthcare providers , and instead involve the full social safety net of the community . Focusing the ﬁrst health fair on women’s health issues aligned nicely with established needs , as well as the library’s March theme , Women’s History . Evoking programmatic expertise : Public libraries have been running successful community events for decades . Whether it’s a preschool storytime , a technology training , or a community health fair , the same basic principles for planning , prioritizing and seeking ongoing public and partner input can make an event a success . If you haven’t had the chance to plan an event for your library , ask for guidance from somebody else on staﬀ , or seek that expertise in a partner . Buﬀalo & Erie County Public Library Women’s Health Fair Buﬀalo , New York / Community Size Served : 919 , 040 Primary Partner : Catholic Health , a nonproﬁt healthcare system Top 3 Tips Renee shared the following tips for libraries interested in planning their own community health activities : Share learning proactively : Renee created an engaging presentation of her process , challenges and learning from putting on the Women’s Health Fair , and shared this at a system - wide Branch Manager’s meeting shortly after the event . This opened systemic conversations about existing programming capacity and needs in unique library branches , and helped raise awareness about resources available within the library system to support health programming . Focus your energy : Community health can be an overwhelming topic . It’s okay to focus your health outreach or programming eﬀorts on an area you know will be useful to your community rather than trying to tackle multiple health priorities at once . Connecting with local agencies and experts engaged in building community health awareness can help you identify an initial topic to emphasize ( such as healthy eating or health insurance outreach ) . Then , you can discover other opportunities to grow your outreach based on your partner or participant input . Customize communications : Cultural competence and plain language are essential in promoting and conducting community health events , particularly to members of the community who may not traditionally access public services . Be mindful not to adopt a “one - size - ﬁts - all” approach to planning or marketing your events . Rather , be sure to use words that will help people feel that the service you are oﬀering is oﬀered in a safe space and is relevant to their needs . Remember that not everyone has access to a computer at home , and use multiple media for outreach . Engage trusted commun - ity gatekeepers to help spread the word , e . g . , community - speciﬁc blogs or newspapers . Looking Forward In addition to creating an adaptable approach to health programming for the library system , the Central Library has been approached by the Erie County Health Depart - ment to assist them in promoting their Community Health Assessment survey . The library will do so through providing a link to the survey from the library’s online health subject guides , and by providing space to the health department to engage with the public , furthering the library’s strategic goal of providing information to create a vibrant , healthy , and informed community . Education is a ﬁrst line of prevention when it comes to health and wellness . Thinking about the size or scope of your community engagement before seeking partners will help you ﬁnd the right people in the right organizations . Don’t be afraid to ask more than once—community organizations are eager to collaborate , once they know how dynamic the library truly is . You can be the one to show them . – Renee Masters , Information / Outreach Specialist , Buﬀalo & Erie County Public Library Buﬀalo & Erie County Public Library This project is made possible by the Institute of Museum and Library Services , grant award number RE - 00 - 13 - 0090 - 13 . FIND FREE RESOURCES AND SHARE YOUR STORY AT http : / / oc . lc / ehealth “ ”