Designing collaborative musical experiences for broad audiences Ben Bengler Interactional Sound and Music Centre for Digital Music School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science Queen Mary University of London Mile End Road , London E1 4NS , UK benedikt . bengler @ eecs . qmul . ac . uk Nick Bryan - Kinns Interactional Sound and Music Centre for Digital Music School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science Queen Mary University of London Mile End Road , London E1 4NS , UK nickbk @ eecs . qmul . ac . uk ABSTRACT This paper reports on the design and audience evaluation of a collaborative interactive music system titled Polymet - ros . Designed for broad audiences , Polymetros aims to en - able users without musical skills to experience collaborative music - making . First , we describe our design approach with reference to related research . A particular interest was to in - vestigate how to provide novices with individual musical con - trol within a collaborative context . We then present an audi - ence evaluation that was conducted during an exhibition at a major art museum in the UK attended by large numbers of the general public across the age range . The results lead us to evaluate our design approach and reﬂect on implications for facilitating collaborative music - making for broad audiences . Furthermore , the ﬁndings provide interesting indications how the context of a public exhibition setting affects the audience interaction with such an interactive multi - player experience . Author Keywords Collaboration , interactive music systems , interaction design , multi - user interfaces , public creativity , audience experience , ﬁeld study ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 5 . 3 . Group and Organization Interfaces : Evalua - tion / methodology ; H . 5 . 5 . Sound and Music Computing : Sys - tems General Terms Human Factors ; Design INTRODUCTION This paper discusses results from an ongoing research project that investigates how to transfer the traditionally exclusive ex - perience of musical collaboration to a much broader audience Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . C & C’13 , June 17 - 20 2013 , Sydney , NSW , Australia Copyright 2013 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 2150 - 1 / 13 / 06 . . . $ 15 . 00 . using interactive technology . In contrast to Western art mu - sic , where collaboration mainly aims for a particular musical result according to ‘high art’ aesthetic criteria , we are inter - ested in the creative process of making music as an end in itself . By considering music - making as an enjoyable group activity rather than an expert profession the idea of collab - orative musical experiences refers to enabling people with - out particular musical training to experience being part of a creative , collaborative musical process . Common attributes characterising similar approaches in the existing literature in - clude ‘open - ended’ [ 1 ] [ 5 ] , ‘social’ [ 2 ] [ 20 ] and ‘democratic’ [ 17 ] [ 22 ] . As part of this project , we developed the interac - tive music system Polymetros which is designed as an audi - ence experience for exhibitions , festivals or public workshops while serving as a ﬂexible research tool to investigate and evaluate our strategies under such real - word conditions . Since such contexts are generally intended to reach out to a wide public , our target audience is characterised by a broad range of skills , experience , and age . However , particularly with regard to musical abilities , it has to be considered that large parts of the audience in a public context cannot be as - sumed to have honed musical skills gained through formal musical training such as learning a musical instrument . In the following paper we refer to this group as musical novices . Therefore , a particular interest was to investigate how to pro - vide novices with opportunities to experience and maintain control over their musical activities and how these contribute to the collaboratively created music . This approach was based on our research claim , informed by relevant literature , that feeling part of a collaborative musical process is closely re - lated to the sense of control each participant has over their particular contribution . Moreover , we consider individual control as an essential pre - condition for active musical col - laboration and therefore as an essential design goal for inter - active systems aiming at facilitating such experiences . The paper will ﬁrst outline how our general approach and the particular design of the Polymetros system was informed by related research and then present the results of an audience evaluation conducted at a public exhibition event . 234 CONTEXT AND RELATED WORK Reﬂecting on what constitutes the satisfaction of making mu - sic , Atau Tanaka argues that the musicians’ satisfaction is di - rectly related to the sense of how their actions manifest in the resulting music . This includes the direct feedback of the in - strument as well as “the identiﬁability a musician maintains in feeling the contribution his part is making in an ensem - ble” [ 17 ] . In accordance to the general idea of the ‘sense of agency’ which refers to the sense of control over one’s own actions [ 7 ] , Tanaka calls these notations ‘sense of mu - sical agency’ [ 17 ] . Considering this concept with regard to a scenario involving musical novices clearly illustrates the challenge we face when designing interactive technology that aims at transferring such an experience to a broad audience : Unlike an ensemble consisting of musicians who spent years of training in order to control and shape their instrument’s feedback into a distinctive voice within the ensemble con - text , collaborative musical experiences can not rely on skills and practices that need to be developed over a long period of time . Therefore , interactive technology steps in to bridge these technical demands by facilitating possibilities for musi - cal control and interaction that are achievable for everyone . A common strategy is the use of pre - produced musical mate - rial : Instead of enabling the creation of musical content , the system provides high - level control possibilities that allow the participants to inﬂuence its musical output . Multi - person ap - plications that have explored such an approach include Rob - son’s Sound Toys [ 15 ] , the Jam - O - Drum system [ 3 ] or MIT Media Lab’s Musical Navigatrics [ 13 ] . Even though these systems differ signiﬁcantly in terms of appearance and used sensor technology , they share the same basic principle : Each participant’s interaction is mapped to a high - level parameter such as volume or timbre allowing them to modify a partic - ular element of a pre - composed sound set . A common cri - tique of such an approach is that the user’s possibilities to have an impact on the musical outcome are often strongly re - stricted in favour of an intended , predetermined output . Sergi Jord ` a argues that by “seeking to guarantee a complex or pre - deﬁned musical output , many of these [ sound interactives ] do not give to their interactors more than a couple of bits to play with” [ 10 ] . Also Weinberg criticises the deﬁciency of many novice systems for not allowing their players to “truly contribute meaningfully and creatively to the composition , but rather they are only allowed to manipulate and control pre - composed material” [ 19 ] . Moreover , it is questionable whether such restricted possibilities of inﬂuence are sufﬁcient to convey a ‘sense of musical agency’ and the experience of actually making music . In accordance with his critique , Jord ` a directed the devel - opment of the collaborative interactive tabletop system Re - actable [ 11 ] , which has became quite well - known over recent years . The design goals were to create a “state - of - the - art in - teractive music instrument” that allows its players total con - trol without being based on pre - produced material or presets . It should be suitable for skilled electronic musicians in con - certs as well as for complete novices in installations without instructions [ 11 ] . The Reactable relies on the metaphor of a modular synthesiser whereas the different available mod - ules are represented by tangible objects . These include audio generators like oscillators or sample players , control modules like LFOs ( Low frequency oscillator ) and sequencer objects as well as audio effects such as ﬁlters or delays . The modules can be dynamically patched together on the tabletop surface while their particular properties , mutual dependencies and the overall data ﬂow are visualised via rear projection . In this way , several people can collaboratively build up a modular interactive musical environment for real time sound synthe - sis . Being a highly versatile and powerful environment for experts , we consider it as less appropriate for music making among novices . Even if suitable to allow a novice to exper - imentally explore electronic sound synthesis , a collaborative creation undertaken by several players simultaneously seems to require a profound understanding of the underlying prin - ciples and various interdependencies among the available ob - jects . Unlike Reactable , Weinberg’s collaborative music systems are explicitly designed for novices . Avoiding the use of pre - recorded audio , the musical output of the Beatbug Network [ 20 ] is entirely based on material created by the users dur - ing their playing experience . Each player is provided with their own bug - shaped , hand - held interface allowing them to enter a short rhythmic pattern which is then sent to an other player’s bug chosen at random . The receiving player can de - cide whether to transform it by applying audio effects via the bug’s bend - sensor antennae and pass the modiﬁed version on or keep the received pattern playing as is and contribute their own pattern . In a turn - based manner , all group members are able to contribute their own phrase while maintaining the transformations they like . Similar to Weinberg’s Squeezables [ 21 ] , the Beatbug Network is also based on the concept of in - terconnected musical networks ( IMNs ) that allow players “to inﬂuence , share , and shape each others’ music in real - time” [ 20 ] . Due to the complexity of the interactions , both systems were mainly suited for structured performances that follow a pre - composed score being rehearsed in a series of guided workshops rather than open - ended audience experiences in a public context [ 19 ] . But Weinberg’s network - based approach reveals an interesting perspective on the relevance of a per - sonal contribution in such environments : Informed by his de - sign experiences , Weinberg recommends restricting the level of interdependency in order to avoid “uncertainty about the individual control of each player” [ 21 ] . Therefore , a player should not be able to modify a peer’s phrase beyond recog - nition , as its creator might experience a loss of control and inﬂuence on the overall musical result . This can make the players “feel disconnected from the music they created , as their detailed idiosyncratic contribution might be eliminated” [ 19 ] . These claims closely correspond to Tanaka’s concept of musical agency and highlights the importance of provid - ing players with opportunities to create and maintain clearly identiﬁable contributions within a collaborative musical con - text . POLYMETROS We now come to a description of Polymetros , which is an in - teractive , table - based music system designed as an audience experience for 3 - 4 participants . Every player is provided 235 with their own physical user interface allowing for an indi - vidual musical contribution within this collaborative context ( Figure 1 ) . Figure 1 . Polymetros Design strategy In light of ﬁndings from our literature review as discussed in the above section , we aimed to ﬁnd a design approach that is neither based on pre - produced musical material nor on concepts or metaphors originating from a technical back - ground . Therefore we considered an interaction concept re - lying on basic musical properties such as note , pitch and time . While the use of these commonly understood proper - ties seems promising , it poses the challenge of how to en - able novices to create their personal musical contribution on a basic musical level while also allowing for collaboration in such a way that manages the tension between ‘cacophonic chaos’ and an oversimplicity caused by highly restricted pos - sibilities . From assessing and reﬁning this strategy , the idea emerged to use Minimal Music as an inspirational basis for the system design . Referring to a musical style mainly associated with the Amer - ican composers Steve Reich , Phillip Glass , Terry Riley and La Monte Young [ 12 ] , Minimal Music is characterised by the use of short repetitive musical phrases that are gradual mod - iﬁed in length , time signature or melodic shape . This leads to procedural transformations of the resulting music that of - ten maintains a stable harmony while the main interest lies in the perceptible process itself [ 14 ] . As described by Phillip Glass , Minimal Music “no longer has a mediative function , referring to something outside itself , but it rather embodies itself without any mediation” [ 12 ] . This conception of music without an imposed higher sense being rather an end in itself closely relates to the idea of a musical experience as deﬁned earlier . The music qualities are often characterised as ‘hyp - notic’ , ‘trance - like’ causing a sense of timelessness . Beside that , Minimal Music implies a ‘democratic’ attitude towards players as well as musical material : There are no soloists or lead instruments as no sound has any greater importance than another [ 12 ] . As these qualities , the musical structure , and the underlying techniques of Minimal Music closely corresponded to our in - tended scenario , we decided to use speciﬁc properties of this musical ‘expert - domain’ to inform the design of an interac - tive system for a broad audience . In practical terms , we aimed to allow for every player to create and control a repetitive mu - sical phrase which would become their personal contribution to a constantly evolving , collaborative musical output . Be - sides editing the actual notes of the motif , they should be able to dynamically change tempo and time signature , add and re - move notes / rests or shifting their phrase by a metrical entity in relation to their co - players’ contributions . Inspired by min - imalist composing techniques , these interventions allow the users to continuously deduce new variations and modify their contributions in a way that results in distinct alterations in the overall musical output . However , it is important to note that this inspirational in - ﬂuence does not inevitably constrain the system’s output to Minimal Music in the traditional sense . The derived control strategies provide a wider , versatile range of possibilities in terms of pattern - based music , for example in the studies re - ported in this paper we observed participants using Polymet - ros to create music almost in the style of Dubstep . Figure 2 . A Polymetros instrument System description Polymetros is based on a software application written in MAX which controls a multi - user hardware interface combined with external audio equipment for sound synthesis and au - dio routing ( Figure 3 ) . The user interface is composed of 3 - 4 individual hardware devices which are connected to a cen - tral hub in a star - like topology . Each participant controls one device which features a grid of illuminated buttons . These devices are referred to as instruments ( Figure 2 ) . In order to implement the musical possibilities as described previously , every player can create and edit their musical phrase via a 8 by 8 button matrix where the x direction corresponds to time in beats and the y direction to pitch according to a chosen mu - sical scale . In this case study a natural minor scale was used . The phrase is continuously played back in a loop while the actual playing position is indicated by a horizontal bar ‘trav - elling’ over the grid . Via the button row on top of the melody grid the user can dynamically change the loop length by deﬁn - ing the active section on the grid . The function buttons on the 236 Figure 3 . Technical overview right allow the user to shift the active section , change tempo and octave register as well as mute the instrument’s output . All functions and states of the interface are indicated by visual feedback via tri - colour LEDs embedded in the buttons . In ad - dition , the instrument’s cable connection to the hub ﬂashes up every time a note is triggered on its grid . The sphere - shaped hub serves as the visual centre pulsating red with the beat as the metaphorical ‘heart’ of the system . In the reported study the sounds of the instruments were based on different mallet and pitched percussion instruments as these sound rea - sonably pleasing over a very wide pitch range . Polymetros is assembled on a round table with built - in loudspeakers that are hidden under the cloth stretched over the tabletop . These are mounted in such a way that each speaker is directed at one particular player serving as their personally assigned au - dio monitor . Using high - quality miniature speakers with a directional characteristic , an equal and well - deﬁned listening situation can be provided for all players . CASE STUDY Pilot Before the case study presented here , a pilot was conducted at an open studio event at the authors’ university as part of the Digital Shoreditch Festival 2012 . During this three - day exhi - bition the initial version of Polymetros was played by around 300 people while being video recorded and attended by one of the authors over the entire course of the event . The ﬁnd - ings signiﬁcantly informed the practice and methodological approach of how to conduct an ‘in - the - wild’ study of such a system within the context of a public exhibition . Beside that , they led to several improvements of the initial prototype in - cluding system reliability and user interface design as well as the implementation of often requested features such as indi - vidual tempo control . Context and setup The user study was conducted during the exhibition of Poly - metros at the Digital Design Weekend 2012 which took place on September 22nd and 23rd at the Victoria and Albert Mu - seum ( V & A ) in London , UK . Being part of the London De - sign Festival , this annual event is dedicated to contemporary digital art and design , including interactive installations , per - formances , demonstrations and workshops . Incorporating an open studio - like atmosphere , most of the exhibiting artists attended the event in order to demonstrate and discuss their work with audiences . Polymetros was installed in a slightly darkened studio space alongside several other interactive and static artworks that required dimmed lighting . The system was positioned near a corner of the room sufﬁciently far from the walls to be approachable from all sides . Even though Polymetros was the only exhibit that incorporated sound within this area , the overall noise level was rather high due to the event’s open studio character . On request of the curator the originally in - tended output volume had to be lowered to ensure that the sound is not audible in adjacent areas . Two video cameras were installed to record the user interaction from two differ - ent angles . For conducting the case study we were aided by two assis - tants . This allowed the onsite researcher to mainly focus on contextual observation while the collaborators conducted and coordinated the other study - related tasks . These involved controlling the data logging system as described in the fol - lowing section , handing out the questionnaires and providing some initial guidance on the interface functionality . Due to the open studio character of the event , the research team was also available to answer speciﬁc questions and discuss the ex - hibit with interested audience members . Methods and Data collection Informed by the pilot study , we applied a mixed - methods ap - proach using questionnaires , interaction logs , ﬁeld observa - tions and video analysis taking into account the contextual demands and the complexity of the setting . Questionnaire The questionnaire was designed to capture how participants rate different aspects of their playing experience . It was handed out by a member of the research team who ap - proached visitors just after they ﬁnished playing with Poly - metros with the request to ﬁll in a questionnaire . Consider - ing the given context , the questionnaire was designed to be completed in a short amount of time ( 1 - 3min ) . Beside gath - ering demographic data such as age and gender , it consisted of nine statements the participants were asked to rate on a 5 point Likert - type scale ( not at all - slightly - moderately - fairly - very much ) . The questionnaire items are listed in Table 1 . While the ﬁrst two statements referred to the par - ticipants’ musical skills and their experience with interactive technology ( S1 , S2 ) , the other seven items related to the ac - tual playing experience ( E1 - E7 ) . During the two days of the exhibition the questionnaire was ﬁlled in by 150 participants ( 82 female and 68 male ) from ages 5 to 66 ( M = 24 . 3 , SD = 14 . 05 ) . Data logging For recording the user interaction with the interface a data logging application has been integrated into the Polymetros system . Via a remote control device the facilitator was able to activate and stop the data recording according to the time 237 S1 : I am a musical person . S2 : I am experienced using interactive devices . ( e . g . smart phone , tablet , video gaming ) E1 : I felt part of a creative process . E2 : I felt in control . E3 : I felt connected to the other players . E4 : It was challenging . E5 : I liked the music we created . E6 : My playing was inﬂuenced by the playing of the others . E7 : I would recommend playing Polymetros to my friends . Table 1 . Questionnaire statements . a user spent playing on a particular instrument . Each created log contained an ID code indicating the number and instru - ment used , the start and end time as well as all edits made with the interface . During the study the most recent two ID codes of each instrument were shown on a display clearly vis - ible for all members of the research team . This allowed the fa - cilitator handing out the questionnaires to mark collected sur - veys with the corresponding ID if a log ﬁle has been created for this particular user . In this way , 63 of the 150 completed questionnaires could be allocated to their corresponding set of interaction data . Field and video observations The observations were carried out by one of the authors for several hours on both days of the exhibition . They were mainly conducted from a standing desk located in the corner of the room which was also used to monitor the system func - tionality via a nearby computer display . Descriptive notes were taken referring to speciﬁc playing experiences of one or several audience members as well as events and activities of interest in the surrounding area . Beside participants’ actions , the records included related gestures and behaviours such as laughing or head - nodding as well as age , gender and the cor - responding ID code if available . Due to the close proximity to the users , we were able to note down verbal statements including spontaneous ‘outlouds’ of players , communication between audience members and comments made towards the research team . In order to complement the ﬁeld notes and examine speciﬁc aspects in greater detail 5 hours of the recorded video material were examined and annotated . In contrast to the ﬁeld obser - vations , studying the video recordings allowed us a more pre - cise observation of how participants used their instrument’s interface and what kind of musical contributions they cre - ated . It also enabled us to observe and review activities of interest that unfolded over a longer period of time such as a person’s transition from an observer to an active player ( cf . [ 16 ] ) or details that were difﬁcult to recognise on site due to the surrounding audience . Beside that , all relevant verbal data recorded by the camera - mounted microphone were tran - scribed . STUDY RESULTS slightly moderately fairly very much S1 : musicality not at all S2 : tech . experience Figure 4 . Self - rating of musicality and technical experience ( 150 partic - ipants ) The data of the questionnaire are shown in Figure 4 and Fig - ure 5 . Each survey item is represented as an individual box plot showing median ( bold , horizontal line within the box ) , ﬁrst and third quartile ( edges of the box ) , extreme values ( whiskers ) and outliners ( empty dots ) of the corresponding dataset . Beside that , the mean value is marked with a dia - mond symbol . 0 1 2 3 4 slightly moderately fairly very much E2 : control E1 : process E3 : connection E4 : challange E5 : music E6 : influence E7 : satisfaction not at all Figure 5 . Items related to playing experience ( 150 participants ) Experience questionnaire While the self - rating of the participants’ musical abilities is distributed over a wide range ( S1 ) , the majority of them con - sidered themselves as experienced users of interactive tech - nology ( S2 ) . Visual inspection of the experience - related items shows that most participants evaluated their playing ex - perience as very positive : Designed to rate their overall satis - faction in an indirect way , 102 of 150 respondents stated they would very much recommend playing to their friends ( E7 ) . In addition , the majority of participants indicated that they were pleased with musical result ( E5 ) and that they felt part of a creative process ( E1 ) . Beside that , we note a relatively high rank of the item ‘feeling connected to the other players’ ( E3 , median = fairly ) . The high rating of the item referring to the players’ feeling of control ( E2 ) suggests that the chosen design approach is 238 generally appropriate for broad audiences . For exploring po - tential associations between individual survey items we used the Goodman and Kruskal’s gamma coefﬁcient as a dedicated measure of associations between ordinal variables with rela - tively few categories . Due to our speciﬁc interest in how the feeling of being in control is related to other qualities of the experience we calculated gamma for several combinations . We found highly signiﬁcant associations between ‘feeling in control’ and ‘feeling part of a creative process’ ( gamma = 0 . 56 , p < 0 . 0001 ) , ‘feeling in control’ and ‘recommend play - ing to friends’ ( gamma = 0 . 50 , p < 0 . 0001 ) and ‘feeling in control’ and ‘feeling connected to other players’ ( gamma = 0 . 43 , p < 0 . 0001 ) . These ﬁndings indicate that experienc - ing control is related to other key qualities of the participants’ playing experience such as feeling part of a creative process or feeling satisﬁed with the overall interaction . With the term dwell time we refer to the period of time a par - ticipant was actively engaged with one of the instruments . Based on 294 interaction logs , the average dwell time was 3 . 3 minutes . We used the matched data set of questionnaire data with associated interaction logs as described previously to explore the relationship between the participants’ dwell time and their survey responses to the items ‘process’ ( E1 ) , ‘control’ ( E2 ) , ‘like’ ( E5 ) , ‘satisfaction’ ( E7 ) . Calculating the Spearman’s rank correlation coefﬁcient for these com - binations indicated no association between the dwell time and how the respondents rated such aspects in the experience questionnaire . This ﬁnding raised our interest in examining what factors were likely to be relevant for the participants’ dwell time in our speciﬁc scenario and we devoted particular attention to this issue during the video analysis . Observations Over the two day period of the exhibition , Polymetros demon - strated a strong appeal to the audience : While most of the time all three instruments were in use , the players were usu - ally accompanied by a number of spectators surrounding the system . This situation seemed to establish an area of inter - est attracting further passing visitors to take a closer look at Polymetros whereas the majority stayed to interact with it . A similar social dynamic relating to interactives in public areas was reported by Brignull and Rogers referred to as the ‘honey pot effect’ [ 4 ] . In this rather crowded setting people appeared to start learn - ing how to interact with the system by watching previous players : Several audience members were observed perform - ing well - directed actions immediately after they took over one of the instruments , showing a prior understanding of the interface . Only complementary features such as length or tempo selection were left to be indicated by the facilita - tor . In general , we found that most of the audience mem - bers understood the interaction concept when given a short guidance by the facilitator . However , due to the rush of peo - ple over long periods of the exhibition it was not possible to provide guidance to all newly arrived players . While many visitors were able to discover the relevant aspects of their in - strument on their own , a number of audience members could be observed having difﬁculties in understanding the interface . Figure 6 . Typical contributions These seemed to be caused by a lack of understanding of the loop - based concept of the user interface , as suggested by ob - servations of inappropriate input gestures in relation to the sequential playback of the instruments grid . A key experience for the participants appeared to be the mo - ment of ‘getting - it’ which could be observed when a hint given by the facilitator or a co - participant led to the under - standing of how their instrument works . Accompanied by the ﬁrst realisation of what is actually played by their instrument , many participants reacted to this understanding with a facial expression of excitement or spontaneous outlouds . This could be described as a particular kind of “Aha” moment ( cf . [ 6 ] ) , the “This is me ! ” experience . A prevalent input strategy was the creation of musical pat - terns characterised by simple geometric properties . The most common phrases consisted of horizontal and upward or downward diagonal lines whereas in most cases all available notes were used ( Figure 6 ) . Resulting in ‘closed musical ﬁg - ures’ , this approach was applied by many players providing a clear audio - visual correlation between the representation on the interface and the musical result . It appeared to us that this preference was related to the fact that for many people such ﬁgures were easier to identify in the overall musical outcome compared to more ‘sparse’ or complex patterns . Often such phrases were modiﬁed in an incremental manner by changing just a single event per playback cycle . This strategy suggests a systematic attempt to create distinct alterations that provide clear feedback afﬁrming of the user’s understanding of the interface . In several cases , the similar sound characteristics of the differ - ent instruments appeared to cause difﬁculties for the players in identifying their pattern in the overall musical output . The reason for choosing either mallet or pitched percussion - based sounds for all instruments was motivated by the fact that these are well qualiﬁed to be transposed over a very wide pitch range having a versatile sound characteristic : It ranges from drum - like sounds in low registers to bright , bell - like sounds in high registers . This design choice aimed to enable all play - ers to modify their phrase without restrictions over a wide 239 pitch range . But as a consequence , the instruments sounded quite similar when played in the same octave register . While this ﬁnding suggests that it may be better to use more diverse sounds where each is restricted to a certain pitch range , this would come at some cost , as it appeared that many players particularly enjoyed ‘moving’ their phrase over a wide oc - tave range in a dynamic manner resulting in an immediate and salient acoustic feedback . Despite the fact that the interaction with the Polymetros ap - peared to be attractive and very enjoyable for the exhibition audience , it has to be noted that collaborations involving ac - tive engagement between ‘instrumentalists’ could be rarely observed during the case study . By active engagement we re - fer to a situation where players coordinate their actions in a systematic way in order to develop the musical outcome over a certain period of time . However , we observed several at - tempts between players who commented on their actions or discussed their playing activities across the table . In all these cases the participants appeared to know each other being ei - ther friends , couples or family members . Nevertheless , in most instances audience members who knew each other collaborated by playing together on a single instru - ment , rather than on multiple instruments . They were more likely to explore Polymetros together by explaining the inter - face to their companion , co - editing a musical pattern or com - menting on each others’ actions . These observations correlate to the ﬁndings of von Lehn , Heath and Hindmarsh [ 18 ] show - ing that interactive exhibits are often examined by visitors in interaction with their companions . Such co - participation on a shared instrument appeared to be a highly collaborative ac - tivity in itself . But unlike in the pilot study , where several groups were ac - tively ‘performing’ together , such attempts involving all play - ers could not be observed during the case study . Reviewing the video material of the pilot showed that such actively co - ordinated collaborations mainly took place if audience mem - bers who were already acquainted approached the Polymet - ros system whilst it was not in use . In such cases it appears most likely that a group splits up to play on different instru - ments , explores the system together and develops strategies to coordinate their actions via verbal and non - verbal commu - nication . In addition , this approach seems to promote mutual awareness and interest for the co - players’ actions . But due to the high visitor turnout during the case study at the V & A , new players usually joined in an ongoing musical process in - dividually rather than exploring the system together . Most of all , not knowing the other players appeared to be the main barrier to actively engage with them in order to jointly co - ordinate the musical outcome . Although it could be noticed that players were observing other participants’ actions or dis - cussing their own playing with their companions or members of the research team , they would not directly address their unknown co - players . However , playing techniques such as muting one’s instrument rhythmically in relation to other pat - terns , which could be observed several times during the study , showed an explicit awareness for other players’ contributions . Beside that , the high visitor turnout during the study seemed to have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on how long the visitors stayed to play with the system : The video observations indicate that people are likely to leave their instrument if they become aware that another audience member is waiting in their di - rect vicinity . It appears that in such a situation many audi - ence members feel an ‘obligation to leave’ in order to make room for other visitors . This is supported by the fact , that the average dwell time of 3 . 3 min ( 294 logs ) approximately cor - responds to the dwell time measured on the opening evening of the pilot study , where the system was similarly highly fre - quented ( 3 . 8 min , 92 logs ) . On the two following days of the pilot , which were much less well attended , the average dwell time increased to 6 min ( 72 logs ) . Along with the ob - servation that several visitors seemed to quit playing merely because their companions were moving on , this suggests that in many cases the dwell time was determined by contextual factors rather than the participants’ playing experience . This is supported by the results presented earlier indicating no as - sociation between the participants’ dwell time and how they rated their playing experience in the questionnaire . REFLEXIONS In the following section we reﬂect on the results of the study in order to evaluate our design approach and assess implica - tions for facilitating collaborative musical experiences . On a general level , the study indicated that the players’ ‘sense of control’ is an important feature of a collaborative musi - cal experience and relates to other important qualities such as the participants’ overall satisfaction with their playing expe - rience . Our approach to facilitate such a feeling of control through enabling each player to contribute on a basic musical level drawn from Minimal Music appeared to be an appro - priate strategy for an interactive collaborative music system . Avoiding the use of pre - produced audio , Polymetros demon - strated that it is understandable and engaging for a diverse user group with different musical and technical abilities al - lowing all players to contribute individually to an overall mu - sical outcome . However , the observed difﬁculties of several players in identifying the own contribution which was caused by the similar sounding instruments , suggest opportunities for a re - design of the sonic properties . One possibility is to im - plement more idiosyncratic sound characteristics for each in - strument . On the other hand , such an approach has to be care - fully assessed taking into consideration that it might counter - act the players’ individual control over their contributions by restricting the variability of their instruments’ sound charac - teristics . However , an important feature of the system is that the sound palette can easily be changed for different contexts , for example using drum , bass and synthesiser sounds ‘shifts’ Polymetros’s musical character into the realm of electronica and club music . In contrast to screen - based interactive exhibits , which have been criticised for excluding the surrounding audience from understanding the interaction with the system by undermin - ing “mutual and public visibility of conduct” [ 8 ] , the physical interface approach showed to be an appropriate design choice for the multi - user scenario : Providing a highly visible repre - 240 sentation of the interaction , the design demonstrated that it succeeded in facilitating understandability for the surround - ing audience while giving the participants visual access to their co - players’ actions . Beside that , the physical and tactile properties of the instruments enabled more than one person to use a single instance of the user interface simultaneously - an opportunity that is often entirely disregarded by screen - based interactives [ 9 ] . As indicated by the observations , especially contextual inﬂu - ences such as unfamiliarity with other players and the fact that visitors mostly joined in individually rather than exploring the system as a group appeared to restrict collaborations in - volving active engagement between audience members . Re - ﬂecting on these ﬁndings made us aware that from a visitor’s perspective ‘active collaboration’ might not be a necessarily relevant or desirable aspect in the context of such a highly - frequented , public setting . This corresponds to ﬁndings of von Lehn et al . indicating that it rarely occurs that exhibits in galleries or museums are jointly explored by strangers , even if these are designed to facilitate co - participation or collab - oration [ 18 ] . However , it is interesting to note that , despite the limited degree of active engagements between different ‘instrumentalists’ during the study , half of the respondents stated in the questionnaire that they felt either fairly ( 34 . 7 % ) or very much ( 16 % ) connected to the other players . This indi - cates that many audience members experienced their playing as a joint activity . Nevertheless , based on our experiences from the pilot study and informal evaluations we believe that active engagement among players has the potential to signiﬁcantly deepen the playing experience for all participants . This raised our inter - est in how we can more successfully facilitate collaborations involving more active engagement while ‘reducing’ the ob - served contextual inﬂuences . We explored an intuitive strat - egy of facilitation within the last hours of the exhibition , when Polymetros was less attended . Instead of solely providing an initial guidance to each player individually , the facilitator in - vited all present players to explore the system together : First , group members were asked to ‘wipe’ the grids of their in - struments in order to start a ‘new composition’ together . By giving instructions to the whole group the facilitator encour - aged the players to contribute one after another in a round - based manner in order to successively build up the musical outcome together . This approach appeared to support mutual awareness among players by guiding their focus within the group . Moreover , it clearly illustrated ‘who is playing what’ and how the overall musical outcome emerges from the indi - vidual contributions of each participant . Thus , we suggest , it appeared to promote a deeper overall understanding for func - tionality and collaborative possibilities of the system for both players and spectators . FUTURE WORK From our experiences described in the previous section , we are interested in exploring this initial group facilitation strat - egy in future exhibitions of the system . Furthermore , we plan to complement this approach in a more controlled study set - ting such as lab - based group activities in which players are encouraged to compose and perform little musical pieces to - gether whilst manipulating features of the system to study the inﬂuence of individual control . However , as the main interest of our research lies in the support of public musical creativity , we are aware that results from a controlled study have to be carefully balanced with the ﬁndings of our ﬁeld research due to the signiﬁcant contextual inﬂuences as observed in the pre - sented study . Besides , we are currently further analysing the gathered interaction data in order to characterise the musical contributions created by the participants and investigate how these relate to their responses given in the questionnaire using the matched data set . SUMMARY In this paper we reported on the design and audience eval - uation of a collaborative interactive music system for broad audiences . We ﬁrst gave a detailed description of the design rationale in relation to relevant literature with a particular fo - cus on how to provide novices with opportunities for musical control in collaborative contexts . The resulting design en - ables every player to create and control a repetitive musical pattern inspired by minimalist composing techniques aiming to support a clear identiﬁcation of their playing in the col - laboratively created music . The case study emphasised the importance of supporting each player’s sense of control and indicated that it relates to other qualities of the participants’ playing experience such as feeling satisﬁed with the overall interaction or feeling part of a creative process . In terms of design , the ﬁndings suggested improvements of the instru - ments’ sound characteristics to enhance their identiﬁability in the overall musical outcome . We also explored an initial strategy of facilitation in order to encourage active engage - ment among the players . The presented ﬁeld study gave clear indications that the ways the audience approached , explored and interacted with Poly - metros were signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by the context of the public exhibition . While the observations are speciﬁc to the case study reported in this paper , we believe that , at a more general level , they contribute to the understanding of audi - ence interaction with collaborative interactive experiences in public settings and are relevant to inform other designs that aim to facilitate collaborative public creativity . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank Nela Brown , Kareem Khazem , Sara Heitlinger , Richard Kelly , Colin Powell , Mark Plumbley and Irini Papadimitriou . This work was kindly supported by the Centre for Digital Mu - sic ( C4DM ) , Queen Mary University of London and the EP - SRC funded DePIC project ( EP / J017205 / 1 ) , Benedikt Ben - gler is funded by a PhD Studentship from Queen Mary Uni - versity of London . REFERENCES 1 . Blaine , T . New music for the masses . Adobe Design Center , Think Tank Online http : / / www . adobe . com / uk / designcenter / thinktank / ttap _ music / ( accessed 21 September 2012 ) ( 2006 ) . 241 2 . Blaine , T . , and Fels , S . Contexts of collaborative musical experiences . In Proceedings of the 2003 conference on New interfaces for musical expression , NIME ’03 , National University of Singapore ( Singapore , Singapore , 2003 ) , 129 – 134 . 3 . Blaine , T . , and Perkis , T . The jam - o - drum interactive music system : A study in interaction design . In Proceedings of the 3rd conference on Designing interactive systems : processes , practices , methods , and techniques , DIS ’00 , ACM ( New York , NY , USA , 2000 ) , 165 – 173 . 4 . Brignull , H . , and Rogers , Y . Enticing people to interact with large public displays in public spaces . In In Proceedings of the IFIP International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction ( INTERACT 2003 ) ( 2003 ) , 17 – 24 . 5 . Bryan - Kinns , N . , and Hamilton , F . Identifying mutual engagement . Behaviour Information Technology ( 2009 ) , 1 – 25 . 6 . Cs ´ ıkszentmih ` alyi , M . Creativity : Flow and the Psychology of Discovery and Invention . Harper Perennial , 1996 . 7 . Gallagher , S . Philosophical conceptions of the self : implications for cognitive science . Trends in Cognitive Sciences 4 ( 2000 ) , 14 – 21 . 8 . Heath , C . , Luff , P . , von Lehn , D . , Hindmarsh , J . , and Cleverly , J . Crafting participation : designing ecologies , conﬁguring experience . Visual Communication 1 ( 2002 ) , 9 – 33 . 9 . Heath , C . , and von Lehn , D . Conﬁguring ‘interactivity’ : Enhancing engagement in science centres and museums . Social Studies of Science 38 ( 2008 ) , 63 – 91 . 10 . Jord ` a , S . Digital instruments and players : part i — efﬁciency and apprenticeship . In Proceedings of the 2004 conference on New interfaces for musical expression , NIME ’04 , National University of Singapore ( Singapore , Singapore , 2004 ) , 59 – 63 . 11 . Jord ` a , S . , Kaltenbrunner , M . , Geiger , G . , and Bencina , R . The reactable . In Proceedings of the International Computer Music Conference ( ICMC 2005 ) ( 2005 ) , 579 – 582 . 12 . Mertens , M . American Minimal Music . Kahn & Averill , 1983 . 13 . Pardue , L . S . ; Paradiso , J . A . Musical navigatrics : new musical interactions with passive magnetic tags . In Proceedings of the 2002 conference on New interfaces for musical expression , NIME ’02 , National University of Singapore ( Singapore , Singapore , 2002 ) , 1 – 3 . 14 . Reich , S . Music as a gradual procces , reprinted in : Writings on Music 1965 - 2000 . Oxford University Press 2000 , 1968 . 15 . Robson , D . Play ! : Sound toys for non - musicians . Computer Music Journal 26 , 3 ( 2002 ) , 50 – 61 . 16 . Sheridan , J . , and Bryan - Kinns , N . Designing for performative tangible interaction . International Journal of Arts and Technology 1 , 3 - 4 ( 2008 ) , 288 – 308 . 17 . Tanaka , A . Interaction , experience and the future of music . In Consuming Music Together , B . O’Hara , K . ; Brown , Ed . , vol . 35 of Computer Supported Cooperative Work . Springer Netherlands , 2006 , 267 – 288 . 18 . von Lehn , D . , Heath , C . , and J . , H . Exhibiting interaction : Conduct and collaboration in museums and galleries . Symbolic Interaction 24 ( 2001 ) , 189 – 216 . 19 . Weinberg , G . Interconnected Musical Networks - Bringing Expression and Thoughtfulness to Collaborative Group Playing . PhD thesis , MIT , 2003 . 20 . Weinberg , G . , Aimi , R . , and Jennings , K . The beatbug network : A rhythmic system for interdependent group collaboration . In Proceedings of NIME ’02 ( 2002 ) , 107 – 111 . 21 . Weinberg , G . ; Gan , S . The squeezables : Toward an expressive and interdependent multi - player musical instrument . Computer Music Journal 25 , 2 ( July 2001 ) , 37 – 45 . 22 . Xamb ´ o , A . , Laney , R . , and Dobbyn , C . Touchtr4ck : Democratic collaborative music . In Proceedings of the ﬁfth international conference on Tangible , embedded , and embodied interaction , TEI ’11 , ACM ( New York , NY , USA , 2011 ) , 309 – 312 . 242