Moving forward : polarised trafﬁcking in cell migration Sarah J . Fletcher and Joshua Z . Rappoport School of Biosciences , University of Birmingham , Edgbaston , Birmingham B15 2TT , UK Polarised vesicle trafﬁcking has been suggested to regulate cell migration . Understanding how this takes place has been complicated by the use of disparate assays and cellular models . Although polarised trafﬁck - ing does occur in cell motility it is not clear which path - ways are involved . We propose a model for migrating cells where caveolar endocytosis occurs at the rear of the adherent surface , whereas clathrin - mediated endocyto - sis takes place in the middle - to - front region of the cell . We also suggest there is evidence to support polarised recycling of internalised cargo to the leading edge of migrating cells . Further research is required to conﬁrm our hypothesis and a systematic evaluation of multiple pathways within individual systems and across different models is needed . Cell migration Cell migration is a physiological requirement for many processes ranging from ﬂagella - based swimming of sperm to the amoeboid crawling of Dictyostelium and the collec - tive healing of an epithelial wound . Directed motility represents a common process that can occur through heterogeneous mechanisms . There are many types of directed cell migration . However , two primary models of directed motility predominate with regard to in vitro assay systems : attraction to the source of a chemical signal ( chemotaxis ) and release of contact inhibition ( wound heal - ing ) . Paradigms for these two processes include chemotac - tic motility of individual neutrophils seeking out pathogens , and sheet - like motion of epithelial monolayers into a denuded region . It might seem self - evident that the mechanisms controlling chemotaxis and wound healing would not be identical ; for instance , recycling of receptors for soluble ligands might be more important in the former . However , despite much detailed information regarding the processes governing cell motility , this information has yet to be integrated into a single coherent model . There is much contention about the role of vesicle trafﬁcking in cell migration predominantly due to the use of disparate assay systems and cellular models . There - fore we will be evaluating previous work in this ﬁeld , drawing conclusions from studies using differing motile cell types that undergo both directed and random migration in a variety of experimental models . We will focus speciﬁcally on clathrin - mediated endocytosis , caveo - lar endocytosis and recycling of internalised cargo , and their proposed functions in cell motility . Furthermore , we will provide evidence for our own model of how vesicle trafﬁcking might regulate cell motility ( Figure 1 ) . The coordinated motility of adherent cells has been shown to involve multiple integrated cellular processes . Upon sensing a migratory stimulus , be it a chemoattrac - tant or loss of contact inhibition , morphological changes take place that lead to a polarised elongated phenotype [ 1 ] . An initial stage of polarisation is the formation of a dynamic ‘lamellipodium’ via extensive actin polymeris - ation and branching [ 2 ] . This takes place at the front of a migrating cell in the direction of migration and is referred to as the ‘leading edge’ [ 3 ] . However , cell spreading does not equal migration , and lamellipodial extension must be coupled to a mechanism for generating motile force so as to initiate sustained and directed motility of the cell body . Myosin - based contractility has been implicated as a mech - anism through which cell adhesion to a substratum in two - dimensions could be coupled to forward motion ( for a full review see Ref . [ 4 ] ) . Regulation of cell adhesion to the substrate is another key factor in cell migration , and this occurs predominantly via focal adhesions [ 5 ] . Focaladhesionsare sitesdenselypopulatedwithintegrin heterodimers that link the actin cytoskeleton and extra - cellular matrix [ 6 ] . How these processes are initiated and then maintained during migration is not fully known ; how - ever , research implies that vesicle trafﬁcking could play a role . Ezratty et al . [ 7 ] foundthat microtubuleassembly , focal adhesion kinase and dynamin were required for focal adhesion disassembly . Dynamin is a key requirement for vesicle ﬁssion within several endocytosis pathways and it was concluded that endocytosis is essential for focal adhesion disassembly . They also found that expression of dominant - negative dynamin decreased migration of NIH 3T3 ﬁbroblasts during wound healing , hence implicating endocytosis as a factor in cell migration via focal adhesion disassembly [ 7 ] . However , work by Mark McNiven has shown that dynamin is required for many other cellular processes involved in cell motility [ 8 ] and migratory effects seen upon dynamin inhibition might therefore not be due speciﬁcally to inhibition of endocytosis . Another study implicating vesicle trafﬁcking in cell migration is that by Sturge et al . [ 9 ] who examined pro - migratory receptor Endo180 - mediated Rho – ROCK – MLC2 - based contractile signals and cell adhesion at the trailing edge . This group found that endosomes containing Endo180 localise at cell – substrate adhesion sites in unre - tracted tails of the MG63 osteosarcoma cell line . They also reported colocalisation with EEA1 and rab11 , suggesting that Endo180 trafﬁcks through recycling pathways . Opinion Corresponding author : Rappoport , J . Z . ( J . Rappoport @ bham . ac . uk ) . 0962 - 8924 / $ – see front matter (cid:2) 2009 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2009 . 11 . 006 Available online 12 January 2010 71 Furthermore , through the use of MCF7 cells stably expres - sing mutant Endo180 proteins , internalisation of Endo180 was found to be required for cell spreading and efﬁcient turnover of cell – cell - substrate adhesions during migration . These two latter studies imply that vesicle trafﬁcking plays a role in cell migration . However , more work is required to elucidate exactly how vesicle trafﬁcking regulates cell migration and whether vesicle trafﬁcking is polarised to a speciﬁc region within the cell ( Table 1 ) . Vesicle trafﬁcking Integrins play a pivotal role in both cell adhesion and migration . Regulation of the localisation and activation state of particular integrins has emerged as an important mechanism for controlling cell motility in several models . As a mechanism to control integrin function , vesicle traf - ﬁcking has the potential to regulate adhesion and migration [ 10 , 11 ] . Furthermore , lipid delivery to the lead - ing edge must be coordinated in order to extend the plasma membrane at the lamellipodium . Other molecules traf - ﬁcked in a migrating cell could include receptors for soluble ligands ( e . g . chemoattractants ) [ 12 ] , as well as v - SNAREs introduced into the plasma membrane following vesicle fusion [ 13 ] . Thus , vesicle trafﬁcking has been suggested to play numerous roles in cell motility , ranging from bulk membrane ﬂow to the recycling of cell - adhesion molecules [ 14 ] ( Figure 2 ) . However , the precise trafﬁcking pathways involved are currently unclear . Polarised vesicle trafﬁcking Although it seems apparent that vesicle trafﬁcking is involved in cell motility , the precise mechanistic linkages Figure 1 . Proposedhypothesisfor polarisedvesicletraffickingin migratingcells . Thefigure showsclathrin - mediatedendocytosistakingplace atthe middle - to - frontregions of migrating cells with caveolar endocytosis at the rear of migrating cells . Polarised trafficking of internalised / newly - synthesised cargo to the leading edge of the cell . TGN , trans - Golgi network ; EE , early endosome ; LE , late endosome . Table 1 . Inhibition of trafﬁcking alters cell motility Trafﬁckingpathway Method of pathway inhibition Migratory phenotype observed CME siRNA knockdown of AP - 2 Decreased migration of the human ﬁbrosarcoma HT1080 cell line in transwell - migration chemotaxis assays [ 28 ] . Eps15 EH29 – GFP DNA Expression in HSB - 2 , CEM and PEER T - cells had no effect on polarised morphology and inhibited chemotaxis towards the chemokine stromal - cell - derived factor - 1 in transwell migration assays [ 33 ] . Caveolarendocytosis Cholesterolsequestration - ﬁlipin Decreased migration and inhibition of invasion of human endothelial cells into collagen I gel [ 42 ] . Caveolin - 1 knockdown In wound - healing assays caveolin - 1 deﬁcient mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts exhibited increased migration speed , poor directionality , and a non - polarised morphology [ 38 ] . Caveolin - 1 ( P132L ) Met - 1 mammary carcinoma cells expressing cav - 1 ( P132L ) exhibited increased migration into matrigel and increased chemotaxis towards serum in transwell assays [ 50 ] . Biosyntheticsecretory Golgi - disruption - brefeldin A Treatment of Swiss 3T3 ﬁbroblasts with brefeldin A inhibited polarised phenotype generation , cell migration , and affected membrane protrusion in wound - healing assays [ 51 ] . PKD ( K618N ) PKD ( K618N ) expression , inhibited lamellipodial activity at the leading edge , retrograde ﬂow , and decreased motility in randomly migrating Swiss 3T3 ﬁbroblasts [ 52 ] . Endocyticrecycling Rab4 ( N121I ) Expression in NIH3T3 ﬁbroblasts decreased persistent migration in wound - healing assays but had no effect on migration speed [ 10 ] . Rab11 ( S25N ) Reduced random migration of MDCK epithelial cells [ 53 ] . Rab11b ( S25N ) Expression in PtK1 epithelial cells decreased persistent migration and increased protrusive activity throughout the cell membrane in random - migration studies . In wound - healing assays , expression caused loss of directionality [ 54 ] . Rab11 ( S25N ) Expression decreased invasion of MDA - MB - 231 cells into Matrigel [ 55 ] . Opinion Trends in Cell Biology Vol . 20 No . 2 72 between the two processes are not at all clear . One long - standing hypothesis is that polarised vesicle trafﬁcking could serve to accomplish tasks such as transporting cell adhesion molecules from the rear of a motile cell to the front ( Figure 2A ) ( Ref . [ 15 ] ) . It has also been suggested that polarised trafﬁcking provides lipid to the leading edge in a cycle of bulk membrane ﬂow ( Figure 2B ) ( Ref . [ 14 ] ) . Another potential role for polarised trafﬁcking could be in receptor recycling during chemotaxis ( Figure 2C ) . How - ever , whereas receptors for soluble ligands generally do cycle between the cell surface and endocytic compartments [ 16 ] , there has been little evidence for polarised trafﬁcking of chemo - attractant receptors . Bailly et al . [ 16 ] evaluated the potential for polarised trafﬁcking of the epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) in MTLn3 adenocarcinoma cells undergoing chemotaxis towards EGF . This group used imaging with GFP - tagged EGFR in live cells and found increased quantities of EGFR - containing vesicles towards the EGF pipette , most probably due to polarised internalisation at the leading edge . Although a direct correlation between polarised EGFR endocytosis and moti - lity cannot be made from this study , observations made in Drosophila border cells have demonstrated the importance of polarised receptor - tyrosine - kinase signalling at the lead - ing edge of migrating cells and a potential role for endo - cytosis in regulating this phenomenon [ 17 ] . Although polarised recycling of chemoattractant recep - tors has not received the same attention as cell - adhesion molecule trafﬁcking , studies have shown selective acti - vation of TorC2 ( a complex capable of phosphorylating both PKB and PKC ) at the leading edge of Dictyostelium discoideum cells undergoing chemotaxis towards cAMP [ 18 ] . Talin B is a substrate of PKB and controls the attachment to substrate via cell - adhesion molecules . This group also found loss of PKBR1 reduced cell – cell - substrate attachment . This study therefore suggests a model where TorC2 encounters membrane - associated activators at the leading edge , and then phosphorylates PKB and returns to the cytosol leading to increased cell attachments to the substrate , aiding migration A further hypothesis formed by both our own work [ 19 ] and that of others [ 20 ] proposes a mechanism where cla - thrin - mediated endocytosis takes place in the middle - to - front regions of migrating cells . Subsequently , internalised cargo undergoes polarised endocytic recycling to the lead - ing edge . This middle - to - front trafﬁcking hypothesis has previously been implicated as a factor regulating focal adhesion dynamics via localised integrin internalisation and recycling [ 20 ] ( Table 2 ) . However , if polarised delivery of lipids to the leading edge of a motile cell does occur , this could result in a rearward membrane ﬂow . Whereas such a front - to - back membrane ﬂow was observed by tracking the trajectories of beads anchored to the plasma membrane of migrating chick dorsal root ganglion ( DRG ) cells [ 21 ] , similar exper - iments in randomly migrating neutrophils did not ﬁnd evidence of rearward ﬂow [ 22 ] . Whether the differing results of these two studies stem from the use of different cell types or experimental techniques is unknown . Cell - speciﬁc variation is clearly a key aspect when examining cell migration . Not only do different cell types alter their migration strategy according to the nature of the stimulus , but the roles of vesicle trafﬁcking could differ in the various modes of cell motility or through different phases of migration ( e . g . the production of the leading lamellipodium versus the steady - state generation of motile force ) . Migratory behaviour will also vary as a function of the type of motility being studied ( e . g . planar migration versus invasion through a matrix ) . It could be inadvisable to compare directly the migration of cells such as ﬁsh keratocytes with that of Madin – Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) cells . The ﬁsh cells migrate at around 30 m m / min Figure 2 . Three proposed mechanisms for polarised vesicle trafficking . ( a ) Internalisation and transport of cell - adhesion molecules from the rear of a motile cell to the front . ( b ) Internalisation of bulk membrane during plasma - membrane lipid trafficking to the leading edge . ( c ) Potential model for receptor recycling during chemotaxis . Table 2 . Integrin internalisation and recycling pathways a Integrin Internalisation RecyclingPathway a ? b 1 Dynamin - dependant [ 56 ] Rab11 ( Ref . [ 57 ] ) a 5 b 1 Clathrin independent [ 58 ] Rab11 ( Refs [ 11 , 60 – 62 ] ) Caveolin1 - dependant [ 59 ] a 2 b 1 Caveolae [ 63 ] - Pak1 - dependant [ 64 ] a 6 b 1 - Rab11 ( Ref . [ 60 ] ) a 6 b 4 Rab11 ( Ref . [ 55 ] ) a L b 2 Filipin - sensitive [ 20 ] Rab11 ( Ref . [ 20 ] ) a v b 3 ; unstimulated NXXY motif not required [ 65 ] Rab11 ( Refs [ 11 , 60 ] ) Clathrin - coated pits [ 66 ] a v b 3 ; PDGF - stimulated - Rab4 ( Refs [ 11 , 65 ] ) a v b 5 Clathrin - coated pits [ 67 ] - a v b ? Clathrin - coated pits [ 68 ] - a v b 6 Clathrin coated pits [ 69 ] - a Table adapted from Caswell and Norman , Ref . [ 20 ] . Opinion Trends in Cell Biology Vol . 20 No . 2 73 and have a crescent - shaped morphology due to lamellipodia extending halfway around the cell body [ 23 ] , whereas MDCK cells migrate at (cid:2) 20 m m / hr , maintain cell – cell con - tacts and form a triangular polarised morphology with a broad leading lamella [ 19 ] . These cell - speciﬁc variations are likely to require highly different regulatory mechanisms . Focal adhesion turnover must be more rapid in migrating keratocytes than in motile MDCK cells , and this could be due to recycling via a pathway faster than that in MDCK cells . Recycling might not be the only factor : the two cell types could have different levels of expression of cell - adhesion molecules leading to differing strengths of inter - action with the cell substrate . Furthermore , different cell lines could have differing requirements for leading - edge actin polymerisation and acto - myosin contraction as well as reliance upon different vesicle trafﬁcking pathways . These are just a few examples of how cell – cell differences could affectmigrationand how varyingcelltypes canexhibit different migratory phenotypes within a single assay sys - tem . Another important factor implicated in the regulation of cell migration is the biosynthetic secretory pathway . Sev - eral studies have repeatedly suggested that exocytosis of biosynthetic cargo from the trans - Golgi network is polarised to the leading edge of migrating cells ( Table 1 ) ( Ref . [ 24 ] ) . The role of the biosynthetic secretory pathway in cell migration is beyond the scope of this article . Instead , we have chosen to focus on the role of clathrin - mediated endoctosis , caveolar endocytosis and endocytic trafﬁcking in cell migration . We aim to provide evidence for our own hypotheses ( Figure 1 ) . We suggest that current evidence supports a mechanism in which clathrin - mediated endo - cytosis takes place in the middle - to - front regions of migrating cells , whereas caveolar endocytosis takes place at the rear of the cell . Post - endocytosis , the data suggest that polarised trafﬁcking of internalised cargo takes place towards the leading edge ( Figure 1 ) . However , we also highlight the need for a more systematic methodological approach to discover the exact potential of polarised vesicle trafﬁcking in cell migration , particularly as more trafﬁck - ing pathways are uncovered . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis The internalisation of integral membrane proteins and associated soluble ligands occurs via endocytosis [ 25 ] . Clathrin - coated vesicles ( CCV ) were the ﬁrst endocytic intermediates to be identiﬁed and have been shown to be the means of entry for cargoes ranging from integrins ( Table 2 ) to viruses [ 26 – 28 ] . Endocytic CCVs are formed from clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) in the plasma membrane . CCV formation initiates with recruitment of clathrin tris - kelia to the cytosolic leaﬂet of the plasma membrane ( CCP ) , the selection of the cargo receptors to be interna - lized , recruitment of several adaptor proteins , and termi - nates via membrane ﬁssion mediated by the GTPase dynamin [ 26 ] . Uncoated CCVs are subsequently able to fuse with endocytic organelles for effective cargo recycling . Numerous chemo - attractant receptors have been shown to enter the cell via clathrin - mediated endocytosis [ 29 , 30 ] , and this has been suggested to be a pathway integral to cell motility [ 15 ] . However , experiments aimed at determining whether clathrin - mediated endocytosis is polarised in migrating cells have been difﬁcult to integrate into a coherent understanding , potentially due to signiﬁcant differences between cell types . One of the ﬁrst investigations into the potential for polarised clathrin - mediated endocytosis was performed in 1983 by Mark Brestcher [ 31 ] . Electron microscopy ( EM ) was used to quantify the distribution of coated pits on the dorsal surface of so - called ‘giant’ HeLa cells . This study suggested that coated pits are not concentrated towards or away from the periphery of a spreading cell . Subsequently , several studies have demonstrated that clathrin - mediated endocytosis is polarised in migrating cells [ 19 , 32 – 36 ] . However , the domain to which it is polarised has not always been consistent from study to study . Over 25 years ago it was ﬁrst suggested that chemotac - tic neutrophils display polarised distributions of clathrin - coated pits and vesicles away from the lamellipodium and towards the uropod ( a trailing non - adherant projection ) [ 32 ] . Similar observations were made in randomly migrating T - lymphocytes [ 33 ] where confocal imaging showed that clathrin light chains colocalised with AP - 2 and transferrin , and were polarised towards the uropod and away from the leading edge . By contrast , transient recruitment of GFP - tagged clathrin heavy chain to the trailing edge was observed in Dictyostelium cells [ 34 ] . The laboratory of Vance Lemmon was further able to demonstrate polarised clathrin - mediated endocytosis of the neuronal cell adhesion molecule L1 in chick DRG growth cones [ 35 ] . Through application of two - colour con - focal microscopy , this study showed that endocytosis pre - ferentially takes place towards the rear and centre of growth cones , and was absent from the periphery . Two studies employing epithelial - derived cells have challenged the view that endocytosis is polarised to the rear of motile cells . Total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy , that selectively illuminates the adher - ent plasma membrane , demonstrated that clathrin light chain , dynamin - 2 ( aa ) , and the transferrin receptor were all polarised away from the back and towards the front of MDCK cells during wound healing [ 19 ] . Clathrin localis - ation , the number of clathrin - coated pits , clathrin - coated vesicles , and internalisation events were all polarised towards the cell front . Similarly , the AP - 2 clathrin adaptor complex was observed to be polarised towards the leading edge of migrating HeLa cells following wounding [ 36 ] . However , one cannot accord each of the aforementioned studies equal weight . Observations reported by Bretscher in 1983 ( Ref . [ 37 ] ) cannot be invoked as evidence against polarised endocytosis in the context of cell motility for several reasons . These studies were performed in cells not undergoing directed motility , and furthermore this analysis was limited to the non - adherent plasma mem - brane . Thus this study did not take into account regions where polarised endocytosis of cell - adhesion molecules might be expected to arise – our hypothesis suggests that caveolar endocytosis takes place in the adherent cell sur - face at the rear , whereas clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) takes place towards the middle to front . Although several groups have reported that CME is polarised to the Opinion Trends in Cell Biology Vol . 20 No . 2 74 rear of migrating cells , few of these studies actually observed events in the adherent surface . Davies et al . [ 33 ] examined chemotactic neutrophils using EM analysis of horizontal sections without any contribution from the adherent plasma membrane . Although the uropod was non - adherent in these cells , 3D reconstruction of confocal images in this study demonstrated that the ‘neck’ region connecting to the leading edge showed increased endocy - tosis relative to the front . Furthermore , observations of CME at the rear of Dictyostelium cells was examined in randomly migrating cells and was only seen during rapid retraction of the tail region [ 34 ] . Increased endocytosis at the rear was therefore not thought to be ‘a prerequisite for cell translocation’ [ 34 ] . Overall these studies fail to com - bine three key components required for the examination of polarised trafﬁcking : ( i ) initiation of directed migration , ( ii ) observation of events throughout the plasma membrane especially in the adherent surface , and ( iii ) analysis of live cells . The two studies that combined these components have provided results that are strikingly different from those of earlier studies , and it was found that CME was polarised away from the rear of migrating cells [ 19 , 36 ] . This differ - ence could be explained if different cell types exploit differ - ent mechanisms of motility or if the motility mechanism varies according to the nature of the migratory stimulus . Systematic analysis employing identical methods of analysis on cells from various lineages ( e . g . neuronal , lymphocyte , epithelial ) will be required to further elucidate the role of CME in cell motility . Caveolar endocytosis In recent years , modes of so - called ‘clathrin - independent’ endocytosis have increased both in prominence and in complexity [ 25 ] . Internalisation through caveolae – ﬂask - shaped invaginations rich in cholesterol and sphingolipids – has emerged as a pathway particularly relevant to the endocytosis of particular integrins ( Table 2 ) , as well as of some receptors for soluble ligands [ 33 ] . Caveolae have long been studied in endothelial cells ( ECs ) . Motility of ECs is integral to the process of angiogenesis , and the role of caveolae in EC migration is therefore of particular interest [ 39 – 41 ] . Although the following studies serve to illuminate the potential for polarised caveolar endocytosis in motile ECs , similar observations in other cell types are currently lacking . However , it should be noted that a role for caveolae in cell motility has been conﬁrmed in diverse cell types ( Table 1 ) . One study imaged caveolin - 1 distribution in ECs under - going directed migration on a two - dimensional surface initiated via a scratch wound ; immunoﬂuorescence revealed that caveolin - 1 was polarised to the rear of motile cells [ 40 ] . A subsequent study from another group employed both confocal and electron microscopy to further evaluate the potential for polarised caveolar endocytosis in migrating ECs [ 41 ] . Speciﬁcally , this study veriﬁed that caveolin - 1 is polarised to the rear of endothelial cells undergoing 2D migration to ﬁll in a wound on a coverslip . However , in contrast to caveolin - 1 localisation during wound - healing assays , polarisation to anterior protrusions was observed in chemotactic ECs crawling through pores in a Boyden chamber ﬁlter towards an FGF source . This group utilised immuno - gold EM and demonstrated that anterior caveolin - 1 localisation in trans - migrating cells was predominantly cytosolic and was not associated with vesicles , whereas , as in cells undergoing planar motility , there was an increase in caveolae number at the cell rear but there was no cytosolic caveolin - 1 . EM analysis also revealed many caveolae in the posterior of cells crawling on glass , whereas the leading lamella was essentially free of caveolae . However , it should be noted that another study employing ECs demonstrated colocalisation of caveolin - 1 with MT1 - MMP and a v b 3 - integrin within ‘motility - associ - ated’ protrusions , and thus caveolae can potentially be localised away from the cell rear [ 42 ] . As mentioned previously there are several ‘pitfalls’ in these experiments , complicating the issue of polarised caveolar endocytosis in migrating cells . In the studies of Isshiki et al . [ 40 ] cells were both ﬁxed and permeabilised prior to confocal imaging to identify caveolin - 1 localisation ; it is possible the processes of ﬁxation and permabilisation might affect the localisation of caveolin - 1 . Furthermore , only confocal microscopy was used for imaging of caveolin - 1 , and it is difﬁcult to ascertain the extent to which this apparent polarisation represents cytosolic or plasma - mem - brane - associated localisation . These caveats have been resolved in studies performed by Parat et al . [ 41 ] where scratch wound assays were performed in living cells and imaged using time - lapse epiﬂuorescence microscopy and correlated with EM to demonstrate the presence of caveo - lae at the plasma membrane . This study further examined several experimental parameters as a possible explanation for the differences in caveolae and caveolin - 1 localisation between the two migratory models . Several control exper - iments conﬁrmed similar caveolae localisation when parameters such as cell culture technique , chemotactic stimulus , gravitational and substrate differences were altered . This study clearly highlights the importance of employing appropriate and consistent methodology in the analysis of polarised trafﬁcking . Regarding the later study [ 42 ] there are two caveats – the cells analysed were not responding to a migratory stimulus , nor were the apparent localisations unequivocally identiﬁed as vesicular in nature . One key factor overlooked by each of the afore - mentioned groups ( and that must be taken into account in future research ) is the need to image actual caveolar endocytic events . In summary , although polarisation of caveolar endocytosis to the cell rear appears to be a some - what consistent ﬁnding , these studies show clearly that even within a single cellular system ( ECs ) the analysis of trafﬁcking can be extremely complex . Endocytic recycling Several papers within the last 15 years have focused upon the potential for polarised endocytic recycling during cell motility . The development of new experimental techniques such as TIRF microscopy makes this an excellent time to build on our current knowledge of polarised recycling . Recy - cling of internalised cargo could be a key factor in both the development and maintenance of a motile phenotype . This represents a particularly interesting area because the recy - cling of membrane proteins could potentially be integral to Opinion Trends in Cell Biology Vol . 20 No . 2 75 the detection of chemotactic signals ( e . g . chemoattractant receptors ) aswellastothegenerationofmotileforce ( e . g . cell adhesion molecules ) [ 11 ] . Polarised endocytic trafﬁcking , particularly towards the leading edge , has been observed in many cases described below . However , as with other speciﬁc questions concerning this general subject , there remains a great deal of uncertainty stemming from the use of disparate cell lines , models and assay systems . Randomly migrating ﬁbroblasts have been extensively used as a model for recycling studies . Transferrin can be used as a general marker for endocytic trafﬁcking and was used highly effectively in the studies of Hopkins et al . [ 43 ] . Using randomly - migrating chick embryonic ﬁbroblasts , pulse - chase transferrin recycling and immunocytochem - istry , this group observed that transferrin and transfer - rin - receptor recycling takes place primarily in the direction of the leading lamella [ 43 ] . Increased recycling from the plasma membrane to a juxtanuclear recycling compart - ment was also observed in faster - migrating ﬁbroblasts . Similarly , in randomly migrating WI38 ﬁbroblast cells , vesicles containing GFP - tagged a 5 - integrin were observed to move from the perinuclear region towards the base of the leading lamella [ 44 ] . In addition , polarised trafﬁcking of vesicles containing b 1 - integrin was observed in randomly migrating skeletal muscle ﬁbroblasts [ 45 ] . These vesicles appeared to move inward from the rear lagging edge to the front [ 45 ] , supporting the vesicle - trafﬁcking model pro - posed in Figure 1 . It should be noted that , unlike many other issues regarding polarised trafﬁcking in cell motility , endocytic recycling of cell - adhesion molecules from the back towards the leading edge has been demonstrated in several other systems . In chick DRG cells the L1 cell - adhesion molecule preferentially recycles towards the cell peripheral zone following endocytosis [ 46 ] . Similarly , two studies in ran - domly migrating neutrophils chemokinetically stimulated with the peptide fMLP provided evidence for polarised integrin recycling [ 47 , 48 ] . Both of these papers employed calcium buffering to prevent release of integrins from matrix substrates , and observed subsequent redistribution of a v b 3 - integrin [ 47 ] and a 5 - integrin [ 48 ] from the front of the cell to the trailing edge . It was therefore suggested that integrin release from extracellular matrix must precede endocytosis . If prevented , this leads to accumulation at the cell rear and loss from the leading edge , due to an inability to initiate back - to – the - front polarised recycling . Clearly there is much evidence for polarised recycling , but some of the studies discussed above have shortcomings . Work in 1994 by Hopkins et al . [ 43 ] , although highly innovative , had one key drawback – the cells were not undergoing directed migration . It is possible that recycling pathways and subsequent polarised endocytosis could change following a migratory stimulus to accommodate a different cellular phenotype . However , pulse - chase trans - ferrin recycling and time - lapse microscopy in live cells , as well as EM imaging of immunogold - labelled transferrin receptors , revealed polarised trafﬁcking of both receptor and ligand to the leading edge of migrating ﬁbroblasts [ 43 ] . Although these observations are similar to those of Lau - kaitis et al . [ 44 ] during analysis of a 5 - integrin in migrating W138 ﬁbroblasts , again the lack of directed migration might be an issue . Also , despite showing polarised trafﬁck - ing of vesicles containing a 5 - integrin to the lamellipodia , there was no observation of fusion events between these vesicles and the plasma membrane . Finally , although the results of this study are consistent with polarised recy - cling , it cannot be excluded that a proportion of visualised GFP - a 5 was actually within the biosynthetic secretory pathway and not within the endocytic system . Whereas the initial observations made by Palecek et al . [ 45 ] seem to correspond to results obtained in previous experiments , upon closer examination there are several issues that could question the overall relevance of cell - adhesion molecule recycling in cell motility . This same study observed that approximately 80 % of b 1 - integrin was actually left in a trail behind migrating cells . There - fore , if the vast majority of b 1 - integrin is not recycling , and biosynthetic trafﬁcking is clearly involved in ﬁbroblast motility ( see Table 1 ) , polarised recycling of cell - adhesion molecules might not be a requirement for cell migration at all . However , substrate is clearly an issue when examining polarised recycling of adhesion molecules in migrating cells . In studies performed by Kamiguchi et al . [ 35 ] , polarised trafﬁcking in chick DRG cells was dependent upon substrate . Endocytosed L1 was not transported to the peripheral zone in DRG cells plated on laminin , whereas polarised trafﬁcking took place in cells plated on a chimeric protein made from the Fc region of human IgG and the extracellular domain of human L1 . Furthermore , using sophisticated immunocytochemical methods , internalised L1 was found to recycle to the leading edge of advancing growth cones in cells plated on the chimeric protein . In cells plated on laminin , L1 was instead recycled locally to the distal axonal shaft and to the central domain of the growth cone . Thus , this research clearly shows that both polarised recycling of adhesion receptors and their recycling path - ways are dependent upon the cell substrate . However , DRGs are physiologically very different from ﬁbroblasts . They lack late endosomal and lysosomal com - partments [ 49 ] and thus could exploit different recycling pathways for their motility . Therefore these ﬁndings can - not necessarily be extrapolated to other cell types . Studies by Lawson et al . [ 47 ] nevertheless appear to provide evi - dence of polarised recycling of a v b 3 - integrin . However , this work did not employ techniques capable of measuring polarised integrin recycling . A common procedure used throughout the study was the use of calcium buffering to inhibit integrin detachment from the adherent surface . However , this same group’s work with membrane sheets indicates that b 3 - integrin recycling does occur , and this was polarised to the cell rear in Ca 2 + - buffered cells . This is further supported by immunocytochemistry and confocal imaging of b 3 , but does not prove the existence of rear - to - front b 3 trafﬁcking . This same potential limitation is seen in this group’s later research [ 48 ] where localisation of a 5 - integrin to the rear of the cell was taken as evidence for polarised trafﬁcking . However , here the group went one step further , and they reported that a 5 was recycled via an endocytic recycling compartment polarised to behind the leading lamella in migrating polymorphonuclear neutro - phils . Nevertheless , this study still does not prove polarised trafﬁcking of integrins . Together these studies Opinion Trends in Cell Biology Vol . 20 No . 2 76 are indicative of recycling as an important factor in cell migration . Many have suggested that polarised trafﬁcking to the front of several motile cell types is crucial for motility , but issues including cell ﬁxation , the nature of the migratory stimulus , the need direct for imaging of fusion events between the vesicles and plasma membrane , and the type of cell substrate must all be taken into account during future experimental design . Ideally , one would be able to image the internalisation of membrane proteins through particular endocytosis pathways , and where vesicles can subsequently be tracked through the endocytic system until the ultimate fusion of recycling endosomes with the plasma membrane to deliver quanta of labelled integrins and chemoattractant receptors . Concluding remarks Although signiﬁcant evidence exists that suggests that polarised trafﬁcking takes place during cell motility , sev - eral key questions remain . Given the variety of cell types analysed within vastly different assay systems , it is per - haps not surprising that a clear understanding has yet to emerge regarding the potential for polarised trafﬁcking in migrating cells . Current data suggest that the adherent plasma membrane in motile cells displays high levels of endocytosis . Furthermore , it seems that caveolar endocy - tosis occurs at the cell rear , whereas clathrin - mediated endocytosis occurs in middle - to - front regions of migrating cells ( Figure 1 ) . We also suggest that the evidence supports polarised endocytic trafﬁcking of internalised cargo to the front of migrating cells . One further prediction is that speciﬁc integrin heterodimers should follow the polarised trafﬁcking of the pathways with which they have been previously associated ( Table 2 ) . Nevertheless , as this article undoubtedly demonstrates , more systematic stu - dies are currently needed that either evaluate the same trafﬁcking pathway in different models or that analyse multiple pathways within a single paradigm . In addition , further live - cell imaging approaches are needed to resolve questions concerning polarised trafﬁcking in cells under - going directed migration . Although the question of the role of vesicle trafﬁcking in cell migration has remained for decades , a great deal of work is still needed before the potential for polarised trafﬁcking is understood . Acknowledgements S . J . F . is funded by a BBSRC doctoral training grant . J . Z . R . would like to acknowledge funding from BBSRC ( Grant H002308 ) . Both authors would like to thank Jennifer Thorley for critically evaluating this manuscript . References 1 Lauffenburger , D . A . and Horwitz , A . F . ( 1996 ) Cell migration : a physically integrated molecular process . Cell 84 , 359 – 369 2 Small , J . V . et al . ( 1995 ) Actin ﬁlament organization in the ﬁsh keratocyte lamellipodium . J . Cell Biol . 129 , 1275 – 1286 3 Chou , J . et al . ( 2003 ) Directional motility induced by epidermal growth factor requires Cdc42 . Exp . Cell Res . 287 , 47 – 56 4 Mitchison , T . J . and Cramer , L . P . ( 1996 ) Actin - based cell motility and cell locomotion . Cell 84 , 371 – 379 5 Izzard , C . S . and Lochner , L . R . ( 1976 ) Cell - to - substrate contacts in living ﬁbroblasts : an interference reﬂexion study with an evaluation of the technique . J . Cell Sci . 21 , 129 – 159 6 Zamir , E . and Geiger , B . ( 2001 ) Molecular complexity and dynamics of cell – matrix adhesions . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 3583 – 3590 7 Ezratty , E . J . et al . ( 2005 ) Microtubule - induced focal adhesion disassembly is mediated by dynamin and focal adhesion kinase . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 581 – 590 8 Cao , H . et al . ( 2005 ) Actin and Arf1 - dependent recruitment of a cortactin – dynamin complex to the Golgi regulates post - Golgi transport . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 483 – 492 9 Sturge , J . et al . ( 2006 ) Endosomes generate localized Rho - ROCK - MLC2 - based contractile signals via Endo180 to promote adhesion disassembly . J . Cell Biol . 175 , 337 – 347 10 White , D . P . et al . ( 2007 ) Alpha v beta3 and alpha5beta1 integrin recycling pathways dictate downstream Rho kinase signaling to regulate persistent cell migration . J . Cell Biol . 177 , 515 – 525 11 Roberts , M . et al . ( 2001 ) PDGF - regulated rab4 - dependent recycling of alphavbeta3 integrin from early endosomes is necessary for cell adhesion and spreading . Curr . Biol . 11 , 1392 – 1402 12 Zieske , J . D . et al . ( 2000 ) Activation of epidermal growth factor receptor during corneal epithelial migration . Invest . Ophthalmol . Vis . Sci . 41 , 1346 – 1355 13 Gerst , J . E . ( 1999 ) SNAREsandSNARE regulatorsinmembranefusion and exocytosis . Cell . Mol . Life Sci . 55 , 707 – 734 14 Bretscher , M . S . ( 1984 ) Endocytosis : relation to capping and cell locomotion . Science 224 , 681 – 686 15 Sheetz , M . P . et al . ( 1999 ) Cell migration as a ﬁve - step cycle . Biochem . Soc . Symp . 65 , 233 – 243 16 Bailly , M . et al . ( 2000 ) Epidermal growth factor receptor distribution during chemotactic response . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 3873 – 3883 17 Je´kely , G . et al . ( 2005 ) Regulators of endocytosis maintain localized receptortyrosinekinasesignalinginguidedmigration . Dev . Cell 9 , 197 – 207 18 Kamimura , Y . et al . ( 2008 ) PIP3 - independent activation of TorC2 and PKB at the cell’s leading edge mediates chemotaxis . Curr . Biol . 18 , 1034 – 1043 19 Rappoport , J . Z . and Simon , S . M . ( 2003 ) Real - time analysis of clathrin - mediated endocytosis during cell migration . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 847 – 855 20 Caswell , P . T . and Norman , J . C . ( 2006 ) Integrin trafﬁcking and the control of cell migration . Trafﬁc 7 , 14 – 21 21 Dai , J . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 1995 ) Axon membrane ﬂows from the growth cone to the cell body . Cell 83 , 693 – 701 22 Lee , J . et al . ( 1990 ) The direction of membrane lipid ﬂow in locomoting polymorphonuclear leukocytes . Science 247 , 1229 – 1233 23 Kucik , D . F . et al . ( 1990 ) Cell migration does not produce membrane ﬂow . J . Cell Biol . 111 , 1617 – 1622 24 Mellor , H . ( 2004 ) Cell motility : Golgi signalling shapes up to ship out . Curr Biol . 14 , R434 – R435 25 Doherty , G . J . and McMahon , H . T . ( 2009 ) Mechanisms of endocytosis . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 78 , 857 – 902 26 Rappoport , J . Z . ( 2008 ) Focusing on clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Biochem . J . 412 , 415 – 423 27 Daecke , J . etal . ( 2005 ) Involvementofclathrin - mediated endocytosisin human immunodeﬁciency virus type 1 entry . J . Virol . 79 , 1581 – 1594 28 Chao , W . T . and Kunz , J . ( 2009 ) Focal adhesion disassembly requires clathrin - dependent endocytosis of integrins . FEBS Lett . 583 , 1337 – 1343 29 Rappoport , J . Z . and Simon , S . M . ( 2009 ) Endocytic trafﬁcking of activated EGFR is AP - 2 dependent and occurs through preformed clathrin spots . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 1301 – 1305 30 Sturge , J . et al . ( 2002 ) N - WASP activation by a beta1 - integrin - dependent mechanism supports PI3K - independent chemotaxis stimulated by urokinase - type plasminogen activator . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 699 – 711 31 Bretscher , M . S . and Thomson , J . N . ( 1983 ) Distribution of ferritin receptors and coated pits on giant HeLa cells . EMBO J . 2 , 599 – 603 32 Davis , B . H . et al . ( 1982 ) Membrane activity and topography of F - Met - Leu - Phe - Treated polymorphonuclear leukocytes . Acute and sustained responses to chemotactic peptide . Am . J . Pathol . 108 , 206 – 216 33 Samaniego , R . et al . ( 2007 ) Rho / ROCK and myosin II control the polarized distribution of endocytic clathrin structures at the uropod of moving T lymphocytes . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 3534 – 3543 34 Damer , C . K . and O’Halloran , T . J . ( 2000 ) Spatially regulated recruitment of clathrin to the plasma membrane during capping and cell translocation . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 2151 – 2159 35 Kamiguchi , H . et al . ( 1998 ) The neural cell adhesion molecule L1 interacts with the AP - 2 adaptor and is endocytosed via the clathrin - mediated pathway . J . Neurosci . 18 , 5311 – 5321 Opinion Trends in Cell Biology Vol . 20 No . 2 77 36 Nishimura , T . and Kaibuchi , K . ( 2007 ) Numb controls integrin endocytosis for directional cell migration with aPKC and PAR - 3 . Dev . Cell . 13 , 15 – 28 37 Bretscher , M . S . ( 1988 ) Fibroblasts on the move . J . Cell Biol . 106 , 235 – 237 38 Grande - Garcia , A . and del Pozo , M . A . ( 2008 ) Caveolin - 1 in cell polarization and directional migration . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 87 , 641 – 647 39 Severs , N . J . ( 1988 ) Caveolae : static inpocketings of the plasma membrane , dynamic vesicles or plain artifact ? J . Cell Sci 90 , 341 – 348 40 Isshiki , M . et al . ( 2002 ) Sites of Ca ( 2 + ) wave initiation move with caveolaetothe trailing edgeof migratingcells . J . CellSci . 115 , 475 – 484 41 Parat , M . O . et al . ( 2003 ) Differential caveolin - 1 polarization in endothelial cells during migration in two and three dimensions . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 3156 – 3168 42 Galvez , B . G . et al . ( 2004 ) Caveolae are a novel pathway for membrane - type1matrixmetalloproteinasetrafﬁcinhumanendothelialcells . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 678 – 687 43 Hopkins , C . R . et al . ( 1994 ) In migrating ﬁbroblasts , recycling receptors are concentrated in narrow tubules in the pericentriolar area , and then routedtotheplasmamembraneoftheleadinglamella . J . CellBiol . 125 , 1265 – 1274 44 Laukaitis , C . M . et al . ( 2001 ) Differential dynamics of alpha 5 integrin , paxillin , and alpha - actinin during formation and disassembly of adhesions in migrating cells . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 1427 – 1440 45 Palecek , S . P . et al . ( 1996 ) Integrin dynamics on the tail region of migrating ﬁbroblasts . J . Cell Sci . 109 , 941 – 952 46 Kamiguchi , H . and Lemmon , V . ( 2000 ) Recycling of the cell adhesion molecule L1 in axonal growth cones . J . Neurosci . 20 , 3676 – 3686 47 Lawson , M . A . and Maxﬁeld , F . R . ( 1995 ) Ca 2 + - and calcineurin - dependent recycling of an integrin to the front of migrating neutrophils . Nature 377 , 75 – 79 48 Pierini , L . M . et al . ( 2000 ) Oriented endocytic recycling of alpha5beta1 in motile neutrophils . Blood 95 , 2471 – 2480 49 Parton , R . G . et al . ( 1992 ) Axonal and dendritic endocytic pathways in cultured neurons . J . Cell Biol . 119 , 123 – 137 50 Bonuccelli , G . et al . ( 2009 ) Caveolin - 1 ( P132L ) , a common breast cancer mutation , confers mammary cell invasiveness and deﬁnes a novel stem cell / metastasis - associated gene signature . Am . J . Pathol 174 , 1650 – 1662 51 Bershadsky , A . D . and Futerman , A . H . ( 1994 ) Disruption of the Golgi apparatus by brefeldin A blocks cell polarization and inhibits directed cell migration . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 91 , 5686 – 5689 52 Prigozhina , N . L . and Waterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2004 ) Protein kinase D - mediated anterograde membrane trafﬁcking is required for ﬁbroblast motility . Curr . Biol . 14 , 88 – 98 53 Mammoto , A . et al . ( 1999 ) Rab11BP / Rabphilin - 11 , a downstream target of rab11 small G protein implicated in vesicle recycling . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 25517 – 25524 54 Prigozhina , N . L . and Waterman - Storer , C . M . ( 2006 ) Decreased polarity and increased random motility in PtK1 epithelial cells correlate with inhibition of endosomal recycling . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 3571 – 3582 55 Yoon , S . O . et al . ( 2005 ) Hypoxia stimulates carcinoma invasion by stabilizing microtubules and promoting the Rab11 trafﬁcking of the alpha6beta4 integrin . Cancer Res . 65 , 2761 – 2769 56 Ng , T . et al . ( 1999 ) PKCalpha regulates beta1 integrin - dependent cell motility through association and control of integrin trafﬁc . EMBO J . 18 , 3909 – 3923 57 Powelka , A . M . etal . ( 2004 ) Stimulation - dependent recycling of integrin beta1 regulated by ARF6 and Rab11 . Trafﬁc 5 , 20 – 36 58 Altankov , G . and Grinnell , F . ( 1995 ) Fibronectin receptor internalization and AP - 2 complex reorganization in potassium - depleted ﬁbroblasts . Exp . Cell Res . 216 , 299 – 309 59 Shi , F . and Sottile , J . ( 2008 ) Caveolin - 1 - dependent beta1 integrin endocytosis is a critical regulator of ﬁbronectin turnover . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 2360 – 2371 60 Roberts , M . S . et al . ( 2004 ) Protein kinase B / Akt acts via glycogen synthase kinase 3 to regulate recycling of alpha v beta 3 and alpha 5 beta 1 integrins . Mol . Cell . Biol . 24 , 1505 – 1515 61 Skalski , M . andCoppolino , M . G . ( 2005 ) SNARE - mediatedtrafﬁckingof alpha ( 5 ) beta ( 1 ) integrin is required for spreading in CHO cells . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 335 , 1199 – 1210 62 Tayeb , M . A . et al . ( 2005 ) Inhibition of SNARE - mediated membrane trafﬁc impairs cell migration . Exp . Cell Res . 305 , 63 – 73 63 Upla , P . et al . ( 2004 ) Clustering induces a lateral redistribution of alpha 2 beta 1 integrin from membrane rafts to caveolae and subsequent protein kinase C - dependent internalization . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 625 – 636 64 Karjalainen , M . et al . ( 2008 ) A Raft - derived , Pak1 - regulated entry participates in alpha2beta1 integrin - dependent sorting to caveosomes . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 , 2857 – 2869 65 Woods , A . J . et al . ( 2004 ) PKD1 / PKCmu promotes alphavbeta3 integrin recycling and delivery to nascent focal adhesions . EMBO J . 23 , 2531 – 2543 66 Sancey , L . et al . ( 2009 ) Clustering and internalization of integrin alphavbeta3 with a tetrameric RGD - synthetic peptide . Mol . Ther . 17 , 837 – 843 67 De Deyne , P . G . et al . ( 1998 ) The vitronectin receptor associates with clathrin - coated membrane domains via the cytoplasmic domain of its beta5 subunit . J . Cell Sci . 111 , 2729 – 2740 68 Upla , P . et al . ( 2004 ) Clustering induces a lateral redistribution of alpha 2 beta 1 integrin from membrane rafts to caveolae and subsequent protein Kinase C - dependant internalization . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 625 – 636 69 Ramsay , A . G . et al . ( 2007 ) HS1 - associated protein X - 1 regulates carcinoma cell migration and invasion via clathrin - mediated endocytosis of integrin alphavbeta6 . Cancer Res . 67 , 5275 – 5284 Opinion Trends in Cell Biology Vol . 20 No . 2 78