Keynote Address W . H . Mac WILLIAMS M Y purpose here at this conference is to provide a background , first for meetings like this on subjects dealing with computers , and second , for this particular meeting . My qualifications for keynoting are , I think , as good as those of anyone here : as far as this particular meeting is concerned , I am not now directly engaged in working on computers of the type that we are going to discuss ; and the organization that I represent , the Bell Telephone Labora tories , is not in the business of making such computers . So I speak as a rela tively innocent bystander . This meeting , as your Chairman has indicated , is sponsored by the Joint AIEE - IRE Computer Committee , with assistance from the Association for Computing Machinery . It is a direct outgrowth of the successsful meeting a year ago at Atlantic City on electron tubes for computers . The Atlantic City meeting was initiated by Dr . A . L . Samuel as a representative of the Research Development Board , and was co - spon sored by the AIEE and IRE . Several factors were responsible for its success : it was timely ; it permitted a thorough discussion of a small number of subjects ; it brought together the divergent points of view of the manufacturer and the user ; and it lasted long enough for the different points of view to be assimilated . These advantages can be obtained only rarely in the general meetings of the sponsoring societies because their large member ships include so many different interests . These facts led Professor Brainerd to suggest the formation of the Joint AIEE - IRE Computer Committee , whose members are listed in the front matter of this book , to consider whether more meetings of the Atlantic City type should be held , and if so , on what subjects . We concluded that several subjects demanded attention , among them ( 1 ) a review of the useful results obtained from operating high - speed digital computers , ( 2 ) a com parison of the logic of these computers , ( 3 ) input and output equipment , ( 4 ) high speed memory , and ( 5 ) choice of number system . The first two subjects seemed to us to W . H . MAC WILLIAMS is with the Bell Telephone Laboratories , Whippany , N . J . be the most urgent , and led us to arrange this meeting . We hope that you will tell us whether you too feel that such meetings are desirable , and that you will indicate in a positive way which subjects you consider most important . The start of this meeting is clearly too early to ask for your opinions , but after the meet ing is over please let us have your views . We have arranged this meeting for you ; let us know how you feel about it . Now let ' s be more specific about this meeting . A review of life in the field of large - scale digital computers will make , it clear how timely this meeting is . Let me point out four phases of life in this field through which you have all passed , more or less together . The phases were preceded by a period of pioneering , in which a relatively small number of people developed computers such as the EN I AC and the MARK I calculator . The first phase I have called the future , or building , or talking phase . The com mon denominator was a remark some what like this : " What a wonderful critter our computer is going to be . " The second phase is what might be called the subjunctive , or debugging , or possibly the silent phase . The re marks that people made in this phase were , " It sure would be nice if we could get this thing to work . " The third phase is the present , or working , or bright - look phase , and the remarks that people made at this time were , " Our computer is working now , but we haven ' t had enough experience to judge it properly . " The fourth I have called the past or getting - results phase . This again is a talking phase , and people tend to say nowadays , " It has been working fine ; we are glad we built it , but we wish we had done this and this instead of what we actually did . However , we are going to fix that in our new model , and besides we are going to make it a lot simpler and more reliable . " It is because of this latter phase that we have scheduled this meeting now . Computer people have had enough ex perience to judge the large machines that they have produced , and it is ap propriate to take stock now , before people get too far along on the new round of machines which is being started . We may now state formally the pur pose of this meeting : namely , to assess the adequacy of the designs of present working high - speed digital computers in order to point out the direction in which computer design should go , to make computers best for the jobs that they have been doing and for the jobs that they will have to do . This is basically an engineering or design objective , but it is clear that it also involves the users in an important way . This is a meeting of both builders and users , all of whom are actively in terested in the field . It is a topical meeting because many people are looking around and deciding how to make new machines , for both civil and military purposes . A sensible assessment of the computers requires a study of their comparative anatomy ; that is , a comparison of the logics of their design . Summaries of logic have been included in the indiviual papers . Published material in this field ' has been rather sparse . Only a few machines have been well written up in material available to the general public . An important objective of this meeting has been to provide published proceedings that will be available to everyone . Much of the material on detailed subjects such as logic will be presented in abbre viated form , but the written material for the proceedings has not been cut . We have aimed to make the published proceedings a record of the characteris tics and usefulness of new operating high - speed computers . Most of the papers in this meeting are devoted to computers which are now in use . It has been our aim to combine the points of view of the builder and the user . In the case of the UNIVAC , we have papers by both the designer and the user , since they are separate groups . There have been two cases where we have not been able to follow this practice . In the case of the Harvard MARK III calculator , we have information from the user only , since the designer has already spoken at length about this machine . And in . the case of the ERA - 1101 , we have information from the builder only , because the user is not free to talk about his classified applications . There are three papers on the program that do not relate directly to individual machines . First , there is a report by one of the most prominent users of computing equipment , which will deal with en - Mac Williams — Keynote Address i > gineering applications of computers . This report will be given by Mr . C . R . Strang of the Douglas Aircraft Company . There also is on the program a paper on the application of transistors to digital computation , since these devices have tremendous possibilities for cutting down power consumption , computer size . . . . I had better stop myself before I give you a sales talk . The paper will be presented by Mr . J . H . Felker . An important objective of this meeting is to indicate desirable design trends . To assist in this objective and to start general discussion , the last paper will be a summary of the material presented and a forecast of the future of com puters , by Mr . J . W . Forrester . One could say really that we have been optimists to schedule a meeting like this . We feel that in addition to keep ing computer engineers employed—in itself a praiseworthy objective—a great deal of worthwhile experience has been obtained from the perhaps $ 30 , 000 , 000 that have been spent so far on large high - speed digital computers . It is im portant to get the most out of the ex perience resulting from this large amount of work , so that our new machines ca ; r be made as good as possible . We hope that this meeting will enable you to do just that . Please let us know how you like the meeting and what sug gestions you have for other similar meet ings . The U N I V AC System J . PRESPER ECKERT , JR . JAMES R . WEfNER Organization of the UNIVAC System I N March 1951 , the first UNIVAC * system formally passed its accept ance tests and was put promptly into operation by the Bureau of the Census . Since the UNIVAC is the first computer which can handle both alphabetic and numerical data to reach full - scale opera tion so far , its operating record and a re view of the types of problems to which it has been applied provide an interesting milestone in the ever - widening field of electronic digital computers . The organization of the UNIVAC is such that those functions which do not directly require the main computer are performed by separate auxiliary units each having its own power supply . Thus the keyboard to magnetic tape , punched card to magnetic tape and tape to type written copy operations are delegated to auxiliary components . The main computer assembly includes all of those units which are directly con cerned with the main or central computer operations . A block diagram of this ar rangement is shown in Figure 1 . All of the elements shown are contained within the central computer casework except the supervisory control desk ( SC ) and the Uniservos , * to which the lines in the upper right section of the diagram connect . The supervisory control , in addition to * Registered trade mark . H . FRAZER WELSH HERBERT F . MITCHELL all the necessary control switches and in dicator lights , contains an input key board . Also cabled to the supervisory control is a typewriter which is operable by the main computer . By means of these two units , limited amounts of in formation can be inserted or removed either at the will of the operator or by the programmed instructions . The input - output circuits operate on all data entering or leaving the com puter . The input and output synchro nizers properly time the incoming or out going data for either the Uniservos ( tape devices ) or the supervisory control de vices . The input and output registers ( / and 0 ) are each 60 word ( 720 char acters ) temporary storage registers which are intermediate between the main com puter and the input - output devices . The high - speed bus amplifier is a switching central through which all data must pass during transfer between any arithmetic register and the main memory or between the memory and the input - output registers . The arithmetic reg isters are shown along the bottom of dia gram each connected to the high speed bus system . The L - , F - , X - , and A - registers are each of one word or 12 - character capacity and are directly concerned with the arith metic operations . The V - and Y - reg isters are of 2 - and 10 - word capacity , re spectively . They are used solely for mul tiple word transfers within the main mem ory . Associated with the arithmetic reg isters are the algebraic adder ( AA ) , the comparator ( CP ) , and the multiplier quotient counter ( MQC ) . ADDITION - SUBTRACTION INSTRUCTIONS The addition - subtraction operations are performed in conjunction with the com parator since all numerical quantities are absolute magnitudes with an algebraic sign attached . Before either an addition or subtraction is performed , the two quan tities , one already in the A - register and the other either from the memory or from the . ^ - register , depending upon the par ticular instruction , are compared for mag nitude and sign . The adder inputs can then be switched so as always to produce a noncomplemented result for any oper ation . The choice of adder input ar rangement is therefore under the control of the comparator . The comparator also determines the proper sign for the result according to the usual algebraic rules . One additional function performed by the comparator for addition and subtrac tion is to control the complementer . This determination is based upon which opera tion ( + , or — ) is indicated , and , whether the signs are like or unlike . For a sub tract instruction , the sign of the subtra hend is reversed before entering the com parator . The comparator then compares the signs of the quantities in order to J . PRBSPBR ECKERT , JR . , JAMBS R . WBINBR , H . FRAZBR WELSH , and HERBERT F . MITCHELL are all with Eckert - Mauchly Computer Corporation , Divi sion of Remington Rand , Philadelphia , Pa . The UNIVAC System has been an over - all com pany project and hundreds of people have partici pated . It is , therefore , difficult to acknowledge the contributions of individuals . However , special mention must be made of the contributions of Mr . H . Lukoff , Mr . E . I . Blumenthal , Mr . L . D . Wilson , and Mr . J . D . Chapline , Jr . To the Census Bureau a great debt of gratitude is owed for their continuous support of this project . 6 Eckert , Weiner , Welsh , Mitchell—The UNIVAC System