Vol . : ( 0123456789 ) Educational Psychology Review ( 2023 ) 35 : 66 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10648 - 023 - 09789 - 3 1 3 REVIEW ARTICLE A Theoretical and Metatheoretical Reframing of the Development of Cognitive Processing and Learning Daniel L . Dinsmore 1 · Luke K . Fryer 2 · Denis G . Dumas 3 Accepted : 7 June 2023 / Published online : 20 June 2023 © The Author ( s ) , under exclusive licence to Springer Science + Business Media , LLC , part of Springer Nature 2023 Abstract The literature on cognitive processing and strategic processing is murky with regard to how these types of processing influence learning . One reason for this is that the frameworks used to investigate these relations have separately focused on differ - ent aspects related to cognitive processing with little integration between them . To address these issues , we discuss why this may have happened , and the obstacles to integrating multiple models , and give three exemplars of how integrated models can help untangle the relations between cognitive processing and learning . Specifi - cally , we highlight the Model of Domain Learning , Self - regulated Learning , and Approaches to Learning . Our goal in developing these integrations is to provide researchers with a more complex , dynamic way to evaluate the role of cognition in learning . Keywords Strategies · Strategic processing · Cognitive processing · Surface - level processing · Deep - level processing · Learning The purpose of this special issue is to break down theoretical barriers and encour - age theoretical integration . Our focus in this contribution to the special issue is to examine these theoretical barriers in the area of individuals’ cognitive processing . We will delve into what we mean with this term throughout the article , but to orient readers who might be newer to this area of cognitive processing , it refers to the spe - cialized procedural knowledge needed to make progress on a task or problem ( Press - ley et al . , 1989 ) . These cognitive processes can be either intentional and effortful Topical Collection on Hybridizing Motivational Strains . * Daniel L . Dinsmore daniel . dinsmore @ unf . edu 1 Dean’s Office , University of North Florida , Bldg 57 , Suite 3600 , 1 UNF Drive , Jacksonville , FL 32224 , USA 2 Faculty of Education , The University of Hong Kong , Pok Fu Lam , Hong Kong 3 Department of Educational Psychology , University of Georgia , Athens , GA , USA Educational Psychology Review ( 2023 ) 35 : 66 1 3 66 Page 2 of 18 ( i . e . , strategic ) or automatized ( i . e . , skillful ; Alexander et al . , 1998 ) . We also want to situate this problem within the broader special issue . While each of the seven ques - tions that are central to this special issue is considered within this article , we address four of them most specifically to frame our exploration here . In particular , we are here concerned with instances where current models utilized in educational psychol - ogy are falling short of explaining cognitive and metacognitive processing ( Q1 of the special issue ) ; the importance of examining the fundamental differences in meta - theoretical assumptions in reconciling or integrating theories / models of cognitive processing ( Q6 of the special issue ) ; and how models within and outside of edu - cational psychology can be better utilized both in explaining cognitive processing itself ( Q3 of the special issue ) as well as better predicting learning outcomes ( Q5 ) . Why the Current Theoretical Status Quo in the Cognitive Processing Literature Needs to be Addressed In order to discuss why more and better theoretical integration is needed , vis - à - vis the cognitive processing literature , we need to lay out why this theoretical integra - tion is even necessary . What has become abundantly clear over the past few decades is that , in general , the field’s shared understanding of cognitive processing has not progressed to the degree that it needs to either in the research literature or in edu - cational practice . We realize this is a bold claim , in its support we provide numer - ous examples across theoretical frameworks to make this case : examples that will be provided throughout this article . Central to cognitive processing in educational psychology and related fields is the assumption , sometimes implicit , that “better” cognitive processing will result in better learning outcomes . However , it remains unclear what “better” cognition might actually mean : does it mean deeper , faster , or more often utilized processes , or something else ? Multiple reviews published in this journal and elsewhere high - lighted and underscored this general issue . For example , in an investigation of 134 studies that examined the relation between strategic processing and learning out - comes , Dinsmore ( 2017 ) argued that the frequency of strategy use was much less predictive than when a strategy was used ( i . e . , conditional use of that strategy ) as well as how well that strategy was used ( i . e . , quality of that strategy ) . However , reex - amining this issue through the conditional use and quality of strategy deployment is far from the only way to reconceptualize the naïve assumptions about “better” or “more” cognitive processing that we believe continue to exist in the literature . Thus , we briefly present three cases of theoretical work in the educational psychol - ogy literature here , along with a discussion of how these theories contradict naïve assumptions and , importantly , why these models themselves are not the sole answer to building better theories around cognitive processing . The three models we focus on initially in this article are commonly used by educational psychologists to con - ceptualize and operationalize cognitive processing . Our intention here is not to describe each of these models in detail as there are extensive writings on all three in the literature , but rather to discuss what they add to our understanding of cognitive processing and what they do not address . 1 3 Educational Psychology Review ( 2023 ) 35 : 66 Page 3 of 18 66 In general , we gather ideas from each of these three theoretical perspectives in order to potentially push the discourse on cognitive processing forward . We believe that by integrating the full complexity of cognition within an education setting is necessary for engaging in fruitful scholarly conversation about the phenomenon of learning that is the focus of our scholarly discipline : each of these three the - oretical approaches bring critically important aspects of that phenomenon to the table , while potentially missing other aspects . So , we begin by discussing these approaches in terms of what they place in the foreground of their theoretical view , and what is more in the background from each perspective . Then , we work to inte - grate these various foci into a theoretical discussion that we hope will be useful as the field moves forward toward a fuller embrace of the complexities of the phenom - ena we study . Student Approaches to Learning Research into levels of processing during the learning process has historically been divided into two streams . North American research into memory and atten - tion ( Neisser , 1967 ; Treisman , 1964 , 1969 ) came together in the well - cited distinc - tions put forward by Craik and Lockhart ( 1972 ) . American educational psychology research that has built on this division is well represented by the Model of Domain Learning ( MDL ) . European deep and surface processing research was first signaled by educational psychology research that examined how changes in testing ( i . e . , from essays to more “objective” measures ; Ruch , 1929 ) affected students’ study processes ( Meyer , 1934 , 1935 ; Terry , 1933 ) . Some decades later , Marton and Säljo reported on their unpublished research program examining students’ self - reported levels of processing after having read a passage and completing a test ( 1976a ) and their fol - low - up study ( 1976b ) . This research aimed to induce deep and surface processing and learning outcomes through assessment structure ( i . e . , surface processing = fac - tual ; deep processing = conceptual ) . While Marton and Säljo ( 1976a ; 1976b ) did not cite Craik and Lockhart , it is clear that their test of processing levels was indebted to their distinction . As noted by Richardson ( 2015 ) , the term Student Approaches to Learning ( SAL ; Marton & Säljo , 1984 ) came later as the field began to coalesce around how adults learn , with the majority of the research being done in higher edu - cation . During the late 1970s and early 1980s , Ramsden and Entwistle connected , applied , and upscaled Marton and Säljo’s research on depth of processing and its connections to perceptions of assessment structure to the broader context of learning at a university ( Entwistle & Ramsden , 1983 ) . This was undertaken through inter - views with students and surveys designed to assess and enable correlations between students’ perceptions of the course learning environment ( e . g . , clear goals , work - load , formality of teaching , social climate ; Ramsden , 1979 ) and the self - reported processing students’ employed to learn during courses ( Ramsden & Entwistle , 1981 ) . This extension of Marton and Saljo’s work then combined students’ motiva - tion and proximal learning goals to the depth of their processing . This fusion of pro - cessing with these affective constructs moved this program of research from depth of processing toward depth of learning approach . Hundreds of studies have built on Educational Psychology Review ( 2023 ) 35 : 66 1 3 66 Page 4 of 18 these beginnings , resulting in a wide variety of self - report surveys—many of which were centered on studying for university tests and examinations ( Dinsmore , 2017 ) . In our view , two key issues have prevented the Student Approaches to Learn - ing arrangement of levels of cognitive processing from having a substantial singu - lar impact on our understanding of how students learn . The first is that this model largely ignores an individual’s prior and developing knowledge of a domain , and relies exclusively on expectations / perceptions of the learning environment to pre - dict depth of processing . While it is the case that prior knowledge can have vari - ous differential effects on learning , the effects of prior knowledge of learning hold generally ( e . g . , Hattie , 2015 ) and with various domains such as reading ( e . g . , Hattan et al . , 2023 ) , science ( e . g . , Braasch & Goldman , 2010 ) , and mathematics ( e . g . , Fyfe et al . , 2012 ) . Second , its pairing motivation / goal and processing depth has concep - tual and resulting measurement weaknesses that have never been resolved , particu - larly with regard to validity and reliability of measurement relating to issues of self - report ( Asikainen & Gijbels , 2017 ) . This issue is further elucidated in the following paragraph . The first point is an issue that has been addressed by the Model of Domain Learn - ing ( Alexander , 1997 , 2004 ) . The development of knowledge in a domain is cen - tral to understanding how cognitive processing changes across the broader learning experience . In formal education , this experience is punctuated by assessment expe - riences . The second point , ATL’s construct - level pairing of motivation and goals ( or intentions ) and depth of cognitive processing ( i . e . , surface approaches and deep approaches to learning ) , causes problems at both theoretical and measurement lev - els . Theoretically , if a developmental model were to explain a substantial proportion of an individual’s depth of cognitive processing ( Dinsmore & Alexander , 2012 ) , it would render this construct - level pairing inaccurate . Measurement , particularly with weak construct validity and reliability for surface processing ( e . g . , Fryer et al , 2012 ; Richardson , 1994 ) , has also been a persistent issue . We suggest these issues might be remedied by separating depth of cognitive processing and students’ motivation and goal constructs and applying motivation and goals as predictors and outcomes of cognitive processing depth . This approach would be more consistent with the MDL’s approach to modeling cognitive processing , opening the door to integration . The Model of Domain Learning Alexander’s ( Alexander , 1997 , 2003 , 2004 ; Fives & Dinsmore , 2018 ) Model of Domain Learning is quite clear in how it addresses the issue of cognitive process - ing—and specifically strategy use . Rather than assuming that more cognitive pro - cessing is necessarily better , the model is specific with regard to what types of strat - egies are useful to the learner at certain points in their development of expertise . Although the model describes three forces , i . e . , knowledge , strategies , and interest , we only focus on strategies here . The strategies in the MDL refer to both surface - level strategies ( i . e . , specialized procedural knowledge aimed at understanding or solving a well - structured problem ; Dinsmore & Alexander , 2016 ) and deep - level strategies ( i . e . , specialized procedural 1 3 Educational Psychology Review ( 2023 ) 35 : 66 Page 5 of 18 66 knowledge aimed at transforming a problem or solving an ill - structured problem ; Dinsmore & Alexander , 2016 ) . Importantly , these two types of strategies do not both increase , rather , as the learner moves away from acclimation ( i . e . , from nov - ice to expert , there is actually a decrease in surface - level strategies while deep - level strategies increase ; Fig . 1 ) . This is important as these deeper - level strategies require both higher levels of domain knowledge as well as the investment of the learner that only higher levels of individual interest provide ( e . g . , Schiefele , 1999 ) . While the MDL provides clear predictions of what happens to cognitive pro - cesses—specifically strategies—less clear in the model is how other types of strat - egies such as metacognitive or self - regulatory strategies play a role alongside the domain - specific surface - and deep - level strategies . Certainly , Alexander has dis - cussed the importance of these types of strategies ( e . g . , Alexander , 2004 ) , and the interactions of these types of strategies have been empirically investigated ( e . g . , Dinsmore & Zoellner , 2018 ) ; there is a further need to articulate the complex inter - relations between domain - specific strategies described in the MDL and self - regula - tory strategies—which we turn to next . Self‑regulated Learning Of these three models , self - regulated learning ( SRL ) is probably the most difficult to discuss as SRL is not a monolith , but rather a collection of models some of which focus on , or are underpinned by , very different philosophical and metatheoretical assumptions—the latter of which we will discuss more in depth subsequently ( Pana - dero , 2017 ) . For instance , SRL ranges from models that emphasize motivational aspects , such as Zimmerman and Schunk’s ( 2001 ) model , to Winne and Hadwin’s Fig . 1 Predictions about the development of strategies across the stages of expertise in the MDL . Note : from Alexander ( 2005 ) . Used with permission Educational Psychology Review ( 2023 ) 35 : 66 1 3 66 Page 6 of 18 ( 1998 ) model that specifically addresses the use of strategies ( i . e . , tactics ) . While the former is underpinned by Bandura’s social - cognitive theory ( e . g . , Bandura , 1986 ) , the latter is underpinned by information processing approaches ( e . g . , Simon , 1978 ) . While these are two of the more well - cited examples , SRL also encompasses phe - nomenological models such as the one McCombs ( 1986 ) has forwarded . For this discussion to stay within the bounds of the article , we have chosen to discuss Winne and Hadwin’s COPES model here as it most directly relates to cognitive processing . The COPES ( conditions , operations , products , evaluations , and standards ) model ( Fig . 2 ) addresses cognitive processing in two of these areas . These are in the opera - tions and products . With regard to operations , the COPES model includes acquired tactics and strategies ( i . e . , strategies aimed at information manipulation ) . These so - called SMART strategies ( searching , monitoring , assembling , rehearsing , and Fig . 2 Winne and Hadwin’s COPES model 1 3 Educational Psychology Review ( 2023 ) 35 : 66 Page 7 of 18 66 translating ) are cognitive in nature as they produce cognitive products ( Greene & Azevedo , 2007 ) . These operations thus result in products that include studying tac - tics ( i . e . , stage 3 in the model ; e . g . , remembering a piece of text ) . Further , the COPES model articulates monitoring at both the object level and the metalevel ( Greene & Azevedo , 2007 ) . The object level refers to the learner compar - ing the product to their initial standard ( i . e . , cognitive evaluations ) , and the meta - level ( i . e . , metacognition ) refers to thinking about metalevel information—such as task difficulty—that might result in a change of standards . Thus , the COPES model explicitly articulates cognitive and metacognitive strategies in what Winne and Had - win referred to as a “recursive , weakly sequenced system” ( p . 281 ) . Greene and Azevedo ( 2007 ) highlight the power of such a model thusly , “The inclusion of moni - toring and control in the cognitive architecture allows these processes to influence each phase of SRL” ( p . 337 ) . The COPES model also addresses the environment in which the learner is self - regulating . Specifically , the model hypothesizes that task conditions ( i . e . , resources , instructional cues , time , and social context ) influence operations—which include acquired tactics and strategies . For instance , more instructional control , such as instructional cues from the teacher that communicate to students they have task choices , generally results in greater use of tactics and strategies ( Lodewyk et al . , 2009 ) . In summary , the COPES model addresses both domain - general cognitive pro - cessing and metacognitive processing and articulates how the relations between them change as learners continually iterate ( or not ) through the cycle . However , the COPES does not articulate any domain - specific processes or differentiate between types of processes ( e . g . , levels ) . Additionally , we agree with Greene and Azevedo that while the COPES does address influences of the environment , “What is not clear is how exactly this occurs” ( p . 344 ) . Where Does this Leave the Field ? To summarize , this leaves the field—educational psychology and its related areas— with three models that explicitly address cognitive processing during student learn - ing or the development of expertise . These models address important questions regarding cognitive processing . For SAL , how do coursework and the structure of that coursework during a semester influence how students process information ? For the MDL , how does the nature of the procedural knowledge a student employs— specifically strategies—change over time as individuals move toward more expert performance in a domain ? And finally , for the COPES model , how does an indi - vidual’s primitive and acquired tactics and strategies ( i . e . , operations in the model ) influence the products of SRL ( i . e . , task definitions , goals , tactics , and adaptations ) and ultimately performance ? In our view , these three models place fundamentally different aspects of cognitive processing in their theoretical foreground , while they each leave other aspects in their background . Namely , SAL centers on the environ - ment , the MDL on domain - specific strategies , and COPES on domain - general and metacognitive strategies . Additionally , the MDL examines long - term development Educational Psychology Review ( 2023 ) 35 : 66 1 3 66 Page 8 of 18 over lengthy stages , the COPES model examines short - term changes over the course of a task , and SAL is not necessarily developmental—or at the very least only exam - ines changes in student strategy use over the course of an academic semester . Thus , the question is not which current model should we pursue more , but rather how do we reconcile , integrate , transform , or discard these models or parts of these models to ask newer and better research questions about cognitive pro - cessing to facilitate individuals’ learning , performance , and pathways to expertise in a domain . We very much agree with Box and Draper’s ( 1987 ) contention that , “Essentially , all models are wrong , but some are useful” ( p . 474 ) . The trick is , of course , figuring out which model is useful for whom ( as well when and how that usefulness is relevant ) . Given this reminder , our intention here is not to produce one new canonical model , but rather provide guidance on how we might engage in cross - cutting model integration , in order to move the scholarly discourse forward into a more nuanced whole . Before we engage in this work , we also want to comment on what we think the barriers are to accomplishing our goal . In other words , why are educational psy - chologists not already doing this ? While there is no data on this problem per se , we would conjecture three reasons . First , the nature of doctoral training likely leads to “campism” in selecting the models that guide our research agendas . Second , recon - ciling , integrating , and transforming models is complex work that might be difficult or unwieldy to accomplish in any one paper . And , third , models do not necessarily share a whole host of assumptions that we should be attending to when reconciling , integrating , and transforming them . The former two issues we address briefly , while the latter issue we expound upon in the next section . First , with regard to campism , we have seen in our own careers and those of our colleagues the tendency to use , promote , and write about the theories and models our advisors did . This in and of itself is not a bad thing , but if it results in cer - tain groups holding fast to certain models , with other groups holding fast to other models without reflection and examination of those models then we would contend that this pattern is indeed not helpful . Rather , it would be our hope that each indi - vidual might be an advocate for a particular theoretical point of view , but recognize that their model is not perfect—as Box and Draper reminded us—and endeavor to understand other models in the pursuit of a more useful theory to move the field forward . Analogously , we agree with Helmreich’s ( 1975 ) lamentation in social psy - chology between theoretical and applied branches that , “The conflict between those entrenched in both the applied and the theoretical camps is a war without heroes” ( p . 553 ) . For us , the heroes here are those that work across the boundaries of theoretical and methodological divides and therefore help produce an organized and integrated agenda for the field in general . Second , it seems to us that cross - cutting work among different theoretical models presents additional challenges in terms of publication . Part of this issue is related to the first point , where certain journals privilege certain theories , models , or meth - ods . Again , this is not necessarily always a negative , but the need for the field to be cognizant of this issue is important . More problematic what we have seen as journal editors and reviewers is that papers that rely on one model without further complexi - fication may have an easier time through the review process . Colloquially , because 1 3 Educational Psychology Review ( 2023 ) 35 : 66 Page 9 of 18 66 an empirical study that is closely steeped in a single theoretical viewpoint might be perceived as more internally consistent and clearly communicated , there can be less for the reviewer to pick at , but ultimately in our view , less contribution to the field . How many more studies do we need that examine students’ strategies in an under - graduate course through one particular theoretical lens ? On the other hand , trying to fuse models together in new ways opens the authors up to reviewers and editors finding , again colloquially , more to pick at . It might be that , unfortunately , the more complication added to an individual empirical or review paper , the more danger there is that a reviewer or editor might reject a paper . The Importance of Attending to Metatheoretical Assumptions The third barrier—in our view—requires more discussion . Part of the complexity of reconciling , integrating , and transforming models is that they are not all built of the same materials , in the same sizes , or in similar shapes . The creation of alloys ( two pure metals combined or a metal and non - metal combined ) here serves as an apt analogy for us . The purpose of an alloy is to create a better material than the two pure elements that one started with . In order to create an alloy , metals are mixed from their liquid state , rather than their solid state where mixing is much more dif - ficult . In this section , we attempt to metaphorically “melt” these models down to better understand how they might strengthen each other and be combined later into a new , stronger , alloy . Metatheoretical Assumptions Finding the convergences and divergences of models and fusing them together will not be effective unless the underlying metatheoretical assumptions of each model and the resulting fused model are considered and made explicit . By metatheoretical assumptions , we are referring to the ontological and epistemic groundings of a the - ory or model . Ontological groundings refer to the study of “what is” ( e . g . , Hofwe - ber , 2011 ) , while epistemological groundings refer to the study of knowledge and justified belief ( e . g . , Steup , 2014 ) . In this section , we lay out the metatheoretical assumptions of the three models described previously as well as how these might be reconciled as we consider the fusions of these three models . It is important to note that these metatheoretical assumptions of the existing models are our interpre - tations from the theoretical and empirical work in these areas . However , since these metatheoretical assumptions have not been explicit , we do hold that others’ interpre - tations may differ from ours , and more likely in much of the extant literature have remained unexamined . There are three issues to consider here—the focus on what develops , how it develops , and when it develops . First , with regard to what develops , we need to reconcile that these three models have different foci regarding cognitive and meta - cognitive processing . For the MDL , the focus is on cognitive processing and in particular levels of cognitive processing with regard to domain - general and Educational Psychology Review ( 2023 ) 35 : 66 1 3 66 Page 10 of 18 domains - specific strategies . For SAL , the focus is similarly on the levels of pro - cessing of the individual . For COPES , the focus is on self - regulatory , metacogni - tive , and study strategies that are domain general . The literature for all three models suggests that findings are mixed empirically with regard to how these processes relate to learning outcomes ( e . g . , Asikainen & Gijbels , 2017 ; Dinsmore , 2017 ) . One interpretation of these mixed findings is that there are instances in that study strategies help , instances that they do not , and similar instances that domain - spe - cific strategies help and instances in which they do not . More likely , however , in our view is that these strategies interact in dynamic ways depending on when they are examined . For example , a novice learner is going to rely more heavily on study strategies and surface - level processing , whereas an expert is going to rely primarily on metacognitive strategies and deep - level processing . The puzzle , however , is yet to have been pieced together . Second , not only do these models differ in what develops the span in which they develop is different as well . The COPES model examines changes in recursive cycles at the task level . SAL has typically been examined at the course level over the span of a semester or two ( e . g . , Fryer & Vermunt , 2018 ; Ramsden & Entwistle , 1981 ) . The MDL has examined development over the trajectory from novice to expert ; however , most of this has been studied cross - sectionally ( e . g . , Dinsmore et al . , 2018 ) . Again , it is quite possible that the mixed findings in the literature might be a result of not only what changes ( e . g . , study strategies , domain - specific , deep - level processes ) but when they are most likely to change to impact learning outcomes . Third , we also need to determine how we model this development . These three models have fundamentally different developmental mechanisms . For the MDL , development occurs in stages ; for COPES , it is cyclical ; and for SAL , it is person - environment interaction . Do we expect development to occur in cycles throughout a task , in stages over the course of years , or is there some person - environment inter - action that has to be examined moment - by - moment ? Cognitive Processing Fused Model Exemplars—Future Directions for Research Evidence to answer the question we posed herein can only be collected by fusing these models . By simply collecting evidence separately , we cannot begin to figure out how these foci , time spans , and mechanisms of development interact . As we consider exemplars of fused models to investigate cognitive processing , it is impera - tive that what the fused model is useful for is considered . In other words , which of the core models discussed here ( e . g . , the MDL , SAL , COPES ) , how the key aspects of that model to bring to the forefront , and what theoretical assumptions they might have can only be done in light of the problem to be solved . Thus , we highlight two exemplars here—a more focused investigation fusing SAL and the MDL as well as a much broader scenario involving all three . 1 3 Educational Psychology Review ( 2023 ) 35 : 66 Page 11 of 18 66 MDL‑SAL to Examine How Coursework Can Help Develop Expertise in Academic Domains The first of these fused models is between the MDL and SAL . We believe that such as fusion would be most beneficial in studies of older students—e . g . , postsecond - ary undergraduate and graduate students—that examine how university coursework influences the trajectory of their careers . In many countries—and in the USA espe - cially—there is increasing emphasis being placed on universities as institutions that prepare individuals for careers in the workplace . Thus , a model that focuses on the development of expertise in an academic domain that includes their cognitive processing ( e . g . , the MDL ) and a model that examines how coursework shapes stu - dents’ cognitive processing are promising candidates . Foregrounding Key Variables As discussed previously , the foci of these two models are quite different with regard to the time span and developmental mechanism . For the MDL , the specific focus vis - à - vis cognitive processing is how the individual acquires and uses two types of cognitive processes—i . e . , surface - level and deep - level processing—as they develop the requisite expertise in an academic domain . The MDL provides a prediction regarding the decrease and increase , respectively , of these processes as the indi - vidual develops more expertise . What it has not captured adequately is how or why this trajectory of cognitive processing changes . In other words , it does not directly answer such questions as what are optimal instructional processes to facilitate more expert cognitive processing among others . SAL , on the other hand , has foregrounded attempts to understand how particular instructional methods or course experiences may support or inhibit deep - level pro - cessing—person - environment fit . Attending to Their Metatheoretical Assumptions While it would be tempting to simply say that we can create a fused model from these two models by simply foregrounding the MDL’s trajectory of experts’ reli - ance on deep versus surface processing and SAL’s hypothesis about instructional contexts , the metatheoretical differences described earlier are important to attend to . Both models include the notion that a particular process ( or strategy in the MDL ) is either surface level or deep level and this is how they have been investigated ( see Aaskinanin & Gijbels , 2017 for SAL and Dinsmore et al . , 2018 for the MDL ) . Thus , there seems to be little issue with fusing these models based on this assumption . Development , on the other hand , has two divergences that need to be addressed if the models are to be fused . The first is the focus on intra versus interindividual differences and the second is the time periods of development that are considered . Theoretically and empirically speaking , the MDL has focused on intra - individual differences ( i . e . , change within an individual over time ) , while SAL has focused Educational Psychology Review ( 2023 ) 35 : 66 1 3 66 Page 12 of 18 on both intra - and inter - individual differences ( i . e . , change across individuals over time ) . This is important as a focus on how an individual changes over time ( e . g . , from novice to expert ) regarding their cognitive processing is quite different from what instructional practices or course attributes change their use of cognitive pro - cessing over the course of a semester or program . Thus , the research questions asked in studies using these two models have been very different . This is not to say that both types of questions cannot be asked in the same study ; however , this cre - ates some analytic challenges which we address further subsequently . Thus , there are questions about how one might design a research study using these two models with regard to between - subjects design ( for SAL ) or cross - sectional / longitudinal studies ( for the MDL ) . The choice of either type of design will fit one model but not the other . Further , the causes of this development are different both in their origin and how they are manifested . By origin , we refer to the source of causality for change in cognitive processing . For the MDL , these sources of causality are internal . It is theorized that as one force changes , it supports or inhibits change in another source—with the forces being knowledge , strategies , and interest . For instance , in the MDL , it is not possible to employ deep - level processes without a concurrent accrual of domain and topic knowledge . For SAL , there is no such assumption that these internal processes have any bearing on whether or not deep - level processes are employed . Rather , the application of a particular level of strategy is usually solely dependent on the course or instructional context . It is certainly possible the causes of change in cognitive processing could be both—and indeed these two fac - tors may be interactive or only be relevant in certain circumstances . Finally , though , both models are relatively similar in that they are situated within the Cartisian - split mechanistic tradition . The MDL is a stage - like model that is not proposed to be recursive and causality moves only in one direction . SAL , however , has no such undergirding . For example , a student might thrive in one course given certain environmental conditions ( e . g . , an inquiry - focused course ) and struggle in another ( e . g . , a lecture - based course ) . Importantly , cross - sectional interindivid - ual examinations of cognitive and metacognitive processing could not predict or explain this . Rather , considerations of true longitudinal research are necessary . Promises of an MDL‑SAL Fused Model Given that these metatheoretical challenges make writing research questions , designing the study , and analyzing the study more difficult , why would we pursue such a fused model ? It is precisely the differences in the metatheoretical assump - tions that we believe need further prodding . For instance , as foreshadowed previ - ously , there has been little investigation of the potential interactive effects of the individual forces alluded to in the MDL and the course contexts alluded to in SAL . While , in our view , the MDL has provided the general contours of the devel - opment of expertise and the role of cognitive processing within this development , greater precision will require new ways of thinking about this complex , dynamic problem that builds on those strengths of the MDL . In other words , we have largely 1 3 Educational Psychology Review ( 2023 ) 35 : 66 Page 13 of 18 66 ignored the shifting classroom contexts that students engage in that make learn - ing so difficult to predict or explain and we have thus subsequently wondered why our models are not incredibly predictive or explanatory to the more minor fluctua - tions over time even though the larger contours that the MDL predicts seem to hold . This premise is depicted visually in Fig . 3 where we draw on Alexander’s predicted change in cognitive processing and add the additional contours needed to explain how day - to - day learning impacts the much larger developmental spectrum for which the MDL’s predictive power is so useful . In this figure , we maintain the general contours of the MDL—its developmen - tal nature on the x - axis and the frequency of strategy use on the y - axis . However , instead of representing the development of these levels of processing by a single line that represents the mean level , in this model , we represent these tracks as indi - vidually varying spaghetti . We attribute the variances to the shapes of these curves in individuals’ deep - and surface - level processing to two major influences which we have discussed previously : metacognitive monitoring , and affordances ( or lack thereof ) in the learning environment . More metacognitive monitoring and con - trol increase one’s ability to engage in more deep - level processing , while the lack thereof is unlikely to cause shifts in cognitive processing from predominantly sur - face level to a more deep level . The other influence is the nature of the learning environment in which the learner is situated . Certain learning environments will raise or lower these levels of processing . For instance , these types of effects have been demonstrated by the studies of Marton and Säljo as well as more contempo - rary examinations about how instructions for task experiences influence the quality of processing and learning outcomes ( e . g . , McCrudden et al . , 2010 ) . Two additional notes to the proposed model above are also in order . First , the tra - jectories depicted in Fig . 3 represent optimal trajectories . While the MDL describes the optimal path to expertise for processing , we acknowledge that not all learners will become experts . Thus , we have labeled the x - axis as “timeframe” to signify that most learners will simply plateau or stagnate in the processes they employ in a given domain . Indeed , there are a wide variety of reasons that a learner might plateau and never reach the levels of deeper - processing strategies in what the MDL Fig . 3 Contours of strategic processing in an MDL - SAL integrated model Educational Psychology Review ( 2023 ) 35 : 66 1 3 66 Page 14 of 18 described as the competence stage , much less expertise . For example , a budding computer scientist might be put into a class where they are expected to simply learn rote processes of coding . This environmental influence will likely obviate the need for deeper - processing strategies , depress the need for metacognitive activity , and not ignite any situational interest . On the other hand , in a class where learners are free to explore open - ended coding experiences that align with their other interests ( e . g . , coding a game ) , they may need to employ deeper - level strategies , engage in metacognitive activity , and spark their situational interest . Second , the influences of the attributes discussed previously ( i . e . , environmen - tal factors , individual differences , and metacognitive monitoring and control ) are dependent on when those particular factors are present . There may be times when a particular learning environment has a positive influence on the use of deep - process - ing strategies and other times when it might do the opposite . For example , there may be times when rote learning is important for further development and times when it is not . In other words , if we were to zoom in on an individual’s trajectory , the curve would likely be jagged and in many cases—at least in the short term—polynomial , such as a cubic function instead of just one quadratic bend . Thus , it is extremely important that the timeframe with which an individual or group of individuals are being measured is clearly specified . Fusing the MDL , COPES , and SAL While the above example of a fused MDL and SAL model can be specified more easily , fusing these three is more difficult . Given the space constraints here , we do not claim to fully explicate such a model ; rather , we aim to provide a beginning to these conversations that we feel are essential . Foregrounding Key Variables Key to unlocking the mixed findings in the literature vis - à - vis cognitive and meta - cognitive processing is combining the correct variables , at the correct times , with the correct mechanisms . With regard to the key variables , there is ample evidence that the variables described previously for each model by themselves cannot ade - quately explain or predict learning outcomes well . As in the last exemplar with the MDL and SAL , we would also envision a model in which the cycle described in the COPES model is integrated with the person - environment fit described in SAL . This would address Greene and Azevedo’s ( 2017 ) suggestion to better describe how task conditions and operations change iteratively in the COPES model . Likewise , juxtaposing study strategies , metacognitive strategies , domain - specific strategies , and the levels at which these strategies operate ( i . e . , deep versus surface ) can address an issue put forth by Alexander ( 2004 ) about how metacognitive strate - gies develop during the three stages of expertise ( i . e . , acclimation , competence , and proficiency ) . 1 3 Educational Psychology Review ( 2023 ) 35 : 66 Page 15 of 18 66 Attending to and Leveraging Their Metatheoretical Assumptions The issue with a model that attempts to fuse COPES , the MDL , and SAL is the com - plexity of fusing a stage model ( i . e . , the MDL ) and a cyclical model ( i . e . , COPES ) with one that does not describe development in either fashion ( i . e . , person - envi - ronment interaction in SAL ) . In other words , do we focus our efforts on iterative , short - term changes , sweeping long - term changes , or some combination ? In order to accomplish the latter , it will require longitudinal studies that rely on concurrent strategy use . The longitudinal nature is necessary to capture the development over time while the concurrent strategy use is required to capture ongoing task - level and course - level changes within the individual . Utilizing both variable - centered ( e . g . , Freed et al . , 2020 ) and person - centered approaches ( e . g . , latent profile analysis ; Fryer & Shum , 2020 ) will be required . This would be a major change in that the processing literature is dominated by retrospective surveys such as the Motivated Strategies for Learning Questionnaire given at one time point . Promises of a COPES , MDL , SAL Integrated Model The promise of such as model is to hone both our explanation of student learning and how cognitive and metacognitive processing contribute to it and our ability to predict longer - term trends in both learning and the development of expertise . In other words , by fusing these models—or at least aspects of them—we can decrease the mixed findings across the literature with regard to the relations between process - ing and learning outcomes . Certainly , the picture will not be as simple as the linear increases and decreases in Fig . 1 . While we suggested in the fusion of the MDL and SAL that environmental conditions may bend these linear relations in Fig . 1 , the COPES model would suggest that even the curves in Fig . 3 would be inadequate . The truer picture of one’s development of the host of processes encapsulated in this article is likely quite jagged as the individual engages in that cycle of self - regula - tion . More successful individuals will move toward the general contours predicted by the MDL and may be pushed further toward it ( or away ) by the environmental forces set forth in SAL . Concluding Thoughts One assumption that we have made from the beginning of this article is that there should be theoretical integration for the theories mentioned in this article . One , this does not mean that the theories on their own do not offer valuable insights into the phenomena which they describe or explain . For instance , if one were to only want to explain changes at the task level , the COPES model would be the obvious choice for those we reviewed here . Importantly , these models and theories provide containers for which we can neatly organize research findings ( e . g . , Tracey & Morrow , 2017 ) . However , we also believe that only seeing through one lens—whether it is because Educational Psychology Review ( 2023 ) 35 : 66 1 3 66 Page 16 of 18 of the difficulty in integrating the theories for publication or because of the camp - ism we described earlier—we do believe opportunities will be missed in seeing the larger picture if the same researchers are only looking through their particular lens . This is akin to having astronomy divided into those that look only at the near - Earth outer space , those that look at only our solar system , and only those that look at the outer reaches of our universe . There are unique insights gleaned from understanding our solar system , the role it plays in the greater universe , and how this affects our lives closer to Earth . Similarly , we see the same for learning . A good teacher needs to understand where a student is currently , but importantly , how their current understanding may or may not impact them throughout a course or throughout their lifespan . For example , an instructor understanding how a freshman engineering student is solv - ing Calculus problems currently can help prepare them for how this calculus will help them design mechanical devices for end users . Conversely , we could not predict their longer - term trajectory of learning in their major without understanding how they complete individual learning tasks . Thus , the question for us is not whether we should integrate models ; the question is how to integrate them in order to move the field forward . We have offered here a framework for doing so as well as some exem - plars of how this might work . It is our hope that this article provides a theoretical ( and metatheoretical ) roadmap for doing so that enables researchers to break from the campism of particular models that have reached the end of their usefulness on their own and a way to detail the fusion of these older models to create more useful ones that can be well understood by editors , reviewers , and readers . Declarations Conflict of Interest The authors declare no competing interests . References Alexander , P . A . ( 1997 ) . Mapping the multidimensional nature of domain learning : The interplay of cog - nitive , motivational , and strategic forces . In M . L . Maehr & P . R . Pintrich ( Eds . ) , Advances in moti - vation and achievement ( Vol . 10 , pp . 213 – 250 ) . JAI Press . Alexander , P . A . ( 2003 ) . The development of expertise : The journey from acclimation to proficiency . Educational Researcher , 32 ( 8 ) , 10 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3102 / 00131 89X03 20080 10 Alexander , P . A . ( 2004 ) . A model of domain learning : Reinterpreting expertise as a multidimensional , multistage process . In D . Y . Dai & R . J . Sternberg ( Eds . ) , Motivation , emotion , and cognition : Inte - grative perspectives on intellectual functioning and development ( pp . 273 – 298 ) . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Alexander , P . A . , Graham , S . , & Harris , K . R . ( 1998 ) . A perspective on strategy research : Progress and prospects . Educational Psychology Review , 10 ( 2 ) , 129 – 154 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1023 / A : 10221 85502 996 Asikainen , H . , & Gijbels , D . ( 2017 ) . Do students develop towards more deep approaches to learning dur - ing studies ? A systematic review on the development of students’ deep and surface approaches to learning in higher education . Educational Psychology Review , 29 ( 2 ) , 205 – 234 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10648 - 017 - 9406 - 6 Bandura , A . ( 1986 ) . Social foundations of thought and action : A social cognitive theory . Prentice Hall . 1 3 Educational Psychology Review ( 2023 ) 35 : 66 Page 17 of 18 66 Box , G . E . , & Draper , N . R . ( 1987 ) . Empirical model - building and response surfaces . John Wiley & Sons . Braasch , J . L . G . , & Goldman , S . R . ( 2010 ) . The role of prior knowledge in learning from analogies in sci - ence texts . Discourse Processes , 47 ( 6 ) , 447 – 479 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01638 53090 34209 60 Craik , F . I . , & Lockhart , R . S . ( 1972 ) . Levels of processing : A framework for memory research . Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior , 11 ( 6 ) , 671 – 684 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0022 - 5371 ( 72 ) 80001 - X Dinsmore , D . L . ( 2017 ) . Towards a dynamic , multidimensional model of strategic processing . Educational Psychology Review , 29 ( 2 ) , 235 – 268 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10648 - 017 - 9407 - 5 Dinsmore , D . L . , & Alexander , P . A . ( 2012 ) . A critical discussion of deep and surface processing : What it means , how it is measured , the role of context , and model specification . Educational Psychology Review , 24 ( 4 ) , 499 – 567 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10648 - 012 - 9198 - 7 Dinsmore , D . L . , & Alexander , P . A . ( 2016 ) . A multidimensional investigation of deep - level and surface - level processing . Journal of Experimental Education , 84 ( 2 ) , 213 – 244 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00220 973 . 2014 . 979126 Dinsmore , D . L . , & Zoellner , B . P . ( 2018 ) . The relation between cognitive and metacognitive strategic pro - cessing during science simulations . British Journal of Educational Psychology , 88 ( 1 ) , 95 – 117 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / bjep . 12177 Dinsmore , D . L . , Hattan , C . , & List , A . ( 2018 ) . A meta - analysis of strategy use and performance in the Model of Domain Learning . In H . Fives & D . L . Dinsmore ( Eds . ) , The Model of Domain Learning : Understanding the development of expertise ( pp . 37 – 55 ) . Routledge . Entwistle , N . J . , & Ramsden , P . ( 1983 ) . Understanding student learning . Croom Helm . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4324 / 97813 15718 637 Fives , H . , & Dinsmore , D . L . ( Eds . ) ( 2018 ) . The model of domain learning : Understanding the development of expertise . Routledge . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4324 / 97813 15458 014 Freed , R . , Greene , J . A . , & Plumley , R . D . ( 2020 ) . Variable - centered approaches . In D . L . Dinsmore , L . K . Fryer , & M . M . Parkinson ( Eds . ) , Handbook of Strategies and Strategic Processing ( pp . 345 – 360 ) . Routledge . Fryer , L . K . , & Shum , A . ( 2020 ) . Person - centered approaches to explaining students’ cognitive processing strategies . In D . L . Dinsmore , L . K . Fryer , & M . M . Parkinson ( Eds . ) , Handbook of Strategies and Stra - tegic Processing ( pp . 361 – 372 ) . Routledge . Fryer , L . K . , & Vermunt , J . D . ( 2018 ) . Regulating approaches to learning : Testing learning strategy conver - gences across a year at university . British Journal of Educational Psychology , 88 ( 1 ) , 21 – 41 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / bjep . 12169 Fryer , L . K . , Ginns , P . , Walker , R . A . , & Nakao , K . ( 2012 ) . The adaptation and validation of the CEQ and the R - SPQ - 2F to the Japanese tertiary environment : CEQ and the R - SPQ - 2F in the Japanese tertiary envi - ronment . British Journal of Educational Psychology , 82 ( 4 ) , 549 – 563 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 2044 - 8279 . 2011 . 02045 . x Fyfe , E . R . , Rittle - Johnson , B . , & DeCaro , M . S . ( 2012 ) . The effects of feedback during exploratory math - ematics problem solving : Prior knowledge matters . Journal of Educational Psychology , 104 ( 4 ) , 1094 – 1108 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / a0028 389 Greene , J . A . , & Azevedo , R . ( 2007 ) . A theoretical review of Winne and Hadwin’s model of self - regulated learning : New perspectives and directions . Review of Educational Research , 77 ( 3 ) , 334 – 372 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3102 / 00346 54303 03953 Hattan , C . , Alexander , P . A . , & Lupo , S . M . ( 2023 ) . Leveraging what students know to make sense of texts : What the research says about prior knowledge activation . Review of Educational Research . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3102 / 00346 54322 11484 78 Hattie , J . ( 2015 ) . The applicability of visible learning to higher education . Scholarship of Teaching and Learning in Psychology , 1 ( 1 ) , 79 – 91 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / stl00 00021 Helmreich , R . ( 1975 ) . Applied social psychology : The unfulfilled promise . Personality and Social Psychol - ogy Bulletin , 1 ( 4 ) , 548 – 560 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 01461 67275 00100 402 Hofweber , T . ( 2011 ) . Logic and ontology . In E . N . Zalta ( Ed . ) , The Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy ( Fall 2014 ed . ) . Stanford , CA : Stanford University . Retrieved from http : / / plato . stanf ord . edu / archi ves / fall2 014 / entri es / logic - ontol ogy / . Lodewyk , K . R . , Winne , P . H . , & Jamieson - Noel , D . L . ( 2009 ) . Implications of task structure on self - regu - lated learning and achievement . Educational Psychology , 29 ( 1 ) , 1 – 25 . Marton , F . , & Säljö , R . ( 1976a ) . On qualitative differences in learning : I . Outcome and process . British Jour - nal of Educational Psychology , 46 ( 1 ) , 4 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 2044 - 8279 . 1976 . tb029 80 . x Educational Psychology Review ( 2023 ) 35 : 66 1 3 66 Page 18 of 18 Marton , F . , & Säljö , R . ( 1976b ) . On qualitative differences in learning—II outcome as a function of the learner’s conception of the task . British Journal of Educational Psychology , 46 , 115 – 127 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 2044 - 8279 . 1976 . tb023 04 . x Marton , F . , & Säljö , R . ( 1984 ) . Approaches to learning . In F . Marton , D . J . Hounsell , & N . J . Entwistle ( Eds . ) , The experience of learning ( pp . 36 – 55 ) . Scottish Academic Press . McCombs , B . L . ( 1986 ) . The role of the self - system in self - regulated learning . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 11 ( 4 ) , 314 – 332 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0361 - 476X ( 86 ) 90028 - 7 McCrudden , M . T . , Magliano , J . P . , & Schraw , G . ( 2010 ) . Exploring how relevance instructions affect per - sonal reading intentions , reading goals and text processing : A mixed methods study . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 35 ( 4 ) , 229 – 241 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cedps ych . 2009 . 12 . 001 Meyer , G . ( 1934 ) . An experimental study of the old and new types of examination : I The effect of the exami - nation set on memory . Journal of Educational Psychology , 25 ( 9 ) , 641 – 661 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / h0073 102 Meyer , G . ( 1935 ) . An experimental study of the old and new types of examination : II . Methods of study . Journal of Educational Psychology , 26 ( 1 ) : 30 – 40 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / h0050 853 Neisser , U . ( 1967 ) . Cognitive psychology . Appleton - Century - Crofts . Panadero , E . ( 2017 ) . A review of self - regulated learning : Six models and four directions for research . Fron - tiers in Psychology , 422 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2017 . 00422 Pressley , M . , Borkwski , J . G . , & Schneider , W . ( 1989 ) . Good information processing : What it is and how education can promote it . International Journal of Educational Research , 13 ( 8 ) , 857 – 867 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0883 - 0355 ( 89 ) 90069 - 4 Ramsden , P . ( 1979 ) . Student learning and perceptions of the academic environment . Higher Education , 8 ( 4 ) , 411 – 427 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF016 80529 Ramsden , P . , & Entwistle , N . J . ( 1981 ) . Effects of academic departments on students’ approaches to studying . British Journal of Educational Psychology , 51 ( 3 ) , 368 – 383 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 2044 - 8279 . 1981 . tb024 93 . x Richardson , J . T . E . ( 1994 ) . Cultural specificity of approaches to studying in higher education : A literature survey . Higher Education , 27 , 449 – 468 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF013 84904 Richardson , J . T . E . ( 2015 ) . Approaches to learning or levels of processing : What did Marton and Säljö ( 1976a ) really say ? The Legacy of the Work of the Göteborg Group in the 1970s . Interchange , 1 – 31 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10780 - 015 - 9251 - 9 Schiefele , U . ( 1999 ) . Interest and learning from text . Scientific Studies of Reading , 3 ( 3 ) , 257 – 279 . Simon , H . A . ( 1978 ) . Information - processing theory of human problem solving . In W . K . Estes ( Ed . ) , Hand - book of learning and cognitive processes ( pp . 271 – 295 ) . Erlbaum . Steup , M . ( 2014 ) . Epistemology . In E . N . Zalta ( Ed . ) , The Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy ( Spring 2014 ed . ) . Stanford , CA : Stanford University . Retrieved from http : / / plato . stanf ord . edu / archi ves / spr20 14 / entri es / epist emolo gy / . Terry , P . W . ( 1933 ) . How students review for objective and essay tests . The Elementary School Journal , 33 ( 8 ) , 592 – 603 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 456929 Tracey , D . H . , & Morrow , L . M . ( 2017 ) . Lenses on reading : An introduction to theories and models . Guilford Publications . Treisman , A . M . ( 1964 ) . Selective attention in man . British Medical Bulletin , 20 , 12 – 16 . Treisman , A . M . ( 1969 ) . Strategies and models of selective attention . Psychological Review , 76 ( 3 ) , 282 – 299 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / h0027 242 Winne , P . H . , & Hadwin , A . F . ( 1998 ) . Studying as self - regulated learning . In D . J . Hacker , J . Dunlosky , & A . Graesser ( Eds . ) , Metacognition in educational theory and practice ( pp . 277 – 304 ) . Erlbaum . Zimmerman , B . J . , & Schunk , D . H . ( 2001 ) . Reflections on theories of self - regulated learning and academic achievement . In B . Zimmerman , & D . Schunk ( Eds . ) , Self - regulated learning and academic achieve - ment : Theoretical perspectives ( 2nd ed . , pp . 289 – 307 ) . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . Springer Nature or its licensor ( e . g . a society or other partner ) holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the author ( s ) or other rightsholder ( s ) ; author self - archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law .