International Journal of Cognition and Technology 1 : 2 ( 2002 ) 355 - 362 Book Review by Kerstin Dautenhahn Robots for Kids : Exploring New Technologies for Learning Edited by Allison Druin and James Hendler Published in 2000 by Morgan Kaufmann Publishers , ISBN 1 - 55860 - 597 - 5 “Robots for Kids” presents an overview on certain - primarily US American - research projects concerned with developing robotic technologies for educational purposes . The book was published in 2000 and since its appearance this research area has been growing steadily . For this reason , this review provides some extra information concerning recent developments within the field , in addition to the discussion of chapters in the book itself . The editors of the book have been highly involved in developing computer technology for children . Allison Druin is Assistant Professor in the Human - Computer Interaction Lab and the Department of Human Development at the University of Maryland . She previously edited the book “Designing Multimedia Environments for Children” ( with Cynthia Solomon ) , published in 1996 , and “The Design of Children’s Technology” that appeared in 1998 . James A . Hendler is full Professor in the Department of Computer Science and the Department of Electrical Engineering at the University of Maryland . “Robots for Kids” is divided into three parts . Part I , “New Robot Technologies for Kids” , consists of four chapters , including an introduction by James Hendler , and three “kid’s views” . The latter make the book quite appealing since the explain how robots were designed , programmed and tested , all described from a child’s perspective . This also includes children’s stories , attitudes and emotions towards the robots . The first chapter , “To Mindstorms and Beyond” by Fred Martin and his colleagues at the MIT Media Laboratory , traces the 30 - year history of the development of a robot construction kit by a group led by Seymour Papert , with work beginning in the 1960s . The result was a programming language called LOGO , which has since been widely used in education . A second important outcome of this early research was a remote controlled device , a ‘turtle’ robot , which can move around on the floor according to a set of LOGO instructions that children program . The chapter describes the evolution of those early technologies of “robots for kids” up to the LEGO Mindstorms Robotics Invention system that was launched in 1998 , and which has become very popular with children , University students and other adults likewise . Many projects referred to in this book use this technology . In chapter two , Masahiro Fujita and his colleagues at the Sony Computer Science Laboratories propose a new industry called ‘robot entertainment’ . This proposal led Sony to develop several prototypes of a mobile , autonomous , dog - like robot that ultimately resulted in the AIBO that has been on the market since 1999 . An important feature of AIBO and other entertainment robots launched during the past few years is interactivity , that is , the ability to engage the user , and to make the user “care” about and bond with the robot . This is a goal shared by many other researchers that develop socially intelligent software and virtual or robotic autonomous agents ( Dautenhahn et al 2002 ) . From a robotics point of view the AIBO is a sophisticated ( although not inexpensive ) entertainment robot that is also used in research laboratories all over the world , for , among other things , research into robot - human interaction or within the Artificial Intelligence challenge domain of Robocup , wherein soccer playing AIBOs form the 4 - legged league ( http : / / www . robocup . org / ) . Since 1999 Sony has produced a series of variations of the original AIBO , including the latest lion - type version ERS - 210 or a futuristic version of the robot pet called ERS - 220 ( http : / / www . aibo . com ) . In summer 2002 Sony provided The Open - R Software Development Kit ( SDK ) that can be used to control the AIBOs . AIBO’s main means of perceiving its environment is via touch sensors and vision . It can exhibit a variety of different dog - like behaviours , and will learn by means of praising or scolding by the user . Currently Sony ' s biped entertainment robot SDR - 4X is making the news , but for many researchers AIBO still remains synonymous with entertainment robotics . Chapter three introduces a research project that the editors of the book are involved in at the University of Maryland . Together with Jaime Montemayor they describe PETS , ( the “Personal Electronic Teller of Stories” ) , a story - telling environment with ‘emotional’ robots , designed for elementary school children . An interesting aspect of this project is how the system was developed : through collaboration of an interdisciplinary group of researchers ( educators , computer scientists , artists , roboticists and engineers ) working together with a group of 7 - 11 year old children . Both adults and children were equal partners in the design process , following the design philosophy of ‘cooperative inquiry’ . The chapter provides details on the design choices that were made , the different roles played by the adults and children , and what has been learned from the project . In chapter four , Richard Maddocks from RJM Design gives first - person insights into the toy market that he has been involved in for more than 25 years . As a toy designer at Matchbox he worked with many different categories of toys and the respective processes involved : diecast vehicles , dolls , action figures , preschool toys , games , plastic construction kits and remote - controlled / electric - powered vehicles . Using very concrete examples , Richard Maddock nicely traces the path from the original ‘dream’ via preliminary design sketches through prototype models until the product is finally released , pointing out various issues that make the whole process a ‘drama’ . The chapter is illustrated with many photos , design sketches and drawings . Part II , “Innovative Approaches to Using Robots for Education” , contains five chapters , including an introduction by Allison Druin and complemented by four “kid’s views” . In chapter five Gabrielle Miller and her colleagues from the Kennedy Krieger Institute discuss the use of robotics , in order to address the needs of learners with diverse needs in an inclusive classroom . Based on principles of teaching for diverse learners that were developed by Churton et al ( 1998 ) , the authors see the following elements as crucial for the successful use of robots for diverse learners : experiential learning that helps students to understand and interpret concepts , cooperative learning for the facilitation of social behaviour , inquiry methods that support independent thinking and problem - solving , and a variety of different strategies used in instruction . The chapter discusses particular problems that children with learning disabilities face and how robotics can make a contribution . In addition to using robots for facilitating learning , robotics in classrooms can also prepare students for the demands on workplaces . The chapter concludes by briefly outlining three case studies where robots were used to support all learners . In chapter six Marina Umaschi Bers and Claudia Urrea from the MIT Media Laboratory introduce the research programme of “con - science” , which attempts to integrate learning about technology and values by providing tools and methodologies , including the construction of robotic devices . The authors discuss the goals and the learning processes that took place during a first pilot study , and a workshop where 25 parents and children explored technology and values together in an Argentinian school using the LEGO Mindstorms Robotics Invention System . The chapter illustrates how participants decided to use the technology in a variety of ways throughout a number of projects , namely to represent symbols , values , or to evoke reflection and conversation . This chapter gives an example of research that is not technology - oriented as such , but where technology is used to explore non - technological domains of human life , including moral and religious values . In chapter seven , David P . Miller and Cathryne Stein from the KISS Institute for Practical Robotics give several examples of how robotics can be used in the classroom , based on their experience with thousands of children . The chapter discusses different projects in which children learn about various disciplines relevant to the curriculum , each with an emphasis on robotics . The projects notably include the team - based “Botball tournaments” , the “Robotics in Residence” ( RinR ) programme , where an expert roboticist spends time with children in schools , and the outreach programme which targets economically disadvantaged , underrepresented or minority groups . Botball and RinR teach basic engineering and computer science principles , whilst also encouraging group teamwork , promoting an interest in science and maths and motivating the students . The authors conclude that , due to the multidisciplinary nature of robotics , it “would be possible to teach the entire K - 12 curriculum using robotics as a framework” ( p . 242 ) . In chapter eight Mark Yim and Mark D . Chow from the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center and William L . Dunbar from the Henry M . Gunn High School outline their three years , ’ experience as participants in the FIRST ( “For Inspiration in Science and - profit organisation ) robotics competition . In an initiative with teams of schools and corporate sponsors , students are getting motivated about aspects of science and engineering . It is also shown that the project facilitates self - confidence , teamwork , time - management and social skills . The excitement and fun of the project which the authors were involved in led to the construction of a large , complex , manoeuvrable robot that could be used to compete against other teams . Differing from other high - school competitions , the FIRST robots are human - sized and very strong . In the arena the robots are remotely - controlled by students , although levels of autonomy can vary . The chapter also addresses various aspects surrounding such competitions , such as media interest or parental involvement . In chapter nine Robin R . Murphy ( University of South Florida ) and Michael Rosenblatt ( CMU ) introduce Robocamp , a one - week science summer camp for sixth to eigth graders . The goal of the summer school is to use robotics and Artificial Intelligence techniques in order to explore biological and physical sciences . The camp covers a variety of topics , including locomotion , perception and circuits . The pre - teen audience builds and programmes a robot , using a visit to the Zoo for inspiration and research into animal behaviour . Many guided activities complement the work . The chapter describes in detail the syllabus , the exercises done each day , the equipment used , and the lessons learned , with the hope that other people can replicate such a summer camp . The last and third part of the book addresses “Future Visions” and consists of one chapter and one “kid’s view” . In chapter ten the author and lecturer Ray Hammond discusses the potential future of robots and intelligent machines in our society . The contributions in the book are very much grounded in the constructionist approach that has been strongly advocated by Seymour Papert for several decades . Computer technology ( software and hardware ) has become a focus of attention for developing new approaches to learning and education . Generally , the constructionist approach focuses on active exploration of the environment , namely improvisational , self - directed , ‘playful’ activities in appropriate learning environments ( ‘contexts’ ) which can be used as ‘personal media’ . In recent years , more and more computer software and robotic toys have become available , cf . the new generation of robotic pets , such as the previously mentioned robotic dog , AIBO . It can be expected that a new generation of children will use computer technology to an unprecedented degree in a variety of professional , educational and entertainment contexts , including interactive robotic toys and digitally - enhanced objects and tangible interfaces ( Laurel , 1993 ) . Such new interactive systems and novel interfaces are also likely to impact methods of therapy and rehabilitation , cf . activities in using autonomous robots in autism therapy ( Dautenhahn & Werry 2000 ) . While I generally agree with the enthusiasm of the editors and authors concerning the use of robotics for teaching and learning , I would also like to offer caution in accepting statements such as that quoted above in the discussion of chapter seven . Given the current interest into using computer technology in classrooms , one needs to be careful not to get carried away by the possibilities that new technologies offer . A purely technology - driven path towards education and learning could introduce computers and robots at all costs , without a solid scientific basis of studies showing their benefits . Robotic and computer technologies bring many benefits , e . g . in terms of self - directed learning and motivation , but they are clearly not a generic “solution” . Surely ( most ) children enjoy working with robots , surely they will gain some kind of benefit , at the least in terms of enjoyment . But I believe that it is necessary to demonstrate the “added value” of robots , namely , if and how children who are using such technology on a long - term basis improve in learning compared to children who are not exposed to such technologies . Such research will show us when and why robots in classrooms are beneficial , for what target groups they are suitable , and when better not to use them . The theme of using computer and robotic technology for children has significant relevance for Cognitive Technology , which is concerned with the relationship between the two domains of machines and human minds . Robots in the hands of or in interaction with children can go far beyond the nature of toys , such as non - robotic toys that are important in children’s ( and adults’ ) play . Such “traditional” toys serve as facilitators and physical representatives of imagination and fantasy , for example a doll might one day represent a princess , while the next day it might represent an evil witch . Similarly a stick might represent a magic sword , an arrow , or simply a stick used as a tool in play . Then , what is so special about robots , what aspects allow them to transcend into being instruments that can play a constructive role in the development of children’s minds ? In Gorayska et al . ( 2001 ) one characteristic is discussed that distinguishes an instrument from a tool : tools usually just ‘make a process happen’ , but they remain themselves unchanged . On the other hand instruments usually provide feedback , they can guide and expect guidance from us during the process in which they are involved . A plastic or wooden toy train does not adjust itself to change the process of learning and playing in which the child is immersed . The toy train will not actively change according to the processes of interaction , apart from wear and tear as a result of mechanical contact . A robot on the other hand is more than a passive toy , it is an interactive physical toy that can adapt to and actively shape the interactions . Robots of the future might play different fundamental roles in our society , in education , at the workplace , in therapy and rehabilitation , and other areas . We , as humans , can hope for a benign future , a future in which robots are beneficial to the individual and the society . But we need to learn what robots are and what they can become , cf . the following brief scenario of a possible future with robots : We know quite well what a human is like , as a rough estimation we can take ourselves as a good example . We do not know exactly what humans " are for " , but we have an idea about what they can do , should do , or normally are doing . Our picture of humans and their “function” is not consistent , and need not be . But the picture is colourful , and structured ; it is full of stories . What is an artefact for , e . g . a robot ? A ) It can be a machine , working and solving tasks for us , for example , an intelligent vacuum cleaner . If it has finished its work then we switch it off or it goes to its " nest " . In any case , it should not bother us . B ) It can be a very complex , unpredictable , " intelligent " machine , solving complex tasks , surviving in sewerage pipes or on the Moon . They should " function " , by whatever means and techniques can be realised . Do we care about them ? Well , they are somehow " life - like " , but they are not like us , so why should we ? We should be able to control them , because they could become dangerous . They are not adapted to us . If they are really good , then they can be competitors for resources . Will they be able to entertain us , to please us , to tell us stories ? I believe not . They are enacting the stories they have been told ( by the human designer ) . Humans will be “better” , maybe physically weaker and incredibly slow . But we will keep the role of the story - teller . The human - embodied mind is the only source of creativity . C ) Robots can be our " companions " , our personal robots . They can help us in daily life , interact with us in an individual way , keep us comfortable , help us survive , entertain us . They are adapted to us , as an individual person , to our human society , to our human life . They can play these funny imitation games with us and make us laugh when they desperately try to flip - flap , but fail , their wheels block every time . They learn during their life - time about themselves , and about us . They are sitting with us in the garden , watching the crows playing in the air . We say how much we wish to be able to fly . The robot expresses : “I know what you mean” . They can listen , and create their own stories . Do we care about them ? Do we care about our pet dogs ? Of course , they are a bit like us , somehow family members . They have a meaning to us , in our " world " , the mental world created inside our mind , the only world we have access to . The only " real thing " . We don ' t care what species the robots belong to or what kind of material they are made of . They are our friends ( Dautenhahn , 1997 ) . References M . Churton , A . Cranston - Gingras , T . Blair ( 1998 ) Teaching Children with Diverse Abilities , Allyn and Bacon . K . Dautenhahn ( 1997 ) Robots and Humans . Abstract of invited talk presented at Robotix - 1997 , March 1997 , Glasgow . K . Dautenhahn , I . Werry ( 2000 ) Issues of Robot - Human Interaction Dynamics in the Rehabilitation of Children with Autism , Proc . From Animals to Animats , The Sixth International Conference on the Simulation of Adaptive Behavior ( SAB2000 ) , 11 - 15 September 2000 , Paris , France , pp . 519 - 528 . K . Dautenhahn , A . Bond , L . Cañamero , B . Edmonds ( 2002 ) Socially Intelligent Agents – Creating Relationships with Computers and Robots , Kluwer Academic Publishers . B . Gorayska , J . P . Marsh , J . L . Mey ( 2001 ) Cognitive Technology : Tool or Instrument ? IN . M . Beynon , C . L . Nehaniv , K . Dautenhahn ( Eds . ) : CT2001 , LNAI 2117 , pp . 1 - 16 , Springer - Verlag . B . Laurel ( 1993 ) Computers as Theatre , Addison - Wesley . S . Papert ( 1980 ) Mindstorms : Children , Computers , and Powerful Ideas , Basic Books , New York .