How do Presentation and Context Influence Representation for Functional Fixedness Tasks ? Michael C . Frank ( mcfrank @ stanford . edu ) Department of Philosophy , Building 90 Stanford , CA 94305 - 2155 USA Michael Ramscar ( ramscar @ psych . stanford . edu ) Department of Psychology , Jordan Hall , Building 420 Stanford , CA 94305 - 2130 USA A truism in many kinds of problem solving is that if the problem is set up right , the solution is obvious . The trick lies in finding the best way to represent the task . Functional fixedness tasks are tasks modeled around this “trick”—in order to solve them optimally , participants need to use objects in a novel way . In the candle task , first described in Maier ( 1931 ) , participants must use a box of tacks and a book of matches to mount a candle on a wall so that it can burn normally and without dripping . The optimal solution is to take the tacks out of their box , tack the box to the wall , and place the candle on the box , but participants only discover this solution approximately one quarter of the time . On the other hand , if the tacks are presented next to the box instead of inside it , the task is trivial . The candle task is a functional fixedness task because in order to solve it , participants must overcome their representation of the box as having a fixed function as a container in order to represent it as a possible support for the candle . In a classic study , Glucksberg & Weisberg ( 1966 ) revealed that participants who failed to produce the correct solution were subsequently less likely to produce the word “box” in a free association task , leading Glucksberg and Weisberg to conclude that participants failed to overcome their functional fixedness because did not have the “box” concept available to them . In a study , conducted on 68 undergraduate students at Stanford University , we tested the veracity of this view by presenting participants with written descriptions of the candle task and asking them to describe any solution they could find . In all of the conditions , the participants were presented with the word “box” so that the lexical concept was explicitly available in the stimuli . In the control condition , the text of the problem was printed unmodified . In the first experimental condition , the phrases “candle , ” “book of matches , ” and “box of tacks” were underlined . In the second experimental condition , the words “candle , ” “book , ” “matches , ” “box , ” and “tacks” were all underlined . The percentage of solution in the first condition was 23 % , whereas the percentages in the other two were 55 % and 47 % , respectively . T - tests showed there was a significant difference both between the control condition and the second condition ( p < . 05 ) and between the control and the third condition ( p = . 05 ) . These results were confirmed by a second study that tested the effects of underlining the word “box” or underlining all relevant nouns except “box . ” This second study produced the same pattern of results . The difference between solvers and non - solvers in these studies cannot be explained simply in terms of the lexical concept “box” being available to one but not the other group in this instance . All our participants were presented with the lexical concept “box” . Rather , whether or not participants solve the candle task seems to depend on whether they instantiate a partial representation of “box” or a more complete one . Since finding an optimal solution for functional fixedness tasks depends crucially on this shift in representation , a more flexible view of representation appears to be necessary to give an account of how participants solve and fail to solve the tasks . These data suggest that in order to model the processes of representation that are going on when participants attempt to solve functional fixedness tasks ( and other types of insight problems ) we will need to move away from simple “atomic” approaches to the representation of lexical concepts , and move instead to a more flexible representation model that can account for quick shifts in the representations of objects based on small differences in presentation ( or attention ) . In further studies we will examine the question of how the presence of non - essential constituents in the task setup can influence participants’ reasoning process and hence their representations of the objects used in the solution . Our aim is to investigate what kind of an effect external contextual cues can have on participants’ ability to solve functional fixedness tasks and their speed of solution . Acknowledgments This research is funded with help from the Symbolic Systems Program and the Office of the Vice Provost for Undergraduate Education at Stanford University . References Glucksberg , S . , & Weisberg , R . W . ( 1966 ) . Verbal behavior and problem solving : Some effects of labeling in a functional fixedness problem . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 71 , 659 - 664 . Maier , N . R . F . ( 1931 ) . Reasoning in humans II . The solution of a problem and its appearance in consciousness . Journal of Comparative Psychology , 12 , 181 - 194 . 1345