Mind Association The Unreality of Time Author ( s ) : J . Ellis McTaggart Source : Mind , New Series , Vol . 17 , No . 68 ( Oct . , 1908 ) , pp . 457 - 474 Published by : Oxford University Press on behalf of the Mind Association Stable URL : http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 2248314 . Accessed : 09 / 04 / 2013 05 : 03 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use , available at . http : / / www . jstor . org / page / info / about / policies / terms . jsp . JSTOR is a not - for - profit service that helps scholars , researchers , and students discover , use , and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive . We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship . For more information about JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . . Oxford University Press and Mind Association are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize , preserve and extend access to Mind . http : / / www . jstor . org This content downloaded from 130 . 251 . 200 . 3 on Tue , 9 Apr 2013 05 : 03 : 12 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions NEW SERIES . No . 68 . ] LOCTOBER , 1 908 . A QUARTERLY REVIEW OF PSYCHOLOGYAND PHILOSOPHY I . - THE UNREALITY OF TIME . BY J . ELLIS MCTAGGART . IT doubtless seems highly paradoxical to assert that Time is unreal , and that all statements which involve its reality are erroneous . Such an assertion involves a far greater depar - ture from the natural position of mankind than is involved in the assertion of the unreality of Space or of the unreality of Matter . So decisive a breach with that natural position is not to be lightly accepted . And yet in all ages the belief in the unreality of time has proved singularly attractive . In the philosophy and religion of the East we find that this doctrine is of cardinal importance . And in the West , where philosophy and religion are less closely connected , we find that the same doctrine continually recurs , both among philosophers and among theologians . Theology never holds itself apart from mysticism for any long period , and almost all mysticism denies the reality of time . In philosophy , again , time is treated as unreal by Spinoza , by Kant , by Hegel , and by Schopenhauer . In the philosophy of the present day the two most important , movements ( excluding those which are as yet merely critical ) are those which look to Hegel and to Mr . Bradley . And both of these schools deny the reality of time . Such a concurrence of opinion cannot be denied to be highly significant - and is not the less significant because the doctrine takes such different forms , and is supported by such different arguments . I believe that time is unreal . ' But I do so for reasons which are not , I think , employed by any of the philosophers whom I have mentioned , and I propose to explain my reasons in this paper . 31 This content downloaded from 130 . 251 . 200 . 3 on Tue , 9 Apr 2013 05 : 03 : 12 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 458 J . ELLIS MCTAGGART : Positions in time , as time appears to us prima ' facie , are distinguished in two ways . Each position is Earlier than some , and Later than some , of the other positions . And each position is either Past , Present , or Future . The dis - tinctions of the former class are permanent , while those of the latter are not . If M is ever earlier than N , it is always earlier . But an event , which is now present , was future and will be past . Since distinctions of the first class are permanent , they might be held to be more objective , and to be more essential to the nature of time . I believe , however , that this would be a mistake , and that the distinction of past , present and future is as essential to time as the distinction of earlier and later , while in a certain sense , as we shall see , it may be regarded as more fundamental than the distinction of earlier and later . And it is because the distinctions of past , present and future seem to me to be essential for time , that I regard time as unreal . For the sake of brevity I shall speak of the series of posi - tions running from the far past through the near past to the present , and then from the present to the , near future and the far future , as the A series . The series of positions which runs from earlier to later I shall call the B series . The con - tents of a position in time are called events . The contents of a single position are admitted to be properly called a plurality of events . ( I believe , however , that they can as truly , though not more truly , be called a single event . This - view is not universally accepted , and it is not necessary for my argument . ) A position in time is called a moment . The first question which we must consider is whether it is essential to the reality of time that its events should form an A series as well as a B series . And it is clear , to begin - with , that we never observe time except as forming both these series . We perceive events in time as being present , and those are the only events which we perceive directly . And all other events in time which , by memory or inference , we believe to - be real , are regarded as past or future - those . earlier than the present being past , and those later than the present being future . Thus the events ' of time , as observed by us , form an A series as well as a B series . It is possible , however , that this is merely subjective . It - may be the case that the distinction introduced among positions in time by the A series - the distinction of past , present and future - is simply a constant illusion of our minds , and that the real nature of time only contains the distinction of the B series - the distinction of earlier and This content downloaded from 130 . 251 . 200 . 3 on Tue , 9 Apr 2013 05 : 03 : 12 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions THE UNREALITY OF TIME . 459 later . In that case we could not perceive time as it really is , but we might be able to think of it as it really is . This is not a very common view , but it has found able supporters . I believe it to be untenable , because , as I said above , it seems to me that the A series is essential to the nature of time , and that any difficulty in the way of regarding the A series as real is equally a difficulty in the way of regarding time as real . It would , I suppose , be universally admitted that time involves change . A particular thing , indeed , may exist un - changed through any amount of time . But when we ask what we mean by saying that there were different moments of time , or a certain duration of time , through which the thing was the same , we find that we mean that it remained the same while other things were changing . A universe in which nothing whatever changed ( including the thoughts of the conscious beings in it ) would be a timeless uiliverse . If , then , a B series without an A series can constitute time , change must be possible without an A series . Let us suppose that the distinction of past , present and future does - not apply to reality . Can change apply to reality ? What is it that changes ? Could we say that , in a time which formed a B _ series but not an A series , the change consisted in the fact that an event ceased to be an event , while another event began to be an event ? If this were the case , we should certainly have got a change . But this is impossible . An event can never cease to be an event . It can never get out of any time series in which it once is . If N . is ever earlier than 0 and later than M , it will always be , and has always been , earlier than 0 and later than M , since the relations of earlier and later are per - manent . And as , by our present hypothesis , time is con - stituted by a B series alone , N will always have a position in a time series , and has always had one . i That is , it will always be , and has always been , an event , and cannot begin or cease to be an event . Or shall we say that one event M merges itself into another event N , while preserving a certain identity by means of an unchanged element , so that we can say , not merely that M has ceased and N begun , but that it is M which has I It is equally true , though it does not concern us on the hypothesis which we are now considering , that whatever is once in an A series is always in one . If one of the determinations past , present , and future can ever be applied to N , then one of them always has been and always will be applicable , though of course nob always the same one . This content downloaded from 130 . 251 . 200 . 3 on Tue , 9 Apr 2013 05 : 03 : 12 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 460 J . ELLIS MCTAGGART : become N ? Still the same difficulty recurs . M and N may have a common element , but they are not the same event , or there would be no change . If therefore M changes into N at a certain moment , then , at that moment , M has ceased to be M , and N has begun to be N . But we have seen that no event can cease to be , or begin to be , itself , since it never ceases to have a place as itself in the B series . Thus one event cannot change into another . Neither can the change be looked for in the numerically different moments of absoluate time , supposing such moments to exist . For the same arguments will apply here . Each such moment would have its own place in the B series , since each would be earlier or later than each of the others . And as the B series indicate permanent relations , no moment could ever cease to be , nor could it become another moment . Since , therefore , what occurs in time never begins or ceases to be , or to be itself , and since , again , if there is to be change it must be change of what occurs in time ( for the timeless never changes ) , I ' submit that only one alternative remains . Changes must happen to the events of such a nature that the occurrence of these changes does not hinder the events from being events , and the same events , both before and after the change . Now what characteristics of an event are there which can change and yet leave the event the same event ? ( I use the word characteristic as a general term to include both the qualities which the event possesses , and the relations of which it is a term - or rather the fact that the event is a term of these relations . ) It seems to me that there is only one class of such characteristics - namely , the determination of the event in question by the terms of the A series . Take any event - the death of Queen Anne , for example and consider what change can take place in its characteristics . That it is a death , that it is the death of Anne Stuart , that it has such causes , that it has such effects - every character - istic of this sort never changes . " Before the stars saw one another plain " the event in question was a death of an English Queen . At the last moment of time - if time has a last moment - the event in question will still be a death of an English Queen . And in every respect but one it is equally dev6id of change . But in one respect it does change . It began by being a future event . It became every moment an event in the nearer future . At last it was present . Then it became past , and will always remain so , though every moment it becomes further and further past . Thus we seem forced to the conclusion that all change is This content downloaded from 130 . 251 . 200 . 3 on Tue , 9 Apr 2013 05 : 03 : 12 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions THE UNREALITY OF TIME . 461 dnly a change of the characteristics imparted to events by their presence in the A series , whether those characteristics are qualities or relations . If these characteristics are qualities , then the events , we must admit , would not be always the same , since an event whose qualities alter is , of course , not completely the same . And , even if the characteristics are relations , the events would not be completely the same , if - as I believe to be the case - the relation of X to Y involves the existence in X of a quality of relationship to Y . ' Then there would be two alternatives before us . We might admit that events did really change their nature , in respect of these characteristics , though not in respect of any others . I see no difficulty in admitting this . It would place the determinations of the A series in a very unique position among the characteristics of the event , but on any theory they would be very unique characteristics . It ' is usual , for example , to say that a past event never changes , but I do not see why we should not say , instead of this , " a past event changes only in one respect - that every moment it is further from the present than it was before " . But although I see no intrinsic diffi - culty in this view , it is not the alternative I regard as ulti - mately true . For if , as I believe , time is unreal , the admission that an event in time Would change in respect of its position in - the A series would not involve that anything really did change . Without the A series then , there would be no change , and consequently the B series by itself is not sufficient for time , since time involves change . The B series , however , cannot exist except as temporal , since earlier and later , which are the distinctions of which it consists , are clearly time - determinations . So it follows that there can be no B series where there is no A series , since where there is no A series there is no time . But it does not follow that , if we subtract the determina - tions of the A series from time , we shall have no series left at all . There is a series - a series of the permanent relations to one another of those realities which in time are events - and it is the combination of this series with the A deter - minations which gives time . But this other series - let us I I am not asserting , as Lotze did , that a relation between X and Y consists of a quality in X and a quality in Y - a view which I regard as quite indefensible . - I assert that a relation Z between X and Y involves the existence in X of the quality " having the relation Z to Y " so that a difference of relations always involves a difference in quality , and a change of relations always involves a change of quality . This content downloaded from 130 . 251 . 200 . 3 on Tue , 9 Apr 2013 05 : 03 : 12 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 462 J . ELLIS MCTAGGART : call it the C series - is not temporal , for it involves no change , but only an order . Events have an order . They are , let us say , in the order M , N , 0 , P . And they are therefore not in the order M , 0 , N , P , or 0 , N , M , P , or in any other possible order . But that they have this order no more implies that there is any change than the order of the letters of the alphabet , or of the Peers on the Parliament Roll , implies any change . And thus those realities which appear to us as events might form such a series without being entitled to the name of events , since that name is only given to realities which are in a time series . It is only when change and time come in that the relations of this C series become relations of earlier and later , and so it becomes a B series . More is wanted , however , for the genesis of a B series and of time than simply the C series and the fact of change . For the change must be in a particular direction . And the C series , while it determines the order , does not determine the direction . If the C series runs M , N , 0 , P , then the B series from earlier to later cannot run M , 0 , N , P , or M , P , 0 , N , or in any way but two . But it can run either M , N , 0 , P ( so that M is earliest and P latest ) or else P , 0 , N , M ( so that P is earliest and Mi latest ) . And there is nothing either in the C series or in the fact of change to determine which it will be . A series which is not temporal has no direction of its own , though it has an order . If we keep to the series of the natural numbers , we cannot put 17 between 21 and 26 . But we keep to the series , whether we go from 17 , through 21 , to 26 , or whether we go from 26 , through * 21 , to 17 . The first direction seems the more natural to us , because this series has only one end , and it is generally more con - venient to have that end as a beginning than as a ter - mination . But we equally keep to the series in counting backward . Again , in the series of categories in Hegel ' s dialectic , the series prevents us from putting the Absolute Idea between Being and Causality . But it permits us either to go from Being , through Causality , to the Absolute Idea , or from the Absolute Idea , through Causality , to Being . The first is , according to Hegel , the direction of proof , and is thus gener - ally the most convenient order of enumeration . But if we found it convenient to enumerate in the reverse direction , we should still be observing the series . A non - temporal series , then , has no direction in itself , though a person considering it may take the terms in one This content downloaded from 130 . 251 . 200 . 3 on Tue , 9 Apr 2013 05 : 03 : 12 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions THE UNREALITY OF TIME . 463 direction or in the other , according to his own convenience And in the same way a person who contemplates a time - order may contemplate it in either direction . I may trace the order of events from the Great Charter to the Reform Bill , or from the Reform Bill to the Great Charter . But in dealing with the time series we have not to do merely with a change in an external contemplation of it , but with a change which belongs to the series itself . And this change has a direction of its own . The Great Charter came before the Reform Bill , and the Reform Bill did not come before the Great Charter . Therefore , besides the C series and the fact of change there must be given - in order to get time - the fact that the change is in one direction and not in the other . We can now see that the A series , together with the C series , is sufficient to give us time . For in order to get change , and change in a given direction , it is sufficient that one position in the C series should be Present , to the exclusion of all others , and that this characteristic of presentness should pass along the series in such - a way that all positions on the one side of the Present have been present , and all positions on the other side of it will be present . That which has been present is Past , that which will be present is Future . ' Thus to our previous con - clusion that there can be no time unless the A series is true of reality , we can add the further conclusion that no other elements are required to constitute a time - series except an A series and a C series . We may sum up the relations of the three series to time as follows : The A and B series are equally essential to time , which must be distinguished as past , present and future , and must likewise be distinguished , as earlier and later . But the two series are not equally fundamental . The distinctions of the A series are ultimate . We cannot explain what is meant by past , present and future . We can , to some extent , de - scribe them , but they cannot be defined . We can only show their meaning by examples . " Your breakfast this morn - ing , " we can say to an inquirer , " is past ; this conversation is present ; your dinner this evening is future . " We can do no more . The B series , on the other hand , is not ultimate . For , given a C series of permanent relations of terms , which is 1 This account of the nature of the A series is not valid , for it involves a vicious circle , since it uses " has been " and " will be " to explain Past and Future . But , as I shall endeavour to show later on , this vicious circle is inevitable when we deal with the A series , and forms the ground on which we must reject it . This content downloaded from 130 . 251 . 200 . 3 on Tue , 9 Apr 2013 05 : 03 : 12 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 464 J . ELLIS MCTAGGART : not in itself temporal , and therefore is not a B series , and given the further fact that the terms of this C series also form an A series , and it results that the terms of the C series become a B series , those which are placed first , in the direc - tion from past to future , being earlier than those whose places are further in the direction of the future . The C series , however , is as ultimate as the A series . We cannot get it out of anything else . That the units of time do form a series , the relations of which are permanent , is as ultimate as the fact that each of them is present , past , or future . And this ultimate fact is essential to time . For it is admitted that it is essential to time that each moment of it shall either be earlier or later than any other moment ; and these relations are permanent . And this - the B series - cannot be got out of the A series alone . It is only when the A series , which gives change and direction , is combined with the C series , which gives permanence , that the B series can arise . Only part of the conclusion which I have now reached is required for the general purpose of this paper . I am en - deavouring to base the unreality of time , not on the fact that the A series is more fundamental than the B series , but on the fact that it is as essential as the B series - that the dis - tinctions of past , present and future are essential to time , and that , if the distinctions are never true of reality , then no reality is in time . This view , whether it is true or false , has nothing surpris - ing in it . It was pointed out above that time , as we perceive it , always presents these distinctions . And it has generally been held that this is a real characteristic of time , and not an illusion due to the way in which we perceive it . Most phil - osophers , whether they did or did not believe time to be true of reality , have regarded thle distinctions of the A series as essential to time . When the opposite view has been maintained , it has generally been , I believe , because it was held ( rightly , as I shall try to show later on ) that the distinctions of present , past and future cannot be true of reality , and that conse - quently , if the reality of time is to be saved , the distinction in question must be shown to be unessential to time . The presumption , it was held , was for the reality of time , and this would give us a reason for rejecting the A series as unessen - - tial to time . But of course this could only give a presump - tion . If the analysis of the notion of time showed that , by removing the A series , time was destroyed , this line of argument would be no longer open , and the unreality of the A series would involve the unreality of time . This content downloaded from 130 . 251 . 200 . 3 on Tue , 9 Apr 2013 05 : 03 : 12 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions THE UNREALITY OF TIME . 465 I have endeavoured to show that the removal of the A series does destroy time . But there are two objections to this theory , which we must now consider . The first deals with those time - series which are not really existent , but which are falsely believed to be existent , or which are imagined as existent . Take , for example , the adventures of Don Quixote . This series , it is said , is not an A series . I cannot at this moment judge it to be either past , present or future . Indeed I know that it is none of the three . Yet , it is said , it is certainly a B series . The adventure of the galley - slaves , for example , is later than the adventure of the windmills . And a B series involves time . The conclu - sion drawn is that an A series is not essential to time . The answer to this objection I hold to be as follows . Time only belongs to the existent . If any reality is in time , that involves that the reality in question exists . This , I imagine , would be universally , admitted . It may be ques - tioned whether all of what exists is in time , or even whether anything really existent is in time , but it would not be denied that , if anything is in time , it must exist . Now what is existent in the adventures of Don Quixote ? Nothing . For the story is imaginary . The acts of Cer - vantes ' mind when he invented the story , the acts of my mind when I think of the story - these exist . But then these form part of an A series . Cervantes ' invention of the story is in the past . My thought of the story is in the past , the present , and - I trust - the future . But the adventures of Don Quixote may be believed by a child to be historical . And in reading them I may by an effort of the imagination contemplate them as if they really happened . In this case , the adventures are believed to be existent or imagined as existent . But then they are believed to be in the A series , or imagined as in the A series . The child who believes them historical will believe that they happened in the past . If I imagine them as existent , I shall imagine them as happening in the past . In the same way , if any one believed the events recorded in Morris ' s News from Nowhere to exist , or imagined them as existent , he would believe them to exist in the future or imagine them as existent in the future . Whether we place the object of our belief or our imagination in the present , the past , or the future , will depend upon the characteristics of that object . But somewhere in our A series it will be placed . Thus the answer to the objection is that , just as a thing is in time , it is in the A series . If it is really in time , it is really in the A series . If it is believed to be in time , it is believed This content downloaded from 130 . 251 . 200 . 3 on Tue , 9 Apr 2013 05 : 03 : 12 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 466 J . ELLIS MCTAGGART : to be in the A series . If it is imagined as in time , it is imag - ined as in the A series . The second objection is based on the possibility , discussed by Mr . Bradley , that there might be several independent time - series in reality . For Mr . Bradley , indeed , time is only ap - pearance . There is no real time at all , and therefore there are not several real series of time . But the hypothesis here is that there should be within reality several real and inde - pendent time - series . The objection , I imagine , is that the time - series would be all real , while the distinction of pasf , present , and future would only have meaning within each series , and could not , therefore , be taken as ultimately real . There would be , for example , many presents . Now , of course , many points of time can be present ( each point in each time - series is a present once ) , but they must be present successively . And the presents of the different time - series would not be succes - sive , since they are not in the same time . ( Neither would they be simultaneous , since that equally involves being in the same time . They would have no time - relation whatever . ) And different presents , unless they are successive , cannot be real . So the different time - series , which are real , must be able to exist independently of the distinction between past , piesent , and future . . I cannot , however , regard this objection as valid . No doubt , in such a case , no present would be the present - it would only be the present of a certain aspect of the universe . But then no time would be the time - it would only be the time of a certain aspect of the universe . It would , no doubt , be a real time - series , but I do not see that the present would be less real than the time . I am not , of course , asserting that there is no contradiction in the existence of several distinct A series . My main thesis is that the existence of any A series involves a contradiction . What I assert here is merely that , supposing that there could be any A series , I see no extra difficulty involved in there being several such series independent of one another , and that therefore there is no incompatibility between the essen - tiality of an A series for time and the existence of several distinct times . Moreover , we must remember that the theory of a plurality of time - series is a mere hypothesis . No reason has ever been given why we should believe in their existence . It has only been said that there is no reason why we should disbelieve in their existence , and that therefore they may exist . But if their existence should be incompatible with something else , This content downloaded from 130 . 251 . 200 . 3 on Tue , 9 Apr 2013 05 : 03 : 12 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions THE UNREALITY OF TIME . 467 for which there is positive evidence , then there would be a reason why we should disbelieve in their existence . Now there is , as I have tried to show , positive evidence for believ - ing that an A series is essential to time . Supposing therefore that it were the case ( which , for the reasons given above , I deny ) that the existence of a plurality of time - series was incompatible with the essentiality for time of the A series , it would be the hypothesis of a plurality of times which should be rejected , and not our conclusion as to the A series . I now pass to the second part of my task . Having , as it seems to me , succeeded in proving that there can be no time without an A series , it remains to prove that an A series cannot exist , and that therefore time cannot exist . This would involve that time is not real at all , since it is ad - mitted that , the only way in which time can be real is by existing . The terms of the A series are characteristics of events . We say of events that they are either past , present , or future . If moments of time are taken as separate realities , we say of them also that they are past , present , or future . A characteristic may be either a relation or a quality . Whether we take the terms of the A series as relations of events ( which seems the more reasonable view ) or whether we take them as qualities of events , it seems to me that they involve a contradiction . Let us first examine the supposition that they are relations . In that case only one term of each relation can be an event or a moment . The other term must be something outside the time - series . ' For the relations of the A series are chang - ing relations , and the relation of terms of the time - series to one another do not change . Two events are exactly in the same places in the time - series , relatively to one another , a million years before they take place , while each of them is taking place , and when they are a million years in the past . The same is true of the relation of moments to each other . Again , if the moments of time are to be distinguished as separate realities from the events which happen in them , the relation between an event and a moment is unvarying . Each event is in the same moment in the future , in the present , and in the past . I It has been maintained that the present is whatever is simultaneous with the assertion of its presentness , the future whatever is later than the assertion of its futurity , and the past whatever is earlier than the assertion of its pastness . But this theory involves that time exists inde - pendently of the A series , and is incompatible with the results we have already reached . This content downloaded from 130 . 251 . 200 . 3 on Tue , 9 Apr 2013 05 : 03 : 12 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 468 J . ELLIS MCTAGGART : The relations which form the A series then must be rela - tions of events and moments to something not itself in the time - series . What this something is might be difficult to say . But , waiving this point , l a more positive difficulty presents itself . Past , present , and future are incompatible determinations . Every event must be one or the other , but no event can be more than one . This is essential to the meaning of the terms . And , if it were not so , the A series would be in - sufficient to give us , in combination with the C series , the result of time . For time , as we have seen , involves change , and the only change we can get is from future to present , and from present to past . The characteristics , therefore , are incompatible . But every event has them all . If M is past , it has been present and future . If it is future , it will be present and past . If it is present , it has been future and will be past . Thus all the three incompatible terms are predicable of each event , which is obviously inconsistent with their being incompatible , and inconsistent with their producing change . It may seem that this can easily be explained . Indeed it has been impossible to state the difficulty without almost giving the explanation , since our language has verb - forms for the past , present , and future , but no form that is common to all three . It is never true , the answer will run , that M is present , past and future . It is present , will be past , and has been future . Or it is past , and has been future and present , or again is future and will be present and past . The characteristics are only incompatible when they are simPltaneous , and there is no contradiction to this in the fact that each term has all of them successively . But this explanation involves a vicious circle . For it assumes the existence of time in order to account for the way in which moments are past , present and future . Time then must be pre - supposed to account for the A series . But we have already seen that the A series has to be assumed in order to account for time . Accordingly the A series has to be pre - supposed in order to account for the A series . And this is clearly a vicious circle . What we have done is this - to meet the difficulty that my writing of thi , s article has the characteristics of past , present and future , we say that it is present , has been future , and will be past . But " has been " is only distinguished from " is ' " by being existence in the past and not in the present , and " will be " is only distinguished from both by being existence in the future . Thus our statement comes to This content downloaded from 130 . 251 . 200 . 3 on Tue , 9 Apr 2013 05 : 03 : 12 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions THE UNREALITY OF TIME . 469 this that the event in question is present in the present , future in the past , past in the future . And it is clear that there is a vicious circle if we endeavour to assign the char - acteristics of present , future and past by the criterion of the characteristics of present , past and future . The difficulty may be put in another way , in which the fallacy will exhibit itself rather as a vicious infinite series than as a vicious circle . If we avoid the incompatibility of the three characteristics by asserting that M is present , has been future , and will be past , we are constructing a second A series , within which the first falls , in the same way in which events fall within the first . It may be doubted whether any intelligible meaning can be given to the asser - tion that time is in time . But , in any case , the second A series will suffer from the same difficulty as the first , which can only be removed by placing it inside a third A series . The same principle will place the third inside a fourth , and so on without end . You can never get rid of the contradic - tion , for , by the act of removing it from what is to be explained , you produce it over again in the explanation . And so the explanation is invalid . Thus a contradiction arises if the A series is asserted of reality when the A series is taken as a series of relations . Could it be taken as a series of qualities , and would this give us a better result ? Are there three qualities - futur - ity , presentness , and pastness , and are events continually changing the first for the second , anid the second for the third ? It seems to me that there is very little to be said for the view that the changes of the A series are changes of qualities . No doubt my anticipation of an experience M , the experience itself , and the memory of the experience are three states which have different qualities . But it is not the future M , the present M , and the past M , which have these three different qualities . The qualities are possessed by three distinct events - the anticipation of M , the experience M itself , and the memory of M , each of which is in turn future , present , and past . Thus this gives no support to the view that the changes of the A series are changes of qualities . But we need not go further into this question . If the characteristics of the A series were qualities , the same difficulty would arise as if , they were relations . For , as before , they are not compatible , and , as before , every event has all of them . This can only be explained , as before , by saying that each event has them successively . And thus This content downloaded from 130 . 251 . 200 . 3 on Tue , 9 Apr 2013 05 : 03 : 12 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 470 J . ELLIS MCTAGGART : the same fallacy would have been committed as in the pre - ' vious case . We have come then to the conclusion that the application of the A series to reality involves a contradiction , and that consequently the A series cannot be true of reality . And , since time involves the A series , it follows that time cannot be true of reality . Whenever we judge anything to exist in time , we are in error . And whenever we perceive anything as existing in time - which is the only way in which we , ever do perceive things - we are perceiving it more or less as it really is not . We must consider a possible objection . Our ground for rejecting time , it may be said , is that time cannot be ex - plained without assuming time . But may this not prove - not that time is invalid , but rather that time is ultimate ? It is impossible to explain , for example , goodness or truth unless by bringing in the term to be explained as part of the explanation , and we therefore reject the explanation as in - valid . But we do not therefore reject the notion as erroneous , but accept it as something ultimate , which , while it does not - admit of explanation , does not require it . But this does not apply here . An idea may be valid of reality though it does not admit of a valid explanation . But it cannot be valid of reality if its application to reality involves : a contradiction . Now we began by pointing out that there was such a contradiction in the case of time - that the char - . acteristics of the A series are mutually incompatible and yet all true of every term . Unless this contradiction is removed , the idea of time must be rejected as invalid . It was to remove this contradiction that the explanation was suggested IIt is very usual to present Time under the metaphor of a spatial movement . But is it to be a movement from past to future , or from future to past ? If the A series is taken as one of qualities , it will naturally be taken as a movement from past to future , since the quality of presentness - has belonged to the past states and will belong to the future states . If the A series is taken as one of relations , it is possible to take the move - ment either way , since either of the two related terms can be taken as the one which moves . If the events are taken as moving by a fixed point of presentness , the movement is from future to past , since the future events are those which have not yet passed the point , and the past are those which have . If presentness is taken as a moving point successively related to each of a series of events , the movement is from past to future . Thus we say that events come out of the future , but we say that we ourselves move towards the future . For each man identifies himself especially with his present state , as against his future or his past , since the present is the only one of which he has direct experience . And - thus the self , if it is pictured as moving at all , is pictured as moving with - the point of presentness along the stream of events from past to future . This content downloaded from 130 . 251 . 200 . 3 on Tue , 9 Apr 2013 05 : 03 : 12 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions THE UNREALITY OF TIME . 471 that the characteristics belong to the terms successively . When this explanation failed as being circular , the con - tradiction remained unremoved , and the idea of time must be rejected , not because it cannot be explained , but because the contradiction cannot be removed . What has been said already , if valid , is an adequate ground for rejecting time . But we may add another consideration . Time , as we have seen , stands and falls with the A series . Now , even if we ignore the contradiction which we have just diicovered in the application of the A series to reality , was there ever any positive reason why we should suppose that the A series was valid of reality ? Why do we believe that events are to be distinguished as past , present and future ? I conceive that the belief arises from distinctions in our own experience . At any moment I have certain peroeptions , I have also the memory of certain other perceptions , and the anticipation of others again . The direct perception itself is a mental state qualitatively different from the memory or the anticipation of perceptions . On this is based the belief that the per - ception itself has a certain characteristic when I have it , which is replaced by other characteristics when I have the memory or the anticipation of it - which characteristics are called presentness , pastness , and futurity . Having got the idea of these characteristics we apply them to other events . Everything simultaneous with the direct perception which I have now is called present , and it is even held that there would be a present if no one had a direct perception at all . In the same way acts simultaneous with remembered per - ceptions or anticipated perceptions are held to be past or future , and this again is extended to events to which none of the perceptions I now remember or anticipate are simul - taneous . But the origin of our belief in the whole distinction lies in the distinction between perceptions and anticipations or memories of perceptions . A direct perception is present when I , have it , and so is what is simultaneous with it . In the first place this defini - tion involves a circle , for the words " when I have it , " can only mean " when it is present " . But if we left out these words , the definition would be false , for I have many direct presentations which are at different times , and which cannot , therefore , all be present , except successively . This , however , is the fundamental contradiction of the A series , which has been already considered . The point I wish to consider here is different . The direct perceptions which I now have are those which This content downloaded from 130 . 251 . 200 . 3 on Tue , 9 Apr 2013 05 : 03 : 12 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 472 J . ELLIS MCTAGGART : now fall within my " specious present " . Of those which are beyond it , I can only have memory or anticipation . Now the " specious present " varies in length according to circum - stances , and may be different for two people at the same period . The event M may be simultaneous both with X ' s perception Q and Y ' s perception R . At a certain moment Q may have ceased to be part of X ' s specious present . M , therefore , will at that moment be past . But at the same moment R may still be part of Y ' s specious present . And , therefore , M will be present , at the same moment at which it is past . This is impossible . If , indeed , the A series was something purely subjective , there would be no difficulty . We could say that M was past for X and present for Y , just as we could say that it was pleasant for X and painful for Y . But we are considering attempts to take time as real , as some - thing which belongs to the reality itself , and not only to our beliefs about it , and this can only be so if the A series also applies to the reality itself . And if it does this , then at any moment M must be present or past . It cannot be both . The present through which events really pass , therefore , cannot be determined as simultaneous . with the specious present . It must have a duration fixed as an ultimate fact . This duration cannot be the same as the duration of all specious presents , since all specious presents have not the same duration . And thus an event may be past when I am experiencing it as present , or present when I am experiencing it as past . The duration of the objective present may be the thousandth part of a second . Or it may be a century , and the accessions of George IV . and Edward VII . may form part of the same present . What reason can we have to believe in the existence of such a present , which we certainly do not observe to be a present , and which has no relation to what we do observe to be a present ? If we escape from these difficulties by taking the view , which has sometimes been held , that the present in the A series is not a finite duration , but a mere point , separating future from past , we shall find other difficulties as serious . For then the objective time in which events are will be some - thing utterly different from the time in which we perceive them . The time in which we perceive them has a present of varying finite duration , and , therefore , with the future and the past , is divided into three durations . The objective time has only two durations , separated by a present which has nothing but the name in common with the present of ex - perience , since it is not a duration but a point . What is This content downloaded from 130 . 251 . 200 . 3 on Tue , 9 Apr 2013 05 : 03 : 12 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions THE UNREAIJITY OF TIME . 473 there in our experience which gives us the least reason to believe in such a time as this ? And so it would seem that the denial of the reality of time is not so very paradoxical after all . It was called paradoxical because it seemed to contradict our experience so violently - - to compel us to treat so much as illusion which appears primda facie to give knowledge of reality . But we now see that our experience of time - centring as it does about the specious present - would be no less illusory if there were a real time in which the realities we experience existed . The specious present of our observations - varying as it does from you to me - cannot correspond to the present of the events , observed . And consequently the past and future of our observations could not correspond to the past and future of the events observed . On either hypothesis - whether we take . time as real or as unreal - everything is observed in a specious present , but nothing , not even the observations themselves , can ever be in a specious present . And in that case I do not see that we treat experience as much more illusory when we say that nothing is ever in a present at all , than when we say that everything passes through some entirely different present . Our conclusion , then , is that neither time as a whole , nor the A series and B series , really exist . But this leaves it possible that the C series does really exist . The A series was rejected for its inconsistency . And its rejection involved the rejection of the B series . But we have found no such con - tradiction in the C series , and its invalidity does not follow from the invalidity of the A series . It is , therefore , possible that the realities which we per - ceive as events in a time - serie ? do really form a non - temporal series . It is also possible , so far as we have yet gone , that they do not form such a series , and that they are in reality no more a series than they are temporal . But I think - though I have no room to go into the question here - that the former view , according to which they really do form a C series , is the more probable . Should it be true , it will follow that in our perception of these realities as events in time , there will be some truth as well as some error . Through the deceptive form of time , we shall grasp some of their true relations . If we say that the events M and N are simultaneous , we say that they occupy the same position in the time - series . And there will be some truth in this , for the realities , which we perceive as the events M and N , do really occupy the same position in a , series , though it is not a temporal series . 32 This content downloaded from 130 . 251 . 200 . 3 on Tue , 9 Apr 2013 05 : 03 : 12 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 474 J . ELLIS MCTAGGART : THE UNREALITY OF TIME . Again , if we assert that the events M , N , 0 , are all at different times , and are in that order , we assert that they occupy different positions in the time - series , and that the position of N is between the positions of M and 0 . And it will be true that the realities which we see as these events will be in a series , though not in a temporal series , and that their positions in it will be different , and that the position of the reality which we perceive as the event N will be between the positions of the realities which we perceive as the events M and 0 . If this view is adopted , the result will so far resemble those reached by Hegel rather than those of Kant . For Hegel re - garded the order of the time - series as a reflexion , though a distorted reflexion , of something in the reat nature of the timeless reality , while Kant does not seem to have contem - plated the possibility that ' anything in the nature of the noumenon should correspond to the time order which appears i - n the phenomenon . But the question whether such an objective C series does , exist , must remain for future discussion . And many other , questions press upon us which inevitably arise if the reality of time is denied . If there is such a C series , are positions in it simply ultimate facts , or are they determined by the vary - ing amounts , in the objects which hold those positions , of . some quality which is common to all of them ? And , if so , what is that quality , and is it a greater amount of it which determines things to appear as later , and a lesser amount which determines them to appear as earlier , or is the reverse true ? On the solution of these questions it may be that our hopes and fears for the universe depend for their confirmation or rejection . And , again , is the series of appearances in time a series which is infinite or finite in length ? And how are we to deal with the appearance itself ? If we reduce time and change to appearance , must it not be to an appearance which changes and which is - ir time , and is not time , then , shown to be real after all ? This is doubtless a serious question , but I hope to show hereafter that it can be answered in a satisfactory way . This content downloaded from 130 . 251 . 200 . 3 on Tue , 9 Apr 2013 05 : 03 : 12 AM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions