Snitches , Trolls , and Social Norms : Unpacking Perceptions of Social Media Use for Crime Prevention Aarti Israni † , Sheena Erete † , Ch´e L . Smith * † College of Computing and Digital Media , DePaul University , Chicago , IL U . S . A . * Food and Drug Administration , Silver Spring , MD U . S . A . aisrani2 @ gmail . com , serete @ depaul . edu , che . smith @ fda . hhs . gov ABSTRACT In this paper , we describe how people perceive the use of social media to support crime prevention in their communi - ties . Based on survey and interview data from residents in high - and low - crime neighborhoods in Chicago , we found that African Americans , people from high - crime neighbor - hoods , and people with low levels of trust in local police are less likely to view social media as an appropriate tool to support citizens or the police in local crime prevention ef - forts . Residents’ concerns include information getting into the wrong hands , trolls , and being perceived as a snitch . De - spite concerns with usage , citizens also viewed social me - dia as a tool that can supplement in - person crime preven - tion efforts and facilitate relationship - building and informa - tion sharing . We discuss the complexities of hyper - local us - age of social media to combat crime by describing the social and historical contexts in which these tools exist . Author Keywords social media ; crime prevention ; community policing ; online norms ; low income ; neighborhoods ; privacy ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords H . 5 . m . Information Interfaces and Presentation ( e . g . HCI ) : Miscellaneous INTRODUCTION Much attention has recently focused on the relationships be - tween the police and local communities [ 5 , 6 , 15 ] . Par - ticularly in the United States , there is a national conversa - tion around police ofﬁcers’ roles and responsibilities arising from reports of police brutality in cities - including Balti - more , Chicago , and Ferguson [ 6 ] - that have resulted in a series of U . S . Department of Justice investigations of local law enforcement agencies accused of violating citizens’ con - stitutional rights [ 11 ] . As a result , there has been increased interest in the use of technology in policing , ranging from the Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM acknowledges that this contribution was authored or co - authored by an employee , contractor or afﬁliate of the United States government . As such , the United States Government retains a nonexclusive , royalty - free right to publish or reproduce this article , or to allow others to do so , for Government purposes only . CSCW ’17 , February 25 - March 01 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA . Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 4335 - 0 / 17 / 03 . . . $ 15 . 00 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2998181 . 2998238 use of social media to engage residents to law enforcement’s use of social media and body cameras [ 6 , 67 ] . Understanding the use of social media in policing is criti - cal given that social media applications continue to pervade the routines , activities , and interactions of our everyday lives . Nearly two - thirds of American adults used social network - ing sites in 2015 [ 47 ] , with Facebook reporting more than 1 . 59 billion daily active users [ 46 ] . Such social media ap - plications have become a ubiquitous means to share and col - lect information , keep in touch with people , and engage in discussion [ 30 ] . In addition , people use social media to ob - serve and engage in political events such as the Occupy Wall Street Movement , Spain’s contested election in May 2011 , and Iran’s post - election turmoil in 2009 [ 8 , 22 , 45 ] . While these studies illustrate how citizens use technology to respond to more sporadic events as they occur , there is also a grow - ing body of research in HCI around people who are using information and communication technologies ( ICTs ) to en - gage in community policing to address local crime [ 20 , 28 , 33 , 39 ] . Community policing is the idea that residents and police partner to address crime and other related issues [ 39 ] . For the purposes of this research , we deﬁne communities as geographically bound areas where residents live , work , and play . Although prior research suggests social media can be bene - ﬁcial to both communities and law enforcement [ 18 , 39 , 48 , 50 ] , there are growing concerns about issues such as privacy , information security , and government surveillance [ 16 , 17 , 23 , 27 , 40 , 41 , 60 , 61 ] . Despite the growing use of social me - dia by law enforcement and residents , few studies focus on citizens’ perceptions of the use of social media for commu - nity policing and the police’s presence on social media [ 20 , 39 , 49 ] . Thus , in this paper , we address the following research question : What are citizens’ perceptions of using social me - dia to engage in neighborhood crime prevention ? While prior studies have explored residents’ use of social media for com - munity policing [ 39 , 41 , 49 ] , our study focuses on citizens’ attitudes toward the use of social media by neighbors and law enforcement . In addition , we examine the impact of demo - graphic factors ( i . e . race , income , neighborhood crime level ) as well as feelings that have traditionally inﬂuenced citizens’ thoughts towards crime prevention ( e . g . , trust of the police ) [ 52 , 58 ] . Session : Trolls & Harassment CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 1193 To address our research question , we surveyed 260 residents across 58 Chicago neighborhoods and interviewed 8 residents in 3 Chicago neighborhoods . Our study objectives included : 1 . learning how residents use social media in their efforts to prevent local crime ; 2 . understanding residents’ percep - tion of law enforcement’s use of social media ; and 3 . iden - tifying residents’ beliefs about appropriate use of social me - dia in crime prevention efforts . Our results suggest that res - idents’ use of social media for local crime prevention efforts and their perceptions of appropriate social media use differ depending on race , income , police trust , and neighborhood crime level . Minorities were less likely to report using so - cial media to address crime and felt less comfortable with police using social media . Our survey results also suggest that residents from high crime neighborhoods have less trust toward the police and are less likely to perceive social media as an appropriate tool for police use as compared to those in low - crime areas . Our qualitative analysis suggests that citi - zens , particularly those in high - crime neighborhoods , viewed social media as a tool to supplement , not replace , in - person community crime prevention efforts . This work makes two main contributions to the HCI com - munity . First , this research deepens our understanding of the perceptions and concerns that shape people’s interactions with social media . Speciﬁcally , this research builds on ex - isting HCI research focused on the impact of online norms and privacy concerns on social media interactions and usage [ 27 , 39 , 40 , 41 , 44 , 61 ] . Second , our work provides insights into citizens’ online usage and expectations for social me - dia to support local crime prevention efforts . By describing the complexities of attitudes toward hyper - local usage of so - cial media to address crime and how technology solutions can be positioned to support community expectations , we extend prior research that focused primarily on community technol - ogy use [ 18 , 20 , 28 , 32 , 39 , 41 , 50 ] . RELATED WORK Prior research suggests that social media supports crime pre - vention and community policing efforts by providing a plat - form for police to share information with the community [ 12 , 45 ] and for community members to share their concerns [ 20 , 36 ] . However , privacy concerns sometimes inﬂuence social media users’ participation in these community - policing ef - forts . In the following sections , we examine how social media is used in crime prevention , discuss users’ privacy concerns , and describe online norms that may impact the behavior of social media users . Using Social Media to Support Community Policing In the last ﬁve years , there has been a growth in the usage of social media such as Facebook and Twitter to support com - munity policing efforts around the world , which has resulted in increased partnership between residents and police . In In - dia , for example , the Bangalore City Police use Facebook to engage residents in crime - prevention efforts . When residents provide feedback on neighborhood safety and make sugges - tions for improving safety , the Bangalore City Police Depart - ment directly responds to their concerns and suggestions [ 50 ] . In the UK , the Greater Manchester Police use Twitter to ﬁght rumors , establish a trusted voice and gather intelligence from the public [ 12 ] . In Chicago , an police - created online web - site called ClearPath was shown to be unsuccessful in stim - ulating engagement among city residents , but a preliminary survey of popular community - based online social networks revealed evidence of discussion about Chicago neighborhood crime and safety issues in at least 12 citizen - lead online tools [ 39 ] . Social media platforms offer many beneﬁts to support crime prevention and community policing efforts . The study on the Bangalore City Police’s Facebook page revealed that resi - dents’ contributions yielded actionable information that could be used to enhance safety and support crime prevention ef - forts related to fraud , police misconduct , and ﬁrst informa - tion reports [ 50 ] . In addition , social media strengthens ties between the police and citizens , enforces social norms , facili - tates community policing , and helps keep citizens informed [ 39 ] . A study on the perceptions of Indian police toward the use of online social networks revealed their belief that social networks allowed them to enforce social norms and spread awareness about unacceptable behaviors such as witch hunting and crimes against women . In addition , social net - works enabled two - way discussions around policing deci - sions and concerns [ 48 ] . Social media also increases com - munity engagement in ofﬂine crime prevention activities and helps strengthen the community’s voice in these activities . As a result , community members learn about crime and suspi - cious activity from their neighbors in ways that can enhance communication and bring about more community - led discus - sions with police [ 20 ] . Based on [ 39 ] and [ 20 ] , Kadar and col - leagues created a system , SALUS , to evaluate citizens’ com - munication vs . information - sharing habits [ 32 ] . Prior research illustrates the beneﬁts of using social media for crime - prevention purposes , including increased partner - ship between citizens and police , awareness of local crime , and citizen engagement in policing efforts [ 12 , 18 , 20 , 32 , 39 , 50 ] . Our study builds upon this research by exploring citi - zens’ perceptions of these beneﬁts along with their concerns and expectations . Privacy and Social Media Although social media offers several features that might sup - port crime prevention , there are growing concerns about pri - vacy that may have an impact on the extent of user participa - tion in social media [ 16 , 17 , 60 ] . Prior research indicates user concern about privacy and the potential for unauthorized ac - cess to their personal data [ 23 , 60 ] . According to one study , such concerns cause social media users to censor the infor - mation they share on social networking sites [ 27 ] . Experiences with online privacy violations as well as news about conﬁdentiality and security breaches can diminish so - cial media users’ trust and limit their interaction with online forums . A study examining how faculty and students at a uni - versity established privacy in an e - mail forum revealed users’ concerns about its effectiveness following an incident where a department member forwarded an e - mail to users outside the department , overstepping the privacy of those within the department [ 40 ] . Following this breach in privacy , depart - Session : Trolls & Harassment CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 1194 ment faculty and students expressed concerns about disclos - ing their opinions in the forum and suggested that the forum would be used on a limited basis . In addition , news about conﬁdentiality and security breaches can limit users’ trust and interactions with social networking sites . One study revealed that privacy concerns catalyzed by stories about online con - ﬁdentiality and security breaches were the primary reasons users refrained from using social media sites [ 61 ] . While these studies focus on individuals’ privacy concerns for social media in the context of social and academic set - tings , where the primary audience consists of users’ friends , family , and co - workers , the present study examines how these concerns manifest when social media is used for local crime prevention . It also explores the role of law enforcement and its impact on citizens’ concerns and usage of social media . Online Norms and Social Media The desire to establish privacy boundaries has led to a grow - ing need to regulate social norms in online communities . Re - search has shown that implicit norms or unspoken rules inﬂu - ence how much and what types of content social networking users are willing to share [ 36 , 44 ] . Violations of these norms , including hostile debates and derailed conversations initiated by users known as “trolls , ” cause frustration and fuel the need for online norm regulation . In one study , participants in on - line communities reported that heated interactions , ﬁghts , and instances of name calling ranked among the most common and annoying violations of norms [ 44 ] . Although participants did not state that these violations affected their usage , they did express a strong desire that such feuds and discussions be kept out of the public eye . In some cases , users have tried to prevent such violations by regulating online norms themselves . In a study exploring how residents used a community website to voice their concerns about crime and safety , individual users moderated online dis - cussions to ensure that members refrained from hostile con - versations and that discussions aligned with the goals of the forum [ 39 ] . To summarize , social media has been used to support crime prevention efforts and to address speciﬁc concerns ( e . g . , on - line norms , privacy ) that shape the behaviors of users . The present study extends this research by exploring how these concerns manifest in the context of crime prevention and their impact on citizens’ interactions with social media . In addi - tion , we explore how citizens’ perceptions and expectations of social media’s role in crime prevention differ depending on various sociological factors ( i . e . race , income , neighborhood crime level ) . The study also delves into trust issues citizens may have with local police . CHICAGO : A CASE STUDY With a population of about 2 . 7 million residents in the city and more than 12 million in the metropolitan area , Chicago is the third largest city in the United States . Socioeconomic status varies among residents , and though the median house - hold income is approximately $ 48K , close to 20 % of house - holds live below the poverty level [ 3 ] . Chicago is a racially and ethnically diverse city with residents roughly divided into thirds including African Americans , Caucasians , and Hispan - ics [ 3 ] . Chicago is divided into 77 geographically bound re - gions known as community areas [ 9 ] . In this paper , we use the term “community” to refer to Chicago’s community ar - eas , which were created in the 1920’s by the University of Chicago [ 1 ] . We selected them as the geographic boundaries because these are static , well - deﬁned spaces that are used for local and regional urban planning . Moreover , residents most often refer to these community areas when describing their neighborhoods . Finally , most of the technologies surveyed use community areas when soliciting location from users . Although statistics suggest that crime has steadily decreased across the United States , it remains a major issue in Chicago . Though the city is home to the second largest police depart - ment in the nation [ 37 ] , Chicago ranks among the top three cities in the United States with the most homicides since 1985 [ 13 ] . Since the early 1990’s , the Chicago Police strategy to - ward crime has shifted from reacting to incidents of crime to actively working to prevent crime [ 56 ] . In 1993 , Chicago de - veloped the Chicago Alternative Policing Strategy ( CAPS ) , a community policing initiative in which residents and po - lice partner to address crime . As part of this effort , residents meeting monthly with the police are active in local decision - making processes and organize activities such as neighbor - hood watches . Chicago is an ideal place to study community involvement and perceptions as well as crime prevention ef - forts for two reasons : 1 . the city has long served as a hub for criminology studies , and 2 . the city is known for having de - veloped “the most prominent big - city neighborhood - oriented [ policing ] program in the [ US ] nation [ 58 ] . ” METHODS Due to the exploratory nature of our research , we conducted a two - part study that consisted of a survey and 8 interviews of Chicago residents about their perceptions of and experiences with social media and crime prevention . In the next sections , we describe the recruitment process , our participants , and the methods for data collection and analysis . Because our study focuses on understanding perceptions around using social media for crime prevention , we recruited participants from neighborhoods where residents were known to use social media websites for discussions around crime . To understand online engagement across Chicago , we initially conducted a survey of 21 social media websites to assess the levels of engagement in each of the 77 Chicago commu - nity areas . This survey was conducted between October and November 2015 . We assessed engagement by reviewing the number of participants that contributed content about local crime , the type and amount of content that was shared , and the number of Chicago community areas that used these applica - tions within the past year . We reviewed the applications for conversations around incidents of crime ( e . g . , gangs , shoot - ings , thefts ) that occurred in local contexts ( e . g . , Chicago community areas , Chicago streets ) . Based on our assess - ment , we identiﬁed Everyblock , Neighborhood Square , and Facebook as three of the most used social media websites for conversations about local crime within the city of Chicago ; hence , we recruited interviewees from neighborhoods that ac - Session : Trolls & Harassment CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 1195 High Crime Medium Crime Low Crime Total Gender Male 45 . 2 % ( 14 ) 38 . 9 % ( 63 ) 46 . 3 % ( 31 ) 41 . 5 % ( 108 ) Female 54 . 8 % ( 17 ) 61 . 1 % ( 99 ) 53 . 7 % ( 36 ) 58 . 5 % ( 152 ) Race Caucasian 58 . 1 % ( 18 ) 68 . 5 % ( 111 ) 80 . 6 % ( 54 ) 70 . 4 % ( 183 ) African American 22 . 6 % ( 7 ) 14 . 2 % ( 23 ) 6 . 0 % ( 4 ) 13 . 1 % ( 34 ) Hispanic 6 . 5 % ( 2 ) 8 . 0 % ( 13 ) 6 . 0 % ( 4 ) 7 . 3 % ( 19 ) Household Income < $ 50K 22 . 6 % ( 7 ) 19 . 8 % ( 32 ) 19 . 4 % ( 13 ) 20 . 0 % ( 52 ) $ 50 - 90K 25 . 8 % ( 8 ) 29 . 0 % ( 47 ) 25 . 4 % ( 17 ) 27 . 7 % ( 72 ) > $ 90K 25 . 8 % ( 8 ) 38 . 3 % ( 62 ) 41 . 8 % ( 28 ) 37 . 7 % ( 98 ) Highest Level of Education Less than a Bachelors Degree 35 . 5 % ( 11 ) 19 . 1 % ( 31 ) 32 . 8 % ( 22 ) 24 . 6 % ( 64 ) Bachelors Degree 19 . 4 % ( 6 ) 41 . 4 % ( 67 ) 40 . 3 % ( 27 ) 38 . 5 % ( 100 ) Masters Degree and Beyond 45 . 2 % ( 14 ) 39 . 5 % ( 64 ) 26 . 9 % ( 18 ) 36 . 9 % ( 96 ) Table 1 : Demographic Proﬁle of Survey Respondents ; % of Asian , Native American , and Other races not shown ; % of respon - dents that chose not to report their household income not shown tively use these three websites to discuss crime . We recognize that there may be other private websites that residents use to actively converse online ( e . g . , e - mail lists , Google groups ) ; however , we intentionally focused on online groups and web - sites that could be found by newcomers and had relatively low barriers to entry ( e . g . , Nextdoor currently requires a ver - iﬁcation from the billing address of a phone , credit card , or a postcard ) . Additionally , given that neighborhood crime level is an im - portant factor in residents’ perception of crime prevention [ 51 , 54 , 58 ] , it was critical that our research participants were from neighborhoods with various crime levels . Hence , we adopted the standard approach used to provide national US crime statistics published by the US Bureau of Justice , the US Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) , and decades of urban - area criminology research [ 52 , 58 , 59 ] . We measured neighborhood crime level by dividing the number of index crimes reported from March 8 , 2015 to March 7 , 2016 by the number of residents in each community area ( based on 2010 census reports ) . “Index crimes , ” a standardized deﬁnition of crime classiﬁcation that includes the most serious offenses ( i . e . , murder , criminal sexual assault , robbery , aggravated as - sault , aggravated battery , burglary , theft , motor vehicle theft , and arson ) , was created speciﬁcally to overcome variations in crime reporting at the local , state , and national level . We de - ﬁne “high crime” community areas as those in the top 25 % of index crime per resident reported ; the “medium crime” level includes the middle 50 % of index crime per resident reported ; and the “low crime” level represents areas with the bottom 25 % of index crime per resident reported . Survey : Data Collection & Analysis We conducted a 38 - question survey of residents across all 77 community areas in Chicago . Survey participants were re - cruited via social media websites . An online posting with in - formation about the study and a link to the survey was submit - ted to Everyblock , Neighborhood Square , Yelp Talk Chicago , Reddit , and 21 unique Facebook community groups focused on discussing crime . In addition , an e - mail with informa - tion and a link to the survey was sent to seven neighborhood - speciﬁc Yahoo group distribution lists . To participate in the study , people needed to reside in the city of Chicago , be at least 18 years of age or older , and familiar with using social media . The survey was made available for six weeks from March through April 2016 . We received a total of 347 survey responses and analyzed 260 ( 75 % ) after removing surveys that were incomplete . Of the 260 survey responses , 58 % were female . Most participants ( 42 % ) were between the ages of 35 and 54 , and the median household income fell in the range of $ 70 , 000 to $ 79 , 999 . The majority of participants ( 53 % ) lived in Chicago for more than 20 years ; 29 % lived in Chicago between 5 and 20 years ; and 97 % had been living in their current neighborhood for at least 1 year . Three percent of the participants were em - ployed by the Chicago Police Department . The majority of our participants ( 63 % ) were identiﬁed as living in medium crime areas , followed by low crime ( 26 % ) and high crime ( 11 % ) . Table 1 provides additional demographics of the sur - vey respondents by neighborhood crime level . Given the exploratory nature of our study , we created most of the survey questions and associated scales . The only scales that were pre - created were demographic questions [ 3 ] . The ﬁrst part of the survey focused on residents’ experiences us - ing social media including the types of social media appli - cations used , their purposes for using social media , and the frequency with which they used social media to seek , re - ceive , or contribute information about crime or suspicious activity . Questions pertaining to frequency used a 7 - point Likert scale anchored by “never” and “1 or more times a day . ” The second part of the survey focused on residents’ per - ceptions of using social media to support crime prevention and their perceptions of the police using social media to sup - port crime prevention . For these questions , participants were given a series of statements pertaining to their perceptions of the appropriate use of social media for crime prevention ; the 5 - point Likert scale was anchored by “Strongly Agree” and “Strongly Disagree . ” Last , we collected demographic in - formation about participants’ gender , age , income , ethnicity , highest level of education , occupational category , marital sta - tus , current neighborhood , length of residence in Chicago , and length of residence in their current neighborhood . We began analyzing the survey data by ﬁrst examining the de - scriptive statistics . Table 2 provides descriptive statistics as - Session : Trolls & Harassment CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 1196 Min Max Mean or % STD Social Media Usage Frequency in using social media to seek information about crime / suspicious activity 1 ( 1 or more times a day ) 7 ( Never ) 2 . 67 1 . 87 Use social media to ﬁnd out about local crime or suspi - cious activity 0 ( No ) 1 ( Yes ) 0 . 90 0 . 30 Use social media to report information about local crime or suspicious activity 0 ( No ) 1 ( Yes ) 0 . 55 0 . 50 Use social media to report a suspicious activity or crime heard from family , friends , or neighbors 0 ( No ) 1 ( Yes ) 0 . 26 0 . 44 The Police Should Use Social Media To To share crime alerts 1 ( Strongly Disagree ) 5 ( Strongly Agree ) 4 . 42 1 . 08 To share updates about suspicious activity or crimes that were reported by the community 1 ( Strongly Disagree ) 5 ( Strongly Agree ) 4 . 31 1 . 11 To monitor private posts related to crime and suspicious activity 1 ( Strongly Disagree ) 5 ( Strongly Agree ) 2 . 55 1 . 50 The police should not use social media to support crime prevention and community policing in my neighborhood 1 ( Strongly Disagree ) 5 ( Strongly Agree ) 1 . 88 1 . 19 I Feel Comfortable With The police using social media to support crime preven - tion and community policing 1 ( Strongly Disagree ) 5 ( Strongly Agree ) 4 . 21 1 . 05 Reporting suspicious activity with others in my neigh - borhood or community via social media 1 ( Strongly Disagree ) 5 ( Strongly Agree ) 3 . 95 1 . 13 Reporting suspicious activity in my neighborhood to the police via a private message 0 ( No ) 1 ( Yes ) 0 . 64 0 . 48 I Believe It is the police’s job to work with the community 1 ( Strongly Disagree ) 5 ( Strongly Agree ) 4 . 79 0 . 52 It is the community’s job to be a part of local policing 1 ( Strongly Disagree ) 5 ( Strongly Agree ) 4 . 53 0 . 73 I Trust The police in my neighborhood 1 ( Strongly Disagree ) 5 ( Strongly Agree ) 3 . 83 1 . 03 Table 2 : Descriptive Statistics for a Subset of Survey Questions sociated with a subset of the questions provided in our survey . Using both Chi - Squared and Mann - Whitney U tests , we then analyzed several independent variables that we believed could inﬂuence perception of crime such as race , income , neighbor - hood crime level , and trust toward the police based on prior literature [ 58 , 62 ] . The results of our Mann - Whitney and Chi - Squared tests revealed associations between these factors ( i . e . race , income , neighborhood crime level , and trust toward the police ) and several dependent variables related to survey par - ticipants’ perceptions and use of social media for crime pre - vention . These dependent variables were ( 1 ) whether participants use social media to ﬁnd information about local crime or suspi - cious activity , ( 2 ) whether participants access speciﬁc social media applications ( e . g . , Everyblock , Facebook ) to ﬁnd out about local crime or suspicious activity , ( 3 ) whether partic - ipants employ social media to share information about lo - cal crime or suspicious activity , ( 4 ) whether participants use speciﬁc social media applications ( e . g . local e - mails ) to share information about local crime or suspicious activity , ( 5 ) whether participants use social media to report local crime or suspicious activity they heard from family , friends , or neigh - bors , ( 6 ) whether participants somewhat or strongly agreed that the police should use social media to support crime pre - vention in their neighborhood , ( 7 ) whether participants felt comfortable using social media to report suspicious activity with neighbors , and ( 8 ) whether participants felt comfortable with the police using social media to support crime preven - tion efforts in their neighborhood . We then conducted a series of binary logistic regression tests against these dependent variables to further analyze the im - pact of factors such as race , income , neighborhood crime level , and trust toward local police while adjusting for con - founding effects . Respondents that somewhat or strongly agreed that they trusted their local police were categorized as “high trust” while all other respondents were categorized as “low trust . ” Respondents that reported combined household incomes in the top 25 % of household incomes in the city of Chicago ( greater than $ 90K ) were categorized as “high - income” while respondents that reported household incomes below Chicago’s median household income ( below $ 50K ) were categorized as “low - income . ” Session : Trolls & Harassment CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 1197 Interviews : Data Collection & Analysis We recruited 8 interviewees via social media websites from 2 low - crime neighborhoods and 1 high - crime neighborhood to understand differences in responses from residents of low - and high - crime areas . We initially submitted an online post - ing with information about the study and the interview pro - cess to individual neighborhood groups associated to the low - and high - crime community areas on Facebook , Everyblock , and Neighborhood Square . After receiving three responses from people interested in participating , we pursued a more targeted recruiting method , sending private messages to 28 of the most active members in conversations around local crime using Facebook and Everyblock . To identify active members , we reviewed how much content members contributed to these applications within the past year and whether any of the con - tent contributed was related to local crime or suspicious activ - ity . From this targeted approach , three more people agreed to participate in the interview process . The seventh participant was the spouse of one of the ﬁrst six and agreed to participate after hearing about the study from his spouse . The eighth par - ticipant was a local business owner in the high - crime commu - nity area who we met while conducting interviews . We recognize that due to our targeted recruitment methods , our interview sample is biased towards more active social me - dia users . In addition , our sample size is relatively small as we only interviewed 8 participants , seven of eight of whom identiﬁed as Caucasian and one who identiﬁed with a mixed racial background . Thus , it is difﬁcult to generalize our re - sults to all users . Five of the interviewees were from the high - crime neighborhood , and three were from low - crime neigh - borhoods . Five of the interviewees were female , while three were male . The average age was 40 , and the median income level was between $ 55K and $ 84K . The number of years par - ticipants lived in their neighborhood ranged from 1 year to 20 years , with 7 years as the average , while the number of years participants lived in Chicago ranged from 10 years to 44 years , with an average of 24 years . Each interview lasted approximately 45 minutes to an hour . To explore residents’ perceptions of social media usage to support policing and crime prevention , we asked about their experiences with and perceptions of social media , their in - teractions with and perceptions of the Chicago Police , their perceptions around crime prevention and community polic - ing , and their thoughts on using social media to support crime prevention . We conducted interviews at local public libraries or cafes . All interviews were audio - recorded and transcribed . Participants were thanked for their time but were not mone - tarily compensated . To analyze our interviews , we ﬁrst transcribed and induc - tively analyzed the data by creating 229 codes in the initial round of coding [ 10 ] . We then iterated , reapplying the codes to the data until we exhausted the application of the codes . We then grouped the codes into 29 larger descriptive categories , followed by grouping these codes into four high - level cate - gories : Concerns that Govern Social Media Usage , Concerns with the Police Using Social Media , Police Responsibilities in Crime Prevention and Community Policing , and Support - ing Ofﬂine Crime Prevention Activities and Relationships . We begin the following section by describing the results of our survey , which indicated that four factors ( i . e . , race , in - come , neighborhood crime level , and trust in local police ) impact participants’ use and perception of social media for crime prevention . We then present qualitative data from our interviews that further describe our participants’ thoughts about the role that social media plays in community crime prevention and their concerns about using social media . SURVEY RESULTS At a high - level , results from our survey suggest that the ma - jority ( 74 % ) of participants agreed that social media should be used to support crime prevention and policing and that the police should use social media to support these efforts ( 76 % ) . Yet , when exploring the impact of other factors on the sur - vey responses , our analysis reveals that race , income , crime level , and trust inﬂuence perceptions and social media usage . Binary logistic regression tests indicated an association be - tween each of these factors and participants’ perceptions and social media usage while controlling for the confounding ef - fects between these factors . Tables 3 , 4 , and 5 provide details of the results from our regression analysis . Impact of Race on Social Media Use African Americans were less likely to use social media to ﬁnd out about local crime or suspicious activity than Caucasians . Though Hispanics also less frequently reported using social media to ﬁnd out about crime and suspicious activity than Caucasians (   2 ( 3 , N = 260 ) = 8 . 49 , p < . 05 ) , these differences were not statistically signiﬁcant when controlling for income and crime level . In addition , African Americans were less likely than Caucasians to use social media applications like Everyblock and Nextdoor to ﬁnd out more information about crime and suspicious activity . Although African Americans and Hispanics agreed less fre - quently than Caucasians that the police should use social me - dia to share updates about suspicious activity or crime (   2 ( 6 , N = 260 ) = 17 . 84 , p < . 01 ) , these differences were not statisti - cally signiﬁcant when controlling for income and crime level . Impact of Income on Social Media Use We classiﬁed “high - income” individuals as people whose re - ported combined household income ranked in the top 25 % of household incomes in the city of Chicago . “Low - income” individuals were deﬁned as those whose reported combined household income fell below the median household income in the city of Chicago . When examining the impact of in - come on our survey participants’ social media usage , we did not ﬁnd any signiﬁcant differences . However , our survey results suggest that those who reported lower household income levels were less likely to agree that the police should use social media to support crime preven - tion efforts in their neighborhood than people who reported higher household incomes . Session : Trolls & Harassment CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 1198 U s e s o c i a l m e d i a t o ﬁnd ou t abou t l o c a l c r i m e o r s u s p i c i ou s a c ti v it y U s e E ve r y b l o ck t o ﬁnd ou t abou t l o c a l c r i m e o r s u s p i c i ou s a c ti v it y U s e N ex t doo r t o ﬁnd ou t abou t l o c a l c r i m e o r s u s p i c i ou s a c ti v it y U s e F a ce boo k t o ﬁ n d ou t abou t l o c a l c r i m e o r s u s p i c i ou s a c ti v it y R e po r ti ng s u s p i c i ou s a c ti v it y / c r i m e h e a r d f r o m f a m il y , f r i e nd s o r n e i ghbo rs U s e l o c a l e - m a il s t o s ha r e i n f o r m a ti on abou t l o c a l c r i m e o r s u s p i c i ou s a c ti v it y B S . E . E xp ( B ) B S . E . E xp ( B ) B S . E . E xp ( B ) B S . E . E xp ( B ) B S . E . E xp ( B ) B S . E . E xp ( B ) A fr i ca n A m e r i ca n - 1 . 055 0 . 52 0 . 348 * - 1 . 419 0 . 426 * * 0 . 242 - 1 . 554 0 . 773 0 . 211 * 0 . 674 0 . 52 0 . 554 0 . 358 0 . 478 1 . 901 - 0 . 134 0 . 61 2 . 337 H i s p a n i c - 0 . 209 0 . 804 0 . 812 - 0 . 003 0 . 517 0 . 997 - 1 . 645 1 . 049 0 . 193 - 0 . 59 0 . 409 2 . 059 - 0 . 058 0 . 615 1 . 431 - 1 . 335 1 . 074 0 . 874 C a u ca s i a n † L o w I n c o m e - 0 . 285 0 . 589 0 . 752 - 0 . 425 0 . 374 0 . 654 - 0 . 031 0 . 471 0 . 97 0 . 162 0 . 371 1 . 176 - 0 . 066 0 . 43 0 . 936 0 . 595 0 . 489 1 . 813 H i gh I n c o m e † H i gh C r i m e L e v e l - 0 . 881 0 . 743 0 . 415 0 . 367 0 . 463 1 . 444 0 . 301 0 . 55 1 . 351 - 0 . 987 0 . 475 0 . 373 * - 1 . 761 0 . 671 0 . 172 * * 0 . 009 0 . 653 1 . 009 M e d i u m C r i m e L e v e l - 0 . 502 0 . 585 0 . 606 0 . 797 0 . 307 2 . 219 * * - 0 . 204 0 . 375 0 . 815 0 . 04 0 . 311 1 . 041 - 0 . 76 0 . 323 0 . 468 * - 0 . 011 0 . 402 0 . 99 L o w C r i m e L e v e l † L o w T r u s t i n P o li ce - 0 . 025 0 . 464 0 . 975 - 0 . 129 0 . 293 0 . 879 0 . 215 0 . 365 1 . 24 - 0 . 301 0 . 295 0 . 74 - 1 . 095 0 . 378 0 . 335 * * - 1 . 886 0 . 573 0 . 152 * * H i gh T r u s t i n P o li ce † T a b l e 3 : R e s u lt s o f B i n a r y L og i s ti c R e g r e ss i on f o r V a r i a b l e s P r e d i c ti ng R e po r t e d S o c i a l M e d i a U s e f o r C r i m e P r e v e n ti on ; p < . 05 * , p < . 01 * * , † r e f e r e n ce v a l u e u s e d f o r a n a l y s i s T h e po li ce s hou l d no t u s e s o c i a l m e d i a t o s uppo r t c r i m e p r eve n ti on and c o mm un it y po li c i ng i n m y n e i ghbo r hood I f ee l c o m f o r t ab l e w it h t h e po li ce u s i ng s o c i a l m e d i a t o s uppo r t c r i m e p r eve n ti on i n m y n e i ghbo r hood I f ee l c o m f o r t ab l e u s i ng s o c i a l m e d i a t o r e po r t s u s p i c i ou s a c ti v it y w it h o t h e rs i n m y n e i ghbo r hood B S . E . E xp ( B ) B S . E . E xp ( B ) B S . E . E xp ( B ) A fr i ca n A m e r i ca n 0 . 208 0 . 586 1 . 734 0 . 511 0 . 514 1 . 667 - 0 . 018 0 . 451 0 . 982 H i s p a n i c 0 . 833 0 . 645 1 . 231 1 . 015 0 . 802 - 0 . 325 - 0 . 325 0 . 55 0 . 722 C a u ca s i a n † L o w I n c o m e 1 . 525 0 . 592 4 . 593 * * - 0 . 594 0 . 48 0 . 552 - 0 . 621 0 . 421 0 . 538 H i gh I n c o m e † H i gh C r i m e L e v e l 0 . 567 0 . 689 1 . 764 - 0 . 562 0 . 589 0 . 57 - 0 . 312 0 . 505 0 . 732 M e d i u m C r i m e L e v e l 0 . 192 0 . 511 1 . 212 - 0 . 341 0 . 433 0 . 711 0 . 114 0 . 361 1 . 12 L o w C r i m e L e v e l † L o w T r u s t i n P o li c e - 0 . 103 0 . 44 0 . 902 - 1 . 479 0 . 355 0 . 228 * * - 1 . 107 0 . 321 0 . 331 * * H i gh T r u s t i n P o li c e † T a b l e 4 : R e s u lt s o f B i n a r y L og i s ti c R e g r e ss i on f o r V a r i a b l e s P r e d i c ti ng P e r ce p ti on s o f S o c i a l M e d i a U s e f o r C r i m e P r e v e n ti on ; p < . 05 * , p < . 01 * * , † r e f e r e n ce v a l u e u s e d f o r a n a l y s i s Session : Trolls & Harassment CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 1199 It is the police’s job to work with the community It is the community’s job to be a part of local policing B S . E . Exp ( B ) B S . E . Exp ( B ) African American - 1 . 092 0 . 879 0 . 335 0 . 872 0 . 843 2 . 392 Hispanic - 0 . 589 1 . 204 0 . 555 0 . 645 1 . 112 1 . 905 Caucasian † Low Income - 0 . 513 0 . 821 0 . 599 - 1 . 594 0 . 737 0 . 203 * High Income † High Crime Level 0 . 939 1 . 099 2 . 557 0 . 709 1 . 238 2 . 031 Medium Crime Level 0 . 804 0 . 809 2 . 235 - 0 . 676 0 . 7 0 . 509 Low Crime Level † Low Trust in Police - 2 . 46 0 . 856 0 . 085 * * - 1 . 811 0 . 567 0 . 163 * * High Trust in Police † Table 5 : Results of Binary Logistic Regression for Variables Predicting Role of Police and Community in Crime Preven - tion ; p < . 05 * , p < . 01 * * , †reference value used for analysis Impact of Crime Level on Social Media Use People from medium - crime areas were more likely to use Ev - eryblock to ﬁnd out more about suspicious activity than peo - ple from low - crime areas , while people from low - crime ar - eas were more likely to use Facebook to ﬁnd out more about suspicious activity than people from high - crime areas . Peo - ple from low - crime areas were also more likely to use social media to share information about local crime or suspicious activity they heard about from family , friends , and neighbors than people from high - crime or medium - crime areas . Although our survey results suggest that people from high - crime areas were less likely to agree that the police should use social media to support crime prevention and commu - nity policing than people from low - crime areas ( U = 778 , Z = - 2 . 168 , p < . 05 ) , these differences were not statistically sig - niﬁcant when controlling for race and income . Impact of Trust on Social Media Use People with low levels of trust toward their local police were less likely to use social media to share information about lo - cal crime or suspicious activity they heard about from family , friends , and neighbors than people with high levels of trust . Additionally , people with low levels of trust toward their local police were less likely to use local e - mails to share informa - tion about local crime or suspicious activity than people with high levels of trust . Although our results show that those with higher levels of trust toward local police more frequently re - ported seeking out information about crime or suspicious ac - tivity than those with lower levels of trust (   2 ( 2 , N = 260 ) = 8 . 49 , p < . 05 ) , these differences were not statistically signiﬁ - cant when controlling for race , income , and crime level . People with low levels of trust toward their local police were less likely to feel comfortable reporting suspicious activity with others in their neighborhood or feel comfortable with the police using social media for crime prevention and commu - nity policing than people with higher levels of trust . Although our survey results show that those with lower levels of trust toward their local police were less likely to agree that the po - lice should use social media to support crime prevention and community policing ( U = 5857 . 5 , Z = - 2 . 965 , p < . 01 ) , these dif - ferences were not statistically signiﬁcant when controlling for race , income , and crime level . INTERVIEW RESULTS Based on our interview data , four primary themes emerged as participants described their feelings towards the use of social media for crime prevention : 1 . Community members have concerns that govern their usage of social media applications for crime prevention ; 2 . Community members have concerns about the police using social media for crime prevention ; 3 . Community members have certain expectations for the police in their neighborhood and the ways in which social media can support these responsibilities ; 4 . Social media supports but does not supplant ofﬂine crime prevention activities and relationships . Concerns that Govern Social Media Usage Although 90 % of survey respondents reported using social media to receive information , only 55 % reported that they use social media to share information about suspicious ac - tivity or crime . Only 43 % felt comfortable directly report - ing this activity to police in a public post on a neighborhood watch page , while 63 % felt comfortable reporting activity in a private message . All interviewees expressed concerns that inﬂuence their in - teractions on social media and their comfort with interacting with the police via social media . When considering what to contribute to social media , residents indicated they have un - derlying concerns about the social norms that govern these applications and the audiences viewing their posts . Resi - dents’ primary concerns about using social media to con - tact the police are associated with the public nature of the communications and the community’s perceptions of them . These concerns generally inﬂuence how much and what type of information people are willing to provide , along with the medium they use to share the information . Residents pre - fer to keep their communications with the police private to avoid being seen as a “neighborhood snitch” and to avoid in - formation getting into “the wrong hands . ” Snitch is deﬁned as someone who informs authorities about someone else’s wrongdoings . Social Norms Perceptions of social norms govern how people interact with social media [ 36 , 44 ] . Social norms are informal rules that are accepted by users and inﬂuence the behavior of others [ 7 ] . Residents’ perceptions of the roles of the individuals who are posting messages ( site administrators , general public ) and how others in the community react to posts inﬂuence what information residents share and how they share it [ 39 ] . Although only one interview participant mentioned actively observing how other users participate in online communities before deciding to contribute ( P5 ) , ﬁve of the eight intervie - wees , from both high - and low - crime areas , mentioned shar - ing information about crime and suspicious activity in online communities , because they saw others in the community do - ing the same . For instance , when describing why she shared on her Facebook community page a message about gunshots , P7 says : Because it’s something that people often share . . . usually I can hear something or I’ll see a bunch of police activity and I’ll see that some - Session : Trolls & Harassment CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 1200 one’s already on top of it . But we heard what we thought were gunshots and nobody had said anything yet . This quote illustrates the pivotal role other online members play in establishing the unspoken rules of participation in social media forums . Although many online communities like Facebook and Everyblock groups include a visible list of rules of how members should interact with the site , residents rely on their observations of the ways active group members use the forum to understand what their contribution and role should be on the site [ 36 , 44 ] . Audience : Knowing Who’s Watching Residents are conscious that their contributions to social me - dia are a reﬂection of themselves , speciﬁcally when using ap - plications like Facebook , where users’ identities are associ - ated with their names and proﬁle pictures [ 17 ] . This concern , coupled with the sensitivity of a topic such as crime , inﬂu - ences how users contribute to social media . Only about half ( 54 % ) of survey respondents had posted information about crime . Three of the eight interviewees , from both high - and low - crime areas , expressed concerns about posting comments online because of people that they know , stating that this lim - its what they are willing to post on social media websites . For instance , when describing his concerns about posting to Facebook , P6 says : If I say something on Facebook , it’s connected to my name . It’s con - nected to people I know and to be frank sometimes you may have dif - ferent opinions than family members and sometimes it’s better to keep your opinions to yourself . As this quote illustrates , people acknowledge the fact that they are connected to extended family , colleagues , and ac - quaintances on applications like Facebook , and they are con - cerned about how their posts are perceived by their existing connections and how they might impact their relationships . They are hesitant to post anything that might upset these re - lationships . Half of our interviewees expressed concerns about posting online about crime because of people they do not necessarily know . P5 says : I don’t want to be that sacriﬁcial lamb that goes up there and posts something that people will scoff at or look down on , or chastise me publicly . No One Wants To Be a Neighborhood Snitch When considering the idea of sharing information about crime or suspicious activity with the police via social me - dia , two of the ﬁve interviewees from high - crime areas ex - pressed concerns about being seen as a neighborhood snitch by the community , while no residents from low - crime neigh - borhoods expressed this concern . The term “snitch” typically has a negative connotation of one who relays information to law enforcement . For instance , when describing her comfort level with contacting the police with information about crime or suspicious activity via social media , P2 says : On the internet I don’t necessarily want to be like the tattletale of the neighborhood and then somebody being arrested because of it and have my picture and my name associated with having those conversa - tions with the police . To avoid these negative judgments or reactions from the com - munity , residents prefer to communicate with police in a pri - vate medium . Three of the ﬁve interviewees from high - crime neighborhoods and two of the three from low - crime neigh - borhoods expressed a preference for direct and private com - munications with the police . For example , when describing whether social media should be used to contact the police about crime or suspicious activity , P4 says : I think what they should do is contact people directly . Because there is this whole culture in Chicago , the ”do not snitch” and this persons talking to the police . And I’m not sure I’d want that to be on a platform . Information Getting into the Wrong Hands Interview participants emphasized their concerns about infor - mation shared via social media getting into the wrong hands and the potential for subsequent criminal retaliation . Clearly , these concerns inﬂuence the types of information people are willing to share via social media . This aligns with prior lit - erature suggesting that concerns about the risks of sharing information with strangers on social networking sites cause users of social media to self - censor the amount and types of data they include in their proﬁle [ 27 ] . Residents indicated that too much information shared about a personal incident or one with personal property involved could become a guidebook for criminals to commit further crimes . Two of the three interviewees from low - crime neigh - borhoods and one of the ﬁve from high - crime neighborhoods expressed concerns that the Internet offered many ways for wrongdoers to track their location and activities . For exam - ple , when describing her comfort level in using social media as an outlet to report crime , P5 says : It’s not that difﬁcult for people to ﬁnd your address if they know your name . Not via Facebook , necessarily . Plenty of people block their address that way but there are check - ins , and photo metadata , and Spokeo , and other sites that you can go to and look up a person’s address pretty easily . I’m not sure if I would feel comfortable being a witness to anything and then posting about it in any kind of social setting . This quote illustrates residents’ concerns over the limited in - formation security offered by the Internet and social media websites . Trolling and Lack of Moderation All interviewees in our study expressed concerns about the prevalence of trolling on social media sites where mem - bers could post information anonymously ( e . g . , Everyblock ) . Trolling is a phenomenon that occurs in online communities where members hijack existing conversations and derail the conversations with their own topic [ 26 ] . For instance , when describing why she decided to stop using Everyblock , P4 states : Everyblock went completely haywire . . . actual good discussions will get derailed by a bunch of people who are just bored . And people are just too involved that instead of just ignoring the trolls and continuing to Session : Trolls & Harassment CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 1201 communicate with actual people who want a dialogue they get all riled up into that other stuff . Seven out of eight interviewees expressed the desire for ad - ministrators to actively moderate discussions on these sites . For instance , when describing why she decided to stop using Everyblock , P5 says : That’s really one of the big reasons that I don’t use those sites [ Every - block ] that much , is because there isn’t active administration . I think there’s a neighborhood moderator but their job just seems to get more people to use it than to actually moderate on the sites . These quotes illustrate the challenges residents face when us - ing anonymous sites and the need for active moderation . While interviewees expressed frustrations about trolling on sites that allowed users to post anonymously and a desire for moderation , ﬁve out of eight participants stated that they trusted information posted about local crime and suspicious activity , regardless of whether it came from an anonymous source . When describing why he trusts information shared about local crime , P3 says : “ If someone’s in their house and they see someone outside getting mugged right in front of their house , I believe that . I dont think there’s a motive to be deceptive about that kind of thing . ” Concerns with the Police Using Social Media Most of our survey respondents ( 76 % ) agreed that the police should use social media to support crime prevention ; how - ever , those that reported lower household incomes were less likely than those with higher household incomes to share that view . At the same time , interviewees voiced concerns about police access to personal data and the potential for abuse of power should information from social media be used against speciﬁc community members . This aligns with prior litera - ture suggesting that some community members mistrust and fear retaliation by city ofﬁcials [ 18 ] . Additionally , residents expressed their concerns about the establishment of a surveil - lance state , where police and law enforcement would monitor their day - to - day activities . Private Conversations & Abuse of Power Fifty - two percent of survey respondents felt that the police should not use social media to monitor private conversations related to crime and suspicious activity . Two of the eight interviewees , all from low - crime neighborhoods , expressed concerns that if police were given access to personal and pri - vate data via social media , they could potentially abuse their access and use the information against community members . When describing his comfort level with the police having ac - cess to social media , P6 says : I could see how if a community organizer speaks out against the police I could see how they could use their own data against them . Take it out of context or imply they’re doing illegal based on the activity that they see . They could use it to harass them . As this quote illustrates , residents concerned about police ac - cess to social media platforms fear that if police disapprove of a community member’s comments in an online forum , they can and will use the information to incriminate them . Surveillance State When considering their comfort level with police having ac - cess to social media , two of the three interviewees from low - crime neighborhoods and two of the ﬁve from high - crime neighborhoods expressed concerns with the idea of a surveil - lance state in which law enforcement ofﬁcers could monitor aspects of their lives without their consent . For example , in expressing her views about the potential for a surveillance state , P5 says : I’m not a fan of more Big Brother looking at proﬁles and things like that without speciﬁc consent . To have government or law enforcement at the higher level looking maybe at everybody’s proﬁles and every - thing that people are posting . As this quote illustrates , residents have an underlying concern about the government monitoring their activities without their consent . Police’s Responsibility in Crime Prevention & Community Policing Based on our survey results , a majority ( 95 % ) of participants somewhat or strongly agree that it is the community’s job to be a part of local policing and that it is the police’s job to work with the community . Survey respondents with higher levels of trust toward police were more likely than those with lower levels to agree that it is law enforcement’s job to work with the community and that it is the community’s job to be part of local policing . These respondents were also more likely than those with lower levels of trust to view social media as a tool police should use to support crime prevention and community policing in their neighborhood ( U = 6536 . 5 , Z = - 2 . 025 , p < . 05 ) . Interviewees expressed their expectations for the police’s responsibility in their neighborhood and ideas for how social media can support these responsibilities ; they em - phasized that the police should proactively monitor pockets of crime in their neighborhood and keep the community in - formed about crime . Proactive Policing Interview and survey respondents generally perceived social media applications like Facebook as resources police can leverage to monitor neighborhood crime and proactively po - lice the neighborhood . Seventy - three percent of survey par - ticipants indicated that the police should use social media to monitor public posts related to crime and suspicious activity . Seven of the eight interview participants in high - and low - crime neighborhoods expressed a similar view . As P5 says : I think it’s another way to look at the community and understand what’s happening in the community , if they have the resources to do it . Again , I think they might be able to read about things that are hap - pening in a location that they just wouldn’t get that info any other way . One interview participant stated that the police could use the information provided on social media to support proactive in - vestigations on crime . For instance , when describing how police could use social media , P5 says : If there were a person or a group , you know a department , I guess , that were in charge of social media , and just kind of kept an eye on things , they might be able to use that intelligence to help . Session : Trolls & Harassment CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 1202 These quotes illustrate the perception that social media is a way for the police to proactively monitor known pockets of criminal activity and support criminal investigations . Keep Community Informed about Crime Our survey results suggest that African Americans and His - panics view social media as a tool the police should use less frequently than Caucasians . At the same time , a majority of participants felt that the police should use social media to share crime alerts ( 89 % ) and updates about crimes and suspi - cious activity reported by the community ( 86 % ) . While two of eight interviewees , both from high - crime areas , expressed the need for police to keep community members informed about crime happening in their neighborhoods , both voiced their frustration with delayed communications and alerts from police . For instance , when describing the police communica - tion about local armed robberies , P4 says : What actually happened last year was there was a bunch of robberies during the day time . They were posted on the crime prevention page . That was almost daily , day - time . And ﬁnally I just e - mailed the [ po - lice ] and I was like ’What is going on with the armed robberies by us ? ’ And two days later they ﬁnally put out a community alert . But there were at least 15 or something . This quote illustrates residents’ desire to be informed about neighborhood crime and their perception that the police are not providing residents with enough timely information about local crimes and the actions taken to respond to them . Supporting Ofﬂine Crime Prevention Activities & Rela - tionships Interview participants , particularly those from high - crime ar - eas , emphasized the importance of attending local in - person events and relationship - building meetings and acknowledged social media’s role in supporting these activities and relation - ships . This aligns with prior literature that suggests that com - munity members use information and communication tech - nologies ( ICTs ) to support and increase community engage - ment in ofﬂine crime prevention efforts [ 20 ] . All interviewees expressed the importance of establishing and maintaining ofﬂine relationships with neighbors and other community members in order to prevent crime and generate awareness of crime in their neighborhood . Participants ac - knowledged that social media could help establish these of - ﬂine relationships but could not solely prevent crime . For example , when describing the beneﬁts of using social media for crime prevention , P2 says social media is : . . . a vehicle to get to know your neighbors and then taking those rela - tionships ofﬂine to kind of be like the nosy neighbors that look out for each other . So one [ beneﬁt is ] laying down the foundation for real - life relationships . Similarly , P4 says : I think the biggest crime prevention is people talking to each other . People being outside . . . . You actually still need to talk to each other . . . . Like the community garden helped out a lot . What the garden did is it made people meet one another who are actually now neighbors . Interview participants indicated that social media is important in helping to establish and maintain online and in - person re - lationships with neighbors , which participants thought could ultimately prevent crime . Prior research suggest that connect - ing local residents is an effective method to deter crime [ 19 ] . Three of the eight interview participants , all from high - crime neighborhoods , mentioned leveraging their ofﬂine relation - ships with community members to learn about crimes that were not reported via the police or news media . In describing how she obtained information about crime , P4 says : There was a rape that happened on my block and that was not even told to us . Nobody knew about it . Like a neighbor told me about it . . . but if I had not talked to that neighbor . . . and all the women in our neighborhood wanted to know that . But if we’re relying on the cops to tell us that , nothing is happening . And the news is not picking up anything either . So how are we supposed to know about anything , except through talking to each other ? And that’s crime prevention . This quote illustrates the perception that not all information about local crime or suspicious activity gets reported by the police ( or even news media ) and that ofﬂine relationships help residents obtain an awareness of such activities . One frustration that residents of high - crime neighborhoods share is the lack of participation by some in organized neigh - borhood activities like block clubs and monthly community - police meetings . Two of ﬁve interview participants from high - crime areas stated that while several social media appli - cations provide a vehicle to engage community members in ofﬂine crime prevention activities , not all members were will - ing to take advantage of the opportunities . As P2 explains , it’s especially easy for people using social media to avoid making ﬁrm commitments : People kind of use social media to back out of doing things . You can put out an invite on Facebook and people can like , especially now they just changed the settings so that you dont say ’Yes I’m attending , ’ you say ’I’m interested in an event . ’ As this quote illustrates , although social media provides a ve - hicle to generate awareness of local events , awareness does not necessarily translate to increased community participa - tion . DISCUSSION To summarize , our ﬁndings suggest that : • African Americans , people from high - crime neighbor - hoods , and people with low levels of trust in local police are less likely to view social media as an appropriate tool to support citizens or the police in local crime - prevention efforts . Residents cited concerns with online social norms , information getting into the wrong hands , trolling , and be - ing perceived as a snitch as reasons why social media may not be appropriate . • People with low levels of trust in police and lower com - bined household incomes are less likely to feel comfort - able with the police using social media for crime preven - tion purposes or perceive social media as a tool the police should use to support crime - prevention efforts . Concerns Session : Trolls & Harassment CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 1203 that shape these attitudes involve the potential for abuse of power by police and the establishment of a surveillance state . • Despite concerns about using social media , most partici - pants felt that social media has the ability to supplement ( but not supplant ) ofﬂine crime prevention activities and support relationship - building by facilitating citizen - citizen information sharing and communication . In this section , we discuss the social and historical context of factors that may inﬂuence participant attitudes toward so - cial media use . We then describe the role of police and par - ticipant perceptions of law enforcement . Next , we consider how citizens’ prior experiences may impact their attitudes to - ward technology use by police . We conclude by presenting the challenges of designing online communication tools that equitably support all citizens engaging in technology - driven community policing efforts . Different Perspectives on Social Media Use A high - level analysis suggests that the majority of survey par - ticipants view social media as a tool that can be used to sup - port community engagement in policing ; a deeper analysis , however , reveals that demographic factors such as race , in - come , and crime level , as well as attitudes toward the po - lice , inﬂuence participant comfort levels as well . Histori - cally , crime has been extremely concentrated in communities plagued by intense poverty and racial segregation in the US [ 35 , 42 , 58 ] . This does not mean race predicts crime , but in - stead refers to the historic oppression of over - policing areas in which people of color reside [ 31 ] , speciﬁcally areas that are predominantly African American or Hispanic [ 4 ] . One re - sult of over - policing and issues of housing segregation is the well - known trust gap toward the police that exists between whites and minorities [ 29 , 57 , 62 ] . Minorities have less trust towards the police due to systemic issues of racial proﬁling [ 65 ] and historical mistreatment ( disrespect , humiliation , ex - cessive force , and disproportionate minority conﬁnement ) by the police [ 31 , 64 ] . These behaviors have led to deep - rooted mistrust , which likely has an impact on perceptions of tech - nology use in policing . Given that minorities do engage in community policing [ 58 ] , it is not as simple as saying that mi - norities do not want to be involved in policing ; instead , hes - itation to use social media in policing may be due to the fact that many online communication tools are linked to names ( or there is apprehension that names will be made public despite assurances of conﬁdentiality ) . There also may be concerns about engaging in crime prevention online due to the digi - tal record created , which differs from in - person engagement , where it is less likely that a long - term record is kept ( e . g . , au - dio and video recording of CAPS meetings are not allowed ) , and one may feel that they know their audience . There may be additional concerns about abuse by police and lack of le - gitimacy due to the absence of the community in the creation and design process of these technologies [ 56 ] . Also , given that face - to - face communication is highly valued in minority communities [ 59 ] , there may be further issues of legitimacy between the creator of the technology and their relationship with the community [ 63 ] . Historically , income has also been a factor in community policing . In the US , most neighborhoods are homogeneous when it comes to income , leading to concentrated areas of poverty [ 54 , 66 ] . Such neighborhoods have a long history of adversity , including high resident mobility , lack of invest - ment , and poor health outcomes [ 52 , 54 ] . Beyond low in - come , race is still a factor , with middle class African Amer - icans being more pessimistic than middle class Caucasians regarding police trust and engaging in community policing [ 66 ] . Given the historic institutional factors ( e . g . , over - policing , concentrated poverty , lack of investment and educational op - portunities ) that have led to considerable social disadvantage among minorities and those with fewer resources , it is not sur - prising that there is some cynicism towards using technology to support community policing . Understanding the histori - cal and social factors is critical to designing technologies that support community engagement in policing for all citizens . While this study highlights citizens’ concerns , future work should explore potential methods to better design technolo - gies to support community engagement . For example , future work can explore the role of anonymity in community tech - nologies as well as understanding how to deploy technology in a way that is legitimized by community members who have less trust of such tools , building on prior work that explores collaborative local crime mapping [ 21 ] . Lastly , there are fu - ture opportunities to examine social media platforms that fo - cus on hyper - local engagement , where racial minorities are proﬁled and discouraged from participating [ 38 ] . Future work could explore the roles of stereotyping , social norms , and is - sues of inclusion faced by people of color in ways that can prevent intentional and unintentional proﬁling . Our results , which show that citizens with less trust in police are less likely than those with high trust to use social media to combat crime , align with prior research that suggests that people’s trust for the police shapes their cooperation in crime prevention efforts [ 62 ] . Future work could consider the im - portance of understanding the impact of trust and the histori - cal relationships that citizens in particularly high - crime areas may have with law enforcement . For example , systems that force users to identify their real names and addresses ( e . g . , Nextdoor [ 41 ] ) , no matter how well - intentioned , may actu - ally alienate citizens who experience high levels of distrust . Researchers of such systems should be aware that large seg - ments of the population may not use those systems due to the lack of anonymity , yet anonymity may lead to less trust in the online information shared [ 2 , 21 ] . More broadly , there is an opportunity to examine the impact of anonymity and trust on social media usage by the underserved to address social issues beyond crime ( e . g . , health , sustainability , shared economy ) . Role of Police & Social Media Research has cited the importance of the community’s coop - eration with police efforts to combat crime [ 53 ] and the bene - ﬁts of using social media by the police , speciﬁcally enforcing social norms , gathering public intelligence , and keeping citi - zens informed [ 12 , 48 , 50 ] . While our survey results suggest that a majority ( 95 % ) of citizens agree that the community Session : Trolls & Harassment CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 1204 has a role in local policing and that citizens expect the police to use social media to proactively monitor the neighborhood for known pockets of crime and continually alert the com - munity with updates , these expectations are overshadowed by citizens’ concerns about the police’s position of power , surveillance , privacy , and being seen as a “snitch . ” The relationship between the police and the public is com - plex . Research has shown that the public’s willingness to co - operate in policing activities is shaped by their trust in the police and their perceptions of the fairness police use to ex - ercise their authority [ 55 , 62 ] . Similarly , our study revealed that those with less trust in their police were less likely to feel comfortable with the police using social media for crime prevention and that concerns that shaped these perceptions included the potential for the police to abuse their power and use information obtained against citizens . To overcome these concerns and provide police with a channel to monitor crime and suspicious activity in a given neighborhood , designers can consider technology solutions that provide transparency around the ways police intend to use information provided by users . Incorporating visible content about the police’s inten - tions for the information provided by citizens can help estab - lish trust between the police and the community . Additionally , citizens in high - crime areas expressed concerns about being seen as a “snitch” by others in their community if their communications with the police were publicly acces - sible . To allay these concerns , designers can consider tech - nology solutions that provide users with the ability to post information anonymously or provide police with an anony - mous view of online conversations ( e . g . , aggregated data ) . Challenges of using Social Media for Crime Prevention Although social media offers many beneﬁts for crime preven - tion and community policing , some outstanding challenges hinder users’ participation . Prior studies have illustrated so - cial media users’ concerns with unknown strangers accessing their personal data [ 27 ] . In addition to fears about informa - tion getting into the wrong hands , our study revealed resi - dents’ concerns about social norms , the audience of informa - tion shared online , and the prevalence of trolling in sites that allow users to post information anonymously . Social norms govern people’s participation on social media websites including the types of content people share . Un - derstanding the unspoken rules of participation includes un - derstanding the roles of website administrators and the gen - eral public and the ways in which users interact with one an - other online . Residents hesitate to share information about crime or suspicious activity without a concrete understanding of the unspoken rules and knowledge that their posts will be accepted by the online community . To lower these barriers to participation , technology could be designed to make the unspoken rules transparent , highlighting the roles of admin - istrators and general users and the types of content permitted on the site . Including a visible set of social rules in an online forum could help decrease users’ hesitation to participate . While our study uncovered people’s reservations with shar - ing information about local crime and suspicious activity in public forums , residents expressed concerns about the extent of trolling that occurred in anonymous social media sources . Research has shown computer - mediated communication sys - tems that offer anonymity foster a sense of impunity and ten - dency to act on commonly inhibited impulses [ 25 , 34 ] , which leads to conversation derailment and trolling . More recently , people have used social media applications like Twitter to re - port content that is considered mean - spirited , allowing others in online communities to respond and informally moderate such behavior [ 14 , 43 ] . Additionally , the automated detec - tion of online harassment in social media applications has re - cently emerged as a topic in HCI [ 24 ] . To regulate online dis - turbances like trolling , designers can consider technology so - lutions that incorporate crowd - based regulation or automated harassment detection systems . While our study examines people’s concerns with participat - ing in social media platforms for crime prevention purposes , we do not discuss their motivations for doing so . Future work can explore citizens’ motivations for contributing information to social media platforms and the impact of factors such as race , income , and neighborhood crime - level . LIMITATIONS Although our survey and interviews included participants from various backgrounds and locations within the city , our sample is limited due to our recruitment methods . We in - tentionally recruited people who were already using social media applications for community information , which means our sample might not include those who do not actively ac - cess these tools . Nearly half of the interviewees , for exam - ple , were actively recruited via social media websites based on their usage of these applications . Thus , our results might not account for the perspectives of less active users . Future work can address these concerns by pre - screening potential interviewees for their social media usage and accommodat - ing a wide range of users based on the frequency of usage and the speciﬁc social media channels used . Although our interview sample included participants from diverse neigh - borhoods , our sample size is relatively small as we only in - terviewed 8 participants , seven of eight whom identiﬁed as Caucasian and one who identiﬁed with a mixed racial back - ground . Thus , it is difﬁcult to generalize our results to all users . Also , our study participants were recruited via social media applications that have low barriers to entry . However , not all community members engage in these websites and may pre - fer to use forums that require higher barriers to entry ( e . g . , private e - mail groups ) . Thus , our results may not account for the perspectives of those users . To engage users of forums that have higher barriers to entry , future work could invest time in building relationships and partnerships in the com - munity and leveraging these partnerships to obtain access to such mediums . Last , our study participants were in Chicago , a large U . S . city with a strong history in crime and policing strategies [ 58 ] as well as historical issues of systemic , racialized , and class - based segregation ; thus , our results may not be representative of all cities , particularly those with a very different history Session : Trolls & Harassment CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 1205 of crime and crime prevention . Future studies could com - pare perceptions of social media use for community policing among different cities . CONCLUSION In this paper , we surveyed and interviewed residents from high - and low - crime neighborhoods to obtain their perspec - tives about using social media for crime prevention . Inter - viewees reported the importance of ofﬂine relationships and activities in advancing crime prevention , as well as social media’s role in supporting these efforts . Participants shared various concerns that hindered their usage of social media for crime prevention , including social norms , trolls , the au - dience of their posts , and the misuse of information by city ofﬁcials or wrongdoers . Despite these concerns , interviewees described their expectations for police and the role of social media . Technologies aimed at supporting crime prevention and community - policing efforts can provide transparency to rules of participation and help engage users in establishing of - ﬂine relationships and activities . To enable police to monitor and share information about crime while respecting citizens’ concerns for privacy , these technologies can be designed to support an aggregate and anonymous view of the data offered through social media while supporting crowd - based regula - tion of unwelcome online behaviors such as trolling . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank our participants who took the time to share their stories . We would also like to thank Tawanna Dillahunt and our anonymous reviewers for their comments on previous versions of this paper . REFERENCES 1 . Robin F . Bachin . 2005 . University of Chicago . ( 2005 ) . Retrieved February 2 , 2016 from http : / / www . encyclopedia . chicagohistory . org / pages / 1289 . html . 2 . Jan Blom , Divya Viswanathan , Mirjana Spasojevic , Janet Go , Karthik Acharya , and Robert Ahonius . 2010 . Fear and the City : Role of Mobile Services in Harnessing Safety and Security in Urban Use Contexts . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’10 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1841 – 1850 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1753326 . 1753602 3 . United States Census Bureau . 2015 . Quick Facts : Chicago , Illinois . ( 2015 ) . Retrieved May 9 , 2016 from http : / / www . census . gov / quickfacts / table / PST045215 / 1714000 , 00 . 4 . Liqun Cao , James Frank , and Francis T Cullen . 1996 . Race , community context and conﬁdence in the police . American journal of police 15 , 1 ( 1996 ) , 3 – 22 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1108 / 07358549610116536 5 . Christina Capecchi . 2015 . Black Lives Matter Protesters Gather ; Mall Is Shut in Response . ( 2015 ) . Retrieved February 2 , 2016 from http : / / www . nytimes . com / 2015 / 12 / 24 / us / black - lives - matter - protesters - gather - mall - of - america - is - shut . html . 6 . Jay Caspian Kang . 2015 . Our Demand is Simple : Stop Killing Us . ( 2015 ) . Retrieved February 2 , 2014 from http : / / www . nytimes . com / 2015 / 05 / 10 / magazine / our - demand - is - simple - stop - killing - us . html . 7 . Robert B Cialdini and Noah J Goldstein . 2004 . Social inﬂuence : Compliance and conformity . Annu . Rev . Psychol . 55 ( 2004 ) , 591 – 621 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . psych . 55 . 090902 . 142015 8 . Michael D Conover , Emilio Ferrara , Filippo Menczer , and Alessandro Flammini . 2013 . The digital evolution of occupy wall street . PloS one 8 , 5 ( 2013 ) , e64679 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0064679 9 . Chicago Fact Book Consortium . 1984 . Local community fact book : Chicago metropolitan area : based on the 1970 and 1980 censuses . Academy Chicago Publishers , Limited . 10 . Juliet Corbin and Anselm Strauss . 2014 . Basics of qualitative research : Techniques and procedures for developing grounded theory . Sage publications . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1094428108324514 11 . Monica Davey and Mitch Smith . 2015 . Justice Ofﬁcials to Investigate Chicago Police Department After Laquan McDonald Case . ( 2015 ) . Retrieved March 3 , 2016 from http : / / www . nytimes . com / 2015 / 12 / 07 / us / justice - dept - expected - to - investigate - chicago - police - after - laquan - mcdonald - case . html . 12 . Sebastian Denef , Petra S . Bayerl , and Nico A . Kaptein . 2013 . Social Media and the Police : Tweeting Practices of British Police Forces During the August 2011 Riots . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3471 – 3480 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2466477 13 . Drew Desilver . 2014 . Despite recent shootings , Chicago nowhere near U . S . ’murder capital’ . ( 2014 ) . Retrieved March 5 , 2016 from http : / / www . pewresearch . org / fact - tank / 2014 / 07 / 14 / despite - recent - shootings - chicago - nowhere - near - u - s - murder - capital / . 14 . Ned Ehrbar . 2016 . Leslie Jones exposes rampant social media racism , quits Twitter . ( 2016 ) . Retrieved March 7 , 2016 from http : / / www . cbsnews . com / news / leslie - jones - exposes - rampant - social - media - racism - quits - twitter / . 15 . John Eligon . 2016 . Emboldened by Protests , Black Lives Matter Activists Move From Street to Ballot . ( 2016 ) . Retrieved March 7 , 2016 from http : / / www . nytimes . com / 2016 / 02 / 07 / us / emboldened - by - protests - black - lives - matter - activists - move - from - street - to - ballot . html . 16 . Nicole B Ellison . 2007 . Social network sites : Deﬁnition , history , and scholarship . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication 13 , 1 ( 2007 ) , 210 – 230 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1083 - 6101 . 2007 . 00393 . x Session : Trolls & Harassment CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 1206 17 . Nicole B Ellison , Jessica Vitak , Charles Steinﬁeld , Rebecca Gray , and Cliff Lampe . 2011 . Negotiating privacy concerns and social capital needs in a social media environment . In Privacy online . Springer , 19 – 32 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 21521 - 6 3 18 . Sheena Lewis Erete . 2013a . Empowerment Through Community Crime - prevention Technologies . interactions 20 , 6 ( Nov . 2013 ) , 27 – 31 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2517444 19 . Sheena Lewis Erete . 2013b . Protecting the Home : Exploring the Roles of Technology and Citizen Activism from a Burglar’s Perspective . In Proc . of CHI ( CHI ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2507 – 2516 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2481347 20 . Sheena L . Erete . 2015 . Engaging Around Neighborhood Issues : How Online Communication Affects Ofﬂine Behavior . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & # 38 ; Social Computing ( CSCW ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1590 – 1601 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675182 21 . Vasco Furtado , Leonardo Ayres , Marcos De Oliveira , Eurico Vasconcelos , Carlos Caminha , Johnatas DOrleans , and Mairon Belchior . 2010 . Collective intelligence in law enforcement – The WikiCrimes system . Information Sciences 180 , 1 ( 2010 ) , 4 – 17 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ins . 2009 . 08 . 004 22 . Sandra Gonz´alez - Bail´on , Javier Borge - Holthoefer , Alejandro Rivero , and Yamir Moreno . 2011 . The dynamics of protest recruitment through an online network . Scientiﬁc reports 1 ( 2011 ) . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / srep00197 23 . Ralph Gross and Alessandro Acquisti . 2005 . Information Revelation and Privacy in Online Social Networks . In Proceedings of the 2005 ACM Workshop on Privacy in the Electronic Society ( WPES ’05 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 71 – 80 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1102199 . 1102214 24 . Joshua Guberman , Carol Schmitz , and Libby Hemphill . 2016 . Quantifying Toxicity and Verbal Violence on Twitter . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing Companion ( CSCW ’16 Companion ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 277 – 280 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2818052 . 2869107 25 . Claire Hardaker . 2010 . Trolling in asynchronous computer - mediated communication : From user discussions to academic deﬁnitions . Journal of Politeness Research 6 ( 2010 ) , 215 – 239 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1515 / jplr . 2010 . 011 26 . Susan Herring , Kirk Job - Sluder , Rebecca Scheckler , and Sasha Barab . 2002 . Searching for safety online : Managing ” trolling” in a feminist forum . The Information Society 18 , 5 ( 2002 ) , 371 – 384 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01972240290108186 27 . Jordan Marguerite Hitchcock . 2008 . Public or private ? A social cognitive exploratory study of privacy on social networking sites . Master’s thesis . California State University , Fullerton , CA . 28 . Yuheng Hu , Shelly D . Farnham , and Andr´es Monroy - Hern´andez . 2013 . Whoo . Ly : Facilitating Information Seeking for Hyperlocal Communities Using Social Media . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’13 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3481 – 3490 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2466478 29 . Wilson Huang and Michael S Vaughn . 1996 . Support and conﬁdence : Public attitudes toward the police . Americans view crime and justice : A national public opinion survey ( 1996 ) , 31 – 45 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4135 / 9781483326900 . n3 30 . Adam N . Joinson . 2008 . Looking at , Looking Up or Keeping Up with People ? : Motives and Use of Facebook . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’08 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1027 – 1036 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1357054 . 1357213 31 . Delores Jones - Brown . 2007 . Forever the Symbolic Assailant : The More Things Change , the More they Remain the Same . Criminology & Public Policy 6 , 1 ( 2007 ) , 103 – 121 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1745 - 9133 . 2007 . 00424 . x 32 . Cristina Kadar , Yiea - Funk Te , Raquel Ros´es Br¨ungger , and Irena Pletikosa Cvijikj . 2016 . Digital Neighborhood Watch : To Share or Not to Share ? . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 2148 – 2155 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2851581 . 2892400 33 . Andrea Kavanaugh , John M Carroll , Mary Beth Rosson , Than Than Zin , and Debbie Denise Reese . 2005 . Community networks : Where ofﬂine communities meet online . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication 10 , 4 ( 2005 ) , 00 – 00 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1083 - 6101 . 2005 . tb00266 . x 34 . Sara Kiesler , Jane Siegel , and Timothy W McGuire . 1984 . Social psychological aspects of computer - mediated communication . American psychologist 39 , 10 ( 1984 ) , 1123 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0003 - 066x . 39 . 10 . 1123 35 . Lauren J . Krivo and Ruth D . Peterson . 1996 . Extremely Disadvantaged Neighborhoods and Urban Crime . Social Forces 75 , 2 ( 1996 ) , 619 – 648 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / sf / 75 . 2 . 619 36 . Cliff Lampe and Erik Johnston . 2005 . Follow the ( Slash ) Dot : Effects of Feedback on New Members in an Online Community . In Proceedings of the 2005 International ACM SIGGROUP Conference on Supporting Group Work ( GROUP ’05 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 11 – 20 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1099203 . 1099206 Session : Trolls & Harassment CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 1207 37 . LawEnforcementEdu . 2014 . America’s Largest Police Departments . ( 2014 ) . Retrieved Febuary 2 , 2016 from http : / / www . lawenforcementedu . net / 2014 / 03 / americas - largest - police - departments / . 38 . Sam Levin . 2015 . Racial Proﬁling Via Nextdoor . com . ( 2015 ) . Retrieved March 13 , 2016 from http : / / m . eastbayexpress . com / oakland / racial - profiling - via - nextdoorcom / Content ? oid = 4526919 & showFullText = true . 39 . Sheena Lewis and Dan A . Lewis . 2012 . Examining Technology That Supports Community Policing . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’12 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 1371 – 1380 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208595 40 . Ryan Malphurs . 2009 . Privacy in Conﬂict : How Implicit Behavior Norms Inform Expectations of Privacy . Kaleidoscope : A Graduate Journal of Qualitative Communication Research 8 , 1 ( 2009 ) , 6 . 41 . Christina A . Masden , Catherine Grevet , Rebecca E . Grinter , Eric Gilbert , and W . Keith Edwards . 2014 . Tensions in Scaling - up Community Social Media : A Multi - neighborhood Study of Nextdoor . In Proceedings of the 32Nd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’14 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 3239 – 3248 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557319 42 . Douglas S Massey and Nancy A Denton . 1993 . American apartheid : Segregation and the making of the underclass . Harvard University Press . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 229532 43 . J Nathan Matias , Amy Johnson , Whitney Erin Boesel , Brian Keegan , Jaclyn Friedman , and Charlie DeTar . 2015 . Reporting , reviewing , and responding to harassment on Twitter . Available at SSRN 2602018 ( 2015 ) . 44 . Caitlin McLaughlin and Jessica Vitak . 2012 . Norm evolution and violation on Facebook . New Media & Society 14 , 2 ( 2012 ) , 299 – 315 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1461444811412712 45 . Evgeny Morozov . 2009 . Iran : Downside to the Twitter Revolution . Dissent 56 , 4 ( 2009 ) , 10 – 14 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1353 / dss . 0 . 0092 46 . Facebook Newsroom . 2016 . Stats . ( 2016 ) . Retrieved March 8 , 2016 from http : / / newsroom . fb . com / company - info / . 47 . Andrew Perrin . 2015 . Social Media Usage : 2005 - 2015 . ( 2015 ) . Retrieved March 13 , 2016 from http : / / www . pewinternet . org / 2015 / 10 / 08 / social - networking - usage - 2005 - 2015 / . 48 . Niharika Sachdeva and Ponnurangam Kumaraguru . 2015a . Deriving Requirements for Social Media Based Community Policing : Insights from Police . In Proceedings of the 16th Annual International Conference on Digital Government Research ( dg . o ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 316 – 317 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2757401 . 2757452 49 . Niharika Sachdeva and Ponnurangam Kumaraguru . 2015b . Online Social Networks and Police in IndiaUnderstanding the Perceptions , Behavior , Challenges . In ECSCW 2015 : Proceedings of the 14th European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 19 - 23 September 2015 , Oslo , Norway . Springer , 183 – 203 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 20499 - 4 10 50 . Niharika Sachdeva and Ponnurangam Kumaraguru . 2015c . Social Networks for Police and Residents in India : Exploring Online Communication for Crime Prevention . In Proceedings of the 16th Annual International Conference on Digital Government Research ( dg . o ’15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 256 – 265 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2757401 . 2757420 51 . Robert J Sampson . 1985 . Neighborhood and crime : The structural determinants of personal victimization . Journal of research in crime and delinquency 22 , 1 ( 1985 ) , 7 – 40 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0022427885022001002 52 . Robert J Sampson . 2012 . Great American city : Chicago and the enduring neighborhood effect . University of Chicago Press . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7208 / chicago / 9780226733883 . 001 . 0001 53 . Robert J Sampson and Dawn Jeglum Bartusch . 1998 . Legal cynicism and ( subcultural ? ) tolerance of deviance : The neighborhood context of racial differences . Law and society review ( 1998 ) , 777 – 804 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 827739 54 . Robert J Sampson , Stephen W Raudenbush , and Felton Earls . 1997 . Neighborhoods and violent crime : A multilevel study of collective efﬁcacy . Science 277 , 5328 ( 1997 ) , 918 – 924 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 277 . 5328 . 918 55 . Austin Sarat . 1977 . Studying American legal culture : An assessment of survey evidence . Law and Society Review ( 1977 ) , 427 – 488 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 3053128 56 . Amie M Schuck and Dennis P Rosenbaum . 2008 . Building trust and a police - community website : An assessment of the CLEARPath planning and community engagement process . ( 2008 ) . 57 . Howard Schuman . 1997 . Racial attitudes in America : Trends and interpretations . Harvard University Press . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 228700 58 . Wesley G Skogan . 2006 . Police and community in Chicago : A tale of three cities . Oxford University Press on Demand . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / acprof : oso / 9780195154580 . 001 . 0001 Session : Trolls & Harassment CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 1208 59 . Wesley G Skogan and Susan M Hartnett . 1997 . Community policing , Chicago style . Oxford University Press on Demand . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2307 / 2654535 60 . Sarah Spiekermann , Hanna Krasnova , Ksenia Koroleva , and Thomas Hildebrand . 2010 . Online social networks : why we disclose . Journal of Information Technology 25 , 2 ( 2010 ) , 109 – 125 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1057 / jit . 2010 . 6 61 . Zeynep Turan , Hasan Tinmaz , and Yuksel Goktas . 2013 . The Reasons for Non - Use of Social Networking Websites by University Students / Razones por las que los alumnos universitarios no utilizan las redes sociales . Comunicar 21 , 41 ( 2013 ) , 137 . 62 . Tom R Tyler . 2005 . Policing in black and white : Ethnic group differences in trust and conﬁdence in the police . Police quarterly 8 , 3 ( 2005 ) , 322 – 342 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1098611104271105 63 . Tom R Tyler and Jeffrey Fagan . 2008 . Legitimacy and cooperation : Why do people help the police ﬁght crime in their communities . Ohio St . J . Crim . L . 6 ( 2008 ) , 231 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 2139 / ssrn . 887737 64 . Tom R Tyler and Yuen Huo . 2002 . Trust in the Law : Encouraging Public Cooperation with the Police and Courts Through : Encouraging Public Cooperation with the Police and Courts Through . Russell Sage Foundation . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1353 / sof . 2004 . 0010 65 . Ronald Weitzer . 2002 . Incidents of police misconduct and public opinion . Journal of Criminal Justice 30 , 5 ( 2002 ) , 397 – 408 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / s0047 - 2352 ( 02 ) 00150 - 2 66 . George Wilson and Roger Dunham . 2001 . Race , Class , and Attitudes Toward Crime Control : The Views of the African American Middle Class . Criminal Justice and Behavior 28 , 3 ( 2001 ) , 259 – 278 . DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0093854801028003001 67 . Nick Wing . 2015 . Study Shows Less Violence , Fewer Complaints When Cops Wear Body Cameras . ( 2015 ) . Retrieved March 8 , 2016 from http : / / www . huffingtonpost . com / entry / police - body - camera - study us 561d2ea1e4b028dd7ea53a56 . Session : Trolls & Harassment CSCW 2017 , February 25 – March 1 , 2017 , Portland , OR , USA 1209